
1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2016 Mar 29. pii: S0003-9861(16)30078-9. doi:
10.1016/j.abb.2016.03.026. [Epub ahead of print]

Low Temperature Plasma Processing for Cell Growth Inspired Carbon Thin Films
Fabrication.

Kumar M(1), Piao JX(2), Jin SB(2), Lee JH(3), Tajima S(4), Hori M(4), Han JG(5).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Plasma Surface Technology, NU-SKKU Joint Institute for
Plasma-Nano Materials, School of Advanced Materials Science and Engineering,
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, 440-746, South Korea. Electronic address:
manishk@skku.edu. (2)Center for Advanced Plasma Surface Technology, NU-SKKU Joint
Institute for Plasma-Nano Materials, School of Advanced Materials Science and
Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, 440-746, South Korea. (3)Biological 
& Nanoscale Materials Lab, Advanced Materials Science and Engineering,
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, 440-746, South Korea. (4)Plasma Nanotechnology
Research Center, Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, 4648603, Japan.
(5)Center for Advanced Plasma Surface Technology, NU-SKKU Joint Institute for
Plasma-Nano Materials, School of Advanced Materials Science and Engineering,
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, 440-746, South Korea. Electronic address:
hanjg@skku.edu.

The recent bio-applications (i.e. bio-sensing, tissue engineering and cell
proliferation etc.) are driving the fundamental research in carbon based
materials with functional perspectives. High stability in carbon based coatings
usually demands the high density deposition. However, the standard techniques,
used for the large area and high throughput deposition of crystalline carbon
films, often require very high temperature processing (typically >800 (o)C in
inert atmosphere). Here, we present a low temperature (<150 (o)C) pulsed-DC
plasma sputtering process, which enables sufficient ion flux to deposit dense
unhydrogenated carbon thin films without any need of substrate-bias or
post-deposition thermal treatments. It is found that the control over plasma
power density and pulsed frequency governs the density and kinetic energy of
carbon ions participating during the film growth. Subsequently, it controls the
contents of sp(3) and sp(2) hybridizations via conversion of sp(2) to sp(3)
hybridization by ion's energy relaxation. The role of plasma parameters on the
chemical and surface properties are presented and correlated to the bio-activity.
Bioactivity tests, carried out in mouse fibroblast L-929 and Sarcoma osteogenic
(Saos-2) bone cell lines, demonstrate promising cell-proliferation in these
films.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 27036854  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. J Nanobiotechnology. 2016 Mar 31;14(1):25.

Neuroactivity of detonation nanodiamonds: dose-dependent changes in
transporter-mediated uptake and ambient level of excitatory/inhibitory
neurotransmitters in brain nerve terminals.

Pozdnyakova N(1), Pastukhov A(1), Dudarenko M(1), Galkin M(1), Borysov A(1),
Borisova T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurochemistry, Palladin Institute of Biochemistry, National
Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, 9 Leontovicha Street, Kiev, 01601, Ukraine.
(2)Department of Neurochemistry, Palladin Institute of Biochemistry, National
Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, 9 Leontovicha Street, Kiev, 01601, Ukraine.
tborisov@biochem.kiev.ua.

BACKGROUND: Nanodiamonds are one of the most perspective nano-sized particles
with superb physical and chemical properties, which are mainly composed of carbon
sp(3) structures in the core with sp(2) and disorder/defect carbons on the
surface. The research team recently demonstrated neuromodulatory properties of
carbon nanodots with other than nanodiamonds hybridization types, i.e., sp(2)
hybridized graphene islands and diamond-like sp(3) hybridized elements.
RESULTS: In this study, neuroactive properties of uncoated nanodiamonds produced 
by detonation synthesis were assessed basing on their effects on
transporter-mediated uptake and the ambient level of excitatory and inhibitory
neurotransmitters, glutamate and <U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid (GABA), in isolated rat
brain nerve terminals. It was shown that nanodiamonds in a dose-dependent manner 
attenuated the initial velocity of Na(+)-dependent transporter-mediated uptake
and accumulation of L-[(14)C]glutamate and [(3)H]GABA by nerve terminals and
increased the ambient level of these neurotransmitters. Also, nanodiamonds caused
a weak reduction in acidification of synaptic vesicles and depolarization of the 
plasma membrane of nerve terminals.
CONCLUSIONS: Therefore, despite different types of hybridization in nanodiamonds 
and carbon dots, they exhibit very similar effects on glutamate and GABA
transport in nerve terminals and this common feature of both nanoparticles is
presumably associated with their nanoscale size. Observed neuroactive properties 
of pure nanodiamonds can be used in neurotheranostics for simultaneous
labeling/visualization of nerve terminals and modulation of key processes of
glutamate- and GABAergic neurotransmission. In comparison with carbon dots, wider
medical application involving hypo/hyperthermia, external magnetic fields, and
radiolabel techniques can be perspective for nanodiamonds.

PMID: 27036406  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Nat Commun. 2016 Apr 1;7:11129. doi: 10.1038/ncomms11129.

Practical carbon-carbon bond formation from olefins through nickel-catalyzed
reductive olefin hydrocarbonation.

Lu X(1,)(2), Xiao B(1), Zhang Z(1), Gong T(1), Su W(1), Yi J(1), Fu Y(1), Liu
L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale, iChEM, CAS 
Key Laboratory of Urban Pollutant Conversion, Anhui Province Key Laboratory of
Biomass Clean Energy, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei
230026, China. (2)Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084,
China.

New carbon-carbon bond formation reactions expand our horizon of retrosynthetic
analysis for the synthesis of complex organic molecules. Although many methods
are now available for the formation of C(sp(2))-C(sp(3)) and C(sp(3))-C(sp(3))
bonds via transition metal-catalyzed cross-coupling of alkyl organometallic
reagents, direct use of readily available olefins in a formal fashion of
hydrocarbonation to make C(sp(2))-C(sp(3)) and C(sp(3))-C(sp(3)) bonds remains to
be developed. Here we report the discovery of a general process for the
intermolecular reductive coupling of unactivated olefins with alkyl or aryl
electrophiles under the promotion of a simple nickel catalyst system. This new
reaction presents a conceptually unique and practical strategy for the
construction of C(sp(2))-C(sp(3)) and C(sp(3))-C(sp(3)) bonds without using any
organometallic reagent. The reductive olefin hydrocarbonation also exhibits
excellent compatibility with varieties of synthetically important functional
groups and therefore, provides a straightforward approach for modification of
complex organic molecules containing olefin groups.

PMID: 27033405  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Nano Lett. 2016 Mar 31. [Epub ahead of print]

Rethinking Coal: Thin Films of Solution Processed Natural Carbon Nanoparticles
for Electronic Devices.

Keller BD, Ferralis N, Grossman JC.

Disordered carbon materials, both amorphous and with long-range order, have been 
used in a variety of applications, from conductive additives and contact
materials, to transistors and photovoltaics. Here we show a flexible
solution-based method of preparing thin films with tunable electrical properties,
from suspensions of ball-milled coals following centrifugation. The as-prepared
films retain the rich carbon chemistry of the starting coals, with conductivities
ranging over orders of magnitude, while thermal treatment of the resulting films 
further tunes the electrical conductivity in excess of 7 orders of magnitude.
Optical absorption measurements demonstrate tunable optical gaps from 0 to 1.8
eV. Through low-temperature conductivity measurements and Raman spectroscopy, we 
demonstrate that variable range hopping controls the electrical properties in
as-prepared and thermally treated films and that annealing increases the sp2
content, localization length, and disorder. The measured hopping energies
demonstrate electronic properties similar to amorphous carbon materials and
reduced graphene oxide. Finally, Joule heating devices were fabricated from
coal-based films, and achieved temperatures as high as 285 °C with excellent
stability.

PMID: 27031328  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. J Org Chem. 2016 Mar 29. [Epub ahead of print]

Copper-Catalyzed C(sp2)-H Difluoroalkylation of Aldehyde-Derived Hydrazones with 
Diboron as Reductant.

Ke M, Song Q.

An efficient and general method for C(sp2)-H difluoroalkylation of
aldehyde-derived hydrazones via Cu(II)/B2pin2 catalyzed reaction between
difluoroalkyl bromides and hydrazones was developed. In this reaction, both
aromatic and aliphatic aldehyde-derived hydrazones could be achieved in good to
excellent yields. For some heteroaromatic aldehyde-derived hydrazones, two
fluoroacetates could be introduced onto the final products. Preliminary mechanism
study manifested that a difluoroalkyl radical via SET pathway was involved in the
reaction. And catalytic diboron reagent plays an indispensible role in this
transformation.

PMID: 27022838  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Biosens Bioelectron. 2016 Mar 19. pii: S0956-5663(16)30235-4. doi:
10.1016/j.bios.2016.03.046. [Epub ahead of print]

A high sensitivity field effect transistor biosensor for methylene blue detection
utilize graphene oxide nanoribbon.

Lin TC(1), Li YS(2), Chiang WH(2), Pei Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electrical Engineering, National Chung Hsing University,
Taichung 40227, Taiwan. (2)Department of Chemical Engineering, National Taiwan
University of Science and Technology, Taipei 10607, Taiwan. (3)Department of
Electrical Engineering, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung 40227, Taiwan; 
Graduate Institute of Optoelectronic Engineering, National Chung Hsing
University, Taichung 40227, Taiwan. Electronic address:
zingway@dragon.nchu.edu.tw.

In this work, we developed a field effect transistor (FET) biosensor utilizing
solution-processed graphene oxide nanoribbon (GONR) for methylene blue (MB)
sensing. MB is a unique material; one of its crucial applications is as a marker 
in the detection of biomaterials. Therefore, a highly sensitive biosensor with a 
low detection limit that can be fabricated simply in a noncomplex detection
scheme is desirable. GONR is made by unzipping multiwall carbon nanotubes, which 
can be mass-produced at low temperature. The GONR-FET biosensor demonstrated a
sensitivity of 12.5µA/mM (determined according to the drain current difference
caused by the MB concentration change). The Raman spectra indicate that the
materials quality of the GONR and the domain size for the C=C sp(2) bonding were 
both improved after MB detection. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy revealed that 
the hydroxyl groups on the GONR were removed by the reductive MB. According to
XPS and Raman, the positive charge is proposed to transfer from MB to GONR during
sensing. This transfer causes charge in-neutrality in the GONR which is
compensated by releasing OH functional groups. With high sensitivity, a low
detection limit, and a simple device structure, the GONR-FET sensor is suitable
for sensing biomaterials.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 27020064  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Org Lett. 2016 Mar 28. [Epub ahead of print]

Exploiting the Bis-Nucleophilicity of a-Aminoboronates: Copper-Catalyzed,
Intramolecular Aminoalkylations of Bromobenzoyl Chlorides.

Dumas AM(1), Sieradzki AJ(1), Donnelly LJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Process Chemistry, Merck Sharp and Dohme Ltd. , Hertford Road,
Hoddesdon EN11 9BU, United Kingdom.

a-Aminoboronate salts are interesting examples of heteroatomic species containing
adjacent nucleophilic centers. We have developed an acylation/arylation reaction 
using 2-bromobenzoyl chlorides as bis-electrophiles that harnesses the
nucleophilicity of both positions, leading to isoindolinones. The reactions
proceed under mild conditions via an intramolecular, Cu-catalyzed sp(3)-sp(2)
coupling, giving products in up to 95% yield. These conditions enable arylation
of a,a-disubstituted aminoboronates, which are difficult to accomplish using
methods based on less abundant and more expensive transition metals.

PMID: 27017848  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. J Phys Chem B. 2016 Mar 25. [Epub ahead of print]

HCN, Formamidic Acid and Formamide in Aqueous Solution: A Free Energy Map.

Kua J, Thrush KL.

What chemical species might be found if water or ammonia reacts with HCN in
aqueous solution under neutral conditions? Is it energetically favorable for
formamidic acid, the first hydration product of HCN, to tautomerize into
formamide under standard conditions? Do these molecules form stable oligomers in 
solution? To answer these questions, we constructed a Gibbs free energy map of
the molecules that might be present to evaluate their relative thermodynamic and 
kinetic stability. Our protocol utilizes density functional theory calculations, 
Poisson-Boltzmann implicit solvent and thermodynamic corrections. We find that
for C1 species, formamide is indeed the thermodynamic sink, although the initial 
barrier to hydration is ~30 kcal/mol. Molecules with one carbon and three
heteroatoms are less stable. We also find that for HCN trimerization, although
the planar sp(2) six-membered ring is more stable compared to its monomers, the
reverse is true for the non-planar sp(3) six-membered rings formed by
trimerization of formamidic acid or formamide.

PMID: 27016454  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. Chem Commun (Camb). 2016 Mar 24. [Epub ahead of print]

Palladium-catalyzed C(sp(3))-C(sp(2)) cross-coupling of homoleptic rare-earth
metal trialkyl complexes with aryl bromides: efficient synthesis of
functionalized benzyltrimethylsilanes.

Cai G(1), Huang Y(1), Du T(1), Zhang S(1), Yao B(1), Li X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Cluster Science of Ministry of Education, School of
Chemistry, Beijing Institute of Technology, 5 South Zhongguancun Street, Haidian 
District, Beijing 100081, China. yaobo@bit.edu.cn xfli@bit.edu.cn.

The first C(sp(3))-C(sp(2)) cross-coupling of rare-earth metal alkyl complexes
with aryl bromides has been developed. This reaction was conducted at low
catalyst loading (0.5 mol%) and exhibited a broad substrate scope, thus providing
a facile method for the synthesis of benzyltrimethylsilanes with diverse
functional groups.

PMID: 27009850  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. J Am Chem Soc. 2016 Mar 22. [Epub ahead of print]

Bimetallic C-C Bond Forming Reductive Elimination from Nickel.

Xu H, Diccianni JB, Katigbak J, Hu C, Zhang Y, Diao T.

Ni-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions have found important applications in
organic synthesis. The fundamental characterization of the key steps in
cross-coupling reactions, including C-C bond forming reductive elimination,
represents a significant challenge. Bimolecular pathways were invoked in early
proposals, but the experimental evidence was quite limited. We present the
preparation of well-defined (pyridine-pyrrolyl)Ni mono-methyl and phenyl
complexes that allow the direct observation of bimolecular reductive elimination 
to generate ethane and biphenyl, respectively. The sp3-sp3 and sp2-sp2 couplings 
proceed via two distinct pathways. Oxidants promote the fast formation of Ni(III)
from (pyridine-pyrrolyl)Ni-methyl, which dimerizes to afford a bimetallic Ni(III)
intermediate. Our data is most consistent with the subsequent methyl coupling
from the bimetallic Ni(III) to generate ethane as the rate-determining step. In
contrast, the formation of biphenyl is facilitated by the coordination of a
bidentate donor ligand.

PMID: 27005998  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Burns. 2016 Mar 18. pii: S0305-4179(16)00078-4. doi: 10.1016/j.burns.2016.02.018.
[Epub ahead of print]

Investigating the phenomenology of imagery following traumatic burn injuries.

Cockerham ES(1), Çili S(2), Stopa L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Salisbury Foundation NHS Trust, Odstock Road, Salisbury SP2 8BJ, United
Kingdom. Electronic address: elaine_cockerham@yahoo.co.uk. (2)University of
Southampton, Highfield, Southampton SO17 1BJ, United Kingdom. Electronic address:
soljana.cili@gmail.com. (3)University of Southampton, Highfield, Southampton SO17
1BJ, United Kingdom. Electronic address: l.stopa@soton.ac.uk.

Intrusive images related to adverse experiences are an important feature of a
number of psychological disorders and a hallmark symptom of posttraumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD). Depression, anxiety, and PTSD are all common reactions following
a burn injury. However, the nature of burn-related trauma memories and associated
intrusions and their contribution to psychological disorders is not well
understood. The aim of the study was to take a broad look at the nature of
imagery experienced by people who have sustained a burn injury. Nineteen
participants completed self-report questionnaires assessing depression, anxiety, 
and PTSD symptoms and were administered a semi-structured interview which
explored the characteristics (vividness, sensory modalities, intrusions, emotion 
intensity) of imagery formed in relation to their burn injuries. Ongoing
intrusive imagery was reported by over half the participants and there were
significant correlations between frequency of intrusive images and posttraumatic 
symptoms, and between intensity of emotions associated with intrusive images and 
depression and posttraumatic symptoms. A thematic analysis of the memory
narratives revealed four main themes: threat to self, view of the world, view of 
others, and positive psychological change. These results are discussed in
relation to existing trauma theory and burn injury literature. Implications for
clinical practice and recommendations for further research are proposed.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd and ISBI. All rights reserved.

PMID: 27005586  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. J Am Chem Soc. 2016 Mar 22. [Epub ahead of print]

Metal-free sp2-C-H borylation as a common reactivity pattern of frustrated
2-aminophenylboranes.

Chernichenko K, Lindqvist M, Kótai B, Nieger M, Sorochkina K, Pápai I, Repo T.

C-H borylation is a powerful and atom-efficient method for converting affordable 
and abundant chemicals into versatile organic reagents used in the production of 
fine chemicals and functional materials. Herein we report a facile C-H borylation
of aromatic and olefinic C-H bonds with 2-aminophenylboranes. Computational and
experimental studies reveal that the metal-free C-H insertion proceeds via a
frustrated Lewis pair mechanism, a heterolytic splitting of the C-H bond by a
cooperative action of the amine and the boryl groups. Adapted geometry of the
reactive B and N centers results in an unprecedentently low kinetic barrier for
both the insertion into sp2-C-H bond and the intramolecular protonation of
sp2-C-B bond in 2-ammoniophenyl(aryl)- or -(alkenyl)borates. This common
reactivity pattern serves as a platform for various catalytic reactions such as
C-H borylation and hydrogenation of alkynes. In particular, we demonstrate that
simple 2-aminopyridinium salts efficiently catalyze the C-H borylation of
hetarenes with catecholborane. This reaction is presumably mediated by a borenium
species isoelectronic to 2-aminophenylboranes.

PMID: 27003334  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 22;11(3):e0152022. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0152022.
eCollection 2016.

Proteomic Profiling of Mouse Liver following Acute Toxoplasma gondii Infection.

He JJ(1), Ma J(1,)(2), Elsheikha HM(3), Song HQ(1), Zhou DH(1), Zhu XQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Key Laboratory of
Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute,
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu Province 730046, PR
China. (2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Hunan Agricultural University,
Changsha, Hunan Province 410128, PR China. (3)Faculty of Medicine and Health
Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine and Science, University of Nottingham,
Sutton Bonington Campus, Loughborough, LE12 5RD, United Kingdom.

Toxoplasma gondii remains a global public health problem. However, its
pathophysiology is still not-completely understood particularly the impact of
infection on host liver metabolism. We performed iTRAQ-based proteomic analysis
to evaluate early liver protein responses in BALB/c mice following infection with
T. gondii PYS strain (genotype ToxoDB#9) infection. Our data revealed
modification of protein expression in key metabolic pathways, as indicated by the
upregulation of immune response and downregulation of mitochondrial respiratory
chain, and the metabolism of fatty acids, lipids and xenobiotics. T. gondii seems
to hijack host PPAR signaling pathway to downregulate the metabolism of fatty
acids, lipids and energy in the liver. The metabolism of over 400 substances was 
affected by the downregulation of genes involved in xenobiotic metabolism. The
top 10 transcription factors used by upregulated genes were Stat2, Stat1, Irf2,
Irf1, Sp2, Egr1, Stat3, Klf4, Elf1 and Gabpa, while the top 10 transcription
factors of downregulated genes were Hnf4A, Ewsr1, Fli1, Hnf4g, Nr2f1, Pparg,
Rxra, Hnf1A, Foxa1 and Foxo1. These findings indicate global reprogramming of the
metabolism of the mouse liver after acute T. gondii infection. Functional
characterization of the altered proteins may enhance understanding of the host
responses to T. gondii infection and lead to the identification of new
therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC4803215
PMID: 27003162  [PubMed - in process]


14. Chemistry. 2016 Mar 22. doi: 10.1002/chem.201505097. [Epub ahead of print]

Total Synthesis, Stereochemical Assignment, and Field-Testing of the Sex
Pheromone of the Strepsipteran Xenos peckii.

Zhai H(1), Hrabar M(2), Gries R(2), Gries G(3), Britton R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British Columbia,
V5A 1S6, Canada. (2)Department of Biological Sciences, Simon Fraser University,
Burnaby, British Columbia, V5A 1S6, Canada. (3)Department of Biological Sciences,
Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British Columbia, V5A 1S6, Canada.
gries@sfu.ca. (4)Department of Chemistry, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby,
British Columbia, V5A 1S6, Canada. rbritton@sfu.ca.

The sex pheromone of the endoparasitoid insect Xenos peckii (Strepsiptera:
Xenidae) was recently identified as
(7E,11E)-3,5,9,11-tetramethyl-7,11-tridecadienal. Herein we report the asymmetric
synthesis of three candidate stereostructures for this pheromone using a
synthetic strategy that relies on an sp(3) -sp(2) Suzuki-Miyaura coupling to
construct the correctly configured C7-alkene function. Comparison of (1) H NMR
spectra derived from the candidate stereostructures to that of the natural sex
pheromone indicated a relative configuration of (3R*,5S*,9R*). Chiral gas
chromatographic (GC) analyses of these compounds supported an assignment of
(3R,5S,9R) for the natural product. Furthermore, in a 16-replicate field
experiment, traps baited with the synthetic (3R,5S,9R)-enantiomer alone or in
combination with the (3S,5R,9S)-enantiomer captured 23 and 18 X. peckii males,
respectively (mean±SE: 1.4±0.33 and 1.1±0.39), whereas traps baited with the
synthetic (3S,5R,9S)-enantiomer or a solvent control yielded no captures of
males. These strong field trapping data, in combination with spectroscopic and
chiral GC data, unambiguously demonstrate that
(3R,5S,9R,7E,11E)-3,5,9,11-tetramethyl-7,11-tridecadienal is the X. peckii sex
pheromone.

© 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 27001535  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


15. J Urban Health. 2016 Mar 21. [Epub ahead of print]

What Factors Contribute to Intimate Partner Violence Against Women in Urban,
Conflict-Affected Settings? Qualitative Findings from Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire.

Cardoso LF(1), Gupta J(2), Shuman S(3), Cole H(4), Kpebo D(5), Falb KL(6).

Author information: 
(1)School of Social Policy and Practice, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA. gurfein@sp2.upenn.edu. (2)George Mason University,
Department of Global and Community Health, College of Health and Human Services, 
Fairfax, VA, USA. (3)La Salle University, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (4)International
Rescue Committee, London, UK. (5)International Rescue Committee, Abidjan, Côte
d'Ivoire. (6)International Rescue Committee, New York, USA.

Rapid urbanization is a key driver of the unique set of health risks facing urban
populations. One of the most critical health hazards facing urban women is
intimate partner violence (IPV). In post-conflict urban areas, women may face an 
even greater risk of IPV. Yet, few studies have examined the IPV experiences of
urban-dwelling, conflict-affected women, including those who have been internally
displaced. This study qualitatively examined the social and structural
characteristics of the urban environment that contributed to the IPV experiences 
of women residing in post-conflict Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire. Ten focus groups were 
conducted with men and women, both internally displaced (IDPs) and non-displaced.
Lack of support networks, changing gender roles, and tensions between traditional
gender norms and those of the "modern" city were reported as key contributors to 
IPV. Urban poverty and with it unemployment, food insecurity, and housing
instability also played a role. Finally, IDPs faced heightened vulnerability to
IPV as a result of displacement and discrimination. The relationship between
economic strains and IPV are similar to other conflict-affected settings, but
Abidjan's urban environment presented other unique characteristics contributing
to IPV. Understanding these factors is crucial to designing appropriate services 
for women and for implementing IPV reduction interventions in urban areas.
Strengthening formal and informal mechanisms for help-seeking, utilizing
multi-modal interventions that address economic stress and challenge inequitable 
gender norms, as well as tailoring programs specifically for IDPs, are some
considerations for IPV program planning focused on conflict-affected women in
urban areas.

PMID: 27000124  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


16. J Am Chem Soc. 2016 Mar 23. [Epub ahead of print]

Tandem C(sp(2))-OMe Activation/C(sp(2))-C(sp(2)) Coupling in Early
Transition-Metal Complexes: Aromatic C-O Activation beyond Late Transition
Metals.

Radkov V(1), Roisnel T, Trifonov A(1), Carpentier JF, Kirillov E.

Author information: 
(1)G. A. Razuvaev Institute of Organometallic Chemistry of RAS , 603950 Nizhny
Novgorod, Russia.

We report on combined structural, kinetic, and computational studies unraveling
the mechanism of a unique, highly selective intramolecular C(sp(2))-OMe
cleavage/C(sp(2))-C(sp(2)) coupling tandem reaction in group 3 metal (Y and Sc)
complexes of amidine-amidopyridinate ligands. The latter process represents a
rare stoichiometric model of the nonredox cleavage of inert C(sp(2))-O bonds
relevant to cross-coupling reactions of aromatic ethers catalyzed by late
transition metals.

PMID: 26999638  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


17. Molecules. 2016 Mar 18;21(3). pii: E375. doi: 10.3390/molecules21030375.

A Novel Biomolecule-Mediated Reduction of Graphene Oxide: A Multifunctional
Anti-Cancer Agent.

Choi YJ(1), Kim E(2), Han J(3), Kim JH(4), Gurunathan S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Konkuk University, Seoul
143-701, Korea. choi_yunjung@nate.com. (2)Department of Stem Cell and
Regenerative Biology, Konkuk University, Seoul 143-701, Korea.
np-gennao@hanmail.net. (3)Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology,
Konkuk University, Seoul 143-701, Korea. woong1211@naver.com. (4)Department of
Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Konkuk University, Seoul 143-701, Korea.
jhkim541@konkuk.ac.kr. (5)Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology,
Konkuk University, Seoul 143-701, Korea. gsangiliyandi@yahoo.com.

Graphene oxide (GO) is a monolayer of carbon atoms that form a dense honeycomb
structure, consisting of hydroxyl and epoxide functional groups on the two
accessible sides and carboxylic groups at the edges. In contrast, graphene is a
two-dimensional sheet of sp2-hybridized carbon atoms packed into a honeycomb
lattice. Graphene has great potential for use in biomedical applications due to
its excellent physical and chemical properties. In this study, we report a facile
and environmentally friendly approach for the synthesis of reduced graphene oxide
(rGO) using uric acid (UA). The synthesized uric acid-reduced graphene oxide
(UA-rGO) was fully characterized by ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) absorption
spectra, X-ray diffraction (XRD), dynamic light scattering (DLS), Fourier
transform infrared (FTIR), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and Raman
spectroscopy. GO and UA-rGO induced a dose-dependent decrease in cell viability
and induced cytotoxicity in human ovarian cancer cells. The results from this
study suggest that UA-rGO could cause apoptosis in mammalian cells. The toxicity 
of UA-rGO is significantly higher than GO. Based on our findings, UA-rGO shows
cytotoxic effects against human ovarian cancer cells, and its synthesis is
environmentally friendly. UA-rGO significantly inhibits cell viability by
increasing lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) release, reactive oxygen species (ROS)
generation, activation of caspase-3, and DNA fragmentation. This is the first
report to describe the comprehensive effects of UA-rGO in ovarian cancer cells.
We believe that the functional aspects of newly synthesized UA-rGO will provide
advances towards various biomedical applications in the near future.

PMID: 26999102  [PubMed - in process]


18. Chemistry. 2016 Mar 21. doi: 10.1002/chem.201600865. [Epub ahead of print]

Catalyst-Free Three-Component Tandem CDC Cyclization: Convenient Access to
Isoindolinones from Aromatic Acid, Amides, and DMSO by a Pummerer-Type
Rearrangement.

Wang PM(1), Pu F(1), Liu KY(1), Li CJ(2), Liu ZW(1), Shi XY(3), Fan J(1), Yang
MY(1), Wei JF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Applied Surface and Colloid Chemistry (Ministry of
Education), Key Laboratory for Macromolecular Science of Shaanxi Province, School
of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi'an, 710062, 
P.R. China. (2)Department of Chemistry, McGill University, Montreal, QC, H3A 0B8,
Canada. (3)Key Laboratory of Applied Surface and Colloid Chemistry (Ministry of
Education), Key Laboratory for Macromolecular Science of Shaanxi Province, School
of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi'an, 710062, 
P.R. China. shixy@snnu.edu.cn.

A catalyst-free multicomponent CDC reaction is rarely reported, especially for
the intermolecular tandem CDC cyclization, which represents an important strategy
for constructing cyclic compounds. Herein, a three-component tandem CDC
cyclization by a Pummerer-type rearrangement to afford biologically relevant
isoindolinones from aromatic acids, amides, and DMSO, is described. This
intermolecular tandem reaction undergoes a C(sp(2) )-H/C(sp(3) )-H
cross-dehydrogenative coupling, C-N bond formation, and intramolecular amidation.
A notable feature of this novel protocol is avoiding a catalyst and additive
(apart from oxidant).

© 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26998754  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


19. J Chem Educ. 2015 Dec 8;92(12):2170-2172. Epub 2015 Oct 8.

Resonance Energy of an Arene Hydrocarbon from Heat of Combustion Measurements.

Kolesnichenko VL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Xavier University, New Orleans, Louisiana 70125,
United States.

A simple experimental method for determination of the resonance energy by
measuring the energies of combustion for two isomeric compounds, aromatic
1-tert-butyl-3,5-dimethylbenzene and nonaromatic
trans,trans,cis-1,5,9-cyclododecatriene is proposed. Both compounds not only have
the same molecular formula, but also contain the same number of sp(2) and sp(3)
carbon atoms. After converting the obtained values into the gas phase heats of
combustion and subtracting one value from another, the resulting mean resonance
energy of 184 kJ/mol was obtained. The proposed method can be offered as an
experiment for an undergraduate physical chemistry lab curriculum.

PMCID: PMC4795981
PMID: 26997668  [PubMed]


20. Exp Parasitol. 2016 Mar 15. pii: S0014-4894(16)30037-6. doi:
10.1016/j.exppara.2016.03.011. [Epub ahead of print]

Generation and characterization of monoclonal antibodies specific for 18 kDa
antigen from Taenia solium cysticerci.

Zhang S(1), Luo X(1), Guo A(1), Zhu X(1), Cai X(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Key Laboratory of
Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute,
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou 730046, China. (2)State Key
Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Key Laboratory of Veterinary
Parasitology of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou 730046, China. Electronic address:
caixuepeng@caas.cn.

The gene encoding a mature 18 kDa glycoprotein of Taenia solium cysticerci (Ts18)
was cloned and bacterially expressed with a His-tagged fusion protein. Monoclonal
antibodies (MAbs) against the recombinant Ts18 antigen were generated in vitro by
routine murine hybridoma technique of fusing splenocytes, from BALB/c mice
immunized with the vesicular fluid of T. solium cysticerci (TsVF), with mouse
myeloma cells (SP2/0). The reactivity and specificity of these MAbs were
evaluated by indirect ELISA and immunoblotting techniques. Three stable hybridoma
clones, namely 3B11, 6C5, and 6G4, were screened using His-Ts18-based ELISA, and 
these showed two IgG1 isotypes and one IgM isotype. All MAbs reacted with
His-Ts18 at molecular weight (MW) 12.8 kDa and the native antigen at MW 18 kDa in
TsVF and whole larval extracts (WLE). In a dot blotting test, MAbs 6C5 and 6G4
showed no obvious cross-reactivity with heterologous vesicular fluids from other 
taeniid species, including T. saginata (TsaVF), T. pisiformis (TpVF), T.
hydatigena (ThVF), T. multiceps (TmVF), and Echinococcus granulosus (EgVF).
Immunofluorescent assays showed that MAb 6C5 specifically reacted with the Ts18
expressed from pEGFP-N1-Ts18-transfected HeLa cells. Immunolocalization analysis,
using MAb 6C5 as a probe, indicated that Ts18 was present at high concentrations 
in the region of the larval sucker and spiral canal. The results indicate that
the Ts18 protein is an abundantly secreted parasite protein and MAbs against it
might provide a step forward for improving the diagnosis of porcine
cysticercosis.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26993086  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


21. Chem Commun (Camb). 2016 Mar 18. [Epub ahead of print]

An unprecedented benzannulation of oxindoles with enalcarbenoids: a
regioselective approach to functionalized carbazoles.

Rathore KS(1), Lad BS(1), Chennamsetti H(1), Katukojvala S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Science Education & Research,
Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh 462066, India. sk@iiserb.ac.in.

A novel Rh(ii)/Brønsted acid catalyzed tandem benzannulation of oxindoles with
enaldiazo carbonyls led to the formation of valuable 1-hydroxy-2-acylcarbazoles. 
This reaction is proposed to involve a formal insertion of a rhodium
enalcarbenoid into an oxindole sp(2) C-O bond, an oxa-Michael addition,
Friedel-Crafts reaction and a semipinacol type 1,2-carbonyl migration.

PMID: 26992045  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


22. J Org Chem. 2016 Mar 24. [Epub ahead of print]

I2-Catalyzed Multicomponent Reactions for Accessing Densely Functionalized
Pyrazolo[1,5-a]pyrimidines and Their Disulphenylated Derivatives.

Sun J(1), Qiu JK(1), Jiang B(2), Hao WJ(2), Guo C(1), Tu SJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Biotechnology and
Pharmaceutical Engineering, Nanjing Tech University , Nanjing 211816, P. R.
China. (2)School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of
Green Synthetic Chemistry for Functional Materials, Jiangsu Normal University ,
Xuzhou 221116, P. R. China.

New I2-catalyzed multicomponent bicyclization reactions of ß-ketonitriles with
sulfonyl hydrazides have been established, providing a direct and metal-free
access toward unreported pyrazolo[1,5-a]pyrimidin-4-ium sulfonates. The latter
could be quantitatively converted into densely functionalized
pyrazolo[1,5-a]pyrimidines in the presence of bases. Using sulfonyl hydrazides as
a sulfenylating agent, the resulting pyrazolo[1,5-a]pyrimidines enabled
I2-catalyzed unprecedented disulphenylations to access fully substituted
pyrazolo[1,5-a]pyrimidines through direct C(sp(2))-H bond bifunctionalization.

PMID: 26991413  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


23. J Am Chem Soc. 2016 Mar 18. [Epub ahead of print]

A General Method for Aminoquinoline-Directed, Copper-Catalyzed sp(2) C-H Bond
Amination.

Roane J(1), Daugulis O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Houston , Houston, Texas 77204-5003,
United States.

An operationally simple and general method for copper-catalyzed,
aminoquinoline-assisted amination of ß-C(sp(2))-H bonds of benzoic acid
derivatives is reported. The reaction employs Cu(OAc)2 or (CuOH)2CO3 catalysts,
an amine coupling partner, and oxygen from air as a terminal oxidant.
Exceptionally high generality with respect to amine coupling partners is
observed. Specifically, primary and secondary aliphatic and aromatic amines,
heterocycles, such as indoles, pyrazole, and carbazole, sulfonamides, as well as 
electron-deficient aromatic and heteroaromatic amines are competent coupling
components.

PMID: 26990413  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


24. Monoclon Antib Immunodiagn Immunother. 2016 Mar 15. [Epub ahead of print]

Preparation of Monoclonal Antibodies and a Simple Myeloperoxidase-Immunosorbent
Assay for Detecting Human Myeloperoxidase.

Bian ZP(1), Li XZ(1), Wu HF(2), Xu JD(2), Gu CR(1), Chen XJ(1), Yang D(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Research Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, First Affiliated Hospital of
Nanjing Medical University , Nanjing, China . (2)2 Department of Cardiology,
First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University , Nanjing, China .

Myeloperoxidase (MPO), a leukocyte hemoprotein released from neutrophils, is
thought to be a potential participant in plaque formation and plaque rupture.
Therefore, MPO is regarded as an early marker predicting the risk for
atherosclerosis, especially for coronary artery disease and acute coronary
syndrome. We generated hybridoma clones 1E3 and 3E8 secreting monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs) specific to human MPO. BALB/c mice were immunized with MPO
protein purified from human neutrophils. Splenocytes from these mice were fused
with the mouse myeloma cell line SP2/0. Based on isotyping of the mAbs, both
clones 1E3 and 3E8 were referred to the IgG1 subclass. The specificities of 1E3
and 3E8 were assessed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and only 3E8 
was confirmed by western blot. We developed a simple MPO-immunosorbent assay
(MPO-ISA) on microplate based on both the immune activity and peroxidase activity
of MPO. The mAb secreted by clone 3E8 was chosen as coating antibody to capture
the plasma MPO without interfering with the peroxidase activity of MPO. Then,
tetramethylbenzidine substrate was added to the microwell directly, catalyzed by 
captured MPO, and a colored product was formed. The simple MPO-ISA test has a
sensitivity of 3.68<U+2009>ng/mL. The linear concentration of MPO-ISA for commercial MPO
standard ranged to 250<U+2009>ng/mL. The average recovery rate is 101.02%. The
imprecision within day was <10% at three different MPO levels. The imprecision
between-day was <10% at low and middle MPO levels and varied to 14.61% at the
high MPO level. We found that the established MPO-ISA can detect the plasma MPO
from human and cavy, but not from mouse and rat. Compared with the commercial
human MPO ELISA assay, the MPO-ISA can be used to detect the natural human MPO
protein, but not recombinant MPO polypeptides. The generated mAbs and MPO-ISA
test may be useful tools to assess risk for inflammation and cardiac events.

PMID: 26978734  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


25. Int J Vasc Med. 2016;2016:7928681. doi: 10.1155/2016/7928681. Epub 2016 Feb 7.

Dependence of Proximal GC Boxes and Binding Transcription Factors in the
Regulation of Basal and Valproic Acid-Induced Expression of t-PA.

Ulfhammer E(1), Larsson P(1), Magnusson M(1), Karlsson L(1), Bergh N(1), Jern
S(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Wallenberg Laboratory for Cardiovascular Research, Institute of Medicine, 
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, 413 45 Gothenburg, Sweden.

Objective. Endothelial tissue-type plasminogen activator (t-PA) release is a
pivotal response to protect the circulation from occluding thrombosis. We have
shown that the t-PA gene is epigenetically regulated and greatly induced by the
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor valproic acid (VPA). We now investigated
involvement of known t-PA promoter regulatory elements and evaluated dependence
of potential interacting transcription factors/cofactors. Methods. A reporter
vector with an insert, separately mutated at either the t-PA promoter CRE or GC
box II or GC box III elements, was transfected into HT-1080 and HUVECs and
challenged with VPA. HUVECs were targeted with siRNA against histone acetyl
transferases (HAT) and selected transcription factors from the Sp/KLF family.
Results. An intact VPA-response was observed with CRE mutated constructs, whereas
mutation of GC boxes II and III reduced the magnitude of the induction by 54 and 
79% in HT-1080 and 49 and 50% in HUVECs, respectively. An attenuated induction of
t-PA mRNA was observed after Sp2, Sp4, and KLF5 depletion. KLF2 and p300 (HAT)
were identified as positive regulators of basal t-PA expression and Sp4 and KLF9 
as repressors. Conclusion. VPA-induced t-PA expression is dependent on the
proximal GC boxes in the t-PA promoter and may involve interactions with Sp2,
Sp4, and KLF5.

PMCID: PMC4761389
PMID: 26966581  [PubMed]


26. Adv Biomed Res. 2016 Feb 8;5:15. doi: 10.4103/2277-9175.175901. eCollection 2016.

Preparation of monoclonal antibodies against mannosylated lipoarabinomannan
(ManLAM), a surface antigen of BCG vaccine produced in Iran.

Taghikhani M(1), Moukhah R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Tehran University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. (2)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, School of
Medicine, The University of Tarbiat Modares, Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Bacille Calmette-Guerin (BCG) vaccine is the only vaccine that is
used against Mycobacterium tuberculosis, but its efficacy is limited in
mycobacterium-endemic regions. One of the major antigens present on the cell
envelope of the vaccine that suppresses the immune system is mannosylated
lipoarabinomannan (ManLAM).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this study, we immunized 4-week-old mice with sonicated
BCG vaccine injected intraperitoneally two times at an interval of 2 weeks and
with ManLAM antigen injected intravenously and then extracted the spleen cells of
the immunized mice. They were fused with SP2/0 myeloma cells.
RESULTS: Five cell line clones producing antibody against ManLAM antigens were
prepared and each clone was tested for immunoreactivity against sonicated BCG and
purified ManLAM by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and immunoblotting. 
The clones designated H13F33E11 and H23D91G4 reacted strongly with ManLAM.
Immunoblotting using monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) H13F33E11 and H23D91G4 showed
that these MAbs bind to ManLAM with a molecular weight of 35 kDa.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we produced a monoclonal antibody of immunoglobulin
G3 (IgG3) subclass. This MAb can be used for purification of ManLAM in culture
media and detection of the antigen in patient's urine and for increasing the
efficacy of BCG vaccine.

PMCID: PMC4770601
PMID: 26962517  [PubMed]


27. Br J Hosp Med (Lond). 2016 Mar;77(3):C41-4. doi: 10.12968/hmed.2016.77.3.C41.

Assessment of hand injuries.

Wong KY(1), Maw J(2), Gillespie P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Plastic Surgery Registrar in the Department of Plastic and Reconstructive
Surgery, Salisbury NHS Foundation Trust, Salisbury SP2 8BJ. (2)Clinical Fellow in
the Department of Urology, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,
Cambridge. (3)Consultant Plastic and Hand Surgeon in the Department of Plastic
and Reconstructive Surgery, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, 
Cambridge.

PMID: 26961459  [PubMed - in process]


28. Br J Hosp Med (Lond). 2016 Mar;77(3):C34-40. doi: 10.12968/hmed.2016.77.3.C34.

Hand anatomy.

Maw J(1), Wong KY(2), Gillespie P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Fellow in the Department of Urology, Cambridge University Hospitals
NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge. (2)Plastic Surgery Registrar in the Department
of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Salisbury NHS Foundation Trust, Salisbury 
SP2 8BJ. (3)Consultant Plastic and Hand Surgeon in the Department of Plastic and 
Reconstructive Surgery, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,
Cambridge.

PMID: 26961458  [PubMed - in process]


29. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg. 2016 Apr;136(4):579-83. doi: 10.1007/s00402-016-2415-y. 
Epub 2016 Mar 5.

Effective prevention of recurrent dislocation following primary cemented
Endo-MarkIII/SP2 total hip arthroplasty using a posterior lip augmentation
device.

Schmidl S(1), Jakobs O(2), Guenther D(3), Lausmann C(2), Schoof B(2), Beckmann
J(4), Gehrke T(2), Gebauer M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Orthopedic Surgery HELIOS ENDO-Klinik Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany.
st.schmidl@hotmail.de. (2)Orthopedic Surgery HELIOS ENDO-Klinik Hamburg, Hamburg,
Germany. (3)Department of Trauma, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(4)Sportsclinic Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany.

PURPOSE: This retrospective study was performed to determine the effectiveness of
preventing recurrent dislocation following primary cemented Endo-MarkIII/SP2
total hip replacement using a posterior lip augmentation device (PLAD).
METHODS: Between January 2003 and Dezember 2006, 27 PLADs were used in the
treatment of recurrent hip dislocation in 27 patients who had received a cemented
primary total hip arthroplasty using Endo-MarkIII/SP2 (Waldemar LINK, Hamburg,
Germany) components. The mean number of dislocations prior to stabilization with 
this specific device was 2.6 (range 2-4, SD ± 0.4) with a mean time to revision
surgery of 10 months (IQR 13). The mean age of the patients at time of revision
surgery was 81.5 years (range 70-94, SD ± 6.9). The control group evaluating the 
clinical outcome using the Harris Hip Score (HHS) also received a cemented
primary total hip arthroplasty using the same implants. A retrospective clinical 
and radiological review was carried out at a mean follow-up of 68.5 months (range
30-103, SD ± 17.7).
RESULTS: Of the 27 patients, 6 had died at the time of the latest review, with
the posterior lip augmentation device still in situ and without reported further 
dislocation after PLAD application. In 2 of the remaining 21 patients recurrent
dislocation occurred, thus a subsequent revision of respective implants had to be
performed to achieve persistent joint stability. At latest follow-up no deep
infection or implant loosening occurred.
CONCLUSION: Surgical treatment of recurrent dislocation following primary
cemented Endo-MarkIII/SP2 total hip replacement using a posterior lip
augmentation device is a safe and effective procedure which can lead to a
secondary stabilization of the total hip arthroplasty in about 90 % of the
patients.

PMID: 26946002  [PubMed - in process]


30. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2016 Mar 4. [Epub ahead of print]

TransOmic analysis of forebrain sections in Sp2 conditional knockout embryonic
mice using IR-MALDESI imaging of lipids and LC-MS/MS label-free proteomics.

Loziuk P(1), Meier F(1,)(2,)(3), Johnson C(4), Ghashghaei HT(5), Muddiman DC(6).

Author information: 
(1)W.M. Keck FTMS Laboratory for Human Health Research, Department of Chemistry, 
North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, 27695, USA. (2)Department of
Chemistry, Saarland University, 66123, Saarbruecken, Germany. (3)Proteomics and
Signal Transduction, Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18,
82152, Martinsried, Germany. (4)Department of Molecular Biomedical Sciences,
College of Veterinary Medicine, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC,
27607, USA. (5)Department of Molecular Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary
Medicine, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, 27607, USA.
Troy_Ghashghaei@ncsu.edu. (6)W.M. Keck FTMS Laboratory for Human Health Research,
Department of Chemistry, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, 27695,
USA. dcmuddim@ncsu.edu.

Quantitative methods for detection of biological molecules are needed more than
ever before in the emerging age of "omics" and "big data." Here, we provide an
integrated approach for systematic analysis of the "lipidome" in tissue. To test 
our approach in a biological context, we utilized brain tissue selectively
deficient for the transcription factor Specificity Protein 2 (Sp2). Conditional
deletion of Sp2 in the mouse cerebral cortex results in developmental
deficiencies including disruption of lipid metabolism. Silver (Ag) cationization 
was implemented for infrared matrix-assisted laser desorption electrospray
ionization (IR-MALDESI) to enhance the ion abundances for olefinic lipids, as
these have been linked to regulation by Sp2. Combining Ag-doped and conventional 
IR-MALDESI imaging, this approach was extended to IR-MALDESI imaging of embryonic
mouse brains. Further, our imaging technique was combined with bottom-up shotgun 
proteomic LC-MS/MS analysis and western blot for comparing Sp2 conditional
knockout (Sp2-cKO) and wild-type (WT) cortices of tissue sections. This provided 
an integrated omics dataset which revealed many specific changes to fundamental
cellular processes and biosynthetic pathways. In particular, step-specific
altered abundances of nucleotides, lipids, and associated proteins were observed 
in the cerebral cortices of Sp2-cKO embryos. Graphical abstract TransOmic
Analysis of Dorsolateral cortices of Sp2 conditional Knockout mouse embryos.
Target tissue was extracted by laser microdissection and analyzed by LC-MS/MS
label- free quantitative proteomics. In parallel, lipid imaging of these tissues 
was performed by conventional IR-MALDESI and Agdoped IR-MALDESI imaging. These
data were then integrated to obtain insight into lipid pathways altered by
presence or absence of transcription factor Specificity Protein 2.

PMID: 26942738  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


31. Analyst. 2016 Mar 3. [Epub ahead of print]

Magnetic impurities in single-walled carbon nanotubes and graphene: a review.

Vejpravova J(1), Pacakova B(1), Kalbac M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physics of the CAS, v.v.i., Na Slovance 2, 182 21 Prague 8, Czech
Republic. vejpravo@fzu.cz. (2)J. Heyrovsky Institute of Physical Chemistry of the
CAS, v.v.i., Dolejskova 3, 182 23 Prague 8, Czech Republic.
martin.kalbac@jh-inst.cas.cz.

Control over magnetism in single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) and graphene is
of fundamental importance. Creation and manipulation using the unpaired spins
without the need for archetypal magnetic elements results in sp(2)-hybridised
nanocarbons being at the forefront of applications in both spintronics and
nanoelectronics. The crucial limitation for the experimental observation of the
intrinsic carbon magnetism stems from the presence of magnetic impurities, from
which a magnetic response usually dominates. Thus, the rigorous identification of
such magnetic impurities and their efficient removal is of enormous importance.
The present review reports on the current state-of-the-art methodology for the
detection and quantification of magnetic impurities in SWCNTs and graphene,
reflecting both the preparation and subsequent purification procedures. First,
the most common techniques for the preparation of SWCNTs (i.e., arc discharge,
laser ablation and chemical vapour deposition) and the corresponding magnetic
impurities are reviewed. Then, the available volume, surface and local probes for
the identification and quantification of the impurities are discussed, and their 
efficiency and limitations are evaluated for the given cases. A summary of the
current understanding of graphene-related magnetism in the context of the
identified impurities is also given. Finally, the key knowledge is reviewed with 
respect to future prospects in the field.

PMID: 26938351  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


32. J Am Chem Soc. 2016 Mar 18. [Epub ahead of print]

Positional Selectivity in C-H Functionalizations of 2-Benzylfurans with
Bimetallic Catalysts.

Zhang J(1), Sha SC(1), Bellomo A(1), Trongsiriwat N(1), Gao F(1), Tomson NC(1),
Walsh PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Roy and Diana Vagelos Laboratories, Penn/Merck Laboratory for High-Throughput 
Experimentation, Department of Chemistry, University of Pennsylvania , 231 South 
34th Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6323, United States.

Metal-catalyzed carbon-carbon bond-forming reactions are a mainstay in the
synthesis of pharmaceutical agents. A long-standing problem plaguing the field of
transition metal catalyzed C-H functionalization chemistry is control of
selectivity among inequivalent C-H bonds in organic reactants. Herein we advance 
an approach to direct site selectivity in the arylation of 2-benzylfurans founded
on the idea that modulation of cooperativity in bimetallic catalysts can enable
navigation of selectivity. The bimetallic catalysts introduced herein exert a
high degree of control, leading to divergent site-selective arylation reactions
of both sp(2) and sp(3) C-H bonds of 2-benzylfurans. It is proposed that the
selectivity is governed by cation-p interactions, which can be modulated by
choice of base and accompanying additives [MN(SiMe3)2, M = K or Li·12-crown-4].

PMID: 26937718  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


33. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2016 Mar 2. [Epub ahead of print]

A Study on Electrolytic Corrosion of Boron-Doped Diamond Electrodes when
Decomposing Organic Compounds.

Kashiwada T(1), Watanabe T(1), Ootani Y(2), Tateyama Y(2), Einaga Y(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Keio University , 3-14-1 Hiyoshi, Yokohama 223-8522, 
Japan. (2)International Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (WPI-MANA),
National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS) , 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba, Ibaraki
305-0044, Japan. (3)JST-ACCEL, 3-14-1 Hiyoshi, Yokohama 223-8522, Japan.

Electrolytic corrosion of boron-doped diamond (BDD) electrodes after applying a
high positive potential to decompose organic compounds in aqueous solution was
studied. Scanning electron microscopy images, Raman spectra, and glow discharge
optical emission spectroscopy revealed that relatively highly boron-doped domains
were primarily corroded and relatively low boron-doped domains remained after
electrolysis. The corrosion due to electrolysis was observed especially in
aqueous solutions of acetic acid or propionic acid, while it was not observed in 
other organic compounds such as formic acid, glucose, and methanol. Electron spin
resonance measurements after electrolysis in the acetic acid solution revealed
the generation of methyl radicals on the BDD electrodes. Here, the possible
mechanisms for the corrosion are discussed. Dangling bonds may be formed due to
abstraction of OH groups from C-OH functional groups by methyl radicals generated
on the surface of the BDD electrodes. As a result, the sp(3) diamond structure
would be converted to the sp(2) carbon structure, which can be easily etched.
Furthermore, to prevent electrolytic corrosion during electrolysis, both the
current density and the pH condition in the aqueous solution were optimized. At
low current densities or high pH, the BDD electrodes were stable without
electrolytic corrosion even in the acetic acid aqueous solution.

PMID: 26934500  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


34. Chemistry. 2016 Mar 2. doi: 10.1002/chem.201504775. [Epub ahead of print]

Single-Point Remote Control of Flapping Motion in Clothespin-Shaped Bimetallic
Palladium Complexes Based on the N(sp(2) )-N(sp(3) ) Interconversion in Amide
Functionalities.

Inoue R(1), Kawamorita S(1), Naota T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Engineering Science, Osaka
University, Machikaneyama, Toyonaka, Osaka, 560-8531, Japan. (2)Department of
Chemistry, Graduate School of Engineering Science, Osaka University,
Machikaneyama, Toyonaka, Osaka, 560-8531, Japan. naota@chem.es.osaka-u.ac.jp.

The synthesis, structure, and flapping motion of clothespin-shaped binuclear
trans-bis(salicylaldiminato)palladium(II) complexes (anti-1) with
4-azaheptamethylene linkers bearing amide (a-g), urethane (h), or urea (i)
functionalities are described in this report. Various 2D (1) H NMR experiments
and XRD analyses indicate that the amide- and urethane-linked anti-1<U+2009>a,b,d-h
complexes exist as equilibrated mixtures of major and minor conformers<U+2009>I and II
in CDCl3 , whereas the complexes anti-1<U+2009>c and i were observed as a single
species. The mapping of NOESY cross-peaks between conformers<U+2009>I and II revealed
that the equilibration of the major and minor conformers of anti-1<U+2009>a,b,d-h
proceeds by two pathways, namely a nonrotatory flapping motion of the coordinated
blades and a nonflapping rotation of C-N bonds, whereas the equilibration of
anti-1<U+2009>c proceeds by simultaneous flapping and rotation motions. Kinetic studies 
carried out by means of (1) H-(1) H EXSY experiments revealed that 1) the <U+0394>G(<U+2260>)
298K values for the flapping motion are controlled remotely by the steric and
electronic effects of the RCON functionalities and 2) the activation parameters
for the nonrotatory flapping process are identical to those for the nonflapping
peptide rotation in the complexes anti-1<U+2009>a,b,d-h, which indicates that the
present multistep conformational transformation induced by the flapping motion is
controlled by the rate-determining pyramidalization/depyramidalization (i.e.,
sp(2) /sp(3) interconversion) of the nitrogen atoms of the functionalities. The
static and controllable molecular mobility of anti-1 bearing peptide linkers has 
been discussed by comparison with the dynamic behavior of its analogues anti-2-4 
with flexible polymethylene linkers.

© 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26934178  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


35. World J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2016 Apr;32(4):64. doi: 10.1007/s11274-016-2023-6. 
Epub 2016 Mar 1.

Microalgae from the Selenastraceae as emerging candidates for biodiesel
production: a mini review.

Yee W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Sciences, Faculty of Science and Technology, Nilai
University, No. 1, Persiaran Universiti, 71800, Nilai, Negeri Sembilan, Malaysia.
willyyee@nilai.edu.my.

Over the years, microalgae have been identified to be a potential source of
commercially important products such as pigments, polysaccharides,
polyunsaturated fatty acids and in particular, biofuels. Current demands for
sustainable fuel sources and bioproducts has led to an extensive search for
promising strains of microalgae for large scale cultivation. Prospective strains 
identified for these purposes were among others, mainly from the genera
Hematococcus, Dunaliella, Botryococcus, Chlorella, Scenedesmus and
Nannochloropsis. Recently, microalgae from the Selenastraceae emerged as
potential candidates for biodiesel production. Strains from the Selenastraceae
such as Monoraphidium sp. FXY-10, M. contortum SAG 47.80, Ankistrodesmus sp.
SP2-15 and M. minutum were high biomass and lipid producers when cultivated under
optimal conditions. A number of Selenastraceae strains were also reported to be
suitable for cultivation in wastewater. This review highlights recent reports on 
potential strains from the Selenastraceae for biodiesel production and contrasts 
their biomass productivity, lipid productivity as well as fatty acid profile.
Cultivation strategies employed to enhance their biomass and lipid productivity
as well as to reduce feedstock cost are also discussed in this paper.

PMID: 26931604  [PubMed - in process]


36. Adv Mater. 2016 Feb 25. doi: 10.1002/adma.201504891. [Epub ahead of print]

Toward Efficient Orange Emissive Carbon Nanodots through Conjugated sp(2) -Domain
Controlling and Surface Charges Engineering.

Qu S(1), Zhou D(1), Li D(1), Ji W(1), Jing P(1), Han D(1), Liu L(1), Zeng H(2),
Shen D(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Luminescence and Applications, Changchun Institute of 
Optics, Fine Mechanics and Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 3888 Eastern
South Lake Road, Changchun, Jilin, 130033, China. (2)Institute of Optoelectronics
& Nanomaterials, College of Material Science and Engineering, Nanjing University 
of Science and Technology, Nanjing, 210094, China.

A strategy of achieving efficient orange emissive carbon nanodots (CNDs) with
large sized conjugated sp(2) -domain is achieved in a solvothermal synthetic
route using dimethylformamide as solvent, which is the basis of orange bandgap
emission; enhanced orange emission with photoluminescent quantum yield of 46% is 
realized through surface charges engineering by surface
metal-cation-functionalization.

© 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26919550  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


37. Chem Sci. 2016 Feb 1;7(2):1474-1479. Epub 2015 Dec 1.

Rh(III)-Catalyzed Diastereoselective C-H Bond Addition/Cyclization Cascade of
Enone Tethered Aldehydes.

Boerth JA(1), Ellman JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Yale University, Connecticut, 06520, USA. Tel:
+1-203-432-2647.

The Rh(III)-catalyzed cascade addition of a C-H bond across alkene and carbonyl
p-bonds is reported. The reaction proceeds under mild reaction conditions with
low catalyst loading. A range of directing groups were shown to be effective as
was the functionalization of alkenyl in addition to aromatic C(sp(2))-H bonds.
When the enone and aldehyde electrophile were tethered together, cyclic ß-hydroxy
ketones with three contiguous stereocenters were obtained with high
diastereoselectivity. The intermolecular three-component cascade reaction was
demonstrated for both aldehyde and imine electrophiles. Moreover, the first x-ray
structure of a cationic Cp*Rh(III) enolate with interatomic distances consistent 
with an <U+03B7>(3)-bound enolate is reported.

PMCID: PMC4762265 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26918112  [PubMed]


38. Nano Lett. 2016 Feb 23. [Epub ahead of print]

Raman fingerprints of atomically precise graphene nanoribbons.

Verzhbitskiy I, De Corato M, Ruini A, Molinari E, Narita A, Hu Y, Schwab MG,
Bruna M, Yoon D, Milana S, Feng X, Müllen K, Ferrari AC, Casiraghi C, Prezzi D.

Bottom-up approaches allow the production of ultra-narrow and atomically precise 
graphene nanoribbons (GNRs), with electronic and optical properties controlled by
the specific atomic structure. Combining Raman spectroscopy and ab-initio
simulations, we show that GNR width, edge geometry and functional groups all
influence their Raman spectra. The low-energy spectral region below 1000 cm-1 is 
particularly sensitive to edge morphology and functionalization, while the D peak
dispersion can be used to uniquely fingerprint the presence of GNRs, and
differentiates them from other sp2 carbon nanostructures.

PMID: 26907096  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


39. Springerplus. 2016 Feb 11;5:120. doi: 10.1186/s40064-015-1626-y. eCollection
2016.

Assessment of genetic diversity, population structure and relationships in Indian
and non-Indian genotypes of finger millet (Eleusine coracana (L.) Gaertn) using
genomic SSR markers.

Ramakrishnan M(1), Antony Ceasar S(2), Duraipandiyan V(3), Al-Dhabi NA(4),
Ignacimuthu S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Plant Biotechnology, Entomology Research Institute, Loyola
College, Chennai, 600 034 India. (2)Division of Plant Biotechnology, Entomology
Research Institute, Loyola College, Chennai, 600 034 India ; Faculty of
Biological Sciences, Centre for Plant Sciences and School of Molecular and
Cellular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT UK. (3)Division of Plant
Biotechnology, Entomology Research Institute, Loyola College, Chennai, 600 034
India ; Department of Botany and Microbiology, Addiriyah Chair for Environmental 
Studies, College of Science, King Saud University, P.O.Box. 2455, Riyadh, 11451
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. (4)Department of Botany and Microbiology, Addiriyah
Chair for Environmental Studies, College of Science, King Saud University,
P.O.Box. 2455, Riyadh, 11451 Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. (5)Division of Plant
Biotechnology, Entomology Research Institute, Loyola College, Chennai, 600 034
India ; Visiting Professor Program, Deanship of Scientific Research, College of
Science, King Saud University, P.O.Box. 2455, Riyadh, 11451 Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia.

We evaluated the genetic variation and population structure in Indian and
non-Indian genotypes of finger millet using 87 genomic SSR primers. The 128
finger millet genotypes were collected and genomic DNA was isolated. Eighty-seven
genomic SSR primers with 60-70 % GC contents were used for PCR analysis of 128
finger millet genotypes. The PCR products were separated and visualized on a 6 % 
polyacrylamide gel followed by silver staining. The data were used to estimate
major allele frequency using Power Marker v3.0. Dendrograms were constructed
based on the Jaccard's similarity coefficient. Statistical fitness and population
structure analyses were performed to find the genetic diversity. The mean major
allele frequency was 0.92; the means of polymorphic alleles were 2.13 per primer 
and 1.45 per genotype; the average polymorphism was 59.94 % per primer and
average PIC value was 0.44 per primer. Indian genotypes produced an additional
0.21 allele than non-Indian genotypes. Gene diversity was in the range from 0.02 
to 0.35. The average heterozygosity was 0.11, close to 100 % homozygosity. The
highest inbreeding coefficient was observed with SSR marker UGEP67. The Jaccard's
similarity coefficient value ranged from 0.011 to 0.836. The highest similarity
value was 0.836 between genotypes DPI009-04 and GPU-45. Indian genotypes were
placed in Eleusine coracana major cluster (EcMC) 1 along with 6 non-Indian
genotypes. AMOVA showed that molecular variance in genotypes from various
geographical regions was 4 %; among populations it was 3 % and within populations
it was 93 %. PCA scatter plot analysis showed that GPU-28, GPU-45 and DPI009-04
were closely dispersed in first component axis. In structural analysis, the
genotypes were divided into three subpopulations (SP1, SP2 and SP3). All the
three subpopulations had an admixture of alleles and no pure line was observed.
These analyses confirmed that all the genotypes were genetically diverse and had 
been grouped based on their geographic regions.

PMCID: PMC4749518
PMID: 26900542  [PubMed]


40. Oncol Lett. 2016 Feb;11(2):953-958. Epub 2015 Dec 4.

Revealing the role of VEGFA in clear cell sarcoma of the kidney by
protein-protein interaction network and significant pathway analysis.

Wang Z(1), Wang Z(1), Zhou Z(1), Ren Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Linyi People's Hospital, Linyi, Shandong 276003,
P.R. China.

Despite clear cell sarcoma of the kidney (CCSK) being the second most common
renal tumor in children, its mechanism has not yet been fully investigated. The
aim of the present study was to investigate the potential role of vascular
endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA) in CCSK development. Following preprocessing 
of the original GSE2712 data, the differentially-expressed genes (DEGs) between
14 CCSK and 3 fetal kidney samples were identified through Significance Analysis 
of Microarrays, using the R package. Pathway enrichment analysis was then
performed on the DEGs. A protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was
constructed using the Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins
database and the DEGs that were enriched in the most significant pathways.
Following this, gene ontology analysis was performed on the VEGFA-associated
genes, whilst transcription factor binding site analysis was conducted on the hot
genes. A total of 2,681 DEGs, including 543 upregulated and 2,138 downregulated
genes, were identified, and these were significantly enriched in pathways
associated with cancer and focal adhesion. Furthermore, VEGFA, integrin ß1,
integrin aV, v-akt murine thymoma viral oncogene homolog 1 and endothelial growth
factor receptor were identified as hot genes in the PPI network. In addition, the
upregulated VEGFA-associated genes, cyclin D1 and cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor 1B, affected kinase regulation, and the downregulated VEGFA-associated 
genes, receptor tyrosine-protein kinase erbB-2, mesenchymal-epithelial transition
tyrosine kinase receptor and kinase insert domain receptor, were enriched in the 
protein tyrosine kinase process. It was identified that VEGFA was regulated by
restorer of fertility, erythromycin resistance methylase, GA binding protein
subunit a, norepinephrine transporter, nuclear factor <U+03BA>B and Sp2 transcription
factor genes. Overall, VEGFA and its associated genes serve important roles
during CCSK development, and alongside transcription factors, they may function
as novel therapeutic targets for disease treatment.

PMCID: PMC4734171
PMID: 26893674  [PubMed]


41. Org Biomol Chem. 2016 Feb 18. [Epub ahead of print]

Synthetic studies towards putative yuremamine using an iterative C(sp(3))-H
arylation strategy.

Calvert MB(1), Sperry J(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemical Sciences, University of Auckland, 23 Symonds Street,
Auckland, New Zealand. j.sperry@auckland.ac.nz.

An overview of an iterative, 8-aminoquinoline (AQ)-directed C(sp(3))-H arylation 
strategy towards the pyrroloindole structure initially assigned to the alkaloid
yuremamine is described. During initial efforts using a model indane system, it
was discovered that the iodoresorcinol unit was not a viable C(sp(3))-H arylation
partner when masked as its dimethyl ether but upon switching to a MOM group, the 
ether oxygen served to stabilise the high valent Pd intermediate during the
reaction, thus promoting reductive elimination and leading to acceptable yields
of the C(sp(3))-H arylation product. The second C(sp(3))-H arylation with an
iodopyrogallol gave a 1,3-diarylated model yuremamine system possessing the
desired 1,3-cis relationship. When the successful model studies were applied to a
pyrroloindole system in pursuit of yuremamine, it became apparent that C9
underwent competing C(sp(2))-H arylation if left vacant, but installing a
tryptamine side chain at this site prevented the desired C(sp(3))-H arylation
from occurring altogether. However, a C9-methyl pyrroloindole underwent iterative
C(sp(3))-H arylation at C1 with an iodoresorcinol followed by C3 with an
iodopyrogallol to give a diarylated product with the aryl groups in the undesired
1,3-trans-relationship, arising from epimerisation at C1 during the second
C(sp(3))-H arylation event. Although the synthesis of putative yuremamine was not
accomplished, several findings are disclosed that will serve as useful additions 
to the burgeoning field of directed C(sp(3))-H arylations and related C-H
functionalization reactions.

PMID: 26891188  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


42. ChemSusChem. 2016 Feb 12. doi: 10.1002/cssc.201501516. [Epub ahead of print]

Selective and Stable Ethylbenzene Dehydrogenation to Styrene over Nanodiamonds
under Oxygen-lean Conditions.

Diao J(1), Feng Z(1), Huang R(1), Liu H(2), Hamid SB(3), Su DS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Shenyang National Laboratory for Materials Science, Institute of Metal
Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenyang, 110016, China. (2)Shenyang
National Laboratory for Materials Science, Institute of Metal Research, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shenyang, 110016, China. liuhy@imr.ac.cn. (3)Nanotechnology 
& Catalysis Research Centre, NANOCAT, University of Malaya, IPS Building, 50603, 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. (4)Shenyang National Laboratory for Materials Science,
Institute of Metal Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenyang, 110016,
China. dssu@imr.ac.cn.

For the first time, significant improvement of the catalytic performance of
nanodiamonds was achieved for the dehydrogenation of ethylbenzene to styrene
under oxygen-lean conditions. We demonstrated that the combination of direct
dehydrogenation and oxidative dehydrogenation indeed occurred on the nanodiamond 
surface throughout the reaction system. It was found that the active sp(2) -sp(3)
hybridized nanostructure was well maintained after the long-term test and the
active ketonic carbonyl groups could be generated in situ. A high reactivity with
40<U+2009>% ethylbenzene conversion and 92<U+2009>% styrene selectivity was obtained over the
nanodiamond catalyst under oxygen-lean conditions even after a 240 h test,
demonstrating the potential of this procedure for application as a promising
industrial process for the ethylbenzene dehydrogenation to styrene without steam 
protection.

© 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26871428  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


43. Jundishapur J Microbiol. 2015 Dec 26;8(12):e26727. doi: 10.5812/jjm.26727.
eCollection 2015.

Production of Monoclonal Antibody Against Recombinant Polypeptide From the Erns
Coding Region of the Bovine Viral Diarrhea Virus.

Seyfi Abad Shapouri MR(1), Ekhtelat M(2), Ghorbanpoor Najaf Abadi M(1), Mahmoodi 
Koohi P(3), Lotfi M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Shahid Chamran
University of Ahvaz, Ahvaz, IR Iran. (2)Department of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of
Pharmacy, Ahvaz Jundishapur University of Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, IR Iran.
(3)Department of Pathobiology, Faculty of Para Veterinary Science, Bu-Ali Sina
University, Hamedan, IR Iran. (4)Department of Quality Control, Razi Vaccine and 
Serum Research Institute, Karaj, IR Iran.

BACKGROUND: Bovine viral diarrhea (BVD) is an economically important cattle
disease with a worldwide distribution. Detection and elimination of animals
persistently infected (PI) with bovine viral diarrhea virus (BVDV) is essential
for the control of BVD and eradication of BVDV. There are usually no
pathognomonic clinical signs of BVDV infection. Diagnostic investigations
therefore rely on laboratory-based detection of the virus, or virus-induced
antigens or antibodies.
OBJECTIVES: Erns as an immunogenic protein of BVDV, is genetically and
antigenically conserved among different isolates and therefore, is a candidate
antigen for development of the enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for
serological studies or identification of PI animals. The aim of this study was to
produce a monoclonal antibody (MAb) against recombinant Erns.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: For this purpose, recombinant maltose-binding protein
(MBP)-Erns protein was expressed in Escherichia coli and purified using amylose
resin chromatography column and used as an antigen in MAb production. Spleen
cells of the immunized mice with the recombinant antigen were fused with SP2/0
myeloma cells. Next, culture supernatants of primary clones of fused cells were
screened by indirect ELISA. After three rounds of cloning, the reactivity of the 
MAbs with recombinant and natural antigen was established by Western blotting.
RESULTS: Based on our results, MAb against recombinant Erns was produced and
reacted successfully with recombinant and natural antigens.
CONCLUSIONS: With regards to the role of Erns in the identification of PI
animals, it appears that Erns recombinant antigen and the specific monoclonal
antibodies produced against it may be suitable for developing BVDV laboratory
diagnostic assays.

PMCID: PMC4746439
PMID: 26870309  [PubMed]


44. Chem Soc Rev. 2016 Feb 11. [Epub ahead of print]

Copper-catalyzed oxidative carbon-heteroatom bond formation: a recent update.

Zhu X(1), Chiba S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Chemistry and Biological Chemistry, School of Physical and
Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 637371,
Singapore. shunsuke@ntu.edu.sg.

This review updates recent advances in Cu-catalyzed (anaerobic) oxidative
carbon-heteroatom bond formation on sp(3)- and sp(2)-C-H bonds as well as
alkenes, classified according to the types of stoichiometric oxidants.

PMID: 26865058  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


45. Carbohydr Res. 2016 Jan 21. pii: S0008-6215(16)30003-9. doi:
10.1016/j.carres.2016.01.006. [Epub ahead of print]

Influence of the configurational pattern of sp(2)-iminosugar pseudo N-, S-, O-
and C-glycosides on their glycoside inhibitory and antitumor properties.

Sánchez-Fernández EM(1), Gonçalves-Pereira R(2), Rísquez-Cuadro R(2), Plata
GB(3), Padrón JM(3), García Fernández JM(4), Ortiz Mellet C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Orgánica, Facultad de Química, Universidad de Sevilla,
Profesor García González 1, 41012 Sevilla, Spain. Electronic address:
esanchez4@us.es. (2)Departamento de Química Orgánica, Facultad de Química,
Universidad de Sevilla, Profesor García González 1, 41012 Sevilla, Spain.
(3)BioLab, Instituto Universitario de Bio-Orgánica "Antonio González", Centro de 
Investigaciones Biomédicas de Canarias, Universidad de La Laguna, 38206 La
Laguna, Spain. (4)Instituto de Investigaciones Químicas (IIQ), CSIC-Universidad
de Sevilla, Avda. Américo Vespucio 49, 41092 Sevilla, Spain. (5)Departamento de
Química Orgánica, Facultad de Química, Universidad de Sevilla, Profesor García
González 1, 41012 Sevilla, Spain. Electronic address: mellet@us.es.

The synthesis of a complete series of cyclic carbamate-type sp(2)-iminosugar N-, 
S-, O- and C-octyl pseudoglycosides related to nojirimycin, mannojirimycin and
galactonojirimycin, all having the a-pseudoanomeric configuration, is reported.
The gem-diamine-type N-pseudoglycosides can be accessed directly from the
corresponding reducing sp(2)-imisosugar precursors by reaction with octylamine in
methanol, whereas per-O-acetyl or 1-fluoro derivatives were used as
pseudoglycosyl donors for the preparation of S-pseudoglycosides or O- and
C-pseudoglycosides, respectively. Evaluation of their inhibitory properties
against a panel of glycosidases evidenced selectivity profiles that strongly
depend on the configurational pattern and the nature of the glycosidic linkage.
On the contrary, the antiproliferative activity determined against a panel of
tumor cell lines was largely independent of the relative orientation of the
hydroxyl groups in the sp(2)-iminosugar moiety. Indeed, sp(2)-iminosugar
representatives exhibiting significant growth inhibition potencies were
identified in all three configurationally different types of compounds studied,
namely a-d-gluco, a-d-manno and a-d-galacto glycoside analogs. Interestingly,
none of the compounds affected viability and mortality of normal cells at the
used concentrations. Altogether, the results strongly suggest that the anticancer
activity of amphiphilic sp(2)-iminosugar glycosides might be unrelated, or not
solely related, to their glycosidase inhibitory activity.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26850915  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


46. Chem Commun (Camb). 2016 Feb 2. [Epub ahead of print]

E-H (E = B, Si, Ge) bond activation of pinacolborane, silanes, and germanes by
nucleophilic palladium carbene complexes.

Comanescu CC(1), Iluc VM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Notre Dame, Notre
Dame, IN 46556, USA. viluc@nd.edu.

The reactivity of two nucleophilic palladium carbenes, [PC(sp(2))P]Pd(PMe3) and
[PC(sp(2))P]Pd(PPh3), where [PC(sp(2))P] =
bis[2-(di-iso-propylphosphino)phenyl]methylene, toward the E-H bond activation of
Ph4-nEHn (E = Si, Ge; n = 1-3) and pinacolborane (HBpin) is discussed. Unlike
previous reports, both types of isomer species, hydride [PC(EHn-1Ph4-n)P]PdH or
[PC(Bpin)P]PdH and silyl/germyl [PC(H)P]Pd(EHn-1Ph4-n), were observed depending
on the substrate and the phosphine ligand, showing that the polarity of the Pd-C 
bond can be tuned by the phosphine substituents.

PMID: 26830660  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


47. Nat Mater. 2016 Feb 1. doi: 10.1038/nmat4541. [Epub ahead of print]

Realistic molecular model of kerogen's nanostructure.

Bousige C(1,)(2), Ghimbeu CM(3), Vix-Guterl C(3), Pomerantz AE(4), Suleimenova
A(4), Vaughan G(5), Garbarino G(5), Feygenson M(6), Wildgruber C(7), Ulm FJ(1),
Pellenq RJ(1,)(2,)(8), Coasne B(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.
(2)<MSE>2, UMI 3466 CNRS-MIT, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, Massachusetts
02139, USA. (3)Institut de Science des Matériaux de Mulhouse (IS2M), UMR 7360
CNRS - UHA, 15 rue Jean Starcky, BP 2488, 68057 Mulhouse cedex, France.
(4)Schlumberger-Doll Research, 1 Hampshire Street, Cambridge, Massachusetts
02139, USA. (5)European Synchrotron Radiation Facility, BP-220, F-38043, Grenoble
Cedex 9, France. (6)Chemical and Engineering Materials Division, Oak Ridge
National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee 37831, USA. (7)Instrument and Source
Division (NScD), Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee 37831, USA. 
(8)CINaM, CNRS/Aix Marseille Université, Campus de Luminy, 13288 Marseille cedex 
09, France.

Despite kerogen's importance as the organic backbone for hydrocarbon production
from source rocks such as gas shale, the interplay between kerogen's chemistry,
morphology and mechanics remains unexplored. As the environmental impact of shale
gas rises, identifying functional relations between its geochemical, transport,
elastic and fracture properties from realistic molecular models of kerogens
becomes all the more important. Here, by using a hybrid experimental-simulation
method, we propose a panel of realistic molecular models of mature and immature
kerogens that provide a detailed picture of kerogen's nanostructure without
considering the presence of clays and other minerals in shales. We probe the
models' strengths and limitations, and show that they predict essential features 
amenable to experimental validation, including pore distribution, vibrational
density of states and stiffness. We also show that kerogen's maturation, which
manifests itself as an increase in the sp(2)/sp(3) hybridization ratio, entails a
crossover from plastic-to-brittle rupture mechanisms.

PMID: 26828313  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


48. Planta Med. 2016 Mar;82(5):432-9. doi: 10.1055/s-0035-1568182. Epub 2016 Jan 29.

Development of an Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay and Immunoaffinity Column
Chromatography for Saikosaponin d Using an Anti-Saikosaponin d Monoclonal
Antibody.

Sai J(1), Zhao Y(2), Shan W(3), Qu B(2), Zhang Y(2), Cheng J(3), Qu H(4), Wang
Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Third Affiliated Hospital, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine,
Beijing, China. (2)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Beijing University of
Chinese Medicine, Beijing, China. (3)School of Chinese Materia Medica, Beijing
University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing, China. (4)Center of Scientific
Experiment, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing, China.

This work developed a novel immunochemical approach for the quality control of
saikosaponin d using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Splenocytes from mice 
immunized with the saikosaponin d-bovine serum albumin conjugate were fused with 
the hypoxanthine-aminopterin-thymidine-sensitive mouse myeloma SP2/0 cell line,
and a hybridoma secreting monoclonal antibody against saikosaponin d was
successfully obtained. The prepared anti-saikosaponin d monoclonal antibody 1E7F3
has a novel characteristic, showing weak reactivity with compounds that are
structurally related to saikosaponin d. Using monoclonal antibody 1E7F3, a
specific and reliable enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay was developed to detect
saikosaponin d. The system shows a full measurement range from 156.25 to
5000.00<U+2009>ng × mL(-1). Both intra-assay and inter-assay repeatability and precision
were achieved, with relative standard deviations lower than 10.00<U+200A>%. The recovery
rates ranged from 92.36<U+200A>% to 101.00<U+200A>%, meeting the requirements for biological
samples. There was a good correlation between the enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay and high-performance liquid chromatography analyses of saikosaponin d, and 
the saikosaponin d levels in formulated Chinese medicines were successfully
determined. Furthermore, immunoaffinity column chromatography was established
using this anti-saikosaponin d monoclonal antibody, and the elution profile of
saikosaponin d was detected by a Bio-Rad QuadTec UV/Vis detector at 203<U+2009>nm. The
results demonstrate that we generated a reliable and more efficient assay system 
for measuring saikosaponin d and provide a potential approach for purifying and
separating saikosaponin d.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 26824622  [PubMed - in process]


49. Mol Cancer Ther. 2016 Mar;15(3):491-502. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-15-0309. Epub
2016 Jan 28.

GSK-3ß Governs Inflammation-Induced NFATc2 Signaling Hubs to Promote Pancreatic
Cancer Progression.

Baumgart S(1), Chen NM(2), Zhang JS(3), Billadeau DD(3), Gaisina IN(4),
Kozikowski AP(4), Singh SK(5), Fink D(1), Ströbel P(6), Klindt C(1), Zhang L(7), 
Bamlet WR(8), Koenig A(2), Hessmann E(2), Gress TM(1), Ellenrieder V(2), Neesse
A(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Endocrinology, Infectiology and Metabolism,
University of Marburg, Marburg, Germany. (2)Department of Gastroenterology and
Gastrointestinal Oncology, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen,
Germany. (3)Schulze Center for Novel Therapeutics, Division of Oncology Research,
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota. (4)Drug Discovery Program, Department of
Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy, University of Illinois at Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois. (5)Barrow Brain Tumor Research Center, St. Joseph's Hospital
and Medical Center, Phoenix, Arizona. (6)Institute of Pathology, University
Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany. (7)Division of Anatomic Pathology, 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota. (8)Division of Biostatistics, College of
Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota. (9)Department of Gastroenterology
and Gastrointestinal Oncology, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen,
Germany. albrecht.neesse@med.uni-goettingen.de.

We aimed to investigate the mechanistic, functional, and therapeutic role of
glycogen synthase kinase 3ß (GSK-3ß) in the regulation and activation of the
proinflammatory oncogenic transcription factor nuclear factor of activated T
cells (NFATc2) in pancreatic cancer. IHC, qPCR, immunoblotting,
immunofluorescence microscopy, and proliferation assays were used to analyze
mouse and human tissues and cell lines. Protein-protein interactions and promoter
regulation were analyzed by coimmunoprecipitation, DNA pulldown, reporter, and
ChIP assays. Preclinical assays were performed using a variety of pancreatic
cancer cells lines, xenografts, and a genetically engineered mouse model (GEMM). 
GSK-3ß-dependent SP2 phosphorylation mediates NFATc2 protein stability in the
nucleus of pancreatic cancer cells stimulating pancreatic cancer growth. In
addition to protein stabilization, GSK-3ß also maintains NFATc2 activation
through a distinct mechanism involving stabilization of NFATc2-STAT3 complexes
independent of SP2 phosphorylation. For NFATc2-STAT3 complex formation,
GSK-3ß-mediated phosphorylation of STAT3 at Y705 is required to stimulate
euchromatin formation of NFAT target promoters, such as cyclin-dependent
kinase-6, which promotes tumor growth. Finally, preclinical experiments suggest
that targeting the NFATc2-STAT3-GSK-3ß module inhibits proliferation and tumor
growth and interferes with inflammation-induced pancreatic cancer progression in 
Kras(G12D) mice. In conclusion, we describe a novel mechanism by which GSK-3ß
fine-tunes NFATc2 and STAT3 transcriptional networks to integrate upstream
signaling events that govern pancreatic cancer progression and growth.
Furthermore, the therapeutic potential of GSK-3ß is demonstrated for the first
time in a relevant Kras and inflammation-induced GEMM for pancreatic cancer. Mol 
Cancer Ther; 15(3); 491-502. ©2016 AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26823495  [PubMed - in process]


50. Burns. 2016 Jan 20. pii: S0305-4179(15)00392-7. doi: 10.1016/j.burns.2015.12.002.
[Epub ahead of print]

Compulsory teaching of first aid in UK schools - A missed opportunity?

Walsh K(1), Hili S(2), Dheansa B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Core Surgical Trainee 1, Royal Preston Hospital, Sharoe Green Lane, Preston,
Lancashire, PR2 9HT. Electronic address: drkcwalsh@gmail.com. (2)Plastic Surgery 
Registrar, Salisbury NHS foundation Trust, Odstock Rd, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP2
8BJ. Electronic address: stef.hili@doctors.org.uk. (3)Consultant Plastic, Burns
and Reconstructive Surgeon, Queen Victoria Hospital, Holtye Road, East Grinstead,
RH19 3DZ. Electronic address: baljit.dheansa@qvh.nhs.uk.

PMID: 26803371  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


51. Burns. 2016 Jan 20. pii: S0305-4179(15)00401-5. doi: 10.1016/j.burns.2015.12.010.
[Epub ahead of print]

Legislation to prevent burns, not home prevention schemes.

Walsh K(1), Hili S(2), Dheansa B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Royal Preston Hospital, Sharoe Green Lane, Preston, Lancashire PR2 9HT, UK.
Electronic address: drkcwalsh@gmail.com. (2)Salisbury NHS foundation Trust,
Odstock Rd, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, UK. Electronic address:
stef.hili@doctors.org.uk. (3)Queen Victoria Hospital, Holtye Road, East Grinstead
RH19 3DZ, UK. Electronic address: baljit.dheansa@qvh.nhs.uk.

PMID: 26803368  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


52. Chem Asian J. 2016 Jan 14. doi: 10.1002/asia.201501328. [Epub ahead of print]

Nitrogen-Doped Graphene for Photocatalytic Hydrogen Generation.

Baek JB(1), Chang DW(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Energy and Chemical Engineering/Center for Dimension-Controllable
Orga, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology UNIST, Ulsan, KOREA,
REPUBLIC OF. jbbaek@unist.ac.kr. (2)dwchang@pknu.ac.kr.

Photocatalytic hydrogen (H2) generation in water splitting process recently has
attracted tremendous interest, because it allows the direct conversion of clean
and unlimited solar energy into the ideal energy resource of H2. For efficient
photocatalytic H2 generation, the role of the photocatalyst is critical. With
increasing demand for more efficient, sustainable, and cost-effective
photocatalysts, various types of semiconductor photocatalysts have been
intensively developed. In particular, on the basis of its superior catalytic and 
tunable electronic properties, nitrogen-doped graphene is a potential candidate
for a high-performance photocatalyst. Nitrogen-doped graphene also offers
additional advantages originating from its unique two-dimensional sp2 hybridized 
carbon network including large specific surface area and exceptional charge
transport properties. It has been reported that nitrogen-doped graphene can play 
diverse but positive functions including photo-induced charge
acceptor/meditators, light absorbers from UV to visible light, n-type
semiconductors, and giant molecular photocatalysts. Herein, we summarize the
recent progress and general aspects of nitrogen-doped graphene as a photocatalyst
for photocatalytic H2 generation. In addition, challenges and future perspectives
in this field are also discussed.

© 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26762892  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


53. Korean J Food Sci Anim Resour. 2015;35(1):41-9. doi: 10.5851/kosfa.2015.35.1.41. 
Epub 2015 Feb 28.

Antioxidant Activity of Allium hookeri Root Extract and Its Effect on Lipid
Stability of Sulfur-fed Pork Patties.

Cho HS(1), Park W(1), Hong GE(1), Kim JH(1), Ju MG(1), Lee CH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Biotechnology of Animal Resources, Konkuk
University, Seoul 143-701, Korea.

This study was performed to assess the antioxidant activity of Allium hookeri
root extract (AHE) on lipid oxidation of raw sulfur-fed pork patties for 14 d of 
refrigerated storage. Different concentration of ethanol (0-100%) and time (1-12 
h) were applied to determine the extraction condition. Water (0% ethanol)
extraction for 1 h was selected as an optimal extraction condition of AHE for the
following study showing the highest total phenolic content and total flavonoid
content, as well as the strongest antioxidant activity. The 1% AHE (SP1), 3% AHE 
(SP2), and 0.05% ascorbic acid (SP3) were added into sulfur-fed pork patties
against controls; SP0 (sulfur-fed pork patties with no AHE) and P0 (normal pork
patties with no AHE). The pH values of P0 and SP0 significantly increased
(p<0.05) than others on 14 d and redness of P0 showed the largest decrement
during storage. P0 and SP0 showed higher production of conjugated dienes on d 7
than others (p<0.05). Thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS) values were
decreased in proportion to the increased level of AHE on 14 d (p<0.05) resulting 
in higher TBARS values on P0 and SP0 (p<0.05) and the negative correlation
between AHE level and TBARS were also demonstrated (r=-0.910, p=0.001).
Therefore, the results suggest that AHE effectively retarded the lipid oxidation 
rate of sulfur-fed pork patties indicating the potential usage of AHE as a
natural preservative.

PMCID: PMC4682492
PMID: 26761799  [PubMed]


54. Anim Cogn. 2016 Jan 11. [Epub ahead of print]

Emotional contagion of distress in young pigs is potentiated by previous exposure
to the same stressor.

Goumon S(1), pinka M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Science, Prague, Czech Republic.
sebastien.goumon@gmail.com. (2)Institute of Animal Science, Prague, Czech
Republic.

This study tested whether emotional contagion occurs when piglets directly
observe a penmate in distress (restraint) and whether there is an effect of
previous experience on the response to subsequent restraint or exposure to
conspecific distress. Piglets (49.7 ± 0.7 days) were exposed in pairs to two
stress phases (SP1 and SP2) in an arena divided into two pens by a wire mesh
wall. During SP1, one of the pigs of a pair was either restrained (Stress
treatment) or sham-restrained (Control treatment), while the other pig was
considered observer. During SP2, the previous observer was restrained, while its 
penmate took the observer role. Heart rate variability, locomotion,
vocalizations, body/head/ear and tail postures were monitored. During SP1,
observer pigs responded to conspecific distress with increased indicators of
attention (looking at, proximity to and snout contacts with the distressed pigs) 
and increased indicators of fear (reduced locomotion, increased freezing). During
SP2, the observer pigs that had been restrained previously reacted more strongly 
(through higher proximity, decreased locomotion, increased freezing) to observing
the penmate in restraint than pigs without the previous negative experience. This
study suggests that young pigs are susceptible to emotional contagion and that
this contagion is potentiated by previous exposure to the same stressor. These
findings have implications for pig welfare in practical animal husbandry systems.

PMID: 26753689  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


55. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 6;6:18741. doi: 10.1038/srep18741.

Exon-centric regulation of ATM expression is population-dependent and amenable to
antisense modification by pseudoexon targeting.

Kralovicova J(1), Knut M(1), Cross NC(1,)(2), Vorechovsky I(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Southampton Faculty of Medicine Southampton SO16 6YD United
Kingdom. (2)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory Salisbury Hospital Salisbury SP2 
8BJ United Kingdom.

ATM is an important cancer susceptibility gene that encodes a critical apical
kinase of the DNA damage response (DDR) pathway. We show that a key
nonsense-mediated RNA decay switch exon (NSE) in ATM is repressed by U2AF, PUF60 
and hnRNPA1. The NSE activation was haplotype-specific and was most promoted by
cytosine at rs609621 in the NSE 3' splice-site (3'ss), which is predominant in
high cancer risk populations. NSE levels were deregulated in leukemias and were
influenced by the identity of U2AF35 residue 34. We also identify
splice-switching oligonucleotides (SSOs) that exploit competition of adjacent
pseudoexons to modulate NSE levels. The U2AF-regulated exon usage in the ATM
signalling pathway was centred on the MRN/ATM-CHEK2-CDC25-cdc2/cyclin-B axis and 
preferentially involved transcripts implicated in cancer-associated gene fusions 
and chromosomal translocations. These results reveal important links between 3'ss
control and ATM-dependent responses to double-strand DNA breaks, demonstrate
functional plasticity of intronic variants and illustrate versatility of intronic
SSOs that target pseudo-3'ss to modify gene expression.

PMCID: PMC4702124
PMID: 26732650  [PubMed - in process]


56. J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2015 Sep;15(9):6769-73.

Facile Synthesis of High Quality Graphene Oxide from Graphite Flakes Using
Improved Hummer's Technique.

Low FW, Lai CW, Abd Hamid SB.

Graphene is a promising candidate for making next-generation nanotechnology
devices due to its outstanding properties in terms of physical, chemical,
mechanical aspects. Based on the theoretical point of view, graphene is a
two-dimensional (2D) crystal structure with sp2 hybridized carbon atoms
arrangement and has attracted extensive attention in a considerable number of
applications such as solar energy, sensor and energy storage, naming a few.
Herein, graphene oxide (GO) is synthesized from graphite flakes using the
Improved Hummer's method. The results demonstrated the comparison of synthesized 
GO samples based on stirred duration of 6 h and 72 h. The FTIR results proved
that the 72 h GO sample was well-bonded with the C-O functional group, signifying
the successful synthesis of GO under an extended stirred duration. The FESEM
images showed that the synthesized GO was well-arranged in crystal lattice of
graphene sheets whereas the EDX result showed that higher atomic % of Oxygen, O2 
was obtained with a longer stirred duration due to the high opportunity for
oxygenated bonded to occur on the C-C functional group.

PMID: 26716241  [PubMed]


57. Food Nutr Res. 2015 Dec 21;59:28870. doi: 10.3402/fnr.v59.28870. eCollection
2015.

Protective effect of soluble eggshell membrane protein hydrolysate on cardiac
ischemia/reperfusion injury.

Yang T(1,)(2,)(3), Li Y(1,)(2), Ma M(4), Lin Q(1,)(2), Sun S(1,)(2), Zhang B(3), 
Feng X(3), Liu J(5).

Author information: 
(1)National Engineering Laboratory of Rice and By-product Deep Processing,
Central South University of Forestry and Technology, Changsha, People's Republic 
of China. (2)College of Food Science & Engineering, Central South University of
Forestry & Technology, Changsha, People's Republic of China. (3)Department of
Histology and Embryology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Central South
University, Changsha, People's Republic of China. (4)National R&D Center for Egg 
Processing, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, People's Republic of China. 
(5)Department of Histology and Embryology, School of Basic Medical Sciences,
Central South University, Changsha, People's Republic of China;
liujunwen@csu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Soluble eggshell membrane protein (SEP) has been proved to hold the
antioxidant activity. The functional role of SEP on cardioprotection was
investigated in vivo and in vitro.
METHODS: Rats and cardiomyocytes were pretreated with SP2, a hydrolysate attained
from SEP, and then subjected to ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) or
hypoxia/reoxygenation (H/R) and hydrogen peroxide, respectively. The measurement 
of myocardial infarct size, cell apoptosis assay, cell viability assay, and
caspase activity assay were performed on rats and cardiomyocytes.
RESULTS: The results showed that the treatment of SP2 induced the resistance to
I/R or H/R injury on rats and cardiomyocytes as indicated by decreased infarct
size and decreased cellular apoptosis. The cardioprotective roles of SP2 were
partly resulted from the downregulated expression and activity of caspase-3 in
which the effect was similar to the caspase inhibitor, z-VAD-fmk, and could be
rescued by caspase activator, PAC-1.
CONCLUSIONS: This investigation has demonstrated that SP2 attenuated the damage
of I/R and H/R on rats and cardiomyocytes by the caspase-dependent pathway. This 
cardioprotective effect of SP2 suggested a novel therapeutic agent of SEP for
ischemic-related heart diseases.

PMCID: PMC4689127
PMID: 26699793  [PubMed]


58. J Appl Clin Med Phys. 2015 Sep 8;16(5):5664.

Ultraviolet exposure of Gafchromic XR-RV3 and XR-SP2 films.

Katsuda T(1), Gotanda R, Gotanda T, Akagawa T, Tanki N, Kuwano T, Yabunaka K.

Author information: 
(1)Tokai Gakuin University. tkatsudajp@yahoo.co.jp.

Gafchromic film has been used for X-ray dose measurement in diagnostic
examinations. Their use has been initiated for three-dimensional X-ray dose
measurement by using the high-resolution characteristics of Gafchromic films in
computed tomography. However, it is necessary to solve the problem of nonuniform 
thickness in the active layers of Gafchromic films. A double exposure technique
using X-rays is performed in therapeutic radiology; it is difficult to use in a
diagnostic examination because of the heel effect. Therefore, it is suggested
that ultraviolet (UV) rays be substituted for X-rays. However, the appropriate UV
wavelength is unknown. In this study, we aimed to determine which UV wavelengths 
are effective to expose Gafchromic XR-RV3 and XR-SP2. UV lamps with peak
wavelengths of 245 nm, 310 nm, and 365 nm were used. The three UV wavelengths
were used to irradiate Gafchromic XR-RV3 and XR-SP2 films for 60 min, and
irradiation was repeated every 60 min for 600 min thereafter. Films were scanned 
after each irradiation period on a flatbed scanner. The images were split into
their red-green-blue components, and red images were stored using ImageJ version 
1.44o image analysis software. Regions of interest (ROI), 0.5 inches in diameter,
were placed at the centers of the subtracted Gafchromic film images, and graphs
of UV irradiation duration and mean pixel values were plotted. There were
reactions to UV-A on both Gafchromic XR-RV3 and XR-SP2; those to UV-B were
moderate. However, UV-C demonstrated few reactions with Gafchromic XR-RV3 and
XR-SP2. From these results, irradiation with UV-A may be able to correct
nonuniformity errors. Uniform UV-A irradiation of Gafchromic films with large
areas is possible, and UV rays can be used as a substitute for X-rays in the
double exposure technique.

PMID: 26699326  [PubMed - in process]


59. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2015 Dec 18. doi: 10.1071/RD15324. [Epub ahead of print]

Effect of inbreeding depression on bull sperm quality and field fertility.

Dorado J, Cid RM, Molina A, Hidalgo M, Ariza J, Moreno-Millán M, Demyda-Peyrás S.

The present study investigated the effect of inbreeding depression on sperm
quality using automated and objective methods and subsequent effects on beef bull
field fertility. Individual inbreeding coefficient (F) values and field fertility
data were determined using a dataset of AI bulls belonging to the Spanish Retinta
Breeders Association (Asociación Nacional de Criadores de Ganado Vacuno Selecto
de Raza Retinta (ANCRE)). Animals were clustered in two groups according to the F
values as follows: (1) a high inbreeding group (HI; F = 13.5%, mean 16.3); and
(2) a non-inbreeding group (NI; F = 0%). In total, 17 different assessments were 
performed in both experimental groups, including evaluation of sperm morphology, 
acrosomal and DNA status, sperm plasma membrane integrity and function
(hypo-osmotic swelling test), 10 kinetic parameters and the structure of sperm
subpopulations. Sperm morphology, acrosomal and DNA status and osmotic tolerance 
were similar in both groups. Three velocity parameters (curvilinear velocity,
straight line velocity and average path velocity) and the amplitude of lateral
head displacement were higher in HI (P < 0.05). Cluster analysis of kinematic
parameters revealed three different sperm subpopulations (sP1, sP2 and sP3), with
the proportion of the sP1 population (highly active but non-progressive
spermatozoa) being significantly (P < 0.05) higher in the HI group. Field
fertility was assessed using two calving record datasets. In a smaller database
including only bulls evaluated in the present study, there was a significant
increase in the calving interval of cows sired with HI bulls. Conversely, in an
extended genetic analysis of the ANCRE database, inbreeding only explained a
small part of the variation in calving interval, and the results of regression
analysis were not significant among bulls. The findings of the present study
suggest that high inbreeding levels have a moderate effect on bull semen quality,
with an increased percentage of highly active but non-progressive spermatozoa,
but only when F values reached a certain threshold. This motility pattern could
explain, in part, the higher calving interval produced by inbred bulls under
field conditions.

PMID: 26678044  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


60. Nanoscale. 2016 Jan 21;8(3):1705. Epub 2015 Dec 17.

Correction: Nanoscale structure and superhydrophobicity of sp(2)-bonded boron
nitride aerogels.

Pham T(1), Goldstein AP, Lewicki JP, Kucheyev SO, Wang C, Russell TP, Worsley MA,
Woo L, Mickelson W, Zettl A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley,
California 94720, USA.

Correction for 'Nanoscale structure and superhydrophobicity of sp(2)-bonded boron
nitride aerogels' by Thang Pham et al., Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 10449-10458.

PMID: 26676371  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


61. Beilstein J Org Chem. 2015 Nov 9;11:2132-44. doi: 10.3762/bjoc.11.230.
eCollection 2015.

C-H bond halogenation catalyzed or mediated by copper: an overview.

Hao W(1), Liu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of the Functional Small Organic Molecules, Ministry of
Education, and College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Jiangxi Normal
University, Nanchang 330022, P.R. China.

Carbon-halogen (C-X) bonds are amongst the most fundamental groups in organic
synthesis, they are frequently and widely employed in the synthesis of numerous
organic products. The generation of a C-X bond, therefore, constitutes an issue
of universal interest. Herein, the research advances on the copper-catalyzed and 
mediated C-X (X = F, Cl, Br, I) bond formation via direct C-H bond transformation
is reviewed.

PMCID: PMC4661017
PMID: 26664634  [PubMed]


62. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2016 Apr;100(8):3489-98. doi:
10.1007/s00253-015-7193-x. Epub 2015 Dec 5.

Pilot-scale verification of maximum tolerable hydrodynamic stress for mammalian
cell culture.

Neunstoecklin B(1), Villiger TK(1), Lucas E(2), Stettler M(2), Broly H(2),
Morbidelli M(3), Soos M(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Applied Biosciences, Institute for Chemical and
Bioengineering, ETH Zurich, 8093, Zurich, Switzerland. (2)Merck Serono S.A.,
Biotech Process Sciences, Corsier-sur-Vevey, Switzerland. (3)Department of
Chemistry and Applied Biosciences, Institute for Chemical and Bioengineering, ETH
Zurich, 8093, Zurich, Switzerland. massimo.morbidelli@chem.ethz.ch. (4)Department
of Chemistry and Applied Biosciences, Institute for Chemical and Bioengineering, 
ETH Zurich, 8093, Zurich, Switzerland. miroslav.soos@chem.ethz.ch. (5)Department 
of Chemical Engineering, University of Chemistry and Technology, Technicka 3,
16628, Prague, Czech Republic. miroslav.soos@chem.ethz.ch.

Although several scaling bioreactor models of mammalian cell cultures are
suggested and described in the literature, they mostly lack a significant
validation at pilot or manufacturing scale. The aim of this study is to validate 
an oscillating hydrodynamic stress loop system developed earlier by our group for
the evaluation of the maximum operating range for stirring, based on a maximum
tolerable hydrodynamic stress. A 300-L pilot-scale bioreactor for cultivation of 
a Sp2/0 cell line was used for this purpose. Prior to cultivations, a
stress-sensitive particulate system was applied to determine the stress values
generated by stirring and sparging. Pilot-scale data, collected from 7- to 28-Pa 
maximum stress conditions, were compared with data from classical 3-L
cultivations and cultivations from the oscillating stress loop system. Results
for the growth behavior, analyzed metabolites, productivity, and product quality 
showed a dependency on the different environmental stress conditions but not on
reactor size. Pilot-scale conditions were very similar to those generated in the 
oscillating stress loop model confirming its predictive capability, including
conditions at the edge of failure.

PMID: 26637424  [PubMed - in process]


63. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Sep 15;8(9):16077-82. eCollection 2015.

Clinical application of a novel computer-aided detection system based on
three-dimensional CT images on pulmonary nodule.

Zeng JY(1), Ye HH(2), Yang SX(1), Jin RC(3), Huang QL(1), Wei YC(1), Huang SG(1),
Wang BQ(1), Ye JZ(4), Qin JY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi
Medical University Nanning 530031, China. (2)Department of Cardiothoracic
Surgery, The Affiliated Minzu Hospital of Guangxi Medical University Nanning
530001, China. (3)School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University 
of Science and Technology Wuhan 430074, Hubei, China. (4)Department of
Hepatobiliary Surgery, Tumor Hospital Affiliated to Guangxi Medical University
Nanning 530021, China.

The aim of this study was to investigate the clinical application effects of a
novel computer-aided detection (CAD) system based on three-dimensional computed
tomography (CT) images on pulmonary nodule. 98 cases with pulmonary nodule (PN)
in our hospital from Jun, 2009 to Jun, 2013 were analysed in this study. All
cases underwent PN detection both by the simple spiral CT scan and by the
computer-aided system based on 3D CT images, respectively. Postoperative
pathological results were considered as the "gold standard", for both two
checking methods, the diagnostic accuracies for determining benign and malignant 
PN were calculated. Under simple spiral CT scan method, 63 cases is malignant,
including 50 true positive cases and 13 false positive cases from the "gold
standard"; 35 cases is benign, 16 true negative case and 19 false negative cases,
the Sensitivity 1 (Se1)=0.725, Specificity1 (Sp1)=0.448, Agreement rate1 (Kappa
1)=0.673, J1 (Youden's index 1)=0.173, LR(+)1=1.616, LR(-)1=0.499. Kappa 1=0.673 
between the 0.4 and 0.75, has a moderate consistency. Underwent computer-aided
detection (CAD) based on 3D CT method, 67cases is malignant, including 62 true
positive cases and 7 false positive cases; 31 cases is benign, 24 true negative
case and 7 false negative cases, Sensitivity 2 (Se2)=0.899, Specificity2
(Sp2)=0.828, Agreement rate (Kappa 2)=0.877, J2 (Youden's index 2)=0.727,
LR(+)2=5.212, LR(-)2=0.123. Kappa 2=0.877 >0.75, has a good consistency.
Computer-aided PN detecting system based on 3D CT images has better clinical
application value, and can help doctor carry out early diagnosis of lung disease 
(such as cancer, etc.) through CT images.

PMCID: PMC4659004
PMID: 26629115  [PubMed]


64. Biosens Bioelectron. 2015 Nov 18. pii: S0956-5663(15)30606-0. doi:
10.1016/j.bios.2015.11.053. [Epub ahead of print]

Immunosensing procedures for carcinoembryonic antigen using graphene and
nanocomposites.

Luong JH(1), Vashist SK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Innovative Chromatography Group, Irish Separation Science Cluster (ISSC),
Department of Chemistry and Analytical, Biological Chemistry Research Facility
(ABCRF), University College Cork, Cork, Ireland. Electronic address:
j.luong@ucc.ie. (2)Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Pathobiochemistry,
Klinikum Rechts der Isar der Technische Universität München, Ismaninger Str. 22, 
D-81675 Munich, Germany. Electronic address: sandeep.vashist@tum.de.

Two-dimensional (2D) graphene, sp(2)-hybridized carbon, and its two major
derivatives, graphene oxide (GO) and reduced graphene oxide (rGO) have played an 
important role in immunoassays (IAs) and immunosensing (IMS) platforms for the
detection of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), an implicated tumor biomarker found 
in several types of cancer. The graphene family with high surface area is
functionalized to form stable nanocomposites with gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) and 
electron mediators. The capture anti-CEA antibody (Ab) with high density can be
anchored on AuNPs of such composites to provide remarkable detection sensitivity,
significantly below the level found in normal subjects and cancer patients.
Electrochemical and fluorescence/chemiluminescence-quenching properties of
graphene-based nanocomposites are exploited in various detection schemes. Future 
endeavors are envisioned for the development of an array platform with
high-throughput for CEA together with other tumor biomarkers and C-reactive
protein, a universal biomarker for infection and inflammation. The ongoing
efforts dedicated to the replacement of a lab-based detector by a cellphone with 
smart applications will further enable cost-effective and frequent monitoring of 
CEA in order to establish its clinical relevance and provide tools for real-time 
monitoring of patients during chemotherapy.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26620098  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


65. Protein Expr Purif. 2016 Mar;119:94-101. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2015.11.016. Epub
2015 Nov 22.

Development of monoclonal antibodies and immunochromatographic lateral flow
device for rapid test of alanine aminotransferase isoenzyme 1.

Hu X(1), Cheng S(2), Liu X(2), Li J(1), Zheng W(2), Lu G(3), Zhang J(3), Zheng
J(4), Zhang J(5).

Author information: 
(1)The Blood Transfusion Department, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing 
Medical University, Chongqing, PR China. (2)Clinical Laboratory, Shandong
Jiaotong Hospital, No.11 Wuyinshan Road, Tianqiao District, Ji'nan, Shandong
Province, PR China. (3)Artron BioResearch Inc., 3938 North Fraser Way, Burnaby,
British Columbia, V5J 5H6, Canada. (4)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology on
Infectious Diseases, Chongqing Medical University, No.1 Yixueyuan Road, Yuzhong
District, Chongqing 400016, PR China. (5)The Blood Transfusion Department, The
Second Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, PR China. 
Electronic address: juanmcq@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) has been used as a sensitive marker
for liver injury in people and in preclinical toxicity studies. But measurement
of ALT isoenzymes, ALT1 and ALT2, was reported to be of more diagnostic value.
The aim of this study is to develop an ideal pair of anti-ALT1 monoclonal
antibodies (MAbs) of high specificity and affinity, and subsequently prepare a
Immunochromatographic lateral flow device (LFD) for rapid test of ALT1 in human
serums.
METHODS: The complete coding sequence of ALT1 gene (1500 bp) was cloned from
human hepatoma G2 cells (HepG2) and inserted into the expression vector
pET-32a(+). ALT1 recombinant protein was routinely prepared by E. coli BL21 (DE3)
expression and Ni(2+) affinity purification. Balb/c mice were immunized with
purified ALT1 and the splenocytes were fused with Sp2/0 myeloma cells. The
positive clones, verified by indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
using purified ALT1, were subcloned to single clones by limiting dilution
process. A MAb pair was selected from the obtained MAbs according the sandwich
ELISA pairing results and then used for lateral flow device (LFD) production.
After evaluation of the sensitivity and specificity, the LFD strips were employed
to test human serum samples with known ALT activity levels.
RESULTS: ALT1 recombinant protein was expectedly prepared by expression and
purification. A total of 8 stable clones that produced antibodies specifically
recognizing ALT1 protein were developed. After sandwich ELISA pairing, an ideal
pair of anti-ALT1 MAbs, designated as BD7 and DG3, were selected and proved to be
of high specificity, titer and affinity. Based on the MAb pair, LFD strips
specifically for ALT1 rapid test were subsequently prepared. The detection
threshold of the LFD strips was 12 U/L. No cross reaction was found.
CONCLUSIONS: The ALT1 LFD with high sensitivity and specificity was successfully 
developed. It is valuable for testing ALT1 protein in human sera and can be a
beneficial complement for traditional ALT test.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26611609  [PubMed - in process]


66. Guang Pu Xue Yu Guang Pu Fen Xi. 2015 Jun;35(6):1534-8.

[Study on the Micro-FTIR Spectra of the Euhedral Faceted Polycrystalline Diamonds
(EFPCDs) from Western Yangtze Craton and Its Geological Significance].

[Article in Chinese]

Hu PY, Zeng LL, Yang ZJ, Fu HF, Liu SW, Shen WJ, Peng ZL.

The results of Micro-FTIR spectra analysis of the euhedral faceted
polycrystalline diamonds (EFPCDs) from the Western Yangtze Craton show that the
EFPCDs are mostly IaAB type, the concentration of nitrogen.varies greatly from
25. 70- 358.35 µg x g(-1). Different nitrogen content distributes in different
diamond grains or position in same sample. The C Center was not found in the
samples and the conversion from A center to B center is incomplete, in the
meanwhile, B% value concentrated in 40%. Thus, polycrystalline diamonds are not
formed in the stage of nucleation but gathered together after formation of the
individual diamond grains during the residence time in the mantle. And its
formation environment is. more complex than the euhedral faceted polycrystalline 
diamonds from Mengyin kimberlite, the Eastern of North China Craton. The diamonds
extremely possibly originated in the deep mantle from 160 to 180 km, reaching the
depth of the core of the Yangtze Craton, at the same time it is close to the
bottom of the lithosphere. The C-H bond of sp2 hybridization are conducive to the
formation of platelets in diamonds. Meanwhile, its concentrations are generally
higher than the C-H bond of sp3 hybridization in the samples.

PMID: 26601362  [PubMed]


67. J Chem Theory Comput. 2014 Dec 9;10(12):5391-6. doi: 10.1021/ct5008229.

Computation of the Density Matrix in Electronic Structure Theory in Parallel on
Multiple Graphics Processing Units.

Cawkwell MJ, Wood MA(1), Niklasson AM, Mniszewski SM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Materials Engineering, Purdue University , 701 West Stadium Avenue, 
West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, United States.

The algorithm developed in Cawkwell, M. J. et al. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2012 , 
8 , 4094 for the computation of the density matrix in electronic structure theory
on a graphics processing unit (GPU) using the second-order spectral projection
(SP2) method [ Niklasson, A. M. N. Phys. Rev. B 2002 , 66 , 155115 ] has been
efficiently parallelized over multiple GPUs on a single compute node. The
parallel implementation provides significant speed-ups with respect to the single
GPU version with no loss of accuracy. The performance and accuracy of the
parallel GPU-based algorithm is compared with the performance of the SP2
algorithm and traditional matrix diagonalization methods on a multicore central
processing unit (CPU).

PMID: 26583222  [PubMed]


68. J Chem Theory Comput. 2015 Oct 13;11(10):4644-54. doi: 10.1021/acs.jctc.5b00552. 
Epub 2015 Sep 29.

Efficient parallel linear scaling construction of the density matrix for
Born-Oppenheimer molecular dynamics.

Mniszewski SM(1), Cawkwell MJ(1), Wall ME(1), Mohd-Yusof J(1), Bock N(1), Germann
TC(1), Niklasson AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Computer, Computational, and Statistical Sciences Division and Theoretical
Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory , Los Alamos, New Mexico 87545, United
States.

We present an algorithm for the calculation of the density matrix that for
insulators scales linearly with system size and parallelizes efficiently on
multicore, shared memory platforms with small and controllable numerical errors. 
The algorithm is based on an implementation of the second-order spectral
projection (SP2) algorithm [ Niklasson, A. M. N. Phys. Rev. B 2002 , 66 , 155115 
] in sparse matrix algebra with the ELLPACK-R data format. We illustrate the
performance of the algorithm within self-consistent tight binding theory by total
energy calculations of gas phase poly(ethylene) molecules and periodic liquid
water systems containing up to 15,000 atoms on up to 16 CPU cores. We consider
algorithm-specific performance aspects, such as local vs nonlocal memory access
and the degree of matrix sparsity. Comparisons to sparse matrix algebra
implementations using off-the-shelf libraries on multicore CPUs, graphics
processing units (GPUs), and the Intel many integrated core (MIC) architecture
are also presented. The accuracy and stability of the algorithm are illustrated
with long duration Born-Oppenheimer molecular dynamics simulations of 1000 water 
molecules and a 303 atom Trp cage protein solvated by 2682 water molecules.

PMID: 26574255  [PubMed]


69. Environ Monit Assess. 2015 Dec;187(12):751. doi: 10.1007/s10661-015-4983-7. Epub 
2015 Nov 14.

Arsenic-induced genotoxicity in Nile tilapia (Orechromis niloticus); the role of 
Spirulina platensis extract.

Sayed Ael-D(1), Elbaghdady HA(2), Zahran E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Zoology Department, Faculty of Science, Assiut University, 71516, Assiut,
Egypt. alaa_h254@yahoo.com. (2)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science,
Mansoura University, Mansoura, 35516, Egypt. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, 
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Mansoura University, Mansoura, 35516, Egypt.

Arsenic (As) is one of the most relevant environmental global single substance
toxicants that have long been regarded as a carcinogenic and genotoxic potential.
In this respect, we evaluated the cytogenetic effect of arsenic exposure in Nile 
tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus), in terms of erythrocyte alteration, apoptosis,
and induction of micronuclei. Spirulina platensis (SP) is a filamentous
cyanobacterium microalgae with potent dietary phytoantioxidant,
anti-inflammatory, and anti-cancerous properties supplementation. The protective 
role of Spirulina as supplementary feeds was studied in Nile tilapia (O.
niloticus) against arsenic-induced cytogenotoxicity. Four groups were assigned as
control group (no SP or As), As group (exposed to water-born As in the form of
NaAsO2 at 7 ppm), SP1 (SP at 7.5%<U+2009>+<U+2009>As at the same level of exposure), and SP2
(SP at 10%<U+2009>+<U+2009>As at the same level of exposure). As-treated group had a
significant increase in all cytogenetic analyses including erythrocyte
alteration, apoptosis, and induction of micronuclei after 2 weeks with continuous
increase in response after 3 weeks. The combined treatment of Spirulina at two
different concentrations of 7.5 and 10% had significantly declined the induction 
of erythrocyte alteration, apoptosis, and micronuclei formation induced by
arsenic intoxication.

PMID: 26573688  [PubMed - in process]


70. Eur J Med Chem. 2015 Oct 26. pii: S0223-5234(15)30320-2. doi:
10.1016/j.ejmech.2015.10.038. [Epub ahead of print]

Efficient stereoselective synthesis of 2-acetamido-1,2-dideoxyallonojirimycin
(DAJNAc) and sp(2)-iminosugar conjugates: Novel hexosaminidase inhibitors with
discrimination capabilities between the mature and precursor forms of the enzyme.

de la Fuente A(1), Rísquez-Cuadro R(2), Verdaguer X(3), García Fernández JM(4),
Nanba E(5), Higaki K(6), Ortiz Mellet C(7), Riera A(8).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), The Barcelona Institute
of Science and Technology, Baldiri Reixac 10, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Departamento de Química Orgánica, Facultad de Química, Universidad de Sevilla,
Apartado 1203, E-41071 Sevilla, Spain. (3)Institute for Research in Biomedicine
(IRB Barcelona), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Baldiri
Reixac 10, 08028 Barcelona, Spain; Departament de Química Orgànica, Universitat
de Barcelona, Martí i Franquès, 1, E-08028 Barcelona, Spain. (4)Instituto de
Investigaciones Químicas (IIQ), CSIC and Universidad de Sevilla, Américo Vespucio
49, Isla de la Cartuja, E-41092 Sevilla, Spain. (5)Division of Functional
Genomics, Research Center for Bioscience and Technology, Tottori University, 86
Nishi-cho, Yonago 683-8503, Japan. (6)Division of Functional Genomics, Research
Center for Bioscience and Technology, Tottori University, 86 Nishi-cho, Yonago
683-8503, Japan. Electronic address: kh4060@med.tottori-u.ac.jp. (7)Departamento 
de Química Orgánica, Facultad de Química, Universidad de Sevilla, Apartado 1203, 
E-41071 Sevilla, Spain. Electronic address: mellet@us.es. (8)Institute for
Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), The Barcelona Institute of Science and
Technology, Baldiri Reixac 10, 08028 Barcelona, Spain; Departament de Química
Orgànica, Universitat de Barcelona, Martí i Franquès, 1, E-08028 Barcelona,
Spain. Electronic address: antoni.riera@irbbarcelona.org.

Due to their capacity to inhibit hexosaminidases,
2-acetamido-1,2-dideoxy-iminosugars have been widely studied as potential
therapeutic agents for various diseases. An efficient stereoselective synthesis
of 2-acetamido-1,2-dideoxyallonojirimycin (DAJNAc), the most potent inhibitor of 
human placenta ß-N-acetylglucosaminidase (ß-hexosaminidase) among the epimeric
series, is here described. This novel procedure can be easily scaled up,
providing enough material for structural modifications and further biological
tests. Thus, two series of sp(2)-iminosugar conjugates derived from DAJNAc have
been prepared, namely monocyclic DAJNAc-thioureas and bicyclic
2-iminothiazolidines, and their glycosidase inhibitory activity evaluated. The
data evidence the utmost importance of developing diversity-oriented synthetic
strategies allowing optimization of electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions to
achieve high inhibitory potencies and selectivities among isoenzymes. Notably,
strong differences in the inhibition potency of the compounds towards
ß-hexosaminidase from human placenta (mature) or cultured fibroblasts (precursor 
form) were encountered. The ensemble of data suggests that the ratio between
them, and not the inhibition potency towards the placenta enzyme, is a good
indication of the chaperoning potential of TaySachs disease-associated mutant
hexosaminidase.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 26564401  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


71. Top Curr Chem. 2015 Nov 7. [Epub ahead of print]

Aminations with Hypervalent Iodine.

Muñiz K(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemical Research of Catalonia (ICIQ), 16 Avgda. Països Catalans,
43007, Tarragona, Spain. kmuniz@iciq.es. (2)Catalan Institution for Research and 
Advanced Studies (ICREA), Pg. Lluís Companys 23, 08010, Barcelona, Spain.
kmuniz@iciq.es.

Recent progress in the area of hypervalent iodine-mediated and catalyzed
amination reaction of hydrocarbons is reviewed. These reactions comprise
processes under both intra and intermolecular control and include the
functionalization of aromatic C-H bonds as well as conversion of sp-, sp(2)-, and
sp(3)-hybridized carbon atoms. These developments demonstrate that hypervalent
iodine(III) methodology has reached a high level in amination chemistry. The
individual reactions are discussed with a focus on mechanistic details and
emphasis is made to the underlying hypervalent iodine reagents, for which
structural information is available.

PMID: 26546327  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


72. BMJ. 2015 Nov 4;351:h5851. doi: 10.1136/bmj.h5851.

Additional factors to take into account when diagnosing miscarriage.

Fountain SA(1), Dipper M(2), Smith H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury SP2 8BJ, UK shaunfountain@yahoo.co.uk. 
(2)Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury SP2 8BJ, UK.

Comment in
    BMJ. 2015;351:h5852.

Comment on
    BMJ. 2015;351:h4579.

PMID: 26537252  [PubMed - in process]


73. J Adolesc. 2015 Dec;45:263-73. doi: 10.1016/j.adolescence.2015.10.008. Epub 2015 
Nov 11.

From placement to prison revisited: Do mental health services disrupt the
delinquency pipeline among Latino, African American and Caucasian youth in the
child welfare system?

Garcia AR(1), Greeson JK(2), Kim M(3), Thompson A(2), DeNard C(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Social Policy & Practice, University of Pennsylvania, 3701 Locust
Walk, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Electronic address: antgar@sp2.upenn.edu.
(2)School of Social Policy & Practice, University of Pennsylvania, 3701 Locust
Walk, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (3)Department of Social Work, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.

Racial and ethnic disparities in delinquency among child welfare-involved youth
are well documented. However, less is known about the mechanisms through which
these disparities occur. This study explores the extent to which sets of
variables predict the occurrence of juvenile delinquency and whether
race/ethnicity moderates the strength of the relationships between (1) social,
emotional, and behavioral (SEB) problems and delinquency and (2) mental health
service use and delinquency. We used a nationally representative sample of 727
African American, Caucasian, and Latino youth between the ages of 12-17 who were 
referred to the child welfare system. Controlling for age, gender, placement
instability, maltreatment history, poverty, and urbanicity, linear regression
analyses revealed that African American and Latino youth engaged in more
delinquent acts than Caucasian youth did. However, service use decreased the
likelihood of engaging in more delinquent acts for African Americans. Additional 
efforts are needed to illuminate and address the contextual and organizational
barriers to delivering effective mental health services as a strategy to reduce
racial disparities in delinquent behavior.

Copyright © 2015 The Foundation for Professionals in Services for Adolescents.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26536399  [PubMed - in process]


74. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Nov;31(11):1549-53.

[Preparation of monoclonal antibody against recombinant human interferon-ß1a].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang D(1), LA W(1), Li L(1), Wang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Applied Chemistry and Biological Technology, Shenzhen Polytechnic,
Shenzhen 518044, China.

OBJECTIVE: To prepare the monoclonal antibody (mAb) against recombinant human
interferon-ß1a (rhIFN-ß1a).
METHODS: BALB/c mice were immunized with purified rhIFN-ß1a. The spleen
lymphocyte cells from the one whose blood specific antibody titer exceeded 1:10
000 were fused with Sp2/0 cells. The fused cells went through HAT selection,
serial dilution, and positive selection until stable hybridoma cell lines were
obtained. The equilibrium dissociation constant (K(D)) of antibodies was
calculated based on ELISA result. The cell line with the best KD value was
cultured in a stirred-tank bioreactor with a fed-batch strategy to produce
secreted anti-rhIFN-ß1a monoclonal antibody. The mAb released into the cell
culture supernatant were purified by ultrafiltration and protein-G affinity
chromatography.
RESULTS: Thirteen hybridoma cell lines which stably produced anti-rhIFN-ß1a
antibody were retrieved from standard hybridoma fusion and selection procedures. 
One of the 13 cell lines, 1E8 with the KD value of 4.6 × 10<U+207B><U+2079> mol/L was cultured 
and antibody titer in the cell culture supernatant reached 1:5000. The mAb with
90% purity was recovered from the two-steps purification.
CONCLUSION: The anti-rhIFN-ß1a mAb with high purity has been successfully
obtained.

PMID: 26522367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Psychiatr Q. 2015 Oct 30. [Epub ahead of print]

Measuring Limit-Setting Practices Used by Family Members Towards Relatives with
Psychiatric Disorders.

Labrum T(1), Walk M(2), Solomon PL(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Social Policy and Practice, University of Pennsylvania, 3701 Locust 
Walk, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA. tlabrum@sp2.upenn.edu. (2)School of Public
and Environmental Affairs, Indiana University, 801 W Michigan Street,
Indianapolis, IN, 46202, USA. (3)School of Social Policy and Practice, University
of Pennsylvania, 3701 Locust Walk, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA.

Family members often set limits with relatives with psychiatric disorders (PD),
however, no scale currently exists measuring the use of such limit-setting
practices. The present article describes the development and results of a new
measure, the Family Limit-Setting Scale (FLSS). Via a national online survey, the
FLSS was completed by 573 adults residing in the U.S. who report having an adult 
relative with PD. We conducted exploratory and confirmatory factor analyses,
examined internal consistencies and other indicators of construct validity, and
performed invariance analyses assessing the generality of the optimal factor
model to men, women, Caucasian respondents, and non-Caucasian respondents.
Results indicate that the FLSS has an acceptable two factor structure (routine
limit-setting and crisis prevention limit-setting) with both factors being highly
generalizable to all groups of respondents examined. Internal consistencies and
other indicators provide additional evidence of the FLSS' construct validity. Use
of the FLSS will enable the conduction of quantitative research in this area. In 
addition, this measure may be employed in education/support organizations for
families with a member with mental illness in an effort to identify persons using
high levels of limit-setting practices who may benefit from extra support and/or 
guidance.

PMID: 26518780  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


76. Psychiatr Q. 2015 Oct 27. [Epub ahead of print]

Autovideography: The Lived Experience of Recovery for Adults with Serious Mental 
Illness.

Petros R(1), Solomon P(2), Linz S(3), DeCesaris M(4), Hanrahan NP(5).

Author information: 
(1)University of Pennsylvania School of Social Policy and Practice, 3815 Walnut
St., Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA. petrosr@sp2.upenn.edu. (2)University of
Pennsylvania School of Social Policy and Practice, 3701 Locust Walk, Caster
Building, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA. (3)Rutgers School of Nursing, Camden, 215
North 3rd Street, Camden, NJ, 08102, USA. (4)University of Pennsylvania School of
Nursing, 418 Curie Blvd, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA. (5)School of Nursing,
Northeastern University and Bouve' College of Health Sciences, 102 Robinson Hall,
360 Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.

Mental health services have been transforming toward a recovery orientation for
more than a decade, yet a robust understanding of recovery eludes many providers,
and consensus on a conceptual definition has yet to be reached. This article
examines mental health consumers' lived experience of recovery and evaluates the 
usefulness and comprehensiveness of CHIME, a major framework conceptually
defining recovery for adults with serious mental illness. Researchers partnered
with a mental health association in a major US city to engage in research with
graduates of a recovery and education class for adults diagnosed with serious
mental illness. Twelve participants were loaned video cameras and invited to
"Tell us about your recovery" through autovideography. Of the 12 participants,
six produced videos directly responding to the overall research question and were
subsequently included in the present analysis. Data were analyzed thematically,
and CHIME adequately represented the major domains presented in consumer videos
with two notable modifications: subdomains of "reciprocity" within relationships 
and "contributing to others" were added to comprehensively represent consumer
perspectives about recovery. Adding two subdomains to CHIME more effectively
represents consumer narratives about recovery, contributes to the social
construction of the personhood of people with serious mental illness, and offers 
a more robust description of the process of recovery.

PMID: 26506921  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


77. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Oct 5;14(4):11965-74. doi: 10.4238/2015.October.5.10.

Immunological characteristics of outer membrane protein omp31 of goat Brucella
and its monoclonal antibody.

Zheng WY(1), Wang Y(2), Zhang ZC(3), Yan F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Disease, The 253th Hospital of P.L.A., Hohhot, China 
zhengwydid@126.com. (2)Department of Pharmacy, Affiliated Hospital of Inner
Mongolia Medical University, Hohhot, China. (3)Department of Infectious Disease, 
The 253th Hospital of P.L.A., Hohhot, China.

We examined the immunological characteristics of outer membrane protein omp31 of 
goat Brucella and its monoclonal antibody. Genomic DNA from the M5 strain of goat
Brucella was amplified by polymerase chain reaction and cloned into the
prokaryotic expression vector pGEX-4T-1. The expression and immunological
characteristics of the fusion protein GST-omp31 were subjected to preliminary
western blot detection with goat Brucella rabbit immune serum. The Brucella
immunized BALB/c mouse serum was detected using purified protein. The
high-potency mouse splenocytes and myeloma Sp2/0 cells were fused. Positive
clones were screened by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay to establish a
hybridoma cell line. Mice were inoculated intraperitoneally with hybridoma cells 
to prepare ascites. The mAb was purified using the n-caprylic acid-ammonium
sulfate method. The characteristics of mAb were examined using western blotting
and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. A 680-base pair band was observed after
polymerase chain reaction. Enzyme digestion identification and sequencing showed 
that the pGEX-4T-1-omp31 prokaryotic expression vector was successfully
established; a target band of approximately 57 kDa with an apparent molecular
weight consistent with the size of the target fusion protein. At 25°C, the
expression of soluble expression increased significantly; the fusion protein
GST-omp31 was detected by western blotting. Anti-omp31 protein mAb was obtained
from 2 strains of Brucella. The antibody showed strong specificity and
sensitivity and did not cross-react with Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus,
Bacillus subtilis, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, or Bacillus pyocyaneus. The
pGEX-4T-1-omp31 prokaryotic expression vector was successfully established and
showed good immunogenicity. The antibody also showed strong specificity and good 
sensitivity.

PMID: 26505344  [PubMed - in process]


78. J Phys Chem Lett. 2015 Nov 5;6(21):4431-6. doi: 10.1021/acs.jpclett.5b02175. Epub
2015 Oct 27.

Quantification of Conventional and Nonconventional Charge-Assisted Hydrogen Bonds
in the Condensed and Gas Phases.

Katsyuba SA(1), Vener MV(2), Zvereva EE(1,)(3), Fei Z(4), Scopelliti R(4),
Brandenburg JG(5), Siankevich S(4), Dyson PJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)A. E. Arbuzov Institute of Organic and Physical Chemistry, Kazan Scientific
Centre of the Russian Academy of Sciences , Arbuzov Street 8, 420088 Kazan,
Russia. (2)Department of Quantum Chemistry, Mendeleev University of Chemical
Technology , Miusskaya Square 9, 125047 Moscow, Russia. (3)Institut de
Nanosciences et Cryogénie, SP2M/L_sim, CEA , 17 Rue des Martyrs, 38054 Grenoble, 
France. (4)Institut des Sciences et Ingénierie Chimiques, Ecole Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) EPFL - BCH , CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.
(5)Mulliken Center for Theoretical Chemistry, Institut für Physikalische und
Theoretische Chemie der Universität Bonn , Beringstrasse 4, 53115 Bonn, Germany.

Charge-assisted hydrogen bonds (CAHBs) play critical roles in many systems from
biology through to materials. In none of these areas has the role and function of
CAHBs been explored satisfactorily because of the lack of data on the energy of
CAHBs in the condensed phases. We have, for the first time, quantified three
types of CAHBs in both the condensed and gas phases for
1-(2'-hydroxylethyl)-3-methylimidazolium acetate ([C2OHmim][OAc]). The energy of 
conventional OH···[OAc](-) CAHBs is ~10 kcal·mol(-1), whereas nonconventional
C(sp2)H···[OAc](-) and C(sp3)H···[OAc](-) CAHBs are weaker by ~5-7 kcal·mol(-1). 
In the gas phase, the strength of the nonconventional CAHBs is doubled, whereas
the conventional CAHBs are strengthened by <20%. The influence of cooperativity
effects on the ability of the [OAc](-) anion to deprotonate the imidazolium
cation is evaluated. The ability to quantify CAHBs in the condensed phase on the 
basis of easier accessible gas-phase estimates is highlighted.

PMID: 26496074  [PubMed - in process]


79. Monoclon Antib Immunodiagn Immunother. 2015 Oct;34(5):334-40. doi:
10.1089/mab.2015.0003.

Preparation and Identification of a Monoclonal Antibody Against Cystatin C.

Zha Z(1), Zhao X(2), Liu W(3), Zhang M(2), Tang B(4), Wu B(1), Qu F(2), Chen
X(2), Wu X(2), Cao L(4), Guo H(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Urology, The Affiliated Jiangyin Hospital of Southeast
University Medical College , Wuxi, China . (2)2 Department of Urology, Nanjing
Drum Tower Hospital, The Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing University Medical School
, Nanjing, China . (3)3 China Animal Disease Control Center , Beijing, China .
(4)4 Vazyme Biotech Co. , Nanjing, China .

Cystatin C (Cys C) has been shown to be an excellent marker of renal function,
especially when evaluating the early stages of acute kidney injury. It is less
affected by age, gender, muscle mass, and ethnicity. The detection of Cys C is
important and has broad application prospects. Therefore, we have developed a
panel of monoclonal antibodies against Cys C that can be used to establish an
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kit and paired for further use in other
methods of detecting Cys C. This study describes the preparation, application,
and characterization of monoclonal antibodies used in ELISA. The antibodies were 
developed by PEG fusion of the SP2/0 cells with splenic B cells from Cys C
immunized BALB/c mice. Antibody-producing cells were identified by ELISA and
Western blot analysis. By way of cloning and screening, four hybridoma cell lines
were established. Simultaneously large-scale monoclonal antibodies produced in
mice ascites were prepared. The results showed that the cell clone 8D12 could be 
used in immunohistochemical staining. With the ELISA additivity test, we got a
preliminarily finding that the monoclonal antibodies were not on the same
epitope. The antibody matching test showed that 5D7 and 7A8 successfully paired
with 8D12, and the optimal reaction conditions were initially identified.

PMID: 26492621  [PubMed - in process]


80. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2016 Feb;71(2):307-13. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkv341. Epub 2015
Oct 15.

Characterization of novel conjugative multiresistance plasmids carrying cfr from 
linezolid-resistant Staphylococcus epidermidis clinical isolates from Italy.

Brenciani A(1), Morroni G(1), Pollini S(2), Tiberi E(1), Mingoia M(1), Varaldo
PE(3), Rossolini GM(4), Giovanetti E(5).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Microbiology, Department of Biomedical Sciences and Public Health,
Polytechnic University of Marche Medical School, Ancona, Italy. (2)Department of 
Medical Biotechnologies, University of Siena, Siena, Italy. (3)Unit of
Microbiology, Department of Biomedical Sciences and Public Health, Polytechnic
University of Marche Medical School, Ancona, Italy pe.varaldo@univpm.it.
(4)Department of Medical Biotechnologies, University of Siena, Siena, Italy
Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Florence,
Florence, Italy Clinical Microbiology and Virology Unit, Florence Careggi
University Hospital, Florence, Italy. (5)Unit of Microbiology, Department of Life
and Environmental Sciences, Polytechnic University of Marche, Ancona, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: The objective of this study was to investigate the genetic
environment of the cfr gene from two linezolid-resistant clinical isolates of
Staphylococcus epidermidis from Italy.
METHODS: The two strains (SP1 and SP2) were phenotypically and genotypically
characterized. Transferability of cfr was assessed by electrotransformation and
conjugation. The genetic contexts of cfr were investigated by PCR mapping,
sequencing and comparative sequence analyses.
RESULTS: SP1 and SP2 belonged to ST23 and ST83, respectively. In both strains,
the cfr gene was located on a plasmid, which could be transferred to
Staphylococcus aureus by transformation and conjugation. In isolate SP1,
linezolid resistance mediated by mutations in 23S rRNA and the L3 ribosomal
protein was also detected. pSP01, the cfr-carrying plasmid from strain SP1, had a
larger number of additional resistance genes and was sequenced (76<U+200A>991 bp). It
disclosed a distinctive mosaic structure, with four cargo regions interpolated
into a backbone 95% identical to that of S. aureus plasmid pPR9. Besides cfr,
resistance genes distributed in the cargo regions included blaZ, lsa(B), msr(A)
and aad, and a gene cluster for resistance to heavy metals. A closely related cfr
plasmid (pSP01.1, ~49 kb), differing from pSP01 by the lack of a large cargo
region with some resistance genes, was detected in strain SP2.
CONCLUSIONS: The conjugative multiresistance plasmid pSP01 is the first
cfr-carrying plasmid to be sequenced in Italy. This is the first time cfr has
been found: (i) in association with blaZ, msr(A) and heavy metal resistance
genes; and (ii) in an S. epidermidis strain (SP2) belonging to ST83.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British 
Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26472766  [PubMed - in process]


81. Plant Biol (Stuttg). 2015 Oct 14. doi: 10.1111/plb.12407. [Epub ahead of print]

Increased temperatures negatively affect Juniperus communis seeds: evidence from 
transplant experiments along a latitudinal gradient.

Gruwez R(1), De Frenne P(1), Vander Mijnsbrugge K(2,)(3), Vangansbeke P(1,)(4),
Verheyen K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Forest & Nature Lab, Ghent University, Melle-Gontrode, Belgium. (2)Research
Institute for Nature and Forest, Geraardsbergen, Belgium. (3)Agency for Nature
and Forest, Brussels, Belgium. (4)Flemish Institute for Technological Research
(VITO), Mol, Belgium.

With a distribution range that covers most of the Northern hemisphere, common
juniper (Juniperus communis) has one of the largest ranges of all vascular plant 
species. In several regions in Europe, however, populations are decreasing in
size and number due to failing recruitment. One of the main causes for this
failure is low seed viability. Observational evidence suggests that this is
partly induced by climate warming, but our mechanistic understanding of this
effect remains incomplete. Here, we experimentally assess the influence of
temperature on two key developmental phases during sexual reproduction, i.e.
gametogenesis and fertilisation (seed phase two, SP2) and embryo development
(seed phase three, SP3). Along a latitudinal gradient from southern France to
central Sweden, we installed a transplant experiment with shrubs originating from
Belgium, a region with unusually low juniper seed viability. Seeds of both seed
phases were sampled during three consecutive years, and seed viability assessed. 
Warming temperatures negatively affected the seed viability of both SP2 and SP3
seeds along the latitudinal gradient. Interestingly, the effect on embryo
development (SP3) only occurred in the third year, i.e. when the gametogenesis
and fertilisation also took place in warmer conditions. We found strong
indications that this negative influence mostly acts via disrupting growth of the
pollen tube, the development of the female gametophyte and fertilisation (SP2).
This, in turn, can lead to failing embryo development, for example, due to
nutritional problems. Our results confirm that climate warming can negatively
affect seed viability of juniper.

© 2015 German Botanical Society and The Royal Botanical Society of the
Netherlands.

PMID: 26465806  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


82. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Nov 13;467(2):341-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.09.155. Epub 2015 Oct 6.

O-GlcNAc modification of Sp3 and Sp4 transcription factors negatively regulates
their transcriptional activities.

Ha C(1), Lim K(2).

Author information: 
(1)ASAN Institute for Life Science, ASAN Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of
Korea. (2)Center for Vaccine Biology and Immunology, University of Rochester
Medical Center, NY 14642, USA. Electronic address: Kihong_Lim@urmc.rochester.edu.

The addition of O-linked N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) on serine or threonine
modifies a myriad of proteins and regulates their function, stability and
localization. O-GlcNAc modification is common among chromosome-associated
proteins, such as transcription factors, suggesting its extensive involvement in 
gene expression regulation. In this study, we demonstrate the O-GlcNAc status of 
the Sp family members of transcription factors and the functional impact on their
transcriptional activities. We highlight the presence of O-GlcNAc residues in Sp3
and Sp4, but not Sp2, as demonstrated by their enrichment in GlcNAc positive
protein fractions and by detection of O-GlcNAc residues on Sp3 and Sp4
co-expressed in Escherichia coli together with O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT) using
an O-GlcNAc-specific antibody. Deletion mutants of Sp3 and Sp4 indicate that the 
majority of O-GlcNAc sites reside in their N-terminal transactivation domain.
Overall, using reporter gene assays and co-immunoprecipitations, we demonstrate a
functional inhibitory role of O-GlcNAc modifications in Sp3 and Sp4 transcription
factors. Thereby, our study strengthens the current notion that O-GlcNAc
modification is an important regulator of protein interactome.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26431879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2015 Mar;15(3):2001-8.

Flexible and Conductive Graphene-Poly (diallyldimethylammoniumchloride)
Buckypaper.

You X, Pak JJ.

This paper describes the fabrication and characterization of flexible, conductive
reduced graphene oxide (rGO)-poly(diallyldimethylammoniumchloride) (PDDA)
buckypaper (BP). PDDA acts as a reducing agent to prepare an rGO-PDDA nanosheet
dispersion from graphite oxide. The incorporation of PDDA as a "glue" molecule
successfully binds rGO nanosheets into BPs with strong interlayer binding. The
resulting BPs were characterized by scanning electronic microscopy (SEM), Raman, 
energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX), X-ray diffraction (XRD), and
resistivity measurements. The sp2 structure was greatly restored by the
PDDA-induced reduction. Moreover, rGO was chemically doped from the adsorbed
PDDA, which causes the Raman G band to shift from ~1585 to ~1610 cm(-1). This
chemical doping substantially increased the density of the free charge carriers
in rGO and thereby further enhanced the electrical conductivity of the rGO-BP.
Good inter-layer connection in the rGO percolating network was obtained after
thermal annealing at higher than ~250 °C. The resulting rGO-PDDA-BPs exhibited an
isotropic sheet resistance as low as ~100 O/sq, which indicates a reduction by
six orders of magnitude compared to the GO-BPs resistance before annealing. This 
PDDA-induced reduction with a low-temperature annealing process preserved the
BPs' structural integrity and mechanical flexibility, thus overcoming the
fragility problems with high-temperature annealing.

PMID: 26413612  [PubMed]


84. Cryst Growth Des. 2015 Mar 4;15(3):1502-1511.

Solid-State Examination of Conformationally Diverse Sulfonamide Receptors Based
on Bis(2-anilinoethynyl)pyridine, -Bipyridine, and -Thiophene.

Berryman OB(1), Johnson CA 2nd(1), Vonnegut CL(1), Fajardo KA(1), Zakharov LN(2),
Johnson DW(1), Haley MM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry and the Materials Science Institute,
University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon 97403-1253, United States. (2)CAMCOR,
University of Oregon, 1443 East 13th Avenue, Eugene, Oregon 97403, United States.

Utilizing an induced-fit model and taking advantage of rotatable acetylenic
C(sp)-C(sp(2)) bonds, we disclose the synthesis and solid-state structures of a
series of conformationally diverse bis-sulfonamide arylethynyl receptors using
either pyridine, 2,2'-bipyridine, or thiophene as the core aryl group. Whereas
the bipyridine and thiophene structures do not appear to bind guests in the solid
state, the pyridine receptors form 2 + 2 dimers with water molecules, two
halides, or one of each, depending on the protonation state of the pyridine
nitrogen atom. Isolation of a related bis-sulfonimide derivative demonstrates the
importance of the sulfonamide N-H hydrogen bonds in dimer formation. The pyridine
receptors form monomeric structures with larger guests such as BF4 (-) or HSO4
(-), where the sulfonamide arms rotate to the side opposite the pyridine N atom.

PMCID: PMC4577069
PMID: 26405435  [PubMed]


85. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2016 Jan;116(1):217-25. doi: 10.1007/s00421-015-3260-3. Epub 
2015 Sep 23.

Individuality of breathing during volitional moderate hyperventilation.

Besleaga T(1), Blum M(2), Briot R(3), Vovc V(1), Moldovanu I(1), Calabrese P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Physiology and Biophysics, State Medical and
Pharmaceutical University "Nicolae Testemitanu", Chisinau, Republic of Moldova.
(2)UJF-Grenoble 1/CNRS/TIMC-IMAG UMR 5525/BCM Team, 38041, Grenoble, France.
(3)UJF-Grenoble 1/CNRS/TIMC-IMAG UMR 5525/PRETA Team, 38041, Grenoble, France.
(4)UJF-Grenoble 1/CNRS/TIMC-IMAG UMR 5525/PRETA Team, 38041, Grenoble, France.
pascale.calabrese@imag.fr.

PURPOSE: The aim of this study is to investigate the individuality of airflow
shapes during volitional hyperventilation.
METHODS: Ventilation was recorded on 18 healthy subjects following two protocols:
(1) spontaneous breathing (SP1) followed by a volitional hyperventilation at each
subject's spontaneous (HVSP) breathing rate, (2) spontaneous breathing (SP2)
followed by hyperventilation at 20/min (HV20). HVSP and HV20 were performed at
the same level of hypocapnia: end tidal CO2 (FETCO2) was maintained at 1 % below 
the spontaneous level. At each breath, the tidal volume (VT), the breath (TTOT), 
the inspiratory (TI) and expiratory durations, the minute ventilation, VT/TI,
TI/TTOT and the airflow shape were quantified by harmonic analysis. Under
different conditions of breathing, we test if the airflow profiles of the same
individual are more similar than airflow profiles between individuals.
RESULTS: Minute ventilation was not significantly different between SP1
(6.71 ± 1.64 l·min(-1)) and SP2 (6.57 ± 1.31 l·min(-1)) nor between HVSP
(15.88 ± 4.92 l·min(-1)) and HV20 (15.87 ± 4.16 l·min(-1)). Similar results were 
obtained for FETCO2 between SP1 (5.06 ± 0.54 %) and SP2 (5.00 ± 0.51 %), and HVSP
(4.07 ± 0.51 %) and HV20 (3.88 ± 0.42 %). Only TI/TTOT remained unchanged in all 
four conditions. Airflow shapes were similar when comparing SP1-SP2, HVSP-HV20,
and SP1-HVSP but not similar when comparing SP2-HV20.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest the existence of an individuality of airflow
shape during volitional hyperventilation. We conclude that volitional ventilation
alike automatic breathing follows inherent properties of the ventilatory system. 
Registered by Pascale Calabrese on ClinicalTrials.gov, # NCT01881945.

PMID: 26400417  [PubMed - in process]


86. J Am Chem Soc. 2015 Oct 21;137(41):13389-97. doi: 10.1021/jacs.5b08756. Epub 2015
Oct 5.

Oxidant-Free Au(I)-Catalyzed Halide Exchange and C(sp2)-O Bond Forming Reactions.

Serra J(1), Whiteoak CJ(1), Acuña-Parés F(1), Font M(1), Luis JM(1),
Lloret-Fillol J(1), Ribas X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Química Computacional i Catàlisi (IQCC) and Departament de
Química, Universitat de Girona , Campus de Montilivi, Girona E-17071, Catalonia, 
Spain.

Au has been demonstrated to mediate a number of organic transformations through
the utilization of its p Lewis acid character, Au(I)/Au(III) redox properties or 
a combination of both. As a result of the high oxidation potential of the
Au(I)/Au(III) couple, redox catalysis involving Au typically requires the use of 
a strong external oxidant. This study demonstrates unusual external oxidant-free 
Au(I)-catalyzed halide exchange (including fluorination) and Csp2-O bond
formation reactions utilizing a model aryl halide macrocyclic substrate.
Additionally, the halide exchange and Csp2-O coupling reactivity could also be
extrapolated to substrates bearing a single chelating group, providing further
insight into the reaction mechanism. This work provides the first examples of
external oxidant-free Au(I)-catalyzed carbon-heteroatom cross-coupling reactions.

PMID: 26397959  [PubMed]


87. Crit Rev Biotechnol. 2015 Sep 18:1-13. [Epub ahead of print]

Human cell lines for biopharmaceutical manufacturing: history, status, and future
perspectives.

Dumont J(1), Euwart D(1), Mei B(1), Estes S(1), Kshirsagar R(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Biogen , Cambridge , MA , USA.

Biotherapeutic proteins represent a mainstay of treatment for a multitude of
conditions, for example, autoimmune disorders, hematologic disorders, hormonal
dysregulation, cancers, infectious diseases and genetic disorders. The
technologies behind their production have changed substantially since
biotherapeutic proteins were first approved in the 1980s. Although most
biotherapeutic proteins developed to date have been produced using the mammalian 
Chinese hamster ovary and murine myeloma (NS0, Sp2/0) cell lines, there has been 
a recent shift toward the use of human cell lines. One of the most important
advantages of using human cell lines for protein production is the greater
likelihood that the resulting recombinant protein will bear post-translational
modifications (PTMs) that are consistent with those seen on endogenous human
proteins. Although other mammalian cell lines can produce PTMs similar to human
cells, they also produce non-human PTMs, such as galactose-a1,3-galactose and
N-glycolylneuraminic acid, which are potentially immunogenic. In addition, human 
cell lines are grown easily in a serum-free suspension culture, reproduce rapidly
and have efficient protein production. A possible disadvantage of using human
cell lines is the potential for human-specific viral contamination, although this
risk can be mitigated with multiple viral inactivation or clearance steps. In
addition, while human cell lines are currently widely used for biopharmaceutical 
research, vaccine production and production of some licensed protein
therapeutics, there is a relative paucity of clinical experience with human cell 
lines because they have only recently begun to be used for the manufacture of
proteins (compared with other types of cell lines). With additional research
investment, human cell lines may be further optimized for routine commercial
production of a broader range of biotherapeutic proteins.

PMID: 26383226  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


88. Vox Sang. 2016 Feb;110(2):172-8. doi: 10.1111/vox.12321. Epub 2015 Sep 18.

Characterization of a new human monoclonal antibody directed against the Vel
antigen.

Danger Y(1,)(2), Danard S(1), Gringoire V(1), Peyrard T(3,)(4,)(5), Riou P(1),
Semana G(1), Vérité F(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)EFS Bretagne, Rennes, France. (2)Structure Fédérative BioSit UMS 3480
CNRS-US18 Inserm, Rennes, France. (3)Institut National de la Transfusion
Sanguine, Département Centre National de Référence pour les Groupes Sanguins,
Paris, France. (4)INSERM UMR_S1134, Paris, France. (5)Laboratoire d'Excellence
LABEX GR-Ex, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: The Vel blood group antigen is a poorly characterized 
high-prevalence antigen. Until now, anti-Vel antibodies have been observed in
only alloimmunized Vel-negative individuals. In this study, we aimed to establish
a human hybridoma cell line secreting the first anti-Vel monoclonal antibody
(mAb), clone SpG213Dc.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Peripheral blood lymphocytes from a French Vel-negative
woman with anti-Vel in her plasma were transformed with Epstein-Barr virus and
then hybridized with the myeloma cell line Sp2/O-Ag14 using the polyethylene
glycol (PEG) method. A specific anti-Vel mAb was successfully produced and was
extensively characterized by serological, flow cytometry and Western blot
analyses.
RESULTS: One human anti-Vel-secreting clone was produced and the secreted
anti-Vel mAb (SpG213Dc) was examined. The specificity of the SpG213Dc mAb was
assessed by its reactivity against a panel of nine genotyped RBCs including,
respectively, three Vel-negative and six Vel-positive (three wild-type homozygous
and three heterozygous) samples using flow cytometry method. Vel-positive RBCs
were specifically stained and were subsequently used to perform Western blot and 
immunoprecipitation analysis of the Vel antigen.
CONCLUSION: Serological characterization of the new monoclonal anti-Vel SpG213Dc 
showed a heterogeneous level of expression of the Vel antigen on the different
RBCs. Our results suggest that the mAb SpG213Dc can be reliably used as a blood
grouping reagent, thus allowing the mass-scale phenotyping of blood donors to
strengthen rare blood banks with Vel-negative RBC units.

© 2015 International Society of Blood Transfusion.

PMID: 26382919  [PubMed - in process]


89. J Int Adv Otol. 2015 Aug;11(2):114-7. doi: 10.5152/iao.2015.426.

Binaural Interaction Component in Speech Evoked Auditory Brainstem Responses.

Uppunda AK(1), Bhat J, D'costa PE, Raj M, Kumar K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Audiology, All India Institute of Speech and Hearing, Mysore,
Karnataka, India. kaushlendra.kumar@manipal.edu.

OBJECTIVE: This article aims to describe the characteristics of the binaural
interaction component (BIC) of speech-evoked auditory brainstem response (ABR).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: All 15 subjects had normal peripheral hearing sensitivity.
ABRs were elicited by speech stimulus /da/.
RESULTS: The first BIC (BIC-SP1) in the speech-evoked ABR occurred at around 6 ms
in the region of peak V. The second BIC (BIC-SP2) was present around 8 ms in the 
latency region of peak A. The third and fourth BICs of speech-evoked ABR (BIC-SP3
& BIC-SP4) were observed at around 36 ms and 46 ms, respectively, in the latency 
regions of peaks E and F, respectively. BIC-SP1 and BIC-SP2 were present in all
subjects tested (100%), whereas BIC-SP3 and BIC-SP4 were present in 11 (73%).
CONCLUSION: Because ABRs are not affected by sleep and mature early, this tool
can be evaluated in identifying binaural interaction in younger and
difficult-to-test populations.

PMID: 26380999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Front Plant Sci. 2015 Aug 26;6:660. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2015.00660. eCollection
2015.

Molecular dissection of Phaseolus vulgaris polygalacturonase-inhibiting protein 2
reveals the presence of hold/release domains affecting protein trafficking toward
the cell wall.

De Caroli M(1), Lenucci MS(1), Manualdi F(1), Dalessandro G(1), De Lorenzo G(2), 
Piro G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biologiche ed Ambientali, Università del 
Salento Lecce, Italy. (2)Dipartimento di Biologia e Biotecnologie Charles Darwin,
Università degli Studi di Roma "La Sapienza" Rome, Italy.

The plant endomembrane system is massively involved in the synthesis, transport
and secretion of cell wall polysaccharides and proteins; however, the molecular
mechanisms underlying trafficking toward the apoplast are largely unknown.
Besides constitutive, the existence of a regulated secretory pathway has been
proposed. A polygalacturonase inhibitor protein (PGIP2), known to move as soluble
cargo and reach the cell wall through a mechanism distinguishable from default,
was dissected in its main functional domains (A, B, C, D), and C sub-fragments
(C1-10), to identify signals essential for its regulated targeting. The secretion
patterns of the fluorescent chimeras obtained by fusing different PGIP2 domains
to the green fluorescent protein (GFP) were analyzed. PGIP2 N-terminal and
leucine-rich repeat domains (B and C, respectively) seem to operate as
holding/releasing signals, respectively, during PGIP2 transit through the Golgi. 
The B domain slows down PGIP2 secretion by transiently interacting with Golgi
membranes. Its depletion leads, in fact, to the secretion via default
(Sp2-susceptible) of the ACD-GFP chimera faster than PGIP2. Depending on its
length (at least the first 5 leucine-rich repeats are required), the C domain
modulates B interaction with Golgi membranes allowing the release of chimeras and
their extracellular secretion through a Sp2 independent pathway. The addition of 
the vacuolar sorting determinant Chi to PGIP2 diverts the path of the protein
from cell wall to vacuole, suggesting that C domain is a releasing rather than a 
cell wall sorting signal.

PMCID: PMC4550104
PMID: 26379688  [PubMed]


91. Drug Alcohol Rev. 2015 Sep 15. doi: 10.1111/dar.12331. [Epub ahead of print]

Impact of the introduction of standardised packaging on smokers' brand awareness 
and identification in Australia.

Balmford J(1), Borland R(1), Yong HH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Nigel Gray Fellowship Group, Cancer Council Victoria, Melbourne, Australia.

INTRODUCTION AND AIMS: The introduction of standardised packaging (SP) in
Australia in December 2012 has heightened interest in how image and branding
might affect smoking. This paper tests the hypothesis that brand awareness and
identification among smokers will decline after the introduction of SP.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Longitudinal study of three waves of smokers in Australia,
conducted between October 2011-February 2012 (pre-SP) (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>1104), February-May
2013 (post-SP1) (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>1093) and August-December 2014 (post-SP2) (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>1090). We
explored the extent of changes in two variables, brand awareness (noticing others
with the brand of cigarettes you smoke) and brand identification (perceiving
something in common among smokers of your brand), and examined change in a number
of other measures of brand appeal, brand characteristics and determinants of
brand choice.
RESULTS: Brand awareness 'at least sometimes' reduced from 45.3% pre-SP to 26.9% 
at post-SP2 [odds ratio (OR) 0.35 (0.27-0.45)]. Brand identification also
decreased from 18.2% to 12.7% [OR 0.62 (0.42-0.91)]. Significant decline was also
found in measures of perceived brand prestige [OR 0.51 (0.39-0.66)] and choice of
brand for health reasons [OR 0.45 (0.32-0.63)]. Liking the look of the pack was
strongly associated with brand identification, but only post-SP (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.02 for
interaction across the three waves).
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS: The introduction of SP of tobacco products in
Australia has been associated with reductions in brand awareness and
identification, and changes in related measures. The findings support the notion 
that SP has reduced the capacity for smokers to use pack branding to create and
communicate a desired identity. [Balmford J, Borland R, Yong H-H. Impact of the
introduction of standardised packaging on smokers' brand awareness and
identification in Australia. Drug Alcohol Rev 2015;00:000-000].

© 2015 Australasian Professional Society on Alcohol and other Drugs.

PMCID: PMC4792799 [Available on 2017-03-15]
PMID: 26369651  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


92. J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2015 Aug;15(8):5501-11.

Carbon Nanomaterials for Drug Delivery and Cancer Therapy.

Chakrabarti M, Kiseleva R, Vertegel A, Ray SK.

Nanotechnology is one of the most exciting disciplines and it incorporates
physics, chemistry, materials science, and biology. It can be applied to design
cancer medicines with improved therapeutic indices. At the basic level, carbon
nanotubes (CNTs) and graphene are sp2 carbon nanomaterials. Their unique physical
and chemical properties make them interesting candidates of research in a wide
range of areas including biological systems and different diseases. Recent
research has been focused on exploring the potential of the CNTs as a carrier or 
vehicle for intracellular transport of drugs, proteins, and targeted genes in
vitro and in vivo. Several research groups are actively involved to find out a
functional CNT carrier capable of transporting targeted drug molecules in animal 
models with least toxicity. Current investigations are also focused on graphene, 
an allotrope of carbon, which appears to be a promising agent for successful
delivery of biomolecules in various animal models. But potential clinical
implementations of CNTs are still hampered by distinctive barriers such as poor
bioavailability and intrinsic toxicity, which pose difficulties in tumor
targeting and penetration as well as in improving therapeutic outcome. This
article presents recent progresses in the design and evaluation of closely
related CNTs for experimental cancer therapy and explores their implications in
bringing nanomedicines into the clinics.

PMID: 26369109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Protein Expr Purif. 2015 Sep 9. pii: S1046-5928(15)30061-9. doi:
10.1016/j.pep.2015.09.011. [Epub ahead of print]

Purification of a Dimeric Arginine Deiminase from Enterococcus faecium GR7 and
Study of its Anti-Cancerous Activity.

Kaur B(1), Kaur R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Punjabi University, Patiala- 147002, Punjab,
India. Electronic address: baljinderbt@hotmail.com. (2)Department of
Biotechnology, Punjabi University, Patiala- 147002, Punjab, India.

The arginine deiminase (ADI, E.C 3.5.3.6) - a key enzyme of ADI pathway of
Enterococcus faecium GR7 was purified to homogeneity. A sequential purification
strategy involving ammonium sulfate fractionation, molecular sieve followed by
Sephadex G-100 gel filtration was applied to the crude culture filtrate to obtain
a pure enzyme preparation. The enzyme was purified with a fold of 16.92 and
showed a final specific activity of 76.65 IU/mg with a 49.17% yield. The dimeric 
ADI has a molecular mass of about 94364.929 Da, and comprises of hetrodimers of
49.1 kDa and 46.5 kDa as determined by MALDI-TOF and PAGE analysis. To assess
anti-cancerous activity of ADI by MTT assay was carried out against cancer cell
lines (MCF-7, Sp2/0-Ag14 and Hep-G2). Purified ADI exhibited the most profound
antiproliferative activity against Hep-G2 cells; with half-maximal inhibitory
concentration (IC50) of 1.95 µg/ml. Purified ADI from E. faecium GR7 was observed
to induce apoptosis in the Hep-G2 cells by DNA fragmentation assay. Our findings 
suggest the possibility of a future use of ADI from E. faecium GR7 as a potential
anticancer drug.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26363115  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


94. Eur J Med Chem. 2015 Aug 31. pii: S0223-5234(15)30222-1. doi:
10.1016/j.ejmech.2015.08.038. [Epub ahead of print]

Inhibitor versus chaperone behaviour of d-fagomine, DAB and LAB sp(2)-iminosugar 
conjugates against glycosidases: A structure-activity relationship study in
Gaucher fibroblasts.

Mena-Barragán T(1), García-Moreno MI(1), Nanba E(2), Higaki K(3), Concia AL(4),
Clapés P(5), García Fernández JM(6), Ortiz Mellet C(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organic Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, University of Seville, 
C/ Profesor García González 1, 41012 Seville, Spain. (2)Division of Functional
Genomics, Research Center for Bioscience and Technology, Tottori University, 86
Nishi-cho, Yonago 683-8503, Japan. (3)Division of Functional Genomics, Research
Center for Bioscience and Technology, Tottori University, 86 Nishi-cho, Yonago
683-8503, Japan. Electronic address: kh4060@med.tottori-u.ac.jp. (4)Instituto de 
Química Avanzada de Cataluña, IQAC-CSIC. Jordi Girona 18-26, 08034 Barcelona,
Spain. (5)Instituto de Química Avanzada de Cataluña, IQAC-CSIC. Jordi Girona
18-26, 08034 Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address: pere.clapes@iqac.csic.es.
(6)Instituto de Investigaciones Químicas (IIQ), CSIC - Universidad de Sevilla, C/
Américo Vespucio 49, Isla de la Cartuja, 41092 Seville, Spain. (7)Department of
Organic Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, University of Seville, C/ Profesor
García González 1, 41012 Seville, Spain. Electronic address: mellet@us.es.

A library of sp(2)-iminosugar conjugates derived from the piperidine iminosugar
d-fagomine and the enantiomeric pyrrolidine iminosugars DAB and LAB has been
generated in only two steps involving direct coupling of the fully unprotected
polyhydroxylated heterocycles with isothiocyanates, to give monocyclic thiourea
adducts, and further intramolecular nucleophilic displacement of the d-located
primary hydroxyl group by the thiocarbonyl sulphur atom, affording bicyclic
isothioureas. These transformations led to a dramatic shift in the inhibitory
selectivity from a- to ß-glucosidases, with inhibition potencies that depended
strongly on the nature of the aglycone-type moiety in the conjugates. Some of the
new derivatives behaved as potent inhibitors of human ß-glucocerebrosidase
(GCase), the lysosomal enzyme whose dysfunction is responsible for Gaucher
disease. Moreover, GCase inhibition was 10-fold weaker at pH 5 as compared to pH 
7, which is generally considered as a good property for pharmacological
chaperones. Surprisingly, most of the compounds strongly inhibited GCase in wild 
type fibroblasts at rather low concentrations, showing an unfavourable
chaperone/inhibitor balance on disease-associated GCase mutants in cellulo. A
structure-activity relationship analysis points to the need for keeping a
contiguous triol system in the glycone moiety of the conjugates to elicit a
chaperone effect. In any case, the results reported here represent a proof of
concept of the utmost importance of implementing diversity-oriented strategies
for the identification and optimization of potent and specific glycosidase
inhibitors and chaperones.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26361824  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


95. J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2015 Feb;15(2):1030-6.

Structure and Bonding in Chlorine-Functionalized Nanodiamond--Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance and X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy Study.

Panich AM, Sergeev NA, Olszewski M, Froumin N, Dideykin AT, Sokolov VV, Vul' AY.

We report on investigation of detonation nanodiamond annealed at 800C°in chlorine
atmosphere by means of 1H, 13C and 35Cl nuclear magnetic resonance and X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy. The results of these methods are found to be
consistent with each other and evidence formation of chlorine-carbon groups and
sp2 carbon shell on the nanodiamond surface. The data obtained provide detailed
information about the structure and bonding in this diamond nanoparticle.
Interaction of nuclear spins with unpaired electron spins of dangling bonds
results in fast 13C nuclear spin-lattice relaxation.

PMID: 26353609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Qual Health Res. 2015 Sep 8. pii: 1049732315603367. [Epub ahead of print]

Couple's Narratives of Communion and Isolation Following Abnormal Prenatal
Microarray Testing Results.

Werner-Lin A(1), Barg FK(2), Kellom KS(2), Stumm KJ(3), Pilchman L(3), Tomlinson 
AN(2), Bernhardt BA(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
awer@sp2.upenn.edu. (2)University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
USA. (3)Arcadia University, Glenside, Pennsylvania, USA.

In 2% to 3% of cases, prenatal microarray testing detects deletions and
duplications in a fetus' genome that are undetected by conventional cytogenetics.
Many of these changes are associated with variable or uncertain symptomatology.
Little is known about how couples experience uncertain results. This study
analyzed 24 interviews with members of 12 heterosexual U.S. couples who received 
pathogenic or uncertain microarray prenatal testing results. Researchers used
narrative analysis to examine couples' understanding and incorporation of
findings into decision making regarding pregnancy termination. Couples felt
unprepared for these findings and frustrated because scant information was
available to aid interpretation. Women sought information and made decisions, and
men marginalized their distress to support their wives. A shift in voice from
first to second person indicated attempts to normalize emotional responses by
making the process "common" to all couples. Families pursuing highly sensitive
prenatal testing may need expert guidance to support decision making.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 26351292  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


97. J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2015 Jan;15(1):747-51.

Electrochemical Performance of Electrophoretically Deposited Nanostructured
LiMnPO4-Sucrose Derived Carbon Composite Electrodes for Lithium Ion Batteries.

Ravi SP, Praveen P, Sreelakshmi KV, Balakrishnan A, Subramanian KR, Shantikumar
V, Lee YS, Sivakumar N.

The present study reports an approach by which thin films of sucrose added
olivine type LiMnPO4-Ccomposite and pristine LiMnPO4 is made by a technique of
electrophoretic co-deposition in which pristine and composite samples were
synthesized by a sol-gel route. These thin films with enhanced surface area is
used to fabricate cathodes for rechargeable Li ion batteries. XRD confirms phase 
pure single crystalline orthorhombic structure. Transmission Electron Microscopy 
(TEM) images shows the carbon coating over LiMnPO4 and the particle size
restricted in the nano regime. The presence of sp2 hybridized carbon on LiMnPO4
particles is confirmed by X-ray Photon spectroscopy (XPS). To explore the
electrochemical behavior, cyclic voltammetry (CV) and cycling studies were
performed. The specific capacity for LiMnPO4-C is found to be increased by 43% in
comparison to the pristine LiMnPO4. It also exhibited 86% retention in capacity
compared to the pristine LiMnPO4 (52%). The result indicates that a proper carbon
coating can significantly improve the electronic conductivity and hence the
specific capacity.

PMID: 26328437  [PubMed]


98. Nat Commun. 2015 Sep 1;6:8086. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9086.

Mutations in NLRP5 are associated with reproductive wastage and multilocus
imprinting disorders in humans.

Docherty LE(1,)(2), Rezwan FI(1,)(2), Poole RL(1,)(2), Turner CL(3), Kivuva E(3),
Maher ER(4), Smithson SF(5), Hamilton-Shield JP(6), Patalan M(7), Gizewska M(7), 
Peregud-Pogorzelski J(8), Beygo J(9), Buiting K(9), Horsthemke B(9), Soellner
L(10), Begemann M(10), Eggermann T(10), Baple E(11), Mansour S(12), Temple
IK(1,)(11), Mackay DJ(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Academic Unit of Human Development and Health, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Southampton, Southampton General Hospital, Southampton SO16 6YD, UK. (2)Wessex
Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury NHS Foundation Trust, Salisbury SP2 8BJ, 
UK. (3)Peninsula Clinical Genetics Service, Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital,
Exeter EX1 2ED, UK. (4)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Cambridge,
and Cambridge NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge 
CP2 0QQ, UK. (5)Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospitals Bristol,
Bristol BS2 8EG, UK. (6)School of Clinical Sciences, University of Bristol,
Bristol BS2 8AE, UK. (7)Department of Pediatrics, Endocrinology, Diabetology,
Metabolic Diseases and Cardiology, Pomeranian Medical University, 71-252,
Szczecin, Poland. (8)Department of Paediatric Oncology, Pomeranian Medical
University, 71-252 Szczecin, Poland. (9)Institut für Humangenetik,
Universitätsklinikum Essen, Universität Duisburg-Essen, Hufelandstr 55, 45122
Essen, Germany. (10)Institut für Humangenetik, University Hospital, RWTH Aachen, 
Pauwelsstr 30, 52074 Aachen, Germany. (11)Wessex Clinical Genetics Service,
University Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation Trust, Southampton SO16 5YA, UK.
(12)St George's Healthcare NHS Trust, University of London, London, SW17 0QT UK.

Human-imprinting disorders are congenital disorders of growth, development and
metabolism, associated with disturbance of parent of origin-specific DNA
methylation at imprinted loci across the genome. Some imprinting disorders have
higher than expected prevalence of monozygotic twinning, of assisted reproductive
technology among parents, and of disturbance of multiple imprinted loci, for
which few causative trans-acting mutations have been found. Here we report
mutations in NLRP5 in five mothers of individuals affected by multilocus
imprinting disturbance. Maternal-effect mutations of other human NLRP genes,
NLRP7 and NLRP2, cause familial biparental hydatidiform mole and multilocus
imprinting disturbance, respectively. Offspring of mothers with NLRP5 mutations
have heterogenous clinical and epigenetic features, but cases include a
discordant monozygotic twin pair, individuals with idiopathic developmental delay
and autism, and families affected by infertility and reproductive wastage. NLRP5 
mutations suggest connections between maternal reproductive fitness, early
zygotic development and genomic imprinting.

PMCID: PMC4568303
PMID: 26323243  [PubMed - in process]


99. Theriogenology. 2015 Dec;84(9):1536-41. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2015.07.038. Epub 2015 Aug 4.

Sperm head phenotype and male fertility in ram semen.

Maroto-Morales A(1), Ramón M(2), García-Álvarez O(1), Montoro V(1), Soler AJ(1), 
Fernández-Santos MR(1), Roldan ER(3), Pérez-Guzmán MD(2), Garde JJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)SaBio IREC (UCLM-CSIC-JCCM), Campus Universitario, Albacete, Spain.
(2)Regional Center of Animal Selection and Reproduction (CERSYRA) JCCM,
Valdepeñas, Spain. (3)Reproductive Ecology and Biology Group, Museo Nacional de
Ciencias Naturales (CSIC), Madrid, Spain. (4)SaBio IREC (UCLM-CSIC-JCCM), Campus 
Universitario, Albacete, Spain. Electronic address: Julian.garde@uclm.es.

Although there is ample evidence for the effects of sperm head shape on sperm
function, its impact on fertility has not been explored in detail at the
intraspecific level in mammals. Here, we assess the relationship between sperm
head shape and male fertility in a large-scale study in Manchega sheep (Ovis
aries), which have not undergone any selection for fertility. Semen was collected
from 83 mature rams, and before insemination, head shapes were measured for five 
parameters: area, perimeter, length, width, and p2a (perimeter(2)/2×p×area) using
a computer-assisted sperm morphometric analysis. In addition, a cluster analysis 
using sperm head length and p2a factor was performed to determine sperm
subpopulations (SPs) structure. Our results show the existence of four sperm SPs,
which present different sperm head phenotype: SP1 (large and round), SP2 (short
and elongated), SP3 (shortest and round), and SP4 (large and the most elongated).
No relationships were found between males' fertility rates and average values of 
sperm head dimensions. However, differences in fertility rates between rams were 
strongly associated to the proportion of spermatozoa in an ejaculate SP with
short and elongated heads (P < 0.001). These findings show how the heterogeneity 
in sperm head shape of the ejaculate has an effect on reproductive success, and
highlight the important role of modulation of the ejaculate at the intraspecific 
level.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26318229  [PubMed - in process]


100. J Biomed Nanotechnol. 2015 Jan;11(1):137-42.

Graphitized-Carbon-Nanofiber Paper-Enzyme Electrode Fabrication Through
Non-Covalent Modification for Enzyme Biofuel Cell Application.

Fapyane D, Lee SJ, Kang SH, Ahn JH, Chang IS.

Carbon nanofibers are an emerging smart material that are promising for use as a 
biosensor and a biofuel cell transducer material due to their morphological and
electrochemical characteristics. In particular, graphitized carbon nanofibers
possess unique structures of graphite-like edges within their high surface area
that provide a large active site for enzyme attachment. For a specific
application such as a biofuel cell, which requires highly stable electrical
communication and electricity generation, non-covalent enzyme immobilization
using bifunctional molecule is suggested as an appropriate approach because it
does not change the carbon hybridization from sp2 to sp3 as covalent
immobilization by acid treatment does. Graphitized carbon-nanofiber paper (GCNFp)
electrode were fabricated through dispersion-filtration method in which glucose
oxidase as model enzyme were immobilized by a bifunctional molecule that forms
p-p stacking of the pyrene moiety with the nanofiber wall coupled by a reactive
end-amine reaction. This system provides a practical enzyme-electrode hybrid that
facilitates comparatively faster enzyme-electrode electrical communication than
other system using similar material, as calculated from the heterogeneous
electron-transfer rate constant (K(s)) which was 5.45 s(-1).

PMID: 26301307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2015 Aug 24. doi: 10.1071/RD15231. [Epub ahead of print]

Effect of seminal plasma proteins on the motile sperm subpopulations in ram
ejaculates.

Luna C, Yeste M, Rivera Del Alamo MM, Domingo J, Casao A, Rodriguez-Gil JE,
Pérez-Pé R, Cebrián-Pérez JA, Muiño-Blanco T.

It has been proposed that seminal plasma proteins (SPP) support survival of ram
spermatozoa, exerting a dual effect, both capacitating and decapacitating. In
this study, changes in motility patterns of ram spermatozoa capacitated in the
presence of epidermal growth factor (EGF) were evaluated. Clustering procedures
were used to determine the presence of sperm subpopulations with specific motion 
characteristics. Four sperm subpopulations (SP) were defined after the
application of a principal component analysis procedure. Progressive spermatozoa 
with high straightness (STR) were found in SP1, reflected in the high linearity
(LIN) and STR values and low amplitude of lateral head movement (ALH; rapid,
non-hyperactivated spermatozoa). SP2 spermatozoa seemed to be starting to acquire
hyperactivated motility, while the SP3 group consisted of rapid, hyperactivated
spermatozoa. SP4 showed less-vigorous spermatozoa, with non-linear motility. The 
addition of SPP before in vitro capacitation with EGF induced a decrease in SP1
and an increase in SP3. However, a reduction in the chlortetracycline-capacitated
sperm rate and protein tyrosine phosphorylation was found, which corroborates
with the hypothesis that the SPP protective effect on spermatozoa is related to
their decapacitating role. These findings allow us to deduce that ram spermatozoa
are able to undergo capacitation with no hyperactivation and that SPP are able to
induce hyperactivation in spermatozoa but maintain them in a decapacitated state.

PMID: 26300553  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


102. J Agric Food Chem. 2015 Sep 16;63(36):7914-20. doi: 10.1021/acs.jafc.5b03027.
Epub 2015 Sep 2.

Enantioselective and Synergetic Toxicity of Axial Chiral Herbicide Propisochlor
to SP2/0 Myeloma Cells.

Liu Y(1), Zhang X(1), Liu C(1), Yang R(1), Xu Z(1), Zhou L(2), Sun Y(1), Lei
H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Food Quality and Safety, College of
Food Science, South China Agricultural University , Guangzhou, Guangdong 510642, 
People's Republic of China. (2)Central Laboratory, Navy General Hospital ,
Beijing 100048, People's Republic of China.

The axial chiral herbicide propisochlor is used to control weeds. Different
enantiomers of a compound usually have different biological activities. It is
unclear how the toxicities of the propisochlor enantiomers differ. Propisochlor
enantiomers, separated by high-performance liquid chromatography, were tested on 
SP2/0 myeloma cells. Cytotoxicity and apoptosis were measured, and interactions
between the enantiomers were evaluated. The rac-propisochlor, pure R-(+) isomer, 
and pure S-(-) isomer inhibited cell proliferation and induced apoptosis. The
rac-propisochlor, R-(+) isomer, and S-(-) isomer half maximal effective
concentration values after 24 h of incubation were 111 ± 0.15, 68 ± 0.09, and 99 
± 0.21 µM, respectively. R-(+) isomer induced the most apoptosis. R-(+) isomer
was ~1.63 times more cytotoxic than rac-propisochlor and ~1.46 times more
cytotoxic than S-(-) isomer. Antagonistic cytotoxic interactions were found
between R-(+) and S-(-) isomers. This is the first time the toxicities of these
enantiomers and antagonism between the enantiomers have been reported. The
antagonism indicates that the ecotoxicological effects of the enantiomers should 
be investigated.

PMID: 26299567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. BMC Microbiol. 2015 Aug 20;15:168. doi: 10.1186/s12866-015-0507-4.

Identification of a novel linear epitope on the NS1 protein of avian influenza
virus.

Wen X(1,)(2), Sun J(3), Wang X(4), Bao H(5), Zhao Y(6), Zeng X(7), Xu X(8), Ma
Y(9), Gu L(10), Chen H(11).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Influenza Laboratory of the Ministry of Agriculture and State Key
Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research Institute,
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, People's Republic of China.
wenxuexia0420@163.com. (2)College of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural
University, Beijing, People's Republic of China. wenxuexia0420@163.com. (3)Animal
Influenza Laboratory of the Ministry of Agriculture and State Key Laboratory of
Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy
of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, People's Republic of China.
conansun6812@163.com. (4)Animal Influenza Laboratory of the Ministry of
Agriculture and State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin
Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, 
People's Republic of China. wxr@hvri.ac.cn. (5)Animal Influenza Laboratory of the
Ministry of Agriculture and State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology,
Harbin Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Harbin, People's Republic of China. 772152723@qq.com. (6)Animal Influenza
Laboratory of the Ministry of Agriculture and State Key Laboratory of Veterinary 
Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, People's Republic of China. 859829800@qq.com.
(7)Animal Influenza Laboratory of the Ministry of Agriculture and State Key
Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research Institute,
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, People's Republic of China.
395457707@qq.com. (8)Animal Influenza Laboratory of the Ministry of Agriculture
and State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research 
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, People's Republic of
China. 781198447@qq.com. (9)Animal Influenza Laboratory of the Ministry of
Agriculture and State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin
Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, 
People's Republic of China. mayong135166@163.com. (10)Animal Influenza Laboratory
of the Ministry of Agriculture and State Key Laboratory of Veterinary
Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, People's Republic of China. 18854801560@163.com.
(11)Animal Influenza Laboratory of the Ministry of Agriculture and State Key
Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research Institute,
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, People's Republic of China.
chenhualan@caas.cn.

BACKGROUND: The NS1 protein of avian influenza virus (AIV) is an important
virulent factor of AIV. It has been shown to counteract host type I interferon
response, to mediate host cell apoptosis, and to regulate the process of protein 
synthesis. The identification of AIV epitopes on NS1 protein is important for
understanding influenza virus pathogenesis.
RESULTS: In this paper, we describe the generation, identification, and epitope
mapping of a NS1 protein-specific monoclonal antibody (MAb) D9. First, to induce 
the production of MAbs, BALB/c mice were immunized with a purified recombinant
NS1 expressed in E. coli. The spleen cells from the immunized mice were fused
with myeloma cells SP2/0, and through screening via indirect ELISAs, a MAb, named
D9, was identified. Western blot assay results showed that MAb D9 reacted
strongly with the recombinant NS1. Confocal laser scanning microscopy showed that
this MAb also reacts with NS1 expressed in 293T cells that had been transfected
with eukaryotic recombinant plasmids. Results from screening a phage display
random 7-mer peptide library with MAb D9 demonstrated that it recognizes phages
displaying peptides with the consensus peptide WNLNTV--VS, which closely matches 
the (182)WNDNTVRVS(190) of AIV NS1. Further identification of the displayed
epitope was performed with a set of truncated polypeptides expressed as
glutathione S-transferase fusion proteins, and the motif (182)WNDNT(186) was
defined as the minimal unit of the linear B cell epitope recognized by MAb D9 in 
western blot assays. Moreover, homology analysis showed that this epitope is a
conserved motif among AIV.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified a conserved linear epitope, WNDNT, on the AIV NS1
protein that is recognized by MAb D9. This MAb and its epitope may facilitate
future studies on NS1 function and aid the development of new diagnostic methods 
for AIV detection.

PMCID: PMC4545905
PMID: 26289074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Magn Reson Chem. 2015 Sep;53(9):754-68. doi: 10.1002/mrc.4249.

Nontarget analysis of Murchison soluble organic matter by high-field NMR
spectroscopy and FTICR mass spectrometry.

Hertkorn N(1), Harir M(1), Schmitt-Kopplin P(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz Zentrum Muenchen, German Research Center for Environmental Health,
Research Unit Analytical Biogeochemistry (BGC), Ingolstaedter Landstrasse 1,
Neuherberg, Germany. (2)Chair of Analytical Food Chemistry, Technische
Universität München, Alte Akademie 10, Freising-Weihenstephan, Germany.

High-field NMR spectra of Murchison meteorite methanolic extracts revealed
primarily aliphatic extraterrestrial organic matter (EOM) with near statistical
branching of commonly C(3-5) units separated by heteroatoms and aromatic units.
The ratios of CCH, OCH and C(sp2)H units were 89<U+2009>:<U+2009>8<U+2009>:<U+2009>3, whereas carbon-based
aliphatic chain termination was in the order methyl ><U+2009> -COOH<U+2009>><U+2009> -CH(CH3)COOH.
Aliphatic methine carbon was abundant, but its weak NMR signatures were primarily
deduced from JRES (J-resolved) NMR spectra. Carbon NMR spectra were dominated by 
methylene and methyl carbon; strong apodization revealed methine carbon, of which
about 20% was aromatic. Extrapolation provided 5-7% aromatic carbon present in
Murchison soluble EOM. Compositional heterogeneity in Murchison methanolic
extracts was visible in NMR and Fourier transform ion cyclotron (FTICR) mass
spectra obtained from a few cubic millimeters of solid Murchison meteorite;
increasing sample size enhanced uniformity of NMR spectra. Intrinsic chemical
diversity and pH-dependent chemical shift variance contributed to the disparity
of NMR spectra. FTICR mass spectra provided distinct clustering of CHO/CHOS and
CHNO/CHNOS molecular series and confirmed the prevalence of aliphatic/alicyclic
(73%) over single aromatic (21%) and polyaromatic (6%) molecular compositions,
suggesting extensive aliphatic substitution of aromatic units as proposed by NMR.
Murchison soluble EOM molecules feature a center with enhanced aromatic and
heteroatom content, which provides rather diffuse and weak NMR signatures
resulting from a huge overall chemical diversity. The periphery of Murchison EOM 
molecules comprises flexible branched aliphatic chains and aliphatic carboxylic
acids. These project on narrow ranges of chemical shift, facilitating observation
in one-dimensional and two-dimensional NMR spectra. The conformational entropy
provided by these flexible surface moieties facilitates the solubility of EOM.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 26275226  [PubMed - in process]


105. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2016 Jan;116(1):29-38. doi: 10.1007/s00421-015-3238-1. Epub
2015 Aug 14.

Kids are not little adults: what MET threshold captures sedentary behavior in
children?

Saint-Maurice PF(1,)(2), Kim Y(3,)(4), Welk GJ(5), Gaesser GA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Kinesiology, Iowa State University, 235 Forker Building, Ames,
IA, 50011, USA. pedrosm@iastate.edu. (2)School of Psychology: CIPsi, University
of Minho, Braga, Portugal. pedrosm@iastate.edu. (3)Department of Kinesiology,
Iowa State University, 235 Forker Building, Ames, IA, 50011, USA.
youngwon.kim@mrc-epid.cam.ac.uk. (4)MRC Epidemiology Unit, School of Clinical
Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 0QQ, UK.
youngwon.kim@mrc-epid.cam.ac.uk. (5)Department of Kinesiology, Iowa State
University, 235 Forker Building, Ames, IA, 50011, USA. gwelk@iastate.edu.
(6)School of Nutrition and Health Promotion, Arizona State University, 550 N
Third St, Phoenix, AZ, 85004, USA. glenn.gaesser@asu.edu.

PURPOSE: The study compares MET-defined cutpoints used to classify sedentary
behaviors in children using a simulated free-living design.
METHODS: A sample of 102 children (54 boys and 48 girls; 7-13 years) completed a 
set of 12 activities (randomly selected from a pool of 24 activities) in a random
order. Activities were predetermined and ranged from sedentary to vigorous
intensities. Participant's energy expenditure was measured using a portable
indirect calorimetry system, Oxycon mobile. Measured minute-by-minute VO2 values 
(i.e., ml/kg/min) were converted to an adult- or child-MET value using the
standard 3.5 ml/kg/min or the estimated child resting metabolic rate,
respectively. Classification agreement was examined for both the "standard" (1.5 
adult-METs) and an "adjusted" (2.0 adult-METs) MET-derived threshold for
classifying sedentary behavior. Alternatively, we also tested the classification 
accuracy of a 1.5 child-MET threshold. Classification accuracy of sedentary
activities was evaluated relative to the predetermined intensity categorization
using receiver operator characteristic curves.
RESULTS: There were clear improvements in the classification accuracy for
sedentary activities when a threshold of 2.0 adult-METs was used instead of 1.5
METs (Se1.5 METs = 4.7 %, Sp1.5 METs = 100.0 %; Se2.0 METs = 36.9 %, Sp2.0
METs = 100.0 %). The use of child-METs while maintaining the 1.5 threshold also
resulted in improvements in classification (Se = 45.1 %, Sp = 100.0 %).
CONCLUSION: Adult-MET thresholds are not appropriate for children when
classifying sedentary activities. Classification accuracy for identifying
sedentary activities was improved when either an adult-MET of 2.0 or a child-MET 
of 1.5 was used.

PMID: 26271677  [PubMed - in process]


106. J Phys Chem Lett. 2015 Jan 2;6(1):44-7. doi: 10.1021/jz502414y. Epub 2014 Dec 12.

Strongly Nonlinear Dependence of Energy Transfer Rate on sp(2) Carbon Content in 
Reduced Graphene Oxide-Quantum Dot Hybrid Structures.

Dong Y, Son DH.

The dependence of the energy transfer rate on the content of sp(2)-hybridized
carbon atoms in the hybrid structures of reduced graphene oxide (RGO) and
Mn-doped quantum dot (QD(Mn)) was investigated. Taking advantage of the
sensitivity of QD(Mn)'s dopant luminescence lifetime only to the energy transfer 
process without interference from the charge transfer process, the correlation
between the sp(2) carbon content in RGO and the rate of energy transfer from
QD(Mn) to RGO was obtained. The rate of energy transfer showed a strongly
superlinear increase with increasing sp(2) carbon content in RGO, suggesting the 
possible cooperative behavior of sp(2) carbon domains in the energy transfer
process as the sp(2) carbon content increases.

PMID: 26263089  [PubMed]


107. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 7;10(8):e0135141. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135141.
eCollection 2015.

Analysis of Response Elements Involved in the Regulation of the Human Neonatal Fc
Receptor Gene (FCGRT).

Mikulska JE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunochemistry, Ludwik Hirszfeld Institute of Immunology and
Experimental Therapy, Polish Academy of Sciences, Wroclaw, Poland.

Republished in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(9):e0139744.

Human epithelial, endothelial and PMA-differentiated THP-1 cell lines were used
as model systems to study the transcriptional regulation of the human FCGRT gene 
encoding the alpha chain of hFcRn. The data obtained from site-directed
mutagenesis in transient transfection experiments indicate that the Sp1 sites at 
positions -641, -635, and -313, CF1/YY1 elements at positions -586 and -357, and 
the AP-1 motif at -276 within the-660/-233 fragment of the human FCGRT promoter
(hFCGRT) participate in the regulation of human FCGRT in all selected cell lines.
However, their individual contribution to promoter activity is not equivalent.
The Sp1 binding site at -313 and the AP-1 site at -276 are critical for the
activity of the hFCGRT promoter in epithelial and endothelial cells. Moreover,
the CF1/YY1 site at -586 in differentiated THP-1 cells, plays an essential role
in the transcriptional activity of the promoter. In addition, the C/EBPbeta
binding site at -497 of the hFCGRT promoter in epithelial and endothelial cells, 
and the C/EBPbeta motif located at -497 and -233 within the hFCGRT promoter in
differentiated THP-1 cells may function as positive regulatory sequences in
response to LPS or PMA stimulation. EMSA and supershift analyses showed that the 
functionally identified binding motifs in the hFCGRT promoter were able to
specifically interact with their corresponding (Sp1, Sp2, Sp3, c-Fos, c-Jun, YY1,
and C/EBPbeta or C/EBPdelta) transcription factors (TFs), suggesting their
possible involvement in the regulation of the human FCGRT gene expression.

PMCID: PMC4529178
PMID: 26252948  [PubMed - in process]


108. Otol Neurotol. 2015 Sep;36(8):1390-8. doi: 10.1097/MAO.0000000000000822.

Standardized Active Middle-Ear Implant Coupling to the Short Incus Process.

Mlynski R(1), Dalhoff E, Heyd A, Wildenstein D, Rak K, Radeloff A, Hagen R,
Gummer AW, Schraven SP.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery "Otto Koerner"
University Medical Center Rostock, Rostock; Department of Otolaryngology,
Section of Physiological Acoustics and Communication, University of Tübingen,
Tübingen; and Department of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology, Plastic, Aesthetic and
Reconstructive Head and Neck Surgery, Comprehensive Hearing Center, University of
Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: Active middle-ear implants with floating-mass transducer (FMT)
technology are used to treat mild-to-severe sensorineural hearing losses. The
standard surgical approach for incus vibroplasty is a mastoidectomy and a
posterior tympanotomy, crimping the FMT to the long incus process. An alternative
fixation side with less surgical trauma might be the short incus process and
incus body.The aim of this study was to develop and test a short incus process
coupling device for its functional properties in temporal bone preparations and
clinical practice.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: An extended antrotomy and a posterior tympanotomy were
performed in 10 fresh human temporal bones. As a control for normal middle-ear
function, the tympanic membrane was stimulated acoustically, and the vibration of
the stapes footplate was measured using laser Doppler vibrometry. FMT-induced
vibration responses of the stapes were then measured for standard attachment at
the long process and for 2 types of couplers designed for attachment at the short
process of the incus (SP1 and SP2 coupler). Additionally, the functional outcome 
in 2 patients provided with an SP2 coupler was assessed postoperatively at 2
weeks, 3 months, and then 11 months, using pure-tone audiometry, auditory
thresholds for frequency-modulated (warble) tones, vibroplasty thresholds, and
speech audiometry in quiet and noise.
RESULTS: For the SP2 coupler, velocity-amplitude responses in temporal-bone
preparations showed generally similar mean amplitudes as compared with the
standard coupling of the FMT to the long process but with clearly increased mean 
amplitudes between 0.7 and 1.5 kHz and with reduced interindividual variation
between 0.5 and 3 kHz. The clinical data of 2 patients with mild-to-severe
sensory hearing loss showed good vibroplasty thresholds and convincing results
for speech audiometry in quiet (Freiburger monosyllables at 65 dB SPL, 23 ± 31%
unaided versus 83 ± 4% aided) and noise (Hochmair-Schulz-Moser-test at 65 dB SPL 
at 10 dB SNR, 32 ± 45% unaided and 42 ± 29% aided).
CONCLUSION: The attachment of the FMT to the short incus process with the SP2
coupler leads to good mechanical and functional coupling in an experimental setup
and clinical practice.

PMID: 26247138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. BMJ. 2015 Aug 3;351:h3692. doi: 10.1136/bmj.h3692.

Interpreting raised serum ferritin levels.

Koperdanova M(1), Cullis JO(2).

Author information: 
(1)Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury SP2 8BJ, UK. (2)Salisbury District
Hospital, Salisbury SP2 8BJ, UK jonathan.cullis@salisbury.nhs.uk.

Comment in
    BMJ. 2015;351:h4569.

PMID: 26239322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2015 Oct;32(10):1509-16. doi: 10.1007/s10815-015-0547-6.
Epub 2015 Aug 4.

Double-strand DNA breaks and repair response in human immature oocytes and their 
relevance to meiotic resumption.

Coticchio G(1), Dal Canto M(2), Guglielmo MC(2), Albertini DF(3,)(4), Mignini
Renzini M(2), Merola M(2), Lain M(2), Sottocornola M(2), De Ponti E(5), Fadini
R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biogenesi Reproductive Medicine Centre, Istituti Clinici Zucchi, Via Zucchi,
24, Monza, Italy. coticchio.biogenesi@grupposandonato.it. (2)Biogenesi
Reproductive Medicine Centre, Istituti Clinici Zucchi, Via Zucchi, 24, Monza,
Italy. (3)Center for Human Reproduction, New York, NY, USA. (4)Department of
Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Kansas, Kansas City, USA.
(5)Department of Medical Physics, San Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Italy.

PURPOSE: Only 50-60 % of immature human oocytes attain the mature stage in vitro.
Such a deficiency may be a reflection of inadequate conditions of in vitro
maturation (IVM) or a manifestation of intrinsic oocyte defects. In the present
study, we explored the possibility that the DNA of immature oocytes may be
damaged and that such a condition, or inability to trigger a repair action, is
associated to germinal vesicle (GV) arrest.
METHODS: Immature oocytes (GV-stage oocytes) were obtained from women undergoing 
stimulated (Stim-C) or IVM (IVM-C) cycles. GV oocytes obtained from stimulated
cycles were fixed for successive analysis either after recovery (T0) or following
30 h (T30) of culture if still arrested at the GV stage. Oocytes retrieved in IVM
cycles were used only if they were found arrested at the GV stage after 30 h
(T30) of culture. All oocytes were fixed and stained to detect chromatin and
actin. They were also assessed for positivity to <U+03B3>H2AX and Rad51, markers
revealing the presence of double-strand DNA breaks and the activation of a DNA
repair response, respectively. Labelled oocytes were analysed using a Leica TCS
SP2 laser scanning confocal microscope.
RESULTS: In Stim-C oocytes, <U+03B3>H2AX positivity was 47.5 and 81.5 % in the T0 and
T30 groups, respectively (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.003), while <U+03B3>H2AX-positive oocytes were 58.3 % in
the IVM-C T30 group (Stim-C T0 vs. IVM-C T30, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.178; Stim-C T30 vs. IVM-C
T30, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.035). Positivity for nuclear staining to Rad51 occurred in 42.1 and
74.1 % of Stim-C in the T0 and T30 subgroups, respectively (T<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.006), while
66.7 % of IVM-C T30 oocytes resulted positive for a DNA repair response (Stim-C
T0 vs. IVM-C T30, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.010; Stim-C T30 vs. IVM-C T30, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.345).
CONCLUSIONS: The present data document the existence of double-strand DNA breaks 
(DSBs) in human immature oocytes. Also, they are consistent with the hypothesis
that insults to DNA integrity may be an important factor affecting meiotic
resumption.

PMCID: PMC4615920 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26238391  [PubMed - in process]


111. Protein J. 2015 Aug;34(4):256-66. doi: 10.1007/s10930-015-9619-9.

Purification and Initial Functions of Sex-Specific Storage Protein 2 in Bombyx
mori.

Chen J(1), Shu T, Chen J, Ye M, Lv Z, Nie Z, Gai Q, Yu W, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Silkworm Bioreactor and Biomedicine,
College of Life Science, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Hangzhou, 310018, China,
cjqgqj@126.com.

In this study, we identified a heat-resistant protein from the chrysalis stage of
the silkworm which we named sex-specific storage protein 2 (SSP2). This protein
was stable even at 80 °C, and has an amino acid sequence that is 90.65 %
homologous to SP2. We utilized the heat-resistant characteristics of SSP2 to
purify the protein and maintain its biological activity. In addition, using flow 
cytometry and the MTT assay, we found that SSP2 had anti-apoptotic effects on BmN
cells, and that SSP2 could also inhibit cell apoptosis induced by chemical
factors. These results suggest that SSP2 has a cell-protective function, and
provides a basis for future work on the function of storage proteins in silkworm.

PMID: 26231571  [PubMed - in process]


112. J Interpers Violence. 2015 Jul 30. pii: 0886260515596335. [Epub ahead of print]

Rates of Victimization of Violence Committed by Relatives With Psychiatric
Disorders.

Labrum T(1), Solomon PL(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA tlabrum@sp2.upenn.edu.
(2)University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Persons with psychiatric disorders are at an increased risk of committing
violence, with approximately half of all violence being perpetrated against
family members. However, family violence perpetrated by persons with psychiatric 
disorders is a highly under-researched area, so much so that it is impossible to 
even approximately estimate the extent of the problem. This article presents the 
results of a national online survey of 573 adults with an adult relative with
psychiatric disorders. Nearly half (47%) of all respondents reported being the
victim of violence committed by their relative with psychiatric disorders since
the onset of their relative's illness, and 22% reported being the victim of such 
violence in the past 6 months. Being the victim of minor versus serious violence 
was examined. The results of this study, in combination with sparse research
previously conducted, suggest that 20% to 35% of persons with high levels of
contact with a relative with psychiatric disorders have been the victim of
violence committed by their relative with psychiatric disorders in the past 6 to 
12 months, and that at least 40% have been the victim of said violence since the 
onset of their relative's illness. In the present study, no statistically
significant differences were detected in rates of victimization based on the
relationship type of the respondent to their relative with psychiatric disorders.
It is imperative that further research be conducted that may inform the
development of policies and interventions aiming to prevent family violence
perpetrated by persons with psychiatric disorders.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 26231334  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


113. Virology. 2015 Nov;485:47-57. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2015.06.031. Epub 2015 Jul 23.

Differential effects of Sp cellular transcription factors on viral promoter
activation by varicella-zoster virus (VZV) IE62 protein.

Khalil MI(1), Ruyechan WT(2), Hay J(2), Arvin A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Microbiology & Immunology, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States; Department of Molecular Biology,
National Research Center EL-Buhouth St., Dokki, Cairo, Egypt. Electronic address:
mkhalil2@stanford.edu. (2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and the
Witebsky Center for Microbial Pathogenesis and Immunology, University at Buffalo,
Buffalo, NY, United States. (3)Departments of Pediatrics and Microbiology &
Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States.

The immediate early (IE) 62 protein is the major varicella-zoster virus (VZV)
regulatory factor. Analysis of the VZV genome revealed 40 predicted GC-rich boxes
within 36 promoters. We examined effects of ectopic expression of Sp1-Sp4 on
IE62- mediated transactivation of three viral promoters. Ectopic expression of
Sp3 and Sp4 enhanced IE62 activation of ORF3 and gI promoters while Sp3 reduced
IE62 activation of ORF28/29 promoter and VZV DNA replication. Sp2 reduced IE62
transactivation of gI while Sp1 had no significant influence on IE62 activation
with any of these viral promoters. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA)
confirmed binding of Sp1 and Sp3 but not Sp2 and Sp4 to the gI promoter. Sp1-4
bound to IE62 and amino acids 238-258 of IE62 were important for the interaction 
with Sp3 and Sp4 as well as Sp1. This work shows that Sp family members have
differential effects on IE62-mediated transactivation in a promoter-dependent
manner.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4619144 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26207799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Exp Biol. 2015 Jul;218(Pt 14):2201-10. doi: 10.1242/jeb.121061.

Flight-motor-driven respiratory airflow increases tracheal oxygen to nearly
atmospheric level in blowflies (Calliphora vicina).

Wasserthal LT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Staudtstrasse 5,
Erlangen 91058, Germany lutz.thilo.wasserthal@fau.de.

It is widely accepted that an efficient oxygen supply and removal of CO2 in small
flying insects are sufficiently performed by diffusion with open spiracles. This 
paper shows that in the tethered flying blowfly, gas exchange occurs by
autoventilation and unidirectional airflow. The air is inspired through the
mesothoracic spiracles (Sp1) during the downstroke of the wings and is expired
through the metathoracic spiracles (Sp2) during the upstroke. This directed
airflow through the thoracic tracheal system was documented by pre-atrial
pressure measurements at the Sp1 and Sp2, revealing a sub-atmospheric mean
pressure at the Sp1 and an over-atmospheric mean pressure at the Sp2. In the
mesothoracic air sacs, the mean pressure is sub-atmospheric, conditioned by the
only slightly open spiracles. In a split flow-through chamber experiment, the CO2
released through the Sp2 confirmed this unidirectional respiratory gas flow,
implicating an inner tracheal valve. In the thoracic tracheal system, the PO2
 during flight exceeds the high resting PO2  by 1-2 kPa, reaching nearly
atmospheric values. In the abdominal large air sacs, the PO2  drops during
flight, probably due to the accumulation of CO2. Periodic heartbeat reversals
continue during flight, with a higher period frequency than at rest, supporting
the transport of CO2 via the haemolymph towards the metathoracic tracheae and
abdominal air sacs.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 26202777  [PubMed - in process]


115. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2015 Aug 17;54(34):10012-5. doi: 10.1002/anie.201504962. 
Epub 2015 Jul 15.

Cobalt(II)-Catalyzed C(sp2)-H Alkynylation/Annulation with Terminal Alkynes:
Selective Access to 3-Methyleneisoindolin-1-one.

Zhang LB(1), Hao XQ(1), Liu ZJ(1), Zheng XX(1), Zhang SK(1), Niu JL(2), Song
MP(3).

Author information: 
(1)The College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Zhengzhou University,
Kexue avenue 100, Zhengzhou 450001 (P. R. China). (2)The College of Chemistry and
Molecular Engineering, Zhengzhou University, Kexue avenue 100, Zhengzhou 450001
(P. R. China). niujunlong@zzu.edu.cn. (3)The College of Chemistry and Molecular
Engineering, Zhengzhou University, Kexue avenue 100, Zhengzhou 450001 (P. R.
China). mpsong@zzu.edu.cn.

A highly efficient cobalt(II)-catalyzed alkynylation/annulation of terminal
alkynes assisted by an N,O-bidentate directing group is described. This protocol 
is characterized by wide substrate scope utilizing cheap cobalt catalysts, and
offers a new approach to 3-methyleneisoindolin-1-one, which can be converted into
an oxadiazine salt in one step. Moreover, the directing group could be removed in
three steps.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26179736  [PubMed]


116. J Virol. 2015 Oct;89(19):9739-47. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00750-15. Epub 2015 Jul 15.

RNA and Nucleocapsid Are Dispensable for Mature HIV-1 Capsid Assembly.

Mattei S(1), Flemming A(2), Anders-Össwein M(2), Kräusslich HG(3), Briggs JA(4), 
Müller B(5).

Author information: 
(1)Structural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology
Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany Molecular Medicine Partnership Unit, Heidelberg, 
Germany. (2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Virology, University Hospital
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. (3)Department of Infectious Diseases, Virology, 
University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany Molecular Medicine
Partnership Unit, Heidelberg, Germany. (4)Structural and Computational Biology
Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany Molecular
Medicine Partnership Unit, Heidelberg, Germany john.briggs@embl.de
Barbara_Mueller@med.uni-heidelberg.de. (5)Department of Infectious Diseases,
Virology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany Molecular Medicine 
Partnership Unit, Heidelberg, Germany john.briggs@embl.de
Barbara_Mueller@med.uni-heidelberg.de.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) is released from infected cells in an
immature, noninfectious form in which the structural polyprotein Gag is arranged 
in a hexameric lattice, forming an incomplete spherical shell. Maturation to the 
infectious form is mediated by the viral protease, which cleaves Gag at five
sites, releasing the CA (capsid) protein, which forms a conical capsid encasing
the condensed RNA genome. The pathway of this structural rearrangement is
currently not understood, and it is unclear how cone assembly is initiated. RNA
represents an integral structural component of retroviruses, and the viral
nucleoprotein core has previously been proposed to nucleate mature capsid
assembly. We addressed this hypothesis by replacing the RNA-binding NC
(nucleocapsid) domain of HIV-1 Gag and the adjacent spacer peptide 2 (SP2) by a
leucine zipper (LZ) protein-protein interaction domain [Gag(LZ)] in the viral
context. We found that Gag(LZ)-carrying virus [HIV(LZ)] was efficiently released 
and viral polyproteins were proteolytically processed, though with reduced
efficiency. Cryo-electron tomography revealed that the particles lacked a
condensed nucleoprotein and contained an increased proportion of aberrant core
morphologies caused either by the absence of RNA or by altered Gag processing.
Nevertheless, a significant proportion of HIV(LZ) particles contained mature
capsids with the wild-type morphology. These results clearly demonstrate that the
nucleoprotein complex is dispensable as a nucleator for mature HIV-1 capsid
assembly in the viral context.IMPORTANCE: Formation of a closed conical capsid
encasing the viral RNA genome is essential for HIV-1 infectivity. It is currently
unclear what viral components initiate and regulate the formation of the capsid
during virus morphogenesis, but it has been proposed that the ribonucleoprotein
complex plays a role. To test this, we prepared virus-like particles lacking the 
viral nucleocapsid protein and RNA and analyzed their three-dimensional structure
by cryo-electron tomography. While most virions displayed an abnormal morphology 
under these conditions, some particles showed a normal mature morphology with
closed conical capsids. These data demonstrate that the presence of RNA and the
nucleocapsid protein is not required for the formation of a mature, cone-shaped
HIV-1 capsid.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4577892
PMID: 26178992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Cell Biochem Funct. 2015 Jul;33(5):334-40. doi: 10.1002/cbf.3121. Epub 2015 Jul
15.

Inhibition of MCL-1 by obatoclax sensitizes Sp2/0-Ag14 hybridoma cells to
glutamine deprivation-induced apoptosis.

Harnett CC(1), Abusneina A(1), Clément J(2), Gauthier ER(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Biomolecular Sciences Ph.D. program, Laurentian University, Sudbury, Ontario, 
Canada. (2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Laurentian University,
Sudbury, Ontario, Canada. (3)Biology Department, Laurentian University, Sudbury, 
Ontario, Canada.

For several cancer cell types, the lack of an adequate supply of the amino
acidl-glutamine (Gln) triggers apoptosis, a phenomenon termed Gln addiction. In
this report, we examined the role of the anti-apoptotic proteins of the B-cell
lymphoma 2 (BCL-2) protein family in the survival of Sp2/0-Ag14 (Sp2/0) mouse
hybridoma cells, a cell line that undergoes apoptosis within minutes of Gln
deprivation. Western blot analysis revealed that myeloid cell leukaemia 1 (MCL-1)
was expressed at much higher levels than BCL-2, B-cell lymphoma extra-large and
BCL-2-like protein 2 making it the prominent pro-survival BCL-2 family member in 
this hybridoma. Gln deprivation triggered a progressive decrease in MCL-1 protein
levels, which coincided with the decrease in Sp2/0 cell survival. Moreover, Sp2/0
cells were much more sensitive to the broad Bcl-2 homology domain-3 (BH3) mimetic
obatoclax (which targets MCL-1) than to the more selective drug ABT-737 (which
does not target MCL-1). Finally, we show that obatoclax sensitizes Sp2/0 cells to
apoptosis following Gln starvation. All together, the data presented here reveal 
that modulation of the pro-survival protein MCL-1 is an important step in the
sequence of events leading to the initiation of apoptosis in Gln-starved Sp2/0
cells. Cancer cells require an adequate supply ofl-glutamine for their survival. 
Using a mouse hybridoma cell line that is exquisitely sensitive to glutamine
starvation, we show that the levels of the pro-survival BCL-2 family protein
MCL-1 decrease upon glutamine starvation in a manner that correlates with the
loss of cell viability. Moreover, inhibiting MCL-1 with the drug obatoclax
sensitizes hybridoma cells to glutamine starvation. Thus, in some cancer cells,
glutamine starvation triggers the inactivation of pro-survival proteins. Our data
suggest that the combined inhibition of glutamine biosynthesis pathways and BCL-2
proteins may prove effective against some cancers.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 26178811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2015 Aug 10;54(33):9523-7. doi: 10.1002/anie.201503056.
Epub 2015 Jul 14.

Application of a C-C Bond-Forming Conjugate Addition Reaction in Asymmetric
Dearomatization of ß-Naphthols.

Yang D(1), Wang L(1), Kai M(1), Li D(1), Yao X(1), Wang R(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Preclinical Study for New Drugs of Gansu Province, Lanzhou
University, Lanzhou, 730000 (China). (2)Key Laboratory of Preclinical Study for
New Drugs of Gansu Province, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, 730000 (China).
wangrui@lzu.edu.cn. (3)State Key Laboratory for Oxo Synthesis and Selective
Oxidation, Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Lanzhou, 730000 (China). wangrui@lzu.edu.cn.

A C-C bond-forming conjugate reaction was successfully applied to the
enantioselective dearomatization of ß-naphthols. A C(sp2)-C(sp3) bond is formed
by using propargylic ketones as reactive partners. Good to excellent Z/E ratios
and ee values were obtained by employing an in situ generated magnesium catalyst.
Further transformations of the Z-configured C-C double bond in the products were 
achieved under mild reaction conditions. Moreover, the stereocontrolling element 
of this magnesium-catalyzed dearomatization reaction was explored by
computational chemistry.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26173841  [PubMed - in process]


119. Malar J. 2015 Jul 15;14:272. doi: 10.1186/s12936-015-0794-0.

Treatment policy change to dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine contributes to the
reduction of adverse maternal and pregnancy outcomes.

Poespoprodjo JR(1,)(2,)(3), Fobia W(4), Kenangalem E(5,)(6), Lampah DA(7),
Sugiarto P(8), Tjitra E(9), Anstey NM(10,)(11), Price RN(12,)(13).

Author information: 
(1)Mimika District Health Authority, District Government Building, Jl.
Cendrawasih, Timika, 99910, Papua, Indonesia. didot2266@yahoo.com. (2)Timika
Malaria Research Programme, Papuan Health and Community Development Foundation,
Jl. SP2-SP5, RSMM Area, Timika, 99910, Papua, Indonesia. didot2266@yahoo.com.
(3)Department of Child Health, Faculty of Medicine, University Gadjah Mada, Jl.
Kesehatan no 1, Sekip, Yogyakarta, 55284, Indonesia. didot2266@yahoo.com.
(4)Timika Malaria Research Programme, Papuan Health and Community Development
Foundation, Jl. SP2-SP5, RSMM Area, Timika, 99910, Papua, Indonesia.
timikaresearchfacility@gmail.com. (5)Mimika District Health Authority, District
Government Building, Jl. Cendrawasih, Timika, 99910, Papua, Indonesia.
ennykenangalem@yahoo.com. (6)Timika Malaria Research Programme, Papuan Health and
Community Development Foundation, Jl. SP2-SP5, RSMM Area, Timika, 99910, Papua,
Indonesia. ennykenangalem@yahoo.com. (7)Timika Malaria Research Programme, Papuan
Health and Community Development Foundation, Jl. SP2-SP5, RSMM Area, Timika,
99910, Papua, Indonesia. aditimika@yahoo.com. (8)Mitra Masyarakat Hospital, Jl.
SP2-SP5-Charitas, Timika, 99910, Indonesia. sugiartopaulus@gmail.com. (9)National
Institute of Health Research and Development, Ministry of Health, Jl. Percetakan 
Negara, Jakarta, 10560, Indonesia. emil@litbang.depkes.go.id. (10)Global and
Tropical Health Division, Menzies School of Health Research, Charles Darwin
University, Darwin, PO Box 41096, Casuarina, NT, 0811, Australia.
nicholas.anstey@menzies.edu.au. (11)Division of Medicine, Royal Darwin Hospital, 
Darwin, NT, 0810, Australia. nicholas.anstey@menzies.edu.au. (12)Global and
Tropical Health Division, Menzies School of Health Research, Charles Darwin
University, Darwin, PO Box 41096, Casuarina, NT, 0811, Australia.
rprice@menzies.edu.au. (13)Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, Centre for
Tropical Medicine and Global Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX37LJ, UK.
rprice@menzies.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: In Papua, Indonesia, maternal malaria is prevalent, multidrug
resistant and associated with adverse outcomes for mother and baby. In March
2006, anti-malarial policy was revised for the second and third trimester of
pregnancy to dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine (DHP) for all species of malaria.
This study presents the temporal analysis of adverse outcomes in pregnancy and
early life following this policy change.
METHODS: From April 2004 to May 2010, a standardized questionnaire was used to
collect information from all pregnant women admitted to the maternity ward. A
physical examination was performed on all live birth newborns. The relative risks
(RR) and the associated population attributable risks (PAR) of adverse outcomes
in women with a history of malaria treatment to the risk in those without a
history of malaria during the current pregnancy were examined to evaluate the
temporal trends before and after DHP deployment.
RESULTS: Of 6,556 women enrolled with known pregnancy outcome, 1,018 (16%)
reported prior anti-malarial treatment during their pregnancy. The proportion of 
women with malaria reporting treatment with DHP rose from 0% in 2004 to 64%
(121/189) in 2010. In those with history of malaria during pregnancy, the
increasing use of DHP was associated with a 54% fall in the proportion of
maternal malaria at delivery and a 98% decrease in congenital malaria (from 7.1% 
prior to 0.1% after policy change). Overall policy change to more effective
treatment was associated with an absolute 2% reduction of maternal severe anaemia
and absolute 4.5% decrease in low birth weight babies.
CONCLUSIONS: Introduction of highly effective treatment in pregnancy was
associated with a reduction of maternal malaria at delivery and improved neonatal
outcomes. Ensuring universal access to arteminisin combination therapy (ACT) in
pregnancy in an area of multidrug resistance has potential to impact
significantly on maternal and infant health.

PMCID: PMC4501192
PMID: 26169783  [PubMed - in process]


120. Chem Sci. 2014 Dec 1;5(12):4763-4767.

Formal Asymmetric Hydrobromination of Styrenes via Copper-Catalyzed 1,3-Halogen
Migration.

Van Hoveln RJ(1), Schmid SC(1), Tretbar M(1), Buttke CT(1), Schomaker JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin, 1101 University Ave.
Madison, Wisconsin 53706, United States.

An enantioselective Cu(I)-catalyzed 1,3-halogen migration reaction accomplishes a
formal hydrobromination by transferring a bromine activating group from a sp(2)
carbon to a benzylic carbon in good er and with concomitant borylation of the
Ar-Br bond. Computational modelling aids in understanding the reaction outcome
and suggests future directions to improve the formal asymmetric hydrobromination.
The benzyl bromide can be displaced with a variety of nucleophiles to produce a
wide array of functionalized products.

PMCID: PMC4494760
PMID: 26167268  [PubMed]


121. Eur J Pharm Sci. 2015 Oct 12;78:90-102. doi: 10.1016/j.ejps.2015.07.008. Epub
2015 Jul 9.

Aprepitant loaded solid preconcentrated microemulsion for enhanced
bioavailability: A comparison with micronized Aprepitant.

Kamboj S(1), Sharma R(1), Singh K(1), Rana V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutics Division, Dept. of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Drug Research,
Punjabi University, Patiala 147002, India. (2)Pharmaceutics Division, Dept. of
Pharmaceutical Sciences and Drug Research, Punjabi University, Patiala 147002,
India. Electronic address: vikas_pbi@rediffmail.com.

Aprepitant (APT) is a lipophilic, poorly water soluble drug with moderate
permeability characteristic. Therefore, we aimed to improve solubility as well as
permeability that could possibly improve oral bioavailability of APT. For this
purpose, Quality by design (QbD) approach employing simplex lattice mixture
design was used to prepare solid preconcentrated microemulsion (S-PCM). Further, 
the software generated numerically optimized S-PCM formulations were developed by
utilizing desirability function. The spectral attributes (powder X-ray
diffraction, ATR-FTIR, and differential scanning calorimetry) of S-PCM
formulations suggested that APT was present in amorphous form. The results of
droplet size (150-180 nm), zeta potential (-13 to -15 mV), poly dispersity index 
(PDI) (0.211-0.238) and emulsification time (<1 min), of these S-PCM formulations
(SP1, SP2 and SP3) suggested spherical shape morphology (Transmission electron
microscopy) with thermodynamic stability. The comparison of in vitro/ex vivo
behavior of S-PCM (SP1) with micronized and non-micronized formulations of APT
suggested 2-fold and 5-fold enhancement in solubility and permeability,
respectively. This was further evident from pharmacokinetic studies in rabbits
that showed 1.5-fold enhancement in bioavailability of S-PCM with respect to
micronized APT. Thus, it could be envisaged that development of S-PCM formulation
of APT is the best alternative to micronization technology based APT formulations
reported earlier.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26165621  [PubMed - in process]


122. J Org Chem. 2015 Aug 7;80(15):7360-74. doi: 10.1021/acs.joc.5b00733. Epub 2015
Jul 16.

Palladium-Catalyzed Chelation-Assisted Regioselective Oxidative Dehydrogenative
Homocoupling/Ortho-Hydroxylation in N-Phenylpyrazoles.

Batchu H, Bhattacharyya S, Kant R, Batra S(1).

Author information: 
(1)§Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, New Delhi, 110025, India.

A palladium-catalyzed pyrazole-directed regioselective oxidative C(sp2)-H
functionalization of the N-phenyl ring in N-phenylpyrazoles to afford either a
biaryl bis-pyrazole (via dehydrogenative homocoupling) or
N-(o-hydroxyphenyl)pyrazole (via C-H oxygenation) or their mixture is described. 
The substitutions on the N-phenyl ring and the pyrazole ring and the dilution of 
the reaction medium with respect to the TFA/TFAA mixture (substrate
concentration) have a remarkable influence on the outcome of the reaction. It was
discovered that if the reactions were performed under highly dilute conditions
(ca. 10 times) then N-(o-hydroxyphenyl)pyrazoles were the major or the sole
products.

PMID: 26151504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Am J Hematol. 2015 Nov;90(11):1090. doi: 10.1002/ajh.24106.

Neutrophilic leukemoid reaction in multiple myeloma.

Milojkovic D(1), Hunter A(2), Barton L(2), Cross NC(3), Bain BJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, Hammersmith 
Hospital, Ducane Road, London, W12 0HS. (2)Department of Haematology, University 
Hospitals of Leicester NHS Trust, Infirmary Square, Leicester, LE1 5WW. (3)Wessex
Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury, SP2 8BJ.
(4)St Mary's Hospital Campus of Imperial College, St Mary's Hospital, Praed
Street, London, W2 1NY.

PMID: 26147944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Psychiatr Serv. 2015 Nov;66(11):1180-93. doi: 10.1176/appi.ps.201400355. Epub
2015 Jul 1.

Reviewing Illness Self-Management Programs: A Selection Guide for Consumers,
Practitioners, and Administrators.

Petros R(1), Solomon P(1).

Author information: 
(1)The authors are with the School of Social Policy and Practice, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia (e-mail: petrosr@sp2.upenn.edu ).

Illness self-management (ISM) programs for adults with serious mental illness
offer strategies to increase self-directed recovery activities to maximize
wellness and increase independence from the service delivery system. This article
describes five of the most popular ISM programs: Pathways to Recovery, The
Recovery Workbook, Building Recovery of Individual Dreams and Goals through
Education and Support, Wellness and Recovery Action Planning, and Illness
Management and Recovery. It provides guidance for administrators, practitioners, 
and consumers for the purposes of selecting the program or programs providing the
best fit. The framework for describing the five programs encompasses four
contextual domains that supplement empirical evidence for a more comprehensive
evaluation: structure, value orientation toward recovery, methods of teaching,
and educational content. Contextual domains distinguish programs from one
another, including length and time commitment, requisite resources, inclusion of 
group support, utilization of medical language and pathology, degree of
traditional didactic education, and prioritization of consumer-driven
self-exploration. The authors also searched PsycINFO, Google Scholar, and
Cochrane Reviews for empirical evidence and evaluated the five programs on the
strength of the evidence and the effectiveness of the intervention. Evidence of
program effectiveness was found to range from low to moderate. However, empirical
evidence alone is insufficient for selecting among the five programs, and
contextual domains may offer the most relevant guidance by matching program
features with goals of consumers, practitioners, and administrators.

PMID: 26129995  [PubMed - in process]


125. Cancer Cell Int. 2015 Jun 24;15:66. doi: 10.1186/s12935-015-0199-8. eCollection
2015.

Retraction: Hypericin-mediated photodynamic therapy induces apoptosis of myoloma 
SP2/0 cells depended on caspase activity in vitro.

Zhang J(1), Shao L(2), Wu C(3), Lu H(2), Xu R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Engineering Research Center of Molecular Medicine, Ministry of Education,
China and School of Medicine, Huaqiao University, 269 Chenghua North Road, 361021
Quanzhou, Fujian Province China. (2)Department of Bioscience, College of
Chemistry and Life Science, Zhejiang Normal University, 321004 Jinhua, China.
(3)Department of Pathology, Second Affiliated Hospital of Fujian Medical
University, 36200 Quanzhou, China.

PMCID: PMC4480993
PMID: 26113802  [PubMed]


126. Colorectal Dis. 2015 Oct;17(10):929. doi: 10.1111/codi.13024.

Reply to Bhalla et al.

Bracey E(1), Branagan G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Colorectal Surgery, Salisbury District Hospita, SP2 8BJ, UK.
graham.branagan@salisbury.nhs.uk. (2)Department of Colorectal Surgery, Salisbury 
District Hospita, SP2 8BJ, UK.

Comment on
    Colorectal Dis. 2015 Oct;17(10):929.
    Colorectal Dis. 2015 Oct;17(10):917-21.

PMID: 26095637  [PubMed - in process]


127. Mediators Inflamm. 2015;2015:564625. doi: 10.1155/2015/564625. Epub 2015 May 18.

FCGR2A Promoter Methylation and Risks for Intravenous Immunoglobulin Treatment
Responses in Kawasaki Disease.

Kuo HC(1), Hsu YW(2), Wu MS(2), Woon PY(3), Wong HS(4), Tsai LJ(5), Lin RK(6),
Klahan S(2), Hsieh KS(1), Chang WC(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Kawasaki Disease Center, Kaohsiung Chang Gung
Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung 80031,
Taiwan. (2)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei 11696, Taiwan. (3)Department of Molecular Biology and Human
Genetics, Tzu Chi University, Hualien 97004, Taiwan. (4)Master Program for
Clinical Pharmacogenomics and Pharmacoproteomics, School of Pharmacy, Taipei
Medical University, Taipei 11696, Taiwan. (5)Graduate Institute of Medical
Sciences, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 11696, Taiwan.
(6)Graduate Institute of Pharmacognosy, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 11696, 
Taiwan. (7)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei 11696, Taiwan ; Master Program for Clinical Pharmacogenomics
and Pharmacoproteomics, School of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical University, Taipei
11696, Taiwan ; Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine,
Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung 80031, Taiwan ; Department of Pharmacy,
Taipei Medical University-Wan Fang Hospital, Taipei 11696, Taiwan.

Kawasaki disease (KD) is characterized by pediatric systemic vasculitis of an
unknown cause. The low affinity immunoglobulin gamma Fc region receptor II-a
(FCGR2A) gene was reported to be involved in the susceptibility of KD. DNA
methylation is one of the epigenetic mechanisms that control gene expression;
thus, we hypothesized that methylation status of CpG islands in FCGR2A promoter
associates with the susceptibility and therapeutic outcomes of Kawasaki disease. 
In this study, 36 KD patients and 24 healthy subjects from out-patient clinic
were recruited. Eleven potential methylation sites within the targeted promoter
region of FCGR2A were selected for investigation. We marked the eleven
methylation sites from A to K. Our results indicated that methylation at the CpG 
sites G, H, and J associated with the risk of KD. CpG sites B, C, E, F, H, J, and
K were found to associate with the outcomes of IVIG treatment. In addition, CpG
sites G, J, and K were predicted as transcription factors binding sites for
NF-kB, Myc-Max, and SP2, respectively. Our study reported a significant
association among the promoter methylation of FCGR2A, susceptibility of KD, and
the therapeutic outcomes of IVIG treatment. The methylation levels of CpG sites
of FCGR2A gene promoter should be an important marker for optimizing IVIG
therapy.

PMCID: PMC4451985
PMID: 26089602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Cancer Cell Int. 2014 Dec 19;15:58. doi: 10.1186/s12935-015-0193-1. eCollection
2015.

Hypericin-mediated photodynamic therapy induces apoptosis of myoloma SP2/0 cells 
depended on caspase activity in vitro.

Zhang J(1), Shao L(2), Wu C(3), Lu H(2), Xu R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Engineering Research Center of Molecular Medicine, Ministry of Education,
China and School of Medicine, Huaqiao University, 269 Chenghua North Road,
Quanzhou, Fujian Province 361021 China. (2)Department of Bioscience, College of
Chemistry and Life Science, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua, 321004 China.
(3)Department of Pathology, Second Affiliated Hospital of Fujian Medical
University, Quanzhou, 36200 China.

BACKGROUND: Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is becoming a promising therapeutic
modality for hematological malignancies. Hypericin is a natural photosensitizer
possessing anti-depressant, anti-virus and anti-cancer activities. The present
study was designed to explore the effect and mechanism of hypericin-mediated PDT 
on the mouse multiple myeloma (MM) cells in vitro.
METHODS: The mouse myeloma SP2/0 cells were incubed with different concentrations
of hypericin and then illuminated with different light doses. The inhibitory
effect of hypericin-mediated PDT on tumor cell proliferation was assayed by 3-(4,
5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) method. The
apoptosis related morphological changes of SP2/0 cells were observed by
microscopy. The biochemical hallmarks of apoptosis such as DNA fragments,
mitochondrial membrane potential changes were assessed. The expression of
apoptosis related proteins were investigated by western blotting.
RESULTS: Hypericin-mediated PDT induced the proliferation inhibition and
apoptosis of tumor cells in a dose dependent manner. Tumor cells showed obvious
morphological changes of apoptosis and necrosis and DNA fragmentation after
treated by hypericin mediated PDT (0.025<U+2009>~<U+2009>0.05 µM). The mitochondria membrane
potential in SP2/0 cells was decreased significantly after incubated with the
0.025 µM and 0.5 µM hypericin (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). The expression level of caspase-3 was
decreased, while caspase activity was elevated with the increasing drug dosage.
The apoptosis of SP2/0 cells was blocked by a pan-caspase inhibitor Z-VAD-FMK and
caspase-3 inhibitor Ac-DEVD-CHO.
CONCLUSION: Hypericin-mediated PDT induced apoptosis mainly dependent on caspase 
related pathways. Hypericin-mediated PDT may be a potential and alternative
therapy for MM.

PMCID: PMC4464615
PMID: 26074732  [PubMed]


129. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2015 Jan;31(1):75-85.

[Development of monoclonal antibodies against the gp90 protein of
reticuloendotheliosis virus and mapping of their recognition regions].

[Article in Chinese]

Sun M, Li X, Cao H, Wang Y, Zheng SJ.

In order to develop monoclonal antibodies (McAbs) against the gp90 protein of
reticuloendotheliosis virus (REV), the His-tagged gp90 protein of REV was used to
immunize BALB/c mice. Hybridomas were generated by fusing mouse myeloma cells
SP2/0 with the splenocytes from the immunized mice. After screening and 3 rounds 
of cloning process, 3 hybridomas (3G5-B8, 3G5-A10 and 1G12) that stably secreted 
McAbs against the REV-gp90 were obtained. The isotypes of the McAbs were
determined to be IgG1, IgG1 and IgG2b. The McAbs specifically bound to gp90 in
REV-infected DF-1 cells, as demonstrated by Western blotting and indirect
immunofluorescence assay. The recognition regions on gp90 that were recognized by
3G5-B8/3G5-A10 and 1G12 were located between amino acids 200 to 245 and 230 to
235, respectively, as demonstrated by Western blotting analysis. These McAbs will
be useful in the diagnosis and pathogenesis study of REV.

PMID: 26021081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2014 Dec;14(12):9124-30.

Microstructure and properties of silicon-incorporated DLC film fabricated using
HMDS gas and RF-PECVD process.

Song BJ, Song WJ, Han JH, Kim KR, Yoon SJ, Kim TG, Kim JK, Cho H, Kim GH, Hwang
DY, Kim HS.

The microstructure and characteristics of silicon-incorporated diamond-like
carbon film, fabricated using a radio-frequency plasma-enhanced chemical vapor
deposition process with hexamethyldisilane [(CH3)3,Si x Si(CH3)3:HMDS] gas as a
silicon source, were investigated. Diamond-like carbon films with silicon
compositions from 0 to 5 atomic percent were deposited onto ultra-fine grained
AZ31 magnesium alloy substrate as buffer layers or multilayers. Si doping led not
only to an increase in the bonding ratio (sp3/sp2), but improvements in hardness,
critical adhesion, and corrosion resistance. Out of the investigated samples, the
multi-deposited silicon diamond-like carbon thin film on magnesium substrate
showed the best combination of adhesive, wear resistance, and corrosion
resistance properties.

PMID: 25971022  [PubMed]


131. Chemosphere. 2015 Sep;135:257-64. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2015.04.064. Epub
2015 May 15.

Multibiomarker in fish to evaluate a river used to water public supply.

Bueno-Krawczyk AC(1), Guiloski IC(2), Piancini LD(3), Azevedo JC(4), Ramsdorf
WA(4), Ide AH(4), Guimarães AT(5), Cestari MM(3), Silva de Assis HC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Ecology and Conservation Post-graduate Program, Federal University of Paraná, 
P.O. Box 19031, Curitiba-Paraná 81531-990, Brazil. Electronic address:
bueno_acd@yahoo.com.br. (2)Department of Pharmacology, Federal University of
Paraná, P.O. Box 19031, Curitiba-Paraná 81531-990, Brazil. (3)Department of
Genetics, Federal University of Paraná, P.O. Box 19031, Curitiba-Paraná
81531-990, Brazil. (4)Environmental Science and Technology Post-graduate Program,
Paraná Federal Technological University, Curitiba, PR, Brazil. (5)Department of
Biological Sciences and Health, West Paraná State University, Cascavel, PR,
Brazil.

We aimed to evaluate the ecological integrity of a large river, which receives
agricultural and urban effluents and is used to water public supply. The fish
species Astyanax bifasciatus was used as bioindicator during winter and spring
2012, and summer 2013 at the Middle Iguaçu River basin in Paraná state, Brazil.
Water chemical and physical measures and ecotoxicological tests were carried out 
as well biochemical and genetic biomarkers in sampled fish in each period. The
studied area was divided in three sample points: SP1, located where the water is 
collected to public supply; SP2, located in an urbanized area, and SP3, located
at an urbanized area with the discharge of the sewage treatment. Although water
chemical and physical analyzes were range of the Brazilian law to hydric bodies, 
anticholinesterasic effects were found in winter, oxidative stress in summer and 
spring. The higher genotoxic effect was in winter to all sample points. The
temporal variation in biomarkers and the detection of caffeine in the water call 
attention to the water quality in this river mainly to be used to public supply.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25965005  [PubMed - in process]


132. Pharmacol Ther. 2015 Aug;152:111-24. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2015.05.008. Epub 
2015 May 8.

Sp1 transcription factor: A long-standing target in cancer chemotherapy.

Vizcaíno C(1), Mansilla S(1), Portugal J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología Molecular de Barcelona, CSIC, Parc Científic de
Barcelona, E-08028 Barcelona, Spain. (2)Instituto de Biología Molecular de
Barcelona, CSIC, Parc Científic de Barcelona, E-08028 Barcelona, Spain.
Electronic address: jpmbmc@ibmb.csic.es.

Sp1 (specificity protein 1) is a well-known member of a family of transcription
factors that also includes Sp2, Sp3 and Sp4, which are implicated in an ample
variety of essential biological processes and have been proven important in cell 
growth, differentiation, apoptosis and carcinogenesis. Sp1 activates the
transcription of many cellular genes that contain putative CG-rich Sp-binding
sites in their promoters. Sp1 and Sp3 proteins bind to similar, if not the same, 
DNA tracts and compete for binding, thus they can enhance or repress gene
expression. Evidences exist that the Sp-family of proteins regulates the
expression of genes that play pivotal roles in cell proliferation and metastasis 
of various tumors. In patients with a variety of cancers, high levels of Sp1
protein are considered a negative prognostic factor. A plethora of compounds can 
interfere with the trans-activating activities of Sp1 and other Sp proteins on
gene expression. Several pathways are involved in the down-regulation of Sp
proteins by compounds with different mechanisms of action, which include not only
the direct interference with the binding of Sp proteins to their putative DNA
binding sites, but also promoting the degradation of Sp protein factors.
Down-regulation of Sp transcription factors and Sp1-regulated genes is
drug-dependent and it is determined by the cell context. The acknowledgment that 
several of those compounds are safe enough might accelerate their introduction
into clinical usage in patients with tumors that over-express Sp1.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25960131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Genome Med. 2015 May 7;7(1):44. doi: 10.1186/s13073-015-0163-1. eCollection 2015.

Erratum to: a SNP profiling panel for sample tracking in whole-exome sequencing
studies.

Pengelly RJ(1), Gibson J(1), Andreoletti G(1), Collins A(1), Mattocks CJ(2),
Ennis S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Southampton, Duthie Building (MP 808), Southampton General Hospital, Tremona
Road, Southampton, SO16 6YD UK. (2)National Genetics Reference Laboratory
(Wessex), Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury, SP2 8BJ UK.

Erratum for
    Genome Med. 2013;5(9):89.

This is an Erratum to Genome Medicine 2013, 5:89, highlighting an error in Table 
1 of the original article. Please see related article:
http://genomemedicine.com/content/5/9/89.[This corrects the article DOI:
10.1186/gm492.].

PMCID: PMC4422541
PMID: 25949530  [PubMed]


134. Sci Rep. 2015 May 6;5:10037. doi: 10.1038/srep10037.

Natural carbon-based dots from humic substances.

Dong Y(1), Wan L(1), Cai J(1), Fang Q(1), Chi Y(1), Chen G(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Chemistry, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Analysis and
Detection for Food Safety, and Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Analysis and
Detection for Food Safety, Fuzhou University, Fujian 350108, China.

For the first time, abundant natural carbon-based dots were found and studied in 
humic substances (HS). Four soluble HS including three humic acids (HA) from
different sources and one fulvic acids (FA) were synthetically studied.
Investigation results indicate that all the four HS contain large quantities of
Carbon-based dots. Carbon-based dots are mainly small-sized graphene oxide
nano-sheets or oxygen-containing functional group-modified graphene nano-sheets
with heights less than 1<U+2009>nm and lateral sizes less than 100<U+2009>nm. Carbon-based
nanomaterials not only contain abundant sp2-clusters but also a large quantity of
surface states, exhibiting unique optical and electric properties, such as
excitation-dependent fluorescence, surface states-originated
electrochemiluminescence, and strong electron paramagnetic resonance. Optical and
electric properties of these natural carbon-based dots have no obvious
relationship to their morphologies, but affected greatly by their surface states.
Carbon-based dots in the three HS have relative high densities of surface states 
whereas the FA has the lowest density of surface states, resulting in their
different fluorescence properties. The finding of carbon-based dots in HS
provides us new insight into HS, and the unique optical properties of these
natural carbon-based dots may give HS potential applications in areas such as
bio-imaging, bio-medicine, sensing and optoelectronics.

PMCID: PMC4421865
PMID: 25944302  [PubMed]


135. J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2014 Oct;14(10):7948-53.

Synthesis and characterization of sulfonated poly(ether sulfone)s containing
mesonaphthobifluorene for polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell.

Lim Y, Seo D, Lee S, Hossain MA, Lim J, Lee S, Hong T, Kim W.

The novel sulfonated poly(ether sulfone)s containing mesonaphthobifluorene (MNF) 
moiety were synthesized and characterized their properties. The prepared polymers
have highly conjugated aromatic structure due to the MNF group which is an
allotrope of carbon and one atom thick planar sheets of sp2-bonded carbon atoms. 
Poly(ether sulfone)s bearing tetraphenylethylene on polymer backbone were
synthesized by polycondensation and followed intra-cyclization from
tetraphenylethylene to form MNF by Friedel-craft reaction with Lewis acid
(FeCl3). The sulfonation was performed selectively on MNF units with conc.
sulfuric acid. The structural properties of the sulfonated polymers were
investigated by 1H-NMR spectroscopy. The membranes were studied by ion exchange
capacity (IEC), water uptake, and proton conductivity. The synthesized polymer
electrolyte membranes showed better thermal and dimensional stabilities owing to 
the inducted highly conjugated aromatic structure in the polymer backbone. The
water uptake of the synthesized membranes ranged from 23-52%, compared with
32.13% for Nafion 211 at 80 degrees C. The synthesized membranes exhibited proton
conductivities (80 degrees C, RH 90%) of 74.6-100.4 mS/cm, compared with 102.7
mS/cm for Nafion 211.

PMID: 25942900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Plast Reconstr Aesthet Surg. 2015 Jul;68(7):1020. doi:
10.1016/j.bjps.2015.03.007. Epub 2015 Mar 19.

Regarding the use of the serratus anterior muscle pedicle as recipient vessels in
DIEP flap breast reconstruction.

Asaad K(1), Cole RP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Salisbury District Hospital, Odstock Road, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, UK.
Electronic address: kamilasaad@hotmail.com. (2)Salisbury District Hospital,
Odstock Road, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, UK.

Comment on
    J Plast Reconstr Aesthet Surg. 2014 Dec;67(12):1758-60.

PMID: 25936924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Int J Nanomedicine. 2015 Apr 15;10:2951-69. doi: 10.2147/IJN.S79879. eCollection 
2015.

Reduction of graphene oxide by resveratrol: a novel and simple biological method 
for the synthesis of an effective anticancer nanotherapeutic molecule.

Gurunathan S(1), Han JW(1), Kim ES(1), Park JH(1), Kim JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biotechnology, Konkuk University, Seoul, Republic of
Korea.

OBJECTIVE: Graphene represents a monolayer or a few layers of sp2-bonded carbon
atoms with a honeycomb lattice structure. Unique physical, chemical, and
biological properties of graphene have attracted great interest in various fields
including electronics, energy, material industry, and medicine, where it is used 
for tissue engineering and scaffolding, drug delivery, and as an antibacterial
and anticancer agent. However, graphene cytotoxicity for ovarian cancer cells is 
still not fully investigated. The objective of this study was to synthesize
graphene using a natural polyphenol compound resveratrol and to investigate its
toxicity for ovarian cancer cells.
METHODS: The successful reduction of graphene oxide (GO) to graphene was
confirmed by UV-vis and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. Dynamic light
scattering and scanning electron microscopy were employed to evaluate particle
size and surface morphology of GO and resveratrol-reduced GO (RES-rGO). Raman
spectroscopy was used to determine the removal of oxygen-containing functional
groups from GO surface and to ensure the formation of graphene. We also performed
a comprehensive analysis of GO and RES-rGO cytotoxicity by examining the
morphology, viability, membrane integrity, activation of caspase-3, apoptosis,
and alkaline phosphatase activity of ovarian cancer cells.
RESULTS: The results also show that resveratrol effectively reduced GO to
graphene and the properties of RES-rGO nanosheets were comparable to those of
chemically reduced graphene. Biological experiments showed that GO and RES-rGO
caused a dose-dependent membrane leakage and oxidative stress in cancer cells,
and reduced their viability via apoptosis confirmed by the upregulation of
apoptosis executioner caspase-3.
CONCLUSION: Our data demonstrate a single, simple green approach for the
synthesis of highly water-dispersible functionalized graphene nanosheets,
suggesting a possibility of replacing toxic hydrazine by a natural and safe
phenolic compound resveratrol, which has similar efficacy in the reduction of GO 
to rGO. Resveratrol-based GO reduction would facilitate large-scale production of
graphene-based materials for the emerging graphene-based technologies and
biomedical applications.

PMCID: PMC4404963
PMID: 25931821  [PubMed - in process]


138. Avicenna J Med Biotechnol. 2015 Jan-Mar;7(1):2-7.

Production and Characterization of Monoclonal Antibodies against Human Prostate
Specific Antigen.

Bayat AA(1), Ghods R(2), Shabani M(1), Mahmoudi AR(1), Yeganeh O(1), Hassannia
H(3), Sadeghitabar A(1), Balay-Goli L(1), Noutash-Haghighat F(1), Sarrafzadeh
AR(4), Jeddi-Tehrani M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Monoclonal Antibody Research Center, Avicenna Research Institute, ACECR,
Tehran, Iran. (2)Monoclonal Antibody Research Center, Avicenna Research
Institute, ACECR, Tehran, Iran ; Department of Molecular Medicine, School of
Advanced Medical Technologies, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran,
Iran. (3)Department of Immunology, School of Public Health, Tehran University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. (4)Department of Pathology, Khatam Al Anbia
Hospital, Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Prostate Specific Antigen (PSA) is an important laboratory marker for
diagnosis of prostatic cancer. Thus, development of diagnostic tools specific for
PSA plays an important role in screening, monitoring and early diagnosis of
prostate cancer. In this paper, the production and characterization of a panel of
murine monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) against PSA have been presented.
METHODS: Balb/c mice were immunized with PSA, which was purified from seminal
plasma. Splenocytes of hyperimmunized mice were extracted and fused with Sp2/0
cells. By adding selective HAT medium, hybridoma cells were established and
positive clones were selected by ELISA after four times of cloning. The isotypes 
of produced mAbs were determined by ELISA and then purified from ascitic fluids
using Hi-Trap protein G column. The reactivities of the mAbs were examined with
the purified PSA and seminal plasma by ELISA and western blot techniques.
Furthermore, the reactivities of the mAbs were assessed in Prostate Cancer (PCa),
Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia (BPH) and brain cancer tissues by
Immunohistochemistry (IHC).
RESULTS: Five anti-PSA mAbs (clones: 2G2-B2, 2F9-F4, 2D6-E8, IgG1/<U+041A>) and clones
(2C8-E9, 2G3-E2, IgG2a/<U+041A>) were produced and characterized. All mAbs, except
2F9-F4 detected the expression of PSA in PCa and BPH tissues and none of them
reacted with PSA in brain cancer tissue in IHC. Besides, all mAbs could detect a 
protein band around 33 kDa in human seminal plasma in western blot.
CONCLUSION: These mAbs can specifically recognize PSA and may serve as a
component of PSA diagnostic kit in various biological fluids.

PMCID: PMC4388886
PMID: 25926946  [PubMed]


139. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2015 Aug;70(8):2330-6. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkv101. Epub 2015
Apr 28.

Mitochondrial and apoptotic in vitro modelling of differential HIV-1 progression 
and antiretroviral toxicity.

Morén C(1), Bañó M(1), González-Casacuberta I(1), Catalán-Garcia M(2),
Guitart-Mampel M(1), Tobías E(1), Cardellach F(1), Pedrol E(3), Peraire J(4),
Vidal F(4), Domingo P(5), Miró Ò(6), Gatell JM(7), Martínez E(7), Garrabou G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Muscle Research and Mitochondrial Function Laboratory, Cellex-IDIBAPS, Faculty
of Medicine, University of Barcelona, Hospital Clinic of Barcelona (HCB),
Barcelona, Spain Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras
(CIBERER), Madrid, Spain. (2)Muscle Research and Mitochondrial Function
Laboratory, Cellex-IDIBAPS, Faculty of Medicine, University of Barcelona,
Hospital Clinic of Barcelona (HCB), Barcelona, Spain Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain
macatala@clinic.ub.es. (3)Internal Medicine Department, Hospital of Figueres,
Girona, Spain. (4)Infectious Diseases Unit, Department of Internal Medicine,
Hospital Universitari Joan XXIII, IISPV, Universitat Rovira i Virgili, Tarragona,
Spain. (5)Infectious Diseases Unit, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau,
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (6)Muscle Research and
Mitochondrial Function Laboratory, Cellex-IDIBAPS, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Barcelona, Hospital Clinic of Barcelona (HCB), Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Infectious Diseases Unit, Faculty of Medicine, University of Barcelona,
Hospital Clinic of Barcelona (HCB), Barcelona, Spain.

OBJECTIVES: Ex vivo analysis of mitochondrial function may reveal HIV progression
and the impact of ART. We propose a mitochondrial and apoptotic in vitro model
using Jurkat T cells incubated with plasma. The objectives of this study were to 
evaluate mitochondrial and apoptotic lesions in this model in relation to HIV
progression, and to assess the effect of >1 year of standard
non-thymidine-containing therapy.
METHODS: This was a cross-sectional comparison among three age- and
gender-matched groups (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>19<U+200A>×<U+200A>3): healthy non-HIV-infected participants,
HIV-infected long-term non-progressors (LTNPs) and standard antiretroviral-naive 
chronically infected patients [standard progressors (Sps)], longitudinally
evaluated before (Sp1) and after (Sp2) >1 year of
efavirenz<U+200A>+<U+200A>tenofovir<U+200A>+<U+200A>emtricitabine therapy. We analysed mitochondrial DNA
content by RT-PCR, mitochondrial function by spectrophotometry, mitochondrial
protein synthesis by western blot analysis, mitochondrial dynamics by western
blot analysis (MFN2), apoptotic transition pore formation by western blot
analysis (VDAC-1) and mitochondrial membrane potential and annexin V/propidium
iodide fluorescence by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: There was a decreasing non-significant trend towards lower mitochondrial
parameters for HIV-infected values with respect to uninfected control reference
values. HIV progression (LTNP versus Sp1) was associated with decreased
mitochondrial genetic, functional and translational parameters, which partially
recovered after treatment intervention (Sp2). Mitochondrial fusion showed a trend
to decrease non-significantly in Sp patients compared with LTNP patients,
especially after therapy. All apoptotic parameters showed a trend to increase in 
Sp1 with respect to LTNP, followed by recovery in Sp2.
CONCLUSIONS: We proposed an in vitro model for mitochondrial and apoptotic
assessment to test the effects of HIV infection and its therapy, resembling in
vivo conditions. This model could be useful for clinical research purposes.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British 
Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25921514  [PubMed - in process]


140. J Sep Sci. 2015 Jul;38(13):2363-70. doi: 10.1002/jssc.201500242. Epub 2015 Jun
18.

Development of an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and immunoaffinity
chromatography for glycyrrhizic acid using an anti-glycyrrhizic acid monoclonal
antibody.

Zhang Y(1), Qu H(2), Zeng W(3), Zhao Y(4), Shan W(3), Wang X(4), Wang Q(4), Zhao 
Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biopharmaceutics, School of Chinese Materia Medica, Beijing
University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing, China. (2)Department of Molecular
Biology, Centre of Scientific Experiment, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine,
Beijing, China. (3)Department of Chemistry of TCM, School of Chinese Materia
Medica, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing, China. (4)Department of 
Basic TCM Clinical Science, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Beijing University 
of Chinese Medicine, Beijing, China.

In this work, a new monoclonal antibody specific for glycyrrhizic acid was
prepared and characterized. A hybridoma secreting an anti-glycyrrhizic acid
monoclonal antibody was produced by fusing splenocytes from a mouse immunized
against a glycyrrhizic acid-bovine serum albumin conjugate with the
hypoxanthine-aminopterin-thymidine-sensitive mouse myeloma cell line
(Sp2/0-Ag14). Subsequently, an indirect, competitive enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay for glycyrrhizic acid was developed using the monoclonal antibody. In this 
assay, we detected an effective measuring range of 78.12-2500 ng/mL. Both
intra-assay and inter-assay repeatability and precision were achieved, with
relative standard deviations lower than 10%. In addition, glycyrrhizic acid
levels in both formulated Chinese medicines and biological samples were
determined with high sensitivity and efficiency. We then successfully developed a
reliable immunoaffinity chromatography to separate glycyrrhizic acid completely
from its parent medicine. These methods will contribute to further research
investigations to better understand the interactions of glycyrrhizic acid with
other drugs in the complex system of traditional Chinese medicine.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25914291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Biosens Bioelectron. 2015 Sep 15;71:256-60. doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2015.04.049. Epub
2015 Apr 18.

Development of ELISA and colloidal gold immunoassay for tetrodotoxin detetcion
based on monoclonal antibody.

Ling S(1), Chen QA(2), Zhang Y(3), Wang R(1), Jin N(1), Pang J(4), Wang S(5).

Author information: 
(1)The Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Biopesticide and Chemical Biology,
Fujian Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Fungi and Mycotoxins, Fujian Agriculture and 
Forestry University, Fuzhou 350002, China; School of Life Sciences, Fujian
Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou 350002, China. (2)Fujian Commercial
College, Fuzhou 350012, China; School of Food Sciences, Fujian Agriculture and
Forestry University, Fuzhou 350002, China. (3)The Ministry of Education Key
Laboratory of Biopesticide and Chemical Biology, Fujian Key Laboratory of
Pathogenic Fungi and Mycotoxins, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University,
Fuzhou 350002, China; School of Food Sciences, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry
University, Fuzhou 350002, China. (4)School of Food Sciences, Fujian Agriculture 
and Forestry University, Fuzhou 350002, China. (5)The Ministry of Education Key
Laboratory of Biopesticide and Chemical Biology, Fujian Key Laboratory of
Pathogenic Fungi and Mycotoxins, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University,
Fuzhou 350002, China; School of Life Sciences, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry
University, Fuzhou 350002, China. Electronic address: wshyyl@sinna.com.

A monoclonal hybridoma cell named 5B9 against tetrodotoxin (TTX) was obtained
after fusion of myeloma SP2/0 cells with spleen cells isolated from the immunized
Balb/c mice. The 5B9 monoclonal antibody (McAb) with high affinity (about 2.55 × 
10(9)) is specific to TTX, and this McAb belongs to the immunoglobulin G (IgG)
isotype. Finally, an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and colloidal gold
immunoassay were established based on this McAb. The linear range of ELISA to
detect TTX was 5-500 ng/mL, and the limit of detection (LOD) was 4.44 ng/mL. The 
average CV of intra- and inter-assay was less than 8%, with the samples recovery 
range of 70.93-99.99%. A competitive format colloidal gold strip was developed
for detection of TTX in real samples, and the LOD for TTX is 20 ng/mL, and the
assay time of the qualitative test can be finished in less than 10 min without
any equipment. The result from test strip revealed that the test strip has a good
agreement with those obtained from ELISA.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25913446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Trials. 2015 Apr 22;16:180. doi: 10.1186/s13063-015-0715-0.

Person-centered care planning and service engagement: a study protocol for a
randomized controlled trial.

Stanhope V(1), Tondora J(2), Davidson L(3), Choy-Brown M(4), Marcus SC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Silver School of Social Work, New York University, 1 Washington Square North, 
New York, NY, 10003, USA. victoria.stanhope@nyu.edu. (2)Department of Psychiatry,
Program for Recovery and Community Health, Yale University School of Medicine, 19
Peck Street, Building One, New Haven, CT, 06513, USA. janis.tondora@yale.edu.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Program for Recovery and Community Health, Yale
University School of Medicine, 19 Peck Street, Building One, New Haven, CT,
06513, USA. larry.davidson@yale.edu. (4)Silver School of Social Work, New York
University, 1 Washington Square North, New York, NY, 10003, USA.
mimi.choybrown@nyu.edu. (5)Penn School of Social Policy & Practice, University of
Pennsylvania, 3701 Locust Walk, Caster Building, Room C16, Philadelphia, PA,
19104-6214, USA. marcuss@sp2.upenn.edu.

BACKGROUND: Service disengagement is a pervasive challenge the mental health care
system faces. Mental health services are of little value should persons with
mental illnesses continue to opt out of receiving them. Consumers attribute
disengagement from care to an absence of choice in their treatment. In response, 
the mental health system is adopting a person-centered model, based upon recovery
principles, to engage consumers more actively in their care. Person-centered care
planning is a promising practice involving collaboration to develop and implement
an actionable plan to assist the person in achieving personal recovery goals.
METHODS/DESIGN: This study design combines a parallel-group randomized controlled
trial of community mental health organizations with qualitative methods to assess
the effectiveness of person-centered care planning. Participants at 14 sites in
Delaware and Connecticut will be randomized to treatment as usual or the
person-centered care planning intervention. Participants will be in leadership (n
= 70) or supervisory or direct care (n = 210) roles. The person-centered care
planning intervention involves intensive staff training and 12 months of ongoing 
technical assistance. Quantitative survey data will be collected at baseline, 6
months and 12 months measuring person-centered care planning competency and
organizational factors. Consumer outcomes (engagement, medication adherence,
functioning and consumer satisfaction) will be assessed by Medicaid and
state-level data. Qualitative data focused on process factors will include staff 
and consumer interviews and focus groups. In this intent-to-treat analysis, we
will use mixed-effects multivariate regression models to evaluate the
differential impact of the person-centered care planning intervention on each
consumer and implementation outcome as well as the extent to which clinician
assessments of organizational factors are associated with the implementation
outcome. Mixed methods will triangulate and strengthen the interpretation of
outcomes.
DISCUSSION: The aim of this study is to generate valuable guidance for state
systems engaged in scale-up and transformation efforts. Targeted staff selection 
for training to support sustainability will serve to provide further insight into
important intervention implementation strategies. Person-centered care planning
has the potential to enhance the impact of all evidence-based and
recovery-oriented practices and bring practice into line with the emerging
national guidelines in health care reform.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: This trial was registered with ClinicalTrials.gov
(Identifier: NCT02299492) on 21 November 2014 as New York University Protocol
Record PCCP-13-9762, Person-Centered Care Planning and Service Engagement.

PMCID: PMC4409728
PMID: 25897762  [PubMed - in process]


143. Monoclon Antib Immunodiagn Immunother. 2015 Apr;34(2):122-5. doi:
10.1089/mab.2014.0056.

Monoclonal antibody against M protein of spring viremia of carp virus.

Li Z(1), Zhang Q, Luo P, Liu G, Wang M, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Aquatic Animal Medicine, College of Fisheries, Huazhong
Agricultural University , Wuhan, Hubei, China .

M protein of spring viremia of carp virus (SVCV) was expressed in Escherichia
coli and then used to immunize BALB/c mice. One monoclonal antibody (5A1) against
M protein was generated by fusion of mouse myeloma cell line SP2/0 and spleen
lymphocytes from immunized mice. The characterizations of this MAb were confirmed
by ELISA (enzyme linked immunosorbent assay), IFA (immunofluorescent assay), and 
Western blot analysis. All results indicate that MAb 5A1 was specific to SVCV M
protein.

PMCID: PMC4410279
PMID: 25897611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Monoclon Antib Immunodiagn Immunother. 2015 Apr;34(2):110-5. doi:
10.1089/mab.2014.0050.

Generation and Characterization of a New Monoclonal Antibody Against CXCL4.

Gao J(1), Wu M, Gao J, Wang X, Zhang Y, Zhu S, Yu Y, Han W.

Author information: 
(1)1 Laboratory of Regeneromics, School of Pharmacy, School of Agriculture and
Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University , Shanghai, China .

CXCL4 plays important roles in numerous disease processes, which makes the CXCL4 
signaling pathway a potential therapeutic target. In this study, we aimed to
develop a neutralizing antibody against both human and mouse CXCL4. Rats were
immunized with recombinant human CXCL4 (rhCXCL4). Hybridoma clones were created
by fusion of the immunized rat spleen cells with mouse myeloma SP2/0 cells and
screened using recombinant mouse CXCL4 (rmCXCL4) and rhCXCL4. The CXCL4
monoclonal antibody (CXCL4 MAb) produced by the 16D6-3 hybridoma clone was
sequenced and characterized by Western blot and Biacore assays. It recognized
both human and mouse CXCL4 with high affinity and neutralized the effect of
rhCXCL4 in vitro. Thus, the antibody may be used in the studies of CXCL4 in
murine disease models and as a template in the antibody humanization for clinical
developments.

PMCID: PMC4410284
PMID: 25897609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Monoclon Antib Immunodiagn Immunother. 2015 Apr;34(2):96-100. doi:
10.1089/mab.2014.0057.

Monoclonal Antibodies Against NS2B of Japanese Encephalitis Virus.

Dong Q(1), Xu Q, Ruan X, Huang S, Cao S.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology and Laboratory of Animal
Virology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University ,
Wuhan, Hubei, China .

Japanese encephalitis (JE) is one of the most important viral encephalitis,
caused by the Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV). The function of non-structural
protein 2B (NS2B) mostly remains unclear. In our study, NS2B of Japanese
encephalitis virus (JEV) was expressed in Escherichia coli and purified by
dialysis. After fusing mouse myeloma cell line SP2/0 with spleen lymphocytes from
NS2B protein immunized mice, three clones of monoclonal antibodies (MAbs), named 
1B9, 3E12, and 4E6, were generated. The specificity and sensitivity of MAbs were 
demonstrated by ELISA, indirect immunofluorescence assay, and Western blot. These
MAbs will be useful in further exploration of the functions of NS2B and the
pathogenesis of Japanese encephalitis virus.

PMID: 25897607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Pharm Sci. 2015 Jun;104(6):1866-84. doi: 10.1002/jps.24444. Epub 2015 Apr 14.

Antibody glycosylation and its impact on the pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics of monoclonal antibodies and Fc-fusion proteins.

Liu L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacokinetics, Pharmacodynamics and Drug Metabolism, Merck
Research Laboratory, West Point, Pennsylvania, 19486, USA.

Understanding the impact of glycosylation and keeping a close control on
glycosylation of product candidates are required for both novel and biosimilar
monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) and Fc-fusion protein development to ensure proper
safety and efficacy profiles. Most therapeutic mAbs are of IgG class and contain 
a glycosylation site in the Fc region at amino acid position 297 and, in some
cases, in the Fab region. For Fc-fusion proteins, glycosylation also frequently
occurs in the fusion partners. Depending on the expression host, glycosylation
patterns in mAb or Fc-fusions can be significantly different, thus significantly 
impacting the pharmacokinetics (PK) and pharmacodynamics (PD) of mAbs. Glycans
that have a major impact on PK and PD of mAb or Fc-fusion proteins include
mannose, sialic acids, fucose (Fuc), and galactose (Gal). Mannosylated glycans
can impact the PK of the molecule, leading to reduced exposure and potentially
lower efficacy. The level of sialic acid, N-acetylneuraminic acid (NANA), can
also have a significant impact on the PK of Fc-fusion molecules. Core Fuc in the 
glycan structure reduces IgG antibody binding to IgG Fc receptor IIIa relative to
IgG lacking Fuc, resulting in decreased antibody-dependent cell-mediated
cytotoxicity (ADCC) activities. Glycoengineered Chinese hamster ovary (CHO)
expression systems can produce afucosylated mAbs that have increased ADCC
activities. Terminal Gal in a mAb is important in the complement-dependent
cytotoxicity (CDC) in that lower levels of Gal reduce CDC activity. Glycans can
also have impacts on the safety of mAb. mAbs produced in murine myeloma cells
such as NS0 and SP2/0 contain glycans such as Gala1-3Galß1-4N-acetylglucosamine-R
and N-glycolylneuraminic acid (NGNA) that are not naturally present in humans and
can be immunogenic when used as therapeutics.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. and the American Pharmacists Association.

PMID: 25872915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2015 May 26;54(22):6595-9. doi: 10.1002/anie.201501260.
Epub 2015 Apr 14.

Rhodium(III)-Catalyzed [3+2]/[5+2] Annulation of 4-Aryl 1,2,3-Triazoles with
Internal Alkynes through Dual C(sp2)-H Functionalization.

Yang Y(1), Zhou MB(1), Ouyang XH(1), Pi R(1), Song RJ(1), Li JH(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensing and Chemometrics, College of
Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082 (China).
(2)State Key Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensing and Chemometrics, College of
Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082 (China).
jhli@hnu.edu.cn. (3)State Key Laboratory of Applied Organic Chemistry, Lanzhou
University, Lanzhou 730000 (China). jhli@hnu.edu.cn.

A rhodium(III)-catalyzed [3+2]/[5+2] annulation of 4-aryl 1-tosyl-1,2,3-triazoles
with internal alkynes is presented. This transformation provides straightforward 
access to indeno[1,7-cd]azepine architectures through a sequence involving the
formation of a rhodium(III) azavinyl carbene, dual C(sp(2))-H functionalization, 
and [3+2]/[5+2] annulation.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25872912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Planta Med. 2015 Jun;81(9):765-70. doi: 10.1055/s-0035-1545913. Epub 2015 Apr 9.

A Sensitive and Specific Indirect Competitive Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay
for Detection of Paeoniflorin and Its Application in Pharmacokinetic Interactions
between Paeoniflorin and Glycyrrhizinic Acid.

Zhao Y(1), Qu H(2), Wang X(1), Zhang Y(1), Shan W(3), Zhao Y(1), Wang Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine,
Beijing, China. (2)Scientific Research Experiment Center, Beijing University of
Chinese Medicine, Beijing, China. (3)College of Traditional Chinese Pharmacy,
Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing, China.

This study aimed to develop an indirect competitive enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay based on monoclonal antibodies against paeoniflorin to study the effects of
different doses of glycyrrhizinic acid on the pharmacokinetics of paeoniflorin in
mice. An anti-paeoniflorin monoclonal antibody was produced from a hybridoma
created through a fusion of splenocytes immunized with paeoniflorin-bovine serum 
albumin and conjugated with the hypoxanthine-aminopterin-thymidine-sensitive
mouse myeloma cell line SP2/0. The resultant antibody was used to develop and
validate a rapid, specific and sensitive, indirect competitive enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay for the measurement of paeoniflorin (linear range
4.8-312.5<U+2009>ng<U+200A>·<U+200A>mL(-1)). The intraday and interday precision values of the
indirect competitive ELISA method were well within the recommended range
(=<U+2009>10<U+200A>%), and the recovery rate was, on average, 101.13<U+200A>%. Pharmacokinetic
parameters obtained from mouse blood samples at various intervals following the
oral administration of paeoniflorin and glycyrrhizic acid at three doses
(1<U+200A>:<U+200A>0.3, 1<U+200A>:<U+200A>1, 1<U+200A>:<U+200A>3, respectively) demonstrated that the highest dose of
glycyrrhizic acid inhibits the absorption of paeoniflorin.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 25856441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Apr;31(4):540-3, 552.

[Preparation and characterization of monoclonal antibodies against F domain of
human progranulin].

[Article in Chinese]

Li Y(1), Ren D(1), Xia H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Co-innovation Center for Qinba Regions' Sustainable Development, College of
Life Sciences, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi'an 710119, China.

OBJECTIVE: To prepare and characterize the monoclonal antibody (mAb) against F
domain of human progranulin (GrnF).
METHODS: Yeast expression vector containing GrnF gene was constructed using
molecular biological technology. Then eukaryotic fusion protein human serum
albumin (HSA)-GrnF from yeast vector was expressed and purified. BALB/c mice were
immunized by the purified HSA-GrnF fusion protein. The splenocytes of the BALB/c 
mice were isolated from spleen and fused with Sp2/0 myeloma cells. Indirect ELISA
and limiting dilution assay were used for screening hybridoma cell lines. The
specificity of monoclonal antibodies against GrnF was evaluated with indirect
ELISA, Western blotting and immunohistochemistry. The immunoglobulin subclass was
identified with mouse monoclonal antibody isotyping reagents.
RESULTS: Two hybridoma cell lines, 1G6 and 4E8, were obtained and heavy chain
subclasses of the two hybridoma cell lines were IgG1.
CONCLUSION: The mAbs that can specifically recognize GrnF have been successfully 
prepared.

PMID: 25854577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Org Chem. 2015 May 1;80(9):4661-71. doi: 10.1021/acs.joc.5b00564. Epub 2015 Apr
16.

Modular Approach to Reductive C(sp2)-H and C(sp3)-H Silylation of Carboxylic Acid
Derivatives through Single-Pot, Sequential Transition Metal Catalysis.

Hua Y(1), Jung S(1), Roh J(1), Jeon J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Texas at Arlington,
Arlington, Texas 76019, United States.

We report a modular approach to catalytic reductive Csp2-H and Csp3-H silylation 
of carboxylic acid derivatives encompassing esters, ketones, and aldehydes.
Choice of either an Ir(I)/Rh(I) or Rh(I)/Rh(I) sequence leads to either
exhaustive reductive ester or reductive ketone/aldehyde silylation, respectively.
Notably, a catalyst-controlled direct formation of doubly reduced silyl ethers is
presented, specifically via Ir-catalyzed exhaustive hydrosilylation. The
resulting silyl ethers undergo Csp2-H and benzylic Csp3-H silylation in a single 
vessel.

PMID: 25853682  [PubMed]


151. Nat Commun. 2015 Apr 7;6:6691. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7691.

Genetic variation at MECOM, TERT, JAK2 and HBS1L-MYB predisposes to
myeloproliferative neoplasms.

Tapper W(1), Jones AV(1), Kralovics R(2), Harutyunyan AS(2), Zoi K(3), Leung
W(1), Godfrey AL(4), Guglielmelli P(5), Callaway A(6), Ward D(6), Aranaz P(6),
White HE(1), Waghorn K(1), Lin F(1), Chase A(1), Baxter EJ(4), Maclean C(4),
Nangalia J(4), Chen E(4), Evans P(7), Short M(7), Jack A(7), Wallis L(8), Oscier 
D(8), Duncombe AS(9), Schuh A(10), Mead AJ(11), Griffiths M(12), Ewing J(13),
Gale RE(14), Schnittger S(15), Haferlach T(15), Stegelmann F(16), Döhner K(16),
Grallert H(17), Strauch K(18), Tanaka T(19), Bandinelli S(20), Giannopoulos A(3),
Pieri L(5), Mannarelli C(5), Gisslinger H(21), Barosi G(22), Cazzola M(23),
Reiter A(24), Harrison C(25), Campbell P(26), Green AR(4), Vannucchi A(5), Cross 
NC(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton SO16 6YD, UK
[2] Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury
SP2 8BJ, UK. (2)CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian
Academy of Sciences, Vienna 1090, Austria. (3)Haematology Research Laboratory,
Biomedical Research Foundation, Academy of Athens, Athens 11527, Greece. (4)1]
Department of Haematology, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge CB2 0XY, UK [2]
Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0XY, UK.
(5)Laboratorio Congiunto MMPC, Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, 
University of Florence, Florence 50134, Italy. (6)Wessex Regional Genetics
Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury SP2 8BJ, UK. (7)Haematological
Malignancy Diagnostic Service, St James's Institute of Oncology, Bexley Wing, St 
James's University Hospital, Leeds LS9 7TF, UK. (8)Department of Haematology,
Royal Bournemouth Hospital, Bournemouth BH7 7DW, UK. (9)Department of
Haematology, University Hospital Southampton, Southampton SO16 6YD, UK.
(10)Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, Molecular Diagnostic Laboratory, Oxford
University Hospitals NHS Trust, Oxford OX3 7LE, UK. (11)Haematopoietic Stem Cell 
Biology Laboratory, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of
Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK. (12)1] School of Cancer Sciences, University of
Birmingham,, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK [2] West Midlands Regional Genetics
Laboratory, Birmingham Women's NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham B15 2TG, UK.
(13)Birmingham Heartlands Hospital, Birmingham B9 5SS, UK. (14)Department of
Haematology, UCL Cancer Institute, London WC1 E6BT, UK. (15)MLL Munich Leukaemia 
Laboratory, Munich 81377, Germany. (16)Department of Internal Medicine III,
University Hospital of Ulm, Ulm 89081, Germany. (17)1] Institute of Epidemiology 
II, Research Unit of Molecular Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German
Research Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg 85764, Germany [2] German
Center for Diabetes Research, Neuherberg 85764, Germany. (18)1] Institute of
Epidemiology II, Research Unit of Molecular Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum
München, German Research Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg 85764,
Germany [2] Institute of Medical Informatics, Biometry and Epidemiology, Chair of
Genetic Epidemiology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, 80539 Munich, Germany.
(19)Longitudinal Study Section, Translational Gerontology Branch, National
Institute on Aging, Baltimore, Maryland 21224-6825, USA. (20)Geriatric Unit,
Azienda Sanitaria Firenze (ASF), Florence 50122, Italy. (21)Medical University of
Vienna, Department of Internal Medicine I, Division of Hematology and Blood
Coagulation, Vienna 1090, Austria. (22)Center for the Study of Myelofibrosis,
IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo Foundation, Pavia 27100, Italy. (23)1] Department of
Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy [2] Department of
Hematology Oncology, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia 27100, Italy.
(24)III. Medizinische Klinik, Universitätsmedizin Mannheim, Mannheim 68167,
Germany. (25)Department of Haematology, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation
Trust, Guy's Hospital, London SE1 9RT, UK. (26)Cancer Genome Project, Wellcome
Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton CB10 1SA, UK.

Clonal proliferation in myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN) is driven by somatic
mutations in JAK2, CALR or MPL, but the contribution of inherited factors is
poorly characterized. Using a three-stage genome-wide association study of 3,437 
MPN cases and 10,083 controls, we identify two SNPs with genome-wide significance
in JAK2(V617F)-negative MPN: rs12339666 (JAK2; meta-analysis P=1.27 × 10(-10))
and rs2201862 (MECOM; meta-analysis P=1.96 × 10(-9)). Two additional SNPs,
rs2736100 (TERT) and rs9376092 (HBS1L/MYB), achieve genome-wide significance when
including JAK2(V617F)-positive cases. rs9376092 has a stronger effect in
JAK2(V617F)-negative cases with CALR and/or MPL mutations (Breslow-Day P=4.5 ×
10(-7)), whereas in JAK2(V617F)-positive cases rs9376092 associates with
essential thrombocythemia (ET) rather than polycythemia vera (allelic <U+03C7>(2) P=7.3 
× 10(-7)). Reduced MYB expression, previously linked to development of an ET-like
disease in model systems, associates with rs9376092 in normal myeloid cells.
These findings demonstrate that multiple germline variants predispose to MPN and 
link constitutional differences in MYB expression to disease phenotype.

PMCID: PMC4396373
PMID: 25849990  [PubMed - in process]


152. Immunol Lett. 2015 May;165(1):32-8. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2015.03.008. Epub 2015
Apr 1.

Efficient peptide recovery from secreted recombinant MHC-I molecules expressed
via mRNA transfection.

Lazarus D(1), Weinstein-Marom H(2), Fishman S(3), Yossef R(4), Zuri D(4), Barnea 
E(5), Admon A(5), Margalit A(4), Gross G(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, MIGAL - Galilee Research Institute, South Industrial
Zone, Kiryat Shmona 11016, Israel; The Lautenberg Center for General and Tumor
Immunology, The Hebrew University Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem 91120,
Israel. (2)Laboratory of Immunology, MIGAL - Galilee Research Institute, South
Industrial Zone, Kiryat Shmona 11016, Israel; Department of Medicine, Hadassah
University Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, Hebrew University, Jerusalem 91120,
Israel. (3)Laboratory of Immunology, MIGAL - Galilee Research Institute, South
Industrial Zone, Kiryat Shmona 11016, Israel. (4)Laboratory of Immunology, MIGAL 
- Galilee Research Institute, South Industrial Zone, Kiryat Shmona 11016, Israel;
Department of Biotechnology, Tel-Hai College, Upper Galilee, 12210, Israel.
(5)Department of Biology, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 32000,
Israel. (6)Laboratory of Immunology, MIGAL - Galilee Research Institute, South
Industrial Zone, Kiryat Shmona 11016, Israel; Department of Biotechnology,
Tel-Hai College, Upper Galilee, 12210, Israel. Electronic address:
gidi@migal.org.il.

Most current methods for identifying peptides that are bound to a distinct MHC-I 
product in a given cell sample utilize detergent solubilization of membrane
proteins followed by immunoaffinity purification. Since detergent traces and cell
debris hamper subsequent peptide analysis, exceedingly large cell samples are
often required. To avoid the use of detergents, truncated MHC-I heavy chains have
recently been expressed by stable DNA transfection or retroviral transduction,
resulting in the secretion of soluble MHC-I complexes to the growth medium. The
electroporation of in vitro-transcribed mRNA achieves remarkable efficacy and
uniformity of gene expression in numerous cell types, exhibiting exceedingly fast
kinetics. We reasoned that mRNA transfection offers a simple, fast and widely
applicable alternative to current gene delivery protocols for expressing secreted
MHC-I products in cells of interest. To test this assumption we used mRNA to
express soluble derivatives of HLA-A2 in the human AF10 B cell myeloma and 624mel
melanoma and H-2K(d) in the mouse SP2/0 B cell myeloma. The level of MHC-I
complexes secreted by these cells peaked within less than 24h post-transfection
and they could be affinity-purified directly from the culture medium in
considerably greater yields when compared to nonionic detergent lysates on a
cell-to-cell basis. Mass-spectrometry analysis of eluted peptides revealed larger
pools in the secreted material than in lysates with substantial overlap in
composition. Our results introduce mRNA transfection as a powerful tool for
determining the cell's MHC-I peptidome, which can be potentially applied to a
broad range of cell types.

Copyright © 2015 European Federation of Immunological Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25839126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. ACS Catal. 2015 Feb 6;5(2):587-595. Epub 2014 Dec 8.

Mechanistic and Kinetic Studies of the Direct Alkylation of Benzylic Amines: A
Formal C(sp(3))-H Activation Proceeds Actually via a C(sp(2))-H Activation
Pathway.

Pollice R(1), Dastbaravardeh N(1), Marquise N(1), Mihovilovic MD(1), Schnürch
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Applied Synthetic Chemistry, Vienna University of Technology ,
Getreidemarkt 9/163-OC, Vienna 1060, Austria.

Mechanistic investigations of a Rh(I)-catalyzed direct C-H alkylation of benzylic
amines with alkenes, formally an C(sp(3))-H activation, reveal this reaction to
proceed via imine intermediates and, hence, via C(sp(2))-H activation. The
reaction shows a primary kinetic isotope effect of 4.3 at the benzylic C-H
position together with a reversible H-D exchange at the same position, which
indicates that there are at least two distinct steps in which the corresponding
C-H bonds are broken. The imine intermediates are shown to be converted to the
final product under the reaction conditions, and a time course analysis of the
alkylated imine intermediate shows that it is formed before the final amine
product in the course of the reaction.

PMCID: PMC4372103
PMID: 25838971  [PubMed]


154. Trop Anim Health Prod. 2015 Jun;47(5):787-96. doi: 10.1007/s11250-015-0772-0.
Epub 2015 Apr 1.

Prevalence of bovine theileriosis in North Central region of Algeria by real-time
polymerase chain reaction with a note on its distribution.

Ziam H(1), Kelanamer R, Aissi M, Ababou A, Berkvens D, Geysen D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Sciences, Saad Dahlab University, BP 270, Ouled Yaich,
9000, Blida, Algeria.

To determine the presence and distribution of bovine theileriosis in the North
Central region of Algeria, 358 DNA samples and 359 blood smears were analyzed
from nine provinces. Theileria DNA extracted from cattle blood was amplified by
fluorescence resonance energy transfer polymerase chain reaction (FRET-PCR).
Blood smears were examined for Theileria piroplasms by microscopical examination 
(ME) of Giemsa-stained slides. While microscopical identification revealed only
42 animals being infected with Theileria piroplasms, PCR-positive amplification
using Theileria genus-specific primers was obtained from 132 Theileria spp.
(P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001). Among the 132 positives, 108 animals (81.8 %) were found positive
of Theileria annulata, while 24 (18.2 %) were found positive for Theileria sp.
(P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001). However, melting curve analysis of these latter samples revealed
the presence of two different peaks, 51.5<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.5 °C corresponding to Theileria sp1
and 52.5<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.5 °C for Theileria sp2. Cloning and sequencing of Theileria sp1 and 
Theileria sp2 using the Cox primers indicated that these species are very closely
related to Theileria buffeli. There is a highly significant difference in the
distribution of theileriosis between different provinces (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001). This
disparity between provinces is probably due to differences in tick contact,
influenced by the subhumid bioclimatic gradient and differences in agricultural
land use.

PMID: 25827097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Beilstein J Nanotechnol. 2015 Mar 3;6:632-9. doi: 10.3762/bjnano.6.64.
eCollection 2015.

A versatile strategy towards non-covalent functionalization of graphene by
surface-confined supramolecular self-assembly of Janus tectons.

Du P(1), Bléger D(1), Charra F(2), Bouchiat V(3), Kreher D(1), Mathevet F(1),
Attias AJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Parisien de Chimie Moléculaire, Chimie des Polymères, UMR CNRS 8232, 
Université Pierre et Marie Curie, 3 rue Galilée, 94200 Ivry, France.
(2)Laboratoire de Nanophotonique, Service de Physique de l'Etat Condensé
CEA/Saclay 91191 Gif sur Yvette Cedex, France. (3)Department Nanosciences
Institut Neel, CNRS, Univ. Grenoble-Alpes, 38042 Grenoble Cedex 09, France.

Two-dimensional (2D), supramolecular self-assembly at surfaces is now
well-mastered with several existing examples. However, one remaining challenge to
enable future applications in nanoscience is to provide potential functionalities
to the physisorbed adlayer. This work reviews a recently developed strategy that 
addresses this key issue by taking advantage of a new concept, Janus tecton
materials. This is a versatile, molecular platform based on the design of
three-dimensional (3D) building blocks consisting of two faces linked by a
cyclophane-type pillar. One face is designed to steer 2D self-assembly onto
C(sp(2))-carbon-based flat surfaces, the other allowing for the desired
functionality above the substrate with a well-controlled lateral order. In this
way, it is possible to simultaneously obtain a regular, non-covalent paving as
well as supramolecular functionalization of graphene, thus opening interesting
perspectives for nanoscience applications.

PMCID: PMC4362293
PMID: 25821703  [PubMed]


156. Org Biomol Chem. 2015 May 7;13(17):4896-902. doi: 10.1039/c5ob00404g.

Manganese(III)-mediated alkenyl C(sp2)-P bond formation from the reaction of
ß-nitrostyrenes with dialkyl phosphites.

Xue JF(1), Zhou SF, Liu YY, Pan X, Zou JP, Asekun OT.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Organic Synthesis of Jiangsu Province, College of Chemistry 
and Chemical Engineering, Soochow University, 199 Renai Street, Suzhou, Jiangsu
215123, China. jpzou@suda.edu.cn panxq@suda.edu.cn.

Mn(OAc)3-mediated tandem phosphonyl radical addition to ß-nitrostyrenes followed 
by denitration to form (E)-2-alkenyl phosphonates in good yield is described.

PMID: 25812140  [PubMed]


157. Chemistry. 2015 May 4;21(19):7043-7. doi: 10.1002/chem.201406591. Epub 2015 Mar
20.

Modular Stereoselective Synthesis of (1<U+2192>2)-C-Glycosides based on the sp(2) -sp(3)
Suzuki-Miyaura Reaction.

Oroszova B(1), Choutka J, Pohl R, Parkan K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry of Natural Compounds, University of Chemistry and
Technology, Prague, Technická 5, 166 28 Prague 6 (Czech Republic).

This work reports a modular and rapid approach to the stereoselective synthesis
of a variety of a- and ß-(1<U+2192>2)-linked C-disaccharides. The key step is a
Ni-catalyzed cross-coupling reaction of D-glucal pinacol boronate with alkyl
halide glycoside easily prepared from commercially available D-glucal. The
products of this sp(2) -sp(3) cross-coupling reaction can be converted to
glucopyranosyl, mannopyranosyl, or 2-deoxy-glucopyranosyl C-mannopyranosides by
one- or two-step stereoselective oxidative-reductive transformations. To the best
of our knowledge, we demonstrated the first synthetic application of a
challenging sp(2) -sp(3) Suzuki-Miyaura cross-coupling reaction in carbohydrate
chemistry.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25801323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. PLoS Genet. 2015 Mar 20;11(3):e1005102. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005102.
eCollection 2015.

Zinc finger independent genome-wide binding of Sp2 potentiates recruitment of
histone-fold protein Nf-y distinguishing it from Sp1 and Sp3.

Völkel S(1), Stielow B(1), Finkernagel F(1), Stiewe T(2), Nist A(2), Suske G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT), Philipps-University
of Marburg, Marburg, Germany. (2)Genomics Core Facility, Zentrum für Tumor- und
Immunbiologie (ZTI), Philipps-University of Marburg, Marburg, Germany.

Transcription factors are grouped into families based on sequence similarity
within functional domains, particularly DNA-binding domains. The Specificity
proteins Sp1, Sp2 and Sp3 are paradigmatic of closely related transcription
factors. They share amino-terminal glutamine-rich regions and a conserved
carboxy-terminal zinc finger domain that can bind to GC rich motifs in vitro. All
three Sp proteins are ubiquitously expressed; yet they carry out unique functions
in vivo raising the question of how specificity is achieved. Crucially, it is
unknown whether they bind to distinct genomic sites and, if so, how binding site 
selection is accomplished. In this study, we have examined the genomic binding
patterns of Sp1, Sp2 and Sp3 in mouse embryonic fibroblasts by ChIP-seq. Sp1 and 
Sp3 essentially occupy the same promoters and localize to GC boxes. The genomic
binding pattern of Sp2 is different; Sp2 primarily localizes at CCAAT motifs.
Consistently, re-expression of Sp2 and Sp3 mutants in corresponding knockout MEFs
revealed strikingly different modes of genomic binding site selection. Most
significantly, while the zinc fingers dictate genomic binding of Sp3, they are
completely dispensable for binding of Sp2. Instead, the glutamine-rich
amino-terminal region is sufficient for recruitment of Sp2 to its target
promoters in vivo. We have identified the trimeric histone-fold CCAAT box binding
transcription factor Nf-y as the major partner for Sp2-chromatin interaction.
Nf-y is critical for recruitment of Sp2 to co-occupied regulatory elements.
Equally, Sp2 potentiates binding of Nf-y to shared sites indicating the existence
of an extensive Sp2-Nf-y interaction network. Our results unveil strikingly
different recruitment mechanisms of Sp1/Sp2/Sp3 transcription factor members
uncovering an unexpected layer of complexity in their binding to chromatin in
vivo.

PMCID: PMC4368557
PMID: 25793500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Apr 20;43(7):3747-63. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv194. Epub 2015 
Mar 16.

Identification of U2AF(35)-dependent exons by RNA-Seq reveals a link between 3'
splice-site organization and activity of U2AF-related proteins.

Kralovicova J(1), Knut M(1), Cross NC(2), Vorechovsky I(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Southampton, Faculty of Medicine, Southampton SO16 6YD, UK.
(2)University of Southampton, Faculty of Medicine, Southampton SO16 6YD, UK
Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury SP2
8BJ, UK. (3)University of Southampton, Faculty of Medicine, Southampton SO16 6YD,
UK igvo@soton.ac.uk.

The auxiliary factor of U2 small nuclear RNA (U2AF) is a heterodimer consisting
of 65- and 35-kD proteins that bind the polypyrimidine tract (PPT) and AG
dinucleotides at the 3' splice site (3'ss). The gene encoding U2AF35 (U2AF1) is
alternatively spliced, giving rise to two isoforms U2AF35a and U2AF35b. Here, we 
knocked down U2AF35 and each isoform and characterized transcriptomes of HEK293
cells with varying U2AF35/U2AF65 and U2AF35a/b ratios. Depletion of both isoforms
preferentially modified alternative RNA processing events without widespread
failure to recognize 3'ss or constitutive exons. Over a third of differentially
used exons were terminal, resulting largely from the use of known alternative
polyadenylation (APA) sites. Intronic APA sites activated in depleted cultures
were mostly proximal whereas tandem 3'UTR APA was biased toward distal sites.
Exons upregulated in depleted cells were preceded by longer AG exclusion zones
and PPTs than downregulated or control exons and were largely activated by PUF60 
and repressed by CAPERa. The U2AF(35) repression and activation was associated
with a significant interchange in the average probabilities to form
single-stranded RNA in the optimal PPT and branch site locations and sequences
further upstream. Although most differentially used exons were responsive to both
U2AF subunits and their inclusion correlated with U2AF levels, a small number of 
transcripts exhibited distinct responses to U2AF35a and U2AF35b, supporting the
existence of isoform-specific interactions. These results provide new insights
into function of U2AF and U2AF35 in alternative RNA processing.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4402522
PMID: 25779042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2015;16(5):2043-9.

Preparation and characterization of anti-GP73 monoclonal antibodies and
development of double-antibody sandwich ELISA.

Li QW(1), Chen HB, Li ZY, Shen P, Qu LL, Gong LL, Xu HP, Pang L, Si J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing, China E-mail : sijin_efy@njmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Serum Golgi protein 73 (GP73) as a novel and potential marker for
diagnosing hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) have been found to be elevated in HCC
patients and associated with clinical variables representing tumor growth and
invasiveness. The aim of this study was to prepare a pair of monoclonal antibodys
(mAbs) against GP73 and develop a newly designed double-antibody sandwich
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (s-ELISA), which would be used in the detection
of serum GP73 (sGP73) as well as in the diagnosis of HCC.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Produced by prokaryotic expression, the purified
recombinant GP73 (rGP73), produced by prokaryotic expression, was used to
immunize the Balb/c mice. Two hybridoma cell lines against GP73 were obtained by 
fusing mouse Sp2/0 myeloma cells with spleen cells from the immunized mice. The
titers of anti-GP73 mAb reached 1:243,000. Western blotting analysis and
Immunohistochemistry staining revealed that anti-GP73 mAb could recognize GP73
protein. The double-antibody s-ELISA was successfully established and validated
by 119 HCC and 103 normal serum samples.
RESULTS: showed that the detection limit of this method could reach 1.56 ng/ml,
and sGP73 levels in HCC group (mean=190.6 ng/ml) were much higher than those of
in healthy controls (mean=70.92 ng/ml).
CONCLUSIONS: Results of our study not only showed that sGP73 levels of HCC
patients were significantly higher than those of healthy controls, but also
indicated that the laboratory homemade anti-GP73 mAbs could be the optimal tool
used in evaluating sGP73 levels, which would provide a solid foundation for
subsequent clinical applications.

PMID: 25773808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Mar 9;16(3):5334-46. doi: 10.3390/ijms16035334.

Comparison of mutation profiles in the Duchenne muscular dystrophy gene among
populations: implications for potential molecular therapies.

López-Hernández LB(1,)(2), Gómez-Díaz B(3), Luna-Angulo AB(4), Anaya-Segura
M(5,)(6), Bunyan DJ(7), Zúñiga-Guzman C(8,)(9), Escobar-Cedillo RE(3),
Roque-Ramírez B(10), Ruano-Calderón LA(11), Rangel-Villalobos H(12),
López-Hernández JA(13), Estrada-Mena FJ(4), García S(14), Coral-Vázquez RM(15).

Author information: 
(1)National Medical Centre "20 de Noviembre", Institute for Social Security of
State Workers, Mexico City 03100, Mexico. lblhmedgen@gmail.com. (2)Asociación de 
Distrofia Muscular de Occidente A.C., Guadalajara 44380, Mexico.
lblhmedgen@gmail.com. (3)National Institute of Rehabilitation, Mexico City 14389,
Mexico. (4)Department of Molecular Biology, Panamerican University, Mexico City
03920, Mexico. (5)Asociación de Distrofia Muscular de Occidente A.C., Guadalajara
44380, Mexico. (6)University Center of Exact Sciences and Engineering, University
of Guadalajara, Guadalajara 44430, Mexico. (7)Wessex Regional Genetics
Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury SP2 8BJ, UK.
Dave.Bunyan@salisbury.nhs.uk. (8)Asociación de Distrofia Muscular de Occidente
A.C., Guadalajara 44380, Mexico. anilorac_zg911@hotmail.com. (9)University Center
of Exact Sciences and Engineering, University of Guadalajara, Guadalajara 44430, 
Mexico. anilorac_zg911@hotmail.com. (10)National Medical Centre "20 de
Noviembre", Institute for Social Security of State Workers, Mexico City 03100,
Mexico. bladimir_roque@hotmail.com. (11)General Hospital of Durango, Durango,
34000, Mexico. laruanoc@hotmail.com. (12)Instituto de Investigación en Genética
Molecular, Centro Universitario de la Ciénega, Universidad de Guadalajara,
Ocotlán, 47810, México. hrangel13@hotmail.com. (13)Department of Human Genetics, 
Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden 2333 ZA, The Netherlands.
julyberries@hotmail.com. (14)National Medical Centre "20 de Noviembre", Institute
for Social Security of State Workers, Mexico City 03100, Mexico.
rolasil@yahoo.com.mx. (15)Studies Section of Postgraduate and Research, School of
Medicine, National Polytechnic Institute, Mexico City 11340, Mexico.

Novel therapeutic approaches are emerging to restore dystrophin function in
Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD), a severe neuromuscular disease characterized
by progressive muscle wasting and weakness. Some of the molecular therapies, such
as exon skipping, stop codon read-through and internal ribosome entry
site-mediated translation rely on the type and location of mutations. Hence,
their potential applicability worldwide depends on mutation frequencies within
populations. In view of this, we compared the mutation profiles of the
populations represented in the DMD Leiden Open-source Variation Database with
original data from Mexican patients (n = 162) with clinical diagnosis of the
disease. Our data confirm that applicability of exon 51 is high in most
populations, but also show that differences in theoretical applicability of exon 
skipping may exist among populations; Mexico has the highest frequency of
potential candidates for the skipping of exons 44 and 46, which is different from
other populations (p < 0.001). To our knowledge, this is the first comprehensive 
comparison of theoretical applicability of exon skipping targets among specific
populations.

PMCID: PMC4394478
PMID: 25761239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Mar;31(3):397-401.

[Preparation and identification of monoclonal antibody against repression and
activation protein 1].

[Article in Chinese]

Meng L(1), Shou C(1), Lian S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational
Research, Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Cancer Hospital &
Beijing Institute for Cancer Research, Peking University, Beijing 100142, China.

OBJECTIVE: To prepare and identify monoclonal antibody (mAb) against human
telomere-associated repression and activation protein 1 (Rap1).
METHODS: BALB/c mice were immunized with recombinant Rap1 protein. The spleen
cells of the immunized mice were fused with Sp2/0 cells. The positive clones were
confirmed and selected by indirect ELISA for titer determination and specificity 
identification.
RESULTS: One hybridoma cell strain secreting specific mAb against Rap1 was
obtained, namely 6F11. ELISA showed that the titer of the ascites was 1:10 000.
Western blotting, immunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence experiments
demonstrated that the mAb could specifically recognize and bind Rap1.
CONCLUSION: We have prepared mAb against human telomere-associated protein Rap1. 
The Rap1 mAb has a good binding ability and specificity.

PMID: 25744847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Biosci Bioeng. 2015 Oct;120(4):432-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2015.02.001. Epub
2015 Feb 27.

High-yield preparation of recombinant human a-thrombin for therapeutic use.

Meta A(1), Hirashima M(1), Imamura T(1), Kawamura R(1), Yano K(2), Uehara K(1),
Nakashima T(3).

Author information: 
(1)R&D Division, The Chemo-Sero-Therapeutic Research Institute, KAKETSUKEN,
1314-1 Kyokushi-Kawabe, Kikuchi, Kumamoto 869-1298, Japan. (2)Blood Plasma
Division, The Chemo-Sero-Therapeutic Research Institute, KAKETSUKEN, 1314-1
Kyokushi-Kawabe, Kikuchi, Kumamoto 869-1298, Japan. (3)R&D Division, The
Chemo-Sero-Therapeutic Research Institute, KAKETSUKEN, 1314-1 Kyokushi-Kawabe,
Kikuchi, Kumamoto 869-1298, Japan. Electronic address:
nakashima-to@kaketsuken.or.jp.

In this study, we established stable cell lines producing 1.5 mg/mL recombinant
human prothrombin in 400-L fed-batch culture, using CHO DG44 cells as a host cell
line. And we also established a recombinant human a-thrombin purification process
that produces a purified product suitable for use as a biopharmaceutical, by
using recombinant ecarin from CHO DG44 cells, achieving a total yield of
approximately 27% of prothrombin in culture medium. The establishment of stable
cell lines with high expression levels, long-term passage stability and
satisfactory scale-up are essential to ensure the stable supply of
biopharmaceuticals. Furthermore, biopharmaceuticals must be of high quality to
assure safety and effectiveness in target applications. We had previously
reported that recombinant human prethrombin-2 expression level in a stable cell
line established using the mouse myeloma cells, Sp2/0-Ag14, reached 200 µg/mL
using animal-free materials in 50-L fed-batch culture. However, the productivity 
was insufficient to completely replace a-thrombin in human plasma preparations.
By employing CHO DG44 cells as a host cell line, we had established a stable cell
line and achieved significant improvements in quality, productivity of
recombinant human a-thrombin manufacture suitable for use as a biopharmaceutical.

Copyright © 2015 The Society for Biotechnology, Japan. Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 25735923  [PubMed - in process]


164. Monoclon Antib Immunodiagn Immunother. 2015 Feb;34(1):36-43. doi:
10.1089/mab.2014.0077.

Production and characterization of a peptide-based monoclonal antibody against
CD44 variant 6.

Zarei S(1), Bayat AA, Hadavi R, Mahmoudi AR, Tavangar B, Vojgani Y, Jeddi-Tehrani
M, Amirghofran Z.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Immunology, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences , Shiraz,
Iran .

The gene that codes for the CD44 family members consists of 20 exons, nine of
which encode the standard form of the molecule. The other exons can be inserted
in various combinations into the membrane proximal region of the extracellular
domain of the protein, giving rise to variant isoforms (CD44v). CD44 variants,
especially the CD44v6, have been reported to regulate tumor invasion,
progression, and metastasis of carcinomas. Producing a high affinity monoclonal
antibody against human CD44v6 provides a powerful tool to monitor and trace
CD44v6 function in different biological fluids. In this study, a synthetic
peptide from CD44v6 was conjugated to keyhole limpet hemocyanin (KLH) and
injected into BALB/c mice. Splenocytes from the immunized mice were fused with
murine SP2/0 myeloma cells followed by selection of antibody producing hybridoma 
cells. After screening of hybridoma colonies by ELISA, high affinity antibodies
were selected and purified by affinity chromatography. Western blot,
immunocytochemistry, and flow cytometry experiments were used to characterize the
antibodies. Six stable hybridoma cell lines, designated as 1H1, 1H2, 2A12, 2G11, 
3H3, and 3H7, were obtained. Flow cytometry and immunocytochemistry results
showed that the new monoclonal antibodies recognized CD44v6 on the cell surface. 
This novel panel of anti-CD44v6 antibodies has the potential for investigating
the role of CD44v6 in cancer pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4350255
PMID: 25723282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Lancet Glob Health. 2015 Mar;3(3):e143-53. doi: 10.1016/S2214-109X(14)70385-7.

Cost-effectiveness of two versus three or more doses of intermittent preventive
treatment for malaria during pregnancy in sub-Saharan Africa: a modelling study
of meta-analysis and cost data.

Fernandes S(1), Sicuri E(2), Kayentao K(3), van Eijk AM(4), Hill J(4), Webster
J(5), Were V(6), Akazili J(7), Madanitsa M(8), ter Kuile FO(9), Hanson K(5).

Author information: 
(1)London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, Keppel Street, London, UK.
Electronic address: silke.fernandes@lshtm.ac.uk. (2)ISGlobal, Barcelona Ctr. Int.
Health Res. (CRESIB), Hospital Clínic-Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, UK; Malaria Research and
Training Centre, Department of Epidemiology of Parasitic Diseases, Faculty of
Medicine, Pharmacy and Dentistry, University of Sciences, Techniques and
Technologies of Bamako, Bamako, Mali. (4)Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine,
Liverpool, UK. (5)London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, Keppel Street,
London, UK. (6)KEMRI/CDC Research and Public Health Collaboration, Kisumu, Kenya.
(7)Navrongo Health Research Centre, Navrongo, Ghana. (8)College of Medicine,
University of Malawi, Blantyre, Malawi. (9)Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine,
Liverpool, UK; KEMRI/CDC Research and Public Health Collaboration, Kisumu, Kenya.

Comment in
    Lancet Glob Health. 2015 Mar;3(3):e116-7.

BACKGROUND: In 2012, WHO changed its recommendation for intermittent preventive
treatment of malaria during pregnancy (IPTp) from two doses to monthly doses of
sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine during the second and third trimesters, but noted the
importance of a cost-effectiveness analysis to lend support to the decision of
policy makers. We therefore estimated the incremental cost-effectiveness of IPTp 
with three or more (IPTp-SP3+) versus two doses of sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine
(IPTp-SP2).
METHODS: For this analysis, we used data from a 2013 meta-analysis of seven
studies in sub-Saharan Africa. We developed a decision tree model with a lifetime
horizon. We analysed the base case from a societal perspective. We did
deterministic and probabilistic sensitivity analyses with appropriate parameter
ranges and distributions for settings with low, moderate, and high background
risk of low birthweight, and did a separate analysis for HIV-negative women.
Parameters in the model were obtained for all countries included in the original 
meta-analysis. We did simulations in hypothetical cohorts of 1000 pregnant women 
receiving either IPTp-SP3+ or IPTp-SP2. We calculated disability-adjusted
life-years (DALYs) for low birthweight, severe to moderate anaemia, and clinical 
malaria. We calculated cost estimates from data obtained in observational
studies, exit surveys, and from public procurement databases. We give financial
and economic costs in constant 2012 US$. The main outcome measure was the
incremental cost per DALY averted.
FINDINGS: The delivery of IPTp-SP3+ to 1000 pregnant women averted 113·4 DALYs at
an incremental cost of $825·67 producing an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio 
(ICER) of $7·28 per DALY averted. The results remained robust in the
deterministic sensitivity analysis. In the probabilistic sensitivity analyses,
the ICER was $7·7 per DALY averted for moderate risk of low birthweight, $19·4
per DALY averted for low risk, and $4·0 per DALY averted for high risk. The ICER 
for HIV-negative women was $6·2 per DALY averted.
INTERPRETATION: Our findings lend strong support to the WHO guidelines that
recommend a monthly dose of IPTp-SP from the second trimester onwards.
FUNDING: Malaria in Pregnancy Consortium and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.

Copyright © 2015 Fernandes et al. Open Access article distributed under the terms
of CC BY-NC-SA. Published by .. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25701992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Phys Rev Lett. 2015 Jan 30;114(4):047403. Epub 2015 Jan 28.

Electronic structures and optical properties of partially and fully fluorinated
graphene.

Yuan S(1), Rösner M(2), Schulz A(2), Wehling TO(2), Katsnelson MI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecules and Materials, Radboud University Nijmegen,
Heyendaalseweg 135, 6525AJ Nijmegen, Netherlands. (2)Institut für Theoretische
Physik, Universität Bremen, Otto-Hahn-Allee 1, 28359 Bremen, Germany and Bremen
Center for Computational Materials Science, Universität Bremen, Am Fallturm 1a,
28359 Bremen, Germany.

In this Letter, we study the electronic structures and optical properties of
partially and fully fluorinated graphene by a combination of ab initio G0W0
calculations and large-scale multiorbital tight-binding simulations. We find
that, for partially fluorinated graphene, the appearance of paired fluorine atoms
is more favorable than unpaired atoms. We also show that different types of
structural disorder, such as carbon vacancies, fluorine vacancies, fluorine
vacancy clusters and fluorine armchair and zigzag clusters, will introduce
different types of midgap states and extra excitations within the optical gap.
Furthermore, we argue that the local formation of sp3 bonds upon fluorination can
be distinguished from other disorder inducing mechanisms which do not destroy the
sp2 hybrid orbitals by measuring the polarization rotation of passing polarized
light.

PMID: 25679908  [PubMed]


167. J Virol. 2015 Apr;89(8):4345-55. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03094-14. Epub 2015 Feb 4.

Inhibition of hepatitis B virus gene expression and replication by hepatocyte
nuclear factor 6.

Hao R(1), He J(1), Liu X(1), Gao G(2), Liu D(3), Cui L(1), Yu G(1), Yu W(1), Chen
Y(1), Guo D(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology and Modern Virology Research Center, College 
of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei, China. (2)Department of
Molecular Carcinogenesis, the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Smithville, Texas, USA. (3)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Wuhan University,
Wuhan, Hubei, China. (4)State Key Laboratory of Virology and Modern Virology
Research Center, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei, China 
School of Basic Medical Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei, China
dguo@whu.edu.cn.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV), a small enveloped DNA virus, chronically infects more
than 350 million people worldwide and causes liver diseases from hepatitis to
cirrhosis and liver cancer. Here, we report that hepatocyte nuclear factor 6
(HNF6), a liver-enriched transcription factor, can inhibit HBV gene expression
and DNA replication. Overexpression of HNF6 inhibited, while knockdown of HNF6
expression enhanced, HBV gene expression and replication in hepatoma cells.
Mechanistically, the SP2 promoter was inhibited by HNF6, which partly accounts
for the inhibition on S mRNA. Detailed analysis showed that a cis element on the 
HBV genome (nucleotides [nt] 3009 to 3019) was responsible for the inhibition of 
the SP2 promoter by HNF6. Moreover, further analysis showed that HNF6 reduced
viral pregenomic RNA (pgRNA) posttranscriptionally via accelerating the
degradation of HBV pgRNA independent of La protein. Furthermore, by using
truncated mutation experiments, we demonstrated that the N-terminal region of
HNF6 was responsible for its inhibitory effects. Importantly, introduction of an 
HNF6 expression construct with the HBV genome into the mouse liver using
hydrodynamic injection resulted in a significant reduction in viral gene
expression and DNA replication. Overall, our data demonstrated that HNF6 is a
novel host factor that can restrict HBV replication via both transcriptional and 
posttranscriptional mechanisms.IMPORTANCE: HBV is a major human pathogen whose
replication is regulated by host factors. Liver-enriched transcription factors
are critical for many liver functions, including metabolism, development, and
cell proliferation, and some of them have been shown to regulate HBV gene
expression or replication in different manners. In this study, we showed that
HNF6 could inhibit the gene expression and DNA replication of HBV via both
transcriptional and posttranscriptional mechanisms. As HNF6 is differentially
expressed in men and women, the current results may suggest a role of HNF6 in the
gender dimorphism of HBV infection.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4442367
PMID: 25653429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Vet Rec. 2015 Apr 4;176(14):359. doi: 10.1136/vr.102806. Epub 2015 Feb 4.

Should single layer centrifugation of dog semen be done before or after the semen
is cooled?

Gálvez MJ(1), Ortiz I(1), Hidalgo M(1), Morrell JM(2), Dorado J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Reproduction Group, Department of Animal Medicine and Surgery, Faculty 
of Veterinary Medicine, University of Cordoba, Córdoba 14071, Spain. (2)Division 
of Reproduction, Department of Clinical Sciences, Swedish University of
Agricultural Sciences, Box 7054, Uppsala SE-75007, Sweden.

The aim of this study was to assess the effectiveness of sperm selection by
single layer centrifugation (SLC) on canine sperm quality when SLC was performed 
before or after the cooling process, or when double SLC (before and after
cooling) was performed. Twenty ejaculates from four dogs were divided into four
aliquots as follows: unselected: no SLC was performed; SLC prior to cooling
(SLC-PC): sperm selection was carried out before cooling; SLC after cooling
(SLC-AC): sperm selection was performed after cooling; and double SLC: sperm
selection was carried out before and after cooling. Sperm motility (by
computer-assisted semen analysis), morphology (Diff-Quick staining), sperm
membrane integrity (Vital-Test kit) and acrosome integrity (double fluorescent
stain) were assessed in re-warmed semen samples. Four sperm subpopulations (sP)
were detected using a pattern analysis technique (sP1: highly active,
non-progressive; sP2: low velocity, highly progressive; sP3: less vigorous,
poorly progressive; sP4: highly progressive motility). A higher proportion of
sperm were classified as sP4 in SLC-AC samples. Most of the sperm parameters
assessed showed higher values in the SLC-AC group. We conclude that SLC-AC is the
best protocol to improve sperm quality in chilled canine semen in comparison to
the other procedures tested.

British Veterinary Association.

PMID: 25653394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2015 Mar 23;54(13):4075-8. doi: 10.1002/anie.201412051.
Epub 2015 Feb 4.

Nickel-catalyzed enantioselective C-C bond formation through C(sp2)-O cleavage in
aryl esters.

Cornella J(1), Jackson EP, Martin R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemical Research of Catalonia (ICIQ), Av. Països Catalans 16,
43007, Tarragona (Spain).

We report the first enantioselective C<U+F8FF>C bond formation through C<U+F8FF>O bond cleavage
using aryl ester counterparts. This method is characterized by its wide substrate
scope and results in the formation of quaternary stereogenic centers with high
yields and asymmetric induction.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25650559  [PubMed]


170. Molecules. 2015 Feb 2;20(2):2529-35. doi: 10.3390/molecules20022529.

Propane dehydrogenation catalyzed by ZSM-5 zeolites. A mechanistic study based on
the selective energy transfer (SET) theory.

Larsson R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Engineering II, University of Lund, P.O. Box 124, SE-22100 Lund,
Sweden. Ragnar.Larsson@chemeng.lth.se.

Experimentally determined activation energies of propane dehydrogenation
catalyzed by ZSM-5 zeolites have been used to test the SET theory. The basis of
this theory is that the catalyst system transfers vibrational energy via a
resonance process to a specific vibration mode of the reacting molecule. Being
excited up to a certain number of vibrational quanta the molecule is brought to
reaction. By analyzing the above-mentioned activation energies we found the wave 
number of this "specific mode" to be 1065 cm-1. This is very close to the rocking
vibration of propane (1053 cm-1). We suggest that the propane molecule reacts
when excited so that the CH3 group has been forced towards a flat structure with 
a carbon atom hybridization that is more sp2 than sp3. Consequently there is no
way for three H-atoms to bind to the carbon and one of them must leave. This is
the starting point of the reaction. The isokinetic temperature of the system was 
found as Tiso = 727 ± 4 K. From the SET formula for Tiso when both
energy-donating (<U+03C9>) and energy-accepting (<U+03BD>) vibrations have the same frequency, 
viz., Tiso = Nhc<U+03BD>/2R, we obtain <U+03BD> = <U+03C9> = 1011 ± 6 cm-1. This agrees rather well
with the CH3 rocking mode (1053 cm-1) and also with asymmetric "TO4" stretching
vibrations of the zeolite structure (<U+03C9>).

PMID: 25648595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Am Chem Soc. 2015 Feb 18;137(6):2187-90. doi: 10.1021/ja512602m. Epub 2015 Feb 
4.

Ligand cooperation in the formal hydrogenation of N2O using a PC(sp2)P iridium
pincer complex.

Doyle LE(1), Piers WE, Borau-Garcia J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Calgary , 2500 University Drive N.W.,
Calgary, Alberta T2N 1N4, Canada.

A new PC(carbene)P pincer ligand with 2,3-benzo[b]thiophene linkers connecting
the flanking dialkyl phosphine donors to the central carbene can be attached to
Ir(I). The chloro derivative reacts with N2O with loss of N2 to form an
iridaepoxide species by addition of an oxygen atom to the Ir-C linkage. This
compound reacts with H2 to afford the oxidative addition product, in which the
hydride ligands are trans to the Ir-O bond. Heating this dihydride results in
slow release of H2O; kinetic and spectroscopic studies show that conversion of
the dihydride to its isomer, in which the hydrides are cis to the Ir-O bond, is
required for H2O elimination to take place. Together, these reactions constitute 
the stoichiometric conversion of N2O and H2 to N2 and H2O; further mechanistic
studies suggest ways to make the system catalytic.

PMID: 25642725  [PubMed]


172. Epigenetics. 2014 Dec;9(12):1626-40. doi: 10.4161/15592294.2014.988052.

OASIS/CREB3L1 is epigenetically silenced in human bladder cancer facilitating
tumor cell spreading and migration in vitro.

Rose M(1), Schubert C, Dierichs L, Gaisa NT, Heer M, Heidenreich A, Knüchel R,
Dahl E.

Author information: 
(1)a Molecular Oncology Group; Institute of Pathology ; RWTH Aachen University ; 
Aachen , Germany.

CREB3L1 has been recently proposed as a novel metastasis suppressor gene in
breast cancer. Our current study highlights CREB3L1 expression, regulation, and
function in bladder cancer. We demonstrate a significant downregulation of
CREB3L1 mRNA expression (n = 64) in primary bladder cancer tissues caused by
tumor-specific CREB3L1 promoter hypermethylation (n = 51). Based on
pyrosequencing CREB3L1 methylation was shown to be potentially associated with a 
more aggressive phenotype of bladder cancer. These findings were verified by an
independent public data set containing data from 184 bladder tumors. In addition,
immunohistochemical evaluation showed that CREB3L1 protein expression is
decreased in bladder cancer tissues as well. Interestingly, protein loss is
predominately observed in the nuclei of aggressive tumor cells. Based on in vitro
models we clearly show that CREB3L1 re-expression mediates suppression of tumor
cell migration and colony growth of high grade and invasive bladder cancer cells.
The candidate tumor suppressor and TGF-ß signaling inhibitor HTRA3 was
furthermore identified as putative target gene of CREB3L1 in both invasive J82
bladder cells and primary bladder tumors. Hence, our data provide for the first
time evidence that the transcription factor CREB3L1 may have an important role as
a putative tumor suppressor in bladder cancer.

PMCID: PMC4623247
PMID: 25625847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Org Chem. 2015 Feb 6;80(3):1332-7. doi: 10.1021/jo502928e. Epub 2015 Jan 26.

Regioselective oxidative trifluoromethylation of imidazoheterocycles via C(sp2)-H
bond functionalization.

Monir K(1), Bagdi AK, Ghosh M, Hajra A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Visva-Bharati (A Central University) , Santiniketan
731235, India.

Catalytic oxidative trifluoromethylation of imidazopyridines has been carried out
at room temperature through the functionalization of the sp(2) C-H bond employing
Langlois reagent under ambient air. A library of
3-(trifluoromethyl)imidazo[1,2-a]pyridines with broad functionalities have been
synthesized regioselectively. This methodology is also applicable to
imidazo[2,1-b]thiazole and benzo[d]imidazo[2,1-b]thiazole.

PMID: 25615451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Org Lett. 2015 Feb 6;17(3):496-9. doi: 10.1021/ol503514t. Epub 2015 Jan 20.

Assembly of indoline-2-carboxylate-embodied dipeptides via Pd-catalyzed C(sp2)-H 
bond direct functionalization.

He YP(1), Zhang C, Fan M, Wu Z, Ma D.

Author information: 
(1)College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Environmental Engineering,
Liaoning Shihua University , Dandong Lu West 1, Fushun 113001, China.

Intramolecular dehydrogenative cyclization of 2-methoxyiminoacyl-protected
phenylalanine derivatives proceeded at 110 °C under catalysis of Pd(OAc)2 in the 
presence of 1-fluoro-2,4,6-trimethylpyridinium tetrafluoroborate to afford
substituted indoline-2-carboxylates that were converted into
indoline-2-carboxylate-embodied dipeptides via Raney Ni-catalyzed hydrogenation.

PMID: 25602435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Fungal Biol. 2015 Jan;119(1):44-52. doi: 10.1016/j.funbio.2014.10.008. Epub 2014 
Nov 6.

New species of Ophiocordyceps unilateralis, an ubiquitous pathogen of ants from
Thailand.

Kobmoo N(1), Mongkolsamrit S(2), Wutikhun T(3), Tasanathai K(2), Khonsanit A(2), 
Thanakitpipattana D(2), Luangsa-Ard JJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Microbe Interaction Laboratory, National Center for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology (BIOTEC), 113 Thailand Science Park, Phahonyothin Road, Khlong
Nueng, Khlong Luang, Pathum Thani 12120, Thailand. Electronic address:
noppol.kob@biotec.or.th. (2)Microbe Interaction Laboratory, National Center for
Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (BIOTEC), 113 Thailand Science Park,
Phahonyothin Road, Khlong Nueng, Khlong Luang, Pathum Thani 12120, Thailand.
(3)Technician Officer Institution, The National Nanotechnology Center, 130
Thailand Science Park, Phahonyothin Road, Klong Nueng, Klong Luang, Pathum Thani 
12120, Thailand.

Ophiocordyceps unilateralis is an ubiquitous pathogen of ants with hidden
phylogenetic diversity associated with host specificity. In this study, we
describe two new species to this species complex: Ophiocordyceps septa and
Ophiocordyceps rami. Both were found on unidentified ants of the genus Camponotus
(C. sp.1 and C. sp2 respectively). Ophiocordyceps septa is very similar to
Ophiocordyceps polyrhachis-furcata, Ophiocordyceps camponoti-leonardi, and
Ophiocordyceps camponoti-saundersi (found respectively on the ants Polyrhachis
furcata, Camponotus leonardi, and Camponotus saundersi) but differs in the size, 
the shape and the septation of the ascospores, while O. rami is clearly
identifiable with macro-morphological features including multiple stromata
similar to Ophiocordyceps halabalaensis on Camponotus gigas. A thorough
morphological examination was also provided for O. polyrhachis-furcata, O.
camponoti-leonardi, and O. camponoti saundersi, showing that the first was
apparently distinguishable from the others by the absence of septation of the
ascospores. A combined molecular phylogeny also supports O. septa and O. rami as 
distinct new species.

Copyright © 2014 The British Mycological Society. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All 
rights reserved.

PMID: 25601148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2015 Mar;53(3):263-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bjoms.2014.12.005. Epub 2015 Jan 8.

The predictive value of obstructive sleep apnoea severity on clinical outcomes
following maxillomandibular advancement surgery.

Islam S(1), Taylor CJ(2), Ormiston IW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Maxillofacial Surgery, Leicester Royal Infirmary, Leicester, UK.
Electronic address: drshafiqislam@hotmail.co.uk. (2)Department of Respiratory
Medicine, Salisbury District Hospital, Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, UK. (3)Department of
Maxillofacial Surgery, Leicester Royal Infirmary, Leicester, UK.

We aimed to evaluate whether the severity of preoperative obstructive sleep
apnoea (OSA) has potential predictive value for the clinician assessing patients 
referred for maxillomandibular advancment surgery. We performed a retrospective
analysis of consecutive patients who underwent maxillofacial operations for OSA
at our institution. We stratified them into 2 groups according to
apnoea/hypopnoea index (AHI) scores calculated from a preoperative sleep study:
mild-moderate OSA (AHI less than 30) and severe OSA (AHI 30 and above). Both
groups were matched for baseline demographic and clinical characteristics. We
compared postoperative scores for the AHI and Epworth sleepiness scale (ESS), and
lowest recorded oxygen saturation between groups. We identified 51 patients of
whom 39 had complete data available for inclusion in our analysis. We found no
statistically significant difference in the postoperative AHI scores between the 
two groups. The reduction in the mean ESS after operation was greater in the
severe group than in the mild-moderate group (mean (SD) ESS 4 (3) compared with 9
(6), p<0.05). There were high rates of surgical success (postoperative AHI less
than 15) in both groups, and results were comparable (mild-moderate group 82%,
severe group 86%). The preoperative AHI does not appear to be a good predictor of
surgical success after maxillomandibular advancement surgery. Patients with
severe OSA postoperatively demonstrated a greater improvement in their subjective
symptoms, when compared to subjects with mild-moderate OSA.

Copyright © 2014 The British Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25577404  [PubMed - in process]


177. Nat Commun. 2015 Jan 9;6:5901. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6901.

Combining gene mutation with gene expression data improves outcome prediction in 
myelodysplastic syndromes.

Gerstung M(1), Pellagatti A(2), Malcovati L(3), Giagounidis A(4), Porta MG(5),
Jädersten M(6), Dolatshad H(2), Verma A(7), Cross NC(8), Vyas P(9), Killick
S(10), Hellström-Lindberg E(6), Cazzola M(3), Papaemmanuil E(1), Campbell PJ(1), 
Boultwood J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton CB10 1SA, UK. (2)LLR Molecular
Haematology Unit, NDCLS, RDM, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK. (3)1]
Department of Hematology Oncology, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, 27100
Pavia, Italy [2] Departments of Molecular Medicine and Internal Medicine and
Medical Therapy, University of Pavia, 27100 Pavia, Italy. (4)Department of
Hematology, Oncology, and Palliative Care, Marienhospital Düsseldorf, 40479
Düsseldorf, Germany. (5)1] Department of Hematology Oncology, Fondazione IRCCS
Policlinico San Matteo, 27100 Pavia, Italy [2] Department of Internal Medicine
and Medical Therapy, University of Pavia, 27100 Pavia, Italy. (6)Division of
Hematology, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 76 Stockholm,
Sweden. (7)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.
(8)National Genetics Reference Laboratory, Salisbury NHS Foundation Trust,
Salisbury SP2 8BJ, UK. (9)MRC Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall Institute of
Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK. (10)Department of
Haematology, Royal Bournemouth Hospital, Bournemouth BH7 7DW, UK.

Cancer is a genetic disease, but two patients rarely have identical genotypes.
Similarly, patients differ in their clinicopathological parameters, but how
genotypic and phenotypic heterogeneity are interconnected is not well understood.
Here we build statistical models to disentangle the effect of 12 recurrently
mutated genes and 4 cytogenetic alterations on gene expression, diagnostic
clinical variables and outcome in 124 patients with myelodysplastic syndromes.
Overall, one or more genetic lesions correlate with expression levels of ~20% of 
all genes, explaining 20-65% of observed expression variability. Differential
expression patterns vary between mutations and reflect the underlying biology,
such as aberrant polycomb repression for ASXL1 and EZH2 mutations or perturbed
gene dosage for copy-number changes. In predicting survival, genomic,
transcriptomic and diagnostic clinical variables all have utility, with the
largest contribution from the transcriptome. Similar observations are made on the
TCGA acute myeloid leukaemia cohort, confirming the general trends reported here.

PMCID: PMC4338540
PMID: 25574665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Ther Drug Monit. 2015 Oct;37(5):594-9. doi: 10.1097/FTD.0000000000000184.

Generation of an anti-Dabigatran Monoclonal Antibody and Its Use in a Highly
Sensitive and Specific Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay for Serum Dabigatran.

Oiso S(1), Morinaga O, Goroku T, Uto T, Shoyama Y, Kariyazono H.

Author information: 
(1)*Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences; Departments of Pharmaceutical
Health Care Sciences; and Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Nagasaki International University, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Dabigatran (DT) is a direct thrombin inhibitor used to prevent venous
and arterial thromboembolism due to atrial fibrillation. DT is the active form of
the commercially available prodrug DT etexilate. Although DT has many clinical
advantages over warfarin, it increases the incidence of bleeding in patients with
renal dysfunction. Circulating levels of DT are increased in such patients
because it is mainly eliminated by renal excretion. Therapeutic drug monitoring
may therefore help to prevent adverse DT effects, but no method for measuring
circulating DT levels has been reported, except for an analysis by liquid
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. This study sought to develop a novel
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) to measure DT concentrations.
METHODS: Mice were immunized with a DT-keyhole limpet hemocyanin conjugate to
generate an anti-DT antibody. Immunized mouse splenocytes and myeloma cells
(SP2/0) were fused to obtain an anti-DT monoclonal antibody (DT-mAb). DT-mAb and 
DT solutions were added to microplate wells coated with a DT-human serum albumin 
conjugate. DT concentrations were determined based on the principles of ELISA.
RESULTS: DT-mAb was successfully purified from a hybridoma, and the competitive
ELISA developed using this DT-mAb could evaluate DT concentrations ranging from
7.8 to 125 ng/mL. The ELISA signal was not linear using DT-spiked serum; however,
it was linear when serum ultrafiltrate was used. Weak cross-reactivity with DT
etexilate was detected, but no cross-reactivity was observed with other
structurally related drugs or drugs commonly used for the treatment of atrial
fibrillation.
CONCLUSIONS: The developed competitive ELISA is a valuable and specific tool to
analyze free DT in serum ultrafiltrate for therapeutic drug monitoring and
pharmacokinetic studies.

PMID: 25565675  [PubMed - in process]


179. Iran J Pharm Res. 2015 Winter;14(1):177-87.

Effect of Cysteamine on Cell Growth and IgG4 Production in Recombinant Sp2.0
Cells.

Jahandar H(1), Vaziri B(1), Nematollahi L(1), Afsharirad T(1), Mirabzadeh E(1),
Torkashvand F(1), Khalaj V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Biotechnology Department, Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur
Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.

The manipulation of redox potential in secretory pathway by thiol reducing agents
can be a strategy to improve the production levels of disulfide-bonded proteins
including recombinant antibodies. Here we have studied the influence of
cysteamine on viability and the production level of IgG4 in Sp2.0 cells. For this
purpose, the recombinant Sp2.0 cells producing an anti CD33 IgG4, were subjected 
to different concentrations of cysteamine. At concentrations of 2, 4 and 5 mM
cysteamine, the secreted levels of IgG4 did not change significantly. However, in
concentration of 7 mM cysteamine, a significant decrease was observed in IgG4
levels which may indicate the cytotoxicity of this compound in higher
concentrations. Our results show that the cysteamine treatment reduces the cell
viability in a dose-dependent manner. Also it was observed that 2 mM cysteamine
had no late effect on IgG4 production level and only at day 3, this concentration
of cysteamine decreased the cell viability significantly. To test whether the
addition of cysteamine can affect the expression level of protein disulfide
isomerase, RT-PCR analysis was carried out. The results revealed that cysteamine 
does not affect the PDI transcription and expression level of IgG4 in this type
of recombinant cells.

PMCID: PMC4277631
PMID: 25561924  [PubMed]


180. Chem Commun (Camb). 2015 Feb 11;51(12):2273-6. doi: 10.1039/c4cc09077b.

Regioselective C(sp2)-H dual functionalization of indoles using hypervalent
iodine(III): bromo-amination via 1,3-migration of imides on
indolyl(phenyl)iodonium imides.

Moriyama K(1), Ishida K, Togo H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Chiba University, 1-33
Yayoi-cho, Inage-ku, Chiba 263-8522, Japan. moriyama@faculty.chiba-u.jp
togo@faculty.chiba-u.jp.

A regioselective C(sp(2))-H dual functionalization of indoles, which underlies
bromo-amination via the 1,3-migration of imide groups on indolyl(phenyl)iodonium 
imides as novel imide-combined hypervalent iodines(III), has been developed to
provide 2-bis(sulfonyl)amino-3-bromo-indoles under the metal-free conditions.

PMID: 25556519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2015 Feb;53(2):183-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bjoms.2014.11.011. Epub 2014 Dec 18.

Effect of preoperative continuous positive airway pressure duration on outcomes
after maxillofacial surgery for obstructive sleep apnoea.

Islam S(1), Taylor C(2), Ormiston IW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Maxillofacial Surgery, Leicester Royal Infirmary, Leicester LE1 
5WW, UK. Electronic address: drshafiqislam@hotmail.co.uk. (2)Department of Chest 
Medicine, Salisbury District Hospital, Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, UK. (3)Department of
Maxillofacial Surgery, Leicester Royal Infirmary, Leicester LE1 5WW, UK.

Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) remains the first-line treatment for
obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA), and is known to result in various physiological
changes. The objective of this study was to evaluate the association between
duration of preoperative CPAP therapy and outcome after maxillomandibular
advancement (MMA) for OSA. We retrospectively analysed consecutive patients
treated at our institution, and divided them into 2 groups based on duration of
treatment with CPAP: short-term (up to 12 months) and long-term use (12 months or
more). We controlled for baseline demographic and clinical characteristics. We
compared postoperative scores for the apnoea/hypopnoea index (AHI) and the
Epworth sleepiness scale (ESS), and lowest recorded oxygen saturation between
groups. In 43 patients data were available on the preoperative use of CPAP, and
in 37 of them preoperative and postoperative polysomnographic data were also
available for inclusion. Most had bimaxillary advancement with genioplasty.
Differences between the groups in mean reduction in the AHI and lowest oxygen
saturation were not significant, and operative success rates were comparable.
After operation, the reduction in ESS scores was significantly greater in the
long-term group than in the short-term group (mean (SD) 8(3) compared with 2 (2),
respectively, p<0.001). Our results suggest that the duration of use of CPAP
preoperatively does not significantly influence objective outcome measures. The
reduction in AHI scores after MMA was equivalent in both groups. The long-term
group seemed to fare better than the short-term group on subjective outcome
measures.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 25532967  [PubMed - in process]


182. Chem Commun (Camb). 2015 Feb 4;51(10):1937-40. doi: 10.1039/c4cc08187k.

Nickel catalyzed dealkoxylative C(sp2)-C(sp3) cross coupling
reactions--stereospecific synthesis of allylsilanes from enol ethers.

Guo L(1), Leiendecker M, Hsiao CC, Baumann C, Rueping M.

Author information: 
(1)RWTH Aachen University, Institute of Organic Chemistry, Landoltweg 1, D-52074 
Aachen, Germany. magnus.rueping@rwth-aachen.de.

The application of cyclic and acyclic enol ethers as electrophiles in cross
coupling reactions offers new possibilities for the preparation of functional
compounds. A novel nickel catalyzed dealkoxylative cross coupling reaction allows
access to structurally diverse allylsilanes and alcohol derivatives with high
stereospecificity and in good yields under mild reaction conditions directly from
the corresponding enol ethers.

PMID: 25532100  [PubMed]


183. J Biotechnol. 2015 Jan 20;194:100-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2014.12.003. Epub
2014 Dec 18.

Determination of the maximum operating range of hydrodynamic stress in mammalian 
cell culture.

Neunstoecklin B(1), Stettler M(2), Solacroup T(2), Broly H(2), Morbidelli M(1),
Soos M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Chemical and Bioengineering, Department of Chemistry and Applied
Biosciences, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland. (2)Merck Serono S.A., Biotech 
Process Sciences, Corsier-sur-Vevey, Switzerland. (3)Institute for Chemical and
Bioengineering, Department of Chemistry and Applied Biosciences, ETH Zurich, 8093
Zurich, Switzerland. Electronic address: miroslav.soos@chem.ethz.ch.

Application of quality by design (QbD) requires identification of the maximum
operating range for parameters affecting the cell culture process. These include 
hydrodynamic stress, mass transfer or gradients in dissolved oxygen and pH. Since
most of these are affected by the impeller design and speed, the main goal of
this work was to identify a maximum operating range for hydrodynamic stress,
where no variation of cell growth, productivity and product quality can be
ensured. Two scale-down models were developed operating under laminar and
turbulent condition, generating repetitive oscillating hydrodynamic stress with
maximum stress values ranging from 0.4 to 420Pa, to compare the effect of the
different flow regimes on the cells behavior. Two manufacturing cell lines (CHO
and Sp2/0) used for the synthesis of therapeutic proteins were employed in this
study. For both cell lines multiple process outputs were used to determine the
threshold values of hydrodynamic stress, such as cell growth, morphology,
metabolism and productivity. They were found to be different in between the cell 
lines with values equal to 32.4±4.4Pa and 25.2±2.4Pa for CHO and Sp2/0,
respectively. Below the measured thresholds both cell lines do not show any
appreciable effect of the hydrodynamic stress on any critical quality attribute, 
while above, cells responded negatively to the elevated stress. To confirm the
applicability of the proposed method, the obtained results were compared with
data generated from classical small-scale reactors with a working volume of 3L.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25529344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. European J Org Chem. 2014 Jul;2014(20):4335-4341. Epub 2014 May 27.

Total Synthesis of (±)-Paroxetine by Diastereoconvergent Cobalt-Catalysed
Arylation.

Despiau CF(1), Dominey AP(2), Harrowven DC(1), Linclau B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry, University of Southampton, Highfield, Southampton SO17 1BJ, UK
http://www.southampton.ac.uk/chemistry/about/staff/linclau.page.
(2)GlaxoSmithKline, Medicines Research Centre Gunnels Wood Road, Stevenage SG1
2NY, UK.

A total synthesis of paroxetine is reported, with a diastereoselective and
diastereoconvergent cobalt-catalysed sp(3)-sp(2) coupling reaction involving a
3-substituted 4-bromo-N-Boc-piperidine (Boc = tert-butoxycarbonyl) substrate as a
key step. A 9:1 diastereoselectivity was obtained, while a control experiment
involving a conformationally locked 3-substituted 4-bromo-tert-butyl cyclohexane 
ring proceeded with essentially complete stereoselectivity.

PMCID: PMC4255755
PMID: 25505371  [PubMed]


185. J Org Chem. 2015 Jan 16;80(2):751-61.

Synthesis of fused 1-aminoindole polycycles by a sequence of palladium-catalyzed 
NH and C(sp2)H arylations.

Luong TT, Brion JD, Alami M, Messaoudi S.

An efficient Pd-catalyzed selective intramolecular arylation of functionalized
N,N'-substituted 1-aminoindoles has been reported. In all cases, the reactions
take place rapidly in DMA and efficiently proceed in the presence of a
Pd(OAc)2/Dpephos catalytic system, furnishing the fused indolo[2,1-a]phthalazines
in high yields. Additionally, the one-pot double CH arylation at positions C-2
and C-3 of N,N'-substituted 1-aminoindoles is effective and leads to unknown
complex scaffolds of biological interest.

PMID: 25496127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Org Chem. 2015 Jan 16;80(2):911-9. doi: 10.1021/jo5024238. Epub 2014 Dec 22.

Silver-catalyzed C(sp2)-H functionalization/C-O cyclization reaction at room
temperature.

Dai JJ(1), Xu WT, Wu YD, Zhang WM, Gong Y, He XP, Zhang XQ, Xu HJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medical Engineering, Hefei University of Technology , Hefei 230009, 
P. R. China.

Silver-catalyzed C(sp(2))-H functionalization/C-O cyclization has been developed.
The scalable reaction proceeds at room temperature in an open flask. The present 
method exhibits good functional-group compatibility because of the mild reaction 
conditions. Using a AgNO3 catalyst and a (NH4)2S2O8 oxidant in CH2Cl2/H2O
solvent, various lactones are obtained in good to excellent yields. A kinetic
isotope effect (KIE) study indicates that the reaction may occur via a radical
process.

PMID: 25495388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Nat Commun. 2014 Dec 10;5:5714. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6714.

Laser-induced porous graphene films from commercial polymers.

Lin J(1), Peng Z(2), Liu Y(3), Ruiz-Zepeda F(4), Ye R(2), Samuel EL(2), Yacaman
MJ(4), Yakobson BI(5), Tour JM(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Materials Science and NanoEngineering, Rice University, 6100 
Main Street, Houston, Texas 77005, USA [2] Smalley Institute for Nanoscale
Science and Technology, Rice University, 6100 Main Street, Houston, Texas 77005, 
USA. (2)Department of Chemistry, Rice University, 6100 Main Street, Houston,
Texas 77005, USA. (3)Department of Materials Science and NanoEngineering, Rice
University, 6100 Main Street, Houston, Texas 77005, USA. (4)Department of Physics
and Astronomy, University of Texas at San Antonio, One UTSA Circle, San Antonio, 
Texas 78249, USA. (5)1] Department of Materials Science and NanoEngineering, Rice
University, 6100 Main Street, Houston, Texas 77005, USA [2] Smalley Institute for
Nanoscale Science and Technology, Rice University, 6100 Main Street, Houston,
Texas 77005, USA [3] Department of Chemistry, Rice University, 6100 Main Street, 
Houston, Texas 77005, USA.

The cost effective synthesis and patterning of carbon nanomaterials is a
challenge in electronic and energy storage devices. Here we report a one-step,
scalable approach for producing and patterning porous graphene films with
three-dimensional networks from commercial polymer films using a CO2 infrared
laser. The sp(3)-carbon atoms are photothermally converted to sp(2)-carbon atoms 
by pulsed laser irradiation. The resulting laser-induced graphene (LIG) exhibits 
high electrical conductivity. The LIG can be readily patterned to interdigitated 
electrodes for in-plane microsupercapacitors with specific capacitances of
>4<U+2009>mF<U+2009>cm(-2) and power densities of ~9<U+2009>mW<U+2009>cm(-2). Theoretical calculations
partially suggest that enhanced capacitance may result from LIG's unusual
ultra-polycrystalline lattice of pentagon-heptagon structures. Combined with the 
advantage of one-step processing of LIG in air from commercial polymer sheets,
which would allow the employment of a roll-to-roll manufacturing process, this
technique provides a rapid route to polymer-written electronic and energy storage
devices.

PMCID: PMC4264682
PMID: 25493446  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


188. ACS Nano. 2014 Dec 23;8(12):12292-9. doi: 10.1021/nn506257c. Epub 2014 Dec 11.

A fluoride-driven ionic gate based on a 4-aminophenylboronic acid-functionalized 
asymmetric single nanochannel.

Liu Q(1), Xiao K, Wen L, Dong Y, Xie G, Zhang Z, Bo Z, Jiang L.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Key Laboratory of Energy Conversion and Storage Materials, College of 
Chemistry, Key Laboratory of Theoretical and Computational Photochemistry,
Ministry of Education, Beijing Normal University , Beijing 100875, P. R. China.

Fluorine is one of the human body's required trace elements. Imbalanced fluoride 
levels severely affect the normal functioning of living organisms. In this
article, an anion-regulated synthetic nanochannel is described. A fluoride-driven
ionic gate was developed by immobilizing a fluoride-responsive functional
molecule, 4-aminophenylboronic acid, onto a single conical polyimide nanochannel.
When the ionic gate was in the presence of fluoride, the boron bound F-, and the 
hybridization of the boron center changed from sp2 to sp3. Thus, negatively
charged monofluoride adduct (RB(OH)2F-), difluoride adduct (RB(OH)F2-), and
trifluoride adduct (RBF3-) modified surfaces with different wettability would be 
formed successively by increasing the concentration of F-. On the basis of the
variation of surface charge and wettability, the nanochannel can actualize
reversible switching between the "off" state and the "on" state in the absence
and presence of F-, respectively. As an anion-regulated synthetic nanochannel,
this fluoride-driven ionic gate was characterized by measuring ionic current,
which possesses high sensitivity, fine selectivity, and strong stability. Thus,
this gate may show great promise for use in biosensors, water quality monitoring,
and drug delivery.

PMID: 25482729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Cardiol. 2015 Aug;66(2):135-42. doi: 10.1016/j.jjcc.2014.10.008. Epub 2014 Nov 
5.

Correlations of arterial stiffness/central hemodynamics with serum cardiac
troponin T and natriuretic peptide levels in a middle-aged male worksite cohort.

Kimura K(1), Tomiyama H(2), Matsumoto C(1), Odaira M(1), Shiina K(1), Nagata
M(3), Yamashina A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo,
Japan. (2)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical University,
Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address: tomiyama@tokyo-med.ac.jp. (3)Kajima
Corporation, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Elevated serum levels of cardiac troponin T (cTnT) and N-terminal
fragment of B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP), and also increased arterial
stiffness/abnormal central hemodynamics, are well-known risk factors for future
cardiovascular events. The present study was conducted to clarify which of the
two - the serum level of cTnT or that of NT-proBNP - might be more closely
associated with the arterial stiffness/central hemodynamics.
METHODS: In 2374 male employees of a company (46±9 years), the following
parameters were measured: second peak of the radial systolic pressure waveform
(SP2), radial augmentation index (rAI), PP2 (SP2 minus the diastolic blood
pressure), brachial-ankle pulse wave velocity (baPWV), and serum levels of cTnT
and NT-pro BNP.
RESULTS: After adjustments for confounding variables, binary logistic regression 
analyses demonstrated that baPWV was associated with a significant odds ratio for
serum NT-proBNP =125pg/mL (1.690; 95% confidence interval=1.136-2.514, p=0.002)
and rAI was associated with a significant odds ratio for serum NT-proBNP =55pg/mL
(1.205; 95% confidence interval=1.012-1.435, p=0.036). The baPWV, rAI, SP2, and
PP2 were not associated with significant odds ratios for elevated serum cTnT
levels (=0.014ng/mL and =0.010ng/mL).
CONCLUSIONS: In the middle-aged male worksite cohort studied, increased arterial 
stiffness/abnormal central hemodynamics appeared to be associated with elevated
serum NT-proBNP levels, rather than with minimally elevated serum cTnT levels.
This difference may be one of the plausible explanations for the independency of 
the predictive values of the two serum markers for future cardiovascular events.

Copyright © 2014 Japanese College of Cardiology. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 25467920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Diam Relat Mater. 2014 Feb 1;42:33-40.

Rhenium Alloys as Ductile Substrates for Diamond Thin-Film Electrodes.

Halpern JM(1), Martin HB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

Molybdenum-rhenium (Mo/Re) and tungsten-rhenium (W/Re) alloys were investigated
as substrates for thin-film, polycrystalline boron-doped diamond electrodes.
Traditional, carbide-forming metal substrates adhere strongly to diamond but lose
their ductility during exposure to the high-temperature (1000°C) diamond,
chemical vapor deposition environment. Boron-doped semi-metallic diamond was
selectively deposited for up to 20 hours on one end of Mo/Re (47.5/52.5 wt.%) and
W/Re (75/25 wt.%) alloy wires. Conformal diamond films on the alloys displayed
grain sizes and Raman signatures similar to films grown on tungsten; in all
cases, the morphology and Raman spectra were consistent with well-faceted,
microcrystalline diamond with minimal sp(2) carbon content. Cyclic voltammograms 
of dopamine in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) showed the wide window and low
baseline current of high-quality diamond electrodes. In addition, the films
showed consistently well-defined, dopamine electrochemical redox activity. The
Mo/Re substrate regions that were uncoated but still exposed to the
diamond-growth environment remained substantially more flexible than tungsten in 
a bend-to-fracture rotation test, bending to the test maximum of 90° and not
fracturing. The W/Re substrates fractured after a 27° bend, and the tungsten
fractured after a 21° bend. Brittle, transgranular cleavage fracture surfaces
were observed for tungsten and W/Re. A tension-induced fracture of the Mo/Re
after the prior bend test showed a dimple fracture with a visible ductile core.
Overall, the Mo/Re and W/Re alloys were suitable substrates for diamond growth.
The Mo/Re alloy remained significantly more ductile than traditional tungsten
substrates after diamond growth, and thus may be an attractive metal substrate
for more ductile, thin-film diamond electrodes.

PMCID: PMC4231539
PMID: 25404788  [PubMed]


191. Organometallics. 2014 Nov 10;33(21):5956-5959. Epub 2014 Oct 9.

Stable Silenolates and Brook-Type Silenes with Exocyclic Structures.

Haas M(1), Fischer R(1), Flock M(1), Mueller S(1), Rausch M(1), Saf R(1),
Torvisco A(1), Stueger H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Inorganic Chemistry and Institute for Chemistry and Technology of
Materials, Graz University of Technology , Stremayrgasse 9, A-8010 Graz, Austria.

The first silenolates with exocyclic structures
[(Me3Si)2Si(Si2Me4)2SiC(R)O](-)K(+) (2a: R = 1-adamantyl; 2b: mesityl; 2c:
o-tolyl) were synthesized by the reaction of the corresponding
acylcyclohexasilanes 1a-c with KOtBu. NMR spectroscopy and single-crystal X-ray
diffraction analysis suggest that the aryl-substituted silenolates 2b,c exhibit
increased character of functionalized silenes as compared to the
alkyl-substituted derivative 2a due to the different coordination of the K(+)
counterion to the SiC(R)O moiety. 2b,c, thus, reacted with ClSiiPr3 to give the
exocyclic silenes (Me3Si)2Si(Si2Me4)2Si=C(OSiiPr3)R (3b: R = Mes; 3c: o-Tol),
while 2a afforded the Si-silylated acylcyclohexasilane 1d. The thermally
remarkably stable compound 3b, which is the first isolated silene with the sp(2) 
silicon atom incorporated into a cyclopolysilane framework, could be fully
characterized structurally and spectroscopically.

PMCID: PMC4228504
PMID: 25400314  [PubMed]


192. Beilstein J Org Chem. 2014 Oct 29;10:2521-30. doi: 10.3762/bjoc.10.263.
eCollection 2014.

Microsolvation and sp(2)-stereoinversion of monomeric
a-(2,6-di-tert-butylphenyl)vinyllithium as measured by NMR.

Knorr R(1), Knittl M(1), Rossmann EC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department Chemie, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Butenandtstrasse
5-13 (Haus F), 81377 München, Germany.

The ß-unsubstituted title compound dissolves in THF as a uniformly trisolvated
monomer, whereas it forms exclusively disolvated monomers in tert-butyl methyl
ether, Et2O, TMEDA, or toluene with TMEDA (1.4 equiv). This was established at
low temperatures through the observation of separated NMR signals for free and
lithium-coordinated ligands and/or through the patterns and magnitudes of
(13)C,(6)Li NMR coupling constants. An aggregated form was observed only with
Et2O (2 equiv) in toluene as the solvent. The olefinic geminal interproton
coupling constants of the H2C= part can be used as a secondary criterion to
differentiate between these differently solvated ground-states (3, 2, or <2
coordinated ligands per Li). Due to a kinetic trisolvation privilege of THF, the 
cis/trans sp(2)-stereoinversion rates could be measured through analyses of (1)H 
NMR line broadening and coalescence only in THF as the solvent: The
pseudomonomolecular (because THF-catalyzed), ionic mechanism is initialized by a 
C-Li bond heterolysis with the transient immobilization of one additional THF
ligand, followed by stereoinversion of the quasi-sp(2)-hybridized carbanionic
center in cooperation with a "conducted tour" migration of Li(+)(THF)4 along the 
a-aryl group within the solvent-separated ion pair.

PMCID: PMC4222283
PMID: 25383123  [PubMed]


193. Cytotechnology. 2014 Nov 5. [Epub ahead of print]

Culture phases, cytotoxicity and protein expressions of agarose hydrogel induced 
Sp2/0, A549, MCF-7 cell line 3D cultures.

Ravi M(1), Kaviya SR, Paramesh V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Faculty of Biomedical Sciences Technology and
Research, Sri Ramachandra University, Porur, Chennai, 600116, India,
maddalyravi@hotmail.com.

Advancements in cell cultures are occurring at a rapid pace, an important
direction is culturing cells in 3D conditions. We demonstrate the usefulness of
agarose hydrogels in obtaining 3 dimensional aggregates of three cell lines,
A549, MCF-7 and Sp2/0. The differences in culture phases, susceptibility to
cisplatin-induced cytotoxicity are studied. Also, the 3D aggregates of the three 
cell lines were reverted into 2D cultures and the protein profile differences
among the 2D, 3D and revert cultures were studied. The analysis of protein
profile differences using UniProt data base further augment the usefulness of
agarose hydrogels for obtaining 3D cell cultures.

PMID: 25371010  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


194. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 3;9(11):e111576. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111576.
eCollection 2014.

The potential utility of predicted one bond carbon-proton coupling constants in
the structure elucidation of small organic molecules by NMR spectroscopy.

Venkata C(1), Forster MJ(2), Howe PW(3), Steinbeck C(1).

Author information: 
(1)European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton,
Cambridge, United Kingdom. (2)Chemical Research, Syngenta, Jealott's Hill
Research Centre, Bracknell, United Kingdom. (3)Product Safety, Syngenta,
Jealott's Hill Research Centre, Bracknell, United Kingdom.

NMR spectroscopy is the most popular technique used for structure elucidation of 
small organic molecules in solution, but incorrect structures are regularly
reported. One-bond proton-carbon J-couplings provide additional information about
chemical structure because they are determined by different features of molecular
structure than are proton and carbon chemical shifts. However, these couplings
are not routinely used to validate proposed structures because few software tools
exist to predict them. This study assesses the accuracy of Density Functional
Theory for predicting them using 396 published experimental observations from a
diverse range of small organic molecules. With the B3LYP functional and the TZVP 
basis set, Density Functional Theory calculations using the open-source software 
package NWChem can predict one-bond CH J-couplings with good accuracy for most
classes of small organic molecule. The root-mean-square deviation after
correction is 1.5 Hz for most sp3 CH pairs and 1.9 Hz for sp2 pairs; larger
errors are observed for sp3 pairs with multiple electronegative substituents and 
for sp pairs. These results suggest that prediction of one-bond CH J-couplings by
Density Functional Theory is sufficiently accurate for structure validation. This
will be of particular use in strained ring systems and heterocycles which have
characteristic couplings and which pose challenges for structure elucidation.

PMCID: PMC4218771
PMID: 25365289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Health Technol Assess. 2014 Oct;18(67):1-296. doi: 10.3310/hta18670.

Clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness results from the randomised
controlled Trial of Oral Mandibular Advancement Devices for Obstructive sleep
apnoea-hypopnoea (TOMADO) and long-term economic analysis of oral devices and
continuous positive airway pressure.

Sharples L(1), Glover M(2), Clutterbuck-James A(3), Bennett M(4), Jordan J(2),
Chadwick R(3), Pittman M(3), East C(3), Cameron M(5), Davies M(3), Oscroft N(3), 
Smith I(3), Morrell M(6), Fox-Rushby J(2), Quinnell T(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Leeds Clinical Trials Research Unit, Leeds, UK. (2)Health
Economics Research Unit, Brunel University, Uxbridge, UK. (3)Papworth Hospital
NHS Foundation Trust, Papworth Everard, Cambridge, UK. (4)Medical Research
Council Biostatistics Unit, Cambridge, UK. (5)Maxillofacial Unit, Addenbrooke's
NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, UK. (6)National Heart and Lung Institute,
Imperial College London, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Obstructive sleep apnoea-hypopnoea (OSAH) causes excessive daytime
sleepiness (EDS), impairs quality of life (QoL) and increases cardiovascular
disease and road traffic accident risks. Continuous positive airway pressure
(CPAP) treatment is clinically effective but undermined by intolerance, and its
cost-effectiveness is borderline in milder cases. Mandibular advancement devices 
(MADs) are another option, but evidence is lacking regarding their clinical
effectiveness and cost-effectiveness in milder disease.
OBJECTIVES: (1) Conduct a randomised controlled trial (RCT) examining the
clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of MADs against no treatment in
mild to moderate OSAH. (2) Update systematic reviews and an existing health
economic decision model with data from the Trial of Oral Mandibular Advancement
Devices for Obstructive sleep apnoea-hypopnoea (TOMADO) and newly published
results to better inform long-term clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness 
of MADs and CPAP in mild to moderate OSAH.
TOMADO: A crossover RCT comparing clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness
of three MADs: self-moulded [SleepPro 1 (SP1); Meditas Ltd, Winchester, UK];
semibespoke [SleepPro 2 (SP2); Meditas Ltd, Winchester, UK]; and fully bespoke
[bespoke MAD (bMAD); NHS Oral-Maxillofacial Laboratory, Addenbrooke's Hospital,
Cambridge, UK] against no treatment, in 90 adults with mild to moderate OSAH. All
devices improved primary outcome [apnoea-hypopnoea index (AHI)] compared with no 
treatment: relative risk 0.74 [95% confidence interval (CI) 0.62 to 0.89] for
SP1; relative risk 0.67 (95% CI 0.59 to 0.76) for SP2; and relative risk 0.64
(95% CI 0.55 to 0.76) for bMAD (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001). Differences between MADs were not
significant. Sleepiness [as measured by the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS)] was
scored 1.51 [95% CI 0.73 to 2.29 (SP1)] to 2.37 [95% CI 1.53 to 3.22 (bMAD)]
lower than no treatment (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001), with SP2 and bMAD significantly better than 
SP1. All MADs improved disease-specific QoL. Compliance was lower for SP1, which 
was unpopular at trial exit. At 4 weeks, all devices were cost-effective at
£20,000/quality-adjusted life-year (QALY), with SP2 the best value below
£39,800/QALY.
META-ANALYSIS: A MEDLINE, EMBASE and Science Citation Index search updating two
existing systematic reviews (one from November 2006 and the other from June 2008)
to August 2013 identified 77 RCTs in adult OSAH patients comparing MAD with
conservative management (CM), MADs with CPAP or CPAP with CM. MADs and CPAP
significantly improved AHI [MAD -9.3/hour (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001); CPAP -25.4/hour
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001)]. Effect difference between CPAP and MADs was 7.0/hour (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001),
favouring CPAP. No trials compared CPAP with MADs in mild OSAH. MAD and CPAP
reduced the ESS score similarly [MAD 1.6 (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001); CPAP 1.6 (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001)].
LONG-TERM COST-EFFECTIVENESS: An existing model assessed lifetime cost-utility of
MAD and CPAP in mild to moderate OSAH, using the revised meta-analysis to update 
input values. The TOMADO provided utility estimates, mapping ESS score to
European Quality of Life-5 Dimensions three-level version for device
cost-utility. Using SP2 as the standard device, MADs produced higher mean costs
and mean QALYs than CM [incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) £6687/QALY]. 
From a willingness to pay (WTP) of £15,367/QALY, CPAP is cost-effective, although
the likelihood of MADs (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.48) and CPAP (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.49) being cost-effective is
very similar. Both were better than CM, but there was much uncertainty in the
choice between CPAP and MAD (at a WTP £20,000/QALY, the probability of being the 
most cost-effective was 47% for MAD and 52% for CPAP). When SP2 lifespan
increased to 18 months, the ICER for CPAP compared with MAD became £44,066. The
ICER for SP1 compared with CM was £1552, and for bMAD compared with CM the ICER
was £13,836. The ICER for CPAP compared with SP1 was £89,182, but CPAP produced
lower mean costs and higher mean QALYs than bMAD. Differential compliance rates
for CPAP reduces cost-effectiveness so MADs become less costly and more
clinically effective with CPAP compliance 90% of SP2.
CONCLUSIONS: Mandibular advancement devices are clinically effective and
cost-effective in mild to moderate OSAH. A semi-bespoke MAD is the appropriate
first choice in most patients in the short term. Future work should explore
whether or not adjustable MADs give additional clinical and cost benefits.
Further data on longer-term cardiovascular risk and its risk factors would reduce
uncertainty in the health economic model and improve precision of effectiveness
estimates.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: This trial is registered as ISRCTN02309506.
FUNDING: This project was funded by the National Institute for Health Research
(NIHR) Health Technology Assessment programme and will be published in full in
Health Technology Assessment; Vol. 18, No. 67. See the NIHR Journals Library
website for further project information.

PMCID: PMC4781121
PMID: 25359435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Monoclon Antib Immunodiagn Immunother. 2014 Oct;33(5):340-3. doi:
10.1089/mab.2014.0025.

Monoclonal antibodies against G protein of spring viremia of carp virus.

Luo P(1), Ruan X, Zhang Q, Li Z, Wang M, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Aquatic Animal Medicine, College of Fisheries, Huazhong
Agricultural University , Wuhan, Hubei, China .

Part of the G protein (3094-4170 bp) of spring viremia of carp virus (SVCV) was
expressed in Escherichia coli and purified by dialysis in our study. Two clones
of monoclonal antibodies (MAbs 1H11 and 4B8) against G protein were generated by 
fusion of mouse myeloma cell line SP2/0 and spleen lymphocytes from part of G
protein (3094-4170 bp) immunized mice. The results of ELISA (enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay), IFA (indirect immunofluorescent assay), and Western blot
assay further demonstrated the characterizations of the two MAbs. Both 1H11 and
4B8 were specific to SVCV G protein. Ten pairs of synthesized overlapping
peptides were used to identify the epitope of the MAbs. The MAbs are useful in
the development of SVCV diagnostic methods.

PMCID: PMC4216518
PMID: 25358003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Org Lett. 2014 Nov 7;16(21):5682-5. doi: 10.1021/ol502745g. Epub 2014 Oct 16.

Oxalyl amide assisted palladium-catalyzed arylation of C(sp2)-H bond at the d
position.

Han J(1), Liu P, Wang C, Wang Q, Zhang J, Zhao Y, Shi D, Huang Z, Zhao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Organic Synthesis of Jiangsu Province, College of Chemistry,
Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Soochow University , Suzhou 215123,
China.

A successful protocol has been developed for d-arylation of ß-arylethamines at
the ortho position under mild conditions. The newly developed methodology first
presents broad substrate scope, great functional group tolerance, and good to
excellent yield in the synthesis of substituted ß-arylethylamines. The
transformation represents a practical advantage of oxalyl amide in assistance
with C-H functionalization at a remote position.

PMID: 25322337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Org Chem. 2014 Nov 7;79(21):10605-10. doi: 10.1021/jo501778h. Epub 2014 Oct 28.

Iodine-mediated thiolation of substituted naphthols/naphthylamines and
arylsulfonyl hydrazides via C(sp2)-H bond functionalization.

Kang X(1), Yan R, Yu G, Pang X, Liu X, Li X, Xiang L, Huang G.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Applied Organic Chemistry, Key Laboratory of
Nonferrous Metal Chemistry and Resources Utilization of Gansu Province,
Department of Chemistry, Lanzhou University , Lanzhou 730000, China.

A direct method has been developed for iodine-mediated thiolation of
naphthols/naphthylamines and arylsulfonyl hydrazides through the formation of C-S
bond and cleavage of S-N/S-O bonds. In this transformation, a range of valuable
thioethers are easily achieved in moderate to good yields.

PMID: 25322279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Opt Express. 2014 Aug 11;22(16):19375-85. doi: 10.1364/OE.22.019375.

Tuning the nonlinear optical absorption of reduced graphene oxide by chemical
reduction.

Shi H, Wang C, Sun Z, Zhou Y, Jin K, Redfern SA, Yang G.

Reduced graphene oxides with varying degrees of reduction have been produced by
hydrazine reduction of graphene oxide. The linear and nonlinear optical
properties of both graphene oxide as well as the reduced graphene oxides have
been measured by single beam Z-scan measurement in the picosecond region. The
results reveal both saturable absorption and two-photon absorption, strongly
dependent on the intensity of the pump pulse: saturable absorption occurs at
lower pump pulse intensity (~1.5 GW/cm2 saturation intensity) whereas two-photon 
absorption dominates at higher intensities (=5.7 GW/cm2). Intriguingly, we find
that the two-photon absorption coefficient (from 1.5 cm/GW to 4.5cm/GW) and the
saturation intensity (from 1 GW/cm2 to 2 GW/cm2) vary with chemical reduction,
which is ascribed to the varying concentrations of sp2 domains and sp2 clusters
in the reduced graphene oxides. Our results not only provide an insight into the 
evolution of the nonlinear optical coefficient in reduced graphene oxide, but
also suggest that chemical engineering techniques may usefully be applied to tune
the nonlinear optical properties of various nano-materials, including atomically 
thick graphene sheets.

PMID: 25321022  [PubMed]


200. J Virol. 2015 Jan;89(1):323-36. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02701-14. Epub 2014 Oct 15.

Selective acquisition of host-derived ICAM-1 by HIV-1 is a matrix-dependent
process.

Jalaguier P(1), Cantin R(1), Maaroufi H(2), Tremblay MJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Axe des Maladies Infectieuses et Immunitaires, Centre de Recherche du Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec-Pavillon CHUL, Québec, Canada. (2)Plate-Forme
de Bio-Informatique and Institut de Biologie Intégrative et des Systèmes,
Pavillon Charles-Eugène-Marchand, Université Laval, Québec, Canada. (3)Axe des
Maladies Infectieuses et Immunitaires, Centre de Recherche du Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire de Québec-Pavillon CHUL, Québec, Canada Département de
Microbiologie-Infectiologie et Immunologie, Faculté de Médecine, Université
Laval, Québec, Canada michel.j.tremblay@crchul.ulaval.ca.

HIV-1 acquires an impressive number of foreign components during its formation.
Despite all previous efforts spent studying the nature and functionality of
virus-anchored host molecules, the exact mechanism(s) through which such
constituents are acquired by HIV-1 is still unknown. However, in the case of
ICAM-1, one of the most extensively studied transmembrane proteins found
associated with mature virions, the Pr55(Gag) precursor polyprotein appears to be
a potential interaction partner. We investigated and characterized at the
molecular level the process of ICAM-1 incorporation using initially a
Pr55(Gag)-based virus-like particle (VLP) model. Substitution of various domains 
of Pr55(Gag), such as the nucleocapsid, SP2, or p6, had no effect on the
acquisition of ICAM-1. We found that the structural matrix protein (MA) is
mandatory for ICAM-1 incorporation within VLPs, and we confirmed this novel
observation with the replication-competent HIV-1 molecular clone NL4.3.
Additional studies suggest that the C-terminal two-thirds of MA, and especially
13 amino acids positioned inside the fifth a-helix, are important. Moreover,
based on three-dimensional (3D) modeling of protein-protein interactions (i.e.,
protein-protein docking) and further validation by a virus capture assay, we
found that a series of acidic residues in the MA domain interact with basic amino
acids located in the ICAM-1 cytoplasmic tail. Our findings provide new insight
into the molecular mechanism governing the acquisition of ICAM-1, a host molecule
known to enhance HIV-1 infectivity in a significant manner. Altogether, these
observations offer a new avenue for the development of antiviral therapeutics
that are directed at a target of host origin.IMPORTANCE: Intercellular adhesion
molecule 1 (ICAM-1) is a cell surface host component known to be efficiently
inserted within emerging HIV-1 particles. It has been demonstrated that
host-derived ICAM-1 molecules act as a strong attachment factor and increase
HIV-1 infectivity substantially. Despite previous efforts spent studying
virus-associated host molecules, the precise mechanism(s) through which such
constituents are inserted within emerging HIV-1 particles still remains obscure. 
Previous data suggest that the Pr55(Gag) precursor polyprotein appears as a
potential interaction partner with ICAM-1. In the present study, we demonstrate
that the HIV-1 matrix domain plays a key role in the ICAM-1 incorporation
process. Some observations were confirmed with whole-virus preparations amplified
in primary human cells, thereby providing physiological significance to our data.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4301152
PMID: 25320314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Chemistry. 2014 Nov 24;20(48):15775-84. doi: 10.1002/chem.201404776. Epub 2014
Oct 10.

Iridium complexes containing mesoionic C donors: selective C(sp3)-H versus
C(sp2)-H bond activation, reactivity towards acids and bases, and catalytic
oxidation of silanes and water.

Petronilho A(1), Woods JA, Mueller-Bunz H, Bernhard S, Albrecht M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, University College Dublin, Belfield,
Dublin 4 (Ireland).

Metalation of a C2-methylated pyridylimidazolium salt with [IrCp*Cl2]2 affords
either an ylidic complex, resulting from C(sp(3))-H bond activation of the
C2-bound CH3 group if the metalation is performed in the presence of a base, such
as AgO2 or Na2CO3, or a mesoionic complex via cyclometalation and thermally
induced heterocyclic C(sp(2))-H bond activation, if the reaction is performed in 
the absence of a base. Similar cyclometalation and complex formation via
C(sp(2))-H bond activation is observed when the heterocyclic ligand precursor
consists of the analogous pyridyltriazolium salt, that is, when the metal bonding
at the C2 position is blocked by a nitrogen rather than a methyl substituent.
Despite the strongly mesoionic character of both the imidazolylidene and the
triazolylidene, the former reacts rapidly with D(+) and undergoes isotope
exchange at the heterocyclic C5 position, whereas the triazolylidene ligand is
stable and only undergoes H/D exchange under basic conditions, where the
imidazolylidene is essentially unreactive. The high stability of the Ir-C bond in
aqueous solution over a broad pH range was exploited in catalytic water oxidation
and silane oxidation. The catalytic hydrosilylation of ketones proceeds with
turnover frequencies as high as 6,000 h(-1) with both the imidazolylidene and the
triazolylidene system, whereas water oxidation is enhanced by the stronger donor 
properties of the imidazol-4-ylidene ligands and is more than three times faster 
than with the triazolylidene analogue.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25302630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Ceylon Med J. 2014 Sep;59(3):79-83. doi: 10.4038/cmj.v59i3.7468.

Polymerase chain reaction - restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis for
the differentiation of mycobacterial species in bronchial washings.

Weerasekera DK(1), Magana-Arachchi DN, Madegedara D, Dissanayake N.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology, Institute of Fundamental Studies, Hantana Road,
Kandy.nayomam@yahoo.com.

OBJECTIVES: To identify mycobacterial species in bronchoscopy specimens with a
simple assay based on polymerase chain reaction and restriction enzyme digestion.
METHODS: Sputum smear negative, bronchoscopy specimens (n=202) were collected
from patients attending the Central Chest Clinic and the Teaching Hospital Kandy,
Sri Lanka. DNA, extracted from the mycobacterial cultures (n=43) were amplified
using known mycobacterial specific Sp1 and Sp2 primers. Resulting products were
digested with HaeIII and CfoI restriction enzymes and DNA sequencing was
performed for the selected isolates.
RESULTS: Among the culture positive patients, PCR was able to distinguish 12
rapid growers (~280-320 bp), 15 slow (~200-220 bp) and 10 patients having both
rapid and slow and one having two rapid growing mycobacteria. DNA Sequence
analysis revealed the presence of M. intracellulare (n=3), M. phocaicum (n=7), M.
tuberculosis complex (n=13), Nocardia (n=2), M. smegmatis (n=1) and Mycobacterium
sp (n=12). The identified organisms got digested upon exposure to HaeIII
restriction enzyme whereas when exposed to CfoI, only M. phocaicum yielded 80 bp 
and 230 bp DNA fragments while others remained undigested. Consequently, six
patients were confirmed to have M. tuberculosis complex, seven had both M.
tuberculosis and non-tuberculosis bacteria (NTM) in their bronchoscopy specimens 
while 21 had NTM.
CONCLUSIONS: Optimised PCR-RFLP assay was able to differentiate M. tuberculosis
complex bacteria from nontuberculosis mycobacteria and Nocardia. Molecular
analysis confirmed the presence of NTM in bronchoscopy specimens and according to
the study a significant proportion of patients (13% to 14%) of the study
population were found to have NTM in their bronchial washings.

PMID: 25286094  [PubMed - in process]


203. Photochem Photobiol Sci. 2014 Dec;13(12):1661-70. doi: 10.1039/c4pp00278d. Epub
2014 Oct 6.

Novel application of pH-sensitive firefly luciferases as dual reporter genes for 
simultaneous ratiometric analysis of intracellular pH and gene
expression/location.

Gabriel GV(1), Viviani VR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Biotechnology of Bioluminescence, Department of
Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics, Federal University of São Carlos (UFSCar),
Sorocaba, SP, Brazil. viviani@ufscar.br.

Firefly luciferases are widely used as bioluminescent reporter genes for
bioimaging and biosensors. Aiming at simultaneous analyses of different gene
expression and cellular events, luciferases and GFPs that exhibit distinct
bioluminescence and fluorescence colors have been coupled with each promoter,
making dual and multicolor reporter systems. Despite their wide use, firefly
luciferase bioluminescence spectra are pH-sensitive, resulting in a typical large
red shift at acidic pH, a side-effect that may affect some bioanalytical
purposes. Although some intracellular pH-indicators employ dual color and
fluorescent dyes, none has been considered to benefit from the characteristic
spectral pH-sensitivity of firefly luciferases to monitor intracellular
pH-associated stress, an important indicator of cell homeostasis. Here we
demonstrate a linear relationship between the ratio of intensities in the green
and red regions of the bioluminescence spectra and pH using firefly luciferases
cloned in our laboratory (Macrolampis sp2 and Cratomorphus distinctus), allowing 
estimation of E. coli intracellular pH, thus providing a new analytical method
for ratiometric intracellular pH-sensing. This is the first dual reporter system 
that employs a single luciferase gene to simultaneously monitor intracellular pH 
using spectral changes, and gene expression and/or ATP concentration using the
bioluminescence intensity, showing great potential for real time bioanalysis of
intracellular processes associated with metabolic changes such as apoptosis, cell
death, inflammation and tissue acidification, among the other physiological
changes.

PMID: 25285909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Zootaxa. 2014 Sep 8;3860(4):379-95. doi: 10.11646/zootaxa.3860.4.6.

Molecular phylogeny and biogeography of the genus Acanthodactylus Fitzinger, 1834
(Reptilia: Lacertidae) in Iran, inferred from mtDNA Sequences.

Heidari N(1), Rastegar-Pouyani E(2), Rastegar-Pouyani N(3), Faizi H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Razi University, 6714967346
Kermanshah, Iran; Email: unknown. (2)Department of Biology, Hakim Sabzevari
University, Sabzevar, Iran; Email: unknown. (3)Department of Biology, Faculty of 
Science, Razi University, 6714967346 Kermanshah, Iran,; Email: unknown.

Phylogenetic relationships of Iranian Acanthodactylus species were investigated
using 1407 bp of mitochondrial DNA including 606 bp of cytochrome b and 801 bp of
NADH dehydrogenase subunit 4 (ND4). Analyses done with maximum parsimony,
maximum-likelihood, and Bayesian inference included 67 specimens from 27
geographically distinct localities in Iran. Our molecular results proposed three 
clear and geographically isolated clades by their phylogenetic positions and
genetic differences. These three major clades are: (1) A. micropholis+ A.
grandis+ A. khamirensis; (2) A. blanfordi+ A. schmidti+ Acanthodactylus sp1; (3) 
A. nilsoni+ A. boskianus + Acanthodactylus sp2. The phylogenetic analyses of the 
genus did not group A. grandis with the remaining species of the A. boskianus
group and clustered it along with A. khamirensis within the A. micropholis group.
In addition, phylogenetic results revealed a monophyletic status for A. schmidti 
and A. micropholis groups. Molecular clock approach indicated that the most
recent divergence event splits A. micropholis from A. khamirensis about 2 MYA and
results of dispersal-vicariance analyses showed that this diversification
occurred by dispersal event rather than vicariance. Results of Reconstruct
Ancestral State in Phylogenies (RASP) showed that Most Recent Common Ancestor
(MRCA) of A. micropholis, A. blanfordi and A. sp1 originated in eastern Iran. The
first diversification of the genus in Iran most likely occurred between 8.5-9 MYA
corresponding with the hypothesis that the genus has entered Iran long after the 
complete uplifting of the Zagros Mts. (10-12 MYA) which limited its dispersal
only to the Persian Gulf shores and western slopes of the Zagros Mts.

PMID: 25283214  [PubMed - in process]


205. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2015 Jan;53(1):34-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bjoms.2014.09.008.
Epub 2014 Oct 2.

Effects of maxillomandibular advancement on systemic blood pressure in patients
with obstructive sleep apnoea.

Islam S(1), Taylor CJ(2), Ormiston IW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Maxillofacial Surgery, Leicester Royal Infirmary, Leicester LE1 
5WW, UK. Electronic address: drshafiqislam@hotmail.co.uk. (2)Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Salisbury District Hospital, Wiltshire, Salisbury SP2 8BJ, 
UK. (3)Department of Maxillofacial Surgery, Leicester Royal Infirmary, Leicester 
LE1 5WW, UK.

Obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) is associated with resistant hypertension. We
investigated to what extent maxillomandibular advancement affected a patient's
blood pressure postoperatively. We retrospectively analysed consecutive patients 
who had Bimaxillary advancement for OSA at our hospital following referral from
the local sleep clinic. We collected relevant data on clinical characteristics
and explored the changes in systolic and diastolic blood pressures, as well as
mean arterial pressure (MAP) preoperatively, with those taken 6 months following 
surgery. We identified 51 patients with a mean (SD) age of 44 (8) years and a
mean (SD) body mass index of 29 (3.4). Preoperative and postoperative data on
blood pressure were available for analysis in 45. The mean (SD) systolic blood
pressure was significantly reduced in our sample following surgery (from
131(12.6) to 127 (12.5)mmHg, p<0.001). The mean (SD) reduction in postoperative
MAP values in the overall group, approached statistical significance (recorded
MAP 96.6(10) to 93.1(8)mmHg, p=0.06). In a subgroup of 10 patients who had
established hypertension the reduction in values postoperatively (mean reduction:
systolic blood pressure 6 mmHg, diastolic blood pressure 10 mmHg, mean arterial
pressure 9 mmHg) was greater than that observed in the overall group. Our results
have shown an improvement in systemic blood pressure after maxillomandibular
advancement for OSA, particularly in those with established hypertension. The
data suggest that in addition to being a highly effective treatment for OSA, this
surgery may more effectively lower systemic blood pressure than other treatment
modalities.

Copyright © 2014 The British Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25282591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Oct;30(10):1051-3.

[Preparation and characterization of mouse monoclonal antibody against outer
membrane protein P6 of Haemophilus influenzae].

[Article in Chinese]

Wen X(1), Zhou F(1), Zhang Y(1), Qiao H(1), Gao X(1), Jia X(1), Zhang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathogen Biology and Immunology, Hebei North University,
Zhangjiakou 075000, China.

OBJECTIVE: To prepare and identify monoclonal antibody against Haemophilus
influenzae(Hi) outer membrane protein P6.
METHODS: Recombinant protein P6 as an immunogen was administered
intraperitoneally to BALB/c mice. The splenocytes of the mouse were isolated from
spleen and hybridized with Sp2/0 myeloma cells. Indirect ELISA was used for
screening hybridoma and the number of chromosomes in hybridoma cells was
determined by karyotype analysis. The titers and specificity of monoclonal
antibodies in their culture supernatant were detected by indirect ELISA. The
immunoglobulin class, subclasses and type of the monoclonal antibody were
identified with colloidal gold labeled IsoQuick(TM) strips.
RESULTS: Two hybridoma cell lines designated a2G3 and <U+03B3>2C4 were obtained.
Karyotype analysis showed that the chromosome numbers of a2G3 and <U+03B3>2C4 were 103
and 95, respectively. The highest titers of antibodies in their culture
supernatant were 1:256 and 1:512, respectively. Both monoclonal antibodies only
reacted with standard or clinical isolated strains of Hi, and they both did not
react with other bacteria. A2G3 was IgG2b, and <U+03B3>2C4 was IgM, both of which were
kappa light chains. They could recognize different antigen epitope of protein P6.
CONCLUSION: Two hybridoma cell lines producing the monoclonal antibodies against 
protein P6 of Hi outer membrane are obtained.

PMID: 25270206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Parasitology. 2015 Apr;142(4):527-33. doi: 10.1017/S003118201400153X. Epub 2014
Sep 30.

Analysis of genetic variability of Fasciola hepatica populations from different
geographical locations by ISSR-PCR.

Robles-Pérez D(1), García-García P(2), Martínez-Pérez JM(1), Rojo-Vázquez FA(1), 
Martínez-Valladares M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,University of León,Campus de Vegazana, 24071
León,Spain. (2)Faculty of Biological and Environmental Sciences,University of
León,Campus de Vegazana, 24071 León,Spain. (3)Instituto de Ganadería de Montaña
(CSIC-ULE),Finca Marzanas, 24346 Grulleros, León,Spain.

Inter-simple sequence repeats markers were used to determinate the genetic
variability of Fasciola hepatica populations recovered from sheep and cattle from
Spain (Sp1, Sp2, Sp3 and Sp4), UK (Eng), Ireland (Ir) and Mexico (Mex). Twenty
five primers were tested but only five produced 39 reproducible bands, being
71.79% polymorphic bands. This percentage ranged from 10.26% in Sp4 to 48.72% in 
Sp1, and per host between 28.21 and 48.72% in sheep and between 10.26 and 38.46% 
in cattle. This relatively low range of genetic diversity within populations,
with a mean of 34.40%, implies that a large proportion of variation resided among
populations. The population differentiation (Gst = 0.547) indicated that 54.7% of
variation is due to differences between populations and 45.3% due to differences 
within population. The Nei's distance ranged between 0.091 and 0.230 in sheep and
between 0.150 and 0.337 in cattle. The genetic relationships between populations 
and individuals were shown by a UPGMA dendrogram and a principal coordinate
analysis; both grouped all populations separately from Sp4, a population of from 
the Midwest of Spain with the lowest level of diversity. Small genetic distances 
were observed between Eng and Ir, on the one hand, and Sp1, Sp2, Sp3, from the
Northwest of Spain, together with Mex, on the other.

PMID: 25266441  [PubMed - in process]


208. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2015 Jan;53(1):23-7. doi: 10.1016/j.bjoms.2014.09.003.
Epub 2014 Sep 27.

Does a patient's Mallampati score predict outcome after maxillomandibular
advancement for obstructive sleep apnoea?

Islam S(1), Selbong U(2), Taylor CJ(3), Ormiston IW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Maxillofacial Surgery, Leicester Royal Infirmary, Infirmary
Square, Leicester LE1 5WW, UK. Electronic address: drshafiqislam@hotmail.co.uk.
(2)Department of Maxillofacial Surgery, Leicester Royal Infirmary, Infirmary
Square, Leicester LE1 5WW, UK. (3)Respiratory Medicine, Salisbury Hospital,
Odstock Road, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, UK.

The Mallampati airway classification has been used to estimate the success of
uvulopalatopharyngoplasty in patients with obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) but its
predictive value in maxillomandibular advancement has not been proved. We aimed
to explore the association between preoperative Mallampati scores and surgical
outcome after bimaxillary advancement for OSA. We retrospectively analysed data
on 50 patients who had maxillofacial operations for OSA at our hospital and
stratified them into two groups based on Mallampati scores: high (class III/IV)
and low (class I/II). We compared pre- and postoperative apnoea/hypopnoea indices
(AHIs), Epworth sleepiness scores, and lowest recorded oxygen saturation in both 
groups. The postoperative values for all three outcome measures were not
significantly different when patients were stratified according to the Mallampati
classification (mean (SD) AHI was 41(19) before and 7 (6) after operation in the 
low group, and 42 (15) before and 9 (7) after in the high group). Success rates
(AHI less than 15 postoperatively) were similar in both low and high score groups
(p>0.05). Maxillomandibular advancement alleviates obstruction at multiple levels
and our study has shown comparable surgical outcomes in both groups. The
Mallampati score can be used to optimise patient selection for surgeons
considering single-level procedures for OSA. Our study suggests that the
Mallampati classification is less useful for the prediction of surgical outcome
after maxillomandibular advancement surgery.

Copyright © 2014 The British Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25266137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Early Hum Dev. 2014 Nov;90(11):761-4. doi: 10.1016/j.earlhumdev.2014.08.022. Epub
2014 Sep 26.

Translating research into political advocacy to improve infant and child health.

Kt AA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Aynsley-Green Consulting, Harnham Road, Salisbury SP2 8LE, England. Electronic
address: al@aynsley-green.com.

Dramatic improvements have occurred in the overall health of our children driven 
by rigorous research translated into clinical practice. However, all is not well 
for too many, not only for their health but for other outcomes of their lives.
These outcomes reflect poorly on how professional groups in child life and health
have advocated effectively at the political level for the needs of children and
for the services to support them. Professional staff in child health, including
those involved in neonatal care, must become more effective in translating
research into political advocacy for the best interests of children. A scientific
approach to political advocacy is needed that is equivalent in its rigour to the 
best of bio-medical research. Above all, the care of the newly born infant should
not be seen in isolation, but in the overall context of childhood and the
services to support children today.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 25260960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Phys Rev Lett. 2014 Sep 5;113(10):107401. Epub 2014 Sep 2.

Biexciton auger recombination in colloidal graphene quantum dots.

Sun C(1), Figge F(1), McGuire JA(1), Li Q(2), Li LS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics and Astronomy, Michigan State University, East Lansing, 
Michigan 48824, USA. (2)Department of Chemistry, Indiana University, Bloomington,
Indiana 47405, USA.

We measure biexciton Auger recombination (AR) in colloidal graphene quantum dots 
(GQDs) by transient absorption spectroscopy. AR is reflected in GQDs with 132 and
168 sp2-hybridized C atoms as a decay with a ~0.3<U+2009><U+2009>ps time constant and an
amplitude depending superlinearly on pump fluence. Despite the
orders-of-magnitude difference in size between GQDs and carbon nanotubes, their
biexciton AR rates are similar. This similarity is a result of strong carrier
interactions in sp2-hybridized carbon nanostructures and suggests that GQDs may
hold promise in the context of carrier multiplication.

PMID: 25238384  [PubMed]


211. Nat Commun. 2014 Sep 15;5:4941. doi: 10.1038/ncomms5941.

Sculpting carbon bonds for allotropic transformation through solid-state
re-engineering of -sp2 carbon.

Jung HY(1), Araujo PT(2), Kim YL(1), Jung SM(3), Jia X(4), Hong S(1), Ahn CW(5), 
Kong J(3), Dresselhaus MS(6), Kar S(7), Jung YJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, Northeastern University, 
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. (2)1] Department of Electrical Engineering and 
Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts
02139, USA [2] Present address: Department of Physics and Astrophysics,
University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, Alabama 35487, USA. (3)Department of
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA. (4)Department of Materials
Science and Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02139, USA. (5)National Nanofab Center, Korea Advanced Institute of
Science and Technology, 335 Gwahangno, Daejeon 305-806, South Korea. (6)1]
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA [2] Department of
Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139,
USA. (7)Department of Physics, Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

Carbon forms one of nature's strongest chemical bonds; its allotropes having
provided some of the most exciting scientific discoveries in recent times. The
possibility of inter-allotropic transformations/hybridization of carbon is hence 
a topic of immense fundamental and technological interest. Such modifications
usually require extreme conditions (high temperature, pressure and/or high-energy
irradiations), and are usually not well controlled. Here we demonstrate
inter-allotropic transformations/hybridizations of specific types that appear
uniformly across large-area carbon networks, using moderate alternating voltage
pulses. By controlling the pulse magnitude, small-diameter single-walled carbon
nanotubes can be transformed predominantly into larger-diameter single-walled
carbon nanotubes, multi-walled carbon nanotubes of different morphologies,
multi-layered graphene nanoribbons or structures with sp(3) bonds. This
re-engineering of carbon bonds evolves via a coalescence-induced reconfiguration 
of sp(2) hybridization, terminates with negligible introduction of defects and
demonstrates remarkable reproducibility. This reflects a potential step forward
for large-scale engineering of nanocarbon allotropes and their junctions.

PMID: 25222600  [PubMed]


212. Forensic Sci Int. 2014 Nov;244:70-7. doi: 10.1016/j.forsciint.2014.08.011. Epub
2014 Aug 21.

Development of indirect competitive ELISA for quantification of mitragynine in
Kratom (Mitragyna speciosa (Roxb.) Korth.).

Limsuwanchote S(1), Wungsintaweekul J(2), Keawpradub N(1), Putalun W(3), Morimoto
S(4), Tanaka H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacognosy and Pharmaceutical Botany, Faculty of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Prince of Songkla University, Hat Yai, Songkhla 90112,
Thailand. (2)Department of Pharmacognosy and Pharmaceutical Botany, Faculty of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Prince of Songkla University, Hat Yai, Songkhla 90112,
Thailand. Electronic address: juraithip.w@psu.ac.th. (3)Faculty of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen 40002, Thailand. (4)Department of
Pharmacognosy, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Monoclonal antibody (MAb) against mitragynine (MG), an analgesic alkaloid from
Kratom leaves (Mitragyna speciosa), was produced. MG was coupled to carrier
proteins employing either 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)
carbodiimide/N-hydroxysuccinimide (EDC/NHS), a zero-length cross linker or a
5-carbon length glutaraldehyde cross linker. To confirm the immunogenicity, the
hapten numbers were determined using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization 
time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS). Preparation of the MAb was
accomplished by the electrofusion method. Hybridoma 1A6 that was constructed from
the fusion between splenocytes of EDC/NHS conjugate immunized mice and SP2/0-Ag14
myeloma cells was selected, cloned twice and expanded. The cross-reactivities
(CRs) of this MAb 1A6 with a series of indole alkaloids were 30.54%, 24.83% and
8.63% for speciogynine, paynantheine and mitraciliatine, respectively. Using this
MAb, an indirect competitive enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (icELISA) was
developed with a measurement range of 32.92-250 µg/mL. Quantitative analysis of
the MG contents in plant samples by icELISA correlated well with the standard
high performance liquid chromatography method (R(2)=0.994). The MAb against
mitragynine provided a tool for detection of MG in Kratom preparations.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25216455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Chem Commun (Camb). 2014 Nov 4;50(85):12867-9. doi: 10.1039/c4cc05051g.

Oxidative coupling of alkenes with amides using peroxides: selective amide
C(sp3)-H versus C(sp2)-H functionalization.

Yang XH(1), Wei WT, Li HB, Song RJ, Li JH.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensing and Chemometrics, College of
Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China.
jhli@hnu.edu.cn.

A new oxidative coupling of unactivated terminal alkenes with amides using
peroxides is described, in which mono- and difunctionalization of alkenes are
selectively achieved. In this reaction with amides, the chemoselectivity toward
the functionalization of the C(sp(3))-H bonds adjacent to the nitrogen atom or
the functionalization of the carbonyl C(sp(2))-H bonds across alkenes relies on
the reaction conditions.

PMID: 25212419  [PubMed]


214. J Am Chem Soc. 2014 Sep 24;136(38):13194-7. doi: 10.1021/ja508165a. Epub 2014 Sep
15.

Ligand-promoted alkylation of C(sp3)-H and C(sp2)-H bonds.

Zhu RY(1), He J, Wang XC, Yu JQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute , 10550 North Torrey
Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, United States.

9-Methylacridine was identified as a generally effective ligand to promote a
Pd(II)-catalyzed C(sp(3))-H and C(sp(2))-H alkylation of simple amides with
various alkyl iodides. This alkylation reaction was applied to the preparation of
unnatural amino acids and geometrically controlled tri- and tetrasubstituted
acrylic acids.

PMCID: PMC4183600
PMID: 25208210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Chimia (Aarau). 2014;68(6):414-8. doi: 10.2533/chimia.2014.414.

Selective incorporation of difluoromethylene moieties into arenes assisted by
transition metals.

Gao B(1), Ni C(1), Hu J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Organofluorine Chemistry Shanghai Institute of Organic
Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences 345 Ling-Ling Road, Shanghai 200032,
China. (2)Key Laboratory of Organofluorine Chemistry Shanghai Institute of
Organic Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences 345 Ling-Ling Road, Shanghai
200032, China. jinbohu@sioc.ac.cn.

Fluorinated compounds are of significant importance in various fields due to
their unique chemical, physical, and biological properties. Accordingly, the
incorporation of fluorine atom(s) or fluorine-containing functionalities into
organic molecules has received considerable attention. For decades, extensive
reports and reviews mainly focused on the fluorination and perfluoroalkylation
(especially trifluoromethylation) whereas the preparation of partially
fluorinated compounds was less developed. Difluoromethylated arenes and their
derivatives (ArCF2R, R <U+2260> F, R(f), H) have been found to be as important in
pharmaceuticals as trifluoromethylated arenes. However, it is only recently that 
these compounds have experienced a revival of interest from synthetic chemists.
The direct construction of carbon(sp2)-carbon(sp3) bonds via transition
metal-mediated cross-coupling reactions represents one of the most
straightforward strategies for the introduction of difluoromethylene moieties
(CF2R, R <U+2260> F, R(f)) to aromatic compounds. This mini-review focuses on recent
advances of this research topic from both synthetic and mechanistic perspectives.

PMID: 25198751  [PubMed]


216. Planta Med. 2014 Aug;80(13):1143-50. doi: 10.1055/s-0034-1382959. Epub 2014 Sep
8.

Establishment of an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and application on
determination of ginsenoside Re in human saliva.

Qu H(1), Sai J(2), Wang Y(2), Sun Y(2), Zhang Y(2), Li Y(2), Zhao Y(2), Wang
Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Scientific Experiment, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine,
Chaoyang District, Beijing, China. (2)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Beijing
University of Chinese Medicine, Chaoyang District, Beijing, China.

This work describes an immunochemical approach for the quality control of Panax
ginseng and a pharmacological study of ginsenoside Re, a major bioactive
constituent in P. ginseng, using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. A
hybridoma secreting monoclonal antibody against ginsenoside Re was produced by
fusing splenocytes immunized with a ginsenoside Re-bovine serum albumin conjugate
with the hypoxanthine-aminopterin-thymidine-sensitive mouse myeloma SP2/0 cell
line. The method, at an effective measuring range of 7.8-500 ng<U+200A>·<U+200A>mL(-1) of
ginsenoside Re, successfully detected ginsenoside Re in Chinese traditional herb 
prescriptions. The results demonstrate that we generated a novel and reliable
assay system for measuring ginsenoside Re in Chinese medicines more efficiently. 
Futhermore, we determined the ginsenoside Re concentrations in the saliva of six 
healthy adults after the oral administration of a ginseng capsule to study the
pharmacokinetics of ginsenoside Re in human saliva.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 25197955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Int J Surg Case Rep. 2014;5(10):643-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2014.07.012. Epub
2014 Aug 12.

Intrasaccular caecal adenocarcinoma presenting as enlarging right inguinoscrotal 
hernia.

Marsden M(1), Curtis N(1), McGee S(2), Bracey E(1), Branagan G(1), Sleight S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Colorectal Surgery, Salisbury District Hospital, Odstock Road,
Salisbury, Wilts SP2 8BJ, UK. (2)Department of Radiology, Salisbury District
Hospital, Odstock Road, Salisbury, Wilts SP2 8BJ, UK. (3)Department of Colorectal
Surgery, Salisbury District Hospital, Odstock Road, Salisbury, Wilts SP2 8BJ, UK.
Electronic address: simon.sleight@salisbury.nhs.uk.

INTRODUCTION: Colorectal cancer and inguinal hernias are both common surgical
pathologies in the elderly but rarely co-exist. Where the conditions overlap,
there can be difficulties in both diagnosis and treatment.
PRESENTATION OF CASE: A 78 year old man with unexplained iron deficiency anaemia 
was investigated for gastrointestinal cancer. He was found to have enlarging
bilateral inguinoscrotal hernias. CT colonoscopy revealed a herniated caecal
carcinoma contained within the scrotum. An open excision was performed.
DISCUSSION: Iron deficiency anaemia without obvious bleeding is associated with
colorectal cancer and should be thoroughly investigated. Asymptomatic inguinal
hernias are often ignored by patients. However, a change in an existing hernia
may be associated with neoplasia.
CONCLUSION: Dual pathology raises new difficulties in assessment, investigation
and management of colorectal cancer.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4189051
PMID: 25194594  [PubMed]


218. Am J Hypertens. 2015 Apr;28(4):452-8. doi: 10.1093/ajh/hpu174. Epub 2014 Sep 5.

Longitudinal changes in late systolic cardiac load and serum NT-proBNP levels in 
healthy middle-aged Japanese men.

Tomiyama H(1), Nishikimi T(2), Matsumoto C(3), Kimura K(3), Odaira M(3), Shiina
K(3), Yamashina A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical University, Japan;
tomiyama@tokyo-med.ac.jp. (2)Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Kyoto
University Graduate School of Medicine, Japan. (3)Second Department of Internal
Medicine, Tokyo Medical University, Japan;

BACKGROUND: We determined whether any significant association exists between
change in late systolic cardiac load with time, estimated by radial pressure
waveform analysis, and development of cardiac hemodynamic stress in individuals
with preserved cardiac function.
METHODS: Brachial-ankle pulse wave velocity, radial augmentation index (rAI),
first peak of the radial pressure waveform (SP1), systolic and pulse pressure at 
the second peak of the radial pressure waveform (SP2 and PP2), and serum levels
of N-terminal fragment B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) were measured at
the start (first examination) and at the end (second examination) of this 3-year 
study in healthy Japanese men (n = 1,851).
RESULTS: A stepwise multivariate linear regression analysis demonstrated that
among the parameters of radial pressure waveform analysis and markers of arterial
stiffness analyzed, only PP2 was significantly associated with serum NT-proBNP
levels in study participants at both the first and second examinations.
Furthermore, among the parameters analyzed, only change in PP2 was significantly 
correlated with the change in serum NT-proBNP levels during the study period
(beta = 0.131, P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Sustained late systolic cardiac load might be a more significant
determinant of the development of cardiac hemodynamic stress than sustained early
systolic cardiac load or arterial stiffening in individuals with preserved
cardiac function.

© American Journal of Hypertension, Ltd 2014. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25194157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Org Lett. 2014 Sep 19;16(18):4870-3. doi: 10.1021/ol502378c. Epub 2014 Sep 5.

Amide-assisted acetoxylation of vinyl C(sp2)-H bonds by rhodium catalysis.

Yu W(1), Chen J, Gao K, Liu Z, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Zhejiang University , Hangzhou 310027, China.

A direct regioselective acetoxylation of enamides has been accomplished using a
combination of Cu(OAc)2 and rhodium catalyst. Cu(OAc)2 is served as the oxidant
and also provides the source of acetate in the reaction.

PMID: 25192439  [PubMed]


220. Org Lett. 2014 Sep 19;16(18):4702-5. doi: 10.1021/ol502010g. Epub 2014 Sep 5.

Copper-catalyzed C(sp2)-H amidation with azides as amino sources.

Peng J(1), Xie Z, Chen M, Wang J, Zhu Q.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institutes of
Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences , 190 Kaiyuan Avenue,
Guangzhou 510530, China.

A copper-catalyzed C-H amidation process, with azides as amino sources under
oxidant-free conditions, has been developed. When N-heterocycles were employed as
directing groups, sulfonylazide and benzoylazide could be used as amidating
reagents to provide corresponding N-arylamides. When amidines or imine were used,
tandem C-N/N-N bond formation occurred to afford indazole derivatives in one pot.

PMID: 25191696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2014 Sep 4;2:93. doi: 10.1186/s40478-014-0093-y.

Integrated multi-cohort transcriptional meta-analysis of neurodegenerative
diseases.

Li MD, Burns TC, Morgan AA, Khatri P.

INTRODUCTION: Neurodegenerative diseases share common pathologic features
including neuroinflammation, mitochondrial dysfunction and protein aggregation,
suggesting common underlying mechanisms of neurodegeneration. We undertook a
meta-analysis of public gene expression data for neurodegenerative diseases to
identify a common transcriptional signature of neurodegeneration.
RESULTS: Using 1,270 post-mortem central nervous system tissue samples from 13
patient cohorts covering four neurodegenerative diseases, we identified 243
differentially expressed genes, which were similarly dysregulated in 15
additional patient cohorts of 205 samples including seven neurodegenerative
diseases. This gene signature correlated with histologic disease severity.
Metallothioneins featured prominently among differentially expressed genes, and
functional pathway analysis identified specific convergent themes of
dysregulation. MetaCore network analyses revealed various novel candidate hub
genes (e.g. STAU2). Genes associated with M1-polarized macrophages and reactive
astrocytes were strongly enriched in the meta-analysis data. Evaluation of genes 
enriched in neurons revealed 70 down-regulated genes, over half not previously
associated with neurodegeneration. Comparison with aging brain data (3 patient
cohorts, 221 samples) revealed 53 of these to be unique to neurodegenerative
disease, many of which are strong candidates to be important in neuropathogenesis
(e.g. NDN, NAP1L2). ENCODE ChIP-seq analysis predicted common upstream
transcriptional regulators not associated with normal aging (REST, RBBP5, SIN3A, 
SP2, YY1, ZNF143, IKZF1). Finally, we removed genes common to neurodegeneration
from disease-specific gene signatures, revealing uniquely robust immune response 
and JAK-STAT signaling in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results implicate pervasive bioenergetic deficits, M1-type
microglial activation and gliosis as unifying themes of neurodegeneration, and
identify numerous novel genes associated with neurodegenerative processes.

PMCID: PMC4167139
PMID: 25187168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet. 2014;15:29-46. doi:
10.1146/annurev-genom-090413-025457.

An opportune life: 50 years in human cytogenetics.

Jacobs PA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury NHS Foundation Trust, SP2 8BJ
Salisbury, United Kingdom; email: wessex.genetics@salisbury.nhs.uk.

This article is one person's view of human cytogenetics over the past 50 years.
The flowering of human cytogenetics led the way to the establishment of clinical 
genetics as one of the most important developments in medicine in the twentieth
century. The article is written from the viewpoint of a scientist who never tired
of analyzing the images of dividing cells on the light microscope and
interpreting the wealth of information contained in them.

PMID: 25184528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Org Lett. 2014 Sep 19;16(18):4790-3. doi: 10.1021/ol5022542. Epub 2014 Sep 2.

Copper-mediated direct C(sp3)-H and C(sp2)-H acetoxylation.

Wang Z(1), Kuninobu Y, Kanai M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of Tokyo , 7-3-1
Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

A copper-mediated terminal position-selective C(sp(3))-H acetoxylation using a
bidentate directing group and AgOAc as an oxidant was achieved. This reaction has
high functional group tolerance and is not affected by steric hindrance. The
reaction proceeds in excellent yield, even in gram scale, and the directing group
can be removed after the reaction. Aromatic C(sp(2))-H acetoxylation also
proceeded under similar reaction conditions.

PMID: 25180452  [PubMed]


224. J Adv Prosthodont. 2014 Aug;6(4):266-71. doi: 10.4047/jap.2014.6.4.266. Epub 2014
Aug 14.

Bond and fracture strength of metal-ceramic restorations formed by selective
laser sintering.

Bae EJ(1), Kim JH(1), Kim WC(1), Kim HY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dental Laboratory Science and Engineering, Korea University,
Seoul, Republic of Korea.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to compare the fracture strength of the
metal and the bond strength in metal-ceramic restorations produced by selective
laser sintering (SLS) and by conventional casting (CAST).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Non-precious alloy (StarLoy C, DeguDent, Hanau, Germany)
was used in CAST group and metal powder (SP2, EOS GmbH, Munich, Germany) in SLS
group. Metal specimens in the form of sheets (25.0 × 3.0 × 0.5 mm) were produced 
in accordance with ISO 9693:1999 standards (n=30). To measure the bond strength, 
ceramic was fired on a metal specimen and then three-point bending test was
performed. In addition, the metal fracture strength was measured by continuing
the application of the load. The values were statistically analyzed by performing
independent t-tests (a=.05).
RESULTS: The mean bond strength of the SLS group (50.60 MPa) was higher than that
of the CAST group (46.29 MPa), but there was no statistically significant
difference. The metal fracture strength of the SLS group (1087.2 MPa) was lower
than that of the CAST group (2399.1 MPa), and this difference was statistically
significant.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion the balling phenomenon and the gap formation of the SLS
process may increase the metal-ceramic bond strength.

PMCID: PMC4146726
PMID: 25177469  [PubMed]


225. Monoclon Antib Immunodiagn Immunother. 2014 Aug;33(4):254-60. doi:
10.1089/mab.2014.0019.

Preparation and identification of monoclonal antibodies against <U+03C9>-conotoxin
MVIIA.

Yang Y(1), Ma Y, Li H, Wang S, Zhuang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Biopesticide and Chemical Biology, Ministry of Education,
School of Life Sciences, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University , Fuzhou,
China .

<U+03C9>-Conotoxins MVIIA (<U+03C9>-CTX MVIIA) is a peptide with 25 amino acid residues. It is 
a selective and reversible N-type voltage-gated calcium channel blocker, which
could be used as an analgesic for pain. To date, there are no monoclonal
antibodies (MAb) for immunoassay against <U+03C9>-conotoxin MVIIA. In this study, an MAb
against <U+03C9>-conotoxin MVIIA was prepared. The conotoxin-coding DNA sequence was
chemically synthesized and cloned into expression vector pGEX-6p-1 and pET32a
(+), respectively. The fusion protein GST-CTX was expressed and purified, and was
used to immunize BALB/c mice for preparing the anti-CTX antibody. The spleen
cells were fused with SP2/0 myeloma cells after the titer of antiserum was
detected and qualified. After being screened by indirect ELISA and cloned by
limiting dilution, a hybridoma named 4A12, which produces monoclonal antibody
specifically against <U+03C9>-CTX MVIIA, was successfully obtained. It was found that
there are 102 chromosomes in the 4A12 cell, and the subclass for the MAb is IgM. 
The MAb affinity against <U+03C9>-CTX MVIIA was 7.33×10(9) L/mol, and the cross-reaction
test showed that the MAb specifically bound <U+03C9>-CTX MVIIA. The MAb could be used as
a specific antagonist for <U+03C9>-CTX MVIIA in the physiological study on the CaV
channels in the nervous system.

PMCID: PMC4151065
PMID: 25171005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2014 Oct 13;53(42):11333-7. doi: 10.1002/anie.201407002. 
Epub 2014 Aug 27.

Trans-selective radical silylzincation of ynamides.

Romain E(1), Fopp C, Chemla F, Ferreira F, Jackowski O, Oestreich M, Perez-Luna
A.

Author information: 
(1)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, CNRS, UMR 8232, IPCM, CC 183, 4,
place Jussieu, 75005 Paris (France).

The silylzincation of terminal ynamides is achieved through a radical-chain
process involving (Me3Si)3SiH and R2Zn. A potentially competing polar mechanism
is excluded on the basis of diagnostic control experiments. The unique feature of
this addition across the C=C bond is its trans selectivity. One-pot electrophilic
substitution of the C(sp2)-Zn bond by Cu(I)-mediated C-C bond formation and
subsequent manipulation of the C(sp2)-Si bond provides a modular access to
Z-a,ß-disubstituted enamides.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25160825  [PubMed]


227. Toxicon. 2014 Nov;90:226-36. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2014.08.057. Epub 2014 Aug
23.

Preparation and identification of monoclonal antibody against Citreoviridin and
development of detection by Ic-ELISA.

Jin N(1), Ling S(1), Yang C(1), Wang S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Fungi and Mycotoxins of Fujian Province, Key
Laboratory of Biopesticide and Chemical Biology of the Education Ministry, and
School of Life Sciences, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou
350002, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Fungi and Mycotoxins of Fujian
Province, Key Laboratory of Biopesticide and Chemical Biology of the Education
Ministry, and School of Life Sciences, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry
University, Fuzhou 350002, China. Electronic address: wshyyl@sina.com.

Citreoviridin (CIT), a neurotoxic mycotoxin produced by Penicillium citreonigrum 
is generally detected in cereal grains and agricultural products worldwide, and
has numerous toxicological effects on human and animal health. Therefore, it is
necessary to develop a rapid, sensitive, and reliable immunoassay method for CIT.
In this study, artificial antigen CIT-KLH and CIT-BSA was successfully prepared
via succinic anhydride and carbodiimide two-step method. CIT-KLH conjugates were 
injected into Balb/c mice, and titer of the antiserum against CIT was determined 
using CIT-BSA as coating antigen by ELISA method. A hybridoma cell line 8D8
stably secreting monoclonal antibody against CIT was generated by fusing SP2/0
myeloma cells with the splenocytes from the immunized mice. The titer of 8D8 mAb 
reached 1: 1.28 × 10(5) after purified by caprylic/ammonium sulfate precipitation
(CA-AS) method. The 8D8 mAb was identified as IgG1 subtype. The cross-reactivity 
results indicated that anti-CIT mAb was highly specific to Citreoviridin, and the
average affinity 4.57 × 10(8) L/mol. A sensitive indirect competitive
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ic-ELISA) for CIT was established. Under
optimal condition, the linear range to detect CIT was 11.02-2370.48 ng/mL with
IC50 of 161.66 ng/mL and the limit of detection of the ic-ELISA was 11.86 ng/mL. 
With the mean coefficient of variation lowing 5%, the mean recovery in
intra-assay and inter-assay were (90.06 ± 1.60)% and (89.65 ± 1.69)%,
respectively. Therefore, the anti-CIT mAb secreted by 8D8 hybridoma cell line is 
useful for analysis of food contaminated with CIT.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 25157801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Phys Chem C Nanomater Interfaces. 2014 Aug 14;118(32):18706-18712. Epub 2014
Jul 18.

X-ray Absorption Study of Graphene Oxide and Transition Metal Oxide
Nanocomposites.

Gandhiraman RP(1), Nordlund D(2), Javier C(1), Koehne JE(1), Chen B(1), Meyyappan
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, Mountain View, California 94035,
United States. (2)Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource, Stanford Linear
Accelerator Center, Menlo Park, California 94025, United States.

The surface properties of the electrode materials play a crucial role in
determining the performance and efficiency of energy storage devices. Graphene
oxide and nanostructures of 3d transition metal oxides were synthesized for
construction of electrodes in supercapacitors, and the electronic structure and
oxidation states were probed using near-edge X-ray absorption fine structure.
Understanding the chemistry of graphene oxide would provide valuable insight into
its reactivity and properties as the graphene oxide transformation to
reduced-graphene oxide is a key step in the synthesis of the electrode materials.
Polarized behavior of the synchrotron X-rays and the angular dependency of the
near-edge X-ray absorption fine structures (NEXAFS) have been utilized to study
the orientation of the s and p bonds of the graphene oxide and graphene
oxide-metal oxide nanocomposites. The core-level transitions of individual metal 
oxides and that of the graphene oxide nanocomposite showed that the interaction
of graphene oxide with the metal oxide nanostructures has not altered the
electronic structure of either of them. As the restoration of the p network is
important for good electrical conductivity, the C K edge NEXAFS spectra of
reduced graphene oxide nanocomposites confirms the same through increased
intensity of the sp(2)-derived unoccupied states p* band. A pronounced angular
dependency of the reduced sample and the formation of excitonic peaks confirmed
the formation of extended conjugated network.

PMCID: PMC4136718
PMID: 25152800  [PubMed]


229. Bioresour Technol. 2014 Oct;170:379-84. doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2014.07.114. Epub
2014 Aug 12.

The performance of phosphorus (P)-doped activated carbon as a catalyst in
air-cathode microbial fuel cells.

Chen Z(1), Li K(2), Pu L(1).

Author information: 
(1)The College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Nankai University,
Tianjin 300071, China. (2)The College of Environmental Science and Engineering,
Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China. Electronic address: likx@nankai.edu.cn.

To observe the influence of P-doped activated carbon (AC) in air-cathode
microbial fuel cells (MFCs), AC was treated with H3PO4 (1M) at 80°C and 400°C
respectively, and then was used as catalyst layer in the air-cathode. The maximum
power densities were: 1096±33mW/m(2) (SP2, AC treated at 400°C), 954±36mW/m(2)
(SP1, AC treated at 80°C), which were 55%, 35% higher than the control
(708±27mW/m(2), untreated AC), respectively. The results of electrochemical
impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and the Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) showed that the
total resistance was decreased and the pore structure was changed. The analysis
of X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and Fourier transform infrared
spectroscopy (FTIR) demonstrated that P-doped functional group was produced in
SP2, which caused the 15% greater power density than SP1 by increasing O2
adsorption. What is more important, the chemically modified method is simple and 
economical.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25151475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. BMJ. 2014 May 14;348:g3224. doi: 10.1136/bmj.g3224.

Reception of the "Saatchi bill".

Rose L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmavision Consulting, Salisbury SP2 8NJ, UK lesrose@ntlworld.com.

Comment on
    BMJ. 2014;348:g2974.

PMID: 25134127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Nov;164A(11):2764-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36724. Epub 2014 
Aug 13.

Homozygosity for a novel deletion downstream of the SHOX gene provides evidence
for an additional long range regulatory region with a mild phenotypic effect.

Bunyan DJ(1), Taylor EJ, Maloney VK, Blyth M.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wiltshire, SP2 8BJ, UK.

Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis is caused by heterozygous mutations in SHOX or its
flanking sequences, including whole or partial gene deletions, point mutations
within the coding sequence, and deletions of downstream regulatory elements. The 
same mutations when biallelic cause the more severe Langer Mesomelic dysplasia.
Here, we report on a consanguineous family with a novel deletion downstream of
SHOX in which homozygously deleted individuals have a phenotype intermediate
between Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis and Langer Mesomelic dysplasia while
heterozygously deleted individuals are mostly asymptomatic. The deleted region is
distal to all previously described 3' deletions, suggesting the presence of an
additional regulatory element, deletions of which have a milder, variable
phenotypic effect.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25125269  [PubMed - in process]


232. Planta Med. 2014 Aug;80(12):1029-35. doi: 10.1055/s-0034-1382908. Epub 2014 Aug
6.

Spaceflight environment-induced variation in root yield and active constituents
of Salvia miltiorrhiza.

Peng L(1), Ru M(2), Wang K(1), Li B(1), Wang Y(1), Xia P(1), Liang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Northwest A & F University, Yangling, P.<U+200A>R. China.
(2)Institute of Soil and Water Conservation, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Yangling, P.<U+200A>R. China.

Salvia miltiorrhiza is a significant source of bioactive compounds providing
human health effects. Here, we surveyed root yield and the active constituents'
divergences of second generation S. miltiorrhiza (SP2) responding to a
spaceflight environment. High-performance liquid chromatography was conducted for
the comprehensive constituents' characterizations of 28 SP2 lines (224
individuals) and the ground control (eight individuals). The results showed that 
the mean fresh and dry weight of roots ranged from 116 to 172<U+2009>g and 25 to 119<U+2009>g, 
respectively, in SP2 lines. In addition, the mean contents of four tanshinone
compounds (tanshinone I, tanshinone IIA, cryptotanshinone, and dihydrotanshinone 
I) of 28 SP2 lines varied from 0.32 to 1.04<U+2009>mg<U+200A>·<U+200A>g(-1), 0.47 to 2.39<U+2009>mg<U+200A>·<U+200A>g(-1), 
0.25 to 1.60<U+2009>mg<U+200A>·<U+200A>g(-1), and 0.53 to 1.67<U+2009>mg<U+200A>·<U+200A>g(-1), respectively. Except for
salvianolic acid B, which varied drastically from 72<U+200A>% to 201<U+200A>% of the ground
control treatment, the other six phenolic acid contents of the 28 SP2 lines all
increased after spaceflight. Principal component analysis was performed to obtain
an overview of the distribution of all samples, and score plots clearly separated
the SP2 accessions from ground controls. Moreover, a positive relationship was
observed between tanshinone I and tanshinone IIA (r<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.790, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01), and
rosmarinic acid was positively correlated with salvianolic acid B (r<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.728,
p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01). In conclusion, this study demonstrated that a spaceflight environment 
induced SP2 accessions remarkably in the variation of root yield and active
constituent content.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 25098934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Chem Sci. 2014 Jun 1;5(6):2422-2427.

Selective Radical Amination of Aldehydic C(sp(2))-H Bonds with Fluoroaryl Azides 
via Co(II)-Based Metalloradical Catalysis: Synthesis of N-Fluoroaryl Amides from 
Aldehydes under Neutral and Nonoxidative Conditions.

Jin LM(1), Lu H(1), Cui Y(1), Lizardi CL(1), Arzua TN(1), Wojtas L(1), Cui X(1), 
Zhang XP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33620-5250,
USA. ; Tel: (+ 1) 813-974-7249.

The Co(II) complex of the D 2h-symmetric amidoporphyrin 3,5-Di (t) Bu-IbuPhyrin, 
[Co(P1)], has proven to be an effective metalloradical catalyst for
intermolecular amination of C(sp(2))-H bonds of aldehydes with fluoroaryl azides.
The [Co(P1)]-catalyzed process can employ aldehydes as the limiting reagents and 
operate under neutral and non-oxidative conditions, generating nitrogen gas as
the only byproduct. The metalloradical aldehydic C-H amination is suitable for
different combinations of aldehydes and fluoroaryl azides, producing the
corresponding N-fluoroaryl amides in good to excellent yields. A series of
mechanistic studies support a stepwise radical mechanism for the Co(II)-catalyzed
intermolecular C-H amination.

PMCID: PMC4111259
PMID: 25071929  [PubMed]


234. ACS Comb Sci. 2014 Sep 8;16(9):454-8. doi: 10.1021/co500086f. Epub 2014 Aug 4.

Diversity-oriented syntheses: coupling reactions between electron-deficient
olefins and aryl aldehydes via C(sp2)-H functionalization.

Niu B(1), Xu L, Xie P, Wang M, Zhao W, Pittman CU Jr, Zhou A.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacy School, Jiangsu University , Xuefu Road 301, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu,
China , 212013.

A diversity-oriented syntheses by coupling three electron-deficient olefins
(vinyl sulfonamides, methacrylamides, and methyl acrylates, respectively) with
aryl aldehydes via C(sp(2))-H functionalization were reported. These reactions
gave four different skeletal products respectively under environment-friendly and
mild conditions. All these reactions are highly regioselective and effective,
very suitable for the preparation of synthetic building blocks and compound
library, the results will enrich current coupling chemistry of olefins with
aldehydes and can be applied to other chemistry areas as well.

PMID: 25062387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Org Chem. 2014 Aug 15;79(16):7391-8. doi: 10.1021/jo5011069. Epub 2014 Jul 25.

Cu-catalyzed Fe-driven C(sp)-C(sp) and C(s)p-C(sp2) cross-coupling: an access to 
1,3-diynes and 1,3-enynes.

Ahammed S(1), Kundu D, Ranu BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organic Chemistry, Indian Association for the Cultivation of
Science , Jadavpur, Kolkata 700032, India.

An efficient Csp-Csp cross-coupling of alkynyl bromide and pinacol ester of
alkynyl boronic acid catalyzed by CuFe2O4 nanoparticles has been accomplished in 
dimethyl carbonate to produce unsymmetric 1,3-diynes. This protocol is also
extended for the Csp-Csp2 coupling of alkynyl bromide and alkenyl boronic acid to
provide conjugated 1,3-enynes. The aliphatic, aromatic, and heteroaromatic
alkynes couple with various substituted alkynyl/alkenyl boronates/boronic acids
by this procedure to furnish a library of 1,3-diynes and enynes in high yields.
The catalyst was easily separated by an external magnet and recycled 10 times.

PMID: 25046329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Chemistry. 2014 Aug 4;20(32):10005-10. doi: 10.1002/chem.201402711. Epub 2014 Jul
10.

Aryl-copper(III)-acetylides as key intermediates in Csp2-Csp model couplings
under mild conditions.

Rovira M(1), Font M, Acuña-Parés F, Parella T, Luis JM, Lloret-Fillol J, Ribas X.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Química Computacional i Catàlisi (IQCC) and Departament de
Química, Universitat de Girona, Campus Montilivi, Facultat Ciències, E17071
Girona (Catalonia, Spain).

The mechanism of copper-mediated Sonogashira couplings (so-called Stephens-Castro
and Miura couplings) is not well understood and lacks clear comprehension. In
this work, the reactivity of a well-defined aryl-Cu(III) species (1ClO4) with
p-R-phenylacetylenes (R = NO2, CF3, H) is reported and it is found that facile
reductive elimination from a putative aryl-Cu(III)-acetylide species occurs at
room temperature to afford the Caryl-Csp coupling species (IR), which in turn
undergo an intramolecular reorganisation to afford final heterocyclic products
containing 2H-isoindole (P<U+2009>NO2, P<U+2009>CF3, PHa) or 1,2-dihydroisoquinoline (PHb)
substructures. Density Functional Theory (DFT) studies support the postulated
reductive elimination pathway that leads to the formation of C<U+2009>sp2-Csp bonds and 
provide the clue to understand the divergent intramolecular reorganisation when
p-H-phenylacetylene is used. Mechanistic insights and the very mild experimental 
conditions to effect Caryl-Csp coupling in these model systems provide important 
insights for developing milder copper-catalysed Caryl-Csp coupling reactions with
standard substrates in the future.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25042813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Thorax. 2014 Oct;69(10):938-45. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2014-205464. Epub 2014 Jul
17.

A crossover randomised controlled trial of oral mandibular advancement devices
for obstructive sleep apnoea-hypopnoea (TOMADO).

Quinnell TG(1), Bennett M(2), Jordan J(3), Clutterbuck-James AL(1), Davies MG(1),
Smith IE(1), Oscroft N(1), Pittman MA(1), Cameron M(4), Chadwick R(1), Morrell
MJ(5), Glover MJ(3), Fox-Rushby JA(3), Sharples LD(6).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Support and Sleep Centre, Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, 
Cambridge, UK. (2)Medical Research Council Biostatistics Unit, Institute of
Public Health, University Forvie Site, Cambridge, UK. (3)Health Economics
Research Group, Brunel University, Uxbridge, Middlesex, UK. (4)Department of Oral
and Maxillofacial Surgery, Addenbrooke's NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, UK.
(5)National Heart & Lung Institute, Royal Brompton Campus, Imperial College,
London, UK. (6)Respiratory Support and Sleep Centre, Papworth Hospital NHS
Foundation Trust, Cambridge, UK Medical Research Council Biostatistics Unit,
Institute of Public Health, University Forvie Site, Cambridge, UK Clinical Trials
Research Unit, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.

RATIONALE: Mandibular advancement devices (MADs) are used to treat obstructive
sleep apnoea-hypopnoea syndrome (OSAHS) but evidence is lacking regarding their
clinical and cost-effectiveness in less severe disease.
OBJECTIVES: To compare clinical- and cost-effectiveness of a range of MADs
against no treatment in mild to moderate OSAHS.
MEASUREMENTS AND METHODS: This open-label, randomised, controlled, crossover
trial was undertaken at a UK sleep centre. Adults with Apnoea-Hypopnoea Index
(AHI) 5-<30/h and Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS) score =9 underwent 6 weeks of
treatment with three non-adjustable MADs: self-moulded (SleepPro 1; SP1);
semi-bespoke (SleepPro 2; SP2); fully-bespoke MAD (bMAD); and 4 weeks no
treatment. Primary outcome was AHI scored by a polysomnographer blinded to
treatment. Secondary outcomes included ESS, quality of life, resource use and
cost.
MAIN RESULTS: 90 patients were randomised and 83 were analysed. All devices
reduced AHI compared with no treatment by 26% (95% CI 11% to 38%, p=0.001) for
SP1, 33% (95% CI 24% to 41%) for SP2 and 36% (95% CI 24% to 45%, p<0.001) for
bMAD. ESS was 1.51 (95% CI 0.73 to 2.29, p<0.001, SP1) to 2.37 (95% CI 1.53 to
3.22, p<0.001, bMAD) lower than no treatment (p<0.001 for all). Compliance was
lower for SP1, which was the least preferred treatment at trial exit. All devices
were cost-effective compared with no treatment at a £20,000/quality-adjusted life
year (QALY) threshold. SP2 was the most cost-effective up to £39,800/QALY.
CONCLUSIONS: Non-adjustable MADs achieve clinically important improvements in
mild to moderate OSAHS and are cost-effective. Of those trialled, the
semi-bespoke MAD is an appropriate first choice.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: ISRCTN02309506.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 25035126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Biochemistry. 2014 Aug 19;53(32):5208-20. doi: 10.1021/bi500160m. Epub 2014 Aug
4.

Bioluminescence of beetle luciferases with 6'-amino-D-luciferin analogues reveals
excited keto-oxyluciferin as the emitter and phenolate/luciferin binding site
interactions modulate bioluminescence colors.

Viviani VR(1), Neves DR, Amaral DT, Prado RA, Matsuhashi T, Hirano T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics, Graduate Program of
Biotechnology and Environmental Monitoring, Federal University of São Carlos
(UFSCAR) , RodoviaJoãoLeme dos Santos, km 110, Itinga, Sorocaba, SP, Brazil.

Beetle luciferases produce different bioluminescence colors from green to red
using the same d-luciferin substrate. Despite many studies of the mechanisms and 
structural determinants of bioluminescence colors with firefly luciferases, the
identity of the emitters and the specific active site interactions responsible
for bioluminescence color modulation remain elusive. To address these questions, 
we analyzed the bioluminescence spectra with 6'-amino-D-luciferin
(aminoluciferin) and its 5,5-dimethyl analogue using a set of recombinant beetle 
luciferases that naturally elicit different colors and different pH sensitivities
(pH-sensitive, Amydetes vivianii <U+03BB>max=538 nm, Macrolampis sp2 <U+03BB>max=564 nm;
pH-insensitive, Phrixotrix hirtus <U+03BB>max=623 nm, Phrixotrix vivianii <U+03BB>max=546 nm,
and Pyrearinus termitilluminans <U+03BB>max=534 nm), a luciferase-like enzyme
(Tenebrionidae, Zophobas morio <U+03BB>max=613 nm), and mutants of C311 (S314). The
green-yellow-emitting luciferases display red-shifted bioluminescence spectra
with aminoluciferin in relation to those with D-luciferin, whereas the
red-emitting luciferases displayed blue-shifted spectra. Bioluminescence spectra 
with 5,5-dimethylaminoluciferin, in which enolization is blocked, were almost
identical to those of aminoluciferin. Fluorescence probing using
2-(4-toluidino)naphthalene-6-sulfonate and inference with aminoluciferin confirm 
that the luciferin binding site of the red-shifted luciferases is more polar than
in the case of the green-yellow-emitting luciferases. Altogether, the results
show that the keto form of excited oxyluciferin is the emitter in beetle
bioluminescence and that bioluminescence colors are essentially modulated by
interactions of the 6'-hydroxy group of oxyluciferin and basic moieties under the
influence of the microenvironment polarity of the active site: a strong
interaction between a base moiety and oxyluciferin phenol in a hydrophobic
microenvironment promotes green-yellow emission, whereas a more polar environment
weakens such interaction promoting red shifts. In pH-sensitive luciferases, a
pH-mediated switch from a closed hydrophobic conformation to a more open polar
conformation promotes the typical red shift.

PMID: 25025160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Arch Psychiatr Nurs. 2014 Aug;28(4):250-5. doi: 10.1016/j.apnu.2014.03.005. Epub 
2014 Mar 27.

Lessons learned from implementing a pilot RCT of transitional care model for
individuals with serious mental illness.

Solomon P(1), Hanrahan NP(2), Hurford M(3), DeCesaris M(4), Josey L(5).

Author information: 
(1)University of Pennsylvania School of Social Policy Practice, Center for Mental
Health Policy and Services Research. Electronic address: solomonp@sp2.upenn.edu. 
(2)University of Pennsylvania School of Nursing, Center for Health Outcomes and
Policy Research. Electronic address: nancyp@nursing.upenn.edu. (3)Philadelphia
Department of Behavioral Health and Intellectual Disability Service; University
of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Center for Mental Health Policy and Services 
Research. Electronic address: Matthew.hurford@phil.gov. (4)University of
Pennsylvania School of Nursing, Center for Health Outcomes and Policy Research.
Electronic address: mdecs@nursing.upenn.edu. (5)University of Pennsylvania School
of Nursing, Center for Health Outcomes and Policy Research. Electronic address:
lakeetra@nursing.upenn.edu.

We adapted an evidence-based transitional care model for older adults being
released from acute care hospitals for patients with serious mental illness and
medical co-morbidities being discharged from two psychiatric units of an acute
care hospital (TCare) and evaluated implementation issues. An advisory group (AG)
of community stakeholders assessed barriers and facilitators of a 90-day T-Care
intervention delivered by a psychiatric nurse practitioner (NP) in the context of
conducting a pilot randomized controlled trial. Minutes of AG and case narratives
by NP of 20 intervention participants were content analyzed. Patients with
immediate and pressing physical health problems were most receptive and actively 
utilized the service. Provider barriers consisted of communication and privacy
issues making it difficult to contact patients in mental health facilities. In
contrast, the NP was accepted and valued in the physical health arena.
Psychosocial needs and relationship issues were demanding, and we recommend a
team approach for TCare with the addition of a social worker, peer provider, and 
consulting psychiatrist for severely mentally ill patients being released from an
acute physical health hospitalization.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25017558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Org Biomol Chem. 2014 Aug 21;12(31):5839-42. doi: 10.1039/c4ob01256a.

A cascade alkylarylation reaction of 2-isocyanobiphenyls with simple alkanes for 
6-alkyl phenanthridines via dual C(sp3)-H/C(sp2)-H functionalizations.

Zhu ZQ(1), Wang TT, Bai P, Huang ZZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Zhejiang University, Xixi Campus, Hangzhou 310028, P.
R. China. huangzhizhen@zju.edu.cn.

A cascade alkylarylation reaction of 2-isocyanobiphenyls with simple alkanes for 
6-alkyl phenanthridines has been developed through dual C(sp(3))-H/C(sp(2))-H
functionalizations. The synthetic method has the advantages of high yields, good 
compatibility of functional groups and mild reaction conditions, although very
unreactive alkanes were involved in the reaction. A plausible mechanism through
both copper-catalyzed and DTBP mediated pathways has also been proposed.

PMID: 24995431  [PubMed]


241. Beilstein J Nanotechnol. 2014 Jun 6;5:801-11. doi: 10.3762/bjnano.5.92.
eCollection 2014.

Enhancement of photocatalytic H2 evolution of eosin Y-sensitized reduced graphene
oxide through a simple photoreaction.

Zhang W(1), Li Y(1), Peng S(1), Cai X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, China.

A graphene oxide (GO) solution was irradiated by a Xenon lamp to form reduced
graphene oxide (RGO). After irradiation, the epoxy, the carbonyl and the hydroxy 
groups are gradually removed from GO, resulting in an increase of sp(2)
p-conjugated domains and defect carbons with holes for the formed RGO. The RGO
conductivity increases due to the restoration of sp(2) p-conjugated domains. The 
photocatalytic activity of EY-RGO/Pt for hydrogen evolution was investigated with
eosin Y (EY) as a sensitizer of the RGO and Pt as a co-catalyst. When the
irradiation time is increased from 0 to 24 h the activity rises, and then reaches
a plateau. Under optimum conditions (pH 10.0, 5.0 × 10(-4) mol L(-1) EY, 10 µg
mL(-1) RGO), the maximal apparent quantum yield (AQY) of EY-RGO24/Pt for hydrogen
evolution rises up to 12.9% under visible light irradiation (<U+03BB> = 420 nm), and
23.4% under monochromatic light irradiation at 520 nm. Fluorescence spectra and
transient absorption decay spectra of the EY-sensitized RGO confirm that the
electron transfer ability of RGO increases with increasing irradiation time. The 
adsorption quantity of EY on the surface of RGO enhances, too. The two factors
ultimately result in an enhancement of the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution over
EY-RGO/Pt with increasing irradiation time. A possible mechanism is discussed.

PMCID: PMC4077509
PMID: 24991517  [PubMed]


242. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2014 Jul 14;53(29):7569-73. doi: 10.1002/anie.201404753. 
Epub 2014 Jul 2.

B-H, C-H, and B-C bond activation: the role of two adjacent agostic interactions.

Cassen A(1), Gloaguen Y, Vendier L, Duhayon C, Poblador-Bahamonde A, Raynaud C,
Clot E, Alcaraz G, Sabo-Etienne S.

Author information: 
(1)L.C.C. (Laboratoire de Chimie de Coordination), CNRS, Université de Toulouse, 
UPS, INPT, 205 route de Narbonne 31077 Toulouse (France)
http://www.lcc-toulouse.fr/lcc/spip.php?article433.

Tuning the nature of the linker in a L~BHR phosphinoborane compound led to the
isolation of a ruthenium complex stabilized by two adjacent, d-C-H and
e-B(sp2)-H, agostic interactions. Such a unique coordination mode stabilizes a
14-electron "RuH2P2" fragment through connected s-bonds of different polarity,
and affords selective B-H, C-H, and B-C bond activation as illustrated by
reactivity studies with H2 and boranes.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24990456  [PubMed]


243. Br J Dermatol. 2014 Oct;171(4):806-12. doi: 10.1111/bjd.13228. Epub 2014 Sep 30.

Variations in laser energy outputs over a series of simulated treatments.

Lister TS(1), Brewin MP.

Author information: 
(1)Salisbury Laser Clinic, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP2
8BJ, U.K.

Comment in
    Br J Dermatol. 2014 Oct;171(4):691-2.

BACKGROUND: Test patches are routinely employed to determine the likely efficacy 
and the risk of adverse effects from cutaneous laser treatments. However, the
degree to which these represent a full treatment has not been investigated in
detail.
OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to determine the variability in pulse-to-pulse
output energy from a representative selection of cutaneous laser systems in order
to assess the value of laser test patches.
METHODS: The output energies of each pulse from seven cutaneous laser systems
were measured using a pyroelectric measurement head over a 2-h period, employing 
a regime of 10-min simulated treatments followed by a 5-min rest period (between 
patients).
RESULTS: Each laser system appeared to demonstrate a different pattern of
variation in output energy per pulse over the period measured.
CONCLUSIONS: The output energies from a range of cutaneous laser systems have
been shown to vary considerably between a representative test patch and a full
treatment, and over the course of an entire simulated clinic list.

© 2014 British Association of Dermatologists.

PMID: 24975852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Molecules. 2014 Jun 24;19(6):8661-78. doi: 10.3390/molecules19068661.

Three-dimensional heterocycles: new uracil-based structures obtained by
nucleophilic substitution at the sp2 carbon of bromoisoxazoline.

Memeo MG(1), Lapolla F(1), Bovio B(1), Quadrelli P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica, Univesità degli Studi di Pavia, Viale Taramelli 12,
27100 Pavia, Italy. (2)Dipartimento di Chimica, Univesità degli Studi di Pavia,
Viale Taramelli 12, 27100 Pavia, Italy. paolo.quadrelli@unipv.it.

The regioisomeric cycloadducts of bromonitrile oxide and
N-benzoyl-2,3-oxaza-norborn-5-ene were easily prepared and elaborated into a
novel class of uracil-based scaffolds. The key-synthetic step is the nucleophilic
substitution at the sp2 carbon atom of the bromoisoxazoline three-dimensional
heterocycles. The protocol to perform the nucleophilic substitution of uracil
anions was optimized and adapted to the steric requirements of the substrates. A 
library of pyrimidine derivatives was prepared in very good yields and the
products were fully characterized. They are proposed as nucleoside analogues and 
as synthons for ß-turn motifs within PNA structures.

PMID: 24962398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Virus Res. 2014 Nov 26;193:52-64. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2014.06.004. Epub 2014 
Jun 20.

Selection of fully processed HIV-1 nucleocapsid protein is required for optimal
nucleic acid chaperone activity in reverse transcription.

Wu T(1), Gorelick RJ(2), Levin JG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Section on Viral Gene Regulation, Program in Genomics of Differentiation,
Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-2780, USA. (2)AIDS and Cancer
Virus Program, Leidos Biomedical Research, Inc., Frederick National Laboratory
for Cancer Research, Frederick, MD 21702-1201, USA. (3)Section on Viral Gene
Regulation, Program in Genomics of Differentiation, Eunice Kennedy Shriver
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-2780, USA. Electronic address: levinju@mail.nih.gov.

The mature HIV-1 nucleocapsid protein (NCp7) is generated by sequential
proteolytic cleavage of precursor proteins containing additional C-terminal
peptides: NCp15 (NCp7-spacer peptide 2 (SP2)-p6); and NCp9 (NCp7-SP2). Here, we
compare the nucleic acid chaperone activities of the three proteins, using
reconstituted systems that model the annealing and elongation steps in
tRNA(Lys3)-primed (-) strong-stop DNA synthesis and subsequent minus-strand
transfer. The maximum levels of annealing are similar for all of the proteins,
but there are important differences in their ability to facilitate reverse
transcriptase (RT)-catalyzed DNA extension. Thus, at low concentrations, NCp9 has
the greatest activity, but with increasing concentrations, DNA synthesis is
significantly reduced. This finding reflects NCp9's strong nucleic acid binding
affinity (associated with the highly basic SP2 domain) as well as its slow
dissociation kinetics, which together limit the ability of RT to traverse the
nucleic acid template. NCp15 has the poorest activity of the three proteins due
to its acidic p6 domain. Indeed, mutants with alanine substitutions for the
acidic residues in p6 have improved chaperone function. Collectively, these data 
can be correlated with the known biological properties of NCp9 and NCp15 mutant
virions and help to explain why mature NC has evolved as the critical cofactor
for efficient virus replication and long-term viral fitness.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4252486
PMID: 24954787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2014 Jul 14;53(29):7608-12. doi: 10.1002/anie.201403990. 
Epub 2014 May 30.

Rhodium(I)-catalyzed cycloisomerization of benzylallene-alkynes through C-H
activation.

Kawaguchi Y(1), Yasuda S, Kaneko A, Oura Y, Mukai C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Graduate School of Medicinal Sciences,
Kanazawa University, Kakuma-machi, Kanazawa 920-1192 (Japan).

The efficient Rh(I)-catalyzed cycloisomerization of benzylallene-alkynes produced
the tricyclo[9.4.0.0(3,8)]pentadecapentaene skeleton through a C(sp2)-H bond
activation in good yields. A plausible reaction mechanism proceeds via oxidative 
addition of the acetylenic C-H bond to Rh(I), an ene-type cyclization to the
vinylidenecarbene-Rh(I) intermediate, and an electrophilic aromatic substitution 
with the vinylidenecarbene species. It was proposed based on deuteration and
competition experiments.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24889108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Org Lett. 2014 Jun 6;16(11):2884-7. doi: 10.1021/ol501023n. Epub 2014 May 23.

Copper-mediated tandem oxidative C(sp2)-H/C(sp)-H alkynylation and annulation of 
arenes with terminal alkynes.

Dong J(1), Wang F, You J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Green Chemistry and Technology of Ministry of Education,
College of Chemistry, and State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China
Hospital, West China Medical School, Sichuan University , 29 Wangjiang Road,
Chengdu 610064, P. R. China.

The copper-mediated tandem oxidative C(sp(2))-H/C(sp)-H cross-coupling and
intramolecular annulation of arenes with terminal alkynes has been developed,
which offers a highly efficient approach to the 3-methyleneisoindolin-1-one
scaffold. In this oxidative coupling process, Cu(OAc)2 acts as both the promoter 
and the terminal oxidant. This protocol features a wide substrate scope; high
functional group tolerance; exclusive chemo-, regio-, and stereoselectivity; and 
simple, easily available, and inexpensive reaction system. The transformation has
demonstrated for the first time that Cu(OAc)2 can be renewable after undergoing
an oxidative reaction.

PMID: 24855896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Int J Biometeorol. 2015 Mar;59(3):357-64. doi: 10.1007/s00484-014-0847-z. Epub
2014 May 22.

Scrotal infrared digital thermography as a predictor of seasonal effects on sperm
traits in Braford bulls.

Menegassi SR(1), Barcellos JO, Dias EA, Koetz C Jr, Pereira GR, Peripolli V,
McManus C, Canozzi ME, Lopes FG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Av.
Bento Gonçalves, no 7.712, 91540-000, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.

The aim of this study was to assess the seasonal effects of the environment on
semen quality in bulls, using infrared thermography. Sperm motility (M), mass
motion (MM), and vigor (VIG) were evaluated in sperm samples from 17 Bradford
bulls aged approximately 24 months at the beginning of the study. Infrared
thermography images and data were collected using an infrared FLIR T 300 camera
and Quick Report 1.2 SP2 software to determine the temperature of the proximal
and distal poles of the testis and to assess the testicular temperature gradient.
The seasonal effects on physiological, seminal, and climatic variables were
analyzed by the GLM ANOVA and CORR procedures using SAS®. The microclimatic
factors were recorded in hourly intervals, and the daily mean temperature and
mean relative humidity were calculated to determine the daily
temperature-humidity index (THI) every day for 1 year. The temperature gradient
(TG) variations of the testes were significantly higher in the autumn (4.5 °C),
winter (4.0 °C), and spring (2.9 °C) compared to summer (0.9 °C) (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05).
Ocular globe temperatures were lower in the winter (27.6 °C) and autumn (26.8 °C)
compared to summer (33.9 °C) and spring (31.1 °C) (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). The average MM
(2.58), M (52.64), and VIG (2.70) of the semen decreased in the summer compared
to other seasons (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01). The TG was negatively correlated with THI (-0.44;
P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). For the seminal variables, MaD (-0.45; P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) and TD (-0.50;
P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01) presented a negative correlation with TG. The TG had a positive
correlation between M and VIG, which had values of 0.36 and 0.35, respectively
(P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). We have concluded that infrared thermography can be used to assess
the testicular temperature gradient and its consequences on physical and
quantitative aspects of sperm.

PMID: 24848445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Chem Sci. 2014 Jun 1;5(6):2184-2190.

Total syntheses of indolactam alkaloids (-)-indolactam V, (-)-pendolmycin,
(-)-lyngbyatoxin A, and (-)-teleocidin A-2.

Nathel NF(1), Shah TK(1), Bronner SM(1), Garg NK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, 607
Charles Young Drive East, Box 951569, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

We report the total syntheses of (-)-indolactam V and the C7-substituted
indolactam alkaloids (-)-pendolmycin, (-)-lyngbyatoxin A, and (-)-teleocidin A-2.
The strategy for preparing indolactam V relies on a distortion-controlled
indolyne functionalization reaction to establish the C4-N linkage, in addition to
an intramolecular conjugate addition to build the conformationally-flexible
nine-membered ring. The total synthesis of indolactam V then sets the stage for
the divergent synthesis of the other targeted alkaloids. Specifically, late-stage
sp(2)-sp(3) cross-couplings on an indolactam V derivative are used to introduce
the key C7 substituents and the necessary quaternary carbons. These challenging
couplings, in addition to other delicate manipulations, all proceed in the
presence of a basic tertiary amine, an unprotected secondary amide, and an
unprotected indole. Thus, our approach not only enables the enantiospecific total
syntheses of four indolactam alkaloids, but also serves as a platform for probing
complexity-generating and chemoselective transformations in the context of
alkaloid total synthesis.

PMCID: PMC4019407
PMID: 24839542  [PubMed]


250. J Am Chem Soc. 2014 May 28;136(21):7599-602. doi: 10.1021/ja503489b. Epub 2014
May 16.

Transition-metal-mediated three-component cascade cyclization: selective cage
B-C(sp2) coupling of carborane with aromatics and synthesis of carborane-fused
tricyclics.

Quan Y(1), Qiu Z, Xie Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and State Key Laboratory of Synthetic Chemistry, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong , Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong, China.

Zirconium/nickel comediated one-pot three-component cascade cyclization of
carboryne, alkene, and 2-bromophenyltrimethylsilylacetylene has been achieved,
leading to the formation of a series of C,C,B-substituted carborane-fused
tricyclics. On the basis of experimental results, a plausible mechanism is
proposed including [2 + 2 + 1] cross-cyclotrimerization followed by
intramolecular direct selective cage B-C(sp(2)) coupling. This represents the
first example of direct cage B-C(phenyl) coupling via cage B-H activation.

PMID: 24823971  [PubMed]


251. Chemistry. 2014 Jun 10;20(24):7241-4. doi: 10.1002/chem.201402516. Epub 2014 May 
13.

Nickel-catalyzed decarboxylative acylation of heteroarenes by sp2 C-H
functionalization.

Yang K(1), Zhang C, Wang P, Zhang Y, Ge H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemistry & BioMedical Sciences, School of Chemistry and Chemical
Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Analytical Chemistry for Life Science,
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093 (P. R. China).

Nickel-catalyzed ligand-free decarboxylative cross-coupling of azole derivatives 
with a-oxoglyoxylic acids has been developed. This work represents the first
example of decarboxylative cross-coupling reactions, in a C-H bond
functionalization manner, through nickel catalysis, and tolerates various
functional groups. Additionally, this approach provides an efficient access to
azole ketones, an important structural motif in many medicinal compounds with a
broad range of biological activities.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24823504  [PubMed]


252. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Jun;42(11):7145-59. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku335. Epub 2014
May 9.

Distinct nucleic acid interaction properties of HIV-1 nucleocapsid protein
precursor NCp15 explain reduced viral infectivity.

Wang W(1), Naiyer N(1), Mitra M(1), Li J(2), Williams MC(2), Rouzina I(3),
Gorelick RJ(4), Wu Z(1), Musier-Forsyth K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Center for Retrovirus Research and
Center for RNA Biology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(2)Department of Physics, Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. (4)AIDS and Cancer Virus Program, Leidos
Biomedical Research, Inc., Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research,
Frederick, MD 21702, USA. (5)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Center for
Retrovirus Research and Center for RNA Biology, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA musier@chemistry.ohio-state.edu.

During human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) maturation, three different
forms of nucleocapsid (NC) protein-NCp15 (p9 + p6), NCp9 (p7 + SP2) and
NCp7-appear successively. A mutant virus expressing NCp15 shows greatly reduced
infectivity. Mature NCp7 is a chaperone protein that facilitates remodeling of
nucleic acids (NAs) during reverse transcription. To understand the strict
requirement for NCp15 processing, we compared the chaperone function of the three
forms of NC. NCp15 anneals tRNA to the primer-binding site at a similar rate as
NCp7, whereas NCp9 is the most efficient annealing protein. Assays to measure NA 
destabilization show a similar trend. Dynamic light scattering studies reveal
that NCp15 forms much smaller aggregates relative to those formed by NCp7 and
NCp9. Nuclear magnetic resonance studies suggest that the acidic p6 domain of
HIV-1 NCp15 folds back and interacts with the basic zinc fingers. Neutralizing
the acidic residues in p6 improves the annealing and aggregation activity of
NCp15 to the level of NCp9 and increases the protein-NA aggregate size. Slower
NCp15 dissociation kinetics is observed by single-molecule DNA stretching,
consistent with the formation of electrostatic inter-protein contacts, which
likely contribute to the distinct aggregate morphology, irregular HIV-1 core
formation and non-infectious virus.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4066767
PMID: 24813443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Org Lett. 2014 May 16;16(10):2748-51. doi: 10.1021/ol501070g. Epub 2014 May 7.

Palladium-catalyzed C(sp2)-H pyridocarbonylation of N-aryl-2-aminopyridines: dual
function of the pyridyl moiety.

Liang D(1), He Y, Zhu Q.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institutes of
Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences , 190 Kaiyuan Avenue,
Guangzhou 510530, China.

An efficient synthesis of 11H-pyrido[2,1-b]quinazolin-11-one through
palladium-catalyzed C(sp(2))-H pyridocarbonylation of N-aryl-2-aminopyridines has
been developed. The pyridyl group acts as an intramolecular nucleophile for the
first time in C-H carbonylation reactions.

PMID: 24804565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2014 Jun 21;16(23):11303-9. doi: 10.1039/c4cp00539b.

Identifying sp-sp2 carbon materials by Raman and infrared spectroscopies.

Wang J(1), Zhang S, Zhou J, Liu R, Du R, Xu H, Liu Z, Zhang J, Liu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Nanochemistry, College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering,
Peking University, Beijing 100871, PR China. zfliu@pku.edu.cn jinzhang@pku.edu.cn
LiuZhiRong@pku.edu.cn.

Two-dimensional (2D) materials composed of sp and sp(2) carbon atoms (e.g.,
graphyne and graphdiyne) show many interesting properties. These materials can be
constructed through alkyne homocoupling; however, the occurrence of various side 
reactions increases the difficulty of their synthesis and structural
characterization. Here, we investigate the thermodynamic properties and
vibrational spectra of several aryl-alkynes. Both homocoupling and side reactions
are found to occur spontaneously at room temperature in terms of thermodynamics. 
The calculated Raman spectra of the homocoupling products show regular changes
with increasing polymerization degree. By rationalizing the vibrational modes of 
various oligomers, the Raman spectrum of a 2D sp-sp(2) carbon sheet is predicted;
it exhibits three sharp peaks at 2241, 1560, and 1444 cm(-1). Although the target
and byproducts display similar vibrational modes, a combination of Raman and
infrared spectroscopies can be used to differentiate them. The theoretical
results are then used to analyze the structure of a synthesized sample and
provide useful information.

PMID: 24789090  [PubMed]


255. J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2014 Mar;14(3):2334-42.

P2O5 assisted green synthesis of multicolor fluorescent water soluble carbon
dots.

Babar DG, Sonkar SK, Tripathi KM, Sarkar S.

A low cost synthesis of multicolor fluorescent carbon dots (C-dots) from edible
sugars is described here. Common sugars like dextrose, lactose or maltose in
aqueous medium gets dehydrated using phosphorus pentoxide (P2O5). The reaction is
facile and completed within few minutes to form insoluble carbon (C-dots) mostly 
having the graphitic (G-band, Raman) sp2 hybridized carbon atoms (C-atoms). This 
insoluble carbon on oxidative treatment with nitric acid produced disordered sp3 
(D-band retaining G-band, Raman) hybridized C-atoms, originated from the
graphitic pool with sp2 hybridized C-atoms. This high density assimilation of
self passivated "surfacial defects" become emissive during electronic
transitions. Surfacial defects due to high degree of electrophilic carboxylation 
create the water soluble version of multicolor fluorescent C-dots as "water
soluble fluorescent carbon dots" (wsFCDs). wsFCDs being itself self-passivated
imposes the tunable multicolor emission throughout the visible spectrum without
having any external coating and surface passivation and could be used as
multicolor fluorescent probe especially in the emerging field of optical
bio-imaging.

PMID: 24745229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Chemistry. 2014 May 19;20(21):6324-31. doi: 10.1002/chem.201400018. Epub 2014 Apr
16.

Hybrid nanocarbon as a catalyst for direct dehydrogenation of propane: formation 
of an active and selective core-shell sp2/sp3 nanocomposite structure.

Wang R(1), Sun X, Zhang B, Sun X, Su D.

Author information: 
(1)Shenyang National Laboratory for Materials Science, Institute of Metal
Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 72 Wenhua Road, Shenyang, 110016 (P.R.
China); National Institute of Clean-and-Low-Carbon Energy, Changping District,
Beijing, 102209 (P.R. China).

Hybrid nanocarbon, comprised of a diamond core and a graphitic shell with a
variable sp(2)-/sp(3)-carbon ratio, is controllably obtained through sequential
annealing treatment (550-1300<U+2009>°C) of nanodiamond. The formation of sp(2) carbon
increases with annealing temperature and the nanodiamond surface is reconstructed
from amorphous into a well-ordered, onion-like carbon structure via an
intermediate composite structure--a diamond core covered by a defective, curved
graphene outer shell. Direct dehydrogenation of propane shows that the
sp(2)-/sp(3)-nanocomposite exhibits superior catalytic performance to that of
individual nanodiamond and graphitic nanocarbon. The optimum catalytic activity
of the diamond/graphene composite depends on the maximum structural defectiveness
and high chemical reactivity of the ketone groups. Ketone-type functional groups 
anchored on the defects/vacancies are active for propene formation; nevertheless,
once the oxygen functional groups are desorbed, the defects/vacancies alone might
be active sites responsible for the C-H bond activation of propane.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24740731  [PubMed]


257. Nanoscale Res Lett. 2014 Apr 14;9(1):182. doi: 10.1186/1556-276X-9-182.

Possibility of graphene growth by close space sublimation.

Sopinskyy MV(1), Khomchenko VS, Strelchuk VV, Nikolenko AS, Olchovyk GP, Vishnyak
VV, Stonis VV.

Author information: 
(1)V, Ye, Lashkaryov Institute of Semiconductor Physics, National Academy of
Sciences of Ukraine, 45 Prospect Nauky, Kyiv 03028, Ukraine.
sopinsky@isp.kiev.ua.

Carbon films on the Si/SiO2 substrate are fabricated using modified method of
close space sublimation at atmospheric pressure. The film properties have been
characterized by micro-Raman and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and
monochromatic ellipsometry methods. Ellipsometrical measurements demonstrated an 
increase of the silicon oxide film thickness in the course of manufacturing
process. The XPS survey spectra of the as-prepared samples indicate that the main
elements in the near-surface region are carbon, silicon, and oxygen. The
narrow-scan spectra of C1s, Si2p, O1s regions indicate that silicon and oxygen
are mainly in the SiOx (x<U+2009><U+2009>2) oxide form, whereas the main component of C1s
spectrum at 284.4 eV comes from the sp2-hybridized carbon phase. Micro-Raman
spectra confirmed the formation of graphene films with the number of layers that 
depended on the distance between the graphite source and substrate.

PMCID: PMC3989852
PMID: 24731549  [PubMed]


258. Chem Commun (Camb). 2014 Jun 21;50(49):6439-42. doi: 10.1039/c4cc00743c. Epub
2014 Apr 4.

tert-Butyl peroxybenzoate (TBPB)-mediated 2-isocyanobiaryl insertion with
1,4-dioxane: efficient synthesis of 6-alkyl phenanthridines via C(sp3)-H/C(sp2)-H
bond functionalization.

Cao JJ(1), Zhu TH, Wang SY, Gu ZY, Wang X, Ji SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Organic Synthesis of Jiangsu Province, College of Chemistry,
Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123,
China. shunyi@suda.edu.cn shunjun@suda.edu.cn.

An efficient method for the construction of 6-alkyl phenanthridines by tert-butyl
peroxybenzoate (TBPB)-mediated 2-isocyanobiaryl insertion with 1,4-dioxane was
established. Two new C-C bonds were formed in this reaction via a sequential
C(sp(3))-H/C(sp(2))-H bond functionalization under metal-free conditions.

PMID: 24699898  [PubMed]


259. Artif Cells Nanomed Biotechnol. 2016 Feb;44(1):48-55. doi:
10.3109/21691401.2014.901335. Epub 2014 Apr 3.

Effects of sodium pyruvate on ameliorating metabolic acidosis.

Yang J(1), Zhao JX(1), Wang Y(1), Chen G(1), Cheng WN(2), Luo X(1), Pei XT(1),
Zhao L(1), Su Q(3), Zhou H(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Institute of Transfusion Medicine, Academy of Military Medical Sciences ,
Beijing , P.R. China. (2)b Department of Biological Engineering , College of
Environment and Chemical Engineering, Yanshan University , Qinhuangdao , P. R.
China. (3)c The First Affiliated Hospital of General Hospital of PLA , Beijing , 
P. R. China.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the effects of sodium pyruvate (SP) on metabolic acidosis.
METHODS: For the in vivo experiments, we evaluated effects of SP on an ammonium
chloride (NH4Cl)-induced hyperchloremic acidosis rat model. SP was infused at
overall doses of 2, 4, and 6 mmol·kg(- 1) for the SP1, SP2, and SP3 groups,
respectively. Treatment with sodium bicarbonate (SB) was used as a positive
control (2 mmol·kg(- 1)), and treatment with normal saline (NS) was used as a
volume control (2 mL·kg(- 1)). Blood was sampled from the ophthalmic venous
plexus for pH, blood gases, electrolytes, glucose, creatinine (Cr), and urea
analysis after injection. For the in vitro experiment, propionate was applied to 
induce intracellular acidosis in human endothelial cells. Intracellular pH (pHi) 
was fluorimetrically measured after the addition of SP.
RESULTS: In the in vivo study, the pH of SP1 group showed no significant
difference compared with that of the NS group. The SP2 and SP3 groups had a
higher pH than the NS group (P < 0.01). The SP3 group had a higher pH than the SB
group (P < 0.05) and SP1 group (P < 0.05). Moreover, SP treatment ameliorated the
abnormality of calcium and decreased the blood potassium levels. The SP3 group
had higher glucose levels than SP1 group (P < 0.05). No significant differences
were observed between all the groups in the plasma Cr and urea levels. In the in 
vitro study, the pHi increased immediately after the addition of SP.
CONCLUSION: The data suggest that intravascular treatment with SP represents a
novel therapeutic strategy to ameliorate metabolic acidosis.

PMID: 24697727  [PubMed - in process]


260. Nat Prod Commun. 2014 Mar;9(3):303-8.

A general synthetic approach to hydroquinone meroterpenoids: stereoselective
synthesis of (+)-(S)-metachromin V and alliodorol.

Serra S, Cominetti AA, Lissoni V.

A new general synthetic approach to hydroquinone meroterpenoids is here
described. The framework of the aforementioned natural compounds was built up
through the Li2CuCl4 catalysed cross coupling reaction of the
4-substituted-(E)-prenyl acetates 9 with 2,5-bis(benzyloxy)phenyl magnesium
bromide 8 as a key step. The latter sp3-sp2 coupling affords the products in good
chemical yields and in very high stereoisomeric purity. A further key step of the
present synthetic method consists of the removal of the benzylic protecting
groups by a very mild procedure based on the use of lithium naphthalenide. The
latter reagent, in combination with aliphatic dialkylamines, is able to cleave
all the benzylic protecting groups leaving unaffected the polyenic moieties. By
these means, we devised a new synthesis of the natural hydroquinone
geranylhydroquinone, farnesylhydroquinone, metachromin V and alliodorol. In
addition, the marine meroterpenoid, (+)-(S)-metachromin V, was synthesized for
the first time; its chemical structure was confirmed and its absolute
configuration was unambiguously assigned.

PMID: 24689200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Chemistry. 2014 Apr 25;20(18):5501-10. doi: 10.1002/chem.201304257. Epub 2014 Mar
28.

Rollover-assisted C(sp2)-C(sp3) bond formation.

Zucca A(1), Maidich L, Canu L, Petretto GL, Stoccoro S, Cinellu MA, Clarkson GJ, 
Rourke JP.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica e Farmacia, Università degli Studi di Sassari, Via
Vienna 2, 07100 Sassari (Italy). zucca@uniss.it.

Rollover cyclometalation involves bidentate heterocyclic donors, unusually acting
as cyclometalated ligands. The resulting products, possessing a free donor atom, 
react differently from the classical cyclometalated complexes. Taking advantage
of a "rollover"/"retro-rollover" reaction sequence, a succession of oxidative
addition and reductive elimination in a series of platinum(II) complexes
[Pt(N,C)(Me)(PR3)] resulted in a rare C(sp(2))-C(sp(3)) bond formation to give
the bidentate nitrogen ligands 3-methyl-2,2'-bipyridine,
3,6-dimethyl-2,2'-bipyridine, and 3-methyl-2-(2'-pyridyl)-quinoline, which were
isolated and characterized. The nature of the phosphane PR3 is essential to the
outcome of the reaction. This route constitutes a new method for the activation
and functionalization of C-H bond in the C(3) position of bidentate heterocyclic 
compounds, a position usually difficult to functionalize.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24682987  [PubMed]


262. Chemistry. 2014 Mar 3;20(10):2793-803. doi: 10.1002/chem.201302681.

C(sp(2))-coupled nitronyl nitroxide and iminonitroxide diradicals.

Tolstikov S, Tretyakov E, Fokin S, Suturina E, Romanenko G, Bogomyakov A, Stass
D, Maryasov A, Fedin M, Gritsan N, Ovcharenko V.

Spin-labelled compounds are widely used in chemistry, physics, biology and the
materials sciences but the synthesis of stable high-spin organic molecules is
still a challenge. We succeeded in synthesising heteroatom analogues of the
1,1,2,3,3-pentamethylenepropane (PMP) diradicals with two nitronyl nitroxide
(DR1) and with two iminonitroxide (DR2) fragments linked through the C(sp2) atom 
of the nitrone group. According to magnetic susceptibility measurements, EPR data
and ab initio calculations at the (8,6)CASSCF and (8,6)NEVPT2 levels, DR1 and DR2
have singlet ground states. The singlettriplet energy splitting (2J) is low
(J/k=-7.4 for DR1 and -6.0 K for DR2), which comes from the disjoint nature of
these diradicals. The reaction of [Cu(hfac)2] with DR1 gives rise to different
heterospin complexes in which the diradical acts as a rigid ligand, retaining its
initial conformation. For the [{Cu(hfac)2}2(DR1)(H2O)] complex, sufficiently
strong ferromagnetic interactions (J1/k=42.7 and J2/k=14.1 K) between two
coordinating CuII ions and DR1 were revealed. In
[{Cu(hfac)2}2(DR1)(H2O)][Cu(hfac)2(H2O)], the very strong and antiferromagnetic
(J/k=-416.1 K) exchange interaction between one of the coordinating CuII ions and
DR1 is caused by the very short equatorial CuO bond length (1.962 Å).

PMID: 24677167  [PubMed]


263. Nature. 2014 Apr 3;508(7494):98-102. doi: 10.1038/nature13115. Epub 2014 Mar 23.

Constitutional and somatic rearrangement of chromosome 21 in acute lymphoblastic 
leukaemia.

Li Y(1), Schwab C(2), Ryan SL(2), Papaemmanuil E(3), Robinson HM(4), Jacobs P(5),
Moorman AV(6), Dyer S(7), Borrow J(7), Griffiths M(7), Heerema NA(8), Carroll
AJ(9), Talley P(10), Bown N(11), Telford N(12), Ross FM(5), Gaunt L(13), McNally 
RJ(14), Young BD(6), Sinclair P(6), Rand V(6), Teixeira MR(15), Joseph O(3),
Robinson B(3), Maddison M(3), Dastugue N(16), Vandenberghe P(17), Haferlach
C(18), Stephens PJ(3), Cheng J(19), Van Loo P(20), Stratton MR(3), Campbell
PJ(21), Harrison CJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Cancer Genome Project, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton CB10 1SA,
UK [2]. (2)1] Leukaemia Research Cytogenetics Group, Northern Institute for
Cancer Research, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK [2].
(3)Cancer Genome Project, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton CB10 1SA, UK. 
(4)West Midlands Regional Genetics Laboratory, Birmingham Women's NHS Foundation 
Trust, Birmingham B15 2TG, UK. (5)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury 
NHS Foundation Trust, Salisbury SP2 8BJ, UK. (6)Leukaemia Research Cytogenetics
Group, Northern Institute for Cancer Research, Newcastle University, Newcastle
upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK. (7)1] West Midlands Regional Genetics Laboratory,
Birmingham Women's NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham B15 2TG, UK [2] School of
Cancer Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK. (8)Department 
of Pathology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA. (9)Department
of Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama 35233, USA.
(10)Sheffield Diagnostic Genetics Service, Sheffield Children's NHS Foundation
Trust, Sheffield S10 2TH, UK. (11)Cytogenetics Laboratory, Northern Genetics
Service, Newcastle upon Tyne NE7 7DN, UK. (12)Oncology Cytogenetics, The Christie
NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester M20 4BX, UK. (13)Regional Cytogenetics Unit,
Genetic Medicine, Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,
Saint Mary's Hospital, Manchester M13 9WL, UK. (14)Institute of Health and
Society, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4AX, UK. (15)1] Genetics
Department, Portuguese Oncology Institute, Porto University, 4200-072 Porto,
Portugal [2] Biomedical Sciences Institute (ICBAS), Porto University, 4200-072
Porto, Portugal. (16)Laboratoire d'Hématologie, Génétique des Hémopathies,
Hôpital Purpan, 31059 Toulouse, France. (17)1] Center for Human Genetics,
University Hospital Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium [2] KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven,
Belgium. (18)MLL Munich Leukemia Laboratory, Munich 81377, Germany. (19)1] Center
for Human Genetics, University Hospital Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium [2] KU
Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium [3] Department of Electrical Engineering - ESAT,
University of Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium. (20)1] Cancer Genome Project,
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton CB10 1SA, UK [2] Center for Human
Genetics, University Hospital Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium [3] KU Leuven, 3000
Leuven, Belgium. (21)1] Cancer Genome Project, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute,
Hinxton CB10 1SA, UK [2] Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB2 2XY, UK [3].

Changes in gene dosage are a major driver of cancer, known to be caused by a
finite, but increasingly well annotated, repertoire of mutational mechanisms.
This can potentially generate correlated copy-number alterations across hundreds 
of linked genes, as exemplified by the 2% of childhood acute lymphoblastic
leukaemia (ALL) with recurrent amplification of megabase regions of chromosome 21
(iAMP21). We used genomic, cytogenetic and transcriptional analysis, coupled with
novel bioinformatic approaches, to reconstruct the evolution of iAMP21 ALL. Here 
we show that individuals born with the rare constitutional Robertsonian
translocation between chromosomes 15 and 21, rob(15;21)(q10;q10)c, have
approximately 2,700-fold increased risk of developing iAMP21 ALL compared to the 
general population. In such cases, amplification is initiated by a chromothripsis
event involving both sister chromatids of the Robertsonian chromosome, a novel
mechanism for cancer predisposition. In sporadic iAMP21, breakage-fusion-bridge
cycles are typically the initiating event, often followed by chromothripsis. In
both sporadic and rob(15;21)c-associated iAMP21, the final stages frequently
involve duplications of the entire abnormal chromosome. The end-product is a
derivative of chromosome 21 or the rob(15;21)c chromosome with gene dosage
optimized for leukaemic potential, showing constrained copy-number levels over
multiple linked genes. Thus, dicentric chromosomes may be an important
precipitant of chromothripsis, as we show rob(15;21)c to be constitutionally
dicentric and breakage-fusion-bridge cycles generate dicentric chromosomes
somatically. Furthermore, our data illustrate that several cancer-specific
mutational processes, applied sequentially, can coordinate to fashion copy-number
profiles over large genomic scales, incrementally refining the fitness benefits
of aggregated gene dosage changes.

PMCID: PMC3976272
PMID: 24670643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Chem Commun (Camb). 2014 May 11;50(36):4686-9. doi: 10.1039/c4cc01238k.

Palladium-catalyzed R2(O)P directed C(sp2)-H acetoxylation.

Zhang H(1), Hu RB, Zhang XY, Li SX, Yang SD.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Applied Organic Chemistry, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou
730000, P. R. China. yangshd@lzu.edu.cn.

A novel and efficient Pd-catalyzed C-H acetoxylation is described. The approach
uses R2(O)P as a directing group to synthesize various substituted
2'-phosphorylbiphenyl-2-OAc compounds. Notably, the reaction exhibits smooth
operation under mild conditions and shows good functional group tolerance.
Products are obtained with high selectivity and yields.

PMID: 24658145  [PubMed]


265. Vopr Virusol. 2013 Sep-Oct;58(5):38-43.

[Production of the monoclonal antibodies to the rabies virus nucleoprotein].

[Article in Russian]

Gribencha SV, Kozlov AIu, Kostina LV, Elakov AL, Losich MA, Tsibezov VV,
Zaberezhnyi AD, Aliper TI.

Five hybridomas secreting monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) for the nucleocapsid
protein of the rabies virus were obtained through the fusion of the SP2/0 murine 
myeloma cells with splenocytes of BALB/c mice immunized with fixed rabies virus
(CVS strain). All hybridomas secret MAbs of the IgG class that display different 
specificity to the nucleocapsids of rabies and rabies-related viruses. MAbs 2ell 
showed the specificity for the prevalent in Russia rabies viruses that are
similar to commercially available anti-rabies conjugate.

PMID: 24640170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2014 May 15;159(1-2):58-73. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2014.02.004. Epub 2014 Feb 16.

Generation by self re-fusion of bovine³ × murine² heterohybridomas secreting
virus-neutralizing bovine monoclonal antibodies to bovine herpesvirus 1
glycoproteins gB, gC, and gD.

Levings RL(1), Stoll IR(2), Warg JV(3), Patterson PA(2), Hobbs LA(4), Kaeberle
ML(5), Roth JA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Science, Technology and Analysis Services, Veterinary Services (VS), Animal
and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS), United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA), 1920 Dayton Ave., Ames, IA 50010, United States. Electronic
address: Randall.L.Levings@aphis.usda.gov. (2)Center for Veterinary Biologics,
VS, APHIS, USDA, 1920 Dayton Ave., Ames, IA 50010, United States. (3)National
Veterinary Services Laboratories, VS, APHIS, USDA, 1920 Dayton Ave., Ames, IA
50010, United States. (4)National Animal Disease Center, Agricultural Research
Service, USDA, 1920 Dayton Ave., Ames, IA 50010, United States. (5)Veterinary
Microbiology and Preventive Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State 
University, Ames, IA 50011, United States.

Seventy-eight heterohybridomas (HH) stably secreting bovine monoclonal antibodies
(BomAb) to Bovine herpesvirus 1 (BHV1) were produced by fusing lymph node cells
from a BHV1 hyperimmunized calf with 3 types of non-secreting fusion partners.
Seven were generated through fusion with the murine × murine (murine(2))
hybridoma SP2/0, 3 through fusion with bovine-murine(2) HH previously generated
using cells from the same calf, and 68 through fusion with bovine(2)-murine(2) HH
previously generated by sequential fusions using cells from the same calf. The
chromosome number of example HH increased with increasing numbers of input
fusions. A variety of indirect fluorescent antibody assay patterns was observed
using the BomAb, suggesting diverse antigen specificity. Three
bovine(3)-murine(2) HH secreted IgG1 BomAb neutralizing BHV1 without complement, 
and were chosen for further characterization. SDS-PAGE of detergent-solubilized
BHV1 proteins bound to the 3 neutralizing BomAb demonstrated their individual
specificities for BHV1 envelope glycoproteins gB, gC, and gD, the major
neutralization targets for BHV1. The 3 HH stably secreted the BomAb in culture
for over one year, and pilot-scale production of the BomAb was accomplished by in
vivo and in vitro methods. A cocktail of the 3 BomAb was administered
intravenously (i.v.) to a 6-month-old calf and its serum neutralization activity 
decreased with a half-life consistent with non-immune clearance, suggesting that 
BomAb may be useful for passive immune treatment of disease in cattle. Rabbits
were passively protected by i.v. injection with each of the anti-gB and anti-gD
BomAb when challenged i.v. with BHV1 24h later. Self re-fusion was shown to be
advantageous for efficiently producing HH stably secreting host monoclonal
antibodies. The BomAb described should prove useful in studies of the host immune
response to BHV1, as reagents, and as sources of bovine immunoglobulin sequences.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 24629764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Dig Dis Sci. 2014 Aug;59(8):1743-53. doi: 10.1007/s10620-014-3087-5. Epub 2014
Mar 13.

miR-638 suppresses cell proliferation in gastric cancer by targeting Sp2.

Zhao LY(1), Yao Y, Han J, Yang J, Wang XF, Tong DD, Song TS, Huang C, Shao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, Environment and Genes Related to
Diseases Key Laboratory of Education Ministry, College of Medicine, Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710061, People's Republic of China,
lingyuzhao@aliyun.com.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs play important roles in the development and progression of 
various cancers. Recent studies have shown that miR-638 was downregulated in
several tumors; however, its role in gastric cancer (GC) has not been
investigated in detail.
AIMS: The purpose of this study was to determine the role of miR-638 and to
elucidate its regulatory mechanism in GC.
METHODS: The expression levels of miR-638 and specificity protein 2 (Sp2) were
detected by real-time PCR and Western blotting in GC. After
pcDNA6.2-GW/EmGFP-miR-638 vector, miR-638 inhibitor and Sp2-siRNA transfection,
the AGS cell proliferation was investigated by MTT assay and cell cycle, and
apoptosis was detected using the Annexin V/PI. In addition, the regulation of Sp2
by miR-638 was evaluated by real-time RT-PCR, Western blot and luciferase
reporter assays; cyclin D1 expression was measured by Western blotting.
RESULTS: The expression of miR-638 is dramatically down-regulated and Sp2
expression is remarkably up-regulated in GC tissues. Luciferase assays revealed
that miR-638 inhibited Sp2 expression by targeting the 3'-UTR of Sp2 mRNA.
Overexpression of miR-638 and Sp2-siRNA reduced Sp2 expression at both the mRNA
and protein levels in vitro, and inhibition of miR-638 increased Sp2 expression. 
Moreover, we found that miR-638 overexpression and Sp2-siRNA markedly suppressed 
cell proliferation with decreasing expression of cyclin D1 and inducing G1-phase 
cell-cycle arrest in vitro; inhibition of miR-638 significantly promoted cell
proliferation by increasing expression of cyclin D1 and leading more cells into
the S and G2/M phase.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrated that miR-638 suppressed GC cell
proliferation by targeting Sp2 with influence on the expression of cyclin D1. We 
suggest that miR-638 might be a candidate predictor or an anticancer therapeutic 
target for GC patients.

PMID: 24623314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Org Chem. 2014 Apr 4;79(7):3200-5. doi: 10.1021/jo4028825. Epub 2014 Mar 20.

Palladium-catalyzed alkenylation via sp2 C-H bond activation using phenolic
hydroxyl as the directing group.

Zhang C(1), Ji J, Sun P.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Biofunctional Materials, College of Chemistry and
Materials Science, Nanjing Normal University , Nanjing 210097, China.

This note describes the efficient and highly regioselective synthesis of
2-(2'-alkenylphenyl)phenol derivatives via palladium-catalyzed 2'-alkenylation of
2-arylphenols directed by the phenolic hydroxyl group using benzoquinone as the
oxidant in an atmosphere of air. This reaction can tolerate a series of
functional groups and provides the alkenylation products regio- and
stereoselectively in moderate to good yields.

PMID: 24620903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Sci Rep. 2014 Mar 11;4:4339. doi: 10.1038/srep04339.

A new carbon allotrope with six-fold helical chains in all-sp2 bonding networks.

Wang JT(1), Chen C(2), Wang E(3), Kawazoe Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics, Institute of
Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. (2)Department of
Physics and High Pressure Science and Engineering Center, University of Nevada,
Las Vegas, Nevada 89154, USA. (3)International Center for Quantum Materials,
School of Physics, Peking University, and Collaboration Innovation Center of
Quantum Matter, Beijing 100871, China. (4)1] New Industry Creation Hatchery
Center, Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8579, Japan [2] Institute of Thermophysics,
Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk 630090, Russia.

Using a recently developed approach to constructing covalent network structures
from linear carbyne, we identify by ab initio calculations a new carbon allotrope
in R3m (D(3d)(5) symmetry that comprises six-fold helical chains with alternating
sp(2)-type single and double bonds along the chains that are connected via zigzag
benzene rings. This 6-fold carbene is characterized as a three-dimensional
three-connected chiral crystalline modification of graphite. Phonon and
electronic band calculations indicate that this new structure is dynamically
stable and is a semiconductor with a band gap of 0.47 eV, in contrast to the
semimetallic nature of graphite. Simulated x-ray diffraction patterns of the
6-fold carbene provide an excellent match to the previously unexplained distinct 
diffraction peak of a new carbon allotrope found in recent detonation
experiments. These results establish a new carbon phase and offer insights into
its outstanding structural and electronic properties.

PMCID: PMC3949244
PMID: 24614093  [PubMed]


270. Proc Math Phys Eng Sci. 2014 Mar 8;470(2163):20130617.

Writing with ring currents: selectively hydrogenated polycyclic aromatics as
finite models of graphene and graphane.

Fowler PW(1), Gibson CM(1), Bean DE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry , University of Sheffield , Sheffield S3 7HF, UK.

Alternating partial hydrogenation of the interior region of a polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbon gives a finite model system representing systems on the pathway from 
graphene to the graphane modification of the graphene sheet. Calculations at the 
DFT and coupled Hartree-Fock levels confirm that sp(2) cycles of bare carbon
centres isolated by selective hydrogenation retain the essentially planar
geometry and electron delocalization of the annulene that they mimic.
Delocalization is diagnosed by the presence of ring currents, as detected by
ipsocentric calculation and visualization of the current density induced in the p
system by a perpendicular external magnetic field. These induced 'ring' currents 
have essentially the same sense, strength and orbital origin as in the free
hydrocarbon. Subjected to the important experimental proviso of the need for
atomic-scale control of hydrogenation, this finding predicts the possibility of
writing single, multiple and concentric diatropic and/or paratropic ring currents
on the graphene/graphane sheet. The implication is that pathways for free flow of
ballistic current can be modelled in the same way.

PMCID: PMC3899853
PMID: 24611026  [PubMed]


271. Planta Med. 2014 Mar;80(4):337-42. doi: 10.1055/s-0033-1360394. Epub 2014 Mar 7.

Preparation of a monoclonal antibody against notoginsenoside R1, a distinctive
saponin from Panax notoginseng, and its application to indirect competitive
ELISA.

Limsuwanchote S(1), Wungsintaweekul J(1), Yusakul G(2), Han JY(3), Sasaki-Tabata 
K(2), Tanaka H(2), Shoyama Y(4), Morimoto S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Prince of Songkla University, Hat Yai,
Songkhla, Thailand. (2)Department of Pharmacognosy, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. (3)Tasly
Microcirculation Research Center, Peking University Health Science Center,
Beijing, China. (4)Department of Pharmacognosy, Nagasaki International
University, Sasebo, Nagasaki, Japan.

We have prepared a monoclonal antibody against notoginsenoside R1, a primary
active constituent of Sanqi ginseng (roots of Panax notoginseng). The monoclonal 
antibody was raised by immunizing BALB/c male mice with notoginsenoside R1-bovine
albumin conjugates following cell fusion via electroporation. This method has
been shown to be very effective for producing hybridomas with excellent antibody 
prevalence following cell fusion of their splenocytes with cells of the myeloma
cell line SP2/0. Of all the hybridomas secreting a monoclonal antibody against
notoginsenoside R1, only the 1A1P cell line produces a highly specific antibody
to this compound. Surprisingly, the cross-reactivity of this monoclonal antibody 
for ginsenoside Rg1 and ginsenoside Re, derivatives of protopanaxatriol, was
below 1.02% in a competitive immunoassay. Based on this characteristic of the
monoclonal antibody, an indirect competitive ELISA (range of measurement 0.56-9
µg/mL) was established and applied as a quality control method. In conclusion,
the developed immunoassay was easy to handle and reliable for the analysis of
notoginsenoside R1 in Sanqi ginseng products without requiring a pretreatment.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 24610346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Eur Respir Rev. 2014 Mar 1;23(131):111-7. doi: 10.1183/09059180.00008513.

Pirfenidone: an update on clinical trial data and insights from everyday
practice.

Kreuter M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Pneumology and Respiratory Critical Care Medicine, Center for
Interstitial and Rare Lung Diseases, Thoraxklinik, University of Heidelberg,
Heidelberg, Germany. 2 Translational Lung Research Heidelberg (TLRC), Heidelberg,
Germany, Member of the German Center for Lung Research.

Comment in
    Eur Respir Rev. 2014 Mar 1;23(131):3-4.

Pirfenidone is an orally active, small molecule that inhibits synthesis of
profibrotic and inflammatory mediators. It was approved for the treatment of
adults with mild-to-moderate idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis in the European Union 
based on the results of two pivotal phase III, double-blind, randomised,
placebo-controlled clinical trials (CAPACITY) demonstrating efficacy and safety, 
and supported by two Japanese clinical trials (SP2 and SP3). Currently, there is 
increasing interest in experience with pirfenidone in patients relating to the
real-world setting. Following the publication of the CAPACITY clinical studies,
additional analyses have been conducted to provide further support for
pirfenidone in clinical practice, including a modified per-protocol analysis of
the CAPACITY study population. New data from the RECAP extension study also
provided longer term data for pirfenidone and promising continuation rates with
treatment. Pirfenidone is also being evaluated in specialist centre cohorts
providing important information on real-world efficacy and safety. Increasing
experience with pirfenidone in everyday clinical practice is helping to establish
\expert guidance on the management of known adverse events, together with
practical recommendations, to ensure adherence to treatment so that the possible 
longer term benefits of pirfenidone treatment in reducing lung function decline
can be maximised.

PMID: 24591668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Lasers Med Sci. 2014 Jul;29(4):1449-52. doi: 10.1007/s10103-014-1553-0. Epub 2014
Mar 4.

Laser therapy and photosensitive medication: a review of the evidence.

Kerstein RL(1), Lister T, Cole R.

Author information: 
(1)Salisbury District Hospital, Odstock Road, Salisbury, SP2 8BQ, UK,
ryan.kerstein@gmail.com.

Comment in
    Lasers Med Sci. 2015 Nov;30(8):2223-4.

In the 2009 guidelines from the BMLA, the use of non-essential aesthetic lasers
was contraindicated in patients receiving medication that causes whole-body
photosensitisation as well as those causing local light sensitisation. Following 
this and anecdotal advice, many laser centres refuse to treat patients who are on
known photosensitive medication. Therefore, specific patient cohorts that would
benefit from laser therapy are being denied because of medications, such as
long-term antibiotics for chronic facial acne. This article reviews the published
literature on lasers and photosensitive medications, the mechanisms of
photosensitivity and the role of laser in its production. The aim is to analyse
the available evidence regarding adverse reactions to laser treatment related to 
photosensitive medication. A PubMed review of published article titles and
abstracts was performed using the search term Laser with each of the following
terms individually: photosensitive, photosensitiser, photosensitizer,
phototoxicity, photoallergy, complications, case-report, tetracycline,
minocycline, amiodarone, nitrofurantoin and medication. Four publications were
identified, none of which reported any complication in the use of laser in
patients taking photosensitising medication. As there are no published accounts
of adverse effects of laser in patients with photosensitive medication, we
performed a review of the mechanism of photosensitivity by compiling a list of
photosensitive medication and the peak wavelength of radiation required to
activate the drug. We recommend a national database of drugs and the wavelengths 
causing photosensitive reactions of each which a laser department can access
prior to treatment.

PMID: 24590242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. ScientificWorldJournal. 2014 Jan 21;2014:107918. doi: 10.1155/2014/107918.
eCollection 2014.

Carbyne polysulfide as a novel cathode material for rechargeable magnesium
batteries.

NuLi Y(1), Chen Q(1), Wang W(2), Wang Y(3), Yang J(1), Wang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai
200240, China ; Hirano Institute for Materials Innovation, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200240, China. (2)Research Institute of Chemical Defense,
West Building, No. 35 Huayuanbei Road, Beijing 100083, China. (3)Key Laboratory
for Thin Film and Microfabrication of the Ministry of Education, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China.

We report the formation of carbyne polysulfide by coheating carbon containing
carbyne moieties and elemental sulfur. The product is proved to have a sp2 hybrid
carbon skeleton with polysulfide attached on it. The electrochemical performance 
of carbyne polysulfide as a novel cathode material for rechargeable magnesium
batteries is firstly investigated. The material exhibits a high discharge
capacity of 327.7<U+2009>mAh g(-1) at 3.9<U+2009>mA g(-1). These studies show that carbyne
polysulfide is a promising candidate as cathode material for rechargeable Mg
batteries if the capacity retention can be significantly improved.

PMCID: PMC3918707
PMID: 24587704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 21;9(2):e89669. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089669. eCollection
2014.

Biosensor-based approach identifies four distinct calmodulin-binding domains in
the G protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1.

Tran QK(1), Vermeer M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology & Pharmacology, Des Moines University Osteopathic
Medical Center, Des Moines, Iowa, United States of America.

The G protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1 (GPER) has been demonstrated to
participate in many cellular functions, but its regulatory inputs are not clearly
understood. Here we describe a new approach that identifies GPER as a
calmodulin-binding protein, locates interaction sites, and characterizes their
binding properties. GPER coimmunoprecipitates with calmodulin in primary vascular
smooth muscle cells under resting conditions, which is enhanced upon acute
treatment with either specific ligands or a Ca(2+)-elevating agent. To confirm
direct interaction and locate the calmodulin-binding domain(s), we designed a
series of FRET biosensors that consist of enhanced cyan and yellow fluorescent
proteins flanking each of GPER's submembrane domains (SMDs). Responses of these
biosensors showed that all four submembrane domains directly bind calmodulin.
Modifications of biosensor linker identified domains that display the strongest
calmodulin-binding affinities and largest biosensor dynamics, including a.a.
83-93, 150-175, 242-259, 330-351, corresponding respectively to SMDs 1, 2, 3, and
the juxta-membranous section of SMD4. These biosensors bind calmodulin in a
strictly Ca(2+)-dependent fashion and with disparate affinities in the order
SMD2>SMD4>SMD3>SMD1, apparent K d values being 0.44 ± 0.03, 1.40 ± 0.16, 8.01 ±
0.29, and 136.62 ± 6.56 µM, respectively. Interestingly, simultaneous
determinations of biosensor responses and suitable Ca(2+) indicators identified
separate Ca(2+) sensitivities for their interactions with calmodulin. SMD1-CaM
complexes display a biphasic Ca(2+) response, representing two distinct species
(SMD1 sp1 and SMD1 sp2) with drastically different Ca(2+) sensitivities. The
Ca(2+) sensitivities of CaM-SMDs interactions follow the order
SMD1sp1>SMD4>SMD2>SMD1sp2>SMD3, EC50(Ca(2+)) values being 0.13 ± 0.02, 0.75 ±
0.05, 2.38 ± 0.13, 3.71 ± 0.13, and 5.15 ± 0.25 µM, respectively. These data
indicate that calmodulin may regulate GPER-dependent signaling at the receptor
level through multiple interaction sites. FRET biosensors represent a simple
method to identify unknown calmodulin-binding domains in G protein-coupled
receptors and to quantitatively assess binding properties.

PMCID: PMC3931812
PMID: 24586950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci. 2014 Mar 15;953-954:120-5. doi:
10.1016/j.jchromb.2014.01.051. Epub 2014 Feb 15.

Development of an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay based on anti-puerarin
monoclonal antibody and its applications.

Qu H(1), Zhang G(2), Li Y(2), Sun H(2), Sun Y(2), Zhao Y(3), Wang Q(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Scientific Experiment, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, 11
Beisanhuandong Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing 100029, China. (2)School of Basic
Medical Sciences, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, 11 Beisanhuandong Road,
Chaoyang District, Beijing 100029, China. (3)School of Basic Medical Sciences,
Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, 11 Beisanhuandong Road, Chaoyang
District, Beijing 100029, China. Electronic address: zhaoyandr@gmail.com.
(4)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, 11
Beisanhuandong Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing 100029, China. Electronic
address: wangqg8558@sina.com.

An enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was developed, and its application
in immunoaffinity column chromatography was studied using a monoclonal antibody
(MAb) against puerarin. Splenocytes isolated from a female BALB/c mouse immunised
with a puerarin-bovine serum albumin (BSA) conjugate were fused with SP2/0
myeloma cells. The hybridoma cell line secreting MAb against puerarin (AA9) was
acquired by screening and limiting dilution. The antibody generated was highly
specific for puerarin with <0.01% cross-reactivity with over 50 structurally
related chemicals, except for baicalein (51.8%). Using AA9, we developed an
immunoassay for puerarin with a linear detection range of 10ng/ml to 1µg/ml. This
assay system was further validated using intra- and inter-assays and recovery
experiments. In addition, puerarin levels in both formulated Chinese medicines
and biological samples were determined with high sensitivity and efficiency.
Finally, we developed and validated protocols for knocking puerarin out of its
parent medicine completely. In conclusion, we successfully developed a reliable
ELISA and an immunoaffinity column for puerarin detection and knockout, which are
useful tools for exploring the role of puerarin in formulated Chinese medicines.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24583873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Chem Commun (Camb). 2014 Apr 11;50(28):3719-21. doi: 10.1039/c4cc00154k.

N-Heterocyclic carbene-catalyzed formal cross-coupling reaction of a-haloenals
with thiols: organocatalytic construction of sp2 carbon-sulfur bonds.

He L(1), Guo H, Li YZ, Du GF, Dai B.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Green Processing of Chemical Engineering of Xinjiang
Bingtuan, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shihezi University,
Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region, 832000, China. helin@shzu.edu.cn
db_tea@shzu.edu.cn.

A novel N-heterocyclic carbene (NHC)-catalyzed formal cross-coupling reaction
between a-haloenals and thiols was developed. In the presence of 5 mol% NHC
precursors and 1.6 equiv. potassium carbonate, various thiols coupled with
a-haloenals to produce a-thioenals in 53% to 91% yield and excellent
Z-selectivity.

PMID: 24577225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Br J Anaesth. 2014 Jul;113(1):4-6. doi: 10.1093/bja/aeu013. Epub 2014 Feb 25.

II. Needle phobia: a psychological perspective.

Jenkins K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Salisbury NHS Foundation Trust - Clinical Psychology, Salisbury District
Hospital, Salisbury SP2 8BJ, UK.

PMID: 24574504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. New J Chem. 2013 Nov 1;37(11):3440-3449.

Endonuclease and Exonuclease Activities on Oligodeoxynucleotides Containing
Spiroiminodihydantoin Depend on the Sequence Context and the Lesion
Stereochemistry.

Chen X(1), Fleming AM(1), Muller JG(1), Burrows CJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Utah, 315 South 1400 East, Salt Lake
City, Utah 84112-0850, U.S.A.

8-Oxo-7,8-dihydro-2'-deoxyguanosine (dOG), a well-studied oxidation product of
2'-deoxyguanosine (dG), is prone to facile further oxidation forming
spiroiminodihydantoin 2'-deoxyribonucleoside (dSp) in the nucleotide pool and in 
single-stranded oligodeoxynucleotides (ODNs). Many methods for quantification of 
damaged lesions in the genome rely on digestion of DNA with exonucleases or
endonucleases and dephosphorylation followed by LC-MS analysis of the resulting
nucleosides. In this study, enzymatic hydrolysis of dSp-containing ODNs was
investigated with snake venom phosphodiesterase (SVPD), spleen phosphodiesterase 
(SPD) and nuclease P1. SVPD led to formation of a dinucleotide, 5'-d(Np[Sp])-3'
(N = any nucleotide) that included the undamaged nucleotide on the 5' side of dSp
as the final product. This dinucleotide was a substrate for both SPD and nuclease
P1. A kinetic study of the activity of SPD and nuclease P1 showed a sequence
dependence on the nucleotide 5' to the lesion with rates in the order
dG>dA>dT>dC. In addition, the two diastereomers of dSp underwent digestion at
significantly different rates with dSp1>dSp2; nuclease P1 hydrolyzed the
5'-d(Np[Sp1])-3' dinucleotide two- to six-fold faster than the corresponding
5'-d(Np[Sp2])-3', while for SPD the difference was two-fold. These rates are
chemically reasoned based on dSp diastereomer differences in the syn vs. anti
glycosidic bond orientation. A method for the complete digestion of
dSp-containing ODNs is also outlined based on treatment with nuclease P1 and
SVPD. These findings have significant impact on the development of methods to
detect dSp levels in cellular DNA.

PMCID: PMC3929292
PMID: 24563606  [PubMed]


280. Sci Total Environ. 2014 May 1;479-480:151-8. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2014.01.098. Epub 2014 Feb 19.

Black carbon aerosol characterization in a remote area of Qinghai-Tibetan
Plateau, western China.

Wang Q(1), Schwarz JP(2), Cao J(3), Gao R(4), Fahey DW(2), Hu T(5), Huang RJ(6), 
Han Y(5), Shen Z(7).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Aerosol Science & Technology, SKLLQG, Institute of Earth
Environment, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xi'an 710075, China; Department of
Environmental Science and Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710049,
China. (2)National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Earth System Research 
Laboratory, NOAA, Boulder, CO, USA; Cooperative Institute for Research in
Environmental Sciences, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, USA. (3)Key
Laboratory of Aerosol Science & Technology, SKLLQG, Institute of Earth
Environment, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xi'an 710075, China; Institute of
Global Environmental Change, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710049, China.
Electronic address: cao@loess.llqg.ac.cn. (4)National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, Earth System Research Laboratory, NOAA, Boulder, CO, USA. (5)Key 
Laboratory of Aerosol Science & Technology, SKLLQG, Institute of Earth
Environment, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xi'an 710075, China. (6)Laboratory of
Atmospheric Chemistry, Paul Scherrer Institute, 5232 Villigen PSI, Switzerland;
Centre for Climate and Air Pollution Studies, Ryan Institute, National University
of Ireland Galway, University Road, Galway, Ireland. (7)Department of
Environmental Science and Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710049,
China.

The concentrations, size distributions, and mixing states of refractory black
carbon (rBC) aerosols were measured with a ground-based Single Particle Soot
Photometer (SP2), and aerosol absorption was measured with an Aethalometer at
Qinghai Lake (QHL), a rural area in the Northeastern Tibetan Plateau of China in 
October 2011. The area was not pristine, with an average rBC mass concentration
of 0.36 µg STP-m(-3) during the two-week campaign period. The rBC concentration
peaked at night and reached the minimal in the afternoon. This diurnal cycle of
concentration is negatively correlated with the mixed layer depth and
ventilation. When air masses from the west of QHL were sampled in late afternoon 
to early evening, the average rBC concentration of 0.21 µg STP-m(-3) was
observed, representing the rBC level in a larger Tibetan Plateau region because
of the highest mixed layer depth. A lognormal primary mode with mass median
diameter (MMD) of ~175 nm, and a small secondary lognormal mode with MMD of
470-500 nm of rBC were observed. Relative reduction in the secondary mode during 
a snow event supports recent work that suggested size dependent removal of rBC by
precipitation. About 50% of the observed rBC cores were identified as thickly
coated by non-BC material. A comparison of the Aethalometer and SP2 measurements 
suggests that non-BC species significantly affect the Aethalometer measurements
in this region. A scaling factor for the Aethalometer data at a wavelength of 880
nm is therefore calculated based on the measurements, which may be used to
correct other Aethalometer datasets collected in this region for a more accurate 
estimate of the rBC loading. The results present here significantly improve our
understanding of the characteristics of rBC aerosol in the less studied Tibetan
Plateau region and further highlight the size dependent removal of BC via
precipitation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24561294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Monoclon Antib Immunodiagn Immunother. 2014 Feb;33(1):38-41. doi:
10.1089/mab.2013.0060.

Monoclonal antibodies directed against VP7 protein of human group B rotavirus.

Deng X(1), Xiong G, Cong W, Liu Z, Qi C, Yang J.

Author information: 
(1)Hubei Key Laboratory of Genetic Regulation and Integrative Biology, College of
Life Science, Huazhong Normal University , Wuhan, P.R. China .

The aim of this study was to prepare and identify a monoclonal antibody that
binds the viral proteins 7 (VP7 protein) of human group B rotavirus (GBRV) and to
describe its immunologic characterization. Human group B rotavirus vp7 gene was
successfully ligated into pGEX-KG vector and transformed into Escherichia coli
TOP10 cells. The glutathione S-transferases (GST)-fusion protein GST-VP7 was
induced by Isopropyl ß-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) and immediately purified 
to immunize BALB/c mice. Splenocytes were then prepared from the immunized mouse 
and fused with SP2/0 myeloma cell line. In the end we obtained one positive
hybridoma cell line stably secreting monoclonal antibody against GST-VP7 protein 
by indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and limiting dilution. The 
production of the monoclonal antibody against GBRV will benefit the further study
of GBRV's structures and functions and also lay a solid foundation for the
research of disease prevention, clinical diagnosis, and treatment.

PMID: 24555935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Int J Food Microbiol. 2014 Apr 3;175:45-52. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2014.01.014. Epub 2014 Jan 31.

Detection and quantification by PCR assay of the biocontrol agent Pantoea
agglomerans CPA-2 on apples.

Soto-Muñoz L(1), Teixidó N(2), Usall J(2), Viñas I(1), Torres R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Food Technology Department, Lleida University, XaRTA-Postharvest, Agrotecnio
Center. Av. Rovira Roure, 191, 25198 Lleida, Catalonia, Spain. (2)IRTA,
Postharvest XaRTA, Av. Rovira Roure, 191, 25198 Lleida, Catalonia, Spain.
(3)IRTA, Postharvest XaRTA, Av. Rovira Roure, 191, 25198 Lleida, Catalonia,
Spain. Electronic address: rosario.torres@irta.cat.

The registration of biological control agents requires the development of
monitoring systems to detect and quantify the agent in the environment. Pantoea
agglomerans CPA-2 is an effective biocontrol agent for postharvest diseases of
citrus and pome fruits. The monitoring of CPA-2 in postharvest semi-commercial
trials was evaluated by Rodac impression plates and the colonies isolated were
confirmed by conventional PCR using the SCAR primers PAGA1 and PAGB1. Samples
were taken from different surfaces that had contact with CPA-2, the surrounding
environment and working clothes worn by handlers. Moreover, population dynamics
of the strain CPA-2 were determined on apple surfaces using both the classical
plating technique and real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR). A qPCR assay using a
3'-minor groove-binding (MGB) probe was developed for the specific detection and 
quantification of P. agglomerans strain CPA-2. Based on the nucleotide sequence
of a SCAR fragment of CPA-2, one primer set and TaqMan MGB probe were designed.
The primers SP2-F/SP2-R and the TaqMan MGB probe showed a specific detection of
strain CPA-2 on apple surfaces, which was verified tested against purified DNA
from 17 strains of P. agglomerans, 4 related Pantoea species, and 21 bacterial
strains from other genera isolated from whole and also freshly-cut fruit and
vegetables. The detection level was approximately 10(3) cells per reaction, and
the standard curve was linear within a range of 5log units. Results from
semi-commercial trials showed that CPA-2 had a low impact. The maximum
persistence of P. agglomerans CPA-2 was not longer than 5days in plastic boxes
stored at 0°C. Significant differences in CPA-2 population level dynamics were
observed in results obtained by qPCR and dilution plating. These differences may 
indicate the presence of non-degraded DNA from non-viable cells. In conclusion,
qPCR is a novel potential tool to quickly and specifically monitor recent surface
colonisation by CPA-2 populations on apple surfaces during large-scale
experiments that could ensure efficient and successful treatments.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24534396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2014 Feb;70(Pt 2):607-14. doi:
10.1107/S1399004713031222. Epub 2014 Jan 31.

Structure of Bacillus subtilis <U+03B3>-glutamyltranspeptidase in complex with acivicin:
diversity of the binding mode of a classical and electrophilic
active-site-directed glutamate analogue.

Ida T(1), Suzuki H(2), Fukuyama K(1), Hiratake J(3), Wada K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, Osaka
University, Toyonaka, Osaka 560-0043, Japan. (2)Division of Applied Biology,
Graduate School of Science and Technology, Kyoto Institute of Technology,
Goshokaido-cho, Matsugasaki, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8585, Japan. (3)Institute for
Chemical Research, Kyoto University, Uji, Kyoto 611-0011, Japan. (4)Organization 
for Promotion of Tenure Track, University of Miyazaki, Miyazaki 889-1692, Japan.

<U+03B3>-Glutamyltranspeptidase (GGT) is an enzyme that plays a central role in
glutathione metabolism, and acivicin is a classical inhibitor of GGT. Here, the
structure of acivicin bound to Bacillus subtilis GGT determined by X-ray
crystallography to 1.8 Å resolution is presented, in which it binds to the active
site in a similar manner to that in Helicobacter pylori GGT, but in a different
binding mode to that in Escherichia coli GGT. In B. subtilis GGT, acivicin is
bound covalently through its C3 atom with sp2 hybridization to Thr403 O<U+03B3>, the
catalytic nucleophile of the enzyme. The results show that acivicin-binding sites
are common, but the binding manners and orientations of its five-membered
dihydroisoxazole ring are diverse in the binding pockets of GGTs.

PMCID: PMC3940202
PMID: 24531494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Org Lett. 2014 Feb 21;16(4):1040-3. doi: 10.1021/ol500134p. Epub 2014 Feb 6.

Copper-assisted nickel catalyzed ligand-free C(sp2)-O cross-coupling of vinyl
halides and phenols.

Kundu D(1), Maity P, Ranu BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organic Chemistry, Indian Association for the Cultivation of
Science , Jadavpur, Kolkata 700032, India.

A convenient and efficient protocol has been achieved for the cross-coupling of
phenols and vinyl halides by a unique Ni/Cu catalytic system for the first time, 
where the reaction is catalyzed by Ni and Cu is involved in the transmetalation
process. This procedure provides an easy access to a library of aryl-vinyl and
aryl-styrenyl ethers.

PMID: 24502267  [PubMed]


285. Math Biosci. 2014 Mar;249:60-74. doi: 10.1016/j.mbs.2014.01.007. Epub 2014 Jan
31.

Modelling diameter distributions of two-cohort forest stands with various
proportions of dominant species: a two-component mixture model approach.

Podlaski R(1), Roesch FA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nature Protection, Institute of Biology, Jan Kochanowski
University, ul. Swietokrzyska 15, 25-406 Kielce, Poland. Electronic address:
r_podlaski@pro.onet.pl. (2)USDA Forest Service, Southern Research Station, 200 WT
Weaver Blvd., Asheville, NC 28804-3454, USA.

In recent years finite-mixture models have been employed to approximate and model
empirical diameter at breast height (DBH) distributions. We used two-component
mixtures of either the Weibull distribution or the gamma distribution for
describing the DBH distributions of mixed-species, two-cohort forest stands, to
analyse the relationships between the DBH components, age cohorts and dominant
species, and to assess the significance of differences between the mixture
distributions and the kernel density estimates. The data consisted of plots from 
the Swietokrzyski National Park (Central Poland) and areas close to and including
the North Carolina section of the Great Smoky Mountains National Park (USA;
southern Appalachians). The fit of the mixture Weibull model to empirical DBH
distributions had a precision similar to that of the mixture gamma model,
slightly less accurate estimate was obtained with the kernel density estimator.
Generally, in the two-cohort, two-storied, multi-species stands in the southern
Appalachians, the two-component DBH structure was associated with age cohort and 
dominant species. The 1st DBH component of the mixture model was associated with 
the 1st dominant species sp1 occurred in young age cohort (e.g., sweetgum,
eastern hemlock); and to a lesser degree, the 2nd DBH component was associated
with the 2nd dominant species sp2 occurred in old age cohort (e.g., loblolly
pine, red maple). In two-cohort, partly multilayered, stands in the Swietokrzyski
National Park, the DBH structure was usually associated with only age cohorts
(two dominant species often occurred in both young and old age cohorts). When
empirical DBH distributions representing stands of complex structure are
approximated using mixture models, the convergence of the estimation process is
often significantly dependent on the starting strategies. Depending on the number
of DBHs measured, three methods for choosing the initial values are recommended: 
min.k/max.k, 0.5/1.5/mean, and multistart. For large samples (number of DBHs
measured = 80) the multistage method is proposed--for the two-component mixture
Weibull or gamma model select initial values using the min.k/max.k (for k=1,5,10)
and 0.5/1.5/mean methods, run the numerical procedure for each method, and when
no two solutions are the same, apply the multistart method also.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24491286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Nanoscale Res Lett. 2014 Jan 29;9(1):52. doi: 10.1186/1556-276X-9-52.

Hydrogen induced redox mechanism in amorphous carbon resistive random access
memory.

Chen YJ, Chen HL, Young TF(1), Chang TC, Tsai TM, Chang KC, Zhang R, Chen KH, Lou
JC, Chu TJ, Chen JH, Bao DH, Sze SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical and Electro-Mechanical Engineering, National Sun
Yat-Sen University, Kaohsiung 804, Taiwan. youngtf@mail.nsysu.edu.tw.

We investigated the bipolar resistive switching characteristics of the resistive 
random access memory (RRAM) device with amorphous carbon layer. Applying a
forming voltage, the amorphous carbon layer was carbonized to form a conjugation 
double bond conductive filament. We proposed a hydrogen redox model to clarify
the resistive switch mechanism of high/low resistance states (HRS/LRS) in carbon 
RRAM. The electrical conduction mechanism of LRS is attributed to conductive sp2 
carbon filament with conjugation double bonds by dehydrogenation, while the
electrical conduction of HRS resulted from the formation of insulating sp3-type
carbon filament through hydrogenation process.

PMCID: PMC3922695
PMID: 24475979  [PubMed]


287. Ecol Evol. 2013 Dec;3(16):5237-53. doi: 10.1002/ece3.897. Epub 2013 Dec 3.

Invasion biology in non-free-living species: interactions between abiotic
(climatic) and biotic (host availability) factors in geographical space in
crayfish commensals (Ostracoda, Entocytheridae).

Mestre A(1), Aguilar-Alberola JA(1), Baldry D(2), Balkis H(3), Ellis A(4),
Gil-Delgado JA(1), Grabow K(5), Klobucar G(6), Kouba A(7), Maguire I(6), Martens 
A(5), Mülayim A(3), Rueda J(1), Scharf B(8), Soes M(9), S Monrós J(1),
Mesquita-Joanes F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Ecology, Institut Cavanilles de Biodiversitat i
Biologia Evolutiva, University of Valencia Burjassot, E-46100, Spain. (2)Cessy
Angling Association Cessy, F-01170, France. (3)Department of Biology, Istanbul
University Vezneciler, 34134, Turkey. (4)Ahern Ecology Ltd. Wilton, SP2 0HE, U.K.
(5)Institut für Biologie, Pädagogische Hochschule Karlsruhe Karlsruhe, 76133,
Germany. (6)Department of Zoology, University of Zagreb Zagreb, HR-10000,
Croatia. (7)Faculty of Fisheries and Protection of Waters, University of South
Bohemia Vodnany, 389 25, Czech Republic. (8)Ellhornstrasse 21, Bremen, D-28195,
Germany. (9)Naturalis Biodiversity Center Leiden, 2333 CR & Bureau Waardenburg,
Culemborg, 4100 AJ, The Netherlands.

In invasion processes, both abiotic and biotic factors are considered essential, 
but the latter are usually disregarded when modeling the potential spread of
exotic species. In the framework of set theory, interactions between biotic (B), 
abiotic (A), and movement-related (M) factors in the geographical space can be
hypothesized with BAM diagrams and tested using ecological niche models (ENMs) to
estimate A and B areas. The main aim of our survey was to evaluate the
interactions between abiotic (climatic) and biotic (host availability) factors in
geographical space for exotic symbionts (i.e., non-free-living species), using
ENM techniques combined with a BAM framework and using exotic Entocytheridae
(Ostracoda) found in Europe as model organisms. We carried out an extensive
survey to evaluate the distribution of entocytherids hosted by crayfish in Europe
by checking 94 European localities and 12 crayfish species. Both exotic
entocytherid species found, Ankylocythere sinuosa and Uncinocythere occidentalis,
were widely distributed in W Europe living on the exotic crayfish species
Procambarus clarkii and Pacifastacus leniusculus, respectively. No entocytherids 
were observed in the remaining crayfish species. The suitable area for A. sinuosa
was mainly restricted by its own limitations to minimum temperatures in W and N
Europe and precipitation seasonality in circum-Mediterranean areas. Uncinocythere
occidentalis was mostly restricted by host availability in circum-Mediterranean
regions due to limitations of P. leniusculus to higher precipitation seasonality 
and maximum temperatures. The combination of ENMs with set theory allows studying
the invasive biology of symbionts and provides clues about biogeographic barriers
due to abiotic or biotic factors limiting the expansion of the symbiont in
different regions of the invasive range. The relative importance of abiotic and
biotic factors on geographical space can then be assessed and applied in
conservation plans. This approach can also be implemented in other systems where 
the target species is closely interacting with other taxa.

PMCID: PMC3892332
PMID: 24455152  [PubMed]


288. Daru. 2014 Jan 22;22(1):23. doi: 10.1186/2008-2231-22-23.

Safety concerns to application of graphene compounds in pharmacy and medicine.

Mogharabi M, Abdollahi M, Faramarzi MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Faculty of Pharmacy &
Biotechnology Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran
1417614411, Iran. faramarz@tums.ac.ir.

Graphene, the new allotrope of carbon is a single layer of monocrystalline
graphite with sp2 hybridized carbon atoms. This compound has received worldwide
attention due to its extraordinary physical and chemical properties. Duo to the
widespread application of geraphenes, concerns are raising about its
environmental safety or the safety protocols for handling and waste of
graphene-based materials. The generation of reactive free radicals, adsorption of
important biomolecules, and physical toxicity of graphene also matter. Hereby we 
criticize the concerns on the toxicity of graphenes to provide some perspective
on the potential hazards of future development in graphene-based biomaterials.

PMCID: PMC3922742
PMID: 24450435  [PubMed]


289. Burns. 2014 Aug;40(5):797-804. doi: 10.1016/j.burns.2013.12.017. Epub 2014 Jan
15.

Prevention or treatment of hypertrophic burn scarring: a review of when and how
to treat with the pulsed dye laser.

Brewin MP(1), Lister TS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Specialist Laser Centre, Salisbury District Hospital, Odstock Road,
Salisbury, Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, United Kingdom. Electronic address:
mark.brewin@salisbury.nhs.uk. (2)Wessex Specialist Laser Centre, Salisbury
District Hospital, Odstock Road, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, United Kingdom.

The purpose of this review is to investigate the use of Pulsed Dye Laser (PDL) as
a therapeutic tool for hypertrophic burns scarring. The difference between
keloids and hypertrophic scars is first described. The review then outlines the
progress and assessment of hypertrophic scars for burns patients and the problem 
of their clinical management. The assessment using both objective and subjective 
measurements for complete account of hypertrophic scars is explained. The
efficacy of PDL for both prevention and treatment is summarised for all
hypertrophic scarring and the various laser treatment protocols in previous
research is studied. The differentiation between prevention and treatment is
discussed in relation to scar duration and the need for prevention rather than
treatment is then proposed for intervention using PDL. The paper concludes with
recommendations for future research through a prospective randomised, controlled 
study using 595 nm PDL in the prevention of scars with less than 6 month
duration.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd and ISBI. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24439925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Exp Biol. 2014 May 1;217(Pt 9):1543-54. doi: 10.1242/jeb.097238. Epub 2014 Jan 
16.

Periodic heartbeat reversals cause cardiogenic inspiration and expiration with
coupled spiracle leakage in resting blowflies, Calliphora vicina.

Wasserthal LT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Staudtstrasse 5,
91058 Erlangen, Germany.

Respiration in insects is thought to be independent of the circulatory system
because insects typically lack respiratory pigments and because oxygen transport 
occurs in the gaseous phase through a ramified tracheal system by diffusion and
convection directly to the tissues. In the blowfly, as in other insects with
periodic heartbeat reversal, the haemolymph is periodically shifted between the
anterior body and abdomen, exerting alternating pressure changes on the compliant
tracheae in the thorax and in the abdomen. Simultaneous pressure and O2 optode
measurements show that, during negative pressure periods, the tracheal partial
pressure of oxygen (PO2) increases by 0.5 kPa. In the quiescent fly, tracheal PO2
is rather high (17.5-18.9 kPa), although the thoracic spiracles remain
constricted. Microscopic video recordings and reflectance measurements revealed
that the dorsal soft edges of the valve lips of the second spiracle leave a very 
small leak, which is passively widened during backward pulses of the heart. Thus,
negative pressure, combined with increased leakage of the spiracle Sp2 valve
enable inspiration in the thorax. The positive pressure periods are correlated
with a new type of convective CO2 micro-bursts as shown in flow-through
measurements. The bulk of the CO2 is, however, released after longer interbursts 
in macro-bursts with actively opening valves reminiscent of the open phase in a
cyclic gas exchange. When the valves open, the PO2 in the thoracic air sacs
unexpectedly drops by a mean of 2.75±1.09 kPa, suggesting a displacement of O2 by
the transient accumulation of CO2 in the tracheal system before its release.

PMID: 24436373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Oncol Rep. 2014 Mar;31(3):1235-48. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.2976. Epub 2014 Jan 13.

Ovarian cancer stem cell-specific gene expression profiling and targeted drug
prescreening.

Huang Y(1), Ju B(1), Tian J(1), Liu F(1), Yu H(1), Xiao H(1), Liu X(1), Liu W(1),
Yao Z(2), Hao Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecological Oncology, Tianjin Medical Univerisity Cancer
Institute and Hospital, National Clinical Research Center of Cancer, Key
Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin 300060, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Immunology, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular
Immunology, Key Laboratory of Educational Ministry of China, School of Basic
Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin 300070, P.R. China.

Cancer stem cells, with unlimited self-renewal potential and other stem cell
characteristics, occur in several types of cancer, including ovarian cancer
(OvC). Although CSCs can cause tumor initiation, malignant proliferation, relapse
and multi-drug resistance, ways to eliminate them remain unknown. In the present 
study, we compared ovarian cancer stem cell (OVCSC) expression profiles in normal
ovarian surface epithelium and ovarian cells from patients with advanced disease 
to identify key pathways and specific molecular signatures involved in OVC
progression and to prescreen candidate small-molecule compounds with anti-OVCSC
activity. Comparison of genome-wide expression profiles of OvC stemness groups
with non-stemness controls revealed 6495, 1347 and 509 differentially expressed
genes in SDC, SP1 and SP2 groups, respectively, with a cut-off of fold-change set
at >1.5 and P<0.05. NAB1 and NPIPL1 were commonly upregulated whereas PROS1,
GREB1, KLF9 and MTUS1 were commonly downregulated in all 3 groups. Most
differentially expressed genes consistently clustered with molecular functions
such as protein receptor binding, kinase activity and chemo-repellent activity.
These genes regulate cellular components such as centrosome, plasma membrane
receptors, and basal lamina, and may participate in biological processes such as 
cell cycle regulation, chemoresistance and stemness induction. Key Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways such as ECM receptor, ErbB
signaling, endocytosis and adherens junction pathways were enriched. Gene
co-expression extrapolation screening by the Connectivity Map revealed several
small-molecule compounds (such as SC-560, disulfiram, thapsigargin, esculetin and
cinchonine) with potential anti-OVCSC properties targeting OVCSC signature genes.
We identified several key CSC features and specific regulation networks in OVCSCs
and predicted several small molecules with potential anti-OVCSC pharmacological
properties, which may aid the development of OVCSC-specific drugs.

PMID: 24424387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 9;9(1):e84516. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084516. eCollection 
2014.

Identification of a novel Haemophilus parasuis-specific B cell epitope using
monoclonal antibody against the OppA protein.

Zheng N(1), Chai Z(1), Fu F(1), Jiang F(1), Wang X(1), Zhang X(1), Wang Z(1), Li 
X(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute, the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, China.

Monoclonal antibody (MAb) 1B3 against Haemophilus parasuis (H. parasuis) was
generated by fusing SP2/0 murine myeloma cells and spleen cells from BALB/c mice 
immunized with the whole-bacterial-cell suspension of H. parasuis HS80 (serotype 
5). The MAb 1B3 showed strong reactivity with 15 serotype reference strains of H.
parasuis using Dot blot and Western blot analysis. Immunoprecipitation and
protein spectral analysis indicated that MAb 1B3 recognized by Oligopeptide
permease A (OppA) belongs to the ATP binding cassette transporter family. In
addition, a linear B-cell epitope recognized by MAb 1B3 was identified by the
screening of a phage-displayed 12-mer random peptide library. Sequence analysis
showed that MAb 1B3 was recognized by phages-displaying peptides with the
consensus motif KTPSEXR (X means variable amino acids). Its amino acid sequence
matched (469)KTPAEAR(475) of H. parasuis OppA protein. A series of progressively 
truncated peptides were synthesized to define the minimal region that was
required for MAb 1B3 binding. The epitope was highly conserved in OppA protein
sequences from the isolated H. parasuis strains, which was confirmed by alignment
analysis. Furthermore, the minimal linear epitope was highly specific among 75
different bacterial strains as shown in sequence alignments. These results
indicated MAb 1B3 might be potentially used to develop serological diagnostic
tools for H. parasuis.

PMCID: PMC3887010
PMID: 24416241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. J Sep Sci. 2014 Mar;37(5):558-65. doi: 10.1002/jssc.201301265.

Development and evaluation of gas and liquid chromatographic methods for the
analysis of fatty amines.

Breitbach ZS(1), Weatherly CA, Woods RM, Xu C, Vale G, Berthod A, Armstrong DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Texas at Arlington, Planetarium Place, 
Arlington, TX, USA.

In contrast to the plethora of publications on the separation of fatty acids,
analogous studies involving fatty amines are scarce. A recently introduced
ionic-liquid-based capillary column for GC was used to separate
trifluoroacetylated fatty amines focusing on the analysis of a commercial sample.
Using the ionic liquid column (isothermal mode at 200 °C) it was possible to
separate linear primary fatty amines from C12 to C22 chain length in less 25 min 
with MS identification. The log of the amine retention factors are linearly
related to the alkyl chain length with a methylene selectivity of 0.117 kcal/mol 
for the saturated amines and 0.128 kcal/mol for the mono-unsaturated amines. The 
sp2 selectivity for unsaturated fatty amines also could be calculated as 0.107
kcal/mol for the ionic liquid column. The commercial sample was quantified by GC 
with flame ionization detection (FID). An LC method also was developed with a
reversed phase gradient separation using acetonitrile/formate buffer mobile
phases and ESI-MS detection. Native amines could be detected and identified by
their single ion monitoring chromatograms even when partial coelution was
observed. The analysis of the commercial sample returned results coherent with
those obtained by GC-FID and with the manufacturer's data.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24415651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Org Chem. 2014 Feb 7;79(3):1111-9.

Metal-free synthesis of 2-oxindoles via PhI(OAc)2-mediated oxidative CC bond
formation.

Lv J, Zhang-Negrerie D, Deng J, Du Y, Zhao K.

The series of 3-monofunctionalized 2-oxindoles 2 were conveniently synthesized
from reactions between anilide 1 and phenyliodine(III) diacetate (PIDA) through
hypervalent iodine mediated C(sp2)C(sp2) bond formation followed by a subsequent
deacylation reaction. This metal-free method, shown to provide direct access to
an important oxindole intermediate, could be applied to the total synthesis of
naturally occurring horsfiline.

PMID: 24410404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Guang Pu Xue Yu Guang Pu Fen Xi. 2013 Oct;33(10):2700-4.

[Laser Raman spectral investigations of the carbon structure of LiFePO4/C cathode
material].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang C(1), Li YM(2), Zhao QF(2), Gan XK(2), Yao YC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Kunming University of Science and Technology, Faculty of Metalurgcal and
Engergy Engineering, National Engineering Laboratory for Vacuum Metallurgy,
Kunming 650093, China. yangchao1988@foxmail.com (2)Kunming University of Science 
and Technology, Faculty of Metalurgcal and Engergy Engineering, National
Engineering Laboratory for Vacuum Metallurgy, Kunming 650093, China.

In the present paper, Laser Raman spectral was used to study the carbon structure
of LiFePO4/C positive material. The samples were also been characterized by X-ray
diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscope(SEM), selected area electron
diffraction (SEAD) and resistivity test. The result indicated that compared with 
the sp2/sp3 peak area ratios the I(D)/I(G) ratios are not only more evenly but
also exhibited some similar rules. However, the studies indicated that there
exist differences of I(D)/ I(G) ratios and sp2/sp3 peak area ratios among
different points in the same sample. And compared with the samples using citric
acid or sucrose as carbon source, the sample which was synthetized with mixed
carbon source (mixed by citric acid and sucrose) exhibited higher I(D)/I(G)
ratios and sp2/sp3 peak area ratios. Also, by contrast, the differences of
I(D)/I(G) ratios and sp2/sp3 peak area ratios among different points in the same 
sample are less than the single carbon source samples' datas. In the scanning
electron microscopy (sem) and transmission electron microscopy (sem) images, we
can observed the uneven distributions of carbon coating of the primary particles 
and the secondary particles, this may be the main reason for not being uniform of
difference data in the same sample. The obvious discreteness will affect the
normal use of Raman spectroscopy in these tests.

PMID: 24409720  [PubMed]


296. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Jan;30(1):66-70.

[Preparation and characterization of the monoclonal antibodies against human
CA15-3 and establishment of a sandwich CLIA system].

[Article in Chinese]

Cao L(1), Lan X(2), Wei D(3), Li Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science, Northeast Forestry University, Harbin 150040; Daqing 
MabCom, Inc., Daqing 163316, China. (2)College of Life Science, Northeast
Forestry University, Harbin 150040, China. (3)College of Life Science, Northeast 
Forestry University, Harbin 150040; 2Daqing MabCom, Inc., Daqing 163316, China.
(4)College of Life Science, Northeast Forestry University, Harbin 150040; Daqing 
Biotechnology Research Institute, Northeast Forestry University, Daqing 163316,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To prepare the monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) against human carbohydrate
antigen 15-3 (CA15-3) and establish a double-antibody sandwich chemiluminescent
immunoassay (CLIA) system for detecting CA15-3 in the human serum.
METHODS: BALB/c mice were immunized with human CA15-3 antigen. Spleen cells of
the immunized mice were fused with Sp2/0 cells and the positive hybridoma cells
were selected and subcloned. The supernatant was taken for purify mAbs using
protein A chromatography. The purity, titer, epitope and subtype of the mAbs were
characterized and the sandwich CLIA system was established. The system was
evaluated in its accuracy, limit of detection, linearity, repetitiveness and
specificity.
RESULTS: Five hybridoma cell lines named #3-1-3, #5-2-2, #11-2-2, #12-1-3 and
#16-1-3 were obtained respectively, which are of strong positive signal and high 
secretion. The titers of the mAbs secreted by these hydridomas were above 10(-8);
g/mL. All of the mAbs expressed <U+03BA> light chains, and their heavy chains were as
follows: #3-1-3 mAb had IgG2a, #5-2-2 mAb and #12-1-3 mAb had IgG2b, #11-2-2 mAb 
and #16-1-3 mAb had IgG3. The double-antibody sandwich CLIA system had a good
linear relationship between 0.59 U/mL and 300 U/mL. The recovery rate for
accuracy was 97.45% and the limit of detection was 0.59 U/mL. The assay was
highly linear (correlation coefficient 0.9978) and highly repeatable [coefficient
of variation (CV) <10%]. This CLIA system was also highly specific without
cross-reactivity to the tumor marker AFP, CEA, CA50, CA19-9 and CA72-4.
CONCLUSION: The mAbs against human CA15-3 have been prepared and a sandwich CLIA 
system for detecting CA15-3 in the human serum has been established successfully,
which provides a basis for CA15-3 quantification and clinical application.

PMID: 24405600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Toxicon. 2014 Mar;80:64-72. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2013.12.008. Epub 2013 Dec 27.

Preparation and identification of monoclonal antibody against fumonisin B(1) and 
development of detection by Ic-ELISA.

Ling S(1), Pang J(2), Yu J(2), Wang R(1), Liu L(3), Ma Y(1), Zhang Y(2), Jin
N(1), Wang S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Fungi and Mycotoxins of Fujian Province, Key
Laboratory of Biopesticide and Chemical Biology, Ministry of Education, and
School of Life Sciences, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou
350002, China. (2)School of Food Sciences, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry
University, Fuzhou 350002, China. (3)Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Fungi and
Mycotoxins of Fujian Province, Key Laboratory of Biopesticide and Chemical
Biology, Ministry of Education, and School of Life Sciences, Fujian Agriculture
and Forestry University, Fuzhou 350002, China; Environmental Protection Bureau of
Qitaihe City, Qitaihe 154600, Heilongjiang, China. (4)Key Laboratory of
Pathogenic Fungi and Mycotoxins of Fujian Province, Key Laboratory of
Biopesticide and Chemical Biology, Ministry of Education, and School of Life
Sciences, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou 350002, China.
Electronic address: wshyyl@sina.com.

Fumonisin B(1) (FB(1)) is one of the mycotoxins produced by Fusarium
verticillioides, which was mainly found in corn and related products. FB(1) was
small molecule with no immunogenicity, so it should be conjugated to carrier
proteins such as BSA (bovine serum albumin) or KLH (keyhole limpet hemocyanin) to
generate immunogenicity. In this study, conjugate FB(1)-BSA was used to immunize 
Balb/c mice, and one hybrid cell line 4G5 excreting monoclonal antibody against
FB(1) was obtained by fusing mouse Sp2/0 myeloma cells with spleen cells from the
immunized mouse. Hybridoma 4G5 was injected into the abdomen of Balb/c mice, and 
the anti-FB(1) mcAb was harvested from ascites and the titer reached 6.4 × 10(4) 
after purification with caprylic/ammonium sulfate precipitation (CA-AS) method.
The cross-reactivity results showed that anti-FB(1) mcAb was highly specific to
fumonisin B(1), and the affinity was 2.1 × 10(8) L/M. Indirect competitive ELISA 
(ic-ELISA) indicated that the linear range to detect FB(1) was 1-800 ng/mL with
IC50 of 32 ng/mL. The detection limit was 1.0 ng/mL, and the recovery average was
93.75 ± 6.90%. Therefore, the anti-FB(1) mcAb excreted by 4G5 can be used to
detect fumonisin B(1) in corn and related samples.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 24378835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. J Am Chem Soc. 2014 Jan 22;136(3):1062-9. doi: 10.1021/ja410883p. Epub 2014 Jan
9.

Ni-catalyzed carboxylation of C(sp2)- and C(sp3)-O bonds with CO2.

Correa A(1), León T, Martin R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemical Research of Catalonia (ICIQ), Av. Països Catalans 16,
43007 Tarragona, Spain.

In recent years a significant progress has been made for the carboxylation of
aryl and benzyl halides with CO2, becoming convenient alternatives to the use of 
stoichiometric amounts of well-defined metal species. Still, however, most of
these processes require the use of pyrophoric and air-sensitive reagents and the 
current methods are mostly restricted to organic halides. Therefore, the
discovery of a mild, operationally simple alternate carboxylation that occurs
with a wide substrate scope employing readily available coupling partners will be
highly desirable. Herein, we report a new protocol that deals with the
development of a synergistic activation of CO2 and a rather challenging
activation of inert C(sp(2))-O and C(sp(3))-O bonds derived from simple and cheap
alcohols, a previously unrecognized opportunity in this field. This unprecedented
carboxylation event is characterized by its simplicity, mild reaction conditions,
remarkable selectivity pattern and an excellent chemoselectivity profile using
air-, moisture-insensitive and easy-to-handle nickel precatalysts. Our results
render our method a powerful alternative, practicality and novelty aside, to
commonly used organic halides as counterparts in carboxylation protocols.
Furthermore, this study shows, for the first time, that traceless directing
groups allow for the reductive coupling of substrates without extended p-systems,
a typical requisite in many C-O bond-cleavage reactions. Taking into
consideration the limited knowledge in catalytic carboxylative reductive events, 
and the prospective impact of providing a new tool for accessing valuable
carboxylic acids, we believe this work opens up new vistas and allows new tactics
in reductive coupling events.

PMID: 24377699  [PubMed]


299. Hum Antibodies. 2014;23(1-2):7-12. doi: 10.3233/HAB-140277.

Development and characterization of monoclonal antibodies against human IgA in
Balb/c mice.

Ezzatifar F(1), Majidi J(1), Baradaran B(2), Maleki LA(2), Abdolalizadeh J(3),
Yousefi M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Drug Applied Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz,
Iran Immunology Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz,
Iran Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Tabriz University of Medical 
Sciences, Tabriz, Iran. (2)Immunology Research Center, Tabriz University of
Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine,
Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran. (3)Drug Applied Research
Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran Immunology Research
Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.

OBJECTIVE: Immunoglobulin A (IgA) is the second immunoglobulin in human serum.
Monoclonal antibodies have many potential uses in diagnosis, treatment and
purification. The conjugated monoclonal antibodies against human IgA are utilized
in diagnostic kits.
METHODS: For production of monoclonal antibodies against human Immunoglobulin A, 
spleen cells of the immune mouse were fused with SP2/0 as myeloma cells and Poly 
Ethylene Glycol (PEG). Supernatant of hybridoma cells was screened to determine
the antibody by ELISA. The appropriate clones were selected for limiting dilution
(L.D). Ultimately, appropriate monoclone was injected intraperitoneally into the 
mouse that has been primed with Pristane.
RESULTS: In current study, 175 clones were obtained of which 5 clones had
absorbance values of about 3 were selected for limiting dilution. Between these
clones, 3-D5monoclone with IgG1 subclass was selected as appropriate one and it
was reproduced in FCS free RPMI 1640. For large scale production in invivo, the
appropriate clone was implanted in the peritoneum of the Balb/c mouse and its
titer was determined, which showed 1/100,000 dilution for ascitic fluid, having
no cross reactivity with IgM & IgG.
CONCLUSIONS: Monoclonal antibody was purified by chromatography, confirmed by
SDS-PAGE and then conjugated with enzyme and used for diagnostic kits.

PMID: 25812697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Dec;21(6):1390-3. doi:
10.7534/j.issn.1009-2137.2013.06.005.

[Construction of hybridoma cells with IL1RAP as a new marker for leukemia stem
cells and detection of its monoclonal antibody].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao K(1), Yin LL(1), Zhao DM(2), Wu QY(2), Chen C(3), Pan B(3), Zeng LY(2), Yao 
Y(2), Xu KL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Transplantation Immunology, Xuzhou Medical College; Department
of Hematology, The Affiliated Hospital of Xuzhou Medical College, Xuzhou 221002, 
Jiangsu Province, China. (2)Laboratory of Transplantation Immunology, Xuzhou
Medical College, The Affiliated Hospital of Xuzhou Medical College, Xuzhou
221002, Jiangsu Province, China. (3)Department of Hematology, The Affiliated
Hospital of Xuzhou Medical College, Xuzhou 221002, Jiangsu Province, China.
(4)Laboratory of Transplantation Immunology, Xuzhou Medical College; Department
of Hematology, The Affiliated Hospital of Xuzhou Medical College, Xuzhou 221002, 
Jiangsu Province, China. E-mail:lihmd@163.com.

This study was aimed to prepare and identify human monoclonal antibody against
IL-1 receptor accessory protein (IL1RAP), which is a new identified surface
marker for leukemia stem cell (LSC), BALB/c mice were immunized with recombinant 
hu-IL1RAP and the spleen cells from immunized mice were fused with SP2/0 myeloma 
cells by conventional hybridoma technique. Positive hybridoma cells were selected
and cultured. ELISA and Western blot were used to detect the type, titer and
sensitivity of antibody. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were isolated and
used to test the antibody specificity. The results showed that 8 hybridoma cell
lines able to stably secrete IL1RAP monoclonal antibodies were obtained and named
3H6E10, 4B6A6, 8G11B5, 9E9F2, 10D8A7, 1C7H7, 1D7G11 and 2D3D3 respectively. These
monoclonal antibodies belonging to IgG1/<U+03BA> type could specifically bind to IL1RAP 
from peripheral blood mononuclear cells. It is concluded that the hybridoma cell 
lines with stable secretion of IL1RAP monoclonal antibodies is successfully
constructed, thus providing novel ways to effectively clear LSC in the future.

PMID: 24370017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Occup Environ Hyg. 2014;11(2):101-10. doi: 10.1080/15459624.2013.843783.

A murine monoclonal antibody with broad specificity for occupationally relevant
diisocyanates.

Lemons AR(1), Siegel PD, Mhike M, Law BF, Hettick JM, Bledsoe TA, Nayak AP,
Beezhold DH, Green BJ.

Author information: 
(1)a Allergy and Clinical Immunology Branch, Health Effects Laboratory Division ,
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention , Morgantown , West Virginia.

Diisocyanates (dNCOs) used in industrial applications are well known low
molecular weight allergens. Occupational exposure is associated with adverse
health outcomes including allergic sensitization and occupational asthma. In this
study, we report the production and initial characterization of a dNCO-hapten
specific murine IgM monoclonal antibody (mAb). Female BALB/c mice were immunized 
intraperitoneally with 25 µg of 4,4'-methylene diphenyl diisocyanate
(MDI)-keyhole limpet hemocyanin. Following six biweekly booster immunizations,
splenocytes were recovered and fused to Sp2/0-Ag14 murine myeloma cell line for
hybridoma production. Hybridomas were then screened in a solid-phase indirect
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) against 40:1 4,4'-MDI- human serum
albumin (HSA). mAb reactivity to dNCO-HSA conjugates and dNCO-HSA spiked human
serum were characterized using a sandwich ELISA. One hybridoma produced a
multimeric IgM mAb (15D4) that reacted with 4,4'-MDI-HSA. Sandwich ELISA analysis
demonstrated comparable reactivity with other occupationally relevant dNCO-HSA
adducts, including 2,4-toluene diisocyanate (TDI)-HSA, 2,6-TDI-HSA, and
1,6-hexamethylene diisocyanate (HDI)-HSA, but not other electrophilic chemical
HSA conjugates. The limit of quantification (LOQ) of 4,4'-MDI-HSA, 2,4-TDI-HSA,
2,6-TDI-HSA, and 1,6-HDI-HSA sandwich ELISAs were 567.2, 172.7, 184.2, and
403.5 ng/mL (8.67, 2.60, 2.77, and 6.07 pmol/mL), respectively. In contrast,
experiments using dNCO-supplemented human sera showed an increase in the
detectable limit of the assay. A mAb has been produced that has potential utility
for detecting mixed diisocyanate exposures in occupational environments. The mAb 
may have additional utility in the standardization of specific IgE detection
immunoassays as well as chromatographic-mass spectrometric methods to enrich dNCO
adducted HSA in the plasma of occupationally exposed workers.

PMCID: PMC4624273
PMID: 24369932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Oncogene. 2015 Jan 2;34(1):39-52. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.548. Epub 2013 Dec 23.

LGALS3BP, lectin galactoside-binding soluble 3 binding protein, promotes
oncogenic cellular events impeded by antibody intervention.

Stampolidis P(1), Ullrich A(1), Iacobelli S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry,
Martinsried, Germany. (2)MediaPharma s.r.l., Chieti, Italy.

The extracellular matrix protein lectin galactoside-binding soluble 3 binding
protein (LGALS3BP) constitutes a negative prognostic marker of cancer onset and
progression with increasing value in clinical application. Since its discovery,
however, although the glycoprotein has been implicated in a growing number of
disease-related processes, its actual role and mechanism of action have remained 
ambiguous, thus hindering opportunities for therapeutic development. In this
study, we have determined that LGALS3BP constitutes a novel ligand for integrins 
a1ß1, a5ß1, avß1 and a6ß1 and have identified that these newly established
partnerships at the membrane level are responsible for exerting the molecule's
involvement in cancer through manipulation of multiple canonical 'outside-in'
integrin signalling events. We demonstrate that LGALS3BP-mediated integrin
activation results into signal transmission via Akt, JNK and the Ras cascade via 
the Raf-ERK axis while p38 activity is kept at baseline levels. Transient
cellular adherence to LGALS3BP favours survival and proliferation signalling
while apoptosis is kept at bay. Sustained cellular exposure to LGALS3BP
significantly supports viability, motility and migration. Importantly, an
anti-LGALS3BP antibody, SP2 is capable of impeding these newly defined
LGALS3BP-driven processes without, however, compromising cell viability. These
novel findings reveal the mechanism of action of LGALS3BP during cellular
adherence and warrant its further validation as a potential pharmacological
target for anticancer therapies.

PMID: 24362527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2014 Jan 15;24(2):685-90. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2013.11.039. 
Epub 2013 Nov 23.

Synthesis and evaluation of curcumin derivatives toward an inhibitor of beta-site
amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme 1.

Konno H(1), Endo H(2), Ise S(2), Miyazaki K(2), Aoki H(2), Sanjoh A(3), Kobayashi
K(4), Hattori Y(4), Akaji K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Engineering, Graduate School of Science and
Technology, Yamagata University, Yonezawa, Yamagata 992-8510, Japan. Electronic
address: konno@yz.yamagata-u.ac.jp. (2)Department of Biochemical Engineering,
Graduate School of Science and Technology, Yamagata University, Yonezawa,
Yamagata 992-8510, Japan. (3)R&D Center, Protein Wave Co., Nara 631-0006, Japan. 
(4)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Kyoto Pharmaceutical University,
Yamashina-ku, Kyoto 607-8412, Japan. (5)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Kyoto 
Pharmaceutical University, Yamashina-ku, Kyoto 607-8412, Japan. Electronic
address: akaji@mb.kyoto-phu.ac.jp.

To research a new non-peptidyl inhibitor of beta-site amyloid precursor protein
cleaving enzyme 1, we focused on the curcumin framework, two phenolic groups
combined with an sp2 carbon spacer for low-molecular and high lipophilicity. The 
structure-activity relationship study of curcumin derivatives is described. Our
results indicate that phenolic hydroxy groups and an alkenyl spacer are important
structural factors for the inhibition of beta-site amyloid precursor protein
cleaving enzyme 1 and, furthermore, non-competitive inhibition of enzyme activity
is anticipated from an inhibitory kinetics experiment and docking simulation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24360557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Org Lett. 2014 Jan 17;16(2):382-5. doi: 10.1021/ol4032478. Epub 2013 Dec 19.

Free-radical cascade alkylarylation of alkenes with simple alkanes: highly
efficient access to oxindoles via selective (sp3)C-H and (sp2)C-H bond
functionalization.

Li Z(1), Zhang Y, Zhang L, Liu ZQ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Applied Organic Chemistry, Lanzhou University ,
Lanzhou Gansu 730000, P. R. China.

A copper-catalyzed alkylarylation of alkenes with simple alkanes was achieved,
which not only provided an efficient method to prepare various alkyl-substituted 
oxindoles, but also represented a novel strategy for selective sp(3) C-H
functionalization/C-C bond formation via a free-radical cascade process.
Additionally, selective activation of unactivated (sp(3))C-H and (sp(2))C-H bonds
by one single step is achieved in this system, which would also provide a novel
strategy for raising efficiency in C-H bond functionalization.

PMID: 24354601  [PubMed]


305. J Am Chem Soc. 2014 Jan 8;136(1):169-78. doi: 10.1021/ja407422q. Epub 2013 Dec
16.

sp3-sp2 vs sp3-sp3 C-C site selectivity in Rh-catalyzed ring opening of
benzocyclobutenol: a DFT study.

Ding L(1), Ishida N, Murakami M, Morokuma K.

Author information: 
(1)Fukui Institute for Fundamental Chemistry, Kyoto University , Kyoto 606-8103, 
Japan.

The C(sp(3))-C(sp(2)) vs C(sp(3))-C(sp(3)) site selectivity in the C-C bond
activation in Rh-catalyzed ring opening of benzocyclobutenol was systematically
investigated using density functional theory (DFT). The catalytic cycle includes 
three elementary steps: the proton transfer from the substrate to a rhodium
hydroxide, the C-C cleavage, and the proton transfer from water onto a carbon
forming the final product with regeneration of the rhodium hydroxide. The site
selectivity is determined by the C-C cleavage step; the C(sp(3))-C(sp(2))
cleavage is favored over the C(sp(3))-C(sp(3)) cleavage because the former
transition state is stabilized by an interaction between the benzene ring of the 
substrate and Rh. DMSO, a more polar solvent, reduces the site selectivity as the
more polar C(sp(3))-C(sp(3)) transition state (TS) is stabilized more than the
C(sp(3))-C(sp(2)) TS and decreases the advantage of the latter TS. DPPF ligand is
bulky, and the steric repulsion on the tighter C(sp(3))-C(sp(2)) TS causes the
loss of the site selectivity. For the even more crowded Rh(P(t-Bu)3)2 catalyst,
one phosphine has to dissociate before the C-C cleavage reaction takes place, and
the advantage of the C(sp(3))-C(sp(2)) TS is regained for the less crowded
RhP(t-Bu)3 active catalyst.

PMID: 24341735  [PubMed]


306. J Am Chem Soc. 2014 Jan 8;136(1):36-9. doi: 10.1021/ja410467e. Epub 2013 Dec 23.

Spatial and temporal control of the diazonium modification of sp2 carbon
surfaces.

Kirkman PM(1), Güell AG, Cuharuc AS, Unwin PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Warwick , Gibbet Hill Road, Coventry,
CV4 7AL, U.K.

Interest in the controlled chemical functionalization of sp(2) carbon materials
using diazonium compounds has been recently reignited, particularly as a means to
generate a band gap in graphene. We demonstrate local diazonium modification of
pristine sp(2) carbon surfaces, with high control, at the micrometer scale
through the use of scanning electrochemical cell microscopy (SECCM).
Electrochemically driven diazonium patterning is investigated at a range of
driving forces, coupled with surface analysis using atomic force microscopy (AFM)
and Raman spectroscopy. We highlight how the film density, level of sp(2)/sp(3)
rehybridization and the extent of multilayer formation can be controlled, paving 
the way for the use of localized electrochemistry as a route to controlled
diazonium modification.

PMID: 24325138  [PubMed]


307. World J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2014 May;30(5):1533-40. doi:
10.1007/s11274-013-1575-y. Epub 2013 Dec 10.

Investigation of the antibacterial activity of a short cationic peptide against
multidrug-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae and Salmonella typhimurium strains and 
its cytotoxicity on eukaryotic cells.

Moghaddam MM(1), Barjini KA, Ramandi MF, Amani J.

Author information: 
(1)Applied Biotechnology Research Center, Baqiyatallah University of Medical
Sciences, P.O. Box 19395-5487, Tehran, Iran, mm.genetics@gmail.com.

With the growing microbial resistance to conventional antimicrobial agents, the
development of novel and alternative therapeutic strategies are vital. During
recent years novel peptide antibiotics with broad spectrum activity against many 
Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria have been developed. In this study,
antibacterial activity of CM11 peptide (WKLFKKILKVL-NH2), a short
cecropin-melittin hybrid peptide, is evaluated against antibiotic-resistant
strains of Klebsiella pneumoniae and Salmonella typhimurium as two important
pathogenic bacteria. To appraise the antibacterial activity, minimal inhibitory
concentration (MIC), minimal bactericidal concentration (MBC) and bactericidal
killing assay were utilized with different concentrations (2-128 mg/L) of
peptide. To evaluate cytotoxic effect of peptide, viability of RAJI, Hela, SP2/0,
CHO, LNCAP cell lines and primary murine macrophage cells were also investigated 
with MTT assay in different concentrations (3-24 and 0.5-16 mg/L, respectively). 
MICs of K. pneumoniae and S. typhimurium isolates were in range of 8-16 and
4-16 mg/L, respectively. In bactericidal killing assay no colonies were observed 
at 2X MIC for K. pneumoniae and S. typhimurium isolates after 80-90 min,
respectively. Despite the fact that CM11 reveals no significant cytotoxicity on
RAJI, Hela, SP2/0, and CHO cell lines beneath 6 mg/L at first 24 and 48 h, the
viability of LNCAP cells are about 50 % at 3 mg/L, which indicates strong
cytotoxicity of the peptide. In addition, macrophage toxicity by MTT assay showed
that LD50 of CM11 peptide is 12 µM (16 mg/L) after 48 h while in this
concentration after 24 h macrophage viability was about 70 %.

PMID: 24323118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. BMB Rep. 2014 Jul;47(7):399-404.

Inhibition of mouse SP2/0 myeloma cell growth by the B7-H4 protein vaccine.

Mu N(1), Liu N(2), Hao Q(1), Xu Y(1), Li J(1), Li W(1), Wu S(1), Zhang C(1), Su
H(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Biotechnology Center, School of
Pharmacy, The Fourth Military Medical University, 17 Changle West Road, 710032
Xi'an, Shaanxi, People's Republic of China. (2)Experiment Teaching Center of
Basic Medicine, The Fourth Military Medical University, 17 Changle West Road,
710032 Xi'an, Shaanxi, People's Republic of China. (3)Department of Oncology,
Tangdu Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, 1 Xinsi Road, 710038, Xi'an,
Shaanxi, People's Republic of China.

B7-H4 is a member of B7 family of co-inhibitory molecules and B7-H4 protein is
found to be overexpressed in many human cancers and which is usually associated
with poor survival. In this study, we developed a therapeutic vaccine made from a
fusion protein composed of a tetanus toxoid (TT) T-helper cell epitope and human 
B7-H4IgV domain (TT-rhB7-H4IgV). We investigated the anti-tumor effect of the
TT-rhB7-H4IgV vaccine in BALB/c mice and SP2/0 myeloma growth was significantly
suppressed in mice. The TT-rhB7-H4IgV vaccine induced high-titer specific
antibodies in mice. Further, the antibodies induced by TT-rhB7-H4IgV vaccine were
capable of depleting SP2/0 cells through complement-dependent cytotoxicity (CDC) 
in vitro. On the other hand, the poor cellular immune response was irrelevant to 
the therapeutic efficacy. These results indicate that the recombinant
TT-rhB7-H4IgV vaccine might be a useful candidate of immunotherapy for the
treatment of some tumors associated with abnormal expression of B7-H4.

PMCID: PMC4163849
PMID: 24314141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Adv Pharm Bull. 2013;3(2):333-7. doi: 10.5681/apb.2013.054. Epub 2013 Aug 20.

A unique report: development of super anti-human IgG monoclone with optical
density over than 3.

Aghebati Maleki L(1), Baradaran B, Abdolalizadeh J, Ezzatifar F, Majidi J.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz,
Iran. ; Tabriz Pharmaceutical Technology Incubator (TPTI).

PURPOSE: Monoclonal antibodies and related conjugates are key reagents used in
biomedical researches as well as, in treatment, purification and diagnosis of
infectious and non- infectious diseases.
METHODS: Balb/c mice were immunized with purified human IgG. Spleen cells of the 
most immune mouse were fused with SP2/0 in the presence of Poly Ethylene Glycol
(PEG). Supernatant of hybridoma cells was screened for detection of antibody by
ELISA. Then, the sample was assessed for cross-reactivity with IgM & IgA by ELISA
and confirmed by immunoblotting. The subclasses of the selected mAbs were
determined. The best clone was injected intraperitoneally to some
pristane-injected mice. Anti-IgG mAb was purified from the animals' ascitic fluid
by Ion exchange chromatography and then, mAb was conjugated with HRP.
RESULTS: In the present study, over than 50 clones were obtained that 1 clone had
optical density over than 3. We named this clone as supermonoclone which was
selected for limiting dilution. The result of the immunoblotting, showed sharp
band in IgG position and did not show any band in IgM&IgA position.
CONCLUSION: Based on the findings of this study, the conjugated monoclonal
antibody could have application in diagnosis of infectious diseases like
Toxoplasmosis, Rubella and IgG class of other infectious and non- infectious
diseases.

PMCID: PMC3848219
PMID: 24312857  [PubMed]


310. Afr J Tradit Complement Altern Med. 2013 Aug 12;10(5):375-9. eCollection 2013.

On the inhibitory effect of Drynaria fortunei extract on human myeloma SP20
cells.

Li B(1), Duan T, Fan L.

Author information: 
(1)Orthopaedics Department, The Affiliated hospital of Shandong University of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, 250014, Ji Nan, China.

The objective of the study was to investigate the inhibitory effect of Drynaria
fortunei extract on human myeloma SP2 cells. Three different total extracts of
Drynaria fortunei were obtained by reflux extraction method using different
organic solvents including ethanol, methanol and petroleum ether. Their
anticancer activities on SP20 cells were tested, and the maximum inhibition rate 
was obtained. The inhibitory effects on tumour cells at 12 h, 24 h, 36 h and 48 h
were tested, and the inhibition curves at different time periods were plotted.
The results showed that the methanol and ethanol extracts have similar inhibition
rates at 24 h, which are around 55%. On the other hand, the maximum inhibition
rate of petroleum ether extract is only 36% within 24 h. Moreover, within the
time periods of 36 h and 48 h, its inhibition rates are all below 10%.

PMCID: PMC3847433
PMID: 24311853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2013 Dec;69(Pt 12):2353-64. doi:
10.1107/S0907444913021823. Epub 2013 Nov 19.

Crystallographic identification of an unexpected protein complex in silkworm
haemolymph.

Pietrzyk AJ(1), Bujacz A, Mueller-Dieckmann J, Lochynska M, Jaskolski M, Bujacz
G.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biocrystallographic Research, Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry,
Polish Academy of Sciences, Noskowskiego 12/14, 61-704 Poznan, Poland.

The first crystal structure of a complex formed by two storage proteins, SP2 and 
SP3, isolated from their natural source, mulberry silkworm (Bombyx mori L.)
haemolymph, has been determined. The structure was solved by molecular
replacement using arylphorin, a protein rich in aromatic amino-acid residues,
from oak silkworm as the initial model. The quality of the electron-density maps 
obtained from the X-ray diffraction experiment allowed the authors to detect that
the investigated crystal structure was composed of two different arylphorins: SP2
and SP3. This discovery was confirmed by N-terminal sequencing. SP2 has been
extensively studied previously, whereas only a few reports on SP3 are available. 
However, to date no structural studies have been reported for these proteins.
These studies revealed that SP2 and SP3 exist in the silkworm body as a
heterohexamer formed by one SP2 trimer and one SP3 trimer. The overall fold,
consisting of three haemocyanin-like subdomains, of SP2 and SP3 is similar. Both 
proteins contain a conserved N-glycosylation motif in their structures.

PMID: 24311577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Nat Commun. 2013;4:2943. doi: 10.1038/ncomms3943.

Coal as an abundant source of graphene quantum dots.

Ye R(1), Xiang C, Lin J, Peng Z, Huang K, Yan Z, Cook NP, Samuel EL, Hwang CC,
Ruan G, Ceriotti G, Raji AR, Martí AA, Tour JM.

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Chemistry, Rice University, 6100 Main Street, Houston, Texas 
77005, USA [2].

Erratum in
    Nat Commun. 2015;6:7063.

Coal is the most abundant and readily combustible energy resource being used
worldwide. However, its structural characteristic creates a perception that coal 
is only useful for producing energy via burning. Here we report a facile approach
to synthesize tunable graphene quantum dots from various types of coal, and
establish that the unique coal structure has an advantage over pure sp2-carbon
allotropes for producing quantum dots. The crystalline carbon within the coal
structure is easier to oxidatively displace than when pure sp2-carbon structures 
are used, resulting in nanometre-sized graphene quantum dots with amorphous
carbon addends on the edges. The synthesized graphene quantum dots, produced in
up to 20% isolated yield from coal, are soluble and fluorescent in aqueous
solution, providing promise for applications in areas such as bioimaging,
biomedicine, photovoltaics and optoelectronics, in addition to being inexpensive 
additives for structural composites.

PMID: 24309588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Molecules. 2013 Nov 28;18(12):14739-46. doi: 10.3390/molecules181214739.

Examination of the potential for adaptive chirality of the nitrogen chiral center
in aza-aspartame.

Bouayad-Gervais SH(1), Lubell WD.

Author information: 
(1)Département de chimie, Université de Montréal, 2900 Boul. Edouard-Monpetit,
Montréal, QC H3T 1J4, Canada. william.lubell@umontreal.ca.

The potential for dynamic chirality of an azapeptide nitrogen was examined by
substitution of nitrogen for the a-carbon of the aspartate residue in the
sweetener S,S-aspartame. Considering that S,S- and R,S-aspartame possess sweet
and bitter tastes, respectively, a bitter-sweet taste of aza-aspartame 9 could be
indicative of a low isomerization barrier for nitrogen chirality
inter-conversion. Aza-aspartame 9 was synthesized by a combination of hydrazine
and peptide chemistry. Crystallization of 9 indicated a R,S-configuration in the 
solid state; however, the aza-residue chiral center was considerably flattened
relative to its natural amino acid counterpart. On tasting, the authors
considered aza-aspartame 9 to be slightly bitter or tasteless. The lack of bitter
sweet taste of aza-aspartame 9 may be due to flattening from sp2 hybridization in
the urea as well as a high barrier for sp3 nitrogen inter-conversion, both of
which may interfere with recognition by taste receptors.

PMID: 24288001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Avicenna J Med Biotechnol. 2013 Oct;5(4):212-9.

Production and characterization of a murine monoclonal antibody against human
ferritin.

Bayat AA(1), Yeganeh O, Ghods R, Zarnani AH, Ardekani RB, Mahmoudi AR, Mahmoudian
J, Haghighat-Noutash F, Jeddi-Tehrani M.

Author information: 
(1)Monoclonal Antibody Research Center, Avicenna Research Institute, ACECR,
Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Ferritin is an iron storage protein, which plays a key role in iron
metabolism. Measurement of ferritin level in serum is one of the most useful
indicators of iron status and also a sensitive measurement of iron deficiency.
Monoclonal antibodies may be useful as a tool in various aspects of ferritin
investigations. In this paper, the production of a murine monoclonal antibody
(mAb) against human ferritin was reported.
METHODS: Balb/c mice were immunized with purified human ferritin and splenocytes 
of hyper immunized mice were fused with Sp2/0 myeloma cells. After four times of 
cloning by limiting dilution, a positive hybridoma (clone: 2F9-C9) was selected
by ELISA using human ferritin. Anti-ferritin mAb was purified from culture
supernatants by affinity chromatography.
RESULTS: Determination of the antibody affinity for ferritin by ELISA revealed a 
relatively high affinity (2.34×10(9) M (-1)) and the isotype was determined to be
IgG2a. The anti-ferritin mAb 2F9-C9 reacted with 79.4% of Hela cells in flow
cytometry. The antibody detected a band of 20 kDa in K562 cells, murine and human
liver lysates, purified ferritin in Western blot and also ferritin in human
serum.
CONCLUSION: This mAb can specifically recognize ferritin and may serve as a
component of ferritin diagnostic kit if other requirements of the kit are met.

PMCID: PMC3838765
PMID: 24285995  [PubMed]


315. Ann Bot. 2014 Feb;113(3):489-500. doi: 10.1093/aob/mct272. Epub 2013 Nov 26.

Negative effects of temperature and atmospheric depositions on the seed viability
of common juniper (Juniperus communis).

Gruwez R(1), De Frenne P, De Schrijver A, Leroux O, Vangansbeke P, Verheyen K.

Author information: 
(1)Forest and Nature Lab, Ghent University, Geraardsbergsesteenweg 267, BE-9090
Melle-Gontrode, Belgium.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Environmental change is increasingly impacting ecosystems
worldwide. However, our knowledge about the interacting effects of various
drivers of global change on sexual reproduction of plants, one of their key
mechanisms to cope with change, is limited. This study examines populations of
poorly regenerating and threatened common juniper (Juniperus communis) to
determine the influence of four drivers of global change (rising temperatures,
nitrogen deposition, potentially acidifying deposition and altering precipitation
patterns) on two key developmental phases during sexual reproduction,
gametogenesis and fertilization (seed phase two, SP2) and embryo development
(seed phase three, SP3), and on the ripening time of seeds.
METHODS: In 42 populations throughout the distribution range of common juniper in
Europe, 11,943 seeds of two developmental phases were sampled. Seed viability was
determined using seed dissection and related to accumulated temperature
(expressed as growing degree-days), nitrogen and potentially acidifying
deposition (nitrogen plus sulfur), and precipitation data.
KEY RESULTS: Precipitation had no influence on the viability of the seeds or on
the ripening time. Increasing temperatures had a negative impact on the viability
of SP2 and SP3 seeds and decreased the ripening time. Potentially acidifying
depositions negatively influenced SP3 seed viability, while enhanced nitrogen
deposition led to lower ripening times.
CONCLUSIONS: Higher temperatures and atmospheric deposition affected SP3 seeds
more than SP2 seeds. However, this is possibly a delayed effect as juniper seeds 
develop practically independently, due to the absence of vascular communication
with the parent plant from shortly after fertilization. It is proposed that the
failure of natural regeneration in many European juniper populations might be
attributed to climate warming as well as enhanced atmospheric deposition of
nitrogen and sulfur.

PMCID: PMC3906965
PMID: 24284814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Hum Antibodies. 2013;22(1-2):1-8. doi: 10.3233/HAB-130265.

Production and characterization of murine monoclonal antibody against synthetic
peptide of CD34.

Maleki LA(1), Majidi J, Baradaran B, Abdolalizadeh J, Akbari AM.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz,
Iran Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Tabriz University of Medical 
Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.

BACKGROUND: The treatment of hematologic malignancies and immunodeficiency
diseases are offered by hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) as a unique self-renewal 
and differentiation source which most commonly is selected by CD34 surface marker
for HSC.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to develop and characterize monoclonal
antibody against CD34 antigen for detection of hematopoietic stem cells.
METHODS: Balb/c mice were immunized with two synthetic peptides of CD34 and
Spleen cells were fused with SP2/0.Fused cells were grown in hypoxanthine,
aminopterine and thymidine (HAT) selective medium and cloned by limiting
dilution. Large scale of monoclonal antibodies was produced by mouse ascites
production of mAb (in vivo) method. Monoclonal antibody was purified by
chromatography. Then reactivity of these antibodies was evaluated in different
immunological assays including ELISA, immunofluorescence (IF), western blot (WB) 
and flowcytometry.
RESULTS: In this study, between five positive clone wells, two clones were chosen
for limiting dilution. Limiting dilution product was one monoclone (3-D5
monoclone) with absorbance about 2. Isotype of this mAb was identified as IgG1
class with Kappa (<U+03BA>) light chain.
CONCLUSIONS: This antibody is highly specific and functional in biomedical
applications such as ELISA, flowcytometry, immunofluorescence, and western blot
assays.

PMID: 24284303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. AAPS J. 2014 Jan;16(1):125-8. doi: 10.1208/s12248-013-9547-6. Epub 2013 Nov 27.

A novel approach to evaluate the pharmacokinetic biocomparability of a monoclonal
antibody derived from two different cell lines using simultaneous crossover
design.

Han C(1), McIntosh TS, Geist BJ, Jiao T, Puchalski TA, Goldberg KM, Yang TY,
Pendley CE, Zhou H, Davis HM.

Author information: 
(1)Biologics Clinical Pharmacology, Janssen Research & Development, LLC, Spring
House, Pennsylvania, 19477, USA, chan@its.jnj.com.

A parallel study design with a large number of subjects has been a typical path
for pharmacokinetic (PK) biocomparability assessment of biotherapeutics with long
half-lives and immunogenic propensity, for example, monoclonal antibodies (mAb). 
A recently published innovative bioanalytical method that can quantify mAb
produced from two different cell lines in the same sample opened an avenue to
exploring a simultaneous crossover study design for PK biocomparability
assessment of biotherapeutics. Siltuximab, a chimeric IgG1 mAb-targeting
interleukin-6, was studied as an example. The pharmacokinetic biocomparability of
siltuximab derived from mouse myeloma (Sp2/0) cells and Chinese hamster ovary
cells was previously assessed and demonstrated in a clinical PK biocomparability 
study that enrolled more than 140 healthy subjects using a parallel trial design.
The biocomparability was successfully shown in six cynomolgus monkeys in a
preclinical proof-of-concept study using the new crossover study design supported
by the analytical method. The impact of antidrug antibodies on the assessment of 
biocomparability was minimal. This novel approach opened up a new arena for the
evaluation of PK biocomparability of biotherapeutics with unique molecular
signatures such as a mAb derived from different cell lines.

PMCID: PMC3889524
PMID: 24281691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Complement Ther Med. 2013 Dec;21(6):641-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ctim.2013.08.003. Epub 
2013 Aug 17.

A validation study on the insertion depth ranges of the five phase points by
using musculoskeletal ultrasound: a pilot study.

Park M(1), Kim S.

Author information: 
(1)Wonkwang University Oriental Medical Hospital, Department of Acupuncture &
Moxibustion, Gwangju, South Korea.

OBJECTIVES: We conducted preliminary research to validate the insertion depth
ranges of the five phase points by using ultrasonography.
DESIGN AND SETTING: The insertion depth ranges of the five phase points were
investigated by reviewing acupuncture and moxibustion literature. The following
lengths were measured in centimetres in order to substitute B-cun values with
centimetre values: the distance from the cubital crease to the palmar crease,
from the inferior border of the medial tibia condyle to the medial malleolus, and
from the popliteal crease to the prominence of the lateral malleolus. The five
phase points were represented by pen marks on the skin, per the World Health
Organization acupuncture point specifications. The anatomical structures of the
five phase points within the insertion depth ranges were observed using colour
Doppler ultrasound.
RESULTS: The five phase points for which the insertion depth ranges needed to be 
modified were LU11, HT9, PC9, LI1, LI2, SI1, SI2, TE1, ST45, BL66, GB44, SP1,
SP2, LR1, and BL67. The five phase points that required careful insertion of
acupuncture needles were LU8, LU9, LU10, LI5, ST36, ST41, SP3, HT4, HT7, HT8,
SI3, SI8, BL40, KI2, KI3, KI10, KI27, GB34, GB38, LR3, and LR4.
CONCLUSION: This preliminary study provided evidence on the insertion depths in
acupuncture treatment. To generate more concrete evidence regarding insertion
depths, further research should be conducted in a participant group with more
diverse body mass index (BMI) values by using acupoint-specific ultrasonography
transducers that can measure the acupoints properly.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24280473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Neurosci Lett. 2014 Jan 13;558:82-6. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2013.11.014. Epub 2013
Nov 20.

Excitability of the central masticatory pathways in patients with sleep bruxism.

Huang H(1), Song YH(1), Wang JJ(2), Guo Q(2), Liu WC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Oral Biomedical Science and Translational Medicine, School of
Stomatology, Tongji University, Middle Yanchang Road 399, Shanghai 200072, PR
China. (2)Shanghai Mental Health Center, School of Medicine Shanghai Jiaotong
University, Shanghai 200030, PR China. (3)Laboratory of Oral Biomedical Science
and Translational Medicine, School of Stomatology, Tongji University, Middle
Yanchang Road 399, Shanghai 200072, PR China. Electronic address:
weicai_liu@tongji.edu.cn.

Since sleep bruxism (SB) is defined as a stereotyped movement and mainly
associated with rhythmic masticatory muscle activity, the aim of this study was
to get a better understanding on the subcortical and cortical networks related to
the excitability of the central masticatory pathways in SB patients. Of 26 SB
patients (12 females and 14 males; mean age: 24.9±4.0 years) and 30 normal
subjects (18 females and 12 males; mean age: 24.1±3.1 years) selected, the motor 
evoked potentials (MEPs) elicited by transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) in
masseter muscles, and the masseter inhibitory reflex (MIR) elicited by magnetic
stimulation with single and double-shock techniques were studied. The MEPs
elicited by TMS were similar in both SB patients and normal subjects. As for the 
MIR elicited by single magnetic stimulation, the latency and duration of the
early silent periods (SP1) between the two groups were similar; but in 5 patients
the late silent periods (SP2) was absent, and this difference in the frequency of
absence of the SP2 between SB patients and normal subjects was significant; with 
double-shock technique, the recovery of SP2 was significantly lower in SB
patients compared to normal subjects. These results suggested an abnormal
excitability of the central masticatory in SB patients; and it is also indicated 
that SB may be mainly under the influence of brainstem networks rather than that 
of cortical networks.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24269982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Org Biomol Chem. 2014 Jan 7;12(1):149-55. doi: 10.1039/c3ob41810c. Epub 2013 Nov 
11.

Synthesis of benzosultams via an intramolecular sp2 C-H bond amination reaction
of o-arylbenzenesulfonamides under metal-free conditions.

Li Y(1), Ding Q, Qiu G, Wu J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Functional Small Organic Molecules, Ministry of Education
and College of Chemistry & Chemical Engineering, Jiangxi Normal University,
Nanchang, Jiangxi 330022, China. dqpjxnu@gmail.com.

A practical synthetic method for the generation of benzosultams via an
intramolecular sp(2) C-H bond amination reaction of o-arylbenzenesulfonamides
with PhI(OAc)2-I2 under metal-free conditions is developed. A broad range of
substrates are tolerated under mild reaction conditions, affording bioactive
benzosultams in good to excellent yields. The resulting benzothiazines could be
conveniently transformed into their corresponding iodinated derivatives via
electrophilic substitution reactions.

PMID: 24217561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Anim Reprod Sci. 2013 Dec;143(1-4):64-71. doi: 10.1016/j.anireprosci.2013.10.003.
Epub 2013 Oct 21.

Relationship between conventional semen characteristics, sperm motility patterns 
and fertility of Andalusian donkeys (Equus asinus).

Dorado J(1), Acha D, Ortiz I, Gálvez MJ, Carrasco JJ, Díaz B, Gómez-Arrones V,
Calero-Carretero R, Hidalgo M.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Reproduction Group, Department of Medicine and Animal Surgery, Faculty 
of Veterinary Medicine, University of Cordoba, 14071 Córdoba, Spain. Electronic
address: jdorado@uco.es.

Sperm quality has an important role in determining fertility. The aims of this
study were to compare the conventional sperm parameters, plus the characteristics
of the motility patterns of the different sperm subpopulations, of donkey donors 
with different fertility level, and to determine their relationships to
fertility. Thirty ejaculates from 6 Andalusian donkeys were assessed for gel-free
volume, pH, sperm concentration, motility and morphology. The fertility of
donkeys was classified on the basis of pregnancy rates per cycle, where donkeys
with a per cycle pregnancy rate =60% were considered to be "fertile" (n=3) and
those with a per cycle pregnancy rate <40% were categorized to be "sub-fertile"
(n=3). Significant differences (P<0.001) between the "fertile" and the
"sub-fertile" group were found for total and progressive motility, and for
straight line velocity. Sperm variables associated (P<0.05) with an increase in
percent pregnant per cycle included total motility (r=0.37), progressive motility
(r=0.53), curvilinear velocity (r=0.44), straightness (r=0.39), beat cross
frequency (r=0.44), and gel-free volume (r=0.53). Four sperm subpopulations (sP) 
were identified in fresh semen: sP1 (slow and non-progressive spermatozoa, 20%), 
sP2 (moderately slow but progressive spermatozoa, 71.2%), sP3 (highly active but 
non-progressive spermatozoa, 2.9%), and sP4 (highly active and progressive
spermatozoa, 5.9%). The lowest percentage (3.1%; P<0.001) of sP4 spermatozoa was 
observed in the "sub-fertile" group. Three of the sperm subpopulations were
related (P<0.05) to fertility (sP2, r=0.54; sP3, r=0.45; sP4, r=0.56). In
conclusion, we were able to relate the fertility of donkeys with in vitro
measures of sperm motility using computer-assisted sperm analysis techniques.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24210876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Org Lett. 2013 Dec 20;15(24):6186-9. doi: 10.1021/ol403028a. Epub 2013 Nov 11.

Pd(II)-catalyzed C(sp2)-H hydroxylation with R2(O)P-coordinating group.

Zhang HY(1), Yi HM, Wang GW, Yang B, Yang SD.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Applied Organic Chemistry, Lanzhou University ,
Lanzhou 730000, P. R. China , and State Key Laboratory for Oxo Synthesis and
Selective Oxidation, Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics , Lanzhou 730000, P.
R. China.

A novel R2(O)P-directed Pd(II)-catalyzed C-H hydroxylation to synthesize various 
substituted 2'-phosphorylbiphenyl-2-ol compounds is described. Notably, the
reaction operates under mild conditions and shows good functional group
tolerance, high selectivity, and yield.

PMID: 24206176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Nov;29(11):1169-73.

[Preparation of monoclonal antibodies against flagellin core protein of Vibrio
cholerae and its application in establishing double-antibody sandwich ELISA for
testing Vibrio cholerae from food products].

[Article in Chinese]

Cheng J(1), Zeng J, Zhang L, Zhang L, Zhang H, Liu X, Cao D.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Entry-Exit Inspection and Quarantine Bureau, Beijing 100026, China.

OBJECTIVE: To prepare the monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) against flagellin core
protein of Vibrio cholerae and establish the double-antibody sandwich ELISA
method for testing Vibrio cholerae from food products.
METHODS: BALB/c mice were immunized with flagellin extracted from Vibrio cholerae
Vc75 by differential centrifugation. The splenocytes from the immunized mice were
fused with Sp2/0 myeloma cells when the antibody titer in serum reached 1:32 000.
The hybridoma cell lines were obtained by regular subcloning and used to generate
ascites. And mAbs reacting to Vibrio cholerae flagellin were achieved by purified
from the ascites.
RESULTS: Six hybridoma cell lines stably secreting mAbs against Vibrio cholerae
flagellin were taken and named VcNo.1-VcNo.6. The mAb titer in serum by indirect 
ELISA was 1:2 × 10(6). SDS-PAGE showed that the flagellin protein molecular
weight (Mr) was 44 000 and the purity was high. Double-antibody sandwich ELISA
method was set up using VcNo.6 antibody for detecting Vibrio cholerae. The
sensitivity reached 10(3) CFU/mL. The ELISA method showed high specificity to
Vibrio cholerae through testing 100 Vibrio cholerae (100% positive) and 101
non-Vibrio cholerae strains (100% negative). The detection limit was 1 CFU/g
sample in artificial contaminated samples.
CONCLUSION: The mAbs against flagellin core protein of Vibrio cholerae was
successfully prepared and used to set up the double-antibody sandwich ELISA. The 
mAb of VcNo.6 was highly specific to Vibrio cholerae. The sensitivity of the
established ELISA was as high as 10(3) CFU/mL. Moreover, it did not react to
non-Vibrio cholerae strains. Therefore, the mAbs of VcNo.6 could be widely used
in Vibrio cholerae detection from food samples as well as clinical samples.

PMID: 24200064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J Am Chem Soc. 2013 Nov 20;135(46):17306-9. doi: 10.1021/ja410060e. Epub 2013 Nov
6.

Ru(II)-catalyzed vinylative dearomatization of naphthols via a C(sp2)-H bond
activation approach.

Nan J(1), Zuo Z, Luo L, Bai L, Zheng H, Yuan Y, Liu J, Luan X, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Synthetic and Natural Functional Molecule Chemistry of the
Ministry of Education, College of Chemistry & Materials Science, Northwest
University , Xi'an 710069, China.

Intermolecular annulation reactions of 1-aryl-2-naphthols with internal alkynes
proceed efficiently in the presence of a Ru catalyst and a Cu oxidant to generate
spirocyclic compounds by sequential cleavage of the C(sp(2))-H bond, migratory
insertion of the alkyne, and dearomatization of the naphthyl ring. Various
spirocyclic molecules bearing an all-carbon quaternary stereocenter could be
obtained by this novel method with good yields and excellent regioselectivity,
and the current process tolerates a variety of synthetically important functional
groups.

PMID: 24195654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Radiat Prot Dosimetry. 2014 Oct;161(1-4):253-6. doi: 10.1093/rpd/nct262. Epub
2013 Nov 4.

Digital dual-parameter data acquisition for SP2 hydrogen-filled proportional
counters.

Hawkes NP(1), Roberts NJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Physical Laboratory, Hampton Road, Teddington, Middx TW11 0LW, UK
nigel.hawkes@npl.co.uk. (2)National Physical Laboratory, Hampton Road,
Teddington, Middx TW11 0LW, UK.

Hydrogen-filled proportional counters perform well as neutron spectrometers in
the energy region from a few tens of keV up to ~1.5 MeV. Unfortunately, gamma
rays also generate signals in these detectors. It is possible in principle to
distinguish the two types of event via the rise time of their respective signal
pulses, but the data acquisition system needed for this is complex to assemble
and adjust if one uses conventional modular analogue electronics. In this work a 
digital sampling system, in conjunction with custom software, was used to measure
and acquire amplitude and rise time data from type SP2 counters. The
interpretation of the data was supported by a Monte Carlo calculation. The
performance of the system is compared with that of a conventional 1-parameter
analogue system, and the potential of the digital technique to supplant
conventional methods is discussed.

© Crown copyright 2013.

PMID: 24191120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Zhejiang Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2013 Sep;42(5):511-6.

[Preparation of anti-B7-H4 monoclonal antibody to investigate B7-H4 expression in
pancreatic cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Hong B(1), Qian Y, Yao HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, the Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University
School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310009, China.

OBJECTIVE: To prepare a monoclonal antibody (mAb) against extracellular domain of
B7-H4 and to investigate the expression of B7-H4 in pancreatic cancer tissue with
the prepared mAb.
METHODS: Balb/c mice were immunized with 3T3-B7-H4 cells and the splenic cells of
the immunized mice were fused with Sp2/0 myeloma cells by conventional hybridoma 
techniques. An indirect ELISA method using 3T3-B7-H4 lysate as antigen was
established to screen antibody-producing hybridoma cell lines. Western blott,
immunoprecipitation (IP), and immunohistochemistry (IHC) were applied to
characterize the mAb. Immunohistochemical staining was used to detect the
expression of B7-H4 in human pancreatic cancer tissue. The correlation of B3-H4
expressions and pathological features of pancreatic cancer was analyzed.
RESULTS: A hybridoma cell line secreting mAb against B7-H4 was obtained. The
subclass of this mAb was IgM, and the light chain was Kappa. Western blot and IP 
showed that the mAb specifically recognized B7-H4. IHC staining revealed that the
mAb stained in a predominantly diffuse plasmalemmal or cytoplasmic pattern when
applied to certain tumor tissues. The B7-H4 was diffusely expressed in the
cytoplasma and/or membrane of pancreatic cancer tissue, which was much higher
than that expressed in normal pancreatic tissue (4.00 ± 1.44 compared with 1.12 ±
0.78, P ± 0.01). The expression of B7-H4 was higher in pancreatic cancer tissues 
with higher pathological grade or with lymph node metastasis as compared with
that in pancreatic cancer tissues with lower grade or with no lymph mode
metastasis (6.10 ± 0.72 compared with 3.55 ± 1.12,P<0.01: 6.14 ± 0.66 compared
with 3.70 ± 1.25,P<0.01). The expression level of B7-H4 was not related to
patients'age and gender.
CONCLUSION: Monoclonal antibody against B7-H4 with high activity and specificity 
has been prepared successfully. The expression of B7-H4 in pancreatic cancer
tissue is up-regulated,which is closely related to the tumor grade and lymph node
metastasis in pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 24167131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Lasers Med Sci. 2015 Jul;30(5):1619-22. doi: 10.1007/s10103-013-1470-7. Epub 2013
Oct 27.

Electromagnetic interference from lasers and intense light sources in the
treatment of patients with artificial pacemakers and other implantable cardiac
devices.

Lister T(1), Grant L, Lee SM, Cole RP, Jones A, Taylor T, Mayo A, Wright PA.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Specialist Laser Centre, Salisbury District Hospital NHS Foundation
Trust, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP2 8BJ, UK, tom.lister@salisbury.nhs.uk.

Measurements of the electric and magnetic field strengths surrounding six laser
systems and one intense pulsed light system were carried out. The results were
compared to exposure limits published by cardiac device manufacturers to assess
the risk of electromagnetic interference to implantable cardiac devices such as
pacemakers or implantable cardioverter defibrillators. The majority of lasers
assessed in this study were found to produce electric and magnetic field
strengths below the published exposure limits for cardiac devices. However, the
low-frequency electric field and static magnetic field of both the CO2 laser and 
the ruby laser were found to exceed these limits. Ensuring that a small
separation is maintained at all times between the laser unit and any patient with
a pacemaker or implantable cardioverter defibrillator appears to be a sensible
expedient in avoiding overexposure of an implantable cardiac device to
electromagnetic interference. Due to the single-shot fast discharge nature of the
intense pulsed light system, changes in electromagnetic field strength were too
fast for some of the measuring equipment used in this study to register accurate 
readings during operation.

PMID: 24162308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Chemistry. 2013 Dec 2;19(49):16791-803. doi: 10.1002/chem.201303158. Epub 2013
Oct 22.

Fullerene-sp2-iminosugar balls as multimodal ligands for lectins and
glycosidases: a mechanistic hypothesis for the inhibitory multivalent effect.

Rísquez-Cuadro R(1), García Fernández JM, Nierengarten JF, Ortiz Mellet C.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Orgánica, Facultad de Química, Universidad de Sevilla,
C/Prof. García González 1, 41012 Sevilla (Spain).

Concerted functioning of lectins and carbohydrate-processing enzymes, mainly
glycosidases, is essential in maintaining life. It was commonly assumed that the 
mechanisms by which each class of protein recognizes their cognate sugar partners
are intrinsically different: multivalency is a characteristic feature of
carbohydrate-lectin interactions, whereas glycosidases bind to their substrates
or substrate-analogue inhibitors in monovalent form. Recent observations on the
glycosidase inhibitory potential of multivalent glycomimetics have questioned
this paradigm and led to postulate an inhibitory multivalent effect. Here the
mechanisms at the origin of this phenomenon have been investigated. A
D-gluco-configured sp(2)-iminosugar glycomimetic motif, namely
1-amino-5N,6O-oxomethylydenenojirimycin (1N-ONJ), behaving, simultaneously, as a 
ligand of peanut agglutinin (PNA) lectin and as an inhibitor of several
glycosidases, has been identified. Both the 1N-ONJ-lectin- and
1N-ONJ-glycosidase-recognition processes have been found to be sensitive to
multivalency, which has been exploited in the design of a lectin-glycosidase
competitive assay to explore the implication of catalytic and non-glycone sites
in enzyme binding. A set of isotropic dodecavalent C60-fullerene-sp(2)-iminosugar
balls incorporating matching or mismatching motifs towards several glycosidases
(inhitopes) was synthesized for that purpose, thereby preventing differences in
binding modes arising from orientational preferences. The data supports that: 1) 
multivalency allows modulating the affinity and selectivity of a given inhitope
towards glycosidases; 2) multivalent presentation can switch on the inhibitory
capacity for some inhitope-glycosidase pairs, and 3) interactions of the
multivalent inhibitors with non-glycone sites is critical for glycosidase
recognition. The ensemble of results point to a shift in the binding mode on
going from monovalent to multivalent systems: in the first case a typical
''key-lock'' model involving, essentially, the high-affinity active site can be
assumed, whereas in the second, a lectin-like behavior implying low-affinity
non-glycone sites probably operates. The differences in responsiveness to
multivalency for different glycosidases can then be rationalized in terms of the 
structure and accessibility of the corresponding carbohydrate-binding regions.

Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24150869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Mol Biotechnol. 2014 Apr;56(4):312-8. doi: 10.1007/s12033-013-9710-4.

Perspective on the technical challenges involved in the implementation of
array-CGH in prenatal diagnostic testing.

Callaway JL(1), Huang S, Karampetsou E, Crolla JA.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wiltshire, SP2 8BJ, UK, jonathan.callaway@salisbury.nhs.uk.

Our aim was to construct a streamlined technical workflow to facilitate a
prospective, multi-centre evaluation of array comparative genomic hybridisation
(array-CGH) in the prenatal diagnostic context. A collection of commercially
available DNA extraction and quantification techniques were evaluated and
compared using minimal quantities of amniotic fluid, chorionic villi and cultured
cells. When prenatal DNA of suitable quality and quantity was obtained, array-CGH
was performed using Oxford Gene Technology's (OGT, Oxford, UK) CytoSure ISCA 8 ×
60 K oligo array platform. With starting quantities of 2-4 ml amniotic fluid, 2-5
mg chorionic villi or under 150,000 cultured cells the following optimised
technical workflow was identified: DNA extraction using the iGENatal kit
(igenbiotech, Madrid, Spain) and quantification by the Qubit® 2.0 Fluorometer
with the Qubit® dsDNA BR assay kit (Invitrogen, Eugene, OR, USA). In addition,
it was elucidated that array-CGH can be successfully performed with as little as 
125 ng DNA in the experiment using the OGT CytoSure ISCA 8 × 60 K oligo array
platform. Amidst an on-going debate on whether array-CGH should be applied in the
prenatal diagnostic setting, by following the technical recommendations described
here genetics laboratories can now gain exposure to prenatal array-CGH testing
without compromising the conventional karyotype result.

PMID: 24146428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Chem Cent J. 2013 Oct 21;7(1):167. doi: 10.1186/1752-153X-7-167.

A fingerprint pair analysis of hERG inhibition data.

Springer C(1), Sokolnicki KL.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, 100 Technology Square, Cambridge,
MA 02139, USA. Clayton.springer@novartis.com.

BACKGROUND: Drugs that bind to the human Ether-a-go-go Related Gene (hERG)
potassium channel and block its ion conduction can lead to Torsade de Pointes
(TdP), a fatal ventricular arrhythmia. Thus, compounds are screened for hERG
inhibition in the drug development process; those found to be active face a
difficult road to approval. Knowing which structural transformations reduce hERG 
binding would be helpful in the lead optimization phase of drug discovery.
RESULTS: To identify such transformations, we carried out a comprehensive
analysis of all approximately 33,000 compound pairs in the Novartis internal
database which have IC50 values in the dofetilide displacement assay. Most
molecular transformations have only a single example in the data set; however, a 
few dozen transformations have sufficient numbers for statistical analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: We observe that transformations which increased polarity (for
example adding an oxygen, or an sp2 nitrogen), decreased lipophilicity (removing 
carbons), or decreased positive charge consistently reduced hERG inhibition
between 3- and 10-fold. The largest observed reduction in hERG was from a
transformation from imidazole to methyl tetrazole. We also observe that some
changes in aromatic ring substituents (for example hydrogen to methoxy) can also 
reduce hERG binding in vitro.

PMCID: PMC3854090
PMID: 24144230  [PubMed]


331. Chem Commun (Camb). 2013 Dec 4;49(93):10965-7. doi: 10.1039/c3cc46412a.

Copper-catalyzed C(sp2)-H amidation of unactivated arenes by
N-tosyloxycarbamates.

John A(1), Byun J, Nicholas KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, Stephenson Life Sciences Research
Center, Univ. of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma-73019, USA. knicholas@ou.edu.

[(Neocuproine)Cu]PF6 catalyzes the C-H amidation of unactivated arenes by
N-tosyloxytrichloroethylcarbamates. Alkyl benzenes are selectively converted to
aromatic amines and substituted arenes display variable regioselectivity.

PMID: 24132225  [PubMed]


332. Org Biomol Chem. 2013 Dec 7;11(45):7830-3. doi: 10.1039/c3ob41558a. Epub 2013 Oct
16.

Regioselective halogenation of 2-substituted-1,2,3-triazoles via sp2 C-H
activation.

Tian Q(1), Chen X, Liu W, Wang Z, Shi S, Kuang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Tongji University, Siping Road 1239, Shanghai 200092,
China.

A highly regioselective halogenation of 2-substituted-1,2,3-triazoles was
developed via sp(2) C-H activation. This method is compatible with halogen atoms,
as well as electron-donating and electron-withdrawing groups. Meanwhile, the
strategy is also efficient for the synthesis of a key intermediate of Suvorexant.

PMID: 24129498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Org Lett. 2013 Nov 1;15(21):5444-7. doi: 10.1021/ol402537t. Epub 2013 Oct 11.

Palladium-catalyzed cascade oxidation/sp2 C-H acylation of azoarenes with aryl
methanes.

Xiong F(1), Qian C, Lin D, Zeng W, Lu X.

Author information: 
(1)Chengdu Institute of Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences , Chengdu 610041,
China, and School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, South China University
of Technology , Guangzhou 510641, China.

A Pd-catalyzed cascade oxidation/sp(2) C-H bond acylation of azoarenes was
developed in which readily available aryl methanes were used as the in situ
generated acyl sources. This reaction provides a convenient access to ortho-acyl 
azoarenes under mild conditions.

PMID: 24117421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Chem Commun (Camb). 2013 Nov 28;49(92):10817-9. doi: 10.1039/c3cc45861j.

Oxidative 1,2-difunctionalization of activated alkenes with benzylic C(sp3)-H
bonds and aryl C(sp2)-H bonds.

Zhou MB(1), Wang CY, Song RJ, Liu Y, Wei WT, Li JH.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensing and Chemometrics, College of
Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China.
jhli@hnu.edu.cn.

DTBP (di-tert-butyl peroxide) is utilized to mediate oxidative
1,2-difunctionalization of activated alkenes with an aryl C(sp(2))-H bond and a
benzylic C(sp(3))-H bond for the synthesis of functionalized oxindoles. This
reaction is a new organomediated strategy for alkene difunctionalization
facilitated by Lewis acids.

PMID: 24113153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Monoclon Antib Immunodiagn Immunother. 2013 Oct;32(5):362-5. doi:
10.1089/mab.2013.0023.

Monoclonal antibodies against Nsp2 protein of the highly pathogenic porcine
reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus.

Li B(1), Du L, Sun B, Yu Z, Wen L, Zhang X, Guo R, Ni Y, Hu Y, Zhou J, Zhu H, Lv 
L, Yu Y, Wang X, He K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Medicine, Jiangsu Academy of Agricultural Sciences;
Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biological Engineering and Technology, Ministry of
Agriculture; National Center for Engineering Research of Veterinary Bio-products 
, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, P.R. China .

Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome (PRRS) continues to be a serious
threat, causing an economically significant impact on the swine industry
worldwide. In this study, non-structural protein Nsp2 of porcine reproductive and
respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) was expressed in Escherichia coli and purified
by dialysis. An important monoclonal antibody (MAb 2H6) against Nsp2 protein was 
generated by fusing mouse myeloma cell line SP2/0 with spleen lymphocytes from
Nsp2 protein immunized mice. Then activity of the MAb was characterized by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), Western blot analysis, and indirect
immunofluorescence assays. The results demonstrated that the MAb has a positive
reaction to HP-PRRSV in IFA at 1:100 dilution and in Western blot analysis at
1:500 dilution, and no reaction with classic PRRSV. These indicated that this MAb
against Nsp2 protein of PRRSV might be a good candidate for a specific diagnostic
method and functional exploration of the Nsp2 protein.

PMID: 24111869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Monoclon Antib Immunodiagn Immunother. 2013 Oct;32(5):341-8. doi:
10.1089/mab.2013.0018.

Development, purification, and characterization of monoclonal antibodies against 
recombinant histidine-rich protein 3 of Plasmodium falciparum.

Palani B(1), Ranjini SS, Jayaprakash NS, Vijayalakshmi MA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Bioseparation Technology, VIT University , Vellore, Tamil Nadu,
India .

In the present study, monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) against recombinant
histidine-rich protein (rHRP3) were developed and assessed for their potential in
detection of Plasmodium falciparum HRP3. Hybridomas were obtained by fusion of
Sp2/0 mouse myeloma cells and spleen cells from the mouse immunized with purified
rHRP3. Three MAbs (IgG1 isotype) specific to rHRP3 were established and
characterized by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and immunoblotting for
sensitivity and specificity. Purification of MAbs from hybridoma cell culture
supernatant and PAbs from rabbit anti-serum were carried out using
Phenylpropylamine (PPA) HyperCel() sorbent. The MAbs were able to detect rHRP3
and the HRP3 from P. falciparum spent medium. Sandwich ELISA was developed to
quantify HRP3 in the spent medium of P. falciparum culture. The generated MAbs
could be potentially used in immuno-based diagnostic systems for the detection of
P. falciparum HRP.

PMID: 24111866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2013 Nov 4;52(45):11726-43. doi: 10.1002/anie.201301451. 
Epub 2013 Sep 17.

Catalytic functionalization of C(sp2)-H and C(sp3)-H bonds by using bidentate
directing groups.

Rouquet G(1), Chatani N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Chemistry, Faculty of Engineering, Osaka University,
Suita, Osaka 565-0871 (Japan).

C-H bonds are ubiquitous in organic compounds. It would, therefore, appear that
direct functionalization of substrates by activation of C-H bonds would eliminate
the multiple steps and limitations associated with the preparation of
functionalized starting materials. Regioselectivity is an important issue because
organic molecules can contain a wide variety of C-H bonds. The use of a directing
group can largely overcome the issue of regiocontrol by allowing the catalyst to 
come into proximity with the targeted C-H bonds. A wide variety of functional
groups have been evaluated for use as directing groups in the transformation of
C-H bonds. In 2005, Daugulis reported the arylation of unactivated C(sp(3))-H
bonds by using 8-aminoquinoline and picolinamide as bidentate directing groups,
with Pd(OAc)2 as the catalyst. Encouraged by these promising results, a number of
transformations of C-H bonds have since been developed by using systems based on 
bidentate directing groups. In this Review, recent advances in this area are
discussed.

Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24105797  [PubMed]


338. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Oct;29(10):1068-71.

[Preparation of monoclonal antibodies against flagellin core protein of Vibrio
vulnificus and its application in testing Vibrio vulnificus from food products].

[Article in Chinese]

Zeng J(1), Cheng J, Zhang L, Zhang L, Zhang H, Wei H, Liu X, Cao D.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Entry-Exit Inspection and Quarantine Bureau, Beijing 100026, China.

OBJECTIVE: To prepare the monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) against flagellin core
protein of Vibrio (V.) vulnificus and establish the double-antibody sandwich
ELISA for testing V. vulnificus from food products.
METHODS: BALB/c mice were immunized by flagellin which was extracted by
differential centrifugation method from V. vulnificus ATCC 1.1758. The
splenocytes taken from the immunized mice were fused with Sp2/0 myeloma cells
when the antibody titer reached 1:32 000 in serum. The hybridoma cell lines were 
prepared and screened by hybridoma technique and ELISA. The cells secreting mAbs 
were cloned through the limited dilution. The hybridoma cell lines were used to
generate ascites. The mAbs were obtained by purification from the ascites.
RESULTS: Five hybridoma cell lines which stably secreted mAbs against flagellin
were isolated and named VVNo.1-VVNo.5. The mAb titer in serum reached
1:(2×10(6);). SDS-PAGE showed that the relative molecular mass (Mr;) of flagellin
protein was 44 000, and that the purity was high. Double-antibody sandwich ELISA 
was set up using VVNo.5 antibody, and the sensitivity reached 10(3); CFU/mL
culture broth. The ELISA showed that VVNo.5 antibody was highly specific to V.
vulnificus. The detection limit was 2 CFU/25 g culture broth in artificial
contaminated samples.
CONCLUSION: The mAbs were obtained against flagellin core protein of V.
vulnificus. The double-antibody sandwich ELISA was established using VVNo.5 mAb. 
The monoclonal antibody of VVNo.5 was highly specific to V. vulnificus, without
cross reaction with non-target bacteria. Therefore the monoclonal antibodies of
VVNo.5 could be widely used in detecting V. vulnificus from food samples as well 
as the clinical samples.

PMID: 24103267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. J Neurochem. 2014 Jan;128(1):101-10. doi: 10.1111/jnc.12456. Epub 2013 Oct 23.

Epigenetic activation of mouse ganglioside synthase genes: implications for
neurogenesis.

Tsai YT(1), Yu RK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics and the Institute of
Neuroscience, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia, USA.

The quantity and expression pattern of gangliosides in mammalian brain change
drastically during development and are mainly regulated through stage-specific
expression of ganglioside synthase genes. Despite extensive investigations in the
past, it remains largely unclear how the transcriptional activation of the genes 
encoding glycosyltransferases is regulated. Here, we show that in the
neuronogenic cultures of mouse embryonic brain-derived neuroepithelial cells,
histone modifications including acetylated histone H3 and histone H4, but not
histone H3 trimethylation at lysine 27 of two genes encoding two key regulatory
GTs, namely, N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase I and sialyltransferase II, were
extensively and gradually enhanced, respectively. As a consequence, the level of 
each GT mRNA was increased correspondingly. Hyperacetylation of histones on the
GalNAcT promoter resulted in recruitment of the trans-activation factors Sp2 and 
AP-1 when cellular histone deacetylases 1 and 2 were knocked down with RNA
interference or inhibited by treatment with valproic acid. Moreover, epigenetic
activation of GalNAcT was also detected, as accompanied by a pronounced induction
of neural differentiation in primary neuroepithelium culture responding to an
exogenous supplement of ganglioside GM1, a downstream product of the gene's
encoding enzyme. Our findings thus provide direct evidence of novel pathways for 
ganglioside expression via the epigenetic up-regulation of ganglioside synthase
genes during neural development.

© 2013 International Society for Neurochemistry.

PMID: 24102378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Org Lett. 2013 Oct 18;15(20):5210-3. doi: 10.1021/ol402736v. Epub 2013 Oct 8.

Palladium-catalyzed C(sp2 and sp3)-H activation/C-O bond formation: synthesis of 
benzoxaphosphole 1- and 2-oxides.

Eom D(1), Jeong Y, Kim YR, Lee E, Choi W, Lee PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Kangwon National University , Chuncheon 200-701,
Republic of Korea.

An efficient synthetic method of benzoxaphosphole 1- and 2-oxides is reported
from phosphonic and phosphinic acids without prefunctionalization through a
Pd-catalyzed C(sp(2) and sp(3))-H activation/C-O bond formation under aerobic
conditions.

PMID: 24102336  [PubMed]


341. J Org Chem. 2013 Oct 4;78(19):9689-714. doi: 10.1021/jo4013628. Epub 2013 Sep 19.

Scope and limitations of auxiliary-assisted, palladium-catalyzed arylation and
alkylation of sp2 and sp3 C-H bonds.

Nadres ET(1), Santos GI, Shabashov D, Daugulis O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Houston , Houston, Texas 77204, United 
States.

The scope of palladium-catalyzed, auxiliary-assisted direct arylation and
alkylation of sp(2) and sp(3) C-H bonds of amine and carboxylic acid derivatives 
has been investigated. The method employs a palladium acetate catalyst,
substrate, aryl, alkyl, benzyl, or allyl halide, and inorganic base in tert-amyl 
alcohol or water solvent at 100-140 °C. Aryl and alkyl iodides as well as benzyl 
and allyl bromides are competent reagents in this transformation. The picolinic
acid auxiliary is used for amine <U+03B3>-functionalization, and the 8-aminoquinoline
auxiliary is used for carboxylic acid ß-functionalization. Some optimization of
base, additives, and solvent is required for achieving best results.

PMCID: PMC3829615
PMID: 24090404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Org Lett. 2013 Oct 18;15(20):5270-3. doi: 10.1021/ol402494e. Epub 2013 Oct 3.

Palladium-catalyzed sp2 and sp3 C-H bond activation and addition to isatin toward
3-hydroxy-2-oxindoles.

Wang GW(1), Zhou AX, Wang JJ, Hu RB, Yang SD.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Applied Organic Chemistry, Lanzhou University ,
Lanzhou 730000, P. R. China, and State Key Laboratory for Oxo Synthesis and
Selective Oxidation, Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics , Lanzhou 730000, P.
R. China.

The first Pd(II)-catalyzed C-H addition to isatins by direct sp(2)/sp(3) C-H bond
activation for the construction of 3-substituted-3-hydroxy-2-oxindoles is
reported. The bidentate nitrogen ligands were found to promote this reaction.
Specifically, the preliminary bioassay indicated that
3-(5-chlorobenzoxazole)-3-hydroxy-N-benzyl-2-oxindole (2w) is a new inhibitor of 
human kidney cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma cells. Moreover, this reaction
system exhibits great functional group tolerance and requires no directing group,
extra base, or additives.

PMID: 24090099  [PubMed]


343. Genome Med. 2013 Sep 27;5(9):89. doi: 10.1186/gm492. eCollection 2013.

A SNP profiling panel for sample tracking in whole-exome sequencing studies.

Pengelly RJ(1), Gibson J(1), Andreoletti G(1), Collins A(1), Mattocks CJ(2),
Ennis S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Southampton, Duthie Building (MP 808), Southampton General Hospital, Tremona
Road, Southampton SO16 6YD, UK. (2)National Genetics Reference Laboratory
(Wessex), Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury SP2 8BJ, UK.

Erratum in
    Genome Med. 2015;7(1):44.

Whole-exome sequencing provides a cost-effective means to sequence protein coding
regions within the genome, which are significantly enriched for etiological
variants. We describe a panel of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to
facilitate the validation of data provenance in whole-exome sequencing studies.
This is particularly significant where multiple processing steps necessitate
transfer of sample custody between clinical, laboratory and bioinformatics
facilities. SNPs captured by all commonly used exome enrichment kits were
identified, and filtered for possible confounding properties. The optimised panel
provides a simple, yet powerful, method for the assignment of intrinsic, highly
discriminatory identifiers to genetic samples.

PMCID: PMC3978886
PMID: 24070238  [PubMed]


344. J Hypertens. 2014 Jan;32(1):90-9. doi: 10.1097/HJH.0b013e3283658e7d.

Arterial stiffness/central hemodynamics, renal function, and development of
hypertension over the short term.

Tomiyama H(1), Townsend RR, Matsumoto C, Kimura K, Odaira M, Yoshida M, Shiina K,
Yamashina A.

Author information: 
(1)aSecond Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo,
Japan bUniversity of Pennsylvania, Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA.

Comment in
    J Hypertens. 2014 May;32(5):1154-5.
    J Hypertens. 2014 Jan;32(1):26-7.
    J Hypertens. 2014 May;32(5):1154.

OBJECTIVES: We examined the following: whether the estimated glomerular
filtration rate calculated from the serum cystatin C levels (eGFRcys) and the
brachial-ankle pulse wave velocity (baPWV) might be independent predictors of the
development of hypertension over the short term, without any interaction; whether
the baPWV may be directly associated with the development of hypertension without
the mediation of the arterial stiffness-related acceleration of renal functional 
decline; whether the second peak of the radial pressure waveform (SP2) might also
be a significant independent predictor of the development of hypertension.
METHODS: In 1229 middle-aged normotensive Japanese men with preserved renal
function, the baPWV, SP2 and eGFRcys were measured at the baseline and at the end
of the 3-year study period.
RESULTS: Hypertension was detected at the end of the 3-year study period in 127
men. The logistic regression analysis with adjustments demonstrated significant
independent odds ratios of the baPWV and eGFRcys for the presence of hypertension
at the end of the 3-year study period, without any interaction. When entered
simultaneously in this model, the SP2 also showed a significant odds ratio.
General linear model analysis revealed that none of the baPWV or SP2 measured at 
the baseline was related to the renal function assessed at the end of the 3-year 
study period.
CONCLUSIONS: The mechanisms underlying the association between arterial
stiffness/central hemodynamics and the short-term development of hypertension
appear to differ from those underlying the association between kidney function
and the short-term development of hypertension.

PMID: 24061545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Allergol Int. 2013 Dec;62(4):447-62. doi: 10.2332/allergolint.12-OA-0522. Epub
2013 Sep 25.

Characterization and gene cloning of an acidic thaumatin-like protein (TLP 1), an
allergen from sapodilla fruit (Manilkara zapota).

Ashok Kumar HG(1), Hegde VL, Shetty SM, Venkatesh YP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Nutrition, Central Food Technological Research 
Institute (CFTRI), Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, Mysore,
Karnataka, India.

Comment in
    Allergol Int. 2013 Dec;62(4):401-2.

BACKGROUND: Allergy to sapodilla (Manilkara zapota) fruit ingestion is rare. An
independent study from our group has identified a basic thaumatin-like protein
(TLP 2) as the major allergen. The present study was aimed at identifying and
characterizing additional allergens from sapodilla.
METHODS: Allergic subjects were identified by case history, skin prick test (SPT)
and allergen-specific IgE. Sapodilla extract was fractionated using SP-Sepharose 
into 3 components (SP1, SP2 and SP3) which were analyzed by native/SDS-PAGE,
IgE-immunoblot, isoelectric focusing (IEF) and N-terminal sequencing. The
conserved regions of plant TLPs and the N-terminal sequence were used to design
primers for PCR.
RESULTS: SPT and ELISA confirmed a subject with oral allergy syndrome (OAS) to
sapodilla and custard apple. Two proteins (26.9 and 24.5kDa; reducing conditions)
were detected as allergens, of which the latter in SP2 has already been
identified as basic TLP (TLP 2). The 26.9kDa protein present in SP1 was
identified as an acidic TLP based on native PAGE, IEF and N-terminal sequencing. 
Presence of a basic ß-1,3-glucanase in SP3 was inferred by zymography. Sequence
analysis of the genomic clone of the acidic TLP gene revealed that it is
intronless and non-glycosylated. Evolutionary relatedness to olive, grape and
kiwi fruit allergenic TLPs were inferred by phylogenetic analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: An acidic TLP (TLP 1) was identified as a new allergen in sapodilla.
TLP 1 is a single polypeptide (207 residues) belonging to the thaumatin family of
the GH64-TLP-SF superfamily. Clinically, sapodilla should be considered in the
list of fruits causing OAS.

PMID: 24060761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. J Am Chem Soc. 2013 Oct 2;135(39):14480-3. doi: 10.1021/ja403954g. Epub 2013 Sep 
18.

Copper-catalyzed one-pot trifluoromethylation/aryl migration/desulfonylation and 
C(sp2)-N bond formation of conjugated tosyl amides.

Kong W(1), Casimiro M, Merino E, Nevado C.

Author information: 
(1)Organic Chemistry Institute, Universität Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.

A novel copper-catalyzed one-pot trifluoromethylation/aryl
migration/desulfonylation and C(sp(2))-N bond formation with conjugated tosyl
amides as starting materials is presented here. The reaction affords
a-aryl-ß-trifluoromethyl amides bearing a quaternary stereocenter or
trifluoromethylated oxindoles in a regioselective manner.

PMID: 24047140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Spectrochim Acta A Mol Biomol Spectrosc. 2014 Jan 3;117:541-7. doi:
10.1016/j.saa.2013.08.005. Epub 2013 Aug 9.

Synthesis and solvent-dependent photochromic reactions of porphyrin-spiropyran
hybrid compounds.

Hur DY(1), Park TJ, Shin EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Sunchon National University, Suncheon, Jeonnam
540-950, Republic of Korea.

Porphyrin(Por)-spiropyran(SP) hybrid compounds, including Por-SP dyad, Por-SP2
triad, and Por-SP4 pentad, were prepared and characterized by (1)H NMR, MALDI-TOF
MS and UV-Vis spectroscopies. Upon 350 nm UV irradiation of Por-SPn (n=1, 2, 4)
in dichloromethane, unusual red-shifted absorption spectra were observed with the
colour change from pink into green. Probably due to the protonation of core
nitrogens in porphyrin ring, their absorption maxima in dichloromethane were
shifted from 418 (Soret band), 515, 550, 590, 645 (four Q bands) nm into 450 and 
665 nm. Also, fluorescence maxima were also shifted from 650 and 715 nm to 692
nm. In the other hands, upon irradiation with 350nm UV light in THF, the colour
changed from pink into violet and absorption band at 590 nm increased and the
fluorescence spectra showed the decrease of 650 and 715 nm bands and increase of 
600-640 nm band, due to the normal ring-opening reaction of spiropyran moiety
into merocyanine. In the dark, original absorption and fluorescence spectra were 
recovered very slowly in dichloromethane, but quickly in THF. The reversible
photochromic reactions of Por-SPn (n=1, 2, 4) in dichloromethane and THF were
investigated by observing absorption and fluorescence spectral changes during UV 
irradiation or standing in the dark.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24036185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Phys Rev Lett. 2013 Aug 30;111(9):095501. Epub 2013 Aug 27.

Extended interplanar linking in graphite formed from vacancy aggregates.

Trevethan T(1), Dyulgerova P, Latham CD, Heggie MI, Seabourne CR, Scott AJ,
Briddon PR, Rayson MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey GU2 7XH,
United Kingdom.

The mechanical and electrical properties of graphite and related materials such
as multilayer graphene depend strongly on the presence of defects in the lattice 
structure, particularly those which create links between adjacent planes. We
present findings which suggest the existence of a new type of defect in the
graphite or graphene structure which connects adjacent planes through continuous 
hexagonal sp2 bonding alone and can form through the aggregation of individual
vacancy defects. The energetics and kinetics of the formation of this type of
defect are investigated with atomistic density functional theory calculations.
The resultant structures are then employed to simulate high resolution
transmission electron microscopy images, which are compared to recent
experimental images of electron irradiation damaged graphite.

PMID: 24033044  [PubMed]


349. Adv Mater. 2013 Dec 3;25(45):6539-45. doi: 10.1002/adma.201302927. Epub 2013 Sep 
13.

Direct observation of quantum-confined graphene-like states and novel hybrid
states in graphene oxide by transient spectroscopy.

Wang L(1), Wang HY, Wang Y, Zhu SJ, Zhang YL, Zhang JH, Chen QD, Han W, Xu HL,
Yang B, Sun HB.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory on Integrated Optoelectronics, College of Electronic
Science and Engineering, Jilin University, 2699 Qianjin Street, Changchun,
130012, China.

Quantum-confined graphene-like electronic states are directly observed in
graphene oxide and photothermally reduced graphene oxide via transient
spectroscopy. An unexpected novel hybrid state arising from amorphous carbon-like
peripheral structure with high sp(3) /sp(2) carbon ratio in close vicinity of
confined graphene-like states is found commonly existent in various carbon
nanomaterials, including graphene oxide, graphene quantum dots, and carbon dots.

© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24030902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. ACS Nano. 2013 Oct 22;7(10):8540-6. doi: 10.1021/nn402452p. Epub 2013 Sep 12.

Synthesis of highly crystalline sp2-bonded boron nitride aerogels.

Rousseas M(1), Goldstein AP, Mickelson W, Worsley MA, Woo L, Zettl A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, University of California , Berkeley, California 94720, 
United States.

sp(2)-Bonded boron nitride aerogels are synthesized from graphene aerogels via
carbothermal reduction of boron oxide and simultaneous nitridation. The color and
chemical composition of the original gel change dramatically, while structural
features down to the nanometer scale are maintained, suggesting a direct
conversion of the carbon lattice to boron nitride. Scanning and transmission
electron microscopies reveal a foliated architecture of wrinkled sheets, a unique
morphology among low-density, porous BN materials. The converted gels display a
high degree of chemical purity (>95%) and crystalline order and exhibit unique
cross-linking structures.

PMID: 24011289  [PubMed]


351. Phys Rev Lett. 2013 Aug 23;111(8):085503. Epub 2013 Aug 20.

Interlayer carbon bond formation induced by hydrogen adsorption in few-layer
supported graphene.

Rajasekaran S(1), Abild-Pedersen F, Ogasawara H, Nilsson A, Kaya S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Stanford University,
Stanford, California 94305, USA and SIMES, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, 
2575 Sand Hill Road, Menlo Park, California 94025, USA.

We report on the hydrogen adsorption induced phase transition of a few layer
graphene (1 to 4 layers) to a diamondlike structure on Pt(111) based on core
level x-ray spectroscopy, temperature programed desorption, infrared
spectroscopy, and density functional theory total energy calculations. The
surface adsorption of hydrogen induces a hybridization change of carbon from the 
sp2 to the sp3 bond symmetry, which propagates through the graphene layers,
resulting in interlayer carbon bond formation. The structure is stabilized
through the termination of interfacial sp3 carbon atoms by the substrate. The
structural transformation occurs as a consequence of high adsorption energy.

PMID: 24010453  [PubMed]


352. Sci Rep. 2013;3:2575. doi: 10.1038/srep02575.

All-carbon sp-sp2 hybrid structures: geometrical properties, current
rectification, and current amplification.

Zhang Z(1), Zhang J, Kwong G, Li J, Fan Z, Deng X, Tang G.

Author information: 
(1)School of Physics and Electronic Science, Changsha University of Science and
Technology, Changsha 410114, China. lgzzhang@sohu.com

All-carbon sp-sp(2) hybrid structures comprised of a zigzag-edged trigonal
graphene (ZTG)and carbon chains are proposed and constructed as nanojunctions. It
has been found that such simple hybrid structures possess very intriguing
propertiesapp:addword:intriguing. The high-performance rectifying behaviors
similar to macroscopic p-n junction diodes, such as a nearly linear positive-bias
I-V curve (metallic behavior), a very small leakage current under negative bias
(insulating behavior), a rather low threshold voltage, and a large bias region
contributed to a rectification, can be predicted. And also, a transistor can be
built by such a hybrid structure, which can show an extremely high current
amplification. This is because a sp-hybrid carbon chain has a special electronic 
structure which can limit the electronic resonant tunneling of the ZTG to a
unique and favorable situation. These results suggest that these hybrid
structures might promise importantly potential applications for developing
nano-scale integrated circuits.

PMCID: PMC3759849
PMID: 23999318  [PubMed]


353. Theriogenology. 2013 Nov;80(8):955-62. doi: 10.1016/j.theriogenology.2013.07.027.
Epub 2013 Aug 27.

Use of single-layer centrifugation with Androcoll-C to enhance sperm quality in
frozen-thawed dog semen.

Dorado J(1), Gálvez MJ, Morrell JM, Alcaráz L, Hidalgo M.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Reproduction Group, Department of Medicine and Animal Surgery, Faculty 
of Veterinary Medicine, University of Cordoba, Córdoba, Spain. Electronic
address: jdorado@uco.es.

The aim of this study was to investigate whether single-layer centrifugation
(SLC) with Androcoll-C could select good quality spermatozoa, including those
with specific motility patterns, from doses of frozen dog semen. Semen from five 
dogs was collected and cryopreserved following a standard protocol. After
thawing, the semen samples were divided in two aliquots, one of which was used as
a control and the other one processed by SLC. Assessment of sperm motility
(assessed by computer-assisted semen analysis), morphology (Diff-Quick staining),
viability (dual staining with propidium iodine/acridine orange), and acrosome
integrity (dual staining with propidium iodine/isothiocyanate-labeled peanut
[Arachis hypogaea] agglutinin) were performed on aliquots of fresh semen,
frozen-thawed control samples, and frozen-thawed SLC-treated preparations. A
multivariate clustering procedure separated 57,577 motile spermatozoa into three 
subpopulations (sP): sP1 consisted of poorly active and nonprogressive
spermatozoa (48.8%), sP2 consisted of moderately slow but progressive spermatozoa
(13.3%), and sP3 consisted of highly active and/or progressive spermatozoa
(37.8%). SLC with Androcoll-C yielded sperm suspensions with improved motility,
viability, and acrosome integrity (P < 0.01). The frozen-thawed SLC-treated
samples were enriched in sP3, representing 38.5% of the sperm population.
Likewise, sP2 was more frequently observed after SLC, but not significantly so.
From these results, we concluded that for dog semen samples selected by SLC with 
Androcoll-C after thawing, the sperm quality parameters, including motility
patterns, are better than in frozen-thawed control samples.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23987984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Biomacromolecules. 2013 Oct 14;14(10):3376-9. doi: 10.1021/bm401040v. Epub 2013
Sep 13.

Microstructured optical fibers and live cells: a water-soluble, photochromic zinc
sensor.

Heng S(1), McDevitt CA, Stubing DB, Whittall JJ, Thompson JG, Engler TK, Abell
AD, Monro TM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Photonics & Advanced Sensing and School of Chemistry & Physics, 
The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia 5005.

A new biologically compatible Zn(II) sensor was fabricated by embedding a Zn(II) 
sensing spiropyran within the surface of a liposome derived from Escherichia coli
lipids (LSP2). Solution-based experiments with increasing Zn(II) concentrations
show improved aqueous solubility and sensitivity compared to the isolated
spiropyran molecule (SP2). LSP2 is capable of sensing Zn(II) efflux from dying
cells with preliminary data indicating that sensing is localized near the surface
membrane of HEK 293 cells. Finally, LSP2 is suitable for development into a
nanoliter-scale dip-sensor for Zn(II) using microstructured optical fiber as the 
sensing platform to detect Zn(II) in the range of 100 <U+03C1>M with minimal
photobleaching. Existing spiropyran based sensing molecules can thus be made
biologically compatible, with an ability to operate with improved sensitivity
using nanoscale liquid sample volumes. This work represents the first instance
where photochromic spiropyran molecules and liposomes are combined to create a
new and multifunctional sensing entity for Zn(II).

PMID: 23980997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Oncol Rep. 2013 Nov;30(5):2442-8. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2686. Epub 2013 Aug 22.

B7-H1 protein vaccine induces protective and therapeutic antitumor responses in
SP2/0 myeloma-bearing mice.

Zhang C(1), Wang W, Qin X, Xu Y, Huang T, Hao Q, Li W, Wu S, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Biotechnology Center, School of
Pharmacy, The Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710032, P.R.
China.

B7-H1 is a co-inhibitory molecule belonging to the B7 family. The B7-H1 protein
is only expressed on macrophage lineage of cells in normal tissues, but is
overexpressed in most types of tumor. The aberrant expression of cell surface
B7-H1 on cancer cells is generally associated with high-risk prognostic factors. 
The tumor-associated B7-H1 increases apoptosis of antigen-specific T cells
through interaction with its receptor PD-1 on CD8+ T cells and contributes to
tumor immune evasion. These features suggest that B7-H1 may be a therapeutic
target for the B7-H1-expressing tumors. We developed a therapeutic vaccine by
coupling a tetanus toxoid T-helper cell epitope with the N-terminal of B7-H1
IgV-like domain. This vaccine was able to induce high titers of antibodies
against B7-H1 in mice which were able to bind to native cell surface B7-H1. We
chose the B7-H1-expressing SP2/0 myeloma and its syngeneic host (the BALB/c
mouse) as the model to study the antitumor activity of the rhB7-H1M vaccine.
Vaccination with this modified B7-H1 protein resulted in almost complete
protection from SP2/0 tumor challenge and efficiently eliminated pre-established 
tumors in mice. In addition, B7-H1 vaccination was able to decrease the
percentage of CD4+ Foxp3+ regulatory T cells in tumor-bearing mice and which
might improve antitumor immunity. These data demonstrate the potential of
B7-H1-based vaccine as a therapeutic agent for the treatment of cancer
overexpressing B7-H1.

PMID: 23970300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Bioresour Technol. 2013 Oct;146:400-7. doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2013.07.085. Epub 
2013 Jul 26.

High lipid productivity of an Ankistrodesmus-Rhizobium artificial consortium.

Do Nascimento M(1), Dublan Mde L, Ortiz-Marquez JC, Curatti L.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones en Biodiversidad y Biotecnología - Consejo
Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, Mar del Plata, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.

Microalgae have great potential as alternative productive platforms for
sustainable production of bioenergy, food, feed and other commodities. Process
optimization to realize the claimed potential often comprises strains selection
and improvement and also developing of more efficient cultivation, harvesting and
downstream processing technology. In this work we show that inoculation with the 
bacterium Rhizobium strain 10II resulted in increments of up to 30% in
chlorophyll, biomass and lipids accumulation of the oleaginous microalgae
Ankistrodesmus sp. strain SP2-15. Inoculated cultures have reached a high lipid
productivity of up to 112 mg L(-1) d(-1) after optimization. The resulting
biomass presented significant levels of O3 fatty acids including stearidonic
acid, suggesting potential as an alternative land-based source of essential fatty
acids.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23948276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2013 May;38(10):1606-9.

[Development and identification of monoclonal antibodies of cape jasmine proteins
in Reduning injection].

[Article in Chinese]

Li F(1), Zhou JM, Wang HM, Zhou J, Bi YA, Wang ZZ, Xiao W.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Kanion Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., State Key Laboratory of New
Pharmaceutical Process for Traditional Chinese Medicine, Enterprises Academician 
Workstations in Jiangsu Province, Lianyungang 222001, China. lf198098@126.com

Liposoluble cape jasmine proteins were used to immunize BALB/C mice. Indirect
ELISA was utilized to develop one monoclonal antibody by integrating SP2/0 cells 
and spleen cells from immunized BALB/C mice. The subclass of the monoclonal
antibody was identified as IgG2b, with Kappa chain as its light chain. The ascite
titer of 2H8 monoclonal antibody was 1:204 080. Western-blot analysis proved that
2H8 reacted with cape jasmine proteins to identify specific liposoluble protein
with molecuar weight of around 58.5 kDa. Dot-ELISA was established with 2H8
ascites as the primary antibody, showing the minimum detectable amount of 19.5
ng. This study lays a foundation for the development of protein kits of Reduning 
injection.

PMID: 23947147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2013 Sep 16;52(38):9896-8. doi: 10.1002/anie.201303556.
Epub 2013 Aug 12.

8-Aminoquinoline: a powerful directing group in metal-catalyzed direct
functionalization of C-H bonds.

Corbet M(1), De Campo F.

Author information: 
(1)Eco-Efficient Products & Processes Laboratory (E2P2L) Solvay/CNRS UMI 3464,
Solvay Research & Innovation Center Shanghai, 3966 Jindu Road, Xinzhuang
Industrial Zone, Shanghai 201108 (P. R. China) http://www.solvay.com.
matthieu.corbet@solvay.com.

Chelate me if you can: Over the last decade, strategies for the functionalization
of both C(sp2)-H and C(sp3)-H bonds have witnessed an increasing use of a simple,
yet powerful directing group, 8-aminoquinoline (in blue). This auxiliary is very 
efficient in a wide range of metal-mediated reactions, and can be readily removed
to afford the desired carboxylic acids or corresponding derivatives.

Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23939922  [PubMed]


359. Women Health. 2013;53(6):572-96. doi: 10.1080/03630242.2013.817504.

Homelessness among female veterans: a systematic review of the literature.

Byrne T(1), Montgomery AE, Dichter ME.

Author information: 
(1)National Center on Homelessness Among Veterans, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104, USA. byrnet@sp2.upenn.edu

The authors conducted a systematic, critical review of the literature to assess
and summarize existing research on homelessness among female veterans. They
searched seven electronic databases (ERIC, Proquest Dissertations and Theses,
PsycINFO, PubMed, Social Services Abstracts, Social Science Citation Index, and
Sociological Abstracts), websites of several government and research
organizations, and reference lists of prior studies. They abstracted data on
study design, funding source, and topic from studies meeting inclusion criteria
and classified each study into one of the following categories: epidemiology,
health and other services utilization, and interventions. The authors included
both experimental and observational studies of interventions in the review and
performed a narrative synthesis for each of the 26 studies identified. No studies
were experimental, 20 were observational, and the remainder were either
qualitative or descriptive. Of the 26 identified studies, 14 were epidemiologic, 
7 focused on the health and additional service utilization, and 5 were
intervention studies. Findings provided important baseline epidemiologic
information about homelessness among female veterans and indicated that female
veterans were at an increased risk of homelessness relative to their male veteran
and female non-veteran counterparts. Additional research is needed to develop and
implement effective, evidence-based programs to prevent and end homelessness
among women veterans.

PMID: 23937730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Jan;27(1-2):31-5. doi: 10.1515/jpem-2013-0037.

Glycemic control in familial vs. sporadic type 1 diabetes patients over 5 years.

Reddy S, Reinert SE, Gopalakrishnan G, Plante W, Boney CM, Quintos JB.

BACKGROUND: Studies have shown that familial type 1 diabetes patients (FTID) have
less severe metabolic derangement at presentation compared to sporadic patients
(ST1D), but data on long-term metabolic control are lacking.
OBJECTIVE/HYPOTHESIS: (1) FT1D will have less severe presentation and better
HbA1c over 5 years compared to ST1D; (2) HbA1c in the offspring will correlate
with parent HbA1c in parent-offspring group; and (3) HbA1c of the second affected
sibling (SP2) will correlate with the first affected sibling (SP1) in sib-pairs.
METHODS: Cohort of 33 parent-offspring and 19 sib-pairs; controls included 33
sporadic subjects matched by age, sex, ethnicity, puberty, and insulin regimen.
Paired t-test and Pearson's correlation were used for statistical analysis.
RESULTS: At diagnosis, mean age in FT1D vs. matched ST1D (7.7±4.9 vs. 7.6±4.5
years), mean HbA1c (9.6% vs. 10.7%), HCO3 (21 vs. 18 meq/L), glucose (428 vs. 463
mg/dL) and pH (7.35 vs. 7.36; p=ns) were not different. At 5 years, HbA1c (8.9%
vs. 8.8%; p=0.81), clinic visits (12 vs. 12.5, p=0.68) and emergency room visits 
(0.48 vs. 0.24, p=0.10) were not different. In affected siblings, only HCO3 was
different (SP1:18 vs. SP2: 24 meq/L; p<0.01). HbA1c for SP2 correlated positively
with SP1 (r=0.67, p<0.01). Offspring HbA1c correlated positively with affected
parents (9.3% vs. 8.6%, r=0.57, p=0.18) but was not significant.
CONCLUSION: Metabolic control at diagnosis and at 5 years was similar in FT1D and
ST1D. In sib-pairs, the second affected sibling had milder clinical presentation 
compared to the first affected sibling.

PMID: 23934637  [PubMed - in process]


361. Org Biomol Chem. 2013 Sep 28;11(36):6142-9. doi: 10.1039/c3ob41177j.

Rhodium(III)-catalyzed vinylic sp2 C-H bond functionalization: efficient
synthesis of pyrido[1,2-a]benzimidazoles and imidazo[1,2-a]pyridines.

Dong L(1), Huang JR, Qu CH, Zhang QR, Zhang W, Han B, Peng C.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Drug-Targeting and Drug Delivery System of the Education
Ministry, Department of Medicinal Chemistry, West China School of Pharmacy,
Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China. dongl@scu.edu.cn

A simple approach for synthesis of novel aza-fused scaffolds such as
pyrido[1,2-a]benzimidazoles and imidazo[1,2-a]pyridines was developed by
Rh(III)-catalyzed direct oxidative coupling between alkenes and unactivated
alkynes without an extra directing group. The method would allow a broad
substrate scope, providing fused heterocycles with potential biological
properties.

PMID: 23925493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. MAbs. 2013 Sep-Oct;5(5):801-9. doi: 10.4161/mabs.25215. Epub 2013 May 31.

Ch14.18 antibody produced in CHO cells in relapsed or refractory Stage 4
neuroblastoma patients: a SIOPEN Phase 1 study.

Ladenstein R(1), Weixler S, Baykan B, Bleeke M, Kunert R, Katinger D, Pribill I, 
Glander P, Bauer S, Pistoia V, Michon J, Garaventa A, Lode HN.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute and St. Anna Children's Hospital and
Department of Paediatric and Adolescent Medicine; Medical University; Vienna,
Austria.

PURPOSE: This study aimed to assess the safety, pharmacokinetic and activity
profiles of the human-mouse chimeric monoclonal anti-disialoganglioside GD2
antibody ch14.18 produced in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells (ch14.18/CHO).
METHODS: Sixteen children with recurrent/refractory neuroblastoma (median age 7.6
y) were enrolled in this Phase 1 dose-finding study. Patients received
ch14.18/CHO courses of 10, 20 or 30 mg/m (2)/day as an eight-hour infusion over
five consecutive days. Three courses at the same dose level were allowed unless
disease progressed. Clearance and biodistribution of radiolabelled ch14.18/CHO in
Balb/c and A/J mice were analyzed.
RESULTS: A total of 41 ch14.18/CHO courses were given (10 × 3 courses, 5 × 2
courses, 1 × 1 course). Side effects were similar in expectedness, frequency and 
magnitude to those reported for ch14.18/SP2/0. The dose level of 20 mg/m(2)/day
was confirmed. Toxicity was reversible and no treatment-related deaths occurred. 
In children, the peak plasma concentration was 16.51 µg/ml ± 5.9 µg/ml and the
half-life was 76.91 h ± 52.5 h. A partial response following ch14.18/CHO was
observed in 2/7 patients with residual disease. In mice, the half-lives were 22.7
h ± 1.9h for ch14.18/CHO and 25.0 h ± 1.9 h for ch14.18/SP2/0. The
biodistribution of (125)I-ch14.18/CHO in mice with neuroblastoma was identical to
(125)I-ch14.18/SP2/0, indicating GD 2 targeting activity in vivo. Ch14.18
produced in CHO cells showed an unchanged toxicity profile and pharmacokinetics
in neuroblastoma patients compared with ch14.18 produced in SP2/0 cells, and
evidence of clinical activity was observed. In mice, analysis of pharmacokinetics
and biodistribution showed comparable results between ch14.18/CHO and
ch14.18/SP2/0. Based on these results, ch14.18/CHO was accepted for prospective
clinical evaluation.

PMCID: PMC3851232
PMID: 23924804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2013 Sep 11;5(17):8572-80. doi: 10.1021/am402030m.
Epub 2013 Aug 20.

Fabrication and characterization of nanotemplated carbon monolithic material.

He X(1), Nesterenko EP, Nesterenko PN, Brabazon D, Zhou L, Glennon JD, Luong JH, 
Paull B.

Author information: 
(1)Irish Separation Science Cluster, Dublin City University , Glasnevin, Dublin
9, Ireland.

A novel hierarchical nanotemplated carbon monolithic rod (NTCM) was prepared
using a novel facile nanotemplating approach. The NTCM was obtained using
C60-fullerene modified silica gels as hard templates, which were embedded in a
phenolic resin containing a metal catalyst for localized graphitization, followed
by bulk carbonization, and template and catalyst removal. TEM, SEM, and BET
measurements revealed that NTCM possessed an integrated open hierarchical porous 
structure, with a trimodal pore distribution. This porous material also possessed
a high mesopore volume and narrow mesopore size distribution. During the course
of carbonization, the C60 conjugated to aminated silica was partly decomposed,
leading to the formation of micropores. The Raman signature of NTCM was very
similar to that of multiwalled carbon nanotubes as exemplified by three major
peaks as commonly observed for other carbon materials, i.e., the sp3 and sp2
carbon phases coexisted in the sample. Surface area measurements were obtained
using both nitrogen adsorption/desorption isotherms (BET) and with a methylene
blue binding assay, with BET results showing the NTCM material possessed an
average specific surface area of 435 m2 g(-1), compared to an area of 372 m2
g(-1) obtained using the methylene blue assay. Electrochemical studies using NTCM
modified glassy carbon or boron doped diamond (BDD) electrodes displayed
quasi-reversible oxidation/reduction with ferricyanide. In addition, the BDD
electrode modified with NTCM was able to detect hydrogen peroxide with a
detection limit of below 300 nM, whereas the pristine BDD electrode was not
responsive to this target compound.

PMID: 23915389  [PubMed]


364. Monoclon Antib Immunodiagn Immunother. 2013 Aug;32(4):295-300. doi:
10.1089/mab.2012.0124.

Monoclonal antibodies directed against the outer membrane protein of Bordetella
avium.

Liu G(1), Liang M, Zuo X, Zhao X, Guo F, Yang S, Zhu R.

Author information: 
(1)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Biotechnology and Disease Control
and Prevention, College of Animal Science and Technology, Shandong Agricultural
University, Shandong Taian, PR China.

Bordetella avium is the etiologic agent of coryza and rhinotracheitis in poultry.
This respiratory disease is responsible for substantial economic losses in the
poultry industry. Monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) were produced against the outer
membrane proteins (OMPs) of B. avium isolated from diseased chickens. BALB/c mice
were immunized with the extracted B. avium OMPs. Then the splenocytes from
immunized mice and SP2/0 myeloma cells were fused using PEG 4000. Three stable
hybridoma clones (designated as 3G10, 4A3, and 4E8) were produced via indirect
ELISA and three rounds of subcloning. The MAbs were classified as IgG1, and can
recognize the 58<U+2009> kDa OMP band by Western blot assays. No MAb cross-reactivity
with chicken Proteus mirabilis, Escherichia coli, and Salmonella was observed. A 
double antibody sandwich ELISA (DAS-ELISA) was developed using the rabbit
polyclonal antibodies as the capture antibody and MAb 4A3 as the detection
antibody. Under the DAS-ELISA, the minimum detectable concentration of B. avium
was 1 × 10(4) CFU/mL, and no cross-reactivity occurred with chicken Proteus
mirabilis, Escherichia coli, and Salmonella. Results showed that the DAS-ELISA
has good sensitivity and specificity. Clinical application showed the DAS-ELISA
was more sensitive than the plate agglutination test. This study may be used to
develop a quick and specific diagnostic kit, analyze epitopes, and establish
systems for typing B. avium.

PMCID: PMC3733320
PMID: 23909425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Monoclon Antib Immunodiagn Immunother. 2013 Aug;32(4):283-9. doi:
10.1089/mab.2012.0119.

Preparation and characterization of monoclonal antibodies against VSTM1.

Li T(1), Wang W, Chen Y, Han W.

Author information: 
(1)Peking University Center for Human Disease Genomics, Department of Immunology,
Key Laboratory of Medical Immunology, Ministry of Health, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing, China.

VSTM1 (V-set and transmembrane domain containing 1) is a novel membrane molecule 
identified from immunogenomics, which has two main isoforms, VSTM1-v1 and
VSTM1-v2. VSTM1-v1 is a type I transmembrane protein, and VSTM1-v2 is a classical
secretory protein, lacking only the transmembrane domain compared with VSTM1-v1. 
This study was designed to generate VSTM1-specific monoclonal antibodies (MAbs)
for further exploration of its expression and function. Mice were immunized with 
two recombinant prokaryotic proteins of GST-VSTM1-v2 and VSTM1-v2 without any
tag. Hybridomas were generated by the fusion of the splenocytes to Sp2/0 myeloma 
cells. Three hybridoma cell lines (2C11, 6E11, and 7A8) stable in secreting
anti-VSTM1 MAb were obtained and further characterized. All three MAbs were IgG2b
isotype and effective in detecting the overexpressed VSTM1 in both Western blot
and flow cytometry assays, while recognizing the endogenous VSTM1 in Western blot
analysis only. These MAbs could be helpful in the basic study of VSTM1 and in
revealing the interesting conformation difference between the overexpressed and
endogenous proteins.

PMCID: PMC3733324
PMID: 23909423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Phys Chem A. 2013 Aug 8;117(31):6893-903. doi: 10.1021/jp4063109. Epub 2013 Jul
30.

Characterizing complexes with pnicogen bonds involving sp2 hybridized phosphorus 
atoms: (H2C-PX)2 with X = F, Cl, OH, CN, NC, CCH, H, CH3, and BH2.

Del Bene JE(1), Alkorta I, Elguero J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Youngstown State University, Youngstown, Ohio 44555, 
USA. jedelbene@ysu.edu

Ab initio MP2/aug'-cc-pVTZ searches of the potential surfaces of (H2C-PX)2
complexes, with X = F, Cl, OH, CN, NC, CCH, H, CH3, and BH2, have been carried
out to identify and characterize the properties of complexes with P···P pnicogen 
bonds. All (H2C-PX)2 form equilibrium conformation A dimers with C(2h) symmetry
in which A-P···P-A approaches a linear alignment, with A the atom of X directly
bonded to P. Conformation A dimers containing the more electronegative
substituents are stabilized by a P···P pnicogen bond, have shorter P-P distances,
and have binding energies which correlate with the P-P distance. Dimers
stabilized by a P···P pnicogen bond and two P···H(b) interactions consist of
those with the more electropositive substituents, have shorter P-H(b) distances, 
and have binding energies which are too high for their P-P distances.
Conformation A complexes with P···H(b) interactions in addition to the P···P bond
are more stable than the corresponding (PH2X)2 complexes, while with only one
exception, complexes stabilized by only a P···P bond are less stable than the
corresponding (PH2X)2 complexes. In the region of the potential surfaces with
C-P···P-C approaching linearity (conformation B), the only planar equilibrium
complex is (H2C-POH)2, which is stabilized primarily by two O-H···P hydrogen
bonds. The remaining (H2C-PX)2 complexes are not stabilized by pnicogen bonds,
but by p interactions between the two H2C-PX monomers which are in parallel
planes. When A-P···P-C approaches linearity, two types of equilibrium structures 
with P···P bonds exist. Of the conformation C dimers, (H2C-POH)2 is planar and
the most stable, with a P···P pnicogen bond and an O-H···P hydrogen bond.
(H2C-PH)2 and (H2C-PCH3)2 are also planar, and stabilized by a P···P pnicogen
bond and a P···H(b) interaction. The absence of a P···H(b) interaction results in
nonplanar C' conformations with structures in which the monomers essentially
retain their symmetry plane, but the plane of one molecule is rotated about the
P···P bond relative to the other. C and C' dimers are less stable than the
corresponding A dimers, except for (H2C-PCH3)2. (31)P chemical shielding patterns
are consistent with the changing nature of the interactions which stabilize
(H2C-PX)2 complexes. EOM-CCSD (31)P-(31)P spin-spin coupling constants increase
quadratically as the P-P distance decreases.

PMID: 23899399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Anim Reprod Sci. 2013 Aug;140(3-4):232-40. doi:
10.1016/j.anireprosci.2013.06.012. Epub 2013 Jul 4.

Single-layer centrifugation through PureSperm® 80 selects improved quality
spermatozoa from frozen-thawed dog semen.

Dorado J(1), Alcaraz L, Gálvez MJ, Acha D, Ortiz I, Urbano M, Hidalgo M.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Reproduction Group, Department of Medicine and Animal Surgery, Faculty 
of Veterinary Medicine, University of Cordoba, Córdoba, Spain. jdorado@uco.es

Erratum in
    Anim Reprod Sci. 2013 Nov 30;142(3-4):198.

The aim of this study was to investigate whether single-layer centrifugation
(SLC) with PureSperm® 80 could select good quality spermatozoa, including those
with specific motility patterns, from doses of frozen dog semen. Semen from 5
dogs was collected and cryopreserved following a standard protocol. After
thawing, semen samples were divided into two aliquots: one of them was used as
control and the other one processed by SLC. Assessment of sperm motility
(assessed by computer-assisted semen analysis), morphology (Diff-Quick staining) 
and viability (triple fluorescent stain of propidium
iodine/isothiocyanate-labeled peanut (Arachis hypogaea) agglutinin/Rhodamine
123), were performed on aliquots of fresh semen, frozen-thawed control and
frozen-thawed SLC treated samples. A multivariate clustering procedure separated 
26,051 motile spermatozoa into three subpopulations (sP): sP1 consisting of
highly active but non-progressive spermatozoa (40.3%), sP2 consisting of
spermatozoa with high velocity and progressive motility (30.0%), and sP3
consisting of poorly active and non-progressive spermatozoa (29.7%). SLC with
PureSperm® 80 yielded sperm suspensions with improved motility, morphology,
viability and acrosome integrity (P<0.001). The frozen-thawed SLC treated samples
were enriched in sP2, reaching a proportion of 44.1% of the present spermatozoa. 
From these results, we concluded that SLC with PureSperm® 80 may be an
alternative and successful method for improving the quality of frozen-thawed dog 
spermatozoa. Moreover, sP2 (high-speed and progressive spermatozoa) was more
frequently observed after SLC. Finally, this study also demonstrated that the
general motile sperm structure present in dogs remained constant despite the
effect caused by either cryopreservation or separation by SLC through PureSperm® 
80.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23896392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2013 Sep 9;52(37):9801-4. doi: 10.1002/anie.201305202.
Epub 2013 Jul 23.

Pyridine-directed palladium-catalyzed phosphonation of C(sp2)-H bonds.

Li C(1), Yano T, Ishida N, Murakami M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Synthetic Chemistry and Biological Chemistry, Kyoto University, 
Katsura, Kyoto 615-8510, Japan.

PMID: 23881771  [PubMed]


369. Cytotechnology. 2014 May;66(3):395-411. doi: 10.1007/s10616-013-9587-x. Epub 2013
Jul 24.

A murine-human chimeric IgG antibody against vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor 2 inhibits angiogenesis in vitro.

Ding G(1), Chen X, Zhu J, Feng Z.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Antibody Technique of Ministry of Health, Department of
Pathology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 210029, China.

Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2) has been reported to play 
an important role in angiogenesis and tumorigenesis. A murine anti-VEGFR2 mAb
(A8H1) has been established in a previous study. To reduce the incompatibility of
the murine mAb for human use, the chimeric anti-VEGFR2-IgG was developed by
genetic recombination of the variable regions of the A8H1 antibody and the
constant regions of human IgG, and was expressed in Sp2/0 cells transfected with 
the two recombinant vectors containing the heavy chain and the light chain
regions. After screening, clone 2F12 was selected and was found to stably secrete
the murine-human chimeric anti-VEGFR2-IgG (coded 2F12). This chimeric IgG
maintained the specificity and the affinity of the parental murine antibody
against VEGFR2, and effectively identified VEGFR2 expressed on the surface of
HUVECs and BEL-7402 cells. Furthermore, the 2F12 antibody demonstrated inhibition
of angiogenesis in vitro, such as proliferation, migration, invasion and tube
formation of HUVECs. This murine-human chimeric IgG may be considered for further
development as an anti-angiogenesis and anti-tumor agent.

PMCID: PMC3973788
PMID: 23881538  [PubMed]


370. Food Chem. 2013 Dec 1;141(3):1972-9. doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2013.04.107. Epub
2013 May 9.

Protective effect of Spirulina platensis enriched in phenolic compounds against
hepatotoxicity induced by CCl4.

Kepekçi RA(1), Polat S, Çelik A, Bayat N, Saygideger SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Arts and Science, University of Gaziantep,
27310 Gaziantep, Turkey. raysunkepekci@gmail.com

Phenolic compounds make up the major secondary metabolites with high
pharmaceutical potential. Microalgae were reported to contain low amounts of
phenolic compounds. The present study aimed to investigate the hepatoprotective
potential of biomass of Spirulina platensis enriched in phenolic compounds. The
protective effects of the biomass of S. platensis with low amounts of phenolics
(SP1) and with high amounts of phenolics (SP2) against CCl4-induced acute
hepatotoxicity were evaluated in rats. The increased levels of ALT, AST and MDA
along with decreased activities of SOD and CAT were significantly (p<0.01)
ameliorated by SP2. Histological examinations revealed that SP2 was more potent
than SP1 in protecting the liver from toxic injury of CCl4 and preserving the
hepatocyte ultrastructure. The lesions including necrosis, lymphocyte
infiltration, ballooning degeneration and hepatocyte injury as irregular lamellar
organisation, dilations in endoplasmic reticulums and the presence of great
number of cytoplasmic vacuolization were healed by SP2.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23870917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2013 Jul 15;52(29):7586-9. doi: 10.1002/anie.201302402.
Epub 2013 Jun 12.

In situ generation of nucleophilic allenes by the gold-catalyzed rearrangement of
propargylic esters for the highly diastereoselective formation of intermolecular 
C(sp3)-C(sp2) bonds.

Yu Y(1), Yang W, Rominger F, Hashmi AS.

Author information: 
(1)Organisch-Chemisches Institut, Ruprecht-Karls-Universität Heidelberg, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 270, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

New perspectives, in particular for the synthesis of isochromane derivatives (see
scheme), are provided by the title reaction. Excellent diastereoselectivites are 
achieved in this reaction which proceeds through a gold-catalyzed 1,3-acyloxy
migration. In some cases exclusively the Z isomer is detected.

Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23843175  [PubMed]


372. Inorg Chem. 2013 Aug 5;52(15):8851-64. doi: 10.1021/ic401052a. Epub 2013 Jul 10.

Functionalization reactions characteristic of a robust bicyclic diphosphane
framework.

Tofan D(1), Temprado M, Majumdar S, Hoff CD, Cummins CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77
Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, United States.

The 3,4,8,9-tetramethyl-1,6-diphospha-bicyclo-[4.4.0]deca-3,8-diene (P2(C6H10)2) 
framework containing a P-P bond has allowed for an unprecedented selectivity
toward functionalization of a single phosphorus lone pair with reference to
acyclic diphosphane molecules. Functionalization at the second phosphorus atom
was found to proceed at a significantly slower rate, thus opening the pathway for
obtaining mixed functional groups for a pair of P-P bonded <U+03BB>(5)-phosphorus atoms.
Reactivity with the chalcogen-atom donors MesCNO (Mes = 2,4,6-C6H2Me3) and SSbPh3
has allowed for the selective synthesis of the diphosphane chalcogenides
OP2(C6H10)2 (87%), O2P2(C6H10)2 (94%), SP2(C6H10)2 (56%), and S2P2(C6H10)2 (87%).
Computational studies indicate that the oxygen-atom transfer reactions involve
penta-coordinated phosphorus intermediates that have four-membered {PONC} cycles.
The P-E bond dissociation enthalpies in EP2(C6H10)2 were measured via
calorimetric studies to be 134.7 ± 2.1 kcal/mol for P-O, and 93 ± 3 kcal/mol for 
P-S, respectively, in good agreement with the computed values. Additional
reactivity with breaking of the P-P bond and formation of diphosphinate
O3P2(C6H10)2 was only observed to occur upon heating of dimethylsulfoxide
solutions of the precursor. Reactivity of diphosphane P2(C6H10)2 with azides
allowed the isolation of monoiminophosphoranes (RN)P2(C6H10)2(R = Mes, CPh3,
SiMe3), and treatment with additional MesN3 yielded symmetric and unsymmetric
diiminodiphosphoranes (RN)(MesN)P2(C6H10)2 (91% for R = Mes). Metalation
reactions with the bulky diiminodiphosphorane ligand (MesN)2P2(C6H10)2 (nppn)
allowed for the isolation and characterization of (nppn)Mo(<U+03B7>(3)-C3H5)Cl(CO)2
(91%), (nppn)NiCl2 (76%), and [(nppn)Ni(<U+03B7>(3)-2-C3H4Me)][OTf] showing that these
ligands provide an attractive preorganized binding pocket for both late and early
transition metals.

PMID: 23841641  [PubMed]


373. Acta Chim Slov. 2013;60(1):1-4.

Hyper-diamonds and dodecahedral architectures by tetrapodal carbon nanotube
junctions.

Nagy K(1), Nagy CL, Tasnadi E, Katona G, Diudea MV.

Author information: 
(1)Babes-Bolyai University, Faculty of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering
Cluj-Napoca, Arany J. 11, 400028.

Tetrapodal junctions are used to construct diamond-like networks and dodecahedral
architectures. They can be associated with the already synthesized spongy carbon,
consisting only of sp2 covalent carbon atoms, and the zeolites, periodic
structures in the Euclidean space. In this paper, the structure and stability of 
two zigzag tetrapodal junctions are discussed. Series of objects are built up by 
connecting a various number of junctions. Geometry optimization and single point 
computations (total energy E(tot) and HOMO-LUMO gap energy E(gap)) were performed
at the Hartree-Fock level of theory in view of evaluating their stability. The
genus of such nanostructures was calculated from the number of consisting
tetrapodal junctions.

PMID: 23841325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Jul;29(7):734-8.

[Preparation of monoclonal antibodies against flagellin core protein of Vibrio
parahaemolyticus and its activity analysis].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang L(1), Zhang X, Zhang H, Wei H, Ma D, Liu X, Cao D, Zeng J.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Entry-Exit Inspection and Quarantine Bureau, Beijing 100026, China.

OBJECTIVE: To prepare monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) against flagellin core protein
of Vibrio (V.) parahaemolyticus and establish the double-sandwich ELISA for
testing V.parahaemolyticus from food products.
METHODS: BALB/c mice were immunized with flagellin which was extracted from
V.parahaemolyticus ATCC17802 through differential centrifugation. The splenocytes
from the immunized mice were fused with Sp2/0 myeloma cells in log-phase growth
when the antibody titer in serum was 1:32 000. The hybridoma cell lines were
screened by regular subcloning approach and used to generate ascites. And mAbs
reacting to V.parahaemolyticus flagellin were obtained by purifying from the
ascites.
RESULTS: Six hybridoma cell lines secreting mAbs against V.parahaemolyticus
flagellin were prepared and named VpNo.1-VpNo.6. The mAb titer in serum by
indirect ELISA was 1:2×10(6);. The mAbs were subjected to Ig classes and
subclasses detection and Western blotting. The Ig subclasses of these mAbs were
IgG1, IgG1, IgM, IgG1, IgG2a and IgM, respectively. SDS-PAGE showed that the
flagellin protein molecular weight (Mr;) was 42 000. Using VpNo.6,
Double-sandwich ELISA kit was set up and applied in detecting V.parahaemolyticus,
and its sensitivity was 10(3); CFU/mL. The ELISA showed VpNo.6 had a desirable
specificity to V.parahaemolyticus in testing 134 V.parahaemolyticus and 74
non-V.parahaemolyticus strains. The lowest limit of detection was 21 CFU/g sample
in the base-material addition test.
CONCLUSION: The monoclonal antibodies against flagellin core protein of
V.parahaemolyticus were successfully prepared. The double-sandwich ELISA we
established using VpNo.6 mAb had a sensitivity as high as 10(3); CFU/mL. The
monoclonal antibody of VpNo.6 was highly specific to V.parahaemolyticus.

PMID: 23837985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Org Lett. 2013 Jul 19;15(14):3698-701. doi: 10.1021/ol401508u. Epub 2013 Jul 5.

Chemoselective sp2-sp3 cross-couplings: iron-catalyzed alkyl transfer to
dihaloaromatics.

Malhotra S(1), Seng PS, Koenig SG, Deese AJ, Ford KA.

Author information: 
(1)Genentech Inc., Small Molecule Process Chemistry, 1 DNA Way, South San
Francisco, California 94080, USA. malhotra.sushant@gene.com

The chemoselective functionalization of a range of dihaloaromatics with methyl,
cyclopropyl, and higher alkyl Grignard reagents via iron-catalyzed cross-coupling
is described. The site selectivity of C-X (X = halogen) activation is determined 
by factors such as the position of the halogen on the ring, the solvent, and the 
nucleophile. A one-pot protocol for the chemoselective synthesis of mixed dialkyl
heterocycles is achieved solely employing iron catalysis.

PMID: 23829418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Ann R Coll Surg Engl. 2013 Apr;95(3):177-83. doi:
10.1308/003588413X13511609958253.

Damage control - trauma care in the first hour and beyond: a clinical review of
relevant developments in the field of trauma care.

Sharrock AE(1), Midwinter M.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Surgery Department, Salisbury District Hospital, Odstock Road,
Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP2 8BJ, UK. sharrock@doctors.org.uk

INTRODUCTION: Trauma provision in the UK is a topic of interest. Regional trauma 
networks and centres are evolving and research is blossoming, but what bearing
does all this have on the care that is delivered to the individual patient? This 
article aims to provide an overview of key research concepts in the field of
trauma care, to guide the clinician in decision making in the management of major
trauma.
METHODS: The Ovid MEDLINE(®), EMBASE and PubMed databases were used to search
for relevant articles on haemorrhage control, damage control resuscitation and
its exceptions, massive transfusion protocols, prevention and correction of
coagulopathy, acidosis and hypothermia, and damage-control surgery.
FINDINGS: A wealth of research is available and a broad range has been reviewed
to summarise significant developments in trauma care. Research has been
categorised into disciplines and it is hoped that by considering each, a tailored
management plan for the individual trauma patient will evolve, potentially
improving patient outcome.

PMCID: PMC4165240
PMID: 23827287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Chemistry. 2013 Jul 8;19(28):9104-9. doi: 10.1002/chem.201301585. Epub 2013 Jun
18.

In situ generation of PhI(+)CF3 and transition-metal-free oxidative sp2 C-H
trifluoromethylation.

Xu C(1), Liu J, Ming W, Liu Y, Liu J, Wang M, Liu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Northeast Normal University, Renmin Street 5268,
130024 Changchun, P.R. China.

PMID: 23813904  [PubMed]


378. Innate Immun. 2014 Apr;20(3):320-6. doi: 10.1177/1753425913492181. Epub 2013 Jun 
28.

In vitro inflammatory responses elicited by isolates of Alloiococcus otitidis
obtained from children with otitis media with effusion.

Ashhurst-Smith C(1), Hall ST, Burns CJ, Stuart J, Blackwell CC.

Author information: 
(1)1Hunter Area Pathology Service Microbiology, The University of Newcastle,
Newcastle, New South Wales, Australia.

Alloiococcus otitidis is usually detected in children with otitis media (OM) by
PCR as it is not often detected by routine culture. Our improved method for its
isolation obtained A. otitidis from nearly 50% of 78 children with OM with
effusion. The role of A. otitidis in pathogenesis of OM is unclear. This study
tested two hypothesis: (1) that fresh isolates of A. otitidis would elicit
pro-inflammatory cytokines from THP-1 monocytic cells equivalent to those induced
by Streptococcus pneumoniae; (2) priming THP-1 cells with interferon-gamma
(IFN-<U+03B3>) a surrogate for virus infection, would enhance pro-inflammatory
responses. Recent clinical isolates of A. otitidis, S. pneumoniae (ATCC 49619)
and a blood culture isolate of S. pneumoniae (SP2) were used in the assays.
Cytokines were quantified by BioRad bead assay and Luminex 200. IFN-<U+03B3> priming
enhanced cytokine responses. S. pneumoniae ATCC 49619 induced lower responses
than SP2 for IL-1ß, IL-6, TNF-a. A. otitidis LW 27 elicited higher IL-1ß and
TNF-a responses than either pneumococcal isolate. Small green colony types of A. 
otitidis induced higher responses than large white colony types for IL-8 and
IL-1ß. The hypothesis that A. otitidis elicits cytokines observed in middle ear
effusions was supported; the need to use recent clinical isolates in studies of
pathogenesis was highlighted.

PMID: 23812253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Pak J Pharm Sci. 2013 Jul;26(4):699-706.

Cytotoxicity of alkaloids isolated from Peganum harmala seeds.

Lamchouri F(1), Zemzami M, Jossang A, Abdellatif A, Israili ZH, Lyoussi B.

Author information: 
(1)Equipe de Recherche, Substances Naturelles & Environnement, Faculté
Polydisciplinaire de Taza BP. Taza, Maroc. fatima.lamchouri@gmail.com

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Peganum harmala is used in traditional medicine
to treat a number of diseases including cancer. Our preliminary studies show that
the alkaloidal extract of PH seed is cytotoxic to several tumor cell lines in
vitro and has antitumor effect in a tumor model in vivo. The present
investigation was aimed at extending our previous studies in identifying the
components in P. harmala seed-extract responsible for the cytotoxic effects, and 
study the cytotoxic and antiproliferative activity of isolated alkaloids and
total alkaloidal fraction (TAF) in several tumor cell lines. Four alkaloids:
harmalicidine, harmine, peganine (vasicine) and vasicinone were isolated from the
P. harmala seed-extract and their activity and that of TAF were tested a) for
their cytotoxic activity against four tumor cell lines [three developed by us by 
chemical-induction in Wistar rats: 1) Med-mek carcinoma ; 2) UCP-med carcinoma ; 
3) UCP-med sarcoma] ; and 4) SP2/O-Ag14, and b) for antiproliferative effect on
cells of Jurkat, E6-1 clone (inhibition of incorporation of {(3)H-thymidine} in
cellular DNA). The alkaloids and TAF inhibited the growth of tumor cell lines to 
varying degrees; Sp2/O-Ag14 was the most sensitive, with IC50 values
(concentration of the active substance that inhibited the growth of the tumor
cells by 50%) ranging between 2.43 µg/mL and 19.20 µg/mL, while UCP-med carcinoma
was the least sensitive (range of IC50 = 13.83 µg/mL to 59.97 µg/mL). Of the
substances evaluated, harmine was the most active compound (IC50 for the 4 tumor 
cell lines varying between 2.43 µg/mL and 18.39 µg/mL), followed by TAF (range of
IC50 = 7.32 µg/mL to 13.83 µg/mL); peganine was the least active (IC50 = 50 µg/mL
to > 100 µg/mL). In terms of antiproliferative effect, vasicinone and TAF were
more potent than other substances: the concentration of vasicinone, and TAF
needed to inhibit the incorporation of {(3)H-TDR} in the DNA cells of Jurkat,
E6-1 clone by 50% (IC50) were 8.60 ± 0.023 µg/mL and 8.94 ± 0.017 µg/mL,
respectively, while peganine was the least active (IC50 >100 µg/mL). The IC50
values for harmalacidine (27.10 ± 0.011 µg/mL) and harmine (46.57 ± 0.011 µg/mL) 
were intermediate. The harmala alkaloids inhibited the growth of four tumor cell 
lines, and proliferation of Jurkat cells with varying potencies. Harmine was the 
most potent in inhibiting cell growth, and vasicinone was most active as
antiproliferating substance. The TAF had significant cytotoxic as well as
antiproliferating activity.

PMID: 23811445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2013 Jul;132(1):177e-8e. doi: 10.1097/PRS.0b013e3182910e5c.

Cephalic vein harvest for deep inferior epigastric perforator salvage: an
aesthetic upper arm incision.

Khoda B(1), Horlock N.

Author information: 
(1)Salisbury NHS Foundation Hospital Wessex Centre for Burns and Plastic Surgery 
Odstock Road, Salisbury SP2 8BJ, United Kingdom. ben.khoda@yahoo.co.uk

PMID: 23806942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2013 Jul 22;52(30):7850-4. doi: 10.1002/anie.201303376.
Epub 2013 Jun 26.

Selective C(sp2)-C(sp) bond cleavage: the nitrogenation of alkynes to amides.

Qin C(1), Feng P, Ou Y, Shen T, Wang T, Jiao N.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Peking University, Xue Yuan Rd. 38, Beijing 100191, China.

Breakthrough: A novel catalyzed direct highly selective C(sp2)-C(sp) bond
functionalization of alkynes to amides has been developed. Nitrogenation is
achieved by the highly selective C(sp2)-C(sp) bond cleavage of aryl-substituted
alkynes. The oxidant-free and mild conditions and wide substrate scope make this 
method very practical.

Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23804537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Org Lett. 2013 Jul 5;15(13):3476-9. doi: 10.1021/ol4015656. Epub 2013 Jun 26.

A metal-free tandem demethylenation/C(sp2)-H cycloamination process of
N-benzyl-2-aminopyridines via C-C and C-N bond cleavage.

Liang D(1), He Y, Liu L, Zhu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
190 Kaiyuan Avenue, Guangzhou 510530, China.

A mild, metal-free synthesis of pyrido[1,2-a]benzimidazoles starting with
N-benzyl-2-aminopyridines, which employs PhI(OPiv)2 as a stoichiometric oxidant, 
has been developed. The process is initiated by an unusual PhI(OPiv)2-mediated
ipso S(E)Ar reaction, followed by solvent-assisted C-C and C-N bond cleavage.

PMID: 23802877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Org Lett. 2013 Jul 5;15(13):3484-6. doi: 10.1021/ol401535k. Epub 2013 Jun 25.

Ortho- and para-selective ruthenium-catalyzed C(sp2)-H oxygenations of phenol
derivatives.

Liu W(1), Ackermann L.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Organische und Biomolekulare Chemie, Georg-August-Universität,
Tammannstr. 2, 37077 Göttingen, Germany.

Versatile ruthenium catalysts allowed for efficient direct oxygenations of aryl
carbamates under remarkably mild reaction conditions. In addition to
chelation-assisted C-H activation, the optimized ruthenium catalyst proved
amenable to para-selective hydroxylations of anisoles without Lewis basic
directing groups.

PMID: 23799802  [PubMed]


384. Methods Enzymol. 2013;526:45-59. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-405883-5.00003-X.

Visualization of intracellular hydrogen peroxide with HyPer, a genetically
encoded fluorescent probe.

Mishina NM(1), Markvicheva KN, Bilan DS, Matlashov ME, Shirmanova MV, Liebl D,
Schultz C, Lukyanov S, Belousov VV.

Author information: 
(1)Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, RAS, Moscow, Russia.

The fluorescent sensor HyPer allows monitoring of intracellular H2O2 levels with 
a high degree of sensitivity and specificity. Here, we provide a detailed
protocol of ratiometric imaging of H2O2 produced by cells during phagocytosis,
including instructions for experiments on different commercial confocal systems, 
namely, Leica SP2, Leica SP5, and Carl Zeiss LSM, as well as wide-field Leica
6000 microscope. The general experimental scheme is easily adaptable for imaging 
H2O2 production by various cell types under a variety of conditions.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23791093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Org Lett. 2013 Jul 5;15(13):3230-3. doi: 10.1021/ol4011757. Epub 2013 Jun 21.

Programmed selective sp2 C-O bond activation toward multiarylated benzenes.

Zhao F(1), Zhang YF, Wen J, Yu DG, Wei JB, Xi Z, Shi ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing National Laboratory of Molecular Sciences, College of Chemistry,
Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

A variety of important multiarylated benzenes were efficiently synthesized from
phloroglucinol derivatives 1 through sequential cross-couplings via Pd-catalyzed 
C-OTs, Ni-catalyzed C-OC(O)NEt2, and C-OMe bond activation. High selectivity was 
achieved based on the rational design and inherent diversity in the reactivity of
different C-O bonds.

PMID: 23789920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Phytochem Anal. 2013 Nov-Dec;24(6):645-53. doi: 10.1002/pca.2448. Epub 2013 Jun
13.

Development of an Eastern blotting technique for the visual detection of
aristolochic acids in Aristolochia and Asarum species by using a monoclonal
antibody against aristolochic acids I and II.

Li XW(1), Morinaga O, Tian M, Uto T, Yu J, Shang MY, Wang X, Cai SQ, Shoyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, 100191, PR China; Department of
Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Nagasaki International
University, Sasebo, Nagasaki, 859-3298, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: Aristolochic acids (AAs) are naturally occurring nephrotoxicants
and human carcinogens. Aristolochic acid I (AA-I) and aristolochic acid II
(AA-II) are two important AAs with clear toxicity.
OBJECTIVE: To obtain a monoclonal antibody (MAb) recognising AA-I and AA-II and
develop an Eastern blotting technique for the specific visualisation and easy
determination of AA-I and AA-II in plant extracts or tissues of Aristolochia and 
Asarum species.
METHODS: A hybridoma secreting MAb against AAs was prepared by cell fusion with
splenocytes derived from a mouse immunised with AA-I-keyhole limpet haemocyanin
(KLH) conjugate and the myeloma cell line SP2/0-Ag14. AA-I and AA-II were
separated by thin-layer chromatography (TLC) and then blotted onto a positively
charged polyethersulphone (PES) membrane using a modified carbodiimide method.
The resulting membrane-bound AA-protein conjugates were linked to the newly
prepared MAb and then to the secondary antibody labelled with peroxidase.
4-Chloro-1-naphthol was then added as the peroxidase substrate for staining.
RESULTS: MAb 2A10-10B showed a high specificity for AA-I (100%) and AA-II (69.3%)
and low cross reactivity (= 2.2%) toward analogues that may disrupt detection of 
AA-I and AA-II in plants. An established Eastern blotting method was applied to
the immunohistolocalisation of AA-I and AA-II in dry plant tissues, and this
analysis showed that the phelloderm, cortex and phloem of Aristolochia
manshuriensis stem may contain higher amounts of total AA-I and AA-II as compared
with the pith and xylem.
CONCLUSION: This method was extremely useful for the visual screening of AA-I and
AA-II among easily mistaken herbal medicines.

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 23761269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. J Am Chem Soc. 2013 Jun 26;135(25):9350-3. doi: 10.1021/ja4047894. Epub 2013 Jun 
14.

Cu-catalyzed mild C(sp2)-H functionalization assisted by carboxylic acids en
route to hydroxylated arenes.

Gallardo-Donaire J(1), Martin R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemical Research of Catalonia (ICIQ), Av. Països Catalans 16,
43007, Tarragona, Spain.

A formal Cu-catalyzed C(sp(2))-H hydroxylation assisted by benzoic acids is
described. The procedure is characterized by its mild reaction conditions and
wide substrate scope utilizing simple and cheap Cu catalysts, thus becoming a
user-friendly and operationally simple protocol for C(sp(2))-H hydroxylation.

PMID: 23758209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Monoclon Antib Immunodiagn Immunother. 2013 Jun;32(3):205-10. doi:
10.1089/mab.2013.0001.

Monoclonal antibodies directed against chicken ß2-microglobulin developed with a 
synthesized peptide.

Yu C(1), Liu Q, Gao W, Qian K, Mei M, Shao HX, Wu GH, Jin WJ, Qin AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Ministry of Education Key Lab for Avian Preventive Medicine, Yangzhou
University, Yangzhou, PR China.

We developed a panel of monoclonal antibodies (MAb) against chicken
ß2-microglobulin (chß2M) by fusions between SP2/0 myeloma cells and spleen cells 
from mice immunized with a synthesized peptide corresponding to positions 91-119 
of the COOH domain of chß2M. Two of them, 6E7 and 3D1, identified as IgG1/<U+03BA>,
could react with chß2M protein from avian macrophage HD11 cells and human 293T
cells transfected with pcDNA3.1-chß2M in immunofluorescence assays. Only a 12<U+2009>kDa
protein band of chß2M could be detected in the HD11 and 293T/chß2M cell lysates
by Western blot analysis. Chicken ß2M in serum and plasma could be found in
Western blot by MAb 3D1. Moreover, MAb 3D1 also recognized the chß2M antigen on
the cell membranes in flow cytometry. Immunohistochemical staining with these
MAbs revealed that chß2M was present in chicken thymus, spleen, and bursa. These 
MAbs will be good tools for analyzing the mechanism of the chicken immune system.

PMCID: PMC3733132
PMID: 23750479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. J Biochem. 2013 Aug;154(2):177-84. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvt042. Epub 2013 Jun 8.

Mutation in the a-subunit of F(1)F(O)-ATPase causes an increased motility
phenotype through the sodium-driven flagella of Vibrio.

Terashima H(1), Terauchi T, Ihara K, Nishioka N, Kojima S, Homma M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Nagoya University,
Chikusa-Ku, Nagoya 464-8602, Japan.

Bacterial flagellar motors exploit the electrochemical potential gradient of a
coupling ion as energy source and are composed of stator and rotor proteins.
Vibrio alginolyticus has a Na(+)-driven motor and its stator is composed of PomA 
and PomB. Recently, we isolated increased motility strains (sp1-sp4) from the
PomA-N194D/PomB-D24N mutant whose motility was quite weak. To detect the
responsible mutation, we have used a next-generation sequencer and determined the
entire genome sequences of the sp1 and sp2 strains. Candidate mutations were
identified in the gene encoding the a-subunit of F1Fo-ATPase (uncB). To confirm
this, we constructed a deletion strain, which gave the increased motility
phenotype. The amount of membrane-bound ATPase was reduced in the sp2 and <U+0394>uncB
mutants. From these results, we conclude that a mutation in the uncB gene causes 
the increased motility phenotype in V. alginolyticus. They confer faster motility
in low concentrations of sodium than in the parental strain and this phenotype is
suppressed in the presence of KCN. Those results may suggest that the proton
gradient generated by the respiratory chain is increased by the uncB mutation,
consequently the sodium motive force is increased and causes the increased
motility phenotype.

PMID: 23750030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2013 Nov;63(Pt 11):4163-6. doi:
10.1099/ijs.0.053629-0. Epub 2013 Jun 7.

Natronobacterium texcoconense sp. nov., a haloalkaliphilic archaeon isolated from
soil of a former lake.

Ruiz-Romero E(1), Sánchez-López KB, de los Angeles Coutiño-Coutiño M,
González-Pozos S, Bello-López JM, López-Ramírez MP, Ramírez-Villanueva DA,
Dendooven L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Soil Ecology, ABACUS, Cinvestav, Mexico.

A novel haloalkaliphilic archaeon, strain B23(T) was isolated from the former
lake Texcoco in Mexico. The strain was Gram-stain-negative, the cells coccoid to 
ovoid rods, red pigmented and aerobic. Strain B23(T) grew in 1.7-4.3 M NaCl, at
pH 6.5-9.5 and at 25-45 °C with optimal growth at 2.6-3.4 M NaCl, pH 7.5-8.5 and 
37 °C. Phylogenetic analysis based on 16S rRNA gene sequences revealed that
strain B23(T) was most closely related to Natronobacterium gregoryi SP2(T) with
97.3<U+200A>% sequence similarity. The polar lipids of strain B23(T) were
phosphatidylglycerol and several unidentified phospholipids. The G+C content of
the DNA of the strain was 62.5 mol%. Levels of DNA-DNA relatedness between strain
B23(T) and Natronobacterium gregoryi DSM 3393(T) was 32.3<U+200A>%. The name
Natronobacterium texcoconense sp. nov. is proposed. The type strain is B23(T)
(<U+200A>=<U+200A>CECT 8068(T)<U+200A>=<U+200A>JCM 17655(T)).

PMID: 23749283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Hepatol Res. 2014 Jul;44(7):788-97. doi: 10.1111/hepr.12173. Epub 2013 Jul 4.

Chronic ethanol diet increases regulatory T-cell activity and inhibits hepatitis 
C virus core-specific cellular immune responses in mice.

Ortiz V(1), Wands JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology and Liver Research
Center, Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Providence, Rhode
Island, USA.

AIM: Chronic ethanol consumption is associated with persistent hepatitis C viral 
(HCV) infection. This study explores the role of the host cellular immune
response to HCV core protein in a murine model and how chronic ethanol
consumption alters T-cell regulatory (Treg) populations.
METHODS: BALB/c mice were fed an isocaloric control or ethanol liquid diet.
Dendritic cells (DC) were isolated after expansion with a hFl3tL-expression
plasmid and subsequently transfected with HCV core protein. Core-containing DC
(1<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(6) ) were s.c. injected (×3) in mice every 2<U+2009>weeks. Splenocytes from
immunized mice were isolated and stimulated with HCV core protein to measure
generation of viral antigen-specific Treg, as well as secretion of interleukin
(IL)-2, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a and IL-4. Cytotoxicity was measured by
lactate dehydrogenase release from HCV core-expressing syngeneic SP2/19 myeloma
cells.
RESULTS: Splenocytes from mice immunized with ethanol-derived and HCV core-loaded
DC exhibited significantly lower in vitro cytotoxicity compared to mice immunized
with HCV core-loaded DC derived from isocaloric pair-fed controls. Stimulation
with HCV core protein triggered higher IL-2, TNF-a and IL-4 release in
splenocytes following immunization with core-loaded DC derived from controls as
compared to chronic ethanol-fed mice. Splenocytes derived from mice immunized
with core-loaded DC isolated from ethanol-fed mice exhibited a significantly
higher CD25(+) FOXP3(+) and CD4(+) FOXP3(+) Treg population.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that immunization with HCV core-containing DC
from ethanol-fed mice induces an increase in the CD25(+) FOXP3(+) and CD4(+)
FOXP3(+) Treg population and may suppress HCV core-specific CD4(+) and CD8(+)
T-cell immune responses.

© 2013 The Japan Society of Hepatology.

PMCID: PMC3883867
PMID: 23710581  [PubMed]


392. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2013 Jun 28;15(24):9498-502. doi: 10.1039/c3cp51375k. Epub
2013 May 20.

Identifying the trend of reactivity for sp2 materials: an electron delocalization
model from first principles calculations.

Wang Z(1), Yang B, Wang Y, Zhao Y, Cao XM, Hu P.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Chemical Engineering, Center for Computational
Chemistry and Research Institute of Industrial Catalysis, East China University
of Science and Technology, Shanghai, P R China.

The reactivity of sp(2) carbon materials is studied using the adsorption and
dissociation of O2 on graphene and graphene oxide as model systems. The reactions
on the basal plane, zigzag and armchair edges of graphene and graphene oxide with
different oxygen-containing groups are calculated using first principles
calculations. Two Brønsted-Evans-Polanyi relationships are identified and an
electron delocalization model is suggested to understand the general trend of
reactivity for sp(2) carbon materials.

PMID: 23685875  [PubMed]


393. Psychiatr Serv. 2013 Aug 1;64(8):782-8. doi: 10.1176/appi.ps.201200365.

Comparing neighborhoods of adults with serious mental illness and of the general 
population: research implications.

Byrne T(1), Prvu Bettger J, Brusilovskiy E, Wong YL, Metraux S, Salzer MS.

Author information: 
(1)School of Social Policy and Practice, University of Pennsylvania, 3701 Locust 
Walk, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. byrnet@sp2.upenn

OBJECTIVE: The International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health
emphasizes the importance of assessing the impact of environmental factors on
functioning and disability. Drawing on this emphasis, this study used a set of
objective measures to compare the characteristics of neighborhoods of adults with
serious mental illness and of the general population. It also examined the
relationship between neighborhood characteristics and neighborhood concentration 
of persons with serious mental illness.
METHODS: The sample comprised 15,246 adults who were treated for serious mental
illness in Philadelphia between 1997 and 2000. Principal-components analysis of
22 neighborhood characteristics resulted in an ideal-factor solution of six
components. The mean values of each component in neighborhoods of persons with
serious mental illness were compared with values in an equally sized group of
neighborhoods created by randomly generated addresses representative of the
city's general population. Ordinary least-squares regression was used to assess
the association between neighborhood characteristics and neighborhood
concentration of persons with serious mental illness.
RESULTS: Neighborhoods in which adults with serious mental illness resided had
higher levels of physical and structural inadequacy, drug-related activity, and
crime than comparison neighborhoods. Higher levels of physical and structural
inadequacy, crime, drug-related activity, social instability, and social
isolation were associated with higher concentration of persons with serious
mental illness in the neighborhood's adult population.
CONCLUSIONS: The differences in neighborhood characteristics identified in this
study point to factors that merit closer attention as potential barriers or
facilitators in the functioning, participation, and community integration of
persons with serious mental illness.

PMID: 23677444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. BMJ. 2013 May 15;346:f2856. doi: 10.1136/bmj.f2856.

An unusual burn.

Mitchell CJ(1), Ahmad Z, Khan MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Burns, Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Salisbury District
Hospital, Salisbury SP2 8BJ, UK. cjmitchell@doctors.org.uk

PMID: 23676620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Chem Commun (Camb). 2013 Jun 21;49(49):5598-600. doi: 10.1039/c3cc42226g.

A straightforward access to guaiazulene derivatives using palladium-catalysed sp2
or sp3 C-H bond functionalisation.

Zhao L(1), Bruneau C, Doucet H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut des Sciences Chimiques de Rennes, UMR 6226 CNRS-Université de Rennes 
1 Organométalliques: Matériaux et Catalyse, 35042 Rennes Cedex, France.

A novel palladium-catalysed direct arylation of guaiazulenes with a variety of
aryl bromides is reported. Both sp(2) and sp(3) C-H bonds have been
functionalised, as the nature of the cation of the base was found to allow the
control of the regioselectivity of the arylation giving rise to C2 or C3 arylated
guaiazulenes and also to 4-benzylguaiazulenes.

PMID: 23673684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Int J Genomics. 2013;2013:145450. doi: 10.1155/2013/145450. Epub 2013 Mar 26.

Expression and Functional Analysis of Storage Protein 2 in the Silkworm, Bombyx
mori.

Yu W(1), Wang M, Zhang H, Quan Y, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang Sci-Tech
University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310018, China ; Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory
of Silkworm Bioreactor and Biomedicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310018, China.

Storage protein 2 (SP2) not only is an important source of energy for the growth 
and development of silkworm but also has inhibitory effects on cell apoptosis.
Endothelial cell (EC) apoptosis is an important contributing factor in the
development of atherosclerosis; therefore, study of the antiapoptotic activity of
SP2 on ECs provides information related to the treatment of atherosclerosis and
other cardiovascular diseases. In this study, the sp2 gene was cloned and
expressed in Escherichia coli to produce a 6xHis-tagged fusion protein, which was
then used to generate a polyclonal antibody. Western blot results revealed that
SP2 levels were higher in the pupal stage and hemolymph of fifth-instar larvae
but low in the egg and adult stages. Subcellular localization results showed that
SP2 is located mainly on the cell membrane. In addition, a Bac-to-Bac system was 
used to construct a recombinant baculovirus for SP2 expression. The purified SP2 
was then added to a culture medium for human umbilical vein ECs (HUVECs), which
were exposed to staurosporine. A cell viability assay demonstrated that SP2 could
significantly enhance the viability of HUVEC. Furthermore, both ELISA and flow
cytometry results indicated that SP2 has anti-apoptotic effects on
staurosporine-induced HUVEC apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC3647547
PMID: 23671839  [PubMed]


397. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2013 Jun 24;52(26):6576-8. doi: 10.1002/anie.201302015.
Epub 2013 May 9.

Site-selective catalytic C(sp2)-H bond azidations.

Song W(1), Kozhushkov SI, Ackermann L.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Organische und Biomolekulare Chemie, Georg-August-Universität
Göttingen, Tammannstrasse 2, 37077 Göttingen, Germany.

PMID: 23657914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Zhen Ci Yan Jiu. 2013 Feb;38(1):68-72.

[Comparison of pain thresholds of acupoints on the leg in healthy volunteers].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang ZZ(1), Zhang J, Li DH.

Author information: 
(1)Hebei Union University, Tangshan 063000, China.

OBJECTIVE: To detect the pain threshold of acupoints on the leg in healthy
volunteers so as to analyze the sensory specificity of different acupoints.
METHODS: A total of 66 healthy volunteers (34 male and 30 female) aged from 19 to
64 years were recruited in the present study. Pain thresholds of acupoints on the
lower leg were detected by using an Electronic Von Frey Anesthesiometer after
constructing an anthropometric diagram about the cutaneous division of the lower 
leg.
RESULTS: 1) Among acupoints Shugu (BL 65), Jinggu (BL 64), Kunlun (BL 60),
Chengshan (BL 57) of the Bladder Meridian from the heel to the popliteal fossa,
and non-acupoint (1cun lateral to BL 60), no significant differences were found
among these acupoint regions in the pain threshold (P > 0.05), while that of the 
non-acupoint was significantly higher in comparison with these acupoint regions
(P < 0.05). 2) At the Zusanli (ST 36) level, no significant differences were
found among the Yanglingquan (GB 34), Zusanli (ST 36) and Yinlingquan (SP 9)
regions in the pain threshold (P > 0.05) and the pain threshold was obviously
higher in the non-acupoint (1 cun lateral to ST36) than in the GB34, ST36 and SP 
9 regions (P < 0.05). 3) At the Xiajuxu (ST39) level, no significant differences 
were found among the Xiajuxu (ST39), Waiqiu (GB 36), Yangjiao (GB35), Feiyang
(BL58) and Lougu (SP7) regions in the pain threshold (P > 0.05), but the
non-acupoint (1 cun lateral to ST39) showed a higher threshold than those of the 
above-mentioned 5 acupoints (P < 0.05). 4) Among the 5 Xing-spring acupoints Dadu
(SP2), Xingjian (LR2), Neiting (ST44) and Xiaxi (GB 43) distributing in the
interdistal region, the pain threshold was lowest in the Neiting (ST 44) and
highest in the Xiaxi (GB 43) regions (P < 0.05). 5) Among the acupoints Shuiquan 
(KI 5), Taixi (KI 3), Zhubin (KI 9) and Lougu (SP7) on the lower leg, the pain
threshold was lowest in the Zhubin (KI 9) and highest in the Lougu (SP 7) regions
(P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: In healthy subjects, the pain threshold is generally higher in the
non-acupoint region and also shows a sparse lower sensory threshold in some
acupoints as Neiting (ST 44), Zhubin (KI 9), etc. The specificity of acupoints
needs being studied further.

PMID: 23650804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2013 Feb;13(2):1063-7.

Molecular dynamics simulations of friction process between diamond-like carbon
and Si-DLC films.

Lan H(1), Kato T.

Author information: 
(1)School of Mechanical, Electronic and Control Engineering, Beijing Jiaotong
University, No. 3 of Shangyuan Residence, Haidian District, Beijing 100044,
China.

Diamond-like carbon (DLC) films have been extensively studied over the past
decades due to their unique combination of properties; in particular,
silicon-doped DLC (Si-DLC) films are of significant interest for tribological
effects, they had a very low friction coefficient and possessed the potential to 
improve wear performance in humid atmospheres and at higher temperatures. But
many experimental results of the Si-DLC films showed that their tribological
properties changed greatly on different silicon content. In the paper, molecular 
dynamics (MD) simulations were used to study microstructure of amorphous Si-DLC
films and a sliding friction process between DLC and Si-DLC films on
un-lubricated and oil-lubricated conditions respectively. The results show that
silicon atoms are almost surrounded by carbon atoms in all Si-DLC films. The
sp3/sp2 ratio in Si-DLC films increases with the increasing silicon content.
After sliding, a transfer film between the DLC and Si-DLC films is formed on the 
un-lubricated condition. In contrast, a boundary lubrication layer is found on
the oil-lubricated condition. Moreover, the friction forces on the un-lubricated 
condition are larger than those on the oil-lubricated condition.

PMID: 23646572  [PubMed]


400. J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2013 Feb;13(2):933-6.

Synthesis of functional carbon nanospheres by a composite-molten-salt method and 
amperometric sensing of hydrogen peroxide.

Wang X(1), Hu C, Xiong Y, Zhang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Physics, Chongqing University, Chongqing 400044, PR
China.

Functional carbon nanospheres have been synthesized from analytically pure
glucose by a composite-molten-salt (CMS) method. Field emission scanning electron
microscopy, transmission electron microscopy, Raman and Fourier transformation
infra-red spectroscopy indicate the carbon nanospheres are solid, bond
hybridisation (sp2/sp3) and with many functional groups on their surfaces.
Amperometric sensor based on the synthesized carbon nanospheres have been
fabricated without pretreatment or modification. The detection of hydrogen
peroxide exhibits high sensitivity and good selectivity. The electrochemical
measurement of these nanospheres demonstrates much superior performance to those 
of the carbon nanospheres synthesized by hydrothermal method.

PMID: 23646545  [PubMed]


401. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2013 May;29(5):500-3.

[Preparation of monoclonal antibody against phosphinothricin acetyltransferase].

[Article in Chinese]

Gao X(1), Wang Y, Shi S, Li Z, Li X, Xu W, Zhang Z, Lu Y, Zhang J, Li Q, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)College of Horticulture, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin 150030,
China. eo_777654@sina.com

OBJECTIVE: To express phosphinothricin acetyltransferase (PAT) with biological
activity and prepare monoclonal antibodies against PAT.
METHODS: The full length bar gene was cloned by PCR and inserted into prokaryotic
expression vector pET28a<U+207A>. The recombinant plasmid pET28-bar was transformed into
E.coli BL21(DE3), and under the induction of IPTG, PAT was expressed. The
expressed protein was purified by Ni<U+207A>; affinity chromatography to analyze its
activity. The purified PAT was used to immunize BALB/c mice, and then the spleen 
cells from the immunized mice were fused with Sp2/0 cells. The hybridoma clones
secreting antibodies against PAT were isolated by indirect ELISA and then
subcloned.
RESULTS: Soluble PAT was expressed in E.coli. The purified PAT had the activity
of acetyltransferase. We totally prepared 9 hybridoma cell lines which secreted
specific anti-PAT monoclonal antibodies.
CONCLUSION: The expressed recombinant PAT can be used for biological reagent to
prevent and relieve herbicide damage. Monoclonal antibodies against PAT may be
used to detect the transgenic products.

PMID: 23643270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Apr;29(4):400-2, 406.

[Preparation and characterization of monoclonal antibodies against viral
hemorrhagic septicemia virus].

[Article in Chinese]

Jing H(1), Wang J, Cao H, Lin X.

Author information: 
(1)Research Centre of Aquatic Animal Diseases, Institute of Animal Quarantine,
Chinese Academy of Inspection and Quarantine, Beijing 100029, China.
jinghongli8451@126.com

OBJECTIVE: To prepare the monoclonal antibody (mAb) against viral hemorrhagic
septicemia virus (VHSV) and analyze the biological properties.
METHODS: The BALB/c mice were immunized with the VHSV which was purified by
differential centrifugation. Spleen cells of the immune mice were collected and
fused with Sp2/0 myeloma cells by hybridoma technology. The indirect ELISA was
used to screen hyridoma cells and identify the specificity of mAb. The Western
blotting was used to identify antigen site.
RESULTS: After three cycle of subcloning with limited dilution method, we
obtained a cell strain that secreted mAb against VHSV and was named 4A5. The
indirect ELISA showed that the titer of mAb ascites was 10<U+207B>4;. It belonged to
IgG3 subclass <U+03BA> chain and couldn't react with other fish viruses or fish cell
lines in the ELISA except VHSV. Western blotting revealed that mAb 4A5 bound to a
70 kDa of protein band of VHSV as antigen.
CONCLUSION: The obtained mAb has a high specificity, which could be used for
rapid diagnosis and detection of VHSV in aquaculture.

PMID: 23643170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2013 Nov;110(11):2915-27. doi: 10.1002/bit.24950. Epub 2013
Jun 20.

Feasibility study of semi-selective protein precipitation with salt-tolerant
copolymers for industrial purification of therapeutic antibodies.

Capito F(1), Bauer J, Rapp A, Schröter C, Kolmar H, Stanislawski B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Technische Universität
Darmstadt, Petersenstrasse 22, 64287 Darmstadt, Germany; Merck KGaA, Darmstadt,
Germany. florian.capito@external.merckgroup.com.

We present a feasibility study for an antibody capturing process from clarified
cell culture fluid using semi-selective protein precipitation with salt-tolerant 
copolymers. Protein precipitation is mediated by hydrophobic and electrostatic
interactions with the copolymer that can be customized for the respective target.
Precipitation yield with different copolymers at ionic strength of 2-22.5<U+2009>mS<U+2009>cm<U+207B>¹
and pH 5.0-pH 5.7 was evaluated using pure monoclonal antibody solutions.
Optimized parameters were used to elucidate yield and purity of various
antibodies precipitated at physiological conditions from cell culture fluid of
CHO, NS0, and SP2/0 cell culture fluid. Precipitated protein was easily
redissolved in small volume, enabling concentrating monoclonal antibodies (mAb)
more than 40-fold and up to 100-fold, while residual polymer was removed to >98% 
using cationic polymer attached to silica flakes. mAb recovery of >90% and host
cell protein clearance of >80% were achieved, not requiring any pre-dilution of
cell culture fluid. Precipitation showed no impact on mAb binding affinity when
compared to non-precipitated mAb. The obtained yield and purity were lower
compared to a protein A based purification and loss of mAb was factor 1.5-3.0
higher. Yet, for high titer mAb purification processes being implemented in the
future, precipitation is an attractive option due to its ease of scalability and 
cost-effectiveness.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23637026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Jun;161A(6):1329-38. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35919. Epub 2013 
May 1.

Diagnostic screening identifies a wide range of mutations involving the SHOX
gene, including a common 47.5<U+2009>kb deletion 160<U+2009>kb downstream with a variable
phenotypic effect.

Bunyan DJ(1), Baker KR, Harvey JF, Thomas NS.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, UK. dave.bunyan@salisbury.nhs.uk

Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) results from heterozygous mutations of the
SHOX gene, with homozygosity or compound heterozygosity resulting in the more
severe form, Langer mesomelic dysplasia (LMD). These mutations typically take the
form of whole or partial gene deletions, point mutations within the coding
sequence, or large (>100<U+2009>kb) 3' deletions of downstream regulatory elements. We
have analyzed the coding sequence of the SHOX gene and its downstream regulatory 
regions in a cohort of 377 individuals referred with symptoms of LWD, LMD or
short stature. A causative mutation was identified in 68% of the probands with
LWD or LMD (91/134). In addition, a 47.5<U+2009>kb deletion was found 160<U+2009>kb downstream 
of the SHOX gene in 17 of the 377 patients (12% of the LWD referrals, 4.5% of all
referrals). In 14 of these 17 patients, this was the only potentially causative
abnormality detected (13 had symptoms consistent with LWD and one had short
stature only), but the other three 47.5<U+2009>kb deletions were found in patients with 
an additional causative SHOX mutation (with symptoms of LWD rather than LMD).
Parental samples were available on 14/17 of these families, and analysis of these
showed a more variable phenotype ranging from apparently unaffected to LWD.
Breakpoint sequence analysis has shown that the 47.5<U+2009>kb deletion is identical in 
all 17 patients, most likely due to an ancient founder mutation rather than
recurrence. This deletion was not seen in 471 normal controls (P<0.0001),
providing further evidence for a phenotypic effect, albeit one with variable
penetration.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23636926  [PubMed - in process]


405. Vet Comp Oncol. 2014 Mar;12(1):47-51. doi: 10.1111/vco.12036. Epub 2013 Apr 25.

Development and characterization of monoclonal antibodies to subgroup A avian
leukosis virus.

Qiu Y(1), Li X, Fu L, Cui Z, Li W, Wu Z, Sun S.

Author information: 
(1)College of Basic Medicine, Taishan Medical University, Tai'an, China.

Avian leukosis virus subgroup A (ALV-A) is a retrovirus which infects egg-type
chickens and is the main pathogen of lymphoid leukosis (LL) and myeloid leukosis 
(ML). In order to greatly enhance the diagnosis and treatment of clinical avian
leukemia, two monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) to ALV-A were developed by fusion
between SP2/0 and spleen cells from mice immunized with expressed ALV-A env-gp85 
protein. Using immunofluorescence assay (IFA), two MAbs reacted with ALV-A, but
not with subgroups B and J of ALV. Western blot tests showed that molecular
weight of ALV-A envelope glycoprotein recognized by MAbs was about 53 kD.
Isotyping test revealed that two MAbs (A5C1 and A4C8) were IgG1 isotypes. These
MAbs can be used for diagnosis and epidemiology of ALV-A.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23615298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2013 May 27;52(22):5827-31. doi: 10.1002/anie.201300957. 
Epub 2013 Apr 22.

PdCl2 and N-hydroxyphthalimide co-catalyzed C(sp2)-H hydroxylation by dioxygen
activation.

Yan Y(1), Feng P, Zheng QZ, Liang YF, Lu JF, Cui Y, Jiao N.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, Peking University, Xue
Yuan Rd. 38, Beijing 100191, China.

PMID: 23609931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Monoclon Antib Immunodiagn Immunother. 2013 Apr;32(2):132-5. doi:
10.1089/mab.2012.0103.

Monoclonal antibodies against 24<U+2009>kDa surface antigen of hepatitis B viruses.

Abolhassani M(1), Nejad-Moghaddam A, Modaresi MH.

Author information: 
(1)Hybridoma Laboratory, Department of Immunology, Pasteur Institute of Iran,
Tehran, Iran. mabolhassani@yahoo.com

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is one of the major public health problems
worldwide. Effective control of HBV transmission in areas of high and
intermediate endemicity would not be possible without vaccination of the
vulnerable group. The diagnosis of acute and chronic hepatitis B infection is
based on the detection of hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg). In this study, we 
prepared nine hybridomas that produced monoclonal antibodies specific for HBsAg. 
BALB/c mice were immunized with 24<U+2009>kDa HBsAg and the immune spleen cells were
fused with SP2/0 myeloma cell line. We obtained seven IgG1, one IgM, and one
IgG2b positive clones. The stable hybrids were sub-cloned and ascitic fluid was
prepared in the BALB/c mice. After antibody purification by protein G, the
affinity column was prepared and the pure 24<U+2009>kDa HBsAg from cell extract was
eluted from the column. Western blot analysis showed that all monoclonal
antibodies are specific for 24<U+2009>kDa antigen. Since 24<U+2009>kDa HBsAg is used for
vaccination against hepatitis, these monoclonal antibodies are the best candidate
for the isolation and purification of recombinant HBsAg from yeast expression
vector by affinity column to be used for vaccination.

PMID: 23607349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Case Rep Obstet Gynecol. 2013;2013:386765. doi: 10.1155/2013/386765. Epub 2013
Mar 28.

Acute Transverse Myelitis Associated with Buserelin Use during IVF.

Alleemudder DI(1), Sadek K, Fountain S, Davies S.

Author information: 
(1)Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury SP2 8BJ, UK.

A healthy woman undergoing in vitro fertilization (IVF) developed acute
transverse myelitis (ATM) following the use of Buserelin. ATM has a
multifactorial etiology and may develop as a result of the activation of immune
responses. Infectious agents have been postulated as possible triggers of an
immune response (Sá, 2009). Gonadotropin-releasing agonists may have a similar
role and trigger the acceleration of preexisting disease by the activation of
immune responses (Ho et al., 1995, and Umesaki et al., 1999).

PMCID: PMC3625571
PMID: 23607013  [PubMed]


409. Monoclon Antib Immunodiagn Immunother. 2013 Feb;32(1):21-5. doi:
10.1089/mab.2012.0068.

Immune-tolerizing procedure for preparation of monoclonal antibodies against
glycoprotein E of Pseudorabies virus.

Lu S(1), Xiang M, Dan H, Wu B, Gao Q, Huang H, He Q, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan, PR China.

The glycoprotein E (gE) of pseudorabies virus (PRV) is known to be an important
marker protein in the control and eradication of Aujeszky's disease. In this
study, BALB/c mice were immunized with gE-deleted PRV as tolerogen and with
wild-type PRV as immunogen. The spleen cells from the immunized mice were then
fused with the myeloma cell line Sp2/0. Two hybridoma cell lines that could
stably secrete the monoclonal antibody (MAb) against gE were achieved by using
indirect ELISA screening and subcloning three times; they were named 1D2 and 2B2.
Indirect immunofluorescence assay (IFA) revealed that the MAbs were specifically 
against gE of PRV. MAbs 1D2 and 2B2 were subgroup IgG1. The MAbs obtained in this
study provide useful tools for the development of differential diagnostic methods
for PRV.

PMCID: PMC4014296
PMID: 23600501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 8;8(4):e61288. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061288. Print 2013.

Synergistic activation of innate and adaptive immune mechanisms in the treatment 
of gonadotropin-sensitive tumors.

Bose A(1), Huhtaniemi I, Singh O, Pal R.

Author information: 
(1)Immunoendocrinology Lab, National Institute of Immunology, New Delhi, India.

Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) prolongs the secretion of progesterone from
the corpus luteum, providing a critical stimulus for the sustenance of pregnancy.
hCG (or individual subunits) is also secreted by a variety of trophoblastic and
non-trophoblastic cancers and has been associated with poor prognosis. Early
clinical studies have indicated merit in anti-hCG vaccination as potential
immunotherapy, but anti-tumor efficacy is believed to be compromised by
sub-optimal immunogenecity. In the present study, enhanced tumorigenesis was
observed when SP2/O cells were subcutaneously injected in either male or female
BALB/c x FVB/J(ßhCG/-) F1 transgenic mice, establishing the growth-promoting
effects of the gonadotropin for implanted tumors in vivo. The utility of
Mycobacterium indicus pranii (MIP) was evaluated, as an innate anti-tumor
immunomodulator as well as adjuvant in mice. MIP elicited the secretion of the
inflammatory cytokines IFN<U+03B3>, IL-6, IL-12p40, KC and TNFa from murine antigen
presenting cells. When MIP was incorporated into an anti-hCG vaccine formulation 
previously employed in humans (a ßhCG-TT conjugate adsorbed on alum), elevated T 
cell recall proliferative and cytokine responses to hCG, ßhCG and TT were
observed. MIP increased vaccine immunogenicity in mice of diverse genetic
background (including in traditionally low-responder murine strains), leading to 
enhanced titres of bioneutralizing anti-hCG antibodies which exhibited
cytotoxicity towards tumor cells. Individual administration of MIP and ßhCG-TT to
BALB/c mice subcutaneously implanted with SP2/O cells resulted in anti-tumor
effects; significantly, immunization with ßhCG-TT supplemented with MIP invoked
synergistic benefits in terms of tumor volume, incidence and survival. The
development of novel vaccine formulations stimulating both adaptive and innate
anti-tumor immunity to induce collaborative beneficial effects may fill a niche
in the adjunct treatment of hCG-sensitive tumors that are resistant to
conventional therapy.

PMCID: PMC3620410
PMID: 23593454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Phys Rev Lett. 2013 Apr 12;110(15):156803. Epub 2013 Apr 9.

Theory of carbomorph cycles.

Shklyaev OE(1), Mockensturm E(1), Crespi VH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical and Nuclear Engineering, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802-6300, USA. (2)Department of
Physics and Materials Research Institute, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, Pennsylvania 16802-6300, USA.

We present a theory of a reversibly deforming sp2-carbon-based system controlled 
by competing strain, surface, and electrostatic energies, a carbomorph. For
example, external forces (such as electrostatic, chemical, interfacial) could
convert a bistable carbon nanotube between the collapsed and inflated states.
Such a system could operate as a voltage-controlled constant-force spring, a
charge-controlled harmonic spring, or an electromechanical engine or generator
(with linear stroke up to few microns) driven across a propagating
quasi-one-dimensional structural phase transition.

PMID: 25167297  [PubMed]


412. J Am Chem Soc. 2013 Apr 17;135(15):5921-9. doi: 10.1021/ja402552h. Epub 2013 Apr 
8.

Controlling the effective surface area and pore size distribution of sp2 carbon
materials and their impact on the capacitance performance of these materials.

Zhang L(1), Yang X, Zhang F, Long G, Zhang T, Leng K, Zhang Y, Huang Y, Ma Y,
Zhang M, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory for Functional Polymer Materials and Centre for Nanoscale
Science and Technology, Institute of Polymer Chemistry, College of Chemistry,
Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China.

A series of sp(2) carbon materials with different specific surface area (SSA) and
controlled pore size distribution (PSD) were synthesized at large scale through a
facile and low-cost method. The SSA and PSD of these carbon materials were
controlled by using different carbon sources and preparation methods. With
different total and effective SSA (E-SSA) and PSD, the impacts on their
capacitance performance were investigated thoroughly, which demonstrated that
both E-SSA and PSD played the most important roles in their capacitance
performance. Furthermore, theoretical modeling was performed, and the results are
in agreement with the experimental results for the influence of E-SSA and PSD on 
their capacitance performance. Based on these, a general model using the
slit/cylindrical NL-DFT approach is proposed for the estimation of the specific
capacitance of sp(2) carbon materials, which offers a simple but reliable method 
to predict the capacitance performance of these materials, thus speeding up the
design and screening of the materials for high-performance supercapacitor and
other surface area related devices.

PMID: 23565654  [PubMed]


413. J Org Chem. 2013 Apr 19;78(8):3636-46. doi: 10.1021/jo400162d. Epub 2013 Apr 2.

Copper-catalyzed aerobic C(sp2)-H functionalization for C-N bond formation:
synthesis of pyrazoles and indazoles.

Li X(1), He L, Chen H, Wu W, Jiang H.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, South China University of
Technology, Guangzhou 510640, P. R. China.

A simple, practical, and highly efficient synthesis of pyrazoles and indazoles
via copper-catalyzed direct aerobic oxidative C(sp(2))-H amination has been
reported herein. This process tolerated a variety of functional groups under mild
conditions. Further diversification of pyrazoles was also investigated, which
provided its potential for drug discovery.

PMID: 23547954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Zhonghua Kou Qiang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Jan;48(1):50-2.

[The masseter inhibitory reflex and the recovery of the reflex after magnetic
stimulation in normal subjects].

[Article in Chinese]

Huang H(1), Song YH, Wang JJ, Guo Q, Liu WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Prosthodontics, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the masseter inhibitory reflex (MIR) and the recovery cycle
of the MIR reflex after magnetic stimulation in normal subjects.
METHODS: In 30 healthy subjects we studied the MIR evoked by single magnetic
stimulation in the mental territory. Masseter electromyographic activity, latency
and duration of the early silent periods (SP1) and late silent periods (SP2), and
SP2 amplitude percent were recorded. Paired stimuli technique was used,
conditioning and test stimuli were delivered at different interstimulus intervals
(ISI), ie.100, 200, 300, 400, 500, and 600 ms, then the recovery cycle of the MIR
was analyzed.
RESULTS: Latency of SP1 was 12.1 (11.1, 14.4) ms, and duration of the SP1 was
(17.3 ± 2.9) ms. Latency of SP2 was (47.7 ± 6.0) ms, and duration of the SP2 was 
(39.7 ± 13.3) ms. SP2 amplitude percent was 100.0%. With the paired stimuli
technique, SP1 of the inhibitory reflex evoked by the test stimuli was found to
be stable at every ISIs, but SP2 of the inhibitory reflex evoked by the test
stimuli, instead, varied according to different ISI. With the short ISI, the area
of SP2 evoked by the test stimuli was reduced, and with the increase of the ISI, 
the recovery degree of the area of SP2 evoked by the test stimuli was ascending, 
at 100 ms the SP2 amplitude percent was 17.1%, at 400 ms it was 93.4%, and it was
close to 100% at 600 ms.
CONCLUSIONS: The study indicates that the use of the MIR elicited by the single
and paired magnetic stimulation may be useful to examine or quantify some
craniofacial diseases.

PMID: 23534523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Org Lett. 2013 Apr 5;15(7):1784-7. doi: 10.1021/ol400690t. Epub 2013 Mar 27.

Palladium-catalyzed diarylmethyl C(sp3)-C(sp2) bond formation: a new coupling
approach toward triarylmethanes.

Xia Y(1), Hu F, Liu Z, Qu P, Ge R, Ma C, Zhang Y, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing National Laboratory of Molecular Sciences (BNLMS), College of
Chemistry, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

Palladium-catalyzed reductive coupling reactions between N-tosylhydrazones and
aryl halides lead to the formation of C(sp(3))-C(sp(2)) bonds. This approach
provides a general route for the synthesis of triarylmethanes.

PMID: 23534368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. ACS Nano. 2013 Apr 23;7(4):3045-52. doi: 10.1021/nn305922u. Epub 2013 Apr 4.

Delaminated graphene at silicon carbide facets: atomic scale imaging and
spectroscopy.

Nicotra G(1), Ramasse QM, Deretzis I, La Magna A, Spinella C, Giannazzo F.

Author information: 
(1)CNR-IMM, Strada VIII, 5, 95121 Catania, Italy.

Atomic-resolution structural and spectroscopic characterization techniques
(scanning transmission electron microscopy and electron energy loss spectroscopy)
are combined with nanoscale electrical measurements (conductive atomic force
microscopy) to study at the atomic scale the properties of graphene grown
epitaxially through the controlled graphitization of a hexagonal SiC(0001)
substrate by high temperature annealing. This growth technique is known to result
in a pronounced electron-doping (~10(13) cm(-2)) of graphene, which is thought to
originate from an interface carbon buffer layer strongly bound to the substrate. 
The scanning transmission electron microscopy analysis, carried out at an energy 
below the knock-on threshold for carbon to ensure no damage is imparted to the
film by the electron beam, demonstrates that the buffer layer present on the
planar SiC(0001) face delaminates from it on the (112n) facets of SiC surface
steps. In addition, electron energy loss spectroscopy reveals that the
delaminated layer has a similar electronic configuration to purely sp2-hybridized
graphene. These observations are used to explain the local increase of the
graphene sheet resistance measured around the surface steps by conductive atomic 
force microscopy, which we suggest is due to significantly lower
substrate-induced doping and a resonant scattering mechanism at the step regions.
A first-principles-calibrated theoretical model is proposed to explain the
structural instability of the buffer layer on the SiC facets and the resulting
delamination.

PMID: 23530467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Chem Soc Rev. 2013 Jul 7;42(13):5744-67. doi: 10.1039/c3cs60020c.

sp2 C-H bond activation in water and catalytic cross-coupling reactions.

Li B(1), Dixneuf PH.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 6226 CNRS-Université Rennes1, Institut des Sciences Chimiques de Rennes,
Centre of Catalysis and Green Chemistry-Organometallics, Materials and Catalysis,
35042 Rennes, France.

The metal-catalysed successive activation and functionalisation of sp(2) C-H
bonds is the at heart of synthetic innovations for the development of C-C bond
cross-coupling processes. Against expectation catalytic C-H bond transformations 
can be performed in water as an available, renewable, safe solvent but most
importantly as a partner improving the catalyst activity. The objective of the
review is to present the catalytic successes for C-H bond transformations in
water, discovered mainly during the last six years and involving mostly palladium
and ruthenium catalysts, often with the help of a carboxylate partner for the
initial key C-H bond deprotonation. Water is beneficial for the direct catalytic 
arylation with (hetero)aryl halides of functional arene ortho C-H bonds with
pyridine, pyrazole, oxazoline, imine, urea, amide directing groups leading to
functional biaryl derivatives, polyheterocycles and polydentate ligands.
Metal-catalysed activation of the sp(2) C-H bond in water also allows the
cross-coupling reaction of two different C-H bonds in the presence of an oxidant 
and regioselective alkenylations of arenes, heterocycles and functional alkenes
are now controlled. Annulation reactions via insertion of alkynes into both
activated C-H and heteroatom-hydrogen bonds in water constitute new routes to
heterocycles.

PMID: 23525331  [PubMed]


418. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2013 Apr 10;5(7):2535-9. doi: 10.1021/am3031129. Epub 
2013 Mar 22.

Origin of rectification in boron nitride heterojunctions to silicon.

Teii K(1), Hori T, Mizusako Y, Matsumoto S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Science for Electronics and Materials, Interdisciplinary
Graduate School of Engineering Sciences, Kyushu University, Kasuga, Fukuoka
816-8580, Japan. teii@asem.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Cubic and hexagonal boron nitride (cBN and hBN) heterojunctions to n-type Si are 
fabricated under low-energy ion bombardment by inductively coupled
plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition using the chemistry of fluorine. The
sp2-bonded BN/Si heterojunction shows no rectification, while the cBN/sp2BN/Si
heterojunction has rectification properties analogue to typical p-n junction
diodes despite a large thickness (~130 nm) of the sp2BN interlayer. The
current-voltage characteristics at temperatures up to 573 K are governed by
thermal excitation of carriers, and mostly described with the ideal diode
equation and the Frenkel-Poole emission model at low and high bias voltages,
respectively. The rectification in the cBN/sp2BN/Si heterojunction is caused by a
bias-dependent change in the barrier height for holes arising from stronger
p-type conduction in the cBN layer and enhanced with the thick sp2BN interlayer
for impeding the reverse current flow at defect levels mainly associated with
grain boundaries.

PMID: 23521160  [PubMed]


419. ACS Nano. 2013 Apr 23;7(4):3607-15. doi: 10.1021/nn400588u. Epub 2013 Apr 1.

Nitrogen-doped partially reduced graphene oxide rewritable nonvolatile memory.

Seo S(1), Yoon Y, Lee J, Park Y, Lee H.

Author information: 
(1)National Creative Research Initiative, Center for Smart Molecular Memory,
Department of Chemistry, Sungkyunkwan University, 300 Cheoncheon-dong, Jangan-gu,
Suwon, Gyeonggi-do 440-746, Korea.

As memory materials, two-dimensional (2D) carbon materials such as graphene oxide
(GO)-based materials have attracted attention due to a variety of advantageous
attributes, including their solution-processability and their potential for
highly scalable device fabrication for transistor-based memory and cross-bar
memory arrays. In spite of this, the use of GO-based materials has been limited, 
primarily due to uncontrollable oxygen functional groups. To induce the stable
memory effect by ionic charges of a negatively charged carboxylic acid group of
partially reduced graphene oxide (PrGO), a positively charged pyridinium N that
served as a counterion to the negatively charged carboxylic acid was carefully
introduced on the PrGO framework. Partially reduced N-doped graphene oxide
(PrGODMF) in dimethylformamide (DMF) behaved as a semiconducting nonvolatile
memory material. Its optical energy band gap was 1.7-2.1 eV and contained a sp2
C-C framework with 45-50% oxygen-functionalized carbon density and 3% doped
nitrogen atoms. In particular, rewritable nonvolatile memory characteristics were
dependent on the proportion of pyridinum N, and as the proportion of pyridinium N
atom decreased, the PrGODMF film lost memory behavior. Polarization of charged
PrGODMF containing pyridinium N and carboxylic acid under an electric field
produced N-doped PrGODMF memory effects that followed voltage-driven
rewrite-read-erase-read processes.

PMID: 23521146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Langmuir. 2013 Apr 16;29(15):4839-46. doi: 10.1021/la4000846. Epub 2013 Apr 2.

Carbon-binding designer proteins that discriminate between sp2- and
sp3-hybridized carbon surfaces.

Coyle BL(1), Rolandi M, Baneyx F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington 98195-1750, United States.

Robust and simple strategies to directly functionalize graphene- and
diamond-based nanostructures with proteins are of considerable interest for
biologically-driven manufacturing, biosensing, and bioimaging. Here, we identify 
a new set of carbon-binding peptides that vary in overall hydrophobicity and
charge and engineer two of these sequences (Car9 and Car15) within the framework 
of E. coli thioredoxin 1 (TrxA). We develop purification schemes to recover the
resulting TrxA derivatives in a soluble form and conduct a detailed analysis of
the mechanisms that underpin the interaction of the fusion proteins with
carbonaceous surfaces. Although equilibrium quartz crystal microbalance
measurements show that TrxA::Car9 and TrxA::Car15 have similar affinities for
sp(2)-hybridized graphitic carbon (Kd = 50 and 90 nM, respectively), only the
latter protein is capable of dispersing carbon nanotubes. Further investigation
by surface plasmon resonance and atomic force microscopy reveals that TrxA::Car15
interacts with sp(2)-bonded carbon through a combination of hydrophobic and p-p
interactions but that TrxA::Car9 exhibits a cooperative mode of binding that
relies on a combination of electrostatics and weaker p stacking. Consequently, we
find that TrxA::Car9 binds equally well to sp(2)- and sp(3)-bonded (diamondlike) 
carbon particles whereas TrxA::Car15 is capable of discriminating between the two
carbon allotropes. Our results emphasize the importance of understanding both
bulk and molecular recognition events when exploiting the adhesive properties of 
solid-binding peptides and proteins in technological applications.

PMCID: PMC3658162
PMID: 23510486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. J Pharm Biomed Anal. 2013 May 5;78-79:154-60. doi: 10.1016/j.jpba.2013.02.010.
Epub 2013 Feb 20.

Production and characterization of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) against human
serum albumin (HSA) for the development of an immunoaffinity system with oriented
anti-HSA mAbs as immobilized ligand.

Rajak P(1), Vijayalakshmi MA, Jayaprakash NS.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Bioseparation Technology, VIT University, Vellore-632014, Tamil
Nadu, India.

Proteins present in human serum are of immense importance in the field of
biomarker discovery. But, the presence of high-abundant proteins like albumin
makes the analysis more challenging because of masking effect on low-abundant
proteins. Therefore, removal of albumin using highly specific monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs) can potentiate the discovery of low-abundant proteins. In the
present study, mAbs against human serum albumin (HSA) were developed and
integrated in to an immunoaffinity based system for specific removal of albumin
from the serum. Hybridomas were obtained by fusion of Sp2/0 mouse myeloma cells
with spleen cells from the mouse immunized with HSA. Five clones (AHSA1-5)
producing mAbs specific to HSA were established and characterized by enzyme
linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and immunoblotting for specificity,
sensitivity and affinity in terms of antigen binding. The mAbs were able to bind 
to both native albumin as well as its glycated isoform. Reactivity of mAbs with
different mammalian sera was tested. The affinity constant of the mAbs ranged
from 10(8) to 10(9)M(-1). An approach based on oriented immobilization was
followed to immobilize purified anti-HSA mAbs on hydrazine activated agarose gel 
and the dynamic binding capacity of the column was determined.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23499914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Am J Ophthalmol. 2013 Jun;155(6):991-999.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.ajo.2013.01.016. Epub
2013 Mar 15.

Myopia-related fundus changes in Singapore adults with high myopia.

Chang L(1), Pan CW, Ohno-Matsui K, Lin X, Cheung GC, Gazzard G, Koh V, Hamzah H, 
Tai ES, Lim SC, Mitchell P, Young TL, Aung T, Wong TY, Saw SM.

Author information: 
(1)Duke Eye Center, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA.

PURPOSE: To examine the pattern of myopia-related macular and optic disc changes 
in Singapore adults with high myopia (spherical equivalent =-6.00 diopters).
DESIGN: Asian adults with high myopia from 3 population-based surveys.
METHODS: Adults 40 years and older (n = 359) with high myopia were pooled from 3 
population-based surveys in Singapore Asians: (1) the Singapore Prospective Study
Program (SP2, n = 184); (2) the Singapore Malay Eye Study (SiMES, n = 98); and
(3) the Singapore Indian Eye Study (SINDI, n = 77). All study participants
underwent standardized refraction and fundus photography, and SiMES and SINDI
subjects also completed ocular biometry measurements. Myopia-related macular
(posterior staphyloma, lacquer cracks, Fuchs spot, myopic chorioretinal atrophy, 
and myopic choroidal neovascularization) and optic disc (optic nerve head tilt,
optic disc dimensions, and peripapillary atrophy) changes were evaluated.
RESULTS: The most common myopia-related macular finding in adults with high
myopia was staphyloma (23%), followed by chorioretinal atrophy (19.3%). There
were few cases of lacquer crack (n = 6, 1.8%), T-sign (n = 6, 1.8%), retinal
hemorrhage (n = 3, 0.9%), active myopic choroidal neovascularization (n = 3,
0.9%), and no case of Fuchs spot. The most common disc finding associated with
high myopia was peripapillary atrophy (81.2%), followed by disc tilt (57.4%).
Staphyloma and chorioretinal atrophy increased in prevalence with increasing age,
increasing myopic refractive error, and increasing axial length (all P < .001).
Ethnicity comparisons demonstrated the highest proportion of staphyloma (P = .04)
among Malays, the highest proportion of peripapillary atrophy (P = .01) and disc 
tilt (P < .001) among Chinese, and the largest cup-to-disc ratio (P < .001) among
Indians.
CONCLUSIONS: Staphyloma and chorioretinal atrophy lesions were the most common
fundus findings among Asian adults with high myopia. In this population, tilted
discs and peripapillary atrophy were also common, while choroidal
neovascularization and Fuchs spot were rare. In contrast with Singapore
teenagers, in whom tilted disc and peripapillary atrophy were common while
staphyloma and chorioretinal atrophy were rare, pathologic myopia appears to be
dependent on the duration of disease and, thus, age of the individual.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23499368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2013 Apr 10;5(7):2725-32. doi: 10.1021/am4003183. Epub
2013 Apr 1.

Influence of silver incorporation on the structural and electrical properties of 
diamond-like carbon thin films.

Dwivedi N(1), Kumar S, Carey JD, Tripathi RK, Malik HK, Dalai MK.

Author information: 
(1)National Physical Laboratory (CSIR), K.S. Krishnan Road, New Delhi 110 012,
India. neerajdwivedi6@gmail.com

A simple approach is proposed for obtaining low threshold field electron emission
from large area diamond-like carbon (DLC) thin films by sandwiching either Ag
dots or a thin Ag layer between DLC and nitrogen-containing DLC films. The
introduction of silver and nitrogen is found to reduce the threshold field for
emission to under 6 V/µm representing a near 46% reduction when compared with
unmodified films. The reduction in the threshold field is correlated with the
morphology, microstructure, interface, and bonding environment of the films. We
find modifications to the structure of the DLC films through promotion of
metal-induced sp2 bonding and the introduction of surface asperities, which
significantly reduce the value of the threshold field. This can lead to the
next-generation, large-area simple and inexpensive field emission devices.

PMID: 23488991  [PubMed]


424. J Pharm Pharmacol. 2013 Apr;65(4):574-81. doi: 10.1111/jphp.12022. Epub 2013 Jan 
10.

Comparative pharmacokinetics of a tumour-targeting therapy candidate
rh-IFNa2a-NGR with rh-IFNa2a administered intravenously in mice and rats.

Wang XX(1), Lu L, Song CL, Qian WN, Zhang SY, Zhang YQ, Wu YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Integrative Traditional & Western Medicine, Lanzhou University,
Lanzhou, Gansu, China.

OBJECTIVES: rh-IFNa2a-NGR is a promising anti-tumor candidate. The aim of present
study was to compare pharmacokinetics of rh-IFNa2a-NGR with rh-IFNa2a.
METHODS: Pharmacokinetics and elimination were investigated after intravenous
administration to mice and rats. Compared tumor and tissue distribution profiles 
between rh-IFNa2a-NGR and rh-IFNa2a were illustrated in the tumor transplanted
mice of SP2/0 myeloma. Double antibody sandwich ELISA method was used to assess
the level of both rh-IFNa2a-NGR and rh-IFNa2a in serum, tissue, bile and urine.
KEY FINDINGS: After a single intravenous administration, the pharmacokinetic
characters of rh-IFNa2a-NGR and rh-IFNa2a were described using a two-compartment 
model. No significant differences were observed between the two drugs in
pharmacokinetic and elimination data. However, the concentration of rh-IFNa2a-NGR
in tumor was 5.34 times and 1.52 times as high as that of rh-IFNa2a at 0.5<U+2009>h
(P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01) and 1<U+2009>h. In addition, immunohistochemical stain displayed
rh-IFNa2a-NGR was predominantly located in tumor vascular tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: rh-IFNa2a-NGR could be an agent for tumor vascular-targeting therapy
and these findings provided references for further clinical study.

© 2013 The Authors. JPP © 2013. Royal Pharmaceutical Society.

PMID: 23488787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Methods Mol Biol. 2013;988:93-113. doi: 10.1007/978-1-62703-327-5_7.

Cetuximab Fab and Fc N-glycan fast characterization using IdeS digestion and
liquid chromatography coupled to electrospray ionization mass spectrometry.

Janin-Bussat MC(1), Tonini L, Huillet C, Colas O, Klinguer-Hamour C, Corvaïa N,
Beck A.

Author information: 
(1)Physico-Chemistry Department, Centre d'Immunologie Pierre-Fabre, Saint
Julien-en-Genevois, France.

Antibodies and related products represent one of the fastest growing areas of new
drug development within the pharmaceutical industry. Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs)
undergo many posttranslational modifications (PTMs) that must be extensively
characterized. Here we described a rapid mass spectrometry (MS) method for the
characterization of cetuximab glycosylation. The reported analytical technique is
based on the use of a cystein protease, immunoglobulin-degrading enzyme of
Streptococcus pyogenes that allows a fast limited proteolysis of the mAb with low
material consumption. The resulting large fragments are analyzed by
ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography combined to an electrospray
ionization mass spectrometer and a time-of-flight analyzer (ESI-TOF). Cetuximab
is a potent chimeric mouse/human antibody worldwide approved for the treatment of
colon and head and neck cancers. This antibody, produced by SP2/0 murine myeloma 
cells, is N-glycosylated both in the Fc and Fab moieties, which have been shown
to impact on safety and PK/PD and considered as a critical quality attribute. The
method can also be applied for biosimilars, biobetters, and next-generation
antibodies and Fc-fusion proteins.

PMID: 23475716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2013 Sep 1;132(1-2):202-6. doi:
10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2013.02.004. Epub 2013 Mar 7.

Hazardous drinking and its association with homelessness among veterans in care.

Ghose T(1), Fiellin DA, Gordon AJ, Metraux S, Goetz MB, Blackstock O, McInnes K, 
Rodriguez-Barradas MC, Justice AC.

Author information: 
(1)School of Social Policy & Practice, D17 Caster, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19130, United States. toorjo@sp2.upenn.edu

BACKGROUND: While scholarship on alcohol use and homelessness has focused on the 
impact of alcohol abuse and dependence, little is known about the effects of
lower levels of misuse such as hazardous use. Veterans receiving care in the
Department of Veterans Affairs Health Care System (VA) constitute a population
that is vulnerable to alcohol misuse and homelessness. This research examines the
effects of hazardous drinking on homelessness in the Veterans Aging Cohort Study,
a sample of 2898 older veterans (mean age=50.2), receiving care in 8 VAs across
the country.
METHODS: Logistic regression models examined the associations between (1)
hazardous drinking at baseline and homelessness at 1-year follow-up, (2)
transitions into and out of hazardous drinking from baseline to follow-up and
homelessness at follow-up, and (3) transitioning to hazardous drinking and
transitioning to homelessness from baseline to follow-up during that same
time-period.
RESULTS: After controlling for other correlates including alcohol dependence,
hazardous drinking at baseline increased the risk of homelessness at follow-up
(adjusted odds ratio [AOR]=1.39, 95% confidence interval [CI]=1.02, 1.88).
Transitioning to hazardous drinking more than doubled the risk of homelessness at
follow-up (AOR=2.42, 95% CI=1.41, 4.15), while more than doubling the risk of
transitioning from being housed at baseline to being homeless at follow-up
(AOR=2.49, 95% CI=1.30, 4.79).
CONCLUSIONS: Early intervention that seeks to prevent transitioning into
hazardous drinking could increase housing stability among veterans. Brief
interventions which have been shown to be effective at lower levels of alcohol
use should be implemented with veterans in VA care.

Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 23474200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Vet Parasitol. 2013 May 20;194(2-4):179-82. doi: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2013.01.050.
Epub 2013 Feb 5.

Identification of the differentially expressed genes in SP2/0 myeloma cells from 
Balb/c mice infected with Trichinella spiralis.

Deng B(1), Gong P, Li J, Cheng B, Ren W, Yang J, Li H, Zhang G, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University, 5333
Xi'an Road, Changchun 130062, China.

To study the molecular mechanism of suppressed growth caused by Trichinella
spiralis, an SP2/0 myeloma model was established using parasite-infected Balb/c
mice. Suppression subtractive hybridization (SSH) was then utilized to identify
differentially expressed genes between tumor cells from the infected and
non-infected mice. On the 11th day after infection, 2 × 10(6) SP2/0 myeloma cells
were subcutaneously inoculated into 6-8 week old female Balb/c mice in both the
experimental and control groups. Twenty-eight days after tumor cell inoculation, 
the mice were euthanized and the sizes and weights of the tumors were measured.
Messenger RNA was isolated and used to perform SSH. Putative differentially
expressed genes were identified, sequenced and analyzed by BLASTn. Among the
sequences detected which ranged in size between 180 and 850 bp, genes encoding
RpL41, NKTR, Rbbp4 and ANXA2 were enriched and considered possible proteins
involved in tumor growth inhibition.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23473833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Org Lett. 2013 Apr 5;15(7):1428-31. doi: 10.1021/ol4000026. Epub 2013 Mar 8.

Catalytic carbon insertion into the ß-vinyl C-H bond of cyclic enones with alkyl 
diazoacetates.

Lee SI(1), Kang BC, Hwang GS, Ryu do H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, 440-746, Korea.

The first example of the boron Lewis acid catalyzed C(sp2)-H functionalization of
cyclic enones was achieved using diazoacetates. The insertion of the carbon atom 
of diazoacetates utilizes BF3Et2O or a newly designed oxazaborolidinium ion as a
catalyst to afford ß-functionalized cyclic enones from simple cyclic enones in a 
single step and high yields. The reaction mechanism was investigated with
deuterium labeled 2-cyclohexen-1-one.

PMID: 23472942  [PubMed]


429. Vet Parasitol. 2013 May 20;194(2-4):183-5. doi: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2013.01.051.
Epub 2013 Feb 5.

Identification of a novel gene product expressed by Trichinella spiralis that
binds antiserum to Sp2/0 myeloma cells.

Duan L(1), Li J, Cheng B, Lv Q, Gong PT, Su LB, Cai Y, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University, 5333
Xi'an Road, Changchun 130062, China.

To obtain novel antigen genes for use as an anti-tumor vaccine, a Trichinella
spiralis cDNA expression library was constructed from muscle larvae RNA and
screened with sera from Balb/C mice injected with Sp2/0 myeloma cells. One
positive clone was obtained after three rounds of immunoscreening of the cDNA
expression library and was subsequently excised in vivo using the ExAssist helper
phage with SOLR strain. A full-length gene was amplified using 5'-RACE technology
and analyzed by BLAST, Protein Analysis System of ELM, and DNAStar Software. The 
sequencing results showed that the fragment was 569 bp in length and contained an
open reading frame. It was predicted that the full-length gene encoded 136 amino 
acids. This gene, TS2, contained four putative N-Arg dibasic convertase
(nardilysine) cleavage sites, one peptide C-terminal amidation site, and one
glycosaminoglycan attachment site. Six antibody epitopes were predicted by
bioinformatic analysis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23465747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Org Lett. 2013 Mar 15;15(6):1402-5. doi: 10.1021/ol4003948. Epub 2013 Mar 5.

Pd-catalyzed tandem sp2-sp3 coupling reactions of chiral stannolanes: an
efficient preparation of optically active tetrahydrobenz[f]isoindoles.

Kamimura A(1), So M, Ishikawa S, Uno H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Molecular Bioscience, Yamaguchi University, Ube,
755-8611, Japan. ak10@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp

A novel double Migita-Kosugi-Stille coupling reaction with dihydrostannolanes,
which are readily available from a radical cascade reaction, was achieved with
dihalobenzenes in the presence of a palladium catalyst. Use of unsymmetrical
1-bromo-2-iodobenzene derivatives accomplished the double coupling reaction which
gave tetrahydrobenz[f]isoindoles in a regioselective manner.

PMID: 23461269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. J Chem Inf Model. 2013 Apr 22;53(4):773-82. doi: 10.1021/ci300482n. Epub 2013 Mar
25.

Developing descriptors to predict mechanical properties of nanotubes.

Borders TL(1), Fonseca AF, Zhang H, Cho K, Rusinko A 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of North Texas, Denton, Texas 76203, USA. 
tammie.l.borders@gmail.com

Descriptors and quantitative structure property relationships (QSPR) were
investigated for mechanical property prediction of carbon nanotubes (CNTs). 78
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations were carried out, and 20 descriptors were
calculated to build quantitative structure property relationships (QSPRs) for
Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio in two separate analyses: vacancy only and
vacancy plus methyl functionalization. In the first analysis, C(N2)/C(T) (number 
of non-sp2 hybridized carbons per the total carbons) and chiral angle were
identified as critical descriptors for both Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio. 
Further analysis and literature findings indicate the effect of chiral angle is
negligible at larger CNT radii for both properties. Raman spectroscopy can be
used to measure C(N2)/C(T), providing a direct link between experimental and
computational results. Poisson's ratio approaches two different limiting values
as CNT radii increases: 0.23-0.25 for chiral and armchair CNTs and 0.10 for
zigzag CNTs (surface defects <3%). In the second analysis, the critical
descriptors were C(N2)/C(T), chiral angle, and M(N)/C(T) (number of methyl groups
per total carbons). These results imply new types of defects can be represented
as a new descriptor in QSPR models. Finally, results are qualified and quantified
against experimental data.

PMID: 23452005  [PubMed]


432. J Org Chem. 2013 Apr 19;78(8):4177-83. doi: 10.1021/jo400221x. Epub 2013 Mar 13.

Synthesis of heteroarylated polyfluorobiphenyls via palladium-catalyzed
sequential sp2 C-H bonds functionalizations.

Yan T(1), Chen L, Bruneau C, Dixneuf PH, Doucet H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut des Sciences Chimiques de Rennes, UMR 6226 CNRS-Université de Rennes 
Centre of Catalysis and Green Chemistry, Campus de Beaulieu, 35042 Rennes,
France.

The higher reactivity of C5-H bonds of heteroarenes as compared to C-H bonds of
bromopolyfluorobenzenes for palladium-catalyzed direct arylation allows the
selective synthesis of the polyfluoroaryl-heteroarenes in moderate to high
yields, without C-H bond functionalization of the polyfluorobenzene ring. In most
cases, low loading of Pd(OAc)2 catalyst (0.5-1 mol %) was employed. Then, from
these heteroarylated polyfluorobenzenes, the palladium-catalyzed C-H bond
functionalization of the polyfluorobenzene ring allows the synthesis of
heteroarylated polyfluorobiphenyls.

PMID: 23445271  [PubMed]


433. BJU Int. 2013 May;111(5):811-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-410X.2012.11691.x. Epub 2013 
Feb 19.

Tamm-Horsfall protein-associated nucleotides in patients with interstitial
cystitis.

Argade S(1), Shaw T, Su Y, Parsons CL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Urology, University of California (UC) San Diego Health System,
San Diego, CA 92103-8897, USA.

WHAT'S KNOWN ON THE SUBJECT? AND WHAT DOES THE STUDY ADD?: The nucleotides
associated with Tamm-Horsfall protein (THP) identified in this study are 2'(3')
isomers, which are uncommon and very little is known about their biochemical
pathway and role in interstitial cystitis (IC). The current study provides
additional evidence of our earlier finding that THP is abnormal in IC patients.
This can adversely affect THP's protective function, and suggests that THP plays 
a role in the pathogenesis of the disease.OBJECTIVE: To identify and characterise
Tamm-Horsfall protein (THP)-associated metabolites present in patients with
interstitial cystitis (IC). Identification of these metabolites would give us
insight into the complex interaction of THP with urinary metabolites and its
effect on the protective function of THP.
PATIENTS, SUBJECTS AND METHODS: THP was isolated from the urine specimens of 146 
patients with IC and 87 control subjects, and was analysed for total sialic acid 
(SA) content by 1,2-diamino-4,5-methylenedioxybenzene. 2HCl (DMB)-high
performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). THP-associated metabolites were
isolated by Superdex-200 size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) as a second peak
(SP2) and the SP2 was further fractionated into six major components by C18
reverse phase-HPLC. Ion-pair HPLC analysis was performed to identify and quantify
THP-associated metabolites. The metabolite structures were confirmed by
reversed-phase HPLC combined with electrospray ionization (ESI), liquid
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS and LC-MS/MS) and by
high-resolution ESI-time of flight mass spectrometry (HR-ESI-TOFMS).
RESULTS: The THP-associated metabolites (SP2) were more prevalent in patients
with IC than in the controls (40.4% vs 12.6%, P < 0.001) as determined by
Superdex-200 SEC. Superdex-200 SEC showed higher SP2 content in patients with IC 
than in controls, as determined by area under the peak/100<U+2009>µg of THP. The mean
(sem), for patients was 84.3 (8.1) vs 18.0 (2.4) milli-absorption unit*min, for
controls (P < 0.001). Total SA content of THP was much lower in SP2-positive
patients with IC than those who were SP2-negative. The mean (sem) was 41.6 (3.2) 
vs 92.6 (2.2)<U+2009>nmol/mg THP, respectively (P < 0.001). Ion-pair HPLC identified SP2
metabolites as nucleotides, namely 5'-CMP, 3'-UMP, 3'-AMP, 3'-GMP, 2'-AMP and
2'-GMP. The total nucleotide content of SP2 was significantly higher in patients 
with IC than in controls. The mean (sem) was 25.3 (2.9) vs 2.2 (0.2) µg/mg THP,
respectively (P < 0.001). LC-MS and LC-MS/MS confirmed the nucleotides based on
retention time on HPLC, and mass to charge ratio (m/z) of the parent ion and the 
daughter ions. HR-ESI-TOFMS gave further confimation of the nucleotide sturctures
with high mass accuracy.
CONCLUSIONS: In the THP of patients with IC, there is a direct correlation
between reduced SA levels and high prevalence of nucleotides associated with it. 
The THP of patients with IC has a much higher content of these nucleotides than
control, and these unique nucleotide isomers identified are very consistent in
all SP2-positive patients with IC, suggesting biological significance. This study
provides additional evidence that THP is abnormal in patients with IC.

© 2013 BJU International.

PMID: 23421394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. J Phys Chem Lett. 2013 Feb 21;4(4):561-7. doi: 10.1021/jz302000q. Epub 2013 Jan
31.

Exploration of Structures of Two-Dimensional Boron-Silicon Compounds with sp(2)
Silicon.

Dai J(1), Zhao Y(1), Wu X(2), Yang J(3), Zeng XC(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Nebraska Center for Materials and Nanoscience,
University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska 68588, United States. (2)CAS
Key Lab of Materials for Energy Conversion, Department of Materials Science and
Engineering and Hefei National Lab for Physical Science at Microscale, University
of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230026, China. (3)§Department of
Chemical Physics and Hefei National Lab for Physical Science at Microscale,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230026, China.

The most stable structures of two-dimensional (2D) boron-silicon (B-Si) compounds
containing planar sp(2)-bonding silicon (sp(2)-Si) are explored using the
first-principles calculation-based particle-swarm optimization method. Among 10
B-Si compounds considered, we find that for BSi4, BSi3, BSi, B2Si, B3Si, B5Si,
and B6Si, each Si atom is bonded with three B or Si atoms within the same plane, 
representing a preference of planar sp(2)-Si structure in B-Si compounds. For
BSi2 and B4Si, the predicted lowest-energy structures entail a small out-of-plane
buckling. Furthermore, a planar-tetracoordinated Si (ptSi) atom bonded with four 
B atoms within the same plane is observed in the lowest-energy structure of B7Si 
compound. Dynamical stabilities of the predicted 10 2D B-Si compounds are
confirmed via phonon-spectrum calculation. The lowest-energy 2D B-Si compounds
are all metals, regardless of the B-Si stoichiometry considered in this study.

PMID: 26281866  [PubMed]


435. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2013 Mar 25;52(13):3638-41. doi: 10.1002/anie.201210029. 
Epub 2013 Feb 18.

Synthesis of oxindoles by iron-catalyzed oxidative 1,2-alkylarylation of
activated alkenes with an aryl C(sp2)-H bond and a C(sp3)-H bond adjacent to a
heteroatom.

Wei WT(1), Zhou MB, Fan JH, Liu W, Song RJ, Liu Y, Hu M, Xie P, Li JH.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensing and Chemometrics, College of
Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China.

PMID: 23417843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Org Lett. 2013 Mar 1;15(5):1104-7. doi: 10.1021/ol400145z. Epub 2013 Feb 15.

Geminal bis(silyl) enal: a versatile scaffold for stereoselective synthesizing
C3,O1-disilylated allylic alcohols based upon anion relay chemistry.

Yan L(1), Sun X, Li H, Song Z, Liu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Drug-Targeting of Education Ministry and Department of
Medicinal Chemistry, West China School of Pharmacy, Sichuan University, Chengdu
610041, P. R. China.

Geminal bis(silyl) enal 2a is shown to be a useful scaffold for anion relay
chemistry (ARC) aimed at the stereoselective synthesis of C(3),O(1)-disilylated
allylic alcohols. The ARC reaction is initiated by the addition of an
alkyllithium to the aldehyde and features a CuCN-promoted C(sp2)-to-O 1,4-silyl
migration to generate a vinylcuprate that reacts with activated electrophiles.

PMID: 23410199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Avicenna J Med Biotechnol. 2012 Oct;4(4):170-7.

Production and Characterization of Mouse Monoclonal Antibodies Recognizing Human 
Pan-IgG Specific Conformational or Linear Epitopes.

Hajighasemi F(1), Khoshnoodi J, Shokri F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Public Health, Tehran University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran ; Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine,
Shahed University, Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Pan-IgG specific monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) are essential tools for
assessment of humoral immunity, immune deficiency and gammopathy. In this study, 
four hybridoma clones producing MAbs with different specificities for human IgG
isotypes were established.
METHODS: Splenocytes from Balb/c mice immunized with Fc fractions of human IgG
were fused with SP2/0 myeloma cells. Hybridoma cells were selected in HAT
selective medium and cloned by limiting dilution assay. Antibody-secreting cells 
were screened by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and the specificity of
secreted MAbs was further analyzed using a panel of purified myeloma IgG proteins
by ELISA and immunoblotting. Cross-reactivity to immunoglobulins (Igs) of other
species was studied by indirect ELISA using serum samples collected from 9
animals.
RESULTS: Immunoblotting studies revealed recognition of either linear or
conformational epitopes by these MAbs. The most abundant cross-reactivity (100%) 
was observed with monkey Igs, while no cross-reactivity was detected with rabbit,
guinea pig, sheep, goat, cat and hen sera. Two of the MAbs cross-reacted with
either dog or horse sera. The affinity constant of two MAbs was measured by ELISA
and found to be 0.74×10(8)M(-1) and 0.96×10(7)M(-1).
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that these pan-IgG specific MAbs recognize
restricted linear or conformational epitopes located on all human IgG subclasses 
with no cross-reactivity to IgG from most species studied. These MAbs are
potentially useful tools for quantification of total or antigen-specific IgG
levels.

PMCID: PMC3558227
PMID: 23408136  [PubMed]


438. J Org Chem. 2013 Mar 15;78(6):2786-91. doi: 10.1021/jo302765g. Epub 2013 Feb 11.

Palladium-catalyzed highly selective ortho-halogenation (I, Br, Cl) of
arylnitriles via sp2 C-H bond activation using cyano as directing group.

Du B(1), Jiang X, Sun P.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Biofunctional Materials, College of Chemistry and
Materials Science, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing 210097, China.

Erratum in
    J Org Chem. 2013 Dec 6;78(23):12280.

A palladium-catalyzed ortho-halogenation (I, Br, Cl) of arylnitrile is described.
The optimal reaction conditions were identified after examining various factors
such as catalyst, additive, solvent, and reaction temperature. Using cyano as the
directing group, the halogenation reaction gave good to excellent yields. The
method is compatible to the arylnitriles with either electron-withdrawing or
electron-donating groups. The reaction is available to the substrate in at least 
gram scale. The present method was successfully applied to the synthesis of the
precursors of paucifloral F and isopaucifloral F.

PMID: 23373558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Fitoterapia. 2013 Mar;85:119-24. doi: 10.1016/j.fitote.2013.01.006. Epub 2013 Jan
23.

Triterpenoids of Chrysosplenium carnosum.

Lu MY(1), Liao ZX, Ji LJ, Sun HF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Engineering, School of Chemistry and Chemical
Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, PR China.

A phytochemical study of the ethanolic extract of Chrysosplenium carnosum Hook.
f. et Thoms. led to the isolation of two new oleanane-type triterpenoids,
6ß-hydroxy-3-oxoolean-12-en-27-oic acid (1) and 3ß,
21a-dihydroxyolean-12-en-27-oic acid (2), along with fourteen known compounds
(3-16), all of which were isolated from this plant for the first time. The
structures of these compounds were established on the basis of spectroscopic
methods. Compounds 1-4 were evaluated for their in vitro anti-tumor activities on
B16F10, SP2/0 and Hep-G2 cells lines. Compounds 1, 3 and 4 exhibited strong
inhibitory activity against B16F10 and SP2/0 cells' growth, compared with
moderate cytotoxic activity against Hep-G2 cells. However, compound 2 showed to
be inactive against these tumor cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23352747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. J Phys Chem A. 2013 Feb 21;117(7):1583-95. doi: 10.1021/jp309356b. Epub 2013 Feb 
6.

Structures, stabilization energies, and binding energies of
quinoxaline···(H2O)(n), quinoxaline dimer, and quinoxaline···Cu complexes: a
theoretical study.

Kabanda MM(1), Ebenso EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, North-West University (Mafikeng Campus), Private Bag 
x2046, Mmabatho 2735, South Africa. mbyechura@gmail.com

Quinoxaline is a parent structure for a broad class of N-heteroaromatic
compounds, many of which exhibit various biological activities. The interaction
of quinoxaline with explicit water molecules or metal ions and the formation of
quinoxaline dimer play an important role in many of the biological activities of 
quinoxaline. This study investigates the structures, stabilization, and binding
energies of quinoxaline complexes with water, transition metal ions, and
quinoxaline dimer to provide information on the preferred geometries, interaction
energies, and type of noncovalent interactions accounting for the stability of
the complexes. The investigations are performed in vacuo and in water solution
using MP2 and DFT methods. The results of the study on the
quinoxaline···(H(2)O)(n) show that the preferred adducts in vacuo involve one,
two, or three water molecules hydrogen bonded to the N atom and the neighboring H
atom of the C(sp2)-H group. The results in water solution show a preference for
water-water clustering. The dimers of quinoxaline are stabilized by either p-p
stacking or weak C-H···N intermolecular hydrogen bonds. The relative stability of
the quinoxaline···Cu complexes depends on the site on which the Cu ion binds and 
the binding strength depends on both the nature of the cation and the binding
site.

PMID: 23343309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2013 Feb;405(5):1435-43. doi: 10.1007/s00216-012-6624-0. Epub 
2013 Jan 15.

Recent advances in the development of graphene-based surface plasmon resonance
(SPR) interfaces.

Szunerits S(1), Maalouli N, Wijaya E, Vilcot JP, Boukherroub R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche Interdisciplinaire (IRI, USR 3078), Université Lille 1, 
Villeneuve d'Ascq, France. Sabine.Szunerits@iri.univ-lille1.fr

Surface plasmon resonance (SPR) is a powerful technique for measurement of
biomolecular interactions in real-time in a label-free environment. One of the
most common techniques for plasmon excitation is the Kretschmann configuration,
and numerous studies of ligand-analyte interactions have been performed on
surfaces functionalized with a variety of biomolecules, for example DNA, RNA,
glycans, proteins, and peptides. A significant limitation of SPR is that the
substrate must be a thin metal film. Post-coating of the metal thin film with a
thin dielectric top layer has been reported to enhance the performance of the SPR
sensor, but is highly dependent on the thickness of the upper layer and its
dielectric constant. Graphene is a single-atom thin planar sheet of sp2 carbon
atoms perfectly arranged in a honeycomb lattice. Graphene and graphene oxide are 
good supports for biomolecules because of their large surface area and rich p
conjugation structure, making them suitable dielectric top layers for SPR
sensing. In this paper, we review some of the key issues in the development of
graphene-based SPR chips. The actual challenges of using these interfaces for
studying biomolecular interactions will be discussed and the first examples of
the use of graphene-on-metal SPR interfaces for biological sensing will be
presented.

PMID: 23314618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2013 Feb 11;52(7):2109-13. doi: 10.1002/anie.201207918.
Epub 2013 Jan 10.

Nitrogen-doped sp2-hybridized carbon as a superior catalyst for selective
oxidation.

Gao Y(1), Hu G, Zhong J, Shi Z, Zhu Y, Su DS, Wang J, Bao X, Ma D.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, College of Chemistry and
Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

PMID: 23307693  [PubMed]


443. J Orofac Orthop. 2013 Jan;74(1):18-27. doi: 10.1007/s00056-012-0121-0. Epub 2013 
Jan 11.

Two-dimensional lateral cephalometric evaluation of varying types of Class II
subgroups on posterior airway space in postadolescent girls: a pilot study.

Oz U(1), Orhan K, Rubenduz M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics, School of Dentistry, Near East University,
Lefkosa, Northern Cyprus, Turkey. ulasoz@gmail.com

AIMS: The purpose of this study was to compare pharyngeal airway linear
measurements of untreated skeletal Class II subjects with low-, neutral- and
high-angle facial patterns and a skeletal Class I control group of postadolescent
girls.
METHODS: We enrolled 50 postadolescent girls in this study. The Class II,1 cohort
included subjects presenting ANB angles greater than 4°. Subjects were
categorized as belonging to one of three different rotation models: high, neutral
and low angles. ANOVA and Duncan's tests were used to identify differences within
and among groups (p<0.05).
RESULTS: Pharyngeal airway measurements were significantly smaller (p<0.05) in
the high-angle Class II group. In addition, the narrowest linear measurements of 
the oropharynx (ph-pph) were also smaller in the high-angle Class II group
(p=0.055). Soft palate thickness (sp1-sp2) was significantly greater (p<0.05) in 
the low-angle Class II group.
CONCLUSION: That smaller airway measurements in only the high-angle Class II
subjects were noted confirms an association between pharyngeal airway
measurements and a vertical skeletal pattern. However, we could not ascertain
that a sagittal jaw relationship had an effect on airway space.

PMID: 23307178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Org Lett. 2013 Jan 18;15(2):270-3. doi: 10.1021/ol303088z. Epub 2013 Jan 9.

Palladium-catalyzed ortho-CH-bond oxygenation of aromatic ketones.

Choy PY(1), Kwong FY.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Chiroscience and Department of Applied Biology and
Chemical Technology, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon,
Hong Kong.

A palladium-catalyzed C((sp2))-H bond oxygenation reaction is described. This
protocol represents the first example of a C-H bond cleavage/C-O bond formation
sequence, by employing a ketone moiety as the directing group. With this new
catalytic method, a variety of ortho-acylphenols can be easily accessed from
arylketones.

PMID: 23301995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. JRSM Short Rep. 2012 Aug;3(8):55. doi: 10.1258/shorts.2012.012067. Epub 2012 Aug 
17.

Primary lymphoma of the pituitary gland: an unusual cause of hemianopia in an
immunocompetent patient.

Rainsbury P(1), Mitchell-Innes A, Clifton Nj, Khalil H.

Author information: 
(1)Salisbury District Hospital , Salisbury , Wiltshire SP2 8BJ , UK.

PMCID: PMC3434436
PMID: 23301143  [PubMed]


446. Br J Cancer. 2013 Mar 5;108(4):959-63. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2012.577. Epub 2013 Jan
8.

Male breast cancer, age and sex chromosome aneuploidy.

Jacobs PA(1), Maloney V, Cooke R, Crolla JA, Ashworth A, Swerdlow AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury Foundation NHS Trust, Salisbury
SP2 8BJ, UK.

BACKGROUND: In cultured, dividing transformed T lymphocytes and in dividing bone 
marrow cells from normal men and those with a haematological malignancy, sex
chromosome aneuploidy has been found to increase in prevalence and degree with
age. This has rarely been investigated in non-dividing uncultured blood samples. 
The loss and gain of the X chromosome in dividing transformed lymphocytes in
women with age is much more frequent than that of the Y chromosome in males.
However, paradoxically X chromosome aneuploidy is rarely seen in the dividing
cells of bone marrow of females.
METHODS: In blood samples from 565 men with breast cancer and 54 control men from
the England and Wales general population, 80 cell nuclei per sample were scored
for presence of X and Y chromosomes using fluorescent centromeric probes.
RESULTS: Sex chromosome aneuploidy, largely Y chromosome loss, was present in 63%
of cases and 57% of controls, with the prevalence and degree of aneuploidy
increasingly sharply and highly significantly with age. At ages 65-80 years, 71% 
of cases and 85% of controls showed aneuploidy and 15% and 25%, respectively, had
= 10% of cells aneuploid. Allowing for age, aneuploidy was less prevalent
(P=0.03) in cases than controls.
CONCLUSION: Sex chromosome aneuploidy in non-dividing nuclei of peripheral blood 
cells is frequent in adult men, the prevalence and degree increasing sharply with
age. The possible relation of sex chromosome aneuploidy to breast cancer risk in 
men, and to cancer risk generally, needs further investigation, ideally in cohort
studies.

PMCID: PMC3590654
PMID: 23299533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Br J Cancer. 2013 Feb 5;108(2):438-41. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2012.562. Epub 2013 Jan
8.

An intronic polymorphic deletion in the PTEN gene: implications for molecular
diagnostic testing.

Sandell S(1), Schuit RJ, Bunyan DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury
SP2 8BJ, UK.

BACKGROUND: A cohort of 629 patients with suspected Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba
syndrome or Cowden syndrome was tested for mutations in the PTEN gene.
METHODS: Dosage analysis of PTEN was carried out using a PTEN-specific multiplex 
ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) kit, whereas point mutation
analysis was performed using direct sequencing.
RESULTS: Approximately 4% of the patients from the testing cohort were
heterozygously deleted for the two MLPA probe-binding sites situated in intron 1.
The same deletion was subsequently seen in ~3% of 220 normal controls, and in
patients from the testing cohort with a causative mutation elsewhere in the PTEN 
gene. Sequencing of the variant revealed an 899 bp deletion, the 3' breakpoint of
which is only 58 bp from the start of exon 2.
CONCLUSION: Although all evidence suggests that the 899 bp deletion is a
polymorphism with no clinical effect, it removes the binding sites of almost all 
published PTEN exon 2 forward primers, resulting in allelic loss during PCR.

PMCID: PMC3566822
PMID: 23299532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Comp Biochem Physiol Part D Genomics Proteomics. 2013 Mar;8(1):82-5. doi:
10.1016/j.cbd.2012.12.001. Epub 2012 Dec 8.

A transcriptional survey of the cDNA library of Macrolampis sp2 firefly lanterns 
(Coleoptera: Lampyridae).

Viviani VR(1), Carmargo IA, Amaral DT.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program of Biotechnology and Environmental Monitoring, Campus of
Sorocaba, Federal University of São Carlos, Rodovia João Leme dos Santos, Itinga,
SP, Brazil. viviani@ufscar.br

The biochemistry of firefly bioluminescence is well understood; however, the
molecular physiology of the lanterns is still poorly studied, especially the
biosynthesis and origin of beetle luciferin which are almost unknown. Using a
cDNA library previously constructed from Macrolampis sp2 lanterns, we randomly
selected and sequenced 572 cDNAs in order to have a first transcriptional profile
of the most represented messages found in the lanterns and therefore to better
understand their molecular physiology. As expected, high percentage of the gene
products (~22%) displayed high similarity with Coleoptera genome products. About 
7% represented mitochondrial genes, including several copies of cytochrome
oxidase, which are also expected for this tissue. Luciferase genes were
especially abundant, representing ca 2% of the products. Gene products involved
with cysteine and sulfur metabolism such as the cystathionine ß-lyase and the
S-adenosylmethionine synthetase were abundant. Noteworthy, an abundance of
proteins involved with hormone metabolism was found, suggesting a possible link
between bioluminescence and hormone metabolism.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 23299360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Anim Reprod Sci. 2013 Feb;137(1-2):93-102. doi:
10.1016/j.anireprosci.2012.12.007. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

Identification of sperm head subpopulations with defined pleiomorphic
characteristics in ejaculates of captive Goeldi's monkeys (Callimico goeldii).

Valle RR(1), Arakaki PR, Carvalho FM, Muniz JA, Leal CL, García-Herreros M.

Author information: 
(1)ICS, Universidade Paulista, São Paulo, Brazil; FMVZ, Universidade de São
Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the incidence of pleiomorphisms and its
influence on the distribution of sperm morphometric subpopulations in ejaculates 
from the vulnerable Goeldi's monkey (Callimico goeldii) by using a combination of
computerized analysis system and Principal Component Analysis (PCA) methods. Each
sperm head was measured for four primary spermatozoal head dimensional parameters
(area [A (µm(2))], perimeter [P (µm)], length [L (µm)] and width [W (µm)]) and
three head shape derived parameters (ellipticity [(L/W)], elongation
[(L-W)/(L+W)] and rugosity [(4pA/P(2))]). Six separate subpopulations (SPs) were 
identified: SP1, constituted by very large, narrow and very elliptical
spermatozoa (A=16.85±1.56µm(2), W=2.75±0.42µm and ellipticity=2.16±0.24); SP2,
characterized by average sized, short, wide and round spermatozoa
(A=15.00±1.92µm(2), L=5.06±0.49µm, W=3.51±0.31µm and ellipticity=1.44±0.15); SP3,
represented by small, wide and slightly round spermatozoa (A=14.95±1.75µm(2),
W=3.47±0.29µm and ellipticity=1.48±0.14); SP4 included very small, short and very
round spermatozoa (A=14.15±2.38µm(2), L=4.90±0.57µm and elongation=0.18±0.05);
SP5 consisted of average sized and slightly elliptical spermatozoa
(A=15.14±1.72µm(2) and ellipticity=1.49±0.14); and SP6 included large and round
spermatozoa (A=16.30±1.62µm(2) and elongation=0.19±0.04). There were differences 
in the sperm subpopulation distribution (P<0.001) among the five donors analyzed.
In conclusion, the results of the current study confirmed that the use of
computer sperm analysis methods combined with PCA cluster analyses are useful
methods to identify, classify, and characterize different sperm head morphometric
subpopulations in neotropical primates. Broadening our knowledge of C. goeldii
sperm morphometric abnormalities as well as developing reliable techniques for
sperm evaluation may be essential for ex situ conservation of this threatened
species.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23294901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Development. 2013 Feb 1;140(3):552-61. doi: 10.1242/dev.085621.

Neural development is dependent on the function of specificity protein 2 in cell 
cycle progression.

Liang H(1), Xiao G, Yin H, Hippenmeyer S, Horowitz JM, Ghashghaei HT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biomedical Sciences and Center for Comparative
Medicine and Translational Research, College of Veterinary Medicine, North
Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27607, USA.

Faithful progression through the cell cycle is crucial to the maintenance and
developmental potential of stem cells. Here, we demonstrate that neural stem
cells (NSCs) and intermediate neural progenitor cells (NPCs) employ a zinc-finger
transcription factor specificity protein 2 (Sp2) as a cell cycle regulator in two
temporally and spatially distinct progenitor domains. Differential conditional
deletion of Sp2 in early embryonic cerebral cortical progenitors, and perinatal
olfactory bulb progenitors disrupted transitions through G1, G2 and M phases,
whereas DNA synthesis appeared intact. Cell-autonomous function of Sp2 was
identified by deletion of Sp2 using mosaic analysis with double markers, which
clearly established that conditional Sp2-null NSCs and NPCs are M phase arrested 
in vivo. Importantly, conditional deletion of Sp2 led to a decline in the
generation of NPCs and neurons in the developing and postnatal brains. Our
findings implicate Sp2-dependent mechanisms as novel regulators of cell cycle
progression, the absence of which disrupts neurogenesis in the embryonic and
postnatal brain.

PMCID: PMC3561788
PMID: 23293287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Faraday Discuss. 2012;156:279-91; discussion 293-309.

Mechanism of ultra low friction of multilayer graphene studied by coarse-grained 
molecular simulation.

Washizu H(1), Kajita S, Tohyama M, Ohmori T, Nishino N, Teranishi H, Suzuki A.

Author information: 
(1)Toyota Central R&D Labs., Inc., Nagakute, Aichi 480-1192, Japan. h@washizu.org

Coarse-grained Metropolis Monte Carlo Brownian Dynamics simulations are used to
clarify the ultralow friction mechanism of a transfer film of multilayered
graphene sheets. Each circular graphene sheet consists of 400 to 1,000,000 atoms 
confined between the upper and lower sliders and are allowed to move in 3
translational and 1 rotational directions due to thermal motion at 300 K. The
sheet-sheet interaction energy is calculated by the sum of the pair potential of 
the sp2 carbons. The sliding simulations are done by moving the upper slider at a
constant velocity. In the monolayer case, the friction force shows a stick-slip
like curve and the average of the force is high. In the multilayer case, the
friction force does not show any oscillation and the average of the force is very
low. This is because the entire transfer film has an internal degree of freedom
in the multilayer case and the lowest sheet of the layer is able to follow the
equipotential surface of the lower slider.

PMID: 23285635  [PubMed]


452. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2013 Feb;34(2):617-22. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2012.12.005.
Epub 2012 Dec 27.

GRP78 from grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella) provides cytoplasm protection
against thermal and Pb2+ stress.

Zhu Y(1), Fan Q, Mao H, Liu Y, Hu C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, College of Life Science and Food Engineering,
Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, China.

Glucose regulated protein (GRP) located in endoplasmic reticulum (ER) was a
member of heat shock protein (Hsp) family. The protective mechanism adapted to ER
stimuli was closely related to GRP. GRP78, known as BiP, was one of central
regulator responded to stress in ER. Grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella) GRP78
(CiGRP78) was up-regulated in almost tissues, especially in liver, under heat
shock (34 °C), cold stress (4 °C) or lead nitrate (0.25 mmol/L) stress. In order 
to understand the function of CiGRP78 in cellular protection, CiGRP78 ORF cDNA
was inserted into the plasmid of pET-32a(+) or pEGFP-C1 respectively, then the
recombinant plasmids were transformed or transfected into Escherichia coli cells,
mouse myeloma cells (SP2/0) or grass carp kidney cells (CIK). In the cells,
CiGRP78 was over-expressed following thermal, cold or Pb(2+) stress. Results
showed that CiGRP78 not only contributed to protecting prokaryotic cells against 
thermal or cold extremes, but also played the same role in SP2/0 and CIK cells.
After treatment with heat stress at 42 °C for 1 h, although the viability of the 
cells declined a lot, CIK cells with pEGFP-C1/CiGRP78 exhibited a higher survival
rate (28%) than wild-type cells (7%) or cells with only pEGFP-C1 (5.1%). When the
time lag extended to 2.5 h, the survival rates were 19%, 5.7%, 4.8% respectively.
In addition, CiGRP78 would also provide a transient cytoplasm protection against 
Pb(2+) stress in a dose- and time-dependent manner. After treatment with lead
nitrate at concentration of 10 µmol/L for 12 h, 24 h or 36 h, the survival rates 
of cells with pEGFP-C1 or wild-type cells were 46.7% or 46.7% (12 h), 25% or 22% 
(24 h), 10% or 11% (36 h) respectively. When the cells were treated with lead
nitrate at the concentration of 25 µmol/L, the survival rates of cells with
pEGFP-C1 or wild-type cells were 45.5% or 30% (12 h), 16.7% or 25% (24 h), 6.5%
or 8% (36 h), respectively. CiGRP78 provided a distinct protection in CIK cells
at the low concentration for 24 h. The survival rates of CIK cells with
pEGFP-C1/CiGRP78 treated with lead nitrate at concentration of 10 µmol/L or 25
µmol/L were 65.9% or 58.8% respectively. When the cells were treated with lead
nitrate at concentration of 50 µmol/L for 24 h, the survival rate of the CIK
cells was only about 30%. If the process-time was extended to 36 h, CiGRP78 could
not provide any cytoplasm protection for CIK cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23274159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Epilepsy Behav Case Rep. 2013 Nov 6;1:161-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ebcr.2013.10.001.
eCollection 2013.

Ictal unilateral eye blinking and contralateral blink inhibition - A video-EEG
study and review of the literature.

Kalss G(1), Leitinger M(1), Dobesberger J(1), Granbichler CA(1), Kuchukhidze
G(2), Trinka E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Christian Doppler Klinik, Paracelsus Medical
University Salzburg, Ignaz Harrer Straße 79, 5020 Salzburg, Austria.
(2)Department of Neurology, Christian Doppler Klinik, Paracelsus Medical
University Salzburg, Ignaz Harrer Straße 79, 5020 Salzburg, Austria ; Department 
of Neurology, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innrain 52,
Christoph-Probst-Platz, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria.

INTRODUCTION: There is limited information on ictal unilateral eye blinking (UEB)
as a lateralizing sign in focal seizures. We identified two patients with UEB and
propose a novel mechanism of UEB based on a review of the literature.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We report on two patients with intractable focal epilepsy 
showing UEB among 269 consecutive patients undergoing noninvasive video-EEG
monitoring from October 2011 to May 2013.
RESULTS: Unilateral eye blinking was observed in 0.7% (two of 269) of our
patients. Patient one had four focal seizures. Semiological signs in all of her
seizures were impaired consciousness, bilateral eye blinking (BEB), and UEB on
the right. During one seizure, BEB recurred after UEB with a higher blink
frequency on the right. Patient two had ten focal seizures. Among them were one
electrographic seizure and nine focal seizures with BEB (in 3/10) and UEB on the 
left (in 1/10 seizures, respectively). Both patients did not display any clonic
activity of the face. In seizures with UEB, ictal EEG onset was observed over the
ipsilateral frontotemporal region in both of the patients (over F8 in 2/4, Fp2-F8
in 1/4, Sp2-T2 in 1/4, and F7 in 1/1 seizures, respectively). Ictal pattern
during UEB showed bilateral ictal activity (in 4/4) and ictal discharges over the
ipsilateral frontal region (maximum over F3 in 1/1 seizure). Interictal EEG
showed sharp waves over the same regions.
DISCUSSION: Unilateral eye blinking was ipsilateral to the frontotemporal ictal
EEG pattern in both patients. The asymmetric blink frequency during BEB in
patient one leads to the hypothesis that ictal UEB is caused by contralateral
blink inhibition due to activation in frontotemporal cortical areas and mediated 
by trigeminal fibers.

PMCID: PMC4150618
PMID: 25667853  [PubMed]


454. J Pers Med. 2013 Aug 20;3(3):191-202. doi: 10.3390/jpm3030191.

Examining the Relationship between Choice, Therapeutic Alliance and Outcomes in
Mental Health Services.

Stanhope V(1), Barrenger SL(2), Salzer MS(3), Marcus SC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Silver School of Social Work, New York University, 1 Washington Square N, New 
York, NY 10003, USA. victoria.stanhope@nyu.edu. (2)Silver School of Social Work, 
New York University, 1 Washington Square N, New York, NY 10003, USA.
Stacey.barrenger@nyu.edu. (3)Department of Rehabilitation, Temple University,
1700 N. Broad Street, Suite 304, Philadelphia, PA 19122, USA. msalzer@temple.edu.
(4)School of Social Policy and Practice, Caster Building, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. marcuss@sp2.upenn.edu.

BACKGROUND: Self-determination within mental health services is increasingly
recognized as an ethical imperative, but we still know little about the impact of
choice on outcomes among people with severe mental illnesses. This study examines
whether choice predicts outcomes and whether this relationship is mediated by
therapeutic alliance.
METHOD: The study sample of 396 participants completed a survey measuring choice,
therapeutic alliance, recovery, quality of life and functioning. Multivariate
analyses examined choice as a predictor of outcomes, and Sobel tests assessed
alliance as a mediator.
RESULTS: Choice variables predicted recovery, quality of life and perceived
outcomes. Sobel tests indicated that the relationship between choice and outcome 
variables was mediated by therapeutic alliance.
IMPLICATIONS: The study demonstrates that providing more choice and opportunities
for collaboration within services does improve consumer outcomes. The results
also show that collaboration is dependent on the quality of the relationship
between the provider and consumer.

PMCID: PMC4251393
PMID: 25562652  [PubMed]


455. Hum Antibodies. 2013;22(3-4):67-71. doi: 10.3233/HAB-140272.

Production of anti-CD14 monoclonal antibody using synthetic peptide of human CD14
as immunizing antigen.

Maleki LA(1), Shanehbandi D(1), Majidi J(1), Yusefi M(1), Abdolalizadeh J(1),
Orangi M(1), Baradaran B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz,
Iran.

BACKGROUND: CD14 is a myeloid differentiation antigen expressed primarily on
peripheral blood monocytes, dendritic cells and macrophages. It is a key
regulator of inflammatory responses to gram-negative bacteria, oxidative burst
and septic shock.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to produce and characterize monoclonal
antibody against CD14 for use in detection and diagnosis of monocytes.
METHODS: To produce MAb against CD14 protein, mice were immunized with two
KLH-conjugated CD14 peptides. The spleen cells of the immunized mice were then
fused with SP2/0 by hybridoma technique. Fused cells were grown in selective
medium and cloned by limiting dilution method. The desired clones were selected
and supernatants of hybridoma cells were screened by ELISA for antibody.
Monoclonal antibody was purified by chromatography and confirmed by SDS-PAGE.
Finally, immunoblotting and flowcytometry were recruited to explore the
specificity of the MAb.
RESULTS: Our results showed successful production and characterization of anti
CD14 monoclonal antibody. The MAb was IgG2a with Kappa light chain and
immunobloting and flowcytometry results demonstrated specific reactivity of this 
MAb with CD14.
CONCLUSIONS: The results show that, the produced anti- CD14 MAb is highly
specific and functional in biomedical applications such as flow cytometry and
western blotting and could be utilized for identification of monocytes.

PMID: 24961864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Qual Health Res. 2013 Apr;23(4):495-506. doi: 10.1177/1049732312469463. Epub 2012
Dec 20.

Surviving the aftershock: postearthquake access and adherence to HIV treatment
among Haiti's tent residents.

Ghose T(1), Boucicaut E, King C, Doyle A, Shubert V.

Author information: 
(1)University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.
toorjo@sp2.upenn.edu

In this research we examined how the conditions of Haiti's tent communities,
inhabited by those displaced by the January 10, 2010, earthquake, shaped access
and adherence to highly active antiretroviral treatment (HAART) for Haitians with
HIV. Conditions in the encampments were marked by unhygienic and cramped living
spaces, exposure to the elements, a lack of privacy, unavailability of food and
clean water, and a dependence on poorly functioning aid agencies. These
conditions shaped access and adherence to HAART by (a) exacerbating the stigma of
being HIV positive and undermining mental health; (b) presenting logistical
challenges to accessing medical care, storing pills, and ingesting them safely
and privately; and (c) sustaining a political economy of aid characterized by
unequal treatment in major HAART-dispensing centers, unequal circulation of
international funds, and the emergence of alternative medical institutions within
encampments that could improve future treatment. Policy and intervention
implications are discussed.

PMID: 23258118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2012 Dec;31(6):465-8. doi: 10.1089/hyb.2012.0054.

A monoclonal antibody against bovine adiponectin.

Raffelsieper M(1), Mielenz B, Häußler S, Sauerwein H, Mielenz M, Illges H.

Author information: 
(1)University of Applied Sciences Bonn-Rhein-Sieg, Immunology and Cell Biology,
Rheinbach, Germany .

Adiponectin (AdipoQ) is an adipokine mainly secreted by white fatty tissue,
playing a major role in energy homeostasis and insulin sensitivity. For cattle,
AdipoQ data are largely limited to mRNA expression; to our knowledge, valid
information about the AdipoQ protein in bovine tissues and body fluids is not
available. Therefore, we have developed a monoclonal antibody against bovine
AdipoQ. This study describes the preparation, application, and characterization
of a monoclonal antibody for use in ELISA, Western blot, and histology. The
antibody was developed by PEG fusion of the SP2/0 cell line with splenic B cells 
from AdipoQ immunized C57Bl/6 mice. Antibody-producing cells were identified by
ELISA and specified by immunoblotting and immunostaining of bovine
retroperitoneal adipose tissue. The novel antibody detects AdipoQ in histological
samples, ELISA, and Western blots.

PMID: 23244328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Huan Jing Ke Xue. 2012 Sep;33(9):3241-6.

[Effect of covalent functionalization on DNA cleavage activity and ROS formation 
of single-walled carbon nanotubes].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu RR(1), Tao XQ, Dang Z, Li KM, Cai MF.

Author information: 
(1)South China Institute of Environmental Sciences, Ministry of Environmental
Protection, Guangzhou 510655, China. wurenren@scies.org

Biotoxicity of selected covalent functionalizaed single-walled carbon nanotubes
(SWNTs) was investigated by plasmid DNA cleavage assay. The effect of covalent
functionalization on the physical structural and chemical activity of SWNTs was
also studied by Vis-NIR spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy and ROS assay. The DNA
cleavage intensity was promoted by covalent functionalization, and the intensity 
of DNA damage caused by the three types of carbon nanotubes in a descending order
was found to be carboxylated SWNTs (SWNT-COOH) > polyethyleneglycol-lated SWNTs
(SWNT-PEG) > uncovalent functionalized SWNTs (uSWNTs). SWNTs were efficient
intermediate to trigger electron transfer from electron donor to O2 in dark
condition which lead to superoxide radical (O2*-) formation. The electron
transfer intensity caused by selected SWNTs was also SWNT-COOH > SWNT-PEG >
SWNTs. The reason is that defect sites which changed from sp2-hybridized carbon
atom on the side wall of carbon nanotubes were more reactive than the perfect
ones.

PMID: 23243887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Huan Jing Ke Xue. 2012 Sep;33(9):3014-23.

[Sediment and pore water nutrient characteristics in growing zones of
Alternanthera philoxeroides in the Shiwuli River, Chaohu Lake].

[Article in Chinese]

Li RZ(1), Li F, Zhou AJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Resources and Environmental Engineering, Hefei University of
Technology, Hefei 230009, China. Lrz1970@163.com

In order to investigate the nitrogen and phosphorus characteristics of sediments 
and pore water in growing zones of aquatic macrophytes (Alternanthera
philoxeroides), three classic representative sampling points in the planted
Alternanthera philoxeroides fields (i. e. SP1, SP2 and SP3) and one reference
site in the seldom vegetation (i. e. SP4) were chosen along the Shiwuli River,
pouring into Chaohu Lake. Fifteen sediment cores were collected and sliced
in-situ with a thickness of 2 cm, and a total of 80 samples were obtained. In the
laboratory, both the contents of TN, TP, NH4(+) -N, NO3(-) -N, Fe/Al-P, Ca-P,
organic matter in sediments and the concentrations of TN, TP, NH4(+) -N, NO3(-)
-N and PO4(3-) -P in pore water were measured. And then, the vertical
distribution profiles were illustrated and explored, and the correlations were
also analyzed for the growing zones of Alternanthera philoxeroides. Through the
comparison of profiles, it found that both nitrogen and phosphorus concentrations
in pore water showed a rough similarity for three vegetation fields. At the
surface sediment-overlying water interface, in general, there was a good
agreement on the source-sink relationship for nitrogen and phosphorus
corresponding to the SP1, SP2 and SP3. Study results showed that the vertical
distribution of NH4(+) -N and NO3(-) -N in pore water within the depth of 0-18 cm
could be characterized by using exponential functions such as Exp2PMod2 or Exp3P2
provided by OriginLab software, but PO4(3-) -P hardly ever did, implying that
PO4(3-)-P might have a weaker regularity in solute diffusion than that of NH4(+) 
-N and NO3(-) -N.

PMID: 23243853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Adv Mater. 2013 Feb 20;25(7):998-1003. doi: 10.1002/adma.201203923. Epub 2012 Dec
13.

Sp2 C-dominant N-doped carbon sub-micrometer spheres with a tunable size: a
versatile platform for highly efficient oxygen-reduction catalysts.

Ai K(1), Liu Y, Ruan C, Lu L, Lu GM.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Electroanalytical Chemistry, Changchun Institute of
Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun, P. R. China.

A simple, yet versatile strategy to prepare size-controlled and monodisperse
carbon sub-micrometer spheres is developed based on the biomolecule dopamine.
Unlike traditional carbon materials, the resulting carbon sub-micrometer spheres 
contain much less sp(3) carbon with high-level electroactive nitrogen. Moreover, 
metal-carbon hybrid sub-micrometer spheres can be easily obtained, and show
highly promising catalytic properties in the oxygen-reduction reaction.

Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23239109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Gene. 2013 Feb 25;515(2):329-38. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.12.002. Epub 2012 Dec
9.

Neuroprotective changes of thalamic degeneration-related gene expression by
acupuncture in an MPTP mouse model of parkinsonism: microarray analysis.

Yeo S(1), Choi YG, Hong YM, Lim S.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group of Pain and Neuroscience, WHO Collaborating Center for
Traditional Medicine, East-West Medical Research Institute, Kyung Hee University,
Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Acupuncture stimulations at GB34 and LR3 inhibit the reduction of tyrosine
hydroxylase in the nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons in the parkinsonism animal 
models. Especially, behavioral tests showed that acupuncture stimulations
improved the motor dysfunction in a previous study by almost 87.7%. The thalamus 
is a crucial area for the motor circuit and has been identified as one of the
most markedly damaged areas in Parkinson's disease (PD), so acupuncture
stimulations might also have an effect on the thalamic damage. In this study,
gene expression changes following acupuncture at the acupoints were investigated 
in the thalamus of a 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-induced 
parkinsonism model using a whole transcript array. It was confirmed that
acupuncture at these acupoints could inhibit the decrease of tyrosine hydroxylase
in the thalamic regions of the MPTP model, while acupuncture at the non-acupoints
could not suppress this decrease by its level shown in the acupoints. GeneChip
gene array analysis showed that 18 (5 annotated genes: Dnase1l2, Dusp4, Mafg,
Ndph and Pgm5) of the probes down-regulated in MPTP, as compared to the control, 
were exclusively up-regulated by acupuncture at the acupoints, but not at the
non-acupoints. In addition, 14 (3 annotated genes; Serinc2, Sp2 and Ucp2) of the 
probes up-regulated in MPTP, as compared to the control, were exclusively
down-regulated by acupuncture at the acupoints, but not at the non-acupoints. The
expression levels of the representative genes in the microarray were validated by
real-time RT-PCR. These results suggest that the 32 probes (8 annotated genes)
which are affected by MPTP and acupuncture may be responsible for exerting the
inhibitory effect of acupuncture in the thalamus which can be damaged by MPTP
intoxication.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23235115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Dec;28(12):1286-90.

[Preparation and identification of monoclonal antibody against human spermine
oxidase].

[Article in Chinese]

Qinli CH(1), Yang JL, Han Y, Cai FQ, Wang YL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Medical College, Three Gorges University,
Yichang 443002, China.

AIM: To prepare mouse anti-human spermine oxidase (anti-hSMO) monoclonal antibody
(mAb) and testify its application in the biological techniques including Western 
blotting and immunohistochemistry.
METHODS: Plasmid pET-15b/SMO was first transferred into BL21 (DE3), and then SMO 
recombinant protein with 6×His tag was induced to express by IPTG and purified by
Ni-NTA resin. The purified recombinant SMO was used to immunize BALB/c mouse. The
spleen cells from the immunized mouse were harvested and hybridized with Sp2/0
myeloma cells to obtain a hybridoma cell line that could efficiently synthesize
and secret anti-SMO mAb. The titer and antigen specificity of this antibody were 
identified by ELISA, Western blotting and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: We successfully obtained the hybridoma cell line which could stably
secret anti-SMO mAb. The mAb was of a high titer and antigen specificity and
could be used in ELISA, Western blotting, and immunohistochemistry for SMO.
CONCLUSION: The mouse anti-hSMO mAB with a high antigen specificity has been
prepared successfully and used for a variety of bio-analytical techniques.

PMID: 23232520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Biochemistry. 2013 Jan 8;52(1):19-27. doi: 10.1021/bi300740y. Epub 2012 Dec 13.

The luciferin binding site residues C/T311 (S314) influence the bioluminescence
color of beetle luciferases through main-chain interaction with oxyluciferin
phenolate.

Viviani VR(1), Amaral DT, Neves DR, Simões A, Arnoldi FG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics, Graduate Program of
Biotechnology and Environmental Monitoring, Federal University of São Carlos
(UFSCAR), Rodovia João Leme dos Santos, km 110, Itinga, Sorocaba, SP, Brazil.
viviani@ufscar.br

Beetle luciferases emit different bioluminescence colors from green to red;
however, no clear relationship between the identity of the luciferin binding site
residues and bioluminescence colors was found in different luciferases, and it is
unclear whether critical interactions affecting emission spectra occur on the
thiazolyl or on the benzothiazolyl sides of the luciferin binding site. Through
homology modeling and site-directed mutagenesis using our multicolor set of
beetle luciferases (Pyrearinus termitilluminans larval click beetle, Pte, <U+03BB>(max) 
= 534 nm; Phrixothrix hirtus railroad worm red emitting, PxRE, <U+03BB>(max) = 623 nm;
and Macrolampis sp2 firefly, Mac, <U+03BB>(max) = 564 nm), we show that the residues
C/T311 (S314) play an important role in bioluminescence color determination.
Modeling studies indicate that the main-chain carbonyls of these residues are
close to both oxyluciferin phenolate and AMP, whereas the side chains pack
against second-shell residues. The C311(S314)A mutation considerably red shifts
the spectra of the green-yellow-emitting luciferases (Pte <U+03BB>(max) = 534 to 590 nm;
Mac <U+03BB>(max) = 564 to 583/613 nm) and affects the K(M) values for luciferin and
ATP, but not the spectrum of the red-emitting luciferase. On the other hand,
whereas the exchange between C/T311 (S314) caused smaller effects on the emission
spectra of green-yellow-emitting luciferases, the C311T substitution (naturally
found in green-emitting railroad worm luciferases) resulted in the largest
reported blue shift in P. hirtus red-emitting luciferase (<U+03BB>(max) = 623 to 606
nm). Altogether, these results indicate that the stability of residues C/T311
(S314) and the size of the cavity around oxyluciferin phenolate affect
bioluminescence colors and suggest, for the first time, the occurrence of a
critical interaction between main-chain carbonyls of position 311 (314) residues 
and oxyluciferin phenolate.

PMID: 23205709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. J Inorg Biochem. 2013 Feb;119:65-74. doi: 10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2012.11.001. Epub
2012 Nov 10.

Cell uptake and cytotoxicity of a novel cyclometalated iridium(III) complex and
its octaarginine peptide conjugate.

Dolan C(1), Moriarty RD, Lestini E, Devocelle M, Forster RJ, Keyes TE.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemical Sciences, National Centre for Sensor Research, Dublin City 
University, Glasnevin, Dublin, Ireland.

The synthesis and characterisation of iridium(III)
bis(2-(2,4-difluorophenyl)pyridinato-N,
C2')-2(4-carboxylphenyl)imidazo[4,5-f][1,10]phenanthroline perchlorate,
[Ir(dfpp)(2)(picCOOH)](+) and its octaarginine conjugate
[Ir(dfpp)(2)(picCONH-Arg(8))](9+) are reported. Both complex and conjugate
exhibit intense and long-lived luminescence, which is O(2) and pH sensitive.
Conjugation to the polyarginine peptide renders the complex very water soluble.
The uptake of the parent iridium(III) complex and conjugate are compared in two
mammalian cell lines; SP2 myeloma and Chinese hamster ovary (CHO). Both complexes
internalise into the cytoplasm, however dye uptake rate and distribution vary
with peptide conjugation and with cell identity. Whereas transmembrane transport 
is thought to have been facilitated by the dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) used as
co-solvent (0.05% v/v) for the parent complex, the octaarginine, the
dye-conjugate (iridium-R(8)) is membrane permeable in water only. Both complexes 
exhibit high cytotoxicity, evident through blebbing and vacuole formation within 
living cells, indicative of apoptosis, within 30min of exposure to the probe. The
IC(50) recorded for the cells in the dark was independent, in the case of the
parent complex, of the identity of the cell, with IC(50) of 84.8µM and 88µM
respectively for SP2 and CHO cells. The IC(50) approximately doubled for the
polyarginine conjugate and displayed a significant dependence on cell type with
IC(50) of 35µM and 54.1µM respectively for SP2 and CHO cells. These IC(50) values
were recorded in the dark. However under irradiation cell death is considerably
faster. Evidence from imaging suggests that the conjugate penetrates the nucleus 
whereas the parent does not, indicating that nuclear penetration may play a role 
in cytotoxicity.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23201851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. BMC Biotechnol. 2012 Nov 30;12:92. doi: 10.1186/1472-6750-12-92.

Characterization of transferrin receptor-mediated endocytosis and cellular iron
delivery of recombinant human serum transferrin from rice (Oryza sativa L.).

Zhang D(1), Lee HF, Pettit SC, Zaro JL, Huang N, Shen WC.

Author information: 
(1)Ventria Bioscience, Fort Collins, CO 80524, USA. dzhang@ventria.com

BACKGROUND: Transferrin (TF) plays a critical physiological role in cellular iron
delivery via the transferrin receptor (TFR)-mediated endocytosis pathway in
nearly all eukaryotic organisms. Human serum TF (hTF) is extensively used as an
iron-delivery vehicle in various mammalian cell cultures for production of
therapeutic proteins, and is also being explored for use as a drug carrier to
treat a number of diseases by employing its unique TFR-mediated endocytosis
pathway. With the increasing concerns over the risk of transmission of infectious
pathogenic agents of human plasma-derived TF, recombinant hTF is preferred to use
for these applications. Here, we carry out comparative studies of the TFR
binding, TFR-mediated endocytosis and cellular iron delivery of recombinant hTF
from rice (rhTF), and evaluate its suitability for biopharmaceutical
applications.
RESULT: Through a TFR competition binding affinity assay with HeLa human cervic
carcinoma cells (CCL-2) and Caco-2 human colon carcinoma cells (HTB-37), we show 
that rhTF competes similarly as hTF to bind TFR, and both the TFR binding
capacity and dissociation constant of rhTF are comparable to that of hTF. The
endocytosis assay confirms that rhTF behaves similarly as hTF in the slow
accumulation in enterocyte-like Caco-2 cells and the rapid recycling pathway in
HeLa cells. The pulse-chase assay of rhTF in Caco-2 and HeLa cells further
illustrates that rice-derived rhTF possesses the similar endocytosis and
intracellular processing compared to hTF. The cell culture assays show that rhTF 
is functionally similar to hTF in the delivery of iron to two diverse mammalian
cell lines, HL-60 human promyelocytic leukemia cells (CCL-240) and murine
hybridoma cells derived from a Sp2/0-Ag14 myeloma fusion partner (HB-72), for
supporting their proliferation, differentiation, and physiological function of
antibody production.
CONCLUSION: The functional similarity between rice derived rhTF and native hTF in
their cellular iron delivery, TFR binding, and TFR-mediated endocytosis and
intracellular processing support that rice-derived rhTF can be used as a safe and
animal-free alternative to serum hTF for bioprocessing and biopharmaceutical
applications.

PMCID: PMC3521190
PMID: 23194296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2013 Jan 14;15(2):680-4. doi: 10.1039/c2cp43221h. Epub 2012 
Nov 28.

Two viable three-dimensional carbon semiconductors with an entirely sp2
configuration.

He C(1), Sun L, Zhang C, Zhong J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Quantum Engineering and Micro-Nano Energy Technology, Xiangtan 
University, Xiangtan 411105, China.

Using the first-principles method, we investigate the energetic stability,
dynamic stability and electronic properties of two viable three-dimensional (3D) 
carbon semiconductors with an entirely sp(2) configuration, sp(2)-diamond and
cubic-graphite. Both allotropes are more stable than the previously proposed
K4-carbon and T-carbon and were confirmed to be dynamically stable.
Interestingly, sp(2)-diamond and cubic-graphite behave as semiconductors, which
is contrary to previously proposed all-sp(2) metallic carbons. sp(2)-Diamond is a
semiconductor with a direct band gap of 1.66 eV and cubic-graphite is an indirect
semiconductor with a band gap of 2.89 eV. Further studies show that both
sp(2)-diamond and cubic-graphite possess structural all-sp(2) configurations but 
not electronic sp(2) hybridizations. The very low densities and entirely sp(2)
configurations of sp(2)-diamond and cubic-graphite can be potentially applied in 
hydrogen-storage, photocatalysts and molecular sieves.

PMID: 23187896  [PubMed]


467. MAbs. 2013 Jan-Feb;5(1):150-61. doi: 10.4161/mabs.22773. Epub 2012 Nov 26.

A novel approach for the simultaneous quantification of a therapeutic monoclonal 
antibody in serum produced from two distinct host cell lines.

Geist BJ(1), Davis D, McIntosh T, Yang TY, Goldberg K, Han C, Pendley C, Davis
HM.

Author information: 
(1)Biologics Clinical Pharmacology, Janssen Research & Development, LLC, Radnor, 
PA, USA. BGeist@its.jnj.com

Therapeutic monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) possess a high degree of heterogeneity
associated with the cell expression system employed in manufacturing, most
notably glycosylation. Traditional immunoassay formats used to quantify
therapeutic mAbs are unable to discriminate between different glycosylation
patterns that may exist on the same protein amino acid sequence. Mass
spectrometry provides a technique to distinguish specific glycosylation patterns 
of the therapeutic antibody within the same sample, thereby allowing for
simultaneous quantification of the same mAb with different glycosylation
patterns. Here we demonstrate a two-step approach to successfully differentiate
and quantify serum mixtures of a recombinant therapeutic mAb produced in two
different host cell lines (CHO vs. Sp2/0) with distinct glycosylation profiles.
Glycosylation analysis of the therapeutic mAb, CNTO 328 (siltuximab), was
accomplished through sample pretreatment consisting of immunoaffinity
purification (IAP) and enrichment, followed by liquid chromatography (LC) and
mass spectrometry (MS). LC-MS analysis was used to determine the percentage of
CNTO 328 in the sample derived from either cell line based on the N-linked G1F
oligosaccharide on the mAb. The relative amount of G1F derived from each cell
line was compared with ratios of CNTO 328 reference standards prepared in buffer.
Glycoform ratios were converted to concentrations using an immunoassay measuring 
total CNTO 328 that does not distinguish between the different glycoforms.
Validation of the IAP/LC-MS method included intra-run and inter-run variability, 
method sensitivity and freeze-thaw stability. The method was accurate (%bias
range = -7.30-13.68%) and reproducible (%CV range = 1.49-10.81%) with a LOQ of
2.5 µg/mL.

PMCID: PMC3564880
PMID: 23182963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. J Org Chem. 2012 Dec 21;77(24):11167-76. doi: 10.1021/jo302248c. Epub 2012 Dec 5.

Substitution-assisted stereochemical control of bispidone-based ligands.

Legdali T(1), Roux A, Platas-Iglesias C, Camerel F, Nonat AM, Charbonnière LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Ingénierie Moléculaire Appliquée à l'Analyse, IPHC, UMR 7178
CNRS/UdS, ECPM, Bât R1N0, 25 rue Becquerel, 67087 Strasbourg Cedex 02, France.

Three new bispidone derivatives substituted by methylenecarboxylic ethyl ester
groups have been synthesized in high yields as potential ligands for (64)Cu
complexation and PET imaging. Their solution and solid-state structures have been
determined by (1)H NMR spectroscopy and X-ray crystallography. These studies
reveal a strong rigidity of the bicycle, which adopts either a chair-chair or a
boat-chair conformation depending on the substituents in the N3 and N7 positions.
A methyl substituent at N3 stabilizes the chair-chair conformation, whereas
ethylacetate or 2-pyridylmethyl groups induce a considerable stabilization of the
boat-chair conformation. However, when introduced in the position N7, a
2-pyridylmethyl substituent stabilizes the chair-chair isomer. The relative
energies of the isomers and the isomerization process have been modeled by
density functional theory calculations on a series of six N-substituted
bispidones, including those newly synthesized. The subtle influence of the
substituents has been related not only to the effect of steric hindrance on the
thermodynamic stability but also to the presence of weak H-bonding interactions
involving hydrogen-bonding acceptors, such as pyridylmethyl or ethylacetate
substituents, and donors, such as C(sp2)-H of the pyridyl rings or C(sp3)-H at
various positions of the bispidone skeleton.

PMID: 23176106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Chem Commun (Camb). 2013 Jan 7;49(2):173-5. doi: 10.1039/c2cc36817j. Epub 2012
Nov 20.

Synthesis of phenanthridinones via palladium-catalyzed C(sp2)-H
aminocarbonylation of unprotected o-arylanilines.

Liang D(1), Hu Z, Peng J, Huang J, Zhu Q.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institutes of
Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 190 Kaiyuan Avenue,
Guangzhou 510530, China.

An efficient synthesis of free (NH)-phenanthridinones through Pd-catalyzed
C(sp(2))-H aminocarbonylation of unprotected o-arylanilines under an atmospheric 
pressure of CO has been developed. Some ortho heteroarene substituted anilines as
well as N-alkyl protected o-arylanilines are also suitable substrates for this
C-H aminocarbonylation reaction.

PMID: 23168677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. J Biomed Opt. 2012 Nov;17(11):110901. doi: 10.1117/1.JBO.17.11.110901.

Simulating light transport through skin for color prediction of port wine stain
lesions: a review.

Lister T(1), Wright PA, Chappell PH.

Author information: 
(1)Salisbury District Hospital, Wessex Specialist Laser Centre, Salisbury SP2
8BJ, United Kingdom. tom.lister@soton.ac.uk

A survey of the literature is presented regarding the simulation of port wine
stain (PWS) skin color. Knowledge of PWS features, such as the depths and
diameters of affected vessels, is essential for informing laser treatment. These 
may be determined through the inverse application of a skin model. The techniques
which have been applied to achieve this are analyzed in detail. Radiative
transfer (RT) is found to be the preferred method of simulation. By far the most 
common approximations to RT are the diffusion approximations, which have been
applied successfully in the past and Monte Carlo techniques, which are now the
methods of choice. As the requirements for improvement of laser treatment on an
individual basis continues, the needs for further work towards accurate
estimations of individual optical coefficients and robust, flexible simulation
techniques are identified.

PMID: 23151537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. J Immunol Methods. 2013 Jan 31;387(1-2):228-36. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2012.11.001.
Epub 2012 Nov 9.

Preparation and characterization of monoclonal antibody specific for
copper-chelate complex.

Liu F(1), Lou Y, Shi X, Wang H, Zhu X.

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Monitoring and Management of Crop Diseases and Pest Insects,
Ministry of Agriculture, College of Plant Protection, Nanjing Agricultural
University, Nanjing 210095, China.

Monoclonal antibody (MAb) against chelated Cu(2+) was developed. The conjugate
employed as immunogens in BALB/c mice to raise antibodies was synthesized using
Cu(2+) coupling to keyhole limpet hemocyanin (KLH) via a bifunctional chelator
(2-(4-isothiocyanatobenzyl)-1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecane-1,4,7,10-tetraacetic
acid, p-SCN-Bn-DOTA). One of the hybridomas secreting antibody that bound tightly
to Cu(2+)-ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA) complex but not to metal-free
EDTA was isolated from the fusion between murine splenocytes and SP2/0 myeloma
cells. The performance of a competitive enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
was assessed for its sensitivity to changes in pH and ionic strength. The
cross-reactivities (CR) with other metals were below 1%, except for Hg(2+) with a
CR of 7.19 %. The IC(50) value achieved for copper was 0.89 µg/mL, showing a
detection range of 0.25-8.13 µg/mL and the lowest detection limit of 0.032 µg/mL.
The concentration of Cu(2+) in environmental water and serum samples obtained by 
ELISA correlated well with Atomic Absorption Spectrometry (AAS), and the mean
recovery was 93.7%. These results indicated that ELISA could be a convenient
analytical tool for monitoring copper in drinking water and human serum.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23142463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. J Chem Theory Comput. 2012 Nov 13;8(11):4094-101. doi: 10.1021/ct300442w. Epub
2012 Oct 8.

Computing the Density Matrix in Electronic Structure Theory on Graphics
Processing Units.

Cawkwell MJ(1), Sanville EJ(1), Mniszewski SM(1), Niklasson AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Theoretical Division and Computer, Computational, and Statistical Sciences
Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico 87545, United
States.

The self-consistent solution of a Schrödinger-like equation for the density
matrix is a critical and computationally demanding step in quantum-based models
of interatomic bonding. This step was tackled historically via the
diagonalization of the Hamiltonian. We have investigated the performance and
accuracy of the second-order spectral projection (SP2) algorithm for the
computation of the density matrix via a recursive expansion of the Fermi operator
in a series of generalized matrix-matrix multiplications. We demonstrate that
owing to its simplicity, the SP2 algorithm [Niklasson, A. M. N. Phys. Rev. B2002,
66, 155115] is exceptionally well suited to implementation on graphics processing
units (GPUs). The performance in double and single precision arithmetic of a
hybrid GPU/central processing unit (CPU) and full GPU implementation of the SP2
algorithm exceed those of a CPU-only implementation of the SP2 algorithm and
traditional matrix diagonalization when the dimensions of the matrices exceed
about 2000 × 2000. Padding schemes for arrays allocated in the GPU memory that
optimize the performance of the CUBLAS implementations of the level 3 BLAS DGEMM 
and SGEMM subroutines for generalized matrix-matrix multiplications are described
in detail. The analysis of the relative performance of the hybrid CPU/GPU and
full GPU implementations indicate that the transfer of arrays between the GPU and
CPU constitutes only a small fraction of the total computation time. The errors
measured in the self-consistent density matrices computed using the SP2 algorithm
are generally smaller than those measured in matrices computed via
diagonalization. Furthermore, the errors in the density matrices computed using
the SP2 algorithm do not exhibit any dependence of system size, whereas the
errors increase linearly with the number of orbitals when diagonalization is
employed.

PMID: 26605576  [PubMed]


473. Org Lett. 2012 Dec 7;14(23):5864-7. doi: 10.1021/ol302767w. Epub 2012 Nov 7.

Intramolecular dehydrogenative coupling of sp2 C-H and sp3 C-H bonds: an
expeditious route to 2-oxindoles.

Ghosh S(1), De S, Kakde BN, Bhunia S, Adhikary A, Bisai A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research
Bhopal, MP-462 023, India.

An intramolecular-dehydrogenative-coupling (IDC) using "transition-metal-free"
oxidation conditions has been achieved to synthesize a variety of 2-oxindoles
bearing an all-carbon quaternary stereogenic center at the benzylic position. The
methodology involves a one-pot C-alkylation of ß-N-arylamido esters (3, 6) with
alkyl halides using potassium tert-butoxide concomitant with a dehydrogenative
coupling. A radical-mediated pathway has been tentatively proposed for the
oxidative process.

PMID: 23134301  [PubMed]


474. Ann R Coll Surg Engl. 2012 Nov;94(8):574-8. doi:
10.1308/003588412X13373405387771.

Management of colorectal polyp cancers.

Naqvi S(1), Burroughs S, Chave HS, Branagan G.

Author information: 
(1)Salisbury District Hospital, Odstock Road, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, UK.
shehryer.naqvi02@imperial.ac.uk

INTRODUCTION: Management of malignant colorectal polyps is controversial. The
options are resection or surveillance. Resection margin status is accepted as an 
independent predictor of adverse outcome. However, the rate of adverse outcome in
polyps with a resection margin of <1mm has not been investigated.
METHODS: A retrospective search of the pathology database was undertaken. All
polyp cancers were included. A single histopathologist reviewed all of the
included polyp cancers. Polyps were divided into three groups: clear resection
margin, involved resection margin and unknown resection margin. Polyps were also 
analysed for tumour grade, morphology, Haggitt/Kikuchi level and lymphovascular
invasion. Adverse outcome was defined as residual tumour at the polypectomy site 
and/or lymph node metastases in the surgical group and local or distant
recurrence in the surveillance group.
RESULTS: Sixty-five polyps (34 male patients, mean age: 73 years, range: 50-94
years) were included. Forty-six had clear polyp resection margins; none had any
adverse outcomes. Sixteen patients had involved polyp resection margins and
twelve of these underwent surgery: seven had residual tumour and two of these
patients had lymph node metastases. Four underwent surveillance, of whom two
developed local recurrence. Three patients had resection margins on which the
histopathologist was unable to comment. All patients with a clear resection
margin had no adverse outcome regardless of other predictive factors.
CONCLUSIONS: Polyp cancers with clear resection margins, even those with <1mm
clearance, can be treated safely with surveillance in our experience. Polyp
cancers with unknown or involved resection margins should be treated surgically.

PMCID: PMC3954284
PMID: 23131228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Plant Biotechnol J. 2013 Jan;11(1):115-27. doi: 10.1111/pbi.12018. Epub 2012 Nov 
6.

Deep sequencing analysis of the transcriptomes of peanut aerial and subterranean 
young pods identifies candidate genes related to early embryo abortion.

Chen X(1), Zhu W, Azam S, Li H, Zhu F, Li H, Hong Y, Liu H, Zhang E, Wu H, Yu S, 
Zhou G, Li S, Zhong N, Wen S, Li X, Knapp SJ, Ozias-Akins P, Varshney RK, Liang
X.

Author information: 
(1)Crops Research Institute, Guangdong Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Guangzhou, China.

The failure of peg penetration into the soil leads to seed abortion in peanut.
Knowledge of genes involved in these processes is comparatively deficient. Here, 
we used RNA-seq to gain insights into transcriptomes of aerial and subterranean
pods. More than 2 million transcript reads with an average length of 396 bp were 
generated from one aerial (AP) and two subterranean (SP1 and SP2) pod libraries
using pyrosequencing technology. After assembly, sets of 49 632, 49 952 and
50 494 from a total of 74 974 transcript assembly contigs (TACs) were identified 
in AP, SP1 and SP2, respectively. A clear linear relationship in the gene
expression level was observed between these data sets. In brief, 2194
differentially expressed TACs with a 99.0% true-positive rate were identified,
among which 859 and 1068 TACs were up-regulated in aerial and subterranean pods, 
respectively. Functional analysis showed that putative function based on
similarity with proteins catalogued in UniProt and gene ontology term
classification could be determined for 59 342 (79.2%) and 42 955 (57.3%) TACs,
respectively. A total of 2968 TACs were mapped to 174 KEGG pathways, of which 168
were shared by aerial and subterranean transcriptomes. TACs involved in
photosynthesis were significantly up-regulated and enriched in the aerial pod. In
addition, two senescence-associated genes were identified as significantly
up-regulated in the aerial pod, which potentially contribute to embryo abortion
in aerial pods, and in turn, to cessation of swelling. The data set generated in 
this study provides evidence for some functional genes as robust candidates
underlying aerial and subterranean pod development and contributes to an
elucidation of the evolutionary implications resulting from fruit development
under light and dark conditions.

© 2012 The Authors Plant Biotechnology Journal © 2012 Society for Experimental
Biology, Association of Applied Biologists and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 23130888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2012 Dec 3;51(49):12293-7. doi: 10.1002/anie.201206578.
Epub 2012 Nov 4.

Friedel-Crafts arylation for the formation of C(sp2)-C(sp2) bonds: a route to
unsymmetrical and functionalized polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons from aryl
triazenes.

Zhou J(1), Yang W, Wang B, Ren H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Zhejiang University, 38 Zheda Road, Hangzhou 310027, 
P. R. China.

PMID: 23124928  [PubMed]


477. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab. 2013 Apr;23(2):187-94. Epub 2012 Oct 30.

Effect of repeated sodium phosphate loading on cycling time-trial performance and
VO2peak.

Brewer CP(1), Dawson B, Wallman KE, Guelfi KJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Sport Science, Exercise and Health, University of Western Australia,
Perth, WA, Australia.

Research into supplementation with sodium phosphate has not investigated the
effects of a repeated supplementation phase. Therefore, this study examined the
potential additive effects of repeated sodium phosphate (SP) supplementation on
cycling time-trial performance and peak oxygen uptake (VO2peak). Trained male
cyclists (N = 9, M ± SD VO2peak = 65.2 ± 4.8 ml · kg-1 · min-1) completed
baseline 1,000-kJ time-trial and VO2peak tests separated by 48 hr, then ingested 
either 50 mg · kg fat-free mass-1 · d-1 of tribasic SP or a combined glucose and 
NaCl placebo for 6 d before performing these tests again. A 14-d washout period
separated the end of one loading phase and the start of the next, with 2 SP and 1
placebo phase completed in a counterbalanced order. Although time-trial
performance (55.3-56.5 min) was shorter in SP1 and SP2 (~60-70 s), effect sizes
and smallest-worthwhile-change values did not differ in comparison with baseline 
and placebo. However, mean power output was greater than placebo during
time-trial performance at the 250-kJ and 500-kJ time points (p < .05) after the
second SP phase. Furthermore, mean VO2peak values (p < .01) were greater after
the SP1 (3.5-4.3%), with further improvements (p < .01) found in SP2 (7.1-7.7%), 
compared with baseline and placebo. In summary, repeated SP supplementation,
ingested either 15 or 35 d after initial loading, can have an additive effect on 
VO2peak and possibly time-trial performance.

PMID: 23114686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. J Am Chem Soc. 2012 Nov 7;134(44):18237-40. doi: 10.1021/ja3092278. Epub 2012 Oct
29.

Copper-promoted sulfenylation of sp2 C-H bonds.

Tran LD(1), Popov I, Daugulis O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Houston, Houston, Texas 77204-5003,
USA.

An auxiliary-assisted, copper catalyzed or promoted sulfenylation of benzoic acid
derivative ß-C-H bonds and benzylamine derivative <U+03B3>-C-H bonds has been developed.
The method employs disulfide reagents, copper(II) acetate, and DMSO solvent at
90-130 °C. Application of this methodology to the direct
trifluoromethylsulfenylation of C-H bonds was demonstrated.

PMCID: PMC3498454
PMID: 23102009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2012 Oct;31(5):372-7. doi: 10.1089/hyb.2012.0045.

A monoclonal antibody against leptin.

Mahmoudian J(1), Jeddi-Tehrani M, Bayat AA, Mahmoudi AR, Vojgani Y, Tavangar B,
Hadavi R, Zarei S.

Author information: 
(1)Monoclonal Antibody Research Center, Avicenna Research Institute, Academic
Center for Education, Culture, and Research, Tehran, Iran.

Leptin is an important protein that regulates energy storage and homeostasis in
humans and animals. Leptin deficiency results in various abnormalities such as
diabetes, obesity, and infertility. Producing a high affinity monoclonal antibody
against human leptin provides an important tool to monitor and trace leptin
function in different biological fluids. In this study, recombinant human leptin 
was conjugated to KLH and injected into mice. After immunization, mouse myeloma
SP2/0 cells were fused with murine splenocytes followed by selection of
antibody-producing hybridoma cells. After screening of different hybridoma
colonies by ELISA, a high affinity antibody was selected and purified by affinity
chromatography. The affinity constant of the antibody was measured by ELISA.
Western blot, immunocytochemistry, and flow cytometry experiments were used to
characterize the antibody. The anti-leptin antibody had a high affinity (around
1.13 × 10(-9) M) for its antigen. The saturation of the antibody with leptin (20 
moles leptin per 1 mole antibody) in Western blot analysis proved that the
antibody had specific binding to its antigen. Immunocytochemistry and flow
cytometry on JEG-3 (human placental choriocarcinoma cell) cells revealed that the
anti-leptin antibody recognized intracellular leptin. In conclusion, we report
here the production and characterization of a murine anti-leptin antibody with
high affinity for human leptin.

PMID: 23098305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2012 Oct;31(5):352-7. doi: 10.1089/hyb.2012.0033.

A monoclonal antibody against F1-F0 ATP synthase beta subunit.

Yuan J(1), Zhang C, Fang S, Zhuang Z, Ling S, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Biopesticide and Chemical Biology, Ministry of Education,
College of Life Sciences, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou,
China.

As a transmembrane enzyme, ATP synthase plays an important role in energy
metabolism of organ tissues, as well as in tumors. In this study we generated a
monoclonal antibody, 6G11, to the catalytic subunit of F1-F0 ATP synthase
(ATP5B). The SDS-PAGE result demonstrated that the hybridoma clone had a
molecular weight of 50 and 27<U+2009>kDa components that could be the heavy and light
chains of the monoclonal antibody, respectively. Chromosome analysis of the
hybridoma clone proved that they had 98 to 102 chromosomal numbers that were the 
sum of the SP2/0 and spleen cells. Western blot assay revealed that the hybridoma
clone reacted specifically with the ATP synthase beta subunit, but not with other
proteins. In addition, the subclass of the hybridoma clone was identified as IgG1
by capture ELISA. Furthermore, it demonstrated that the antibody retained
stability after half a year. These results indicated that the hybridoma clone
6G11 was a monoclonal antibody with significant stability and special reactivity 
to ATP5B antigen.

PMID: 23098302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. J Virol. 2013 Jan;87(1):454-63. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01211-12. Epub 2012 Oct 24.

Mutations in multiple domains of Gag drive the emergence of in vitro resistance
to the phosphonate-containing HIV-1 protease inhibitor GS-8374.

Stray KM(1), Callebaut C, Glass B, Tsai L, Xu L, Müller B, Kräusslich HG, Cihlar 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Gilead Sciences, Inc., Foster City, California, USA. kirsten.stray@gilead.com

GS-8374 is a potent HIV protease inhibitor (PI) with a unique diethyl-phosphonate
moiety. Due to a balanced contribution of enthalpic and entropic components to
its interaction with the protease (PR) active site, the compound retains activity
against HIV mutants with high-level multi-PI resistance. We report here the in
vitro selection and characterization of HIV variants resistant to GS-8374. While 
highly resistant viruses with multiple mutations in PR were isolated in the
presence of control PIs, an HIV variant displaying moderate (14-fold) resistance 
to GS-8374 was generated only after prolonged passaging for >300 days. The
isolate showed low-level cross-resistance to darunavir, atazanavir, lopinavir,
and saquinavir, but not other PIs, and contained a single R41K mutation in PR
combined with multiple genotypic changes in the Gag matrix, capsid, nucleocapsid,
and SP2 domains. Mutations also occurred in the transframe peptide and p6* domain
of the Gag-Pol polyprotein. Analysis of recombinant HIV variants indicated that
mutations in Gag, but not the R41K in PR, conferred reduced susceptibility to
GS-8374. The Gag mutations acted in concert, since they did not affect
susceptibility when introduced individually. Analysis of viral particles revealed
that the mutations rendered Gag more susceptible to PR-mediated cleavage in the
presence of GS-8374. In summary, the emergence of resistance to GS-8374 involved 
a combination of substrate mutations without typical resistance mutations in PR. 
These substrate changes were distributed throughout Gag and acted in an additive 
manner. Thus, they are classified as primary resistance mutations indicating a
unique mechanism and pathway of resistance development for GS-8374.

PMCID: PMC3536386
PMID: 23097440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. J Biomed Opt. 2012 Sep;17(9):90901-1. doi: 10.1117/1.JBO.17.9.090901.

Optical properties of human skin.

Lister T(1), Wright PA, Chappell PH.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Specialist Laser Centre, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury, SP2
8BJ, United Kingdom. tom.lister@soton.ac.uk

A survey of the literature is presented that provides an analysis of the optical 
properties of human skin, with particular regard to their applications in
medicine. Included is a description of the primary interactions of light with
skin and how these are commonly estimated using radiative transfer theory (RTT). 
This is followed by analysis of measured RTT coefficients available in the
literature. Orders of magnitude differences are found within published absorption
and reduced-scattering coefficients. Causes for these discrepancies are discussed
in detail, including contrasts between data acquired in vitro and in vivo. An
analysis of the phase functions applied in skin optics, along with the remaining 
optical coefficients (anisotropy factors and refractive indices) is also
included. The survey concludes that further work in the field is necessary to
establish a definitive range of realistic coefficients for clinically normal
skin.

PMID: 23085902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Cell Biochem Funct. 2013 Jul;31(5):417-26. doi: 10.1002/cbf.2916. Epub 2012 Oct
18.

Control of late apoptotic events by the p38 stress kinase in L-glutamine-deprived
mouse hybridoma cells.

Harnett CC(1), Guerin PJ, Furtak T, Gauthier ER.

Author information: 
(1)Biomolecular Sciences Program, Laurentian University, Sudbury, ON, Canada.

L-Glutamine (Gln) starvation rapidly triggers apoptosis in Sp2/0-Ag14 (Sp2/0)
murine hybridoma cells. Here, we report on the role played by the
stress-activated kinase p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) in this
process. p38 activation was detected 2<U+2009>h after Gln withdrawal and, although
treatment with the p38 inhibitor SB203580 did not prevent caspase activation in
Gln-starved cells, it reduced the occurrence of both nuclear
condensation/fragmentation and apoptotic body formation. Similarly, transfection 
of Sp2/0 cells with a dominant negative p38 MAPK reduced the incidence of nuclear
pyknosis and apoptotic body formation following 2<U+2009>h of Gln starvation. Gln
withdrawal-induced apoptosis was blocked by the overexpression of the
anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-xL or by the caspase inhibitor Z-VAD-fmk.
Interestingly, Bcl-xL expression inhibited p38 activation, but Z-VAD-fmk
treatment did not, indicating that activation of this MAPK occurs downstream of
mitochondrial dysfunction and is independent of caspases. Moreover, the
anti-oxidant N-acetyl-l-cysteine prevented p38 phosphorylation, showing that p38 
activation is triggered by an oxidative stress. Altogether, our findings indicate
that p38 MAPK does not contribute to the induction of apoptosis in Gln-starved
Sp2/0 cells. Rather, Gln withdrawal leads to mitochondrial dysfunction, causing
an oxidative stress and p38 activation, the latter contributing to the formation 
of late morphological features of apoptotic Sp2/0 cells.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 23080342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Virol. 2012 Dec;86(24):13708-16. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01704-12. Epub 2012 Oct 10.

Role of the SP2 domain and its proteolytic cleavage in HIV-1 structural
maturation and infectivity.

de Marco A(1), Heuser AM, Glass B, Kräusslich HG, Müller B, Briggs JA.

Author information: 
(1)Structural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology
Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany.

HIV-1 buds as an immature, noninfectious virion. Proteolysis of its main
structural component, Gag, is required for morphological maturation and
infectivity and leads to release of four functional domains and the spacer
peptides SP1 and SP2. The N-terminal cleavages of Gag and the separation of SP1
from CA are all essential for viral infectivity, while the roles of the two
C-terminal cleavages and the role of SP2, separating the NC and p6 domains, are
less well defined. We have analyzed HIV-1 variants with defective cleavage at
either or both sites flanking SP2, or largely lacking SP2, regarding virus
production, infectivity, and structural maturation. Neither the presence nor the 
proteolytic processing of SP2 was required for particle release. Viral
infectivity was almost abolished when both cleavage sites were defective and
severely reduced when the fast cleavage site between SP2 and p6 was defective.
This correlated with an increased proportion of irregular core structures
observed by cryo-electron tomography, although processing of CA was unaffected.
Mutation of the slow cleavage site between NC and SP2 or deletion of most of SP2 
had only a minor effect on infectivity and did not induce major alterations in
mature core morphology. We speculate that not only separation of NC and p6 but
also the processing kinetics in this region are essential for successful
maturation, while SP2 itself is dispensable.

PMCID: PMC3503038
PMID: 23055560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Chemistry. 2012 Dec 3;18(49):15816-21. doi: 10.1002/chem.201202672. Epub 2012 Oct
10.

Free-amine-directed alkenylation of C(sp2)-H and cycloamination by palladium
catalysis.

Liang Z(1), Ju L, Xie Y, Huang L, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, PR China.

A new protocol for the palladium-catalyzed free-amine-directed alkenylation of
C(sp(2))-H bonds and cycloamination is described. Substituted biaryl-2-amines
react with various alkenes, including electron-deficient alkenes, aryl alkenes
and alkyl alkenes, to give the corresponding phenanthridines with exclusive
regioselectivity. The use of a-branched styrenes leads to the formation of
tricyclic compounds with a seven-membered amine ring. The method operates through
a free-amine-directed alkenylation and a subsequent hydroamination cyclization
reaction.

Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23055185  [PubMed]


486. Virol Sin. 2012 Oct;27(5):316-9. doi: 10.1007/s12250-012-3261-x. Epub 2012 Oct
11.

Generation of monoclonal antibodies against non-structural protein 3AB of
foot-and-mouth disease virus.

Lin T(1), Shao J, Chang H, Gao S, Cong G, Du J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, National Foot and
Mouth Disease Reference Laboratory, Lanzhou Vetersinary Research Institute,
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou 730046, China.

To identify linear epitopes on the non-structural protein 3AB of foot-and-mouth
disease virus (FMDV), BABL/c mice were immunized with the 3AB protein and
splenocytes of BALB/c mice were fused with myeloma Sp2/0 cells. Two hybridoma
monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) cell lines against the 3AB protein of foot-and-mouth
disease virus (FMDV) were obtained, named C6 and E7 respectively. The
microneutralization titer was 1:1024 for mAb C6, and 1:512 for E7. Both mAbs
contain kappa light chains, and were of subclass IgG2b. In order to define the
mAbs binding epitopes, the reactivity of these mAbs against FMDV were examined by
indirect ELISA. The results showed that both mAbs can react with FMDV, but had no
cross-reactivity with Swine Vesicular Disease (SVD) antigens. The titers in
abdomen liquor were 1:5×10(6) for C6 and 1:2×10(6) for E7. In conclusion, the
mAbs obtained from this study are specific for the detection of FMDV, can be used
for etiological and immunological researches on FMDV, and have potential use in
diagnosis and future vaccine designs.

PMID: 23055007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. J Mol Med (Berl). 2013 Apr;91(4):459-72. doi: 10.1007/s00109-012-0958-0. Epub
2012 Sep 30.

Fenretinide sensitizes multidrug-resistant human neuroblastoma cells to
antibody-independent and ch14.18-mediated NK cell cytotoxicity.

Shibina A(1), Seidel D, Somanchi SS, Lee DA, Stermann A, Maurer BJ, Lode HN,
Reynolds CP, Huebener N.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center School of
Medicine, Lubbock, TX, USA.

Neuroblastoma (NB) is the most common extracranial solid tumor in children.
Combining passive immunotherapy with an antibody to the disialoganglioside GD2
(ch14.18/SP2/0) and cytokines with 13-cis-retinoic acid for post-myeloablative
maintenance therapy increased survival in high-risk NB, but the overall prognosis
for these children is still in need of improvement. Fenretinide (4-HPR) is a
synthetic retinoid that has shown clinical activity in recurrent NB and is
cytotoxic to a variety of cancer cells, in part via the accumulation of
dihydroceramides, which are precursors of GD2. We investigated the effect of
4-HPR on CHO-derived, ch14.18-mediated anti-NB effector functions,
complement-dependent cytotoxicity (CDC), and antibody-dependent and
antibody-independent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC and AICC, respectively). Here,
we demonstrate for the first time that pretreatment of fenretinide-resistant NB
cells with 4-HPR significantly enhanced ch14.18/CHO-mediated CDC and ADCC and
AICC by both human natural killer cells and peripheral blood mononuclear cells.
Treatment with 4-HPR increased GD2 and death receptor (DR) expression in
resistant NB cells and induced an enhanced granzyme B and perforin production by 
effector cells. Blocking of ganglioside synthesis with a glucosylceramide
synthase inhibitor abrogated the increased ADCC response but had no effect on the
AICC, indicating that GD2 induced by 4-HPR mediates the sensitization of NB cells
for ADCC. We also showed that 4-HPR induced increased GD2 and DR expression in a 
resistant NB xenograft model that was associated with an increased ADCC and AICC 
response using explanted tumor target cells from 4-HPR-treated mice. In summary, 
these findings provide an important baseline for the combination of 4-HPR and
passive immunotherapy with ch14.18/CHO in future clinical trials for high-risk NB
patients.

PMID: 23052481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. BMC Syst Biol. 2012;6 Suppl 1:S2. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-6-S1-S2. Epub 2012 Jul
16.

A computational procedure for identifying master regulator candidates: a case
study on diabetes progression in Goto-Kakizaki rats.

Piao G(1), Saito S, Sun Y, Liu ZP, Wang Y, Han X, Wu J, Zhou H, Chen L, Horimoto 
K.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei,
China. wujr@sibs.ac.cn

BACKGROUND: We have recently identified a number of active regulatory networks
involved in diabetes progression in Goto-Kakizaki (GK) rats by network screening.
The networks were quite consistent with the previous knowledge of the regulatory 
relationships between transcription factors (TFs) and their regulated genes. To
study the underlying molecular mechanisms directly related to phenotype changes, 
such as diseases, we also previously developed a computational procedure for
identifying transcriptional master regulators (MRs) in conjunction with network
screening and network inference, by effectively perturbing the phenotype states.
RESULTS: In this work, we further improved our previous method for identifying MR
candidates, by listing them in a more reliable manner, and applied the method to 
reveal the MR candidates for diabetes progression in GK rats from the active
networks. Specifically, the active TF-gene pairs for different time periods in GK
rats were first extracted from the networks by network screening. Another set of 
active TF-gene pairs was selected by network inference, by considering the gene
expression signatures for those periods between GK and Wistar-Kyoto (WKY) rats.
The TF-gene pairs extracted by the two methods were then further selected, from
the viewpoints of the emergence specificity of TF in GK rats and the
regulated-gene coverage of TF in the expression signature. Finally, we narrowed
all of the genes down to only 5 TFs (Etv4, Fus, Nr2f1, Sp2, and Tcfap2b) as the
candidates of MRs, with 54 regulated genes, by merging the selected TF-gene
pairs.
CONCLUSIONS: The present method has successfully identified biologically
plausible MR candidates, including the TFs related to diabetes in previous
reports. Although the experimental verifications of the candidates and the
present procedure are beyond the scope of this study, we narrowed down the
candidates to 5 TFs, which can be used to perform the verification experiments
relatively easily. The numerical results showed that our computational method is 
an efficient way to detect the key molecules responsible for biological
phenomena.

PMCID: PMC3403593
PMID: 23046543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Am J Orthopsychiatry. 2012 Oct;82(4):573-84. doi:
10.1111/j.1939-0025.2012.01181.x.

Institutional predictors of developmental outcomes among racially diverse foster 
care alumni.

Garcia AR(1), Pecora PJ, Harachi T, Aisenberg E.

Author information: 
(1)School of Social Policy and Practice, University of Pennsylvania, 3701 Locust 
Walk, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. antgar@sp2.upenn.edu

Child welfare practitioners are confronted with the responsibility of relying on 
best practice to ensure children in foster care transition successfully into
adulthood after leaving the foster care system. Yet, despite recent reforms and
efforts to address their needs, research clearly shows that foster care alumni
are still more likely to experience negative developmental outcomes compared to
adults in the general population. The purpose of this study was to better
understand how child-serving systems of care adequately prepare racially diverse 
foster care alumni to thrive. Controlling for gender, age, placement instability,
and circumstances of exit from foster care, study findings highlighted salient
racial and ethnic differences relative to which factors predicted the odds of
mental health, education, and employment outcomes. Implications for developing
and implementing culturally sensitive, evidence-based prevention and intervention
programs to promote positive developmental outcomes among racially diverse foster
care alumni are discussed.

© 2012 American Orthopsychiatric Association.

PMCID: PMC3487698
PMID: 23039355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2012 Sep;12(9):6921-9.

A facile hydrothermal strategy for synthesis of SnO2 nanorods-graphene
nanocomposites for high performance photocatalysis.

Chen LY(1), Zhang WD, Xu B, Yu YX.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, South China University of
Technology, 381 Wushan Road, Guangzhou 510640, People's Republic of China.

In this study, we report a facilely hydrothermal process for synthesizing SnO2
nanorods-graphene (SnO2 nanorods-GR) composite using graphite oxide and SnCl4 as 
raw materials. The SnO2 nanorods-GR composite was characterized by X-ray
diffraction, electron microscopy, Xray photoelectron spectroscopy, and
thermogravimetric analysis. Compared to commercial TiO2 nanoparticles P25 and
neat SnO2 nanorods, the SnO2 nanorods-GR composite exhibits higher photocatalytic
activity under UV light irradiation. The mechanism of its high photocatalytic
activity is mainly ascribed to the synergy effect between SnO2 and graphene, in
which graphene acts as an adsorbent and electron acceptor due to its large
structure of pi-pi conjugation from sp2 hybrid carbon atoms. The results
demonstrated in this study provide a promising way to enhance the photocatalytic 
activity by compounding semiconductive nanocrystals with graphene.

PMID: 23035415  [PubMed]


491. Phys Rev Lett. 2012 Jul 13;109(2):025502. Epub 2012 Jul 9.

"Compressed graphite" formed during C60 to diamond transformation as revealed by 
scattering computed tomography.

Álvarez-Murga M(1), Bleuet P, Garbarino G, Salamat A, Mezouar M, Hodeau JL.

Author information: 
(1)European Synchrotron Radiation Facility, Grenoble F-38043 France and Institut 
Néel, CNRS, BP 166, F-38042 Grenoble Cedex 9, France.

The collapsing of C60 into polycrystalline diamond has been studied after
nonhydrostatic pressurization at ambient temperature using x-ray scattering
computed tomography. Using this selective structural probe we provide evidence of
concentric coexistence of "compressed graphite" (d(00l)~3.09-3.11<U+2009><U+2009>Å),
sp2-graphitelike phase (d(00l)~3.35-3.42<U+2009><U+2009>Å), and sp3-like amorphous carbon
surrounding polycrystalline diamond (a~3.56-3.59<U+2009><U+2009>Å). The so-called "compressed
graphite" exhibits a collapsed c axis and is textured with disordered layers.
This latter phase is better described as a short interlayered carbon phase with
buckled sp2-sp3 layers with possible interlayer bonding. Additionally, our 3D
maps of phase distribution and of the residual stress retained in the
polycrystalline diamond phase support the importance of stressed synthesis
conditions for diamond formation.

PMID: 23030177  [PubMed]


492. Chem Commun (Camb). 2012 Nov 7;48(86):10678-80. doi: 10.1039/c2cc35425j.

Copper-catalyzed intramolecular direct amination of sp2 C-H bonds for the
synthesis of N-aryl acridones.

Zhou W(1), Liu Y, Yang Y, Deng GJ.

Author information: 
(1)College of Chemical Engineering, Xiangtan University, Xiangtan 411105, China. 
wzhou@xtu.edu.cn

A copper-catalyzed approach for the synthesis of N-aryl acridones via sp(2) C-H
bond amination using air as oxidant under neutral conditions is disclosed. This
reaction not only provides a complementary method for synthesizing medicinally
important acridones, but also offers a new strategy for sp(2) C-H bond amination.

PMID: 23010788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. J Nat Med. 2013 Jul;67(3):512-8. doi: 10.1007/s11418-012-0708-1. Epub 2012 Sep
25.

Development of an indirect competitive enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(icELISA) using highly specific monoclonal antibody against paclitaxel.

Chao Z(1), Tan M, Paudel MK, Sakamoto S, Ma L, Sasaki-Tabata K, Tanaka H, Shoyama
Y, Xuan L, Morimoto S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Southern Medical University, 1023
Shatai Road South, Guangzhou, 510515, People's Republic of China.
chaozhi1971@yahoo.com.cn

Paclitaxel, the major active component of the yew tree, is used as an important
anti-cancer agent. To obtain the monoclonal antibody (MAb) against paclitaxel for
paclitaxel determination using immunoassay, 7-xylosyltaxol was conjugated to the 
carrier protein bovine serum albumin (BSA) to construct the immunogen, and the
ratio of hapten in XylTax-BSA conjugate was determined by matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry. After immunization of
mice with this conjugate, hybridomas secreting MAbs against paclitaxel were
obtained by fusing the splenocytes with the mouse myeloma cell line SP2/0. After 
hybridoma screening, the anti-paclitaxel MAb 3A3 was obtained, which showed a
relatively high specificity to paclitaxel (cross-reactivities against other
naturally occurred taxanes: 7-xylosyltaxol, 31.8%; cephalomannine, 6.17%;
baccatin III, 10-deacetyl-baccatin III, 1-hydroxybaccatin I,
13-acetyl-9-dihydrobaccatin III and 1-acetoxyl-5-deacetyl-baccatin I, <0.11%).
Using the MAb 3A3, we established an indirect competitive enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (icELISA) for paclitaxel determination with a detection range
of 0.098-312.5 µg ml(-1). Determination of paclitaxel contents in various yew
tree samples with this icELISA resulted in recovery rates ranging from 92 to
94.8%, and intra- and inter-assay variations of 3.6 and 4.7%, respectively. This 
icELISA provides a valuable method of paclitaxel determination for various
purposes.

PMID: 23007175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Phys Rev Lett. 2012 Jun 15;108(24):245501. Epub 2012 Jun 11.

Experimental evidence for epitaxial silicene on diboride thin films.

Fleurence A(1), Friedlein R, Ozaki T, Kawai H, Wang Y, Yamada-Takamura Y.

Author information: 
(1)School of Materials Science, Japan Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology (JAIST), 1-1 Asahidai, Nomi, Ishikawa 923-1292, Japan.

As the Si counterpart of graphene, silicene may be defined as an at least
partially sp2-hybridized, atom-thick honeycomb layer of Si that possesses
p-electronic bands. Here we show that two-dimensional, epitaxial silicene forms
through surface segregation on zirconium diboride thin films grown on Si wafers. 
A particular buckling of silicene induced by the epitaxial relationship with the 
diboride surface leads to a direct p-electronic band gap at the G point. These
results demonstrate that the buckling and thus the electronic properties of
silicene are modified by epitaxial strain.

PMID: 23004288  [PubMed]


495. Chemistry. 2012 Oct 29;18(44):13964-7. doi: 10.1002/chem.201202271. Epub 2012 Sep
20.

Synthesis of benzimidazoles by PIDA-promoted direct C(sp2)-H imidation of
N-arylamidines.

Huang J(1), He Y, Wang Y, Zhu Q.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institutes of
Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China.

A metal-free synthesis of diversified benzimidazoles from N-arylamidines through 
a phenyliodine(III) diacetate (PIDA) promoted intramolecular direct C(sp(2))-H
imidation has been developed. The reaction proceeds smoothly at 0 °C or ambient
temperature to provide the desired products in good to excellent yields. The
synthesis of 2-alkyl- or 2-alkyl-fused benzimidazoles, which are generally
inaccessible by similar Pd- or Cu-catalyzed approaches, can also be achieved.

Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22996950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Nanoscale. 2012 Oct 21;4(20):6658-63.

A physics/circuit-based switching model for carbon-based resistive memory with
sp2/sp3 cluster conversion.

Qin S(1), Zhang J, Fu D, Xie D, Wang Y, Qian H, Liu L, Yu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microelectronics, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.

The switching mechanism in carbon-based resistive-switching random access memory 
is modelled using a percolation approach built on the low-temperature transition 
between phases sp(3) (diamond-like and high-resistive state) and sp(2)
(graphite-like and low-resistive state) for a matrix of carbon clusters in a
diamond-like carbon film. The switching process is described using a random
circuit breaker network with each breaker controlled by the resistance of
clusters sp(2)/sp(3). The key feature of the proposed model is the thermal
stress-induced transition from sp(2) to sp(3) phase and the electric
field-induced transition from sp(3) to sp(2) phase. Compared with experiments on 
the switching biasing scheme, a good agreement between simulation and measured
data validated the accuracy of the proposed model.

PMID: 22990172  [PubMed]


497. J Am Chem Soc. 2012 Oct 3;134(39):16163-6. doi: 10.1021/ja3075242. Epub 2012 Sep 
25.

Rhodium-catalyzed cascade oxidative annulation leading to substituted
naphtho[1,8-bc]pyrans by sequential cleavage of C(sp2)-H/C(sp3)-H and
C(sp2)-H/O-H bonds.

Tan X(1), Liu B, Li X, Li B, Xu S, Song H, Wang B.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Elemento-Organic Chemistry, College of Chemistry,
Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China.

The cascade oxidative annulation reactions of benzoylacetonitrile with internal
alkynes proceed efficiently in the presence of a rhodium catalyst and a copper
oxidant to give substituted naphtho[1,8-bc]pyrans by sequential cleavage of
C(sp(2))-H/C(sp(3))-H and C(sp(2))-H/O-H bonds. These cascade reactions are
highly regioselective with unsymmetrical alkynes. Experiments reveal that the
first-step reaction proceeds by sequential cleavage of C(sp(2))-H/C(sp(3))-H
bonds and annulation with alkynes, leading to 1-naphthols as the intermediate
products. Subsequently, 1-naphthols react with alkynes by cleavage of
C(sp(2))-H/O-H bonds, affording the 1:2 coupling products. Moreover, some of the 
naphtho[1,8-bc]pyran products exhibit intense fluorescence in the solid state.

PMID: 22989331  [PubMed]


498. Anal Biochem. 2012 Dec 15;431(2):120-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ab.2012.09.006. Epub 2012 
Sep 11.

Specific detection of N-glycolylneuraminic acid and Gala1-3Gal epitopes of
therapeutic antibodies by partial-filling capillary electrophoresis.

Yagi Y(1), Kakehi K, Hayakawa T, Ohyama Y, Suzuki S.

Author information: 
(1)Kyowa Hakko Kirin Co., Ltd., Takasaki, Gunma 370-0013, Japan.
yuuki.yagi@kyowa-kirin.co.jp

The oligosaccharide structure is very important in biopharmaceuticals because of 
its effects on protein function, including efficacy and half-life.
N-glycolylneuraminic acid (Neu5Gc) and Gala1-3Gal (a-Gal) residues are known to
show immunogenicity in humans. It is now understood that murine cell lines, such 
as NS0 or SP2, which are typically used for biopharmaceutical manufacture,
produce proteins containing Neu5Gc and a-Gal residues. The expression of these
specific residues is affected by the cell line and culture conditions. Therefore,
monitoring and controlling the levels of these epitopes are important for the
quality control of biopharmaceuticals. To detect the two epitopes on a
therapeutic antibody produced by NS0 cells, we applied partial-filling capillary 
electrophoresis using anti-Neu5Gc antibody and a-galactosidase. In the
anti-Neu5Gc antibody filling method, one minor glycan peak with Neu5Gc residues
at the nonreducing end disappeared specifically from the electropherogram. In the
a-galactosidase filling method, some minor peaks with a1,3-linked Gal residues
disappeared. However, in a therapeutic antibody from Chinese hamster ovary cells,
no peaks disappeared with the two methods. These results show this method can be 
used to specifically detect and quantify the two epitopes on biopharmaceuticals
with high sensitivity.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22982507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. J Org Chem. 2012 Sep 21;77(18):8362-6. Epub 2012 Sep 13.

Pd(OAc)2-catalyzed alkoxylation of arylnitriles via sp2 C-H bond activation using
cyano as the directing group.

Li W(1), Sun P.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Biofunctional Materials, College of Chemistry and
Materials Science, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, 210097, China.

A Pd(OAc)(2)-catalyzed ortho-alkoxylation of arylnitrile was described. Using
cyano as a directing group, the aromatic C-H bond can be functionalized
efficiently to generate ortho-alkoxylated arylnitrile derivatives with moderate
yields. The optimal reaction conditions were identified after examining various
factors such as oxidant, solvent, and reaction temperature. The method was
compatible to the arylnitriles with either electron-withdrawing or
electron-donating groups.

PMID: 22946882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Plant Cell. 2012 Aug;24(8):3463-81. Epub 2012 Aug 31.

Selective regulation of maize plasma membrane aquaporin trafficking and activity 
by the SNARE SYP121.

Besserer A(1), Burnotte E, Bienert GP, Chevalier AS, Errachid A, Grefen C, Blatt 
MR, Chaumont F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut des Sciences de la Vie, Université Catholique de Louvain, B-1348
Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.

Plasma membrane intrinsic proteins (PIPs) are aquaporins facilitating the
diffusion of water through the cell membrane. We previously showed that the
traffic of the maize (Zea mays) PIP2;5 to the plasma membrane is dependent on the
endoplasmic reticulum diacidic export motif. Here, we report that the post-Golgi 
traffic and water channel activity of PIP2;5 are regulated by the SNARE (for
soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor protein attachment protein receptor)
SYP121, a plasma membrane resident syntaxin involved in vesicle traffic,
signaling, and regulation of K(+) channels. We demonstrate that the expression of
the dominant-negative SYP121-Sp2 fragment in maize mesophyll protoplasts or
epidermal cells leads to a decrease in the delivery of PIP2;5 to the plasma
membrane. Protoplast and oocyte swelling assays showed that PIP2;5 water channel 
activity is negatively affected by SYP121-Sp2. A combination of in vitro
(copurification assays) and in vivo (bimolecular fluorescence complementation,
Förster resonance energy transfer, and yeast split-ubiquitin) approaches allowed 
us to demonstrate that SYP121 and PIP2;5 physically interact. Together with
previous data demonstrating the role of SYP121 in regulating K(+) channel
trafficking and activity, these results suggest that SYP121 SNARE contributes to 
the regulation of the cell osmotic homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC3462644
PMID: 22942383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Org Lett. 2012 Sep 21;14(18):4966-9. Epub 2012 Aug 31.

Palladium-catalyzed C(sp2)-H cyanation using tertiary amine derived isocyanide as
a cyano source.

Peng J(1), Zhao J, Hu Z, Liang D, Huang J, Zhu Q.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institutes of
Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 190 Kaiyuan Avenue,
Guangzhou 510530, China.

An unprecedented palladium-catalyzed cyanation of aromatic C-H bonds by using
tertiary amine derived isocyanide as a novel cyano source was developed.
Cu(TFA)(2) was used as a requisite stoichiometric oxidant. Mechanistic studies
suggest that a tertiary carbon cation-based intermediate is involved following
the C-N bond breakage.

PMID: 22937807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Org Lett. 2012 Sep 7;14(17):4594-7. doi: 10.1021/ol3020557. Epub 2012 Aug 27.

Direct carbo-acylation reactions of 2-arylpyridines with a-diketones via
Pd-catalyzed C-H activation and selective C(sp2)-C(sp2) cleavage.

Zhou W(1), Li H, Wang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Huaibei Normal University, Huaibei, Anhui 235000, PR 
China.

An efficient carbo-acylation reaction of 2-arylpyridines with a-diketones via
Pd-catalyzed C-H bond activation and C-C bond cleavage in the presence of TBHP
was developed that generated aryl ketones in good yields. The highly selective
formation of aryl ketones was observed when 2-arylpyridines reacted with
aromatic/aliphatic a-diketones.

PMID: 22924751  [PubMed]


3. Chem Commun (Camb). 2012 Oct 9;48(78):9771-3. doi: 10.1039/c2cc35701a.

Organocatalytic deprotonative functionalization of C(sp2)-H and C(sp3)-H bonds
using in situ generated onium amide bases.

Inamoto K(1), Okawa H, Taneda H, Sato M, Hirono Y, Yonemoto M, Kikkawa S, Kondo
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University, 6-3, Aoba,
Aramaki, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8578, Japan. inamoto@m.tohoku.ac.jp

Onium amides, generated in situ from the combination of aminosilanes and onium
fluorides (R(4)PF, R(4)NF), are employed for the first time as bases for
catalytic deprotonative functionalization of C(sp(2))-H and activated C(sp(3))-H 
bonds under mild conditions.

PMID: 22918470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Oral Implantol. 2012 Aug;38(4):377-90. doi: 10.1563/AAID-JOI-D-11-00212.

Implant-guided volumetric analysis of edentulous maxillary bone with cone-beam
computerized tomography scan. Maxillary sinus pneumatization classification.

Tolstunov L, Thai D, Arellano L.

The primary goal of this anatomic study was to measure the average bone volume of
the edentulous maxilla with a cone-beam computerized tomography (CBCT) scan and
to determine its suitability for implant treatment without additional bone
grafting. The secondary goal of the study was to estimate the degree of sinus
pneumatization (SP) in reviewed CBCT scans, assess the sinus-to-maxillary bone
interrelationship in edentulism, and attempt to classify maxillary sinuses based 
on the degree of their pneumatization. This retrospective radiographic
quantitative study consisted of the analysis of CBCT scans of 30 randomly
selected maxillary edentulous patients who presented in 2008-2010 to the
University of the Pacific, Arthur A. Dugoni School of Dentistry, for evaluation
and treatment of their edentulism. A volume of edentulous maxillary bone mesial
to the maxillary sinuses (intersinal region) that can be used for a full-arch
implant treatment was evaluated based on specifically selected and clinically
relevant measurement criteria. There were 30 CBCT scans of maxillary edentulous
patients reviewed (9 men, 21 women) with a mean age of 67.3 years (range, 41 to
92 years). The total mean maxillary bone volume (MMBV) suitable for implantation 
was 4<U+2009>408.1 mm(3) and ranged from 1489.7 to 7263.1 mm(3). The MMBV in the study
was higher than an assumed or hypothetical bone volume minimally suitable for
4-implant treatment as proposed by the authors for comparative purposes (3500
mm(3)). The degree of SP as seen on a CBCT scan (60 sinuses analyzed on panoramic
images of 30 CBCT scans) had the following results in the study: SP0 (clear: not 
interfering with implant treatment in cases of high/small sinus), 2 sinuses or
3.3%; SP1 (mild sinus enlargement), 29 sinuses or 48.3%; SP2 (moderate SP), 16
sinuses or 26.7%; SP3 (severe SP), 9 sinuses or 15.0%; and SP4 (extreme), 4
sinuses or 6.7%. Most analyzed maxillary sinuses (47 of 60, or 78.3%) were in the
clear, mild, or moderate categories of SP (SP0, SP1, and SP2), which have a
sufficient amount of maxillary bone beneath the maxillary sinuses to allow a
full-arch implant treatment. An inverse correlation between SP and MMBV was
observed. Although many other clinical criteria are important (bone quality,
alveolar crest anatomy, etc), the results of this CBCT radiographic study
indicate that in many maxillary edentulous cases, the existing bone quantity
(volume) can be sufficient for a full-arch maxillary implant treatment with at
least 4 implants without the additional trauma or expense of bone grafts and
sinus lifts. A variety of implant treatment options can be proposed based on
maxillary bone availability and bone-to-sinus interrelationship. It appears that 
with age and edentulism, the amount of available maxillary bone is steadily
decreasing.

PMID: 22913308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Acta Histochem. 2013 Apr;115(3):240-4. doi: 10.1016/j.acthis.2012.07.003. Epub
2012 Aug 15.

Generation and characterization of new HER2 monoclonal antibodies.

Vasconcellos FA(1), Aleixo PB, Stone SC, Conceição FR, Dellagostin OA, Aleixo JA.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Biotecnologia/Centro de Desenvolvimento
Tecnológico, Universidade Federal de Pelotas, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.
aleixo.flavia@yahoo.com.br

Antibodies are among the most commonly used research and diagnostic tools.
Antibody type and clonality are important in any assay as they can influence
epitope detection. HER2 oncoprotein is overexpressed or undergoes gene
amplification in approximately 30% of invasive breast carcinomas and 20% of
gastric adenocarcinomas. Overexpression of HER2 is primarily detected by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) on neoplastic tissue sections. We produced five murine
hybridoma clones secreting monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) against HER2 protein. For
hybridoma production, spleen cells from BALB/c mice immunized with a recombinant 
fragment of the extracellular portion of HER2 (rHER2) were fused to SP2/O-Ag14
cells, selected in HAT medium and screened by indirect ELISA. MAbs secreted were 
characterized according to isotypes, functional affinity constants, reaction with
the native protein in MCF-7 cells by indirect immunofluorescence and in tissue
sections from HER2 positive breast cancer specimens by IHC. Two MAbs were IgG2b
and three were IgG1, and their affinity constants ranged from 6×10(7) to
1×10(9)M(-1). All MAbs reacted with the native protein and two stained strongly
the membrane of neoplastic cells overexpressing HER2. These two MAbs could be
useful in assaying HER2 overexpression in human tissues for research and possibly
diagnostic purposes after a proper large-scale validation study.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22901624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Nanoscale Res Lett. 2012 Aug 19;7(1):466. doi: 10.1186/1556-276X-7-466.

Unusual surface and edge morphologies, sp2 to sp3 hybridized transformation and
electronic damage after Ar+ ion irradiation of few-layer graphene surfaces.

Al-Harthi SH(1), Elzain M, Al-Barwani M, Kora'a A, Hysen T, Myint MT,
Anantharaman MR.

Author information: 
(1)Physics Department, College of Science, Sultan Qaboos University, P,O, Box 36,
Al Khoud, Sultan Qaboos, Muscat, 123, Oman. salim1@squ.edu.om.

Roughness and defects induced on few-layer graphene (FLG) irradiated by Ar+ ions 
at different energies were investigated using X-ray photoemission spectroscopy
(XPS) and atomic force microscopy techniques. The results provide direct
experimental evidence of ripple formation, sp2 to sp3 hybridized carbon
transformation, electronic damage, Ar+ implantation, unusual defects and edge
reconstructions in FLG, which depend on the irradiation energy. In addition,
shadowing effects similar to those found in oblique-angle growth of thin films
were seen. Reliable quantification of the transition from the sp2-bonding to
sp3-hybridized state as a result of Ar+ ion irradiation is achieved from the
deconvolution of the XPS C (1s) peak. Although the ion irradiation effect is
demonstrated through the shape of the derivative of the Auger transition C KVV
spectra, we show that the D parameter values obtained from these spectra which
are normally used in the literature fail to account for the sp2 to sp3
hybridization transition. In contrast to what is known, it is revealed that using
ion irradiation at large FLG sample tilt angles can lead to edge reconstructions.
Furthermore, FLG irradiation by low energy of 0.25 keV can be a plausible way of 
peeling graphene layers without the need of Joule heating reported previously.

PMCID: PMC3496642
PMID: 22901368  [PubMed]


7. Org Med Chem Lett. 2012 Aug 16;2(1):30. doi: 10.1186/2191-2858-2-30.

Chemical characterization, antioxidant and inhibitory effects of some marine
sponges against carbohydrate metabolizing enzymes.

Shaaban M(1), Abd-Alla HI, Hassan AZ, Aly HF, Ghani MA.

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry of Natural Compounds Department, Division of Pharmaceutical
Industries, National Research Centre, Dokki, Giza, 12622, Egypt.
mshaaba_99@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: More than 15,000 marine products have been described up to now;
Sponges are champion producers, concerning the diversity of products that have
been found. Most bioactive compounds from sponges were classified into
anti-inflammatory, antitumor, immuno- or neurosurpressive, antiviral,
antimalarial, antibiotic, or antifouling. Evaluation of in vitro inhibitory
effects of different extracts from four marine sponges versus some antioxidants
indices and carbohydrate hydrolyzing enzymes concerned with diabetes mellitus was
studied. The chemical characterizations for the extracts of the predominating
sponges; SP1 and SP3 were discussed.
METHODS: All chemicals served in the biological study were of analytical grade
and purchased from Sigma, Merck and Aldrich. All kits were the products of
Biosystems (Spain), Sigma Chemical Company (USA), Biodiagnostic (Egypt).
Carbohydrate metabolizing enzymes; Î±-amylase, Î±-glucosidase, and
Î²-galactosidase (EC3.2.1.1, EC3.2.1.20, and EC3.2.1.23, respectively) were
obtained from Sigma Chemical Company (USA).
RESULTS: Four marine sponges; Smenospongia (SP1), Callyspongia (SP2), Niphates
(SP3), and Stylissa (SP4), were collected from the Red Sea at Egyptian coasts,
and taxonomically characterized. The sponges' extracts exhibited diverse
inhibitory effects on oxidative stress indices and carbohydrate hydrolyzing
enzymes in linear relationships to some extent with concentration of inhibitors
(dose dependant). The extracts of sponges (3, 1, and 2) showed, respectively,
potent-reducing power. Purification and Chemical characterization of sponge 1
using NMR and mass spectroscopy, recognized the existence of di-isobutyl
phthalate (1), di-n-butyl phthalate (2), linoleic acid (3), ß-sitosterol (4), and
cholesterol (5). Sponge 3 produced bis-[2-ethyl]-hexyl-phthylester (6) and
triglyceride fatty acid ester (7).
CONCLUSION: Marine sponges are promising sources for delivering of bioactive
compounds. Four marine sponges, collected from Red Sea at Egyptian coasts, were
identified as Smenospongia (SP1), Callyspongia (SP2), Niphates (SP3), and
Stylissa (SP4). The results demonstrated that different sponges extracts
exhibited inhibitory effects on oxidative stress indices and carbohydrate
hydrolyzing enzymes in linear relationships to some extent with concentration of 
inhibitors (dose dependant). The extracts of sponges (3, 1, and 2) showed,
respectively, potent-reducing power. Chemical characterizations of sponges SP1
and SP3 were discussed. Based on this study, marine sponges are considered as
talented sources for production of diverse and multiple biologically active
compounds.

PMCID: PMC3524779
PMID: 22898269  [PubMed]


8. Nanoscale Res Lett. 2012 Aug 16;7(1):460. doi: 10.1186/1556-276X-7-460.

Spontaneous formation of graphene-like stripes on high-index diamond C(331)
surface.

Xu M(1), Zhang Y, Zhang J, Lu J, Qian B, Lu D, Zhang Y, Wang L, Chen X, Shigekawa
H.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Thin Film and Microfabrication of the Ministry of
Education, Research Institute of Micro/Nano Science and Technology, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai, 200240, People's Republic of China.
yfzhang@sjtu.edu.cn.

We employ first-principles density functional theory calculations to study the
surface reconstruction, energetic stability, and electronic structure of diamond 
C(331) surface. Spontaneous formation of graphene-like stripes on the
reconstructed surface is found to occur as the surface terrace C atoms transform 
from sp3 to sp2 hybridization upon structural relaxation. The comparison of the
calculated absolute surface energies of C(331), C(111), and C(110) surfaces
demonstrates the energetic stability of the graphitic-like C(331) surface. Local 
density of electronic states analysis reveals the occurrence of localized
electronic states near the Fermi level, which may have a significant impact on
the surface conductivity.

PMCID: PMC3552805
PMID: 22898095  [PubMed]


9. Methods Mol Biol. 2012;913:191-200. doi: 10.1007/978-1-61779-986-0_12.

In vivo imaging of nitric oxide and reactive oxygen species using laser scanning 
confocal microscopy.

Xie YJ(1), Shen WB.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China.

Both nitric oxide (NO) and reactive oxygen species (ROS) are versatile molecules 
that mediate a variety of cellular responses in plants. In this chapter, methods 
for imaging NO and ROS using laser scanning confocal microscopy (LSCM) are
presented. Arabidopsis roots, dyed with DAF-FM or H(2)DCF, are observed using the
Leica TCS-SP2 LSCM. NO or ROS production are imaged and their kinetic changes
monitored with the laser excitation and emission wavelengths at 488 nm and
between 500 and 530 nm, respectively. In addition, Leica software is employed to 
visualize and calculate the fluorescence intensity data.

PMID: 22895760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2012 Aug;31(4):240-5. doi: 10.1089/hyb.2012.0011.

Inhibition of cell division in mouse B-cell hybridomas: an overlooked property of
2-mercaptoethanol and its impact on in vitro antibody production.

Abebe M(1), Dirieh Y, Ahmad A, Kumar V, Sevinc S.

Author information: 
(1)Healthy Environment and Consumer Safety Branch, Health Canada, Ottawa, Canada.
Makonnen.Abebe@hc-sc.gc.ca

Thiol 2-mercaptoethanol (2-ME) has been reported to enhance growth in lymphocytes
by various investigators. Some have used 50<U+2009>µM for growing hybridomas in vitro.
Concentrations of 50 and 5<U+2009>µM in 5% FBS supplemented D-MEM were tested to
determine their effects on the growth of 5 monoclonal antibody secreting mouse B 
cell hybridomas and the myeloma Sp2/O-Ag14. Viability after 24 and 48<U+2009>h exposure 
was determined by Trypan blue exclusion. Analysis by one-way ANOVA confirmed that
50<U+2009>µM 2-ME has a significant negative impact (p<0.05) on hybridoma as well as on 
myeloma growth, whereas no significant difference (p>0.05) between the control
and the 5<U+2009>µM treatment group was observed after 48<U+2009>h. Also, no significant
difference (p>0.05) in the mortality rates between the control and the treatment 
groups was found. When combined with the observed protracted doubling time in the
50<U+2009>µM treatment group, these results indicate that the impact of 2-ME is due to
inhibition of cell division. The degree of inhibition was observed to vary
between the different hybridomas as well as the myeloma. Although the impact of
2-ME on mitosis has been demonstrated in organisms such as the ciliated protozoan
Tetrahymena pyriformis, the yeast Saccharomycess cerevisiae, and the egg of the
echinoid the sand dollar Dendraster excentricus, this work demonstrates for the
first time that 2-ME impedes the growth of mouse B cell hybridomas. We conclude
that adding 2-ME to mouse B cell hybridoma growth media may not be beneficial.

PMID: 22894776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Langmuir. 2012 Sep 11;28(36):13118-26. doi: 10.1021/la302393p. Epub 2012 Aug 29.

Selective capture and collection of live target cells using a photoreactive
silicon wafer device modified with antibodies via a photocleavable linker.

Ariyasu S(1), Hanaya K, Watanabe E, Suzuki T, Horie K, Hayase M, Abe R, Aoki S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Technologies against Cancer, Tokyo University of Science, 2641
Yamazaki, Noda, Japan.

A device for the capture and recollection of live target cells is described. The 
platform was a silicon (Si) wafer modified with an anti-HEL antibody
(anti-HEL-IgG, HEL = hen egg lysozyme) through a photocleavable
3-amino-3-(2-nitrophenyl)propionic acid (ANP) linker. The modification processes 
of the Si wafer surface were monitored by Fourier transform infrared
spectroscopy-attenuated total reflection (FTIR-ATR) and fast-scanning atomic
force microscopy (FS-AFM). The attachment of IgG and its release reaction on the 
Si surface via the photochemical cleavage of the ANP linker were observed
directly by FS-AFM. The results of an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
indicated that the photorelease of the complex of anti-HEL-IgG with the secondary
antibody-alkaline phosphatase hybrid (secondary IgG-AP) from the Si surface
occurs with minimum damage. Furthermore, it was possible to collect SP2/O cells
selectively that express HEL on their cell membranes (SP2/O-HEL) on the Si wafer 
device. Photochemical cleavage of the ANP linker facilitated the effective
release of living SP2/O cells whose viability was verified by staining
experiments using tripan blue. Moreover, it was possible to reculture the
recovered cells. This methodology represents an effective strategy for isolating 
intact target cells in the biological and medicinal sciences and related fields.

PMID: 22889078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Hypertens Res. 2013 Jan;36(1):19-24. doi: 10.1038/hr.2012.123. Epub 2012 Aug 9.

Central blood pressure: a powerful predictor of the development of hypertension.

Tomiyama H(1), O'rourke MF, Hashimoto H, Matsumoto C, Odaira M, Yoshida M, Shiina
K, Nagata M, Yamashina A.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo,
Japan. tomiyama@tokyo-med.ac.jp

We examined whether the central aortic systolic blood pressure, a marker of the
function of the systemic arterial tree, might be a more powerful predictor of the
development of hypertension than the brachial-ankle pulse wave velocity, a marker
of the stiffness of the large- to middle-sized arteries, independent of the
conventional risk factors for the development of hypertension. In 1268 Japanese
men without hypertension (43±8 years old), the relationships between three
variables (the second peak of the radial pressure waveform (SP2), brachial-ankle 
pulse wave velocity and conventional risk factors measured at the first
examination) with the presence of hypertension at the second examination (after 3
years' follow-up) were examined. Hypertension was detected at the second
examination in 154 men. The best cutoff points of the brachial-ankle pulse wave
velocity and SP2, for predicting the development of hypertension, were 12.7<U+2009>m/s
and 109<U+2009>mm<U+2009>Hg, respectively. The results of a logistic regression analysis
confirmed that an SP2 of =109<U+2009>mm<U+2009>Hg (odds ratio=8.493, P<0.001) was a more
powerful predictor of the development of hypertension than a brachial-ankle pulse
wave velocity of =12.7<U+2009>m/s, independent of the conventional risk factors. The net
reclassification index of SP2 (at the best cutoff point) to brachial-ankle pulse 
wave velocity was 0.211 (P<0.001), indicating that SP2 is a better predictor of
the development of hypertension than brachial-ankle pulse wave velocity. In
middle-aged Japanese men without hypertension, SP2 may be a more powerful
predictor of the development of hypertension than the assessment of stiffness in 
large to middle-sized arteries independent of the conventional risk factors.

PMID: 22875067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Aug;28(8):841-3.

[Preparation and identification of monoclonal antibodies against recombinant N
protein of mouse hepatitis virus].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou J(1), Zhao L, Hu JH, Gao C.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Research Center of Laboratory Animal, Chinese Academy of Science,
Shanghai, China. zhoujie1025@yahoo.com.cn

AIM: To prepare and characterize the monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) against N
protein of mouse hepatitis virus (MHV).
METHODS: BALB/c mice were immunostimulated with the purified recombinant N
protein expressed by Bac-to-Bac baculovirus expression system. Then the spleen
cells of the immunized mice were fused with Sp2/0 myeloma cells by conventional
hybridoma techniques. An indirect ELISA using recombinant N protein as antigen
was established to screen antibody-producing hybridoma cell lines. Western
blotting and IFA were applied to characterize the mAbs.
RESULTS: We obtained four hybridoma cell lines secreting mAbs against recombinant
N protein. The subclasses of two mAbs were IgG2a, one IgG2b and the other IgG1,
and light chains were both Kappa. Western blotting showed that the mAbs
specifically recognized certain antigenic epitope of N protein of MHV.
CONCLUSION: mAbs against N protein of MHV with high activity and specificity were
prepared successfully, which provides a potential basis for further researches on
N protein function and diagnostic methods.

PMID: 22863592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Org Lett. 2012 Aug 17;14(16):4210-3. doi: 10.1021/ol3018819. Epub 2012 Aug 2.

Ruthenium-catalyzed oxidative C(sp2)-H bond hydroxylation: site-selective C-O
bond formation on benzamides.

Thirunavukkarasu VS(1), Hubrich J, Ackermann L.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Organische und Biomolekulare Chemie, Georg-August-Universität,
Tammannstrasse 2, 37077 Göttingen, Germany.

Well-defined ruthenium carboxylate complexes enabled unprecedented
ruthenium-catalyzed C(sp(2))-H hydroxylations on benzamides with PhI(OAc)(2) as
the oxidant at a remarkably low catalyst loading of 1.0 mol %.

PMID: 22853552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Biotechnol Prog. 2012 Sep-Oct;28(5):1138-51. doi: 10.1002/btpr.1606. Epub 2012
Sep 18.

Bioreactor environment-sensitive sentinel genes as novel metrics for cell culture
scale-down comparability.

Kondragunta B(1), Joshi BH, Han J, Brorson KA, Puri RK, Moreira AR, Rao G.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Sensor Technology and Dept. of Chemical, Biochemical and
Environmental Engineering, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD 21250, USA.

Scale-down of bioreactors is currently done based on matching one or more
measurable parameters such as k(L) a and P/V, which could result in insufficient 
process comparability. Currently, there is a lack of genomic translational
studies in cell culture scale-down, which could help delineate measurable
cellular attributes for improved scale-down. In this study, we scaled-down from a
typical bench-scale 5-L bioreactor to a novel high-throughput 35-mL
minibioreactor based on matching oxygen transfer rate, which resulted in cell
growth and product-related discrepancies using Sp2/0 cells. Performing DNA
microarrays on time-course samples from both systems, we identified ~200
differentially expressed transcripts, presumably because of bioreactor aeration
and mixing differences with scale-down. Evaluating these transcripts for
bioreactor-relevant cellular functions such as oxidative stress response and DNA 
damage response, we chose 18 sentinel genes based on their degree of difference
and functionality, which we further verified by quantitative real-time polymerase
chain reaction (qRT-PCR). Tracking the differential expression of Sod1, Apex1,
and Odc1 genes, we were able to correlate sparging-related damage and poor
mixing, as possible causes for physiological changes such as prolonged culture in
minibioreactors. Additionally, to verify our sentinel gene findings, we performed
follow-up improved scale-down studies based on gene analysis and measured
transcriptomic changes. As a result, qRT-PCR-based genomic profiles and cell
growth profiles showed better convergence between the improved minibioreactor
conditions and the model 5-L bioreactor. Our results broadly show that based on
the knowledge from transcriptomic changes of sentinel gene profiles, it is
possible to improve bioreactor scale-down for more comparable processes.

Copyright © 2012 American Institute of Chemical Engineers (AIChE).

PMID: 22848039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Am J Cardiol. 2012 Nov 1;110(9):1219-24. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2012.06.021. Epub
2012 Jul 25.

Meta-analysis of the effect of cardiac rehabilitation interventions on depression
outcomes in adults 64 years of age and older.

Gellis ZD(1), Kang-Yi C.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Mental Health and Aging, School of Social Policy and Practice,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
zgellis@sp2.upenn.edu

Heart disease is a major cause of hospitalization and is associated with greater 
impairment than arthritis, diabetes mellitus, or lung disease. Depression is
prevalent and a serious co-morbidity in heart disease with negative consequences 
including higher levels of chronic physical illness, decreased psychological
well-being, and increased health care costs. The objective of the study was to
examine with meta-analysis the impact of community-based cardiac rehabilitation
(CR) treatment on depression outcomes in older adults. Randomized controlled
trials comparing patients (=64 years old) receiving CR to cardiac controls were
considered. Meta-analyses were based on 18 studies that met inclusion criteria,
comprising 1,926 treatment participants and 1,901 controls. Effect sizes (ESs)
ranged from -0.39 (in favor of control group) to 1.09 (in favor of treatment
group). Mean weighted ES was 0.28, and 11 studies showed positive ESs.
Meta-analysis suggests that most CR programs delivered in the home can
significantly mitigate depression symptoms. Tailored interventions combined with 
psychosocial interventions are likely to be more effective in decreasing
depression in older adults with heart disease than usual care.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22835411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2011 Aug;19(7):2619-26. doi:
10.1007/s11356-012-0819-y. Epub 2012 Jul 21.

Production of monoclonal antibody and application in indirect competitive ELISA
for detecting okadaic acid and dinophytoxin-1 in seafood.

Lu SY(1), Zhou Y, Li YS, Lin C, Meng XM, Yan DM, Li ZH, Yu SY, Liu ZS, Ren HL.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Zoonosis Research, Ministry of Education, Institute of
Zoonosis, Jilin University, Changchun, 130062, People's Republic of China.
lushiying1129@163.com

BACKGROUND, AIM, AND SCOPE: Okadaic acid (OA) and analogues of dinophysistoxin
(DTX) are key diarrheic shellfish poisoning (DSP) toxins, which possibly arouse
DSP symptoms by consuming the contaminated shellfish. Because of the stable
toxicity in high temperature and the long-term carcinogenicity, the outbreaks of 
DSP related to consumption of bivalve mollusks contaminated by DSP toxins pose a 
hazard to public health. Therefore, it is worth developing a fast and reliable
analytical method for the detection of OA and analogues in shellfish. In this
paper, an indirect competitive enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
(icELISA) for detecting OA and DTX-1 in seafood was developed based on monoclonal
antibody (McAb).
METHODS: The OA was conjugated to human immunoglobulin G (IgG) and bovine serum
albumin (BSA) by the active ester method as the immune antigen and the detective 
antigen. The spleen cells from BALB/c mice immunized with OA-IgG were fused with 
SP2/0 myeloma cells. A hybridoma cell line, which secreted McAb against OA, was
selected by "limiting dilution" cloning. An icELISA was developed based on
immobilized conjugate (OA-BSA) competing the McAb with the free OA in seafood
sample.
RESULTS: A hybridoma cell line, which secreted IgG1 subclass monoclonal antibody 
(McAb) against OA, was selected. The IC(50) of the McAb for OA and dinophytoxin-1
(DTX-1) were 4.40 and 3.89 ng/mL, respectively. Based on the McAb, an indirect
competitive ELISA for detection of OA and DTX-1 in seafood was developed. The
regression equation was y<U+2009>=<U+2009>54.713x<U+2009>-<U+2009>25.879 with a coefficient correlation of R 
(2)<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.9729. The linear range and the limit of detection were 0.4-12.5 and
0.45 ng/mL, respectively. The average recovery of OA and DTX-1 spiked shellfish
was 82.29% with the coefficient of variation of 7.67%.
CONCLUSION: The developed icELISA is a fast, sensitive, and convenient assay for 
detecting of total amount of OA and DTX-1 in seafood.

PMID: 22828889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Indian J Exp Biol. 2012 Jul;50(7):459-63.

Production and characterization of monoclonal antibodies against a local isolate 
of classical swine fever virus.

Sarma DK(1), Kashyap N, Deka P, Medhi P, Roychoudhury P.

Author information: 
(1)National Fellow Project Laboratory, Department of Microbiology, College of
Veterinary Science, Assam Agricultural University, Khanapara, Guwahati 781 022,
India. dksarma1956@gmail.com

Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) against a classical swine fever virus (CSFV;
subgenogroup 1:1) isolate from Assam, India were produced and characterized. Four
fusions of myeloma cells (SP2/0Ag) were made with spleenocytes of 8-10 weeks old 
BALB/C mice immunized with the viral antigen. Several hybridoma clones secreting 
antibodies to the virus were obtained after four fusions, but five hybridoma
clones secreting antibody specific to the virus could be stabilized. All the mAbs
belong to the IgG2a isotype. Except one, none of the four mAbs showed cross
reaction with bovine viral diarrhoea virus and border disease virus (BDV). One
mAb showed cross reaction with BDV. All the four mAbs specific to CSFV showed
reactivity with the parental virus in immunoperoxidase test (IPT) and with a
single protein band (molecular weight 55 kD approximately) of the virus in
western blotting. In neutralization peroxidase linked assay (NPLA) all the mAbs
reacted with 13 CSFV local isolates as well as with the cell culture adapted
lapinized vaccine virus strain belonging to the subgenogroup 1:1. This is the
first report on production and characterization of mAbs against CSFV in India.

PMID: 22822524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Bull Exp Biol Med. 2012 May;153(1):139-42.

Generation of monoclonal antibodies to recombinant vascular endothelial growth
factor.

Shein SA(1), Gurina OI, Leopol'd AV, Baklaushev VP, Korchagina AA, Grinenko NF,
Ivanova NV, Volgina NE, Ryabukhin IA, Chekhonin VP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nanobiotechnologies, N. I. Pirogov Russian National
Research Medical University, Moscow, Russia. atomos@rambler.ru

Female BALB/c mice were subcutaneously immunized with recombinant VEGF-164. After
3 immunization cycles, splenic B cells from immunized mouse were fused with
immortalized myeloma culture SP2/0-Ag14 cells. Screening of hybrid cells
producing anti-VEGF antibodies was performed by ELISA and immunocytochemical
analysis on cultured C6 glioma cells. Subsequent cloning yielded hybridoma stably
expressing monoclonal anti-VEGF antibodies recognizing recombinant and native
VEGF.

PMID: 22808513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Infect Agent Cancer. 2012 Jul 17;7(1):16. doi: 10.1186/1750-9378-7-16.

A novel monoclonal antibody for detection of galectin-9 in tissue sections:
application to human tissues infected by oncogenic viruses.

Barjon C(1), Niki T, Vérillaud B, Opolon P, Bedossa P, Hirashima M, Blanchin S,
Wassef M, Rosen HR, Jimenez AS, Wei M, Busson P.

Author information: 
(1)University Paris-Sud 11, CNRS-UMR 8126, Institut de Cancérologie Gustave
Roussy, 114 rue Edouard Vaillant, 94805, Villejuif cedex, France.
pierre.busson@igr.fr.

BACKGROUND: Galectin-9 is a mammalian lectin which possesses immunosuppressive
properties. Excessive production of galectin-9 has been reported in two types of 
human virus-associated diseases chronic hepatitis C and nasopharyngeal carcinoma 
associated to the Epstein-Barr virus. The objective of this study was to produce 
new monoclonal antibodies targeting galectin-9 in order to improve its detection 
in clinical samples, especially on tissue sections analysed by
immunohistochemistry.
METHODS: Hybridomas were produced through immunization of mice with the
recombinant c-terminus part of galectin-9 (residues 191 to 355 of the long
isoform) and semi-solid fusion of spleen cells with Sp2/0 cells. Monoclonal
antibodies were characterized using ELISA, epitope mapping, western blot and
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: We selected seven hybridomas producing antibodies reacting with our
recombinant c-terminus galectin-9 in ELISA. Five of them reacted with the epitope
"TPAIPPMMYPHPA" (common to all isoforms, residues 210 to 222 of the long isoform)
and stained all three isoforms of galectin-9 analysed by western blot. One of
them, 1G3,demonstrated very good sensitivity and specificity when used for
immunohistochemistry. Using 1G3, we could confirm the intense and constant
expression of galectin-9 by Epstein-Barr virus positive malignant cells from
nasopharyngeal carcinomas. In most samples, specific staining was detected in
both cytoplasm and nuclei. Galectin-9 was also detected in liver biopsies from
patients infected by the human hepatitis C or B viruses with expression not only 
in inflammatory leucocytes and Kupffer cells, but also in hepatocytes. In
contrast, galectin-9 was virtually absent in non-infected liver specimens.
CONCLUSION: The 1G3 monoclonal antibody will be a powerful tool to assess
galectin-9 expression and distribution especially in diseases related to
oncogenic viruses.

PMCID: PMC3464730
PMID: 22805533  [PubMed]


21. Chem Soc Rev. 2012 Sep 7;41(17):5588-98. doi: 10.1039/c2cs35096c. Epub 2012 Jul
10.

From C(sp2)-H to C(sp3)-H: systematic studies on transition metal-catalyzed
oxidative C-C formation.

Li BJ(1), Shi ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing National Laboratory of Molecular Sciences, College of Chemistry and
Green Chemistry Center, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China.

In this tutorial review, we will summarize our recent efforts in transition
metal-catalyzed oxidative coupling via C-H functionalization of aromatic,
benzylic and allylic C-H bonds. Related works from other laboratories will be
cited where suitable, aiming to give the readers a flavor of this field. Special 
emphasis is placed on the reaction design and development.

PMID: 22782263  [PubMed]


22. Chem Commun (Camb). 2012 Aug 14;48(63):7847-9. doi: 10.1039/c2cc33203e. Epub 2012
Jul 4.

Copper-catalyzed decarboxylative C(sp2)-C(sp3) coupling reactions via radical
mechanism.

Yang H(1), Sun P, Zhu Y, Yan H, Lu L, Qu X, Li T, Mao J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Organic Synthesis of Jiangsu Province, College of Chemistry,
Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Soochow University, Suzhou, 215123,
P. R. China.

We have successfully developed an example of copper-catalyzed decarboxylative
C(sp(2))-C(sp(3)) coupling reactions via C-H functionalization for the first
time. It is noteworthy that our catalytic system is very stable, low-cost,
palladium-free, ligand-free, and easily accessible.

PMID: 22760299  [PubMed]


23. Chemistry. 2012 Jul 27;18(31):9677-81. doi: 10.1002/chem.201200506. Epub 2012 Jun
28.

Analysis of why boron avoids sp2  hybridization and classical structures in the
BnHn+2 series.

Osorio E(1), Olson JK, Tiznado W, Boldyrev AI.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas, Universidad Andres
Bello, Av. República 252, Santiago, Chile.

We performed global minimum searches for the B(n) H(n+2) (n=2-5) series and found
that classical structures composed of 2c-2e B-H and B-B bonds become
progressively less stable along the series. Relative energies increase from
2.9 kcal<U+2009>mol(-1) in B(2) H(4) to 62.3 kcal<U+2009>mol(-1) in B(5) H(7). We believe this 
occurs because boron atoms in the studied molecules are trying to avoid sp(2)
 hybridization and trigonal structure at the boron atoms, as in that case one
2p-AO is empty, which is highly unfavorable. This affinity of boron to have some 
electron density on all 2p-AOs and avoiding having one 2p-AO empty is a main
reason why classical structures are not the most stable configurations and why
multicenter bonding is so important for the studied boron-hydride clusters as
well as for pure boron clusters and boron compounds in general.

Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22745112  [PubMed]


24. Parasitol Res. 2012 Oct;111(4):1645-50. Epub 2012 Jun 28.

Production of monoclonal antibodies for Plasmodium vivax lactate dehydrogenase
and patient sera screening using sandwich ELISA.

Kim JH(1), Lee J, Sohn HJ, Song HO, Kim JY, Lee WJ, Park H, Shin HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, and Molecular Science and Technology, Ajou
University School of Medicine, Suwon 443-721, Republic of Korea.

Malaria is a worldwide infectious disease. There are many diagnostic kits to
detect malaria infection. However, the sensitivity of these diagnostic kits
remains a problem. To develop a diagnostic kit for malaria that has high
sensitivity, it is necessary to produce monoclonal antibodies (McAbs) with high
affinity. The present study was undertaken to produce hybridoma cells that can be
used to generate McAbs with high affinity and specificity against Plasmodium
vivax lactate dehydrogenase (pvLDH). In this study, BALB/c mice were immunized
with purified recombinant polypeptides that encode pvLDH. McAbs against pvLDH
were produced according to the protocol of hybridoma technique using myeloma
cells (SP2/0 cell lines). The McAbs were characterized by isotyping and by
Western blot analysis. Two McAbs (D2H and D7E) against pvLDH antigen were
obtained. The isotypes of D2H and D7E were IgG2b. They recognize 33 kDa proteins 
that were defined as pvLDH by Western blot analysis. In the affinity test, D2H
and D7E showed positively optical density value until each McAbs were serially
diluted at concentrations of 0.156 and 0.078 µg/ml, respectively. To evaluate
sensitivity and specificity against clinical specimens of P. vivax, purified
McAbs were tested with alkaline phosphatase-conjugated monoclonal antibodies and 
blood samples (n = 180) of P. vivax patients using the sandwich enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay, showing the 98% sensitivity. We suggest that McAbs produced 
in this study may be used for developing efficient and rapid diagnostic kits.

PMID: 22740294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Vis Exp. 2012 Jun 14;(64):e3763. doi: 10.3791/3763.

Studying mitotic checkpoint by illustrating dynamic kinetochore protein behavior 
and chromosome motion in living Drosophila syncytial embryos.

Sinclair M(1), Huang JY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cell and Molecular Biosciences, University of Newcastle, United 
Kingdom.

The spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) mechanism is an active signal, which
monitors the interaction between chromosome kinetochores and spindle microtubules
to prevent anaphase onset until the chromosomes are properly connected. Cells use
this mechanism to prevent aneuploidy or genomic instability, and hence cancers
and other human diseases like birth defects and Alzheimer's. A number of the SAC 
components such as Mad1, Mad2, Bub1, BubR1, Bub3, Mps1, Zw10, Rod and Aurora B
kinase have been identified and they are all kinetochore dynamic proteins.
Evidence suggests that the kinetochore is where the SAC signal is initiated. The 
SAC prime regulatory target is Cdc20. Cdc20 is one of the essential APC/C
(Anaphase Promoting Complex or Cyclosome) activators and is also a kinetochore
dynamic protein. When activated, the SAC inhibits the activity of the APC/C to
prevent the destruction of two key substrates, cyclin B and securin, thereby
preventing the metaphase to anaphase transition. Exactly how the SAC signal is
initiated and assembled on the kinetochores and relayed onto the APC/C to inhibit
its function still remains elusive. Drosophila is an extremely tractable
experimental system; a much simpler and better-understood organism compared to
the human but one that shares fundamental processes in common. It is, perhaps,
one of the best organisms to use for bio-imaging studies in living cells,
especially for visualization of the mitotic events in space and time, as the
early embryo goes through 13 rapid nuclear division cycles synchronously (8-10
minutes for each cycle at 25 °C) and gradually organizes the nuclei in a single
monolayer just underneath the cortex. Here, I present a bio-imaging method using 
transgenic Drosophila expressing GFP (Green Fluorescent Protein) or its
variant-targeted proteins of interest and a Leica TCS SP2 confocal laser scanning
microscope system to study the SAC function in flies, by showing images of GFP
fusion proteins of some of the SAC components, Cdc20 and Mad2, as the example.

PMCID: PMC3471286
PMID: 22733107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Phys Chem Lett. 2012 Jun 21;3(12):1680-3. doi: 10.1021/jz300578x. Epub 2012 Jun
7.

Reaction of the Basal Plane of Graphite with the Methyl Radical.

Mandeltort L(1), Choudhury P(2), Johnson JK(2,)(3), Yates JT Jr(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia
22904, United States. (2)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15261, United States. (3)§National Energy
Technology Laboratory, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15236, United States.

The reaction of methyl radicals with the basal plane of graphite has been
observed to occur with an activation energy of less than 0.3 eV. This reaction is
initiated by Li-induced CH3Cl dissociation to produce CH3 radicals on the
graphite surface. It is found that ~3/4 of the methyl radicals remain on the
graphite surface up to 700 K at puckered sp(3) carbon sites, while 1/4 of the CH3
radicals participate in CH4 formation and small amounts of C2 and C3 hydrocarbon 
formation. CH3 radicals become mobile over an activation energy barrier of ~0.7
eV.

PMID: 26285728  [PubMed]


27. J Pharm Biomed Anal. 2012 Nov;70:47-52. doi: 10.1016/j.jpba.2012.05.020. Epub
2012 May 29.

Discrimination between glycosylation patterns of therapeutic antibodies using a
microfluidic platform, MALDI-MS and multivariate statistics.

Thuy TT(1), Tengstrand E, Aberg M, Thorsén G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Analytical Chemistry, Stockholm University, SE-10691 Stockholm, 
Sweden.

Optimal glycosylation with respect to the efficacy, serum half-life time, and
immunogenic properties is essential in the generation of therapeutic antibodies. 
The glycosylation pattern can be affected by several different parameters during 
the manufacture of antibodies and may change significantly over cultivation time.
Fast and robust methods for determination of the glycosylation patterns of
therapeutic antibodies are therefore needed. We have recently presented an
efficient method for the determination of glycans on therapeutic antibodies using
a microfluidic CD platform for sample preparation prior to matrix-assisted
laser-desorption mass spectrometry analysis. In the present work, this method is 
applied to analyse the glycosylation patterns of three commercially available
therapeutic antibodies and one intended for therapeutic use. Two of the
antibodies produced in mouse myeloma cell line (SP2/0) and one produced in
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells exhibited similar glycosylation patterns but
could still be readily differentiated from each other using multivariate
statistical methods. The two antibodies with most similar glycosylation patterns 
were also studied in an assessment of the method's applicability for quality
control of therapeutic antibodies. The method presented in this paper is highly
automated and rapid. It can therefore efficiently generate data that helps to
keep a production process within the desired design space or assess that an
identical product is being produced after changes to the process.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22703837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012 Jun 13;6:CD009925. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD009925.

Second trimester serum tests for Down's Syndrome screening.

Alldred SK(1), Deeks JJ, Guo B, Neilson JP, Alfirevic Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Womens and Childrens Health, The University of Liverpool,
Liverpool, UK. k.alldred@liv.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Down's syndrome occurs when a person has three copies of chromosome
21 - or the specific area of chromosome 21 implicated in causing Down's syndrome 
- rather than two. It is the commonest congenital cause of mental retardation.
Noninvasive screening based on biochemical analysis of maternal serum or urine,
or fetal ultrasound measurements, allows estimates of the risk of a pregnancy
being affected and provides information to guide decisions about definitive
testing.  
OBJECTIVES: To estimate and compare the accuracy of second trimester serum
markers for the detection of Down's syndrome.
SEARCH METHODS: We carried out a sensitive and comprehensive literature search of
MEDLINE (1980 to May 2007), EMBASE (1980 to 18 May 2007), BIOSIS via EDINA (1985 
to 18 May 2007), CINAHL via OVID (1982 to 18 May 2007), The Database of Abstracts
of Reviews of Effectiveness (The Cochrane Library 2007, Issue 1), MEDION (May
2007), The Database of Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses in Laboratory
Medicine (May 2007), The National Research Register (May 2007), Health Services
Research Projects in Progress database (May 2007). We studied reference lists and
published review articles.  
SELECTION CRITERIA: Studies evaluating tests of maternal serum in women at 14-24 
weeks of gestation for Down's syndrome, compared with a reference standard,
either chromosomal verification or macroscopic postnatal inspection.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Data were extracted as test positive/test negative 
results for Down's and non-Down's pregnancies allowing estimation of detection
rates (sensitivity) and false positive rates (1-specificity). We performed
quality assessment according to QUADAS criteria. We used hierarchical summary ROC
meta-analytical methods to analyse test performance and compare test accuracy.
Analysis of studies allowing direct comparison between tests was undertaken. We
investigated the impact of maternal age on test performance in subgroup analyses.
MAIN RESULTS: Fifty-nine studies involving 341,261 pregnancies (including 1,994
with Down's syndrome) were included. Studies were generally high quality,
although differential verification was common with invasive testing of only
high-risk pregnancies. Seventeen studies made direct comparisons between tests.
Fifty-four test combinations were evaluated formed from combinations of 12
different tests and maternal age; alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), unconjugated oestriol 
(uE3), total human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG), free beta human chorionic
gonadotrophin (ßhCG), free alpha human chorionic gonadotrophin (ahCG), Inhibin A,
SP2, CA125, troponin, pregnancy-associated plasma protein A (PAPP-A), placental
growth factor (PGF) and proform of eosinophil major basic
protein (ProMBP).Meta-analysis of 12 best performing or frequently evaluated test
combinations showed double and triple tests (involving AFP, uE3, total hCG, free 
ßhCG) significantly outperform individual markers, detecting six to seven out of 
every 10 Down's syndrome pregnancies at a 5% false positive rate. Tests
additionally involving inhibin performed best (eight out of every 10 Down's
syndrome pregnancies) but were not shown to be significantly better than standard
triple tests in direct comparisons. Significantly lower sensitivity occurred in
women over the age of 35 years. Women who miscarried in the over 35 group were
more likely to have been offered an invasive test to verify a negative screening 
results, whereas those under 35 were usually not offered invasive testing for a
negative screening result. Pregnancy loss in women under 35 therefore leads to
under ascertainment of screening results, potentially missing a proportion of
affected pregnancies and affecting the accuracy of the sensitivity.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Tests involving two or more markers in combination with
maternal age are significantly more sensitive than those involving one marker.
The value of combining four or more tests or including inhibin have not been
proven to show statistically significant improvement. Further study is required
to investigate reduced test performance in women aged over 35 and the impact of
differential pregnancy loss on study findings.

PMID: 22696388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Sep;40(16):7844-57. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks544. Epub 2012
Jun 7.

Genome-wide localization and expression profiling establish Sp2 as a
sequence-specific transcription factor regulating vitally important genes.

Terrados G(1), Finkernagel F, Stielow B, Sadic D, Neubert J, Herdt O, Krause M,
Scharfe M, Jarek M, Suske G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research, Philipps-University,
Emil-Mannkopff-Str. 2, D-35032 Marburg, Germany.

The transcription factor Sp2 is essential for early mouse development and for
proliferation of mouse embryonic fibroblasts in culture. Yet its mechanisms of
action and its target genes are largely unknown. In this study, we have combined 
RNA interference, in vitro DNA binding, chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing 
and global gene-expression profiling to investigate the role of Sp2 for cellular 
functions, to define target sites and to identify genes regulated by Sp2. We show
that Sp2 is important for cellular proliferation that it binds to GC-boxes and
occupies proximal promoters of genes essential for vital cellular processes
including gene expression, replication, metabolism and signalling. Moreover, we
identified important key target genes and cellular pathways that are directly
regulated by Sp2. Most significantly, Sp2 binds and activates numerous
sequence-specific transcription factor and co-activator genes, and represses the 
whole battery of cholesterol synthesis genes. Our results establish Sp2 as a
sequence-specific regulator of vitally important genes.

PMCID: PMC3439921
PMID: 22684502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Virol Sin. 2012 Jun;27(3):172-8. doi: 10.1007/s12250-012-3242-0. Epub 2012 Jun 9.

Preparation and identification of anti-rabies virus monoclonal antibodies.

Wang WJ(1), Li X, Wang LH, Shan H, Cao L, Yu PC, Tang Q, Liang GD.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Qingdao Agricultural
university, Qingdao 266109, China.

To provide a foundation for the development of rapid and specific methods for the
diagnosis of rabies virus infection, anti-rabies virus monoclonal antibodies were
prepared and rabies virus nucleoprotein and human rabies virus vaccine strain (PV
strain) were used as immunogens to immunize 6-8 week old female BALB/c mice.
Spleen cells and SP2/0 myeloma cells were fused according to conventional
methods: the monoclonal cell strains obtained were selected using the indirect
immunofluorescence test; this was followed by preparation of monoclonal antibody 
ascitic fluid; and finally, systematic identification of subclass, specificity
and sensitivity was carried out. Two high potency and specific monoclonal
antibodies against rabies virus were obtained and named 3B12 and 4A12, with
ascitic fluid titers of 1:8000 and 1:10000, respectively. Both belonged to the
IgG2a subclass. These strains secrete potent, stable and specific anti-rabies
virus monoclonal antibodies, which makes them well suited for the development of 
rabies diagnosis reagents.

PMID: 22684471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Chemistry. 2012 Jul 2;18(27):8527-39. doi: 10.1002/chem.201200279. Epub 2012 Jun 
4.

sp2-Iminosugar O-, S-, and N-glycosides as conformational mimics of a-linked
disaccharides; implications for glycosidase inhibition.

Sánchez-Fernández EM(1), Rísquez-Cuadro R, Ortiz Mellet C, García Fernández JM,
Nieto PM, Angulo J.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Químicas (IIQ), CSIC-Universidad de Sevilla,
Avda. Americo Vespucio 49, 41092, Sevilla, Spain.

The synthesis of mimics of the a(1<U+2192>6)- and a(1<U+2192>4)-linked disaccharides isomaltose
and maltose featuring a bicyclic sp(2)-iminosugar nonreducing moiety O-, S-, or
N-linked to a glucopyranoside residue is reported. The strong generalized
anomeric effect operating in sp(2)-iminosugars determines the a-stereochemical
outcome of the glycosylation reactions, independent of the presence or not of
participating protecting groups and of the nature of the heteroatom. It also
imparts chemical stability to the resulting aminoacetal, aminothioacetal, or
gem-diamine functionalities. All the three isomaltose mimics behave as potent and
very selective inhibitors of isomaltase and maltase, two a-glucosidases that bind
the parent disaccharides either as substrate or inhibitor. In contrast, large
differences in the inhibitory properties were observed among the maltose mimics, 
with the O-linked derivative being a more potent inhibitor than the N-linked
analogue; the S-linked pseudodisaccharide did not inhibit either of the two
target enzymes. A comparative conformational analysis based on NMR and molecular 
modelling revealed remarkable differences in the flexibility about the glycosidic
linkage as a function of the nature of the linking atom in this series. Thus, the
N-pseudodisaccharide is more rigid than the O-linked derivative, which exhibits
conformational properties very similar to those of the natural maltose. The
analogous pseudothiomaltoside is much more flexible than the N- or O-linked
derivatives, and can access a broader area of the conformational space, which
probably implies a strong entropic penalty upon binding to the enzymes. Together,
the present results illustrate the importance of taking conformational aspects
into consideration in the design of functional oligosaccharide mimetics.

Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22674827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Org Lett. 2012 Jun 15;14(12):2944-7. doi: 10.1021/ol301352v. Epub 2012 Jun 6.

Improved protocol for indoline synthesis via palladium-catalyzed intramolecular
C(sp2)-H amination.

He G(1), Lu C, Zhao Y, Nack WA, Chen G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

An efficient method has been developed for the synthesis of indoline compounds
from picolinamide (PA)-protected ß-arylethylamine substrates via
palladium-catalyzed intramolecular amination of ortho-C(sp(2))-H bonds. These
reactions feature high efficiency, low catalyst loadings, mild operating
conditions, and the use of inexpensive reagents.

PMID: 22670815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Org Lett. 2012 Jun 15;14(12):2948-51. doi: 10.1021/ol301214u. Epub 2012 Jun 6.

Palladium-catalyzed alkenylation and alkynylation of ortho-C(sp2)-H bonds of
benzylamine picolinamides.

Zhao Y(1), He G, Nack WA, Chen G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

An efficient functionalization of ortho-C(sp(2))-H bonds of picolinamide
(PA)-protected benzylamine substrates with a range of vinyl iodides as well as
acetylenic bromide is reported. ortho-Phenyl benzoic acid (oPBA) acts as an
effective promoter in this reaction system. This method provides a practical
strategy to access highly functionalized benzylamine compounds for organic
synthesis.

PMID: 22670792  [PubMed]


34. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2012 Jan;28(1):76-85.

[Preparation of a monoclonal antibody against polyhedrin of Ectropis obliqua
nucleopolyhedrovirus].

[Article in Chinese]

Du J(1), Zhang C, Fu J, Chen Z, Xiao Q.

Author information: 
(1)Tea Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou
310008, Zhejiang, China.

To develop a method based on immunoreactions for detection of Ectropis obliqua
Nucleopolyhedrovirus (EoNPV), the polyhedra of the virus were purified and used
to immunize the mouse BALB/c. The spleen cells from the immunized mice were then 
fused with the myeloma cell line Sp2/0. A hybridoma cell line which can stably
secrete the monoclonal antibody against EoNPV was achieved by using indirect
ELISA screening and cloning methods, and was named as 7D3. Meanwhile, the
polyhedrin gene was cloned from EoNPV and expressed in E. coli. Western blotting 
analysis showed that the monoclonal antibody prepared from 7D3 could specifically
react with the recombinant polyhedrin. An indirect ELISA method based on this
monoclonal antibody for detecting EoNPV in infected tea looper was developed.

PMID: 22667111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Pharmacol Rep. 2012;64(2):282-92.

Antinociceptive and anti-inflammatory activities of a sulfated polysaccharide
isolated from the green seaweed Caulerpa cupressoides.

Rodrigues JA(1), Vanderlei ES, Silva LM, Araújo IW, Queiroz IN, Paula GA, Abreu
TM, Ribeiro NA, Bezerra MM, Chaves HV, Lima V, Jorge RJ, Monteiro HS, Leite EL,
Benevides NM.

Author information: 
(1)Northeast Biotechnology Network, Federal University of Ceará, Campus do Pici, 
Fortaleza, Ceará, Av Mister Hull, CEP 60455-760, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Red and brown algae sulfated polysaccharides (SPs) have been widely
investigated as antinociceptive and/or anti-inflammatory agents; however, no
description of these biological properties concerning green algae SPs have been
reported. Caulerpa curpressoides (Chlorophyta) presents three SPs fractions
(Cc-SP1, Cc-SP2, and Cc-SP3). Anticoagulant (in vitro) and anti- and
pro-thrombotic (in vivo) effects of Cc-SP2 had been recently reported. We
evaluated the effects of Cc-SP2 using models of nociception and acute
inflammation in vivo.
METHODS: Male Swiss mice received Cc-SP2 (iv) 30 min prior to receiving 0.6%
acetic acid (10 ml/kg, ip), 1% formalin (20 µl, sc) or were subjected to thermal 
stimuli (51 ± 1 °C). Cc-SP2 was injected sc to male Wistar rats in a peritonitis 
model or a paw edema model using carrageenan (ip or ipl, 500 µg). To analyze the 
systemic effects, Cc-SP2 (27 mg/kg, sc) was administrated to both genders mice
before waiting for 14 days.
RESULTS: Cc-SP2 (3, 9 or 27 mg/kg) reduced (p < 0.05) the number of writhes
induced by acetic acid by 57, 89.9 and 90.6%, respectively, the licking time in
the first (9 or 27 mg/kg with 42.47 and 52.1%, respectively) and the second (3, 9
or 27 mg/kg with 68.95, 82.34 and 84.61%, respectively) phases. In the hot-plate 
test, the antinociceptive effect of Cc-SP2 (9 mg/kg) was primarily observed at 60
min (26.7 ± 1.2 s), with its effect reversed by naloxone (8.6 ± 1.3 s),
suggesting the involvement of the opioid system. Cc-SP2 (3, 9 or 27 mg/kg, sc, p 
< 0.05) showed anti-inflammatory effects by decreasing neutrophils migration by
64, 69 and 73%, respectively, and potently reduced the paw edema, especially at
the second (0.16 ± 0.02, 0.16 ± 0.03 and 0.12 ± 0.05 ml) and third (0.16 ± 0.03, 
0.18 ± 0.02 and 0.14 ± 0.04 ml) hours, respectively. Cc-SP2 did not cause hepatic
or renal alterations or affect body mass or the macroscopy of the organs examined
(p > 0.05). Histopathological analyses of the liver and kidney showed that both
organs were affected by Cc-SP2 treatment, but these effects were considered
reversible.
CONCLUSION: The results indicate that the analgesic and anti-inflammatory effects
of Cc-SP2 could be of biomedical applicability as a new, natural tool in pain and
acute inflammatory conditions.

PMID: 22661177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Nanoscale Res Lett. 2012 Jun 1;7:286. doi: 10.1186/1556-276X-7-286.

Thickness dependency of field emission in amorphous and nanostructured carbon
thin films.

Shakerzadeh M(1), Teo EH, Tay BK.

Author information: 
(1)School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological
University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore, 639798, Singapore. ebktay@ntu.edu.sg.

Thickness dependency of the field emission of amorphous and nanostructured carbon
thin films has been studied. It is found that in amorphous and carbon films with 
nanometer-sized sp2 clusters, the emission does not depend on the film thickness.
This further proves that the emission happens from the surface sp2 sites due to
large enhancement of electric field on these sites. However, in the case of
carbon films with nanocrystals of preferred orientation, the emission strongly
depends on the film thickness. sp2-bonded nanocrystals have higher aspect ratio
in thicker films which in turn results in higher field enhancement and hence
easier electron emission.

PMCID: PMC3431989
PMID: 22655860  [PubMed]


37. Mitochondrial DNA. 2012 Jun;23(3):208-15. doi: 10.3109/19401736.2012.668895.

Interspecific variation in mitochondrial serine transfer RNA (UCN) in Euptychiina
butterflies (Lepidoptera: Satyrinae): structure and alignment.

Marín MA(1), López A, Uribe SI.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Biología y Sistemática de Insectos, Universidad Nacional de
Colombia Sede Medellín, Medellín, Colombia. mamarin0@unal.edu.co

The nucleotide variation and structural patterns of mitochondrial RNA molecule
have been proposed as useful tools in molecular systematics; however, their
usefulness is always subject to a proper assessment of homology in the sequence
alignment. The present study describes the secondary structure of mitochondrial
tRNA for the amino acid serine (UCN) on 13 Euptychiina species and the evaluation
of its potential use for evolutionary studies in this group of butterflies. The
secondary structure of tRNAs showed variation among the included species except
between Hermeuptychia sp1 and sp2. Variation was concentrated in the
ribotimidina-pseudouridine-cystosine (T<U+03C8>C), dihydrouridine (DHU) and variable
loops and in the DHU and T<U+03C8>C arms. These results suggest this region as a
potential marker useful for taxonomic differentiation of species in this group
and also confirm the importance of including information from the secondary
structure of tRNA to optimize the alignments.

PMID: 22651232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Org Chem. 2012 Jun 15;77(12):5418-22. doi: 10.1021/jo300662x. Epub 2012 Jun 5.

Access to C(sp3)-C(sp2) and C(sp2)-C(sp2) bond formation via sequential
intermolecular carbopalladation of multiple carbon-carbon bonds.

Wen Y(1), Huang L, Jiang H.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, South China University of
Technology, Guangzhou 510640, China.

A synthetic strategy of 4-benzyl-substituted 1,3-butadiene derivatives through
Pd-catalyzed three-component coupling reaction of benzyl chlorides, alkynes, and 
monosubstituted alkenes is described. This tandem coupling reaction forms a
C(sp(3))-C(sp(2)) bond and a C(sp(2))-C(sp(2)) bond sequentially in a single-step
operation.

PMID: 22647071  [PubMed]


39. Urol Ann. 2012 May;4(2):131-4. doi: 10.4103/0974-7796.95577.

Fournier's gangrene developing secondary to infected hydrocele: A unique clinical
scenario.

Sarwar U(1), Akhtar N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic Surgery, Salisbury District Hospital, Odstock Road,
Salisbury SP2 8BJ, United Kingdom.

We report the first case of Fournier's gangrene (FG) developing secondary to an
infected hydrocele worldwide. We present a case report with a brief overview of
the literature relating to FG and its aetiology, diagnosis and management. A 70
year-old male was referred by his General Practitioner with a 2 week history of
worsening symptoms of scrotal discomfort and swelling. Following clinical
examination, an initial diagnosis of an infected right-sided hydrocele was made
and treatment, consisting of antibiotics, was initiated. Despite showing good
clinical improvement, several days later, necrotic areas were observed over the
right hemiscrotum with spreading cellulitis. A diagnosis of FG was made. The
patient was started on triple-therapy antibiotics and taken to the operating room
for urgent surgical debridement. Necrotic skin and subcutaneous tissue extending 
over the perineum and lower anterior abdomen was debrided down to healthy tissue.
A further debridement took place 2 days later. The patient continued to improve
and was eventually discharged under the care of Plastic Surgeons for
reconstruction of the soft tissue defect. FG is a type of necrotising fasciitis
predominantly affecting the male perineal, perianal, genital and anterior
abdominal wall regions. It has a significant mortality rate, and the key to
survival is early detection and treatment consisting of antibiotics and surgical 
debridement of the affected area. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
reported case of FG developing secondary to an existing hydrocele without any
prior urological intervention. The case highlights the important clinical
diagnostic and therapeutic interventions required to prevent complications
associated with this, potentially fatal, condition.

PMCID: PMC3355702
PMID: 22629017  [PubMed]


40. Int J Prev Med. 2012 Apr;3(4):295-7.

Acute Right Coronary Ostial Stenosis during Aortic Valve Replacement.

Umran S(1), Chetty G, Sarkar PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic Surgery, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury SP2 8BJ,
England.

We report a rare case of acute right coronary artery stenosis developing in a
patient undergoing aortic valve replacement. We present a case report with a
brief overview of the literature relating to coronary artery occlusion associated
with cardiac valve surgery - the theories and treatments are discussed. A 85
year-old female was admitted under the care of the cardiothoracic team with signs
and symptoms of heart failure. Investigations, including cardiac echocardiography
and coronary angiography, indicated a critical aortic valve stenosis.
Intraoperative right ventricular failure ensued post aortic valve replacement.
Subsequent investigations revealed an acute occlusion of the proximal right
coronary artery with resultant absence of distal flow supplying the right
ventricle. An immediate right coronary artery bypass procedure was performed with
resolution of the right ventricular failure. Subsequent weaning off
cardiopulmonary bypass was uneventful and the patient continued to make excellent
recovery in the postoperative phase. To our knowledge this is one of the few
documented cases of intraoperative acute coronary artery occlusion developing
during valve surgery. However, surgeons should be aware of the potential for
acute occlusion so that early recognition and rapid intervention can be
instituted.

PMCID: PMC3354401
PMID: 22624088  [PubMed]


41. J Phys Condens Matter. 2012 Jun 6;24(22):223001. doi:
10.1088/0953-8984/24/22/223001.

1D graphene-like silicon systems: silicene nano-ribbons.

De Padova P(1), Perfetti P, Olivieri B, Quaresima C, Ottaviani C, Le Lay G.

Author information: 
(1)Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche-ISM, Roma, Italy. paola.depadova@ism.cnr.it

Through this review we can follow the various phases that have led to the
discovery of the new allotrope form of silicon: silicene. This is a one-atom
thick silicon sheet arranged in a honeycomb lattice, similar to graphene. For
silicon, which usually is sp3 hybridized, it represents an unusual and rare
structure. First, silicene was theoretically hypothesized and subsequently its
structure calculated as a possible candidate for nano-ribbons of Si grown on the 
anisotropic Ag(110) surface. It was only later, when the physical and chemical
properties of this peculiar form of silicon, demonstrating the presence of p and 
p* bands giving the so-called Dirac cones at the K corners of the Brillouin zone,
the sp2-like nature of the valence orbitals of the Si-Si bonds and its strong
resistance towards oxygen were reported, that the real existence of silicene
became recognized in the scientific community. This review is essentially focused
on the experimental work performed on 1D isolated silicene nano-ribbons and their
1D dense array grown on Ag(110) surfaces.

PMID: 22592268  [PubMed]


42. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2012 May;32(5):742-5.

[Preparation of a monoclonal antibody against fusion protein preM/EIII of WNV].

[Article in Chinese]

Li L(1), Chen L, Liao Y, Chen J, Shi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Guangzhou General Hospital of Guangzhou
Military Comman, Guangzhou, China. mature303@126.com

OBJECTIVE: To prepare a monoclonal antibody (mAb) against the fusion protein
preM/EIII of West Nile virus (WNV) for clinical detection of WNV.
METHODS: Sp2/0 cells were fused with the spleen cells of BALB/c mice immunized
with the recombinant fusion protein preM/EIII expressed in E. coil to obtain the 
hybridoma cell line that secreted preM/EIII mAb. The hybridoma cells were
injected into the peritoneal cavity of BALB/c mice and the ascites was collected 
and purified. The specificity and titer of the obtained mAb were determined using
ELISA and Western blotting.
RESULTS: One hybridoma cell line secreting preM/EIII mAb, named ME1, was
obtained. The titer of the purified mAb was 10(-6). Identified as a mAb of the Ig
subclass IgG1, ME1 was capable of specific reactions with preM/EIII protein and
WNV without cross-reactions with other viruses such as JEV, SLEV, YFV and DENV.
The accuracy of clinical testing of MNV with ME1 was 97.78%.
CONCLUSION: The mAb against preM/EIII obtained have a high specificity and
accuracy in clinical testing of MNV and can be used in clinical diagnosis of MNV 
infection.

PMID: 22588939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Anal Chem. 2012 Jun 5;84(11):5007-16. doi: 10.1021/ac3006236. Epub 2012 May 14.

Importance of fundamental sp, sp2, and sp3 hydrocarbon radicals in the growth of 
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.

Shukla B(1), Koshi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Aerospace and Mechanical Engineering, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, California 90089-1453, United States. bikaushu@usc.edu

The most basic chemistry of products formation in hydrocarbons pyrolysis has been
explored via a comparative experimental study on the roles of fundamental sp,
sp(2), and sp(3) hydrocarbon radicals/intermediates such as ethyne/ethynyl
(C(2)H(2)/C(2)H), ethene/ethenyl (C(2)H(4)/C(2)H(3)), and methane/methyl
(CH(4)/CH(3)) in products formations. By using an in situ time-of-flight mass
spectrometry technique, gas-phase products of pyrolysis of acetylene (ethyne,
C(2)H(2)), ethylene (ethene, C(2)H(4)), and acetone (propanone, CH(3)COCH(3))
were detected and found to include small aliphatic products to large polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) of mass 324 amu. Observed products mass spectra
showed a remarkable sequence of mass peaks at regular mass number intervals of
24, 26, or 14 indicating the role of the particular corresponding radicals,
ethynyl (C(2)H), ethenyl (C(2)H(3)), or methyl (CH(3)), in products formation.
The analysis of results revealed the following: (a) product formation in
hydrocarbon pyrolysis is dominated by hydrogen abstraction and a vinyl (ethenyl, 
C(2)H(3)) radical addition (HAVA) mechanism, (b) contrary to the existing concept
of termination of products mass growth at cyclopenta fused species like
acenaphthylene, novel pathways forming large PAHs were found succeeding beyond
such cyclopenta fused species by the further addition of C(2)H(x) or CH(3)
radicals, (c) production of cyclopenta ring-fused PAHs (CP-PAHs) such as
fluoranthene/corannulene appeared as a preferred route over benzenoid species
like pyrene/coronene, (d) because of the high reactivity of the CH(3) radical, it
readily converts unbranched products into products with aliphatic chains
(branched product), and (e) some interesting novel products such as dicarbon
monoxide (C(2)O), tricarbon monoxide (C(3)O), and cyclic ketones were detected
especially in acetone pyrolysis. These results finally suggest that existing
kinetic models of product formation should be modified to include the reported
novel species and their formation pathways. It is expected that outcomes of this 
study will be useful to understand the products formation from reactors to
interstellar atmospheres as well as the growth mechanism of carbon nanomaterials.

PMID: 22582767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Gene. 2012 Aug 1;504(1):31-40. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.04.091. Epub 2012 May 8.

Molecular characterization and transcription regulation analysis of type I IFN
gene in grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella).

Li D(1), Tan W, Ma M, Yu X, Lai Q, Wu Z, Lin G, Hu C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, College of Life Science and Food Engineering,
Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, China.

Type I interferons and interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7), which are crucial
for innate immunity against viral infection, have been identified in many teleost
fishes in recent years. In this study, the complete genomic sequence of grass
carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella) type I interferon (termed CiIFN) (GU139255) and
the full-length IRF7 cDNA sequence of grass carp (termed CiIRF7) (GQ141741) were 
cloned and characterized. CiIFN consists of 3368 bp, retaining the characteristic
5-exon/4-intron gene organization in fish type I IFNs. The CiIFN spans 5 exons
and encodes a polypeptide of 180 amino acids, with the first 22 amino acids
representing a putative signal peptide. The CiIFN promoter sequence was found to 
be 760 bp, which can be divided into a proximal region (from -1 to -140 bp) and a
distal region (from -400 to -700 bp). The cDNA of CiIRF7 was found to be 1808 bp 
in full length, with an ORF of 1293 bp that encodes a putative protein of 430
amino acids. The putative amino acid sequence of CiIRF7 possesses a DNA-binding
domain (DBD) in the N-terminal region. Real-time PCR analysis revealed that CiIFN
displayed a low constitutive expression in all the tissues tested. After
stimulation by polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (Poly I:C), the expression of
CiIFN was significantly up-regulated in most tissues of grass carp, with a
relatively strong expression in spleen, kidney and intestine. The recombinant
polypeptides of CiIRF7 and CiIRF7-nDBD were analyzed in gel mobility shift
assays, along with the PCR amplification products of the proximal region
(CiIFNP2), the distal region (CiIFNP6) and the full-length (CiIFNP7) of CiIFN
promoter sequence. The results revealed that CiIRF7 could bind to the distal
region as well as to the proximal region of CiIFN promoter sequence in vitro.
Subsequently, the CiIFNPs (CiIFNP7/2/6) were cloned into pGL3-Basic vectors and
CiIRF7 was subcloned into pcDNA3.1 vectors, then pGL3-CiIFNPs were separately
transiently transfected or co-transfected with pcDNA3.1-CiIRF7 into the mouse
myeloma cell lines (MMCL) SP2/0 and the grass carp kidney cell lines (CIK), and
the impact of CiIRF7 on CiIFN promoter activity was measured by luciferase assays
in the transfected cells. These results demonstrated that CiIRF7 acted as a
positive regulator on the transcription of CiIFN.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22579963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Dalton Trans. 2012 Jul 14;41(26):8190-7. doi: 10.1039/c2dt30288h. Epub 2012 May
9.

sp2 C-H activation of dimethyl fumarate by a [(Cp*Co)2-µ-(<U+03B7>4 : <U+03B7>4-toluene)]
complex.

Hung-Low F(1), Tye JW, Cheng S, Bradley CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX
79409-1061, USA.

The well-defined oxidative addition of the vinylic sp(2) C-H bond of dimethyl
fumarate is mediated by the cobalt triple decker complex [(Cp*Co)(2)-µ-(<U+03B7>(4) :
<U+03B7>(4)-toluene)] (1) at ambient temperature, affording the dinuclear, bridging
cobalt hydride, fumaryl compound (2). The C-H activation product has been
characterized by mass spectrometry, NMR spectroscopy, and X-ray crystallography. 
Computational studies of 2 support asymmetric bonding interactions between the
two metal centres and the bridging hydride/fumaryl fragments. Monitoring the
reaction of dimethyl fumarate with 1 by (1)H NMR spectroscopy allows observation 
of intermediate [Cp*Co(MeO(2)CCH=CHCO(2)Me)](n) (n = 1 or 2) (3). Addition of 4
equivalents of dimethyl fumarate to 1 results in rapid formation of the
bis(ligand) adduct Cp*Co(<U+03B7>(2)-MeO(2)CCH=CHCO(2)Me)(2) (5). Reversibility of the
C-H activation was probed by reaction of additional dimethyl fumarate with 2,
suggesting ligand induced reductive elimination is possible under ambient
conditions. Reaction between 2 and strong s or p ligands, such as PMe(3) or CO,
affords the corresponding Cp*Co(<U+03B7>(2)-MeO(2)CCH=CHCO(2)Me)(L) (L = PMe(3) (7); L =
CO (8)) complexes when heated, demonstrating the ability of 2 to undergo two
electron redox processes. Further evidence for reversible C-H activation is
provided by the isomerization of dimethyl maleate to the corresponding fumarate
using 2, suggesting the complex can serve as a source of Co(I) under the
appropriate catalytic conditions.

PMID: 22572779  [PubMed]


46. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2012 Jun 11;51(24):5976-80. doi: 10.1002/anie.201201186. 
Epub 2012 Apr 24.

Rhodium-catalyzed intramolecular cyclization of naphthol- or phenol-linked
1,6-enynes through the cleavage and formation of sp2 C-O bonds.

Sakiyama N(1), Noguchi K, Tanaka K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Chemistry, Graduate School of Engineering, Tokyo
University of Agriculture and Technology, Koganei, Tokyo 184-8588, Japan.

PMID: 22532495  [PubMed]


47. Front Microbiol. 2012 Apr 17;3:146. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00146. eCollection
2012.

Telmatocola sphagniphila gen. nov., sp. nov., a novel dendriform planctomycete
from northern wetlands.

Kulichevskaya IS(1), Serkebaeva YM, Kim Y, Rijpstra WI, Damsté JS, Liesack W,
Dedysh SN.

Author information: 
(1)S.N. Winogradsky Institute of Microbiology, Russian Academy of Sciences
Moscow, Russia.

Members of the phylum Planctomycetes are common inhabitants of northern wetlands.
We used barcoded pyrosequencing to survey bacterial diversity in an acidic (pH
4.0) Sphagnum peat sampled from the peat bog Obukhovskoye, European North Russia.
A total of 21189 bacterial 16S rRNA gene sequences were obtained, of which 1081
reads (5.1%) belonged to the Planctomycetes. Two-thirds of these sequences
affiliated with planctomycete groups for which characterized representatives have
not yet been available. Here, we describe two organisms from one of these
previously uncultivated planctomycete groups. One isolate, strain OB3, was
obtained from the peat sample used in our molecular study, while another strain, 
SP2(T) (=DSM 23888(T)<U+2009>=<U+2009>VKM B-2710(T)), was isolated from the peat bog
Staroselsky moss. Both isolates are represented by aerobic, budding,
pink-pigmented, non-motile, spherical cells that are arranged in unusual,
dendriform-like structures during growth on solid media. These bacteria are
moderately acidophilic and mesophilic, capable of growth at pH 4.0-7.0 (optimum
pH 5.0-5.5) and at 6-30°C (optimum 20-26°C). The preferred growth substrates are 
various heteropolysaccharides and sugars, the latter being utilized only if
provided in low concentrations (=0.025%). In contrast to other described
planctomycetes, strains SP2(T) and OB3 possess weak cellulolytic potential. The
major fatty acids are C16:1<U+03C9>5c, C18:1<U+03C9>5c, C16:0, and C18:0. Characteristic lipids
are the n-C31 polyunsaturated alkene (9-10 double bonds) and C30:1/C32:1 (<U+03C9>-1)
hydroxy fatty acids. The G<U+2009>+<U+2009>C content of the DNA is 58.5-59.0<U+2009>mol%. Strains
SP2(T) and OB3 share identical 16S rRNA gene sequences, which exhibit only 86 and
87% similarity to those of Gemmata obscuriglobus and Zavarzinella formosa. Based 
on the characteristics reported here, we propose to classify these novel
planctomycetes as representatives of a novel genus and species, Telmatocola
sphagniphila gen. nov., sp. nov.

PMCID: PMC3327967
PMID: 22529844  [PubMed]


48. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2012 Jul;33(1):42-7. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2012.03.033. Epub
2012 Apr 10.

Overexpression of Hsp90 from grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella) increases
thermal protection against heat stress.

Wu CX(1), Zhao FY, Zhang Y, Zhu YJ, Ma MS, Mao HL, Hu CY.

Author information: 
(1)Nanchang Teachers College, Nanchang 330103, China.

With homologous DNA probes, we had screened a grass carp heat shock protein 90
gene (CiHsp90). The full sequence of CiHsp90 cDNA was 2793 bp, which could code a
798 amino acids peptide. The phylogenetic analysis demonstrated that CiHsp90
shared the high homology with Zebrafish Grp94. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis
showed that CiHsp90 was ubiquitously expressed at lower levels in all detected
tissues and up-regulated after heat shock at 34 °C or cold stress at 4 °C. To
understand the function of CiHsp90 involving in thermal protection, an expression
vector containing coding region cDNA was expressed in E. coli BL21 (DE3) plysS.
Upon transfer from 37 °C to 42 °C, these cells that accumulated CiHsp90 peptides 
displayed greater thermoresistance than the control cells. While incubated at 4°C
for different periods, it could also improve the cell viability. After transient 
transfected recombinant plasmid pcDNA3.1/CiHsp90 into mouse myeloma cell line
SP2/0, we found that CiHsp90 could contribute to protecting cells against both
thermal and cold extremes. On the contrary, the mutant construct <U+0394>N-CiHsp90
(256-798aa) could abolish the protection activity both in prokaryotic cells and
eukaryotic cells. Additionally, both CiHsp90 and <U+0394>N-CiHsp90 peptides could reduce
the level of citrate synthase aggregation at the high temperature.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22510210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2012 Apr;31(2):137-41. doi: 10.1089/hyb.2011.0107.

Monoclonal antibodies against NS3 and NS5 proteins of Japanese encephalitis
virus.

Chen Z(1), Shao L, Ye J, Li Y, Huang S, Chen H, Cao S.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan, Hubei, China.

Non-structural proteins NS3 and NS5 of Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) were
expressed in Escherichia coli and purified by dialysis. Two monoclonal antibodies
(MAbs) named 1H7 and 2D4 against NS3 protein and three MAbs named 3C4, 3H7, and
3F10 against NS5 protein were generated by fusing mouse myeloma cell line SP2/0
with spleen lymphocytes from NS3 or NS5 protein immunized mice. Then activity of 
MAbs was characterized by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), Western blot
analysis, and indirect immunofluorescent assays (IFA). Our results demonstrated
that all the MAbs showed high specificity and sensitivity in IFA at 1:100
dilution and in Western blot analysis at 1:500 dilution, which indicated that
these MAbs against NS3 and NS5 proteins of JEV may be used as valuable tools for 
analysis of the protein functions and pathogenesis of JEV.

PMCID: PMC3326271
PMID: 22509919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2012 Apr;31(2):105-10. doi: 10.1089/hyb.2011.0104.

Production of human anti-glycophorin-A monoclonal antibodies and their
purification by pseudoaffinity chromatography using a convective interaction
media monolithic column.

Kumar BP(1), Rajak P, Vijayalakshmi MA, Jayaprakash NS.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Bio-separation Technology, Vellore Institute of Technology, VIT
University, Vellore, Tamilnadu, India.

Monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) against glycophorin-A (GPA) could be used in
identifying MN blood groups, detecting specific markers of erythroid
differentiation, and studying parasite interactions. Large-scale production of
MAbs in bioreactors demands an efficient and rapid separation technology. The
present study describes the production of a human anti-GPA monoclonal antibody
and its purification using a pseudo-bioaffinity L-histidine-convective
interaction media (CIM) monolithic column. Hybridomas were generated by fusion of
mouse myeloma cell line (Sp2/0) and spleen cells from the mouse immunized with
Triton X-100 solubilized RBC membrane proteins. Hybridomas producing antibodies
specific to commercial glycophorin-A were screened by indirect enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The antibodies produced by the stable clones were
found to be IgG1 with kappa light chain. Purification of IgG1 MAbs from the cell 
culture supernatant carried out with a CIM-EDA-histidine disk resulted in high
specific activity with purification fold of 8.3 in the fraction eluted with MOPS 
buffer containing 0.2 M NaCl. Sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and ELISA showed that the antibodies obtained were
highly pure, with high antigen-binding efficiency. The results indicate that
faster separation and efficient recovery of high-purity anti-GPA MAbs could be
achieved by using CIM-EDA-histidine disk.

PMID: 22509914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Nanoscale. 2012 Apr 28;4(9):2839-42. doi: 10.1039/c2nr30299c.

Theoretical investigations of sp-sp2 hybridized zero-dimensional fullerenynes.

Zhang S(1), Zhang Y, Huang S, Wang C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecule and Materials Simulation, State Key Laboratory of
Organic-Inorganic Composites, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 
100029, China.

Widely recognized as the quintessential material, sp(2) hybridized carbon
material with low dimensions, such as zero-dimensional fullerene, one-dimensional
carbon nanotube and two-dimensional graphene, has already compiled an impressive 
list of superlatives. Quite recently, one-dimensional sp-sp(2) hybridized carbon 
tubular arrays with a wall thickness of about 40 nm and two-dimensional carbon
films with the average thickness of 970 nm have been synthesized successfully.
Thus, we expect that the existence of a sp-sp(2) hybridized zero-dimensional
carbon allotrope is possible. A novel and stable zero-dimensional carbon
allotrope (fullerenyne) with sp-sp(2) hybridization is introduced by means of
density functional theory calculation and molecular dynamics confirmation. Unique
porous characteristic C(96) fullernenyne with an O(h) symmetry group exhibits
exceptionally high stability. We hope that the present study will lead to a
further development of a broad new class of carbon materials.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012

PMID: 22499281  [PubMed]


52. J Am Chem Soc. 2012 May 2;134(17):7313-6. doi: 10.1021/ja3023972. Epub 2012 Apr
19.

Efficient alkyl ether synthesis via palladium-catalyzed, picolinamide-directed
alkoxylation of unactivated C(sp3)-H and C(sp2)-H bonds at remote positions.

Zhang SY(1), He G, Zhao Y, Wright K, Nack WA, Chen G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

We report the efficient synthesis of alkyl ethers by the functionalization of
unactivated sp(3)- and sp(2)-hybridized C-H bonds. In the Pd(OAc)(2)-catalyzed,
PhI(OAc)(2)-mediated reaction system, picolinamide-protected amine substrates
undergo facile alkoxylation at the <U+03B3> or d positions with a range of alcohols,
including t-BuOH, to give alkoxylated products. This method features a relatively
broad substrate scope for amines and alcohols, inexpensive reagents, and
convenient operating conditions. This method highlights the emerging value of
unactivated C-H bonds, particularly the C(sp(3))-H bond of methyl groups, as
functional groups in organic synthesis.

© 2012 American Chemical Society

PMID: 22486219  [PubMed]


53. Chemosphere. 2012 Jun;88(1):49-54. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2012.02.050. Epub
2012 Mar 21.

Carbamazepine, carbamazepine epoxide and dihydroxycarbamazepine sorption to soil 
and occurrence in a wastewater reuse site in Tunisia.

Fenet H(1), Mathieu O, Mahjoub O, Li Z, Hillaire-Buys D, Casellas C, Gomez E.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 5569 Hydrosciences Montpellier, Université Montpellier I, BP 14 491, 34093
Montpellier Cedex 5, France. hfenet@univ-montp1.fr

Treated wastewater is being increasingly used for irrigation and aquifer
replenishment through artificial recharge. However, wastewater reuse can result
in contamination of exposed soil and groundwater by chemicals such as some
pharmaceuticals and their metabolites. The fate of these molecules depends
largely on their capacity to sorb onto soil and aquifer materials during
infiltration. In this study, the sorption isotherm of carbamazepine (CBZ), an
anti-seizure medication, and two of its metabolites, i.e.
carbamazepine-10,11-epoxide (CBZ-EP) and
10,11-dihydro-10,11-dihydroxycarbamazepine (DiOH-CBZ), were determined in two
soils in laboratory assays. In the field, the presence of CBZ and its metabolites
were investigated in soil and in groundwater underlying an irrigated area with
treated wastewater. The results showed that CBZ had the highest carbon normalised
sorption coefficients in the two tested soils (irrigated soil and a Lufa SP2.4
reference soil) followed by CBZ-EP and DiOH-CBZ, indicating the relatively higher
mobility of CBZ metabolites compared to CBZ. The chromatographic analysis
revealed that CBZ and its two metabolites were present in treated wastewater used
for irrigation and in groundwater. In soil samples, CBZ concentrations showed a
build-up taking place with irrigation. The mobility of metabolites in soil and
their potential biodegradation require further investigation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22443929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Home Health Care Serv Q. 2012;31(1):1-40. doi: 10.1080/01621424.2011.641919.

Racial/ethnic disparities in home health care: charting a course for future
research.

Davitt JK(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Social Policy and Practice and New Courtland Center for Transitions 
and Health, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6214,
USA. jdavitt@sp2.upenn.edu

Racial/ethnic disparities in health have been well-documented. However, we know
little about the existence of or mechanisms that contribute to disparities in
home health care. This article proposes a conceptual framework, based on a
comprehensive review of the literature, to guide research to understand whether
and how disparities emerge in home health care. The framework outlines the
patient, agency, practice, and system factors that have been shown to or
theoretically could contribute to disparities. Enhanced parity in home health
care will impact society by reducing health costs due to morbidity, while
directly benefiting minority patients.

PMID: 22424305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Beilstein J Org Chem. 2012;8:192-200. doi: 10.3762/bjoc.8.21. Epub 2012 Feb 6.

A concise synthesis of 3-(1-alkenyl)isoindolin-1-ones and
5-(1-alkenyl)pyrrol-2-ones by the intermolecular coupling reactions of
N-acyliminium ions with unactivated olefins.

Lu N(1), Wang L, Li Z, Zhang W.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Applied Organic Chemistry, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou
730000, China;

A concise synthesis of 3-(1-alkenyl)isoindolin-1-ones and
5-(1-alkenyl)pyrrol-2-ones has been achieved by the coupling reactions of
N-acyliminium ions produced from 3-hydroxyisoindol-1-ones or
5-hydroxy-1-pyrrol-2-ones with unactivated olefins in the presence of
BF(3)·OEt(2) at room temperature. For most of the olefins, the reactions afforded
the C(sp3)-C(sp2) cross-coupling products, but for the a-methylstyrene and
1-hexene, the C(sp3)-C(sp3) cross-coupling products were obtained.

PMCID: PMC3302081
PMID: 22423287  [PubMed]


56. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2012 Jun;25(6):682-9. doi: 10.1016/j.echo.2012.02.008.
Epub 2012 Mar 14.

Serial assessment of right ventricular volume and function in surgically
palliated hypoplastic left heart syndrome using real-time transthoracic
three-dimensional echocardiography.

Kutty S(1), Graney BA, Khoo NS, Li L, Polak A, Gribben P, Hammel JM, Smallhorn
JF, Danford DA.

Author information: 
(1)Joint Division of Pediatric Cardiology, University of Nebraska/Creighton
University, Children's Hospital and Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68114, USA.
skutty@unmc.edu

BACKGROUND: Right ventricular (RV) failure is a major cause of morbidity and
mortality in patients with hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS), but the
longitudinal course of RV volumes through staged palliation (SP) has not been
previously investigated. The aim of this study was to evaluate RV volume and
function longitudinally through SP of HLHS using real-time three-dimensional
echocardiography.
METHODS: A total of 18 subjects with HLHS were prospectively studied at four time
points from diagnosis through stage 2 (SP2). Real-time three-dimensional
echocardiographic full-volume data sets were acquired in high-frame rate mode
with electrocardiographic gating. Volumetric and functional analyses were
performed using a semiautomatic contour detection algorithm. Eighteen age-matched
and sex-matched normal infants (aged 0-6 months) were studied at comparable time 
points as controls.
RESULTS: Presurgical examinations (pre-stage 1 [SP1]; n = 18) were performed at a
mean age of 4 days, post-SP1 examinations (n = 17) at a mean age of 20 days,
pre-SP2 examinations (n = 14) at a mean age of 4.6 months, and post-SP2
examinations (n = 14) at a mean age of 5.5 months, constituting a total of 63
examinations. The mean values of RV end-diastolic volume indexed to body surface 
area (EDVi) at the four time points were 87 ± 30, 104 ± 39, 112 ± 34, and 102 ±
35 mL/m(2), respectively. There was an increase in EDVi (P = .024) from pre-SP1
to post-SP1 but no significant change between post-SP1 and pre-SP2. The decrease 
in EDVi after SP2 did not reach statistical significance. Mean RV ejection
fractions (EFs) were 50 ± 5%, 45 ± 5%, 46 ± 5%, and 38 ± 4%, respectively. There 
was a trend toward decreasing EF throughout SP, with statistically significant
decreases from pre-SP1 to post-SP1 (P = .003) and from pre-SP2 to post-SP2 (P <
.001). In normal infants, the mean RV EDVi was 50 ± 10 mL/m(2) (approximately
half that of patients with HLHS), and the mean EF was 51 ± 3%. There was good
interobserver agreement for EDVi, end-systolic volume indexed to body surface
area, and EF.
CONCLUSIONS: Real-time three-dimensional echocardiography is a reproducible means
for evaluating RV volumes and EFs in patients with HLHS. Indexed RV diastolic
volume remains stable to slightly increased, and RV EF deteriorates as the first 
two stages of surgical palliation are accomplished. The findings of this study
highlight the adverse physiology of HLHS, which deteriorates even among early
survivors despite SP.

Copyright © 2012 American Society of Echocardiography. Published by Mosby, Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 22421029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Hum Hypertens. 2013 Apr;27(4):231-6. doi: 10.1038/jhh.2011.117. Epub 2012 Mar
15.

Serum C-reactive protein level and prehypertension in two Asian populations.

Sabanayagam C(1), Shankar A, Lee J, Wong TY, Tai ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Community Medicine, West Virginia University School of Medicine,
Morgantown, WV 26506-9190, USA. csabanayagam@hsc.wvu.edu

Few previous studies in Western populations have reported an association between 
C-reactive protein (CRP) and prehypertension. However, no previous study has
examined this association in Asians. We examined individuals who were free of
hypertension from two independent population-based studies in Singapore: the
Singapore Prospective Study Programme (SP2, n=2843 Chinese, Malay and Indians
aged <U+E2F6>24 years) and the Singapore Malay Eye Study (SiMES, n=957 Malays, aged
40-80 years). Prehypertension was defined as systolic blood pressure (BP)
120-139<U+2009>mm<U+2009>Hg or diastolic BP 80-89<U+2009>mm<U+2009>Hg. CRP was analyzed as categories (<1,
1-3, >3<U+2009>mg<U+2009>l(-1)). The prevalence of prehypertension increased with increasing
categories of CRP in both cohorts (P for trend <0.05 in both cohorts). After
adjusting for potential confounders including body mass index (BMI), smoking and 
diabetes, persons with higher levels of CRP were more likely to have
prehypertension in both SP2 (compared with CRP <1<U+2009>mg<U+2009>l(-1), odds ratio (OR) 1.23,
95% confidence interval (CI) 1.03-1.48 for CRP 1-3 and OR 1.67, 95% CI 1.32-2.10 
for >3<U+2009>mg<U+2009>l(-1)) and SiMES (OR 1.45, 95% CI 1.04-2.01 and OR 1.56, 95% CI
1.07-2.27) respectively. In conclusion, data from two population-based Asian
cohorts suggest that elevated serum CRP levels are associated with
prehypertension.

PMID: 22418747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Violence Against Women. 2012 Jan;18(1):44-63. doi: 10.1177/1077801212437016.

Women's perceptions of safety and risk following police intervention for intimate
partner violence.

Dichter ME(1), Gelles RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Philadelphia VA Medical Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA. mdichter@sp2.upenn.edu

Police intervention is a primary response to intimate partner violence (IPV) but 
does not guarantee a victim's future safety. This study sought to identify
factors associated with IPV survivors' perceptions of safety and risk of
revictimization following police intervention. One hundred sixty-four women
completed a questionnaire, and 11 of those women also took part in qualitative
interviews. The findings revealed that feeling unsafe and perceiving oneself to
be at risk of future violence is associated with experiencing particular forms of
IPV, including battering, lethality threats, and sexual violence. Having support 
from others and distance from the partner helps women feel safe.

PMID: 22411298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Med Leg J. 2012;80(Pt 1):13-8. doi: 10.1258/mlj.2011.011034.

Spurious claims for health-care products: an experimental approach to evaluating 
current UK legislation and its implementation.

Rose LB(1), Posadzki P, Ernst E.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmavision Consulting Ltd, 11 Montague Road, West Harnham, Salisbury SP2
8NJ. les@pharmavision-consulting.co.uk

The lay media, and especially the Internet, contain many misleading claims for
health products which have previously been inadequately regulated by consumer
law. This was an experimental interventional survey within a consumer health-care
setting. Three health products were chosen on the basis of being widely available
on the UK market and having no available evidence of effectiveness. Twelve
volunteers submitted 39 complaints to Consumer Direct (UK portal for the
regulator Trading Standards) regarding false health claims, and 36 complaints
were followed up for a maximum of 4.8 months. The mean time from submission of
complaints to Consumer Direct to acknowledgement by the relevant Trading
Standards office was 13 days. There were no responses from Trading Standards for 
22% of complaints. At the end of the study one supplier had amended their website
following Trading Standards advice, but did not stop all health claims. Another
stopped advertising their product on the Internet and the third continued the
health claims unchanged. EU directive 2005/29/EC is largely ineffective in
preventing misleading health claims for consumer products in the UK.

PMID: 22403120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2012 Apr 21;14(15):5255-9. doi: 10.1039/c2cp40279c. Epub
2012 Mar 8.

Fermi energy level tuning for high performance dye sensitized solar cells using
sp2 selective nitrogen-doped carbon nanotube channels.

Lee GI(1), Nath NC, Sarker S, Shin WH, Ahammad AJ, Kang JK, Lee JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of EEWS (WCU), Department of Materials Science & Engineering, 
KAIST, Daejeon, Korea.

Here, we find that doping sp(2) selective nitrogen, N sp(2), into carbon nanotube
(CNT) channels induces a positive shift in the Fermi level of TiO(2)
photoelectrodes. It is found that this results in the large diffusion coefficient
of solar driven electrons for increasing the photocurrent as well as in the low
recombination rate for improving open circuit voltage with 0.74 V, which could
not be overcome by using pristine CNT channels with 0.66 V.

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012

PMID: 22402605  [PubMed]


61. Antiviral Res. 2012 Apr;94(1):1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2012.02.001. Epub
2012 Feb 15.

A humanized IgG but not IgM antibody is effective in prophylaxis and therapy of
yellow fever infection in an AG129/17D-204 peripheral challenge mouse model.

Thibodeaux BA(1), Garbino NC, Liss NM, Piper J, Schlesinger JJ, Blair CD, Roehrig
JT.

Author information: 
(1)Arthropod-borne and Infectious Diseases Laboratory, Department of
Microbiology, Immunology, and Pathology, Colorado State University, Fort Collins,
80523, USA.

Yellow fever virus (YFV), a member of the genus Flavivirus, is a mosquito-borne
virus found in tropical regions of Africa and South America that causes severe
hepatic disease and death in humans. Despite the availability of effective
vaccines, YFV is responsible for an estimated 200,000 cases and 30,000 deaths
annually. There are currently no prophylactic or therapeutic strategies approved 
for use in human YFV infections. Furthermore, implementation of YFV 17D-204
vaccination campaigns has become problematic due to an increase in reported
post-vaccinal adverse events. We have created human/murine chimeric MAbs of a
YFV-reactive murine monoclonal antibody (mMAb), 2C9, that was previously shown to
protect mice from lethal YFV infection and to have therapeutic activity. The new 
chimeric (cMAbs) were constructed by fusion of the m2C9 IgG gene variable regions
with the constant regions of human IgG and IgM and expressed in Sp2 murine
myelomas. The 2C9 cMAbs (2C9-cIgG and 2C9-cIgM) reacted with 17D-204 vaccine
strain in an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and neutralized virus in vitro
similarly to the parent m2C9. Both m2C9 and 2C9-cIgG when administered
prophylactically 24h prior to infection protected AG129 mice from peripheral
17D-204 challenge at antibody concentrations =1.27 µg/mouse; however, the
2C9-cIgM did not protect even at a dose of 127 µg/mouse. The 17D-204 infection of
AG129 mice is otherwise uniformly lethal. While the m2C9 was shown previously to 
be therapeutically effective in YFV-infected BALB/c mice at day 4 post-infection,
the m2C9 and 2C9-cIgG demonstrated therapeutic activity only when administered 1 
day post-infection in 17D-204-infected AG129 mice.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC3331901
PMID: 22366350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Theriogenology. 2012 May;77(8):1529-39. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2011.11.020. Epub 2012 Feb 25.

Morphometrically-distinct sperm subpopulations defined by a multistep statistical
procedure in ram ejaculates: intra- and interindividual variation.

Maroto-Morales A(1), Ramón M, García-Álvarez O, Soler AJ, Fernández-Santos MR,
Roldan ER, Gomendio M, Pérez-Guzmán MD, Garde JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biology of Reproduction Group, National Wildlife Research Institute (IREC)
UCLM-CSIC-JCCM, 02071 Albacete, Spain.

The existence of sperm subpopulations within the mammalian ejaculate has now been
widely recognized. However, to the best of our knowledge, no data exist regarding
the existence of sperm morphometric subpopulations within the ovine ejaculate.
Computer assisted sperm morphometry analysis (ASMA) data and clustering methods
were used in this study to identify sperm-head subpopulations in ram semen. Two
experiments were carried out. In Experiment 1, ejaculates from 226 mature rams of
the Manchega breed belonging to 36 different herds were used. A minimum of 100
sperm heads were analyzed from each male and eight morphometric characteristics
for each individual sperm were recorded. Subpopulation analysis was performed in 
sequential steps: variable group analysis and correlation analysis to select
which morphometric characteristics to use in cluster analyses; nonhierarchical
clustering analysis using sperm head length and p2a (also known as roundness)
shape factor as initial classificatory variables; and hierarchical clustering
analysis to obtain the final number of clusters. The clustering analyses, based
on 26,306 individual cells, revealed the existence of four sperm subpopulations
(SP1, SP2, SP3 and SP4) with different morphometric characteristics. Significant 
differences in the proportion of spermatozoa in the SP1 and SP3 were found
between rams belonging to different herds. In Experiment 2, the intra- and
intermale variability on the distribution of sperm subpopulations was assessed.
Three ejaculates from each of 21 rams were collected and the same multistep
clustering analysis was performed. For all subpopulations defined, the intermale 
variability resulted in high values, being the intramale variability much lower. 
This fact would allow the use of sperm head morphometry to characterize a male
and might provide valuable information to asses its fertility. In conclusion, our
results show that using computer assisted sperm morphometry analysis and
multivariate cluster analyses, four sperm subpopulations with different head
phenotype were identified in ram ejaculates.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22365694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Chem Commun (Camb). 2012 Mar 25;48(25):3064-6. doi: 10.1039/c2cc17871k. Epub 2012
Feb 15.

Aza-oxindole synthesis by oxidative coupling of C(sp2)-H and C(sp3)-H centers.

Dey C(1), Kündig EP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organic Chemistry, University of Geneva, 30 Quai Ernest
Ansermet, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

A Cu(II) mediated oxidative C(sp(2))-H and C(sp(3))-H coupling protocol gives
access to aza-oxindoles in good to excellent yield in the presence of NaOtBu as
base and toluene as solvent.

PMID: 22337506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Biol Chem. 2012 Apr 13;287(16):13279-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.339374. Epub
2012 Feb 13.

Context surrounding processing sites is crucial in determining cleavage rate of a
subset of processing sites in HIV-1 Gag and Gag-Pro-Pol polyprotein precursors by
viral protease.

Lee SK(1), Potempa M, Kolli M, Özen A, Schiffer CA, Swanstrom R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, and the University of North
Carolina Center for AIDS Research, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

Processing of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) Gag and Gag-Pro-Pol
polyproteins by the HIV-1 protease (PR) is essential for the production of
infectious particles. However, the determinants governing the rates of processing
of these substrates are not clearly understood. We studied the effect of
substrate context on processing by utilizing a novel protease assay in which a
substrate containing HIV-1 matrix (MA) and the N-terminal domain of capsid (CA)
is labeled with a FlAsH (fluorescein arsenical hairpin) reagent. When the seven
cleavage sites within the Gag and Gag-Pro-Pol polyproteins were placed at the
MA/CA site, the rates of cleavage changed dramatically compared with that of the 
cognate sites in the natural context reported previously. The rate of processing 
was affected the most for three sites: CA/spacer peptide 1 (SP1) (10-fold
increase), SP1/nucleocapsid (NC) (10-30-fold decrease), and SP2/p6 (30-fold
decrease). One of two multidrug-resistant (MDR) PR variants altered the pattern
of processing rates significantly. Cleavage sites within the Pro-Pol region were 
cleaved in a context-independent manner, suggesting for these sites that the
sequence itself was the determinant of rate. In addition, a chimera consisting of
SP1/NC P4-P1 and MA/CA P1'-P4' residues (ATIM<U+2193>PIVQ) abolished processing by wild 
type and MDR proteases, and the reciprocal chimera consisting of MA/CA P4-P1 and 
SP1/NC P1'-4' (SQNY<U+2193>IQKG) was cleaved only by one of the MDR proteases. These
results suggest that complex substrate interactions both beyond the active site
of the enzyme and across the scissile bond contribute to defining the rate of
processing by the HIV-1 PR.

PMCID: PMC3339993
PMID: 22334652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Nano Lett. 2012 Mar 14;12(3):1603-8. doi: 10.1021/nl204545q. Epub 2012 Feb 15.

Graphene-on-diamond devices with increased current-carrying capacity: carbon
sp2-on-sp3 technology.

Yu J(1), Liu G, Sumant AV, Goyal V, Balandin AA.

Author information: 
(1)Nano-Device Laboratory, Department of Electrical Engineering and Materials
Science and Engineering Program, University of California, Riverside, California 
92521, USA.

Graphene demonstrated potential for practical applications owing to its excellent
electronic and thermal properties. Typical graphene field-effect transistors and 
interconnects built on conventional SiO(2)/Si substrates reveal the breakdown
current density on the order of 1 µA/nm(2) (i.e., 10(8) A/cm(2)), which is ~100× 
larger than the fundamental limit for the metals but still smaller than the
maximum achieved in carbon nanotubes. We show that by replacing SiO(2) with
synthetic diamond, one can substantially increase the current-carrying capacity
of graphene to as high as ~18 µA/nm(2) even at ambient conditions. Our results
indicate that graphene's current-induced breakdown is thermally activated. We
also found that the current carrying capacity of graphene can be improved not
only on the single-crystal diamond substrates but also on an inexpensive
ultrananocrystalline diamond, which can be produced in a process compatible with 
a conventional Si technology. The latter was attributed to the decreased thermal 
resistance of the ultrananocrystalline diamond layer at elevated temperatures.
The obtained results are important for graphene's applications in high-frequency 
transistors, interconnects, and transparent electrodes and can lead to the new
planar sp(2)-on-sp(3) carbon-on-carbon technology.

© 2012 American Chemical Society

PMID: 22329428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Chem Commun (Camb). 2012 Mar 25;48(25):3136-8. doi: 10.1039/c2cc30207a. Epub 2012
Feb 13.

Rh-catalyzed intramolecular sp2 C-H bond difluoromethylenation.

Li Y(1), Zhu J, Xie H, Li S, Peng D, Li Z, Wu Y, Gong Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Organofluorine Chemistry, Shanghai Institute of Organic
Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 345 Lingling Road, Shanghai 200032,
China.

A new Rh-catalyzed intramolecular coupling reaction of a CF(2)Br group with a
2-aryl of indole or pyrrole via C-H bond activation is presented. This reaction
represents a new way of incorporating difluoromethylene groups into organic
compounds. Preliminary mechanistic studies suggest that this reaction might not
occur via a conventional free radical pathway.

PMID: 22327167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2012 Feb;31(1):60-2. doi: 10.1089/hyb.2011.0083.

Monoclonal antibody that blocks the Toll-like receptor 5 binding region of
flagellin.

Li Y(1), Liu F, Han C, Yan H.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Wuhan, Hubei, People's Republic of China.

The conserved domain of bacteria-derived flagellin coupling Toll-like receptor 5 
(TLR5) activates NF-<U+03BA>B and MAPK signaling transductions, which subsequently
regulate the transcription and expression of genes encoding immune mediators.
However, whether the flagellin binding monoclonal antibody (MAb) obstructs
TLR5-associated signaling is unclear. Here we report on the production and
characterization of MAb 5G10 that specifically recognizes flagellin. The MAb 5G10
was produced by the hybridization of mouse myeloma cell SP2/0 with splenocyte
from a flagellin immunized BALB/c mouse. We observed that deletion of the
conserved amino acid residues 89-96 made flagellin lose its capacity for binding 
5G10. Additionally, MAb 5G10 remarkably suppressed the expression of cytokine IL8
of Caco-2 cell by blocking the flagellin-TLR5 signaling. Furthermore, this MAb
would be useful for cytosolic localization of flagellin and would facilitate the 
elucidation of the physiological function of specific pathogen-associated
molecular patterns.

PMCID: PMC3275795
PMID: 22316487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2012 Feb;31(1):32-9. doi: 10.1089/hyb.2011.0048.

Chitinase 3-like 2 protein monoclonal antibodies.

Avdieiev S(1), Savinska L, Filonenko V, Kavsan V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosynthesis of Nucleic Acids, Institute of Molecular Biology
and Genetics, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, 150 Zabolotnogo str.Kyiv, 
Ukraine.

Chitinase 3-like 2 (CHI3L2) is one of the most overexpressed genes in
glioblastoma. Despite this, both the CHI3L2 gene and its protein product CHI3L2
are poorly characterized. Here we report the generation and characterization of
monoclonal antibodies to CHI3L2 protein (CHI3L2 MAbs). Bacterially expressed 6
His-tagged full-length CHI3L2 was used as antigen. Spleen cells from immunized
mice were collected and fused with SP2/0 myeloma cells. Hybridoma clones 2D3 and 
4D2 producing high titer CHI3L2 MAbs were identified by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and further examined for their activity with the
CHI3L2 protein by Western blot analysis and immunoprecipitation. The 2D3 clone
was chosen for mouse inoculation and ascites formation. Antibodies derived from
the ascitic fluid specifically recognized the recombinant CHI3L2 protein and
strongly interacted with CHI3L2 in glioblastoma tissue lysate, as determined by
Western blot analysis. The antibodies generated may be useful as a tool in
various aspects of CHI3L2 investigation.

PMID: 22316483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2012 Feb;31(1):25-31. doi: 10.1089/hyb.2011.0075.

Monoclonal antibodies against the Escherichia coli DNA repair protein RadA/Sms.

Richardson NC(1), Sargentini NJ, Singh VK, Stuart MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology/Immunology, A.T. Still University, Kirksville
College of Osteopathic Medicine, 800 W. Jefferson Street, Kirksville, MO 63501,
USA.

The RadA/Sms protein facilitates DNA repair in Escherichia coli cells damaged by 
UV radiation, X-rays, and chemical agents. However, the precise mechanism by
which RadA/Sms aids DNA repair is unknown. Here we report the production of
monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) specific for RadA/Sms for use in biochemical and
physiological investigations. Histidine-tagged RadA/Sms (RadA-6xHis) was
overproduced in E. coli BL21 cells transformed with the radA/sms coding region in
plasmid pRSET A and purified by nickel affinity chromatography. Splenocytes from 
female BALB/c mice hyperimmunized with the purified protein were fused to
SP2/0-Ag14 myeloma cells, and the resultant hybridomas were selected in HAT
medium. MAbs were detected in hybridoma culture supernatants by indirect ELISA
and Western blot analysis against purified RadA-6xHis. MAbs from four cell lines 
were further evaluated by Western blotting against peptide maps generated by
endoproteinase Glu-C digestion of RadA-6xHis. Each of the four MAbs recognized a 
unique epitope on the fusion protein. Two of the MAbs (6F5 and 2A2) also detected
wild-type (tagless) RadA/Sms produced from the pJS003 plasmid in E. coli K-12
cells. We anticipate that these antibodies will prove useful for the detection,
isolation, and functional analysis of RadA/Sms.

PMID: 22316482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2012 Feb;31(1):1-6. doi: 10.1089/hyb.2011.0080.

Immunophenotyping of classic murine myeloma cell lines used for monoclonal
antibody production.

Rosa EA(1), Lanza SR, Zanetti CR, Pinto AR.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Microbiologia, Imunologia e Parasitologia, Centro de Ciências 
Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, Florianópolis, Brazil.

Murine myeloma cell lines play an important role in different areas of scientific
research and are essential tools for monoclonal antibody production technology.
Thus, it is important to understand the biology of these cell lines in order to
provide useful information to various research fronts. The present study aims to 
perform detailed analyses of surface antigens expressed on three major murine
myeloma cell lines extensively used for MAb production. The P3X63Ag8.653 cell
line expresses molecules associated with T cell interaction (CD40(low),
CD80(low)), as well as antigens related to plasma cell phenotype (CD138(high),
CD184(low)). The Sp2/0-Ag14 cell line presents molecules associated with BCR
activation and regulation (CD79b(low), CD22(low), CD72(med)), molecules related
to T cell interaction (CD40(low), CD80(low)), and markers of plasma cell
phenotype (CD138(high), CD184(low)). The NS1 cell line presents all molecules of 
plasma cell phenotype evaluated in this study (CD184(low), CD138(high),
CD38(med)) with low expression of CD72 (CD72(low)), a molecule related to BCR
activation. Molecules associated with immune response modulation such as CD23 and
CD25, as well as CD117, a marker related to undifferentiated cell phenotype, were
not observed in any of the three murine myeloma cell lines evaluated. These data 
show that in spite of their common origin and function, the immunological
profiles differ between P3X63Ag8.653, Sp2/0-Ag14, and NS1 cell lines.

PMID: 22316479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Environ Sci Technol. 2012 May 1;46(9):4819-28. doi: 10.1021/es2033845. Epub 2012 
Feb 28.

Are emissions of black carbon from gasoline vehicles underestimated? Insights
from near and on-road measurements.

Liggio J(1), Gordon M, Smallwood G, Li SM, Stroud C, Staebler R, Lu G, Lee P,
Taylor B, Brook JR.

Author information: 
(1)Atmospheric Science and Technology Directorate, Science and Technology Branch,
Environment Canada, 4905 Dufferin Street, Toronto, Ontario M3H 5T4 Canada.
john.liggio@ec.gc.ca

Measurements of black carbon (BC) with a high-sensitivity laser-induced
incandescence (HS-LII) instrument and a single particle soot photometer (SP2)
were conducted upwind, downwind, and while driving on a highway dominated by
gasoline vehicles. The results are used with concurrent CO(2) measurements to
derive fuel-based BC emission factors for real-world average fleet and heavy-duty
diesel vehicles separately. The derived emission factors from both instruments
are compared, and a low SP2 bias (relative to the HS-LII) is found to be caused
by a BC mass mode diameter less than 75 nm, that is most prominent with the
gasoline fleet but is not present in the heavy-duty diesel vehicle exhaust on the
highway. Results from both the LII and the SP2 demonstrate that the BC emission
factors from gasoline vehicles are at least a factor of 2 higher than previous
North American measurements, and a factor of 9 higher than currently used
emission inventories in Canada, derived with the MOBILE 6.2C model. Conversely,
the measured BC emission factor for heavy-duty diesel vehicles is in reasonable
agreement with previous measurements. The results suggest that greater attention 
must be paid to black carbon from gasoline engines to obtain a full understanding
of the impact of black carbon on air quality and climate and to devise
appropriate mitigation strategies.

© 2012 American Chemical Society

PMID: 22309316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Soc Work. 2011 Oct;56(4):337-46.

Design-based practice: a new perspective for social work.

Cohen BJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Social Policy and Practice, University of Pennsylvania, Swarthmore, 
PA 19081, USA. bucohen@sp2.upenn.edu

Evidence-based practice (EBP) has emerged as an alternative to traditional social
work practice and has ignited a new round in the decades-old debate about the
relationship between knowledge and practice in the field. This article identifies
several limitations inherent in the EBP perspective and argues that it would be
unfortunate if EBP were to become the new paradigm for social work practice and
education. It also presents a new perspective for social work called design-based
practice (DBP), which is based on the work of Herbert Simon and Mary Parker
Follett, and compares this perspective with EBP and authority-based practice. DBP
rests on the belief that knowledge is derived from experience and interactions
between practitioners and clients and that professional practice should be
primarily concerned with "how things ought to be."

PMID: 22308666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Chem Commun (Camb). 2012 Mar 11;48(21):2674-6. doi: 10.1039/c2cc17330a. Epub 2012
Feb 3.

Iron-catalysed tandem cross-dehydrogenative coupling (CDC) of terminal allylic
C(sp3) to C(sp2) of styrene and benzoannulation in the synthesis of
polysubstituted naphthalenes.

Liu H(1), Cao L, Sun J, Fossey JS, Deng WP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy and Shanghai Key Laboratory of Functional Materials
Chemistry, East China University of Science and Technology, 130 Meilong Road,
Shanghai 200237, China.

A novel iron-catalysed tandem cross-dehydrogenative coupling and benzoannulation 
process was developed for the synthesis of biologically and synthetically
important polysubstituted naphthalene derivatives from simple 1,2-aryl-propenes
and styrenes in moderate to good yields.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012

PMID: 22307234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2012 Mar 12;51(11):2712-6. doi: 10.1002/anie.201107821.
Epub 2012 Feb 1.

Arylsulfonylacetylenes as alkynylating reagents of Csp2-H bonds activated with
lithium bases.

Ruano JL(1), Alemán J, Marzo L, Alvarado C, Tortosa M, Díaz-Tendero S, Fraile A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Orgánica, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Cantoblanco,
Spain. joseluis.garcia.ruano@uam.es

Chameleon: a new strategy for the synthesis of a wide variety of alkynyl
derivatives by the reaction of substituted arylsulfonylacetylenes with
organolithium species is described. The high yields, the simplicity of the
experimental procedure, the broad scope of this reaction, and the formation of
C(sp)-C(sp2) bonds without using transition metals are the main features of this 
methodology.

Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22298507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Sheng Wu Yi Xue Gong Cheng Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Dec;28(6):1181-4.

[Preparation and identification of monoclonal antibody against
alpha-momorcharins].

[Article in Chinese]

Meng Y(1), Yao X, Wang S, Lin M, Wang H, Meng Y, Zhao X.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Nanobiomedical Technology and Membrane Biology, Sichuan
University/College of Life Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610064, China.

Three BALB/c mice were immunized four times with alpha-momorcharins (alpha-MMC). 
Using polyethylene glycol (PEG) method, the immunized splenocytes were fused with
SP2/0 cells. One strain of hybridoma cells was obtained which secrete antibodies 
against alpha-MMC. To get ascites, the hybridoma cells were injected into the
abdominal cavity of mice. The antibodies were purified from ascites. Indirect
enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and Western blot assay were applied to 
determine the specifity of the monoclonal antibody (McAb). The results showed
that the McAb was specific to alpha-MMC without detectable cross-activity with
MAP30. The McAb provided detecting method for further research of the structure
and function of alpha-MMC.

PMID: 22295710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Biol Pharm Bull. 2012;35(2):251-5.

Intravenously administered 2'-deoxycytidine suppresses mouse myeloma tumor
growth.

Iwazaki A(1), Imai K, Nakanishi K, Yoshioka M.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Setsunan University, Osaka, Japan.
ayano@pharm.setsunan.ac.jp

We examined the in vivo effects of intravenously administered 2'-deoxycytidine
(dCyd) on tumor growth and survival time in mice bearing SP2/0-Ag14 (SP2/0)
myeloma tumors. Administration of dCyd tended to decrease the tumor volume and
significantly decreased the tumor weight. A single intravenous administration of 
dCyd significantly increased survival time of the tumor-bearing mice. The effect 
of dCyd on tumor growth was maintained for at least 1 week after the final
administration. The net amount of dCyd in the kidney, liver, and spleen of the
tumor-bearing mice increased 2.5 to 5.3 fold compared with the amount in
non-tumor-bearing mice. Our results suggest that the increase in dCyd in the mice
inoculated SP2/0 myeloma cells plays an important role for the growth suppression
of the tumor.

PMID: 22293357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Org Lett. 2012 Feb 17;14(4):1078-81. doi: 10.1021/ol203442a. Epub 2012 Jan 30.

Cu-catalyzed oxidative C(sp2)-H cycloetherification of o-arylphenols for the
preparation of dibenzofurans.

Zhao J(1), Wang Y, He Y, Liu L, Zhu Q.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institutes of
Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 190 Kaiyuan Avenue,
Guangzhou 510530, China.

A new process involving copper-catalyzed aerobic C(sp(2))-H activation, followed 
by cycloetherification, has been developed. This reaction serves as a direct
method for the preparation of multisubstituted dibenzofurans starting with
o-arylphenols. The presence of a strong para-electron-withdrawing group (e.g.,
NO(2)) on the phenol is essential for the success of the reaction.

PMID: 22288878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2012 Oct;50(7):678-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bjoms.2011.12.011. Epub 2012 Jan 25.

Stabilisation of premaxillary segment in bilateral cleft palate during alveolar
bone graft.

Singh M(1), Flood T, Mahmood R, Sanghrajka N.

Author information: 
(1)Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery Department, Salisbury District Hospital, Odstock 
Rd, Salisbury SP2 8BJ, United Kingdom. mantaray51@hotmail.com

PMID: 22277699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Molecules. 2012 Jan 6;17(1):556-70. doi: 10.3390/molecules17010556.

Synthesis and DPPH radical scavenging activity of prenylated phenol derivatives.

Osorio M(1), Aravena J, Vergara A, Taborga L, Baeza E, Catalán K, González C,
Carvajal M, Carrasco H, Espinoza L.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química, Universidad Técnica Federico Santa María, Valparaíso,
Chile. mauricio.osorio@usm.cl

The synthesis of twenty six prenylated phenols derivatives is reported. These
compounds were obtained under mild conditions via Electrophilic Aromatic
Substitution (EAS) coupling reactions between phenol derivatives containing
electron-donor subtituents and 3-methyl-2-buten-1-ol using BF(3)×OEt(2).
Dialkylations were also produced with this method. The formation of a chroman
ring by intramolecular cyclization between a sp2 carbon from the prenyl group
with the hydroxyl substituent in the ortho position occurred with some phenols.
All the synthesized compounds were evaluated as antioxidants according to a DPPH 
radical scavenging activity assay. IC(50) values of five synthesized compounds
indicated they were as good antioxidants as Trolox.

PMID: 22269867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Nanoscale Res Lett. 2012 Jan 19;7(1):82. doi: 10.1186/1556-276X-7-82.

Synthesis of highly transparent ultrananocrystalline diamond films from a
low-pressure, low-temperature focused microwave plasma jet.

Liao WH(1), Wei DH, Lin CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering and Institute of Manufacturing
Technology, National Taipei University of Technology, Taipei, 106, Taiwan.
dhwei@ntut.edu.tw.

This paper describes a new low-temperature process underlying the synthesis of
highly transparent ultrananocrystalline diamond [UNCD] films by low-pressure and 
unheated microwave plasma jet-enhanced chemical vapor deposition with
Ar-1%CH4-10%H2 gas chemistry. The unique low-pressure/low-temperature [LPLT]
plasma jet-enhanced growth even with added H2 and unheated substrates yields UNCD
films similar to those prepared by plasma-enhanced growth without addition of H2 
and heating procedure. This is due to the focused plasma jet which effectively
compensated for the sluggish kinetics associated with LPLT growth. The effects of
pressure on UNCD film synthesis from the microwave plasma jet were systematically
investigated. The results indicated that the substrate temperature, grain size,
surface roughness, and sp3 carbon content in the films decreased with decreasing 
pressure. The reason is due to the great reduction of Ha emission to lower the
etching of sp2 carbon phase, resulting from the increase of mean free path with
decreasing pressure. We have demonstrated that the transition from
nanocrystalline (80 nm) to ultrananocrystalline (3 to 5 nm) diamond films grown
via microwave Ar-1%CH4-10%H2 plasma jets could be controlled by changing the
pressure from 100 to 30 Torr. The 250-nm-thick UNCD film was synthesized on glass
substrates (glass transition temperature [Tg] 557°C) using the unique LPLT (30
Torr/460°C) microwave plasma jet, which produced UNCD films with a high sp3
carbon content (95.65%) and offered high optical transmittance (approximately 86%
at 700 nm).

PMCID: PMC3271979
PMID: 22260391  [PubMed]


81. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2011 Oct;27(10):1507-12.

[Eukaryotic expression of human IL17-RD-ECD and generation of its monoclonal
antibody].

[Article in Chinese]

Sun X(1), Mei K, Wang Y, Ren F, Xia Y, Chang Z.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.

IL-17 Receptor D (IL-17 RD) is a cytokine receptor that mediates IL-17 signaling 
and plays an important role in responding to the invasion of extracellular
pathogens and many inflammatory and autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid
arthritis. In this study we report the generation of a mouse monoclonal antibody 
against human IL-17 RD. The recombinant human IL-17RD extracellular domain
(hIL-17RD-ECD) was produced in the baculovirus expression system and purified
from culture medium of sf9 insect cells. The purified protein was used as a
T-dependent antigen to immune Balb/C mice. B cells from the spleen of immunized
mice were fused with murine cell SP2/0. Hybridoma cell lines were screened for
the production of the monoclonal antibody against hIL-17-RD-ECD using ELISA. A
hybridoma cell line 1F8 was found to have a high production of the antibody,
which was further confirmed for the specificity by both western blot and ELISA
analyses. The monoclonal antibody obtained from hybridoma 1F8 was characterized
to be IgG1+Kappa subclass. This study provided a base for the further therapeutic
application of the antibody on the autoimmune disease including rheumatoid
arthritis.

PMID: 22260068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Bioprocess Biosyst Eng. 2012 Aug;35(6):963-75. doi: 10.1007/s00449-012-0681-9.
Epub 2012 Jan 15.

Use of focussed beam reflectance measurement (FBRM) for monitoring changes in
biomass concentration.

Whelan J(1), Murphy E, Pearson A, Jeffers P, Kieran P, McDonnell S, Raposo S,
Lima-Costa ME, Glennon B.

Author information: 
(1)UCD School of Chemical and Bioprocess Engineering, UCD, Belfield, Dublin 4,
Ireland.

Erratum in
    Bioprocess Biosyst Eng. 2012 Sep;35(7):1247. Raposo, Sara [added]; Lima-Costa, Ma
Emília [added].

The potential of focussed beam reflectance measurement (FBRM) as a tool to
monitor changes in biomass concentration was investigated in a number of
biological systems. The measurement technique was applied to two morphologically 
dissimilar plant cell suspension cultures, Morinda citrifolia and Centaurea
calcitrapa, to a filamentous bacteria, Streptomyces natalensis, to high density
cultures of Escherichia coli and to a murine Sp2/0 hybridoma suspension cell
line, 3-2.19. In all cases, the biomass concentration proved to be correlated
with total FBRM counts. The nature of the correlation varied between systems and 
was influenced by the concentration, nature, size and morphology of the particle 
under investigation.

PMID: 22246535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Gerontologist. 2012 Aug;52(4):541-52. doi: 10.1093/geront/gnr134. Epub 2012 Jan
11.

Outcomes of a telehealth intervention for homebound older adults with heart or
chronic respiratory failure: a randomized controlled trial.

Gellis ZD(1), Kenaley B, McGinty J, Bardelli E, Davitt J, Ten Have T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Mental Health & Aging, School of Social Policy & Practice,
University of Pennsylvania, 3701 Locust Walk, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
zgellis@sp2.upenn.edu

PURPOSE:  Telehealth care is emerging as a viable intervention model to treat
complex chronic conditions, such as heart failure (HF) and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD), and to engage older adults in self-care disease
management. 
DESIGN AND METHODS:  We report on a randomized controlled trial examining the
impact of a multifaceted telehealth intervention on health, mental health, and
service utilization outcomes among homebound medically ill older adults diagnosed
with HF or COPD. Random effects regression modeling was used, and we hypothesized
that older adults in the telehealth intervention (n = 51) would receive
significantly better quality of care resulting in improved scores in
health-related quality of life, mental health, and satisfaction with care at 3
months follow-up as compared with controls (n = 51) and service utilization
outcomes at 12 months follow-up. 
RESULTS:  At follow-up, the telehealth intervention group reported greater
increases in general health and social functioning, and improved in depression
symptom scores as compared with usual care plus education group. The control
group had significantly more visits to the emergency department than the
telehealth group. There was an observed trend toward fewer hospital days for
telehealth participants, but it did not reach significance at 12 months. 
IMPLICATIONS:  Telehealth may be an efficient and effective method of
systematically delivering integrated care in the home health sector. The use of
telehealth technology may benefit homebound older adults who have difficulty
accessing care due to disability, transportation, or isolation.

PMID: 22241810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Anal Sci. 2012;28(1):13-20.

An sp2 and sp3 hybrid nanocrystalline carbon film electrode for anodic stripping 
voltammetry and its application for electrochemical immunoassay.

Kurita R(1), Nakamoto K, Sato Y, Kamata T, Ueda A, Kato D, Hirono S, Niwa O.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Tsukuba
Central, Higashi, Ibaraki, Japan. r.kurita@aist.go.jp

A hybridized nanocrystalline carbon film electrode consisting of sp(2) and sp(3) 
bonds was investigated to reveal the reduction properties of Cd(2+) and for
application as a highly sensitive and reliable electrochemical immunoassay.
Conductive nanocrystalline carbon film consisting of about 60% sp(2) and 40%
sp(3) bonds was fabricated using electron cyclotron resonance (ECR) sputtering
equipment, and then the Cd(2+) concentrations were measured with an ECR sputtered
carbon (ECR nano-carbon) electrode by employing an anodic stripping voltammetry
(ASV) technique. The preconcentrated Cd was analyzed with Kelvin probe force
microscopy and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy while observing the
morphology change with an atomic force microscope and a scanning electron
microscope. The preconcentrated Cd on the ECR nano-carbon electrode was revealed 
to be a thin sheet structure, which was significantly different from the Cd on a 
conventional carbon material that grows with a coralloid structure. The
background current during an ASV measurement maintains a low level equivalent to 
that found with boron-doped diamond because the surface of the ECR nano-carbon is
robust and angstrom-level flat. The carbon-electrode performance for ASV was
improved by controlling its structure at a nanometer scale without any metal
doping or coating. Finally, the ECR nano-carbon was used for biomolecular
determination by electrochemical immunoassay with a CdSe nanoparticle label.
Electrochemical immunoassay results were successfully obtained with the ECR
nano-carbon, and they correlated well with fluorescence results obtained for CdSe
nanoparticles.

PMID: 22232218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Vet Med Sci. 2012 Jun;74(6):693-7. Epub 2011 Dec 28.

Epitope mapping of a monoclonal antibody against the Gp85 of avian leukosis virus
subgroup J.

Sun M(1), Yu D, Mo H, Cao H, Chen C, Chen F.

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193,
China.

Avian leukosis virus subgroup J poses a great threat to the poultry industry in
China. To reduce the economic losses, a quick method for detection of ALV-J
antigen is required for diagnosis and identification of the congenitally
transmitting hens. In this study, we report the production and evaluation of one 
monoclonal antibody (MAb) suitable for achieving these goals. The gp85 gene of
avian leukosis virus subgroup J CAUHM01 China isolates was subcloned into the
expression vectors pGEX-6p-1 and pET28a and successfully expressed in E. coli.
After immunizing BALB/c mice with recombinant His-Jgp85 protein, splenic cells
from immunized mice were fused with SP2/0 myeloma cells to produce hybridomas. We
isolated and characterized one ALV-J gp85-specific MAb by determining its titer, 
affinity and IgG subclass. In addition, we performed epitope mapping and
determined the epitope for the MAb 1E3 to be 81-92 aa of ALV-J gp85 protein
(LPWDPQELDILG). Bioinformatics analysis and IFA studies revealed that this
epitope is conserved among all ALV-J isolates and that this antibody could serve 
as a useful reagent for ALV-J detection and diagnosis.

PMID: 22214862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Hum Antibodies. 2012;21(3-4):57-64. doi: 10.3233/HAB-130263.

Development and characterization of monoclonal antibodies against human CD20 in
Balb/c mice.

Sepehr KS(1), Baradaran B, Majidi J, Abdolalizadeh J, Aghebati L, Shahneh FZ.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Applied Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz,
Iran.

BACKGROUND: Targeting CD20 antigen on B-lymphocytes provides good opportunity for
management of the target cells in patients with B-cell malignancies. By the
advent of hybridoma technology, monoclonal antibodies applications exert
extensive changes in medical fields such as diagnosis, treatment and
purification.
OBJECTIVE: The prim aim of this study was to produce monoclonal antibody against 
CD20 for exploitation in diagnosis.
METHODS: In this study, Balb/c mice were immunized with two peptides from
extracellular domain of CD20. Poly Ethylene Glycol (PEG) fused spleen cells of
the most immune mouse with SP2/0 (myeloma cells). Supernatant of hybridoma cells 
were screened for detection of antibody by ELISA. The desired clones were
selected for limiting dilution (L.D). Afterward, specificity and cross reactivity
of these antibodies were determined by immunological assay such as ELISA and
western blot analysis (WB) and Immunofluorescence. Large scale of monoclonal
antibodies was produced by ascetic fluid method. Monoclonal antibody was purified
by chromatography then confirmed by SDS-PAGE.
RESULTS: In this study, between five positive clone wells, 3 clones were chosen
for limiting dilution. Limiting dilution product was one monoclone with
absorbance about 2.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that such monoclonal antibodies against CD20 
can be used in diagnosis of CD20 in the cells surface.

PMID: 23549022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2012 Nov;62(Pt 11):2618-23. doi:
10.1099/ijs.0.038315-0. Epub 2011 Dec 23.

Alkalitalea saponilacus gen. nov., sp. nov., an obligately anaerobic,
alkaliphilic, xylanolytic bacterium from a meromictic soda lake.

Zhao B(1), Chen S.

Author information: 
(1)Biological Systems Engineering, Washington State University, Pullman, WA
99164, USA.

A Gram-positive, obligately anaerobic, motile, slender, flexible rod, designated 
SC/BZ-SP2(T), was isolated from mixed alkaline water and sediment of Soap Lake,
Washington State, USA. Strain SC/BZ-SP2(T) formed salmon to pink colonies and was
alkaliphilic. The isolate grew at pH(35 °C) 7.5-10.5 (optimum pH(35 °C) 9.7), at 
8-40 °C (optimum 35-37 °C) and with 0.35-1.38 M Na(+) (optimum 0.44-0.69 M
Na(+)). The isolate utilized L-arabinose, D-ribose, D-xylose, D-fructose,
D-mannose, D-galactose, cellobiose, maltose, sucrose, trehalose, sorbitol, xylan,
malate and yeast extract as carbon and energy sources; best growth was observed
with L-arabinose, cellobiose, maltose and trehalose. The major fermentation
products from beechwood xylan were propionate and acetate. The dominant fatty
acids were iso-C(15:0), anteiso-C(15:0), iso-C(17:0) 3-OH, C(17:0) 3-OH and
C(15:0) 3-OH. The cell-wall sugars were ribose, xylose, galactose and glucose.
Thiosulfate and sulfite could be reduced to sulfide. The genomic DNA G+C content 
was 39.5 ± 0.9 mol%. Phylogenetic analysis based on 16S rRNA gene sequences
indicated that strain SC/BZ-SP2(T) belonged to the family Marinilabiliaceae of
the order Bacteroidales, class Bacteroidia. The most closely related strains were
Alkaliflexus imshenetskii Z-7010(T) (91.8% 16S rRNA gene sequence similarity),
Marinilabilia salmonicolor Cy s1(T) (91.0%) and Anaerophaga thermohalophila
Fru22(T) (90.4%). On the basis of phenotypic, chemotaxonomic and phylogenetic
features, strain SC/BZ-SP2(T) represents a novel species in a new genus of the
family Marinilabiliaceae, for which the name Alkalitalea saponilacus gen. nov.,
sp. nov. is proposed. The type strain of Alkalitalea saponilacus is SC/BZ-SP2(T) 
(=ATCC BAA-2172(T) =DSM 24412(T)).

PMID: 22199219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2012 Mar;50(2):183-4. doi:
10.1016/j.bjoms.2011.02.011. Epub 2011 Dec 22.

Aesthetic incision for neck dissection.

Gulati A(1), Shekar K, Downie IP.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Salisbury Foundation NHS Trust,
Odstock Road, Salisbury SP2 8BJ, United Kingdom.

PMID: 22196147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Am Chem Soc. 2012 Jan 11;134(1):3-6. doi: 10.1021/ja210660g. Epub 2011 Dec 29.

Highly efficient syntheses of azetidines, pyrrolidines, and indolines via
palladium catalyzed intramolecular amination of C(sp3)-H and C(sp2)-H bonds at <U+03B3> 
and d positions.

He G(1), Zhao Y, Zhang S, Lu C, Chen G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

Efficient methods have been developed to synthesize azetidine, pyrrolidine, and
indoline compounds via palladium-catalyzed intramolecular amination of C-H bonds 
at the <U+03B3> and d positions of picolinamide (PA) protected amine substrates. These
methods feature relatively a low catalyst loading, use of inexpensive reagents,
and convenient operating conditions. Their selectivities are predictable. These
methods highlight the use of unactivated C-H bond, especially the C(sp(3))-H bond
of methyl groups, as functional groups in organic synthesis.

© 2011 American Chemical Society

PMID: 22191666  [PubMed]


90. Cytotechnology. 2012 Mar;64(2):157-63. doi: 10.1007/s10616-011-9401-6. Epub 2011 
Dec 11.

Preparation and purification of monoclonal antibodies against chloramphenicol.

Yi Y(1), Wang Z, Li M, Zhu K, Ying G.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmaceutical Science, Zhejiang University of Technology, Chaowang
road 18, Hangzhou, 310014, China.

Monoclonal antibodies (McAbs) against chloramphenicol (CAP) were produced to
detect CAP residues, which could be toxic and possesses a potential threat to
human health. The CAP-BSA conjugate was obtained by bovine serum albumin (BSA)
coupled with CAP, and used to immunize the mice. The splenocytes from the
immunized mice were fused with mouse myeloma cells SP2/0 to form hybridoma, which
may secrete McAbs against CAP. Hybridomas 1D(1) and 3G(12) secreting McAbs
against CAP were obtained by screening. Ascites containing McAbs were prepared by
injecting 1 x 10(6) cells of hybridoma 1D(1) and 3G(12) into the abdomen of mice.
Protein A affinity chromatography was used to purify McAbs against CAP in a
single chromatographic step with recovery yield above 80% and purity above 95%
and full recovery of antibody activity. Experiments showed that McAb 3G(12) was
highly specific for CAP and had no cross-reactivity with analogues which have a
structure similar to CAP. The IC(50) value was 50.8 ng/mL.

PMCID: PMC3279585
PMID: 22160396  [PubMed]


91. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Dec;27(12):1330-4.

[Preparation of monoclonal antibody against Pfs25 protein and establishment of
double antibody sandwich ELISA method].

[Article in Chinese]

Li P(1), Ma YR, Lu J, Lei Q, Chen Y, Jiang L.

Author information: 
(1)Lanzhou Institute of Biological Products, Lanzhou 730046, China.
lilac_bio@yahoo.com.cn

AIM: To prepare the monoclonal antibody (mAb)against Pfs25 protein of Plasmodium 
falciparum, and establish the method of sandwich ELISA for detecting the Pfs25
protein.
METHODS: Pfs25 protein the recombinant expressed by Pichia pastoris was purified.
The purified Pfs25 protein as the antigen was used to immune the BALB/c mice, The
secreting specific mAb positive cell strains, which were prepared by hybridizing 
the Sp2/0 myeloma cell and the spleen cell from immunized mice, were detected by 
indirect ELISA method. The ascites of mAb were collected from immunization F1
mice, and their biological properties were identified by indirect ELISA. The
anti-Pfs25 antibody was labeled by Horseradish Peroxidase (HRP), the sandwich
ELISA method to detect Pfs25 protein was established based on the anti-Pfs25 mAb 
4B7 and 1B4 as coating and enzyme antibody, respectively.
RESULTS: Three hybridoma cell lines secreting mAb against Pfs25 protein have been
selected from the antibody positive hybridizing cells. The two of them have a
better stability and specificity. The sandwich ELISA method detecting Pfs25
protein was established. Its detecte range was 0.07-1 mg/mL , and its sensitivity
was 41.6 ng/mL.
CONCLUSION: The anti-Pfs25 mAb are successfully prepared and the double antibody 
sandwich ELISA method detecting Pfs25 protein is established. Our study lay a
foundation of developing transmission-blocking malaria vaccine with Pfs25 protein
as antigen.

PMID: 22152818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Dec;27(12):1325-9.

[Mouse anti-human CXCR3 mAb preparation and its biological function].

[Article in Chinese]

Huang L(1), Sun J, Guo JY, Qiu YH.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Affiliated Soochow University, Suzhou 215003, China.
szdalv@163.com

AIM: Obtain hybridoma cell line with continuing expression of mouse anti-human
CXCR3 mAb, investigate expression characteristics of human CXCR3 and how CXCR3
signal transduction function on L929-huCXCR3 and colon carcinoma cell lines
transfer and growth.
METHODS: Taking L929-huCXCR3 cell with high expression of human CXCR3 membrane
molecule as immunogen to immunize BALB/c mouse, we fused immunized mouse spleen
cell with myeloma cell Sp2/0 of its same germ line, then used L929-huCXCR3 as
screening cell and empty vector transfected cell L929-mock as negative control.
Obtained hybridoma cell line with continuing secretion of anti-human CXCR3 mAb
through flow cytometry. We used Ig subclass type rapid qualitation indicator
paper method and indirect immunofluorescence to identify obtained hybridoma cell 
line and mAb, indirect immunofluorescence to analyze CXCR3 expression on tumor
cell surface, Transwell isolation cabin to assess effect on L929-huCXCR3 and
colon carcinoma cell line Colo205, HCT116 and HT29 migration by mAb, MTT method
to analyze how mAb function on colon carcinoma cell line Colo205 proliferation.
RESULTS: Obtained a hybridoma cell line with continuing secretion of mouse
anti-human CXCR3 mAb, named 9B5. According to rapid qualitation test paper
analysis, light chain of the mAb was chain and heavy chain is IgG1 subclass.
Indirect immunofluorescence and flow cytometry results show that the mAb can
recognize CXCR3 molecules on the surface of activated T lymphocyte and colon
carcinoma cell line Colo205, HCT116 and HT29 cell. mAb 9B5 can inhibit oriented
migration of L929-huCXCR3 cells, colon carcinoma cell line Colo205, HCT116 and
HT29 cell, it can also inhibit Colo205 growth promotion effect by IP-10.
CONCLUSION: Successfully obtain a hybridoma cell line with continuing secretion
of mouse anti-human CXCR3 mAb, which has laid material foundation on
investigation of CXCR3 expression characteristics and CXCR3 signal transduction
function on tumor growth and migration. It is prospective to create a new way and
a new drug for treatment of tumor metastasis.

PMID: 22152817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Fish Biol. 2011 Dec;79(7):1851-65. doi: 10.1111/j.1095-8649.2011.03126.x. Epub 
2011 Nov 14.

Metazoan parasite communities of rock cod Eleginops maclovinus along southern
Chilean coast and their use as biological tags at a local spatial scale.

Henriquez VP(1), Gonzalez MT, Licandeo R, Carvajal J.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigación y Desarrollo de Recursos y Ambientes Costeros I~mar,
Universidad de los Lagos, Camino a Chinquihue Km 6, Puerto Montt, Chile.
vaniahenriquezt@gmail.com

The composition of the metazoan parasite fauna of the rock cod Eleginops
maclovinus from three locations in southern Chile was compared to assess the
local spatial variation of the community component of their parasitic faunas. A
total of 13 108 metazoan parasites (5267 endoparasites and 7841 ectoparasites)
belonging to 34 taxa were collected from 268 specimens of E. maclovinus between
October 2008 and March 2009. The populations and community quantitative
descriptors were estimated. Altogether, 97.4% of the fish were infected with at
least one parasite taxon. The most prevalent species were Hypoechinorhynchus
magellanicus (Acanthocephala), Caligus rogercresseyi, Lepeophtheirus mugiloides, 
Clavella adunca (Copepoda) and Similascarophis sp. (Nematoda). Five species are
new records for this host: Argulus araucanus, Hirudinea gen. sp1., Hirudinea gen.
sp2., Benedenia sp. and Camallanidae gen. sp. A linear discriminant analysis
(LDA) showed that the metazoan parasite fauna of E. maclovinus varied
qualitatively and quantitatively among three locations, with 89.7% of fish being 
correctly assigned to their respective locations. This suggested that parasites
could be a reliable tool to discriminate individual fish from geographically
close locations. There was a weak relationship between the parasite fauna and
fish size and there were no accumulations of parasites in the host over time,
which could be associated with ontogenetic changes of diet associated with
habitat use.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal of Fish Biology © 2011 The Fisheries Society of the
British Isles.

PMID: 22141891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. JRSM Short Rep. 2011 Nov;2(11):92. doi: 10.1258/shorts.2011.011061. Epub 2011 Nov
28.

Primary meningioma of the middle ear.

Manjaly JG(1), Watson GM, Jones M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of ENT, Salisbury District Hospital , Salisbury SP2 8BJ , UK.

PMCID: PMC3227376
PMID: 22140618  [PubMed]


95. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e28314. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028314. Epub 2011 Nov 30.

Efficient production of HIV-1 virus-like particles from a mammalian expression
vector requires the N-terminal capsid domain.

Jalaguier P(1), Turcotte K, Danylo A, Cantin R, Tremblay MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Infectiologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de
Québec-CHUL, Québec, Canada.

It is now well accepted that the structural protein Pr55(Gag) is sufficient by
itself to produce HIV-1 virus-like particles (VLPs). This polyprotein precursor
contains different domains including matrix, capsid, SP1, nucleocapsid, SP2 and
p6. In the present study, we wanted to determine by mutagenesis which region(s)
is essential to the production of VLPs when Pr55(Gag) is inserted in a mammalian 
expression vector, which allows studying the protein of interest in the absence
of other viral proteins. To do so, we first studied a minimal Pr55(Gag) sequence 
called Gag min that was used previously. We found that Gag min fails to produce
VLPs when expressed in an expression vector instead of within a molecular clone. 
This failure occurs early in the cell at the assembly of viral proteins. We then 
generated a series of deletion and substitution mutants, and examined their
ability to produce VLPs by combining biochemical and microscopic approaches. We
demonstrate that the matrix region is not necessary, but that the efficiency of
VLP production depends strongly on the presence of its basic region. Moreover,
the presence of the N-terminal domain of capsid is required for VLP production
when Gag is expressed alone. These findings, combined with previous observations 
indicating that HIV-1 Pr55(Gag)-derived VLPs act as potent stimulators of innate 
and acquired immunity, make the use of this strategy worth considering for
vaccine development.

PMCID: PMC3227654
PMID: 22140574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Clin Plast Surg. 2012 Jan;39(1):77-84. doi: 10.1016/j.cps.2011.09.012.

Management of split skin graft donor sites-results of a national survey.

Geary PM(1), Tiernan E.

Author information: 
(1)Odstock Centre for Burns and Plastic Surgery, Salisbury District Hospital,
Odstock, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP2 8BJ, UK. pmgeary@hotmail.com

Republished from
    J Plast Reconstr Aesthet Surg. 2009 Dec;62(12):1677-83.

The authors wished to obtain a 'snapshot' of the range of practice in the
management of split skin graft donor sites in the British Isles. Material/Methods
Questionnaires were sent to all British consultants and locum consultant plastic 
surgeons on July 1, 2006. Of the 357 questionnaires, 279 were returned (a
response rate of 78%). Results Alginates were the most popular dressings,
especially in adult donor sites - first choice for 167 respondents (60%).
Adhesive fabrics were less popular - first choice for small adult donor areas for
46 respondents (16%). Plastic film dressings and Biobrane were even less popular 
- being the first choice for small and large donor areas, respectively, in
children (for approximately 5% of respondents). Ten percent of respondents said
they avoid paraffin gauze and another 10% avoid plastic film dressings in all
cases. Five percent avoid hydrocolloid and another 5% avoid adhesive fabric in
all cases. Conclusion on the basis of these results, the authors feel that any
future study of donor-site dressings should incorporate the most commonly used
dressing (alginate) as a control.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22099851  [PubMed]


97. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2011 Aug;27(8):1164-73.

[Construction of a bivalent plant expression vector carrying VvSUC11 and VvSUC12 
genes and its genetic transformation in sugar beet].

[Article in Chinese]

Yin D(1), Zhu J, Wang A, Xiang B.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Agricultural Biotechnology, Shihezi University, Shihezi
832000, China.

We have recombined genes VvSUC11, VvSUC12 from Vitis vinifera L., and
root-specific promoters of sweet potato storage protein gene from Ipomoea batatas
L. Lam., named as SP1 and SP2. We have constructed a vector pCAMBIA2301-SP1-
VvSUC11-SP2-VvSUC12 using pCAMBIA2301 as an original vector. VvSUC11 and VvSUC12 
were under the control of root-specific promoters of sweet potato storage protein
gene. We transformed the vector into KWS-9103 breeding line of Beta vulgaris L.
with Agrobacterium-mediated transformation. We have established the optimal
genetic transformation protocol of sugar beet as following: the explants
pre-cultured for 4 days were immersed in Agrobacterium suspension of OD(600)=0.5,
supplemented with 0.005% Silwet L-77, and followed by a 4-day culture on medium
containing cefotaxime, then the buds were selected on medium containing kanamycin
and cefotaxime. The percentage of kanamycin-resistant buds was as high as 42%.
Results of PCR and RT-PCR proved that the target genes had integrated into sugar 
beet genome and expressed. It will lay a foundation for further studying their
function in Beta vulgaris.

PMID: 22097805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Adm Policy Ment Health. 2013 Mar;40(2):133-44. doi: 10.1007/s10488-011-0386-4.

Family community integration and maternal mental health.

Cullen SW(1), Solomon PL.

Author information: 
(1)School of Social Policy & Practice, University of Pennsylvania, 3815 Walnut
Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6179, USA. swiesel@sp2.upenn.edu

While the majority of women with mental health problems (MHPs) are mothers,
little is known about the community integration (CI) of these women and their
children. Given that poorer mental health status has been linked with lower CI,
CI has become a long standing goal of mental health policy. Data from a national 
survey examined the association of maternal mental health status with the
physical, social, and psychological integration of families. After adjusting for 
sociodemographics, mothers with MHPs reported similar physical integration but
less social and psychological integration. Interventions focused on improving
social networks, scarce resources, and neighborhood safety are needed for
families impacted by maternal MHPs.

PMID: 22080144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Nanoscale Res Lett. 2011 Nov 11;6:589. doi: 10.1186/1556-276X-6-589.

Atomistic aspects of ductile responses of cubic silicon carbide during nanometric
cutting.

Goel S(1), Luo X, Reuben RL, Rashid WB.

Author information: 
(1)School of Engineering and Physical Sciences, Heriot Watt University,
Edinburgh, EH144AS, Scotland, UK. x.luo@hw.ac.uk.

Cubic silicon carbide (SiC) is an extremely hard and brittle material having
unique blend of material properties which makes it suitable candidate for
microelectromechanical systems and nanoelectromechanical systems applications.
Although, SiC can be machined in ductile regime at nanoscale through single-point
diamond turning process, the root cause of the ductile response of SiC has not
been understood yet which impedes significant exploitation of this ceramic
material. In this paper, molecular dynamics simulation has been carried out to
investigate the atomistic aspects of ductile response of SiC during nanometric
cutting process. Simulation results show that cubic SiC undergoes sp3-sp2
order-disorder transition resulting in the formation of SiC-graphene-like
substance with a growth rate dependent on the cutting conditions. The disorder
transition of SiC causes the ductile response during its nanometric cutting
operations. It was further found out that the continuous abrasive action between 
the diamond tool and SiC causes simultaneous sp3-sp2 order-disorder transition of
diamond tool which results in graphitization of diamond and consequent tool wear.

PMCID: PMC3224798
PMID: 22078069  [PubMed]


100. Chem Commun (Camb). 2012 Jan 18;48(5):635-53. doi: 10.1039/c1cc14592d. Epub 2011 
Nov 9.

Interaction of niobium and tantalum pentahalides with O-donors: coordination
chemistry and activation reactions.

Marchetti F(1), Pampaloni G.

Author information: 
(1)Università di Pisa, Dipartimento di Chimica e Chimica Industriale, Via
Risorgimento 35, I-56126 Pisa, Italy.

The chemistry of niobium and tantalum pentahalides, MX(5), with oxygen compounds 
is reviewed herein. The polynuclear structure of MX(5) is readily broken by
addition of oxygen-containing organic molecules, L, to give either mononuclear or
ionic dinuclear coordination adducts. Then activation of the organic ligand may
take place favoured by several factors, i.e. low M-X bond energy, high
temperature, presence of more than one oxygen function within L, L/M molar ratio 
= 2. The activation reactions are often uncommon in the context of metal halides;
they include the cleavage of C(sp3)-O, C(sp2)-O, C-H and C-C bonds, and eventual 
successive rearrangements proceeding with C-O or C-C couplings. The recently
elucidated reactivity of MX(5) with limited amounts of oxygen compounds will be
presented, and possible connections with the relevant MX(5)-directed syntheses
reported in the literature will be outlined.

PMID: 22073391  [PubMed]


101. Eur Spine J. 2012 Mar;21(3):382-9. doi: 10.1007/s00586-011-2063-4. Epub 2011 Nov 
8.

Efficacy of exercise therapy for the treatment of adolescent idiopathic
scoliosis: a review of the literature.

Mordecai SC(1), Dabke HV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Trauma and Orthopaedics, Salisbury NHS Foundation Trust,
Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP2 8BJ, UK.
Simon_mordecai@yahoo.com

Comment in
    Eur Spine J. 2013 Jun;22(6):1438-9.

PURPOSE: Current evidence regarding the use of exercise therapy in the treatment 
of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) was assessed with a review of published 
literature.
METHODS: An extensive literature search was carried out with commonly used
medical databases. A total of 155 papers were identified out of which only 12
papers were deemed to be relevant.
RESULTS: There were nine prospective cohort studies, two retrospective studies
and one case series. All studies endorsed the role of exercise therapy in AIS but
several shortcomings were identified--lack of clarity of patient recruitment and 
in the method of assessment of curve magnitude, poor record of compliance, and
lack of outcome scores. Many studies reported "significant" changes in the Cobb
angle after treatment, which were actually of small magnitude and did not take
into account the reported inter or intra-observer error rate. All studies had
poor statistical analysis and did not report whether the small improvements noted
were maintained in the long term.
CONCLUSIONS: This unbiased literature review has revealed poor quality evidence
supporting the use of exercise therapy in the treatment of AIS. Well-designed
randomised controlled studies are required to assess the role of exercise therapy
in AIS.

PMCID: PMC3296853
PMID: 22065168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Zhonghua Gan Zang Bing Za Zhi. 2011 Jun;19(6):417-22.

[Down-regulation of hepatitis B virus replication by heparin
sulfate-D-glucosaminyl-3-O-sulfotransferase 3B1].

[Article in Chinese]

Su HB(1), Luo Q, Zhang ZZ, Hu JL, Huang AL.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory Molecular Biology on Infectious Diseases, Ministry of
Education, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of HS3ST3B1 on hepatitis B virus (HBV)
replication.
METHODS: HepG2 cells were classified into 7 groups according to the plasmids
transfected: (1) Blank group, no plasmid transfected; 2. Positive control,
transfected with pCH9-HBV which permits HBV replication; (3) Negative control,
transfected with pCH9-HBV + pcDNA3.1 + pTZU6+1; (4) Treatment A, transfected with
pCH9-HBV + pCDNA3.1-HS3ST3B1 + pTZU6+1; (5) Interference A, transfected with
pCH9-HBV + pCDNA3.1-HS3ST3B1 + psh1126 (a plasmid to interfere HS3ST3B1
expression); (6) Treatment B, transfected with pCH9-HBV + pTZU6+1; (7)
Interference B, transfected with pCH9-HBV + psh1126. The levels of HBV DNA were
detected in the above groups by Southern blotting. HBV total RNA of Negative
control, Treatment A and Interference A were quantified by Real-time PCR to
determine the influence of HS3ST3B1 over-expression on the HBV RNA transcription.
The activity of the four HBV promoters [core promoter (cp), x promoter(xp),
surface antigen promoter1(sp1), surface antigen promoter2 (sp2)] were assayed by 
Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay System. The data was analyzed using one way ANOVA,
with P < 0.05 indicating statistically meaningful difference.
RESULT: Southern blot data revealed the level of HBV DNA in Treatment A and
Interference A accounted for 10% +/- 2% and 31% +/- 4% of that in control.
Compared with control, a statistical difference existed between Treatment A and
Control, with F value equalling to 20.8 and P value equalling to 0.034
respectively. A statistical difference also existed between Interfere A and
Treatment A, with F value equalling to 24.9 and P value equalling to 0.021
respectively. The level of HBV DNA in Experiment B was raised by 130% +/- 11% as 
compared to that in Interference B, and the levels of HBV DNA showed a
dose-dependent decrease when H7 cells were transfected with 0.5, 1.0, 1.5 microg 
pCDNA3.1-HS3ST3B1 respectively. Statistical differences existed between control
and H7 transfected with different dose of pCDNA3.1-HS3ST3B1, with F values
equalling to 22.7, 20.3, 26.5 and P values equalling to 0.029, 0.041 and 0.015
respectively. Real-time PCR revealed that the HBV total RNA in Treatment A
accounted for 17.0% +/- 2.7% of that in control and there was a statistical
difference between Treatment A and control, with F value equalling to 25.6 and P 
value equalling to 0.018. In addition, HBV DNA in Interference A was restored to 
74.0% +/- 3.9% of that in control, and there was also a statistical difference
between Treatment A and Interference A, with F value equalling to 21.3 and P
value equalling to 0.032. However, the down regulation of HBV total RNA had
nothing to do with HBV promoters activity.
CONCLUSION: HS3ST3B1 can inhibit HBV replication and reduce the level of HBV
total RNA, but the downregulation of HBV total RNA may not be the result of
direct interaction of HS3ST3B1 and HBV promoters.

PMID: 22053370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. BMJ. 2011 Oct 28;343:d5204. doi: 10.1136/bmj.d5204.

Management of ankle fractures.

Mordecai S(1), Al-Hadithy N.

Author information: 
(1)Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury SP2 8BJ, UK. simon_mordecai@yahoo.com

PMID: 22039272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Nanoscale Res Lett. 2011 Oct 26;6:565. doi: 10.1186/1556-276X-6-565.

Graphitic carbon growth on crystalline and amorphous oxide substrates using
molecular beam epitaxy.

Jerng SK(1), Seong Yu D, Hong Lee J, Kim C, Yoon S, Chun SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics and Graphene Research Institute, Sejong University,
Seoul 143-747, South Korea. schun@sejong.ac.kr.

We report graphitic carbon growth on crystalline and amorphous oxide substrates
by using carbon molecular beam epitaxy. The films are characterized by Raman
spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. The formations of
nanocrystalline graphite are observed on silicon dioxide and glass, while mainly 
sp2 amorphous carbons are formed on strontium titanate and yttria-stabilized
zirconia. Interestingly, flat carbon layers with high degree of graphitization
are formed even on amorphous oxides. Our results provide a progress toward direct
graphene growth on oxide materials.PACS: 81.05.uf; 81.15.Hi; 78.30.Ly.

PMCID: PMC3213075
PMID: 22029707  [PubMed]


105. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e25567. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025567. Epub 2011 Oct 13.

The molecular signature underlying the thymic migration and maturation of TCRaß+ 
CD4+ CD8 thymocytes.

Teng F(1), Zhou Y, Jin R, Chen Y, Pei X, Liu Y, Dong J, Wang W, Pang X, Qian X,
Chen WF, Zhang Y, Ge Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing,
China.

BACKGROUND: After positive selection, the newly generated single positive (SP)
thymocytes migrate to the thymic medulla, where they undergo negative selection
to eliminate autoreactive T cells and functional maturation to acquire immune
competence and egress capability.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To elucidate the genetic program underlying this 
process, we analyzed changes in gene expression in four subsets of mouse
TCRaß(+)CD4(+)CD8(-) thymocytes (SP1 to SP4) representative of sequential stages 
in a previously defined differentiation program. A genetic signature of the
migration of thymocytes was thus revealed. CCR7 and PlexinD1 are believed to be
important for the medullary positioning of SP thymocytes. Intriguingly, their
expression remains at low levels in the newly generated thymocytes, suggesting
that the cortex-medulla migration may not occur until the SP2 stage. SP2 and SP3 
cells gradually up-regulate transcripts involved in T cell functions and the
Foxo1-KLF2-S1P(1) axis, but a number of immune function-associated genes are not 
highly expressed until cells reach the SP4 stage. Consistent with their critical 
role in thymic emigration, the expression of S1P(1) and CD62L are much enhanced
in SP4 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These results support at the molecular level that single positive
thymocytes undergo a differentiation program and further demonstrate that SP4 is 
the stage at which thymocytes acquire the immunocompetence and the capability of 
emigration from the thymus.

PMCID: PMC3192722
PMID: 22022412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2011 Oct 17;50(43):10226-30. doi: 10.1002/anie.201103340.
Epub 2011 Aug 16.

Oxygen insertion catalysis by sp2 carbon.

Frank B(1), Blume R, Rinaldi A, Trunschke A, Schlögl R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Inorganic Chemistry, Fritz Haber Institute of the Max Planck
Society, Faradayweg 4-6, 14195 Berlin, Germany.

PMID: 22021211  [PubMed]


107. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2011 Dec;31(6):1173-8. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2011.10.012.
Epub 2011 Oct 14.

Cloning and functional analysis of PKZ (PKR-like) from grass carp
(Ctenopharyngodon idellus).

Yang PJ(1), Wu CX, Li W, Fan LH, Lin G, Hu CY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, College of Life Science and Food Engineering,
Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, China.

The new teleost fish PKZ (PKR-like) full-length cDNA (GU299765) had been cloned
and identified from grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idellus). The cDNA of grass carp
PKZ (CiPKZ) has 2185 bp in length with a largest open reading frame (ORF)
encoding 513aa. CiPKZ possesses a conserved C-terminal catalytic domain of eIF2a 
kinase family. Within its N-terminal there are two binding domain (Za) named Za1 
(1-67aa) and Za2 (81-152aa). BLAST homologous search reveals that CiPKZ has a
high-level homology with other fish PKZs and PKRs. Like other fish PKZs and PKRs,
CiPKZ is a ubiquitous tissue expression gene that had a very low level of
constitutive expression but up-regulated in response to Poly I:C or hot stress
(34 °C). For the purpose of searching for the potential function of CiPKZ, we
obtained CiPKZ polypeptide via Escherichia coli Rosetta prokaryotic expression
and purified with Ni-NTA His-Bind Resin affinity chromatography. CiPKZ
polypeptide was used for the test of phosphorylating eIF2ain vitro. The results
demonstrated that CiPKZ could be activated by Z-DNA but not by Poly I:C, and with
subsequent could phosphorylate eIF2a. Meanwhile, four pcDNA3.1/PKZ recombinant
plasmids, including pcDNA3.1/PKZ-wet, pcDNA3.1/PKZ-wet-K198R, pcDNA3.1/PKZ-wet-C,
pcDNA3.1/PKZ-wet-C-K198R had been constructed, respectively. Mouse Myeloma cells 
(Sp2/0) and Human Umbilical Vein Endothelial Cells (HUVEC) were transiently
cotransfected with pcDNA3.1/PKZ recombinant plasmid and PGL-3-promoter plasmid.
The results revealed that CiPKZ could greatly decrease luciferase level in these 
cells. Za and the K198 amino acid residue may play a key role in its function.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 22008285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Sichuan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2011 Sep;42(5):721-4.

[Preparation and identification of monoclonal antibody against hMOF].

[Article in Chinese]

Sun HL(1), Wei DP, Zhang XH, Liu YJ, Zhang CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immuniology, Chongqing Three Gorges Medicine Colloge, Wanzhou
404016, China.

OBJECTIVE: To prepare and identify the monoclonal antibody (mAb) against hMOF.
METHODS: BALB/C mice were immunized with protein from the spleen cells isolated
and fused with SP2/0 cells. After several rounds of screening and cloning, the
hybridoma cell strain secreting anti-hMOF mAb was obtained. Its specificity was
evaluated with ELISA and Western blot, and the titer, immunoglobulin subtype and 
affinity of the mAb were measured.
RESULTS: One cell strains of hybridoma were obtained and named as 4C1C8. The
anti-hMOF mAb secreted by the hybridoma cell strain was identified as IgG1
subtype. The mAb titers in ascitic fluid were 1 409600, as determined with ELISA 
with an affinity reaching to 7.65 x 10(6) L/mol. Western blot demonstrated that
the antibodies could specifically recognize the immunogen. The cell
immunohistochemistry proved that the antibody could recognize the hMOF antigens
expressed on the normal cells HL7702.
CONCLUSION: The success in anti-hMOF mAb preparation provides the basis for
further study of hMOF.

PMID: 22007507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. BMC Med Res Methodol. 2011 Oct 13;11:141. doi: 10.1186/1471-2288-11-141.

Validity of the International Physical Activity Questionnaire and the Singapore
Prospective Study Program physical activity questionnaire in a multiethnic urban 
Asian population.

Nang EE(1), Gitau Ngunjiri SA, Wu Y, Salim A, Tai ES, Lee J, Van Dam RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
National University of Singapore, Singapore, Republic of Singapore.

BACKGROUND: Physical activity patterns of a population remain mostly assessed by 
the questionnaires. However, few physical activity questionnaires have been
validated in Asian populations. We previously utilized a combination of different
questionnaires to assess leisure time, transportation, occupational and household
physical activity in the Singapore Prospective Study Program (SP2). The
International Physical Activity Questionnaire (IPAQ) has been developed for a
similar purpose. In this study, we compared estimates from these two
questionnaires with an objective measure of physical activity in a multi-ethnic
Asian population.
METHODS: Physical activity was measured in 152 Chinese, Malay and Asian Indian
adults using an accelerometer over five consecutive days, including a weekend.
Participants completed both the physical activity questionnaire in SP2 (SP2PAQ)
and IPAQ long form. 43 subjects underwent a second set of measurements on average
6 months later to assess reproducibility of the questionnaires and the
accelerometer measurements. Spearman correlations were used to evaluate validity 
and reproducibility and correlations for validity were corrected for
within-person variation of accelerometer measurements. Agreement between the
questionnaires and the accelerometer measurements was also evaluated using Bland 
Altman plots.
RESULTS: The corrected correlation with accelerometer estimates of energy
expenditure from physical activity was better for the SP2PAQ (vigorous activity: 
r = 0.73; moderate activity: r = 0.27) than for the IPAQ (vigorous activity: r = 
0.31; moderate activity: r = 0.15). For moderate activity, the corrected
correlation between SP2PAQ and the accelerometer was higher for Chinese (r =
0.38) and Malays (r = 0.57) than for Indians (r = -0.09). Both questionnaires
overestimated energy expenditure from physical activity to a greater extent at
higher levels of physical activity than at lower levels of physical activity. The
reproducibility for moderate activity (accelerometer: r = 0.68; IPAQ: r = 0.58;
SP2PAQ: r = 0.55) and vigorous activity (accelerometer: 0.52; IPAQ: r = 0.38;
SP2PAQ: r = 0.75) was moderate to high for all instruments.
CONCLUSION: The agreement between IPAQ and accelerometer measurements of energy
expenditure from physical activity was poor in our Asian study population. The
SP2PAQ showed good validity and reproducibility for vigorous activity, but
performed less well for moderate activity particularly in Indians. Further effort
is needed to develop questionnaires that better capture moderate activity in
Asian populations.

PMCID: PMC3212806
PMID: 21995825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Am Chem Soc. 2011 Oct 19;133(41):16382-5. doi: 10.1021/ja207296y. Epub 2011 Sep
26.

Intermolecular oxidative C-N bond formation under metal-free conditions: control 
of chemoselectivity between aryl sp2 and benzylic sp3 C-H bond imidation.

Kim HJ(1), Kim J, Cho SH, Chang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Molecular-Level Interface Research Center, Korea
Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, 305-701, Republic 
of Korea.

A new synthetic approach toward intermolecular oxidative C-N bond formation of
arenes has been developed under transition-metal-free conditions. Complete
control of chemoselectivity between aryl sp(2) and benzylic sp(3) C-H bond
imidation was achieved by the choice of nitrogen sources, representatively being 
phthalimide and dibenzenesulfonimide, respectively.

PMID: 21928852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2011 Nov 4;50(45):10492-4. doi: 10.1002/anie.201105076.
Epub 2011 Sep 14.

Dual role of S-adenosylmethionine (SAM+) in the methylation of sp2-hybridized
electrophilic carbons.

Buckel W(1), Thauer RK.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für terrestrische Mikrobiologie, Karl-von-Frisch-Strasse
10, 35043 Marburg, Germany.

PMID: 21919174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Am Chem Soc. 2011 Nov 16;133(45):18183-93. doi: 10.1021/ja203978r. Epub 2011
Oct 21.

Ligand-accelerated cross-coupling of C(sp2)-H bonds with arylboron reagents.

Engle KM(1), Thuy-Boun PS, Dang M, Yu JQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey
Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, United States.

A ligand-accelerated Pd(II)-catalyzed C(sp(2))-H/arylboron cross-coupling
reaction of phenylacetic acid substrates is reported. Using Ac-Ile-OH as the
ligand and Ag(2)CO(3) as the oxidant, a fast, high-yielding, operationally
simple, and functional group-tolerant protocol has been developed for the
cross-coupling of phenylacetic acid substrates with aryltrifluoroborates. This
ligand scaffold has also been shown to improve catalysis using 1 atm O(2) as the 
sole reoxidant, which sheds light on the path forward in developing optimized
ligands for aerobic C-H/arylboron cross-coupling.

PMCID: PMC3230269
PMID: 21913636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Sep;27(9):985-8.

[Preparation and identification of monoclonal antibodies against Pla protein of
Yersinia pestis].

[Article in Chinese]

DU CH(1), Wang P, Zhang JZ, Tang X, Song ZZ.

Author information: 
(1)Yunnan Institute for Endemic Diseases Control and Prevention, Dali 671000,
China. dch6890728@163.com

AIM: To prepare the monoclonal antibody of Pla with recombinant Pla (rPla) by
hybridoma cell technology, which will lay the foundation for related research
work.
METHODS: Purified rPla was collected by washing repeatedly with urea, and BALB/c 
mice were immunized by them. Hybridoma cells were achieved by Sp2/0 cell fusion
with mouse spleen cells from successfully immunized mice. Monoclonal antibody was
screened by indirect ELISA and Western blots with rPla, natural crude Pla and GST
respectively.
RESULTS: Three strains of hybridoma cells (named 15B8, 14H4 and 19A4
respectively) which secreted stably the monoclonal antibody of Pla were obtained.
Their subclasses were IgG2a and IgG1 in heavy chains and <U+03BA> chains in light
chains. The ELISA titers of ascites were 10(6); respectively.Three of monoclonal 
antibody can react with natural crude Pla tested by western blots.
CONCLUSION: Monoclonal antibody of natural Pla of Yersinia pestis were
successfully got, which has laid the foundation for further study of the Pla
protein and development diagnosis reagent.

PMID: 21906473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Chem Commun (Camb). 2011 Oct 21;47(39):11140-2. doi: 10.1039/c1cc14558d. Epub
2011 Sep 6.

Nickel-catalyzed sp2 C-H bonds arylation of N-aromatic heterocycles with Grignard
reagents at room temperature.

Qu GR(1), Xin PY, Niu HY, Wang DC, Ding RF, Guo HM.

Author information: 
(1)College of Chemistry and Environmental Science, Key Laboratory of Green
Chemical Media and Reactions of Ministry of Education, Henan Normal University,
Xinxiang 453007, Henan, China. quguir@sina.com

A novel protocol for nickel-catalyzed direct sp(2) C-H bond arylation of purines 
has been developed. This new reaction proceeded efficiently at room temperature
using Grignard reagent as the coupling partner within 5 hours in good to high
yields. This approach provides a new access to a variety of C8-arylpurines which 
are potentially of great importance in medicinal chemistry.

PMID: 21897993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Clin Genet. 2012 Sep;82(3):223-31. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01781.x. Epub
2011 Sep 30.

Systematic screening of FBN1 gene unclassified missense variants for splice
abnormalities.

Robinson DO(1), Lin F, Lyon M, Raponi M, Cross E, White HE, Cox H, Clayton-Smith 
J, Baralle D.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, UK. david.robinson@salisbury.nhs.uk

Defects at the level of pre-mRNA splicing are a common source of genetic mutation
but such mutations are not always easy to identify from DNA sequence data alone. 
Clinical practice has only recently begun to incorporate analysis for this type
of abnormality. Some base changes at the DNA level currently viewed as
unclassified variants or missense mutations may influence RNA splicing. To
address this problem for fibrillin 1 (FBN1) gene missense mutations we have
carried out RNA analysis and in silico analysis with splice site prediction
programs on 40 cases with 36 different mutations. Direct analysis of RNA from
blood was performed by cDNA preparation, PCR amplification of specific FBN1
fragments, gel electrophoresis and sequencing of the PCR products. Of the 36
missense base changes, direct RNA analysis identified 2 which caused an
abnormality of splicing. In silico analysis using five splice site prediction
programs did not always accurately predict the splicing seen by direct RNA
analysis. In conclusion, some apparent missense mutations have an effect on
splicing which can be identified by direct RNA analysis, however, in silico
analysis of splice sites is not always accurate, should be carried out with more 
than one prediction program and results should be used with caution.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21895641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Agric Food Chem. 2011 Sep 28;59(18):9796-9. doi: 10.1021/jf202534y. Epub 2011
Sep 6.

Preparation and identification of monoclonal antibody against abrin-a.

Li XB(1), Yang W, Zhang Y, Zhang ZG, Kong T, Li DN, Tang JJ, Liu L, Liu GW, Wang 
Z.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University, 5333
Xi'an Road, Changchun 130062, People's Republic of China.

BALB/c mice were immunized four times with formalin-prepared abrin-a. Using the
polyethylene glycol method, immunized splenocytes were isolated and fused with
SP2/0 cells. An indirect ELISA was established and used to detect positive clones
secreting monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) against abrin-a. After analysis, three
hybridoma clones secreting IgG-subtype mAbs were obtained. The antibodies were
purified from the hybridoma growth medium using protein A or G affinity
chromatography. Western blot analysis was used to analyze the antigenic epitopes 
on abrin-a recognized by the mAbs. The mAbs were specific for abrin-a, with no
detectable cross-reactivity with several homologous toxins and associated
agglutinins. Sandwich ELISA was then developed using these mAbs, which had a
detection limit for abrin-a of 7.8 ng/mL.

PMID: 21870856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Org Lett. 2011 Sep 16;13(18):4850-3. doi: 10.1021/ol201930e. Epub 2011 Aug 19.

Palladium-catalyzed alkylation of ortho-C(sp2)-H bonds of benzylamide substrates 
with alkyl halides.

Zhao Y(1), Chen G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

A highly efficient and generally applicable method has been developed to
functionalize the ortho-C(sp(2))-H bonds of picolinamide (PA)-protected
benzylamine substrates with a broad range of ß-H-containing alkyl halides. Sodium
triflate has been identified as a critical promoter for this reaction system. The
PA group can be easily installed and removed under mild conditions. This method
provides a new strategy to prepare highly functionalized benzylamines for the
synthesis of complex molecules.

© 2011 American Chemical Society

PMID: 21853967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2011 Aug;30(4):393-5. doi: 10.1089/hyb.2011.0034.

Preparation of novel anti-ski monoclonal antibodies.

Ye F(1), Yang YX, Hu HD, Tong JB, Cai WJ, Zhang DZ, Hu P, Li SL, Ren H.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Infectious Diseases, Ministry of
Education of China, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing Medical University,
Chongqing, China.

Ski is an avian sarcoma virus oncogene homolog best known for inhibiting TGF beta
signaling through its association with the SMAD proteins. Anti-Ski antibodies
(MAbs) of high titer were prepared by immunizing BALB/c mice with multifocal
intradermal injections and fusing high titer antibody producing spleen cells with
myeloma cells of SP2/0 origin. Three MAbs were selected for further
characterization as classes and subclasses. Antibodies were produced by these
three clones with high affinities ranging from 10(9) to 10(11)/m. These clones
were found to be of the immunoglobulin IgG1 and IgG2b subclass with kappa light
chain. They could recognize Ski as determined by Western blot analysis. The
produced MAbs will be a useful tool for further investigation of Ski functions in
organisms.

PMID: 21851241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2011 Aug;30(4):381-5. doi: 10.1089/hyb.2011.0025.

Monoclonal antibodies to sea cucumber polysaccharide and their use in a sandwich 
ELISA assay.

Wang J(1), Zhao H, Zheng Y, Liu W, Zhou H, Han AR, Gao X.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Technology, China Pharmaceutical University,
Nanjing, P.R. China .

Antigen was synthesized with L-SCP, a sea cucumber polysaccharide isolated from
Pearsonothuria graeffei (Semper) and bovine serum albumin (BSA) as a carrier
protein. Spleen cells with high titer antibody producing ability were removed and
fused with myeloma cells of SP2/0-Ag14 origin. Three stable murine monoclonal
antibodies (MAb ascites) producing cell lines to L-SCP were generated according
to a conventional immunization protocol. Their epitope mapping and binding
specificity, which was characterized by blocking and inhibition enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) indicated that these specific MAb ascites have
similar binding patterns. A sandwich ELISA was developed on the basis of
employing L-SCP specific antibodies including MAb 3G6 as capture antibody and
HRP-3G6 as detection antibody. The working range for L-SCP in aqueous solution
from this method was 100-10,000 ng/mL with good sensitivity, specificity, and
precision (relative standard deviation =7.9%). Thus the developed ELISA can be
used as a convenient tool for the rapid detection of L-SCP in biological examples
in the future.

PMID: 21851239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Virol Sin. 2011 Aug;26(4):273-8. doi: 10.1007/s12250-011-3199-4. Epub 2011 Aug
17.

Develope monoclonal antibody against foot-and-mouth disease virus A type.

Lin T(1), Li J, Shao JJ, Cong GZ, Du JZ, Gao SD, Chang HY.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Lanzhou Veterinary
Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou 730046,
China.

In order to develop an anti-FMDV A Type monoclonal antibody (mAb), BABL/c mice
were immunized with FMDV A type. Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) 7B11 and 8H4
against Foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV) serotype A were produced by fusing
SP2/0 myeloma cells with splenocyte from the mouse immunized with A/AV88. The
microneutralization titer of the mAbs 7B11 and 8H4 were 1024 and 512,
respectively. Both mAbs contain kappa light chains, the mAbs were IgG1. In order 
to define the mAbs binding epitopes, the reactivity of these mAbs against A Type 
FMDV, were examined using indirect ELISA, the result showed that both mAbs
reacted with A Type FMDV. These mAbs may be used for further vaccine studies,
diagnostic methods, prophylaxis, etiological and immunological research on FMDV. 
Characterization of these ncindicated that prepared anti-FMDV A mAbs had no
cross-reactivity with Swine Vesicular Disease (SVD) or FMDV O, Asia1 and C Type
antigens. Their titers in abdomen liquor were 1:5×10(6) and 1:2×10(6),
respectively. 7B11 was found to be of subtype IgG(1), 8H4 was classified as
IgG(2b) subtype. The mAbs prepared in this study, are specific for detection of
FMDV serotype A, and is potentially useful for pen-side diagnosis.

PMID: 21847759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Virol Sin. 2011 Aug;26(4):267-72. doi: 10.1007/s12250-011-3198-5. Epub 2011 Aug
17.

Application of GP5 protein to develop monoclonal antibody against porcine
reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus.

Tian H(1), Cheng Y, Wu JY, He JH, Shang YJ, Liu XT.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Lanzhou Veterinary
Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou 730046,
China.

In this study, a panel of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) against Porcine
reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus(PRRSV), named as 8C9 and4B4, were
produced by fusing SP2/0 myeloma cells and spleen cells of BALB/c mice immunized 
with the PRRSV (TCID(50)=5.5), screened by the indirect ELISA and subjected to
several limiting dilutions. mAbs were then identified by biological
characterization. Among the two fusion cell strains, 8C9 belonged to the IgG1
subclass and 4B4 belonged to the IgG2a subclass. The titers in cell culture
supernatant and abdomen liquor reached to 1:10(4)and 1:10(5), respectively. The
specificity test indicated that the two cells had specific reactions for the
PRRSV and GP5 protein respectively, and no reaction with Classical swine fever
virus (CSFV) or Swine vesicular disease virus (SVDV). The molecular weights of
the heavy chain and light chain were about 45.0 kDa and 25.0 kDa, respectively.
In neutralization activity tests, the results showed that the prepared mAb 4B4
can protect 50% of cells with no CPE in dilution up to 1:512, but mAB 8C9 has no 
neutralization activities to PRRSV.

PMID: 21847758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Plast Reconstr Aesthet Surg. 2011 Dec;64(12):1621-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bjps.2011.07.015. Epub 2011 Aug 15.

Critical assessment of the anterolateral thigh flap donor site.

Townley WA(1), Royston EC, Karmiris N, Crick A, Dunn RL.

Author information: 
(1)Odstock Centre for Burns, Plastic and Maxillofacial Surgery, Salisbury
District Hospital, Salisbury SP2 8BJ, UK. willtownley@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: The free anterolateral thigh flap (ALT) is now used as a 'workhorse
flap'. The donor site morbidity is thought to be minimal, although most evidence 
derives from questionnaire-based studies rather than rigorous objective clinical 
assessment. In particular, robust quantitative data on thigh sensibility and
quadriceps function is lacking. The aim of this study was to provide a
comprehensive clinical assessment of donor site morbidity.
METHODS: We performed a prospective study of consecutive free ALT perforator
flaps performed at Salisbury Foundation Trust between March 2008 and April 2010. 
The donor site was assessed at six months including a questionnaire (symptoms,
function), scar analysis (Vancouver Scar Scale, VSS), and evaluation of
quadriceps power and lateral thigh sensibility (compared with the contralateral
unoperated thigh).
RESULTS: One hundred ALT flaps were performed on 97 patients (mean age 46.8
years). The donor site was closed directly in 88 cases and using a split skin
graft in 12 cases. At follow-up (n=68), tingling was the most common reported
symptom (59%), whereas pain, itching and muscle herniation were reported
infrequently. Donor site scars were mostly flat, pale and soft but widened.
Pathological scarring was rare. Sensibility was reduced in donor thighs (p<0.001)
and correlated with flap width but peak quadriceps contraction was similar
between donor and unoperated thighs.
CONCLUSIONS: There was a high throughput and diverse application of ALT flap
reconstructions during the study period. Reduced sensibility was common around
the scar but rarely troublesome. Quadriceps function was not affected even when
dissection of intramuscular perforators was required. The ALT is a versatile flap
that can deliver a large skin paddle with minimal impact on thigh function.

Copyright © 2011 British Association of Plastic, Reconstructive and Aesthetic
Surgeons. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21840779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Chem Asian J. 2011 Nov 4;6(11):3077-83. doi: 10.1002/asia.201100310. Epub 2011
Aug 10.

Combination of sp2- and sp3-type phosphorus atoms for gold chemistry:
preparation, structure, and catalytic activity of gold complexes that bear
ligated 2-silyl-1,3-diphosphapropenes.

Ito S(1), Zhai L, Mikami K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Tokyo
Institute of Technology, Tokyo 152-8552, Japan. ito.s.ao@m.titech.ac.jp

Kinetically protected 2-silyl-1,3-diphosphapropenes that bear both sp(2)- and
sp(3)-type phosphorus atoms were employed in the preparation of gold complexes.
The structural properties of the 1,3-diphosphapropene digold(I) complexes were
characterized by spectroscopic and crystallographic analyses, which revealed
unique aurophilic interactions and conformational properties of the ligand. The
2-silyl-1,3-diphosphapropene-bis(chlorogold) complexes catalyzed
cycloisomerization reactions of 1,6-enyne derivatives even in the absence of
silver co-catalyst, and were able to be recovered after the reaction. The
catalytic activity of the digold complexes primarily depended on the sp(2)-type
phosphorus atom and the silyl group, and could be tuned by the sp(3)-phosphino
group. Additionally, results on the catalytic activity of the digold complex in
the presence and absence of silver salts showed considerable differences.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21834098  [PubMed]


124. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2011 Oct;18(10):1695-701. doi: 10.1128/CVI.05223-11. Epub
2011 Aug 10.

Identification of the immunogenic outer membrane protein A antigen of Haemophilus
parasuis by a proteomics approach and passive immunization with monoclonal
antibodies in mice.

Tian H(1), Fu F, Li X, Chen X, Wang W, Lang Y, Cong F, Liu C, Tong G, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Swine Infectious Diseases, State Key Laboratory of Veterinary
Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Harbin 150001, China.

Monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) against Haemophilus parasuis were generated by
fusing spleen cells from BALB/c mice immunized with whole bacterial cells with
SP2/0 murine myeloma cells. Desirable hybridomas were screened by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Neutralizing MAb 1D8 was selected in protection
assays. ELISA results demonstrated that 1D8 can react with all 15 serotypes of H.
parasuis and field isolate H. parasuis HLJ-018. Passive immunization studies
showed that mice inoculated intraperitoneally with 1D8 had significantly reduced 
prevalence of H. parasuis colonization in the blood, lung, spleen, and liver and 
had prolonged survival time compared to that of the control group. Furthermore,
the passive transfer experiment indicated that MAb 1D8 can protect mice from both
homologous and heterologous challenges with H. parasuis. Using two-dimensional
gel electrophoresis (2-DE), the immunoreactive protein target for MAb 1D8 was
identified. The data presented confirm the protective role of MAb 1D8 and
identify OmpA as the target of the protective monoclonal antibody. The data
suggest that OmpA is a promising candidate for a subunit vaccine against H.
parasuis.

PMCID: PMC3187029
PMID: 21832103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Primates. 2011 Oct;52(4):309-14. doi: 10.1007/s10329-011-0256-4. Epub 2011 Aug
10.

Seed predation by bonobos (Pan paniscus) at Kokolopori, Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

Georgiev AV(1), Thompson ME, Lokasola AL, Wrangham RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, Peabody Museum, 
11 Divinity Ave, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. georgiev@fas.harvard.edu

We compared the feeding ecology of the Hali-Hali community of bonobos (Pan
paniscus) at Kokolopori, a new field site in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, between two periods 5 months apart. During the first study period (SP1),
bonobos relied heavily on the dry seeds of Guibourtia (Caesalpiniaceae), mostly
eaten from the ground. The second period (SP2) was characterized by high
consumption of ripe tree fruit. Terrestrial herbaceous vegetation (THV)
contributed little to the diet in either study period. The low amount of ripe
fruit and the high reliance on seeds in the diet during SP1 were associated with 
high cortisol production and low levels of urinary C-peptide in females,
suggesting nutritional stress. However, female gregariousness was not constrained
during the fruit-poor period, probably because high seed abundance on the ground 
ameliorated scramble feeding competition. This is the first description of
extensive seed predation by bonobos. It suggests that bonobo feeding ecology may 
be more similar to that of chimpanzees than previously recognized.

PMID: 21830045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2011 May;55(5):535-8. doi:
10.1111/j.1399-6576.2011.02423.x.

Propofol 2 mg/kg is superior to propofol 1 mg/kg for tracheal intubation in
children during sevoflurane induction.

Siddik-Sayyid SM(1), Taha SK, Aouad MT, Abdallah FW, Al Alami AA, Kanazi GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, American University of Beirut Medical Center,
Lebanon.

Comment in
    Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2011 Oct;55(9):1148-9; author reply 1149-50.

BACKGROUND: Propofol has been used to facilitate tracheal intubation within a
short time of sevoflurane induction without a muscle relaxant in children. We
compared as the primary outcome the incidence of excellent intubating conditions 
after 8% sevoflurane and propofol 1 or 2 mg/kg.
METHODS: One hundred and four patients (2-7 years) were randomly assigned to
receive propofol 1 mg/kg in group SP1 (n=53) or propofol 2 mg/kg in group SP2
(n=51) after inhalation induction using sevoflurane 8% in oxygen. Forty-five
seconds after propofol and controlled ventilation, intubating conditions were
assessed using a four-point scoring system based on ease of laryngoscopy, vocal
cords position, coughing, jaw relaxation and limb movement. Heart rate and
systolic blood pressure were measured as baseline, after sevoflurane induction,
propofol, intubation and at 2 and 5 min following intubation.
RESULTS: Three patients in group SP1 were excluded from analysis. Time from
sevoflurane induction to intubation (248.9±71.3 s in group SP1 vs. 230.9±61.3 s
in group SP2) and endtidal sevoflurane before intubation (5.6±1.6% in group SP1
vs. 5.2±1.5% in group SP2) did not differ between the two groups. The incidence
of excellent intubating conditions was significantly higher in group SP2 compared
with group SP1 [47/51 (92%) vs. 28/50 (56%)]. The incidence of acceptable
intubating conditions was significantly higher in group SP2 compared with group
SP1 [48/51 (94%) vs. 35/50 (70%)]. No hemodynamic difference was noted at any
time point between the two groups.
CONCLUSION: Propofol 2 mg/kg during 8% sevoflurane induction resulted in a higher
proportion of excellent intubating conditions compared with propofol 1 mg/kg.

PMID: 21827440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 2012 Jan;39(1):78-86. doi:
10.1111/j.1440-1681.2011.05582.x.

Application of complementary luminescent and fluorescent imaging techniques to
visualize nuclear and cytoplasmic Ca²<U+207A> signalling during the in vivo
differentiation of slow muscle cells in zebrafish embryos under normal and
dystrophic conditions.

Webb SE(1), Cheung CC, Chan CM, Love DR, Miller AL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Life Science and Key State Laboratory of Molecular Neuroscience,
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong
SAR, China.

1. Evidence is accumulating for a role for Ca²<U+207A> signalling in the differentiation
and development of embryonic skeletal muscle. 2. Imaging of intact, normally
developing transgenic zebrafish that express the protein component of the
Ca²<U+207A>-sensitive complex aequorin, specifically in skeletal muscle, show that two
distinct periods of spontaneous synchronised Ca²<U+207A> transients occur in the trunk: 
one at approximately 17.5-19.5 h post-fertilization (h.p.f.; termed signalling
period SP1) and the other after approximately 23 h.p.f. (termed SP2). These
periods of intense Ca²<U+207A> signalling activity are separated by a quiet period. 3.
Higher-resolution confocal imaging of embryos loaded with the fluorescent Ca²<U+207A>
reporter calcium green-1 dextran shows that the Ca²<U+207A> signals are generated almost
exclusively in the slow muscle cells, the first muscle cells to differentiate,
with distinct nuclear and cytoplasmic components. 4. Here, we show that
coincidental with the SP1 Ca²<U+207A> signals, dystrophin becomes localized to the
vertical myoseptae of the myotome. Introduction of a dmd morpholino (dmd-MO)
resulted in no dystrophin being expressed in the vertical myoseptae, as well as a
disruption of myotome morphology and sarcomere organization. In addition, the
Ca²<U+207A> signalling signatures of dmd-MO-injected embryos or homozygous sapje mutant 
embryos were abnormal such that the frequency, amplitude and timing of the Ca²<U+207A>
signals were altered compared with controls. 5. Our new data suggest that, in
addition to a structural role, dystrophin may function in the regulation of
[Ca²<U+207A>](i) during the early stages of slow muscle cell differentiation when the
Ca²<U+207A> signals generated in these cells coincide with the first spontaneous
contractions of the trunk.

Clinical and Experimental Pharmacology and Physiology © 2012 Blackwell Publishing
Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 21824171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Org Lett. 2011 Sep 2;13(17):4604-7. doi: 10.1021/ol201807n. Epub 2011 Aug 5.

Palladium-catalyzed intramolecular C(sp2)-H amidination by isonitrile insertion
provides direct access to 4-aminoquinazolines from N-arylamidines.

Wang Y(1), Wang H, Peng J, Zhu Q.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institutes of
Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 190 Kaiyuan Avenue,
Guangzhou 510530, China.

An efficient method for the synthesis of 4-amino-2-aryl(alkyl)quinazolines from
readily available N-arylamidines and isonitriles via palladium-catalyzed
intramolecular aryl C-H amidination by isonitrile insertion has been developed.

PMID: 21819077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Nucleus. 2011 May-Jun;2(3):229-45. doi: 10.4161/nucl.2.3.15893.

The dynamics of the alternatively spliced NOL7 gene products and role in
nucleolar architecture.

Kinor N(1), Shav-Tal Y.

Author information: 
(1)The Mina & Everard Goodman Institute of Nanotechnology, Bar-Ilan University;
Ramat Gan, Israel.

Three alternatively spliced forms of the human NOL7 gene coding for relatively
small proteins were identified. The two shorter forms were generated by intron
retention events, and each isoform was differently localized within the cell. The
NOL7-SP1 long form (29 kD) localized to the nucleolus, SP2 was nucleoplasmic,
while SP3 was distributed throughout the whole cell. NOL7-SP1 was confined to the
nucleolar granular component, and during cell division disassociated from the
nucleolus. Knockdown of NOL7-SP1 levels abrogated nucleolar architecture, in
particular the internal regions, and reduced cell proliferation. Analysis of the 
nucleolar dynamics of the SP1 protein during interphase showed nucleolar high
binding affinity. Dissection of protein domains showed that nucleolar targeting
was mediated by a unique C-terminal nucleolar localization sequence (NoLS).
However, this sequence was not sufficient for conferring high binding affinity,
which required additional regions of the protein. Our analysis shows that NOL7 is
important for maintaining internal nucleolar structure and cell growth rates, and
that while specific protein localization can be obtained by specific short
localization motifs, nucleolar residency through binding must be mediated by a
synergistic combination of protein modules.

PMCID: PMC3149883
PMID: 21818416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Mol Cancer Res. 2011 Oct;9(10):1356-65. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-11-0185. Epub 
2011 Aug 4.

Suppression of IRF4 by IRF1, 3, and 7 in Noxa expression is a necessary event for
IFN-<U+03B3>-mediated tumor elimination.

Piya S(1), Moon AR, Song PI, Hiscott J, Lin R, Seol DW, Kim TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Chosun University School of Medicine, Dong-Gu,
Gwang-ju 501-759, Korea.

IFN-<U+03B3> plays a critical role in tumor immunosurveillance by affecting either
immune cells or tumor cells; however, IFN-mediated effects on tumor elimination
are largely unknown. In this study, we showed that IFN regulatory factors (IRF)
modulated by IFNs up- and downregulated Noxa expression, a prodeath BH3 protein, 
in various cancer cells. Inhibition of Noxa expression using short hairpin RNA in
tumor cells leads to resistance against lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced tumor
elimination, in which IFN-<U+03B3> is known as a critical effecter in mice. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis in both CT26 cells and SP2/0 cells, sensitive and
resistant to LPS-induced tumor elimination, respectively, revealed that the
responsiveness of IRF1, 3, 4, and 7 in the Noxa promoter region in response to
IFN-<U+03B3> might be crucial in LPS-induced tumor elimination. IRF1, 3, and 7 were
upregulated by IFN-<U+03B3> and activated Noxa expression, leading to the death of Noxa 
wild-type baby mouse kidney (BMK) cells but not of Noxa-deficient BMK cells. In
contrast, IRF4 acts as a repressor for Noxa expression and inhibits cell death
induced by IRF1, 3, or 7. Therefore, although IFN-<U+03B3> alone are not able to induce 
cell death in tumor cells in vitro, Noxa induction by IFN-<U+03B3>, which is regulated
by the balance between its activators (IRF1, 3, and 7) and its repressor (IRF4), 
is crucial to increasing the susceptibility of tumor cells to immune
cell-mediated cytotoxicity.

PMID: 21816905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Org Lett. 2011 Aug 19;13(16):4390-3. doi: 10.1021/ol201729w. Epub 2011 Jul 27.

Rhodium-catalyzed oxidative ortho-acylation of benzamides with aldehydes: direct 
functionalization of the sp2 C-H bond.

Park J(1), Park E, Kim A, Lee Y, Chi KW, Kwak JH, Jung YH, Kim IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Ulsan, Ulsan, 680-749, Republic of
Korea.

A rhodium-catalyzed oxidative acylation of benzamides with aryl aldehydes via
direct sp(2) C-H bond cleavage is described. In the presence of [Cp*RhCl(2)](2), 
AgSbF(6), and silver carbonate as an oxidant, N,N-diethyl benzamides can be
effectively carbonylated to yield ortho-acyl benzamides.

© 2011 American Chemical Society

PMID: 21793534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Am J Public Health. 2011 Dec;101 Suppl 1:S353-8. doi: 10.2105/AJPH.2010.300029.
Epub 2011 Jul 21.

Gender disparities in injury mortality: consistent, persistent, and larger than
you'd think.

Sorenson SB(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Social Policy & Practice, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania 19104, USA. sorenson@sp2.upenn.edu

OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this study is to update knowledge about gender
differences in injury mortality.
METHODS: Data were drawn from the Web-based Injury Query System, which contains
US injury mortality data from 1981 to 2007. Male-to-female rate ratios in injury 
mortality are calculated for key variables, and age and ethnic group comparisons 
are made.
RESULTS: Boys and men were more likely than girls and women to die of injury.
From 1981 to 2007, the male-to-female age-adjusted rate ratio decreased by 20% to
2.15 for unintentional injury and increased by 11% to 3.91 for violence-related
injury. Excess male mortality existed in manner of death, cause of death, and
within ethnic and age groups. Additionally, with rare exception, the gender
disparity was greater than ethnic and age disparities in unintentional and
violence-related injury mortality.
CONCLUSIONS: Gender disparities in injury mortality are consistent and
persistent. Gender patterns in injury mortality do not follow typical social
justice analyses of health, in that men are at greater risk. Lifestyle and
behavioral risks as well as masculine socialization merit consideration.

PMCID: PMC3222499
PMID: 21778511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2011 Sep 5;50(37):8614-7. doi: 10.1002/anie.201103450.
Epub 2011 Jul 19.

Stereospecific palladium-catalyzed decarboxylative C(sp3)-C(sp2) coupling of
2,5-cyclohexadiene-1-carboxylic acid derivatives with aryl iodides.

Chou CM(1), Chatterjee I, Studer A.

Author information: 
(1)Organisch-Chemisches Institut, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität,
Corrensstrasse 40, 48149 Münster, Germany.

PMID: 21774047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Womens Health Issues. 2011 Jul-Aug;21(4 Suppl):S190-4. doi:
10.1016/j.whi.2011.04.008.

Intimate partner violence victimization among women veterans and associated heart
health risks.

Dichter ME(1), Cerulli C, Bossarte RM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Health Equity Research and Promotion, Philadelphia VA Medical
Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA. mdichter@sp2.upenn.edu

PURPOSE: Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the leading cause of death for women in 
the United States. CVD risk factors, including depression, smoking, heavy
drinking, being overweight, and physical inactivity, are associated with stress
and may be linked to women's experiences of intimate partner violence (IPV)
victimization. We know little about IPV and CVD risk factors among veteran women.
The purpose of this study was to identify the association between lifetime IPV
victimization and CVD risk factors among women, accounting for veteran status.
METHODS: We used data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's
Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System for 2006 for the eight states that
included the IPV module. We explored the associations between veteran status and 
lifetime IPV victimization and between IPV exposure and CVD risk factors, for
veteran and non-veteran women.
FINDINGS: Veteran women were more likely than non-veteran women to report
lifetime IPV victimization (33.0% vs. 23.8%). IPV exposure was associated with
depression, smoking, and heavy drinking. We did not find evidence for an
association between IPV exposure and lack of exercise or being overweight or
obese, when controlling for demographic characteristics and veteran status.
CONCLUSION: Women veterans have particularly high rates of lifetime IPV
victimization. In addition, IPV victimization is associated with an increased
risk of heart health risk factors. The findings suggest that we should attend to 
IPV exposure among veteran women and further investigate the link between IPV and
military service, and the associated health impacts.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 21724140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Jul;27(7):780-3.

[Prepared the monoclonal antibody associated with hepatocellular carcinoma and
analyzed its epitope].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang BF(1), Liu R, Liu Y, Yang JJ, Liu XL, Gao JE, Sun QH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Research, Institute of Tuberculosis, No.309 Hospital of PLA,
Beijing, China.

AIM: To prepare the monoclonal antibodies associated with hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) for diagnosis.
METHODS: 3 BALB/c mice were immunized with high metastasis characteristic HCC
cells (HCCLM-6). The splenocytes from the immunized mice were fused with murine
myeloma cells (Sp2/0). The hybridoma cells were screened by ELISA after coating
with the total protein and the culture supernatant of HCCLM-6 cells. The mAbs
were characterized by immunohistochemical staining in the HCC tissues, and by
indirect immunofIuorescent staining in different cell lines. The antigen and
epitope recognized by the mAbs were identified by the screening premade Uni-ZAP
human liver cDNA expression library.
RESULTS: Twenty-eight hybridoma cells secreting mAbs were established. One clone 
of the hybridomas, QGA062, secreted specific mAb associated with HCC. The antigen
recognized by the mAb QGA062 was identified as fibronectin (FN), and the epitope 
was localized among the peptide YTVSLVAIKGNQESPK.
CONCLUSION: The mAb against a HCC-associated epitope in FN is established and
characterized, will be a very useful reagent for diagnosis of HCC.

PMID: 21722534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Jul;27(7):773-6.

[Development and characterization of monoclonal antibody against human FcR <U+03B3>
chain].

[Article in Chinese]

Qian K(1), Jin WJ, Shao HX, Wu JM, Qin AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, China. qianku@yzu.edu.cn

AIM: The current study was aimed to generate mouse monoclonal antibodies (mAbs)
specific for Fc receptor common <U+03B3> chain (FcR<U+03B3>), which serves a critical signaling
molecule for numerous human immune receptors that play essential roles in human
immune responses.
METHODS: Two BALB/c mice were immunized with the synthesized polypeptides
containing 19 residues at the carboxyl terminus of human FcR <U+03B3> chain. The spleen 
cells from the immunized mice were fused with myeloma Sp2/0 cells. ELISA was used
to screen mAbs and the positive clones were selected for further characterization
with Western blot and flow cytometry assays.
RESULTS: After screen, there hybridoma cell lines which secreted mAbs
specifically recognized the FcR <U+03B3> chain were obtained and named as 5B6, 7D3 and
8D4. The 7D3 mAb had the best quality and it could recognize the FcR <U+03B3> chain in
vivo and in vitro with 2.5 µg/mL.
CONCLUSION: We have generated the FcR<U+03B3>-specific mAbs, which may serve as a
valuable tool in the functional studies of FcR<U+03B3> associated immune receptors.

PMID: 21722532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Jul;27(7):770-2.

[Synthesis of artificial antigens of amoxicillin and preparation of monoclonal
antibody to amoxicillin].

[Article in Chinese]

Xue T(1), Song K, Xue XP.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Science, Northwestern Ploytechnical University, Xi'an, China. 
cherietxue@gmail.com

AIM: To synthesize two kinds of amoxicillin artificial antigen and to establish
hybridoma cell lines secreting monoclonal antibody against amoxillin.
METHODS: Amoxicillin were respectively coupled with ovalbumin(OVA) and bovine
serum albumin(BSA) by using N-hydroxysuc-cinimide active ester (NHS) method to
prepared the immunogen and detection antigen. Molar ratio of conjugates were
detected by ultraviolet spectrum analysis. BALB/c mice was immunized with
AMX-OVA. The hybridomas were obtained by fusing mouse myeloma cells Sp2/0 with
splenocytes from the mice immunized with AMX-OVA. The aseites with mAb were
purified by octanoic acid-saturated ammonium sulphate method. Isotype was
determined by Mouse Isotype kit (Bio-RadLabs.).
RESULTS: UV spectra shows overlay features between a small molecular compound and
carrier protein. Five hybridoma cell strains secreting specific mAb against
amoxicillin were obtained and the five Amb belong to IgG1 kappa isotype. The
limit of detection of AMX was 0.25 ng/mL and but there is mild degree of
cross-reactions with ampicillin with same structure of ß-lactam ring.
CONCLUSION: The anti-AMX Amb could be used to develop immunoassay for detection
of residues.

PMID: 21722531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Exp Brain Res. 2011 Aug;213(1):73-86. doi: 10.1007/s00221-011-2779-8. Epub 2011
Jun 29.

Responses of human soleus motor units to low-threshold stimulation of the tibial 
nerve.

Binboga E(1), Prasartwuth O, Pehlivan M, Türker KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, Faculty of Medicine, Ege University, Izmir, Turkey.

The peristimulus frequencygram (PSF) has recently been shown to illustrate
postsynaptic potentials of motoneurones much more reliably than the peristimulus 
time histogram (PSTH). The aim of this investigation was to examine the profile
of the postsynaptic potential (PSP) in soleus motoneurones in response to an
H-reflex with and without accompanying M waves of different magnitude by using
PSTH and PSF profiles of single motor units. Nine men and five women healthy
subjects participated in this study. Electrical stimuli were delivered to the
tibial nerve in the popliteal fossa. The reflex response of the soleus muscle was
recorded using both surface electromyogram and single motor unit potentials. The 
PSTH analysis demonstrated that there were four different synaptic events
following low-intensity stimulation of the tibial nerve: primary enhancement in
firing probability (H-reflex or E1), primary reduction in firing probability
(primary silent period or SP1), secondary reduction in firing probability
(secondary silent period or SP2), and secondary enhancement in firing probability
(E2). On the other hand, the PSF analysis indicated only two reflex responses,
long-lasting enhancement in discharge rate including the H-reflex (LLE) and
long-lasting decrease in discharge rate (LLD). The results of the two analyses
methods are compared and contrasted. While the PSTH demonstrated that there was a
silent period (SP1) immediately following the H-reflex, the PSF indicated an
increase in discharge rate during the same period. The PSF also indicated that,
during SP2 and E2, the discharge rate actually decreased (LLD). It was therefore 
suggested that LLD involved activation of several inhibitory pathways including
the autogenic inhibition of units via the Golgi tendon organs. It was concluded
that the PSF could indicate the details of the postsynaptic potentials and is
very useful for bringing out previously unknown effects of electrical stimulation
of muscle nerves.

PMID: 21713503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Indian J Plast Surg. 2011 Jan;44(1):162-3. doi: 10.4103/0970-0358.81465.

The Sommerlad pen: Yet another use.

Ahmad Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic Surgery, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wiltshire, SP2 8BJ, U.K.

PMCID: PMC3111116
PMID: 21713211  [PubMed]


140. Nanoscale Res Lett. 2011 Apr 27;6(1):362. doi: 10.1186/1556-276X-6-362.

Designing novel Sn-Bi, Si-C and Ge-C nanostructures, using simple theoretical
chemical similarities.

Zdetsis AD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics University of Patras, GR 26500, Patra, Greece.
zdetsis@upatras.gr.

A framework of simple, transparent and powerful concepts is presented which is
based on isoelectronic (or isovalent) principles, analogies, regularities and
similarities. These analogies could be considered as conceptual extensions of the
periodical table of the elements, assuming that two atoms or molecules having the
same number of valence electrons would be expected to have similar or homologous 
properties. In addition, such similar moieties should be able, in principle, to
replace each other in more complex structures and nanocomposites. This is only
partly true and only occurs under certain conditions which are investigated and
reviewed here. When successful, these concepts are very powerful and transparent,
leading to a large variety of nanomaterials based on Si and other group 14
elements, similar to well known and well studied analogous materials based on
boron and carbon. Such nanomaterias designed in silico include, among many
others, Si-C, Sn-Bi, Si-C and Ge-C clusters, rings, nanowheels, nanorodes,
nanocages and multidecker sandwiches, as well as silicon planar rings and
fullerenes similar to the analogous sp2 bonding carbon structures. It is shown
that this pedagogically simple and transparent framework can lead to an endless
variety of novel and functional nanomaterials with important potential
applications in nanotechnology, nanomedicine and nanobiology. Some of the so
called predicted structures have been already synthesized, not necessarily with
the same rational and motivation. Finally, it is anticipated that such powerful
and transparent rules and analogies, in addition to their predictive power, could
also lead to far-reaching interpretations and a deeper understanding of already
known results and information.

PMCID: PMC3211452
PMID: 21711875  [PubMed]


141. Nanoscale Res Lett. 2011 Feb 14;6(1):144. doi: 10.1186/1556-276X-6-144.

Guided assembly of nanoparticles on electrostatically charged nanocrystalline
diamond thin films.

Verveniotis E(1), Kromka A, Ledinský M, Cermák J, Rezek B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physics ASCR, Cukrovarnicka 10, 16253, Prague 6, Czech Republic. 
verven@fzu.cz.

We apply atomic force microscope for local electrostatic charging of
oxygen-terminated nanocrystalline diamond (NCD) thin films deposited on silicon, 
to induce electrostatically driven self-assembly of colloidal alumina
nanoparticles into micro-patterns. Considering possible capacitive, sp2 phase and
spatial uniformity factors to charging, we employ films with sub-100 nm thickness
and about 60% relative sp2 phase content, probe the spatial material uniformity
by Raman and electron microscopy, and repeat experiments at various positions. We
demonstrate that electrostatic potential contrast on the NCD films varies between
0.1 and 1.2 V and that the contrast of more than ±1 V (as detected by Kelvin
force microscopy) is able to induce self-assembly of the nanoparticles via
coulombic and polarization forces. This opens prospects for applications of
diamond and its unique set of properties in self-assembly of nano-devices and
nano-systems.

PMCID: PMC3211194
PMID: 21711679  [PubMed]


142. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2011 Jul 25;50(31):7097-100. doi: 10.1002/anie.201101461.
Epub 2011 Jun 24.

Mutual activation: Suzuki-Miyaura coupling through direct cleavage of the sp2 C-O
bond of naphtholate.

Yu DG(1), Shi ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing National Laboratory of Molecular Sciences (BNLMS), College of
Chemistry and Green Chemistry Center, Peking University, Beijing, China.

PMID: 21710512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2011 Jun;30(3):279-86. doi: 10.1089/hyb.2010.0115.

One-step monoclonal antibody based enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for direct
determination of cortisol in serum.

Liu R(1), Chen F, Zou K, Yang T.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Science College, China Three Gorges University, Yichang, Hubei, China.

Monoclonal antibodies to cortisol have obvious potential advantages as starting
materials for assay systems to detect their levels in body fluids. This is very
important for monitoring pituitary gland and adrenal functions. To develop a
one-step competitive heterogeneous enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), a
monoclonal anti-cortisol antibody was generated using a reasonably designed
haptenic derivative. Cortisol-3-O-carboxymethyloxime was coupled to carrier
protein bovine serum albumin (BSA) to enhance its immunogenicity. Spleen cells
were prepared from a BALB/c mouse, which had repeatedly been immunized with a
conjugate of cortisol-3-O-carboxymethyloxime-bovine serum albumin
(cortisol-3-O-CMO-BSA), to be fused with SP2/0 myeloma cells. After one fusion
experiment, four hybridoma clones secreting a practical antibody were
established. One of the resulting monoclonal antibodies, 2C9D11B5, showed an
affinity constant (Ka) of 1.4 × 10(10) M(-1) for cortisol and provided a
practical calibration curve (limit of detection [LOD], 0.26 ng per assay) in this
ELISA system employing cortisol-21-hemisuccinate-horseradish peroxidase
(cortisol-21-HS-HRP) as a tracer. Cross-reactivities with related C-21 steroids
were acceptably low: 11-deoxycortisol (3.5%), cortisone (0.47%), corticosterone
(<0.01%), progesterone (<0.01%), 17-hydroxyprogesterone (1.2%), 6-hydroxycortisol
(7.6%), and tetrahydrocortisol (<0.01%). The intra-assay and inter-assay
coefficient of variations (CVs) ranged from 4.3% to 9.2% and 3.8% to 10.4 %,
respectively. The analytical recoveries were 92.3% to 116.3%. Serum cortisol
levels of healthy volunteers were determined after chilled acetone, stripped to
be 292.76 ± 201.38 ng/mL (n=5), which are in the reference range.

PMID: 21707363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. BMC Microbiol. 2011 Jun 25;11:148. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-11-148.

Characterization of surface proteins of Cronobacter muytjensii using monoclonal
antibodies and MALDI-TOF Mass spectrometry.

Jaradat ZW(1), Rashdan AM, Ababneh QO, Jaradat SA, Bhunia AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering, PO Box 3030, Jordan
University of Science and Technology, Irbid 22110, Jordan. jaradatz@just.edu.jo

BACKGROUND: Cronobacter spp. is a newly emerging pathogen that causes meningitis 
in infants and other diseases in elderly and immunocompromised individuals. This 
study was undertaken to investigate surface antigenic determinants in Cronobacter
spp. using monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) and MALDI-TOF Mass spectrometry.
RESULTS: Spleenocytes from mice that were immunized with heat-killed (20 min,
80°C) Cronobacter cells were fused with SP2 myeloma cells. Five desirable MAbs
(A1, B5, 2C2, C5 and A4) were selected. MAbs A1, B5, 2C2 and C5 were of IgG2a
isotype while A4 was an IgM. Specificity of the MAbs was determined by using
immunoblotting with outer membrane protein preparations (OMPs) extracted from 12 
Cronobacter and 6 non-Cronobacter bacteria. All MAbs recognized proteins with
molecular weight ranging between 36 and 49 kDa except for one isolate (44) in
which no OMPs were detected. In addition, MAbs recognized two bands (38-41 kDa)
in four of the non-Cronobacter bacteria. Most of the proteins recognized by the
MAbs were identified by MALDI-TOF peptide sequencing and appeared to be
heterogeneous with the identities of some of them are still unknown. All MAbs
recognized the same epitope as determined by an additive Index ELISA with their
epitopes appeared to be conformational rather than sequential. Further, none of
the MAbs recognized purified LPS from Cronobacter spp. Specificity of the MAbs
toward OMPs was further confirmed by transmission electron microscopy.
CONCLUSIONS: Results obtained in this study highlight the immunological
cross-reactivity among Cronobacter OMPs and their Enterobacteriaceae
counterparts. Nevertheless, the identity of the identified proteins appeared to
be different as inferred from the MALDI-TOF sequencing and identification.

PMCID: PMC3224122
PMID: 21702985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. BMB Rep. 2011 Jun;44(6):387-92. doi: 10.5483/BMBRep.2011.44.6.387.

Characterization of the molecular features and expression patterns of two serine 
proteases in Hermetia illucens (Diptera: Stratiomyidae) larvae.

Kim W(1), Bae S, Kim A, Park K, Lee S, Choi Y, Han S, Park Y, Koh Y.

Author information: 
(1)National Academy of Agricultural Science, Rural Development Administration,
Suwon, Korea.

To investigate the molecular scavenging capabilities of the larvae of Hermetia
illucens, two serine proteases (SPs) were cloned and characterized. Multiple
sequence alignments and phylogenetic tree analysis of the deduced amino acid
sequences of Hi-SP1 and Hi-SP2 were suggested that Hi-SP1 may be a chymotrypsin- 
and Hi-SP2 may be a trypsin-like protease. Hi-SP1 and Hi-SP2 3-D homology models 
revealed that a catalytic triad, three disulfide bonds, and a substrate-binding
pocket were highly conserved, as would be expected of a SP. E. coli expressed
Hi-SP1 and Hi-SP2 showed chymotrypsin or trypsin activities, respectively. Hi-SP2
mRNAs were consistently expressed during larval development. In contrast, the
expression of Hi-SP1 mRNA fluctuated between feeding and molting stages and
disappeared at the pupal stages. These expression pattern differences suggest
that Hi-SP1 may be a larval specific chymotrypsin-like protease involved with
food digestion, while Hi-SP2 may be a trypsin-like protease with diverse
functions at different stages.

PMID: 21699751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Org Chem. 2011 Aug 5;76(15):6057-66. doi: 10.1021/jo200637g. Epub 2011 Jul 6.

Vicinal 1H-1H NMR coupling constants from density functional theory as reliable
tools for stereochemical analysis of highly flexible multichiral center
molecules.

López-Vallejo F(1), Fragoso-Serrano M, Suárez-Ortiz GA, Hernández-Rojas AC,
Cerda-García-Rojas CM, Pereda-Miranda R.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química y Programa de Posgrado en Farmacologi´a, Centro de
Investigación y de Estudios Avanzados del Instituto Politécnico Nacional, A.P.
14-470, México, D. F. 07000 Mexico.

A protocol for stereochemical analysis, based on the systematic comparison
between theoretical and experimental vicinal (1)H-(1)H NMR coupling constants,
was developed and applied to a series of flexible compounds (1-8) derived from
the 6-heptenyl-5,6-dihydro-2H-pyran-2-one framework. The method included a broad 
conformational search, followed by geometry optimization at the DFT B3LYP/DGDZVP 
level, calculation of the vibrational frequencies, thermochemical parameters,
magnetic shielding tensors, and the total NMR spin-spin coupling constants. Three
scaling factors, depending on the carbon atom hybridizations, were found for the 
(1)H-C-C-(1)H vicinal coupling constants: f((sp3)-(sp3)) = 0.910, f((sp3)-(sp2)) 
= 0.929, and f((sp2)-(sp2))= 0.977. A remarkable correlation between the
theoretical (J(pre)) and experimental (1)H-(1)H NMR (J(exp)) coupling constants
for spicigerolide (1), a cytotoxic natural product, and some of its synthetic
stereoisomers (2-4) demonstrated the predictive value of this approach for the
stereochemical assignment of highly flexible compounds containing multiple chiral
centers. The stereochemistry of two natural
6-heptenyl-5,6-dihydro-2H-pyran-2-ones (14 and 15) containing diverse functional 
groups in the heptenyl side chain was also analyzed by application of this
combined theoretical and experimental approach, confirming its reliability.
Additionally, a geometrical analysis for the conformations of 1-8 revealed that
weak hydrogen bonds substantially guide the conformational behavior of the
tetraacyloxy-6-heptenyl-2H-pyran-2-ones.

PMID: 21692472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Spectrochim Acta A Mol Biomol Spectrosc. 2011 Sep;79(5):1722-30. doi:
10.1016/j.saa.2011.05.044. Epub 2011 May 23.

Vibrational assignments, normal coordinate analysis, B3LYP calculations and
conformational analysis of
methyl-5-amino-4-cyano-3-(methylthio)-1H-pyrazole-1-carbodithioate.

Mohamed TA(1), Hassan AM, Soliman UA, Zoghaib WM, Husband J, Hassan SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Al-Azhar University (Men's Campus), Nasr City 11884, 
Cairo, Egypt. tarek_ama@hotmail.com

The Raman and infrared spectra of solid
methyl-5-amino-4-cyano-3-(methylthio)-1H-pyrazole-1-carbodithioate (MAMPC,
C7H8N4S3) were measured in the spectral range of 3700-100 cm(-1) and 4000-200
cm(-1) with a resolution of 4 and 0.5 cm(-1), respectively. Room temperature 13C 
NMR and (1)H NMR spectra from room temperature down to -60 °C were also recorded.
As a result of internal rotation around C-N and/or C-S bonds, eighteen rotational
isomers are suggested for the MAMPC molecule (Cs symmetry). DFT/B3LYP and MP2
calculations were carried out up to 6-311++G(d,p) basis sets to include
polarization and diffusion functions. The results favor conformer 1 in the solid 
(experimentally) and gaseous (theoretically) phases. For conformer 1, the two
-CH3 groups are directed towards the nitrogen atoms (pyrazole ring) and CS, while
the -NH2 group retains sp2 hybridization and C-CN bond is quasi linear. To
support NMR spectral assignments, chemical shifts (d) were predicted at the
B3LYP/6-311+G(2d,p) level using the method of Gauge-Invariant Atomic Orbital
(GIAO) method. Moreover, the solvent effect was included via the Polarizable
Continuum Model (PCM). Additionally, both infrared and Raman spectra were
predicted using B3LYP/6-31G(d) calculations. The recorded vibrational, 1H and 13C
NMR spectral data favors conformer 1 in both the solid phase and in solution.
Aided by normal coordinate analysis and potential energy distributions, confident
vibrational assignments for observed bands have been proposed. Moreover, the CH3 
barriers to internal rotations were investigated. The results are discussed
herein are compared with similar molecules whenever appropriate.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21676648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Org Chem. 2011 Aug 5;76(15):6362-6. doi: 10.1021/jo2007362. Epub 2011 Jul 5.

Synthesis of quinazolin-4(3H)-ones via Pd(II)-catalyzed intramolecular C(sp2)-H
carboxamidation of N-arylamidines.

Ma B(1), Wang Y, Peng J, Zhu Q.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institutes of
Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 190 Kaiyuan Avenue,
Guangzhou 510530, China.

An efficient synthesis of quinazolin-4(3H)-ones from N-arylamidines, through
palladium-catalyzed intramolecular C(sp(2))-H carboxamidation, has been
developed. The reaction, carried out in the presence of 1.0 equiv of CuO as
oxidant under atmospheric pressure of CO, provides diversified
2-aryl(alkyl)quinazolin-4(3H)-ones in reasonable to good yields from
N-arylamidines, which are readily derived from anilines and nitriles. Compared
with existing approaches to quinazolin-4(3H)-ones, the current strategy features 
atom-economy and step-efficiency.

PMID: 21675775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Scott Med J. 2011 May;56(2):120. doi: 10.1258/smj.2010.010019.

Thrombolysis of acute ischaemic stroke in a district general hospital: are we
doing enough?

Tan AJ(1), Cronan J, Walters DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stroke and Elderly Medicine, Salisbury District General
Hospital, Salisbury SP2 8BJ, UK. adrianTJH@yahoo.co.uk

Thrombolysis of acute ischaemic stroke is safe, efficacious and licensed for use 
in the UK. To date, few studies have looked at the rates of thrombolysis within a
district general hospital setting. The aim of the study was to identify whether
local thrombolysis protocols for stroke are adhered to; the rate of thrombolysis 
and strategies for implementation focused at improving the provision of
thrombolysis of patients with acute ischaemic stroke. The methodology involved in
this was a retrospective study within a district general hospital in the South of
England. Data on patients admitted between 15 April 2008 and 14 April 2009
including demographics, use of the local thrombolysis protocol and reasons for
non-thrombolysis were collected and analysed. Out of a total of 599 patients with
a primary presentation of acute stroke, 18 were considered for thrombolysis. Six 
patients out of these 18 were thrombolysed without complications. Four out of
these six patients had an improved National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale
(NIHSS) post-thrombolysis and one eventually died due to the extensiveness of the
stroke sustained, despite a slightly improved NIHSS. The rate of thrombolysis of 
acute ischaemic stroke is low in this hospital (1.001%). Various measures will
need to be considered for implementation in order to improve the provision of
this service.

PMID: 21670141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Spectrochim Acta A Mol Biomol Spectrosc. 2011 Sep;79(5):1364-74. doi:
10.1016/j.saa.2011.04.070. Epub 2011 May 10.

Spectral investigation of the intramolecular charge-transfer in some
aminotriazole Schiff bases.

Issa YM(1), Hassib HB, Abdelaal HE, Kenawi IM.

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry Department, Faculty of Science, Cairo University, Giza, Egypt.
yousrymi@yahoo.com

3-Amino-1,2,4-triazole Schiff bases were reported to contain intramolecular
charge-transfer. The enhancing and depressing effects were remarkable as the
substituent was changed from electron-donating to electron-withdrawing groups.
The path of the resonating delocalization was reversed in the case of the p-NO2
group. To validate these results we effectively used Weinhold et al's natural
bond orbital analysis to assess the UV and FT-IR spectrophotometric monitoring of
the change reflected in this phenomenon when the substituent in the benzene ring 
is altered. The NBO analysis was simulated by ab inito computations at the
HF/6-31G(d) level of theory, in order to properly detect any possible presence of
a hydrogen bond association. The changes occurring in electron occupancies of
double-centered bonds, antibonding orbitals and in lone-pair orbitals appraised
the results, as did the s and p character listings of the two-centered bonds and 
the simultaneous changes occurring in the geometric parameters of the molecules
in question. Contrary to its normal preference, in these molecules the nitrogen
used sp2 hybrid orbitals for its interaction, housing its electron lone-pair in
the third p hybrid orbital. Furthermore, NBO analysis reflected the presence of a
very soft intramolecular hydrogen association (C-H<U+22EF>p), labelled by UV and FT-IR
assignments, between the benzene and triazole rings in all Schiff bases but
p-N(Me)2. The n-p* stabilization energy decreased in the order:
p-OH>p-OCH3>p-Cl>p-CH3>H>p-NO2>o-OH. The relation between the band position and
Hammett substitution constant is interpreted in relation to the molecular
structure.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21640640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Biol Chem. 2011 Aug 19;286(33):28761-71. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.197533. Epub
2011 May 31.

Disruption of a nuclear NFATc2 protein stabilization loop confers breast and
pancreatic cancer growth suppression by zoledronic acid.

Singh SK(1), Baumgart S, Singh G, König AO, Reutlinger K, Hofbauer LC, Barth P,
Gress TM, Lomberk G, Urrutia R, Fernandez-Zapico ME, Ellenrieder V.

Author information: 
(1)Signaling and Transcription Laboratory, Department of Gastroenterology,
Philipps-University of Marburg, D-35043 Marburg, Germany.

The aminobisphosphonate zoledronic acid has elicited significant attention due to
its remarkable anti-tumoral activity, although its detailed mechanism of action
remains unclear. Here, we demonstrate the existence of a nuclear GSK-3ß-NFATc2
stabilization pathway that promotes breast and pancreatic cancer growth in vitro 
and in vivo and serves as a bona fide target of zoledronic acid. Specifically,
the serine/threonine kinase GSK-3ß stabilizes nuclear NFATc2 through
phosphorylation of the serine-rich SP2 domain, thus protecting the transcription 
factor from E3-ubiquitin ligase HDM2-mediated proteolysis. Zoledronic acid
disrupts this NFATc2 stabilization pathway through two mechanisms, namely GSK-3ß 
inhibition and induction of HDM2 activity. Upon nuclear accumulation, HDM2
targets unphosphorylated NFATc2 for ubiquitination at acceptor lysine residues
Lys-684/Lys-897 and hence labels the factor for subsequent proteasomal
degradation. Conversely, mutagenesis-induced constitutive serine phosphorylation 
(Ser-215, Ser-219, and Ser-223) of the SP2 domain prevents NFATc2 from
HDM2-mediated ubiquitination and degradation and consequently rescues cancer
cells from growth suppression by zoledronic acid. In conclusion, this study
demonstrates a critical role of the GSK-3ß-HDM2 signaling loop in the regulation 
of NFATc2 protein stability and growth promotion and suggests that double
targeting of this pathway is responsible, at least to a significant part, for the
potent and reliable anti-tumoral effects of zoledronic acid.

PMCID: PMC3190684
PMID: 21628454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Phys Chem Lett. 2011 Jun 2;2(11):1310-4. doi: 10.1021/jz200398d. Epub 2011 May 
13.

Stability and Properties of Two-Dimensional Graphene Hydroxide.

Zhu Q(1), Lu YH(1), Jiang JZ(1).

Author information: 
(1)International Center for New-Structured Materials (ICNSM) and Laboratory of
New-Structured Materials (LNSM), Department of Materials Science and Engineering,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, P. R. China.

Systematic study of interaction between graphene and hydroxyls is carried out by 
first-principles calculations. Although single hydroxyl adsorbed on graphene
presents magnetic properties, hydroxyls prefer to adsorb on graphene in pairs
without magnetic properties. The formation energy of hydroxyl pairs with graphene
is coverage-dependent, and the most stable structure is half-covered by hydroxyl 
pairs along zigzag chains with alternative sp2 and sp3 hybridization between
carbon atoms. The bandgap of this structure is 0.97 eV in GW approximation, close
to the bandgap of Si, and this structure is stable at room temperature. It is
possible to build graphene-based electronic circuits from graphene hydroxide
without the need for cutting or etching.

PMID: 26295426  [PubMed]


153. J Ment Health. 2011 Jun;20(3):260-9. doi: 10.3109/09638237.2011.562260.

Racial variations in major depressive disorder onset among immigrant populations 
in the United States.

Lee S(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Social Policy & Practice, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania 19104, USA. sungkyu@sp2.upenn.edu

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Considering the heterogeneity within the immigrant
population, this study aimed to examine racial variations in major depressive
disorder (MDD) onset and the factors associated with it among immigrants in the
United States.
METHODS: Data from the Collaborative Psychiatric Epidemiology Surveys were
analyzed. The Kaplan-Meier method was employed to estimate survival functions by 
race. The Cox proportional hazards model was employed to explore the factors
associated with MDD onset after controlling for socio-demographic and
immigration-related sample characteristics.
RESULTS: Asians showed the highest survival function, followed by African
Americans. A Cox proportional hazards model indicated that those who were
younger, female, and non-Asian were more likely to experience an MDD onset than
were their older, male, and Asian counterparts. None of the immigration-related
characteristics were found to be significantly associated with MDD onset among
foreign-born individuals.
CONCLUSIONS: Findings from this study reveal that different racial groups
experience different patterns of MDD onset over time. Exploring the factors
associated with MDD onset will help mental health providers identify vulnerable
subgroups among immigrant populations and, in turn, promote adequate mental
health services for them.

PMID: 21574791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2011 May;27(5):542-4.

[Preparation and characterization of the anti-HCV HVR1 synthetic peptide
monoclonal antibody].

[Article in Chinese]

Sun J(1), Qi Y, Chi SP, You LY, Li RS, Liu J, Zhu L, Cheng Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute of Infections Diseases, 302nd Hospital of 
Chinese PLA, Beijing 100039, China. Energysj@yeah.net

AIM: To prepare monoclonal antibody (mAb) against HCV HVR1 synthetic peptide and 
characterize its property.
METHODS: 8 week-old female BALB/c mice were immunized with HCV HVR1 synthetic
peptide which was linked to bovine serum albumin (BSA) as immunogen. The
splenocytes of immunized mice were fused with Sp2/0 cells by hybridoma technique.
Monoclonal hybridoma cell line was obtained by limiting dilution, HAT and HT
-selective culture. The specificity of mAb was identified by indirect ELISA,
immunohistochemical staining and inhibitory reactivity.
RESULTS: One hybridoma cell (1A9G9F11) was obtained. The mAb belonged to Ig G3.
The titers of mAb in ascetic and the relative affinity constant of mAb were
3.125×10(-5) and 1.0×10(6) L/mol respectively.Indirect ELISA detecition
demonstrated that the mAb had no cross-reactivates with other viral antigens,
such as HBsAg, HBeAg and HAAg, and with other protein, such as BSA, casein and
thymopentin.
CONCLUSION: One hybridoma cell secreting mAb against-HCV HVR1 has been
established successfully, which lays the foundation for for the further study.

PMID: 21557914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2011 May;27(5):539-41, 544.

[Preparation and identification of monoclonal antibody against human growth
differentiation factor 15].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhan F(1), Zeng XY, Zhang X, Zhou S, Xu Y, Zhang JP, Jiao YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing 210011, China. chinazhanf@gmail.com

AIM: To prepare the monoclonal antibody (mAb) against human growth
differentiation factor 15 (GDF15).
METHODS: The expression vector pGEX-4T-2-gdf15 was constructed and transformed
into E.coli Top10F' for expression. Then the purified fusion protein was used to 
immunize the BALB/c mice. The mouse myeloma cells (Sp2/0) were fused with spleen 
cells from the BALB/c immunized by the purified protein. Subsequently, limited
dilution method was used three times to screen hybridoma cell lines. The titer of
the mAb was detected by ELISA and its specificity was analyzed by Western blot.
The serum level of GDF15 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and health people was 
measured by co-immunoprecipitation (IP) method.
RESULTS: The GST-GDF15 fusion protein was successfully expressed and purified.
One hybridoma cell line designated 9G3 against GDF15 was obtained. IP and mass
spectrometric analysis revealed that the mAb recognized GDF15 in human sera with 
high specificity. The level of GDF15 in HCC patients was much higher than that in
health people.
CONCLUSION: The success in mouse anti-GDF15 mAb preparation provides the basis
for further developing HCC diagnose kit.

PMID: 21557913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Chemosphere. 2011 Aug;84(8):1102-7. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2011.04.042. Epub 
2011 May 7.

A simple McGowan specific volume correction for branching in hydrocarbons and its
consequences for some other solvation parameter values.

van Noort PC(1), Haftka JJ, Parsons JR.

Author information: 
(1)Deltares, P.O. Box 85467, 3508 AL Utrecht, The Netherlands.
paul.vannoort@wur.nl

Differences in molecular properties between linear and branched alkanes as well
as between compounds with branched alkyl groups is of relevance due to the large 
number of branched isomers of environmentally relevant compounds (e.g. fuels,
fuel additives, surfactants). For branched alkane vapor pressures, the McGowan
specific volume is a poor predictor. Therefore, in this study a correction on the
McGowan specific volume is derived in terms of the number of branches and the
number of pairs of vicinal branches to improve the prediction of branched alkane 
vapor pressures. This branching correction also brought branched/alkane solvent
accessible volumes, octanol/water partition coefficients, air/hexadecane
partition coefficients, and aqueous solubilities as well as alkyl-branched
substituted aliphatic hydrocarbon air/hexadecane partition coefficients more in
line with corresponding linear hydrocarbon properties when compared on a McGowan 
specific volume basis. Even for air-hexadecane partition coefficients of
substituted aliphatic hydrocarbons with substituents at non-terminal carbons,
application of the branching correction to the carbon bearing the substituent
caused these partition coefficients to be more in line with those for linear
compounds. Values for the Abraham A and B solvation parameters for nonlinear
aliphatic ethers, amines, and alcohols, recalculated using branching corrected
McGowan specific volumes, turned out to be closer to chemical expectations based 
on linear aliphatic ether, amine and alcohol values compared to previously
reported experimental values obtained using uncorrected McGowan specific volumes.
A comparison of alkylbenzene and alkene partition coefficient estimates from two 
different linear solvation energy relations, one containing a McGowan specific
volume term and one without such a term, suggests that no branching correction is
needed for alkyl groups at sp2 carbons. The main advantage of using branching
corrected McGowan specific volumes is that the values of other solvation
parameters become chemically more consistent.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21550626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2011 Apr;30(2):189-93. doi: 10.1089/hyb.2010.0085.

Metabolic activity and monoclonal antibody production of Salmonella enteritidis O
and H antigen specific hybridoma cells in static culture.

Nalbantsoy A(1), Bora K, Deliloglu-Gurhan I.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Engineering, Bioengineering Department, Ege University, Bornova,
Izmir, Turkey.

The aim of the present work was to study the kinetics of two hybridomas that
produce monoclonal antibody against Salmonella Enteritidis O (5A8) and H (D7)
antigen. The hybridomas originated from the Ag8x653 (5A8) and Sp2/O (D7) myeloma 
cell lines. The relationship between the uptake of glucose and glutamine and the 
release of the lactate and ammonia and monoclonal antibody production into
hybridoma growth were investigated in static culture with serum-containing
DMEM/F:12 medium for the determination of pilot-production strategies of the
hybridomas. Results showed that glucose and glutamine concentrations were
reduced, with an increase in ammonia and lactate concentration in the culture
medium. The hybridoma cell line 5A8 has shown lower metabolic activities compared
with D7, whereas its monoclonal antibody productivity was found to be two-fold
higher than the D7. MAb production by the hybridoma cell line 5A8 seems
promising, considering the moderate level of productivity compared to that found 
in the literature.

PMID: 21529293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2011 Apr;30(2):145-51. doi: 10.1089/hyb.2010.0088.

Generation and characterization of anti-chitinase monoclonal antibodies.

Soukhtanloo M(1), Falak R, Sankian M, Varasteh AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Mashhad University of Medical
Sciences, Mashhad, Khorasan Razavi, Islamic Republic of Iran.

Class IV chitinase, an allergenic protein of Vitis vinifera (grape), was purified
by anion exchange chromatography and used for immunization of Balb/c mice.
Monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) were raised by hybridoma technology using Sp2/0
myeloma cells. Finally after three limiting dilutions, six stable clones were
generated. Antibody isotyping showed that IgG(2a), IgG(2b), and IgM were produced
by one, two, and three of the clones, respectively. All of the MAbs had kappa
light chain. The affinities were in the range of 3<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(8) to 1.2<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(9) M(-1). 
The MAbs were specific for grape chitinase as confirmed by Western blotting. In
conclusion, we successfully produced several MAbs against grape class IV
chitinase, which could be used for assessment of this allergen in different grape
cultivars.

PMID: 21529287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Am Chem Soc. 2011 Jun 22;133(24):9204-7. doi: 10.1021/ja2024959. Epub 2011 May 
4.

Palladium-catalyzed synthesis of benzosilolo[2,3-b]indoles via cleavage of a
C(sp3)-Si bond and consequent intramolecular C(sp2)-Si coupling.

Liang Y(1), Zhang S, Xi Z.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences and Key Laboratory of
Bioorganic Chemistry and Molecular Engineering of the Ministry of Education,
College of Chemistry, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

An efficient process involving Pd-catalyzed selective cleavage of a C(sp(3))-Si
bond and consequent intramolecular C(sp(2))-Si coupling has been developed,
affording benzosilolo[2,3-b]indoles as a new type of silicon-bridged
polyheteroarene in excellent yields. Aldehyde was found for the first time to be 
able to promote the efficiency of the catalytic process remarkably.

PMID: 21517096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2011 May;50(5):480-9. doi:
10.1016/j.jaac.2011.02.007. Epub 2011 Apr 7.

Stimulant adherence and academic performance in urban youth with
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.

Marcus SC(1), Durkin M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Health Equity Research and Promotion, Philadelphia Veterans Affairs
Medical Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. marcuss@sp2.upenn.edu

Comment in
    J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2011 May;50(5):435-7.

OBJECTIVE: This analysis assessed whether stimulant adherence was associated with
improvement in academic grade point average (GPA) among children diagnosed with
and treated for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
METHOD: Medicaid claims were merged with academic records from Philadelphia
public schools of Medicaid-eligible children in first through eighth grades who
were diagnosed with ADHD and who had filled one or more stimulant prescription.
Students diagnosed with mental retardation, autism, or speech, hearing, visual,
or language impairments were excluded. Marking periods were scored for GPA
(range: 0-4.0) based on English, mathematics, social studies, and science grades 
and for stimulant adherence (medication possession ratio = 0.70). Random and
fixed-effects models estimated the effects of stimulant adherence on GPA, between
all adherent and nonadherent marking periods in aggregate and within individual
student's marking periods, respectively.
RESULTS: A total of 3,543 students contributed 29,992 marking periods, of which
18.6% were adherent. Mean GPA was significantly higher during stimulant-adherent 
(2.18) than stimulant-nonadherent (1.99) marking periods in aggregate (p <
.0001). The regression coefficient representing within-student association
between stimulant adherence and GPA over time was 0.108 (p < .0001), indicating
that adherence was associated with a 0.108 increase in GPA. In stratified
analyses, analogous coefficients were 0.106 for boys, 0.111 for girls, 0.078 for 
elementary students, and 0.118 for middle school students (all p < .0001). The
association was stronger among students with (0.139) than without (0.088)
comorbid disruptive behavior disorders (both p < .0001).
CONCLUSIONS: Stimulant adherence, although found to be low among urban elementary
and middle school students diagnosed with ADHD, was associated with a marginal
improvement in GPA.

Copyright © 2011 American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. Published
by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21515197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2011 May 9;50(20):4649-53. doi: 10.1002/anie.201100772.
Epub 2011 Apr 15.

A chiral bidentate sp2-N ligand, Naph-diPIM: application to CpRu-catalyzed
asymmetric dehydrative C-, N-, and O-allylation.

Miyata K(1), Kutsuna H, Kawakami S, Kitamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Materials Science, Department of Chemistry, Nagoya
University, Chikusa, Japan.

PMID: 21500328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Optom Vis Sci. 2011 Jul;88(7):864-71. doi: 10.1097/OPX.0b013e3182195dae.

Norms for the developmental eye movement test for Portuguese children.

Baptista AM(1), de Sousa RA, Casal CC, Marques RJ, da Silva CM.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Physics (Optometry), University of Minho, Campus de Gualtar, Braga, 
Portugal. abaptista@fisica.uminho.pt

PURPOSE: This work aims to define contemporary scores for the Developmental Eye
Movement Test (DEM) for native Portuguese-speaking children (PT) and to compare
these scores with three other published scores: the original norms, published in 
1987 for American English-speaking children (U.S.) and two other scores published
in 1995 (SP1) and 2003 (SP2) for Spanish-speaking children.
METHODS: A standard DEM test was administered to 695 young students ranging in
age from 6 to 13 years from the region of Braga, Portugal. The mean PT scores for
vertical time and adjusted horizontal time as well as the corresponding errors
and ratio were calculated according to age and grade, and these results were
compared with those from other studies. In addition, the clinical response types 
(age and grade) were obtained based on mean PT scores.
RESULTS: For several ages/grades, the scores obtained in this study were
significantly different from the scores reported in other studies. A global
qualitative analysis showed that PT made fewer errors and had similar ratios when
compared with U.S. and SP2. However, PT were generally slower in vertical time
and adjusted horizontal time in the younger age groups. When comparing PT and
SP1, a higher ratio for SP1 was determined in all ages. The clinical response
types signified below-normal performance scores for ages 6 to 9 and grades 1 to
5.
CONCLUSIONS: The unusually large number of oculomotor and/or automaticity
problems found in this normal PT population using a test based on U.S. norms
highlights the need for PT-specific guidelines. It appears that DEM scores may be
affected by differences in language, educational systems, and/or cultural
systems. Therefore, clinicians should be aware of these findings when using the
DEM test on children in countries with differing languages and cultures.

Copyright © 2011 American Academy of Optometry

PMID: 21499164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Comp Biochem Physiol Part D Genomics Proteomics. 2011 Jun;6(2):206-12. doi:
10.1016/j.cbd.2011.03.003. Epub 2011 Apr 4.

Genome duplications within the Xenopodinae do not increase the multiplicity of
antimicrobial peptides in Silurana paratropicalis and Xenopus andrei skin
secretions.

Mechkarska M(1), Eman A, Coquet L, Jérôme L, Jouenne T, Vaudry H, King JD, Takada
K, Conlon JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, United
Arab Emirates University, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates.

A putative genome duplication event within the Silurana lineage has given rise to
the tetraploid frog S. paratropicalis and a second polyploidization within the
Xenopus lineage has produced the octoploid frog X. andrei. Peptidomic analysis of
norepinephrine-stimulated skin secretions of S. paratropicalis and X. andrei led 
to identification of multiple peptides with growth-inhibitory activity against
Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus. Structural characterization
demonstrated that the S. paratropicalis components comprised three peptides
belonging to the caerulein-precursor fragment family (CPF-SP1, -SP2 and -SP3),
two peptides from the xenopsin-precursor fragment family (XPF-SP1 and -SP2), and 
one peptide orthologous to peptide glycine-leucine-amide (PGLa-SP1). The CPF
peptides showed potent, broad-spectrum antimicrobial activity. The X. andrei
components comprised two peptides from the magainin family, (magainin-AN1 and
-AN2), two from the XPF family (XPF-AN1 and -AN2), two from the PGLa
family(PGLa-AN1 and -AN2), and one caerulein-precursor fragment (CPF-AN1).The
primary structures of these peptides indicate a close phylogenetic relationship
between X. andrei and the octoploid frog X. amieti. Under the same experimental
conditions, seven orthologous antimicrobial peptides were previously isolated
from the diploid frog S. tropicalis, nine from the tetraploid frog X. borealis,
and five from the tetraploid frog X. clivii. The data indicate, therefore, that
nonfunctionalization (gene deletion) has been the most common fate of duplicated 
antimicrobial peptide genes following polyploidization events in the Silurana and
Xenopus lineages.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21498136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Org Chem. 2011 May 20;76(10):3997-4007. doi: 10.1021/jo2003488. Epub 2011 Apr
28.

Structure and reactivity of a preactivated sp2-sp3 diboron reagent: catalytic
regioselective boration of a,ß-unsaturated conjugated compounds.

Gao M(1), Thorpe SB, Kleeberg C, Slebodnick C, Marder TB, Santos WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia 24061, United
States.

A novel sp(2)-sp(3) diboron reagent has been developed for the copper-catalyzed
ß-boration of a,ß-unsaturated conjugated compounds. The reaction proceeds under
mild conditions with various substrates, i.e., a,ß-unsaturated esters, ketones,
nitriles, ynones, amides, and aldehydes, in the absence of additives such as
phosphine and sodium tert-butoxide to provide ß-borylhomoenolates in good to
excellent yields. The presence of an sp(3)-hybridized boron center, unambigously 
confirmed by X-ray crystallography, sufficiently activates the unsymmetrical
pinacolato diisopropanolaminato diboron (PDIPA diboron, 2) to transfer the
sp(2)-hybridized boron moiety chemoselectively. These observations suggest that
the activation of one of the boron atoms is an essential step in the Cu-catalyzed
ß-boration catalytic cycle.

PMID: 21491953  [PubMed]


165. Chem Commun (Camb). 2011 May 28;47(20):5717-9. doi: 10.1039/c1cc11087j. Epub 2011
Apr 12.

"On water" sp3-sp2 cross-couplings between benzylic and alkenyl halides.

Krasovskaya V(1), Krasovskiy A, Bhattacharjya A, Lipshutz BH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, University of California, Santa
Barbara, California 93106, USA.

Organic-solvent-free cross-couplings between benzylic and alkenyl halides have
been developed. Various alkenyl halides can be efficiently benzylated by
combining the precursor halides in the presence of Zn dust and a Pd catalyst at
room temperature, in water as the only medium.

© The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011

PMCID: PMC3352766
PMID: 21487612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Adv Mater. 2011 Jun 17;23(22-23):2588-601. doi: 10.1002/adma.201100300. Epub 2011
Apr 12.

The potential of perylene bisimide derivatives for the solubilization of carbon
nanotubes and graphene.

Backes C(1), Hauke F, Hirsch A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Advanced Materials and Processes (ZMP), University of
Erlangen-Nuremberg, Dr. Mack Str. 81, 90762 Fuerth, Germany.

Carbon nanotubes and graphene are outstanding materials of the 21st century with 
a broad spectrum of applications. However, major challenges are faced such as the
intrinsically low solubility of both sp2 carbon allotropes. To overcome this
hurdle the potential of noncovalent functionalization is summarized with a
special focus on the establishment of the perylene bisimide unit as aromatic
anchor to the graphitic surface. Rational surfactant design is unmasked as the
key to solubilization of the carbon allotropes, while at the same time tailoring 
their surface properties, or even electronic properties in a fully reversible
fashion.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21484893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Soc Sci Med. 2011 May;72(9):1522-6. doi: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2011.03.010. Epub
2011 Apr 8.

Safe access to safe water in low income countries: water fetching in current
times.

Sorenson SB(1), Morssink C, Campos PA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Social Policy & Practice, University of Pennsylvania, 3815 Walnut
Street, Philadelphia, United States. sorenson@sp2.upenn.edu

A substantial portion of the world's population does not have ready access to
safe water. Moreover, obtaining water may involve great expense of time and
energy for those who have no water sources in or near home. From an historical
perspective, with the invention of piped water, fetching water has only recently 
become largely irrelevant in many locales. In addition, in most instances, wells 
and clean surface water were so close by that fetching was not considered a
problem. However, population growth, weather fluctuations and social upheavals
have made the daily chore of carrying water highly problematic and a public
health problem of great magnitude for many, especially women, in the poor regions
and classes of the world. In this paper, we consider gender differences in water 
carrying and summarize data about water access and carrying from 44 countries
that participated in the Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS) program. Women 
and children are the most common water carriers, and they spend considerable time
(many trips take more than an hour) supplying water to their households. Time is 
but one measure of the cost of fetching water; caloric expenditures, particularly
during droughts, and other measures that affect health and quality of life must
be considered. The full costs of fetching water must be considered when measuring
progress toward two Millennium Development Goals--increasing access to safe
drinking water and seeking an end to poverty.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21481508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Dalton Trans. 2011 Sep 21;40(35):8912-21. doi: 10.1039/c1dt10118h. Epub 2011 Apr 
8.

Original palladium pincer complexes deriving from 1,3-bis(thiophosphinoyl)indene 
proligands: C(sp3)-H versus C(sp2)-H bond activation.

Nebra N(1), Lisena J, Saffon N, Maron L, Martin-Vaca B, Bourissou D.

Author information: 
(1)University of Toulouse, UPS, LHFA, 118 route de Narbonne, F-31062 Toulouse,
France.

A series of original 2-indenylidene palladium pincer complexes
{PdL[Ind(Ph(2)P==S)(2)]} (L = HNCy(2), PPh(3), Cl(-)) have been prepared by
double C-H activation of a 1,3-bis(thiophosphinoyl)indene proligand.
Crystallographic analyses and DFT calculations indicate that the bonding
situation of the {Pd[Ind(Ph(2)P==S)(2)]} fragment is essentially governed by the 
conjugated and rigid nature of the dianionic pincer ligand, the nature of the
coligand having little influence. The formation of the 2-indenylidene complexes
involves either a 2-indenyl pincer or a four-membered cyclometalated complex as
an intermediate, suggesting that C(sp(2))-H or C(sp(3))-H bond activation takes
place. However, deuterium labelling experiences show that in all cases,
C(sp(3))-H bond activation occurs followed eventually by a Pd/H exchange.
Nevertheless, evidence for direct C(sp(2))-H bond activation under mild
conditions is obtained when a methyl group is introduced at the indene proligand 
to prevent C(sp(3))-H bond activation. The ensuing dissymmetrical 2-indenyl
palladium pincer complex has been fully characterized.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011

PMID: 21475756  [PubMed]


169. Biotechnol Prog. 2011 May-Jun;27(3):766-75. doi: 10.1002/btpr.584. Epub 2011 Apr 
5.

A new mammalian host cell with enhanced survival enables completely serum-free
development of high-level protein production cell lines.

Rossi DL(1), Rossi EA, Goldenberg DM, Chang CH.

Author information: 
(1)Immunomedics, Inc., Morris Plains, NJ 07950, USA.

With over 25 monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) currently approved and many more in
development, there is considerable interest in gaining improved productivity by
increasing cell density and enhancing cell survival of production cell lines. In 
addition, high costs and growing safety concerns with use of animal products have
made the availability of serum-free cell lines more appealing. We elected to
transfect the myeloma cell line Sp2/0-Ag14 with Bcl2-EEE, the constitutively
active phosphomimetic mutant of Bcl2, for extended cell survival. After
adaptation of the initial transfectants to serum-independent growth, a clone with
superior growth properties, referred to as SpESF, was isolated and further
subjected to iterative rounds of stressful growth over a period of 4 months. The 
effort resulted in the selection of a promising clone, designated SpESFX-10,
which was shown to exhibit robust growth and resist apoptosis induced by sodium
butyrate or glutamine deprivation. The advantage of SpESFX-10 as a host for
generating mAb-production cell lines was demonstrated by its increased
transfection efficiency, culture longevity, and mAb productivity, as well as by
the feasibility of accomplishing the entire cell line development process,
including transfection, subcloning, and cryopreservation, in the complete absence
of serum.

Copyright © 2011 American Institute of Chemical Engineers (AIChE).

PMID: 21473000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Phys Rev Lett. 2011 Mar 11;106(10):105505. Epub 2011 Mar 9.

From point defects in graphene to two-dimensional amorphous carbon.

Kotakoski J(1), Krasheninnikov AV, Kaiser U, Meyer JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, University of Helsinki, Post Office Box 43, 00014
Helsinki, Finland. jani.kotakoski@iki.fi

While crystalline two-dimensional materials have become an experimental reality
during the past few years, an amorphous 2D material has not been reported before.
Here, using electron irradiation we create an sp2-hybridized one-atom-thick flat 
carbon membrane with a random arrangement of polygons, including four-membered
carbon rings. We show how the transformation occurs step by step by nucleation
and growth of low-energy multivacancy structures constructed of rotated hexagons 
and other polygons. Our observations, along with first-principles calculations,
provide new insights to the bonding behavior of carbon and dynamics of defects in
graphene. The created domains possess a band gap, which may open new
possibilities for engineering graphene-based electronic devices.

PMID: 21469806  [PubMed]


171. J Gerontol Soc Work. 2011 Apr;54(3):309-24. doi: 10.1080/01634372.2010.540075.

Integrating mental health parity for homebound older adults under the medicare
home health care benefit.

Davitt JK(1), Gellis ZD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Social Policy & Practice; and New Courtland Center for Transitions
and Health, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
jdavitt@sp2.upenn.edu

Despite high rates of mental illness, very few homebound older adults receive
treatment. Comorbid mental illness exacerbates physical health conditions,
reduces treatment adherence, and increases dependency and medical costs. Although
effective treatments exist, many home health agencies lack capacity to
effectively detect and treat mental illness. This article critically analyzes
barriers within the Medicare home health benefit that impede access to mental
health treatment. Policy, practice, and research recommendations are made to
integrate mental health parity in home health care. In particular, creative use
of medical social work can improve detection and treatment of mental illness for 
homebound older adults.

PMID: 21462061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Int J Cancer. 2012 Feb 15;130(4):865-75. doi: 10.1002/ijc.26099. Epub 2011 Aug
27.

Immunotherapeutic efficacy of Mycobacterium indicus pranii in eliciting
anti-tumor T cell responses: critical roles of IFN<U+03B3>.

Rakshit S(1), Ponnusamy M, Papanna S, Saha B, Ahmed A, Nandi D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, Karnataka,
India.

Mycobacterium indicus pranii (MIP) is approved for use as an adjuvant
(Immuvac/Cadi-05) in the treatment of leprosy. In addition, its efficacy is being
investigated in clinical trials on patients with tuberculosis and different
tumors. To evaluate and delineate the mechanisms by which autoclaved MIP enhances
anti-tumor responses, the growth of solid tumors consisting of Sp2/0 (myeloma)
and EL4 (thymoma) cells was studied in BALB/c and C57BL/6 mice, respectively.
Treatment of mice with a single intra-dermal (i.d.) injection of MIP 3 days after
Sp2/0 implantation greatly suppresses tumor growth. MIP treatment of tumor
bearing mice lowers Interleukin (IL)6 but increases IL12p70 and IFN<U+03B3> amounts in
sera. Also, increase in CD8(+) T cell mediated lysis of specific tumor targets
and production of high amounts of IL2 and IFN<U+03B3> by CD4(+) T cells upon stimulation
with specific tumor antigens in MIP treated mice is observed. Furthermore, MIP is
also effective in reducing the growth of EL4 tumors; however, this efficacy is
reduced in Ifn<U+03B3>(-/-) mice. In fact, several MIP mediated anti-tumor responses are
greatly abrogated in Ifn<U+03B3>(-/-) mice: increase in serum Interleukin (IL)12p70
amounts, induction of IL2 and lysis of EL4 targets by splenocytes upon
stimulation with specific tumor antigens. Interestingly, tumor-induced increase
in serum IL12p70 and IFN<U+03B3> and reduction in growth of Sp2/0 and EL4 tumors by MIP 
are not observed in nonobese diabetic severe combined immunodeficiency mice.
Overall, our study clearly demonstrates the importance of a functional immune
network, in particular endogenous CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells and IFN<U+03B3>, in
mediating the anti-tumor responses by MIP.

Copyright © 2011 UICC.

PMID: 21455983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Biol Trace Elem Res. 2011 Dec;144(1-3):854-64. doi: 10.1007/s12011-011-9031-z.
Epub 2011 Mar 25.

Development of ELISA for detection of mercury based on specific monoclonal
antibodies against mercury-chelate.

Zhang Y(1), Li X, Liu G, Wang Z, Kong T, Tang J, Zhag P, Yang W, Li D, Liu L, Xie
G, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University, 5333
Xi'an Road, Changchun, 130062, China.

Immunoassays for heavy metals offer an alternative approach to traditional
techniques for detection of mercury. In this study, a mercury-chelate was
prepared with 1-(4-aminobenzyl) ethylenediamine-N,N,N',N'-tetraacetic acid
(aminobenzyl-EDTA). The resulting complex was linked to keyhole limpet hemocyanin
(KLH) or bovine serum albumin via the amino group and used as the immunizing
antigen or detection antigen, respectively. BALB/c mice were immunized with
KLH-aminobenzyl-EDTA-Hg and spleen cells from BALB/C mice were fused with Sp2/0
cells. One cell line (5F7) produced monoclonal antibodies with preferential
selectivity and sensitivity for aminobenzyl-EDTA-Hg. This cell line had an
affinity constant of 4.31<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(9) L/mol and its cross-reactivity (CR) with other 
metals was <2%. The antibody was used for competitive indirect ELISA (CI-ELISA)
for Hg(2+) measurements. The detection range was 0.087-790.4 µg/L and the lower
limit of detection was 0.042 µg/L. The concentrations of mercury in environmental
water samples obtained by CI-ELISA correlated well with graphite furnace atomic
absorption spectrometry (GFAAS), and the mean recovery was 88.82% to 104.64%.
These results indicate that this method could be used for monitoring mercury of
water.

PMID: 21437665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Braz J Biol. 2011 Feb;71(1):27-35.

Oxygen uptake from aquatic macrophyte decomposition from Piraju Reservoir
(Piraju, SP, Brazil).

Bianchini Jr I(1), Cunha-Santino MB, Panhota RS.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ecologia e Recursos Naturais, Universidade
Federal de São Carlos, São Carlos, SP, Brazil. irineu@ufscar.br

The kinetics of oxygen consumption related to mineralisation of 18 taxa of
aquatic macrophytes (Cyperus sp, Azolla caroliniana, Echinodorus macrophyllus,
Eichhornia azurea, Eichhornia crassipes, Eleocharis sp1, Eleocharis sp2,
Hetereanthera multiflora, Hydrocotyle raniculoides, Ludwigia sp, Myriophyllum
aquaticum, Nymphaea elegans, Oxycaryum cubense, Ricciocarpus natans, Rynchospora 
corymbosa, Salvinia auriculata, Typha domingensis and Utricularia foliosa) from
the reservoir of Piraju Hydroelectric Power Plant (São Paulo state, Brazil) were 
described. For each species, two incubations were prepared with ca. 300.0 mg of
plant (DW) and 1.0 L of reservoir water sample. The incubations were maintained
in the dark and at 20 ºC. Periodically the dissolved oxygen (DO) concentrations
were measured; the accumulated DO values were fitted to 1st order kinetic model
and the results showed that: i) high oxygen consumption was observed for Ludwigia
sp (533 mg g-1 DW), while the lowest was registered for Eleocharis sp1 (205 mg
g-1 DW) mineralisation; ii) the higher deoxygenation rate constants were verified
in the mineralisation of A. caroliniana (0.052 day-1), H. raniculoides (0.050
day-1) and U. foliosa (0.049 day-1). The oxygen consumption rate constants of
Ludwigia sp and Eleocharis sp2 mineralisation (0.027 day-1) were the lowest. The 
half-time of oxygen consumption varied from 9 to 26 days. In the short term, the 
detritus of E. macrophyllus, H. raniculoides, Ludwigia sp, N. elegans and U.
foliosa were the critical resources to the reservoir oxygen demand; while in the 
long term, A. caroliniana, H. multiflora and T. domingensis were the resources
that can potentially contribute to the benthic oxygen demand of this reservoir.

PMID: 21437396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2011 Mar 28;50(14):3303-7. doi: 10.1002/anie.201007187.
Epub 2011 Feb 14.

Highly diastereoselective iron-mediated C(sp2)-C(sp3) cross-coupling reactions
between aryl Grignard reagents and cyclic iodohydrine derivatives.

Steib AK(1), Thaler T, Komeyama K, Mayer P, Knochel P.

Author information: 
(1)Department Chemie, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Butenandtstrasse
5-13, Haus F, 81377 München, Germany.

PMID: 21432956  [PubMed]


176. Phytochem Anal. 2011 Sep-Oct;22(5):385-91. doi: 10.1002/pca.1293. Epub 2011 Mar
17.

An enzyme-linked immunosorbant assay using monoclonal antibody against bacoside
A3 for determination of jujubogenin glycosides in Bacopa monnieri (L.) Wettst.

Tothiam C(1), Phrompittayarat W, Putalun W, Tanaka H, Sakamoto S, Khan IA,
Ingkaninan K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Pharmacognosy, Center of Excellence
for Innovation in Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Naresuan
University, Phitsanulok 65000, Thailand.

INTRODUCTION: In Ayurvedic medicines, Bacopa monnieri (L.) Wettst. (brahmi) is
known as a medicinal plant used for memory enhancement. Its active compounds are 
classified as pseudojujubogenin and jujubogenin glycosides. Owing to the lack of 
chromophore in the saponin glycoside structures, HPLC-UV-vis gives low
sensitivity for determination of such compounds. In the case of the detection of 
small amounts of saponin glycosides, immunological assay could be a suitable
method.
OBJECTIVE: To develop and validate a sensitive enzyme-linked immunosorbant assay 
(ELISA) using monoclonal antibody (MAb) against bacoside A3, the major
jujubogenin glycoside found in brahmi.
METHODOLOGY: An immunogen was prepared by conjugating bacoside A3 with a bovine
serum albumin (BSA). To determine its immunogenicity, the ratio of hapten in
bacoside A3-BSA conjugate was determined by matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionisation time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS). After
immunisation in mice, hybridomas secreting MAbs against bacoside A3 were produced
by fusing the immunised splenocytes with SP2/0- Ag14 myeloma cells. The antibody 
was raised specifically against jujubogenin glycosides. The ELISA using
anti-bacoside A3 MAb was developed.
RESULTS: Bacoside A3 in the range of 3.05-97.70<U+2009>ng mL<U+207B>¹ could be detected by
ELISA using anti-bacoside A3 MAb. The assay showed a detection limit of 0.48<U+2009>ng
mL<U+207B>¹ (0.517<U+2009>nm). The validation study showed that the method was precise,
accurate and sensitive. Interestingly, the MAb showed cross-reactivity with the
other jujubogenin glycosides, bacopaside X and IV. However, it did not show
cross-reactivity with any of pseudojujubogenin glycosides.
CONCLUSION: The study demonstrated that ELISA using anti-bacoside A3 MAb can be
used for determination of total jujubogenin glycosides in brahmi.

Copyright © 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 21413093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Gen Intern Med. 2011 Aug;26(8):894-9. doi: 10.1007/s11606-011-1662-4. Epub 2011
Mar 15.

Intimate partner violence identification and response: time for a change in
strategy.

Rhodes KV(1), Kothari CL, Dichter M, Cerulli C, Wiley J, Marcus S.

Author information: 
(1)Department Of Emergency Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
19104, USA. kvr@sp2.upenn.edu

BACKGROUND: While victims of intimate partner violence (IPV) present to health
care settings for a variety of complaints; rates and predictors of case
identification and intervention are unknown.
OBJECTIVE: Examine emergency department (ED) case finding and response within a
known population of abused women.
DESIGN: Retrospective longitudinal cohort study.
SUBJECTS: Police-involved female victims of IPV in a semi-rural Midwestern
county.
MAIN MEASURES: We linked police, prosecutor, and medical record data to examine
characteristics of ED identification and response from 1999-2002; bivariate
analyses and logistic regression analyses accounted for the nesting of subjects' 
with multiple visits.
RESULTS: IPV victims (N<U+2009>=<U+2009>993) generated 3,426 IPV-related police incidents (mean
3.61, median 3, range 1-17) over the 4-year study period; 785 (79%) generated
4,306 ED visits (mean 7.17, median 5, range 1-87), which occurred after the date 
of a documented IPV assault. Only 384 (9%) ED visits occurred within a week of a 
police-reported IPV incident. IPV identification in the ED was associated with
higher violence severity, being childless and underinsured, more police incidents
(mean: 4.2 vs 3.3), and more ED visits (mean: 10.6 vs 5.5) over the 4 years. The 
majority of ED visits occurring after a documented IPV incident were for medical 
complaints (3,378, 78.4%), and 72% of this cohort were never identified as
victims of abuse. IPV identification was associated with the day of a police
incident, transportation by police, self-disclosure of "domestic assault," and
chart documentation of mental health and substance abuse issues. When IPV was
identified, ED staff provided legally useful documentation (86%), police contact 
(50%), and social worker involvement (45%), but only assessed safety in 33% of
the women and referred them to victim services 25% of the time.
CONCLUSION: The majority of police-identified IPV victims frequently use the ED
for health care, but are unlikely to be identified or receive any intervention in
that setting.

PMCID: PMC3138975
PMID: 21404130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Chem Commun (Camb). 2011 Apr 21;47(15):4406-8. doi: 10.1039/c0cc05738j. Epub 2011
Mar 10.

Three-dimensional network model of carbon containing only sp2-carbon bonds and
boron nitride analogues.

Wu M(1), Wu X, Pei Y, Wang Y, Zeng XC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of
Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska 68588, USA.

We design two network models of carbon and boron nitride crystalline networks,
namely, the honeycomb and triangular foams. The triangular carbon foam is a
unique 3D network model of carbon which contains only sp(2)-carbon bonds. Also,
it has large internal surface area per unit volume and bulk modulus.

© The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011

PMID: 21394348  [PubMed]


179. J Am Chem Soc. 2011 Mar 30;133(12):4243-5. doi: 10.1021/ja200184b. Epub 2011 Mar 
8.

Base-mediated intermolecular sp2 C-H bond arylation via benzyne intermediates.

Truong T(1), Daugulis O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Houston, Houston, Texas 77204-5003,
USA.

A transition-metal-free method for arylation of heterocycle and arene
carbon-hydrogen bonds by aryl chlorides and fluorides has been developed. The
reactions proceed via aryne intermediates and are highly regioselective with
respect to the C-H bond coupling component.

PMCID: PMC3065930
PMID: 21384889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Org Lett. 2011 Apr 1;13(7):1816-9. doi: 10.1021/ol200329e. Epub 2011 Mar 7.

Synthesis of polycyclic molecules by double C(sp2)-H/C(sp3)-H arylations with a
single palladium catalyst.

Pierre C(1), Baudoin O.

Author information: 
(1)Universite´ Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS UMR 5246-Institut de Chimie et
Biochimie Mole´culaires et Supramole´culaires, CPE Lyon, 43 Boulevard du 11
Novembre 1918, 69622 Villeurbanne, France.

Polycyclic molecules were obtained in good yields by double C(sp(2))-H/C(sp(3))-H
arylations mediated by a single palladium/phosphine catalyst. Both double
intermolecular/intramolecular and intramolecular/intramolecular C-C couplings
were performed successfully, which indicates that this concept has a broad
applicability for the rapid construction of molecular complexity.

PMID: 21381642  [PubMed]


181. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2011 Mar 28;50(14):3318-22. doi: 10.1002/anie.201006717. 
Epub 2011 Mar 1.

Carbon-catalyzed oxidative dehydrogenation of n-butane: selective site formation 
during sp3-to-sp2 lattice rearrangement.

Liu X(1), Frank B, Zhang W, Cotter TP, Schlögl R, Su DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Inorganic Chemistry, Fritz Haber Institute of the Max Planck
Society, Faradayweg 4-6, 14195 Berlin, Germany.

PMID: 21365724  [PubMed]


182. Org Lett. 2011 Apr 1;13(7):1614-7. doi: 10.1021/ol200017a. Epub 2011 Feb 28.

Palladium-catalyzed oxidative sp2 C-H bond acylation with alcohols.

Xiao F(1), Shuai Q, Zhao F, Baslé O, Deng G, Li CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Environmentally Friendly Chemistry and Application of
Ministry of Education, College of Chemistry, Xiangtan University, Xiangtan,
411105, China.

An efficient method was developed for the direct acylation of arene sp(2) C-H
bonds with alcohols using palladium chloride as a catalyst and peroxide as the
oxidant. The alcohols were oxidized to their corresponding aldehydes in situ and 
efficiently coupled with 2-arylpyridines to give aryl ketones in chlorobenzene.

PMID: 21355624  [PubMed]


183. AIDS Care. 2011 Mar;23(3):366-77. doi: 10.1080/09540121.2010.507738.

Strategies to enhance linkages between care for HIV/AIDS in jail and community
settings.

Draine J(1), Ahuja D, Altice FL, Arriola KJ, Avery AK, Beckwith CG, Booker CA,
Ferguson A, Figueroa H, Lincoln T, Ouellet LJ, Porterfield J, Spaulding AC,
Tinsley MJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Social Policy and Practice, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, USA. jdraine@sp2.upenn.edu

The policies of mass incarceration and the expansion of the criminal justice
system in the USA over the last 40 years have weighed heavily on individuals and 
communities impacted by drug use and HIV disease. Though less than ideal, jails
provide a unique opportunity to diagnose, treat and implement effective
interventions. The role of jails in HIV detection, treatment, and continuity of
care, however, has yet to be systematically examined. This paper reviews the
service strategies and contexts for 10 demonstration sites funded to develop
innovative methods for providing care and treatment to HIV-infected individuals
in jail settings who are returning to their communities. The sites have
implemented varied intervention strategies; each set in unique policy and service
system contexts. Collaboration among agencies and between systems to implement
these interventions is viewed as particularly challenging undertakings. We
anticipate the sites will collectively serve 700-1000 individuals across the
duration of the initiative. In this paper, we review the service contexts and
strategies developed by the 10 sites. The individual and multi-site evaluations
aim to provide new data on testing, treatment, and community linkages from jails 
that will further develop our knowledge base on effective intervention strategies
in these settings.

PMID: 21347900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Immunol Lett. 2011 Jun 30;137(1-2):62-9. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2011.02.018. Epub
2011 Feb 19.

Transgenic expression of bovine neonatal Fc receptor in mice boosts immune
response and improves hybridoma production efficiency without any sign of
autoimmunity.

Schneider Z(1), Cervenak J, Baranyi M, Papp K, Prechl J, László G, Erdei A,
Kacskovics I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute of Biology, Eötvös Loránd University,
Budapest, Hungary.

The overexpression of the bovine neonatal Fc receptor (bFcRn) in transgenic (Tg) 
mice boosts humoral immune response with increased numbers of antigen-specific
spleen cells and a potent humoral immune response against weakly immunogenic
targets. One of the interesting questions surrounding this enhanced immune
response is whether these Tg mice generate higher number of antigen-specific
hybridomas. To address this question, we immunized these Tg mice and wild type
(wt) controls with trinitrophenylated proteins, generated hybridomas and analyzed
their numbers and specificities. We observed that Tg mice generated a 3-5 fold
increase in antigen-specific IgG titers and had significantly larger spleens
containing higher number of antigen-specific B cells and plasma cells, analyzed
by ELISA and ELISPOT assays. Fusion of the isolated splenocytes with standard
mouse myeloma cells (SP2/0-Ag14) resulted in a 2-4 fold elevation of
hybridization frequency for the hapten, or carrier-specific IgG positive
microcultures, in Tg mice compared to controls. In addition, as augmented immune 
reactivity leads to autoimmunity in some genetically modified mouse strains, we
analyzed autoreactive antibody levels in serum samples derived from elderly bFcRn
Tg mice by a protein chip assay. In contrast to the sample from the MRL/lpr mouse
suffering from autoimmunity, we did not detect autoantibodies in bFcRn Tg mice or
the wt controls. Based on these and our earlier data, we propose that Tg mice
that overexpress bFcRn offer major advantages in monoclonal Ab production.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21338624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Org Lett. 2011 Mar 18;13(6):1286-9. doi: 10.1021/ol103075n. Epub 2011 Feb 21.

Synthesis of biphenyl-2-carbonitrile derivatives via a palladium-catalyzed sp2
C-H bond activation using cyano as a directing group.

Li W(1), Xu Z, Sun P, Jiang X, Fang M.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Biofunctional Materials, College of Chemistry and
Materials Science, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, 210097, China.

Pd(II)-catalyzed aromatic C-H bond activation using cyano as a directing group
was carried out in TFA medium. Biphenyl-2-carbonitrile derivatives were therefore
synthesized from aryl nitriles and aryl halides in moderate to good yields.

PMID: 21338092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Nervenarzt. 2012 Jan;83(1):64-70. doi: 10.1007/s00115-011-3252-4.

[Training in iterative hypothesis testing as part of psychiatric education. A
randomized study].

[Article in German]

Lampen-Imkamp S(1), Alte C, Sipos V, Kordon A, Hohagen F, Schweiger U, Kahl KG.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Psychiatrie, Sozialpsychiatrie und Psychotherapie, Medizinische
Hochschule Hannover.

BACKGROUND: The improvement of medical education is at the center of efforts to
reform the studies of medicine. Furthermore, an excellent teaching program for
students is a quality feature of medical universities. Besides teaching of
disease-specific contents, the acquisition of interpersonal and decision-making
skills is important. However, the cognitive style of senior physicians leading to
a diagnosis cannot easily be taught. Therefore, the following study aimed at
examining whether specific training in iterative hypothesis testing (IHT) may
improve the correctness of the diagnostic process.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Seventy-one medical students in their 9th-11th terms were 
randomized to medical teaching as usual or to IHT training for 4 weeks. The
intervention group received specific training according to the method of IHT. All
students were examined by a multiple choice (MC) exam and additionally by
simulated patients (SP). The SPs were instructed to represent either a patient
with depression and comorbid anxiety and substance use disorder (SP1) or to
represent a patient with depression, obsessive-compulsive disorder and acute
suicidal tendencies (SP2).
RESULTS: All students identified the diagnosis of major depression in the SPs,
but IHT-trained students recognized more diagnostic criteria. Furthermore,
IHT-trained students recognized acute suicide tendencies in SP2 more often and
identified more comorbid psychiatric disorders. The results of the MC exam were
comparable in both groups. An analysis of the satisfaction with the different
training programs revealed that the IHT training received a better appraisal.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results point to the role of IHT in teaching diagnostic skills. 
However, the results of the MC exam were not influenced by IHT training.
Furthermore, our results show that students are in need of training in practical 
clinical skills.

PMID: 21305260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Diabetologia. 2011 Apr;54(4):767-75. doi: 10.1007/s00125-011-2052-5. Epub 2011
Jan 26.

Serum C-reactive protein level and prediabetes in two Asian populations.

Sabanayagam C(1), Shankar A, Lim SC, Lee J, Tai ES, Wong TY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Community Medicine, West Virginia University School of Medicine,
PO Box 9190, Morgantown, WV 26506-9190, USA. csabanayagam@hsc.wvu.edu

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Prediabetes, an early stage in the hyperglycaemic continuum,
increases the future risk of developing diabetes and cardiovascular disease
(CVD). C-reactive protein (CRP), a marker of inflammation, is associated with
diabetes and CVD. However, studies examining the association between CRP and
prediabetes among participants without diabetes are limited.
METHODS: We analysed data from two large population-based studies in Singapore:
the Singapore Prospective Study Programme (SP2, n = 4,252 Chinese, Malay and
Indians aged = 24 years) and the Singapore Malay Eye Study (SiMES, n = 2,337
Malays aged 40-80 years), participants of which were free of diabetes mellitus.
Prediabetes was defined as glycated haemoglobin of 5.7-6.4% in SiMES (n = 1,231);
fasting plasma glucose of 5.6-6.9 mmol/l in SP2 (n = 386).
RESULTS: Elevated high sensitivity CRP (hsCRP) levels were found to be associated
with prediabetes after adjusting for age, sex, race-ethnicity, education,
smoking, alcohol consumption, hypertension, BMI and total cholesterol. Comparing 
those with hsCRP <1 mg/l (referent), the OR (95% confidence interval) of
prediabetes in persons with hsCRP 1-3 mg/l and >3 mg/l was 1.31 (0.99-1.74) and
2.17 (1.61-2.92), p (trend)<U+2009>< 0.0001 in SP2; 1.23 (1.00-1.52) and 1.31
(1.06-1.64), p (trend)<U+2009>= 0.02 in SiMES. In subgroup analysis, the association was
stronger in women, Chinese and Malays, and participants with BMI < 25 kg/m(2).
CONCLUSIONS: Data from two population-based Asian cohorts suggest that elevated
serum hsCRP levels are associated with prediabetes.

PMID: 21267537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Qual Health Res. 2011 May;21(5):587-600. doi: 10.1177/1049732310395328. Epub 2011
Jan 25.

The role of brothels in reducing HIV risk in Sonagachi, India.

Ghose T(1), Swendeman DT, George SM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. toorjo@sp2.upenn.edu

High rates of empowerment, HIV-related knowledge, and condom use among sex
workers in Sonagachi, India have been attributed to a community-led intervention 
called the Sonagachi HIV/AIDS Intervention Program (SHIP). In this research we
examined the crucial role of brothels in the success of the intervention.
In-depth, semistructured interviews were conducted with 55 participants of SHIP. 
The results indicate that brothels help sex workers reduce HIV risk by (a)
serving as targeted sites for SHIP's HIV intervention efforts, (b) being operated
by madams (women managers of brothels) who participate in SHIP's intervention
efforts and promote healthy regimes, (c) structuring the economic transactions
and sexual performances related to sex work, thus standardizing sex-related
behavior, and (d) promoting community empowerment among brothel residents.
Implications of these results are discussed for future efforts to replicate
SHIP's success in other sex work communities.

PMID: 21266706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Mol Biol Cell. 2011 Mar 15;22(6):817-30. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E10-07-0625. Epub 2011 
Jan 19.

Identification of an inhibitory budding signal that blocks the release of HIV
particles and exosome/microvesicle proteins.

Gan X(1), Gould SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Animal cells bud exosomes and microvesicles (EMVs) from endosome and plasma
membranes. The combination of higher-order oligomerization and plasma membrane
binding is a positive budding signal that targets diverse proteins into EMVs and 
retrovirus particles. Here we describe an inhibitory budding signal (IBS) from
the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) Gag protein. This IBS was identified in
the spacer peptide 2 (SP2) domain of Gag, is activated by C-terminal exposure of 
SP2, and mediates the severe budding defect of p6-deficient and PTAP-deficient
strains of HIV. This IBS also impairs the budding of CD63 and several other viral
and nonviral EMV proteins. The IBS does not prevent cargo delivery to the plasma 
membrane, a major site of EMV and virus budding. However, the IBS does inhibit an
interaction between EMV cargo proteins and VPS4B, a component of the endosomal
sorting complexes required for transport (ESCRT) machinery. Taken together, these
results demonstrate that inhibitory signals can block protein and virus budding, 
raise the possibility that the ESCRT machinery plays a role in EMV biogenesis,
and shed new light on the role of the p6 domain and PTAP motif in the biogenesis 
of HIV particles.

PMCID: PMC3057706
PMID: 21248205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Exp Parasitol. 2011 Apr;127(4):784-8. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2010.12.001. Epub
2011 Jan 11.

Identification and characterization of myeloma-associated antigens in Trichinella
spiralis.

Gong P(1), Zhang J, Cao L, Nan Z, Li J, Yang J, Fang H, Jiao H, Jiang T, Su L,
Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University, 5333
Xi'an Road, Changchun 130062, China.

To investigate the presence of myeloma-associated antigens in Trichinella
spiralis and their anti-tumor effect, cross-immune responses between antigens of 
the myeloma cell SP2/0 versus positive sera to T. spiralis, and antigens of T.
spiralis versus positive sera to myeloma cell SP2/0 were determined using T.
spiralis and myeloma specific enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA). The
myeloma-associated antigens in T. spiralis were separated by ultrafiltration and 
2-D electrophoresis, and the amino acid sequences and molecular weights were
determined by spectrometry. An obvious reaction was found between a 33 kDa
antigen and positive sera, and the major component of the antigen was tropomyosin
(TM), which is an surface acidic protein with 284 amino acids. Mice were
immunized with TM to determine the anti-tumor effect in vivo. The results showed 
that CD4(+), CD8(+) T lymphocyte, and CD19(+) B lymphocyte were significantly
increased (P<0.05). The anti-tumor effects were significantly different between
mice immunized with the antigens or adjuvant alone (P<0.05), while the difference
between mice immunized with antigens and whole T. spiralis was not significant
(P>0.05). The results indicated that TM identified in this study may play a role 
in eliciting cross-protective immunity.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21232537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Forensic Sci. 2011 Jan;56 Suppl 1:S172-5. doi:
10.1111/j.1556-4029.2010.01589.x. Epub 2010 Oct 19.

Full STR profile of a 67-year-old bone found in a fresh water lake.

Courts C(1), Madea B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Forensic Medicine, University of Bonn, Germany.
cornelius.courts@uni-bonn.de

DNA extraction from and DNA typing of fresh water-exposed aged bone specimens
poses a challenging task and is not very well examined. This study presents a new
method to extract typable DNA from such problematic bone specimens. The procedure
comprises low-heat drilling and cryogrinding, mild lysis conditions, and
silica-column-based DNA cleaning. DNA quantity is assessed by quantitative PCR
prior to short tandem repeat (STR) amplification. The procedure was employed with
a 67-year-old tibia bone fragment recovered from a fresh water lake and succeeded
to produce a full STR profile using the MPX-SP1 and MPX-SP2 mini-STR kits and a
partial profile with 12 successfully amplified STRs using the Identifiler STR
kit. The new method for the extraction of DNA from aged fresh water-exposed bone 
specimens presented herein was successfully applied to prepare DNA of sufficient 
quality and quantity to generate a full STR profile.

© 2010 American Academy of Forensic Sciences.

PMID: 21198612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Org Chem. 2011 Feb 4;76(3):882-93. doi: 10.1021/jo102175f. Epub 2011 Jan 11.

Pd/PR3-catalyzed cross-coupling of aromatic carboxylic acids with
electron-deficient polyfluoroarenes via combination of decarboxylation with sp2
C-H cleavage.

Zhao H(1), Wei Y, Xu J, Kan J, Su W, Hong M.

Author information: 
(1)Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Fuzhou, P R China.

By using Pd(TFA)(2)/PCy(3) as a catalyst, a broad range of aromatic carboxylic
acids, including heteroaromatic carboxylic acids, efficiently underwent
decarboxylative coupling with an array of polyfluoroarenes in the presence of
stoichiometric amount of silver salts to generate biaryls. Silver salts were
adjusted to the reactivity of aromatic carboxylic acids to efficiently suppress
the protodecarboxylation and therefore improve decarboxylative cross-couplings.
It was established that the palladium complex containing the PCy(3) ligand was
capable of catalyzing the decarboxylation of electron-rich aromatic carboxylic
acids, and silver salts promoted the decarboxylation of both electron-rich and
-deficient ones. To explain the two different decarboxylation processes, two
possible reaction pathways are proposed, which were further supported by the
facts that the stoichiometric arylpalladium complex can directly arylate
pentafluorobenzene in the presence of PCy(3) and the arylpalladium complex can
catalyze the decarboxylative coupling of 2,4-dimethoxybenzoic acid with
pentafluorobenzene. The kinetic isotope effect of 4.0 clearly showed that the C-H
bond cleavage of polyfluoroarenes is involved in the rate-determining step.

PMID: 21222475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Jan;27(1):74-7.

[Preparation of anti-ASNS monoclonal antibody and detection of ASNS expression in
tumor].

[Article in Chinese]

Shi W(1), Zhang QY, Jia ZS, Xu JJ, Wang YM, Yong WB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Peking University School of Oncology,
Beijing Cancer Hospital & Institute, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and
Translational Research(Ministry of Education), Beijing 100142, China.

AIM: To prepare and characterize monoclonal antibodies against ASNS for the
research of ASNS function.
METHODS: To induce the expression of the fusion protein MS2-ASNS, Hybridomas were
generated by the fusion with Sp2/0 myelomas and spleen cells, which were obtained
from mice immunized with MS2-ASNS recombinant proteins. The specificity and titer
of mAb were identified by ELISA methods, and then used to detect the affinity of 
ASNS in cancer cells by Western blot. The expression of ASNS was detected in some
cancer lines and tissues by IHC.
RESULTS: Two hybridoma cell lines F4-15 and F4-16, which stably secret anti-ASNS 
mAbs were produced. Both cell lines produce IgG2a monoclonal antibody. ELISA
demonstrated that anti-ASNS mAbs had high specificity and titer. The titers of
anti-ASNS mAbs produced by hybridoma cell lines were up to 1:5×10(5);. Western
blot demonstrated that ASNS was expressed in some cancer lines, including human
lymphoma cell line K562 and cervical cancer cell line HeLa. The expression of
ASNS was also detected by IHC in several tumor cell lines, such as stomach cancer
cell line SGC-7901 and liver cancer cell lines SMMC-7721, BEL-7402, HepG2 as well
as lung and esophageal carcinoma tissue.
CONCLUSION: The monoclonal antibodies against ASNS have been successfully
prepared, which provides a tool for the following research of nasal type NK/T
cell lymphoma.

PMID: 21208570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Front Biosci (Schol Ed). 2011 Jan 1;3:518-40.

Boron-doped diamond nano/microelectrodes for biosensing and in vitro
measurements.

Dong H(1), Wang S, Galligan JJ, Swain GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology and Cancer Research Center, University of California,
Davis, CA 95616, USA. hdong@ucdavis.edu

Since the fabrication of the first diamond electrode in the mid 1980s, repid
progress has been made on the development and application of this new type of
electrode material. Boron-doped diamond (BDD) electrodes exhibit outstanding
properties compared to oxygen-containing sp2 carbon electrodes. These properties 
make BDD electrodes an ideal choice for use in complex samples. In recent years, 
BDD microelectrodes have been applied to in vitro measurements of biological
molecules in tissues and cells. This review will summarize recent progress in the
development and applications of BDD electrodes in bio-sensing and in vitro
measurements of biomolecules. In the first section, the methods for BDD diamond
film deposition and BDD microelectrodes preparation are described. This is
followed by a description and discussion of several approaches for
characterization of the BDD electrode surface structure, morphology, and
electrochemical activity. Further, application of BDD microelectrodes for use in 
the in vitro analysis of norepinephrine (NE), serotonin (5-HT), nitric oxide
(NO), histamine, and adenosine from tissues are summarized and finally some of
the remaining challenges are discussed.

PMCID: PMC4331346
PMID: 21196394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Int J Ophthalmol. 2011;4(4):422-32. doi: 10.3980/j.issn.2222-3959.2011.04.20.
Epub 2011 Aug 18.

Epidemiology and molecular genetics of congenital cataracts.

Yi J(1), Yun J, Li ZK, Xu CT, Pan BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Endocrine Surgery, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military
Medical University, Xi'an 710032, Shaanxi Province, China.

Congenital cataract is a crystallin severe blinding disease and genetic factors
in disease development are important. Crystallin growth is under a combination of
genes and their products in time and space to complete the coordination role of
the guidance. Congenital cataract-related genes, included crystallin protein gene
(CRYAA, CRYAB, CRYBA1/A3, CRYBA4, CRYBB1, CRYBB2, CRYBB3, CRYGC, CRYGD, CRYGS),
gap junction channel protein gene (GJA1, GJA3, GJA8), membrane protein gene
(GJA3, GJA8, MIP, LIM2), cytoskeletal protein gene (BF-SP2), transcription factor
genes (HSF4, MAF, PITX3, PAX6), ferritin light chain gene (FTL), fibroblast
growth factor (FGF) and so on. Currently, there are about 39 genetic loci
isolated to which primary cataracts have been mapped, although the number is
constantly increasing and depends to some extent on definition. We summarized the
recent advances on epidemiology and genetic locations of congenital cataract in
this review.

PMCID: PMC3340856
PMID: 22553694  [PubMed]


196. Analyst. 2011 Mar 7;136(5):1013-7. doi: 10.1039/c0an00868k. Epub 2010 Dec 22.

Preparation of a specific monoclonal antibody to asiaticoside for the development
of an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.

Juengwatanatrakul T(1), Sritularak B, Amornnopparattanakul P, Tassanawat P,
Putalun W, Tanaka H, Morimoto S.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ubon Ratchathani University, Ubon
Ratchathani, 34190, Thailand.

Asiaticoside (AS), the major active component of Centella asiatica (L.) Urban, is
used as a memory enhancer and for wound healing. We have successfully prepared
monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) against AS, and developed an enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) system for its determination. AS was conjugated to
the carrier protein bovine serum albumin (BSA), which acted as an immunogen. In
order to confirm its immunogenicity, the ratio of hapten in the AS-BSA conjugate 
was determined by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time of flight mass
spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS). After immunization, hybridomas secreting MAbs
against AS were produced by fusing splenocytes with the mouse myeloma cell line, 
SP2/0-Ag14. After the screening, anti-asiaticoside MAb 2B4 was obtained. Weak
cross-reactivities occurred with madecassoside (7.08%), but no cross-reactivities
were observed with other related triterpenoid glycosides (<0.01%). The assay was 
suitable for quantitating AS in the range of 0.78 to 50 µg mL(-1). A good
correlation of AS concentrations in crude extracts of C. asiatica between ELISA
and HPLC methods was obtained (r(2) = 0.999). The contents of AS in various
cultivated C. asiatica samples were assayed by the newly established ELISA. The
recovery rates of AS in the samples were in the range of 95-103% with
coefficients of variation of <10%. The intra- and inter-assay variations were 3.9
and 4.5%, respectively. The ELISA method described should prove useful as an
analytical tool for quality control and standardization of medicinal plants and
pharmaceutical products containing AS.

PMID: 21180694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Injury. 2011 Apr;42(4):381-4. doi: 10.1016/j.injury.2010.10.006. Epub 2010 Dec 9.

Costs and coding--free-flap reconstruction in lower-limb trauma.

Townley WA(1), Urbanska C, Dunn RL, Khan U.

Author information: 
(1)Odstock Centre for Burns, Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Salisbury
Foundation Trust, Salisbury SP2 8BJ, UK. willtownley@hotmail.com

INTRODUCTION: The provision of a complex lower-limb trauma service has
significant resource implications. This financial burden is not recognised by the
current fixed price tariff system (Payment by Results). The aim of this study was
to compare the actual costs of treatment with reimbursement.
METHODS: We conducted a prospective study in two large regional plastic surgery
centres in the UK, Salisbury Foundation Trust (SFT) and the Frenchay Hospital,
Bristol (FH). The total cost of treatment for consecutive patients with complex
lower limb trauma requiring free tissue transfer was calculated and compared with
the Health Resource Group (HRG) tariff.
RESULTS: A cost analysis was performed on 20 patients (10 Salisbury, 10 Frenchay)
with open tibial fractures (all grade IIIb Gustillo & Anderson) requiring
free-flap reconstruction (15 anterolateral thigh (ALT) flaps, one serratus, one
latissimus dorsi (LD), one scapular and two gracilis). The mean treatment cost of
performing a free flap was £12792 ± £970 SEM (SFT) and £10953 ± £650 (FH). In
both centres, the cost was more than double the HRG tariff (£4220 SFT, £4892 FH, 
p < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Our study highlights the considerable disparity between the cost of 
managing patients with severe lower-limb trauma and the remuneration by Primary
Care Trusts (PCTs). Accurate cost analysis of these cases will allow hospital
trusts to negotiate appropriate tariffs with PCTs and develop services, which are
cost neutral.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21145546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2010 Nov;10(11):7036-9.

Magnetic properties of Al-SiC co-sputtered films grown by radio frequency
sputtering.

Liu X(1), Zhen C, Liu Y, Liu S, Zhou H, Li X, Hou D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physics, Hebei Advanced Thin Films Laboratory, Hebei Normal
University, Shijiazhuang 050016, China.

Room-temperature ferromagnetism was observed in the Al-SiC co-sputtered films
fabricated by radio frequency (RF) sputtering. When the annealing temperature
(Ta) was increased from 800 to 1100 degrees C, the ferromagnetic ordering was
present with the formation of Al-C bonds. Both annealing and Al-doped the films
can improve the crystallization of SiC and induce long-range magnetic order in
the Al-SiC co-sputtered films. Experiments show that the Al solubility was less
than 0.8 at% in SiC matrix. As a possible explanation for the existence of local 
magnetic moment in Al-doped SiC, unpaired spins arise in a conversion from sp3 to
the sp3/sp2 hybridization. The partial Si-C bonds in SiC were converted to Al-C
bonds when the trivalent aluminum entered into Si sites. Al atoms introduce some 
net spins in Al doped film with the calculated integrated spin density 0.467
microB. The structural defects produced by Al-doping have provided an exciting
possibility of nonmagnetic atoms-doped to control the spin moments and induce
ferromagnetism in wide-gap semiconductor.

PMID: 21137860  [PubMed]


199. Chem Commun (Camb). 2011 Feb 14;47(6):1902-4. doi: 10.1039/c0cc04581k. Epub 2010 
Dec 3.

Solvent-controlled switch of selectivity between sp2 and sp3 C-H bond activation 
by platinum(II).

Garner AW(1), Harris CF, Vezzu DA, Pike RD, Huo S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, East Carolina University, Greenville, NC 27858, USA.

By merely changing the solvent, two different cyclometalated platinum complexes
resulted from either sp(2) or sp(3) C-H bond activation can be prepared
selectively. For example, the reaction of L1 with K(2)PtCl(4) in MeCN gave
exclusively kinetic product 1a, while the reaction in AcOH was thermodynamically 
controlled and produced predominantly 1b.

PMID: 21127816  [PubMed]


200. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2010 Dec;2(12):3461-6. doi: 10.1021/am100900q. Epub
2010 Nov 29.

Simple photoreduction of graphene oxide nanosheet under mild conditions.

Matsumoto Y(1), Koinuma M, Kim SY, Watanabe Y, Taniguchi T, Hatakeyama K,
Tateishi H, Ida S.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Science and Technology, Kumamoto University, 2-39-1
Kurokami, Kumamoto, 860-8555, Japan. yasumi@gpo.kumamoto-u.ac.jp

Graphene oxide (GO) nanosheets were reduced by UV irradiation in H2 or N2 under
mild conditions (at room temperature) without a photocatalyst. Photoreduction
proceeded even in an aqueous suspension of nanosheets. The GO nanosheets reduced 
by this method were analyzed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and Raman
spectroscopy. It was found that epoxy groups attached to the interiors of
aromatic domains of the GO nanosheet were destroyed during UV irradiation to form
relatively large sp2 islands resulting in a high conductivity. I-V curves were
measured by conductive atomic force microscopy (AFM; perpendicular to a single
nanosheet) and a two-electrode system (parallel to the nanosheet). They revealed 
that photoreduced GO nanosheets have high conductivities, whereas nonreduced GO
nanosheets are nearly insulating. Ag+ adsorbed on GO nanosheets promoted the
photoreduction. This photoreduction method was very useful for photopatterning a 
conducting section of micrometer size on insulating GO. The developed
photoreduction process based on a photoreaction will extend the applications of
GO to many fields because it can be performed in mild conditions without a
photocatalyst.

PMID: 21114256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Cryobiology. 2011 Feb;62(1):22-31. doi: 10.1016/j.cryobiol.2010.11.005. Epub 2010
Nov 26.

Effect of cryopreservation on fish sperm subpopulations.

Beirão J(1), Cabrita E, Pérez-Cerezales S, Martínez-Páramo S, Herráez MP.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biology, University of León, 24071
León, Spain. jbeis@unileon.es

The evaluation of the motility data obtained with a CASA system, applying a
Two-Step Cluster analysis, identified in seabream sperm 3 different sperm
subpopulations that correlated differently with embryo hatching rates. Hence, we 
designed an experiment to understand the effect of the application of different
cryopreservation protocols in these sperm motility-based subpopulations. We
analyzed Sparus aurata frozen/thawed semen motility 15, 30, 45 and 60s after
activation, using CASA software. Different protocols were applied for
cryopreservation: three different cryoprotectants (Dimethyl Sulfoxide (Me(2)SO), 
Ethylene Glycol (EG) and Propylene Glycol (PG)) each at two different
concentrations and two packaging volumes (0.5ml straws, and 1.8ml cryovials) were
tested. Different freezing rates were evaluated corresponding to 1, 2, 3, 4 and
8cm above the liquid nitrogen surface for the straws and 1, 2 and 4cm for the
cryovials. Motility parameters rendered by CASA were treated with a Two-Step
Cluster analysis. Three different subpopulations were obtained: SP1 - slow
non-linear spermatozoa, SP2 - slow linear spermatozoa and SP3 - fast linear
spermatozoa. We considered SP3 as the subpopulation of interest and focused
further analyses on it. Generally, SP3 was the best represented subpopulation 15s
after activation and was also the one showing a greater decrease in time, being
the least represented after 60s. According to the applied univariate general
linear model, samples frozen in straws with 5% Me(2)SO and in cryovials with 10% 
Me(2)SO at 2 and 1cm from the LN(2,) respectively, produced the best results
(closer to the control). Clustering analysis allowed the detection of fish sperm 
subpopulations according to their motility pattern and showed that sperm
composition in terms of subpopulations was differentially affected by the
cryopreservation protocol depending on the cryoprotectant used, freezing rates
and packaging systems.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21112321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Ophthalmology. 2011 Feb;118(2):368-75. doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2010.06.016. Epub
2010 Nov 20.

Genome-wide association studies reveal genetic variants in CTNND2 for high myopia
in Singapore Chinese.

Li YJ(1), Goh L, Khor CC, Fan Q, Yu M, Han S, Sim X, Ong RT, Wong TY, Vithana EN,
Yap E, Nakanishi H, Matsuda F, Ohno-Matsui K, Yoshimura N, Seielstad M, Tai ES,
Young TL, Saw SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine susceptibility genes for high myopia in Singaporean
Chinese.
DESIGN: A meta-analysis of 2 genome-wide association (GWA) datasets in Chinese
and a follow-up replication cohort in Japanese.
PARTICIPANTS AND CONTROLS: Two independent datasets of Singaporean Chinese
individuals aged 10 to 12 years (Singapore Cohort Study of the Risk factors for
Myopia [SCORM]: cases = 65, controls = 238) and more than 21 years (Singapore
Prospective Study Program [SP2]: cases = 222, controls = 435) for GWA studies,
and a Japanese dataset aged more than 20 years (cases = 959, controls = 2128) for
replication.
METHODS: Genomic DNA samples from SCORM and SP2 were genotyped using various
Illumina Beadarray platforms (>HumanHap 500). Single-locus association tests were
conducted for each dataset with meta-analysis using pooled z-scores. The
top-ranked genetic markers were examined for replication in the Japanese dataset.
Fisher P was calculated for the combined analysis of all 3 cohorts.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: High myopia, defined by spherical equivalent (SE) = -6.00 
diopters (D); controls defined by SE between -0.50 and +1.00 D.
RESULTS: Two SNPs (rs12716080 and rs6885224) in the gene CTNND2 on chromosome
5p15 ranked top in the meta-analysis of our Chinese datasets (meta P = 1.14 ×
10(-5) and meta P = 1.51 × 10(-5), respectively) with strong supporting evidence 
in each individual dataset analysis (max P = 1.85 × 10(-4) in SCORM: max P = 8.8 
× 10(-3) in SP2). Evidence of replication was observed in the Japanese dataset
for rs6885224 (P = 0.035, meta P of 3 datasets: 7.84 × 10(-6)).
CONCLUSIONS: This study identified a strong association of CTNND2 for high myopia
in Asian datasets. The CTNND2 gene maps to a known high myopia linkage region on 
chromosome 5p15.

Copyright © 2011 American Academy of Ophthalmology. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3052933
PMID: 21095009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Nanoscale. 2011 Feb;3(2):731-40. doi: 10.1039/c0nr00718h. Epub 2010 Nov 16.

Made-to-order nanocarbons through deterministic plasma nanotechnology.

Ren Y(1), Xu S, Rider AE, Ostrikov KK.

Author information: 
(1)Plasma Sources and Applications Centre, NIE and Institute of Advanced Studies,
Nanyang Technological University, 1 Nanyang Walk, 637616, Singapore.

Through a combinatorial approach involving experimental measurement and plasma
modelling, it is shown that a high degree of control over diamond-like nanocarbon
film sp3/sp2 ratio (and hence film properties) may be exercised, starting at the 
level of electrons (through modification of the plasma electron energy
distribution function). Hydrogenated amorphous carbon nanoparticle films with
high percentages of diamond-like bonds are grown using a middle-frequency (2 MHz)
inductively coupled Ar+CH4 plasma. The sp3 fractions measured by X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and Raman spectroscopy in the thin films are
explained qualitatively using sp3/sp2 ratios 1) derived from calculated sp3 and
sp2 hybridized precursor species densities in a global plasma discharge model and
2) measured experimentally. It is shown that at high discharge power and lower
CH4 concentrations, the sp3/sp2 fraction is higher. Our results suggest that a
combination of predictive modeling and experimental studies is instrumental to
achieve deterministically grown made-to-order diamond-like nanocarbons suitable
for a variety of applications spanning from nano-magnetic resonance imaging to
spin-flip quantum information devices. This deterministic approach can be
extended to graphene, carbon nanotips, nanodiamond and other nanocarbon materials
for a variety of applications.

PMID: 21079877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Chembiochem. 2010 Nov 22;11(17):2453-64. doi: 10.1002/cbic.201000323.

A Fluorescent sp2-iminosugar with pharmacological chaperone activity for gaucher 
disease: synthesis and intracellular distribution studies.

Luan Z(1), Higaki K, Aguilar-Moncayo M, Li L, Ninomiya H, Nanba E, Ohno K,
García-Moreno MI, Ortiz Mellet C, García Fernández JM, Suzuki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Child Neurology, Institute of Neurological Sciences, Faculty of
Medicine, Tottori University, Nishi-cho, Yonago, 683-8504, Japan.

Gaucher disease (GD) is the most prevalent lysosomal-storage disorder, it is
caused by mutations of acid ß-glucosidase (ß-glucocerebrosidase; ß-Glu).
Recently, we found that bicyclic nojirimycin (NJ) derivatives of the
sp(2)-iminosugar type, including the
6-thio-N'-octyl-(5N,6S)-octyliminomethylidene derivative (6S-NOI-NJ), behaved as 
very selective competitive inhibitors of the lysosomal ß-Glu and exhibited
remarkable chaperone activities for several GD mutations. To obtain information
about the cellular uptake pathway and intracellular distribution of this family
of chaperones, we have synthesized a fluorescent analogue that maintains the
fused piperidine-thiazolidine bicyclic skeleton and incorporates a dansyl group
in the N'-substituent, namely
6-thio-(5N,6S)-[4-(N'-dansylamino)butyliminomethylidene]nojirimycin (6S-NDI-NJ). 
This structural modification does not significantly modify the biological
activity of the glycomimetic as a chemical chaperone. Our study showed that
6S-NDI-NJ is mainly located in lysosome-related organelles in both normal and GD 
fibroblasts, and the fluorescent intensity of 6S-NDI-NJ in the lysosome is
related to the ß-Glu concentration level. 6S-NDI-NJ also can enter cultured
neuronal cells and act as a chaperone. Competitive inhibition studies of
6S-NDI-NJ uptake in fibroblasts showed that high concentrations of D-glucose have
no effect on chaperone internalization, suggesting that it enters the cells
through glucose-transporter-independent mechanisms.

PMID: 21064079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2010 Oct;29(5):409-12. doi: 10.1089/hyb.2010.0031.

Preparation and characterization of neutralizing monoclonal antibodies against
FMDV serotype O with synthetic peptide antigen.

Ma L(1), Liu YS, Ding YZ, Chen HT, Zhou JH, Liu WQ, Wang M, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Virology of Ministry of Agriculture, State Key
Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Lanzhou Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, China.

A short linear peptide was designed according to the antigenic site analysis of
VP1 protein of foot-and-mouth virus (FMDV) serotype O and synthesized as the
peptide immunogen. The peptide, which covers the region from amino acid 133 to
160 of VP1 of FMDV, was linked to the N-terminal cysteine and conjugated with the
carrier protein of keyhole limpet hemocyanin (KLH). Normal 6- to 8-week-old
BALB/c mice were immunized with the 20<U+2009>µg dose conjugated peptide antigen four
times. The splenocytes from the immunized mice were fused with SP2/0 mouse
myeloma cells, and positive hybridomas were selected by indirect enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and subcloned four times with limiting dilution. Five
stable hybridoma cell lines, designated as 4F9, 1B11, 1E10, 1D4, and 4B8, were
obtained. Isotyping of all obtained MAbs indicated that the MAbs of 4F9, 1E10,
and 4B8 belonged to IgG2b; the 1B11 and 1D4 belonged to IgG1 and IgM,
respectively. The micro-neutralization test indicated that the MAbs of 4F9, 4B8, 
and 1B11 were capable of neutralizing FMDV serotype O with neutralization indices
ranging from 1.81 to 2.11. These results suggest that linear synthetic peptide
conjugate can elicit antibodies against native FMDV virus and can be used as an
alternative immunogen for production of MAbs with exact epitope.

PMID: 21050041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Ann R Coll Surg Engl. 2010 Nov;92(8):693-6. doi:
10.1308/003588410X12699663904592.

Management of open tibial fractures - a regional experience.

Townley WA(1), Nguyen DQ, Rooker JC, Dickson JK, Goroszeniuk DZ, Khan MS, Camp D.

Author information: 
(1)Odstock Centre for Burns, Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Salisbury
District Hospital, Salisbury SP2 8BJ, UK. willtownley@hotmail.com

Comment in
    Ann R Coll Surg Engl. 2011 Sep;93(6):494-5.

INTRODUCTION: The treatment of soft-tissue injuries associated with tibial
diaphyseal fractures presents a clinical challenge that is best managed by a
combined plastic and orthopaedic surgery approach. The current study was
undertaken to assess early treatment outcomes and burden of service provision
across five regional plastic surgery units in the South-West of England.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: We conducted a prospective 6-month audit of open tibial
diaphyseal fracture management in five plastic surgery units (Bristol, Exeter,
Plymouth, Salisbury, Swansea) with a collective catchment of 9.2 million people. 
Detailed data were collected on patient demographics, injury pattern, surgical
management and outcome followed to discharge.
RESULTS: The study group consisted of 55 patients (40 male, 15 female).
Twenty-two patients presented directly to the emergency department at the
specialist hospital (primary group), 33 patients were initially managed at a
local hospital (tertiary group). The mean time from injury to soft tissue cover
was significantly less (P < 0.001) in the primary group (3.6 ± 0.8 days) than the
tertiary group (10.8 ± 2.2 days), principally due to a delay in referral in the
latter group (5.4 ± 1.7 days). Cover was achieved with 39 flaps (19 free, 20
local), eight split skin grafts. Nine wounds closed directly or by secondary
intention. There were 11 early complications (20%) including one flap failure and
four infections. The overall mean length of stay was 17.5 ± 2.8 days.
CONCLUSIONS: Multidisciplinary management of severe open tibial diaphyseal may
not be feasible at presentation of injury depending on local hospital specialist 
services available. Our results highlight the need for robust assessment, triage 
and senior orthopaedic review in the early post-injury phase. However, broader
improvements in the management of lower limb trauma will additionally require
further development of combined specialist trauma centres.

PMCID: PMC3229382
PMID: 21047449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Agric Food Chem. 2010 Dec 8;58(23):12137-42. doi: 10.1021/jf101728d. Epub 2010 
Nov 3.

Chemiluminescence evaluation of antioxidant activity and prevention of DNA damage
effect of peptides isolated from soluble eggshell membrane protein hydrolysate.

Huang X(1), Zhou Y, Ma M, Cai Z, Li T.

Author information: 
(1)National R&D Center for Egg Processing, Huazhong Agricultural University, 1
Shizishan Street, Wuhan, Hubei 430070, China.

A new kind of soluble eggshell membrane protein (SEP) was prepared from eggshell 
membrane (ESM). The extraction rate of SEP could rise to 90% by two times,
basically accomplishing the complete utilization of the whole ESM. Five proteases
were employed as hydrolytic enzyme for the preparation of antioxidative peptides 
from SEP, and the antioxidative activities of the hydrolysates were investigated 
using a chemiluminescence method. Among the hydrolysates, alcalase hydrolysates
with the highest free radical scavenging activity were further separated into
three fractions using Sephadex G-25 gel filtration chromatography of the 4 h
hydrolysate (SP1, SP2, and SP3). Among these three fractions, SP2 with an average
molecular weight of 618.86 Da possessed the strongest fraction of scavenging
activity. The IC50 values of the superoxide radicals, hydroxyl scavenging
activities, and protective effect on DNA damage caused by hydroxyl radicals
generated were 0.10, 0.18, and 0.95 mg/mL, respectively. These results
demonstrate that inexpensive ESM waste could be a new alternative in the
production of antioxidative peptides.

PMID: 21047127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Oncol Lett. 2010 Nov;1(6):999-1004. Epub 2010 Sep 8.

Changes in 2'-deoxycytidine levels in various tissues of tumor-bearing mice.

Iwazaki A(1), Imai K, Nakanishi K, Yoshioka M.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Setsunan University, Osaka 573-0101,
Japan.

The nucleoside 2'-deoxycytidine (dCyd) increases in the plasma of cancer patients
with poor prognoses. 5-fluorouracil (5FU) is one of the anti-cancer agents used
in chemotherapy for patients whose plasma dCyd is elevated. We examined the free 
dCyd level in various tissues of mice, with and without tumors, and in mice with 
and without the administration of 5FU or of dCyd, and investigated the effects of
dCyd in tumor-bearing animals. SP2/0-Ag14 mouse myeloma cells were transplanted
subcutaneously into mice and 5FU or dCyd was administered intraperitoneally. Free
dCyd was measured in blood and tissues by HPLC at two time points, once when
mouse body weight was maximally decreased (1 day after the last administration of
5FU, day 16) and again when it returned to control level at 1 week after the last
5FU treatment (day 22). Results showed that in tumor-bearing mice, the level of
dCyd (per g wet weight) increased in the spleen. The change in liver weight
caused by the administration of 5FU correlated with the level of dCyd in the
liver. Notably, the relative tumor volume and tumor weight was decreased in
dCyd-treated animals in comparison with controls. In conclusion, the levels of
dCyd were markedly altered in the tissues of the reticuloendothelial and
lymphatic systems, such as liver and spleen, and dCyd apparently had the ability 
to inhibit tumor growth in the body.

PMCID: PMC3412452
PMID: 22870101  [PubMed]


209. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 8;5(10):e13245. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013245.

Production and characterisation of a neutralising chimeric antibody against
botulinum neurotoxin A.

Prigent J(1), Mazuet C, Boquet D, Lamourette P, Volland H, Popoff MR, Créminon C,
Simon S.

Author information: 
(1)CEA, iBiTec-S, Service de Pharmacologie et d'Immunoanalyse, CEA Saclay, Gif
sur Yvette, France.

Botulinum neurotoxins, produced by Clostridium botulinum bacteria, are the
causative agent of botulism. This disease only affects a few hundred people each 
year, thus ranking it among the orphan diseases. However, botulinum toxin type A 
(BoNT/A) is the most potent toxin known to man. Due to their potency and ease of 
production, these toxins were classified by the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) as Category A biothreat agents. For several biothreat agents,
like BoNT/A, passive immunotherapy remains the only possible effective treatment 
allowing in vivo neutralization, despite possible major side effects. Recently,
several mouse monoclonal antibodies directed against a recombinant fragment of
BoNT/A were produced in our laboratory and most efficiently neutralised the
neurotoxin. In the present work, the most powerful one, TA12, was selected for
chimerisation. The variable regions of this antibody were thus cloned and fused
with the constant counterparts of human IgG1 (kappa light and gamma 1 heavy
chains). Chimeric antibody production was evaluated in mammalian myeloma cells
(SP2/0-Ag14) and insect cells (Sf9). After purifying the recombinant antibody by 
affinity chromatography, the biochemical properties of chimeric and mouse
antibody were compared. Both have the same very low affinity constant (close to
10 pM) and the chimeric antibody exhibited a similar capacity to its parent
counterpart in neutralising the toxin in vivo. Its strong affinity and high
neutralising potency make this chimeric antibody interesting for immunotherapy
treatment in humans in cases of poisoning, particularly as there is a probable
limitation of the immunological side effects observed with classical polyclonal
antisera from heterologous species.

PMCID: PMC2953832
PMID: 20967241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2010 Oct;30(10):2219-23.

[Preparation and identification of monoclonal antibodies against Chlamydia
trachomatis Tarp protein].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang J(1), Zhang YQ, Zhong GM, Yu P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Basic Medical School of Central South University,
Changsha 410078, China. jiewang0988@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To obtain monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) against Chlamydia trachomatis
Tarp protein.
METHODS: Chlamydia trachomatis serovar D recombinant Tarp fusion protein was
cloned and expressed. Balb/c mice were immunized with recombinant Tarp fusion
protein, and the spleen cells of the immunized mice were fused with SP2/0 mouse
myeloma cells. The hybridoma cell lines secreting mAbs against Tarp protein were 
screened by an indirect immunofluorescence assay and subcloned by limiting
dilution culture. The specificities of these mAbs to Tarp were determined by
ELISA, and their isotype and chlamydial species specificity identified by an
indirect immunofluorescence assay.
RESULTS: Recombinant GST-Tarp fusion protein with a relative molecular mass of
about 136 000 was successfully cloned and expressed. Seven hybridoma cell lines
stably secreting specific mAbs against Tarp protein were obtained. All the 7 mAbs
reacted strongly with Tarp protein but not with other chlamydial proteins. Two
mAbs were identified to belong to IgG2a isotype and the other 5 to IgG1 isotype. 
All the 7 mAbs reacted strongly with chlamydia serovar A, D, and L2, but not with
MoPn, 6BC, or AR39.
CONCLUSION: The highly specific mAbs against Tarp protein have been obtained to
facilitate further study of the structure and function of Chlamydia Tarp protein.

PMID: 20965809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Phys Chem A. 2010 Oct 28;114(42):11252-62. doi: 10.1021/jp103435d.

From synchronous to sequential double proton transfer: quantum dynamics
simulations for the model porphine.

Accardi A(1), Barth I, Kühn O, Manz J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut fu¨r Chemie und Biochemie, Freie Universita¨t Berlin, Takustr. 3,
14195 Berlin, Germany.

Quantum dynamics simulations of double proton transfer (DPT) in the model
porphine, starting from a nonequilibrium initial state, demonstrate that a switch
from synchronous (or concerted) to sequential (or stepwise or successive)
breaking and making of two bonds is possible. For this proof of principle, we
employ the simple model of Smedarchina, Z.; Siebrand, W.; Ferna´ndez-Ramos, A. J.
Chem. Phys. 2007, 127, 174513, with reasonable definition for the domains D for
the reactant R, the product P, the saddle point SP2 which is crossed during
synchronous DPT, and two intermediates I = I(1) + I(2) for two alternative routes
of sequential DPT. The wavepacket dynamics is analyzed in terms of various
properties, from qualitative conclusions based on the patterns of the densities
and flux densities, until quantitative results for the time evolutions of the
populations or probabilities P(D)(t) of the domains D = R, P, SP2, and I, and the
associated net fluxes F(D)(t) as well as the domain-to-domain (DTD) fluxes
F(D1,D2) between neighboring domains D1 and D2. Accordingly, the initial
synchronous mechanism of the first forward reaction is due to the directions of
various momenta, which are imposed on the wavepacket by the L-shaped part of the 
steep repulsive wall of the potential energy surface (PES), close to the minimum 
for the reactant. At the same time, these momenta cause initial squeezing
followed by rapid dispersion of the representative wavepacket. The switch from
the synchronous to sequential mechanism is called indirect, because it is
mediated by two effects: First, the wavepacket dispersion; second, relief
reflections of the broadened wavepacket from wide regions of the inverse L-shaped
steep repulsive wall of the PES close to the minimum for the product, preferably 
to the domains I = I(1) + I(2) for the sequential DPT during the first back
reaction, and also during the second forward reaction, etc. Our analysis also
discovers a variety of minor effects, such as direct switch of the mechanisms, as
well as damped oscillations in the net fluxes and populations due to
compensations of partially overlapping DTD fluxes.

PMID: 20961160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Cancer Res. 2010 Nov 1;70(21):8507-16. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1213. Epub
2010 Oct 19.

Overexpression of transcription factor sp2 inhibits epidermal differentiation and
increases susceptibility to wound- and carcinogen-induced tumorigenesis.

Kim TH(1), Chiera SL, Linder KE, Trempus CS, Smart RC, Horowitz JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biomedical Sciences, Center for Comparative Medicine
and Translational Research, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North
Carolina 27606, USA.

Sp proteins are evolutionarily conserved transcription factors required for the
expression of a wide variety of genes that are critical for development and cell 
cycle progression. Deregulated expression of certain Sp proteins is associated
with the formation of a variety of human tumors; however, direct evidence that
any given Sp protein is oncogenic has been lacking. Here, we report that Sp2
protein abundance in mice increases in concert with the progression of
carcinogen-induced murine squamous cell carcinomas. Transgenic mice specifically 
overexpressing murine Sp2 in epidermal basal keratinocytes were highly
susceptible to wound- and carcinogen-induced papillomagenesis. Transgenic animals
that were homozygous rather than hemizygous for the Sp2 transgene exhibited a
striking arrest in the epidermal differentiation program, perishing within 2
weeks of birth. Our results directly support the likelihood that Sp2
overexpression occurring in various human cancers has significant functional
effect.

©2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC2970695
PMID: 20959487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2010 Dec;68(12):2980-5. doi: 10.1016/j.joms.2010.05.026. 
Epub 2010 Oct 14.

Lateral cortical bone thickness of human mandibles in region of mental foramen.

Fernandes AC(1), Rossi MA, Schaffner IS, Machado LA, Sampaio AA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Ciências da Vida, Universidade do Estado da Bahia, Salvador,
Bahia, Brazil. atson@uneb.br

PURPOSE: We sought to verify the cortical thickness and presence of tooth roots
and inferior alveolar canal where miniplates are placed using the Champy
technique to treat parasymphyseal fractures between the canine and premolar. We
also studied these anatomic features at the same level anteriorly and posteriorly
to the mental foramen.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 80 dry, normal adult dentate human
hemimandibles (40 male and 40 female) were studied. Verification was performed at
3 levels-above (S), below (I), and at the same height as the mental foramen (F). 
At each level, the thickness and proximity of the tooth roots and inferior
alveolar canal were checked at 4 points; two anteriorly (4.5 and 9 mm) and 2
posteriorly (4.5 and 9 mm) to the mental foramen.
RESULTS: The cortical bone was significantly thicker at level F (Fa2, 2.37 mm;
Fa1, 2.43 mm; Fp1, 2.86 mm; Fp2, 2.89 mm) than the corresponding level S points
(Sa2, 2.00 mm; Sa1, 2.11 mm; Sp1, 2.30 mm; Sp2, 2.45 mm) and level I points (Ia2,
2.11 mm; Ia1, 2.17 mm; Ip1, 2.39 mm; Ip2, 2.43 mm). Regarding the thickness and
risk of injury, no difference was found between the points at levels S and I,
where the miniplates are normally fixed with monocortical screws. No relationship
was seen between the points at level F and the tooth roots or inferior alveolar
canal. In contrast, a relationship between the points at level S and the tooth
root and between the points at level I and the inferior alveolar canal was found.
CONCLUSIONS: Above and below the mental foramen, the cortical bone for miniscrew 
anchorage was up to 3 mm thick. At the level of the foramen, the cortical plate
will provide better anchorage and the insertion of miniscrews will be free of any
risk of injuring the tooth roots or inferior alveolar canal.

Copyright © 2010 American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20950913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Water Sci Technol. 2010;62(7):1526-35. doi: 10.2166/wst.2010.936.

Electro-coagulation treatment efficiency of graphite, iron and aluminum
electrodes using alum and wood ash electrolytes on a Kraft pulp and paper mill
effluent.

Orori OB(1), Etiégni L, Senelwa K, Mwamburi MM, Balozi KB, Barisa GK, Omutange
ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forestry and Wood Science, Moi University, Eldoret 30100, Kenya.
benorori@yahoo.com

Specific power consumption and reduction of BOD, COD, TS, pH, and chemical
elements were used to determine the treatment efficiency of Fe, graphite and Al
electrodes with alum and wood ash as supporting electrolytes on the effluent from
a Kraft pulp and paper mill in Kenya. Five sampling points were selected along
mill's effluent treatment system: primary settling tank (SP1), first aerated
lagoon (SP2), second aerated lagoon (SP3), stabilization pond (SP4), and at
discharge point (SP5). Operating costs were also compared between treatments.
Graphite electrodes combined with alum showed the lowest power consumption (0.5
to 3.9 mWh/m³), followed by Al and Fe. All the electrodes reduced color from a
maximum of 3,200°H to the minimum local standard of 15°H. However Al electrode
with alum was the most effective method for BOD and COD reduction by over 60% and
58.8% respectively and generated less sludge at all sampling points. The cost of 
treatment was lowest with graphite electrode (US$0.006 to 0.0008 per m³ of
effluent), but highest with Al electrodes combined with wood ash (US$31.74 to
8.34 per m³). Further study is required for the effectiveness of increasing the
concentration of wood ash leachate at higher concentration and current density.

PMID: 20935369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Bioorg Med Chem. 2010 Nov 1;18(21):7439-45. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2010.09.003. Epub 
2010 Sep 7.

Fluorescent-tagged sp2-iminosugars with potent ß-glucosidase inhibitory activity.

Aguilar-Moncayo M(1), García-Moreno MI, Stütz AE, García Fernández JM, Wrodnigg
TM, Ortiz Mellet C.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Orgánica, Facultad de Química, Universidad de Sevilla,
Apartado 553, E-41012 Sevilla, Spain.

New fluorescently-labelled sp(2)-iminosugars based on the
5N,6S-[N'-(4-aminobutyl)iminomethylidene]-6-thionojirimycin skeleton have been
synthesized as photoprobes to monitor glycosidase binding. Dansyl, dapoxyl and
coumarin fluorophores were appended to the terminal amino group at the
N'-substituent by either sulfonamide or amide bridging reaction. All the
conjugates behaved as strong (low micromolar to nanomolar) and selective
inhibitors of ß-glucosidases (almonds and bovine liver) and naringinase, in
agreement with the inhibition pattern previously encountered for related
iso(thio)urea-type bicyclic sp(2)-iminosugars. The presence of the fluorescent
probe allows real-time and continuous monitoring of ß-glucosidase inhibition by
fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET), taking advantage of the intrinsic 
tryptophan-associated fluorescence of the protein.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20889348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Bone Joint Surg Br. 2010 Oct;92(10):1460-5. doi: 10.1302/0301-620X.92B10.22749.

Biomechanical evaluation of two reconstruction techniques for posterolateral
instability of the knee.

Rauh PB(1), Clancy WG Jr, Jasper LE, Curl LA, Belkoff S, Moorman CT 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, UK.

We evaluated two reconstruction techniques for a simulated posterolateral corner 
injury on ten pairs of cadaver knees. Specimens were mounted at 30° and 90° of
knee flexion to record external rotation and varus movement. Instability was
created by transversely sectioning the lateral collateral ligament at its
midpoint and the popliteus tendon was released at the lateral femoral condyle.
The left knee was randomly assigned for reconstruction using either a combined or
fibula-based treatment with the right knee receiving the other. After sectioning,
laxity increased in all the specimens. Each technique restored external rotatory 
and varus stability at both flexion angles to levels similar to the intact
condition. For the fibula-based reconstruction method, varus laxity at 30° of
knee flexion did not differ from the intact state, but was significantly less
than after the combined method. Both the fibula-based and combined posterolateral
reconstruction techniques are equally effective in restoring stability following 
the simulated injury.

PMID: 20884989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Bone Joint Surg Br. 2010 Oct;92(10):1351-5. doi: 10.1302/0301-620X.92B10.24054.

The concentric all-polyethylene Exeter acetabular component in primary total hip 
replacement.

Veitch SW(1), Whitehouse SL, Howell JR, Hubble MJ, Gie GA, Timperley AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Salisbury District Hospital, Odstock Road, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, UK.
swveitch@doctors.org.uk

We report the outcome of the flangeless, cemented all-polyethylene Exeter
acetabular component at a mean of 14.6 years (10 to 17) after operation. Of the
263 hips in 243 patients, 122 prostheses are still in situ; 112 patients (119
hips) have died, 18 hips have been revised, and three patients (four hips) were
lost to follow-up. Radiographs at the final review were available for 110 of the 
122 surviving hips. There were acetabular radiolucent lines in 54 hips (49%). Two
acetabular components had migrated but neither patient required revision. The
Kaplan-Meier survivorship at 15 years with 61 hips at risk with revision for any 
cause as the endpoint was 89.9% (95% confidence interval (CI) 84.6 to 95.2) and
for aseptic loosening of the acetabular component or lysis 91.7% (95% CI 86.6 to 
96.8). In 210 hips with a diagnosis of primary osteoarthritis, survivorship with 
revision for any cause as the endpoint was 93.2% (95% CI 88.1 to 98.3), and for
aseptic loosening of the acetabular component 95.0% (95% CI 90.3 to 99.7). The
cemented all-polyethylene Exeter acetabular component has an excellent long-term 
survivorship.

PMID: 20884970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2010 Jun;18(6):464-74.

Problem solving therapy for subthreshold depression in home healthcare patients
with cardiovascular disease.

Gellis ZD(1), Bruce ML.

Author information: 
(1)School of Social Policy & Practice, Center for Mental Health and Aging,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. zgellis@sp2.upenn.edu

BACKGROUND: Randomized trial evaluated problem-solving therapy in home care
(PSTHC) for homebound older adults with cardiovascular disease receiving acute
home care services. This study hypothesized that compared with usual care plus
education intervention, home-based PST-HC would significantly reduce depression
and anxiety scores, lead to improved quality of life, and greater satisfaction
with treatment among elderly with cardiovascular disease.
METHODS: Thirty-eight participants were recruited from a university-affiliated
home healthcare agency for the trial. Six 1-hour PST-HC sessions included
depression education, problem-solving skills, pleasurable activity scheduling,
homework, and weekly telephone calls over a 6-week period. The control comparison
group received usual care plus two sessions of education and a depression
brochure. Outcome measures included the Beck Depression Inventory, Hamilton
Rating Scale for Depression, Beck Anxiety Inventory, and the short form (SF)-36
health status measure. After the intervention, both groups completed the Patient 
Satisfaction Questionnaire.
RESULTS: Compared with the control group, the PST-HC group showed a significant
decrease in depression but not anxiety scores. The PST-HC group generally
reported more favorable satisfaction with treatment than the control group. The
PST-HC group improved significantly, when compared with the control group in only
two of eight SF-36 subscales: mental health and emotional role function.
CONCLUSIONS: The brief PST-HC intervention demonstrated that depression improved 
among home care elderly. However, there was no change in six of eight health
status measures or anxiety level. Authors discuss integrating interdisciplinary
depression care in the home care setting.

PMCID: PMC2943727
PMID: 20871804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. J Gerontol Soc Work. 2010 Oct;53(7):591-612. doi: 10.1080/01634372.2010.503984.

Racial/ethnic disparities in access to medicare home health care: the disparate
impact of policy.

Davitt JK(1), Kaye LW.

Author information: 
(1)School of Social Policy and Practice, and New Courtland Center for Transitions
and Health, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.
jdavitt@sp2.upenn.edu

The Balanced Budget Act of 1997 dramatically decreased reimbursements for
traditional Medicare home health patients. A multivariate analysis of Medicare
Current Beneficiary Survey data showed that African American and "other" users
experienced greater decreases in home care between 1996 and 1998 than did White
users. These results suggest (a) race/ethnicity is an independent factor in
determining service use post-BBA and (b) health policy has a disparate impact on 
minority older adults. Capitated payment systems must be pursued cautiously to
avoid negative effects on vulnerable populations. The potential for current and
future Medicare policy changes to negatively affect vulnerable populations is
also discussed.

PMID: 20865622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 2011 Feb;34(1):120-3. doi:
10.1007/s00270-010-9974-z. Epub 2010 Sep 21.

Previous PICC placement may be associated with catheter-related infections in
hemodialysis patients.

Butler PJ(1), Sood S, Mojibian H, Tal MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine, P.O.
Box 208042 (SP2-323), New Haven, CT 06520-8042, USA. philip.butler@yale.edu

BACKGROUND: Catheter-related infections (CRIs) are a significant source of
morbidity and mortality in hemodialysis patients. The identification of novel,
modifiable risk factors for CRIs may lead to improved outcomes in this
population. Peripherally inserted central catheters (PICCs) have been
hypothesized to compromise vascular access due to vascular damage and venous
thrombosis, whereas venous thrombosis has been linked to the development of CRIs.
Here we examine the association between PICC placement and CRIs.
METHODS: A retrospective review was performed of all chronic hemodialysis
catheter placements and exchanges performed at a large university hospital from
September 2003 to September 2008. History of PICC line use was determined by
examining hospital radiologic records from December 1993 to September 2008.
Catheter-related complications were assessed and correlated with PICC line
history.
RESULTS: One hundred eighty-five patients with 713 chronic tunneled hemodialysis 
catheter placements were identified. Thirty-eight of those patients (20.5%) had a
history of PICC placement; these patients were more likely to have CRIs (odds
ratio = 2.46, 95% confidence interval = 1.71-3.53, p < .001) compared with
patients without a history of PICC placement. There was no difference between the
two groups in age or number of catheters placed.
CONCLUSION: Previous PICC placement may be associated with catheter-related
infections in hemodialysis patients.

PMID: 20857109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Am J Clin Pathol. 2010 Oct;134(4):621-32. doi: 10.1309/AJCPOG3O3KTPZQNK.

The reliability of rabbit monoclonal antibodies in the immunohistochemical
assessment of estrogen receptors, progesterone receptors, and HER2 in human
breast carcinomas.

Rhodes A(1), Sarson J, Assam EE, Dean SJ, Cribb EC, Parker A.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health & Life Sciences, University of the West of England,
Coldharbour Lane, Bristol, BS16 1QY, England.

The reliability of the rabbit monoclonal antibodies SP1, SP2, SP3, and 4B5 was
immunohistochemically assessed on a range of 96 invasive breast carcinomas and
the results compared with those achieved with established antibody markers for
estrogen receptors (6F11), progesterone receptors (PgR636), and HER2 (polyclonal 
A0485 and clone CB11), with HER2 status validated by fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) and silver in situ hybridization. Optimal results depended
on the duration of microwave antigen-retrieval time and the use of a high pH
buffer for rabbit and mouse estrogen receptor antibodies (SP1 and 6F11), although
only on antigen-retrieval duration for the progesterone receptors SP2 and PgR636.
The highest rate of concordance between HER2 overexpression and HER2 gene
amplification was with the rabbit monoclonal antibodies (SP3 and 4B5) and FISH.
Rabbit monoclonal antibodies are reliable alternatives to established antibody
markers for the immunohistochemical testing of estrogen receptors, progesterone
receptors, and HER2 in breast cancer.

PMID: 20855644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Orthop Traumatol Surg Res. 2010 Nov;96(7):760-8. doi: 10.1016/j.otsr.2010.05.004.
Epub 2010 Sep 20.

Radiographic preoperative templating of extra-offset cemented THA implants: how
reliable is it and how does it affect survival?

Bachour F(1), Marchetti E, Bocquet D, Vasseur L, Migaud H, Girard J.

Author information: 
(1)Dr Rizk Clinic, BP 113288, Beirut, Lebanon.

INTRODUCTION: Securing femoral offset should in theory improve hip stability and 
abductor muscles moment arms. As problems arise mainly in case of originally
increased offset (>40 mm), a range of extra-offset stems is available; the exact 
impact in terms of fixation, however, is not known.
HYPOTHESIS: Extra-offset stems should more reliably reestablish original femoral 
offsets exceeding 40 mm than standard femoral components, limiting instability
risk without possible adverse effect on fixation.
OBJECTIVE: To compare the ability of five commonly available femoral stem designs
to restitute offset exceeding 40 mm, and to assess function and cement fixation
at a minimum 6 years' follow-up in a stem conceived to reproduce such offset.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A continuous series of 74 total hip replacements (THR) in
hips with increased (>40 mm) femoral offset was studied. All underwent
preoperative X-ray templating on Imagika software to assess offset reproduction 
by five models of stem: four standard, and one Lubinus SP2 extra-offset stem. A 
retrospective clinical and X-ray study was conducted with a minimum 6 years'
follow-up on the Lubinus SP2 117° stems used to try to reproduce offset in the
74 THRs.
RESULTS: Apart from the increased (>40 mm) offset, the cervicodiaphyseal angle
was consistently <135°, <130° in 60 femurs (81%) and <125° in 45 (60%). Planning 
showed the four standard stems to induce (>5mm femoral offset reduction in 50-83%
of cases, versus only 25% with the Lubinus SP2 117°). All 74 hips received
Lubinus SP2 117° stems: at a mean 78 months FU (range, 70-94 mo), their mean
Postel-Merle d'Aubigné score was 17±1.8 (range, 13-18). Five of the 74 THRs
underwent surgical revision: three cases of loosening, in which the stem was
replaced, and two of instability, without change of stem. Loosening was not
related to offset reproduction quality; two of the three cases were due to
initial cementing defect, and the third occurred in a femur with previous history
of two osteotomies. There were four cases of dislocation (5.4%: two primary,
which were not operated on, and two recurrent, managed by acetabular revision),
despite good reproduction of the preoperative offset in three of the four cases. 
Mean 7-year implant survivorship was 95.1% (±4.8).
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: The anatomic form of the Lubinus SP2 117° should in
theory provide a uniform cement mantle. Survivorship, however, is less good than 
for regular offset versions (126° or 135°). On the other hand, it does reproduce 
anatomy in case of >40mm offset, providing extra offset of more than 51mm. The
slightly shorter survivorship requires more long-term surveillance.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Level IV, retrospective study.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20851077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Sichuan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2010 Jul;41(4):571-4.

[Preparation and identification of a monoclonal antibody against recombinant
human L-type pyruvate kinase N].

[Article in Chinese]

Liao TT(1), Zhang CY, Jiang XM, Wei DP, Zhang CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, West China School of Preclinical and Forensic
Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China.

OBJECTIVE: To prepare and identify the monoclonal antibody (mAb) against pyruvate
kinase N terminal (PK-N).
METHODS: BALB/C mice were immunized with immunogen PK-N-GST-tag. Then the spleen 
cells were isolated and fused with SP2/0 cells. After several rounds of detecting
and cloning, the hybridoma cell strains secreting anti-PK-N mAb were obtained.
Its specificity was evaluated with ELISA and Western blot, and the titer,
immunoglobulin subtype and affinity of the mAb were measured.
RESULTS: Two cell strains of hybridoma, 2B2E4G and 2C6F5, were obtained. The
hybridoma cell strains secreting anti-PK-N mAb belonged to IgG2b subtype, with a 
mAb titer in ascetic fluid of 1 : 409600 and 1 : 102400, respectively. Their
affinity reached 3.54 x 10(8) L/mol and 2.72 x 10(8) L/mol, respectively, as
determined by ELISA. Western blot demonstrated that the mAb could specifically
recognize the immunogen and the natural cell lysis protein. The cell
immunohistochemistry proved that the antibody could recognize human L type
pyruvate kinase expressed in the plasma of HL-7702 cell strain and paraffin slice
of hepatoma.
CONCLUSION: The success in anti-PK-N mAb preparation provides a foundation for
further studies into glycolysis in normal condition and metabolic diseases.

PMID: 20848771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Phytopathology. 2010 Oct;100(10):1111-7. doi: 10.1094/PHYTO-12-09-0365.

Combinatorially selected peptides for protection of soybean against Phakopsora
pachyrhizi.

Fang ZD(1), Marois JJ, Stacey G, Schoelz JE, English JT, Schmidt FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Plant Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211, USA.

Phakopsora pachyrhizi, the fungal pathogen that causes Asian soybean rust, has
the potential to cause significant losses in soybean yield in many production
regions of the United States. Germplasm with durable, single-gene resistance is
lacking, and control of rust depends on timely application of fungicides. To
assist the development of new modes of soybean resistance, we identified peptides
from combinatorial phage-display peptide libraries that inhibit germ tube growth 
from urediniospores of P. pachyrhizi. Two peptides, Sp2 and Sp39, were identified
that inhibit germ tube development when displayed as fusions with the coat
protein of M13 phage or as fusions with maize cytokinin oxidase/dehydrogenase
(ZmCKX1). In either display format, the inhibitory effect of the peptides on germ
tube growth was concentration dependent. In addition, when peptides Sp2 or Sp39
in either format were mixed with urediniospores and inoculated to soybean leaves 
with an 8-h wetness period, rust lesion development was reduced. Peptides Sp2 and
Sp39, displayed on ZmCKX1, were found to interact with a 20-kDa protein derived
from germinated urediniospores. Incorporating peptides that inhibit pathogen
development and pathogenesis into breeding programs may contribute to the
development of soybean cultivars with improved, durable rust tolerance.

PMID: 20839946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Proteome Sci. 2010 Sep 8;8:45. doi: 10.1186/1477-5956-8-45.

Comparative analysis of proteome maps of silkworm hemolymph during different
developmental stages.

Hou Y(1), Zou Y, Wang F, Gong J, Zhong X, Xia Q, Zhao P.

Author information: 
(1)College of Biotechnology, Institute of Sericulture and Systems Biology,
Southwest University, Chongqing 400716, PR China. zhaop@swu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: The silkworm Bombyx mori is a lepidopteran insect with four
developmental stages: egg, larva (caterpillar), pupa, and adult. The hemolymph of
the silkworm is in an open system that circulates among all organs, and functions
in nutrient and hormone transport, injury, and immunity. To understand the
intricate developmental mechanisms of metamorphosis, silkworm hemolymph from
different developmental stages, including the 3rd day of fifth instar, the 6th
day of fifth instar, the 3rd day of pupation, the 8th day of pupal stage and the 
first day of the moth stage, was investigated by two-dimensional electrophoresis 
and mass spectrometry.
RESULTS: Two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis showed that from the 
larval to moth stages, silkworm hemolymph proteins changed markedly. Not only did
major proteins such as SP1, SP2, and the 30 K lipoprotein change, but other
proteins varied greatly at different stages. To understand the functions of these
proteins in silkworm development, 56 spots were excised from gels for analysis by
matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry
(MALDI-TOF MS). We identified 34 proteins involved in metamorphosis, programmed
cell death, food digestion, metabolism, and nutrient storage and transport. Most 
proteins showed different expression at different stages, suggesting functions in
development and metamorphosis. An abundance of proteins related to immunity were 
found, including hemolin, prophenoloxidase, serine proteinase-like protein,
paralytic peptide-binding protein, and protease inhibitor.
CONCLUSIONS: Proteomics research not only provides the opportunity for direct
investigation of protein expression patterns, but also identifies many attractive
candidates for further study. Two-dimensional maps of hemolymph proteins
expressed during the growth and metamorphosis of the silkworm offer important
insights into hemolymph function and insect metamorphosis.

PMCID: PMC2944163
PMID: 20822545  [PubMed]


226. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2010 Jun;26(6):809-16.

[A novel method for monitoring miRNA activity by expression changes of secreted
luciferase gene in live cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Tian W(1), Dong X, Wang G, Wu X.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Molecular Virology and Genetic Engineering, Institute
for Viral Disease Prevention and Control, Chinese Center for Disease Prevention
and Control, Beijing 100052, China.

We developed a method for monitoring of miRNA activity in live cells by a
secreted luciferase gene based plasmid sensor named as Gsensor. Firstly, we
constructed pAAV2neo-Gluc-MCS-polyA as "empty Gsensor", which contained multiple 
cloning sites (MCS) for miRNA target inserted. To detect miR142-3p activity,
miR142-3p Gsensor and miR142-3p Gsensor-3 were constructed by inserting one or
three complementary miR142-3p targets into pAAV2neo-Gluc-MCS-ployA. Subsequently,
miR142-3p Gsensor and miR142-3p Gsensor-3 were respectively transfected into U937
cells and Gluc activity was assayed in the supernatant 48 h post transfection.
Results showed that both of them effectively indicated miR142-3p activity of
inhibiting Gluc expression compared with empty Gsensor. Simultaneously, miR142-3p
Gsensor also demonstrated the inhibition of miR142-3p activity by Anti-miR142
when they were cotransfected into U937 cells. This implied one copy of miRNA
target in Gsensor was sensitive enough for investigation of miRNA activity. We
further analyzed factors affecting Gsensor function including time and dose, and 
found that miR142-3p activity sensed by miR142-3p Gsensor rose within 48 h post
transfection and approached stable thereafter. Transfected dose varying among
0.001-0.05 pg/cell had little effect on its function. Using miR142-3p Gsensor, we
further detected miR142-3p activity in HEK293, U937, K562, SP2/0 and P815 cells. 
Results suggested that miR142-3p activity was high in U937, K562, SP2/0 and P815 
cells and almost negative in HEK293. miR142-3p activity was positively correlated
with its relative copies in HEK293, U937 and K562 detected by QRT-PCR. In
conclusion, Gsensor proved to be an effective tool for monitoring of miRNA
activity in live cells, and provide a new method for monitoring miRNA activity in
vitro.

PMID: 20815262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2010 Jun;26(6):753-9.

[Preparation and characterization of specific monoclonal antibodies against
mercury ions].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao L(1), Wang F, Yang H, Li P, Liu M, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Medicine, Inner Mongolia Agricultural
University, Hohhot 010018, China.

The environmental pollution by heavy metals such as mercury, cadmium and lead has
become a worldwide public health hazard. To rapidly and inexpensively monitor
environmental heavy metals is a prerequisite for minimizing human and animal
exposure. The development of immunoassays to detect mercury ion residues has been
a promising trend with the advantage of rapid and cheap operation. We reported
the isolation and characterization of mercury-specific monoclonal antibodies.
Because Hg2+ ions are too small to elicit an immune response, the metal was
coupled to protein carrier (keyhole limpet, KLH) using a chelator
(diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid, DTPA). After the synthesis of antigen and
characterization, monoclonal antibodies against mercury ions were generated by
immunizing BALB/c mice with mercury conjugated antigen (Hg-DTPA-KLH). The stable 
hybridoma cell lines were produced by fusion of murine splenocytes and SP2/0
myeloma cells. The hybridoma cells were subcloned by the limiting dilution and
screened by ELISA, two hybridoma cell lines producing stably specific monoclonal 
antibodies (MAbs) against mercury ions were obtained, named H2H5 and H1H8. The
ascites fluid was produced in BABL/c mice by intraperitoneal injection of 1 x
10(7) H2H5 and H1H8 cells, respectively. The titers of ascites were all above
1:51 200. The isotyping of secrete antibodies from two hybridoma cell lines was
IgG1, kappa type. These data laid a potency of establishing immunoassays methods 
of determining Hg2+ ion residues and had the realistic significance for improving
the efficiency and quality of risk assessment.

PMID: 20815254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2010 Dec;59(12):1771-9. doi:
10.1007/s00262-010-0902-5. Epub 2010 Aug 31.

Evaluation of the immunogenicity of a single chain chimeric peptide composed of
hCGß and oLHa for inhibition of the growth of hCGß-expressing cancer cells.

Jiang C(1), Jiang Y, Huang Z, Shen W, Wang J, Shen Q.

Author information: 
(1)NPFPC Key Laboratory of Contraceptives and Devices, Shanghai Institute of
Planned Parenthood Research, Shanghai, 200032, China.

Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) is a membrane-associated protein highly
expressed in several types of human cancer cells. The expression in the cancer
cells indicates that hCG may be a potential target molecule for cancer
immunotherapy. The objective of this study was to develop a novel immunogenic
molecule, which can efficiently induce the neutralizing antibody against hCG and 
which is also suitable for mass production. The immunogenicity of the recombinant
single chain chimeric protein of hCGß-oLHa expressed by yeast was examined.
Additionally, the inhibitory effects of the anti-hCGß-oLHa antibody on the growth
of hCG-positive cancer cells were determined. It was found that hCGß-oLHa yielded
high titers of anti-hCG rabbit antibody that could effectively neutralize the
bioactivity of hCG. The rabbit anti-hCGß-oLHa IgG inhibited the proliferation of 
hCG-expressing human colorectal cancer cells (LS-174, HCT-116, HCT-15 and KM-12) 
in a dose-dependent manner. Furthermore, an intact anti-tumor vaccine was
prepared by conjugating hCGß-oLHa with tetanus toxoid (TT) and this was used to
immunize Balb/c mice bearing hCG-expressing SP2/0 tumor cells. The progression of
tumors in these immunized mice was remarkably inhibited. These results suggest
that hCGß-oLHa is a new promising immunogenic molecule for the development of an 
anti-hCG-based cancer vaccine.

PMID: 20809357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2010 Aug;29(4):301-4.

Monoclonal antibodies to Ki-67 protein suitable for immunohistochemical analysis.

Khoruzhenko A(1), Kukharchuk V, Cherednyk O, Tykhonkova I, Ovcharenko G,
Malanchuk O, Filonenko V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Signalling, Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics,
NAS of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine.

Detection of cell proliferation index is widely used in experimental and clinical
research. Earlier it was shown that nuclear Ki-67 protein expression is strictly 
related to cell proliferation. It was revealed during all active phases of the
cell cycle in mammals but was absent in G0 phase, so Ki-67 presence in cell
nuclei reflects a potential growth fraction of whole cell population. The main
area of Ki-67 antibody application is in immunocytochemical and
immunohistochemical analyses. The aim of our work was to generate mouse
monoclonal antibodies for Ki-67 antigen detection in mammalian tissues and in
cultured cells. His-tagged fragment of Ki-67 expressed in bacteria was used as an
antigen. Antibody-producing hybridoma cells were generated by standard procedure 
by fusing SP2/0 myeloma cells with splenocytes of immunized mice. Monoclonal
antibodies were analyzed using paraffin-embedded human melanoma tissue samples
and breast cancer cell line MCF-7. It was shown that generated anti-Ki-67
antibodies revealed proliferating cells in MCF-7 culture and after heat-induced
epitope retrieval on paraffin sections of human melanoma tissue. In summary,
generated antibodies could be useful for detection of proliferating cells in
immunohistochemical and immunofluorescence studies of mammalian cells and
tissues.

PMID: 20795306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2010 Oct;17(10):1617-23. doi: 10.1128/CVI.00097-10. Epub
2010 Aug 25.

Development of human-murine chimeric immunoglobulin G for use in the serological 
detection of human flavivirus and alphavirus antibodies.

Thibodeaux BA(1), Panella AN, Roehrig JT.

Author information: 
(1)Arboviral Diseases Branch, Division of Vector-Borne Diseases, National Center 
for Zoonotic Vector-Borne and Enteric Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention/U.S. DHHS, 3150 Rampart Road, Fort Collins, CO 80521, USA.
epx1@cdc.gov

Diagnosis of human arboviral infections relies heavily on serological techniques 
such as the immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibody capture enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (MAC-ELISA) and the indirect IgG ELISA. Broad application of these assays
is hindered by the lack of standardized positive human control sera that react
with a wide variety of flaviviruses (e.g., dengue, West Nile, yellow fever,
Japanese encephalitis, Saint Louis encephalitis, and Powassan viruses), or
alphaviruses (e.g., Eastern equine encephalitis, Western equine encephalitis,
Venezuelan equine encephalitis, and chikungunya viruses) that can cause human
disease. We have created human-murine chimeric monoclonal antibodies (cMAbs) by
combining the variable regions of flavivirus (6B6C-1) or alphavirus (1A4B-6)
broadly cross-reactive murine MAbs (mMAbs) with the constant region of human
IgG1. These cMAbs may be used as standardized reagents capable of replacing human
infection-immune-positive control sera in indirect IgG ELISA for diagnosis of all
human flaviviral or alphaviral infections. The IgG cMAbs secreted from
plasmid-transformed Sp2/0-Ag14 cells had serological activity identical to that
of the parent mMAbs, as measured by ELISA using multiple flaviviruses or
alphaviruses.

PMCID: PMC2952999
PMID: 20739503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Food Addit Contam Part A Chem Anal Control Expo Risk Assess. 2010
Nov;27(11):1589-97. doi: 10.1080/19440049.2010.504237.

Development of competitive indirect ELISA for the detection of tetrodotoxin and a
survey of the distribution of tetrodotoxin in the tissues of wild puffer fish in 
the waters of south-east China.

Tao J(1), Wei WJ, Nan L, Lei LH, Hui HC, Fen GX, Jun LY, Jing Z, Rong J.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Nutrition and Food Safety, Chinese CDC, Beijing 100021,
China.

A monoclonal antibody against tetrodotoxin (TTX) was produced from the hybridoma 
cell line T6D9, which was established by the fusion of Sp2/0 myeloma cells with
spleen cells isolated from a Balb/c mouse immunized with the TTX-keyhole limpet
hemocyanin (KLH) conjugate. This monoclonal antibody belongs to the IgG1
subclass; the affinity constant of the antibody is 2.4 × 10(-8) mol l(-1). The
relative cross-reactivity of the antibody with TTX was 100%, but with saxitoxin, 
KLH and bovine serum albumin (BSA) it was less than 1%, respectively. The titre
of the antibody in ascites was 6.4 × 10(6); the reference working concentration
was 1:1.2 × 10(5). By using this monoclonal antibody, a competitive indirect
enzyme-linked immunoabsorbant assay (ELISA) for the analysis of TTX was
developed. The linear portion of the dose-response curve of TTX concentration was
in range 5-500 ng ml(-1). The limit of detection was 5 ng ml(-1) according 10%
inhibition with TTX to anti-TTX monoclonal antibody. The concentration of TTX
inhibiting 50% of antibody binding was about 50 ng ml(-1). The recoveries from
TTX spiked samples were 79.5-109.5%. In addition, the toxicity of some wild
puffer fish specimens captured from south-east China and the Yangzi River in
Jiangsu province was determined. The results indicate that the toxicity and toxin
tissue distribution vary in different species of wild puffer fish.

PMID: 20730645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Braz J Biol. 2010 Aug;70(3):529-36.

Prey selection in the trap-nesting wasp Trypoxylon (Trypargilum) opacum Brèthes
(Hymenprtera; Crabronidae).

Buschini ML(1), Borba NA, Brescovit AD.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biologia, Universidade Estadual do Centro-Oeste, Guarapuava,
PR, Brazil. isatunes@yahoo.com.br

The purpose of our research was to document and discuss the temporal patterns of 
prey use shown by the trap-nesting wasp Trypoxylon opacum in two different
habitats in Southern Brazil. It was carried out from December 2001 to December
2004. Twenty nine species belonging to five families of spiders were captured by 
T. opacum. Araneidae was the most captured family and has been strongly
represented by the genus Eustala. Through Bray-Curtis s coefficient and the
unweighted pair group method average (UPGMA), the spiders can be divided into
three groups: the smaller group includes the most abundant species (Alpaida sp2, 
Bertrana rufostriata, Eustala sp1, Eustala sp2, Eustala sp3 and Eustala sp4), the
second group includes species with intermediate abundance (Alpaida, Alpaida
gracia and Mangora sp2), and the third and largest group includes the less
abundant species, (Acacesia villalobosi, Alpaida argenata, Alpaida sp1, Araneus
blumenau, Araneus sicki, Crysometa boraceia, Crysometa sp3, Eustala sp8, Eustala 
sp11, Larinia t-notata, Mangora sp1, Ocrepeira aff gnomo, Sanogasta sp.,
Sanogasta sp2, Sanogasta sp3, Salticidae sp2, Theridion sp1, Theridion sp2,
Wagneriana eupalaestris, Wagneriana iguape). Of 1,053 identified spiders, 362
were captured in the grassland areas and 691 in the swamp, since T. opacum built 
nests only in these two habitats. The diversity, richness and evenness of spiders
in T. opacum nests were higher in grassland than in the swamp.

PMID: 20730339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2011 Oct;49(7):580-1. doi:
10.1016/j.bjoms.2010.07.010. Epub 2010 Aug 21.

Use of carbon dioxide laser in lingual frenectomy.

Puthussery FJ(1), Shekar K, Gulati A, Downie IP.

Author information: 
(1)Maxillofacial Unit, Salisbury NHS Trust, Odstock Road, Salisbury, Wiltshire,
SP2 8BJ, United Kingdom. francisjosedr@hotmail.com

Comment in
    Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2013 Apr;51(3):e42-3.

We prospectively studied 21 cases of attachment of the lingual frenulum treated
with laser excision, and report the results of a questionnaire survey of patients
in the immediate postoperative phase.

Copyright © 2010 The British Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20728254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Zhonghua Shi Yan He Lin Chuang Bing Du Xue Za Zhi. 2009 Dec;23(6):412-4.

[Study on preparation and identification of monoclonal antibodies immunized with 
H5N1 influenza virus M1 protein].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen AJ(1), Yao LH, Guo JQ, Xu Y, Liu XY, Jia RQ, Zhang ZQ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Molecular Virology and Genetic Engineering, Institute
for Viral Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese Center for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Beijing.

OBJECTIVE: To prepare monoclonal antibodies specific for M1 protein of H5N1
subtype human influenza virus, this work may provide new tool in rapid diagnosis 
and study of type A influenza virus.
METHODS: BALB/c mice were immunized with purified recombinant H5N1
(A/Anhui/1/2005)/M1 protein expressed in E. coli. Spleen cells of the immunized
mice were fused with sp2/0 cells to produce hybridoma cell lines. ELISA was
performed to identify the monoclonal antibody against M1 protein of H5N1.
Immunofluorescence assay (IFA) were applied to identify the specificity of these 
antibodies.
RESULTS: Three hybridoma cell lines steadily secreting anti-H5N1/M1 McAb were
obtained, and their cross reactivity was confirmed by cross-reaction test and
IFA.
CONCLUSION: Monoclonal antibodies immunized with H5N1 subtype influenza virus M1 
protein are cross-reactive, which can be used to detect different subtype of
influenze virus type A.

PMID: 20718341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Proteome Res. 2010 Jun 4;9(6):3091-102. doi: 10.1021/pr100005u.

A proteomics-based translational approach reveals an antifolate resistance
inherent in human plasma derived from blood donation.

Chin LT(1), Huang PR, Hu KY, Huang NK, Chiu CD, Hour AL, Shui HA, Chu CH, Chen
HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, National Chiayi University, Chiayi,
Taiwan.

The inhibition of dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) by antifolates is a common
practice both in cell culture and in chemotherapy. Surprisingly, antifolate
resistance was also observed in cultured murine myeloma cells (SP2/0) in the
presence of human plasma (HP); thus, we used a proteomic approach to identify
novel plasma biomarker(s) for this condition. In contrast to the in vitro
antifolate response, metabolic enzymes and translation machinery proteins were
found to be up-regulated in the presence of HP. The antifolate resistance
inherent in HP may be explained by a simultaneous promotion of cell proliferation
and the maintenance of DNA integrity. Furthermore, the factor(s) was found to be 
extrinsic, heat stable and very small in size. Adenine, a supplemented additive
in erythrocyte preservation, was subsequently identified as the contributing
factor and exogenous addition in cultures reversed the cytotoxicity induced by
antifolates. Importantly, adenine-containing blood components, which may provide 
enhanced survival to otherwise sensitive antifolate-targeted cells, showed a
dose-dependent adverse effect in transfusion recipients receiving antifolate
(methotrexate) medications. These findings not only highlight a previously
unnoticed role of adenine, but also emphasize a novel mechanistic link between
transfusion and subsequently reduced survival in patients taking methotrexate.

PMID: 20707402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2010 Sep 15;20(18):5506-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2010.07.067.
Epub 2010 Jul 21.

Selectivity improvement of an azole inhibitor of CYP707A by replacing the
monosubstituted azole with a disubstituted azole.

Todoroki Y(1), Naiki K, Aoyama H, Shirakura M, Ueno K, Mizutani M, Hirai N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biological Chemistry, Faculty of Agriculture, Shizuoka
University, Shizuoka 422-8529, Japan. aytodor@agr.shizuoka.ac.jp

The plant growth-retardant uniconazole (UNI), a triazole inhibitor of gibberellin
biosynthetic enzyme (CYP701A), inhibits multiple P450 enzymes including ABA
8'-hydroxylase (CYP707A), a key enzyme in ABA catabolism. Azole P450 inhibitors
bind to a P450 active site by both coordinating to the heme-iron atom via sp2
nitrogen and interacting with surrounding protein residues through a lipophilic
region. We hypothesized that poor selectivity of UNI may result from adopting a
distinct conformation and orientation for different active sites. Based on this
hypothesis, we designed and synthesized novel UNI analogs with a disubstituted
azole ring (DSI). These analogs were expected to have higher selectivity than UNI
because the added functional group may interact with the active site to restrict 
orientation of the molecule in the active site. DSI-505ME and DSI-505MZ, which
have an imidazolyl group with a methyl 5-acrylate, strongly inhibited recombinant
CYP707A3, with no growth-retardant effect.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20692835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Bone Joint Surg Br. 2010 Aug;92(8):1176-81. doi: 10.1302/0301-620X.92B8.23553.

Mapping the strain distribution on the proximal femur with titanium and
flexible-stemmed implants using digital image correlation.

Tayton E(1), Evans S, O'Doherty D.

Author information: 
(1)Salisbury District Hospital, Odstock Road, Salisbury SP2 8BJ, UK.
edwardtayton@hotmail.com

We implanted titanium and carbon fibre-reinforced plastic (CFRP) femoral
prostheses of the same dimensions into five prosthetic femora. An abductor jig
was attached and a 1 kN load applied. This was repeated with five control femora.
Digital image correlation was used to give a detailed two-dimensional strain map 
of the medial cortex of the proximal femur. Both implants caused stress shielding
around the calcar. Distally, the titanium implant showed stress shielding,
whereas the CFRP prosthesis did not produce a strain pattern which was
statistically different from the controls. There was a reduction in strain beyond
the tip of both the implants. This investigation indicates that use of the CFRP
stem should avoid stress shielding in total hip replacement.

PMID: 20675768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Bioinformatics. 2010 Sep 15;26(18):2352-3. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btq425.
Epub 2010 Jul 29.

MetNetMaker: a free and open-source tool for the creation of novel metabolic
networks in SBML format.

Forth T(1), McConkey GA, Westhead DR.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.
pytf@leeds.ac.uk

An application has been developed to help with the creation and editing of
Systems Biology Markup Language (SBML) format metabolic networks up to the
organism scale. Networks are defined as a collection of Kyoto Encyclopedia of
Genes and Genomes (KEGG) LIGAND reactions with an optional associated Enzyme
Classification (EC) number for each reaction. Additional custom reactions can be 
defined by the user. Reactions within the network can be assigned flux
constraints and compartmentalization is supported for each reaction in addition
to the support for reactions that occur across compartment boundaries. Exported
networks are fully SBML L2V4 compatible with an optional L2V1 export for
compatibility with old versions of the COBRA toolbox.AVAILABILITY AND
IMPLEMENTATION: The software runs in the free Microsoft Access 2007 Runtime
(Microsoft Inc.), which is included with the installer and works on Windows XP
SP2 or better. Full source code is viewable in the full version of Access 2007 or
2010. Users must have a license to use the KEGG LIGAND database (free academic
licensing is available). Please go to
www.bioinformatics.leeds.ac.uk/~pytf/metnetmaker for software download, help and 
tutorials.

PMID: 20671147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Diabetologia. 2010 Nov;53(11):2347-51. doi: 10.1007/s00125-010-1853-2. Epub 2010 
Jul 30.

Further refinement of the critical minimal genetic region for the imprinting
disorder 6q24 transient neonatal diabetes.

Docherty LE(1), Poole RL, Mattocks CJ, Lehmann A, Temple IK, Mackay DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wiltshire, SP2 8BJ, UK. l.e.docherty@soton.ac.uk

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Transient neonatal diabetes (TND) is associated with
overexpression of genes within a critical region on 6q24. This study aims to
refine the boundaries of this region to reduce the number of potential candidate 
genes for 6q24 TND.
METHODS: Fifteen patients with transient neonatal diabetes and submicroscopic
chromosome 6 duplications were investigated. The duplications were confirmed by
microsatellite analysis and subsequently mapped using tiled chromosome 6 array
Comparative Genomic Hybridisation (aCGH) and MLPA. Duplication boundaries were
compared to identify the minimal shared region of duplication. These data were
then used with available clinical data to identify associations between size of
6q24 duplication and severity of TND phenotype.
RESULTS: Alignment of the minimal region of duplication to the human genome
reduced the minimal TND critical region, formerly estimated at 440 kb, to
160-173 kb, revealing PLAGL1 (pleiomorphic adenoma gene-like 1) and HYMAI
(imprinted in hydatidiform mole) to be the only genes wholly included therein.
Additionally, the complete paternal duplication of a region containing the
theoretical protein FAM164B was associated with the severe growth restriction
observed in 6q24 duplication patients.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: This study has significantly reduced the critical
region associated with 6q24 TND. It has eliminated several previous TND candidate
genes, leaving the overlapping imprinted genes PLAGL1 and HYMAI as the only
remaining complete candidate genes for 6q24 TND. Moreover, these data provide the
first evidence that an additional region, encompassing the theoretical protein
FAM164B, may have a critical role in the growth restriction phenotype observed in
many 6q24 TND patients.

PMID: 20668833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. J Gerontol Soc Work. 2010 Aug;53(6):495-511. doi: 10.1080/01634372.2010.494196.

Social work practitioner knowledge and assessment of late-life depression.

Gellis ZD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Mental Health & Aging, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
19104, USA. zgellis@sp2.upenn.edu

Erratum in
    J Gerontol Soc Work. 2011 Apr;54(3):345.

Late-life depression has attracted considerable attention in the social work
literature. This study examined levels of knowledge and self-efficacy
(confidence) in evaluation of depression in late life among a random sample of
social workers (N = 168) from the National Association of Social Workers.
Relationships among knowledge on aging, job-related variables, and predictors of 
knowledge of geriatric depression were examined. Participants ranked depression
as one of the most frequent clinical problems seen in practice, scored at the
lower end on knowledge about aging, and experienced great difficulty on the items
pertaining to suicide in the older adults.

PMID: 20658417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Dent Mater. 2008 Aug;24(8):1123-30. doi: 10.1016/j.dental.2008.01.008. Epub 2008 
Mar 11.

Computer aided analysis of digitized dental stone replicas by dental CAD/CAM
technology.

Persson AS(1), Andersson M, Odén A, Sandborgh-Englund G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Odontology, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, Sweden.

OBJECTIVES: To determine the reproducibility of digitized dental stone replicas
compared to the master model and the reliability of the computer aided analysis.
METHODS: Four master dies, prepared for complete crowns were fabricated in
presintered yttria-stabilized tetragonal zirconia (Y-TZP). Eight vinyl
polysiloxane impressions (PROVIL novo; Heraeus Kulzer) were taken of each die and
stone replicas were poured in type IV stone (Vel-Mix Stone; Kerr). The master
dies and the stone replicas were digitized in a touch-probe scanner (Procera
Forte; Nobel Biocare AB), to create triangulated surface-models. The point-cloud 
from the first of the repeated digitizations of each master die was used as
CAD-reference-models (CRM). Discrepancies between the points in the triangulated 
surface-models and the corresponding CRM were measured by a matching-software
(CopyCAD 6.504 SP2; Delcam Plc). The distribution of the discrepancies was
analyzed and presented in color-difference-maps.
RESULTS: The precision of the measuring method, presented as the repeatability
coefficient, ranged between 7 and 16 microm (entire surface), whereas the
analysis of the stone replicas revealed a precision (repeatability coefficient)
ranging from 19 to 26 microm. The accuracy of the replica to master (the mean
discrepancy) ranged from 0.5 to 2.0 microm (95% confidence interval 1.5-2.9
microm).
SIGNIFICANCE: The greatest precision of the measurement was seen in the jacket
surface of the die. The size of the stone replicas varied and the repeatability
coefficient was on average 15 microm (2-25 microm) greater for the
replica-to-master alignment than the repeated digitizations of the master.

PMID: 18336900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. J Org Chem. 2008 Apr 4;73(7):2803-10. doi: 10.1021/jo702681e. Epub 2008 Mar 13.

Metalated nitriles: internal 1,2-asymmetric induction.

Fleming FF(1), Liu W, Ghosh S, Steward OW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, PA 
15282-1530, USA. flemingf@duq.edu

Alkylations of conformationally constrained acyclic nitriles containing vicinal
dimethyl groups and an adjacent phenyl group or trisubstituted alkene are
exceptionally diastereoselective. Probing the alkylation stereoselectivity with a
series of C- and N-metalated nitriles implicates a reactive conformation in which
an sp2-hybridized substituent projects over the metalated nitrile to avoid
allylic strain. Steric screening thereby directs the electrophilic attack to the 
face of the metalated nitrile opposite the projecting substituent. Excellent
stereoselectively is maintained in a diverse range of alkylations that
efficiently install quaternary centers, even with isopropyliodide in which a
contiguous array of tertiary-quaternary-tertiary stereocenters is created!
Screening the conformational requirements with a series of acyclic nitriles and
esters reveals the key structural requirements for high selectivity while
providing a robust, predictive model that accounts for comparable ester
alkylations affording the opposite diastereomer! The intensive survey of
metalated nitrile alkylations identifies the key structural features required for
high 1,2-asymmetric induction, addresses the long-standing challenge of
asymmetric alkylations with acylic metalated nitriles, and provides a versatile
method for installing hindered quaternary centers with excellent stereocontrol.

PMID: 18336042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Nano Lett. 2008 Apr;8(4):1011-5. doi: 10.1021/nl072667q. Epub 2008 Mar 6.

Hyperfine interactions in graphene and related carbon nanostructures.

Yazyev OV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Institute of Chemical Sciences and
Engineering and Institute of Theoretical Physics, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. 
oleg.yazyev@epfl.ch

Hyperfine interactions, magnetic interactions between the spins of electrons and 
nuclei, in graphene and related carbon nanostructures are studied. By using a
combination of accurate first principles calculations on graphene fragments and
statistical analysis, I show that both isotropic and dipolar hyperfine
interactions in sp2 carbon nanostructures can be accurately described in terms of
the local electron spin distribution and atomic structure. A complete set of
parameters describing the hyperfine interactions of 13C and other nuclear spins
at substitution impurities and edge terminations is determined. These results
permit the design of graphene-based nanostructures allowing for longer electron
spin coherence times which are required by spintronics and quantum information
processing applications. Practical recipes for minimizing hyperfine interactions 
in carbon nanostructures are given.

PMID: 18321077  [PubMed]


484. J Am Chem Soc. 2008 Mar 26;130(12):3716-7. doi: 10.1021/ja710536p. Epub 2008 Mar 
4.

A nanocarbon film electrode as a platform for exploring DNA methylation.

Kato D(1), Sekioka N, Ueda A, Kurita R, Hirono S, Suzuki K, Niwa O.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, 1-1-1
Higashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8566, Japan.

We describe the quantitative nonlabel electrochemical detection of both cytosine 
(C) and methylcytosine (mC) in oligonucleotides using newly developed nanocarbon 
film electrodes. The film consists of nanocrystalline sp2 and sp3 mixed bonds
formed by employing the electron cyclotron resonance (ECR) sputtering method. We 
successfully used this film to develop a simple electrochemical DNA methylation
analysis technique based on the measurement of the differences between the
oxidation currents of C and mC since our ECR nanocarbon film electrode can
directly measure all DNA bases more quantitatively than conventional glassy
carbon or boron-doped diamond electrodes. The excellent properties of ECR
nanocarbon film electrodes result from the fact that they have a wide potential
window while maintaining the high electrode activity needed to oxidize
oligonucleotides electrochemically. Proof-of-concept experiments were performed
with synthetic oligonucleotides including different numbers of C and mC. This
film allowed us to perform both C- and mC-positive assays solely by using the
electrochemical oxidation of oligonucleotides without bisulfite or labeling
processes.

PMID: 18314986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Apoptosis. 2008 Apr;13(4):600-8. doi: 10.1007/s10495-008-0189-6.

Preparation and bioevaluation of (99m)Tc-HYNIC-annexin B1 as a novel radioligand 
for apoptosis imaging.

Luo QY(1), Wang F, Zhang ZY, Zhang Y, Lu HK, Sun SH, Zhu RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, 600 Yishan Road, Shanghai 200233, China. lqyn@sh163.net

Annexin B1, a novel Ca2+-dependent PS-binding protein, has been shown to have a
high affinity for PS exposed on the surface of apoptotic cells. To develop and
bioevaluate an annexin B1 based PS-targeting radiotracer, annexin B1 was
radiolabeled with (99m)Tc using HYNIC as a bifunctional chelator. Binding assays 
with activated platelets and apoptotic SP2/0 cells were carried out to evaluate
the in vitro biological activity of (99m)Tc-HYNIC-annexin B1. Biodistribution of 
this radioligand was studied in normal mice. Dexamethasone-induced murine thymus 
apoptosis and fas-mediated murine liver apoptosis models were used to investigate
the ability of radiolabeled annexin B1 to detect apoptosis in vivo. The labeling 
procedure yielded a compound with up to 98% radiochemical purity and good in
vitro stability. The in vitro binding assays indicated that (99m)Tc-HYNIC-annexin
B1 retain its PS-binding activity. Biodistribution of the compound in mice showed
that (99m)Tc-HYNIC-annexin B1 is rapidly cleared from the blood and predominantly
accumulates in the kidney. The marked increase in dexamethasone-treated murine
thymus uptake and fas-mediated murine liver uptake correlated with histologic
evidence of apoptosis. These data suggested that (99m)Tc-HYNIC-annexin B1 retain 
its in vitro and in vivo biological activities. This radiotracer may therefore be
useful as a novel radioligand for the noninvasive detecting of PS externalization
associated with apoptosis.

PMID: 18307043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Immunol Invest. 2008;37(2):113-27. doi: 10.1080/08820130701690741.

Comparison of immune responses induced in mice by vaccination with DNA vaccine
constructs expressing mycobacterial antigen 85A and interleukin-21 and Bacillus
Galmette-Guérin.

Dou J(1), Tang Q, Zhao F, Chu L, Chen J, Cao M, Liu C, Wang Y, Li Y, Li JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogenic Biology and Immunology, Southeast University School
of Basic Medical Science, Nanjing, China. njdoujun@yahoo.com.cn

In this paper, we addressed the immune adjuvant effects of interleukin(IL)-21 on 
DNA vaccine constructs expressing mycobacterium tuberculosis (TB) Ag85A and
compared immune responses induced in mice inoculated DNA vaccine constructs
expressing Ag85A and IL-21 with mice inoculated DNA vaccine constructs expressing
Ag85A alone or Bacillus Galmette-Guérin(BCG.). In this experiment, the gene of
IL-21 was firstly amplified from plasmid pcDNA3.1-mIL21 by PCR and cloned into
the plasmid pRSC, forming recombinant plasmid pRSC-IL21. Then, the gene of Ag85A 
was amplified from the plasmid pIRES-Ag85A by PCR and cloned into the recombinant
pRSC-IL21 again, finally forming co-expression DNA vaccine constructs
pRSC-IL21-Ag85A. It was identified by the analysis of endonuclease digestion, DNA
sequencing, the IL-21 and Ag85A expression in SP2/0 cells. Mice were i.m.
immunized with BCG, DNA vaccine constructs pRSC-Ag85A or pRSC-IL21-Ag85A
respectively, and the immune responses induced in mice was compared with other
vaccines. The results showed that the DNA vaccine constructs pRSC-IL21-Ag85A was 
successfully constructed since the Ag85A and IL-21 was correctly expressed in
SP2/0 cells respectively, and it elicited stronger immune responses in Balb/c
mice than that of mice immunized with pRSC-Ag85A and the efficiency was as BCG
did. We concluded that the IL-21 was a promising immune adjunctive modality to
enhance immunigenicity of DNA vaccine containing Ag85A and the study provided the
possibility of further development of immune accessory effect of IL-21 on DNA
vaccine against TB.

PMID: 18300037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2008 Feb;27(1):54-8. doi: 10.1089/hyb.2007.0535.

Generation and identification of natural monoclonal antibodies against
low-density lipoprotein.

Feng X(1), Xu R, Gao Y, He Z, Li C, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University,
Xi'an, Shaanxi Province, China.

Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) is a major trigger of atherosclerotic lesions. Here
we report the production of natural mouse IgM monoclonal antibodies (MAbs)
against LDL with high specificity and activity, which could provide a potential
value for research on lipid metabolism and atherosclerosis progression. BALB/c
mice were raised in specific pathogen-free conditions and fed a high cholesterin 
diet; the splenocytes from these mice were directly fused with Sp2/0 myeloma
cells using standard hybridoma production techniques. Resulting hybridomas
producing anti-LDL antibodies were screened by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA) and isotyped. As a result, two hybridoma cell lines, named 5G8 and 2H7,
were developed, which could secrete anti-LDL MAbs stably. Both of them belonged
to the IgM subclass. The specificity of the MAb was determined based on its
activity in Western blot and immunoprecipitation analysis.

PMID: 18294078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. J Am Chem Soc. 2008 Mar 19;130(11):3266-7. doi: 10.1021/ja710451s. Epub 2008 Feb 
23.

Site-selective sp2 and benzylic sp3 palladium-catalyzed direct arylation.

Campeau LC(1), Schipper DJ, Fagnou K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Catalysis Research and Innovation, University of Ottawa, Department
of Chemistry, 10 Marie Curie, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1N 6N5.

PMID: 18293986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Org Lett. 2008 Mar 20;10(6):1179-82. doi: 10.1021/ol800080w. Epub 2008 Feb 22.

Sequential intermolecular aminopalladation/ortho-arene C-H activation reactions
of N-phenylpropiolamides with phthalimide.

Tang S(1), Peng P, Pi SF, Liang Y, Wang NX, Li JH.

Author information: 
(1)Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing 100080, China.

A novel palladium-catalyzed intermolecular aminopalladation/C-H activation method
for selectively synthesizing (E)-(2-oxindolin-3-ylidene)phthalimides has been
developed. In the presence of Pd(OAc)2 and PhI(OAc)2, alkynes were
difunctionalized with a phthalimide and an arene sp2 C-H bond to selectively
synthesize (E)-(2-oxoindolin-3-ylidene)phthalimides, which products are of great 
potential pharmaceutical value products in many major therapeutic areas, such as 
oncology, inflammation, neurology, immunology, and endocrinology. To the best of 
our knowledge, the reaction serves as the first example of intermolecular
aminopalladation/C-H activation reactions of alkynes.

PMID: 18290654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Am J Clin Pathol. 2008 Mar;129(3):398-409. doi: 10.1309/2YXRLEQVPPNRWHGA.

Potential for false-positive staining with a rabbit monoclonal antibody to
progesterone receptor (SP2): findings of the UK National External Quality
Assessment Scheme for Immunocytochemistry and FISH highlight the need for correct
validation of antibodies on introduction to the laboratory.

Ibrahim M(1), Dodson A, Barnett S, Fish D, Jasani B, Miller K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University College London, London, England.

This study focused on recent assessment results from the United Kingdom National 
External Quality Assessment Scheme for Immunocytochemistry and Fluorescence
In-Situ Hybridisation breast hormone receptor module in which participants were
asked to demonstrate progesterone receptors (PRs). The slides consisted of 3
infiltrating ductal breast carcinomas, previously classified as a high PR
expresser, a moderate to low PR expresser, and a negative tumor. During this
assessment, 2 commercial rabbit monoclonal antibodies, SP2 (Lab
Vision/NeoMarkers, Fremont, CA), and 1E2 (Ventana, Tucson, AZ) were used by 15%
of the participants. The SP2 rabbit monoclonal antibody showed false-positive and
nonspecific staining on the previously established PR-tumor. This article
highlights the necessity for all clinical laboratories to validate
immunohistochemical methods and protocols when using newly marketed antibodies
such as SP2; use composite tissue blocks with known levels of tumor expression
such as a high, mid, and negative expression; and participate in internal and
external quality assessment schemes, which can highlight potential technical
issues in laboratory methods.

PMID: 18285262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2007 Dec;7(12):4581-7.

Nanocrystalline diamond--an excellent platform for life science applications.

Kloss FR(1), Najam-Ul-Haq M, Rainer M, Gassner R, Lepperdinger G, Huck CW, Bonn
G, Klauser F, Liu X, Memmel N, Bertel E, Garrido JA, Steinmüller-Nethl D.

Author information: 
(1)Department for Cranio-Maxillofacial and Oral Surgery, Medical University of
Innsbruck, Maximilianstr. 10, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria.

Nanocrystalline diamond (NCD) has recently been successfully utilized in a
variety of life science applications. NCD films are favorable and salubrious
substrates for cells during cultivation. Therefore NCD has also been employed in 
tissue engineering strategies. NCD as reported in this contribution was grown by 
means of a modified hot-filament chemical vapor deposition technique, which
results in less than 3% sp2-hybridization and yields grain sizes of 5-20 nm.
After production the NCD surface was rather hydrophobic, however it could be
efficiently refined to exhibit more hydrophilic properties. Changing of the
surface structure was found to be an efficient means to influence growth and
differentiation capacity of a variety of cells. The particular needs for any
given cell type has to be proven empirically. Yet flexible features of NCD appear
to be superior to plastic surfaces which can be hardly changed in quality.
Besides its molecular properties, crystal structural peculiarities of NCD appear 
to influence cell growth as well. In our attempt to facilitate, highly
specialized applications in biomedicine, we recently discovered that growth
factors can be tightly bound to NCD by mere physisorption. Hence, combination of 
surface functionalization together with further options to coat NCD with any kind
of three-dimensional structure opens up new avenues for many more applications.
In fact, high through-put protein profiling of early disease stages may become
possible from serum samples, because proteins bound to NCD can now be efficiently
analyzed by MALDI/TOF-MS. Given these results, it is to be presumed that the
physical properties and effective electrochemical characteristics of NCD will
allow tailoring devices suitable for many more diagnostic as well as therapeutic 
applications.

PMID: 18283848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. J Org Chem. 2008 Mar 21;73(6):2432-4. doi: 10.1021/jo702457t. Epub 2008 Feb 16.

Synthesis of cyclic thioethers through tandem C(sp3)-S and C(sp2)-S bond
formations from alpha,beta'-dichloro vinyl ketones.

Oh K(1), Kim H, Cardelli F, Bwititi T, Martynow AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Indiana University Purdue
University Indianapolis, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA. oh@chem.iupui.edu

The synthesis of 5- to 8-memebered cyclic thioethers 4 has been achieved through 
a simple two-step sequence. The present methodology utilizes the facile
Friedel-Crafts acylation of terminal alkynes 1 with acid chlorides 2 followed by 
tandem C(sp(3))-S and C(sp(2))-S bond formations with NaSH.xH(2)O.

PMID: 18278938  [PubMed]


493. J Phys Chem A. 2008 Mar 20;112(11):2131-3. doi: 10.1021/jp7097334. Epub 2008 Feb 
15.

Ab initio structures for 90 degrees -twisted s-trans-1,3-butadiene and
cyclooctatetraene: the naked sp2-sp2 bond.

Feller D, Craig NC, Matlin AR.

The bond length of a carbon-carbon sp2-sp2 sigma-bond without the perturbing
effects of pi-interactions has been estimated by high level calculations on two
prototypical systems: a 90 degrees -twisted form of butadiene and the tub
conformer of cyclooctatetraene. The former system yields a value of 1.4818 A,
considerably longer than previous estimates. The corresponding bond length in the
latter is slightly shorter due to some pi-electron delocalization.

PMID: 18275171  [PubMed]


494. Genet Mol Res. 2008 Feb 1;7(1):95-106.

Molecular variability in Brycon cf. pesu Müller and Troschel, 1845
(Characiformes: Characidae) from the Araguaia-Tocantins Basin.

Panarari-Antunes RS(1), Prioli AJ, Prioli SM, Júlio HF Jr, Agostinho CS, Prioli
LM.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ecologia de Ambientes Aquáticos Continentais,
Universidade Estadual de Maringá, Maringá, PR, Brasil .

Brycon pesu is a small-sized fish distributed throughout the Amazon and Orinoco
Basins and other coastal basins of northeastern South America. Brycon cf. pesu
specimens from the Araguaia-Tocantins Basin are currently separated into two
morphotypes, Brycon sp1 and Brycon sp2, owing to different coloration of their
anal fin. Brycon sp2 has a reddish margin stripe on the anal fin which
morphologically distinguishes it from Brycon sp1. In the present research,
nuclear and mitochondrial markers were used to test the hypothesis that the
Brycon sp1 and Brycon sp2 morphotypes are distinct species. Specimens from the
two morphotypes were collected from the Lajeado Hydroelectric Plant and the
Palmas River in the Araguaia-Tocantins Basin. Thirty-five loci obtained by the
amplification of five inter-simple sequence repeat primers were analyzed but no
species-specific bands were detected. Electrophoretic profiles obtained from 5S
rDNA non-transcribed spacer amplification failed to show any differentiation in
morphotypes. These results were corroborated by nucleotide sequence analysis of
the mtDNA control region, in which 24 polymorphic nucleotide sites, representing 
a polymorphism rate of only 5%, were detected. The low rates of polymorphism
detected by inter-simple sequence repeat, non-transcribed spacer and mtDNA D-loop
markers strongly reject the hypothesis that the two morphotypes Brycon sp1 and
Brycon sp2 represent distinct species within Brycon cf. pesu. Further studies are
needed to obtain conclusive data on the notion that the coloration of the anal
fin is an intraspecific polymorphism, possibly related to environmental factors.

PMID: 18273825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Curr Protoc Mol Biol. 2001 May;Chapter 11:Unit11.5. doi:
10.1002/0471142727.mb1105s18.

Preparation of myeloma cells.

Fuller SA(1), Takahashi M, Hurrell JG.

Author information: 
(1)Allelix Inc., Mississauga, Ontario.

In this unit, myeloma cells are cultured to ensure their sensitivity to the HAT
selection medium used after cell fusion. Cell culture conditions are adjusted
such that the Sp2/0 cells are in the log phase of growth and exhibit high
viability at the time of collection for fusion. A support protocol is provided to
determine the number of viable cells present in the cell culture.

PMID: 18265077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Am Chem Soc. 2008 Feb 27;130(8):2434-5. doi: 10.1021/ja710532j. Epub 2008 Feb
2.

Brønsted acid-catalyzed insertion of aryldiazoacetates to sp2 carbon-CHO bond:
facile construction of chiral all-carbon quaternary center.

Hashimoto T(1), Naganawa Y, Maruoka K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Sakyo, 
Kyoto 606-8502, Japan.

PMID: 18251483  [PubMed]


497. J Mol Endocrinol. 2008 Feb;40(2):75-91. doi: 10.1677/JME-07-0108.

Identification of transcriptional regulatory elements in the human somatostatin
receptor sst2 promoter and regions including estrogen response element half-site 
for estrogen activation.

Kimura N(1), Takamatsu N, Yaoita Y, Osamura RY, Kimura N.

Author information: 
(1)Tokyo Metropolitan Institute for Neuroscience, Tokyo Metropolitan Organization
for Medical Research, 2-6 Musashidai, Fuchu, Tokyo 183-8526, Japan.

The somatostatin receptor subtype 2 (sst2) mediates inhibition of hormone
secretion and cell proliferation, and modulates neurotransmission. Its expression
is widespread in various normal tissues and many malignant cells, and is
up-regulated by estrogen in breast cancer cells. This study was undertaken to
investigate molecular mechanism of transcriptional regulation of the human sst2
gene, for which an additional exon (exon 1) in the 5'-untranslated region was
recently found. Transient transfection and mutational analysis showed that the
immediate 5'-upstream region containing two Sp1 (-54/-45 and -88/-79) and an
ATF/CRE (-69/-62) sites provided full promoter activity. An EMSA together with
transfection analysis in Sp1-deficient Drosophila Schneider line (SL2) cells
showed that Sp1 acted on the proximal Sp1 site, whereas Sp3, Sp1, and Sp2 did on 
the distal Sp1 site. Activating transcription factor-2 (ATF)-2, c-Jun, and cyclic
AMP response element-binding protein (CREB) interacted with the ATF/CRE site.
Transcriptional activation by estrogen occurred through two different regions;
one included these proximal elements and the other existed in the upstream region
containing estrogen response element (ERE) half-site (-348/-344) and GC-rich
sequence (-447/-414). This upstream estrogen responsiveness was observed in a
human breast cancer T47D cell, but not in GH(3) or estrogen receptor alpha
(ERalpha) -expressing HeLa cells, and was potentiated by overexpression of
ERalpha or ERbeta, whose binding to the ERE half-site was verified by EMSAs. A
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay suggested that ERalpha was recruited to the
ERE half-site after estrogen treatment in T47D cells. The present results should 
provide a molecular basis for transcriptional regulation in a variety of
physiological and pathological contexts of sst2-expressing tissues.

PMID: 18234910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Phys Rev Lett. 2008 Jan 18;100(2):026101. Epub 2008 Jan 14.

Bond-counting rule for carbon and its application to the roughness of diamond
(001).

Yang HX(1), Xu LF, Fang Z, Gu CZ, Zhang SB.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics, Institute of
Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, P.O. Box 603, Beijing 100080, China.

Despite that carbon is tetravalent identical to silicon, first-principles
calculations reveal that stable step structures on diamond (001) are entirely
different from those on silicon. Moreover, pristine Si(001) is flat; pristine
diamond (001) could be rough due to negative step formation energies. A generic
bond-counting rule is established, which should apply to most carbon structures
where sp2 and sp3 hybrids coexist: e.g., it provides a qualitative account of the
step energy order without detailed calculation. Our findings agree with
experimental observations.

PMID: 18232887  [PubMed]


499. Org Lett. 2008 Mar 6;10(5):945-8. doi: 10.1021/ol703130y. Epub 2008 Jan 30.

One-pot synthesis of diarylalkynes using palladium-catalyzed sonogashira reaction
and decarboxylative coupling of sp carbon and sp2 carbon.

Moon J(1), Jeong M, Nam H, Ju J, Moon JH, Jung HM, Lee S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Chonnam National University, 300 Yongbong-dong,
Buk-gu, Gwangju, 500-757, Republic of Korea.

Decarboxylative coupling of sp-sp2 carbons is possible by palladium catalyst.
Employing propiolic acid (1) as a difunctional alkyne, and using the consecutive 
reactions of the Sonogashira reaction and the decarboxylative coupling,
unsymmetrically substituted diaryl alkynes were obtained in moderate to good
yield.

PMID: 18229935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Nat Mater. 2008 Mar;7(3):222-8. doi: 10.1038/nmat2111. Epub 2008 Jan 27.

Direct access to thermally stable and highly crystalline mesoporous
transition-metal oxides with uniform pores.

Lee J(1), Orilall MC, Warren SC, Kamperman M, DiSalvo FJ, Wiesner U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca,
New York 14853, USA.

Even after a decade or so of research, the direct synthesis of highly crystalline
mesoporous transition-metal oxides that are thermally stable and well ordered
still constitutes a major challenge. Although various soft- and hard-templating
approaches have been developed in the past, they usually suffer from multiple,
tedious steps and often result in poor structure control. For many applications
including power generation and energy conversion, however, high crystallinity and
controlled mesoporosity are a prerequisite. To this end, here we report on an
approach established for group-IV (titanium) and group-V (niobium) oxides, with
potential applications to photovoltaic cells and fuel cells, respectively, which 
overcomes previous limitations. It gives direct access to the desired materials
in a 'one-pot' synthesis using block copolymers with an sp2-hybridized
carbon-containing hydrophobic block as structure-directing agents which converts 
to a sturdy, amorphous carbon material under appropriate heating conditions. This
in situ carbon is sufficient to act as a rigid support keeping the pores of the
oxides intact while crystallizing at temperatures as high as 1,000 degrees C.

PMID: 18223653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Arch Dis Child. 2008 Apr;93(4):274-7. doi: 10.1136/adc.2007.125393. Epub 2008 Jan
11.

The MRCPCH MasterCourse.

Scott-Jupp R(1), Hall D, Vyas D, Wei LY.

Author information: 
(1)Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury SP2 8BJ, UK. scottjupp@aol.com

PMID: 18192316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Philos Trans A Math Phys Eng Sci. 2008 May 13;366(1870):1591-611. doi:
10.1098/rsta.2007.2174.

Nanomechanics of carbon nanotubes.

Kis A(1), Zettl A.

Author information: 
(1)School of Engineering, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, CH-1015
Lausanne, Switzerland. andras.kis@epfl.ch

Some of the most important potential applications of carbon nanotubes are related
to their mechanical properties. Stiff sp2 bonds result in a Young's modulus close
to that of diamond, while the relatively weak van der Waals interaction between
the graphitic shells acts as a form of lubrication. Previous characterization of 
the mechanical properties of nanotubes includes a rich variety of experiments
involving mechanical deformation of nanotubes using scanning probe microscopes.
These results have led to promising prototypes of nanoelectromechanical devices
such as high-performance nanomotors, switches and oscillators based on carbon
nanotubes.

PMID: 18192169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Org Lett. 2008 Feb 7;10(3):377-80. doi: 10.1021/ol702420x. Epub 2008 Jan 10.

Differentially protected benzenediboronic acids: divalent cross-coupling modules 
for the efficient synthesis of boron-substituted oligoarenes.

Noguchi H(1), Shioda T, Chou CM, Suginome M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Synthetic Chemistry and Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of
Engineering, Kyoto University, Katsura, Kyoto 615-8510, Japan.

On the basis of the boron-masking strategy, new divalent cross-coupling modules
have been designed for the efficient synthesis of boron-substituted oligoarenes. 
The modules, i.e., monoprotected o-, m-, and p-benzenediboronic acid derivatives,
undergo highly selective Suzuki-Miyaura coupling with sp2 iodides, bromides,
chlorides, and triflates, affording coupling products in which the protected
boronyl groups are left intact.

PMID: 18183990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Chem Asian J. 2008 Feb 1;3(2):261-71. doi: 10.1002/asia.200700333.

C-C coupling reactions of superstrong CF3 groups with C(sp2)-H bonds: reactivity 
and synthetic utility of zero-valent niobium catalyst.

Fuchibe K(1), Mitomi K, Suzuki R, Akiyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Science, Department of Chemistry, Gakushuin University, 1-5-1
Mejiro, Toshima-ku, Tokyo 171-8588, Japan.

It was found that zero-valent niobium is an efficient catalyst for the
intramolecular C-C coupling reactions of o-aryl and o-alkenyl
alpha,alpha,alpha-trifluorotoluene derivatives. The superstrong C-F bonds of CF3 
groups and neighboring C(sp2)-H bonds were doubly activated, and fluorenes and
indenes were obtained in good yields. The niobium fluorocarbenoid species is
proposed to be the key intermediate.

PMID: 18175305  [PubMed]


5. J Am Chem Soc. 2008 Jan 23;130(3):945-54. doi: 10.1021/ja075892i. Epub 2008 Jan
1.

Quantifying weak hydrogen bonding in uracil and 4-cyano-4'-ethynylbiphenyl: a
combined computational and experimental investigation of NMR chemical shifts in
the solid state.

Uldry AC(1), Griffin JM, Yates JR, Pérez-Torralba M, María MD, Webber AL,
Beaumont ML, Samoson A, Claramunt RM, Pickard CJ, Brown SP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Physics and Astronomy, University of St Andrews, North Haugh, St
Andrews KY16 9SS, UK.

Weak hydrogen bonding in uracil and 4-cyano-4'-ethynylbiphenyl, for which
single-crystal diffraction structures reveal close CH...O=C and C[triple
bond]CH...N[triple bond]C distances, is investigated in a study that combines the
experimental determination of 1H, 13C, and 15N chemical shifts by magic-angle
spinning (MAS) solid-state NMR with first-principles calculations using
plane-wave basis sets. An optimized synthetic route, including the isolation and 
characterization of intermediates, to 4-cyano-4'-ethynylbiphenyl at natural
abundance and with 13C[triple bond]13CH and 15N[triple bond]C labeling is
described. The difference in chemical shifts calculated, on the one hand, for the
full crystal structure and, on the other hand, for an isolated molecule depends
on both intermolecular hydrogen bonding interactions and aromatic ring current
effects. In this study, the two effects are separated computationally by, first, 
determining the difference in chemical shift between that calculated for a plane 
(uracil) or an isolated chain (4-cyano-4'-ethynylbiphenyl) and that calculated
for an isolated molecule and by, second, calculating intraplane or intrachain
nucleus-independent chemical shifts that quantify the ring current effects caused
by neighboring molecules. For uracil, isolated molecule to plane changes in the
1H chemical shift of 2.0 and 2.2 ppm are determined for the CH protons involved
in CH...O weak hydrogen bonding; this compares to changes of 5.1 and 5.4 ppm for 
the NH protons involved in conventional NH...O hydrogen bonding. A comparison of 
CH bond lengths for geometrically relaxed uracil molecules in the crystal
structure and for geometrically relaxed isolated molecules reveals differences of
no more than 0.002 A, which corresponds to changes in the calculated 1H chemical 
shifts of at most 0.1 ppm. For the C[triple bond]CH...N[triple bond]C weak
hydrogen bonds in 4-cyano-4'-ethynylbiphenyl, the calculated molecule to chain
changes are of similar magnitude but opposite sign for the donor 13C and acceptor
15N nuclei. In uracil and 4-cyano-4'-ethynylbiphenyl, the CH hydrogen-bonding
donors are sp2 and sp hybridized, respectively; a comparison of the calculated
changes in 1H chemical shift with those for the sp3 hybridized CH donors in
maltose (Yates et al. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2005, 127, 10216) reveals no marked
dependence on hybridization for weak hydrogen-bonding strength.

PMID: 18166050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Am Chem Soc. 2008 Jan 23;130(3):933-44. doi: 10.1021/ja075905s. Epub 2007 Dec
29.

Oxidations of N-(3-indoleethyl) cyclic aliphatic amines by horseradish
peroxidase: the indole ring binds to the enzyme and mediates electron-transfer
amine oxidation.

Ling KQ(1), Li WS, Sayre LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio
44106, USA.

Although oxidations of aromatic amines by horseradish peroxidase (HRP) are
well-known, typical aliphatic amines are not substrates of HRP. In this study,
the reactions of N-benzyl and N-methyl cyclic amines with HRP were found to be
slow, but reactions of N-(3-indoleethyl) cyclic amines were 2-3 orders of
magnitude faster. Analyses of pH-rate profiles revealed a dominant contribution
to reaction by the amine-free base forms, the only species found to bind to the
enzyme. A metabolic study on a family of congeneric N-(3-indoleethyl) cyclic
amines indicated competition between amine and indole oxidation pathways. Amine
oxidation dominated for the seven- and eight-membered azacycles, where ring size 
supports the change in hybridization from sp3 to sp2 that occurs upon
one-electron amine nitrogen oxidation, whereas only indole oxidation was observed
for the six-membered ring congener. Optical difference spectroscopic binding data
and computational docking simulations suggest that all the arylalkylamine
substrates bind to the enzyme through their aromatic termini with similar binding
modes and binding affinities. Kinetic saturation was observed for a particularly 
soluble substrate, consistent with an obligatory role of an enzyme-substrate
complexation preceding electron transfer. The significant rate enhancements seen 
for the indoleethylamine substrates suggest the ability of the bound indole ring 
to mediate what amounts to medium long-range electron-transfer oxidation of the
tertiary amine center by the HRP oxidants. This is the first systematic
investigation to document aliphatic amine oxidation by HRP at rates consistent
with normal metabolic turnover, and the demonstration that this is facilitated by
an auxiliary electron-rich aromatic ring.

PMID: 18163622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Res Gerontol Nurs. 2008 Jan;1(1):4-13. doi: 10.3928/19404921-20080101-03.

The impact of policy on nursing and allied health services. Lessons from the
Medicare Home Health Benefit.

Davitt JK(1), Choi S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Social Policy and Practice, University of Pennsylvania, 3701 Locust 
Walk, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. jdavitt@sp2.upenn.edu

This article analyzes changes in Medicare home health staffing and service
delivery patterns across three different reimbursement methods: cost based
(1996), interim payment system (IPS) (1999), and the prospective payment system
(PPS) (2002). This study combined secondary analysis of existing data (Provider
of Services File and Statistical Supplement) with qualitative interviews of 22
home health agency directors to understand agency responses to policy changes
created under the Balanced Budget Act of 1997. Cuts in staff and visits were
greater under the IPS than they were under the PPS. Agencies cut staff and visits
more dramatically for nonskilled services across both time periods. As a
proportion of total services and visits, nursing and therapy services increased
the most. Directors used various strategies to sustain the agency financially
during these dramatic cuts in reimbursements, including eliminating staff,
shifting staff roles, training staff on reimbursement methods, increasing use of 
telephone monitoring, increasing patient and family education and self-care, and 
cutting services to patients. Directors expressed concerns about staff stress
related to the changes and the need to increase productivity without increasing
staff. However, directors also believed the agency's position would improve under
the PPS. Additional research is needed to determine whether increased staff
stress, work demands, and fewer resources for patients will affect the quality of
care delivered and, thus, patient outcomes under the PPS.

Copyright 2008, SLACK Incorporated.

PMID: 20078013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Nano Lett. 2008 Jan;8(1):36-41. Epub 2007 Dec 22.

Raman spectra of graphite oxide and functionalized graphene sheets.

Kudin KN(1), Ozbas B, Schniepp HC, Prud'homme RK, Aksay IA, Car R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544,
USA.

We investigate Raman spectra of graphite oxide and functionalized graphene sheets
with epoxy and hydroxyl groups and Stone-Wales and 5-8-5 defects by
first-principles calculations to interpret our experimental results. Only the
alternating pattern of single-double carbon bonds within the sp2 carbon ribbons
provides a satisfactory explanation for the experimentally observed blue shift of
the G band of the Raman spectra relative to graphite. To obtain these
single-double bonds, it is necessary to have sp3 carbons on the edges of a zigzag
carbon ribbon.

PMID: 18154315  [PubMed]


9. Neoplasia. 2007 Dec;9(12):1021-9.

In vivo molecular imaging to diagnose and subtype tumors through
receptor-targeted optically labeled monoclonal antibodies.

Koyama Y(1), Barrett T, Hama Y, Ravizzini G, Choyke PL, Kobayashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Imaging Program, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Building 10, Room 1B40, Bethesda, MD,
20892-1088, USA.

Molecular imaging of cell surface receptors can potentially diagnose tumors based
on their distinct expression profiles. Using multifilter spectrally resolved
optical imaging with three fluorescently labeled antibodies, we simultaneously
imaged three different cell surface receptors to distinguish tumor types
noninvasively. We selected tumors overexpressing different subtypes of EGFR
receptor: HER-1 (A431) and HER-2 (NIH3T3/HER2(+)), or interleukin-2 receptor
alpha-subunit receptor (IL-2Ralpha; SP2/Tac). After tumor establishment, a
cocktail of three fluorescently labeled monoclonal antibodies was injected:
cetuximab-Cy5 (targetingHER-1),
trastuzumab-Cy7(HER-2),anddaclizumab-AlexaFluor-700 (IL-2Ra). Optical
fluorescence imaging was performed after 24 hours with both a red filter set and 
three successive filter sets (yellow, red, and deep red). Spectrally resolved
imaging of 10 mice clearly distinguished A431, NIH3T3/HER2(+), and SP2-Tac tumors
based on their distinct optical spectra. Three-filter sets significantly
increased the signal-to-background ratio compared to a single-filter set by
reducing the background signal, thus significantly improving the differentiation 
of each of the receptors targeted (P < .022). In conclusion, following
multifilter spectrally resolved imaging, different tumor types can be
simultaneously distinguished and diagnosed in vivo. Multiple filter sets increase
the signal-to-noise ratio by substantially reducing the background signal, and
may allow more optical dyes to be resolved within the narrow limits of the
near-infrared spectrum.

PMCID: PMC2134899
PMID: 18084609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Lasers Med Sci. 2008 Oct;23(4):427-33. Epub 2007 Dec 12.

Outcome of erbium:yttrium aluminium garnet laser resurfacing treatments.

Cole RP(1), Widdowson D, Moore JC.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Specialist Laser Centre, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury, Wilts 
SP2 8BJ, UK. richard.cole@salisbury.nhs.uk

Erbium:yttrium aluminium garnet (erbium:YAG) laser treatment was used to
resurface skin abnormalities in patients suffering from conditions that included 
epidermal naevi, tuberous sclerosis, angiofibromata, neurofibromatosis, and
scarring caused by acne or other means. Patients completed self-report
questionnaires before their first laser test patch session, and again
approximately 4 months after one treatment, so that its success could be
evaluated from the patient's perspective. Disability and distress were quantified
with the University of York Health Measurement Questionnaire (HMQ). Satisfaction 
with appearance was measured with a specifically designed Salisbury Appearance
Scale (SAS) questionnaire. Pretreatment questionnaires were completed by 108
(HMQ) and 80 (SAS) patients. Thirty-six (HMQ) and 22 (SAS) patients completed a
full treatment during the study period. Some patients had a test patch only
during the study period. Others decided against further treatment after the test 
patch. Control SAS questionnaires were completed by 29 subjects on two occasions 
and showed no change over time. There was a significant improvement in patient
satisfaction with appearance (SAS), but there was no significant difference in
the disability and distress (HMQ) after erbium:YAG resurfacing.

PMID: 18074165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. BMC Biotechnol. 2007 Dec 10;7:89.

GADD153 expression does not necessarily correlate with changes in culture
behavior of hybridoma cells.

Mallory M(1), Chartrand K, Gauthier ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Laurentian University, Sudbury,
Ontario, Canada. mtmallory@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: The acute sensitivity of some hybridoma cell lines to culture-related
stresses severely limits their productivity. Recent developments in the
characterization of the stress signals modulating the cellular phenotype revealed
that the pro-apoptotic transcription factor Gadd153 could be used as a marker to 
facilitate the optimization of mammalian cell cultures. In this report, we
analyzed the expression of Gadd153 in Sp2/0-Ag14 murine hybridoma cells grown in 
stationary batch culture and subjected to two different culture optimization
paradigms: L-glutamine supplementation and ectopic expression of Bcl-xL, an
anti-apoptotic gene.
RESULTS: The expression of Gadd153 was found to increase in Sp2/0-Ag14 cells in a
manner which coincided with the decline in cell viability. L-glutamine
supplementation prolonged Sp2/0-Ag14 cell survival and greatly suppressed Gadd153
expression both at the mRNA and protein level. However, Gadd153 levels remained
low after L-glutamine supplementation even as cell viability declined. Bcl-xL
overexpression also extended Sp2/0-Ag14 cell viability, initially delayed the
induction of Gadd153, but did not prevent the increase in Gadd153 protein levels 
during the later phase of the culture, when cell viability was declining.
Interestingly, L-glutamine supplementation prevented Gadd153 up-regulation in
cells ectopically expressing Bcl-xL, but had no effect on cell viability.
CONCLUSION: This study highlights important limitations to the use of Gadd153 as 
an indicator of cell stress in hybridoma cells.

PMCID: PMC2222238
PMID: 18070358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Med Chem. 2007 Dec 27;50(26):6501-6. Epub 2007 Dec 8.

Conformational comparisons of a series of tachykinin peptide analogs.

Beard DJ(1), Perrine SA, Phillips E, Hoque S, Conerly S, Tichenor C, Simmons MA, 
Young JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Mississippi State University, Mississippi State, USA.
debbie.beard@msstate.edu

Previous studies have shown differences in the biological activity and the
structure of two naturally occurring tachykinin peptides, substance P (SP,
RPKPQQFFGLM-NH2) and ranatachykinin C (RTKC, HNPASFIGLM-NH2). To further
understand the basis for these differences, four analogs that selectively
incorporate the amino acid differences between SP and RTKC have been synthesized 
for study. The four peptide analogs studied have the following amino acid
sequences: SP2-11, also known as des-Arg SP (PKPQQFFGLM-NH2); Q5A-SP
(RPKPAQFFGLM-NH2); Q6S-SP (RPKPQSFFGLM-NH2); and Q5AQ6S-SP (RPKPASFFGLM-NH2).
Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and molecular modeling calculations were 
performed on SP, RTKC, SP2-11, Q5A-SP, Q6S-SP, and Q5AQ6S-SP to compare their
conformational differences and similarities in the presence of the membrane
mimetic system sodium dodecyl sulfate. The molecular modeling data of the analogs
Q5A-SP and Q6S-SP show residues 1-3 have a random conformation and residues 4-8
have a helical structure, while the C-terminus contains a poly C7 conformation
that is similar to SP but different from RTKC. The molecular modeling data of the
analogs SP2-11 and Q5AQ6S-SP show a continuous helix conformation for residues
4-11 at the C-terminus, which is different from SP but similar to RTKC. These
structural differences are related to the functional differences of binding of
the peptides at the SP receptor (NK1).

PMID: 18067242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Wei Sheng Wu Xue Bao. 2007 Oct;47(5):928-31.

[Production of monoclonal antibodies to Cymbidium mosaic virus and application in
orchids virus detection].

[Article in Chinese]

Meng CM(1), Wu JX, Xie L, Zheng JK, Hong J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310029, China.
mcm1983@126.com

Three hybridoma cell lines, 2C6, 5B7 and 12G9, secreting monoclonal antibodies
(McAbs) against Cymbidium mosaic virus (CymMV) were produced by fusing mouse
myeloma cells (SP2/0) with spleen cells from BALB/ C immunized by the CymMV
particles. The three McAbs could specifically react with CymMV. The titres of
ascitic fluids of two McAbs are up to 10(-6) in I-ELISA. Isotypes and subclasses 
of the the three McAbs belong to IgG1. Isotypes of light strains of the three
McAbs all belong to kappa. They were used in antigen-coated plate (ACP)-ELISA for
CymMV detection, and ACP-ELISA could successfully detect 0.487 ng of purified
CymMV or virus in plant sap diluted 1:10240. The presence of CymMV in field
Orchids tissues was investigated with ACP-ELISA.

PMID: 18062276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Toxicon. 2008 Mar 1;51(3):345-52. Epub 2007 Oct 24.

Neutralization of hemorrhagic snake venom metalloproteinase HR1a from
Protobothrops flavoviridis by human monoclonal antibody.

Morine N(1), Matsuda S, Terada K, Eto A, Ishida I, Oku H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Okinawa Prefectural Institute of Health and
Environment, 2085 Ozato, Nanjo-city, Okinawa 901-1202, Japan.
morinenb@pref.okinawa.lg.jp

Human monoclonal antibodies (HuMAbs) against HR1a from Protobothrops (formerly
Trimeresurus) flavoviridis venom were obtained by the fusion of SP2/0-Ag14
myeloma cells and spleen cells from KM mice immunized with purified HR1a. The
ability of HuMAbs to neutralize the HR1a was determined by in vitro
neutralization assay and by neutralization of the hemorrhagic activity. The
initial screening of over 300 hybridoma fusion wells resulted in the
establishment of 80 HR1a-reactive hybridomas. Of the reactive clones, HuMAb
HR1a-7 and HR1a-18 neutralized both proteolytic and hemorrhagic activity of HR1a.
Mapping of epitope recognized by the reactive clones was performed by using an
ELISA that measured antibody binding to overlapping peptides (15 amino acid
peptide offset frameshifted by three residues) covering the metalloproteinase
domain sequence of HR1a. HuMAbs HR1a-7 and HR1a-18 neutralized HR1a by reacting
with peptides of EQQRYLNNFRFIELV and IVNTLNETYRYL. The three-dimensional
structure of HR1a based on a homology modeling predicted that these two epitopes 
are surface exposed.

PMID: 18061641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Cancer Biol Ther. 2007 Dec;6(12):1871-9. Epub 2007 Sep 1.

Study of immunotherapy of murine myeloma by an IL-21-based tumor vaccine in
BALB/C mice.

Dou J(1), Chu L, Zhao F, Tang Q, Zhang A, Zhang L, Wang Y, Li Y, Cao M, Gu N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogenic Biology and Immunology, School of Basic Medical
Science, Southeast University, Nanjing, China. njdoujun@yahoo.com.cn

The tumor cells can be recognized and eliminated by the power of the immune
response has result in intense interest in the development of tumor vaccines
transfected with plasmid DNA containing target genes, and the tumor vaccines are 
being evaluated as prophylactic and therapeutic vaccines for tumor. In current
study, we designed a murine myeloma cell (SP2/0) vaccine containing mIL-21
plasmid DNA and to evaluate its anti-tumor efficacy and analyze the mechanism of 
anti-tumor efficacy. It was upregulated obviously that the MHC-I molecule was
expressed on SP2/0-mIL-21 tumor cells surface and the significant tumor
regression and prolonged survival were observed in BALB/c mice injected with the 
SP2/0-mIL-21 tumor vaccine. The four mice without tumors growth were rechallenged
with SP2/0 cells on the opposite site of the back and there was only one with
growth a small tumor after 30 days and others remained tumor free. The cytotoxic 
activities of NK, CTLs and the IFN-gamma; were significantly increased
respectively in immunized mice. The expression of I-TAC in the tumor tissue was
upregulated and the tumor tissue were showed the tumor cells were apoptosis and a
lots of infiltrating lymphocytes and phagocytes. We conclude that the autologous 
IL-21-producing tumor vaccine can induce strong cell-mediated immune response and
it is a promising immune adjunctive modality to prevent or inhibit growth of
SP2/0 cells in mice model.

PMID: 18059168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Psychiatr Serv. 2007 Dec;58(12):1582-7.

Horizons of context: understanding the police decision to arrest people with
mental illness.

Morabito MS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Mental Health Services and Criminal Justice Research, Rutgers
University, New Brunswick, NJ, USA. melisj@sp2.upenn.edu

The criminalization hypothesis assumes that deinstitutionalization coupled with
inadequate police training has led to the increased arrest of people with mental 
illness. Arrest is viewed as a means to manage the troublesome behavior that
often results from mental illness. Supporting research has emphasized the
contributing role that illness plays in the arrest decision. This assumption
largely ignores an extant criminal justice literature on the factors that
influence arrest. On the basis of a review of this criminal justice literature,
beginning with Bittner's 1967 seminal work, a framework is proposed that
incorporates three contexts -- manipulative, temporal, and scenic -- surrounding 
the police encounter and the relationship of these contexts to mental illness.
These three "horizons" incorporate the characteristics of the community, the
offender, and the incident, all of which are recognized as influential in shaping
police discretion. The scenic horizon is indicative of the features of the
community. The temporal horizon includes police knowledge that stretches beyond
the specific incident and officer characteristics. The manipulative horizon
involves the current incident from the standpoint of the officer and includes
considerations of safety for the community as well as the immediate concerns of
the officer. Implications of this framework are then explored with respect to
both police and mental health service mandates.

PMCID: PMC2811044
PMID: 18048560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Psychiatr Serv. 2007 Dec;58(12):1577-81.

Critical time intervention for reentry from prison for persons with mental
illness.

Draine J(1), Herman DB.

Author information: 
(1)School of Social Policy and Practice, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia
PA 19104-6214, USA. jdraine@sp2.upenn.edu

Critical time intervention (CTI) is a nine-month, three-stage intervention that
strategically develops individualized linkages in the community and seeks to
enhance engagement with treatment and community supports through building
problem-solving skills, motivational coaching, and advocacy with community
agencies. It is an empirically supported practice shown to enhance continuity of 
care for people with mental illness after discharge from homeless shelters and
psychiatric hospitals. This article describes CTI as a promising model to provide
support for reentry from prison for people with mental illness. A conceptual
model is presented for evaluating the impact of CTI on the transition from
correctional settings to the community. The model is potentially useful for
further development of mental health service-driven models of reentry process and
outcome. Although CTI is a potentially useful model for reentry services for this
population, challenges remain in adapting it to specific correctional facilities,
justice systems, and community contexts.

PMID: 18048559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2008 Jan 15;18(2):782-7. Epub 2007 Nov 17.

Design, synthesis, and biological activity of piperidine diamine derivatives as
factor Xa inhibitor.

Mochizuki A(1), Nakamoto Y, Naito H, Uoto K, Ohta T.

Author information: 
(1)Medicinal Chemistry Research Laboratory I, Daiichi Sankyo Co., Ltd, 1-2-58,
Hiromachi, Tokyo 140-8710, Japan. mochizuki.akiyoshi.yk@daiichisankyo.co.jp

Previously, we identified cyclohexane diamine derivative 1 as orally bioavailable
factor Xa inhibitor. We have investigated two racemic cis-piperidine diamine
derivatives 2 and 3 based on 1. Compounds 2a-e showed higher fXa inhibitory
activity, anticoagulant activity, and aqueous solubility than 3a-e having same
substituent. Compounds 2a, 2c, 2e, and 2g-m having sp2 nitrogen, especially amide
and urea derivatives, showed potent anticoagulant activity. Compounds 2h and 2k
showed high oral activities in rats.

PMID: 18039572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Nucleic Acids Symp Ser (Oxf). 2007;(51):285-6.

Specific detection of PCR product from Legionella pneumophila strain
Philadelphia1 using zinc finger protein Sp2.

Ikebukuro K(1), Kumagai T, Motoki H, Osawa Y, Matuo T, Horiuchi M, Sode K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Graduate School of Engineering, Tokyo University 
of Agriculture & Technology, 2-24-16 Naka-machi, Koganei, Tokyo 184-8588, Japan.

We have developed a novel method to detect PCR products from pathogen genome DNA 
by Zinc finger protein that can bind to double strand DNA (dsDNA) in sequence
specific manner. In this study, we tried to detect Legionella pneumophila strain 
Philadelphia 1 using Zinc finger protein. We found the specific target DNA
sequence for zinc finger protein Sp2 in L. pneumophila strain Philadelphia 1
genome DNA. Specific PCR product was successfully amplified from L. pneumophila
strain Philadelphia 1 genome DNA and we used Zinc finger protein Sp2 to detect
it. We succeeded in detecting the PCR products from L. pneumophila strain
Philadelphia 1 genome DNA with Sp2.

PMID: 18029698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2007 Nov;27(11):1778-80.

[Preparation and characterization of a monoclonal antibody against human SOCS3].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen CC(1), Li WY, Zhang CJ, Wei DP, Kuang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, West China School of Preclinical and Forensic
Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China. chenchangchunchun@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To prepare and characterize the monoclonal antibody (mAb) against
human SOCS3.
METHODS: BALB/c mice were immunized with recombinant GST-SOCS3 protein, from
which the spleen cells were isolated and fused with Sp2/0 cells. After several
rounds of screening and cloning, the hybridoma cell strain secreting anti-SOCS3
mAb was obtained, whose specificity was evaluated using ELISA and Western
blotting, and the titer, immunoglobulin subtype and affinity of the mAb were also
measured.
RESULTS: The hybridoma cell strain secreting anti-SOCS3 mAb was identified to
belong to IgG2a subtype. The mAb titers in cultural supernatant and acetic fluid 
were 1:640 and 1:25600, respectively, as determined by ELISA with affinity
reaching 4.84x10(6) L/mol.
CONCLUSION: The success in anti-SOCS3 mAb preparation provides the basis for
further study of the negative regulation of cytokine signal transduction and the 
immunoregulation in microorganism infections.

PMID: 18024313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Biotechnol Prog. 2007 Nov-Dec;23(6):1441-6. Epub 2007 Nov 17.

Inhibition of HeLa Cell apoptosis by storage-protein 2.

Rhee WJ(1), Lee EH, Park JH, Lee JE, Park TH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Seoul National University,
Gwanak-Gu Sillim-Dong San 56-1, Seoul 151-744, Korea.

Apoptosis is a barrier to maintaining high viable cell densities in animal cell
culture. Silkworm hemolymph and its 30K protein have been reported to exhibit
anti-apoptotic activity in various mammalian and insect cell systems. The 30K
protein is thermally unstable at temperatures higher than 60 degrees C; however, 
the silkworm hemolymph heat-treated at 70-80 degrees C still exhibited
anti-apoptotic activity. This indicates that silkworm hemolymph contains another 
anti-apoptotic compound other than 30K protein. In this article, the
anti-apoptotic molecule other than 30K protein was found from the silkworm
hemolymph and identified. This molecule was storage-protein 2 (SP2), which has no
homology with any known anti-apoptotic protein. This molecule was heat-stable up 
to 80 degrees C, while 30K protein lost its activity at temperatures higher than 
60 degrees C. When apoptosis was induced by staurosporine in HeLa cells, SP2
protein suppressed nuclear fragmentation and apoptotic body formation. Moreover, 
the generation of reactive oxygen species after apoptosis induction was
inhibited, which means the inhibition occurred in an early step of the apoptotic 
process. Inhibition of apoptosis by the SP2 protein would lead to the
minimization of cell death during commercial mammalian cell culture.

PMID: 18020360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Molecules. 2004 Dec 31;9(12):1160-76.

Using variable and fixed topological indices for the prediction of reaction rate 
constants of volatile unsaturated hydrocarbons with OH radicals.

Pompe M(1), Veber M, Randic M, Balaban AT.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Chemistry and Chemical Technology, University of Ljubljana,
Askerceva 5, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia. matevz.pompe@uni-lj.si

Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) play an important role in different
photochemical processes in the troposphere. In order to predict their impact on
ozone formation processes a detailed knowledge about their abundance in the
atmosphere as well as their reaction rate constants is required. The QSPR models 
were developed for the prediction of reaction rate constants of volatile
unsaturated hydrocarbons. The chemical structure was encoded by constitutional
and topological indices. Multiple linear regression models using CODESSA software
was developed with the RMS(CV) error of 0.119 log units. The chemical structure
was encoded by six topological indices. Additionally, a regression model using a 
variable connectivity index was developed. It provided worse cross-validation
results with an RMS(CV) error of 0.16 log units, but enabled a structural
interpretation of the obtained model. We differentiated between three classes of 
carbon atoms: sp2-hybridized, non-allylic sp3-hybridized and allylic
sp3-hybridized. The structural interpretation of the developed model shows that
most probably the most important mechanisms are the addition to multiple bonds
and the hydrogen atom abstraction at allylic sites.

PMID: 18007510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Nano Lett. 2007 Dec;7(12):3608-11. Epub 2007 Nov 16.

Graphene nanostrip digital memory device.

Gunlycke D(1), Areshkin DA, Li J, Mintmire JW, White CT.

Author information: 
(1)Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC 20375, USA.
daniel.gunlycke@nrl.navy.mil

In equilibrium, graphene nanostrips, with hydrogens sp2-bonded to carbons along
their zigzag edges, are expected to exhibit a spin-polarized ground state.
However, in the presence of a ballistic current, we find that there exists a
voltage range over which both spin-polarized and spin-unpolarized nanostrip
states are stable. These states can represent a bit in a binary memory device
that could be switched through the applied bias and read by measuring the current
through the nanostrip.

PMID: 18004900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Org Chem. 2007 Dec 7;72(25):9669-78. Epub 2007 Nov 15.

Through-space intramolecular palladium rearrangement in substituted aryl
complexes: theoretical study of the aryl to alkylpalladium migration process.

Mota AJ(1), Dedieu A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química InorgAnica, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de
Granada, Campus de Fuentenueva, 18071-Granada, Spain. mota@ugr.es

DFT/B3LYP calculations have been carried out to study intramolecular 1,n
palladium shifts (n = 3-5) between sp2 and sp3 carbon atoms in alkylarylpalladium
systems. Such shifts, which also involve a concomitant exchange with a hydrogen
atom of the alkylaryl ligand, are quite often a pivotal step of several organic
transformations mediated by palladium complexes. We show that the intimate
mechanism for the 1,3 shift corresponds to a Pd(IV) pathway, whereas a Pd(II)
pathway is favored in the case of 1,5 migrations. In the case of 1,4 migrations, 
both mechanisms are competitive. The Pd(IV) pathway can involve either a true
Pd(IV) intermediate (oxidative addition/reductive elimination mechanism) or a
Pd(IV) transition state (oxidative hydrogen migration mechanism). The energy
barrier is very high for the 1,3 palladium shift, making this process very
unlikely, in contrast to the other ones which have enthalpy barriers ranging
between 22.8 kcal mol-1 (for the 1,5 shift) and 31.9 kcal mol-1 (for the least
favorable 1,4 shift studied here). All of these results are in line with our
previous results for palladium shifts between two sp2 carbon atoms. In addition, 
the sp2 to sp3 shifts have been found to be rather exothermic owing to the
possibility for the alkylaryl ligand in the product to achieve a eta3
coordination mode. This eta3 coordination mode results either from the shift
itself (1,3 case) or from a subsequent rearrangement that comprises a
chain-running mechanism within the alkyl chain bound to the metal (for n > 3).

PMID: 18001098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Nov;23(11):1034-7.

[Development and characterization of monoclonal antibodies against VP1 protein of
AsiaI type foot-and-mouth virus].

[Article in Chinese]

Lin T(1), Chang HY, DU HF, Shao JJ, DU JZ, Cong GZ.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Virology of Ministry of Agriculture, State Key
Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Lanzhou Veterinary Research
Institute of Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou 730046, China.

AIM: To prepare the monoclonal antibodies against VP1 protein of type AsiaI
foot-and mouth disease virus (FMDV) and identify the characterization.
METHODS: Three cell of hybridization that strains secreted monoclonal
antibody(mAb) against type AsiaI FMDV were produced by fusing mouse myeloma cells
(Sp2/0) with spleen cells from BALB/c immunized with the purified recombinant VP1
protein.
RESULTS: The three hybridized cell lines reacted with cattle type AsiaI FMDV, the
titres of ascetic fluids of the three mAbs ranged from 1:10(5) to 1:10(6)
indirect ELISA showed. Among the three mAbs,1B8 belonged to IgG1, 5E1 and 5E2
pertained to IgG2a. Besides, the three strain antibodies stably excreted
antibodies and reacted with type AsiaI FMDV.
CONCLUSION: VP1 protein of FMDV could replace FMDV can be use to replace FMDV to 
prepare mAbs.

PMID: 17988586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Nov 13;104(46):18175-80. Epub 2007 Nov 5.

Developmental pathway of CD4+CD8- medullary thymocytes during mouse ontogeny and 
its defect in Aire-/- mice.

Li J(1), Li Y, Yao JY, Jin R, Zhu MZ, Qian XP, Zhang J, Fu YX, Wu L, Zhang Y,
Chen WF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Peking University Health Science Center, 38 Xue Yuan
Road, Beijing 100083, China.

The newly generated single-positive (SP) thymocytes undergo further maturation in
the thymic medulla before their emigration to the periphery. The present study
was undertaken to validate a developmental program we proposed for CD4SP
medullary thymocytes and to explore the mechanisms regulating this process.
During mouse ontogeny, the emergence of different subsets of CD4SP thymocytes
followed a strict temporal order from SP1 to SP4. Parallel to the transition in
surface phenotype, a steady increase in function was observed. As further
evidence, purified SP1 cells were able to sequentially give rise to SP2, SP3, and
SP4 cells in intrathymic adoptive transfer and in culture. Notably, the
development of CD4SP cells in the medulla seemed to be critically dependent on a 
functionally intact medullary epithelial cell compartment because Relb and Aire
deficiency were found to cause severe blockage at the transition from SP3 to SP4.
Taken together, this work establishes an ontogenetically and functionally
relevant maturation program for CD4SP thymocytes. Precise dissection of this
program should facilitate further inquiry into the molecular mechanisms governing
normal thymocyte development and its disturbance in pathological conditions.

PMCID: PMC2084316
PMID: 17984055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. DNA Cell Biol. 2008 Feb;27(2):91-100.

An anti-double-stranded DNA monoclonal antibody induced by tumor cell-derived DNA
inhibits the growth of tumor in vitro and in vivo via triggering apoptosis.

Cao Q(1), Xu W, Wen Z, Xu L, Li K, Chu Y, Xiong S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for ImmunoBiology, Department of Immunology, Shanghai Medical
College of Fudan University, Shanghai, P.R. China.

Serological presence of anti-double-stranded DNA (anti-dsDNA) antibodies is a
common phenomenon in cancer patients. Some patients with relatively high levels
of anti-dsDNA antibodies may have a better prognosis, indicating the potential
antitumor roles of anti-dsDNA antibodies. To delineate the role and mechanisms of
anti-dsDNA antibodies in delaying tumor development, here we prepared a panel of 
anti-dsDNA monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) and assessed their antitumor effects both
in vitro and in vivo. After immunization of BALB/c mice with DNA from SP2/0 tumor
cells, 12 anti-dsDNA mAbs were obtained. Among these mAbs, mAb 2G8 exhibited the 
strongest cytotoxicity to Wehi164 cells in vitro and significantly inhibited the 
growth of tumor in vivo. This mAb 2G8-mediated antitumor effect was mainly
exerted by triggering apoptosis, as evidenced by Annexin V staining and DNA
fragmentation. Further, the expression of antiapoptotic genes Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL
was downregulated while that of pro-apoptotic gene Bax was upregulated,
suggesting the involvement of mitochondrial apoptotic pathway. Taken together,
dsDNA-specific mAb 2G8 revealed promising tumor-suppressive activity by inducing 
apoptosis, which provides a possible new strategy for the development of tumor
intervening methods.

PMID: 17979521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Ann Intern Med. 2007 Nov 6;147(9):620-7.

"You're not a victim of domestic violence, are you?" Provider patient
communication about domestic violence.

Rhodes KV(1), Frankel RM, Levinthal N, Prenoveau E, Bailey J, Levinson W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, School of Social Policy & Practice,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.
kvr@sp2.upenn.edu

Comment in
    Ann Intern Med. 2007 Nov 6;147(9):666-7.

BACKGROUND: Women who are victims of domestic violence frequently seek care in an
emergency department. However, it is challenging to hold sensitive conversations 
in this environment.
OBJECTIVE: To describe communication about domestic violence between emergency
providers and female patients.
DESIGN: Analysis of audiotapes made during a randomized, controlled trial of
computerized screening for domestic violence.
SETTING: 2 socioeconomically diverse emergency departments: one urban and
academic, the other suburban and community-based.
PARTICIPANTS: 1281 English-speaking women age 16 to 69 years and 80 providers (30
attending physicians, 46 residents, and 4 nurse practitioners).
RESULTS: 871 audiotapes, including 293 that included provider screening for
domestic violence, were analyzed. Providers typically asked about domestic
violence in a perfunctory manner during the social history. Provider
communication behaviors associated with women disclosing abuse included probing
(defined as asking > or =1 additional topically related question), providing
open-ended opportunities to talk, and being generally responsive to patient clues
(any mention of a psychosocial issue). Chart documentation of domestic violence
was present in one third of cases.
LIMITATIONS: Nonverbal communication was not examined. Providers were aware that 
they were being audiotaped and may have tried to perform their best.
CONCLUSION: Although hectic clinical environments present many obstacles to
meaningful discussions about domestic violence, several provider communication
behaviors seemed to facilitate patient disclosure of experiences with abuse.
Illustrative examples highlight common pitfalls and exemplary practices in
screening for abuse and response to disclosures of abuse.

PMCID: PMC2365713
PMID: 17975184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Chem Rev. 2007 Nov;107(11):5318-65. Epub 2007 Nov 1.

C-C, C-O, C-N bond formation on sp2 carbon by Pd(II)-catalyzed reactions
involving oxidant agents.

Beccalli EM(1), Broggini G, Martinelli M, Sottocornola S.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Chimica Organica A. Marchesini, Facoltà di Farmacia, Università di
Milano, via Venezian 21, 20133 Milano, Italy. egle.beccalli@unimi.it

PMID: 17973536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Acta Orthop. 2007 Aug;78(4):479-84.

No difference in migration or wear between cemented low-profile cups and standard
cups : a randomized radiostereographic study of 53 patients over 3 years.

Palm L(1), Olofsson J, Aström SE, Ivarsson I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University Hospital Linköping, Sweden.
lars.palm@lio.se

BACKGROUND: Minor design changes may cause major changes in implant performance. 
Thus, as part of a stepwise introduction of a new low-profile cup, we performed a
randomized trial comparing it to a well-documented standard cup.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: 60 patients, stratified according to sex, weight, and age, 
underwent cemented total hip arthroplasty using a Lubinus SP2 stem with ceramic
head and were randomized to either the new low-profile Lubinus Flanged
Anti-Luxation cup (FAL) or the Lubinus Standard Eccentric cup (Standard). 7
patients were excluded and 53 (28 FAL) were evaluated at 3, 6, 12, and 36 months 
postoperatively. Primary outcome variables, cup migration (MTPM), and wear (total
3-dimensional femoral head penetration) were measured with radiostereometry
(RSA). Clinical outcome was evaluated with the western Ontario and McMaster
osteoarthritis index (Womac) and the visual analog pain score (VAS).
RESULTS: We found no difference in migration between the FAL and Standard cups.
There was no difference in wear between the two cups and there was no correlation
between wear and migration. 3 cups (2 FAL and 1 Standard) showed continuous
migration of a magnitude that indicated an increased risk of early loosening.
Clinical outcome was excellent, without any difference between the 2 groups.

PMID: 17966001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Lasers Med Sci. 2008 Oct;23(4):369-74. Epub 2007 Oct 26.

Construction of a novel port wine stain phantom and measurement of colour by
digital imaging and reflectance spectrophotometry.

Widdowson DC(1), Shakespeare PG, Moore JC, Wright PA.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Specialist Laser Centre, Department of Plastic and Reconstructive
Surgery, Salisbury District Hospital NHS Trust, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, UK.
danielwiddowson@hotmail.com

A novel skin phantom is described that is constructed with quantifiable amounts
of skin pigments, as well as a light scattering medium in the form of barium
sulphate suspension. The two predominant skin pigments (melanin and haemoglobin) 
are varied in controlled amounts within the phantoms to simulate skin colour in
different situations. The phantoms were devised in order to simulate the changes 
in skin colour particularly after laser treatment of port wine stains, where
superficial cutaneous vascularity is reduced. Preliminary investigations of two
techniques for skin colour assessment were subsequently carried out so that their
suitability for measuring colour in the skin phantoms could be considered. A
specifically designed device was constructed to enable repeatable digital image
capture of the phantoms. Further development of this skin phantom may enable
comparison of techniques for skin colour assessment.

PMID: 17963020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Plast Reconstr Aesthet Surg. 2007;60(11):1252-5. Epub 2006 Jul 12.

Malignant melanoma and deep penetrating naevus--difficulties in diagnosis in
children.

Ridha H(1), Ahmed S, Theaker JM, Horlock N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Salisbury District Hospital,
Salisbury, Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, UK. hyder-ridha@hotmail.com

A 4-year-old boy presented to our department with a darkly pigmented lesion on
the right side of his neck. It was excised and a diagnosis of deep penetrating
naevus with atypical features was made. At 4-month follow-up our patient had
developed a palpable cervical lymph node. Excision revealed malignant melanoma.
We discuss our management and review the literature regarding DPN and melanoma of
childhood.

PMID: 17950189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Org Chem. 2008 Feb 1;73(3):775-84. Epub 2007 Oct 19.

Bis-(2,5-diphenylphospholanes) with sp2 carbon linkers: synthesis and application
in asymmetric hydrogenation.

Fox ME(1), Jackson M, Lennon IC, Klosin J, Abboud KA.

Author information: 
(1)Dowpharma, Chirotech Technology Ltd, a subsidiary of The Dow Chemical Company,
Unit 162 Cambridge Science Park, Milton Road, Cambridge, CB4 0GH, UK.
Mfox@dow.com

Four chiral diphosphine ligands consisting of bis(2,5-diphenylphospholan-1-yl)
groups connected by the sp(2) carbon linkers 2,3-quinoxaline ((S,S)-Ph-Quinox),
2,3-pyrazine ((S,S)-Ph-Pyrazine), maleic anhydride ((S,S)-Ph-MalPhos), and
1,1'-ferrocene ((S,S)-Ph-5-Fc) were synthesized, and their cationic
[rhodium(I)(COD)] complexes were prepared. These complexes were tested in
asymmetric hydrogenation of functionalized olefins. [((S,S)-Ph-Quinox)Rh(COD)]BF4
showed high activity and selectivity against itaconate and dehydroamino acid
substrates. The corresponding (S,S)-Ph-Pyrazine and (S,S)-Ph-MalPhos complexes
exhibited lower activities and selectivities. [((S,S)-Ph-5-Fc)Rh(COD)]BF4 showed 
high activity with low selectivity for these substrates, but high activity and
selectivity against 2-C-substituted cinnamate salts, whereas rhodium complexes of
(S,S)-Ph-Quinox and (R,R)-Ph-BPE showed low activity and selectivity against
2-C-substituted cinnamate salts.

PMID: 17949042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Wei Sheng Wu Xue Bao. 2007 Aug;47(4):710-3.

[Development and characterization of monoclonal Antibody against M-like protein
of Streptococcus equi subsp. zooepidemicus from pig].

[Article in Chinese]

Fan HJ(1), He S, Lu CP.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Disease Diagnostic and Immunology, Ministry of
Agriculture, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, China.
fhj-68@sohu.com

Streptococcus equi subsp. zooepidemicus belongs to lancefield group C
streptococcus, which can cause disease both in animals and humans. It has been
associated with a wide variety of serious infections, including meningitis,
pneumonia, septic arthritis and mastitis. The M like proteins on the surface of
S. equi subsp. zooepidemicus have an antiphagocytic role analogous to that of
group A streptococcal M proteins that are essential in establishing infection. In
the present study, the M-like gene without partial signal peptide sequence was
amplified from genomic DNA of S. equi subsp. zooepidemicus ATCC35246 strain
isolated from pig by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Then the amplified fragment
was cloned in the proper orientation into the site between EcoR I and Xho I of
pET32-a(+) via restriction endonuclease EcoR I and Xho I. The recombinant plasmid
was verified by restriction endonuclease analysis and nucleotide sequencing, then
transformed into E. coli BL21. An fusion protein was expressed in BL21 after
induced by IPTG, SDS-PAGE analysis showed that the recombinant protein had a
molecular weight of 60 kD, Western blotting showed a positive reaction with the
antiserum against ATCC35246. To prepare the monoclonal antibodies (McAbs) against
the M-like protein, 6-8 weeks old BABL/c mice were immunized endermicly with
purified recombinant M-like protein by Ni-nitrilotriacetic acid affinity
chromatography. Splenocytes from the immuniszed mice were fused with SP2/0 and
indirect ELISA was used to screen hybridoma cells. 12 hybridoma cell lines
secreting McAbs against M-like protein of Streptococcus equi subsp. zooepidemicus
were generated, and indirect ELISA confirmed that these McAbs only reacted with
M-like protein, but not reacted with other bacteria such as group A Streptococci,
Streptococcus suis type 2, Streptococcus equi. The indirect ELISA titers of these
12 ascites McAbs were about 2.56 x 10(4) to 1.01 x 10(5) , and the subtype of
these McAbs belong to IgG2b, IgG1, IgM. The results of adhersion inhibition
showed McAbs 2C8 could inhibit the adhersion of M-like protein to HEp-2 cell.

PMID: 17944378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Am Chem Soc. 2007 Nov 14;129(45):14019-25. Epub 2007 Oct 17.

Photoionization of 1-alkenylperoxy and alkylperoxy radicals and a general rule
for the stability of their cations.

Meloni G(1), Selby TM, Goulay F, Leone SR, Osborn DL, Taatjes CA.

Author information: 
(1)Combustion Research Facility, Mail Stop 9055, Sandia National Laboratories,
Livermore, California 94551-0969, USA. gmeloni@sandia.gov

The photoionization of 1-alkenylperoxy radicals, which are peroxy radicals where 
the OO moiety is bonded to an sp2-hybridized carbon, is studied by experimental
and computational methods and compared to the similar alkylperoxy systems.
Quantum chemical calculations are presented for the ionization energy and cation 
stability of several alkenylperoxy radicals. Experimental measurements of
1-cyclopentenylperoxy (1-c-C5H7OO) and propargylperoxy (CH2=C=CHOO)
photoionization are presented as examples. These radicals are produced by
reaction of an excess of O2 with pulsed-photolytically produced alkenyl radicals.
The kinetic behavior of the products confirms the formation of the alkenylperoxy 
radicals. Electronic structure calculations are employed to give structural
parameters and energetics that are used in a Franck-Condon (FC) spectral
simulation of the photoionization efficiency (PIE) curves. The calculations also 
serve to identify the isomeric species probed by the experiment. Adiabatic
ionization energies (AIEs) of 1-c-C5H7OO (8.70 +/- 0.05 eV) and CH2=C=CHOO (9.32 
+/- 0.05 eV) are derived from fits to the experimental PIE curves. From the
fitted FC simulation superimposed on the experimental PIE curves, the splitting
between the ground state singlet and excited triplet cation electronic states is 
also derived for 1-c-C5H7OO (0.76 +/- 0.05 eV) and CH2=C=CHOO (0.80 +/- 0.15 eV).
The combination of the AIE(CH2=C=CHOO) and the propargyl heat of formation
provides Delta f H(0)(o) (CH2=C=CHOO+) of (1162 +/- 8) kJ mol-1. From Delta f
H(0)(o) (CH2=C=CHOO+) and Delta f H (0)(o) (C3H3+) it is also possible to extract
the bond energy D(0)(o)(C3H3+-OO) of 19 kJ mol-1 (0.20 eV). Finally, from
consideration of the relevant molecular orbitals, the ionization behavior of
alkyl- and alkenylperoxy radicals can be generalized with a simple rule:
Alkylperoxy radicals dissociatively ionize, with the exception of methylperoxy,
whereas alkenylperoxy radicals have stable singlet ground electronic state
cations.

PMID: 17941639  [PubMed]


36. Acc Chem Res. 2007 Oct;40(10):943-52.

Catalytic coupling of sp2- and sp-hybridized carbon-hydrogen bonds with
vinylmetalloid compounds.

Marciniec B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organometallic Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, Adam Mickiewicz 
University, Grunwaldzka 6, 60-780 Poznan, Poland. bogdan.marciniec@amu.edu.pl

In the Account given herein, it has been shown that silylative coupling of
olefins, well-recognized as a new catalytic route for the activation of double
bond C-H bond of olefins and double bond C-Si bond of vinylsilicon compounds with
ethylene elimination, can be extended over both other vinylmetalloid derivatives 
(double bond C-E) (where E = Ge, B, and others) as well as the activation of
triple bond C-H, double bond C aryl-H, and -O-H bond of alcohols and silanols.
This general transformation is catalyzed by transition-metal complexes (mainly Ru
and Rh) containing or initiating TM-H and/or TM-E bonds (inorganometallics). This
new general catalytic route for the activation of double bond C-H and triple bond
C-H as well as double bond C-E bonds called metallative coupling or
trans-metalation (cross-coupling, ring-closing, and polycondensation) constitutes
an efficient method (complementary to metathesis) for stereo- and regioselective 
synthesis of a variety of molecular and macromolecular compounds of vinyl-E (E = 
Si, B, and Ge) and ethynyl-E (E = Si and Ge) functionality, also potent
organometallic reagents for efficient synthesis of highly pi-conjugated organic
compounds. The mechanisms of the catalysis of this deethenative metalation have
been supported by equimolar reactions of TM-H and/or TM-E with initial substances
and reactions with deuterium-labeled reagents.

PMID: 17937482  [PubMed]


37. Biochemistry. 2007 Nov 6;46(44):12700-8. Epub 2007 Oct 10.

Characterization of the PL-I-related SP2 protein from Xenopus.

Frehlick LJ(1), Prado A, Calestagne-Morelli A, Ausió J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, Petch
Building, 258, Victoria, B.C., Canada.

The complete cDNA sequence of Xenopus laevis sperm specific proteins SP1 and SP2 
has been determined. This information when taken together with N-terminal
sequencing and mass spectroscopy data indicates that these two proteins share a
product precursor relationship in which SP2 results from cleavage of a short
N-terminal peptide of SP1. The secondary and tertiary structures of SP2 have been
characterized using circular dichroism and three dimension structure prediction. 
These structural analyses have conclusively shown that SP1/SP2 proteins are
related to proteins of the histone H1 family, particularly to vertebrate histone 
H1x. Hence, they can be considered bona fide members of the protamine-like- I
(PL-I) group of sperm nuclear basic proteins (SNBPs) that have been described in 
other vertebrate and invertebrate groups. SP2 binds to nucleosomal DNA in a way
that is very similar to that of histone H1. However, its interaction with
circular DNA does not exhibit an enhanced preference for the supercoiled
conformation, and it appears to be mainly driven by ionic interactions.

PMID: 17927216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2008 Apr;46(3):251-2. Epub 2007 Oct 17.

Digital photographs of excised lesions: an aid to histopathology reports.

Ethunandan M(1), Downie IP.

Author information: 
(1)Maxillofacial Unit, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP2 8BJ,
United Kingdom. mgethu@hotmail.com

PMID: 17923175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Org Chem. 2007 Oct 26;72(22):8371-5. Epub 2007 Oct 6.

Solvent-controlled stereoselective formation of a cyclic ether in the lewis
acid-mediated allylation of an alpha-chloroacetoxy acyclic ether. Very high
stereoselectivity in CH3CN vs low stereoselectivity in CH2Cl2.

Gridnev ID(1), Kikuchi S, Touchy AS, Kadota I, Yamamoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University, Sendai
980-8578, Japan.

The MgBr2.OEt2-mediated intramolecular allylation of a 4:1 diastereoisomeric
mixture of the alpha-chloroacetoxyl ether 1a bearing the A-G/JK ring system of
brevetoxin B in CH2Cl2 gave a 1:1 diastereoisomeric mixture of the trans- and
cis-cyclization products 4a and 5a having the A-G/I-K ring system, while that in 
CH3CN afforded the trans-isomer 4a nearly as the single product. To help clarify 
a reason for this marked solvent effect in the cyclization of the brevetoxin B
precursor, DFT computations for the starting materials, intermediates, transition
states, and products were carried out. The cyclization would proceed through a
carbocation intermediate 3a having sp2 flat structure (SN1 type mechanism) in
CH2Cl2, in which the activation energies leading to both diastereoisomers are
approximately identical, while in CH3CN alkylnitrilium salts 6a would be formed
through the coordination of CH3CN to the carbocation leading to an sp3-type
intermediate in which sever steric hindrance takes place in the transition state 
leading to the undesired diastereoisomer. The scope of this novel
solvent-controlled stereoselectivity was tested for simple compounds. In small
model compounds the marked solvent dependence was absent, but the model bearing
two consecutive cyclic ether rings 1b exhibited a remarkable solvent effect
similar to that observed in the brevetoxin B system.

PMID: 17918999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Oct;23(10):953-5.

[Development and characterization of monoclonal antibodies against H7
hemagglutinin of avian influenza virus].

[Article in Chinese]

Li YJ(1), Jiao XA, Pan ZM, Sun L, Wang CB, Zhang SH, Sun QY, Liu XF.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Infectious Diseases of Ministry of Agriculture,
Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Zoonosis, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, China.

AIM: To prepare monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) against the hemagglutinin protein of
H7 subtype of avian influenza virus (AIV).
METHODS: (6-8 weeks old) BALB/c mice of were immunized endermicly with H7 subtype
of AIV. The splenocytes from the immunized mice were fused with Sp2/0-Ag-14
myeloma cells after the last immunization. Hybridoma cells were screened by
hemagglutination (HA) and hemagglutination inhibition (HI) tests. The reactivity 
and specificity of mAbs were evaluated by HI test and Western blot assay.
RESULTS: Four hybridoma cell lines secreting specific mAbs named 2E2, 2A4, 5F5
and 7G5 were developed. The HI titers of these mAbs were 5 x 2(7)-5 x 2(11), and 
the immunoglobulin subclass of 2E2 was IgM, that of 2A4 was IgG1, and that of 5F5
and 7G5 was IgG2a. Western blot analysis confirmed that the mAbs only reacted
with M(r) 75 000 HA protein of H7 subtype of AIV but did not react with the
proteins of Newcastle disease virus (NDV). The results of HI reactivity assay
suggested that 2E2, 5F5 and 7G5 only reacted with H7 subtype of AIV but did not
react with other subtypes of AIV, NDV and infectious bronchitis virus (IBV).
However 2A4 reacted not only with H7 subtype of AIV but also with H15N8 reference
strain of AIV at low HI level.
CONCLUSION: These mAbs can be used as a useful tool to analyze the HA structure
of AIV. They also provide the effective reagents for the rapid detection of H7
subtype of AIV.

PMID: 17908508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Oleo Sci. 2007;56(4):179-88.

Therapy of myeloma in vivo using marine phospholipid in combination with Agaricus
blazei Murill as an immune respond activator.

Murakawa K(1), Fukunaga K, Tanouchi M, Hosokawa M, Hossain Z, Takahashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Marine Biosciences, Graduate School of Fisheries Sciences,
Hokkaido University, Hokkaido, Japan.

Mushroom (Agaricus blazei Murill) extract has been reported to possess antitumor 
effects through immune activation. Here, we investigated the beneficial effects
of combining A. blazei extract with marine phospholipids in comparison to A.
blazei extract alone on myeloma sp2 tumor suppression when orally administrated. 
The experimental groups designed for sp2 tumor bearing BALB/c nu/nu mice were
drinks of: (1)control; (2)1.0 mg/mL squid phospholipid liposome alone; (3)0.5
mg/mL A. blazei Murill water extract alone; (4)1.0 mg/mL squid phospholipid
liposome with 0.5 mg/mL A. blazei Murill water extract in the form of those
simple mixture; and (5)1.0 mg/mL squid phospholipid liposome with 0.5 mg/mL A.
blazei Murill water extract partially encapsulated. Orally administrated volumes 
amounted to approximately 5 mL per day per mouse for all groups. A. blazei Murill
water extract alone and squid phospholipid alone served groups show moderate
tumor suppression with total administrations of approximately 105 mg/mouse for
squid phospholipid through out the experimental term. When both A. blazei Murill 
water extract and squid phospholipid were administrated simultaneously in a
simple mixture form, promotional effect on cancer tumor suppression was observed.
And when A. blazei Murill water extract was partially encapsulated in the squid
phospholipid liposomes with total administrations being 105 mg/mouse for squid
phospholipid, effect on cancer tumor suppression was more pronounced. Though
there was no statistically significant difference in tumor sizes between the
simple mixture form administrated group i.e. group (4) and the partially
encapsulated form administrated group i.e. group (5), the tumor vanished mouse
was seen in the partially encapsulated form administrated group. Thus it was
concluded that combinational administration of the A. blazei Murill water extract
and the marine phospholipid may be useful in myeloma sp2 therapy.

PMID: 17898480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Acad Emerg Med. 2007 Oct;14(10):908-11.

Characterizing emergency department discussions about depression.

Rhodes KV(1), Kushner HM, Bisgaier J, Prenoveau E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Health Care Policy Research, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA. kvr@sp2.upenn.edu

BACKGROUND: The reality of emergency health care in the United States today
requires new approaches to mental health in the emergency department (ED). Major 
depression is a disabling condition that disproportionately affects women.
OBJECTIVES: To characterize ED provider-patient discussions about depression.
METHODS: This was a secondary analysis of a database of audiotaped ED visits with
women patients collected during a clinical trial of computer screening for
domestic violence and other psychosocial risks. Nonemergent female patients, ages
18-65 years, were enrolled from two socioeconomically diverse academic EDs. All
audio files with two or more relevant comments were identified as "significant
depression discussions" and independently coded using a structured coding form.
RESULTS: Of 871 audiorecorded ED visits, 70 (8%) included discussions containing 
any reference to depression and 20 (2%) constituted significant depression
discussions. Qualitative analysis of the 20 significant discussions found that 16
(80%) required less than 90 seconds to complete. Ten included less than optimal
provider communication characteristics. Despite the brevity or quality of the
communication, 15 of the 20 yielded high patient satisfaction with their ED
treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: ED providers rarely addressed depression. Qualitative analysis of
significant patient-provider interactions regarding depression found that
screening for depression in the ED can be accomplished with minimal expenditure
of provider time and effort. Attention to psychosocial risk factors has the
potential to improve the quality of ED care and patient satisfaction.

PMID: 17898253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Am Chem Soc. 2007 Oct 10;129(40):12131-40. Epub 2007 Sep 15.

Functionalization of zeolitic cavities: grafting NH2 groups in framework T sites 
of B-SSZ-13--a way to obtain basic solids catalysts?

Regli L(1), Bordiga S, Busco C, Prestipino C, Ugliengo P, Zecchina A, Lamberti C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Inorganic, Physical and Materials Chemistry, NIS Centre of
Excellence, and Centro di Riferimento INSTM, University of Turin, Via P. Giuria
7, I-10125, Torino, Italy.

Insertion of B atoms into an Al-free zeolitic framework with CHA topology results
in the formation of B-SSZ-13 zeotype with Si/B = 11. B K-edge NEXAFS testifies
that B forms [B(OSi)4] units in a Td-like geometry (sp3-hybridized B atoms).
According to B K-edge NEXAFS and IR, template burning results in the formation of
[B(OSi)3] units in a D3h-like geometry (sp2-hybridized B atoms) with a break of a
B-O-Si bond and the formation of a Si-OH group. The activated material contains
B(III) Lewis acid centers able to specifically coordinate bases like NH3. Such
[B(OSi)3] units are reactive toward ammonia, resulting in the formation of B-NH2 
surface functionality inside the pores of B-SSZ-13 already under mild conditions,
i.e., 35 mbar of NH3 at 373 K for 30 min and without crystallinity degradation. A
minor fraction of Si-NH2 cannot be excluded owing to the presence of two IR
doublets at 3500 and 3430 cm-1 and at 1600 and 1550 cm-1. Ab initio
B3LYP/6-31+G(d,p) calculations on a cluster model, supported by a single-point
MP2 on B3LYP/6-31+G(D,P) optimized structures, found the break by NH3 of a B-O-Si
bond of the [B(OSi)3] unit with formation of [SiOH] and [H2N-B(OSi)2] species to 
be energetically favored. Comparison between experimental and computed frequency 
shifts shows them to be in semiquantitative agreement. The high stability of the 
B-NH2 surface functionality is probed by N K-edge NEXAFS spectra collected under 
UHV conditions. These findings can open a new route in the preparation of shape
selective solid basic catalysts.

PMID: 17867687  [PubMed]


44. Biochemistry. 2007 Oct 9;46(40):11361-8. Epub 2007 Sep 12.

Overcoming resistance to beta-lactamase inhibitors: comparing sulbactam to novel 
inhibitors against clavulanate resistant SHV enzymes with substitutions at Ambler
position 244.

Thomson JM(1), Distler AM, Bonomo RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Case Western Reserve University, School of
Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA.

Amino acid changes at Ambler position R244 in class A TEM and SHV beta-lactamases
confer resistance to ampicillin/clavulanate, a beta-lactam/beta-lactamase
inhibitor combination used to treat serious infections. To gain a deeper
understanding of this resistance phenotype, we investigated the activities of
sulbactam and two novel penem beta-lactamase inhibitors with sp2 hybridized C3
carboxylates and bicyclic R1 side chains against a library of SHV beta-lactamase 
variants at the 244 position. Compared to SHV-1 expressed in Escherichia coli,
all 19 R244 variants exhibited increased susceptibility to ampicillin/sulbactam, 
an important difference compared to ampicillin/clavulanate. Kinetic analyses of
SHV-1 and three SHV R244 (-S, -Q, and -L) variants revealed the Ki for sulbactam 
was significantly elevated for the R244 variants, but the partition ratios,
kcat/kinact, were markedly reduced (13 000 --> <or=500). A timed
inactivation-mass spectrometry analysis of SHV inhibited by sulbactam showed that
SHV-1 beta-lactamase was unmodified at 15 min. A parallel experiment with R244S
demonstrated 70 and 88 +/- 3 Da fragments of sulbactam covalently attached to the
beta-lactamase. We also observed that the Ki values of penems 1 and 2 were
increased for R244 variants compared to those for SHV; however, these inhibitors 
effectively restored ampicillin susceptibility in vitro. Compared to that of
sulbactam, the kcat/kinact values of penems for SHV-1 and R244S were low (<or=2),
and unfragmented adducts of each penem were covalently attached to SHV-1 and
R244S when studied using the timed inactivation-mass spectrometry method. The
R244S mutation affects beta-lactamase inactivators differently, but resistance
can be overcome by designing penem inhibitors with strategic chemical properties 
that improve affinity and impair turnover.

PMID: 17848099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Sep;23(9):850-2.

[Preparation of three functional monoclonal antibodies against human FL molecule 
and analysis of their bioactivity].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou CG(1), Tian XJ, Ju SG, Xu Y, Yu GH, Zhang XG, Gu ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Soochow University, Suzhou
215007, China.

AIM: To Prepare three functional monoclonal antibodies(mAbs) against human FL
molecule and analyze their bioactivity.
METHODS: The cell line L929-FL transfected with human FL gene was used as
immunogen. The hybridomas secreting the antibodies against human FL were obtained
by fusing splenoecytes from the immunized mice with murine myeloma cells(Sp2/0). 
Their subclasses were analyzed using fast-strip method. The monoclonal antibodies
were produced in mouse peritoneal cavity and purified by Protein G affinity
chromatography. The inhibitory effect of mAbs against FL on leukemia cell lines
U937 and HL-60 was detected by MTT. The apoptosis of U937 and HL-60 cells stained
by annexin-V/PI was determined by FCM.
RESULTS: Three hybridomas named 3C2, 3C6 and 8D10 were successfully obtained,
which secreted monoclonal antibodies against human FL molecule stably. Their
subclasses were the mouse IgG2a with kappa light chains. The three monoclonal
antibodies recognized the FL molecule on U937 and HL-60 cells that also
coexpressed Flt3 molecule. When U937 and HL-60 cells were cultured in presence of
3C2, 3C6 and 8D10, their proliferation was reduced as compared to that in control
in MTT assay(P < 0.05). The analysis of annexin-V/PI binding to U937 and HL-60
cells by FCM showed the mAbs had the apoptotogenic activity of the monoclonal
antibodies against human FL molecule.
CONCLUSION: 3C2, 3C6 and 8D10 are three funtional monoclonal antibodies against
human FL molecule. They may be of some value in the study of the roles of FL/Flt3
interaction in leukemia pathogenesis.

PMID: 17825235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Sep;23(9):841-3.

[Preparation of a novel functional anti-human CD40 monoclonal antibody and
identification of its bioactivity].

[Article in Chinese]

Tang L(1), Zheng L, Qi CJ, Ma HB, Zhou X, Zhuang YM, Luo XF, Xu Y, Zhang XG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biotechnology, Key Laboratory of Medicine and Clinical
Immunology of Jiangsu Province, Soochow University, Suzhou 215007, China.
tl915@163.com

AIM: To prepare a novel functional mouse anti-human CD40 monoclonal mAb.
METHODS: Female BALB/c mice of 6-8 weeks old were immunized with CD40
transfectant (L929-CD40) as immunogen. The spleen B cells of the mice were fused 
with Sp2/0. The hybridoma cells were screened with CD40 transfectant (L929-CD40) 
by FCM. Fast-strip analysis was performed to identify Ig subclass of this mAb.
The epitope recognized by this mAb was detected by Bio/5C11 competitive assay.
The proliferation and cell cycle of tumor cells in vitro were studied by MTT
assay and PI staining respectively.
RESULTS: One hybridoma cell line named 2B6 was obtained, which had the property
of secreting anti-human CD40 monoclonal antibody continuously and steadily. This 
mAb specifically recognized human CD40 molecule and promoted the proliferation of
tumor cells in vitro.
CONCLUSION: One hybridoma cell line which can secret a novel functional mouse
anti-human CD40 mAb has been developed successfully. This mAb can specifically
recognize human CD40 and influence the growth of tumor cells in vitro.

PMID: 17825232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Sep;23(9):838-40.

[Preparation and characterization of the mAb against Vibrio harveyi].

[Article in Chinese]

Hao GJ(1), Shen JY, Cao Z, Pan XY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Freshwater Fisheries of Zhejiang, Huzhou 313001, China.
melissa511@sina.com

AIM: To prepare the mAb against Vibrio harveyi and analyse their biological
properties.
METHODS: 8-week-old female BALB/c mice were immunized with pathogenic V.harveyi
GYC1108-1, which was isolated from the diseased great yellow croaker in Zhejiang 
China in 2003. Spleen cells collected from the immunized mice after the fifth
immunization were fused with Sp2/0-Ag-14 myeloma cells. ELISA was used to screen 
hybridoma cells and identify the specificity and sensitivity of mAbs.
RESULTS: Limited dilution method was used to subclone the positive clones. After 
three cycles of subcloning, 5 mAbs against GYC1108-1 were obtained and were
proved to have high titer of ELISA. The test of specificity suggested that 1B7
reacted on V.harveyi, V.alginolyticus and V.parahaemolyticus but did not react on
V.mimicus, V.anguillarum, Aeromonas hydrophila and the other isolates among the
14 bacterium species tested. 1B7 was used to detect V.harveyi at the
concentration of 10(4) CFU/mL by indirect ELISA.
CONCLUSION: The obtained mAbs could be used to diagnosis and prevent of V.harveyi
in aquaculture rapidly.

PMID: 17825231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2007 Jul;23(4):719-23.

[Preparation and primary analysis of monoclonal antibodies against VP5 protein of
chicken infectious bursal disease virus].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang N(1), Gao HL, Gao YL, Li JS, Wang XY, Ran DL, Wang XM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Avian Infectious Diseases, National Key Laboratory of Veterinary
Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Harbin 150001, China.

Infectious bursal disease virus (IBDV), the causative agent of a highly
contagious disease in chickens, carries a small nonstructural protein (NS). In
this study, vvIBDV Gx-VP5 genes were cloned into plasmid pET30a( + ) and
expressed in E. coli with IPTG inducing. BALB/c mice were immunized with the
purified recombinant fusion protein. SP2/0 myeloma cells and spleen cells of
BALB/c mice were fused by PEG(MW1500), three hybridoma cell lines were examined
by indirect ELISA and clone for three times by limited dilution, and were named
as 4B4, 6D12, 3E8. The subtype of the monoclonal antibodies were IgG1 with a
subtype identified ELISA kit, and light chains were kappa. The ascites titers of 
monoclonal antibodies were 5 x 10(4), 3.5 x 10(4), 3 x 10(4) by indirect ELISA,
respectively. Indirect ELISA and Western blot results showed that the monoclonal 
antibodies only acted with VP5 protein, IF analysis indicated that three
monoclonal antibodies acted with IBDV Gt. There were specific fluorescence in
detected Vero E6 cells which transient expressed VP5 protein by IFA. Therefore,
monoclonal antibodies specific to IBDV VP5 proteins are specific method for
detected VP5 proteins, and base on establish stabilize expressed VP5 protein Vero
cell lines to research IBDV VP5 protein function.

PMID: 17822051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Phys Chem A. 2007 Oct 4;111(39):9924-30. Epub 2007 Aug 31.

HC[triple bond]P and H3C-C[triple bond]P as proton acceptors in protonated
complexes containing two phosphorus bases: structures, binding energies, and
spin-spin coupling constants.

Alkorta I(1), Elguero J, Bene JE.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Química Médica, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, 
Juan de la Cierva, 3, E-28006 Madrid, Spain. ibon@iqm.csic.es

Ab initio calculations at the MP2/aug'-cc-pVTZ level have been carried out to
investigate the structures and binding energies of cationic complexes involving
protonated sp, sp2, and sp3 phosphorus bases as proton donor ions and the
sp-hybridized phosphorus bases H-C[triple bond]P and H3C-C[triple bond]P as
proton acceptors. These proton-bound complexes exhibit a variety of structural
motifs, but all are stabilized by interactions that occur through the pi cloud of
the acceptor base. The binding energies of these complexes range from 6 to 15
kcal/mol. Corresponding complexes with H3C-C[triple bond]P as the proton acceptor
are more stable than those with H-C[triple bond]P as the acceptor, a reflection
of the greater basicity of H3C-C[triple bond]P. In most complexes with sp2- or
sp3-hybridized P-H donor ions, the P-H bond lengthens and the P-H stretching
frequency is red-shifted relative to the corresponding monomers. Complex
formation also leads to a lengthening of the C[triple bond]P bond and a red shift
of the C[triple bond]P stretching vibration. The two-bond coupling constants
2pihJ(P-P) and 2pihJ(P-C) are significantly smaller than 2hJ(P-P) and 2hJ(P-C)
for complexes in which hydrogen bonding occurs through lone pairs of electrons on
P or C. This reflects the absence of significant s electron density in the
hydrogen-bonding regions of these pi complexes.

PMID: 17760429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Transfusion. 2007 Sep;47(9):1700-9.

Profound thrombocytopenia and survival of hematopoietic stem cell transplant
patients without clinically significant bleeding, using prophylactic platelet
transfusion triggers of 10 x 10(9) or 20 x 10(9) per L.

Nevo S(1), Fuller AK, Zahurak ML, Hartley E, Borinsky ME, Vogelsang GB.

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. snevo@netvision.net.il

BACKGROUND: A trigger of 10 x 10(9) per L for prophylactic platelet (PLT)
transfusions is generally recommended for stable thrombocytopenic patients who
receive chemotherapy, based on studies showing similar incidence, severity, and
fatality of bleeding compared with the 20 x 10(9) per L trigger. The outcome of
thrombocytopenic nonbleeding patients has not been well described. This
retrospective analysis evaluates thrombocytopenia and survival of 381
hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) patients without clinically significant
bleeding, with 10 x 10(9) and 20 x 10(9) per L prophylactic triggers.
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: A total of 170 patients who received prophylactic PLT
transfusions at 20 x 10(9) per L (1997-1998, SP1) and 211 patients who had
prophylaxis at 10 x 10(9) per L (1999-2001, SP2) were identified as nonbleeding
patients. PLT counts and clinical complications were assessed within 100 days
from HSCT.
RESULTS: PLT counts less than or equal to 10 x 10(9) per L were found in 69.2
percent of patients in SP2 and 38.3 percent in SP1 (p < 0.001). Profound
thrombocytopenia (4+ PLT counts <or=10 x 10(9)/L) was found in 19.0 percent of
patients in SP2 and 7.0 percent in SP1 (p = 0.001). Patients with profound
thrombocytopenia had significantly increased early mortality (odds ratio [OR],
3.18; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.25-8.07) and significantly reduced overall 
survival (hazard ratio [HR], 1.95; 95% CI, 1.28-2.97) compared to patients with 0
to 3 PLT counts less than or equal to 10 x 10(9) per L. The association of
profound thrombocytopenia with early mortality was more notable in SP2.
CONCLUSION: The 10 x 10(9) per L transfusion trigger is associated with
significantly greater exposure to low PLT counts. Nonbleeding patients with
profound thrombocytopenia were at significantly greater risk of dying compared
with nonthrombocytopenic patients. These results suggest that safety of the 10 x 
10(9) per L trigger should be more thoroughly evaluated.

PMID: 17725737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2007 Aug;26(4):259-66.

Generation and characterization of monoclonal antibodies against tuberous
sclerosis complex 2.

Malanchuk O(1), Palchevskyy S, Ovcharenko G, Gwalter J, Pozur V, Gout I,
Filonenko V.

Author information: 
(1)Kyiv National Taras Shevchenko University, Biological Faculty, Kyiv, Ukraine.

TSC1 and TSC2 are two recently identified tumor suppressor genes encoding
hamartin and tuberin, respectively. They have been implicated in the pathogenesis
of tuberous sclerosis, a neurological disorder linked with the development of
hamartomas in numerous organs, including the brain, kidneys, heart, and liver.
Both protein products of TSC1 and TSC2 form an intracellular complex exerting
GTPase-activating (GAP) activity towards a small G protein Rheb (Ras homologue
enriched in brain). Inhibition of Rheb is important for the positive regulation
of mTOR pathway, while mutations of hamartin or tuberin result in uncontrolled
cell cycle progression. Although the precise role for the TSC1/2 complex in tumor
suppression is not clear, many studies have established a link with the
regulation of transcription and protein biosynthesis, increasing susceptibility
to apoptosis, cell differentiation, and cell cycle control. We describe the
development of a monoclonal antibody specific towards TSC2/tuberin and
characterize the suitability for Western blotting, immunoprecipitation, and
immunofluorescent applications. The C-terminal region of TSC2 was expressed as a 
His-tag fusion protein in bacteria, affinity purified and used as an immunogen.
Hybrid myelomas were produced from the spleenocytes of immunized mice and SP2/0
myeloma cells. Testing the specificity of cell culture supernatants from
generated hybridomas towards recombinant His-TSC2C in ELISA assay allowed us to
isolate a panel of positive clones. Further analysis of selected clones by
Western blotting and immunoprecipitation revealed one clone, termed D6, which
specifically recognized recombinant and endogenous TSC2. The specificity of
generated antibody was also confirmed in TSC2(/) and TSC2(+/+) mouse embryo
fibroblasts. In summary, the produced antibody is a useful tool in our research
program and will be available for researchers investigating signal transduction
pathways involving TSC1/2 signaling under physiological conditions and in human
pathologies.

PMID: 17725389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2007 Aug;26(4):231-40.

Generation and characterization of mouse monoclonal antibody 5E1 against human
transcription factor GLI3.

Hunt R(1), Bragina O, Drews M, Kasak L, Timmusk S, Valkna A, Kogerman P,
Järvekülg L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Gene Technology, Tallinn University of Technology, Akadeemia tee 
15, Tallinn, Estonia.

GLI3 is a transcriptional effector of the developmentally important hedgehog (Hh)
signaling pathway. Here we report the production of mouse monoclonal antibody
(MAb) against putative repressive motif in GLI3 (GLI3pRM). BALB/c mice were
immunized with purified recombinant human GLI3pRM protein, and the splenocytes
from these mice were fused with myeloma cell line (SP2/0) by using standard
hybridoma production techniques. Resulting hybridomas producing anti-GLI3pRM
antibodies were screened by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and
isotyped. The specificity of MAb 5E1 was determined based on its activity in
Western blot and immunofluorescence analyses of the human NT2/D1 cell line. The
results showed that MAb 5E1 was immunoglobulin IgM/kappa, recognizing recombinant
human GLI3pRM specifically. In addition, MAb 5E1 bound to the full-length
(FL-GLI3) as well as a short protein (GLI3R) and did not cross-react with a
similar region in GLI2. MAb 5E1 could also be used to detect the expression of
Gli3 in mouse cell lines and embryonic tissues.

PMID: 17725385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2007 Aug;26(4):217-22.

Production and characterization of monoclonal antibody against human serum
albumin.

Omidfar K(1), Kashanian S, Paknejad M, Kashanian S, Larijani B, Roshanfekr H.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Center, Medical Sciences/University of
Tehran, Tehran, I.R. Iran. omidfar@tums.ac.ir

Hybridomas secreting monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) producing stable, specific and 
high affinity against human serum albumin (HSA) have been established. The aim of
the present study was the production of MAbs that will be potentially used in
designing immunoassay methods especially immunochromatography assay kit for
screening of microalbuminuria (MAU) in the early detection of diabetic and
nondiabetic nephropathy. The hybridomas were obtained by fusion of spleen cells
from immunized mice with mouse myeloma cell line (SP2). After limiting dilutions 
three clones producing antibodies were designed as EMRC1-3, which displayed
different pattern of fine specificity for HSA and low cross reaction with other
proteins as elucidated by inhibition enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
These clones were found to be of immunoglobulin G (IgG) class with k light chain.
Subclass determination showed that all three MAbs secreted IgG1 type of antibody.
The results of affinity purification for the two selected clones (EMRC1 and
EMRC3) displayed high affinity with no cross reactivity with any of the related
protein molecules. The stable hybridomas secreting anti-HSA were expanded in
50-mL flasks for large-scale production of the required antibodies. The standard 
curves were constructed with a sensitivity of 10 pg per well covering up to 100
ng per well. The high binding activity to HSA antigen and having no cross
reactivity with other related molecules illustrated the potential application of 
these antibodies as an immunodiagnostic reagent in designing an
immunochromatography assay kit for screening of MAU in diabetic and nondiabetic
patients.

PMID: 17725383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Genetics. 2007 Oct;177(2):949-58. Epub 2007 Aug 24.

Effects of recombination on hitchhiking diversity in the Brassica
self-incompatibility locus complex.

Takuno S(1), Fujimoto R, Sugimura T, Sato K, Okamoto S, Zhang SL, Nishio T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Plant Breeding and Genetics, Graduate School of Agricultural
Science, Tohoku University, Sendai, Miyagi 981-8555, Japan.

In self-incompatibility, a number of S haplotypes are maintained by
frequency-dependent selection, which results in trans-specific S haplotypes. The 
region of several kilobases (approximately 40-60 kb) from SP6 to SP2, including
self-incompatibility-related genes and some adjacent genes in Brassica rapa, has 
high nucleotide diversity due to the hitchhiking effect, and therefore we call
this region the "S-locus complex." Recombination in the S-locus complex is
considered to be suppressed. We sequenced regions of >50 kb of the S-locus
complex of three S haplotypes in B. rapa and found higher nucleotide diversity in
intergenic regions than in coding regions. Two highly similar regions of >10 kb
were found between BrS-8 and BrS-46. Phylogenetic analysis using trans-specific S
haplotypes (called interspecific pairs) of B. rapa and B. oleracea suggested that
recombination reduced the nucleotide diversity in these two regions and that the 
genes not involved in self-incompatibility in the S-locus complex and the kinase 
domain, but not the S domain, of SRK have also experienced recombination.
Recombination may reduce hitchhiking diversity in the S-locus complex, whereas
the region from the S domain to SP11 would disfavor recombination.

PMCID: PMC2034657
PMID: 17720932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Sichuan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2007 Jul;38(4):613-6.

[Immunoprotection role of a hepatitis B virus DNA vaccine responsible to BAlb/c
mice].

[Article in Chinese]

He F(1), Tang H, Liu L, Zhao LS, Liu C.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Infectious Diseases, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China 
Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the specific immune response and the immunoprotection
effects of cytotoxic T-lymphocyte (CTL), which is induced by hepatitis B virus
(HBV) DNA vaccine pCMV-S2S, on BALB/c mouse with the attack of SP2/0-S2S cells, a
BALB/c mouse myeloma cell line stably expressing the HBV preS2S antigen.
METHODS: BALB/c mice were divided into 3 groups: experimental group
(intramuscularly injected with pCMV-S2S), control group 1 (HBsAg vaccine
immunizing) or control group 2 (plasmid pCMV immunizing), which were immunized
thrice at week 0.4 and 8 respectively. Specific CTL activities of 3 mice of each 
group were measured by lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) release assays, 4w after the
last boost. The other mice of each group were subcutaneously inoculated with
SP2/0-S2S cells into one lateral of flanks. SP2/0-CMV cell without expressing
preS2S was subcutaneously inoculated into another lateral of mouse flanks. The
time of visible tumor formation and the size of tumor were recorded and observed.
The life span and survival rate of mice after loaded with the tumor cells were
analyzed by Log-Rank statistics and Kaplan-Meier Survival curve respectively.
RESULTS: The specific CTL lysis value of pCMV-S2S group mice was (34.21 +/-
1.38)%, higher than that of HBsAg group [(19.64 +/- 1.50)%] or pCMV group [(3.45 
+/- 1.89)%] (P < 0.05). The visible SP2/0-S2S tumor formation rate in pCMV-S2S
group mice was 58.3% lower than that in the pCMV group (91.7%), 10 d after
inoculated with the tumor cells (P < 0.05). The tumor formation rates of the two 
control groups were no obvious difference. The date of the first mouse dying in
pCMV-S2S group was 24d, delayed for 13d, compared with that in the two control
groups. The average life span of pCMV-S2S group mice after loaded with the tumor 
cells was (31 +/- 1) d, longer than that of the two control groups (P < 0.05).
The 4w survival rate of the pCMV-S2S group mice was obviously increased (75%),
compared with the two control groups (P < 0.05). The average life span and the 4w
survival rate of the two control group mice were no obvious difference.
CONCLUSION: The hepatitis B virus DNA pCMV-S2S vaccination may elicit substantial
HBV preS2S-specific CTL response in vivo, which gives the mouse the
immunoprotection against the attack of SP2/0-S2S cells. The results indicate that
pCMV-S2S may be used to the immunoprotection from HBV infection.

PMID: 17718423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Chem Commun (Camb). 2007 May 28;(20):2037-9.

Unusual nickel-mediated C-S cleavage of alkyl and aryl sulfoxides.

Schaub T(1), Backes M, Radius U.

Author information: 
(1)Universität Karlsruhe (TH), Institut für Anorganische Chemie, Engesserstr.,
Geb. 30.4, D-76131 Karlsruhe, Germany.

The first examples of transition metal mediated C-S cleavage of sulfoxides
containing sp2- and sp3-hybridized carbon bonds attached to the sulfur atom and
the first example of a structurally characterized complex featuring an
oxygen-bound sulfinyl ligand are presented.

PMID: 17713070  [PubMed]


57. Org Biomol Chem. 2007 Sep 7;5(17):2803-11. Epub 2007 Jul 24.

Longer polyenyl cations in relation to soliton theory.

Kildahl-Andersen G(1), Anthonsen T, Liaaen-Jensen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Norwegian University of Science and Technology
(NTNU), NO-7491, Trondheim, Norway.

The carotene-like polyenes decapreno-beta-carotene (C50), C54-beta-carotene (C54,
first synthesis) and dodecapreno-beta-carotene (C60) with 15, 17 and 19
conjugated double bonds, respectively, were synthesized by double Wittig
reactions. Introduction of a leaving group in allylic position failed, and
cations were obtained by hydride elimination effected by i) triphenylcarbenium
tetrafluoroborate-d15, prepared by a new method, or ii) treatment with
trifluoroacetic acid-d. Deuterated reagents were employed for product analysis by
1H NMR. Parallel experiments were performed with beta,beta-carotene (C40). NIR
spectra at room temperature and at -15 degrees C were employed for
characterisation and stability studies of the cationic products. In
CH2Cl2lambdamax in the 900-1350 nm region was recorded. NMR data for the cationic
product of beta,beta-carotene obtained by the two new preparation methods were
consistent with the two monocations previously characterised. The cationic
products of the longer polyenes provided downfield-shifted, broadened signals,
compatible with C50-monocation, mixed C54-mono- and dication and C60-dication.
Combined NIR and NMR data suggest that the extent of charge delocalisation is
limited by the maximum soliton width for cations obtained from linear polyenes
with more than ca. 20 sp2-hybridized carbon atoms.

PMID: 17700849  [PubMed]


58. Ernst Schering Found Symp Proc. 2006;(3):77-98.

Isoindolones and related N-heterocycles via palladium nanoparticle-catalyzed
3-component cascade reactions.

Grigg R(1), Sridharan V.

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry Department, Leeds University, LS2 9JT Leeds, UK.

Non-phosphine-containing cyclopalladated N-heterocycles possessing either sp2
C-Pd(II) or sp3 C-Pd(II) bonds and simple Pd(II) salts are precursors of Pd(0)
nanoparticles whose initial morphology is dependent on the nature of the
precursor. Addition of polyvinylpyrrolidone (pvp) dramatically increases catalyst
lifetime. Nanoparticle generation can be achieved at ambient temperature in the
presence of carbon monoxide by a process akin to the water-gas shift reaction.
Allene also lowers the temperature required for nanoparticle generation.
3-Component catalytic cascades employing one or both of these substrates provide 
access to a variety of 5- and 6-membered N-heterocycles including isoindolones,
N-aminoisoindolones, phthalazones, dihydroisoquinolines, and isoquinolones.

PMID: 17695711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Mol Microbiol Biotechnol. 2007;13(1-3):35-44.

Tyrosinase from Rhizobium etli is involved in nodulation efficiency and
symbiosis-associated stress resistance.

Piñero S(1), Rivera J, Romero D, Cevallos MA, Martínez A, Bolívar F, Gosset G.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Ingeniería Celular y Biocatálisis, Instituto de
Biotecnología/UNAM, Cuernavaca, Mexico.

Tyrosinase (EC 1.14.18.1) is a monophenol oxidase responsible for the synthesis
of the black pigment known as melanin. The tyrosinase gene (melA) is
plasmid-encoded in many rhizobial species. In Rhizobium etli CFN42, the genetic
location of melA in the symbiotic plasmid (p42d) and its RpoN-NifA regulation
suggest an involvement in symbiosis. In this work, we analyzed the symbiotic
phenotype of a streptomycin-resistant derivative of CFN42 (CE3), a melA mutant
(SP2) and a complemented strain (SP66), demonstrating that melA inactivation
reduced nodule formation rate and diminished total nodule number by 27% when
compared to the CE3 strain. The nitrogen fixation capacity of the mutant strain
was not affected. Also, in vitro assays were performed where the resistance of
CE3, SP2 and SP66 strains to H(2)O(2) was evaluated; the melA mutant strain was
consistently less resistant to peroxide. In another series of experiments,
Escherichia coli W3110 strain expressing R. etli melA displayed enhanced
resistance to p-hydroxybenzoic, vanillinic and syringic acids, which are phenolic
compounds frequently found in the soil. Our results are the first to demonstrate 
a specific role for tyrosinase in R. etli: this enzyme is required during early
symbiosis, apparently providing resistance against reactive oxygen species and
phenolic compounds generated as part of the plant protective responses.

Copyright (c) 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 17693711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Ai Zheng. 2007 May;26(5):453-7.

[Preparation of functional antibodies targeting tumor endothelia for the
treatment of hepatic carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Hu H(1), Ran YL, Yu L, Zhou Z, Lou JN, Yang ZH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Cancer Institute, Peking Union
Medical College & Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, 100021, PR China.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVE: Tumor growth relies on angiogenesis; angiogenic
inhibition can effectively treat tumors. This study was to develop monoclonal
antibody library against human hepatic carcinoma vessel endothelial cells
(HCVECs), and screen functional monoclonal antibodies with inhibitory effect on
the angiogenesis of hepatic carcinoma.
METHODS: Endothelial cells were separated from human hepatic carcinoma tissue to 
immunize 10 BALB/c mice. The spleen cells of the immunized mice were fused with
SP2/0 cells and cultured on methyl cellulose. Functional monoclonal antibodies of
each clone were screened by immunofluorescence, endothelial cell proliferation
assay, tube formation assay, and humanized blood vessel in vivo tumor model.
RESULTS: A total of 1,442 monoclonal antibody clones were obtained by fusing
spleen cells with SP2/0 cells; 119 clones could specifically react with HCVECs.
Of the 119 clones, 53 significantly suppressed the proliferation or tube
formation of HCVECs. Two of the 53 monoclonal antibody clones suppressed the
hepatic tumor growth in vivo, with inhibitory rates of 66.7% and 76.5%.
CONCLUSION: We successfully developed 2 functional monoclonal antibodies which
could suppress the hepatic tumor growth in vivo.

PMID: 17672931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Plant J. 2007 Sep;51(6):1099-115. Epub 2007 Jul 27.

Selective targeting of plasma membrane and tonoplast traffic by inhibitory
(dominant-negative) SNARE fragments.

Tyrrell M(1), Campanoni P, Sutter JU, Pratelli R, Paneque M, Sokolovski S, Blatt 
MR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Plant Physiology and Biophysics, IBLS, Plant Sciences, Bower
Building, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, UK.

Vesicle traffic underpins cell homeostasis, growth and development in plants, and
is facilitated by a superfamily of proteins known as SNAREs [soluble NSF
(N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor) attachment protein receptors] that interact
to draw vesicle and target membrane surfaces together for fusion. Structural
homologies, biochemical and genetic analyses have yielded information about the
localization and possible roles of these proteins. However, remarkably little
evidence is yet available that speaks directly to the functional specificities of
these proteins in selected trafficking pathways in vivo. Previously, we found
that expressing a cytosolic (so-called Sp2) fragment of one plasma membrane SNARE
from tobacco and Arabidopsis had severe effects on growth, tissue development and
secretory traffic to the plasma membrane. We have explored this dominant-negative
approach further to examine the specificity and overlaps in Sp2 activity by
generating a toolbox of truncated SNARE constructs and antibodies for transient
expression and analysis. Using a quantitative ratiometric approach with secreted 
green fluorescent protein (secGFP), we report here that traffic to the plasma
membrane is suppressed selectively by Sp2 fragments of plasma membrane SNAREs
AtSYP121 and AtSYP122, but not of the closely related SNARE AtSYP111 nor of the
SNARE AtSYP21 that resides at the pre-vacuolar compartment (PVC). By contrast,
traffic of the YFP-tagged aquaporin fusion protein TIP1;1-YFP to the tonoplast
was blocked (leading to its accumulation in the PVC) when co-expressed with the
Sp2 fragment of AtSYP21, but not when co-expressed with that of AtSYP121. Export 
of secGFP was also sensitive to the Sp2 fragment of the novel, plant-specific
SNARE AtSYP71 that was recently found to be present in detergent-resistant,
plasma membrane fractions. Co-incubation analyses of the plasma membrane SNAREs
with the regulatory subdomain included within the Sp2 fragments showed activity
in destabilizing protein complexes, but only with the complementary SNAREs. We
conclude that the Sp2 fragment action accurately reflects the known specificity
and targeting of these SNAREs, implies functional overlaps that are of potential 
physiological interest, and underscores the use of a dominant-negative strategy
in functional studies of a major subfamily of SNAREs in plants.

PMID: 17662029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2007 Sep 1;98(1):141-54.

Fed-batch bioreactor process scale-up from 3-L to 2,500-L scale for monoclonal
antibody production from cell culture.

Yang JD(1), Lu C, Stasny B, Henley J, Guinto W, Gonzalez C, Gleason J, Fung M,
Collopy B, Benjamino M, Gangi J, Hanson M, Ille E.

Author information: 
(1)Immunomedics, Inc. 300 American Road, Morris Plains, New Jersey 07950, USA.
Jyang@Immunomedics.com

This case study focuses on the scale-up of a Sp2/0 mouse myeloma cell line based 
fed-batch bioreactor process, from the initial 3-L bench scale to the 2,500-L
scale. A stepwise scale-up strategy that involved several intermediate steps in
increasing the bioreactor volume was adopted to minimize the risks associated
with scale-up processes. Careful selection of several available mixing models
from literature, and appropriately applying the calculated results to our
settings, resulted in successful scale-up of agitation speed for the large
bioreactors. Consideration was also given to scale-up of the nutrient feeding,
inoculation, and the set-points of operational parameters such as temperature,
pH, dissolved oxygen, dissolved carbon dioxide, and aeration in an integrated
manner. It has been demonstrated through the qualitative and the quantitative
side-by-side comparison of bioreactor performance as well as through a panel of
biochemical characterization tests that the comparability of the process and the 
product was well controlled and maintained during the process scale-up. The
2,500-L process is currently in use for the routine clinical production of
Epratuzumab in support of two global Phase III clinical trials in patients with
lupus. Today, the 2,500 L, fed-batch production process for Epratuzumab has met
all scheduled batch releases, and the quality of the antibody is consistent and
reproducible, meeting all specifications, thus confirming the robustness of the
process.

PMID: 17657776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Biotechnol Lett. 2007 Dec;29(12):1811-6. Epub 2007 Jul 27.

Novel chimeric anti-ricin antibody C4C13 with neutralizing activity against ricin
toxicity.

Wang Y(1), Guo L, Zhao K, Chen J, Feng J, Sun Y, Li Y, Shen B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Beijing, PR China.

So far, no specific therapeutic agent is available for the treatment of ricin
intoxication. Here, V(H) and V(L) genes were cloned from a hybridoma cell line
secreting anti-ricin mAb 4C13, which could neutralize the toxicity of ricin. A
chimeric antibody, c4C13, containing 4C13 mAb variable region genes fused to
human constant region genes (gamma 1, kappa), was constructed. C4C13 retained the
binding activity and recognized the same, or a closely related, epitope as the
original mouse antibody. Furthermore, c4C13 blocked ricin-induced cytotoxicity to
SP2/0 cells. Compared with its parental mouse antibody, c4C13 will be safer when 
used in human body to reverse clinical ricin intoxication.

PMID: 17657413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2007 Jun;7(6):2092-5.

A study of polyaniline deposited nanocrystalline diamond films for glucose
detection.

Xu Z(1), Jeedigunta S, Kumar A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL
33620, USA.

Nitrogen-doped nanocrystalline diamond (NCD) films have been deposited on Si
substrates in CH4/Ar/N2 gas mixtures by the microwave plasma enhanced chemical
vapor deposition (MPECVD) technique. Such films contain very small diamond grains
(10 to 30 nm) with high electrical conductivity (126 ohms(-1) cm(-1)) compared to
un-doped ones. The films were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM)
and Raman spectroscopy. Near edge X-ray fine structure studies showed that the
nitrogen-doped NCD had slightly higher sp2/sp3 bonding ratio compared to the
un-doped sample. A nitrogen-doped NCD electrode was functionalized by conducting 
polymer films (polyaniline) to work as an interface for biomedical applications. 
Glucose sensing has been demonstrated based on this functionalized electrode.
Linear response of the sensor has been observed for glucose concentration up to 9
mM.

PMID: 17654998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Chemistry. 2007;13(29):8271-6.

Emulation of racemase activity by employing a pair of stereocomplementary
biocatalysts.

Gruber CC(1), Nestl BM, Gross J, Hildebrandt P, Bornscheuer UT, Faber K, Kroutil 
W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Organic and Bioorganic Chemistry, University of Graz,
Heinrichstrasse 28, 8010 Graz, Austria.

Racemization is the key step to turn a kinetic resolution process into dynamic
resolution. A general strategy for racemization under mild reaction conditions by
employing stereoselective biocatalysts is presented, in which racemization is
achieved by employing a pair of stereocomplementary biocatalysts that reversibly 
interconvert an sp3 to a sp2 center. The formal interconversion of the
enantiomers proceeds via a prochiral sp2 intermediate the formation of which is
catalyzed either by two stereocomplementary enzymes or by a single enzyme with
low stereoselectivity. By choosing appropriate reaction conditions, the amount of
the prochiral intermediate is kept to a minimum. This general strategy, which is 
applicable to redox enzymes (e.g., by acting on R2CHOH and R2CHNHR groups) and
lyase-catalyzed addition-elimination reactions, was proven for the racemization
of secondary alcohols by employing alcohol dehydrogenases. Thus, enantiopure
chiral alcohols were used as model substrates and were racemized either with
highly stereoselective biocatalysts or by using (rarely found) non-selective
enzymes.

PMID: 17639544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Virol. 2007 Sep;81(18):10047-54. Epub 2007 Jul 18.

Mutational analysis of the C-terminal gag cleavage sites in human
immunodeficiency virus type 1.

Coren LV(1), Thomas JA, Chertova E, Sowder RC 2nd, Gagliardi TD, Gorelick RJ, Ott
DE.

Author information: 
(1)AIDS Vaccine Program, SAIC-Frederick, Inc., National Cancer Institute at
Frederick, Frederick, MD 21702-1201, USA. ott@ncifcrf.gov

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) Gag is expressed as a polyprotein
that is cleaved into six proteins by the viral protease in a maturation process
that begins during assembly and budding. While processing of the N terminus of
Gag is strictly required for virion maturation and infectivity, the necessity for
the C-terminal cleavages of Gag is less well defined. To examine the importance
of this process, we introduced a series of mutations into the C terminus of Gag
that interrupted the cleavage sites that normally produce in the nucleocapsid
(NC), spacer 2 (SP2), or p6(Gag) proteins. Protein analysis showed that all of
the mutant constructs produced virions efficiently upon transfection of cells and
appropriately processed Gag polyprotein at the nonmutated sites. Mutants that
produced a p9(NC/SP2) protein exhibited only minor effects on HIV-1 infectivity
and replication. In contrast, mutants that produced only the p8(SP2/p6) or
p15(NC/SP2/p6) protein had severe defects in infectivity and replication. To
identify the key defective step, we quantified reverse transcription and
integration products isolated from infected cells by PCR. All mutants tested
produced levels of reverse transcription products either similar to or only
somewhat lower than that of wild type. In contrast, mutants that failed to cleave
the SP2-p6(Gag) site produced drastically less provirus than the wild type.
Together, our results show that processing of the SP2-p6(Gag) and not the NC-SP2 
cleavage site is important for efficient viral DNA integration during infection
in vitro. In turn, this finding suggests an important role for the p9(NC/SP2)
species in some aspect of integration.

PMCID: PMC2045408
PMID: 17634233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Zhongguo Ji Sheng Chong Xue Yu Ji Sheng Chong Bing Za Zhi. 2007 Apr
30;25(2):97-100, 105.

[Preparation of monoclonal antibodies against the adhesion protein 33 of
Trichomonas vaginalis].

[Article in Chinese]

Huang HC(1), Yu SF, Cai M, Tan F, Zheng XY, Pan CW.

Author information: 
(1)Wenzhou Medical College, Wenzhou 325035, China.

OBJECTIVE: To prepare and characterize the monoclonal antibodies (McAbs) against 
recombinant adhesion protein 33 (AP33) of Trichomonas vaginalis.
METHODS: The purified recombinant fusion protein AP33 was used as antigen to
immunize BALB/c mice. Sp2/0 myeloma cells were fused with the splenocytes from
immunized BALB/c mice. After ELISA screening and 4 times of limited dilution, 5
positive hybridoma cell lines were obtained, and the biological properties of the
McAbs were identified by Western blotting. Indirect immunofluorescent antibody
test (IFAT) was performed and the inhibition effect of McAbs on the cytoadherence
of Trichomonas vaginalis to HeLa cell was assayed.
RESULTS: Western blotting demonstrated that 5 McAbs, designated as 4A2, 4F11,
4F8, 4E7 and 4H11, specifically combined with the recombinant AP33 of T.
vaginalis. The McAbs were IgG1 isotypes. Four of them (4F11, 4F8, 4E7 and 4H11)
showed parasite recognition by IFAT. Parasite cytoadherence to a monolayer of
HeLa cells was inhibited in vitro with a inhibition rate of 50.08%, 65.03%,
50.70% and 49.08% by the 4 McAbs under a concentration of 200, 200, 400 and 200
microg/ml, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The prepared McAbs against the recombinant AP33 show a protective
inhibition on cytoadherence of Trichomonas vaginalis in vitro.

PMID: 17633817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Org Lett. 2007 Aug 2;9(16):3141-3. Epub 2007 Jul 13.

Total synthesis of herboxidiene/GEX 1A.

Zhang Y(1), Panek JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Center for Chemical Methodology and Library
Development, Metcalf Center for Science and Engineering, Boston University, 590
Commonwealth Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

A convergent enantioselective synthesis of herboxidiene/GEX 1A (1) is described
that features a double stereodifferentiating crotylation, [4 + 2] annulation, and
a silicon-based sp2-sp2 cross-coupling to assemble the conjugated diene.

PMCID: PMC3164305
PMID: 17629295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Genet Test. 2007 Summer;11(2):146-52.

Application of dHPLC for mutation detection of the fibrillin-1 gene for the
diagnosis of Marfan syndrome in a National Health Service Laboratory.

Howarth R(1), Yearwood C, Harvey JF.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury Hospital NHS Trust, Salisbury, 
Wiltshire, SP2 8BJ, UK.

Marfan syndrome (MFS) is an autosomal dominant connective tissue disorder caused 
by mutations in the fibrillin-1 gene FBN1. Mutation detection of this 65-exon
gene presents a particular challenge for the diagnostic service in cost, time
constraints, and the need to maintain a stringently optimized assay procedure.
Using denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography (dHPLC), we have designed
a procedure for rapid mutation scanning, redesigning 50% of published primer
sets, screening by Ensembl to avoid inclusion of polymorphic variations and
employing a limited set of PCR conditions to allow for a high-throughput 96-well 
format. We have screened 262 unrelated patients with MFS or Marfan-like
phenotypes and detected 103 (39.3%) mutations including 93 different mutations,
72 of which are novel. The mutations include 55 missense (53.4%) 19 splice site
(18.5%), 17 frameshift (16.5%), 11 nonsense (10.7%) and 1 in-frame
deletion/insertion.

PMID: 17627385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Phytochem Anal. 2007 Sep-Oct;18(5):411-8.

Determination of pseudojujubogenin glycosides from Brahmi based on immunoassay
using a monoclonal antibody against bacopaside I.

Phrompittayarat W(1), Putalun W, Tanaka H, Jetiyanon K, Wittaya-Areekul S,
Ingkaninan K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Pharmacognosy, Faculty of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Naresuan University, Phitsanulok 65000, Thailand.

Bacopa monnieri (L.) Wettst. (Brahmi) is an Ayurvedic medicinal plant used for
centuries as a memory enhancer. Dammarane-type triterpenoid saponins classified
as pseudojujubogenin and jujubogenin glycosides are reported as the active
components in this plant. In this study, the monoclonal antibody (MAb) against
bacopaside I, a major pseudojujubogenin glycoside found in Brahmi, was produced
and characterised. Bacopaside I was conjugated with bovine albumin serum to
prepare an immunogen. Hybridomas secreting a monoclonal antibody against
bacopaside I was produced by fusing splenocytes from an immunised mouse and
SP2/0-Ag14 myeloma cells. The results showed that the antibodies were raised
specifically against pseudojujubonin glycosides. An enzyme-linked immunosorbant
assay (ELISA) using anti-bacopaside I MAb was performed in the range of 1.95-62.5
ng/mL of bacopaside I, with a limit of detection of 0.5 ng/mL. The method was
validated and the practical use of the ELISA for analysing saponin glycosides
from Brahmi was demonstrated.

Copyright (c) 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 17624902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Jul;23(7):657-9.

[Preparation and characterization of monoclonal antibody against
Enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli O157:H7 EspA].

[Article in Chinese]

Yu S(1), Luo P, Chen HZ, Li HX, Mao XH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Third Military Medical University,
Chongqing 400038, China.

AIM: To prepare hybridoma cell lines were obtained by fusing Sp2/0 with spleen
cells from BALB/c mice immunized with killed enterohemorrhagic E.coli O157:H7
EspA (EHEC O157:H7 EspA).
METHODS: The subclass isotype and the specificity of monoclonal antibodies (mAb) 
were determined and identified by ELISA, Western blot and immune fluorescence
staining.
RESULTS: Isotype of 3 mAb was IgG1kappa, IgG1lambda, and IgG2kappa, respectively,
and the affinity constant were 3.0x10(9), 2.8x10(9), 1.9x10(9). As demonstrated
by Western blot, these 3 mAb specifically reacted with EspA protein and EHEC
O157:H7. Useing immune fluorescence staining, EHEC O157:H7 could adhere to the
membrace of Hela cell.
CONCLUSION: Three hybridoma cell lines can stably secrete anti-EspA mAb with
high-titer and high-specific have been established. It can be used to deeply
study EHEC O157:H7 pathopoiesis mechanism.

PMID: 17618593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Aug;23(8):757-60.

[Preparation and characterization of two novel functional monoclonal antibodies
against human OX40L].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu HY(1), Wang Q, Chen YJ, Xie F, Mao YX, Liu GQ, Zhang XG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biotechnology, Soochow University, Suzhou 215007, China. 
wuhongya000@sina.com

AIM: To prepare novel anti-OX40L functional monoclonal antibodies and
characterize their distinct biological functions.
METHODS: Routine immunization of BALB/c mice by a tansfected cell line L929/OX40L
expressing high level of OX40L as antigens. Then fuse the immunized spleen with
Sp2/0, a kind of myloma, and screen the positive clones by FCS with L929/OX40L as
a positive control.After acquisition of the hybidomas secreting anti-OX40L mAb,
investigation of their biological activities by Western blot, rapid isotyping
analysis, karyotype analysis, competitive inhibition test, indirect
immunofluorescence and MTT incorporation assay were followed.
RESULTS: Obtain two stable hybridomas, 4D6 and 5C2, which could continuously
secret specific anti-OX40L monoclonal antibodies. The following biological
activity studies showed that these monoclonal antibodies could both recognize the
natural OX40L expressed on the mature DC, especially the OX40L on the several
leukemia cell lines, such as Jurkat, SHI-1, U937 etc. Furthermore, they could
also suppress the proliferation of SHI-1 in vitro.
CONCLUSION: Two hybridomas secreting anti-OX40L monoclonal antibodies
continuously and steadily have been established. These monoclonal antibodies
could specifically recognize human OX40L and effect the proliferation of leukemia
cell line SHI-1 through OX40/OX40L costimulatory signals.

PMID: 17618572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Planta Med. 2007 Aug;73(10):1127-32. Epub 2007 Jul 5.

Preparation of a novel monoclonal antibody against the antimalarial drugs,
artemisinin and artesunate.

Tanaka H(1), Putalun W, De-Eknamkul W, Matangkasombut O, Shoyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacognosy, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. htanaka@phar.kyushu-u.ac.jp

A monoclonal antibody (MAb) 1C1 against artemisinin was prepared by a cell fusion
with splenocytes and aminopterin-sensitive myeloma cells, SP2/0. An
artesunate-BSA conjugate was used as immunogen to raise antibodies specific to
artemisinin. The prepared anti-artemisinin MAb-1C1 have a novel characteristic
which shows a specificity to compounds that are structurally related to
artemisinin such as artesunate (630%) and dihydroartemisinin (29.9%). By using
MAb-1C1, a specific and reliable ELISA was developed for the detection of
compounds structurally related to artemisinin. The system shows a full measuring 
range from 2 to 20 microg/mL in the case of artemisinin and from 4 to 125 ng/mL
in the case of artesunate in the competitive ELISA, and was validated to be of
use for surveying and breeding of Artemisia annua containing a high amount of
artemisinin as well as for the characterization of the pharmacokinetics of
artemisinin and its derivatives.

PMID: 17611929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Org Chem. 2007 Aug 3;72(16):6251-4. Epub 2007 Jun 30.

Synthesis, structural, spectral, and photoswitchable properties of cis- and
trans-2,2,2',2'-tetramethyl-1,1'-indanylindanes.

Shimasaki T(1), Kato S, Shinmyozu T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Materials Chemistry and Engineering (IMCE) and Department of
Molecular Chemistry, Graduate School of Sciences, Kyushu University, Hakozaki
6-10-1, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8581, Japan.

As versatile synthetic intermediates for new photoswitchable molecules with a
tetramethylindanylindane (stiff-stilbene) core, the cis and trans isomers of
5,16-dibromo-2,2,13',13'-tetramethylindanylindanes 2 were synthesized by the
Barton-Kellogg coupling. The bromine atoms of trans-2 could be readily replaced
with alkyl (sp3), aryl (sp2), and ethynyl (sp) groups. The cis isomers of the
parent tetramethylindanylindane 1 and its bromo derivative 2 were isolated, and
their structural and photophysical properties were examined for the first time.
Clean and efficient trans-cis and cis-trans photochemical isomerization processes
were observed in 1.

PMID: 17604396  [PubMed]


75. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2007 Jun;26(3):131-9.

Generation and characterization of mouse monoclonal antibody 5E1 against human
transcription factor GLI3.

Hunt R(1), Bragina O, Drews M, Kasak L, Timmusk S, Valkna A, Kogerman P,
Järvekülg L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Gene Technology, Tallinn University of Technology, Akadeemia tee,
Tallinn, Estonia.

GLI3 is a transcriptional effector of the developmentally important hedgehog (Hh)
signaling pathway. Here we report the production of mouse monoclonal antibody
(MAb) against putative repressive motif in GLI3 (GLI3pRM). BALB/c mice were
immunized with purified recombinant human GLI3pRM protein; the splenocytes from
these mice were fused with myeloma cell line (SP2/0) by using standard hybridoma 
production techniques. Resulting hybridomas producing anti-GLI3pRM antibodies
were screened by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and isotyped. The
specificity of MAb 5E1 was determined based on its activity in Western blot and
immunofluorescence analysis of human NT2/D1 cell line. The results showed that
MAb 5E1 was immunoglobulin IgM/ê and it recognized recombinant human GLI3pRM
specifically. In addition, MAb 5E1 bound to the full-length (FL-GLI3) as well as 
a short protein (GLI3R) and did not cross-react with a similar region in GLI2.
MAb 5E1 could also be used to detect the expression of GLI3 in mouse cell lines
and embryonic tissues.

PMID: 17600494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Cancer Biother Radiopharm. 2007 Apr;22(2):200-5.

In vitro induction of apoptosis in tumor cells by inactivated NDV and IAV.

Yang S(1), Liu W, Cui H, Sun S, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Biological
Sciences, China, Agricultural University, Beijing, China.

We examined how Newcastle disease virus (NDV) and influenza A virus (IAV)
inactivated by 5% formaldehyde, used either alone or in combination, can induce
apoptosis in both HeLa and SP2/0 cells. Inactive NDV and IAV demonstrated
enhanced rates of lysis in apoptotic tumor cells and greater antitumor effects
when combined. Our study supports the argument that viral replication does not
cause virally induced apoptosis.

PMID: 17600467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Phys Chem B. 2007 Jul 19;111(28):8234-41. Epub 2007 Jun 20.

Catalyst volume to surface area constraints for nucleating carbon nanotubes.

Rümmeli MH(1), Kramberger C, Löffler M, Jost O, Bystrzejewski M, Grüneis A,
Gemming T, Pompe W, Büchner B, Pichler T.

Author information: 
(1)IFW Dresden, P.O. Box 270116, D-01171 Dresden, Germany, Dresden University of 
Technology, D-01062 Dresden, Germany. m.ruemmeli@ifw-dresden.de

In this Article, we describe a carbon nanotube formation model in which sp2
carbon hemispheres form the embryonic caps from which a nanotube can grow. This
requirement leads to a single wall carbon nanotube formation window concomitant
with our systematic experimental findings, which show upper and lower diameter
limits. Further, the successful formation of a nucleation cap (hemisphere) is
governed by catalyst particle volume to surface area considerations. Single wall 
carbon nanotubes are only obtained when both the nanotube formation window and
the precipitating catalyst size distribution cross over. The extent to which
these two windows overlap establishes the mean diameter and diameter distribution
of the obtained single wall carbon nanotubes.

PMID: 17580861  [PubMed]


78. Inorg Chem. 2007 Jul 9;46(14):5555-61. Epub 2007 Jun 15.

Preparation and structure of a solid-state hypervalent-iodine polymer containing 
iodine and oxygen atoms in fused 12-atom hexagonal rings.

Richter HW(1), Koser GF, Incarvito CD, Rheingold AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The University of Akron, Akron, Ohio 44325-3601, USA.
richter@uakron.edu

The treatment of dilute aqueous solutions of [hydroxy(tosyloxy)iodo]benzene with 
aqueous Mg(ClO4)2 produced thin elongated-hexagonal plates exhibiting a
supramolecular structure in which tetra-mu-oxopentaiodanyl dication repeat units 
are joined to each other by significantly ionic bonds and each unit is associated
with two perchlorate ions. The linearly extended cationic structure is formed
from the 12-atom hexagonal rings of alternating iodine and oxygen atoms, a novel 
structure. Each 12-membered ring forms a nearly planar hexagonal shape with sides
defined by almost linear O-I-O segments (175.7+/-1.6) degrees. The apexes are
occupied by bridging oxide ligands where the I-O-I angles deviate only slightly
from an ideal 120 degrees hexagonal angle (116.8+/-1.2) degrees, consistent with 
sp2 hybridization of the bridging oxygen atoms that participate in three-center
four-electron bonds with iodine. These 12-atom hexagons are slightly "chair"
distorted at the oxygen atoms. The planes of the rings are separated by layers
containing the phenyl rings. The perchlorate ions reside in void spaces created
by the three-up, three-down arrangement of the phenyl rings around each
12-membered I-O ring and are positioned directly above and below the I-O rings.

PMID: 17569525  [PubMed]


79. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Jun;23(6):556-8.

[Preparation and identification of monoclonal antibodies against Type M/N and
Glycophorin A/B].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen Q(1), Cao H, Zhang HY, Gao XF, Wang F, Li HD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225001, China.

AIM: To prepare monoclonal antibodies(mAbs) against Type M/N and monoclonal
antibodies against Glycophorin A and Glycophorin B (GPA/GPB) and identify rare
blood group MkMk.
METHODS: 8 week-old female BALB/c mice were immunized with type "O" red blood
cells, Splenocytes from the immunized mice were fused with Sp2/0 myeloma cells,
and positive hybridoma clones were screened by panel erythrocytes. The titer of
supernatant and ascitic fluid was tested by direct and indirect agglutination.
The subclasses and isotypes were identified by monoclonal antibody isotyping kit.
The complemental structures of the combining sites of their antibody antigen were
determined by enzyme-treated red cells. The specificity of the GPA/GPB mAbs was
identified by Western blot analysis.
RESULTS: Eight hybridoma cell lines against Type M/N and GPA/GPB were obtained.
The titer of supernatant was between 1 x 2(-4) - 1 x 2(-8), and the titer of
ascitic fluid was between 1 x 2(-7) - 1 x 2(-12). The immunoglobulin subclasses
of all the mAbs were IgG except 1C1C9C4, which was IgM. Four anti-M mAbs and one 
anti-N mAb were deterimined by agglutination test using panel erythrocytes and
the test of the combining sites in antiody antigen. Western blot analysis proved 
that three mAbs recognized GPA/GPB protein.
CONCLUSION: Eight hybridoma cell lines against Type M/N and GPA/GPB have been
obtained successfully. Among them, four mAbs recognize M, one recognizes N and
three recognize GPA/GPB. Our study may be useful to research into MN blood group 
and for serological diagnosis. The anti-GPA/GPB mAbs can be used to prepare
diabodies for the treatment and diagnosis of some of diseases.

PMID: 17553354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Jun;23(6):507-10.

[Anti-tumor mechanisms of Sp2/0 tumor vaccine transfected with mIL-21 gene in
mice].

[Article in Chinese]

Chu LL(1), Dou J, Zhao FS, Tang Q, Zhang AF, Wang YF, Gu N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogenic Biology and Immunology, Southeast University, Nanjing
210009, China.

AIM: To explore the anti-tumor mechanism of Sp2/0-mIL-21 tumor vaccine in mice.
METHODS: The molecules of MHC-I and CD80 on the surface of Sp2/0-mIL-21 tumor
vaccine were detected by flow cytometry (FCM) respectively. A flow cytometric
CFSE-7-AAD cytotoxicity assay was used to detect the cytotoxic activities of NK
cells and CTLs. The expression of I-TAC in the tumor tissue was tested by RT-PCR.
RESULTS: The expression of MHC-I molecule on the surface of tumor vaccine was
up-regulated obviously. The cytotoxic activities of NK cells and CTLs were
significantly enhanced in the mice inoculated with Sp2/0-mIL-21 tumor vaccine
compared with the mice inoculated with Sp2/0 tumor cell in control group. The
expression of I-TAC in the tumor tissue was up-regulated. The histopathologic
section analysis showed more lymphocytes were infiltrated in the tumor tissue.
CONCLUSION: Sp2/0-mIL-21 tumor vaccine can induce strong cell-mediated immune
response to tumor cells after it was inoculated s.c into mice. The anti-tumor
mechanisms induced by Sp2/0 tumor cell vaccine are associated with the
proliferation and activation of T lymphocyte, the differentiation and maturity of
NK cell, the infiltration of lymphocytes in tumor tissue, and the enharuement of 
cytotoxic activities of NK cells and CTLs.

PMID: 17553344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Agric Food Chem. 2007 Jun 27;55(13):4993-8. Epub 2007 Jun 5.

Characterization of monoclonal antibodies for lead-chelate complexes:
applications in antibody-based assays.

Zhu X(1), Hu B, Lou Y, Xu L, Yang F, Yu H, Blake DA, Liu F.

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Monitoring and Management of Plant Diseases and Pests, Ministry of 
Agriculture, College of Plant Protection, Nanjing Agricultural University,
Nanjing 210095, China.

Monoclonal antibodies against lead were generated by immunizing BALB/c mice with 
lead conjugated to keyhole limpet hemocyanin (KLH) via a bifunctional chelator,
S-2-(4-aminobenzyl)diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (DTPA). Stable hybridoma
cell lines were produced by fusion of murine splenocytes and SP2/0 myeloma cells.
One of the hybridomas generated from this fusion (4/7) synthesized and secreted
an antibody that bound tightly to Pb2+-DTPA complexes but not to metal-free DTPA.
The performance for a competitive inhibition enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) incorporating this antibody was assessed for its sensitivity to changes
in pH, ionic strength, and blocking reagents. The cross-reactivities in this
ELISA were less than 3% for Fe3+, Cd2+, Hg2+, and Cu2+ and less than 0.3% for
Cr3+, Mn2+, Mg2+, In3+, Ag1+, Ni2+, Co2+, Zn2+, Ca2+, Cu1+, and Hg1+. The IC50
value achieved for lead was 2.72 +/- 0.034 microM, showing the detection range of
0.092-87.2 microM and the lowest detection limit of 0.056 +/- 0.005 microM.
Recoveries from the analyte-fortified tap water and ultrapure water were in the
range of 80-114% . These results indicate that the ELISA could be a convenient
analytical tool for monitoring lead residues in drinking water.

PMID: 17547420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2007 May;23(5):457-9.

[Preparation and characterization of monoclonal antibody against CP4-EPSPS].

[Article in Chinese]

Jing LX(1), Cai XF, Mu SZ, Liu X, Zhang J, Tang N, Zheng J, Huang AL.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute for Viral Hepatitis, Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology on
Infectious Disease, Chongqing University of Medical Sciences, Chongqing 400016,
China. jinglxcm@163.com

AIM: To prepare monoclonal antibody (mAb) against CP4-EPSPS, which could be
applied to the development of gold colloidal rapid diagnostic kit for the
specific detection of GMO.
METHODS: BALB/c mice were immunized with CP4-EPSPS. Splenocytes of the immunized 
mice were collected and fused with the mouse myeloma cell line Sp2/0 cells. The
hybridoma cells that secreted CP4-EPSPS mAb antibodies were cloned with limited
dilution method. The immunoglobulin (Ig) subtype, the ascites titers, the binding
site, and the affinity of the obtained mAbs were determined by indirect ELISA.
The specificity of mAbs was tested by ELISA and Western blot analysis.
RESULTS: From over 80 positive hybridomas which secreted anti-cp4-EPSPS mAbs, a
pair of hybridomas were screened out, designated III5A3 and III13A2. Chromosome
analysis revealed that the obtained hybridomas were with the universal
characteristics of the monoclonal hybridoma cells which secreted mAb, and the Ig 
subtype of III5A3 and III13A2 mAb was both IgG1. The ascites titers of III5A3 and
III13A2 mAb were 1:10(6) and 1:10(8), respectively. Our study also demonstrated
that these two mAbs, which recognized the same epitope, could both specifically
bind to the CP4-EPSPS protein. The relative affinity constant of III5A3 and
III13A2 mAb was determined as 10(5) and 10(6) respectively.
CONCLUSION: A pair of high titer, specific mAbs against CP4-EPSPS have been
successfully prepared and primarily identified, which may be useful in the
development of a rapid and convenient diagnostic kit for detection of GMO.

PMID: 17488609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Chemistry. 2007;13(21):6130-8.

Molecular assemblies from imidazolyl-containing haloalkenes and haloalkynes:
competition between halogen and hydrogen bonding.

Bouchmella K(1), Boury B, Dutremez SG, van der Lee A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Chimie Moléculaire et Organisation du Solide, UMR 5637, Université
Montpellier II, Case Courrier 007, Place E. Bataillon, 34095 Montpellier Cedex 5,
France.

The structural characterization of molecular assemblies constructed from
imidazolyl-containing haloalkenes and haloalkynes is reported.
1-(3-Iodopropargyl)imidazole (2) and 1-(2,3,3-triiodoallyl)imidazole (5) were
synthesized from 1-propargylimidazole (1). In the solid state, these wholly
organic modules self-assemble through N...I halogen-bonding interactions, thus
giving rise to polymeric chains. The N...I interaction observed in 2
(d(N...I)=2.717 A, angle-spherical C(sp)-I...N=175.8 degrees) is quite strong
relative to previously reported data. The N...I interaction in 5 (d(N...I)=2.901 
A, angle-spherical C(sp2)-I...N=173.6 degrees) is weaker, in accordance with the 
order C(sp)-X<--base>C(sp2)-X<--base. Compound 5 was found to give a 1:1
cocrystal 4 with morpholinium iodide (6). In the X-ray crystal studies of 4,
N...I halogen-bonding interactions similar to those observed in 5 were shown not 
to be present, as the arrangement of the molecules is governed by two interwoven 
hydrogen-bonding networks. The first network involves N-H...O interactions
between nearby morpholinium cations, and the second network is based on N-H...N
hydrogen bonding between morpholinium cations and imidazolyl groups. Both
hydrogen-bonding schemes are charge-assisted. Halogen bonding is not completely
wiped out, however, as the triiodoalkene fragment forms a halogen bond with an
iodide anion in its vicinity (d(I...I)=3.470 A, angle-spherical
C(sp2)-I...I=170.7 degrees). X-ray crystal studies of 6 show a completely
different arrangement from that observed in 4, namely, N-H...O interactions are
not present. In crystalline 6, morpholinium cations are interconnected through
C-H...O bridges (d(H...O)=2.521 and 2.676 A), and the NH2+ groups interact with
nearby iodide anions (d(H...I)=2.633 and 2.698 A).

PMID: 17477453  [PubMed]


84. Transfusion. 2007 May;47(5):801-12.

Acute bleeding complications in patients after hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation with prophylactic platelet transfusion triggers of 10 x 10(9) and
20 x 10(9) per L.

Nevo S(1), Fuller AK, Hartley E, Borinsky ME, Vogelsang GB.

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University, Bunting
Blaustein Cancer Research Building, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
snevo@netvision.net.il

BACKGROUND: Prophylactic platelet (PLT) transfusions are given as a standard care
in patients with hematologic malignancies undergoing hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation (HSCT). This retrospective analysis evaluates utilization of
blood transfusions, risk of bleeding, and survival in 480 HSCT patients at 10 x
10(9) and 20 x 10(9) per L prophylactic trigger levels.
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: A total of 224 patients received prophylactic PLT
transfusions at 20 x 10(9) per L threshold (1997-1998, SP1); 256 patients had
prophylaxis at 10 x 10(9) per L (1999-2001, SP2). Bleeding scores were assigned
daily.
RESULTS: A slight reduction in PLT transfusions per patient in SP2 compared with 
SP1 was not statistically significant (odds ratio, 0.82; 95% confidence interval,
0.51-1.33; p = 0.416), yet a significantly higher proportion of patients in SP2
had PLT counts less than or equal to 10 x 10(9) per L compared to SP1 (p <
0.001). In patients who bled, however, there was no excess exposure to low PLT
counts before bleeding started. A substantial number of patients who bled
received PLT transfusions above the goal before bleeding started (82.9% in SP2,
41.5% in SP1) because of medical complications that associated with increased
risk of bleeding. Bleeding incidence was similar in both study periods (21.9% in 
SP1, 16.4% in SP2; p = 0.526). Bleeding was significantly associated with reduced
survival in both study periods.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients who bled were usually placed on a higher threshold before
the onset of their major bleeding event and were not exposed to additional risk
of bleeding from thrombocytopenia. Similarity in bleeding incidence between study
periods appears to associate with adjustments to high-risk conditions and may not
reflect consequences of the lower transfusion threshold.

PMID: 17465944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Chem Inf Model. 2007 May-Jun;47(3):887-90. Epub 2007 Apr 28.

Aromaticity of carbon nanotubes.

Linert W(1), Lukovits I.

Author information: 
(1)Applied Synthetic Chemistry, Vienna University of Technology, A-1060 Vienna,
Getreidemarkt 9/163-AC, Austria. wlinert@mail.zserv.tuwien.ac.at

Carbon nanotubes are composed of cylindrical graphite sheets. Both nanotubes and 
graphite sheets are benzenoid derivatives composed of sp2 carbon atoms arranged
in a hexagonal pattern. Therefore both systems are aromatic. The extent of the
aromatic character of a molecule G (here benzenoids) can be explained in terms of
the number of possible Kekulé structures in G. In this work the Kekulé structures
in carbon nanotubes and the corresponding, rectangular, graphite-sheets the tubes
might originate from, were enumerated. It was shown that (2,2), (3,3), and (4,4) 
carbon nanotubes are more aromatic than the corresponding, rectangular, planar
structures. This explains why it might be more difficult to saturate nanotubes by
addition reactions than the respective, "narrow", graphite sheets.

PMID: 17465521  [PubMed]


86. Curr Hematol Malig Rep. 2007 May;2(2):75-82. doi: 10.1007/s11899-007-0011-5.

BCR-ABL-negative chronic myeloid leukemia.

Burgstaller S(1), Reiter A, Cross NC.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, University of Southampton,Salisbury NHS
Foundation Trust, Salisbury SP2 8BJ, UK.

Constitutive activation of protein tyrosine kinases plays a central role in the
pathogenesis of myeloproliferative disorders, including BCR-ABL-negative chronic 
myeloid leukemia. Current research is focused on elucidating the full spectrum of
causative mutations in this rare, heterogeneous disease. Activated tyrosine
kinases are excellent targets for signal transduction therapy, and an accurate
diagnosis including morphology, karyotyping, and molecular genetics will become
increasingly important to direct individualized treatment. In addition, new
molecular findings need to be incorporated into disease classification systems.

PMID: 20425354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2007 Apr;26(2):62-5.

Development and identification of monoclonal antibodies against meso-Tetra
(alpha,alpha,alpha,alpha,-O-phenylacetamide benzene) porphyrin.

Wang F(1), Huang X, Du L, Li W, Qi C.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science and Agriculture, Hainan University, Haikou, China.
fywang68@yahoo.com

The small molecule meso-Tetra (alpha,alpha,alpha,alpha-o-phenylacetamide benzene)
porphyrin was synthesized through the condensation of o-nitrobenzaldehyde and
pyrrole followed by reduction of the meso-tetra (o-nitrophenyl) porphyrin. The
small molecule, without carrier, was used as complete antigen to immunize BALB/ C
mice. Spleen cells producing high titer antibody were removed and fused with
myeloma cells of SP2/0 origin. Using a conventional immunization protocol, stable
murine monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) producing cell lines to meso-Tetra
(alpha,alpha,alpha,alpha-o-phenylacetamide benzene) porphyrin 1F2 were obtained. 
Subclass determination showed that the clones produce IgG2a types of MAbs. The
analytical results of HPLC and MALDI/TOFMS suggest that the purity of MAb 1F2 is 
100%, and MAb 1F2 has a relative molecular weight of 156678.8 Da. Our results
demonstrated that small molecule meso-Tetra
(alpha,alpha,alpha,alpha-o-phenylacetamide benzene) porphyrin, as semiantigen
without carrier, can elicit the formation of MAbs.

PMID: 17451352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Mol Biotechnol. 2007 Feb;35(2):135-40.

Simultaneous MLPA-based multiplex point mutation and deletion analysis of the
dystrophin gene.

Bunyan DJ(1), Skinner AC, Ashton EJ, Sillibourne J, Brown T, Collins AL, Cross
NC, Harvey JF, Robinson DO.

Author information: 
(1)National Genetics Reference Laboratory (Wessex), Salisbury Hospital NHS Trust,
Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP2 8BJ. Dave.Bunyan@salisbury.nhs.uk

The Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification assay (MLPA) is the method
of choice for the initial mutation screen in the analysis of a large number of
genes where partial or total gene deletion is part of the mutation spectrum.
Although MLPA dosage probes are usually designed to bind to normal DNA sequence
to identify dosage imbalance, point mutation-specific MLPA probes can also be
made. Using the dystrophin gene as a model, we have designed two MLPA probe
multiplexes that are specific to a number of commonly listed point mutations in
the Leiden dystrophin point mutation database (http://www.dmd.nl). The point
mutation probes are designed to work simultaneously with two widely used
dystrophin MLPA multiplexes, allowing both full dosage analysis and partial point
mutation analysis in a single test. This approach may be adapted for other
syndromes with well defined common point mutations or polymorphisms.

PMID: 17435279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Lasers Med Sci. 2008 Jan;23(1):35-9. Epub 2007 Mar 13.

Adverse effects reported in epilatory ruby laser treatment.

Royston SL(1), Wright PA, Widdowson DC, Wareham WJ, Strike PW.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Specialist Laser Centre, Department of Plastic and Reconstructive
Surgery, Salisbury District Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Salisbury, Wiltshire, 
SP2 8BJ, UK. Sue.Royston@salisbury.nhs.uk

A retrospective study was conducted to investigate the incidence of reported
adverse responses after epilatory laser treatment to control the growth of facial
hair in patients with polycystic ovary syndrome. Forty-eight patients received a 
median of 6 (range 2-11) treatments with an Aesculap ruby laser during a 704 day 
monitoring period at Salisbury District Hospital. Nine adverse skin responses
such as blistering, scabbing, sustained localised erythematous reactions or
hyperpigmentation were reported. The energy output of the laser was also recorded
at the start of every clinical session during this period using an external
energy meter. The measured energy output of the laser was plotted alongside
incidents of adverse responses, although no statistically significant correlation
was found. The question of whether or not some adverse effects in ruby laser
treatment can be attributed to laser performance remains open.

PMID: 17431730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Chem Phys. 2007 Apr 7;126(13):134701.

Unique chemical reactivity of a graphene nanoribbon's zigzag edge.

Jiang DE(1), Sumpter BG, Dai S.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Sciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge,
Tennessee 37831, USA. jiangd@ornl.gov

The zigzag edge of a graphene nanoribbon possesses a unique electronic state that
is near the Fermi level and localized at the edge carbon atoms. The authors
investigate the chemical reactivity of these zigzag edge sites by examining their
reaction energetics with common radicals from first principles. A "partial
radical" concept for the edge carbon atoms is introduced to characterize their
chemical reactivity, and the validity of this concept is verified by comparing
the dissociation energies of edge-radical bonds with similar bonds in molecules. 
In addition, the uniqueness of the zigzag-edged graphene nanoribbon is further
demonstrated by comparing it with other forms of sp2 carbons, including a
graphene sheet, nanotubes, and an armchair-edged graphene nanoribbon.

PMID: 17430050  [PubMed]


91. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2007 Apr;15(4):918-28.

Field validation of the MTI Actigraph and BodyMedia armband monitor using the
IDEEA monitor.

Welk GJ(1), McClain JJ, Eisenmann JC, Wickel EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health and Human Performance, 257 Forker Building, Iowa State
University, Ames, IA 50011, USA. gwelk@iastate.edu

OBJECTIVE: Accelerometers offer considerable promise for improving estimates of
physical activity (PA) and energy expenditure (EE) in free-living subjects.
Differences in calibration equations and cut-off points have made it difficult to
determine the most accurate way to process these data. The objective of this
study was to compare the accuracy of various calibration equations and algorithms
that are currently used with the MTI Actigraph (MTI) and the Sensewear Pro II
(SP2) armband monitor.
RESEARCH METHODS AND PROCEDURES: College-age participants (n=30) wore an MTI and 
an SP2 while participating in normal activities of daily living. Activity
patterns were simultaneously monitored with the Intelligent Device for Estimating
Energy Expenditure and Activity (IDEEA) monitor to provide an accurate estimate
(criterion measure) of EE and PA for this field-based method comparison study.
RESULTS: The EE estimates from various MTI equations varied considerably, with
mean differences ranging from -1.10 to 0.46 METS. The EE estimates from the two
SP2 equations were within 0.10 METS of the value from the IDEEA. Estimates of
time spent in PA from the MTI and SP2 ranged from 34.3 to 107.1 minutes per day, 
while the IDEEA yielded estimates of 52 minutes per day.
DISCUSSION: The lowest errors in estimation of time spent in PA and the highest
correlations were found for the new SP2 equation and for the recently proposed
MTI cut-off point of 760 counts/min (Matthews, 2005). The study indicates that
the Matthews MTI cut-off point and the new SP2 equation provide the most accurate
indicators of PA.

PMID: 17426327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Phys Chem A. 2007 May 3;111(17):3416-22. Epub 2007 Apr 11.

Probing P-H+-P hydrogen bonds: structures, binding energies, and spin-spin
coupling constants.

Del Bene JE(1), Elguero J, Alkorta I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Youngstown State University, Youngstown, Ohio 44555, 
USA. jedelbene@ysu.edu

Ab initio MP2/aug'-cc-pVTZ calculations have been performed to determine the
structures and binding energies of 22 open and 3 cyclic complexes formed from the
sp2 [H(2)C=PH and HP=PH (cis and trans)] and sp3 [PH2(CH3) and PH3] hybridized
phosphorus bases and their corresponding protonated ions. EOM-CCSD calculations
have been carried out to obtain (31)P-(31)P and (31)P-(1)H coupling constants
across P-H+-P hydrogen bonds. Two equilibrium structures with essentially linear 
hydrogen bonds have been found along the proton-transfer coordinate, except for
complexes with P(CH3)H3+ as the proton donor to the sp2 bases. Although the
isomer having the conjugate acid of the stronger base as the proton donor lies
lower on the potential energy surface, it has a smaller binding energy relative
to the corresponding isolated monomers than the isomer with the conjugate acid of
the weaker base as the donor. The hydrogen bond of the latter has increased
proton-shared character. All of the complexes are stabilized by traditional
hydrogen bonds, as indicated by positive values of the reduced coupling constants
(2h)K(P-P) and (1)K(P-H), and negative values of (1h)K(H-P). (2h)J(P-P)
correlates with the P-P distance, a correlation determined primarily by the
nature of the proton donor. For open complexes, (1)J(P-H) always increases
relative to the isolated monomer, while (1h)J(H-P) is relatively small and
negative. (2h)J(P-P) values are quite large in open complexes, but are much
smaller in cyclic complexes in which the P-H+-P hydrogen bonds are nonlinear.
Thus, experimental measurements of (2h)J(P-P) should be able to differentiate
between open and cyclic complexes.

PMID: 17425291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2007 Jul;46(7):670-4.

Haemopoietic growth factors significantly improve the mitotic index and
chromosome quality in cytogenetic cultures of myeloid neoplasia.

Earle VL(1), Ross F, Fisher A, Strike P, Berrington S, Chiecchio L, Cabanas ED,
Washbourne R, Watts K, Grand F.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury
SP2 8BJ, UK. victoria.earle@salibury.nhs.uk

Haemopoietic growth factors stimulate bone marrow cell division, differentiation,
and survival in vivo. We have investigated the use of recombinant human
haemopoietic growth factors in vitro to improve cytogenetic cultures. Using a
combination of granulocyte colony stimulating factor, granulocyte macrophage
colony stimulating factor, stem cell factor, and interleukin-3, we developed an
additive for bone marrow cultures intended to stimulate myeloid cell growth.
Sixty-seven paired parallel cultures were analyzed, of which 50 were abnormal.
The growth factor (GF) cultures showed a median four- to five-fold increase in
mitotic index (MI) (P < 0.0001). In addition, the chromosome morphology was
significantly improved in the GF cultures with a median increase in United
Kingdom National External Quality Assessment Scheme quality score of 1.25 points 
(P < 0.0001). There was no statistically significant difference in the number of 
abnormal cells between the two culture methods. The combination of higher MI and 
improved chromosome quality substantially reduces the time required to process a 
case; furthermore, the GF medium is cheaper than the medium with which it was
compared. This method is suitable for both diagnostic and follow-up cytogenetic
analysis of acute and chronic myeloid neoplasia and is particularly useful for
poorly cellular marrow samples or blood samples that would be expected to fail on
standard culture. The use of this method has enabled substantial improvements in 
work efficiency in our oncology cytogenetic laboratory and reduced average
reporting times from 9.0 days (2004/5) to 7.1 days (2005/6), despite a 6%
increase in sample numbers.

PMID: 17420987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Org Chem. 2007 Apr 27;72(9):3492-9. Epub 2007 Apr 5.

Intramolecular "hydroiminiumation and -amidiniumation" of alkenes: a convenient, 
flexible, and scalable route to cyclic iminium and imidazolinium salts.

Jazzar R(1), Bourg JB, Dewhurst RD, Donnadieu B, Bertrand G.

Author information: 
(1)UCR-CNRS Joint Research Chemistry Laboratory (UMI 2957), Department of
Chemistry, University of California, Riverside, California 92521-0403, USA.

Addition of a stoichiometric amount of HCl to alkenylaldimines, -formamidines,
and -amidines results in the protonation of the sp2-nitrogen atom. The resulting 
alkenylaldiminium, -formamidinium, and -amidinium salts can be isolated and fully
characterized, including single-crystal X-ray diffraction studies. Heating
solutions of these salts induces ring closure cleanly and regioselectively via
formal "exo" addition of the nitrogen-hydrogen bond to the pendent carbon-carbon 
double bond, affording the corresponding cyclic aldiminium,
dihydroisoquinolinium, and imidazolinium salts. Of special interest, novel
4,4-disubstituted imidazolinium salts are accessible via this synthetic route.
Similarly, addition of phosgene to alkenyl ureas and alkenyl amides, followed by 
gentle heating, cleanly affords C-chloro imidazolinium, and cyclic C-chloro
iminium salts, respectively. Treatment of the latter with
tetrakis(triphenylphosphine)palladium allows for the preparation of the first
transition-metal complex bearing a cyclic arylaminocarbene as ligand. Deuterium
labeling experiments suggest that the mechanism of the hydroiminiumation and
-amidiniumation reactions involves an intramolecular proton transfer to the
double bond in the rate-determining step. This novel synthetic methodology gives 
access to a variety of N-heterocyclic carbene (NHC) and cyclic alkyl- and
arylaminocarbene (CAAC) precursors.

PMCID: PMC2440693
PMID: 17408289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. EMBO J. 2007 Apr 18;26(8):2218-26. Epub 2007 Mar 29.

Electron cryotomography of immature HIV-1 virions reveals the structure of the CA
and SP1 Gag shells.

Wright ER(1), Schooler JB, Ding HJ, Kieffer C, Fillmore C, Sundquist WI, Jensen
GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA.

The major structural elements of retroviruses are contained in a single
polyprotein, Gag, which in human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) comprises 
the MA, CA, spacer peptide 1 (SP1), NC, SP2, and p6 polypeptides. In the immature
HIV-1 virion, the domains of Gag are arranged radially with the N-terminal MA
domain at the membrane and C-terminal NC-SP2-p6 region nearest to the center.
Here, we report the three-dimensional structures of individual immature HIV-1
virions, as obtained by electron cryotomography. The concentric shells of the Gag
polyprotein are clearly visible, and radial projections of the different Gag
layers reveal patches of hexagonal order within the CA and SP1 shells. Averaging 
well-ordered unit cells leads to a model in which each CA hexamer is stabilized
by a bundle of six SP1 helices. This model suggests why the SP1 spacer is
essential for assembly of the Gag lattice and how cleavage between SP1 and CA
acts as a structural switch controlling maturation.

PMCID: PMC1852790
PMID: 17396149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Phys Chem B. 2007 Apr 12;111(14):3609-13. Epub 2007 Mar 21.

Crystal structure and electron density of alpha-silicon nitride: experimental and
theoretical evidence for the covalent bonding and charge transfer.

Yashima M(1), Ando Y, Tabira Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Interdisciplinary Graduate
School of Science and Engineering, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Nagatsuta-cho
4259, Midori-ku, Yokohama-shi, Kanagawa, 226-8502, Japan.
yashima@materia.titech.ac.jp

Crystal structure and electron-density distribution of alpha-silicon nitride
(alpha-Si3N4, space group: P31c) have been investigated by a combined technique
of the Rietveld method, the maximum-entropy method (MEM), and MEM-based
pattern-fitting of high-resolution synchrotron powder diffraction data. In
combination with density functional theory calculations, the present experimental
electron-density distribution of the alpha-Si3N4 indicates covalent bonds between
Si and N atoms and charge transfer from the Si to N atom. The triangular
distribution around the N atoms, which is attributable to the nitrogen sp2
hybridization for the nearest silicon and nitrogen pairs, was found in both
experimental and theoretical electron density distributions. The minimum electron
density in an intralayer Si-N bond was a little lower than that in an interlayer 
bond, which would be responsible for the inequality between elastic constants,
C33 > C11. The present work suggests that the high bulk modulus of the
alpha-Si3N4 is attributable to the high minimum electron density of the Si-N
bond.

PMID: 17388537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Am Chem Soc. 2007 Apr 11;129(14):4401-9. Epub 2007 Mar 21.

Tuning the Bergman cyclization by introduction of metal fragments at various
positions of the enediyne. Metalla-Bergman cyclizations.

Brzostowska EM(1), Hoffmann R, Parish CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Baker Laboratory, Cornell
University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA.

We expand the scope of the Bergman cyclization by exploring computationally the
rearrangement of two osmaenediynes and one rhodaenediyne. The three hypothetical 
metallaenediynes are constructed by substituting the 14-electron Os(PH3)3
fragment for the C fragment, or the 15-electron Os(PH3)3H or Rh(PH3)3 fragments
for the sp2 CH fragment, of 3-ene-1,5-diyne. This replacement is guided by the
isolobal analogy and previous metallabenzene chemistry. The rearrangement of
osmaenediyne with an Os(PH3)3 fragment in place of C is exothermic by 3 kcal/mol 
(the parent Bergman reaction is computed to be endothermic by 5 kcal/mol) and
associated with a significant decrease in the barrier to rearrangement to 13
kcal/mol (the Ea of the parent reaction computed at the same level of theory is
33 kcal/mol). The replacement of a CH by the isolobal analogue Os(PH3)3H reduces 
the energy of activation for the rearrangement to 23 kcal/mol and produces a
corresponding metalladiradical that is 8 kcal/mol less stable that the
corresponding osmaenediyne. The activation energy corresponding to the
rearrangement of the rhodaenediyne is the same as that of the organic parent
enediyne. Interesting polytopal rearrangements of metallaenediynes and the
diradical nature of the resulting intermediates are also explored.

PMID: 17373798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Am Chem Soc. 2007 Apr 11;129(14):4430-9. Epub 2007 Mar 20.

A density functional study of the 13C NMR chemical shifts in functionalized
single-walled carbon nanotubes.

Zurek E(1), Pickard CJ, Autschbach J.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Festkörperforschung, Heisenbergstrasse1, 70569
Stuttgart, Germany.

The 13C NMR chemical shifts for functionalized (7,0), (8,0), (9,0), and (10,0)
single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) have been studied computationally using
gauge-including projector-augmented plane-wave (GIPAW) density functional theory 
(DFT). The functional groups NH, NCH3, NCH2OH, and CH2NHCH2 have been considered,
and different sites where covalent addition or substitution may occur have been
examined. The shifts of the carbons directly attached to the group are sensitive 
to the bond which has been functionalized and may, therefore, be used to identify
whether the group has reacted with a parallel or a diagonal C-C bond. The
addition of NH to a parallel bond renders the functionalized carbons formally
sp3-hybridized, yielding shifts of around 44 ppm, independent of the SWNT radius.
Reaction with a diagonal bond retains the formal sp2 hybridization of the
substituted carbons, and their shifts are slightly lower or higher than those of 
the unsubstituted carbon atoms. The calculated 1H NMR shifts of protons in the
functional groups are also dependent upon the SWNT-group interaction. Upon
decreasing the degree of functionalization for the systems where the group is
added to a parallel bond, the average chemical shift of the unfunctionalized
carbons approaches that of the pristine tube. At the same time, the shifts of the
functionalized carbons remain independent upon the degree of functionalization.
For the SWNTs where N-R attaches to a parallel bond, the average shift of the sp2
carbons was found to be insensitive to the substituent R. Moreover, the shifts of
the functionalized sp3 carbons, as well as of the carbons within the group
itself, are independent of the SWNT radius. The results indicate that a wealth of
knowledge may be obtained from the 13C NMR of functionalized SWNTs.

PMID: 17371025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Behav Health Serv Res. 2007 Apr;34(2):151-67. Epub 2007 Mar 15.

Group and organizational involvement among persons with psychiatric disabilities 
in supported housing.

Wong YL(1), Nath SB, Solomon PL.

Author information: 
(1)School of Social Policy and Practice, University of Pennsylvania, 3701 Locust 
Walk, Philadelphia, PA, 19104-6214, USA. ylwong@sp2.upenn.edu

This study examined the patterns and correlates of group and organizational
involvement among persons with psychiatric disabilities using a cross-sectional, 
probability sample of 252 residents in supported independent housing (SIH).
Groups and organizations were classified according to whether or not they have a 
behavioral health focus. Demographic, clinical, and service use characteristics
were examined as potential predictors of membership using Poisson regression
models. Findings indicated that 60% of the sample was involved in some kind of
behavioral or nonbehavioral health organization. Similar to the findings from the
general population, higher rates of membership were found among older persons,
Blacks, those with more years of education, and those with higher incomes. Other 
correlates specific to the SIH sample included prior homelessness, perceived
discrimination, substance abuse history, psychiatric symptoms, psychiatric
diagnosis, and contact with service providers. Implications of study findings for
developing intervention strategies to enhance organizational membership and for
future research are discussed.

PMID: 17357851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Am Chem Soc. 2007 Mar 28;129(12):3510-1. Epub 2007 Mar 3.

Palladium-catalyzed methylation and arylation of sp2 and sp3 C-H bonds in simple 
carboxylic acids.

Giri R(1), Maugel N, Li JJ, Wang DH, Breazzano SP, Saunders LB, Yu JQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry MS015, Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts
02454-9110, USA.

PMID: 17335217  [PubMed]


101. Psychiatr Q. 2007 Jun;78(2):117-28.

Bridging the gap: using microsociological theory to understand how expressed
emotion predicts clinical outcomes.

Stanhope V(1), Solomon P.

Author information: 
(1)School of Social Policy and Practice, University of Pennsylvania, 3701 Locust 
Walk, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6214, USA. stanhope@sp2.upenn.edu

Research has shown that expressed emotion (EE) among families is a strong
predictor of relapse for people with severe mental illness. Recent studies have
also found the presence of EE in consumer-provider relationships. Despite high
consistency in the findings related to EE and relapse, the concept has weak
validity as little is known about how exactly it triggers relapse.
Microsociological theory provides a framework with which to analyze social
interaction and, more specifically, understand how interactions relate to the
emotions of pride and shame. By identifying the components of interaction
rituals, the theory provides insight into the key processes underlying EE and
demonstrates how methodologies based on direct observation have the potential to 
measure EE with greater validity. This article describes how microsociological
theory can be applied to the concept of EE.

PMID: 17333394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Chemistry. 2007;13(15):4223-9.

Palladium-catalyzed Suzuki-Miyaura reaction involving a secondary sp3 carbon:
studies of stereochemistry and scope of the reaction.

Rodríguez N(1), Ramírez de Arellano C, Asensio G, Medio-Simón M.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Orgánica, Universidad de Valencia, Burjassot-Valencia,
Spain.

Palladium-catalyzed C--C bond formation involving secondary sp3-hybridized carbon
is described. These reactions occur with secondary 1-bromoethyl arylsulfoxides
and different arylboronic acids, to produce the corresponding arylated sulfoxides
in moderate to high yields and with complete stereospecificity. Despite the
presence of beta hydrogens in the substrate, the competitive beta-hydride
elimination is not a significant side reaction when coordinating solvents are
used. The reported cross-coupling involves secondary C(sp3)--C(sp2) bond
formation: this is the first time that a mechanistic study has been carried out
with such substrates. The reaction proceeds with inversion of configuration at
the stereogenic C(sp3) carbon. The high stereospecificity of the coupling and the
mildness of the reaction conditions allow for the preservation of the optical
purities of reagents and products and the preparation of useful chiral targets.

PMID: 17330314  [PubMed]


103. Forensic Sci Med Pathol. 2007 Mar;3(1):41-4. doi: 10.1385/FSMP:3:1:41.

Comparative investigation of hair with the genRES(®) MPX-SP1, genRES MPX-SP2, and
genRES MPX-2 kits.

Anslinger K(1), Bayer B, Rolf B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Legal Medicine, Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich,
Frauenlobstrasse 7a, 80337, München, Germany, katja.anslinger@med.anrmuenchen.de.

In recent years there has been considerable improvement in short-tandem repeat
(STR) investigations of hair, which were previously marred by small amounts of
nuclear DNA and its degradation. This study examined the suitability of two STR
kits with shortened amplicons for the investigation of hairs from routine
casework. The overall sucess rate was more than 20%. Furthermore, the usefulness 
of quantification with real-time ploymerase chain reaction as a screening method 
was demonstrated.

PMID: 25868888  [PubMed]


104. Org Lett. 2007 Mar 15;9(6):1101-4. Epub 2007 Feb 21.

Derivatives of azacalix[3](2,6)pyridine are strong neutral organic superbases: a 
DFT study.

Despotovic I(1), Kovacevic B, Maksic ZB.

Author information: 
(1)Quantum Organic Chemistry Group, Department of Organic Chemistry and
Biochemistry, The Ruer Boskovic Institute, P.O. Box 180, 10002 Zagreb, Croatia.

The gas phase basicities and pKa values in acetonitrile of
azacalix[3](2,6)pyridine and its derivatives are determined by the B3LYP DFT
method. It is found that all compounds of this series are neutral organic
superbases. The proton attacks the inner pyridine N(sp2) atom, thus forming a
bifurcated intramolecular hydrogen bond. The most powerful superbase is provided 
by the hexakis(dimethylamino) derivative of the title compound. Its gas phase
proton affinity is 296.6 kcal mol-1, its basicity is 291.3 kcal mol-1, and its
pKa(MeCN) is 30.9 units. [structure: see text]

PMID: 17311392  [PubMed]


105. Eur J Hum Genet. 2007 Apr;15(4):441-5. Epub 2007 Feb 21.

Distribution of the D15Z1 copy number polymorphism.

Cockwell AE(1), Jacobs PA, Crolla JA.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wiltshire, SP2 8BJ, UK. annette.cockwell@salisbury.nhs.uk

Using fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) with the probe p15 (D15Z1), we
investigated the distribution of the polymorphic 15p signal which has been
reported to occur on acrocentric chromosomes in addition to chromosome 15. The
short arm of chromosome 15 has a characteristic signal pattern when hybridized
with the FISH probe D15Z1. However, the D15Z1 signal can occasionally be seen on 
the short arm of other acrocentric chromosomes. We studied the distribution of
the D15Z1 probe in 1657 patients consisting both of individuals with a normal
karyotype and those with a variety of chromosome abnormalities involving the
acrocentric chromosomes. Our results show that one in six individuals, regardless
of their patient ascertainment category or karyotypic status, had one or more
additional D15Z1 signals, and that there were no significant differences in the
distribution of extra signals among the patient groups.

PMID: 17311084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2007;46(18):3346-8.

Conversion of a disilenide into a silene: silyl-anion-substituted silene by a
sila-Peterson-type reaction from an sp2-type silyl anion.

Inoue S(1), Ichinohe M, Sekiguchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Pure and Applied Sciences,
University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8571, Japan.

PMID: 17304607  [PubMed]


107. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Feb;23(2):164-7.

[Study on the cytotoxicity of spleen lymphocytes and immune mechanisms in mice
immunized by Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Ra].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang LX(1), Lu XY, Li H, Yang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Immunology, Key Laboratory of Laboratory Medicine
Diagnostics, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China.
wlx8109@163.com

AIM: To explore the specific cytotoxicity of spleen lymphocytes and the immune
mechanisms in mice immunized by Mycobacterium tuberculosis(MTB) H37Ra.
METHODS: At the various interval (30 days, 60 days) after the mice were immunized
by MTB H37Ra, BCG and PBS, the spleen lymphocytes of the immunized mice were used
as the effector cells while the Sp2/0 cells expressing the secreted protein Ag85B
were used as the target cells, and the cytotoxicity of spleen lymphocytes in the 
immunized mice was measured by MTT assay. Spleen lymphocytes were collected at 60
days after immunization and stimulated with PPD, and the expression of perforin, 
granzyme B on mRNA level was detected by RT-PCR.
RESULTS: The cytotoxicity of spleen lymphocytes in the group immunized by MTB
H37Ra was significantly higher than that of PBS control group (P<0.05), and
slightly higher than that of BCG group. The mRNA expression of perforin, granzyme
B in H37Ra group and BCG group was significantly higher than that in PBS control 
group (P<0.05); the expression of perforin mRNA in H37Ra group was significantly 
higher than that in BCG group (P<0.05), but there was no obvious difference with 
regard to the expression of granzyme B mRNA between H37Ra group and BCG group.
CONCLUSION: The cytotoxicity of spleen lymphocytes is enhanced after mice were
immunized by MTB H37Ra, which may be related to the expression of perforin and
granzyme B.

PMID: 17286912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2004;4:2561-4.

Hybrid polymer/thin film impedance system for label free monitoring of cells.

Mohanty SK(1), Sohn LL, Beebe DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Biomed. Eng., Wisconsin Univ., Madison, WI, USA.

Impedance measurements (capacitive cytometry) have been used to perform
label-free analysis of cells. Two devices were constructed using a simple liquid 
photopolymerization technique known as muFluidicTectonics. This platform has made
it possible to rapidly fabricate with great ease and without the use of
traditional MEMS technology a cell impedance measurement system. Measurements
were made using not only a single 1 kHz frequency but also a frequency sweep from
50 Hz to 20 kHz. Single frequency measurements on SP2 mouse cells showed show
that there is a strong, linear relationship between the DNA content of individual
cells and their dielectric (or capacitance) response to a 1 kHz field. Frequency 
sweeps were conducted on SF9 cells as means to perform diagnostic measurements of
the device when different number of cells are present.

PMID: 17270796  [PubMed]


109. Gene Ther. 2007 Apr;14(8):638-47. Epub 2007 Feb 1.

A new recombinant vaccinia with targeted deletion of three viral genes: its
safety and efficacy as an oncolytic virus.

Yang S(1), Guo ZS, O'Malley ME, Yin X, Zeh HJ, Bartlett DL.

Author information: 
(1)University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, University of Pittsburgh School of 
Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

To enhance further the safety and efficacy of oncolytic vaccinia virus, we have
developed a new virus with targeted deletions of three viral genes encoding
thymidine kinase and antiapoptotic/host range proteins SPI-1 and SPI-2 (vSPT).
Infection of human and murine tumor cell lines yielded nearly equivalent or a log
lower virus recovery in comparison to parental viruses. Viral infection activated
multiple caspases in cancer cells but not in normal cells, suggesting infected
cells may die via different pathways. In tumor-bearing mice, vSPT recovery from
MC38 tumor was slightly reduced in comparison to two parental viruses. However,
no virus was recovered from the brains and livers of mice injected with vSPT in
contrast to control viruses. vSPT demonstrated significantly lower pathogenicity 
in nude mice. Systemic delivery of vSPT showed significant tumor inhibition in
subcutaneous MC38 tumor, human ovarian A2780 and murine ovarian MOSEC
carcinomatosis models; however, the tumor inhibition by vSPT was reduced compared
with parental viruses. These results demonstrated that although deletion of these
three viral genes further enhanced tumor selectivity, it also weakened the
oncolytic potency. This study illustrates the complexity of creating a
tumor-selective oncolytic virus by deleting multiple viral genes involved in
multiple cellular pathways.

PMID: 17268533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Phys Chem B. 2007 Feb 8;111(5):1099-109.

Local modifications of single-wall carbon nanotubes induced by bond formation
with encapsulated fullerenes.

Yumura T(1), Kertesz M, Iijima S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Georgetown University, 37th and O Streets, NW,
Washington, DC 20057, USA. yumura@ccmfs.meijo-u.ac.jp

Defected fullerenes in nanopeapods form bonds with the encapsulating
single-walled carbon nanotubes when irradiated by an electron beam leading to
changes in the guest (fullerene) and the host (nanotube). Intrinsic reaction
coordinate (IRC) analysis based on B3LYP hybrid density functional theory shows
that a C1-C59 defect with a single protruding C atom is initially formed from the
C60(Ih) cage. The high activation energy for this step (8.37 eV (193.0
kcal/mol)), being assumed to be accessible during irradiation, is lower than that
of the Stone-Wales rearrangement on the sp2 network. The binding of the defected 
fullerene to the nanotube is preferential, orthogonal bonds relative to the tube 
axis being slightly preferred. Because of the covalent bonds formed between the
guest and host, the carbon network on the nanotube is locally perturbed in the
vicinity of the binding site. As a result of the new bonds, bisnorcaradiene-like 
as well as quinonoid-like patterns appear near the binding site. These results
are interpreted using orbital interaction and Clar diagram arguments. The changes
in the bonding pattern on the nanotube should be significant in further
functionalization of carbon nanotubes.

PMID: 17266263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Cytometry A. 2007 Mar;71(3):174-89.

Reliability of confocal microscopy spectral imaging systems: use of multispectral
beads.

Zucker RM(1), Rigby P, Clements I, Salmon W, Chua M.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Toxicology Division (MD-67), National Health and Environmental
Effects Research Laboratory, Office of Research and Development, U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27711,
USA. zucker.robert@.epa.gov

BACKGROUND: There is a need for a standardized, impartial calibration, and
validation protocol on confocal spectral imaging (CSI) microscope systems. To
achieve this goal, it is necessary to have testing tools to provide a
reproducible way to evaluate instrument performance.
METHODS: We evaluated fluorescent spectral beads (FocalCheck) from Molecular
Probes/Invitrogen that consist of four pairs with emissions between 500 and 725
nm and a europium macrocycle quantum dye bead. These bead tools compliment our
previously published protocol for testing spectral imaging systems that used an
inexpensive multi-ion discharge lamp (MIDL) that contains Hg(+), Ar(+), and
inorganic fluorophores that emits distinct, stable spectral features.
RESULTS: We acquired the spectra of the FocalCheck beads on a Zeiss 510 Meta, a
Leica TCS-SP1, a Leica SP2 AOBS, an Olympus FV 1000, and a Nikon C1Si confocal
systems and a PARISS microscopic spectral system and of the europium beads on the
Leica TCS-SP1 and PARISS spectral imaging systems. A lack of performance with
some equipment between 650 and 750 nm was identified using the far red pair of
the FocalCheck beads. The position of the slider in front of PMT 2 that reflects 
light into PMT 1 and PMT 3 affected the measurement of all bead intensities.
Unmixing algorithms were used to separate beads with different fluorochromes and 
separate two fluorochromes on the same bead.
CONCLUSIONS: The FocalCheck multi-spectral beads yielded similar profiles on four
CSI systems and a PARISS spectral system. The utilization of the spectral
FocalCheck beads is helpful to evaluate proper spectral performance, especially
in the far red region. Europium beads provide a very narrow spectrum that can
help to identify machines that have spectral problems. The dyes located on
individual beads or mixed together in ring-core configuration can be used as test
particles to demonstrate spectral unmixing with various algorithms.

PMID: 17266146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2006 Nov;1089:177-93.

Estrogens and antiestrogens as etiological factors and therapeutics for prostate 
cancer.

Ho SM(1), Leung YK, Chung I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, College of Medicine, University of
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA. shuk-mei.ho@uc.edu

Mounting evidence supports a key role played by estrogen or estrogen in synergy
with an androgen, in the pathogenesis of prostate cancer (PCa). New experimental 
data suggest that this process could begin as early as prenatal life. During
adulthood, estrogen carcinogenicity is believed to be mediated by the combined
effects of hormone-induced, unscheduled cell proliferation and bioactivation of
estrogens to genotoxic carcinogens. Increased bioavailability of estrogen through
age-dependent increases in conversion from androgen could also be a contributing 
factor. Individual variations and race-/ethnic-based differences in circulating
or locally formed estrogens or in tissue estrogen responsiveness may explain
differential PCa risk among individuals or different populations. Estrogen
receptor (ER)-alpha and ER-beta are the main mediators of estrogen action in the 
prostate. However, ER-beta is the first ER subtype expressed in the fetal
prostate. During cancer development, ER-beta expression is first lost as tumors
progress into high grade in the primary site. Yet, its reexpression occurs in all
metastatic cases of PCa. A change in cytosine methylation in a regulatory CpG
island located in the proximal promoter of ER-beta may constitute an "on/off"
switch for reversible regulation of ER-beta expression. A variety of
estrogenic/antiestrogenic/selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM)-like
compounds have been shown to use non-ERE pathways, such as tethering of ER-beta
to NF-kappaB binding proteins, Sp2, or Ap1 for gene transactivation. These
findings open new avenues for drug design that now focuses on developing a new
generation of estrogen-based PCa therapies with maximal proapoptotic action but
few or no side effects.

PMID: 17261766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Biochemistry. 2007 Feb 6;46(5):1448-55.

The substrate specificity of MutY for hyperoxidized guanine lesions in vivo.

Delaney S(1), Neeley WL, Delaney JC, Essigmann JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biological Engineering Division, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

The DNA damage product 7,8-dihydro-8-oxo-2'-deoxyguanine (8-oxoG) is a commonly
used biomarker of oxidative stress. The mutagenic potential of this DNA lesion is
mitigated in Escherichia coli by multiple enzymes. One of these enzymes, MutY,
excises an A mispaired with 8-oxoG as part of the process to restore the original
G:C base pair. However, numerous studies have shown that 8-oxoG is chemically
labile toward further oxidation. Here, we examine the activity of MutY on the
8-oxoG oxidation products guanidinohydantoin (Gh), two diastereomers of
spiroiminodihydantoin (Sp1 and Sp2), oxaluric acid (Oa), and urea (Ur).
Single-stranded viral genomes containing a site-specific lesion were constructed 
and replicated in E. coli that are either proficient in DNA repair or that lack
MutY. These lesions were found previously to be potently mutagenic in repair
competent bacteria, and we report here that these 8-oxoG-derived lesions are
equally miscoding when replicated in E. coli lacking MutY; no significant change 
in mutation identity or frequency is observed. Interestingly, however, in the
presence of MutY, Sp1 and Sp2 are more toxic than in cells lacking this repair
enzyme.

PMID: 17260974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Inorg Chem. 2007 Feb 5;46(3):795-800.

New in situ cleavage of both S-S and S-C(sp2) bonds and rearrangement reactions
toward the construction of copper(I) cluster-based coordination networks.

Wang J(1), Zheng SL, Hu S, Zhang YH, Tong ML.

Author information: 
(1)MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinorganic and Synthetic Chemistry, State Key
Laboratory of Optoelectronic Materials and Technologies, School of Chemistry and 
Chemical Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510275, People's Republic
of China.

Solvothermal reaction of 4,4'-dithiodipyridine (dtdp) with CuI at 120 or 160
degrees C results in the formation of three new coordination networks formulated 
with [Cu4I4(tdp)2] (1; tdp = 4,4'-thiodipyridine), [Cu5I5(ptp)2] (2), and
[Cu6I6(ptp)2] [3; ptp = 1-(4-pyridyl)-4-thiopyridine]. The starting dtdp reagent 
was unprecedentedly converted into two tdp and ptp ligands via new in situ
cleavage of both S-S and S-C(sp2) bonds and temperature-dependent in situ ligand 
rearrangement of dtdp. 1 is a two-dimensional (2D) Cu4I4 cubane-like coordination
network of 2-fold interpenetration. While in 2, the Cu8I8 and Cu2I2 cluster units
are alternately connected by the mu2-sulfur bridges into one-dimensional
inorganic chains along the a axis, which are further joined by the ptp spacers
into a three-dimensional (3D) coordination network of 2-fold interpenetration. 3 
is a 3D non-interpenetrating coordination network constructed with 2D inorganic
(Cu2I2)n layers and the ptp spacers. 1 displays an intense orange-red emission
light with a maximum at ca. 563 nm. While luminescence quenching occurs in 2 and 
3 by electron transfer of a photoelectron to the electronegative acceptor
molecule of ptp.

PMID: 17257022  [PubMed]


115. J Org Chem. 2007 Feb 2;72(3):998-1004.

Conformation and stereodynamics of symmetrically ortho-disubstituted aryl
carbinols and aryl ethers.

Casarini D(1), Lunazzi L, Mancinelli M, Mazzanti A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Basilicata, Potenza, Italy.

By making use of low-temperature dynamic NMR spectroscopy, the rotation barriers 
about the sp3-sp2 bond have been determined in a number of hindered benzyl
alcohols symmetrically substituted in the ortho positions, the substituents being
F, Cl, Br, and Me. The free energies of activation covered the range 4.6-10.1
kcal mol-1. Ab initio computations matched satisfactorily the trend of these
values and predicted the conformation adopted by these compounds. In one case,
this result could be also confirmed by the X-ray diffraction structure. In the
case of the corresponding methyl ethers two barriers could be measured,
corresponding to the passage across two distinguishable transition states: the
higher barriers covered the range 5.0-8.1 kcal mol-1 and the lower ones the range
4.7-6.2 kcal mol-1.

PMID: 17253822  [PubMed]


116. J Am Chem Soc. 2007 Feb 14;129(6):1476-7. Epub 2007 Jan 24.

X-ray excited optical luminescence from diamond thin films: the contribution of
sp2- and H-bonded carbon to the luminescence.

Zhou X(1), Sham TK, Wu Y, Chong YM, Bello I, Lee ST, Heigl F, Regier T, Blyth RI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The University of Western Ontario, London, Canada N6A
5B7.

PMID: 17249664  [PubMed]


117. J Plast Reconstr Aesthet Surg. 2007;60(2):210-2. Epub 2006 Mar 20.

A late complication following the insertion of hydrogel breast implants.

Adams TS(1), Crook T, Cadier MA.

Author information: 
(1)Odstock Centre for Burns, Plastic and Maxillo-Facial Surgery, Salisbury
District Hospital, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, UK. titus.adams@btinternet.com

Comment in
    J Plast Reconstr Aesthet Surg. 2007;60(8):967.

This case report draws attention to an unusual presentation and subsequent
complication following the insertion of a PIP Hydrogel implant for breast
augmentation. A cutaneous and capsular foreign body giant cell reaction was
identified, and was preceded by the development of a notable increase in breast
volume prior to spontaneous discharge. We believe that this was caused by
subclinical leakage of the implant contents through a degrading shell. The
biodegradability of hydrogel makes it impossible to ascertain the precise nature 
of the material that leaked out. Given this demonstrable leakage, the adverse
clinical effects and the potential for toxicity that is currently unknown, we
question whether this product (and other hydrogel breast implants like it) should
be formally recalled for the benefit of patient safety.

PMID: 17223521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Bioorg Med Chem. 2007 Mar 1;15(5):2081-91. Epub 2006 Dec 23.

1,4-Bis(alkylamino)benzo[g]phthalazines able to form dinuclear complexes of
Cu(II) which as free ligands behave as SOD inhibitors and show efficient in vitro
activity against Trypanosoma cruzi.

Rodríguez-Ciria M(1), Sanz AM, Yunta MJ, Gómez-Contreras F, Navarro P,
Sánchez-Moreno M, Boutaleb-Charki S, Osuna A, Castiñeiras A, Pardo M, Cano C,
Campayo L.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Orgánica I, Facultad de Química, Universidad
Complutense, 28040 Madrid, Spain.

The synthesis of a new series of 1,4-bis(alkylamino)benzo[g]phthalazines 1-3 is
reported, and their ability to form dinuclear complexes with Cu(II) assayed. The 
geometry of the complexes is dependent on the nature of the electron-donor sites 
at the sidechains. Compounds 1 and 2, that contain sp3 or sp2 nitrogens at the
end of the alkylamino groups, originate monopodal dinuclear complexes which seem 
to include endogenous OH bridges, and the sidechains seem to actively participate
in complexation. However, the substitution of nitrogen by oxygen in 3 leads to a 
tripodal dinuclear complex in which the sidechains are not involved. The in vitro
antiparasitic activity on Trypanosoma cruzi epimastigotes and amastigotes and the
SOD activity inhibition have been evaluated for compounds 1-3, and, as expected, 
1 and 2 show in all cases relevant results, whereas 3 is always the less active
among the three substrates tested.

PMID: 17222558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Matern Child Health J. 2007 May;11(3):269-75. Epub 2007 Jan 10.

Child injury risks are close to home: parent psychosocial factors associated with
child safety.

Rhodes KV(1), Iwashyna TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Health Policy Research, Department of Emergency Medicine, School
of Social Policy and Practice, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
3815 Walnut St., Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. kvr@sp2.upenn.edu

OBJECTIVE: In several populations, maternal depression has been associated with
reduced child safety. In an urban pediatric Emergency Department, we examined the
relationship between parental depression, social support, and domestic conflict
and child safety behaviors.
METHODS: We studied consecutive patients in an Emergency Department. Trained
interviewers used a structured instrument to assess patient, primary caregiver,
and household demographics, socio-economic status, psychosocial factors, child
safety behaviors (whether a gun was in the home, poisons were locked, a
functioning smoke detector was present, and use of carseats or seatbelts), and
whether the home was smoke-free. 1,116 patients provided adequate data.
RESULTS: Depression was associated with a modest and not statistically
significant reduction in child safety behaviors in this population. Lack of
social support and the presence of domestic conflict were robustly,
independently, and statistically significantly associated with less safe homes.
Domestic conflict was associated with more smoking in the home.
CONCLUSION: In our population, child safety was associated less with depression
and more with parental lack of social support and domestic conflict. These can be
assessed in a Emergency Department and may be amenable to intervention.

PMID: 17216351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Anal Chem. 2007 Jan 1;79(1):98-105.

Structure and electrochemical properties of carbon films prepared by a electron
cyclotron resonance sputtering method.

Jia J(1), Kato D, Kurita R, Sato Y, Maruyama K, Suzuki K, Hirono S, Ando T, Niwa 
O.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, 1-1-1
Higashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8566, Japan.

This paper describes the characterization, electrochemical properties, and
applications of carbon films prepared by the electron cyclotron resonance (ECR)
sputtering method. The ECR-sputtered carbon film was deposited within several
minutes at room temperature. The optimized sputtering conditions significantly
change the film structure, which includes many more sp3 bonds (sp3/sp2 = 0.702)
than previously reported film (sp3/sp2 = 0.274)1 with an extremely flat surface
(0.7 A). The ECR-sputtered carbon films exhibit excellent electrochemical
properties. For example, they have nearly the same potential window in the
positive direction as that of high-quality, boron-doped diamond (moderately
doped, 10(19)-10(20) boron atoms/cm3)2 and an even wider potential window in the 
negative direction with a low background current, high stability, and suppression
of fouling by electroactive species without pretreatment. The electron-transfer
rates at ECR-sputtered carbon films are similar to those of glassy carbon (GC)
for Ru(NH3)(6)(2+)/(3+) and Fe(CN)(6)(3-)/(4-), whereas they are much slower than
those of GC for Fe2+/3+, dopamine oxidation, and O2 reduction due to weak
interactions between electroactive species and the ECR-sputtered carbon film
surface. Such a response can be attributed to the ultraflat surface and low
surface O/C ratios of ECR-sputtered carbon films. ECR-sputtered carbon film is
advantageous for measuring biochemicals with high oxidation potentials because of
its wide potential window and high stability. Highly reproducible and
well-defined cyclic voltammograms were obtained for histamine and azide ions with
a peak potential at 1.25 and 1.12 V vs Ag/AgCl, respectively. The film is very
stable for continuous voltammetry measurements in 10 microM bisphenol A, which
usually fouls the electrode surface with oxidation products.

PMID: 17194126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Faraday Discuss. 2006;133:415-25; discussion 427-52.

Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, carbon nanoparticles and the diffuse
interstellar bands.

Duley WW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Physics Department, University of Waterloo, Ontario, Canada N2L 3G1.
wwduley@uwaterloo.ca

Observational data on the appearance and properties of the diffuse interstellar
bands (DIBs) are reviewed in the context of a model in which the proposed
carriers of these bands are large carbon molecules and carbon nanoparticles
containing between 30 and several hundred carbon atoms. The abundance of these
carriers, as estimated from the observed strengths of the DIBs, place strong
constraints on their rates of formation and destruction, and suggest that the
strongest bands, including that at 4428 A, could be produced via the
decomposition of larger carbon particles, possibly those particles that have been
postulated to be the source of the 2175 A extinction feature. Such particles are 
of mixed sp2 and sp3 carbon composition, with sizes between that of large
molecules and small macroscopic solids. Any description of their characteristics 
must combine aspects of molecular and condensed matter physics, and this is
incorporated in the present discussion. I discuss recent experimental and
theoretical data related to these matters.

PMID: 17191461  [PubMed]


122. Chemistry. 2007;13(7):1991-2001.

Structural and dynamic characterization of copper(II) binding of the human prion 
protein outside the octarepeat region.

Berti F(1), Gaggelli E, Guerrini R, Janicka A, Kozlowski H, Legowska A,
Miecznikowska H, Migliorini C, Pogni R, Remelli M, Rolka K, Valensin D, Valensin 
G.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Chemistry, University of Wroclaw, F. Joliot-Curie 15, 50383
Wroclaw, Poland.

Human prion protein (hPrP) fragments encompassing the 91-120 region, namely
hPrP92-100 (SP1), hPrP106-113 (SP2), hPrP91-120 (LP1), and hPrP91-114 (LP2), were
considered for delineation of the Cu(II)-binding site(s). NMR and EPR
spectroscopy results obtained from LP1 or LP2 were compared with those obtained
from SP1 and SP2. The coexistence of two binding sites, one centered at His96 and
the other at His111, was evidenced and ratified by ESI mass spectrometry at low
and high metal:peptide ratios. While room-temperature NMR spectroscopy data were 
consistent with the binding site centered on His111 being approximately fourfold 
stronger than that centered on His96, low-temperature EPR spectroscopy results
yielded evidence for the opposite trend. This disagreement, which has also
occurred in the literature, was clarified by temperature-dependent molecular
dynamics runs that demonstrated Met112 approaching the metal at room temperature,
a process that is expected to stabilize the His111-centered binding site through 
hydrophobic shielding of the metal coordination sphere.

PMID: 17152102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Appl Spectrosc. 2004 Feb;58(2):218-23.

Binding of aromatic isocyanides on gold nanoparticle surfaces investigated by
surface-enhanced Raman scattering.

Joo SW(1), Kim WJ, Yun WS, Hwang S, Choi IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Soongsil University, Seoul 156-743, Korea.
sjoo@ssu.ac.kr

The adsorption structure and binding of phenyl isocyanide (PNC), 2,6-dimethyl
phenyl isocyanide (DMPNC), and benzyl isocyanide (BZI) on gold nanoparticle
surfaces have been studied by means of surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS). 
PNC, DMPNC, and BZI have been found to adsorb on gold assuming a standing
geometry with respect to the surfaces. The presence of the nu(CH) band in the
SERS spectra denotes a vertical orientation of the phenyl ring of PNC, DMPNC, and
BZI on Au. The lack of a substantial red shift and significant band broadening of
the ring breathing modes implied that a direct ring pi orbital interaction with
metal substrates should be quite low. For PNC, the band ascribed to the C-NC
stretching vibration was found to almost disappear after adsorption on Au. On the
other hand, the C-NC band remained quite strong for DMPNC after adsorption. This 
result suggests a rather bent angle of C-N[triple bond]C: for the nitrogen atom
of the NC binding group on the surfaces, whereas a linear angle of C-N[triple
bond]C: should be more favorable on gold surfaces due to an intramolecular steric
hindrance of its two methyl groups. SERS of BZI on gold nanoparticles also
supports a bent angle of :C[triple bond]N-CH2 for its nitrogen atom, suggesting a
preference of sp3 (or sp2) hybridization for the nitrogen atom.

PMID: 17140481  [PubMed]


124. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2006 Oct;1081:112-23.

Development of a monoclonal antibody-based immunohistochemistry method for BSE
surveillance in China.

Wu X(1), Wang Z, Liu Y, Zhang Y, Chen Y, Zou Y.

Author information: 
(1)National BSE Reference Laboratory, National Diagnostic Center for Exotic
Animal Diseases, National Animal Quarantine Institute MOA, 266032, Qingdao,
China.

Five hybridoma cell lines secreting anti-PrP antibodies were established from the
fusion between mouse myeloma Sp2/0 and spleen cells from mice immunized with
recombinant Chinese Luxi yellow cattle (Bos taurus, Luxi) PrP (24-234) or
recombinant Chinese small-tailed Han sheep PrP (94-227). According to their
Western blot reactivity, five monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) could be divided into 
two groups. Group A, mAbs 1H2, 4C6, and 4C11 recognized re-PrP, PrP(C), and
PrP(Sc) from both bovine and sheep. Group B, mAbs 2H3 and 4H10 only recognized
re-PrP and PrP(Sc) of sheep, and especially, these two mAbs could not recognize
PrP(C) from both bovine and sheep. In immunohistochemistry (IHC) test, mAb 4C11
immunostained the PrP(Sc) accumulation in tissue sections from BSE cattle and
Scrapie sheep, and compared with mAb 6H4, it had the same immunohistochemical
pattern. An IHC method based on mAb 4C11 for the detection of BSE was established
and had been applied for the long-term surveillance of BSE in China. From 2001 to
2004, 12,692 samples from the whole country had been tested and all had negative 
results.

PMID: 17135500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Phys Chem B. 2006 Nov 30;110(47):23628-32.

How do aryl groups attach to a graphene sheet?

Jiang DE, Sumpter BG, Dai S.

How aryl groups attach to a graphene sheet is an experimentally unanswered
question. Using first principles density functional theory methods, we shed light
on this problem. For the basal plane, isolated phenyl groups are predicted to be 
weakly bonded to the graphene sheet, even though a new single C-C bond is formed 
between the phenyl group and the basal plane by converting a sp2-carbon in the
graphene sheet to sp3. However, the interaction can be strengthened significantly
with two phenyl groups attached to the para positions of the same six-membered
ring to form a pair on the basal plane. The strongest bonding is found at the
graphene edges. A 1,2-addition pair is predicted to be most stable for the
armchair edge, whereas the zigzag edge possesses a unique localized state near
the Fermi level that shows a high affinity for the phenyl group.

PMID: 17125318  [PubMed]


126. J Phys Chem A. 2006 Nov 23;110(46):12629-35.

Electronic structure of the [MNH2]+ (M = Sc-Cu) complexes.

Hendrickx MF(1), Clima S.

Author information: 
(1)Afdeling voor Kwantumchemie en Fysicochemie, Departement Chemie, Katholieke
Universiteit Leuven, Celestijnenlaan 200F, B-3001 Heverlee-Leuven, Belgium.
marc.hendrickx@chem.kuleuven.be

B3LYP geometry optimizations for the [MNH2]+ complexes of the first-row
transition metal cations (Sc+-Cu+) were performed. Without any exception the
ground states of these unsaturated amide complexes were calculated to possess
planar geometries. CASPT2 binding energies that were corrected for zero-point
energies and including relativistic effects show a qualitative trend across the
series that closely resembles the experimental observations. The electronic
structures for the complexes of the early and middle transition metal cations
(Sc+-Co+) differ from the electronic structures derived for the complexes of the 
late transition metal cations (Ni+ and Cu+). For the former complexes the
relative higher position of the 3d orbitals above the singly occupied 2p(pi) HOMO
of the uncoordinated NH2 induces an electron transfer from the 3d shell to
2p(pi). The stabilization of the 3d orbitals from the left to the right along the
first-row transition metal series causes these orbitals to become situated below 
the HOMO of the NH2 ligand for Ni+ and Cu+, preventing a transfer from occurring 
in the [MNH2]+ complexes of these metal cations. Analysis of the low-lying states
of the amide complexes revealed a rather unique characteristic of their
electronic structures that was found across the entire series. Rather
exceptionally for the whole of chemistry, pi-type interactions were calculated to
be stronger than the corresponding sigma-type interactions. The origin of this
extraordinary behavior can be ascribed to the low-lying sp2 lone pair orbital of 
the NH2 ligand with respect to the 3d level.

PMID: 17107114  [PubMed]


127. Zhongguo Ji Sheng Chong Xue Yu Ji Sheng Chong Bing Za Zhi. 2006 Aug;24(4):247-50.

[Preparation and characterization of monoclonal antibody specific to PfCP-2.9
chimeric protein of Plasmodium falciparum].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang R(1), Qian F, Qu L, Pan WQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Etiologic Biology, the Second Military Medical University,
Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: To prepare and characterize monoclonal antibody against a malaria
vaccine candidate, PfCP-2.9 chimeric protein of Plasmodium falciparum.
METHODS: BALB/c mice were immunized with PfCP-2.9, and the spleen cells were used
for fusion with SP2/0 cells. The monoclonal antibodies were analyzed by ELISA,
Western blotting as well as growth inhibition assay.
RESULT: A monoclonal antibody was obtained. It interacted with the PfCP-2.9
recombinant protein by ELISA and Western blotting. The interaction of the
monoclonal antibody with the protein was reduction-sensitive, indicating that the
antibody recognized a conformational epitope. Moreover, the antibody also
recognized the cultured parasites of P. falciparum by indirect immunofluorescent 
antibody test (IFA). When tested by growth inhibition assay, the antibody
significantly inhibited parasite growth in vitro of 56% inhibition rate at the
antibody concentration of 0.3 mg/ml.
CONCLUSION: A monoclonal antibody against PfCP-2.9 malaria vaccine candidate has 
been obtained, which recognizes a conformational epitope of the protein and
natural protein.

PMID: 17094589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Nov 15;128(45):14438-9.

Nickel-catalyzed addition of alkynylboranes to alkynes.

Suginome M(1), Shirakura M, Yamamoto A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Synthetic Chemistry and Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of
Engineering, Kyoto University Katsura, Nishikyo-ku, Kyoto 615-8510, Japan.
suginome@sbchem.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Alkynylboration has been achieved in the reaction of alkynyl(pinacol)boranes with
alkynes in the presence of nickel catalysts, giving cis-1-borylbut-1-en-3-yne
derivatives. 1-Aryl-1-alkynes underwent the alkynylboration regioselectively with
the selective introduction of the alkynyl groups at their 1-positions, where the 
aryl groups were attached. The boryl-substituted enynes were reacted with sp2
halides under the Suzuki-Miyaura coupling conditions, giving highly conjugated
enynes in high yields.

PMID: 17090009  [PubMed]


129. Zhonghua Shi Yan He Lin Chuang Bing Du Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Sep;20(3):257-9.

[Production and identification of the monoclonal antibodies specific for MHC
class I complexes bound with HPV16E7 CTL epitopic peptide.].

[Article in Chinese]

Yin R(1), Hao F, Zhong BY, Li QJ, Li AX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing 400038, China. Corresponding author: HAO Fei, E-mail:
haofei@mail.tmmu.com.cn.

BACKGROUND: To produce specific monoclonal-antibodies (MAbs) for MHC class I
complexes bound with HPV16E7 CTL epitopic peptide (49-57), and provide a
foundation for the investigation of the present pathway of viral antigen protein 
after in vitro viral infection.
METHODS: Highly purified HPV16E7CTL epitope (49-57) (RAHYNIVTF) was produced, and
then TAP deficient RMA-S cells incubated with RAHYNIVTF were used to immunize the
BALB/c mouse. The spleen cells of the mice were regularly harvested and fused
with the SP2/0 cells. The growing fusion wells were screened and the abstracted
Mabs were identified in terms of sensitivity, specificity and affinity.
RESULTS: The screened hybriroma cells could steadily secrete the MAbs specific
for MHC class I complexes bound with HPV16E7CTL epitopic peptide. The MAbs showed
high reactivity with TAP-deficient RMA-S cells loaded with RAHYNIVTF and RMA-S
cells which have the ability to process the endogenous MHC class I complexes,
while minimally bound to class I molecules bearing other peptides, the results
indicated excellent sensitivity, specificity and affinity of the MAbs.
CONCLUSION: The experiments provide a method for producing MAbs for epitopic
peptide bound MHC class I complexes.

PMID: 17086287  [PubMed - in process]


130. J Biol Chem. 2006 Dec 22;281(51):39105-13. Epub 2006 Oct 27.

Disruption of an SP2/KLF6 repression complex by SHP is required for farnesoid X
receptor-induced endothelial cell migration.

Das A(1), Fernandez-Zapico ME, Cao S, Yao J, Fiorucci S, Hebbel RP, Urrutia R,
Shah VH.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Research Unit, Department of Physiology and Cancer Cell
Biology Program, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.
das.amitava@mayo.edu

The farnesoid X receptor (FXR) signaling pathway regulates bile acid and
cholesterol homeostasis. Here, we demonstrate, using a variety of gain- and
loss-of-function approaches, a role of FXR in the process of cell motility, which
involves the small heterodimeric partner (SHP)-dependent up-regulation of matrix 
metalloproteinase-9. We use this observation to reveal a transcriptional
regulatory mechanism involving the SP/KLF transcription factors, SP2 and KLF6.
Small interference RNA-based silencing studies in combination with promoter, gel 
shift, and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays indicate that SP2 and KLF6 bind
to the matrix metalloproteinase-9 promoter and together function to maintain this
gene in a silenced state. However, upon activation of FXR, SHP interacts with SP2
and KLF6, disrupting the SP2/KLF6 repressor complex. Thus, together, these
studies identify a mechanism for antagonizing Sp/KLF protein repression function 
via SHP, with this process regulating endothelial cell motility.

PMID: 17071613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Insect Mol Biol. 2006 Oct;15(5):603-14.

Comparative analysis of serine protease-related genes in the honey bee genome:
possible involvement in embryonic development and innate immunity.

Zou Z(1), Lopez DL, Kanost MR, Evans JD, Jiang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology and Plant Pathology, Oklahoma State University,
Stillwater, USA.

We have identified 44 serine protease (SP) and 13 serine protease homolog (SPH)
genes in the genome of Apis mellifera. Most of these genes encode putative
secreted proteins, but four SPs and three SPHs may associate with the plasma
membrane via a transmembrane region. Clip domains represent the most abundant
non-catalytic structural units in these SP-like proteins -12 SPs and six SPHs
contain at least one clip domain. Some of the family members contain other
modules for protein-protein interactions, including disulphide-stabilized
structures (LDL(r)A, SRCR, frizzled, kringle, Sushi, Wonton and Pan/apple),
carbohydrate-recognition domains (C-type lectin and chitin-binding), and other
modules (such as zinc finger, CUB, coiled coil and Sina). Comparison of the
sequences with those from Drosophila led to a proposed SP pathway for
establishing the dorsoventral axis of honey bee embryos. Multiple sequence
alignments revealed evolutionary relationships of honey bee SPs and SPHs with
those in Drosophila melanogaster, Anopheles gambiae, and Manduca sexta. We
identified homologs of D. melanogaster persephone, M. sexta HP14, PAP-1 and
SPH-1. A. mellifera genome includes at least five genes for potential SP
inhibitors (serpin-1 through -5) and three genes of SP putative substrates
(prophenoloxidase, spätzle-1 and spätzle-2). Quantitative RT-PCR analyses showed 
an elevation in the mRNA levels of SP2, SP3, SP9, SP10, SPH41, SPH42, SP49,
serpin-2, serpin-4, serpin-5, and spätzle-2 in adults after a microbial
challenge. The SP41 and SP6 transcripts significantly increased after an
injection of Paenibacillus larva, but there was no such increase after injection 
of saline or Escherichia coli. mRNA levels of most SPs and serpins significantly 
increased by 48 h after the pathogen infection in 1st instar larvae. On the
contrary, SP1, SP3, SP19 and serpin-5 transcript levels reduced. These results,
taken together, provide a framework for designing experimental studies of the
roles of SPs and related proteins in embryonic development and immune responses
of A. mellifera.

PMCID: PMC1761132
PMID: 17069636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Endocrinology. 2007 Feb;148(2):752-61. Epub 2006 Oct 26.

Diversity in the complementarity-determining region 3 (CDR3) of antibodies from
mice with evolving anti-thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor antibody responses.

Martinez O(1), Gangi E, Mordi D, Gupta S, Dorevitch S, Lefranc MP, Prabhakar BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology (M/C 790), Room E-709, Building 935,
835 South Wolcott Avenue, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

In a mouse model of autoimmune Graves' disease, stimulatory anti-TSH receptor
(TSHR) antibodies (TSAbs) slowly evolve upon repeated immunization with TSHR and 
lead to hyperthyroidism. Although all immunized mice developed high levels of
TSH-binding inhibitory Ig (TBII), only a subset of these mice become
hyperthyroid, suggesting that the generation of pathogenic antibodies (Abs) may
require affinity maturation. We analyzed the complementarity-determining region 3
(CDR3) of IGHV1 and IGHV5 heavy chains from mice at different stages of disease
development. Subcloned CDR3 PCR products were amplified from RNA isolated from
enriched splenic B/plasma cells of a control mouse, and mice with low TBII and
normal T(4) levels (LTNT(4)), high TBII and normal T(4) levels (HTNT(4)), and
high TBII and high T(4) levels (HTHT(4)). Using statistical analyses, we
correlated usage of D and J genes and the amino acid composition and length of
and mutations within the CDR3 with different outcomes after TSHR immunization.
CDR3 sequences from TSHR-immunized mice contained a higher frequency of D gene
SP2.9 relative to control, whereas sequences from HTHT(4) contained a higher
frequency of D gene Q52 compared with sequences from LTNT(4). Furthermore,
HTHT(4) sequences also contained higher CDR3 replacement mutations, relative to
LTNT(4) and HTNT(4) mice, that are indicative of somatic hypermutation.
Collectively, our results suggest that higher somatic mutations within the CDR3
may correlate with pathogenic antibodies against the TSHR.

PMID: 17068139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Foot Ankle Int. 2006 Oct;27(10):793-6.

Revisiting the concept of talar shift in ankle fractures.

Lloyd J(1), Elsayed S, Hariharan K, Tanaka H.

Author information: 
(1)4 Victoria Drive West, Salisbury District Hospital, Wiltshire, SP2 8QX United 
Kingdom. jelloyd1@btopenworld.com

Comment in
    Foot Ankle Int. 2007 May;28(5):661-2.

BACKGROUND: In 1976, Ramsey and Hamilton published a classic experiment
investigating the biomechanical effects of talar shift in a simple ankle fracture
model. Their finding was that 1 mm of talar shift resulted in a 42% decrease in
tibiotalar contact surface area. Based on this conclusion, 1 mm of talar shift
became the recognized indication for operative fixation.
METHODS: Twelve cadaver ankles were dissected and the distal tibia coated with
carbon powder. A 70-kg load was applied to the distal tibia that resulted in
transference of the carbon onto the talus. The contact surface area was
determined at 0, 1, 2, 4 and 6 mm of talar shift using spacers fixed in the
medial gutter. Tracing paper was used to mark the outline of the contact area and
measured using graph paper.
RESULTS: Our results were similar to Ramsey and Hamilton's original experiment.
One millimeter of lateral talar shift resulted in 40% loss of contact surface
area compared with 42% in the original experiment. A large variance was seen in
talar contact surface area depending on the morphology of the ankle joint.
CONCLUSION: Ramsey and Hamilton's original experiment was valid.

PMID: 17054879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Chem Phys. 2006 Oct 14;125(14):144311.

Jet cooled spectroscopy of H2DO+: Barrier heights and isotope-dependent tunneling
dynamics from H3O+ to D3O+.

Dong F(1), Nesbitt DJ.

Author information: 
(1)JILA, National Institute of Standards and Technology, University of Colorado, 
Boulder, Colorado 80309, USA.

The first high resolution spectroscopic data for jet cooled H2DO+ are reported,
specifically via infrared laser direct absorption in the OH stretching region
with a slit supersonic jet discharge source. Transitions sampling upper (0-) and 
lower (0+) tunneling states for both symmetric (nu1+ <-- 0+, nu1- <-- 0-, and
nu1- <-- 0+) and antisymmetric (nu3+ <-- 0+ and nu3- <-- 0-) OH stretching bands 
are observed, where +/- refers to wave function reflection symmetry with respect 
to the planar umbrella mode transition state. The spectra can be well fitted to a
Watson asymmetric top Hamiltonian, revealing band origins and rotational
constants for benchmark comparison with high-level ab initio theory. Of
particular importance are detection and assignment of the relatively weak band
(nu1- <-- 0+) that crosses the inversion tunneling gap, which is optically
forbidden in H3O+ or D3O+, but weakly allowed in H2DO+ by lowering of the
tunneling transition state symmetry from D(3h) to C(2v). In conjunction with
other H2DO+ bands, this permits determination of the tunneling splittings to
within spectroscopic precision for each of the ground [40.518(10) cm(-1)], nu1 = 
1 [32.666(6) cm(-1)], and nu3 = 1 [25.399(11) cm(-1)] states. A one-dimensional
zero-point energy corrected potential along the tunneling coordinate is
constructed from high-level ab initio CCSD(T) calculations (AVnZ, n = 3,4,5) and 
extrapolated to the complete basis set limit to extract tunneling splittings via 
a vibrationally adiabatic treatment. Perturbative scaling of the potential to
match splittings for all four isotopomers permits an experimental estimate of
DeltaV0 = 652.9(6) cm(-1) for the tunneling barrier, in good agreement with full 
six-dimensional ab initio results of Rajamaki, Miani, and Halonen (RMH) [J. Chem.
Phys. 118, 10929 (2003)]. (DeltaV0 (RMH) = 650 cm(-1)). The 30%-50% decrease in
tunneling splitting observed upon nu1 and nu3 vibrational excitations arises from
an increase in OH stretch frequencies at the planar transition state,
highlighting the transition between sp2 and sp3 hybridizations of the OHD bonds
as a function of inversion bending angle.

PMID: 17042594  [PubMed]


135. Planta. 2007 Mar;225(4):1001-17.

Secretion marker proteins and cell-wall polysaccharides move through different
secretory pathways.

Leucci MR(1), Di Sansebastiano GP, Gigante M, Dalessandro G, Piro G.

Author information: 
(1)Di.S.Te.B.A., Università di Lecce, via prov.le Lecce-Monteroni, 73100 Lecce,
Italy.

The building up of the cell wall is tightly dependent on the functionality of the
secretory pathway. Syntaxins as well as other SNARE proteins play important roles
during vesicle secretion and fusion. We have compared the secretion of newly
synthesised cell-wall polysaccharides to that of secretory marker proteins such
as secreted green-fluorescent protein (sec-GFP) and secreted rat preputial
beta-glucuronidase (secRGUS) in leaf protoplasts and roots of wild-type and
transgenic Nicotiana tabacum plants, overexpressing a syntaxin homologue NtSyr1
(Sp1) and its soluble variant Sp2 that interferes specifically with Sp1 function,
affecting post-Golgi transport. In protoplasts transiently transformed with
secGFP and Sp1, no variation was observed in the pattern of fluorescence with
respect to control; on the contrary, GFP fluorescence accumulate within the cells
in protoplasts co-transformed with secGFP and Sp2. Sp2 reduced the percentage of 
marker protein secretion to 53% as quantified with secRGUS. In protoplasts
obtained from leaves of wild-type and transformed tobacco plants expressing Sp1, 
Sp2 and Sp1 plus Sp2, no remarkable differences in the percentage of newly
synthesised polysaccharides incorporated into the regenerating cell walls were
observed. The same results were confirmed in roots of whole transformed
seedlings. Tests with cytochalasin D (CD) showed a marked decrease in the amount 
of newly synthesised polysaccharides into the wall and a simultaneous sharp
increase in membrane-associated polysaccharides. SecRGUS secretion was also
inhibited by CD. The data indicate that marker proteins and matrix
polysaccharides, as well as cellulose synthase complexes, are secreted through
the involvement of different secretory machineries.

PMID: 17039371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2007 Sep;45(6):493-5. Epub 2006 Oct 4.

Corlett loop for microvascular reconstruction in a neck depleted of vessels.

Ethunandan M(1), Cole R, Flood TR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery, Odstock Centre for Burns, Plastic 
and Maxillofacial Surgery, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP2 
8PJ, United Kingdom. mgethu@hotmail.com

Free tissue transfer has revolutionised reconstruction of the head and neck and
there are currently few local factors that preclude its use. These include a lack
of suitable recipient vessels in the area for microvascular anastomosis. We
describe the use of a Corlett loop in which a temporary arteriovenous fistula
(AVF) is created with a transposed cephalic vein to enable reconstruction of a
mandibular defect with a fibular free flap.

PMID: 17023104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Hum Vaccin. 2006 Mar-Apr;2(2):74-7. Epub 2006 Mar 3.

Association between immunogenicity and adsorption of a recombinant Streptococcus 
pneumoniae vaccine antigen by an aluminum adjuvant.

Levesque PM(1), Foster K, de Alwis U.

Author information: 
(1)ID Biomedical Corporation of Northborough, Northborough, Massachusetts 01532, 
USA.

The impact on immunogenicity of the degree of adsorption of three Streptococcus
pneumoniae (Sp) vaccine antigens to aluminum adjuvants was studied. The three
antigens evaluated (Sp1, Sp2 and Sp3) were highly adsorbed by aluminum hydroxide 
adjuvant, but not adsorbed by aluminum phosphate adjuvant. All of the Sp antigens
adjuvanted with aluminum hydroxide elicited higher antibody responses in mice
than formulations prepared with aluminum phosphate or non-adjuvanted antigen.
Varying the percent aluminum-bound Sp antigen in the formulated vaccine affected 
the observed antibody responses. These observations suggest that the antibody
response observed for Sp antigens in this study is stimulated by a depot effect
of the antigen bound to an aluminum adjuvant.

PMID: 17012880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. FASEB J. 2006 Nov;20(13):2375-7. Epub 2006 Sep 28.

Role of cyclooxygenase-2 induction by transcription factor Sp1 and Sp3 in
neuronal oxidative and DNA damage response.

Lee J(1), Kosaras B, Aleyasin H, Han JA, Park DS, Ratan RR, Kowall NW, Ferrante
RJ, Lee SW, Ryu H.

Author information: 
(1)Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center, Bedford Veteran's Affairs
Medical Center, 200 Springs Rd., Bedford, MA 01730, USA.

Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) has been implicated in neuronal survival and death.
However, the precise regulatory mechanisms involved in COX-2 function are
unclear. In the present study we found that COX-2 is induced in response to
glutathione depletion-induced oxidative stress in primary cortical neurons. Two
proximal specific Sp1 and Sp3 binding sites are responsible for the COX-2
promoter activity under normal as well as oxidative stress conditions through
enhanced Sp1 and Sp3 DNA binding activity. Site-directed mutagenesis confirmed
that -268/-267 positions serve as specific Sp1 and Sp3 recognition sites under
oxidative stress. Enforced expression of Sp1 and Sp3 using HSV vectors increased 
the promoter activity, transcription, and protein level of COX-2 in cortical
neurons. The dominant negative form of Sp1 abrogated the oxidative stress-induced
promoter activity and expression of COX-2. We also demonstrated that
adenovirus-mediated COX-2 gene delivery protected neurons from DNA damage induced
by oxidative, genotoxic, and excitotoxic stresses and by ischemic injury.
Moreover, COX-2(-/-) cortical neurons were more susceptible to DNA damage-induced
cell death. These results indicate that in primary neurons Sp1 and Sp3 play an
essential role in the modulation of COX-2 transcription, which mediates neuronal 
homeostasis and survival by preventing DNA damage in response to neuronal stress.

PMID: 17012241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Oral Oncol. 2006 Nov;42(10):1026-8. Epub 2006 Oct 2.

Ectomesenchymal chondromyxoid tumour of the tongue: Unlikely to originate from
myoepithelial cells.

Goveas N(1), Ethunandan M, Cowlishaw D, Flood TR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Salisbury District Hospital,
Salisbury SP2 8BJ, United Kingdom.

Ectomesenchymal chondromyxoid tumour is a recently described rare entity found
almost exclusively in the anterior dorsum of the tongue. We report an additional 
case, review the pertinent literature and explore the histogenesis of the lesion.
The lesion has no discriminating clinical features and diagnosis is only
established following histopathological examination including immunohistochemical
assessment. The histogenesis of the lesion remains speculative and our study
seems to discount myoepithelial cells as a potential source.

PMID: 17011812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Oct 4;128(39):12634-5.

Palladium-catalyzed alkylation of sp2 and sp3 C-H bonds with methylboroxine and
alkylboronic acids: two distinct C-H activation pathways.

Chen X(1), Goodhue CE, Yu JQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry MS015, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA 02454-9110,
USA.

Palladium-catalyzed alkylations of sp2 and sp3 C-H bonds with either
methylboroxine or alkylboronic acids were developed. Ag2O or AgCO3 is used as a
crucial oxidant and promoter for the transmetalation step. Ether, ester, alcohol,
and alkene functional groups are tolerated. A new C-H activation pathway
differing from the cyclometalation process is elucidated using methylboroxine as 
the coupling partner.

PMID: 17002342  [PubMed]


141. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Sep 27;128(38):12562-73.

Studies on the mechanism of action of prekinamycin, a member of the
diazoparaquinone family of natural products: evidence for both sp2 radical and
orthoquinonemethide intermediates.

Feldman KS(1), Eastman KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania 16802, USA. ksf@chem.psu.edu

The putative reductive activation chemistry of the diazoparaquinone antibiotics
was modeled with Bu(3)Sn-H and prekinamycin dimethyl ether along with
prekinamycin itself. Reaction in various combinations of aromatic solvents, with 
and without the nucleophile benzylmercaptan present, led to isolation of both
radical-trapping arene adducts and nucleophilic capture benzyl thioether
products. On the basis of these product distribution studies, the intermediacies 
of, first, a cyclopentenyl radical and, next, an orthoquinonemethide electrophile
are postulated.

PMCID: PMC2515591
PMID: 16984207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Emerg Med Clin North Am. 2006 Nov;24(4):1053-73.

The future of emergency medicine public health research.

Rhodes KV(1), Pollock DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, School of Social Policy & Practice,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. kvr@sp2.upenn.edu

This chapter addresses past successes and challenges and then elaborates on the
potential for further advances in three areas that bridge emergency medicine and 
the broader public health and health services research agenda: (1) monitoring
health care access; (2) surveillance of diseases, injuries, and health risks; and
(3) delivering clinical preventive services. This article also suggests ways to
advance policy-relevant research on systems of health and social welfare that
impact the health of the public.

PMID: 16982352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Chemistry. 2006 Dec 4;12(35):8952-60.

The nature of halogen...halogen synthons: crystallographic and theoretical
studies.

Awwadi FF(1), Willett RD, Peterson KA, Twamley B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Jordan University of Science and Technology, Irbid,
Jordan. fawwadi@yahoo.com

A study of the halogen...halogen contacts in organic compounds using ab initio
calculations and the results of previously reported crystallographic studies show
that these interactions are controlled by electrostatics. These contacts can be
represented by the geometric parameters of the C--X1...X2--C moieties (where
theta1=C--X1...X2 and theta2=X1...X2--C; ri=X1...X2 distance). The distributions 
of the contacts within the sum of van der Waals radii (rvdW) versus thetai
(theta1=theta2) show a maximum at theta approximately 150 degrees for X=Cl, Br,
and I. This maximum is not seen in the distribution of F...F contacts. These
results are in good agreement with our ab initio calculations. The theoretical
results show that the position of the maximum depends on three factors: 1) The
type of halogen atom, 2) the hybridization of the ipso carbon atom, and 3) the
nature of the other atoms that are bonded to the ipso carbon atom apart from the 
halogen atom. Calculations show that the strength of these contacts decreases in 
the following order: I...I>Br...Br>Cl...Cl. Their relative strengths decrease as 
a function of the hybridization of the ipso carbon atom in the following order:
sp2>sp>sp3. Attaching an electronegative atom to the carbon atom strengthens the 
halogen...halogen contacts. An electrostatic model is proposed based on two
assumptions: 1) The presence of a positive electrostatic end cap on the halogen
atom (except for fluorine) and 2) the electronic charge is anisotropically
distributed around the halogen atom.

PMID: 16972291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Clin Virol. 2006 Dec;37(4):305-12. Epub 2006 Sep 12.

A modified single-tube one-step product-enhanced reverse transcriptase
(mSTOS-PERT) assay with heparin as DNA polymerase inhibitor for specific
detection of RTase activity.

Fan XY(1), Lü GZ, Wu LN, Chen JH, Xu WQ, Zhao CN, Guo SQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University,
Shanghai 200433, China. xyfan008@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: Current regulations and recommendations proposed for the production
of vaccines in continuous cell lines of any origin demand that these be free of
exogenous viruses, particularly retroviruses. Recently, the ultra-sensitive
product-enhanced reverse transcriptase (PERT) assay can be used to detect minute 
of reverse transcriptase (RTase) in single retroviral particle and is 10(6) times
more sensitive than the conventional RTase assays. However, coincidental with
this increase in sensitivity is an increase in false-positive reactions derived
from contaminating cellular DNA polymerases, which are known to have RTase-like
activities.
OBJECTIVES: To develop a modified single-tube one-step PERT (mSTOS-PERT) assay
with improvements on decreasing significantly the level of false-positive
reactions, and to evaluate the mSTOS-PERT assay for sensitivity and specificity.
STUDY DESIGN: Ampliwaxtrade mark was used to compartmentalize the reverse
transcription (RT) and PCR step in the same micro-tube with more efficiency and
reproducibility, while maintaining the high sensitivity. The DNA amplification
products were separated by 2% agarose gel electrophoresis, and then analyzed by
non-isotopic Southern blot hybridization. A wide variety of cell lines used in
biologicals production were detected to validate the improved mSTOS-PERT assay.
RESULTS: The detection limit for the mSTOS-PERT assay was at least 10(-9)U, when 
using AMV-RTase as a positive control. Furthermore, heparin involvement in the RT
step can eliminate completely the false-positive PERT signals which are exhibited
by cellular polymerases such as DNA-dependent DNA polymerase alpha, gamma
released by cell death. Most mammalian cells (MRC-5, Vero, WISH, 2BS, RK-13,
MDCK, etc.) are PERT-negative in cell supernatants. Some PERT-positive signals in
cell lysates were found to be introduced by the cellular DNA polymerases and
could be inhibited specifically by heparin. Chick cells derived from either chick
embryo fibroblasts (CEF) or allantoic fluid from SPF embryonated eggs, murine
hybridoma cell SP2/0, etc., contained authentic RTase activities, which could not
be inactivated by heparin.
CONCLUSIONS: The improved mSTOS-PERT assay described here may distinguish the
genuine RTase activity from cellular polymerases with high sensitivity and
specificity, and is rapid and easy to perform to screen for the possible
contamination of minute retroviruses in the cell substrates used in vaccine
production.

PMID: 16971176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. ScientificWorldJournal. 2006 Sep 7;6:1139-43.

Diaphragm disease: the limitation of laparoscopy and assessment of the small
bowel for strictures using a ball bearing.

Moffat CE(1), Khyan MK, Davies CG, Ghauri AS, Ranaboldo CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Salisbury District Hospital, Wiltshire SP2 8BJ,
UK. catherine.moffat@salisbury.nhs.uk

Diaphragm disease is a rare cause of intestinal obstruction that will be seen
with increasing frequency with the widespread use of nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). We present a case study of a patient with
diaphragm disease where the diagnosis was not apparent at laparoscopy, and
passage of a steel ball through the small intestine was required to identify all 
strictures present. A high index of suspicion, recognition of the limitations of 
conventional diagnostic aids, and the need to assess the full length of the small
bowel are all important in the surgical management of this condition.

PMID: 16964371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Clin Sci (Lond). 2006 Oct;111(4):233-49.

Signal transduction therapy in haematological malignancies: identification and
targeting of tyrosine kinases.

Chase A(1), Cross NC.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury and Human Genetics Division,
University of Southampton, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury SP2 8BJ, U.K.

Tyrosine kinases play key roles in cell proliferation, survival and
differentiation. Their aberrant activation, caused either by the formation of
fusion genes by chromosome translocation or by intragenic changes, such as point 
mutations or internal duplications, is of major importance in the development of 
many haematological malignancies. An understanding of the mechanisms by which
BCR-ABL contributes to the pathogenesis of chronic myeloid leukaemia led to the
development of imatinib, the first of several tyrosine kinase inhibitors to enter
clinical trials. Although the development of resistance has been problematic,
particularly in aggressive disease, the development of novel inhibitors and
combination with other forms of therapy shows promise.

PMID: 16961463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Sep 6;128(35):11635-42.

Control of sp2/sp3 carbon ratio and surface chemistry of nanodiamond powders by
selective oxidation in air.

Osswald S(1), Yushin G, Mochalin V, Kucheyev SO, Gogotsi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Materials Science and Engineering Department, A. J. Drexel Nanotechnology
Institute, Drexel University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The presence of large amounts of nondiamond carbon in detonation-synthesized
nanodiamond (ND) severely limits applications of this exciting nanomaterial. We
report on a simple and environmentally friendly route involving oxidation in air 
to selectively remove sp(2)-bonded carbon from ND. Thermogravimetric analysis and
in situ Raman spectroscopy shows that sp(2) and sp(3) carbon species oxidize with
different rates at 375-450 degrees C and reveals a narrow temperature range of
400-430 degrees C in which the oxidation of sp(2)-bonded carbon occurs with no or
minimal loss of diamond. X-ray absorption near-edge structure spectroscopy
detects an increase of up to 2 orders of magnitude in the sp(3)/sp(2) ratio after
oxidation. The content of up to 96% of sp(3)-bonded carbon in the oxidized
samples is comparable to that found in microcrystalline diamond and is
unprecedented for ND powders. Transmission electron microscopy and Fourier
transform infrared spectroscopy studies show high purity 5-nm ND particles
covered by oxygen-containing surface functional groups. The surface
functionalization can be controlled by subsequent treatments (e.g.,
hydrogenization). In contrast to current purification techniques, the air
oxidation process does not require the use of toxic or aggressive chemicals,
catalysts, or inhibitors and opens avenues for numerous new applications of
nanodiamond.

PMID: 16939289  [PubMed]


148. Inorg Chem. 2006 Sep 4;45(18):7182-90.

Chemistry of HIV-1 virucidal Pt complexes having neglected bidentate sp2 N-donor 
carrier ligands with linked triazine and pyridine rings. synthesis, NMR spectral 
features, structure, and reaction with guanosine.

Maheshwari V(1), Bhattacharyya D, Fronczek FR, Marzilli PA, Marzilli LG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803,
USA.

Complexes of the types LPtCl2 and [L2Pt]X2 [L = substituted
3-(pyridin-2'-yl)-1,2,4-triazine] were synthesized and characterized by NMR
spectroscopy and, for the first time, by X-ray crystallography in an effort to
determine the coordination properties of this novel class of inorganic medicinal 
agents possessing HIV-1 virucidal activity. The agents containing either one or
two sp2 N-donor bidentate ligands are referred to as ptt (platinum triazine)
agents. The X-ray structures of three LPtCl2 compounds revealed the expected
pseudo-square-planar geometry. The X-ray structure of [(pyPh2t)2Pt](BF4)2 [pyPh2t
= 3-(pyridin-2'-yl)-5,6-diphenyl-1,2,4-triazine] has the expected trans
relationship of the unsymmetrical L and is essentially planar, an unusual
property for a Pt(II) complex with two bidentate sp2 N donors. HIV-1 is an RNA
virus; the guanosine ribonucleoside (Guo) binds (MepyMe2t)PtCl2 at both
(inequivalent) available coordination sites to form [(MepyMe2t)Pt(Guo)2]2+
[MepyMe2t = 3-(4'-methylpyridin-2'-yl)-5,6-dimethyl-1,2,4-triazine]. This adduct 
has four nearly equally intense Guo H8 signals attributed to two pairs of
head-to-tail (HT) and head-to-head (HH) conformers, which interchange rapidly
within each pair. However, equilibration between pairs requires rotation of the
Guo cis to the MepyMe2t pyridyl ring, and the H6' proton on this ring projects
toward the Guo and hinders Guo rotation about the Pt-N7 bond. Thus, the HT/HH
pairs do not interchange; such behavior is rare. Guo did not add to
[(MepyMe2t)2Pt]2+, a result suggesting the possibility that the virucidal
activity of LPtCl2 and [L2Pt]2+ ptt agents arises respectively from covalent and 
noncovalent (possibly intercalative interactions favored by [L2Pt]2+ planarity)
binding to biomolecular targets.

PMID: 16933918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Aug;14(4):800-3.

[Influences of bcr-abl gene vaccine on inoculated SP2/0/bcr-abl tumor cells in
mice].

[Article in Chinese]

Jiang YW(1), Qian L, Jiang GH, Liu W, Gong WJ, Ji MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Affiliated Hospital of Yangzhou University, Yangzhou
225001, China.

To study the influence of vaccine of bcr-abl fusion gene fragment on inoculated
SP2/0/bcr-abl tumor cells in mice, BALB/c mice were immunized with pVbcr-abl,
pVbcr-abl/mIL7 plasmids, respectively, then SP2/0/bcr-abl cells expressing the
fragment of bcr-abl fusion gene were inoculated subcutaneously into the groin of 
BALB/c mice in order to observe the effect of vaccine on growth of inoculated
SP2/0/bcr-abl tumor cells. The results showed that there were distinct
differences on the time of tumor growth, the time of tumor ulceration, tumor
volume and survival time of mice bearing tumor between two immunized groups and
two control groups (blank and vacant plasmid groups). The mice immunized with
pVbcr-abl/mIL7 lived longer as compared to mice immunized with pVbcr-abl. The
tissue of inoculated tumor was more compact, tumor organ was larger, tumor form
was irregular in 2 control groups, while the tissue of inoculated tumor was
looser, tumor volume was smaller, and with mass inflammatory infiltration in two 
immunized groups. Moreover, the metastatic tumor cells were found in the livers
of control groups, but not observed in two immunized groups. It is concluded that
the protection occurred in immunized mice which inhibited the growth of
SP2/0/bcr-abl tumor cell in vivo.

PMID: 16928325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Sheng Li Xue Bao. 2006 Aug 25;58(4):391-6.

[Preparation and identification of monoclonal antibody against human
thrombomodulin.].

[Article in Chinese]

Guo ZF(1), He SY, Zhu BY, Yan PK, Li BY, Liao DF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Nanhua University, Hengyang, China.

To produce specific monoclonal antibody (McAb) against human thrombomodulin
(hTM), the full-length hTM cDNA-expressing plasmid pThr402 was transfected into
CHO cells by Lipofectamine 2000 reagent. The hTM-expressing CHO cells, which was 
confirmed by flow cytometry and Western blot, were obtained by G418 selection.
Then the McAb against hTM was prepared with classic hybridoma technique. A cell
line of CHO-TM5 with high level of hTM was used to immunize female Balb/c mice 3 
times at an interval of 4 weeks. On the third day after the third immunization,
mice were sacrificed and spleen cells were harvested to prepare hybridoma cells
with SP2/0 cells at the ratio of 10 to 1. Hybridoma cells were then cultured at
96-well plates for screening. Cellular enzyme-linked immunoabsorbent assay
(CELISA) was applied twice. The first CELISA was done with polythene ELISA plate 
with a monolayer of CHO-TM5 cells. The positive clones from the first screen were
then selected by reacting with similar screening ELISA plate but with CHO cell
monolayer instead. Only clones that were positive for the first screening and
negative for the second screening were kept, and called as CHO-TM5(+)CHO(-)
hybridoma cells. Balb/c mice were intraperitoneally injected with the selected
hybridoma cells. Ascites were collected and monoclonal antibodies were purified
using FPLC, and its Ig class, subclass, and titer were then determined
respectively. The specificity of the yielded McAb was identified with CELISA,
flow cytometry, ABC immunohistochemistry and immunoblotting. One line of
hybridoma cells with high expression of specific McAb against hTM, NH-1, was
obtained. The Ig subclass of the McAb was IgG1 and the titer of ascitic McAb was 
1x10(-6). Flow cytometry, CELISA and Western blot assays demonstrated that McAb
NH-1 could specifically recognize hTM expressed in CHO-TM5 cells and human
umbilical vascular endothelial cells. Meanwhile, the tissue specificity of
antigen recognized by McAb NH-1 was identified by immunohistochemical ABC
staining. NH-1 can specifically recognize the natural hTM expressed mainly in
vascular endothelial cells, which will potentially be useful for investigation of
the functions and clinic values of hTM.

PMID: 16906342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Nano Lett. 2006 Aug;6(8):1812-6.

Raman spectroscopy of single-wall boron nitride nanotubes.

Arenal R(1), Ferrari AC, Reich S, Wirtz L, Mevellec JY, Lefrant S, Rubio A,
Loiseau A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Etude des Microstructures, ONERA-CNRS, 92322 Châtillon, France. 
arenal@anl.gov

Single-wall boron nitride nanotubes samples synthesized by laser vaporization of 
a hexagonal BN target under a nitrogen atmosphere are studied by UV and visible
Raman spectroscopy. We show that resonant conditions are necessary for
investigating phonon modes of BNNTs. Raman excitation in the UV (229 nm) provides
preresonant conditions, allowing the identification of the A1 tangential mode at 
1370 cm(-1). This is 5 cm(-1) higher than the E(2g) mode in bulk h-BN. Ab initio 
calculations show that the lower frequency of bulk h-BN with respect to large
diameter nanotubes and the single sheet of h-BN is related to a softening of the 
sp2 bonds in the bulk due to interlayer interaction.

PMID: 16895378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2006 Jul;22(4):629-34.

[Production of polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies against citrus tristeza virus
and their efficiency for the detection of the virus].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang CX(1), Wang GP, Hong N, Jiang B, Liu H, Wu KW.

Author information: 
(1)National Indoor Conservation Center of Virus-free Gemplasms of Fruit Crops,
Wuhan 430070, China.

Citrus tristeza virus (CTV) was purified from a citrus sample by a modified
protocol, and the yield was about 1 mg from 100 g citrus tissues. Polyclonal
antibody was prepared by immunizing rabbits with the purified CTV preparation
with a titer 1:25600 in indirect ELISA test. Eighteen hybridoma-cell lines
secreting monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) against CTV were screened after the fusion
of mouse myeloma cells (SP2/0) with spleen cells from BALB/c immunized with the
virus preparation. Four hybridoma-cell lines were selected randomly for later
analysis. The results indicated that the titers of ascetic fluids against these
hybridoma cell lines ranged from 1:51200 to 1:204800 in indirect ELISA, and their
isotypes and subclasses were IgG2a for 2G and 3H and IgG2b for IE and 4H. These
four Mabs were used to detect CTV in citrus samples in different sources. Results
showed that TAS-ELISA with polyclonal antibody as trapping antibody and
monoclonal antibody as testing antibody had a higher specificity and sensitivity 
than PAS-ELISA. Four Mabs showed different intensities of serological reaction
with different CTV isolates. However, much work remains for realizing the
characteristics and the serological relationships among these isolates.

PMID: 16894900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Ultramicroscopy. 2007 Feb-Mar;107(2-3):81-94. Epub 2006 Jul 5.

Evolution of ELNES spectra as a function of experimental settings for any
uniaxial specimen: a fully relativistic study.

Bocquet F(1), Bernier N, Saikaly W, Brosset C, Thibault J, Charaï A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire TECSEN, UMR 6122, Faculté des Sciences, Université Paul
Cézanne-Aix Marseille III, 13397 Marseille Cedex 20, France.
franck.bocquet@univ.u-3mrs.fr

We perform calculations of the fully relativistic, corrected geometrical
weighting of the pi* and sigma* transitions measured from the 1s core loss
electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) spectrum in any uniaxial specimen. We
present a complete calculation of the differential scattering cross-section
(DSCS), taking into account the collection angle, the illumination angle and the 
tilt of the sample over the optical axis. Owing to high electron velocity in an
EELS experiment, the relativistic correction has to be considered. We thus,
present a relativistic, corrected DSCS by using the theory recently developed by 
Jouffrey et al. [Ultramicroscopy 102 (2004) 61] and P. Schattschneider et al.
[Phys. Rev. B 72 (2005) 045142]. The relativistic correction is first performed
in the natural coordinate system of the scattering event. We then point out a
straightforward method to introduce this correction in the microscopic coordinate
system, where all calculations have to be done to be experimentally useful. Using
the fully corrected DSCS, we present an expression predicting the evolution of
the R=pi*/(pi*+sigma*) ratio (related to the ratio of sp2 and sp3 bondings) as a 
function of experimental settings. We show how the R-evolution can be predicted, 
for any experimental setting, by the knowledge of one unique reference value. We 
verify on graphite specimens, the validity of the R-calculation by comparing
theoretical predictions presented in this work with experimental data published
elsewhere [Daniels et al., Ultramicroscopy 96 (2003) 523 and Menon et al.,
Ultramicroscopy 74 (1998) 83].

PMID: 16870339  [PubMed]


154. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Aug 2;128(30):9608-9.

Synthesis and characterization of bromonium ylides and their unusual ligand
transfer reactions with N-heterocycles.

Ochiai M(1), Tada N, Murai K, Goto S, Shiro M.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Tokushima, 1-78 Shomachi,
Tokushima 770-8505, Japan.

Stable aliphatic bromonium ylides (RfSO2)2C--Br+C6H4-p-CF3 (Rf = CF3, CF3(CF2)3) 
have been synthesized and structurally characterized for the first time. X-ray
crystallographic analyses indicated a ylide structure with an sp2 hybridization
of the ylide carbanions and with little double-bond character for the ylidic
bond. The bromonium ylides selectively undergo transfer of the aryl group to
nitrogen heterocycles, such as pyridines, yielding N-arylpyridinium salts. This
is in a marked contrast to the reaction of the iodonium ylides, which produces
pyridinium ylides through transylidations.

PMID: 16866496  [PubMed]


155. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2006 Aug;209(4):291-301.

Home accidents in the elderly in Turkey.

Evci ED(1), Ergin F, Beser E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health, Adnan Menderes University, Aydin, Turkey.
devci@yahoo.com

Houses may accommodate environmental barriers that pose a risk for older people. 
This study aimed to identify the main characteristics of the dwellings of the
elderly, and to assess the impact of those on home accidents. In that
cross-sectional study, 3,277 people over 60 years of age living in Aydin province
of Turkey were evaluated in December 2004, using a questionnaire and a home
safety check list. The results indicated that 38.6% of the elderly have had any
type of home accident within the last 12 months, and the most common type of
accident was falls (31.9% of all accidents). Possible causes of accidents were
analyzed and the houses were graded based on two different types of safety point 
scales (SP): SP1 for "house characteristics" and SP2 for "personal opinions."
According to SP1, 22.7% of the houses were defined as in poor condition while
this percentage was 20.1% according to SP2. Poor housing conditions, being
female, living alone, having a chronic illness, physical and hearing disability, 
wearing eyeglasses, inactivity, use of assistive devices and more than four drugs
were found to be associated with having a home accident. The environmental
hazards and factors contributing to accidents or injuries were well-known.
However, the information about home accidents in the elderly and the impact of
dwelling characteristics was limited. This study was considered to be helpful to 
provide a new perspective on this subject. More studies are needed using the home
safety check lists to collect additional quantitative data.

PMID: 16864951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Nature. 2006 Jul 20;442(7100):282-6.

Graphene-based composite materials.

Stankovich S(1), Dikin DA, Dommett GH, Kohlhaas KM, Zimney EJ, Stach EA, Piner
RD, Nguyen ST, Ruoff RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering, Northwestern University, 2145 Sheridan
Road, Evanston, Illinois 60208-3111, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2006 Jul 20;442(7100):254-5.

Graphene sheets--one-atom-thick two-dimensional layers of sp2-bonded carbon--are 
predicted to have a range of unusual properties. Their thermal conductivity and
mechanical stiffness may rival the remarkable in-plane values for graphite
(approximately 3,000 W m(-1) K(-1) and 1,060 GPa, respectively); their fracture
strength should be comparable to that of carbon nanotubes for similar types of
defects; and recent studies have shown that individual graphene sheets have
extraordinary electronic transport properties. One possible route to harnessing
these properties for applications would be to incorporate graphene sheets in a
composite material. The manufacturing of such composites requires not only that
graphene sheets be produced on a sufficient scale but that they also be
incorporated, and homogeneously distributed, into various matrices. Graphite,
inexpensive and available in large quantity, unfortunately does not readily
exfoliate to yield individual graphene sheets. Here we present a general approach
for the preparation of graphene-polymer composites via complete exfoliation of
graphite and molecular-level dispersion of individual, chemically modified
graphene sheets within polymer hosts. A polystyrene-graphene composite formed by 
this route exhibits a percolation threshold of approximately 0.1 volume per cent 
for room-temperature electrical conductivity, the lowest reported value for any
carbon-based composite except for those involving carbon nanotubes; at only 1
volume per cent, this composite has a conductivity of approximately 0.1 S m(-1), 
sufficient for many electrical applications. Our bottom-up chemical approach of
tuning the graphene sheet properties provides a path to a broad new class of
graphene-based materials and their use in a variety of applications.

PMID: 16855586  [PubMed]


157. J Phys Chem B. 2005 Sep 22;109(37):17518-25.

New insights on molybdenum suboxide: nature of carbons in isomerization
reactions.

Torres-García E(1), Rodríguez-Gattorno G, Ascencio JA, Aleman-Vazquez LO,
Cano-Domínguez JL, Martínez-Hernandez A, Santiago-Jacinto P.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Mexicano del Petróleo, Eje Lazaro Cardenas 152, San Bartolo
Atepehuacan 07730 México D.F. México.

MoO3 transformations under isomerization process conditions were studied. The
products obtained after different times under stream (H2/n-heptane mixture, 18.5 
bar, at 370 degrees C) were characterized by X-ray diffraction, Raman
spectroscopy, thermal analysis, and high-resolution transmission electron
microscopy (HRTEM). Theoretical quantum calculations were carried out with the
aim of understanding the paradox of the real active phase in isomerization
reactions. Theoretical calculations predict the existence of a metallic-like MoO 
phase with a structure that matches the X-ray diffraction experimental results.
From experimental and simulated HRTEM images it was possible to identify the
presence of small MoO cubic crystallites inside MoOx matrix phases. These results
also support the previously proposed idea that isomerization reactions take place
as a result of the existence of a bifunctional catalyst. The Raman and
thermo-programmed oxidation (TPO) analyses show the existence of at least two
types of carbonaceous deposits which tend to increase its ordering with the
increase of time under stream. The carbon K edge in electron energy loss
spectroscopy (EELS) of a sample after 24 h under stream shows that these
carbonaceous deposits consist of a mixture of sp2- and sp3-hybridized carbons.

PMID: 16853240  [PubMed]


158. Chem Res Toxicol. 2006 Jul;19(7):908-13.

Assignment of absolute configurations of the enantiomeric spiroiminodihydantoin
nucleobases by experimental and computational optical rotatory dispersion
methods.

Durandin A(1), Jia L, Crean C, Kolbanovskiy A, Ding S, Shafirovich V, Broyde S,
Geacintov NE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, New York University, New York 10003-5180, USA.

The diastereomeric spiroiminodihydantoin (Sp) lesions are oxidation products of
guanine and 8-oxo-7,8-dihydroguanine (8-oxoG) and have generated considerable
interest because of their stereochemistry-dependent mutagenic properties in vivo 
(Henderson, P. T., et al. (2003) Biochemistry 42, 9257-9262). However, the
absolute configurations of the two diastereomers have not yet been elucidated,
and such information may prove valuable for understanding relationships between
biological function and structure at the DNA level (Jia, L., Shafirovich, V.,
Shapiro, R., Geacintov, N. E., and Broyde, S. (2005) Biochemistry 44,
13342-13353). We have synthesized the two chiral Sp nucleobases by hydrolysis of 
the nucleosides denoted by dSp1 and dSp2 according to their elution order in HPLC
experiments using a Hypercarb column, and determined their absolute
configurations using a combination of experimentally measured optical rotatory
dispersion (ORD) spectra in aqueous solutions and computed ORD specific rotations
using density functional theory (DFT). Recent developments have shown that DFT
methods are now sufficiently robust for predicting ORD values of chiral molecules
(Polavarapu, P. L. (2002) Chirality 14, 768-781). The nucleobases Sp1 and Sp2
exhibit experimentally measured CD and ORD spectra that are very close to those
of the respective precursor nucleosides dSp1 and dSp2 in shape and sign. The
first nucleoside stereoisomer (dSp1) to elute from a typical Hypercarb HPLC
column has (-)-S, while the second (dSp2) has (+)-R absolute configuration. The R
and S assignments are applicable to the amino tautomeric forms in each case.

PMID: 16841958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Jul 19;128(28):9048-9.

Intermolecular amidation of unactivated sp2 and sp2 C-H bonds via
palladium-catalyzed cascade C-H activation/nitrene insertion.

Thu HY(1), Yu WY, Che CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Open Laboratory of Chemical Biology of the
Institute of Molecular Technology for Drug Discovery and Synthesis, The
University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong.

This communication describes the Pd(OAc)2-catalyzed intermolecular amidation
reactions of unactivated sp2 and sp3 C-H bonds using primary amides and potassium
persulfate. The substrates containing a pendent oxime or pyridine group were
amidated with excellent chemo- and regioselectivities. It is noteworthy that
reactive C-X bonds were well-tolerated and a variety of primary amides can be
effective nucleophiles for the Pd-catalyzed C-H amidation reactions. For the
reaction of unactivated sp3 C-H bonds, beta-amidation of 1 degrees sp3 C-H bonds 
versus 2 degrees C-H bonds is preferred. The catalytic reaction is initiated by
chelation-assisted cyclopalladation involving C-H bond activation. Preliminary
mechanistic study suggested that the persulfate oxidation of primary amides
should generate reactive nitrene species, which then reacted with the
cyclopalladated complex.

PMID: 16834374  [PubMed]


160. J Phys Chem A. 2005 Sep 22;109(37):8391-7.

Theoretical studies on the structure and aromaticity of Ti2P6+.

Li WQ(1), Tian WQ, Feng JK, Liu ZZ, Ren AM, Zhang G.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Theoretical and Computational Chemistry, Institute of 
Theoretical Chemistry, Jilin University, Changchun 130023, China.

Cationic cluster Ti2P6+ has been studied within density functional theory. The
structure of this cluster is predicted to be a slightly distorted tetragonal
prism. The dissociation energy of this cationic cluster is higher than that of
the known sandwich compound, [(P5)2Ti]2-, because of the different bonding in
these two compounds. In Ti2P6+, the hybridization of P atoms of the ring is sp3. 
The bonding between the metal atoms and the P ring is mainly sigma-pi. While in
[(P5)2Ti]2-, the P atoms take sp2 hybridization, the bonding between the metal
atom and the rings is the typical pi-pi interaction. The electronic
delocalization is another stabilizing factor for Ti2P6+. The nuclear independent 
chemical shift indicates that Ti2P6+ is a three-dimensional aromatic molecule.
The predicted infrared and NMR help to identify the Ti2P6+ conformations in
experiment.

PMID: 16834232  [PubMed]


161. J Phys Chem A. 2005 Sep 22;109(37):8329-35.

Gas-phase structure of protonated histidine and histidine methyl ester: combined 
experimental mass spectrometry and theoretical ab initio study.

Kovacevic B(1), Rozman M, Klasinc L, Srzic D, Maksic ZB, Yañez M.

Author information: 
(1)Quantum Organic Chemistry Group and Laboratory for Chemical Kinetics and
Atmospheric Chemistry, Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Bijenicka 54, HR-10002 Zagreb, 
Croatia. boris@spider.irb.hr

Gas-phase H/D exchange experiments with CD3OD and D2O and quantum chemical ab
initio G3(MP2) calculations were carried out on protonated histidine and
protonated histidine methyl ester in order to elucidate their bonding and
structure. The H/D exchange experiments show that both ions have three equivalent
fast hydrogens and one appreciably slower exchangeable hydrogen assigned to the
protonated amino group participating in a strong intramolecular hydrogen bond
(IHB) with the nearest N(sp2) nitrogen of the imidazole fragment and to the
distal ring NH-group, respectively. It is taken for granted that the proton
exchange in the IHB is much faster than the H/D exchange. Unlike in other
protonated amino acids (glycine, proline, phenylalanine, tyrosine, and
tryptophan) studied earlier, the exchange rate of the carboxyl group in
protonated histidine is slower than that of the amino group. The most stable
conformers and the enthalpies of neutral and protonated histidine and its methyl 
ester are calculated at the G3(MP2) level of theory. It is shown that strong
intramolecular hydrogen bonding between the amino group and the imidazole ring
nitrogen sites is responsible for the stability and specific properties of the
protonated histidine. It is found that the proton fluctuates between the amino
and imidazole groups in the protonated form across an almost vanishing barrier.
Proton affinity (PA) of histidine calculated by the G3(MP2) method is 233.2 and
232.4 kcal mol(-1) for protonation at the imidazole ring and at the amino group
nitrogens, respectively, which is about 3-5 kcal mol(-1) lower than the reported 
experimental value.

PMID: 16834223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Phys Chem A. 2005 Jun 30;109(25):5683-8.

C-H...N and C-H...S hydrogen bonds--influence of hybridization on their strength.

Domagala M(1), Grabowski SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Crystallography and Crystal Chemistry, University of Lódz,
Pomorska 149/153, PL-90236 Lódz, Poland.

Simple complexes connected through C-H...S and C-H...N interactions are
investigated: CH4...NH3, C2H4...NH3, C2H2...NH3, CH4...SH2, C2H4...SH2, and
C2H2...SH2. Ab initio and DFT calculations are performed (SCF, MP2, B3LYP) using 
different basis sets up to the MP2/aug-cc-pVQZ//MP2/aug-cc-pVDZ level of
approximation. The Bader theory is applied since MP2/6-311++G(d,p) wave functions
are used to find and to characterize bond critical points in terms of electron
densities and their Laplacians. The influence of hybridization on the properties 
of C-H...S and C-H...N systems is also studied showing that the strength of such 
interactions increases in the following order: C(sp3)-H...Y, C(sp2)-H...Y,
C(sp)-H...Y, where Y = S, N--it is in line with the previous findings on C-H...O 
hydrogen bonds. The results also show that CH4...SH2 and C2H4...SH2 complexes
should be rather classified as van der Waals interactions and not as hydrogen
bonds. The frequency associated with the C-H stretch of C(sp3)-H...S is
blue-shifted.

PMID: 16833901  [PubMed]


163. J Phys Chem A. 2005 Jun 16;109(23):5085-92.

Reactivity and core-ionization energies in conjugated dienes. Carbon 1s
photoelectron spectroscopy of 1,3-pentadiene.

Thomas TD(1), Saethre LJ, Børve KJ, Gundersen M, Kukk E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon
97331-4003, USA. T.Darrah.Thomas@oregonstate.edu

The high-resolution carbon 1s photoelectron spectrum of trans-1,3-pentadiene has 
been resolved into contributions from the five inequivalent carbon atoms, and
carbon 1s ionization energies have been assigned to each of these atoms. Spectra 
have also been measured for propene and 1,3-butadiene at better resolution than
has previously been available. The ionization energies for the sp2 carbons are
found to correlate well with activation energies for electrophilic addition and
with proton affinities. Comparing the results for 1,3-pentadiene with those for
ethene, propene, and 1,3-butadiene as well as with results of theoretical
calculations makes it is possible to assess the effect of the terminal methyl
group in 1,3-pentadiene. As in propene, the methyl group contributes electrons to
the beta carbon through the pi system. In addition, there is a significant
(though smaller) contribution from the methyl group to the terminal (delta) CH2
carbon, also through the pi system. Most of the effect of the methyl group is
present in the ground-state molecule. There are only relatively small
contributions from the methyl group to the ionization energies from
redistribution of charge in the pi system in response to the removal of a core
electron. In addition to these specific effects, there is an overall decrease in 
average ionization energy as the size of the molecule increases as well as
effects that are specific to the conjugated systems in 1,3-butadiene and
1,3-pentadiene. The results provide insight into the reactivity and
regioselectivity of conjugated dienes.

PMID: 16833862  [PubMed]


164. J Phys Chem A. 2005 Jun 2;109(21):4705-12.

Infrared spectra of a species of astrochemical interest: aminoacrylonitrile
(3-amino-2-propenenitrile).

Benidar A(1), Guillemin JC, Mó O, Yañez M.

Author information: 
(1)PALMS, UMR CNRS 6627, Université de Rennes 1, 35042 Rennes, France,
Laboratoire de Synthèse et Activation de Biomolécules, UMR CNRS 6052, ENSCR,
Institut de Chimie de Rennes, 35700 Rennes, France.

Ammonia easily reacts on cyanoacetylene in the gas phase or in a solvent to form 
the Z- and E-isomers of aminoacrylonitrile (3-amino-2-propenenitrile, 2). This
kinetically stable enamine presents interest for its possible presence in the
interstellar medium, the comets, the atmospheres of Planets including the
Primitive Earth, and from a theoretical point of view. B3LYP/6-311+G(3df,2p) and 
G2 calculations indicate that the imine isomer is significantly less stable than 
the enamine 2. DFT and G2 calculations indicate that the Z-isomer of compound 2
lies ca. 8.0 kJ mol(-1) lower in energy than the E-isomer. The infrared spectra
of the aminoacrylonitrile, in both the gas and condensed phases were recorded in 
the range 500-4000 cm(-1). Consistent with the theoretical calculations, the
imine and the E-isomer of the enamine have never been detected in the infrared
spectrum of a gaseous sample and only the Z-isomer has been observed. With a neat
sample in the condensed phase, IR spectra of a 1:1 and 20:1/Z:E mixtures were
recorded. The comparison of these data with the spectrum of the Z-isomer in the
gas phase allowed us to deduce the IR spectrum of the E-isomer. The E-Z
isomerization takes place through a torsion around the C=C bond. A possible
mechanism involving a previous enamine-imine tautomerism must be discarded
because it implies a much larger barrier than the direct isomerization process.
Consistently, the presence of a deuterium atom has not been observed on the sp2
carbon of the products of distillation of a 1:1/E:Z mixture of the NCCH=CHND2.

PMID: 16833811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Phys Chem A. 2005 May 5;109(17):3822-9.

Structural and conformational properties of 2-propenylgermane (allylgermane)
studied by microwave and infrared spectroscopy and quantum chemical calculations.

Horn A(1), Møllendal H, Demaison J, Petitprez D, Aviles Moreno JR, Benidar A,
Guillemin JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Oslo, P.O. Box 1033 Blindern, NO-0315
Oslo, Norway.

The structural and conformational properties of allylgermane have been
investigated using Stark and Fourier transform microwave spectroscopies, infrared
spectroscopy, and high-level quantum chemical calculations. The parent species
H2C=CHCH2GeH3 was investigated by microwave spectroscopy and infrared
spectroscopy, while three deuterated species, namely, H2C=CDCH2GeH3,
H2C=CHCHDGeH3, and H2C=CHCH2GeD3, were studied only by infrared spectroscopy. The
microwave spectra of the ground vibrational state as well as of the first excited
state of the torsion vibration around the sp2-sp3 carbon-carbon bond were
assigned for the 70Ge, 72Ge, and 74Ge isotopomers of one conformer. This rotamer 
has an anticlinal arrangement for the C=C-C-Ge chain of atoms. The infrared
spectrum of the gas in the 500-4000 cm(-1) range has been assigned. No evidence
of additional rotameric forms other than anticlinal was seen in the microwave and
infrared spectra. Several different high-level ab initio and density functional
theory calculations have been performed. These calculations indicate that a less 
stable form, having a synperiplanar conformation of the C=C-C-Ge link of atoms,
may coexist with the anticlinal form. The energy differences between the
synperiplanar and anticlinal forms were calculated to be 5.6-9.2 kJ/mol depending
on the computational procedure. The best approximation of the equilibrium
structure of the anticlinal rotamer was found in the MP2/aug-cc-pVTZ
calculations. The barrier to internal rotation of the germyl group was found to
be 6.561(17) kJ/mol, from measurements of the splitting of microwave transitions 
caused by tunneling of the germyl group through its threefold barrier.

PMID: 16833698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Phys Chem A. 2005 Jan 27;109(3):520-33.

Flexibility of "polyunsaturated fatty acid chains" and peptide backbones: A
comparative ab initio study.

Law JM(1), Setiadi DH, Chass GA, Csizmadia IG, Viskolcz B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S
3H6, USA.

The conformational properties of omega-3 type of polyunsaturated fatty acid
(PUFA) chains and their fragments were studied using Hartree-Fock (RHF/3-21G) and
DFT (B3LYP/6-31G(d)) methods. Comparisons between a unit (U) fragment of the PUFA
chain and a mono N-Ac-glycine-NHMe residue show that both structures have the
same sequence of sp2-sp3-sp2 atoms. The flexibility of PUFA originates in the
internal rotation about the above pairs of sigma bonds. Therefore, potential
energy surfaces (PESs) were generated by a scan around the terminal dihedral
angles (phi t1 and phi t2) as well as the phi 1 and psi 1 dihedrals of both 1U
congeners (Me-CHCH-CH2-CHCHMe and MeCONH-CH2-CONHMe) at the RHF/3-21G level of
theory. An interesting similarity was found in the flexibility between the cis
allylic structure and the trans peptide models. A flat landscape can be seen in
the cis 1U (hepta-2,5-diene) surface, implying that several conformations are
expected to be found in this (PES). An exhaustive search carried out on the 1U
and 2U models revealed that straight chain structures such as trans and cis beta 
(phi 1 approximately psi 1 approximately 120 degrees; phi 2 approximately psi 2
approximately -120 degrees) or trans and cis extended (phi 1 approximately psi 1 
approximately phi 2 approximately psi 2 approximately 120 degrees) can be formed 
at the lowest energy of both isomers. However, forming helical structures, such
as trans helix (phi 1 approximately -120 degrees, psi 1 approximately 12 degrees;
phi 2 approximately -120 degrees, psi 2 approximately 12 degrees) or cis helix
(phi 1 approximately -130 degrees, psi 1 approximately 90 degrees; phi 2
approximately -145 degrees, psi 2 approximately 90 degrees) will require more
energy. These six conformations, found in 2U, were selected to construct longer
chains such as 3U, 4U, 5U, and 6U to obtain the thermochemistry of secondary
structures. The variation in the extension or compression of the chain length
turned out to be a factor of 2 between the helical and nonhelical structures. The
inside diameter of the "tube" of cis helix turned out to be 3.5 A after
discounting the internal H atoms. Thermodynamic functions were computed at the
B3LYP/6-311+G(2d,p)//B3LYP/6-31G(d). The cis-trans isomerization energy of 1.7
+/- 0.2 kcal mol(-1) unit(-1) for all structure pairs indicates that the
conformer selection was consistent. A folding energy of 0.5 +/- 0.1 kcal mol(-1) 
unit(-1) has been extracted from the energy comparison of the helices and most
extended nonhelical structures. The entropy change associated with the folding
(Delta S(folding)) is decreases faster with the degree of polymerization (n) for 
the cis than for the trans isomer. As a consequence, the linear relationships
between (Delta G(folding)) and n for the cis and trans isomer crossed at about n 
= 3. This suggested that the naturally occurring cis isomer less ready to fold
than the trans isomer since a greater degree of organization is exhibited by the 
cis isomer during the folding process. The result of this work leads to the
question within the group additivity rule: could the method applied in our study 
of the folding of polyallylic hydrocarbons be useful in investigating the
thermochemistry of protein folding?

PMID: 16833374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Phys Chem A. 2005 Jan 20;109(2):394-9.

Molecular structure and internal rotation in 2,3,5,6-tetrafluoroanisole as
studied by gas-phase electron diffraction and quantum chemical calculations.

Belyakov AV(1), Kieninger M, Cachau RE, Ventura ON, Oberhammer H.

Author information: 
(1)St. Petersburg State Technological Institute, 190013, St. Petersburg, Russia.

The geometric structure of 2,3,5,6-tetrafluoroanisole and the potential function 
for internal rotation around the C(sp2)-O bond were determined by gas electron
diffraction (GED) and quantum chemical calculations. Analysis of the GED
intensities with a static model resulted in near-perpendicular orientation of the
O-CH3 bond relative to the benzene plane with a torsional angle around the
C(sp2)-O bond of tau(C-O) = 67(15) degrees. With a dynamic model, a wide
single-minimum potential for internal rotation around the C(sp2)-O bond with
perpendicular orientation of the methoxy group [tau(C-O) = 90 degrees] and a
barrier of 2.7 +/- 1.6 kcal/mol at planar orientation [tau(C-O) = 0 degrees] was 
derived. Calculated potential functions depend strongly on the computational
method (HF, MP2, or B3LYP) and converge adequately only if large basis sets are
used. The electronic energy curves show internal structure, with local minima
appearing because of the interplay between electron delocalization, changes in
the hybridization around the oxygen atom, and the attraction between the
positively polarized hydrogen atoms in the methyl group and the fluorine atom at 
the ortho position. The internal structure of the electronic energy curves mostly
disappears if zero-point energies and thermal corrections are added. The
calculated free energy barrier at 298 K is 2.0 +/- 1.0 kcal/mol, in good
agreement with the experimental determination.

PMID: 16833358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Public Health Rep. 2006 Jul-Aug;121(4):435-44.

Assessing intimate partner violence in health care settings leads to women's
receipt of interventions and improved health.

McCloskey LA(1), Lichter E, Williams C, Gerber M, Wittenberg E, Ganz M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Social Policy & Practice, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia
19104, USA. lmcclosk@sp2.upenn.edu

OBJECTIVE: This study investigated whether disclosure of violence to health care 
providers and the receipt of interventions relate to women's exit from an abusive
relationship and to their improved health.
METHODS: A volunteer sample of 132 women outpatients who described intimate
partner violence during the preceding year were recruited from multiple hospital 
departments and community agencies in suburban and urban metropolitan Boston.
Through in-person interviews, women provided information on demographics, past
year exposure to violence, past year receipt of interventions, and whether they
disclosed partner violence to their health care provider. They also described
their past month health status with the 12-Item Short-Form Health Survey and
further questions.
RESULTS: Of the 132 women, 44% had exited the abusive relationship. Among those
who were no longer with their partner, 55% received a domestic violence
intervention (e.g. advocacy, shelter, restraining order), compared with 37% of
those who remained with their partner. Talking to their health care provider
about the abuse increased women's likelihood of using an intervention (odds ratio
[OR]=3.9). Those who received interventions were more likely to subsequently exit
(OR=2.6) and women no longer with the abuser reported better physical health
based on SF-12 summary scores (p=0.05) than women who stayed.
CONCLUSIONS: Health care providers may make positive contributions to women's
access to intimate partner violence services. Intimate partner violence
interventions relate to women's reduced exposure to violence and better health.

PMCID: PMC1525344
PMID: 16827445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Agric Food Chem. 2006 Jul 12;54(14):4948-53.

Development of a monoclonal antibody-based enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for 
the herbicide chlorimuron-ethyl.

Zhao J(1), Yi GX, He SP, Wang BM, Yu CX, Li G, Zhai ZX, Li ZH, Li QX.

Author information: 
(1)College of Agronomy and Biotechnology, China Agricultural University, Beijing 
100094, China.

Hybridomas secreting a monoclonal antibody (mAb) against the herbicide
chlorimuron-ethyl (CE) were produced by fusing the mouse myeloma cell line
(SP2/0) with splenocytes from a mouse immunized against the conjugate of the
sulfonamide moiety of CE and bovine serum albumin (BSA). The mAb, designated
1F5C5A10, had very weak affinity with metsulfuron, ethametsulfuron,
pyrazosulfuron, bensulfuron, and chlorsulfuron. Two mAb-based indirect
competitive enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (icELISA) were developed. A
conventional icELISA (icELISA-I) showed a concentration of half-maximum
inhibition (IC(50)) of 11.6 ng/mL with a dynamic range of 1.6-84 ng/mL. A
simplified icELISA (icELISA-II) had an IC(50) of 28.7 ng/mL and a dynamic range
of 2.2-372 ng/mL. The two assays were tested on spiked water and soil samples. CE
(1-500 ng/mL) fortified in water samples could be analyzed directly without any
sample preparation by both immunoassays with an average recovery between 74 and
114%. icELISA-II, but not icELISA-I, was able to accurately analyze the herbicide
residues in the crude soil extracts with recoveries between 99 and 129% without
obvious matrix effects due to its lesser amount of sample used. In contrast to
icELISA-I, icELISA-II is more convenient, whereas it consumes more reagents of
coating antigen and goat anti-mouse IgG-peroxidase.

PMID: 16819901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Hum Genet. 2006 Sep;120(2):262-9. Epub 2006 Jul 1.

A maternal hypomethylation syndrome presenting as transient neonatal diabetes
mellitus.

Mackay DJ(1), Boonen SE, Clayton-Smith J, Goodship J, Hahnemann JM, Kant SG,
Njølstad PR, Robin NH, Robinson DO, Siebert R, Shield JP, White HE, Temple IK.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
SP2 8BJ, UK.

The expression of imprinted genes is mediated by allele-specific epigenetic
modification of genomic DNA and chromatin, including parent of origin-specific
DNA methylation. Dysregulation of these genes causes a range of disorders
affecting pre- and post-natal growth and neurological function. We investigated a
cohort of 12 patients with transient neonatal diabetes whose disease was caused
by loss of maternal methylation at the TNDM locus. We found that six of these
patients showed a spectrum of methylation loss, mosaic with respect to the extent
of the methylation loss, the tissues affected and the genetic loci involved. Five
maternally methylated loci were affected, while one maternally methylated and two
paternally methylated loci were spared. These patients had higher birth weight
and were more phenotypically diverse than other TNDM patients with different
aetiologies, presumably reflecting the influence of dysregulation of multiple
imprinted genes. We propose the existence of a maternal hypomethylation syndrome,
and therefore suggest that any patient with methylation loss at one
maternally-methylated locus may also manifest methylation loss at other loci,
potentially complicating or even confounding the clinical presentation.

PMID: 16816970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Jul;22(4):517-20.

[Preparation and characterization of monoclonal antibody against human LSECtin].

[Article in Chinese]

Du XM(1), Tang L, Liu XL, Chen Y, Gao JE, He FC, Sun QH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing
100850, China.

AIM: To prepare and characterize monoclonal antibody (mAb) against human LSECtin 
(liver and lymph node sinusoidal endothelial cell C-type lectin) protein.
METHODS: BALB/c mice were immunized with prokaryotically expressed human LSECtin 
protein. The splenocytes from the immunized mice were fused with murine myeloma
cells (Sp2/0) and then the mAb-positive hybridoma cells were screened by indirect
ELISA. Reaction of mAb to LSECtin antigen was characterized by Western blot,
indirect immunofluorescent staining, immunohistochemical staining and FCM.
RESULTS: Eight hybridoma cells secreting mAbs were established. The isotypes of
the mAbs were IgG. Ascites titers were between 1:10(6) - 1:10(7). All the mAbs
recognized human LSECtin protein on LSECtin-transfected 3T3 cells and six of the 
mAbs specifically recognized liver sinusoidal endothelial cells.
CONCLUSION: Eight anti-LSECtin mAbs have been obtained. The characterization of
the mAbs indicate that they show fine specificity by Western blot, indirect
immunofluorescent staining, immunohistochemical staining and FCM, which can
provide a powerful reagent for the functional study of LSECtin.

PMID: 16806021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Jul 5;128(26):8414-5.

A highly efficient preparative method of alpha-ylidene-beta-diketones via
Au(III)-catalyzed acyl migration of propargylic esters.

Wang S(1), Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry/216, University of Nevada-Reno, 1664 North Virginia
Street, Reno, NV 89557, USA.

Erratum in
    J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Aug 2;128(30):9979.

A highly efficient synthesis of alpha-alkylidene or benzylidene-beta-diketones
from readily available propargylic esters has been developed. The proposed key
transformation is a novel intramolecular acyl migration to nucleophilic
AuIII-C(sp2) bonds. Noteworthy features of this method are its efficiency and
stereoselectivity. The yields of this reaction were mostly close to quantitative,
and high to excellent stereoselectivities were observed in the cases of dienyl
beta-diketones.

PMID: 16802803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Phys Chem B. 2006 Jun 29;110(25):12293-301.

One-dimensional zigzag chains of Cs-: the structures and properties of Li+
(cryptand[2.1.1])Cs- and Cs+ (cryptand[2.2.2])Cs-.

Ichimura AS(1), Huang RH, Xie Q, Morganelli P, Burns A, Dye JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, San Francisco State University, 1600
Holloway Avenue, San Francisco, California 94132, USA. ichimura@sfsu.edu

The crystal structure and properties of lithium (cryptand[2.1.1]) ceside, Li+
(C211)Cs-, are reported. Li+ (C211)Cs- is the second ceside and third alkalide
with a one-dimensional (1D) zigzag chain of alkali metal anions. The distance
between adjacent Cs- anions, 6 A, is shorter than the sum of the van der Waals
radii, 7 A. Optical, magic angle spinning NMR, two-probe alternating and direct
current conductivity, and electron paramagnetic resonance measurements reveal
unique physical properties that result from the overlap of adjacent Cs- wave
functions in the chain structure. The properties of cesium (cryptand[2.2.2])
ceside, Cs+ (C222)Cs-, were also studied to compare the effects of the subtle
geometric changes between the two 1D zigzag chain structures. Li+ (C211)Cs- and
Cs+ (C222)Cs- are both low-band-gap semiconductors with anisotropic
reflectivities and large paramagnetic 133Cs NMR chemical shifts relative to Cs-
(g). An electronic structure model consistent with the experimental data has
sp2-hybridized Cs- within the chain and sp-hybridized chain ends. Ab initio
multiconfiguration self-consistent field calculations on the ceside trimer,
Cs3(3-), support this model and indicate a net bonding interaction between
nearest neighbors. The buildup of electron density between adjacent Cs- anions is
visualized through an electron density difference map constructed by subtracting 
the density of three cesium atoms from the short Cs3(3-) fragment.

PMID: 16800551  [PubMed]


174. J Bone Joint Surg Br. 2006 Jul;88(7):949-50.

The Thompson hemiarthroplasty: a new problem for an old favourite.

Lloyd JM(1), Calder JD.

Author information: 
(1)Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP2 8QX, UK.
jelloyd1@btinternet.com

The Thompson hemiarthroplasty is a popular hip prosthesis. We present two case
reports highlighting a significant alteration in the design of the implant which 
compromised the success of the operations. In recent years the manufacturing
process of this prosthesis has changed, with a resultant increase in the volume
of the stem of 10 ml. It is essential that manufacturers inform orthopaedic
surgeons of any alteration in the design of the implant and supply compatible
instrumentation to minimise surgical errors. Surgeons must remain vigilant when
checking the compatibility of the trial and definitive prostheses.

PMID: 16799002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2006 Jun;14(2):229-33.

Development of new rabbit monoclonal antibody to progesterone receptor (Clone
SP2): no heat pretreatment but effective for paraffin section
immunohistochemistry.

Huang Z(1), Zhu W, Meng Y, Xia H.

Author information: 
(1)Spring Bioscience Corporation, Fremont, California, USA.

Evaluation of estrogen and progesterone receptor (ER, PgR) status in breast
cancer is widely used for the prediction of the response to endocrine therapy and
as a biologic parameter closely related to disease prognosis. The IHC method is
considered to be a specific, sensitive, and economical method for determining ER 
and PgR status. The authors developed the first rabbit anti-PgR mAb (clone SP2)
used in IHC on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sections from breast
carcinomas. This new antibody, compared with currently available anti-PgR
antibodies, has important advantages, including its reactivity even without
heat-based antigen retrieval of fixed-embedded tissue sections in IHC and the
predominance of nuclear immunostaining with only very low cytoplasmic signal. A
comparative study of IHC on 107 histologic specimens from breast cancer cases
showed that SP2 yields the same results as the wellknown mouse mAb to PgR (clone 
1A6). The antibody affinity of SP2 is 12 times higher than that of 1A6. Thus, SP2
may prove of great value in the assessment of PgR status in human breast cancer.

PMID: 16785796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Biochem J. 2006 Sep 15;398(3):411-21.

Differential expression of a C-terminal splice variant of phosphatidylinositol
transfer protein beta lacking the constitutive-phosphorylated Ser262 that
localizes to the Golgi compartment.

Morgan CP(1), Allen-Baume V, Radulovic M, Li M, Skippen A, Cockcroft S.

Author information: 
(1)Lipid Signalling Group, Department of Physiology, University College London,
21 University Street, Rockefeller Building, London WC1E 6JJ, UK.

Mammalian PITPbeta (phosphatidylinositol transfer protein beta) is a
272-amino-acid polypeptide capable of transferring PtdIns, PtdCho and SM
(sphingomyelin) between membrane bilayers. It has been reported that Ser262
present in the C-terminus of PITPbeta is constitutively phosphorylated and
determines Golgi localization. We provide evidence for the expression of an sp
(splice) variant of PITPbeta (PITPbeta-sp2) where the C-terminal 15 amino acids
of PITPbeta-sp1 are replaced by an alternative C-terminus of 16 amino acids.
PITPbeta-sp1 is the product of the first 11 exons, whereas PITPbeta-sp2 is a
product of the first 10 exons followed by the twelfth exon--exon 11 being
'skipped'. Both splice variants are capable of PtdIns and PtdCho transfer, with
PITPbeta-sp2 being unable to transport SM. PITPbeta is ubiquitously expressed,
with the highest amounts of PITPbeta found in HL60 cells and in rat liver; HL60
cells express only PITPbeta-sp1, whereas rat liver expresses both sp variants in 
similar amounts. In both cell types, PITPbeta-sp1 is constitutively
phosphorylated and both the PtdIns and PtdCho forms of PITPbeta-sp1 are present. 
In contrast, PITPbeta-sp2 lacks the constitutively phosphorylated Ser262
(replaced with glutamine). Nonetheless, both PITPbeta variants localize to the
Golgi and, moreover, dephosphorylation of Ser262 of PITPbeta-sp1 does not affect 
its Golgi localization. The presence of PITPbeta sp variants adds an extra level 
of proteome complexity and, in rat liver, the single gene for PITPbeta gives rise
to seven distinct protein species that can be resolved on the basis of their
charge differences.

PMCID: PMC1559474
PMID: 16780419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Virol. 2006 Jul;80(13):6267-75.

Cumulative mutations of ubiquitin acceptor sites in human immunodeficiency virus 
type 1 gag cause a late budding defect.

Gottwein E(1), Jäger S, Habermann A, Kräusslich HG.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Virologie, Im Neuenheimer Feld 324, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

The p6 domain of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) Gag has long been
known to be monoubiquitinated. We have previously shown that the MA, CA, and NC
domains are also monoubiquitinated at low levels (E. Gottwein and H. G.
Krausslich, J. Virol. 79:9134-9144, 2005). While several lines of evidence
support a role for ubiquitin in virus release, the relevance of Gag
ubiquitination is unclear. To directly address the function of Gag
ubiquitination, we constructed Gag variants in which lysine residues in the NC,
SP2, and p6 domains were mutated to arginine either in individual domains or in
combination. Using these mutants, we showed that in addition to MA, CA, NC, and
p6, SP2 is also mono- or di-ubiquitinated at levels comparable to those of the
other domains. Replacement of all lysine residues in only one of the domains had 
minor effects on virus release, while cumulative mutations in NC and SP2 or in NC
and p6 resulted in an accumulation of late budding structures, as observed by
electron microscopy analysis. Strikingly, replacement of all lysine residues
downstream of CA led to a significant reduction in virus release kinetics and a
fivefold accumulation of late viral budding structures compared to wild-type
levels. These results indicate that ubiquitination of lysine residues in Gag in
the vicinity of the viral late domain is important for HIV-1 budding, while no
specific lysine residue may be needed and individual domains can functionally
substitute. This is consistent with Gag ubiquitination being functionally
involved in a transient protein interaction network at the virus budding site.

PMCID: PMC1488962
PMID: 16775314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Jun 21;128(24):8068-77.

Cobalt-catalyzed trimethylsilylmethylmagnesium-promoted radical alkenylation of
alkyl halides: a complement to the Heck reaction.

Affo W(1), Ohmiya H, Fujioka T, Ikeda Y, Nakamura T, Yorimitsu H, Oshima K,
Imamura Y, Mizuta T, Miyoshi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Material Chemistry, Graduate School of Engineering, Kyoto
University, Kyoto-daigaku Katsura, Kyoto 615-8510, Japan.

A cobalt complex, [CoCl2(dpph)] (DPPH = [1,6-bis(diphenylphosphino)hexane]),
catalyzes an intermolecular styrylation reaction of alkyl halides in the presence
of Me3SiCH2MgCl in ether to yield beta-alkylstyrenes. A variety of alkyl halides 
including alkyl chlorides can participate in the styrylation. A radical mechanism
is strongly suggested for the styrylation reaction. The sequential
isomerization/styrylation reactions of cyclopropylmethyl bromide and
6-bromo-1-hexene provide evidence of the radical mechanism. Crystallographic and 
spectroscopic investigations on cobalt complexes reveal that the reaction would
begin with single electron transfer from an electron-rich
(diphosphine)bis(trimethylsilylmethyl)cobalt(II) complex followed by reductive
elimination to yield 1,2-bis(trimethylsilyl)ethane and a (diphosphine)cobalt(I)
complex. The combination of [CoCl2(dppb)] (DPPB =
[1,4-bis(diphenylphosphino)butane]) catalyst and Me3SiCH2MgCl induces
intramolecular Heck-type cyclization reactions of 6-halo-1-hexenes via a radical 
process. On the other hand, the intramolecular cyclization of the prenyl ether of
2-iodophenol would proceed in a fashion similar to the conventional
palladium-catalyzed transformation. The nonradical oxidative addition of
carbon(sp2)-halogen bonds to cobalt is separately verified by a cobalt-catalyzed 
cross-coupling reaction of alkenyl halides with Me3SiCH2MgCl with retention of
configuration of the starting vinyl halides. The cobalt-catalyzed intermolecular 
radical styrylation reaction of alkyl halides is applied to stereoselective
variants. Styrylations of 1-alkoxy-2-bromocyclopentane derivatives provide
trans-1-alkoxy-2-styrylcyclopentane skeletons, one of which is optically pure.

PMID: 16771523  [PubMed]


179. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Jun 21;128(24):7758-60.

Combined hydrogen production and storage with subsequent carbon crystallization.

Lueking AD(1), Gutierrez HR, Fonseca DA, Narayanan DL, Van Essendelft D, Jain P, 
Clifford CE.

Author information: 
(1)The Pennsylvania State University, 120 Hosler, University Park, Pennsylvania
16802-5000, USA. adl11@psu.edu

We provide evidence of low-temperature hydrogen evolution and possible hydrogen
trapping in an anthracite coal derivative, formed via reactive ball milling with 
cyclohexene. No molecular hydrogen is added to the process. Raman-active
molecular hydrogen vibrations are apparent in samples at atmospheric conditions
(300 K, 1 bar) for samples prepared 1 year previously and stored in ambient air. 
Hydrogen evolves slowly at room temperature and is accelerated upon sample
heating, with a first increase in hydrogen evolution occurring at approximately
60 degrees C. Subsequent chemical modification leads to the observation of
crystalline carbons, including nanocrystalline diamond surrounded by graphene
ribbons, other sp2-sp3 transition regions, purely graphitic regions, and a
previously unidentified crystalline carbon form surrounded by amorphous carbon.
The combined evidence for hydrogen trapping and carbon crystallization suggests
hydrogen-induced crystallization of the amorphous carbon materials, as metastable
hydrogenated carbons formed via the high-energy milling process rearrange into
more thermodynamically stable carbon forms and molecular hydrogen.

PMID: 16771488  [PubMed]


180. J Immunol Methods. 2006 Jun 30;313(1-2):20-8. Epub 2006 Mar 29.

Preparation and identification of anti-2, 4-dinitrophenyl monoclonal antibodies.

Yang T(1), Zhong P, Qu L, Wang C, Yuan Y.

Author information: 
(1)Lab of Space Cellular & Molecular Biology, Institute of Space
Medico-Engineering, Beijing, China. y_t_b@hotmail.com

2, 4-Dinitrophenyl (DNP) is a widely used hapten in molecular biology and
immunoassay fields. Considering that 2, 4-dintrophenylhydrazine (DNPH) could be
used as DNA probe and bind with protein carbonyl to form a stable 2
4-dinitrophenyl (DNP) hydrazone product, on which the level of oxidative stress
could be validated with a sensitive noncompetitive ELISA, we prepared
DNP-aminocaproic acid and NHS-aminocaproic acid-dinitrobenzene and the conjugates
between DNP and carrier proteins such as bovine thyroglobulin (BTG) and bovine
serum albumin (BSA). High titer antibody producing spleen cells were removed and 
fused with myeloma cells of SP2/0 origin. Using a conventional immunization
protocol, twenty stable murine monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) producing cell lines 
to DNP were generated. The donor mouse produced antiserum with a high titer of
1/1,280,000. Five MAbs were selected for further characterization as class and
subclass. After four successive limiting dilutions, antibodies were produced by
five clones with high affinities ranging from 10(10) to 10(11) M(-1). These
clones were found to be of IgG(1) subclass with kappa and lambda light chain.
Competitive ELISA and SPR-based sensing system for the detection of DNPH are both
used to confirm the specificity of MAb (4D(9)A(9)C(2)C(2)).

PMID: 16765373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Sichuan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2006 May;37(3):474-6.

[Preparation and identification of monoclonal antibody against human GST-Rta150
fusion protein from Epstein-Barr virus].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhu YH(1), Liang WB, Lü ML, Xu YC, Jia J, Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forensic Biology, West China School of Preclinical and Forensic 
Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China.

OBJECTIVE: To prepare a monoclonal antibody (mAb) against GST-Rta150 fusion
protein from EB virus and identify its characteristics.
METHODS: BALB/c mouse was rendered immune by GST-Rta150 fusion protein; after
that, the spleen cells of immunized mouse were taken to fuse with SP2/0 myeloma
cells by a routine method. Then screening for positive hybridoma cells and
subclone. Following that, the hybridoma cells were injected into the peritoneal
cavity of BALB/c mouse. The ascites was collected and purified. The prepared mAb 
was identified by double immunodiffusion method for its subclass; in addition,
its titer and specificity were identified by ELISA and Western-blot,
respectively.
RESULTS: One hybridoma cell line 1A9 which stably secreted mAb against GST-Rta150
fusion protein was obtained. Its Ig subclass belonged to IgG1, the titer degree
of the purified mAb being 10(-6). Western-blot analysis showed the mAb could
combine with GST-Rta150 fusion protein specially. The titer degree of this
hybridoma cell line remained unchanged after frozen in liquid nitrogen (LN) for
three months.
CONCLUSION: The mAb obtained by this method has powerful specificity and high
stability. This work could serve as a foundation on which to study the Rta
protein from EB virus and the diagnosis and treatment of EB virus correlated
diseases.

PMID: 16761438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Adm Policy Ment Health. 2007 Jan;34(1):13-28.

From principles to practice: a study of implementation of supported housing for
psychiatric consumers.

Wong YL(1), Filoromo M, Tennille J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Social Policy & Practice, University of Pennsylvania, 3701 Locust
Walk, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6214, USA. ylwong@sp2.upenn.edu

In the post-deinstitutionalization era, supported housing has emerged as a
housing and service approach considered most conducive to the goal of consumer
empowerment and community integration. Although prior research found beneficial
effects of supported housing, little empirical work has been done on identifying 
the gaps between the principles and practice of supported housing. Using multiple
data sources on 27 supported independent living (SIL) programs for psychiatric
consumers in a large metropolitan community, this paper examines the extent to
which these programs are implemented in accordance with supported housing.
Findings suggest consistency with as well as deviation from the supported housing
approach in regard to consumer choice, typical and normalized housing, resource
accessibility, consumer control and provision of individualized and flexible
support. This study suggests methods for assessing housing programs for
psychiatric consumers along these domains. Implications for the development of
housing programs that promote consumer empowerment and community integration are 
discussed.

PMID: 16755391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2006 Jun 14;8(22):2572-90. Epub 2006 May 4.

Electron transport and redox reactions in carbon-based molecular electronic
junctions.

McCreery RL(1), Wu J, Kalakodimi RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Ohio State University, 100 W 18th Avenue,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA. mccreery.2@osu.edu

A unique molecular junction design is described, consisting of a molecular mono- 
or multilayer oriented between a conducting carbon substrate and a metallic top
contact. The sp2 hybridized graphitic carbon substrate (pyrolyzed photoresist
film, PPF) is flat on the scale of the molecular dimensions, and the molecular
layer is bonded to the substrate via diazonium ion reduction to yield a strong,
conjugated C-C bond. Molecular junctions were completed by electron-beam
deposition of copper, titanium oxide, or aluminium oxide followed by a final
conducting layer of gold. Vibrational spectroscopy and XPS of completed junctions
showed minimal damage to the molecular layer by metal deposition, although some
electron transfer to the molecular layer resulted in partial reduction in some
cases. Device yield was high (>80%), and the standard deviations of junction
electronic properties such as low voltage resistance were typically in the range 
of 10-20%. The resistance of PPF/molecule/Cu/Au junctions exhibited a strong
dependence on the structure and thickness of the molecular layer, ranging from
0.13 ohms cm2 for a nitrobiphenyl monolayer, to 4.46 ohms cm2 for a biphenyl
monolayer, and 160 ohms cm2 for a 4.3 nm thick nitrobiphenyl multilayer.
Junctions containing titanium or aluminium oxide had dramatically lower
conductance than their PPF/molecule/Cu counterparts, with aluminium oxide
junctions exhibiting essentially insulating behavior. However, in situ Raman
spectroscopy of PPF/nitroazobenzene/AlO(x)/Au junctions with partially
transparent metal contacts revealed that redox reactions occurred under bias,
with nitroazobenzene (NAB) reduction occurring when the PPF was biased negative
relative to the Au. Similar redox reactions were observed in PPF/NAB/TiO(x)/Au
molecular junctions, but they were accompanied by major effects on electronic
behavior, such as rectification and persistent conductance switching. Such
switching was evident following polarization of PPF/molecule/TiO2/Au junctions by
positive or negative potential pulses, and the resulting conductance changes
persisted for several minutes at room temperature. The "memory" effect implied by
these observations is attributed to a combination of the molecular layer and the 
TiO2 properties, namely metastable "trapping" of electrons in the TiO2 when the
Au is negatively biased.

PMID: 16738711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Jun 7;128(22):7144-5.

Electrochemical performance of angstrom level flat sputtered carbon film
consisting of sp2 and sp3 mixed bonds.

Niwa O(1), Jia J, Sato Y, Kato D, Kurita R, Maruyama K, Suzuki K, Hirono S.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Tskuba
Central 6, 1-1-1 Higashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8566, Japan. niwa.o@aist.go.jp

We have developed ultra-flat carbon film electrodes with a wide potential window 
and a low capacitive current by the electron cyclotron resonance (ECR) sputtering
method. The film consists of sp2 and sp3 bonds (sp3/sp2 ratio = 0.702) and is
sufficiently conductive for electrochemical measurements without doping. The film
has average roughness of 0.7 A, which is much flatter than that of
nanocrystalline diamond film. The potential limit of ECR sputtered carbon
(current limit < +/-500 muA/cm2) in the positive direction is 2.0 V vs Ag/AgCl,
which is slightly lower than that of boron-doped diamond (2.1 V) and much wider
than that of a glassy carbon (GC) electrode (1.7 V). In contrast, a much wider
potential window can be obtained in the negative direction. The capacitive
current is also much lower than that of a GC electrode due to the ultra-flat
surface and the low number of oxygen-containing groups at the film surface. ECR
sputtered carbon film can be used to measure each base of oligonucleotides by
electrochemical oxidation without any pretreatment. The ultra-flat surface and
low surface oxygen concentration suppress fouling with electroactive species,
such as oligonucleotides, NADH, and bisphenol A.

PMID: 16734451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Feb;27(2):111-5.

[Recombinant eukaryotic expression plasmid of bcr-abl gene fragment induces
specific immune response in mice].

[Article in Chinese]

Jiang YW(1), Qian L, Gong WJ, Liu W, Jiang GH, Ji MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Affiliated Hospital of Yangzhou University,
Yangzhou 225001, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the specific immune response induced by a recombinant
eukaryotic expression plasmid encoding bcr-abl fusion gene fragment so as to
explore new immunotherapy in mouse.
METHODS: A recombinant eukaryotic vector pVbcr-abl expression cDNA fragment of
bcr-abl fusion gene was constructed and used to immunize BALB/c mice. Serum level
of bcr-abl specific antibody was detected by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA). Twenty days later the immunized mice were subcutaneously inoculated
SP2/0/bcr-abl cells. The survival time, tumor growth time and lymphocytic
infiltration were observed. T cells infiltration into tumor tissue was analyzed
by immunohistochemistry. Changes of T cell subset in the spleen of mice was
analyzed by fluorescent-activated cell sorting (FACS) and the cytotoxicity T
lymphocyte (CTL) activity in spleen by lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)-release assay.
RESULTS: The eukaryotic expression vector pVbcr-abl was constructed successfully,
and highly expressed the cDNA fragment of bcr-abl fusion gene. The BALB/c mice
immunized with the vector could generate the specific antibody and CTL, resulting
in a specific immunoprotection. There were dramatic differences in the
tumor-forming time, tumor ulcer appearing time and tumor-growing speed between
the immunized and the control groups. The mice had longer survival time in the
immunized group than in the control group. There were a large amount of CD3(+) T 
cells infiltration in tumor tissue of the immunized mice. The spleen cells from
the immunized mice had higher CTL activity with a alteration of T cell subset,
the CD4(+)/CD8(+) ratio being 1.54 +/- 0.29, higher than that of control group
(1.18 +/- 0.30).
CONCLUSION: The recombinant eukaryotic expression plasmid pVbcr-abl can induce in
vivo not only the generation of specific antibody, but also high level of
specific CTL activity, resulting in killing the SP2/0/bcr-abl tumor cells
directly and inhibiting the tumor growth.

PMID: 16732966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Int Wound J. 2004 Dec;1(4):225-30.

Telemedicine in wound healing.

Jones SM(1), Banwell PE, Shakespeare PG.

Author information: 
(1)Odstock Burns, Wound Healing & Reconstructive Surgery Charitable Trust, Laing 
Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, UK.

Comment in
    Int Wound J. 2005 Sep;2(3):239-40.

Better care for patients and improved health care depends on the availability of 
good information which is accessible when and where it is needed. The development
of technology, more specifically the Internet, has expanded the means whereby
information can be acquired and transmitted over large distances enabling the
concept of telemedicine to become a reality. Telemedicine, defined as the
practise of medicine at a distance, encompasses diagnosis, education and
treatment. It is a technology that many thought would expand rapidly and change
the face of medicine. However, this has not happened and during the last decade
although certain telemedicine applications, such as video-consulting and
teleradiology, have matured to become essential health care services in some
countries, others, such as telepathology, remain the subject of intensive
research effort. Telemedicine can be used in almost any medical specialty
although the specialties best suited are those with a high visual component.
Wound healing and wound management is thus a prime candidate for telemedicine.
Development of a suitable telemedical system in this field could have a
significant effect on wound care in the community, tertiary referral patterns and
hospital admission rates.

PMID: 16722871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Immunol Invest. 2006;35(2):227-37.

Investigation of GM-CSF immune accessory effects in tumor-bearing mice by direct 
gene immunization.

Dou J(1), Hong X, Zhao F, Wang J, Chen J, Chen G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogenic Biology and Immunology, Southeast University School
of Basic Medical Science, Nanjing, China. njdoujun@yahoo.com.cn

To assess GM-CSF immune accessory effects in tumor-bearing mice, an animal tumor 
model was established by inoculating SP2/0 myeloma cells s.c. into the flank of
Balb/c mice and 14 days later, injecting either 400 mug recombinant
pcDNA3.1/mGM-CSF or a blank plasmid s.c. or i.m. into the tumor four times. The
tumor weight, the activities of CTL and NK, the serum levels of IFN-gamma, IL-2
and lymphocytes infiltrating in tumor tissue were analysed 8 weeks later with
MTT, ELISA and pathological section methods. The results showed that the tumor
lump was reduced in mice injected s.c. (0.880 +/- 0.405 g) or i.m. (0.378 +/-
0.411 g) with pcDNA3.1/mGM-CSF compared with control mice injected s.c. (1.548
+/- 0.221g, P < 0.01)or i.m. (1.554 +/- 0.249g, P < 0.001) with a blank vector.
Lymphocyte infiltration in tumor tissues was very apparent in mice injected i.m. 
with pcDNA3.1/mGM-CSF. In contrast, there was no lymphocyte infiltration in tumor
tissues of control mice. In addition, the serum concentrations of IFN-gamma, IL-2
and the activities of CTL and NK cells were significantly increased in mice
injected with pcDNA3.1/mGM-CSF compared with a control mice (P < 0.01). In
conclusion, direct gene immunization of recombinant pcDNA3.1/mGM-CSF is a
feasible strategy for tumor therapy.

PMID: 16698679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Carbohydr Res. 2006 Aug 14;341(11):1809-19. Epub 2006 May 15.

A novel oligoalginate lyase from abalone, Haliotis discus hannai, that releases
disaccharide from alginate polymer in an exolytic manner.

Suzuki H(1), Suzuki K, Inoue A, Ojima T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Marine Biotechnology and Microbiology, Graduate School of
Fisheries Sciences, Hokkaido University, Hakodate, Japan.

We previously reported the isolation and cDNA cloning of an endolytic alginate
lyase, HdAly, from abalone Haliotis discus hannai [Carbohydr. Res.2003, 338,
2841-2852]. Although HdAly preferentially degraded mannuronate-rich substrates,
it was incapable of degrading unsaturated oligomannuronates smaller than
tetrasaccharide. In the present study, we used conventional chromatographic
techniques to isolate a novel unsaturated-trisaccharide-degrading enzyme, named
HdAlex, from the digestive fluid of the abalone. The HdAlex showed a molecular
weight of 32,000 on SDS-PAGE and could degrade not only unsaturated trisaccharide
but also alginate and mannuronate-rich polymers at an optimal pH and temperature 
of 7.1 and 42 degrees C, respectively. Upon digestion of alginate polymer, HdAlex
decreased the viscosity of the alginate at a slower rate than did HdAly,
producing only unsaturated disaccharide without any intermediate
oligosaccharides. These results indicate that HdAlex degrades the alginate
polymer in an exolytic manner. Because HdAlex split saturated trisaccharide
producing unsaturated disaccharide, we considered that this enzyme cleaved the
alginate at the second glycoside linkage from the reducing terminus. The primary 
structure of HdAlex was deduced with cDNAs amplified from an abalone
hepatopancreas cDNA library by the polymerase chain reaction. The translational
region of 822 bp in the total 887-bp sequence of HdAlex cDNA encoded an
amino-acid sequence of 273 residues. The N-terminal sequence of 16 residues,
excluding the initiation methionine, was regarded as the signal peptide of this
enzyme. The amino-acid sequence of the remaining 256 residues shared 62-67%
identities with those of the polysaccharide lyase family-14 (PL14) enzymes such
as HdAly and turban-shell alginate lyase SP2. To our knowledge, HdAlex is the
first exolytic oligoalginate lyase belonging to PL14.

PMID: 16697989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Org Chem. 2006 May 12;71(10):3793-803.

Remote substituent effects in ruthenium-catalyzed [2+2] cycloadditions: an
experimental and theoretical study.

Liu P(1), Jordan RW, Kibbee SP, Goddard JD, Tam W.

Author information: 
(1)Guelph-Waterloo Centre for Graduate Work in Chemistry and Biochemistry,
Department of Chemistry, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada N1G 2W1.

The effects of a remote substituent on the regioselectivity of
ruthenium-catalyzed [2+2] cycloadditions of 2-substituted norbornenes with
alkynes have been investigated experimentally and theoretically using density
functional theory. Most of the cycloadditions occurred smoothly at room
temperature, giving the exo cycloadducts in excellent yields. Regioselectivities 
of 1.2:1 to 15:1 were observed with various substituents on the C-2 position of
the norbornenes. Exo-C-2-substituents usually showed greater remote substituent
effects on the regioselectivities of the cycloadditions than the corresponding
endo-C-2-substituents. The regioselectivity of the cycloadditions with C-2
substituents containing an exocyclic double bond (sp2 hybridized carbon at C-2)
are much higher than the cycloadditions with the exo and endo 2-substituted
norbornenes. Theoretical studies predicted the same trends as experiment and
matched the experimental product ratios well. The nature of the regioselectivity 
in this reaction is discussed. Different strengths of the pi(C5-C6)-->pi(C2-Y) or
pi(C5-C6)-->sigma(C2-Y) orbital interactions in 2-substituted norbornenes result 
in different degrees of C5-C6 double bond polarization. Stronger C5-C6
polarization will increase the difference in the activation energies between the 
major and minor pathways and thus lead to greater regioselectivities.

PMID: 16674052  [PubMed]


190. J Pineal Res. 2006 May;40(4):350-4.

Preparation and identification of anti-melatonin monoclonal antibodies.

Yang T(1), Wang J, Qu L, Zhong P, Yuan Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Space Cellular and Molecular Biology, Institute of Space
Medico-Engineering, Beijing. y_t_b@hotmail.com

Anti-melatonin monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) of high titer were prepared by
coupling melatonin to bovine serum albumin with formaldehyde and by immunizing
BALB/c mice with multifocal intradermal injections and by fusing high titer
antibody producing spleen cells with myeloma cells of SP2/0 origin. Five MAbs
were selected for further characterization as classes and subclasses. After four 
successive limiting dilutions, antibodies were produced by these five clones with
high affinities ranging from 10(9) to 10(11)/m. These clones were found to be of 
the immunoglobulin Ig G1 and IgG(2b) subclass with kappa light chain. A
systematic study of cross-reactions with seven compounds (indole, aromatic and
imidazole derivatives) showed that the antibody had a high specificity for
melatonin, low reactivity with 6-hydroxymelatonin and
N-acetyl-5-hydroxytryptamine, and no detectable reactivity with tryptamine,
l-tryptophan, 5-methoxytryptamine and N-acetyl-L-tryptophan. The roles of the
indole nucleus and the side chain in the determination of the antigenic
properties of the molecule are discussed. One of the MAbs, 4C9D7, was used to
establish a competitive enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for the detection of
melatonin in supernatant.

PMID: 16635023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2006 Aug;291(2):H600-11. Epub 2006 Apr 14.

Sp3 inhibits Sp1-mediated activation of the cardiac troponin T promoter and is
downregulated during pathological cardiac hypertrophy in vivo.

Azakie A(1), Fineman JR, He Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Univ. of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94143, USA. azakiet@surgery.ucsf.edu

Combinatorial interactions between cis elements and trans-acting factors are
required for regulation of cardiac gene expression during normal cardiac
development and pathological cardiac hypertrophy. Sp factors bind GC boxes and
are implicated in recruitment and assembly of the basal transcriptional complex. 
In this study, we show that the cardiac troponin T (cTnT) promoter contains a GC 
box that is necessary for basal and cAMP-mediated activity of cTnT promoter
constructs transfected in embryonic cardiomyocytes. Cardiac nuclear proteins bind
the cTnT GC box in a sequence-specific fashion and consist of Sp1, Sp2, and Sp3
protein factors. By chromatin immunoprecipitation, Sp1 binds the cTnT promoter
"in vivo." Cotransfected Sp1 trans-activates the cTnT promoter in cardiomyocytes 
in culture. Sp3 represses Sp1-mediated transcriptional activation of the cTnT
gene in embryonic cardiomyocytes. Sp3 repression of Sp1-mediated cTnT promoter
activation is dose dependent, inferring a mechanism of competitive
binding/inhibition. To evaluate the role of Sp factors in cardiac gene expression
in vivo, we have established a clinically relevant animal model of pathological
cardiac hypertrophy where the fetal cardiac program is activated. In this animal 
model, cardiac hypertrophy results from increased left-right shunting, volume
loading of the left ventricle, and pressure loading of the right ventricle. Sp1
expression is increased in all four hypertrophied cardiac chambers, whereas Sp3
expression is diminished. This observation is consistent with the in vitro
activating function of Sp1 and inhibitory effects of Sp3 on activity of cTnT
promoter constructs. Sp factor levels are modulated during the hypertrophic
cardiac program in vivo.

PMID: 16617124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Apr 19;128(15):5033-40.

Aryl transfer between Pd(II) centers or Pd(IV) intermediates in Pd-catalyzed
domino reactions.

Cárdenas DJ(1), Martín-Matute B, Echavarren AM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Organica, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Cantoblanco,
28049 Madrid, Spain. diego.cardenas@uam.es

A computational study has been performed to determine the mechanism of the key
steps of Pd-catalyzed domino reactions in which C(sp2)-C(sp2) are formed from
aryl and alkenyl halides. DFT calculations were done on model complexes of the
proposed intermediates, with PH3 and H2O as ancillary ligands, to explore two
possible mechanisms: the oxidative addition of aryl or alkenyl halides to
palladacycles to give Pd(IV) intermediates, and the transmetalation-type reaction
of aryl or alkenyl ligands between two Pd(II) centers, a palladacycle, and a
Pd(II) complex formed by oxidative addition of aryl or alkenyl halides to Pd0. We
have shown that oxidative addition of iodoethylene to Pd0 precursors is more
favorable than oxidative addition to Pd(II) palladacycles, whereas
transmetalation-type reactions between Pd(II) complexes are facile. Similar
results were obtained with iodobenzene instead of iodoethylene and formamide as
the ancillary ligand. These results suggest that Pd(IV) intermediates are not
involved in these reactions.

PMID: 16608337  [PubMed]


193. J Org Chem. 2006 Apr 14;71(8):2995-3000.

Kinetic substituent and solvent effects in 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition of
diphenyldiazomethanes with fullerenes C60 and C70: a comparison with the addition
to TCNE, DDQ, and chloranil.

Oshima T(1), Kitamura H, Higashi T, Kokubo K, Seike N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Chemistry, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka
University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. oshima@chem.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp

Kinetics of 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition of a series of meta- and para-substituted
diphenyldiazomethanes (DDMs) with fullerenes C60 and C70 as dipolarophiles have
been investigated in toluene at 30 degrees C. Fullerene C60 was ca. 1.5 times
more reactive than C70. The rate constants (k) for the primary [3 + 2] additions 
increased with the increase of the electron-releasing ability of the meta and
para substituent. The log k/k0 values were well correlated by the Yukawa-Tsuno
(Y-T) equations with the smaller negative rho values (-1.6 and -1.7 for C60 and
C70) and the reduced resonance reaction constants r (0.22 and 0.17) compared to
similar reactions of common acceptors, TCNE, DDQ, and chloranil (CA). The plots
of log k (acceptor) versus log k (C60) as reference gave good regression
equations and the slopes became larger in the order of TCNE > DDQ > CA > C70 > or
= C60. The rates were also found to decrease with the increase of solvent
polarity due to the ground-state solvation of fullerenes. However, the relative
reactivity of these acceptors toward the unsubstituted DDM increased in the order
of DDQ > C60 > or = C70 > TCNE > CA. The unexpected higher reactivity of
fullerenes was interpreted in terms of the inherent steric strain by the
pyramidalization of the sp2 C-atoms as well as the shorter [6,6] bonds with
larger pi-electron densities.

PMID: 16599593  [PubMed]


194. Lasers Med Sci. 2006 Apr;21(1):49-53. Epub 2006 Apr 1.

Monitoring the ups and downs of pulsed dye laser energy output.

Wright PA(1), Widdowson DC, Ahmed S, Moore JC.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Specialist Laser Centre, Department of Plastic Surgery, Salisbury
District Hospital, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP2 8BJ, UK.
Philip.Wright@salisbury.nhs.uk

The internal energy meter reading of a Chromos pulsed dye laser (PDL) set at 50% 
of maximum pumping energy was recorded at the start of every clinical session
over an 898 day period and compared with the measurement from an Ophir Optronics 
'Nova' external energy meter. This quick and inexpensive process improved quality
control procedures for the use of the PDL and enabled the performance of laser
components such as the dye, pumping mechanism and optics to be monitored. The
stability of the laser output energy was also monitored during three simulated
clinics on days 665, 870 and 898. External energy meter readings were recorded
every 100 pulses during each simulated clinic comprising six series of 500
pulses. As the energy output was shown to be stable during each clinic (SD<4.7%) 
recalibration during treatments of up to 500 pulses with this laser was deemed to
be unnecessary. However, it was noted that this output energy stability was
maintained by varying the pumping energy from 42 to 88% of maximum. Subsequent
measurements of pulse width conducted with an ET-2000 Silicon Photodetector
demonstrated that although the nominal pulse width was 450 mus, this varied from 
240 to 390 mus as the pumping energy increased from 20 to 50%.

PMID: 16583184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Magn Reson. 2006 Jul;181(1):1-8. Epub 2006 Mar 30.

Recoupling of chemical-shift anisotropy powder patterns in MAS NMR.

Orr RM(1), Duer MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Lensfield Road, Cambridge
CB2 1EW, UK.

A comparison of three different implementations of the chemical-shift recoupling 
experiment of Tycko et al. [R. Tycko, G. Dabbagh, P.A. Mirau, Determination of
chemical-shift-anisotropy lineshapes in a two-dimensional magic-angle-spinning
NMR experiment, J. Magn. Reson. 85 (1989) 265-274] is presented. The methods seek
to reduce the effects of artefacts resulting from pulse imperfections and
residual C-H dipolar coupling in organic solids. An optimised and constant time
implementation are shown to give well-defined and artefact free powder pattern
lineshapes in the indirectly observed dimension for both sp2 and sp3 carbon
sites. Experimental setup is no more demanding than for the original experiment, 
and can be implemented using standard commercial hardware.

PMID: 16574445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Org Chem. 2006 Mar 31;71(7):2802-10.

Synthesis of marine polyacetylenes callyberynes A-C by transition-metal-catalyzed
cross-coupling reactions to sp centers.

López S(1), Fernandez-Trillo F, Midón P, Castedo L, Saa C.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Organica, Facultade de Química, Universidade de
Santiago de Compostela, 15782 Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

Efficient total syntheses of the sponge-derived hydrocarbon polyacetylenes
callyberynes A-C have been achieved using metal-catalyzed cross-coupling
reactions of highly unsaturated 1,3-diyne fragments as the key steps, namely:
Cadiot-Chodkiewicz reaction under Alami's optimized conditions (sp-sp),
sequential Sonogashira reaction of a cis,cis-divinyl dihalide (sp2-sp), and
Kumada-Corriu reaction of an unactivated alkyl iodide (sp3-sp). This last
approach constitutes the first application of a metal-catalyzed sp3-sp
Kumada-Corriu cross-coupling reaction to the synthesis of a natural product.

PMID: 16555835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2006 Apr;257(2):243-52.

Plasmid-encoded gamma-hexachlorocyclohexane degradation genes and insertion
sequences in Sphingobium francense (ex-Sphingomonas paucimobilis Sp+).

Cérémonie H(1), Boubakri H, Mavingui P, Simonet P, Vogel TM.

Author information: 
(1)Ecologie Microbienne UMR-CNRS 5557, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1,
Villeurbanne Cedex, France.

The lin genes encode the gamma-hexachlorocyclohexane (gamma-HCH or lindane)
catabolic pathway in lindane-degrading strains. The location and stability of
these genes have been explored in the lindane-degrading Sphingobium francense
strain Sp+, and in two non-lindane-degrading mutants (Sp1- and Sp2-). The lin
genes, linA, linB, linE and linX were localized by hybridization on three of the 
six plasmids of the S. francense strain Sp+ showing dispersal within the genome. 
The linC gene was detected by PCR, but was not detected by hybridization on any
of the plasmids. The hybridization of the linA and linX genes was negative with
the two non-lindane-degrading mutants S. francense strains, Sp1- and Sp2-. The
dynamic of this genome associated with gene loss and acquisition, and plasmid
rearrangement was explored by a search for associated insertion sequences. A new 
insertion sequence, ISSppa4, belonging to the IS21 family was detected and
compared with IS6100 and ISsp1. Insertion sequence localization was explored on
different hybridization patterns (plasmid, total genome) with the
lindane-degrading Sp+ strain and the two non-degrading derivatives (Sp1-, Sp2-). 
Insertion sequence movement and plasmid rearrangement could explain the emergence
of the non-lindane-degrading mutants.

PMID: 16553860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Plant Cell. 2006 Apr;18(4):935-54. Epub 2006 Mar 10.

Selective mobility and sensitivity to SNAREs is exhibited by the Arabidopsis KAT1
K+ channel at the plasma membrane.

Sutter JU(1), Campanoni P, Tyrrell M, Blatt MR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Plant Physiology and Biophysics, Institute of Biomedical and
Life Sciences-Plant Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, UK.

Recent findings indicate that proteins in the SNARE superfamily are essential for
cell signaling, in addition to facilitating vesicle traffic in plant cell
homeostasis, growth, and development. We previously identified SNAREs SYP121/Syr1
from tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) and the Arabidopsis thaliana homolog SYP121
associated with abscisic acid and drought stress. Disrupting tobacco SYP121
function by expressing a dominant-negative Sp2 fragment had severe effects on
growth, development, and traffic to the plasma membrane, and it blocked K(+) and 
Cl(-) channel responses to abscisic acid in guard cells. These observations raise
questions about SNARE control in exocytosis and endocytosis of ion channel
proteins and their organization within the plane of the membrane. We have used a 
dual, in vivo tagging strategy with a photoactivatable green fluorescent protein 
and externally exposed hemagglutinin epitopes to monitor the distribution and
trafficking dynamics of the KAT1 K(+) channel transiently expressed in tobacco
leaves. KAT1 is localized to the plasma membrane within positionally stable
microdomains of approximately 0.5 microm in diameter; delivery of the K(+)
channel, but not of the PMA2 H(+)-ATPase, to the plasma membrane is suppressed by
Sp2 fragments of tobacco and Arabidopsis SYP121, and Sp2 expression leads to
profound changes in KAT1 distribution and mobility within the plane of the plasma
membrane. These results offer direct evidence for SNARE-mediated traffic of the
K(+) channel and a role in its distribution within subdomains of the plasma
membrane, and they implicate a role for SNAREs in positional anchoring of the
K(+) channel protein.

PMCID: PMC1425843
PMID: 16531497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Med Mycol. 2006 Mar;44(2):159-67.

Candidacidal activity of a monoclonal antibody that binds with glycosyl moieties 
of proteins of Candida albicans.

Kavishwar A(1), Shukla PK.

Author information: 
(1)Fermentation Technology Division, Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow,
India.

The incidence of life threatening mycoses caused by opportunistic fungi has
increased dramatically in recent years with Candida and Aspergillus being the
most commonly encountered species. Candida albicans ranks among the four most
common causes of bloodstream infections and is responsible for vulvovaginal
candidiasis in the majority of women in their reproductive years. Limited
spectrum of antifungal activity of currently available antifungals and emergence 
of resistance has become a serious problem. Therefore, in search of an
alternative form of treatment of candidiasis, in the present study a monoclonal
antibody (MAb-G5) of IgA isotype was identified from the hybridoma produced by
the fusion of lymphocytes of C. albicans immunized mouse with Sp2/O cells. The
MAb-G5 exhibited in vitro candidacidal activity and was also found to be useful
for treatment and prophylactic use under experimental conditions in vivo.

PMID: 16519019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Dalton Trans. 2006 Mar 21;(11):1399-408. Epub 2006 Jan 20.

Iron(II), manganese(II) and cobalt(II) complexes containing tetradentate
biphenyl-bridged ligands and their application in alkane oxidation catalysis.

Britovsek GJ(1), England J, White AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, South Kensington, UK.
g.britovsek@imperial.ac.uk

A series of manganese(II), iron(II) and cobalt(II) bis(triflate) complexes
containing linear tetradentate bis(imine) and bis(amine) ligands with a biphenyl 
bridge have been synthesized. The twist in the ligand backbone due to the
biphenyl unit leads in the case of the bis(imine) ligands (1 and 2) containing
sp2 hybridised N donors, to a distorted cis-alpha coordination geometry, whereas 
in the case of the biphenyl- and biphenylether-bridged bis(amine) ligands (7 - 9 
and 12), a trans coordination geometry is observed. The catalytic properties of
the complexes for the oxidation of cyclohexane, using H2O2 as the oxidant, have
been evaluated. Only the iron complexes show any catalytic activity under the
conditions used, but the low conversions and selectivies observed indicate that
these catalysts lead predominantly to free radical auto-oxidation.

PMID: 16518509  [PubMed]


201. Retrovirology. 2006 Mar 2;3:15.

HTLV-I antisense transcripts initiating in the 3'LTR are alternatively spliced
and polyadenylated.

Cavanagh MH(1), Landry S, Audet B, Arpin-André C, Hivin P, Paré ME, Thête J,
Wattel E, Marriott SJ, Mesnard JM, Barbeau B.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Infectiologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de
Québec, Pavillon CHUL, Québec, G1V 4G2, Canada.
marie-helene.cavanagh@crchul.ulaval.ca

BACKGROUND: Antisense transcription in retroviruses has been suggested for both
HIV-1 and HTLV-I, although the existence and coding potential of these
transcripts remain controversial. Thorough characterization is required to
demonstrate the existence of these transcripts and gain insight into their role
in retrovirus biology.
RESULTS: This report provides the first complete characterization of an antisense
retroviral transcript that encodes the previously described HTLV-I HBZ protein.
In this study, we show that HBZ-encoding transcripts initiate in the 3' long
terminal repeat (LTR) at several positions and consist of two alternatively
spliced variants (SP1 and SP2). Expression of the most abundant HBZ spliced
variant (SP1) could be detected in different HTLV-I-infected cell lines and
importantly in cellular clones isolated from HTLV-I-infected patients.
Polyadenylation of HBZ RNA occurred at a distance of 1450 nucleotides downstream 
of the HBZ stop codon in close proximity of a typical polyA signal. We have also 
determined that translation mostly initiates from the first exon located in the
3' LTR and that the HBZ isoform produced from the SP1 spliced variant
demonstrated inhibition of Tax and c-Jun-dependent transcriptional activation.
CONCLUSION: These results conclusively demonstrate the existence of antisense
transcription in retroviruses, which likely plays a role in HTLV-I-associated
pathogenesis through HBZ protein synthesis.

PMCID: PMC1459196
PMID: 16512901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2006 Mar 3;45(11):1686-712.

Persulfurated aromatic compounds.

Gingras M(1), Raimundo JM, Chabre YM.

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry Laboratory of Organic and Metallic Materials (CMOM), Faculty of
Sciences, University of Nice-Sophia Antipolis, France. gingras@unice.fr

Persulfurated arenes have been known for about 50 years but they were
underexploited in chemistry in spite of facile, mild, and high-yielding
syntheses. Their properties (redox potentials, UV/Vis absorption, conductivity,
nonlinear optical properties, etc.) are mainly due to the aromaticity of the ring
with sp2-hybridized carbon atoms and to the electronic contribution from numerous
divalent sulfur ligands, which also stabilize negative or positive charges. The
characteristic conformational patterns of the sulfur ligands often facilitate
preorganization in supramolecular assemblies, with or without thiophilic metal
cations, for designing redox sensors, ion-selective membranes, clathrates,
organic conductors, nonlinear optical materials, liquid crystals, coordination
polymers, and bioinorganic systems. A new class of supramolecules with various
molecular shapes such as asterisks, chains, wheels, and windmills were reported.

PMID: 16511821  [PubMed]


203. J Virol Methods. 2006 Jul;135(1):1-8. Epub 2006 Feb 21.

Application of the PCR-RFLP method for the rapid differentiation of Spodoptera
exigua nucleopolyhedrovirus genotypes.

Murillo R(1), Muñoz D, Williams T, Mugeta N, Caballero P.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Producción Agraria, Universidad Pública de Navarra, Pamplona
31006, Spain.

Quality control during mass production of Spodoptera exigua multiple
nucleopolyhedrovirus (SeMNPV), and studies on environmental fate following the
use of this virus as a biological pesticide, would be facilitated by a rapid
method for the detection and identification of isolates. A molecular biology tool
was developed that combined the polymerase chain reaction and restriction
fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) to differentiate SeMNPV isolates.
Oligonucleotide primers were designed to amplify five variable SeMNPV genomic
regions (V01, V02, V03, V04, V05). Four wild-type SeMNPV strains isolated from
the United States (US2) and Spain (SP1, SP2, and SP3), and a laboratory cloned
genotype (US1A), were analyzed with 36 different primer-endonuclease
combinations. BglII digestion of the variable region 1 (V01) amplicon was the
only combination that differentiated each of the five virus isolates tested,
although genetic heterogeneity limited the discriminatory power of the technique.
Six novel SeMNPV isolates originating from greenhouse soils in southern Spain
were successfully identified using this method. As judged by sequence analysis,
the V01 region, which comprises the homologous region 1 (hr1), is the most
variable genomic region among the genotypes present in the Spanish isolates. This
method constitutes a useful tool for processing large number of environmental
samples and could be used to address environmental biosafety concerns.

PMID: 16494953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Phys Chem A. 2006 Mar 2;110(8):2607-12.

Role of excited state intramolecular charge transfer in the photophysical
properties of norfloxacin and its derivatives.

Cuquerella MC(1), Miranda MA, Bosca F.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Tecnología Química UPV-CSIC/Departamento de Química, Universidad 
Politécnica de Valencia, Avenida de los Naranjos s/n, 46022-Valencia, Spain.

The photophysical properties of
1-ethyl-6-fluoro-7-(1-piperazinyl)-1,4-dihydro-4-oxoquinoline-3-carboxylic acid
(norfloxacin, NFX) and some of its derivatives have been studied to evaluate the 
role of the free carboxylic acid and the nonprotonated piperazinyl group in the
behavior of the 1,4-dihydro-4-oxoquinoline ring. Steady state and time-resolved
fluorescence measurements at different pHs provide clear evidence in favor of
singlet excited-state deactivation of NFX and its N(4')-methyl derivative
pefloxacin (PFX) via intramolecular electron transfer from the N(4') atom of the 
piperazinyl ring to the fluoroquinolone (FQ) main system. This is a very
efficient, energy-wasting pathway, which becomes dramatically enhanced in basic
media. Acetylation at N(4') (as in ANFX) decreases the availability of the lone
pair, making observable its fluorescence and the transient absorption spectrum of
its triplet excited state even at high pH. It also reveals that the geometry of
FQs changes from an almost sp3 hybridization of the N(1') of the piperazinyl
substituent in the ground state to nearly sp2 in the singlet excited state
(rehybridization accompanied by intramolecular charge transfer, RICT);
accordingly, the singlet energy of ANFX is significantly lower than that of NFX
and PFX. The fluorescence measurements using acetonitrile as a polar nonprotic
organic solvent further support deactivation of the singlet excited state of
nonacetylated NFX derivatives via intramolecular electron transfer from the N(4')
atom.

PMID: 16494369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Hum Genet. 2006 May;119(4):444-50. Epub 2006 Feb 22.

Parental and chromosomal origin of unbalanced de novo structural chromosome
abnormalities in man.

Thomas NS(1), Durkie M, Van Zyl B, Sanford R, Potts G, Youings S, Dennis N,
Jacobs P.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, SP2 8BJ,
Salisbury, Wiltshire, UK.

We report the parental origin, and where possible the chromosomal origin of 115
de novo unbalanced structural chromosome abnormalities detectable by light
microscopy. These consisted of 39 terminal deletions, 35 interstitial deletions, 
8 rings, 12 duplications and 21 unbalanced translocations. In all categories the 
majority of abnormalities were of paternal origin, although the proportions
varied from a high of 84% in the interstitial deletions and rings to a low of 58%
in the duplications. Among the interstitial deletions and duplications, there
were approximately equal numbers of intra- and interchromosomal abnormalities,
while the majority of unbalanced translocations were isodisomic for the
duplicated chromosome. The examination of the parental ages in the four main
classes of abnormality showed terminal deletions of maternal origin to be
associated with a significantly reduced maternal age. Thus, there is a clear
propensity for structural chromosome abnormalities to occur in male germ cells,
although the chromosomal origin seems similar irrespective of the parental
origin.

PMID: 16493556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2006 Feb;128(2):141-8.

Biodegradation of biomass gasification wastewater by two species of pseudomonas
using immobilized cell reactor.

Tian S(1), Qian C, Yang X.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science, Capital Normal University, 100037 Beijing, PR China.

An immobilized cell bioreactor with granular activated carbon as the inert
material inoculated two species, Pseudomonas sp1 and Pseudomonas sp2, to degrade 
chemical oxygen demand (COD) and benzene, naphthalene, phenanthrene, pyridine,
quinoline, and isoquinoline in the wastewater discharging from a biomass
gasification power-generation plant. The results indicated that these toxic
compounds were removed efficiently. The course of the 66-d experiment was divided
into three phases mainly in accordance with different influent COD
concentrations: microbial adaptation and proliferation phase (from 1 to 23 d),
stable metabolic phase (from 24 to 57 d), and high efficient reaction phase (from
58 to 66 d). The high removal rates of COD and some toxic compounds with a 24-h
hydraulic retention time were accomplished.

PMID: 16484723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Burns. 2006 May;32(3):387-8. Epub 2006 Feb 14.

Full thickness skin loss following chemical tattoo removal.

Snelling A(1), Ball E, Adams T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Odstock Centre for Plastic, 
Maxillofacial and Burns Surgery, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury SP2 8BJ, 
UK. ap_snelling@hotmail.com

PMID: 16476522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Lasers Surg Med. 2006 Mar;38(3):200-1.

Thorium X: not yet a closed chapter.

Widdowson DC(1), Shakespeare PG.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Specialist Laser Centre, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wilshire SP2 8BJ, United Kingdom. danielwiddowson@hotmail.com

PMID: 16470846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Mol Biol Cell. 2006 Apr;17(4):1711-22. Epub 2006 Feb 8.

Sp2 localizes to subnuclear foci associated with the nuclear matrix.

Moorefield KS(1), Yin H, Nichols TD, Cathcart C, Simmons SO, Horowitz JM.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Genomic Sciences, Center for Comparative Medicine and
Translational Research, College of Veterinary Medicine, North Carolina State
University, Raleigh, NC 27606, USA.

We have reported that extracts prepared from many human and mouse cell lines show
little or no Sp2 DNA-binding activity and that Sp2 has little or no capacity to
stimulate transcription of promoters that are activated by Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4.
Using an array of chimeric Sp1/Sp2 proteins we showed further that Sp2
DNA-binding activity and trans-activation are each negatively regulated in
mammalian cells. As part of an ongoing effort to study Sp2 function and
regulation we characterized its subcellular localization in comparison with other
Sp-family members in fixed and live cells. We report that 1) Sp2 localizes
largely within subnuclear foci associated with the nuclear matrix, and 2) these
foci are distinct from promyelocytic oncogenic domains and appear to be stable
during an 18-h time course of observation. Deletion analyses identified a 37
amino acid sequence spanning the first zinc-"finger" that is sufficient to direct
nuclear matrix association, and this region also encodes a bipartite nuclear
localization sequence. A second nuclear matrix targeting sequence is encoded
within the Sp2 trans-activation domain. We conclude that Sp2 preferentially
associates with the nuclear matrix and speculate that this subcellular
localization plays an important role in the regulation of Sp2 function.

PMCID: PMC1415311
PMID: 16467376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Org Chem. 2006 Feb 3;71(3):873-82.

Control of stereoselective protonation of enols1,2.

Zimmerman HE(1), Cheng J.

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry Department, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA.
zimmerman@chem.wisc.edu

A decalyl framework with a siloxy enolic moiety and proximate proton transferring
groups was synthesized. On enolate generation with fluoride two competitive
reaction modes were possible: (a) intermolecular protonation, and (b)
intramolecular proton transfer by the proximate group. Control of the protonation
stereochemistry proved possible by varying the proximate group and by changing
the acidity of the medium. With the groups -CH2OH, -CH=O, and -CH2OCH2OCH3 as the
proximate groups, only intermolecular proton transfer was observed with no
dependence on acidity. In contrast, with -COO- and COOH, only intramolecular
protonation resulted but again with no dependence on acidity of the medium. In
contrast, with -CH2NH2 as the proximate group, intramolecular proton transfer
predominated with a dependence on the effective pH of the medium. A kinetic
analysis provided a linear-log relationship of the ratio of the two stereoisomers
with the medium acidity. The analysis revealed that two acetic acid molecules are
involved in providing the proton to the enolate moiety. A theoretical analysis
was developed paralleling the experimental results. In the ketonization
transition state, the hybridization was shown to be close to sp2 hybridized at
the alpha-enolate carbon.

PMID: 16438496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Hum Antibodies. 2005;14(1-2):27-31.

Generation of mouse-human hybridomas secreting human monoclonal antibodies to
Japanese cedar pollen allergen Cry j1.

Naganawa Y(1), Shinmoto H, Shimmoto M.

Author information: 
(1)National Food Research Institute, 2-1-12 Kannondai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki,
305-8642, Japan.

Peripheral blood lymphocytes from 13 donors were transformed with Epstein-Barr
virus (EBV) to establish immortalized human B-cells secreting antibodies to
Japanese cedar (Cryptomeria japonica) pollen allergens. EBV-transformed
B-lymphocytes were then fused with mouse myeloma SP2/O3, and three clones of
mouse-human hybridomas secreting human IgM class monoclonal antibodies to a cedar
pollen allergen Cry j1 were established.

PMID: 16424598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Hum Antibodies. 2005;14(1-2):17-21.

Production of monoclonal antibody against alkaline phosphatase.

Eftekharian MM(1), Moazzeni SM, Pourfathollah AA, Khabiri AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Tarbiat Modarres University Tehran, Iran.
eftekhm@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Monoclonal antibody against alkaline phosphatase (Alp) has many
applications which Alp-anti Alp complex (APAAP) formation is one of the most
important ones. This complex is applicable in many immunohistochemical and
immunocytochemical techniques such as diagnosis of various kinds of leukemias,
lymphomas, skin diseases, kidney dysfunctions, etc.
OBJECTIVE: Production of anti-Alp monoclonal antibody for utilization in APAAP
complex.
METHODS: After several arranged injections of Alp to Balb/c mice and determining 
the specific antibody titer by ELISA test, the spleen lymphocytes of immunized
mice and Sp2/0 myeloma cells were fused using polyethylene glycol as fusing agent
and hybridoma cells were cultured in HAT medium. Identification and selection of 
anti-Alp producing clones were done by performing ELISA test on supernatants of
all resulting clones. Limiting dilution method was used to attain monoclones and 
the effect of obtained antibodies on enzyme activity was investigated by a
specific ELISA test. For production of concentrated Ab, the hybridoma cells were 
injected to peritoneal cavity of mice and the produced ascetic fluids were
collected. Finally class and subclass of the obtained antibodies were determined 
by Isostrip kit.
RESULTS: After six rounds of fusion, 104 Hybridoma clones were obtained and two
Anti-Alp producing clones (A_1G_8 and A_1G_9) were selected and subcloned. Both
antibodies were IgG_1 with kappa (kappa) light chains. These antibodies did not
affect the enzyme activity and the electrophoresis of ascetic fluids showed an
obvious band in gamma (gamma) position.
CONCLUSION: Because these antibodies are from IgG class and don't affect the
enzyme activity, it seems that they are suitable for APAAP complex formation.

PMID: 16424596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Hum Antibodies. 2005;14(1-2):1-5.

Production and characterization of monoclonal antibodies against human IgG in
Balb/c mouse.

Majidi J(1), Baradaran B, Hassan ZM, Mostafaie A.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Applied Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz,
Iran. majidij@tbzmed.ac.ir

Immunoglobulin G (IgG) is the main immunoglobulin in natural human serum. It
constitutes 70 to 75 percent of all immunoglobulins. Monoclonal antibodies have
many applications in diagnosis, treatment and purification. The conjugated
monoclonal antibodies against human IgG are used in most diagnostic kits. For
production of monoclonal antibodies against human IgG, spleen cells of the most
immune mouse were fused with SP2/0 (myeloma cells) using Poly Ethylene Glycol
(PEG). Supernatant of hybridoma cells was screened for detection of antibody by
ELISA. The suitable clones were selected for limiting dilution (L.D). Then, the
supernatant of suitable monoclones were assessed for cross reactivity with IgM & 
IgA by ELISA and confirmed by immunobloting. The subclasses of the selected
monoclonal antibodies were determined and the clones were frozen and kept in
liquid nitrogen. Finally, suitable monoclone was injected into the mouse,
intraperitoneally, that has been primed with Pristane. In this study, 127 clones 
were obtained of which 15 clones had absorbance more than 1 which two of them
with absorbance about 1.5 were selected for limiting dilution. The yield of
limiting dilution was 6 clones with absorbance about 1.8 which did not show cross
reactivity with IgM & IgA. Among these clones, G2 monoclone with IgG1 subclass
was selected as suitable one and it was reproduced in FCS free RPMI 1640. For
large scale production in invivo, the suitable clone was implanted in the
peritoneum of the Balb/c mouse and its titer was measured, which showed 1/100,000
dilution for ascitic fluid, having no cross reactivity with IgM & IgA. Monoclonal
antibody was purified by chromatography, confirmed by SDS- PAGE, conjugated with 
enzyme and applied for diagnostic kits.

PMID: 16424594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. J Biotechnol. 2006 Apr 10;122(3):293-306. Epub 2006 Jan 19.

Validation of an optical sensor-based high-throughput bioreactor system for
mammalian cell culture.

Ge X(1), Hanson M, Shen H, Kostov Y, Brorson KA, Frey DD, Moreira AR, Rao G.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Sensor Technology, Department of Chemical and Biochemical 
Engineering, University of Maryland, Baltimore County, 1000 Hilltop Circle,
Baltimore, MD 21250, United States.

Cell culture optimization is a labor-intensive process requiring a large number
of experiments to be conducted under varying conditions. Here we describe a
high-throughput bioreactor system that allows 12 mini stirred-tank bioreactors to
be operated simultaneously. All bioreactors are monitored by low-cost minimally
invasive optical sensors for pH and dissolved oxygen. The sensors consist of
single-use patches affixed inside the bioreactors and monitored optically from
the outside. Experimental results show that different sensing patches with the
same composition respond consistently. The discrepancy between different pH
sensors is less than 0.1 pH units over most of their responsive range. The
discrepancy between different dissolved oxygen sensors is less than 10% over the 
whole range from 0% to 100% dissolved oxygen. The consistency of the sensing
system ensures that only an initial one-time calibration is required for the
sensing patches. After that, a calibration code is generated and sensing patches 
of the same composition can be used directly. This greatly reduces the time and
cost required for monitored multi-bioreactor operations. We used SP2/0
myeloma/mouse hybridoma cell cultures to demonstrate reactor performance
consistency. Transcriptional profiling, HPLC analysis, viable cell count, and
viability inspection show that the presence of sensing patches and the use of
optical monitoring have no apparent effect on the metabolism of the cells.

PMID: 16423420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Chem Phys. 2006 Jan 14;124(2):024711.

Surface reconstructions and stability of X-shaped carbon nanotube junction.

Meng FY(1), Shi SQ, Xu DS, Chan CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong
Kong, China. mmfymeng@polyu.edu.hk

A complete surface reconstruction takes place after a local connection between
two crossed tubes is established, leading to the creation of an extended X-shaped
junction constituted by topological defects with smooth negative curvature.
Molecular-dynamics simulations show that the surface reconstructions occur
through (1) generalized Stone-Wales transformation and (2) the movement of sp and
sp3 atoms and their transformation to sp2 atoms by bond rearrangement. Based on
both the principle of energy minimization and a generalized Euler's rule, it is
demonstrated that the most stable structure for X junctions contains only 12
heptagons. The annealing temperature influences the topological structure and
stability of junctions.

PMID: 16422630  [PubMed]


216. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006 Apr;1760(4):669-77. Epub 2005 Dec 27.

Differential glycosylation of polyclonal IgG, IgG-Fc and IgG-Fab isolated from
the sera of patients with ANCA-associated systemic vasculitis.

Holland M(1), Yagi H, Takahashi N, Kato K, Savage CO, Goodall DM, Jefferis R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunity and Infection, The Medical School, University of
Birmingham, Edgbaston, UK.

Post-translational modifications (PTMs) of proteins produced in vivo may be
tissue, developmentally and/or disease specific. PTMs impact on the stability and
function of proteins and offer a challenge to the commercial production of
protein biotherapeutics. We have previously reported a marked deficit in
galactosylation of oligosaccharides released from polyclonal IgG isolated from
sera of patients with the anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA)
associated vasculitides; Wegener's granulomatosis (WG) and microscopic
polyangiitis (MPA). Whilst normal polyclonal IgG molecules are glycosylated
within the IgG-Fc region, approximately 20% of molecules also bear
oligosaccharides attached to the variable regions of the light or heavy chain
IgG-Fab. It is of interest, therefore to compare profiles of oligosaccharides
released from the IgG-Fc and IgG-Fab of normal IgG with that isolated from the
sera of patients with WG or MPA. This study shows that whilst the
oligosaccharides released from ANCA IgG-Fc are hypogalactosylated those released 
from IgG-Fab are galactosylated and sialylated. These results show that
hypogalactosylation of IgG-Fc is not due to a defect in the glycosylation or
processing machinery. It rather suggests a subtle change in IgG-Fc conformation
that influences the addition of galactose. Remarkably, this influence is exerted 
on all plasma cells. Interestingly, a licensed monoclonal antibody therapeutic,
produced in Sp2/0 cells, is also shown to be hypogalactosylated in its IgG-Fc but
fully galactosylated in its IgG-Fab.

PMID: 16413679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Eur J Cell Biol. 2006 May;85(5):355-65. Epub 2006 Jan 18.

Oxidative stress is not required for the induction of apoptosis upon glutamine
starvation of Sp2/0-Ag14 hybridoma cells.

Guérin PJ(1), Furtak T, Eng K, Gauthier ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Laurentian University, 935 Ramsey
Lake Road, Sudbury, Ont., Canada P3E 2C6.

L-glutamine (Gln) withdrawal rapidly triggers apoptosis in the murine hybridoma
cell line Sp2/0-Ag14 (Sp2/0). In this report, we examined the possibility that
Gln deprivation of Sp2/0 cells triggers an oxidative stress which would
contribute to the activation of apoptotic pathways. Gln withdrawal triggered an
oxidative stress in Sp2/0 cells, as indicated by an increased accumulation of
reactive oxygen species (ROS) and an increase in the intracellular content in
protein carbonyl groups. Gln starvation also caused a decrease in the
intracellular levels of glutathione (GSH). However, a decrease in GSH was not
sufficient to induce Sp2/0 cell death since reducing GSH levels with
DL-buthionine-[S,R]-sulfoximine did not affect cell viability. The antioxidant
N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC), while effective in inhibiting ROS accumulation and
oxidative stress, did not prevent the loss in cell viability or the processing
and activation of caspase-3 triggered by Gln starvation. On the other hand, NAC
did reduce the formation of apoptotic bodies in dying cells. Altogether these
results indicate that in Sp2/0 cells, Gln deprivation leads to the induction of
an oxidative stress which, while involved in the formation of apoptotic bodies,
is not essential to the activation of the cell death program.

PMID: 16412532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Immunol Methods. 2006 Feb 20;309(1-2):1-10. Epub 2005 Dec 20.

Development of murine monoclonal antibodies to methamphetamine and
methamphetamine analogues.

Danger Y(1), Gadjou C, Devys A, Galons H, Blanchard D, Folléa G.

Author information: 
(1)Etablissement Français du Sang, Laboratoire de Biotechnologie, 34 bd J Monnet,
BP 91115, 44011 Nantes cedex 01, France.

Methamphetamine and ecstasy are addictive drugs that cause major health problems 
in young people. Here we report on the development of high-affinity monoclonal
antibodies to methamphetamine and its analogues, which may constitute powerful
tools for antibody-based therapy. Six haptens, methamphetamine and ecstasy
analogues, were synthesized, linked to a carrier protein and injected into mice. 
Several specific monoclonal antibodies were subsequently obtained following
fusion of splenocytes from the immunized animals, with Sp2/O cells. Antibody
specificity was fully investigated by competition ELISA, using a series of
analogues, to identify specific amphetamine and/or ecstasy-specific antibodies.
Antibody affinity was estimated to be in the range of 10(8) M(-1) with an
enantiomeric hapten. Finally, two characteristic hybridoma clones (DAS-M243-6H5
and DAS-M278-4B12), secreting specific and potent mAbs were isolated. The
development of drug-specific antibodies as in this study may provide promising
therapeutic insight into how to neutralize methamphetamine in vivo during acute
intoxication.

PMID: 16412457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Gut. 2006 Feb;55(2):211, 251.

Blurred vision: cause? Retinopathy secondary to interferon treatment.

Bowen DW(1), Vyas S.

Author information: 
(1)Salisbury District Hospital, Odstock Rd, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, UK.
dafydd.bowen1@ntlworld.com

PMCID: PMC1856525
PMID: 16407386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Hum Genet. 2006 Mar;119(1-2):179-84. Epub 2006 Jan 5.

Epimutation of the TNDM locus and the Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome centromeric
locus in individuals with transient neonatal diabetes mellitus.

Mackay DJ(1), Hahnemann JM, Boonen SE, Poerksen S, Bunyan DJ, White HE, Durston
VJ, Thomas NS, Robinson DO, Shield JP, Clayton-Smith J, Temple IK.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, SP2 8BJ
Salisbury, UK. djgm@soton.ac.uk

Transient neonatal diabetes mellitus (TNDM) is characterised by intra-uterine
growth retardation, while Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is a clinically
heterogeneous overgrowth syndrome. Both TNDM and BWS may be caused by aberrant
loss of methylation (LOM) at imprinted loci on chromosomes 6q24 and 11p15.5
respectively. Here we describe two patients with a clinical diagnosis of TNDM
caused by LOM at the maternally methylated imprinted domain on 6q24; in addition,
these patients had LOM at the centromeric differentially methylated region of
11p15.5. This shows that imprinting anomalies can affect more than one imprinted 
locus and may alter the clinical presentation of imprinted disease.

PMID: 16402210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Biochemistry. 2006 Jan 17;45(2):571-80.

Mechanistic analysis of the unusual redox-elimination sequence employed by
Thermotoga maritima BglT: a 6-phospho-beta-glucosidase from glycoside hydrolase
family 4.

Yip VL(1), Withers SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada V6T 1Z1.

"Classical" glycosidases utilize either direct or double-displacement mechanisms 
involving oxocarbenium ion-like transition states to catalyze the hydrolysis of
glycosidic bonds. By contrast, the mechanism of the glycosidases in glycoside
hydrolase family 4 has been recently proposed to involve NAD+-mediated redox
steps along with alpha,beta-elimination and addition steps via anionic
intermediates. Support for this mechanism in BglT, a 6-phospho-beta-glucosidase
in family 4, has been provided through mechanistic and X-ray crystallographic
analyses [Yip, V. L.Y., et al. (2004) J. Am. Chem. Soc. 126, 8354-8355] in which 
primary deuterium kinetic isotope effects for the hydride abstraction at C3 and
for the alpha-proton abstraction at C2 indicate that these two steps are both
partially rate-limiting. Current data reveal that there is no secondary deuterium
kinetic isotope effect associated with the rehybridization of the C1 sp3 center
to a sp2 center. Furthermore, a flat linear free energy relationship was
established with a series of aryl 6-phospho-beta-D-glucosides of varying leaving 
group abilities. Taken together, these data indicate that cleavage of the C1-O1
linkage does not occur during a rate-limiting step. Since the deprotonation at C2
is slow and partially rate-limiting while the departure of the leaving group is
not, a stepwise E1(cb)-type mechanism rather than an E1 or a concerted E2-syn
mechanism is proposed. Direct evidence for the role of NAD+ was obtained by
reduction in situ using NaBH4 leading to an inactive enzyme that could be
reactivated by the addition of excess NAD+. This was accompanied by the expected 
UV-vis spectrophotometric changes.

PMID: 16401086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Calcif Tissue Int. 2006 Jan;78(1):55-61. Epub 2006 Jan 6.

Synthesis of a potentially bioactive, hydroxyapatite-nucleating molecule.

Chang S(1), Chen H, Liu J, Wood D, Bentley P, Clarkson B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cariology, Restorative Sciences, and Endodontics, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA. renchang@umich.edu

A human phosphophoryn (PP) cDNA was previously cloned from immature root apex
total RNA in our laboratory. This cDNA comprises 2,364 bp, encoding 788 amino
acids. More than 80% of the sequences are arranged as (DSS)(n) (n = 1-16), DS,
and NSS motifs. We hypothesize that the capability of PP to bind Ca(2+) and
nucleate hydroxyapatite may depend on these repeated sequences. Two polypeptides 
were synthesized based on the human PP cDNA sequence to test the hypothesis. One 
polypeptide has the amino acid sequence DDPNSSDESNGNDD (synthetic polypeptide 1, 
SP1), which is from the N-terminal end of PP; the other polypeptide,
DSKSDSSKSESDSS (synthetic polypeptide 2, SP2), is the PP repeated sequence motif.
Phosphorylation of the polypeptides was accomplished by reacting them with
adenosine triphosphate and casein kinases I and II. The ability of these
molecules to cause mineralization was tested in a steady-state agarose gel
system. The results show that phosphorylated SP2 (P-SP2) precipitated
approximately 60% of the total Ca + PO(4) precipitated by PP. P-SP1 precipitated 
about 23% of that precipitated by PP and was similar to the amount precipitated
in the control gel, that is, without added peptides. Transmission electron
microscopy and X-ray diffraction analysis showed that the precipitate formed in
the P-SP2-containing gel was hydroxyapatite. The capability of P-SP2 to nucleate 
Ca + PO(4) and precipitate hydroxyapatite is a result of the repeated sequence
motif, which contains a high percentage of phosphorylated serine. This molecule
could be used in the repair and regeneration of dental tissue.

PMID: 16397739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Front Radiat Ther Oncol. 2006;39:159-70.

Malignant melanoma: PET/CT as a staging procedure.

Müller SP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Klinik und Poliklinik für Nuklearmedizin, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen,
Germany. onm010@sp2.power.uni-essen.de

PMID: 16394679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Ultramicroscopy. 2006 Mar;106(4-5):346-55. Epub 2005 Dec 15.

Energy loss spectroscopic profiling across linear interfaces: the example of
amorphous carbon superlattices.

Stolojan V(1), Moreau P, Henley SJ, Goringe MJ, Silva SR.

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Technology Institute, University of Surrey, Guildford, GU2 7XH, UK.
v.stolojan@surrey.ac.uk

Energy loss spectroscopic profiling is a way to acquire, in parallel,
spectroscopic information across a linear feature of interest, using a Gatan
imaging filter (GIF) fitted to a transmission electron microscope (TEM). This
technique is capable of translating the high spatial resolution of a bright field
image into a sampling of the spectral information with similar resolution. Here
we evaluate the contributions of chromatic aberration and the various acquisition
parameters to the spatial sampling resolution of the spectral information, and
show that this can reach 0.5 nm, in a system not ordinarily capable of forming
electron probes smaller than 2 nm. We use this high spatial sampling resolution
to study the plasmon energy variation across amorphous carbon superlattices, in
order to extract information about their structure and electronic properties. By 
modelling the interaction of the relativistic incident electrons with a
dielectric layer sandwiched between outer layers, we show that, due to the
screening of the interfaces and at increased collection angles, the plasmon
energy in the sandwiched layer can still be identified for layer thicknesses down
to 5 A. This allows us to measure the change in the well bandgap as a function of
well width and to interpret it in terms of the changes in the sp2 -fractions due 
to the deposition method, as measured from the carbon K-edges, and in terms of
quantum confinement of the well wavefunction by the adjacent barriers.

PMID: 16387439  [PubMed]


225. Asian J Androl. 2006 Jan;8(1):53-9.

Gene functional research using polyethylenimine-mediated in vivo gene
transfection into mouse spermatogenic cells.

Lu L(1), Lin M, Xu M, Zhou ZM, Sha JH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, 140 Hanzhong 
Road, Nanjing 210029, China.

AIM: To study polyethylenimine (PEI)-mediated in vivo gene transfection into
testis cells and preliminary functional research of spermatogenic cell-specific
gene NYD-SP12 using this method.
METHODS: PEI/DNA complexes were introduced into the seminiferous tubules of mouse
testes using intratesticular injection. Transfection efficiency and speciality
were analyzed on the third day of transfection with fluorescent microscopy and
hematoxylin staining. The long-lasting expression of the GFP-NYD-SP12 fusion
protein and its subcellular localization in spermatogenic cells at different
stages were analyzed with fluorescent microscopy and propidium iodide staining.
RESULTS: With the mediation of PEI, the GFP-NYD-SP12 fusion gene was efficiently 
transferred and expressed in the germ cells (especially in primary
spermatocytes). Transfection into Sertoli cells was not observed. The subcellular
localization of the GFP-NYD-SP2 fusion protein showed dynamic shifts in
spermatogenic cells at different stages during spermatogenesis.
CONCLUSION: PEI can efficiently mediate gene transfer into spermatocytes. Thus,
it might be useful for the functional research of spermatogenic-cell specific
genes such as the NYD-SP12 gene. In our study, the NYD-SP12 protein was
visualized and was involved in the formation of acrosome during spermatogenesis. 
Our research will continue into the detailed function of NYD-SP12 in
spermatocytes.

PMID: 16372119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Agric Food Chem. 2005 Dec 28;53(26):10057-60.

Flavone C-glycosides from leaves of Oxalis triangularis.

Rayyan S(1), Fossen T, Andersen ØM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Bergen, Allégt. 41, N-5007 Bergen,
Norway.

The flavone C-glycosides luteolin
6-C-(2''-O-beta-xylopyranosyl-beta-glucopyranoside) (1), apigenin
6-C-(2''-O-alpha-rhamnopyranosyl-beta-glucopyranoside) (2), apigenin
6-C-(2''-O-beta-xylopyranosyl-beta-glucopyranoside) (3), apigenin
6-C-(2''-O-(6'''-(E)-caffeoylglucoside)-beta-glucopyranoside) (4), and apigenin
6-C-(2''-O-(6'''-(E)-p-coumaroylglucoside)-beta-glucopyranoside) (5) have been
isolated from the purple leaves of Oxalis triangularis. Compound 4 is new, while 
5 has previously been isolated from Cucumis sativus after treatment with silicon 
and infection with Sphaerotheca fuliginea. Signal duplication in the NMR spectra 
of 2, 4, and 5 revealed the presence of rotameric conformers, created by
rotational hindrance at the C(sp3) -C(sp2) glucosyl-flavone linkage in these
flavone C-glycosides.

PMID: 16366694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Caries Res. 2006;40(1):6-14.

Serological diversity demonstrable by a set of monoclonal antibodies to eight
serotypes of the mutans streptococci.

Ota F(1), Ota M, Mahmud ZH, Mohammad A, Yamato M, Kassu A, Kato Y, Tomotake H,
Batoni G, Campa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Environment and Nutrition, Institute of Health
Biosciences, University of Tokushima, Tokushima-shi, Japan.
ota@nutr.med.tokushima-u.ac.jp

A set of monoclonal antibodies were prepared by the conventional cell fusion of
myeloma cells (SP2/0-Ag14) with spleen cells from BALB/c mice immunised with
whole cells of a strain of mutans streptococci. Their specificities were examined
against 35 reference strains of mutans streptococci, 34 reference strains of
other oral streptococci and 8 reference strains of other microorganisms often
inhabiting the oral cavity. Specificity was examined by enzyme immunoassay using 
whole cells. A total of 52 strains, consisting of 19 strains isolated in Japan,
19 strains isolated in Italy and 14 strains isolated in England, were
characterised by conventional physiological and biochemical tests and then
serotyped by the use of 8 monoclonal antibodies with different specificities.
They were also confirmed by guanine-plus-cytosine contents of their nucleic acid 
and DNA-DNA hybridisation test. The results indicated that all monoclonal
antibodies are useful for identification of 8 serotypes of the mutans
streptococci responsible for dental caries. They also suggest the existence of
more serological varieties among mutans species.

PMID: 16352874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Blood. 2006 Apr 15;107(8):3339-41. Epub 2005 Dec 13.

Minimal molecular response in polycythemia vera patients treated with imatinib or
interferon alpha.

Jones AV(1), Silver RT, Waghorn K, Curtis C, Kreil S, Zoi K, Hochhaus A, Oscier
D, Metzgeroth G, Lengfelder E, Reiter A, Chase AJ, Cross NC.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury
SP2 8BJ, United Kingdom.

Imatinib and recombinant interferon alpha (rIFNalpha) can induce remission in
polycythemia vera (PV) patients, but gauging the depth of responses has not been 
possible due to lack of a specific disease marker. We found that patients
undergoing imatinib (n = 14) or rIFNalpha (n = 7) therapy remained strongly
positive for V617F JAK2, although there was a significant reduction in the median
percentage of mutant alleles that correlated with hematologic response (P =
.001). Furthermore, individuals who achieved complete hematologic remission had
lower levels of V617F than those who did not (P = .001). Of 9 imatinib-treated
cases for whom pretreatment samples were available, 7 with no or partial
hematologic responses showed a marginal increase (median, 1.2-fold; range,
1.0-1.5) in the percentage of V617F alleles on treatment, whereas the 2 patients 
who achieved complete hematologic remission showed a 2- to 3-fold reduction. Our 
data indicate that, although PV patients may benefit from imatinib or rIFNalpha, 
molecular responses are relatively modest.

PMID: 16352805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2005 Dec;24(6):305-8.

Preparation and characterization of a monoclonal antibody against CKLF1 using DNA
immunization with in vivo electroporation.

Chen Y(1), Zhang T, Li T, Han W, Zhang Y, Ma D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Medical Immunology, School of Basic Medical Science, Peking
University, Beijing, PR China. yingyu_chen@bjmu.edu.cn

Chemokine-like factor 1 (CKLF1) is a newly cloned human cytokine from
PHA-stimulated U937 cells in our laboratory, which belongs to a novel gene family
and has at least three alternative RNA splicing forms: CKLF2, CKLF3, and CKLF4.
Former studies demonstrated that CKLF1 has a chemotaxis effect on different
leukocytes both in vitro and in vivo. It can also stimulate the proliferation of 
mouse skeletal muscle cells and bone marrow cells. This study was designed to
generate CKLF1-specific monoclonal antibody (MAb) for further exploration of its 
structure and function. Mice were immunized intramuscularly with naked plasmid
DNA encoding CKLF1 gene with in vivo electroporation. Hybridomas were generated
by the fusion of the spleenocytes to Sp2/0 myeloma cells. One hybridoma cell line
designated as M4, which is stable in secreting anti- CKLF1 MAb, was generated. It
belongs to the IgG1 isotype and is specific for the unique C-terminal domain of
CKLFs protein. The specificity of this antibody has been assessed by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and Western blot. Our results
demonstrated that intramuscular injection of naked DNA encoding CKLF1 gene
combined with in vivo electroporation is an effective and simple method to raise 
MAbs that can be used for basic and clinical research of CKLF1 protein.

PMID: 16332197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2005 Dec;24(6):298-304.

Development and identification of monoclonal antibodies against parathion.

Zeng K(1), Yang T, Zhong P, Qu L, Zhou S, He J, Jiang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Space Cellular & Molecular Biology, Institute of Space
Medico-Engineering, Beijing, PR China.

An amino-derivative of parathion was prepared and conjugated to human serum
albumin (HSA) and bovine thyroglobulin (BTG) via diazonium condensation. Spleen
cells producing high titer antibody were removed and fused with myeloma cells of 
SP2/0 origin. Using a conventional immunization protocol, we generated nine
stable murine monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) producing cell lines to parathion.
After four successive limiting dilutions, antibodies produced by nine clones had 
high affinities, ranging from 10(9) to 10(12) M(-1). These clones were found to
be of IgG class and IgM class with k light chain. Subclass determination showed
that the clones produced IgG(1), IgG(2a), IgG(2b), and IgM types of antibody. One
clone (2H(9)) was used to establish the calibration curve with a sensitivity of
26 ng/mL, a practical working range of 46.8-6000 ng/mL parathion.

PMID: 16332196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Phys Chem A. 2005 Oct 13;109(40):9089-94.

Density functional theoretical study of a series of binary azides M(N3)n (n = 3, 
4).

Li QS(1), Duan HX.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Prevention and Control of Explosion Disasters, The
Institute for Chemical Physics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, 
China. qsli@bit.edu.cn

Geometrical structures of a series of binary azides M(N3)n (M = elements in
groups 3 and 13 (n = 3) and in groups 4 and 14 (n = 4)) were investigated at the 
B3LYP/6-311+G level of theory. Our calculations found that binary group 3
triazides M(N3)3 (M = Sc, Y, La) and binary group 4 tetraazides M(N3)4 (M = Ti,
Zr, Hf) turn out to be stable with all frequencies real having a similar linear
M-N-NN structural feature, as previously reported for M(N3)4 (M = Ti, Zr, Hf).
However, binary azides of group 13 M(N3)3 (M = B, Al, Ga, In, Tl) and group 14
elements M(N3)4 (C, Si, Ge, Sn, Pb) with bent M-N-NN bond angles differ obviously
from binary group 3 and 4 azides in geometrical structure. These facts are mainly
explained by the difference in electronic density overlap between the central
atom and the alpha-N atoms of the azido groups. Two lone-pair electrons on the sp
hybridization alpha-N atoms in the binary group 3 and 4 azides donate electron
density into two empty d orbitals of the central transition metal atom and a pair
of valence bonding electrons, resulting in the alpha-N atoms acting as a
tridentate ligand. The sp2 hybridization alpha-N atoms of the binary group 13 and
14 azides only give one valence electron to form one valence bonding electron
pair acting virtually as monodentate donors.

PMID: 16332016  [PubMed]


232. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2005 Nov 16;85(43):3057-61.

[Detection of Angiostrongylus cantonensis circulating antigen by monoclonal
antibodies].

[Article in Chinese]

Liang SH(1), Huang HC, Pan CW, Tan F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Wenzhou Medical College, Wenzhou 325035, China.

OBJECTIVE: To prepare monoclonal antibodies (McAbs) against soluble antigens of
adult worms of Angiostrongylus cantonensis (A. cantonensis) on the purpose to
detect CAg of A. cantonensis.
METHODS: Female BALB/c mice were immunized with soluble antigens of adult worms
of A. cantonensis and the spleen cells were fused with myeloma SP2/0 cells. The
hybridoma cell strains were screened by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
and Western blotting. Two McAbs (3F1 and 4H2) were applied to detect the CAg in
the sera of rats and mice infected with A. cantonensis and angiostrongyliasis
patients respectively by double antibody sandwich ELISA.
RESULTS: Three McAbs against A. cantonensis adult were obtained. Two McAbs (3F1, 
4H2) were identified as IgG1 and one McAb (2A2) was identified as IgM. The titers
of culture fluid and ascites was 1:25,600, 1:25,600, 1:12,800 and 1:80,000,
1:80,000, 1:40,000 respectively. Western blotting results showed three McAb could
be used to identify 15,000 protein of adult worms of A. cantonensis. The
detection rates of the CAg in the sera of infected rats and mice were 84.2%
(48/57) and 87.2% (41/47) respectively. The detection rate of the CAg in the sera
of angiostrongyliasis patients was 86.4% (19/22), and no cross reactions with
sera from patients with schistosomiasis, cysticercosis cellulose, paragonimiasis 
and trichinellosis were observed. The CAg in the sera from mice examined at
different periods after infection revealed positive 2 week after inoculation and 
the titer of CAg peaked 4 week after inoculation.
CONCLUSION: A new method of sandwich ELISA with high sensitivity and specificity 
to detect the serum A. cantonensis CAg has been obtained, it could be applicable 
to the diagnosis, observation of curative effect and epidemiology of
angiostrongyliasis.

PMID: 16324407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Zhonghua Gan Zang Bing Za Zhi. 2005 Nov;13(11):801-4.

[A study on the inhibitory effect on transplanted tumor growth expressing HCV NS3
protein by HCV minigene vaccine based on invariant chain substitution in mice].

[Article in Chinese]

Gao M(1), Wang HP, Zhou Y, Wang JJ, Wang YN, Wang QL.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Institute of Transfusion Medicine, Beijing 100850, China.

OBJECTIVES: To establish a transplanted tumor producing HCV NS3 protein in mice
and study the therapeutic effect of minigene vaccine based on invariant chain
substitution.
METHODS: SP2/0-NS3 cells expressing HCV NS3 antigen were injected subcutaneously 
into BALB/ c mice. After three days of inoculation, different therapeutical
reagents were injected intramuscularly into different groups of mice. The boost
immunization was carried out two weeks after the first immunization. The
efficiency of HCV NS3 Th1 minigene vaccine was estimated after 60 days
observation.
RESULTS: For saline, pCI-neo, pHCV-NS3 and pHCV-NS3-Th1 treated groups, the
induction period needed for tumor growth was 16.17+/-2.55, 14.40+/-1.82,
16.75+/-2.36, and 24.00+/-5.57 days (t =2.623, P =0.034 vs saline, t =3.713, P
=0.010 vs pCI-neo and t =2.425, P =0.045 vs pHCV-NS3) respectively. The
tumorigenesis rates were 100%, 100%, 57.1% (8/14, chi2 = 6.190, P = 0.013 vs
saline and chi2 = 6.608, P = 0.010 vs pCI-neo) and 46.7% (7/15, chi2 = 9.707, P =
0.002 vs saline and chi2 = 10.311, P = 0.001 vs pCI-neo ) respectively. The
survival rates were 0, 0, 50.0% (7/14, chi2 = 5.787, P = 0.016 vs saline and chi2
= 9.333, P = 0.002 vs pCI-neo) and 53.3% (8/15, chi2 = 6.651, P = 0.010 vs saline
and chi2 = 10.311, P = 0.001 vs pCI-neo) respectively. The average tumor diameter
of the pHCV-NS3-Th1 treated group was significantly smaller compared with the
control groups and the pHCV-NS3 treated group (P =0.001). Moreover, the average
survival time of tumor-bearing mice immunized with pHCV-NS3-Th1 was 6 days longer
compared with the saline treated group, 12 days longer compared with the pCI-neo 
treated group (P =0.001), and 6 days compared with the pHCV-NS3 treated group.
CONCLUSION: HCV NS3 Th1 epitope vaccine might be a potential biotherapy candidate
against HCV infection.

PMID: 16313719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Clin Biochem. 2006 Jan;39(1):28-38. Epub 2005 Nov 28.

Detection of electronegative low density lipoprotein (LDL-) in plasma and
atherosclerotic lesions by monoclonal antibody-based immunoassays.

Damasceno NR(1), Sevanian A, Apolinário E, Oliveira JM, Fernandes I, Abdalla DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, School of Public Health, University of São Paulo, SP,
Brazil.

OBJECTIVES: To produce a monoclonal antibody (MAb) against electronegative LDL
(LDL-) for detecting this modified lipoprotein in blood plasma and tissues.
DESIGN AND METHODS: LDL- was isolated from human blood plasma and used as an
antigen for immunization of Balb/c mice. Lymphocytes of immunized mice were fused
with myeloma cells (SP2/0) to obtain the hybridomas. LDL- was detected in blood
plasma and atherosclerotic lesions of humans and rabbits by MAb-based ELISA and
immunohistochemistry, respectively.
RESULTS: LDL- concentrations were higher (P < 0.05) in the blood plasma of
hypercholesterolemic subjects (HC, 248 +/- 77 mg/dL of total cholesterol) than in
normolipidemic subjects (NL, 173 +/- 82 mg/dL of total cholesterol) and rabbits
(HC, 250 +/- 15 mg/dL of cholesterol versus NL, 81 +/- 12 mg/dL of cholesterol). 
Moreover, LDL- was detected in the atherosclerotic lesions of humans and rabbits.
CONCLUSION: These MAb-based immunoassays are adequate to detect LDL- in
biological samples and represent an important tool for investigating the role of 
LDL- in atherosclerosis.

PMID: 16310760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Cell Mol Immunol. 2004 Dec;1(6):461-6.

Preliminary study on mouse interleukin-21 application in tumor gene therapy.

Dou J(1), Chen G, Wang J, Zhao F, Chen J, Fang X, Tang Q, Chu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Basic Medical School, Southeast
University, Nanjing 210009, China. njdoujun@yahoo.com.cn

Interleukin-21 (IL-21) is a recently characterized T cell-derived cytokine with a
significant homology to IL-2, IL-4 and IL-15. To determine whether IL-21 has
broad immunoregulatory activity and can stimulate durable antitumour responses,
we constructed mouse IL-21 (mIL-21) recombinant plasmid and evaluated its
antitumor efficacy. Mouse IL-21 cDNA was amplified from Con A-activated mouse T
cells by RT-PCR. Recombinant pcDNA3.1/mIL-21 was constructed and transfected into
Sp2/0 cells. Mouse IL-21 expression was analyzed by Western blotting and its
activities were detected by 3H-TdR incorporation and MTT assay. The recombinant
pcDNA3.1/mIL-21 was injected s.c. into tumor lump. Tumor size, weight, the
activities of CTLs, NK cells and LAK cells and serum IFN-gamma level were
measured for evaluating mIL-21 mediated antitumor responses. The results
indicated that mIL-21 was correctly expressed in Sp2/0 cells and it can improve
the proliferation of T cells and B cells, and enhance NK cytotoxic activity in
vitro. The activities of CTL and NK cells, and serum IFN-gamma level were
significantly improved, furthermore the tumor growth was obviously suppressed in 
pcDNA3.1/mIL-21 treated mice. However, the LAK activity did not alter
significantly. Taken together, this study suggests that the injection with
recombinant plasmid containing mIL-21 is a potential approach for tumor gene
therapy.

PMID: 16293216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Org Chem. 2005 Sep 30;70(20):7816-28.

A DFT theoretical study of the condensation of aggregates of sp2 organolithium
compounds on formaldehyde.

Fressigné C(1), Lautrette A, Maddaluno J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche en Chimie Organique Fine, UMR 6014 CNRS, Université de
Rouen, 76821 - Mont St Aignan Cedex (France).

[Chemical reaction: See text] The interaction between three different sp2
organolithium compounds (vinyllithium, 2-methoxyvinyllithium and phenyllithium)
and formaldehyde has been investigated using DFT theoretical methods. The
unsolvated monomers and dimers have been considered and compared to the 1:1 mixed
aggregates formed with lithium dimethylamide. In all cases, the separate
entities, their docking complexes, the transition states, and the condensation
products have been characterized and compared to the corresponding situations
involving methyllithium, taken as a prototypic sp3 nucleophile. Regarding the
monomers, this study shows that, in the three cases considered, formaldehyde
forms a pretransition state complex in which the oxygen of the carbonyl interacts
with the lithium cation along one of its lone pair. A small energy barrier (< or 
=2.1 kcal.mol(-1)) brings to the transition state, then to the lithium alcoholate
resulting from the largely exothermic condensation (approximately 40
kcal.mol(-1)). The structure of the homogeneous dimers considered in a second
step has been optimized and lead to arrangements in which a planar quadrilateral 
C-Li-C-Li is always obtained. In the presence of formaldehyde, these entities
provide complexes exhibiting lithium-oxygen interaction similar to those
occurring with the monomers. For the dimers, the geometry at the TS evokes a
pi-complex between the C=O and the lithium cation, particularly pronounced in the
case of phenyllithium. The resulting alcoholates are obtained following a larger 
exothermic reaction (approximately 55 kcal.mol(-1)). The heterogeneous dimers
with lithium dimethylamide have been finally examined. In these cases, the
aldehyde can orientate toward either the carbon or the nitrogen, leading to the
expected lithium alcoholate or alpha-amino alcoholate, respectively. Whatever the
orientation, the complexes present characteristics close to those calculated for 
the homogeneous dimer complexes. These similarities are conserved at the
transition state.

PMID: 16277301  [PubMed]


237. Biomed Environ Sci. 2005 Aug;18(4):254-9.

Preparation of monoclonal antibody and development of enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay specific for Escherichia coli O157 in foods.

Zhao ZJ(1), Liu XM.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Nutrition and Food Safety, Chinese Center for Disease
Control and Prevention, Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVE: To prepare monoclonal antibodies (MAb) and antisera specific for
Escherichia coli (E. coli) O157, and to develop a sandwich enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) to detect E. coli O157 in foods.
METHODS: Spleen cells from BALB/c mice immunized with the somatic antigen of E.
coli O157:H7 were fused with murine Sp2/0 myeloma cells. The hybridoma cell line 
specific for E. coli O157 was established after having been subcloned. Antisera
specific for E. coli O157 was prepared by intravenous injection into New Zealand 
rabbits with a stain of E. coli O157:H7. The sandwich ELISA was developed with
the polyclonal antibody as the capture antibody and the MAb 3A5 as the detection 
antibody. The inoculated ground poultry meat and pasteurized milk were tested to 
confirm efficiency of the method.
RESULTS: MAb 3A5 specific for E. coli O157 and O113:H21 belonged to subtype IgM. 
The ascetic titers of the antibody was 1:1x10(6). No cross-reactivity of the MAb 
was observed with strains of Salmonella spp, Yersinia enterocolitica, Shigella
dysenteriae, etc. The purified polyclonal antibody had a titer of 1:1x10(5) with 
E. coli O157. The detection limit of this sandwich ELISA was 10(3)-10(4) cfu E.
coli O157/mL in pure culture with a high specificity, which was characterized by 
every non-O157 strain with negative response. With 10h enrichment procedure, E.
coli O157:H7 recovered well from inoculated ground poultry meat and pasteurized
milk at levels of 0.1 cfu/g and 0.1 cfu/mL.
CONCLUSION: MAb 3A5 specific for E. coli O157 and O113:H21 can be produced by
immunizing BALB/c mice with a strain of E. coli O157:H7. Then a sandwich ELISA
can be developed with the polyclonal antibody as the capture antibody and the MAb
3A5 as the detection antibody. The method is proved to be a sensitive and
specific technique to detect low number of E. coli O157 in food.

PMID: 16274107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Org Chem. 2005 Nov 11;70(23):9185-90.

Ag NMR as a tool for mechanistic studies of Ag-catalyzed reactions: evidence for 
in situ formation of alkyn-1-yl silver from alkynes and silver salts.

Létinois-Halbes U(1), Pale P, Berger S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Synthèse et Réactivité Organique, 4 Rue Blaise Pascal, 67000
Strasbourg, France, and Institut für Analytische Chemie, Linnéstrasse 3, 04301
Leipzig, Germany.

[Structure: see formula]. As demonstrated by 1H, 13C, and 109Ag NMR, a
pi-alkyne-Ag complex and then an alkynyl silver are in situ formed from alkyne
and silver salt in conditions related to those used for Ag-catalyzed alkynylation
or for Ag/Pd-catalyzed sp-sp2 cross-coupling reactions. This finding allows for a
rationale of the mechanisms of these reactions.

PMID: 16268588  [PubMed]


239. Org Lett. 2005 Nov 10;7(23):5331-3.

Synthesis of the C6-C21 segment of amphidinolide E.

Marshall JA(1), Schaaf G, Nolting A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Virginia, P.O. Box 400319,
Charlottesville, Virginia 22904, USA. jam5x@virginia.edu

[reaction: see text] A convergent approach to a C6-C21 segment of the polyketide 
amphidinolide E has been developed through combination of three subunits by
allenylindium bromide-aldehyde addition and Suzuki sp2-sp3 coupling.

PMID: 16268571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Org Lett. 2005 Nov 10;7(23):5115-8.

Access to isocarbacyclin derivatives via substrate-controlled enolate formation: 
total synthesis of 15-deoxy-16-(m-tolyl)- 17,18,19,20-tetranorisocarbacyclin.

Sheddan NA(1), Mulzer J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Organische Chemie, Währingerstrasse 38, A-1090 Wien, Austria.

[reaction: see text] We describe a convergent and flexible synthesis of
15-deoxy-16-(m-tolyl)-17,18,19,20-tetranorisocarbacyclin (15-deoxy-TIC), a simple
isocarbacyclin derivative. The synthesis takes advantage of two key step
reactions: a regioselective deprotonation of the described ketone under substrate
control which is then trapped, as the enol triflate, to generate the C6-C9alpha
endocyclic double bond, followed by an sp2-sp3 Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling
reaction (C5-C6) with a suitable primary alkyl Grignard reagent. Introduction of 
the C13-C14 (E)-double bond in the omega-side chain is performed by the
Julia-Kocieñski olefination.

PMID: 16268516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Int Fam Plan Perspect. 2005 Sep;31(3):124-30.

Gender inequality and intimate partner violence among women in Moshi, Tanzania.

McCloskey LA(1), Williams C, Larsen U.

Author information: 
(1)School of Social Policy and Practice, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA. lmcclosk@sp2.upenn.edu

CONTEXT: In Sub-Saharan Africa, where rates of intimate partner violence are
high, knowing the prevalence of abuse and associated patterns of risk is crucial 
to ensuring women's health and development. Intimate partner violence in Tanzania
has not been assessed through a population-based survey.
METHODS: A household-based sample of women aged 20-44 in the urban district of
Moshi, Tanzania, participated in face-to-face interviews in 2002-2003. The
lifetime prevalence of exposure to intimate partner violence and the prevalence
of exposure during the past 12 months were assessed among 1,444 women who
reported having a current partner. Multivariate logistic regression was used to
identify factors associated with intimate partner violence.
RESULTS: Twenty-one percent of women reported having experienced intimate partner
violence (i.e., having been threatened with physical abuse, subjected to physical
abuse or forced into intercourse by a partner) during the previous 12 months; 26%
reported such an experience at any time, including the past 12 months. The
likelihood of violence in the past year was elevated if the woman had had
problems conceiving or had borne five or more children (odds ratios, 1.9 and 2.4,
respectively); if her husband or partner had other partners (2.0) or contributed 
little to expenses for her and her children (3.3); and if she had had no more
than a primary education (1.7).
CONCLUSIONS: Gender inequality within sexual unions is associated with intimate
partner violence. Policies and programs that discourage men from blaming women
for infertility, promote monogamous unions and expand access to education for
women may reduce intimate partner violence in northern urban Tanzania.

PMID: 16263529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Oncogene. 2006 Mar 9;25(10):1474-84.

Expression of cathepsin L in human tumor cells is under the control of distinct
regulatory mechanisms.

Jean D(1), Rousselet N, Frade R.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U.672 (ex U.354), Immunochimie des Régulations Cellulaires et des
Interactions Virales, Bâtiment G8, Génopole d'Evry, Evry Cedex, France.
jean354@genopole.evry.inserm.fr

Cathepsin L, a cysteine protease, is overexpressed in human tumor cells and plays
a major role in melanoma progression. Our aim was herein to identify molecular
mechanisms, which contribute to its overexpression. We found that cathepsin L
protein expression correlated with mRNA level in tumor cells. Therefore, we
focused on mechanisms involved in cathepsin L mRNA regulation. CpG island was
localized in the 5' region of cathepsin L gene that encompassed regulatory
regions identified as essential for promoter activity. CpG dinucleotides, not
methylated in any melanoma cells analysed, were methylated in a B lymphoma cell
line, which poorly express cathepsin L. Our data demonstrate that in lymphoma
cells, cathepsin L silencing was methylation-dependent. Furthermore, gene
amplification was involved in cathepsin L overexpression in one melanoma cell
line, while transcriptional mechanisms but not mRNA stability are responsible of 
cathepsin L overexpression in others melanoma cells. In addition, NF-Y, Sp1, Sp2 
and Sp3 transcription factors, essential to basal cathepsin L transcription, are 
not directly involved in overexpression. Thus, our data provides the first
demonstration that cathepsin L expression in tumor cells is under the control of 
distinct molecular mechanisms.

PMID: 16261157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Dec 16;338(2):1222-8. Epub 2005 Oct 21.

Development of novel fluorescent probe 3-perylene diphenylphosphine for
determination of lipid hydroperoxide with fluorescent image analysis.

Chotimarkorn C(1), Nagasaka R, Ushio H, Ohshima T, Matsunaga S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Technology, Tokyo University of Marine Science 
and Technology, 5-7 Konan 4, Minato, Tokyo 108-8477, Japan.

A novel fluorescent probe 3-perylene diphenylphosphine (3-PeDPP) was synthesized 
for the direct analysis of lipid hydroperoxides. The structure of 3-PeDPP was
identified by the spectroscopic data, FAB-MS, (1)H NMR, and (13)C NMR. The
reactivities of 3-PeDPP with lipid hydroperoxides were investigated in
chloroform/MeOH homogeneous solutions and PC liposome model systems oxidized by
either 2,2'-azobis(2-amidinopropane)dihydrochloride and photosensitized
oxidation. The fluorescence intensity derived from 3-perylene
diphenylphosphineoxide (3-PeDPPO) increased proportionally with amount of
hydroperoxides produced in homogeneous solutions and liposome model systems.
3-PeDPP was easily incorporated into mouse myeloma SP2 cells and thin tissue
section for dynamic membrane lipid peroxidation studies. Linear correlations
between fluorescence intensity and amount of hydroperoxides in the cell membrane 
and tissue sections were obtained. The fluorescence intensity from 2-dimensional 
image analysis was also well correlated with lipid hydroperoxide level in these
models. Thus, the novel probe 3-PeDPP is useful for the direct determination of
lipid hydroperoxides in biological materials.

PMID: 16256945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Agric Food Chem. 2005 Nov 2;53(22):8447-51.

Production of a monoclonal antibody against ochratoxin A and its application to
immunochromatographic assay.

Cho YJ(1), Lee DH, Kim DO, Min WK, Bong KT, Lee GG, Seo JH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Agricultural Biotechnology and Center for Agricultural Biomaterials,
Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea.

A monoclonal antibody (Mab) against ochratoxin A (OTA) was produced from the
hybridoma cell line C7G25, which was established by the fusion of Sp2/0-Ag14
myeloma cells with spleen cells isolated from a BALB/c mouse immunized with the
OTA-bovine serum albumin conjugate. This Mab belongs to the IgG(2a) heavy-chain
subclass with a kappa-type light chain. The level of 50% inhibition concentration
was 1.20 ng/mL in a competitive direct enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(cdELISA), and the detection limit was 0.12 ng/mL. This antibody is specific for 
OTA but also shows cross-reactivity with ochratoxin B (31.7%) in a cdELISA. On
the basis of the sandwich format using the produced Mab against OTA, a rapid
immunochromatographic assay was developed to efficiently detect OTA. This method 
was able to detect up to 500 ng/mL of OTA in <10 min.

PMID: 16248536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Wei Sheng Wu Xue Bao. 2005 Aug;45(4):580-3.

[Production of monoclonal antibodies to Lily symptomless virus and application in
lily virus detection].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu JX(1), Liu CK, Hong J, Liu WH, Ye MQ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310029, China.
wujx@zju.edu.cn

Four hybridoma cell lines, 2A2, 5H9, 5H2 and 5E12, secreting monoclonal
antibodies (MAbs) against Lily symptomless virus (LSV) were produced by fusing
mouse myeloma cells (SP2/0) with spleen cells from BALB/C immunized by the LSV
particles. The four MAbs could specifically react with LSV. The titres of ascitic
fluids of the four MAbs are up to 10(-6) in ELISA. Isotypes and subclasses of 5H9
and 5E12 belong to IgG1 while those of 2A2 and 5H2 belong to IgG3. Isotypes of
light strains of the four MAbs all belong to kappa. The four MAbs were used in
antigen-coated plate (ACP)-ELISA for LSV detection, and ACP-ELISA could
successfully detect 1.8 ng of purified LSV or virus in plant sap diluted 1:300.
The presence of LSV in field lily tissues was investigated with ACP-ELISA.

PMID: 16245875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Phys Rev Lett. 2005 Oct 7;95(15):156401. Epub 2005 Oct 6.

Self-trapped excitons in silicon dioxide: mechanism and properties.

Ismail-Beigi S(1), Louie SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Physics, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, 
USA.

Irradiating silica produces self-trapped excitons (STEs) that spontaneously
create atomic-scale distortions on which they localize themselves. Despite
enduring interest in STEs and subsequent defects in this key technological
material, the trapping mechanism and geometry remain a mystery. Our ab initio
study of STEs in alpha-quartz using a many-electron Green's function approach
answers both questions. The STE comprises a broken O-Si bond with the hole
localized on the defected oxygen and the electron on the defected silicon atom in
a planar sp2 conformation. The results further explain quantitatively the
measured STE spectra.

PMID: 16241743  [PubMed]


247. J Am Chem Soc. 2005 Oct 26;127(42):14538-9.

The reactant state for substrate-activated turnover of acetylthiocholine by
butyrylcholinesterase is a tetrahedral intermediate.

Tormos JR(1), Wiley KL, Seravalli J, Nachon F, Masson P, Nicolet Y, Quinn DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Secondary beta-deuterium kinetic isotope effects have been measured as a function
of substrate concentration for recombinant human butyrylcholinesterase-catalyzed 
hydrolysis of acetyl-L3-thiocholine (L = 1H or 2H). The isotope effect on V/K is 
inverse, D3V/K = 0.93 +/- 0.03, which is consistent with conversion of the sp2
hybridized carbonyl carbon of the scissile ester bond of the E + A reactant state
to a quasi-tetrahedral structure in the acylation transition state. In contrast, 
the isotope effect on Vmax under conditions of substrate activation is markedly
normal, D3(betaVmax) = 1.29 +/- 0.06, an observation that is consistent with
accumulation of a tetrahedral intermediate as the reactant state for catalytic
turnover. Generally, tetrahedral intermediates for nonenzymatic ester hydrolyses 
are high-energy steady-state intermediates. Apparently, butyrylcholinesterase
displays an unusual ability to stabilize such intermediates. Hence, the catalytic
power of cholinesterases can largely be understood in terms of their ability to
stabilize tetrahedral intermediates in the multistep reaction mechanism.

PMCID: PMC3685723
PMID: 16231883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Orig Life Evol Biosph. 2005 Jun;35(3):275-95.

On the structural regularity in nucleobases and amino acids and relationship to
the origin and evolution of the genetic code.

Yang CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Neurochemistry and System Chemical Biology, Nankai University, Tian Jin,
300071, China. yangchm@nankai.edu.cn

To explore how chemical structures of both nucleobases and amino acids may have
played a role in shaping the genetic code, numbers of sp2 hybrid nitrogen atoms
in nucleobases were taken as a determinative measure for empirical
stereo-electronic property to analyze the genetic code. Results revealed that
amino acid hydropathy correlates strongly with the sp2 nitrogen atom numbers in
nucleobases rather than with the overall electronic property such as redox
potentials of the bases, reflecting that stereo-electronic property of bases may 
play a role. In the rearranged code, five simple but stereo-structurally
distinctive amino acids (Gly, Pro, Val, Thr and Ala) and their codon quartets
form a crossed intersection "core". Secondly, a re-categorization of the amino
acids according to their beta-carbon stereochemistry, verified by charge density 
(at beta-carbon) calculation, results in five groups of stereo-structurally
distinctive amino acids, the group leaders of which are Gly, Pro, Val, Thr and
Ala, remarkably overlapping the above "core". These two lines of independent
observations provide empirical arguments for a contention that a seemingly
"frozen" "core" could have formed at a certain evolutionary stage. The possible
existence of this codon "core" is in conformity with a previous evolutionary
model whereby stereochemical interactions may have shaped the code. Moreover, the
genetic code listed in UCGA succession together with this codon "core" has
recently facilitated an identification of the unprecedented icosikaioctagon
symmetry and bi-pyramidal nature of the genetic code.

PMID: 16228642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2005 Oct 15;1731(1):13-22. Epub 2005 Sep 15.

Regulation of inhibitor of differentiation gene 3 (Id3) expression by Sp2-motif
binding factor in myogenic C2C12 cells: downregulation of DNA binding activity
following skeletal muscle differentiation.

Wu J(1), Lim RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Pharmacology and Physiology and Molecular Biology
Program, University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, MO 65201, USA.

Id3 is a member of the Id family of transcriptional regulators that have been
implicated in the development of multiple tissues. Altered expression of the Id
genes and proteins contribute to carcinogenesis and atherosclerosis. Id3 is
highly expressed in proliferating skeletal muscle cells but becomes downregulated
upon terminal differentiation. We have identified several DNase I protected
footprints within a proximal region of the mouse Id3 promoter that has been shown
previously to support high levels of transcriptional activity in proliferating
skeletal muscle cells. Two of these sites interacted, respectively, in vitro with
Sp2 and Egr-1 proteins present in muscle cell nuclear extracts. Mutation analysis
revealed that the Sp2 site accounted for a major part of the Id3 promoter
activity in proliferating muscle cells whereas the Egr-1 site was dispensable.
Consistent with the previously observed downregulation of the endogenous Id3
gene, protein binding to the Sp2 site was substantially reduced with extracts
from differentiated muscle cells. Our results reveal Id3 as a potential target
for Sp2 and raise the possibility that acute activation and the chronic and
maintained expression of Id3 gene might be regulated by different mechanisms.

PMID: 16216350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Clin Hemorheol Microcirc. 2005;33(3):243-51.

Kinetics of the endocytotic pathway of Low Density Lipoprotein (LDL) in human
endothelial cells line under shear stress: an in vitro confocal microscopy study.

Traoré M(1), Sun RJ, Fawzi-Grancher S, Dumas D, Qing X, Santus R, Stoltz JF,
Muller S.

Author information: 
(1)Groupe de Mécanique et Ingénierie Cellulaire et Tissulaire, UMR-CNRS 7563
LEMTA et IFR 111 Bioingénierie, Faculté de Médecine, 54500 Vandoeuvre lès Nancy, 
France. Mariama.Traore@medecine.uhp-nancy.fr

We studied the effect of mechanical forces (shear stress) on the kinetics of
internalization of native LDL and ox-LDL in endothelial cell line ECV304. This
study was performed by using Confocal microscopy and FRET with two carbocyanine
dyes, 1,1'-dioctadecyl-3,3,3',3'-tetramethylindocarbocyanine perchlorate (DiO) as
the donor and 3,3'-dioctadecyloxacarbocyanine perchlorate (DiI) as the receptor. 
The cells were incubated with a culture medium containing either 10 microg/ml
DiI-LDL or DiO-LDL in static conditions or subjected to a laminar flow under a
Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope (SP2 Leica, Germany). The results showed: (1) 
the possibility to evaluate the kinetics of LDL endocytosis in living cells, (2) 
shear stress in comparison with control group more effectively enhanced LDL
uptake, (3) ox-LDL (>50 microg/ml) >4 hours incubation was found to affect the
cells as reflected by their detachment at low shear stress.

PMID: 16215290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Exp Parasitol. 2005 Dec;111(4):239-43. Epub 2005 Oct 4.

Leishmanin skin test in guinea pig with a single purified protein of Leishmania
major.

Khabiri AR(1), Bagheri F, Alimohammadian MH, Assmar M, Nadaf SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.
Alireza_khabiri@yahoo.com

A series of hybridomas was produced by fusion of SP2/0 myeloma cells with spleen 
cells of mice immunized with Leishmania major (L. major). The reactivity of
secreted monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) was evaluated against available leishmanin 
antigen by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay. Only one hybridoma designated as
7F9 secreted IgG1 mAb which was shown to be reactive with leishmanin. This mAb
was further tested against four species of Leishmania (L. donovani, L. tropica,
L. infantum, L. major) and a recombinant gp63. Among the four species tested it
was shown to be only reactive with promastigotes of L. major. The antigen
recognized by this mAb was purified and analyzed from both sonicated and
supernatant cultures of L. major by immunoaffinity chromatography and reverse
phase high performance liquid chromatography. The purified antigen, which gave a 
single band of 56kDa on sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
elicited a strong delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH) reaction in guinea pigs
sensitized with L. major. It was almost of the same degree as that produced by
leishmanin. These results suggest that an L. major-specific antigen is an
alternative as a specific diagnostic skin test reagent, which could lead to a
better understanding of the mechanism of DTH in L. major.

PMID: 16212955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Inorg Chem. 2005 Oct 17;44(21):7644-51.

Exploring the universality of unusual conformations of the 17-membered
Pt(d(G*pG*)) macrochelate ring. Dependence of conformer formation on a change in 
bidentate carrier ligand from an sp3 to an sp2 nitrogen donor.

Bhattacharyya D(1), Marzilli PA, Marzilli LG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana
70803, USA.

Early studies on cis-PtA2(d(G*pG*)) (A2 = diamine or two amines, G =
N7-platinated G) and cis-Pt(NH3)2(d(G*pG*)) models for the key cisplatin-DNA
cross-link suggested that they exist exclusively or mainly as the HH1 conformer
(HH1 = head-to-head G bases, with 1 denoting the normal direction of backbone
propagation). These dynamic models are difficult to characterize. Employing
carrier A2 ligands designed to slow dynamic interchange of conformers, we found
two new conformers, DeltaHT (head-to-tail G* bases with a Delta chirality) and
HH2 (with 2 denoting the backbone propagation direction opposite to normal).
However, establishing that the non-HH1 conformations exist as an intrinsic
feature of the 17-membered Pt(d(G*pG*)) ring requires exploring a range of
different carrier ligands. Here we employ the planar aromatic sp(2) N-donor
5,5'-Me(2)bipy (5,5'-dimethyl-2,2'-bipyridine) ligand, having a shape very
different from those of previously used nonplanar sp(3) N-donor bidentate carrier
ligands, which often bear NH groups. The 5,5'-Me(2)bipy H6 and H6' protons
project toward the d(G*pG*) moiety and hinder the dynamic motion of
5,5'-Me(2)bipyPt(d(G*pG*)). We again found HH1, HH2, and DeltaHT conformers with 
typical properties, supporting the conclusions that the new DeltaHT and HH2
conformers exist universally in dynamic cis-PtA2(d(G*pG*)) adducts, including
cis-Pt(NH3)2(d(G*pG*)), and that the carrier ligand typically has little
influence on the overall structure of the Pt(d(G*pG*)) macrocyclic ring of a
given conformer. The sizes of the G H8 to H6/H6' NOE cross-peaks indicate little 
base canting in all 5,5'-Me(2)bipyPt(d(G*pG*)) conformers, suggesting that
carrier-ligand NH groups favor the canting of one G base in the HH1 and HH2
conformers of typical cis-PtA2(d(G*pG*)) adducts.

PMID: 16212391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Phys Rev Lett. 2005 Aug 26;95(9):096103. Epub 2005 Aug 26.

Growth of carbon nanotubes on metal nanoparticles: a microscopic mechanism from
ab initio molecular dynamics simulations.

Raty JY(1), Gygi F, Galli G.

Author information: 
(1)Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, P.O. Box 808, Livermore, CA 94550,
USA.

We report on ab initio molecular dynamics simulations of the early stages of
single-walled carbon nanotube (SWCNT) growth on metal nanoparticles. Our results 
show that a sp2 bonded cap is formed on an iron catalyst, following the diffusion
of C atoms from hydrocarbon precursors on the nanoparticle surface. The weak
adhesion between the cap and iron enables the graphene sheet to "float" on the
curved surface, as additional C atoms covalently bonded to the catalyst "hold"
the tube walls. Hence the SWCNT grows capped. At the nanoscale, we did not
observe any tendency of C atoms to penetrate inside the catalyst, consistent with
total energy calculations showing that alloying of Fe and C is very unlikely for 
1 nm particles. Root growth was observed on Fe but not on Au, consistent with
experiment.

PMID: 16197231  [PubMed]


254. J Am Chem Soc. 2005 Sep 28;127(38):13154-5.

Highly regioselective arylation of sp3 C-H bonds catalyzed by palladium acetate.

Zaitsev VG(1), Shabashov D, Daugulis O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Houston, Houston, Texas 77204-5003,
USA.

A new palladium-catalyzed arylation process based on C-H activation has been
developed. The utilization of pyridine-containing directing groups allows the
beta-arylation of carboxylic acid derivatives and gamma-arylation of amine
derivatives. Both primary and secondary sp3 C-H bonds, as well as sp2 C-H bonds, 
are reactive.

PMID: 16173737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Toxicon. 2005 Nov;46(6):664-71. Epub 2005 Sep 15.

Molecular characterization of a neutralizing murine monoclonal antibody against
Tityus serrulatus scorpion venom.

Alvarenga LM(1), Machado de Avila RA, Amim PR, Martins MS, Kalapothakis E, de
Lima ME, Santos RG, Granier C, Chávez-Olórtegui C.

Author information: 
(1)Departamentos de Bioquímica-Imunologia, ICB, Universidade Federal de Minas
Gerais, CP: 486; CEP: 31270901, Belo Horizonte-MG, Brazil.

Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) against Tityus serrulatus venom were obtained by the
fusion of SP2/0 murine myeloma cells and spleen cells from BALB/c mice immunized 
with a toxic fraction (TstFG50) of the Tityus venom (this G50 chromatography
fraction represents most of the toxicity of the crude venom) conjugated to bovine
serum albumin (BSA) with glutaraldehyde. From the initial screening of over 200
hybridoma fusion wells, a panel of 9 anti-TstFG50 secreting hybridomas was
established. The capacity of mAbs to neutralize the TstFG50 toxic fraction toxic 
was determined by in vitro neutralization assays and by inhibition of the binding
of 125I-TsVII to its site on rat brain synaptosomes. Only mAbTs1 neutralized 50% 
of the toxic effects produced by scorpion venom and showed 35% inhibition of the 
binding of 125I-TsVII at 10(-7) M. To map the epitope recognized by the
protective mAbTs1, we prepared a comprehensive series of overlapping 15-mer
synthetic peptides covering the amino acid sequences of the four Tityus proteins.
MAbTs1 reacted with peptide 26 of TsIV (KKSKDKKADSGYSYW), peptide 30 of TsVII
(KKGSSGYSAWPASYS) and peptide 31 of TsNTxP (KKGSSGYSAWPASYS). MAbTs1 was not
reactive with any peptide from TsII. The N-terminal lysine residue from the
epitope was found to be critical for mAbTs1 binding. The epitope was positioned
on the available three-dimensional structure of TsVII together with the recently 
identified residues from the pharmacophore of beta-scorpion toxins. The
neutralizing properties of mAbTs1 might be explained by spatial vicinity of
epitope residues with pharmacophore residues.

PMID: 16168449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Am Chem Soc. 2005 Sep 14;127(36):12583-94.

Thermodynamic and strain effects in the competition between 5-exo-dig and
6-endo-dig cyclizations of vinyl and aryl radicals.

Alabugin IV(1), Manoharan M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Florida State University,
Tallahassee, Florida 32306, USA. alabugin@chem.fsu.edu

Electronic and structural factors controlling the competition between 5-exo-dig
and 6-endo-dig cyclizations of sp2-radicals were analyzed using a combination of 
available experimental data and computation. Although the stereoelectronically
favored 5-exo pathways usually has the lower activation energy, formation of a
new aromatic ring not only makes the 6-endo process favorable thermodynamically
in conjugated systems but also lowers its activation barrier to the extent where 
the 5-exo/6-endo selectivity is controlled by subtle factors such as the
different sensitivity of the two pathways to strain effects in polycyclic
systems. In particular, the stronger sensitivity of the 5-exo pathway to strain
leads to a crossover in selectivity. The 6-endo cyclization is kinetically
favored in smaller (and strained) cycles, whereas the 5-exo cyclization has lower
barriers in the larger rings.

PMID: 16144406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2005 Aug;13(4):601-4.

[Establishment of mouse SP2/0 cell line stably expressing bcr-abl fusion gene
fragment].

[Article in Chinese]

Jiang YW(1), Qian L, Liu W, Gong WJ, Wang B, Guan J, Ji MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Affiliated Hospital of Yangzhou University, Yangzhou
225001, China.

To establish SP2/0 cell line H-2(d) stably expressing bcr-abl fusion gene
fragment, the bcr-abl fusion gene was subcloned into retroviral vector pLXSN from
pGEMbcr-abl. The recombinant retroviral vector pLXSNbcr-abl was transfected into 
PT67 packaging cells with the help of lipofectamine. The positive clones were
selected out and cultured after G418 selection. Then viral supernatant was
collected to determine viral titer, the viral titer was 2 x 10(7) CFU/ml. The
SP2/0 cells were infected with the collected viral supernatant. The results
showed that after G418 selection, the bcr-abl fusion gene was integrated into the
chromosome of SP2/0 cells infected stably, with recombinant retrovirus and
expressed in SP2/0 cells confirmed by PCR and RT-PCR respectively. In conclusion,
the mouse tumor cell lines expressing the bcr-abl fusion protein were
successfully established and would be used as a experimental cell model for
anti-CML immunotherapy.

PMID: 16129042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Gene. 2005 Oct 24;360(1):20-6. Epub 2005 Aug 24.

The gonadotropin-regulated long-chain acyl CoA synthetase gene: a novel
downstream Sp1/Sp3 binding element critical for transcriptional promoter
activity.

Sheng Y(1), Li J, Dufau ML, Tsai-Morris CH.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Molecular Endocrinology, ERRB, NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland
20892, United States.

The 79 kD gonadotropin-regulated testicular long chain acyl-CoA synthetase gene
(GR-LACS) is a hormone-regulated member of the acyl-CoA synthetase family that is
expressed abundantly in Leydig cells and to a lesser extent in germinal cells of 
the adult testis. GR-LACS possesses an ATP/AMP binding domain and the fatty
acyl-CoA synthetase (FACS) signature motif. To gain insights into the
transcriptional regulation of GR-LACS in gonadal cells, we determined the genomic
organization of the gene, including the upstream flanking sequences. The mouse
GR-LACS gene spans over at least 45 kb and the coding region is encoded by exons 
1-14. All exon-intron junction sites correspond to the consensus splice sequence 
GT-AG. Exon 7 and 11 comprise the conserved ATP/AMP binding domain and the FACS
signature motif, respectively. Primer extension and S1 nuclease analyses
demonstrated four transcriptional start sites located at -266/-216 bp 5' to the
ATG codon. The minimal promoter domain resides within -254/-217 bp 5' to ATG
codon, and upstream sequences to -404 bp (-1035/-405 bp) contribute to the
inhibition of transcription in the expressing mouse Leydig tumor cells. Removal
of -217/-1 bp, containing a 23 nt GC rich sequence (-112/-90) with an Sp1/Sp3
binding element, within the 1st exon of this TATA-less promoter, significantly
reduced GR-LACS gene transcription. Transcriptional activity was abolished by a 2
nt mutation of this element. Thus, functional analyses of this promoter domain
indicate that transcription of GR-LACS gene requires an Sp1/Sp3 binding element
downstream of the transcriptional start sites which is essential for basal
promoter activity.

PMID: 16125341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Photochem Photobiol. 2005 Jul-Aug;81(4):843-8.

A new firefly luciferase with bimodal spectrum: identification of structural
determinants of spectral pH-sensitivity in firefly luciferases.

Viviani VR(1), Oehlmeyer TL, Arnoldi FG, Brochetto-Braga MR.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biologia, Instituto de Biociências, Universidade Estadual de
São Paulo, Rio Claro, SP, Brazil. viviani@rc.unesp.br

Fireflies emit flashes in the green-yellow region of the spectrum for the purpose
of sexual attraction. The bioluminescence color is determined by the luciferases.
It is well known that the in vitro bioluminescence color of firefly luciferases
can be shifted toward the red by lower pH and higher temperature; for this reason
they are classified as pH-sensitive luciferases. However, the mechanism and
structural origin of pH sensitivity in fireflies remains unknown. Here we report 
the cloning of a new luciferase from the Brazilian twilight active firefly
Macrolampis sp2, which displays an unusual bimodal spectrum. The recombinant
luciferase displays a sensitive spectrum with the peak at 569 nm and a shoulder
in the red region. Comparison of the bioluminescence spectra of Macrolampis,
Photinus and Cratomorphus firefly luciferases shows that the distinct colors are 
determined by the ratio between green and red emitters under luciferase
influence. Comparison of Macrolampis luciferase with the highly similar North
American Photinus pyralis luciferase (91%) showed few substitutions potentially
involved with the higher spectral sensitivity in Macrolampis luciferase.
Site-directed mutagenesis showed that the natural substitution E354N determines
the appearance of the shoulder in the red region of Macrolampis luciferase
bioluminescence spectrum, helping to identify important interactions and residues
involved in the pH-sensing mechanism in firefly luciferases.

PMID: 16124832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2005 Aug;24(4):206-10.

Generation and characterization of monoclonal antibodies to protein kinase 2
(CK2) beta subunit.

Panasyuk G(1), Nemazanyy I, Ovcharenko G, Lyzogubov V, Gout I, Filonenko V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structure and Function of Nucleic Acids, Institute of Molecular 
Biology and Genetics, NAS of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine. panasyuk_g@imbg.org.ua

Protein kinase 2 (CK2) is a ubiquitous and constitutively active serine/threonine
protein kinase with various cell functions. It typically forms tetrameric
complexes consisting of two catalytic (alpha and/or (alpha') and two regulatory
(beta) subunits. The aim of this study was to produce monoclonal antibodies
(MAbs) against the CK2beta subunit and to characterize their suitability for
Western blotting, immunoprecipitation, and immunohistochemical applications.
Bacterially expressed CK2beta-6His-GST recombinant protein has been used as an
antigen. Balb/c mice were immunized and given a final boost, and their spleen
cells were collected and fused with SP2/0 myeloma cells using PEG 2000. The fused
cells were then selected in the HAT-RPMI medium. Anti- CK2beta high-titer
antibody-producing hybridoma cell lines were identified by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and then subcloned by limiting dilution in HT-RPMI
medium supplemented with 20% fetal bovine serum (FBS). A total of 10
IgG-producing cell lines were selected and further tested for their reactivity
with the CK2beta subunit using ELISA, Western blots, immunoprecipitation, and
immunostaining of formaldehyde-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue sections. The
results obtained clearly indicate that several clones produce antibodies that
recognize specifically recombinant and endogenous CK2beta subunit in Western
blotting and immunoprecipitation, and are suitable for immunohistochemical
analysis. In summary, the produced antibodies will be useful for researchers
investigating signaling pathways involving CK2 kinase and their deregulation in
human pathologies.

PMID: 16120027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2005 Aug;24(4):182-8.

Antitumor response against myeloma cells by immunization with mouse syngenic
dendritoma.

Quéant S(1), Sarde CO, Gobert MG, Kadouche J, Roseto A.

Author information: 
(1)Immunocytologie et Oncologie Moléculaire, Université de Technologie de
Compiègne, Compiègne, France.

In order to generate an immune response against myeloma cells in an homogenous
murine model, a stable hybrid cell line (DCSp) was established through the
syngenic fusion between mouse dendritic cells (DC) and mouse Sp2/0 myeloma cells.
DCSp cells behaved as potent T cell stimulators and were able to induce Sp2/0
specific cytotoxicity. When mice were immunized with irradiated hybrids before
SP2/0 injection, they exhibited a significantly higher rate of survival as
compared with controls. When tumors were detected, their emergence was not
delayed, and time elapsed between tumor clinical perception and death remained
unchanged. A humoral immune response was also always associated. We assume that
this stable dendritoma cell line can be considered a valuable tool for myeloma
studies in an homogenous mouse model. The efficiency of dendritoma as a weapon
against tumor cells and the benefit of syngeny in experimental models are
discussed.

PMID: 16120023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Biochem Pharmacol. 2005 Oct 1;70(7):1009-18.

A high-affinity monoclonal antibody with functional activity against the
5-hydroxytryptaminergic (5-HT4) receptor.

Kamel R(1), Eftekhari P, Garcia S, Berthouze M, Berque-Bestel I, Peter JC,
Lezoualc'h F, Hoebeke J.

Author information: 
(1)UPR 9021 du C.N.R.S., Immunologie et Chimie Thérapeutiques, I.B.M.C., 15, Rue 
René Descartes, F-67084 Strasbourg, France.

Splenocytes from a BALB/c mouse immunised with a synthetic peptide corresponding 
to the second extracellular loop of the 5-HT4 receptor were fused with SP2/O
myeloma cells to produce a monoclonal antibody. The monoclonal antibody was of
the IgG2b isotype. The antibody recognised the human 5-HT4(g) (h5-HT4(g))
receptor by immunoblots and by immunofluorescence on chinese hamster ovary (CHO) 
cells expressing this 5-HT4 receptor isoform. Epitope mapping of the antibody
suggested the recognition of a conformational epitope, encompassing the N- and
C-terminal fragments of the second extracellular loop. Kinetic experiments using 
surface plasmon resonance showed that the antibody had a picomolar affinity for
its cognate peptide. Inhibition experiments using the same methodology confirmed 
the specificity of the interaction. The antibody at a concentration of 500 pM
competitively inhibited inverse agonist GR113808 binding and showed an inverse
agonist effect on the basal activity of CHO cells expressing the 5-HT4(g)
receptor. The antibody decreased the effect of 5-HT at 500 and 50 pM
concentrations but it increased 5-HT-induced cAMP levels at 5 pM. The dual effect
of the monoclonal antibody could be ascribed to mono- or bivalent recognition of 
the receptor. The antibody described here is the first example of a high-affinity
modulator of the 5-HT4 receptor.

PMID: 16102731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Androl. 2005 Sep-Oct;26(5):610-8.

Kinematic changes during the cryopreservation of boar spermatozoa.

Cremades T(1), Roca J, Rodriguez-Martinez H, Abaigar T, Vazquez JM, Martinez EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Animal Surgery, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Campus de Espinardo, University of Murcia, E-30071 Murcia, Spain.

The present study evaluates the effect that various steps of a conventional cycle
of cryopreservation have on the patterns of movement exhibited by boar
spermatozoa. Sperm-rich ejaculate fractions collected from 24 mature fertile
boars (1 ejaculate per boar) were cryopreserved following a standard freeze-thaw 
procedure with 0.5-mL plastic straws. Overall sperm motility and the individual
kinematic parameters of motile spermatozoa (assessed by the computer-aided sperm 
analysis system Sperm Class Analyzer [SCA]) were recorded in 5 steps of the
cryopreservation procedure. These steps were as follows: 1) at the time that the 
fresh semen was extended, 2) at 17 degrees C, after sperm concentration by
centrifugation and re-extension of the pellet with lactose-egg yolk extender; 3) 
at 5 degrees C, after added freezing extender; 4) at the time that thawed semen
was held in a water bath at 37 degrees C for 30 minutes; and 5) at the time that 
thawed semen was held in a water bath at 37 degrees C for 150 minutes. Data from 
individual motile spermatozoa, defined by 7 kinematic parameters (curvilinear
velocity [VCL], straight-line velocity [VSL], average path velocity [VAP],
linearity [LIN], straightness [STR], mean amplitude of lateral head displacement 
[ALH], and beat cross frequency [BCF]), were analyzed using a pattern analysis
technique (PATN) to identify and quantify populations and subpopulations of
motile sperm within the semen samples. After the first cluster analysis, 3 motile
sperm populations (P) were identified (P1: progressive and/or vigorous cells
[90.4%], P2: poorly progressive cells [8.3%], and P3: nonprogressive cells
[1.3%]). These populations remained constant (P > .05) throughout the 5-step
cryopreservation procedure. A second PATN was carried out within the P1 sperm
population, which identified 3 sperm subpopulations (sP) (eg, sP1: cells with
progressive and vigorous movement [58.7%], sP2: progressive cells only [24.6%],
and sP3: vigorous cells only, hyperactive-like [16.7%]). Although the relative
frequency of these 3 subpopulations varied among ejaculates (boars), there was no
interaction with any cryopreservation step we examined. Whereas sP1 remained
constant (P > .05), sP2 and sP3 varied significantly (P < .05) through the
cryopreservation procedure, with the increase in sP3 after centrifugation at 17
degrees C and during cooling at 5 degrees C considered particularly relevant. In 
conclusion, the present study confirms the heterogeneity of sperm movement
patterns in boar semen, patterns that vary through the cryopreservation
procedure, especially after removal of the seminal plasma by centrifugation and
subsequent extension at 17 degrees C and after the slow cooling at 5 degrees C,
when obvious increases in hyperactivated movement appeared. The vast majority of 
spermatozoa, those exhibiting progressive and vigorous movement, remained
constant during the cryopreservation procedure, although the proportion differed 
among boars.

PMID: 16088038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. J Med Genet. 2005 Aug;42(8):609-29.

Directly transmitted unbalanced chromosome abnormalities and euchromatic
variants.

Barber JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, UK. john.barber@salisbury.nhs.uk

In total, 200 families were reviewed with directly transmitted, cytogenetically
visible unbalanced chromosome abnormalities (UBCAs) or euchromatic variants
(EVs). Both the 130 UBCA and 70 EV families were divided into three groups
depending on the presence or absence of an abnormal phenotype in parents and
offspring. No detectable phenotypic effect was evident in 23/130 (18%) UBCA
families ascertained mostly through prenatal diagnosis (group 1). In 30/130 (23%)
families, the affected proband had the same UBCA as other phenotypically normal
family members (group 2). In the remaining 77/130 (59%) families, UBCAs had
consistently mild consequences (group 3). In the 70 families with established EVs
of 8p23.1, 9p12, 9q12, 15q11.2, and 16p11.2, no phenotypic effect was apparent in
38/70 (54%). The same EV was found in affected probands and phenotypically normal
family members in 30/70 families (43%) (group 2), and an EV co-segregated with
mild phenotypic anomalies in only 2/70 (3%) families (group 3). Recent evidence
indicates that EVs involve copy number variation of common paralogous gene and
pseudogene sequences that are polymorphic in the normal population and only
become visible at the cytogenetic level when copy number is high. The average
size of the deletions and duplications in all three groups of UBCAs was close to 
10 Mb, and these UBCAs and EVs form the "Chromosome Anomaly Collection" at
http://www.ngrl.org.uk/Wessex/collection. The continuum of severity associated
with UBCAs and the variability of the genome at the sub-cytogenetic level make
further close collaboration between medical and laboratory staff essential to
distinguish clinically silent variation from pathogenic rearrangement.

PMCID: PMC1736115
PMID: 16061560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Chemistry. 2005 Oct 7;11(20):5960-5.

Synthesis of phosphorus ylides bearing a P-H bond from a kinetically stabilized
1,3,6-triphosphafulvene.

Ito S(1), Miyake H, Yoshifuji M, Höltzl T, Veszprémi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University, Aoba, 
Sendai 980-8578, Japan. ito@synchem.chem.tohoku.ac.jp

In mixing 2,4,6-tris(2,4,6-tri-tert-butylphenyl)-1,3,6-triphosphafulvene with
alkyllithium compounds and acetic acid, both of nucleophilic alkylation and
electrophilic protonation occurred at the exo sp2-phosphorus atoms to afford
[2,4-bis(2,4,6-tri-tert-butylphenyl)-1,3-diphosphacyclopentadienylidene](alkyl)(2
,4,6-tri-tert-butylphenyl)phosphoranes which are phosphorus ylides that bear a
P-H bond. A phosphorus ylide bearing both P-H and P-F bonds was obtained by
reaction of 2,4,6-tris(2,4,6-tri-tert-butylphenyl)-1,3,6-triphosphafulvene with
hydrogen tetrafluoroborate, and the structure was determined by X-ray
crystallography. Both P=C double bond and P(+)-C(-) zwitterionic character was
indicated by the metric parameters. The isolated phosphorus ylide bearing a P-H
bond,
[2,4-bis(2,4,6-tri-tert-butylphenyl)-1,3-diphosphacyclopentadienylidene](2,4,6-tr
i-tert-butylphenyl)phosphorane, showed no isomerization by H-migration to the
corresponding phosphinodiphospholes, probably due to the pi-accepting ability of 
the unsaturated PC bonds and aromaticity of the C3P2 ring. The ylide structure
and aromaticity of 2,4-diphosphacyclopenta-2,4-dienylidenephosphorane was
characterized by theoretical calculations. In addition, the regioselective
protonation of the lithiated phosphinodiphospholes generated from the
1,3,6-triphosphafulvene is discussed.

PMID: 16052657  [PubMed]


266. J Chem Inf Model. 2005 Jul-Aug;45(4):1002-9.

Nanoporous carbon allotropes by septupling map operations.

Diudea MV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Babes-Bolyai University, 400028
Cluj, Romania.

Spongy carbon nanostructures, also called schwarzites, have been synthesized.
They consist of highly connected covalent networks, periodic in the three
dimensions of Euclidean space. The intimate structure of schwarzites has a
topology of triply periodic minimal surfaces. They can be tessellated by some
geometric operations on maps, including the newly proposed septupling operations.
Formulas for calculating the lattice parameters of iteratively transformed maps
are presented. Examples are given for both finite/closed cages and infinite/open 
all-sp2 carbon structures. Strain energy calculations for structures, consisting 
of thousands of atoms, show that such carbon allotropes are very relaxed and
approach to the non-strained graphite sheet.

PMID: 16045294  [PubMed]


267. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2005 Dec 15;108(3-4):253-64. Epub 2005 Jul 22.

Characterization of a monoclonal antibody identifying a CD45RA antigen on feline 
leukocytes.

Gengozian N(1), Foster JS, Kestler DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Tennessee Graduate School of Medicine,
1915 White Avenue, Knoxville, TN 37916, USA. ngengozi@covhlth.com

The antibody produced by a murine hybridoma obtained from the fusion of SP2/0
plasmacytoma cells with splenocytes of a mouse immunized with feline bone marrow 
was found to react with 60% of bone marrow cells and 80% of peripheral blood
leukocytes (PBL); reactivity in the latter tissue was restricted almost entirely 
to mononuclear cells. Two-color FACScan analyses of this antibody with mAbs
specific for feline lymphocytes revealed positive and negative populations of CD4
and CD8 cells. The reactivity for CD4 and CD8 cells was animal age dependent,
binding to a higher percentage of the cells in young (2-9 months) versus older
animals (> 4 years). In a mitogen driven assay for IgG production by PBL the
addition of this antibody to the cultures enhanced the suppressor activity of CD8
cells, a function attributed to activation of a CD4 suppressor-inducer
population; removal of CD8 cells negated any induction of suppression. Mild
papain digestion of bone marrow and PBL completely removed the antigen detected
by this antibody while not affecting reactivity of a pan-T antibody. Western blot
analysis showed binding of the antibody to polypeptides of approximately 200 kDa 
on feline bone marrow and PBL. The data suggest that this mAb is identifying the 
feline homologue of the leukocyte common antigen of cells with a functional
specificity characteristic of a CD45RA isoform.

PMID: 16040129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Di Yi Jun Yi Da Xue Xue Bao. 2005 Jul;25(7):833-6.

[Preparation of anti-morphine monoclonal antibodies with complete cross
reactivity with heroin].

[Article in Chinese]

Li L(1), Liu J, Zhu P, Xu JP, Fu N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515,
China. li75lin@fimmu.com

OBJECTIVE: To prepare and characterize anti-morphine monoclonal antibodies (mAbs)
with complete cross reactivity with heroin.
METHODS: Morphine-6-succinyl was conjugated with Blue carrier (BC) in the
presence of carbodi imide. BALB/c mice were immunized with the holoantigens
(M-6-S-BC) and Freund adjuvant, and hybridoma was generated with mouse spleen
cells and Sp2/0 myeloma cells. After 3 fusions and cloning, 4 hybridoma cell
lines secreting monoclonal antibodies to morphine were obtained and the mABs
purified from the mouse ascites followed by characterization with enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
RESULTS: Four hybridoma cell lines secreting anti-morphine mAbs were established 
and designated as G1, G3, H4 and B1, respectively. All the mAbs belonged to IgG1 
isotype and could bind to heroin better than to morphine and codeine, which were 
identified by competitive inhibition ELISA.
CONCLUSION: The anti-morphine mAbs can bind with the opioids, especially heroin, 
and can be useful for sensitive detection of opioids.

PMID: 16027080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Clin Dermatol. 2005 Jul-Aug;23(4):413-8.

The role of skin substitutes in the treatment of burn injuries.

Shakespeare PG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laing Laboratory for Burn Injury Investigation, Salisbury District Hospital,
Salisbury SP2 8BJ, UK. pgs@burnsjournal.demon.co.uk

Extensive burn wounds are difficult to manage and repair. Several engineered skin
substitutes have been developed to aid in this process. These substitutes are
designed with particular objectives in mind which dictate the circumstances under
which they can, and should, be employed to promote healing or prepare the burn
wound for final closure with autograft. This article discusses some of the
rationale behind the use of skin substitutes and reviews some of the substitutes 
in use at the present time. Current perspectives suggest that skin substitute use
is still in its infancy and that there is some way to go before their role in
clinical practice becomes clear. Nevertheless the prospect of being able to
supply new wound repair components and to influence the healing process to modify
outcome and improve the quality of the healed burn wound will ensure a continuing
high degree of interest in these potentially useful and beneficial medical
devices.

PMID: 16023937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2005 Mar;21(2):182-6.

[Expression of target gene in eukaryotic cells driven by prokaryotic T7 promoter 
and its RNA polymerase].

[Article in Chinese]

Yuan ZG(1), Zhang JP, Chu YW, Wang Y, Xu W, Xiong SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology of Shanghai Medical College of Fudan University, Key 
Laboratory of Molecular Medicine of Ministry of Education, Center for Gene
Immunization and Vaccine Research, Shanghai 200032, China.

To enhance the efficiency of the expression of target gene in eukaryotic cells,
one of the strongest prokaryotic expression systems, the T7 RNA polymerase and T7
promoter, was introduced into eukaryotic cells. A duel-plasmid gene expression
system of T7 bacteriophage components was developed; one containing the T7 phage 
RNA polymerase gene under the control of eukaryotic promoter CMV (pCMV-T7pol) and
the other (pT7IRES) containing the T7 promoter and T7 terminator as well as EMCV 
IRES. To test the feasibility of this plasmid system for eukaryotic expression,
hepatitis B virus envelop HBV preS2/S was used to construct pT7IRES-HBs. The
target genes were expressed efficiently by the eukaryonized prokaryotic
expression system in a variety of the cells indicating C2C12, SP2/0, NIH3T3 and
BALB/c 3T3, suggesting the potential applications of the expression system in
gene therapy and gene immunization.

PMID: 16013472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Lasers Med Sci. 2005 Sep;20(2):104-6. Epub 2005 Jul 9.

How well does your ruby laser work?

Wright PA(1), Widdowson DC, Ahmed S, Shakespeare PG.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Specialist Laser Centre, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wiltshire, SP2 8BJ, UK. Philip.Wright@salisbury.nhs.uk

The safe and effective use of cutaneous lasers is dependent upon the selection of
a clinically appropriate laser energy level. Therefore, the accuracy of the
stated laser output is critical. The energy output of an Aesculap ruby laser was 
recorded at the start of every clinical session over a 704-day period using an
external energy meter. Regular review of these records enabled trends of energy
output to be recognised and appropriate action to be taken prior to adverse
clinical sequelae. This monitoring procedure is a quick and inexpensive method of
improving quality control in the use of medical lasers.

PMID: 16007478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Science. 2005 Jul 8;309(5732):278-81.

Isolation of two seven-membered ring C58 fullerene derivatives: C58F17CF3 and
C58F18.

Troshin PA(1), Avent AG, Darwish AD, Martsinovich N, Abdul-Sada AK, Street JM,
Taylor R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Problems of Chemical Physics of Russian Academy of Sciences,
Chernogolovka 142432, Russia.

Fluorination of C60 at 550 degrees C leads to milligram quantities of two stable 
fullerene derivatives with 58-carbon cage structures: C58F18 and C58F17CF3. The
compounds were characterized by mass spectrometry and fluorine nuclear magnetic
resonance spectroscopy, and the data support a heptagonal ring in the framework. 
The resulting strain, which has hindered past attempts to prepare these smaller
quasi-fullerenes, is mitigated here by hybridization change of some of the
carbons in the pentagons from sp2 to sp3 because of fluorine addition. The loss
of carbon from C60 is believed to occur via sequential fluorine addition to a CC 
single bond and an adjacent CC bond, followed by loss of a:CF2 carbene.

PMID: 16002613  [PubMed]


273. Intensive Care Med. 2005 Aug;31(8):1128-31. Epub 2005 Jul 6.

Short-term effects of prone position in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
patients with severe acute hypoxemic and hypercapnic respiratory failure.

Reignier J(1), Lejeune O, Renard B, Fiancette M, Lebert C, Bontemps F, Clementi
E, Martin-Lefevre L.

Author information: 
(1)Medical-Surgical Intensive Care Unit, District Hospital Center, 85025 la
Roche-sur-Yon, France. jean.reignier@chd-vendee.fr

Comment in
    Intensive Care Med. 2005 Aug;31(8):1012-3.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the short-term effects of prone positioning (PP) in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients with severe hypoxemic and
hypercapnic respiratory failure requiring invasive mechanical ventilation.
DESIGN AND SETTING: Prospective observational study in the general intensive care
unit of a university-affiliated hospital.
PATIENTS: 11 consecutive COPD patients with persistent hypoxemia (PaO2/FIO2 < or 
= 200 mmHg with FIO2 > or = 0.6) and hypercapnia requiring invasive mechanical
ventilation. Patients with adult respiratory distress syndrome or left
ventricular failure were excluded. Mean age was 73+/-11 years, mean weight
86+/-31 kg, mean SAPS II 53+/-10, and ICU mortality 36%.
INTERVENTIONS: Patients were turned every 6 h.
MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS: A response to PP (20% or greater PaO2/FIO2 increase)
was noted in 9 (83%) patients. Blood gases were measured in the PP and supine
(SP) positions 3 h after each turn, for 36 h, yielding six measurement sets (SP1,
PP1, SP2, PP2, SP3, and PP3). PaO2/FIO2 was significantly better in PP: 190+/-26 
vs. 113+/-9 mmHg for PP1/SP1, 175+/-22 vs. 135+/-16 mmHg for PP2/SP2, and
199+/-24 vs. 151+/-13 mmHg for PP3/SP3. After PP1 PaO2/FIO2 remained
significantly improved, and the PaO2/FIO2 improvement from SP1 to SP2 was
linearly related to PaO2/FIO2 during PP1 (r=0.8). The tracheal aspirate volume
improved significantly from SP1 to PP1. PaCO2 was not significantly affected by
position.
CONCLUSIONS: PP was effective in treating severe hypoxemia in COPD patients. The 
first turn in PP was associated with increased tracheal aspirate.

PMID: 15999257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Org Biomol Chem. 2005 Jul 21;3(14):2524-33. Epub 2005 Jun 15.

New approaches towards the synthesis of the side-chain of mycolactones A and B.

van Summeren RP(1), Feringa BL, Minnaard AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organic and Molecular Inorganic Chemistry, Stratingh Institute, 
University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 4, 9747 AG, Groningen, The Netherlands.

New approaches towards the synthesis of the C1'-C16' side-chain of mycolactones A
and B from Mycobacterium ulcerans are reported. Chiral building block 4 (Fig. 2) 
with the correct stereochemistry was obtained starting from naturally occurring
monosaccharides, i.e. D-glucose or L-rhamnose. The polyunsaturated moiety 3 was
synthesized in only 3 steps from 2,4-dimethylfuran. The building blocks were
connected through a Sonogashira coupling resulting in the fast and convergent
assembly of an 8,9-dehydro analogue 2 of the side-chain of mycolactones A and B. 
The synthesis of 1 is at this stage hampered by the lack of a selective partial
hydrogenation protocol for alkynes embedded in a conjugated system. Alternative
strategies involving palladium catalyzed sp2-sp2 coupling between C7' and C8' or 
C9' and C10' (Fig. 1) were also explored.

PMID: 15999184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Chem Commun (Camb). 2005 Jul 21;(27):3412-4. Epub 2005 May 31.

Extremal acidity of Rees polycyanated hydrocarbons in the gas phase and DMSO--a
density functional study.

Vianello R(1), Maksic ZB.

Author information: 
(1)Quantum Organic Chemistry Group, Division of Organic Chemistry and
Biochemistry, Ruder Boskovic Institute, Bijenicka 54, Zagreb, Croatia.

It is shown by using the density functional theory (DFT) calculations that Rees
tricyclic[10]annulene 1 and its benzo-annelated derivative 2, substituted by CN
groups at all peripheral sp2 carbon positions, represent hyperstrong neutral
superacids in the gas-phase and DMSO.

PMID: 15997281  [PubMed]


276. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2005 Jul;21(4):473-5.

[Preparation and characterization of non-agglutinating mAbs against membrane
antigen on human erythrocytes].

[Article in Chinese]

Li H(1), Pan JC, Liu Z, Liu JH, Zhang JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Blood Transfusion, PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100853, China. 
huili301@sohu.com

AIM: To prepare monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) against membrane antigens on human
erythrocytes and characterize their properties.
METHODS: BALB/c mice were immunized with the membrane antigens of human type O
erythrocytes. The splenocytes of the immunized mice were fused with Sp2/0 myeloma
cells by hybridoma technique. The antibodies to common antigen on human
erythrocytes were screened by hexadimethrine bromide (polybrene) test tube method
and then the agglutinating antibodies (complete antibodies) were weeded out by
slide hemagglutination assay. The hybridoma cells secreting non-agglutinating
antibodies (incomplete antibodies) were cloned by limiting dilution method. The
stability of the obtained hybridoma cells and the properties of the mAbs were
identified.
RESULTS: One hybridoma cell 2E8 was obtained, which secreted non-agglutinating
antibody. The mAb 2E8 belonged to IgG1, could agglutinate H antigen, and had no
species cross-agglutination reaction. The titers of culture supernatant and
ascites of 2E8 were 1:1,024 and 1:64x10(6), respectively. When the affinity of
mAb 2E8 was evaluated by agglutination reaction, erythrocytes began to
agglutinate after 7 seconds and the clots exceeded 1 mm(2) in 3 minutes.
CONCLUSION: The non-agglutinating mAb against H antigen was prepared
successfully. The mAb 2E8 has good titer, affinity and specificity, which lays
the foundation for preparation of bispecific antibodies (BsAb).

PMID: 15989795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2003 Jul;19(4):462-6.

[Establishment and biological properties of hybridoma cell lines secreting
anti-IBDV idiotypic antibodies].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhu RL(1), Cui ZZ, Zhao J.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Science and Veterinary College, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009,
China. zhurl@sdau.edu.cn

In recent years, the prevention and cure of infectious bursal disease (IBD) have 
become more and more difficult due to the emergence of very virulent strains of
infectious bursal disease virus (vvIBDV) and the variant strains of IBDV. In this
research, the hybridoma cell lines which secretes anti-idiotypic antibodies
against anti-IBDV IgG were established. According to the Jerne's theory of immune
network, the use of the anti-idiotypic antibodies as a vaccine will be a new
method for the prevention of IBD. In this study, the SPF chickens were inoculated
with the IBDV- SD strain, and the bursal was obtained from the died chickens. The
bursal was then homogenized and frozen-thawed 3 cycles, and the virus samples
were prepared by cane sugar density gradient centrifugation and dialysis. Typical
IBDV particles were observed under an electron microscope, and the concentration 
of the virus protein measured by ultraviolet absorbance spectrophotometry was
10.8 mg/mL. SPF chickens were immunized with the virus and the highly immunized
sera were prepared and purified by Sulfuric acid ammonia salt out and Sephadex
G-25 chromatography. Then, Balb/C mice of six or eight weeks old were immunized
interapertoneally(I. P.) with purified antibodies to IBDV at regular intervals.
SP2/0 myeloma cells were fused with the spleencytes from the immunized mice at a 
ratio of 10:1, in 50% polyethylene glycol (1540) and were then cultured in HAT
until all the SP2/0 cells died. The hybridoma cells were selected by ELISA and
the highly positive holes were cloned 3 times with the method of limited
dilution. Two strains (2B6 strain,5F4 strain) of hybridoma cells were obtained,
which were shown by ELISA to steadily secrete anti-IBDV idiotypic antibodies. The
chromosome number of the two hybridoma cells were about 88 - 106, 95 in average, 
and the antibodies secreted belonged to the types of IgG1 and Kappa. Balb/c mice 
of 3 months old were inoculated I.P. with about 10(7) hybridoma cells per capita,
and the ascites were collected 12 days later and the titre of anti-IBDV idiotypic
antibodies measured by ELISA was 1 :25600 (for 2B6) and 1:12800 (for 5F4) . The
ascites containing the anti-IBDV idiotypic antibodies were emulsified with
complete or incomplete Freund's adjuvants, and the anti-IBDV idiotypic antibody
vaccine was obtained. SPF and common Jingbai chickens were immunized with the
vaccine obtained. The immunized chickens with the vaccine were inoculated with
IBDV-SD strain at a dose of 2000 ELD50 after twoimmunizations. All the 10 SPF
chickens in the non-immunized group were sick, and 8 of them died; and 5 out of
the 50 SPF chickens immunized group got sick and 2 died. All the 10 common
Jingbai chickens in the control group were sick, and 6 died; 7 of the 30
immunized common Jingbai chickens got sick and only 1 died. Chi2 analysis showed 
that the difference between the immunized and the non-immunized groups in both
the SPF and the common Jingbai chickens were significant (P < 0.01). Our result
indicated that the anti-IBDV idiotypic antibody vaccine well protected chickens
and had a great potential in both research and clinical application.

PMID: 15969065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Virol Methods. 2005 Aug;127(2):126-32. Epub 2005 Apr 19.

RT-PCR-RFLP for genetic diversity analysis of Tunisian Grapevine fanleaf virus
isolates in their natural host plants.

Fattouch S(1), Acheche H, M'hirsi S, Mellouli L, Bejar S, Marrakchi M, Marzouki
N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biological Engineering, Institut National des Sciences
Appliquées et de Technologie, Centre Urbain Nord, BP No. 676, Tunis 1080,
Tunisia. Sami.Fattouch@insat.rnu.tn

Genetic diversity was characterized in 20 isolates of Grapevine fanleaf virus
(GFLV) recovered from naturally infected grapevine plants (Vitis vinifera) in the
North of Tunisia. Viral RNAs were isolated by oligoprobe capture, and a 605 bp
fragment containing a part of the viral coat protein gene was amplified by
RT-PCR. Sequence variation among isolates was characterized by restriction
fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis and confirmed by sequencing. The
GFLV infections are found as a complex mixture of closely related genomes. In
further studies, RFLP analyses of virus isolates using AluI showed that GFLV
populations in Tunisian vineyards consist of two restrictotypes corresponding to 
distinct sub-populations Sp1 and Sp2. The relative field distribution of these
sub-populations showed that Sp2 was more abundant. Individual genomes were
recovered by cloning the RT-PCR products. The sequences were found to vary from
each other by as much as 11%. Cloning from mixed infections showed that Sp2 are
also predominant.

PMID: 15967236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2003 Mar;19(2):158-62.

[Enhancement of cellular immune response to DNA vaccine encoding hepatitis C
virus core and envelope 2 fusion antigen by murine Fms-like tyrosine kinase 3
ligand].

[Article in Chinese]

Ke JS(1), Zhao P, Cao J, Yu JP, Qi ZT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai
200433, China.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is an important human pathogen that causes chronic liver 
disease worldwide. It is desirable to develop vaccines to prevent HCV infection, 
or at least to prevent progression to chronicity. We once constructed an
optimized hepatitis C virus core and envelope 2 fusion antigen DNA vaccine, which
could induce humoral and cellular immune responses against HCV core and E2
protein in BALB/c mice efficiently. Flt3 (Fms-like tyrosine kinase 3) -ligand has
been identified as an important cytokine for the generation of professional
antigen-presenting cells, particularly dendritic cells. We reasoned that a DNA
vaccine coexpressing the antigen and FL may activate immune responses more
effectually. In this study, The influence of FL on this HCV DNA vaccine was
evaluated. The cDNA encoding signal peptide and extracellular domain of murine FL
was inserted into the plasmid pST-CE2t, and the resulting plasmid pST-CE2t/FL was
transfected into COS7 cells. The HCV core and E2 protein were detected by Western
blotting, and the soluble murine FL was detected by ELISA. Eight-week-old female 
BALB/c mice were inoculated intramuscularly with 100 microg pST-CE2t, pST-CE2t/FL
or mock vector, respectively, and boosted at the same dosage 3 weeks later.
Anti-HCV core and E2 total IgG and isotypes were measured at weeks 1,3,5,7.
Splenocyte proliferative response to recombinant HCV core and E2 protrein were
detected at week 7. SP2/0 cells expressing HCV core protein were used as target
cells for the detection of cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) response. Western blot
analysis showed that a protein band with molecular weight about 70 kD from lysate
of COS7 cells transfected with plasmid pST-CE2t/FL could be detected by anti-HCV 
core or E2 monoclonal antibodies, which indicated that pST-CE2t could express
glucosylated HCV core and E2 fusion protein. Murine FL could be detected in the
culture supernatant of COS7 cells transfected with pST-CE2t/FL. Plasmid pST-CE2t 
immunized mice developed higher anti-HCV core and E2 IgG seroconversion rates and
titers than pST-CE2t/FL group did at different various times, but the IgG2a/IgG1 
ratio of anti-HCV E2 protein in pST-CE2t/FL group is much higher than pST-CE2t
group. Splenocytes from pST-CE2t or pST-CE2t/FL immunized mice could proliferate 
with stimulation of HCV core or E2 protein in vitro, although pST-CE2t/FL group
showed much stronger response. Splenocytes from mice immunized with pST-CE2t/FL
induced 79.03% +/- 9.95% of target cell lysis at the effector/target ratio of
100:1, which was significantly greater than the lysis (62.2% +/- 8.62%) observed 
in mice immunized with pST-CE2t. Our data demonstrated that the incorporation of 
FL can preferentially enhance the cellular response to this HCV fusion antigen
DNA vaccine. In contrast, HCV specific antibodies were inhibited by FL in
vaccinated mice. More and more data supports that recovery from acute HCV
infection may depend upon the generation of broad-based cellular immune responses
to viral proteins. So, FL may be of potential value as an adjuvant in the
development of DNA-based immunization for prophylactic and therapeutic vaccine
against HCV infection.

PMID: 15966314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. FEBS Lett. 2005 Jul 4;579(17):3639-45.

Sp1 elements in SULT2B1b promoter and 5'-untranslated region of mRNA: Sp1/Sp2
induction and augmentation by histone deacetylase inhibition.

Lee YC(1), Higashi Y, Luu C, Shimizu C, Strott CA.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Steroid Regulation, Endocrinology and Reproduction Research Branch,
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of 
Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892-4510, USA.

The steroid/sterol sulfotransferase gene (SULT2B1) encodes for two isozymes of
which one (SULT2B1b) sulfonates cholesterol and is selectively expressed in skin.
The human SULT2B1 gene contains neither a TATAAA nor a CCAAT motif upstream of
the coding region for SULT2B1b; however, this area is GC-rich. Of five Sp1
elements identified two had regulatory activity utilizing immortalized human
keratinocytes: one element is located above the ostensible transcription
initiation site, whereas the other is located within the 5'-untranslated region
of the SULT2B1b mRNA. Sp1 and Sp2 transcription factors identified by supershift 
analyses induced reporter gene activity, an effect markedly augmented by histone 
deacetylase inhibition.

PMID: 15953604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Mol Immunol. 2005 Jul;42(11):1311-9. Epub 2005 Apr 7.

Anti-neuroblastoma effect of ch14.18 antibody produced in CHO cells is mediated
by NK-cells in mice.

Zeng Y(1), Fest S, Kunert R, Katinger H, Pistoia V, Michon J, Lewis G, Ladenstein
R, Lode HN.

Author information: 
(1)Charité Children's Hospital, University Medicine, 13353 Berlin, Germany.

Successful treatment of stage 4 neuroblastoma remains a major challenge in
pediatric oncology. In order to improve the outcome, passive immunotherapy using 
human-mouse chimeric monoclonal anti-disialoganglioside GD2 antibody ch14.18 has 
been evaluated in early phase clinical trials with promising results in
progressing stage 4 neuroblastoma patients. In preparation of European phase III 
clinical trial (HR-NBL-1/ESIOP), the cell line used for production of ch14.18 was
changed. Specifically, the plasmid encoding for ch14.18 antibody was recloned
into CHO cells. Here, we report the in vitro and in vivo anti-neuroblastoma
activity of antibody ch14.18 produced in CHO cells (ch14.18/CHO) compared to that
of ch14.18 manufactured from SP2/0 (ch14.18/SP2/0) and NS0 cells (ch14.18/NS0).
First, we demonstrate identical binding of ch14.18/CHO to the nominal antigen
disialoganglioside GD2 in vitro compared to ch14.18/SP2/0 and ch14.18/NS0.
Binding was GD2-specific, since all precursor- and metabolite-gangliosides of GD2
tested were not recognized by ch14.18/CHO. Second, the functional properties of
ch14.18/CHO were determined in complement-dependent cytotoxicity (CDC) and
antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) reactions against GD2 positive
neuroectodermal tumor cell lines in vitro. There was no difference in CDC
mediated specific tumor cell lysis among the three different ch14.18 antibody
preparations. Interestingly, ch14.18/CHO showed superior ADCC activity at low
antibody concentrations. Third, the efficacy of ch14.18/CHO was evaluated in the 
NXS2 neuroblastoma model in vivo. Importantly, the ch14.18/CHO preparation was
effective in suppression of experimental liver metastasis in this model. In vivo 
depletion of NK-cells completely abrogated this effect, suggesting that the
mechanism involved in the ch14.18/CHO induced anti-neuroblastoma effect is
mediated by NK-dependent ADCC.

PMID: 15950727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2005 Jun;24(3):146-51.

Preparation and characterization of a monoclonal antibody against mannoprotein of
Candida albicans.

Farahnejad Z(1), Rasaee MJ, Moghadam MF, Paknejad M, Kashanian S, Rajabi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Mycology, School of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modarres
University, Tehran, Iran.

BALB/c mice were immunized via injection with whole cell of Candida albicans
serotype A. The spleens were fused with myeloma cells of SP2/0 origin. A
mannoprotein-reactive monoclonal antibody (MAb) was selected and characterized by
ELISA technique. This MAb reacted with strains of Candida such as C. albicans, C.
tropicalis, and C. albicans of the Persian Type Culture Collection (PTCC).
However, our antibody did not react with other Candida species such as C.
parapsilosis, C. glabrata, C. stellatoidae, C. lusitania, C. krusei, and S.
cervisiae. These antibodies also did not recognize extracts of other fungal
species such as Aspergillus fumigatus and Aspergillus flavus, and bacterial
strains such as Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Polyclonal
antibody produced in this study could not differentiate the above species and was
reactive towards all fungal species mentioned above except bacterial strains of
S. aureus and P. aeruginosa. Western blot analysis of ligand affinity-purified
mannoproteins of C. albicans wall protein using this MAb showed reactivity toward
a single protein band in the region of 55-65 kDa molecular weight. The same
antibody, when examined with unpurified C. albicans extract, reacted with a broad
band in the region of 55-105 kDa, which we concluded was due to a possible
different glycosylation pattern of mannoprotein in crude extract in which the
higher molecular weight protein was eliminated by ligand-binding affinity
purification.

PMID: 15943562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Am Chem Soc. 2005 Jun 15;127(23):8250-1.

Selective cleavage of the C-C bonds of aminoethyl groups, via a multistep
pathway, by a pincer iridium complex.

Zhang X(1), Emge TJ, Ghosh R, Goldman AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey,
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

A pincer-ligated iridium complex is found to react with N-ethylamines, HN(Et)R (R
= cyclohexyl, tert-butyl, ethyl), to give the corresponding iridium isocyanide
complexes (PCP)Ir(CH3)(H)(CNR) (PCP = kappa3-2,6-(tBu2PCH2)2C6H3). This novel,
regioselective C-C bond cleavage reaction occurs readily under mild conditions
(25-45 degrees C). The reaction is shown to proceed via initial dehydrogenation
of the amine to give the corresponding imine (N-ethylidenealkylamine). The
ethylidene sp2 C-H bond then undergoes addition to iridium, followed by methyl
migration.

PMID: 15941235  [PubMed]


284. Postgrad Med J. 2005 Jun;81(956):353-7.

Advances in wound healing: topical negative pressure therapy.

Jones SM(1), Banwell PE, Shakespeare PG.

Author information: 
(1)Odstock Burns and Wound Healing Charitable Trust, Laing Laboratory, Salisbury 
District Hospital, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, UK. Sophie.Jones@nhs.net

In clinical practice many wounds are slow to heal and difficult to manage. The
recently introduced technique of topical negative pressure therapy (TNP) has been
developed to try to overcome some of these difficulties. TNP applies a controlled
negative pressure to the surface of a wound that has potential advantages for
wound treatment and management. Although the concept itself, of using suction in 
wound management is not new, the technique of applying a negative pressure at the
surface of the wound is. This paper explores the origins and proposed mechanisms 
of action of TNP therapy and discusses the types of wounds that are thought to
benefit most from use of this system.

PMCID: PMC1743292
PMID: 15937199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Ultramicroscopy. 2005 Aug;104(1):46-56. Epub 2005 Apr 7.

Extended defect related energy loss in CVD diamond revealed by spectrum imaging
in a dedicated STEM.

Bangert U(1), Harvey AJ, Schreck M, Hörmann F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, UMIST, Sackville Street, Manchester M60 1QD, UK.
ursel.bangert@umist.ac.uk

This article aims at investigations of the low EEL region in the wide band gap
system diamond. The advent of the UHV Enfina electron energy loss spectrometer
combined with Digital Micrograph acquisition and processing software has made
reliable detection of absorption losses below 10 eV possible. Incorporated into a
dedicated STEM this instrumentation allows the acquisition of spectral
information via spectrum maps (spectrum imaging) of sample areas hundreds of
nanometers across, with nanometers pixel sizes, adequate spectrum statistics and 
0.3 eV energy resolution, in direct correlation with microstructural features in 
the mapping area. We aim at discerning defect related losses at band gap
energies, and discuss different routes to simultaneously process and analyse the 
spectra in a map. This involves extracting the zero loss peak from each spectrum 
and constructing ratio maps from the intensities in two energy windows, one
defect related and one at a higher, crystal bandstructure dominated energy. This 
was applied to the residual spectrum maps and their first derivatives. Secondly, 
guided by theoretical EEL spectra calculations, the low loss spectra were fitted 
by a series of gaussian distributions. Pixel maps were constructed from amplitude
ratios of gaussians, situated in the defect and the unaffected energy regime. The
results demonstrate the existence of sp2-bonded carbon in the vicinity of
stacking faults and partial dislocations in CVD diamond as well as additional
states below conduction band, tailing deep into the band gap, at a node in a
perfect dislocation. Calculated EEL spectra of shuffle dislocations give similar 
absorption features at 5-8 eV, and it is thought that this common feature is due 
to sp2-type bonding.

PMID: 15935916  [PubMed]


286. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2005 Aug;43(4):341-2.

Adjunctive use of dental implants in mandibular reconstruction with a free
fibular graft.

Askew CA(1), Fleming PS, Downie IP.

Author information: 
(1)Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Salisbury Healthcare NHS Trust, Salisbury SP2 
8BJ, UK. carolineaskew@oceanfree.net

PMID: 15935527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Sichuan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2005 May;36(3):419-21.

[A prompt method to quantitative assay of alpha-Gal on pig cell surface without
injury].

[Article in Chinese]

Zeng LY(1), Li ST, Zhang J, Cheng JQ, Li YP.

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Transplant Engineering and Transplant Immunology, West China
Hospital, Sichuan university, Chengdu 610041, China.

OBJECTIVE: To develop a method for quantitative assay of alpha-Gal on pig cell
surface.
METHODS: After centrifugation of the anticoagulated blood samples, the white
blood cell layer was collected for addition of FITC-BSIB4 and analysis using FCM 
as well as Laser Scan Confocal Microscope (Bio-Rad).
RESULTS: With human blood group B as negative control, and mouse myeloma SP2/0
cells as positive control. the peripheral blood cells of two Chinese pigs were
all positive, there were about 9.16 x 10(5) alpha-Galactosyl epitopes expressed
on the cell-membrane of granulocytes 1.37 x 10(5) on the monocytes of Banna
Minipig Inbred Line (BMI), and 1.16 x 10(6) on the granulocyte and 2.45 x 10(5)
on the monocytes of Sichuan White Pig (SWP). The levels of alpha-Galactosyl
expression on the surface of blood cells in BMI and SWP differed in various
cells, the sequence from high to lower expression levels being on the platelets, 
granulocytes, monocytes, erthrocytes in each species of pig.
CONCLUSION: The method is useful for quantitative assay of alpha-Gal on pig cell 
surface, and the assay may be used for alpha-Gal for on-site large-scaled
screening of living pigs.

PMID: 15931885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Sichuan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2005 May;36(3):305-7.

[Preparation and identification of monoclonal antibody against heterogeneous
nuclear ribonucleoprotein B1].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen MY(1), Li WM, Xu D, Wei DP, Chen WB.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Department, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To establish anti-heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein B1
monoclonal antibody cell line and to identify immunological activity.
METHODS: BALB/c mice were immunized with specific hnRNPB1 polypeptide by
multiple-place hypodermic injection. The splenic cells of the mice were fused
with SP2/0 mouse myeloma cells. The hybridoma culture supernants were screened by
indirect ELISA with artificial synthetic peptide.
RESULTS: Two hybridoma cell lines against hnRNPB1 were successfully obtained; the
titers of antibody in ascites were 1: 1.8 x 10(5). The McAb showed the character 
of no cross reactions. Immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated that the
antibody could bind with hnRNPB1 specifically.
CONCLUSION: The McAb prepared so by this laboratory is of good specificity and
sensitivity.

PMID: 15931852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Blood. 2005 Sep 15;106(6):2162-8. Epub 2005 May 26.

Widespread occurrence of the JAK2 V617F mutation in chronic myeloproliferative
disorders.

Jones AV(1), Kreil S, Zoi K, Waghorn K, Curtis C, Zhang L, Score J, Seear R,
Chase AJ, Grand FH, White H, Zoi C, Loukopoulos D, Terpos E, Vervessou EC,
Schultheis B, Emig M, Ernst T, Lengfelder E, Hehlmann R, Hochhaus A, Oscier D,
Silver RT, Reiter A, Cross NC.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury
SP2 8BJ, United Kingdom.

The analysis of rare chromosomal translocations in myeloproliferative disorders
has highlighted the importance of aberrant tyrosine kinase signaling in the
pathogenesis of these diseases. Here we have investigated samples from 679
patients and controls for the nonreceptor tyrosine kinase JAK2 V617F mutation. Of
the 480 myeloproliferative disorder (MPD) samples, the proportion of positive
cases per disease subtype was 30 (20%) of 152 for atypical or unclassified MPD, 2
of 134 (2%) for idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome, 58 of 72 (81%) for
polycythemia vera, 24 of 59 (41%) essential thrombocythemia (ET), and 15 of 35
(43%) for idiopathic myelofibrosis. V617F was not identified in patients with
systemic mastocytosis (n = 28), chronic or acute myeloid leukemia (n = 35),
secondary erythrocytosis (n = 4), or healthy controls (n = 160). Homozygosity for
V617F was seen in 43% of mutant samples and was closely correlated with
chromosome 9p uniparental disomy. Homozygosity was significantly less common in
ET compared with other MPD subtypes. In 53 cases analyzed, the median level of
PRV1 expression was significantly higher in V617F-positive cases compared with
cases without the mutation. We conclude that V617F is widespread in MPDs.
Detection of this acquired mutation is likely to have a major impact on the way
patients with MPD are diagnosed, as well as serving as an obvious target for
signal transduction therapy.

PMID: 15920007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Eur J Med Chem. 2005 Sep;40(9):897-907.

Synthesis and pharmacological studies at the Gly/NMDA, AMPA and Kainate receptors
of new oxazolo[4,5-c]quinolin-4-one derivatives bearing different substituents at
position-2 and on the fused benzo ring.

Calabri FR(1), Colotta V, Catarzi D, Varano F, Lenzi O, Filacchioni G, Costagli
C, Galli A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Farmaceutiche, Universita' degli Studi di Firenze,
Polo Scientifico, Via Ugo Schiff, 6, 50019 Sesto Fiorentino, FI, Italy.

The synthesis and biological evaluation at the Gly/NMDA, AMPA and Kainate
receptors of new oxazolo[4,5-c]quinolin-4-one derivatives are reported. Different
substituents were introduced at the 2-position (mercapto, carbonyl and methyl
groups) and on the fused benzo ring (chlorine atom(s) and trifluoromethyl group).
Among the herein reported compounds, the 2-mercapto-derivatives 1-4 showed the
highest Gly/NMDA affinities, comparable to that of 5,7-dichlorokynurenic acid.
The most active compound was the 7-chloro-substituted derivative 1 (Ki=0.082
microM) which possesses a Gly/NMDA selectivity of 50- and 500-fold with respect
to AMPA and KA receptors, respectively. Functional antagonism studies performed
on some selected 2-mercapto compounds, at both AMPA and NMDA receptor-ion
channels, assessed the antagonistic properties of these derivatives. SAR studies 
pointed out the importance of the concurrent presence of electron-rich moieties
at both the 2- and 3-positions of the oxazolo[4,5-c]quinolin-4-one framework. In 
fact, the 3-sp2-nitrogen atom plays a significant role in reinforcing the
hydrogen bond that the 4-carbonyl oxygen probably forms with the arginine residue
(R523) of the Gly/NMDA receptor site. The presence of 2-substituent able to form 
a hydrogen bonding interaction was also proved to be important for a good
Gly/NMDA receptor affinity.

PMID: 15919134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. J Am Chem Soc. 2005 May 18;127(19):6968-9.

CuBr-catalyzed direct indolation of tetrahydroisoquinolines via
cross-dehydrogenative coupling between sp3 C-H and sp2 C-H bonds.

Li Z(1), Li CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, McGill University, 801 Sherbrooke Street West,
Montreal, Quebec H3A 2K6, Canada.

A novel and efficient C-C bond formation method was developed via the
cross-dehydrogenative coupling (CDC) reaction of indoles and
tetrahydroisoquinolines catalyzed by copper bromide in the presence of an
oxidizing reagent, tert-BuOOH. The CDC reaction provides a simple and efficient
catalytic method to construct indolyl tetrahydroisoquinolines via a combination
of sp3 C-H bond and sp2 C-H bond followed by C-C bond formation.

PMID: 15884937  [PubMed]


292. Mol Pharmacol. 2005 Aug;68(2):317-29. Epub 2005 May 9.

Cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors decrease vascular endothelial growth factor
expression in colon cancer cells by enhanced degradation of Sp1 and Sp4 proteins.

Abdelrahim M(1), Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
4466 TAMU, Vet. Res. Bldg. 409, College Station, TX 77843-4466.
ssafe@cvm.tamu.edu.

Cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) inhibitors, such as celecoxib (Cel), nimesulfide (NM),
and NS-398 [NS; N-[2-(cyclohexyloxy)-4-nitrophenyl]methanesulfonamide] and other 
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs inhibit colon cancer growth and
angiogenesis; however, the mechanism of this response is not well defined.
Treatment of SW-480 colon cancer cells with Cel, NS, or NM decreased vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) mRNA and immunoreactive protein expression. This
was also accompanied by decreased transactivation in cells transfected with
constructs containing VEGF gene promoter inserts. Deletion analysis of the VEGF
promoter indicated that decreased VEGF expression by COX-2 inhibitors was
associated with the proximal -131 to -47 GC-rich region of the VEGF promoter that
binds Sp proteins. Treatment of SW-480 cells with Cel, NM, and NS also decreased 
Sp1 and Sp4 protein expression but not that of Sp2 or Sp3. Similar results were
observed in RKO, HT-29, and DLD colon cancer cells demonstrating comparable
responses in COX-2-expressing and -nonexpressing colon cancer cell lines. COX-2
inhibitors do not affect Sp1 or Sp4 mRNA levels in SW-480 cells; however,
decreased expression of both proteins was accompanied by increased protein
ubiquitination and inhibited by the proteasome inhibitor gliotoxin. These results
suggest that the antiangiogenic activity of COX-2 inhibitors in colon cancer
cells is linked to activation of proteasome-dependent degradation of Sp1 and Sp4 
proteins.

PMID: 15883203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Br Dent J. 2005 Mar 12;198(5):265-6.

Bifid tongue - a complication of tongue piercing.

Fleming PS(1), Flood TR.

Author information: 
(1)Odstock Centre for Burns, Plastic & Maxillofacial Surgery, Salisbury District 
Hospital, Odstock Road, Salisbury SP2 8BJ. padhraigfleming@hotmail.com

Comment in
    Br Dent J. 2005 May 28;198(10):607.

Tongue piercing is associated with significant morbidity. We report on a patient 
with a bifid tongue defect following insertion of a tongue ornament. This
abnormality resulted in severe emotional disturbance.

PMID: 15870744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Immunol Lett. 2005 Jul 15;99(2):217-27. Epub 2005 Apr 25.

Origin and anti-tumor effects of anti-dsDNA autoantibodies in cancer patients and
tumor-bearing mice.

Lv S(1), Zhang J, Wu J, Zheng X, Chu Y, Xiong S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Shanghai Medical College of Fudan University, PR
China.

In the present investigation, we detected anti-dsDNA autoantibodies in cancer
patients and modeled the production of anti-dsDNA autoantibodies by inoculating
tumors in BALB/c mice. Moreover, induction of anti-dsDNA autoantibodies by
immunization with inactivated tumor cells and their DNA indicated that DNA of
tumor cells was probably the primary antigen, which was supported by the
significantly increasing levels of sera free DNA in cancer patients and
tumor-bearing mice. cELISA and indirect immunofluorescence assay showed that the 
anti-dsDNA autoantibodies could bind to the surface components of tumor cells. In
vitro assay showed that immunosera at week 6 from immunized mice displayed
significant cytotoxicity to tumor cells compared to that of negative control, but
no cytotoxicity mediated by immunosera at week 22 was observed. In addition, by
flow cytometry and electrophoresis of fragmented DNA, the cytotoxicity might
probably be mediated by apoptosis. Our data also showed that the ability of the
anti-dsDNA autoantibodies to induce apoptosis of SP2/0 and Wehi 164 cells was
significantly correlated (r = 0.990, p < 0.01 and r = 0.901, p < 0.05) with their
functional affinity. In vivo, the growth of solid tumors was significantly
inhibited in the immunized mice inoculated directly with SP2/0 and Wehi 164
cells, or in the naïve mice which were inoculated with SP2/0 cells preincubated
with immunosera containing anti-dsDNA autoantibodies. In conclusion, we
demonstrated the origin of anti-dsDNA autoantibodies in cancer patients and
tumor-bearing mice. And our data also showed that these autoantibodies revealed
anti-tumor effect by inducing apoptosis.

PMID: 15869804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2005 May;21(3):330-3.

[The epitope analysis of beta Netrin and preparation and characterization of its 
antibodies].

[Article in Chinese]

Yu LH(1), Gao Y, Wang LH, Han HY, Sun ZX, Zhang CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing
100850, China. yyulihongg@hotmail.com

AIM: To prepare and characterize anti-human beta-Netrin antibodies.
METHODS: B cell dominant epitopes of human beta-Netrin C-terminal 114 amino acid 
sequences were predicated by the GoldKey software. One of the epitopes was
synthesized and coupled with bovine serum album (BSA) by
1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide hydrochloride (EDC). The BALB/c
mice were immunized with the coupled protein. The splenocytes of immunized mice
were fused with Sp2/0 cells by routine method and the hybridomas were selected in
HAT medium. The hybridoma cells secreting specific antibody were detected by
ELISA and cloned by limiting dilution. The titer specificity, and Ig subclass of 
anti-beta-Netrin mAbs were characterized by ELISA, Western blot and
immunocytochemical staining. In addition, New Zealand rabbits were immunized with
the coupled protein to prepare polyclonal antibody against beta-Netrin. The
specificity of the antiserum was verified by Western blot.
RESULTS: A 16-mer peptide NH2-FRGKRTLYPES-WTDRG-COOH was the dominant epitope of 
the B cells. Synthesized peptide coupled with BSA was used as the immunogen to
immunize BALB/c mice. Three hybridoma cell lines that stably secrete specific
mAbs were obtained. The result of immunocytochemical staining showed that
prepared mAb specifically recognize the antigen in the neuronal cells. The
polyclonal antibody against beta-Netrin had high specificity. Western blot
analysis showed that the antiserum bind with the prokaryotically expressed
beta-Netrin specifically.
CONCLUSION: Using the synthesized peptides as hapten, we have prepared
epitope-specific mAbs and pAb against beta-Netrin successfully.

PMID: 15862152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2005 May;21(3):319-21.

[Preparation of monoclonal antibody against human c-erbB2 and identification of
its specificity].

[Article in Chinese]

Song SX(1), Li MY, Hou ZH, Liu FY, Lu ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Laboratory, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang
050017, China. prosongsx@yahoo.com

AIM: To prepare monoclonal antibody(mAb) against human c-erbB2 and identify its
specificity.
METHODS: The epitope of human c-erbB2 antigen was analyzed by using computer
software and a immunodominant epitope at the carboxyl-terminal was selected. A
peptide consisting of 13 amino acids was synthesized and coupled with
keyholelimpet hemocyanin (KLH), and then it was used to immunize BLAB/c mice. The
splenocytes of the immunized mice were fused with Sp2/0 cells routinely and the
hybridoma cells were selected by HAT selected culture, indirect ELISA, and
immunohistochemical staining, and cloned by limiting dilution. The specificity of
the mAb was identified by cross-reaction test and blocking test.
RESULTS: A hybridoma cell line SC8C1, stably secreting anti-c-erbB2 mAb was
obtained. The mAb SC8C1 could react to breast cancer tissue expressing c-erbB2
molecule but did not react to other c-erbB2-negative cells. The mAb will lose the
activity after being blocked with synthesized 13 peptide.
CONCLUSION: A anti-c-erbB2 mAb SC8C1 is prepared successfully using synthesized
13 peptide as immunogen.

PMID: 15862149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Guang Pu Xue Yu Guang Pu Fen Xi. 2005 Jan;25(1):54-7.

[Raman spectrum of nano-graphite synthesized by explosive detonation].

[Article in Chinese]

Wen C(1), Li X, Sun DY, Guan JQ, Liu XX, Lin YR, Tang SY, Zhou G, Lin JD, Jin ZH.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory Mechanical Behavior for Materials, Xi'an Jiaotong
University, Xi'an 710049, China.

The nano-graphite powder synthesized by the detonation of explosives with
negative oxygen balance is a new powder material with potential applications. In 
this work, the preparation of nano-graphite powder in steel chamber by pure TNT
(trinitrotoluene) explosives has been introduced. In the synthesis process, the
protective gases in the steel chamber are N2, CO2 and Ar, and the pressure is
0.25-2 atm. Raman spectrum of the nano-graphite was measured. The characteristic 
Raman band assigned to sp2 of graphite has been observed at about 1 585 cm(-1)
with half-peak width of 22 cm(-1). The peak shifted to a higher frequency by 5
cm(-1) compared with that of bulk graphite. The authors explain this blue shift
phenomenon by size effect. The average size of nanographite from Raman
measurement is 2.97-3.97 nm. X-ray diffraction (XRD) and transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) were used to measure the structure and particle size of the
nano-graphite. The crystallite size of nano-graphite estimated from XRD andTEM
are 2.58 nm (acid untreated) and 1.86 nm (acid treated) respectively, which is in
accord with the results of the measurement approximately.

PMID: 15852818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. BMJ. 2005 Apr 23;330(7497):943-8.

Breast reconstruction.

Ahmed S(1), Snelling A, Bains M, Whitworth IH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Salisbury District Hospital,
Salisbury SP2 8BJ. salim.ahmed@salisbury.nhs.uk

Comment in
    BMJ. 2005 Jun 4;330(7503):1330.

PMCID: PMC556341
PMID: 15845976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Sci China C Life Sci. 2005 Feb;48(1):89-96.

Production of a monoclonal antibody specific for high molecular weight glutenin
subunits (HMW-GS) in wheat and its antigenic determinant.

Wang H(1), Zhang X, Wang H, Pang B.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Crop Germplasm and Biotechnology, Ministry of Agriculture,
Institute of Crop Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing
100081, China.

Wheat high molecular weight glutenin subunits (HMW-GS) 1Bx14 and 1By15 isolated
by preparative SDS-PAGE are used as antigen to immunize BALB/c mice. Subcutaneous
inoculation of the antigen is performed. The intra-peritoneal injection is
completed 3 days before fusion with myeloma cell (SP2/0) via PEG-1500. The fusion
cells are selected by indirect enzyme-linked immuno-sorbent assay (ELISA).
Positive hybrid cells are further verified three times by limit dilution of the
culture cells. A hybridoma cell line is successfully obtained. The monoclonal
antibody belongs to IgG1 subclass. In immunoblotting, the antibody binds to all
HMW-GS of T. aestivum cultivars, but does not bind to other storage proteins in
seeds of wheat. This result is consisting with the high homology in amino acid
sequences among the HMW glutenin subunits in wheat. The antibody also binds to
HMW-GS storage proteins in Aegilops squarrosa and T. durum (durum wheat).
Furthermore, it also binds to HMW storage proteins in Secale cereale (rye),
Hordeum vulgare (barley). However, it never binds seed storage proteins in other 
cereals such as maize, oat, rice, foxtail millet, sorghum etc. The antigen
determinant recognized by the antibody has been located within hexapeptide
[PGQGQQ] or / and nonapeptide [GYYPTSPQQ] in the central repetitive region of
HMW-GS.

PMID: 15844361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Am Chem Soc. 2005 Apr 20;127(15):5314-5.

Chelate and pincer carbene complexes of rhodium and platinum derived from
hexaphenylcarbodiphosphorane, Ph3P=C=PPh3.

Kubo K(1), Jones ND, Ferguson MJ, McDonald R, Cavell RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Hiroshima University,
Higashi-Hiroshima, 739-8526 Japan.

The reaction of [(cod)RhCl]2 with Ph3P=C=PPh3 (1) gave the bidentate Rh(I)
carbene complex, (cod)Rh[eta2-C{P(C6H4)Ph2}{PPh3}] (2), in which one of the Ph
groups in 1 underwent orthometalation to form the chelate. Displacement of cod by
2 equiv of PMe3 transformed 2, via a second orthometalation event, into the
Rh(III) C,C,C pincer carbene complex, HRh(PMe3)2[eta3-C{P(C6H4)Ph2}2] (3). The
reaction of [Me2Pt(SMe2)]2 with 1 led directly to the analogous C,C,C pincer
carbene complex of Pt(II), (Me2S)Pt[eta3-C{P(C6H4)Ph2}2] (4). DFT calculations on
a model form of 3 suggest a net single sigma-bonding interaction between Rh and
an sp2-hybridized carbene center, with a HOMO that is predominantly carbene pz in
character.

PMID: 15826157  [PubMed]


301. Dalton Trans. 2005 Apr 21;(8):1422-7. Epub 2005 Mar 9.

C-H Bond activation and C-C bond formation in the reaction of
2,5-dimethylthiophene with TpMe2Ir compounds.

Paneque M(1), Poveda ML, Carmona E, Salazar V.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Químicas-Departamento de Química Inorgánica,
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientificas-Universidad de Sevilla, Avda.
Américo Vespucio 49, Isla de la Cartuja, 41092, Sevilla, Spain.
paneque@iiq.csic.es

The bulky 2,5-dimethylthiophene (2,5-Me2T) reacts at 60 degrees C with
TpMe2Ir(C2H4)2 to give a mixture of two TpMe2Ir(III) hydride products, 3 and 4,
that contain in addition a thienyl (3) or a thienyl-derived ligand (4). For the
generation of 3 only sp2 C-H activation is needed, but the formation of 4
requires also the activation of an sp3 C-H bond and the formation of a new C-C
bond (between vinyl and thienyl fragments). In the presence of 2,5-Me2T, compound
4 reacts further to produce a complex thiophenic structure (5, characterized by
X-ray methods) that derives formally from two molecules of 2,5-Me2T and a vinyl
fragment. Compounds 3-5 can be readily protonated by [H(OEt2)2][BAr'4](Ar'=
3,5-C6H3(CF3)2), with initial generation of carbene ligands (in the case of 3 and
5) as a consequence of H+ attack at the beta-carbon of the Ir-thienyl unit. Free,
substituted thiophenes, derived from the original 2,5-Me2T, may be isolated in
this way.

PMID: 15824780  [PubMed]


302. Langmuir. 2005 Apr 12;21(8):3384-8.

Formation of a tetra-sigma-bonded intermediate in acetylethyne binding on
Si(100)-2 x 1.

Huang HG(1), Cai YH, Huang JY, Tang HH, Xu GQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, National University of Singapore, 10 Kent Ridge,
Singapore 119260.

The covalent binding of acetylethyne on Si(100)-2 x 1 has been investigated using
high-resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy (HREELS) and X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The HREELS spectra of chemisorbed monolayers
show the absence of the C=O, C[triple bond]C, and C(sp)-H stretching modes
coupled with the appearance of C=C (at 1580 cm(-1)) and C(sp2)-H (at 3067 cm(-1))
stretching modes. This demonstrates that both of the C=O and CC groups of
acetylethyne directly participate in binding with silicon surfaces to form C-O
and C=C bonds, respectively, which is further confirmed by the XPS studies. A
tetra-sigma-binding configuration through two [2 + 2]-like cycloaddition
reactions in acetylethyne binding on Si(100) is proposed to account for the
experimental observation. The cycloadduct containing a C=C double bond may be
employed as an intermediate for further in situ chemical syntheses of multilayer 
organic thin films or surface functionalization.

PMID: 15807577  [PubMed]


303. Biochem J. 2005 Jul 15;389(Pt 2):443-55.

Physical and functional interactions between members of the tumour suppressor p53
and the Sp families of transcription factors: importance for the regulation of
genes involved in cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis.

Koutsodontis G(1), Vasilaki E, Chou WC, Papakosta P, Kardassis D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Sciences, University of Crete Medical School, Heraklion,
Crete, GR-71110, Greece.

In the present study, we have investigated mechanisms of transcriptional
co-operation between proteins that belong to the tumour suppressor p53 and Sp
(specificity protein) families of transcription factors. Such mechanisms may play
an important role in the regulation of genes containing binding sites for both
classes of transcription factors in their promoters. Two of these genes were
analysed in the present study: the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21Cip1 gene
and the PUMA (p53-up-regulated mediator of apoptosis) gene. We found that Sp1 and
Sp3, but not Sp2, co-operate functionally with p53, p73 and p63 for the
synergistic transactivation of the p21Cip1 promoter in Drosophila Schneider SL2
cells that lack endogenous Sp factors. We also found that Sp1 strongly
transactivated the PUMA promoter synergistically with p53, whereas deletion of
the Sp1-binding sites abolished the transactivation by p53. Using p53 mutant
forms in GST (glutathione S-transferase) pull-down assays, we found that the
C-terminal 101 amino acids of p53, which include the oligomerization and
regulatory domains of the protein, are required for the physical interactions
with Sp1 and Sp3, and that deletion of this region abolished transactivation of
the p21Cip1 promoter. Utilizing truncated forms of Sp1, we established that p53
interacted with the two transactivation domains A and B, as well as the
DNA-binding domain. Our findings suggest that Sp factors are essential for the
cellular responses to p53 activation by genotoxic stress. Understanding in detail
how members of the p53 and Sp families of transcription factors interact and work
together in the p53-mediated cellular responses may open new horizons in cancer
chemotherapy.

PMCID: PMC1175122
PMID: 15790310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Phys Rev Lett. 2005 Feb 11;94(5):057407. Epub 2005 Feb 10.

Bonding in liquid carbon studied by time-resolved x-ray absorption spectroscopy.

Johnson SL(1), Heimann PA, MacPhee AG, Lindenberg AM, Monteiro OR, Chang Z, Lee
RW, Falcone RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720,
USA. Steve.Johnson@mailaps.org

Even the most basic properties of liquid carbon have long been debated due to the
challenge of studying the material at the required high temperature and pressure.
Liquid carbon is volatile and thus inherently transient in an unconstrained
environment. In this paper we use a new technique of picosecond time-resolved
x-ray absorption spectroscopy to study the bonding of liquid carbon at densities 
near that of the solid. As the density of the liquid increases, we see a change
from predominantly sp-bonded atomic sites to a mixture of sp, sp2, and sp3 sites 
and compare these observations with molecular dynamics simulations.

PMID: 15783698  [PubMed]


305. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2005 Mar 21;7(6):1103-6.

Investigating the structure of boron nitride nanotubes by near-edge X-ray
absorption fine structure (NEXAFS) spectroscopy.

Hemraj-Benny T(1), Banerjee S, Sambasivan S, Fischer DA, Han W, Misewich JA, Wong
SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, State University of New York at Stony Brook, Stony
Brook, NY 11794-3400, USA.

Herein, we demonstrate that NEXAFS is a very effective technique at (a)
identifying the phases of boron nitride nanotubes with the potential of
distinguishing between hexagonal BN and cubic BN, and (b) monitoring the presence
of defects and degree of crystallinity in nanoscale samples. Specifically, a
prepared sample of boron nitride nanotubes was characterized by NEXAFS. Our
results show that the sample consisted of hexagonal BN tubes that were highly
crystalline and sp2-hybridized.

PMID: 19791320  [PubMed]


306. Leuk Res. 2005 May;29(5):535-43. Epub 2005 Jan 11.

LL-37 enhances adaptive antitumor immune response in a murine model when
genetically fused with M-CSFR (J6-1) DNA vaccine.

An LL(1), Yang YH, Ma XT, Lin YM, Li G, Song YH, Wu KF.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Institute of Hematology and
Blood Diseases Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union
Medical College, 288 Nanjing Road, Tianjin 300020, PR China.

Comment in
    Leuk Res. 2005 May;29(5):477-9.

DNA vaccine against M-CSFR(J6-1) (macrophage colony-stimulating factor receptor
cloned from the J6-1 leukemic cell line) has shown both protective and
therapeutic effects. In this study, to explore the adjuvant effects of LL-37 to
M-CSFR(J6-1) DNA vaccines, we constructed genetically fused vaccines encoding
M-CSFR(J6-1) and LL-37(pF). After immunizing BALB/c mice, specific humoral and
cellular immune responses were detected. Compared with pR (encoding the
extracellular region of M-CSFR(J6-1)), pF was more effective in inducing humoral 
and cytotoxic immune response, prolonging survival of mice challenged with
SP2/0-CSFR(J6-1) tumor cells, and inducing IFN-gamma and IL-4 release by
splenocytes. In this study, we also constructed pLL37 (encoding the mature LL-37)
and coadministrated pLL37 and pR to see whether the genetic fusion was necessary.
We found that compared with pR alone, pLL37+pR could not prolong survival of mice
challenged with SP2/0-CSFR(J6-1) tumor cells. Our results suggest that when
genetically fused with M-CSFR(J6-1), LL-37 could enhance adaptive immune response
against M-CSFR(J6-1) in a murine model challenged with tumor cells bearing
M-CSFR(J6-1).

PMID: 15755506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 27;280(21):20867-78. Epub 2005 Mar 2.

c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) positively regulates NFATc2 transactivation through
phosphorylation within the N-terminal regulatory domain.

Ortega-Pérez I(1), Cano E, Were F, Villar M, Vázquez J, Redondo JM.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares (CNIC), Ronda de Poniente 
5, Tres Cantos, Madrid 28760, Spain.

The nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) family of transcription factors
regulates the transcription of cytokine genes and other genes involved in the
regulation and function of the immune system. NFAT activity is regulated by the
phosphatase calcineurin, which binds and dephosphorylates the NFAT N-terminal
regulatory domain, a critical step required for nuclear translocation and
transcriptional activity. Here we show that the mitogen-activated protein kinase 
(MAPK) JNK activates NFATc2-dependent transcription. Mass spectrometry revealed
that JNK phosphorylates at least six residues within the NFATc2 regulatory domain
in vitro. Transfection of cells with a chimeric construct encoding the GAL-4 DNA 
binding domain linked to wild-type NFATc2 showed that JNK stimulates the NFATc2
transactivation domain in activated Jurkat T lymphocytes, an effect that is
inhibited by dominant-negative versions of JNK. Likewise, the mutation of the
phosphorylation sites identified revealed that Thr(116) and Ser(170) are critical
for the transactivation of NFATc2 by JNK. In addition, clustered mutation of the 
SP-conserved motifs of NFATc2 showed that SP1 and SP2, but not SP3, are also
important for the inducible transactivation of NFATc2. Furthermore, mass
spectrometry analysis of NFATc2-transfected cells indicated that the activation
of the JNK pathway results in the in vivo phosphorylation of Thr(116). Our
results indicate that, unlike other NFAT members, the transcriptional activity of
NFATc2 is up-regulated by JNK. JNK-mediated phosphorylation of NFATs thus appears
to play a differential physiological role among NFAT family members.

PMID: 15743762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Inorg Chem. 2005 Mar 7;44(5):1626-34.

Synthesis, characterization, and electrochemistry of biorelevant photosensitive
low-potential orthometalated ruthenium complexes.

Ryabov AD(1), Le Lagadec R, Estevez H, Toscano RA, Hernandez S, Alexandrova L,
Kurova VS, Fischer A, Sirlin C, Pfeffer M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Carnegie Mellon University, 4400 Fifth Avenue,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA. ryabov@andrew.cmu.edu

Redox potentials of photosensitive cyclometalated RuII derivatives of
2-phenylpyridine or 2-(4-tolyl)pyridine are controllably decreased by up to 0.8 V
within several minutes. This is achieved by irradiation of the ruthena(II)cycles 
cis-[Ru(o-X-2-py)(LL)(MeCN)2]PF6 (2, X = C6H4 (a) or 4-MeC6H3 (b), LL =
1,10-phenanthroline or 2,2'-bipyridine). The cis geometry of the MeCN ligands has
been confirmed by the X-ray structural studies. The sigma-bound sp2 carbon of the
metalated ring is trans to LL nitrogen. Complexes 2 are made from
[Ru(o-X-2-py)(MeCN)4]PF6 (1) and LL. This "trivial" ligand substitution is
unusual because 1a reacts readily with phen in MeCN as solvent to give
cis-[Ru(o-C6H4-2-py)(phen)(MeCN)2]PF6 (2c) in a 83% yield, but bpy does not
afford the bpy-containing 2 under the same conditions.
cis-[Ru(o-C6H4-2-py)(bpy)(MeCN)2]PF6 (2e) has been prepared in CH2Cl2 (74%).
Studies of complexes 2c,e by cyclic voltammetry in MeOH in the dark reveal
RuII/III quasy-reversible redox features at 573 and 578 mV (vs Ag/AgCl),
respectively. A minute irradiation 2c and 2e converts them into new species with 
redox potentials of -230 and 270 mV, respectively. An exceptional potential drop 
for 2c is accounted for in terms of a photosubstitution of both MeCN ligands by
methanol. ESR, 1H NMR, and UV-vis data indicate that the primary product of
photolysis of 2c is an octahedral monomeric low-spin (S = 1/2) RuIII species,
presumably cis-[RuIII(o-C6H4-2-py)(phen)(MeOH)2]2+. The primary photoproduct of
bpy complex 2e is cis-[RuII(o-C6H4-2-py)(bpy)(MeCN)(MeOH)]+, and this accounts
for a lower decrease in the redox potential. Irradiation of 2c in the presence of
added chloride affords [(phen)(o-C6H4-2-py)ClRuIIIORuIVCl(o-C6H4-2-py)(phen)]PF6,
a first mu-oxo-bridged mixed valent dimer with a cyclometalated unit. The
structure of the dimer has been established by X-ray crystallography.

PMID: 15733006  [PubMed]


309. Phys Rev Lett. 2004 Dec 31;93(26 Pt 1):265502. Epub 2004 Dec 21.

Stacking-fault based microscopic model for platelets in diamond.

Miranda CR(1), Antonelli A, Nunes RW.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Física "Gleb Wataghin," Universidade Estadual de Campinas, CP
6165, CEP 13083-970, Campinas, SP, Brazil.

Comment in
    Phys Rev Lett. 2005 Sep 23;95(13):139601; author reply 139602.

We propose a new model for {001} platelets in diamond based on the formation of a
metastable stacking-fault. The core of the defect is a double layer of threefold 
coordinated sp2 carbon atoms embedded in the sp3 diamond matrix. The properties
of the model were determined using ab initio calculations. All significant
experimental signatures attributed to the platelets are fully accounted for. The 
model is also very appealing from the point of view of kinetics, since naturally 
occurring shearing processes will lead to the formation of the metastable fault.

PMID: 15697989  [PubMed]


310. Oral Oncol. 2005 Feb;41(2):142-6.

"Scheduling delay" in oral cancer diagnosis: a new protagonist.

Diz Dios P(1), Padrón González N, Seoane Lestón J, Tomás Carmona I, Limeres Posse
J, Varela-Centelles P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Special Needs, School of Medicine and Dentistry, Santiago de
Compostela University, 36203, Spain. pdiz@usc.es

Diagnostic delays in oral cancer have been classified as "patient delay" and
"delay by the clinicians". However, the influence of the accessibility
(scheduling delay) to the health care system in oral cancer diagnosis has not
been studied before. To assess scheduling delay, a descriptive, cross-sectional
study was designed. This study was based upon role-play telephone conversations
with two standardised patients (lingual ulceration-SP1 and patient seeking fixed 
prosthodontics-SP2). that followed a structured script. The variables considered 
in the study were days to go until the arranged appointment, professional degree 
of the contacted person and referral to other provider of care. The scheduling
delay for SP1 reached a median value of 1 day, and for SP2 was 6 days. When the
professional degree (receptionist vs GDP) of the person arranging the appointment
for the patient with lingual ulceration was considered, the scheduling delay was 
significantly shorter when the appointment was fixed by the GDP (X approximately 
i-X approximately j=4.5; 95%CI=-7.48,-1.51). GDPs gave priority to the patients
with lingual ulcerations over those demanding fixed bridgework (X approximately
i-X approximately j=6.48; 95%CI=-9.46,-3.50). The GDPs showed a high level of
awareness of the oral cancer, however, educational interventions seem to be
necessary for dental surgery receptionists.

PMID: 15695115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Am Chem Soc. 2005 Feb 9;127(5):1338-9.

A new mode of reactivity for pyridine N-oxide: C-H activation with uranium(IV)
and thorium(IV) bis(alkyl) complexes.

Pool JA(1), Scott BL, Kiplinger JL.

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA.

Uranium(IV) and thorium(IV) bis(alkyl) complexes of the type (C5Me5)2AnR2 (An =
U, Th; R = CH3, CH2Ph) activate the sp2 and sp3 hybridized C-H bonds in pyridine 
N-oxide and lutidine N-oxide to produce the corresponding cyclometalated
complexes, (C5Me5)2An(R)[eta2-(O,C)-ONC5H4] and
(C5Me5)2An(R)[eta2-(O,C)-ON-2-CH2-5-CH3-C5H3]. These provide rare examples of C-H
activation chemistry mediated by actinide metal centers. This chemistry is in
contrast to the known oxygen atom transfer reactivity patterns of pyridine
N-oxides with oxophilic metal complexes and constitutes a new mode of reactivity 
for pyridine N-oxides.

PMID: 15686342  [PubMed]


312. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2005 Jan 25;(1):CD004917.

Interventions for infantile esotropia.

Elliott S(1), Shafiq A.

Author information: 
(1)Ophthalmology Department, Salisbury Health Care NHS Trust, Salisbury District 
Hospital, Salisbury, Wiltshire, UK, SP2 8BJ. sue.elliott@salisbury.nhs.uk

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;7:CD004917.

BACKGROUND: Various aspects of the clinical management of infantile esotropia
(IE) are unclear - mainly, the most effective type of intervention and the age at
intervention.
OBJECTIVES: The objective of this review was to assess the effectiveness of
various surgical and non-surgical interventions for IE and to determine the
significance of age at treatment with respect to outcome.
SEARCH STRATEGY: Trials were identified from the Cochrane Central Register of
Controlled Trials - CENTRAL (which contains the Cochrane Eyes and Vision Group
Trials Register) in The Cochrane Library (Issue 3 2004), MEDLINE (1966 to July
2004), EMBASE (1980 to August 2004) and LILACS (July 2004). We manually searched 
the conference proceedings of the European Strabismological Association (ESA)
(1975-1997, 1999-2002), International Strabismological Association (ISA) (1994)
and American Academy of Paediatric Ophthalmology and Strabismus meeting (AAPOS)
(1995-2003). Efforts were made to contact researchers who are active in the field
for information about further published or unpublished studies.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomised trials comparing any surgical or non-surgical
intervention for infantile esotropia.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Each reviewer independently assessed study
abstracts identified from the electronic and manual searches.
MAIN RESULTS: No studies were found that met our selection criteria and therefore
none were included for analysis.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: The main body of literature on interventions for IE are
either retrospective studies or prospective cohort studies. It has not been
possible through this review to resolve the controversies regarding type of
surgery, non-surgical intervention and age of intervention. There is clearly a
need for good quality trials to be conducted in these areas to improve the
evidence base for the management of IE.

PMID: 15674970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Arch Dis Child. 2005 Feb;90(2):111-2.

Readmission of neonates.

Scott-Jupp R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury SP2 8BJ, UK. scottjupp@aol.com

Comment on
    Arch Dis Child. 2005 Feb;90(2):125-31.
    Arch Dis Child. 2005 Feb;90(2):119-24.

PMCID: PMC1720248
PMID: 15665156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Eur J Hum Genet. 2005 Mar;13(3):283-91.

Segmental haplosufficiency: transmitted deletions of 2p12 include a pancreatic
regeneration gene cluster and have no apparent phenotypic consequences.

Barber JC(1), Thomas NS, Collinson MN, Dennis NR, Liehr T, Weise A, Belitz B,
Pfeiffer L, Kirchhoff M, Krag-Olsen B, Lundsteen C.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, UK. john.barber@salisbury.nhs.uk

Segmental aneuploidy usually has phenotypic consequences but unbalanced
rearrangements without phenotypic consequences have also been reported. In
particular, harmless deletions of G-dark bands 5p14 and 16q21 have each been
found in more than one independent family. Here, we report two families that were
ascertained at prenatal diagnosis and had similar overlapping deletions that
removed most of the gene poor G-dark band 2p12. PCR mapping showed that the
deletions had a minimum size of 6.1 and 6.9 Mb with at least 13 hemizygous loci
including a cluster of six pancreatic islet-regenerating genes. These deletions
had no apparent phenotypic consequences in eight family members. In contrast, a
third family was ascertained through a child with Wilm's tumour; both the child
and his mother had more proximal deletions, developmental delay and some
dysmorphic features. The deletion had a minimum size of 5.7 Mb and extended into 
the gene-rich area of 2p11.2. These results are consistent with the idea that
there may be segments of the genome that are consistently haplosufficient. The
introduction of higher resolution methods of dosage analysis into diagnostic
laboratories is already revealing more transmitted abnormalities of uncertain
significance. As a result, published cases of transmitted imbalances have been
collected as a guide to the possible significance of such findings in the future 
(see the 'Chromosome Anomaly Collection' at
www.som.soton.ac.uk/research/geneticsdiv).

PMID: 15657610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Org Chem. 2005 Jan 21;70(2):725-8.

The addition of sp2- and sp-hybridized nucleophiles to a bridgehead bromoketone.

Harmata M(1), Wacharasindhu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, Missouri
65211, USA. harmatam@missouri.edu

The reaction of various sp2- and sp-hybridized organolithium species with
bromoketone 1 is presented. In most cases, control over the course of the process
is possible and products from simple addition, addition followed by a
quasi-Favorskii rearrangement or addition, rearrangement, and addition can be
selectively prepared.

PMID: 15651830  [PubMed]


316. Zhonghua Shi Yan He Lin Chuang Bing Du Xue Za Zhi. 2004 Dec;18(4):316-20.

[Preparation and characterization of monoclonal antibodies against
SARS-associated coronavirus nucleocapsid protein].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang YB(1), Chang ZR, Wang JW, Ji R, Han CH, Zhao L, Ren LL, Chao YG, Qu JG, Qu
CY, Hung T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Viral Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese Center for Disease
Control and Prevention, Beijing 100052, China.

OBJECTIVE: To obtain monoclonal antibodies (McAbs) against severe acute
respiratory syndrome (SARS) associated coronavirus (SARS-CoV) nucleocapsid (N)
protein to develop diagnostic test for SARS and study the pathogenesis of the
disease.
METHODS: BALB/c mice were immunized with purified N protein of SARS-CoV.
Hybridoma cell lines secreting monoclonal antibodies against SARS-associated
coronavirus nucleocapsid were established after cell fusion with mouse splenic
cells and SP2/0 cells. The specificity of the McAbs obtained was examined by
Western blot and indirect fluorescence assay. Epitopes reacted with the McAbs
were preliminarily located through Western blot by expressing truncated N
proteins.
RESULTS: After cell fusion and three rounds of cell cloning, six hybridoma cell
lines secreting monoclonal antibodies specifically against SARS-CoV nucleocapsid 
were obtained. Western blot and indirect fluorescence assay showed that the McAbs
reacted specifically with nucleocapsid protein and SARS-CoV. Among the six McAbs,
three recognize the epitopes located in the N-terminus of the protein, whereas
the others reacted with those located in the C-terminus.
CONCLUSION: The anti-SARS-CoV nucleocapsid McAbs were developed and these McAbs
may be useful in the development of diagnosis assays and basic research of SARS.

PMID: 15650778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Org Lett. 2005 Jan 20;7(2):343-5.

Palladium-catalyzed inter- and intramolecular coupling reactions of aryl and
vinyl halides mediated by indium.

Lee PH(1), Seomoon D, Lee K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Kangwon National University, Chunchon 200-701,
Republic of Korea. phlee@kangwon.ac.kr

Treatment of aryl and vinyl halides with 50 mol % of 100 mesh indium, 2.5 mol %
of Pd-C, and 1.5 equiv of LiCl under mild conditions (DMF, 100 degrees C, 1-3 h) 
could produce coupling products efficiently in good to excellent yields in which 
the C(sp2)-C(sp2) bond was formed. This reagent worked equally well with both
intermolecular and intramolecular coupling reactions, producing a variety of
biaryls, 1,3-dienes, and cyclic compounds.

PMID: 15646993  [PubMed]


318. Hum Genet. 2005 Mar;116(4):267-71. Epub 2005 Jan 12.

Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD): analysis of the PABPN1 gene expansion 
sequence in 86 patients reveals 13 different expansion types and further evidence
for unequal recombination as the mutational mechanism.

Robinson DO(1), Hammans SR, Read SP, Sillibourne J.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wiltshire, SP2 8BJ, UK. david.robinson@salisbury.nhs.uk

Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD) is an autosomal dominant late-onset
neuromuscular degenerative disease characterised by proximal muscle weakness,
ptosis and swallowing difficulty. The causative genetic abnormality is an
expansion consisting of 2-7 additional base triplets in a repeat sequence in exon
1 of the PABPN1 (PABP2) gene and results in an increase in length of the
polyalanine tract in the PABPN1 protein from 10 to 12-17 residues. The expansions
are stable through meiosis and mitosis suggesting a different mechanism of
mutation from that of most other triplet repeat mutations. Most reports describe 
OPMD expansions as consisting of multiples of a GCG sequence. However, some
studies have detected GCA interspersions. We have analysed 86 OPMD patients with 
a PABPN1 gene expansion, including three compound heterozygotes, and have
identified 13 different types of expansion mutation, six of which contain GCA and
GCG and almost all of which are consistent with a mutational mechanism of unequal
recombination.

PMID: 15645184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. World J Gastroenterol. 2005 Jan 28;11(4):557-60.

Induction of hepatitis C virus-specific cytotoxic T and B cell responses by
dendritic cells expressing a modified antigen targeting receptor.

Wang QC(1), Feng ZH, Zhou YX, Nie QH.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Diagnosis and Treatment for Infectious Diseases of Chinese PLA,
Tangdu Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an 710038, Shaanxi
Province, China.

AIM: To find a novel antigen (Ag) presentation strategy to improve the immune
responses induced by dendritic cell (DC) vaccine expressing hepatitis C virus
(HCV) core antigen (pcDNA3HCV C-Fc) in Balb/c mice (H-2d).
METHODS: pcDNA3HCV C-Fc plasmid and eukaryotic expression vector pcDNA3 were
injected into mice sc. Immune responses to pcDNA3HCV C-Fc were studied. Meanwhile
the effect of pcDNA3HCV C-Fc on anti-translated subcutaneous tumor of SP2/0 cells
stably expressing HCV C Ag (SP2/0-HCV C-FC) was also studied. Anti-HCV C in serum
was detected by enzyme-linked immunoadsordent assay (ELISA) and HCV specific
cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) activity was measured by LDH release assay. After 3 
wk of DNA immunization, the cells of SP2/0-HCV C-FC were inoculated into mice
subcutaneously and tumor growth was measured every 5 d. The survival rate and
living time of mice were also calculated.
RESULTS: After 4 wk of DC immunization, the A(450 nm) values of sera in mice
immunized with pcDNA3HCV C-Fc-DC and pcDNA3-DC were 0.56+/-0.17 and 0.12+/-0.03
respectively. The antibody titres in mice codeliveried with pcDNA3HCV C-Fc with
DC were significantly higher than those of mice injected with pcDNA3-DC. The HCV 
specific CTL activities in mice coinjected with DC and pcDNA3HCV C-Fc or empty
expression vectors were (73.2+/-3.1)% and (24.4+/-8.8)%, which were significantly
higher than those of mice injected with water. The DC vaccine could evidently
inhibit tumor growth, prolong the survival time of mice and improve the survival 
rate of mice and these effects could be improved by HCV C-Fc (pcDNA3HCV C-Fc)
gene codelivered.
CONCLUSION: DC vaccine has a strong antigenicity in humoral and cellular
immunities, which can be promoted by transduced pcDNA3HCV C-Fc expressing HCV C
or Fc. Thus, pcDNA3HCV C-Fc-transduced DCs may be a promising candidate for a
CTL-based vaccine against HCV.

PMCID: PMC4250810
PMID: 15641145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Zhonghua Shi Yan He Lin Chuang Bing Du Xue Za Zhi. 2004 Sep;18(3):255-7.

[Development and preliminary application of monoclonal antibodies against N
protein of SARS virus].

[Article in Chinese]

Li XH(1), Wang YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, National Institute for the Control of
Pharmaceutical and Biological Products, Beijing 100050, China.

OBJECTIVE: To develop the monoclonal antibody against N protein of SARS virus and
study its applicability.
METHODS: BALB/c mice were immunized with recombinant N protein. Spleen cells were
collected and infused with SP2/0 cell. The infused cells were screened for anti-N
protein antibody with ELISA. The positive cells were cloned and injected into
abdominal cavity. The antibodies were purified from ascites. The affinities of
those purified antibodies were analyzed with ELISA. The ELISA for detection of
SARS virus antigen was developed by using antibody with the highest affinity. Its
sensitivity and specificity were also evaluated primarily.
RESULTS: Eleven monoclonal cells secreting antibody have been developed. Three of
the 11 purified monoclonal antibodies had very high affinity to N protein, while 
4 purified McAbs showed very weak reaction to N protein, the affinities of
remaining 4 McAbs were in between. The ELISA for detection of SARS virus antigen 
was developed with McAb 7. Its sensitivity was about 31 PFU/ml and had no cross
reaction with other respiratory viruses.
CONCLUSION: The monoclonal antibody has good specificity and may be used to
detect SARS virus antigen. However, its sensitivity is to be evaluated further
with clinical samples from SARS patients, especially at acute phase.

PMID: 15640861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. J Chem Phys. 2005 Jan 8;122(2):024114.

Improved pseudobonds for combined ab initio quantum mechanical/molecular
mechanical methods.

Zhang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, New York University, New York, New York 10003, USA.
yingkai.zhang@nyu.edu

The pseudobond approach offers a smooth connection at the quantum
mechanical/molecular mechanical interface which passes through covalent bonds. It
replaces the boundary atom of the environment part with a seven-valence-electron 
atom to form a pseudobond with the boundary atom of the active part [Y. Zhang, T.
S. Lee, and W. Yang, J. Chem. Phys. 110, 46 (1999)]. In its original formulation,
the seven-valence-electron boundary atom has the basis set of fluorine and a
parametrized effective core potential. Up to now, only the Cps(sp3)-C(sp3)
pseudobond has been successfully developed; thus in the case of proteins, it can 
only be used to cut the protein side chains. Here we employ a different
formulation to construct this seven-valence-electron boundary atom, which has its
own basis set as well as the effective core potential. We have not only further
improved Cps(sp3)-C(sp3) pseudobond, but also developed Cps(sp3)-C(sp2,carbonyl) 
and Cps(sp3)-N(sp3) pseudobonds for the cutting of protein backbones and nucleic 
acid bases. The basis set and effective core potential for the
seven-valence-electron boundary atom are independent of the molecular mechanical 
force field. Although the parametrization is performed with density functional
calculations using hybrid B3LYP exchange-correlation functional, it is found that
the same set of parameters is also applicable to Hartree-Fock and MP2 methods, as
well as DFT calculations with other exchange-correlation functionals. Tests on a 
series of molecules yield very good structural, electronic, and energetic results
in comparison with the corresponding full ab initio quantum mechanical
calculations.

2005 American Institute of Physics.

PMID: 15638579  [PubMed]


322. World J Gastroenterol. 2005 Jan 21;11(3):344-7.

Expression pattern of epithelial cell adhesion molecule on normal and malignant
colon tissues.

Xie X(1), Wang CY, Cao YX, Wang W, Zhuang R, Chen LH, Dang NN, Fang L, Jin BQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an 710032,
Shaanxi Province, China.

AIM: To investigate the expression pattern of epithelial cell adhesion molecule
(Ep-CAM) on normal and malignant colon tissues to evaluate its diagnostic and
therapeutic significance.
METHODS: cDNA encoding Ep-CAM extracellular domain was cloned by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) from excised malignant colon
tissues and inserted into a glutathione S-transferase (GST)-tagged vector.
Ep-CAM-GST fusion protein was induced by isopropyl-beta-D-thiogalactopyranoside
(IPTG) and purified with glutathione-sepharose. The Ep-CAM-GST fusion protein was
mixed with Freund's adjuvant and Balb/c mice were immunized with it. Sp2/0
myeloma cells were fused with the spleen cells of the immunized mice. After
having selected by indirect ELISA, the anti-Ep-CAM monoclonal antibodies (MAbs)
were generated and the corresponding ascites were obtained. Finally, the human
colon carcinoma tissue array prepared from seventy individual patients was
stained with the anti-Ep-CAM MAbs.
RESULTS: The isolated Ep-CAM cDNA sequence was identical to the data in GenBank. 
The expressed fusion protein was almost soluble and had a molecular weight (MW)
of 53 ku. Four MAbs against Ep-CAM were obtained and designated as FMU-Ep1,
FMU-Ep2, FMU-Ep3 and FMU-Ep4 respectively. Among them, FMU-Ep4 could recognize
the natural Ep-CAM on Colo205 and SW480 cells, and all of them could be used for 
immunohistochemical staining of tissue sections. It was found that Ep-CAM was
distributed differently in normal and various malignant colon tissues, including 
squamous cell carcinoma, signet-ring cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma. In normal
colon gland epithelia, Ep-CAM antigen was mainly distributed on the basolateral
membrane and in the region between the basolateral membrane and the cytoplastic
part near the nuclei, whereas the expression pattern of colon malignancies was
mainly on the whole surface of epithelia and the expression was much higher than 
the normal colon tissues. The staining pattern of tissue array showed in
adenocarcinoma and papillary adenocarcinoma, and the expression of Ep-CAM was
increased from grade I to grade III.
CONCLUSION: MAbs against Ep-CAM might be useful for research on the structure and
function of Ep-CAM and may have diagnostic and therapeutic value to various colon
carcinomas.

PMCID: PMC4205334
PMID: 15637741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Hum Genet. 2005 Mar;116(4):255-61. Epub 2005 Jan 6.

Bisulphite sequencing of the transient neonatal diabetes mellitus DMR facilitates
a novel diagnostic test but reveals no methylation anomalies in patients of
unknown aetiology.

Mackay DJ(1), Temple IK, Shield JP, Robinson DO.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
SP2 8BJ, UK. djgm@soton.ac.uk

Transient neonatal diabetes mellitus (TNDM) is associated with overexpression of 
an imprinted locus on chromosome 6q24; this locus contains a differentially
methylated region (DMR) consisting of an imprinted CpG island that normally
allows expression only from the paternal allele of genes under its control. Three
types of abnormality involving 6q24 are known to cause TNDM: paternal uniparental
disomy of chromosome 6 (pUPD6), an isolated methylation defect of the imprinted
CpG island at chromosome 6q24 and a duplication of 6q24 of paternal origin. A
fourth group of patients has no identifiable anomaly of 6q24. Bisulphite
sequencing of the DMR has facilitated the development of a diagnostic test for
TNDM based on ratiometric methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction. We have
applied this method to 45 cases of TNDM, including 12 with pUPD6, 11 with an
isolated methylation mutation at 6q24, 16 with a duplication of 6q24 and six of
unknown aetiology, together with 29 normal controls. All were correctly assigned.
The method is therefore capable of detecting all known genetic causes of TNDM at 
6q24, although pUPD6 and methylation mutation cases are not distinguished from
one another. In addition, we have carried out bisulphite sequencing of the DMR to
compare its methylation status between six TNDM patients with a known methylation
mutation, six patients with no identifiable 6q24 mutation and six normal
controls. Whereas methylation mutation patients showed a near-total absence of
DNA methylation at the TNDM locus, the patients with no identified molecular
anomaly showed no marked methylation variation from controls.

PMID: 15635480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J Chem Phys. 2004 Dec 15;121(23):11661-7.

A density functional study on nitrogen-doped carbon clusters CnN3- (n=1-8).

Chen M(1), Liu J, Dang L, Zhang Q, Au CT.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Physical Chemistry of Solid Surfaces, Department of
Chemistry and Center for Theoretical Chemistry, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005,
People's Republic of China. mdchen@xmu.edu.cn

Using molecular graphics software, we designed numerous models of CnN3- (n=1-8). 
Geometry optimization and calculation on vibration frequency were carried out by 
the B3LYP density functional method. After comparison of structure stability, we 
found that the structures of ground-state CN3- and C2N3- are bent chains with a
nitrogen atom at either end, whereas when n=3-8, the ground-state clusters show
three branches, each with a nitrogen atom located at the end. When n=5-8, the
longest branch of CnN3- is polyacetylenelike. When n=5 or 7, the longest branch
is connected to the central sp2 carbon in a nonlinear manner. The CnN3- (n=1-8)
with an even number of carbon atoms are more stable than those with odd numbers, 
matching the peak pattern observed in laser-induced mass spectra of CnN3-. The
trend of such odd/even alternation is explained based on concepts of bonding
characteristics, electron affinities, and incremental binding energies.

PMID: 15634132  [PubMed]


325. Arch Dermatol Res. 2005 Feb;296(8):345-52. Epub 2005 Jan 4.

Detection of reverse transcriptase activity in human melanoma cell lines and
identification of a murine leukemia virus contaminant.

Deichmann M(1), Huder JB, Kleist C, Näher H, Schüpbach J, Böni J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Heidelberg University Clinics, Vossstrasse 2,
69115, Heidelberg, Germany. martin_deichmann@med.uni-heidelberg.de

BACKGROUND: Stimulated by earlier reports on the presence of retroviruses in
mouse and hamster melanoma cell lines, we addressed the question as to whether
human melanoma cell lines might also harbour a retrovirus.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The melanoma cell lines SK-MEL-25, SK-MEL-28, MEL-JUSO,
MML-I, MeWo, A-375, Colo-38, BS-780 were confirmed to be human by human leucocyte
antigen (HLA) typing, and supernatants were tested by the product-enhanced
reverse transcriptase (PERT) assay for reverse transcriptase (RT) activity. Cell 
lines SK-MEL-25, SK-MEL-28, MEL-JUSO and MML-I were positive, whereas cell lines 
MeWo, A-375, Colo-38 and BS-780 were negative. The RT activity peaked at a
buoyant density in sucrose typical for retroviruses. From this peak fraction an
R-U5 sequence indistinguishable from murine leukemia virus (MLV) was identified
by particle-associated retrovirus RNA amplification (PARRA). Semiquantitative
MLV-specific RNA-PCR demonstrated colocalization of the MLV-like RNA and RT
activity on the sucrose gradient of SK-Mel-25. MLV RNA and DNA were also
detectable in culture supernatants of SK-MEL-28, MEL-JUSO and MML-I, but not of
MeWo, A-375, Colo-38 and BS-780 by semiquantitative polymerase chain reaction
(PCR). Sequence comparison revealed highest homology with the RET sequence
previously identified in mouse myeloma SP2/0-AG14 cells. Taken together, our data
strongly suggest that certain human melanoma cell lines are productively infected
by a MLV which was probably introduced during tumour passage in mice or by
laboratory contamination many years ago and subsequently spread to other lines.
CONCLUSION: We recommend mandatory testing of melanoma and other human cell lines
for contamination with infectious MLV or other animal retroviruses, similar to
mycoplasma screening, in order to avoid artificial experimental data.

PMID: 15630577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 1997 Sep;18(9):449-52.

[Construction and expression of a functional chimeric murine-human antibody
directing against human cross-linked fibrin].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu Y(1), Xia L, Fu J, Ruan C, Wan H, Li P.

Author information: 
(1)Thrombosis and Hemostasis Research Unit, Jiangsu Institute of Hematology,
Suzhou Medical College, Suzhou 215007.

OBJECTIVE: In order to reduce the immunogenicity of the murine antifibrin
monoclonal antibody (MAb) SZ-63 to human beings.
METHODS: First of all, the cDNA sequences encoding the constant regions of the
murine kappa light chain and gamma 1 heavy chain in the SZ-63 MAb were
substituted with the corresponding human genomic sequences. Then the constructed 
MAb was cloned separately into two selectable expression vectors, and the latter 
were transfected into mouse myeloma cells (SP2/0) one by one.
RESULTS: ELISA, Western blot and competition experiment results showed that there
was 0.8 approximately 1.0 mg/L of chimeric 63 IgG in the conditioned medium of
selected cell lines, and the expressed IgG had higher antifibrin D-Dimer
capability than that of the original MAb.
CONCLUSION: The expressed chimeric antibody can be used as a targeting agent for 
thrombus imaging and treatment.

PMID: 15625833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Brain. 2005 Feb;128(Pt 2):386-94. Epub 2004 Dec 15.

Brainstem reflex circuits revisited.

Cruccu G(1), Iannetti GD, Marx JJ, Thoemke F, Truini A, Fitzek S, Galeotti F,
Urban PP, Romaniello A, Stoeter P, Manfredi M, Hopf HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, La Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.
cruccu@uniroma1.it

Our current understanding of brainstem reflex physiology comes chiefly from the
classic anatomical-functional correlation studies that traced the central
circuits underlying brainstem reflexes and establishing reflex abnormalities as
markers for specific areas of lesion. These studies nevertheless had the
disadvantage of deriving from post-mortem findings in only a few patients. We
developed a voxel-based model of the human brainstem designed to import and
normalize MRIs, select groups of patients with or without a given dysfunction,
compare their MRIs statistically, and construct three-plane maps showing the
statistical probability of lesion. Using this method, we studied 180 patients
with focal brainstem infarction. All subjects underwent a dedicated MRI study of 
the brainstem and the whole series of brainstem tests currently used in clinical 
neurophysiology: early (R1) and late (R2) blink reflex, early (SP1) and late
(SP2) masseter inhibitory reflex, and the jaw jerk to chin tapping. Significance 
levels were highest for R1, SP1 and R2 afferent abnormalities. Patients with
abnormalities in all three reflexes had lesions involving the primary sensory
neurons in the ventral pons, before the afferents directed to the respective
reflex circuits diverge. Patients with an isolated abnormality of R1 and SP1
responses had lesions that involved the ipsilateral dorsal pons, near the fourth 
ventricle floor, and lay close to each other. The area with the highest
probabilities of lesion for the R2-afferent abnormality was in the ipsilateral
dorsal-lateral medulla at the inferior olive level. SP2 abnormalities reached a
low level of significance, in the same region as R2. Only few patients had a
crossed-type abnormality of SP1, SP2 or R2; that of SP1 reached significance in
the median pontine tegmentum rostral to the main trigeminal nucleus. Although
abnormal in 38 patients, the jaw jerk appeared to have no cluster location.
Because our voxel-based model quantitatively compares lesions in patients with or
without a given reflex abnormality, it minimizes the risk that the significant
areas depict vascular territories rather than common spots within the territory
housing the reflex circuit. By analysing statistical data for a large cohort of
patients, it also identifies the most frequent lesion location for each response.
The finding of multireflex abnormalities reflects damage of the primary afferent 
neurons; hence it provides no evidence of an intra-axial lesion. The jaw jerk,
perhaps the brainstem reflex most widely used in clinical neurophysiology, had no
apparent topodiagnostic value, probably because it depends strongly on peripheral
variables, including dental occlusion.

PMID: 15601661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Microbiology. 2004 Dec;150(Pt 12):3935-45.

Production and characterization of murine monoclonal antibodies against
Haemophilus parasuis and study of their protective role in mice.

Tadjine M(1), Mittal KR, Bourdon S, Gottschalk M.

Author information: 
(1)Groupe de Recherche sur les Maladies Infectieuses du Porc (GREMIP),
Département de Pathologie et Microbiologie, Faculté de Médecine Vétérinaire,
Université de Montréal, Sainte-Hyacinthe, Québec, Canada J2S 7C6.

Monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) against Haemophilus parasuis were obtained by the
fusion of SP2/0-Ag14 murine myeloma cells and spleen cells from BALB/c mice
immunized with a whole-bacterial-cell suspension (WC) of H. parasuis strain SW124
(serotype 4). Two MAbs showing strong reactivity in ELISA were further
characterized using SDS-PAGE and Western-blot assays. Different treatments of the
WC indicated that MAbs 4D5 and 4G9 identified epitopes of proteinic and
polysaccharidic nature, respectively. Electron microscopic examination revealed
that, unlike the proteinic epitopes, the lipopolysaccharidic epitopes were
exposed on the surface of the cell. Using coagglutination, Western-blot and
dot-blot assays it was found that both MAbs recognized common epitopes of all the
reference strains and field isolates of H. parasuis. None of the other bacteria
tested reacted with the MAbs. These results indicated that both the proteinic and
polysaccharidic antigens carried species-specific epitopes. It is suggested that 
these MAbs may potentially be useful for identification of H. parasuis isolates
as well as for developing serological diagnostic tools. MAbs 4D5 and 4G9 were
unable to kill H. parasuis in vitro in the presence of complement. However, an
enhanced bacterial clearance from blood was observed in mice inoculated with
either of the MAbs. Highly significant protection was observed in mice using MAb 
4G9. This is believed to be the first report of MAbs capable of identifying
common species-specific antigens of H. parasuis and of their implication in
protection against challenge infection in mice.

PMID: 15583147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Org Chem. 2004 Dec 10;69(25):8924-31.

7-trifluoromethylquinoline-functionalized luminescent photochromic spiropyran
with the stable merocyanine species both in solution and in the solid state.

Guo X(1), Zhou Y, Zhang D, Yin B, Liu Z, Liu C, Lu Z, Huang Y, Zhu D.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Sciences, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing 100080, China.

A new spiropyran (SP2) with the stable merocyanine form (MC2) both in solution
and in the solid state at room temperature was designed and synthesized. The
stability of MC2 is believed to be due to the electron-withdrawing effect of both
the quinoline and the trifluoromethyl groups. (1)H NMR spectra indicate that the 
ratio of the open form vs the closed form of SP2 is dependent on the polarity of 
solvents. Single crystals composed of only the open form (MC2) were successfully 
obtained. X-ray structural analysis indicates that except trifluoromethyl and two
methyl groups MC2 is completely planar with an s-trans,s-cis conformation. It
should be noted that this is the first report of the X-ray crystal structure of
the pure open form of spiropyran. MC2 can be slowly transformed into SP2 at -30
degrees C or lower temperature, and the process is accelerated by visible light
irradiation. This special photochromic behavior can be explained by the
calculated thermodynamic data. The spectral properties of SP2/MC2 in the presence
of different metal ions are also studied, and the results show the potential
application of SP2/MC2 in sensing metal ions.

PMID: 15575775  [PubMed]


330. Org Lett. 2004 Dec 9;6(25):4683-6.

Tandem functionalization of nonactivated alkenes and alkynes in intramolecular
N-acyloxyiminium ion carbocyclization. Synthesis of 6-substituted hydroindole
2-carboxylic acids.

Hanessian S(1), Tremblay M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Université de Montréal, C.P. 6128, Station
Centre-ville, Montréal, PQ, H3C 3J7 Canada. stephen.hanessian@umontreal.ca

[reaction: see text] Five-membered N-Boc acyliminium ions derived from
L-pyroglutamic acid harboring 4-butenyl and 4-butynyl tethers undergo Lewis
acid-mediated halo and tandem Friedel-Crafts carbocyclization within minutes at
-78 degrees C to give stereodefined 6-substituted octahydroindole and
hexahydroindole 2-carboxylic acid methyl esters, respectively. The cyclic vinyl
bromides are excellent substrates for Pd-catalyzed Suzuki-Miyaura, Heck, and
Stille couplings. The method also provides access to enantiopure sp2- and
sp3-arylated azabicyclics that are novel and versatile scaffolds for chemical
diversification.

PMID: 15575660  [PubMed]


331. Yao Xue Xue Bao. 2004 Aug;39(8):635-9.

[Study on cytomedicine of alginate-poly(L) lysine-alginate microencapsulated
hybridoma cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao DJ(1), Jin Y, Fu HX, Chen P.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 30031,
China.

AIM: To study the cytomedicine of alginate-poly (L) lysine-alginate (APA)
microencapsulated hybridoma cells and their characteristics.
METHODS: The spleen cells taken from BALB/C mice immunized with purified human
IgG1 kappa type were fused with mouse myeloma cells SP2/0. The hybridoma cell
lines secreting monoclonal antibodies (mAb) against human IgG1 kappa type was
named JY-A1. The APA microencapsulated JY-A1 cells were prepared with a
high-voltage electrostatic system. Microencapsulation parameters were optimized
and their morphology was studied. The mechanical strength and chemical intensity 
of microcapsules were measured. The mAb secrete from APA microencapsulated JY-A1 
cells was determined by ELISA kit. The microcapsules injected into mice abdominal
cavity previously were recovered at intervals.
RESULTS: The microcapsules prepared in the same condition of the high-voltage
electrostatic system were round and homogeneous. The mAb secreted by the
microencapsulated JY-A1 cells were shown to permeate the membranes of APA
microcapsules in vitro. After an intraperitoneal injection to mice, APA
microcapsules were recovered on day 7, 14, 28, 56. The electron microscopy study 
revealed that the majority of recovered microcapsules were intact, and no
evidence of immunological reaction in terms of fibrosis.
CONCLUSION: APA microencapsulated hybridoma cells prepared by high-voltage
electrostatic system have good mechanical strength and chemical intensity. The
APA microencapsulated hybridoma cells can maintain physiological functions in
vitro, and the microcapsules have good biocompatibility in vivo.

PMID: 15563068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2004 Nov;20(6):702-4.

[Preparation and characterization of monoclonal antibodies against the
hemagglutinin of H9 subtype of avian influenza virus].

[Article in Chinese]

Zeng YB(1), Jiao XA, Pan ZM, Huang JL, Zhang PH, Zhang SH, Sun QY, Liu XF.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Lemology, Ministry of Agriculture/College of Animal
Science and Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou University 225009, China.

AIM: To prepare monoclonal antibodies (mAb) against the hemagglutinin(HA) of H9
subtype of avian influenza virus (AIV).
METHODS: 8 week-old female BALB/c mice were immunized with the inactivated
vaccine of H9 subtype of AIV. Splenocytes from the immunized mice were fused with
Sp2/0 myeloma cells, and positive hybridoma clones were screened by indirect
ELISA and hemagglutination inhibition test (HI). The specificity of the mAb was
characterized by ELISA, HI test, indirect immunofluorescence (IF) staining and
Western blot.
RESULTS: Three hybridoma cell lines named 2H1, 2A3 and 1C8 against HA of AIV H9
were obtained. The HI titers of 3 mAbs were 1 x 2(8)-1 x 2(13), and the ELISA
titers were 1 x 10(-7), 1 x 10(-5) and 5 x 10(-6), respectively. The
immunoglobulin subclass of all 3 mAbs was IgG1. Western blot analysis confirmed
that mAb 2H1 could recognize HA and reacted to 31 out of 32 isolates of H9
subtype of AIV.
CONCLUSION: Three mAbs recognizing HA of H9 subtype of AIV were obtained, which
may provide an useful tool for the antigenic analysis, the serological diagnosis,
the epidemiological survey and the evaluation of AIV vaccine.

PMID: 15555440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2004 Nov;20(6):699-701.

[Preparation and characterization of the monoclonal antibody against HIV-1 p24
antigen].

[Article in Chinese]

Hou J(1), Hu Y, Zhu L, Shen HH, Yang JY, Hong SW, Mao PY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Institute of Infectious Diseases, 302th Hospital of
PLA, Beijing 100039, China. lba@263.net

AIM: To establish hybridoma cells secreting monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) against 
HIV-1 p24 antigen and characterize their properties.
METHODS: BALB/c mice were immunized with purified p24 protein and then the from
splenocytes immunized mice were fused with Sp2/0 cells. Monoclonal hybridoma cell
lines were obtained by limiting dilution, HAT and HT-selective culture. The
specificity of mAbs was identified by Dot blot and indirect ELISA.
RESULTS: We had established two hybridoma cell lines secreting mAbs against HIV-1
p24 antigen. The titers of two mAbs in ascitic fluid were 1 x 10(-5) and 1.7 x
10(4)-1.8 x 10(4) mol/L, respectively. Both mAbs belonged to IgG1. Indirect ELISA
detection demonstrated that both mAbs had no cross-reactivities with other viral 
antigens, such as HBcAg, HCV RNA positive sera and HIVgp41.
CONCLUSION: Two hybridoma cell lines secreting mAbs against HIV-1 p24 antigen
have been established successfully, which lays the foundation for detecting HIV-1
p24 antigen.

PMID: 15555439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Neoplasia. 2004 Sep-Oct;6(5):611-22.

Gene expression profiling of microdissected pancreatic ductal carcinomas using
high-density DNA microarrays.

Grützmann R(1), Pilarsky C, Ammerpohl O, Lüttges J, Böhme A, Sipos B, Foerder M, 
Alldinger I, Jahnke B, Schackert HK, Kalthoff H, Kremer B, Klöppel G, Saeger HD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Visceral, Thoracic, and Vascular Surgery, University Hospital
Carl Gustav Carus, Technical University of Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
Robert.Gruetzmann@uniklinikum-dresden.de

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) remains an important cause of
malignancy-related death and is the eighth most common cancer with the lowest
overall 5-year relative survival rate. To identify new molecular markers and
candidates for new therapeutic regimens, we investigated the gene expression
profile of microdissected cells from 11 normal pancreatic ducts, 14 samples of
PDAC, and 4 well-characterized pancreatic cancer cell lines using the Affymetrix 
U133 GeneChip set. RNA was extracted from microdissected samples and cell lines, 
amplified, and labeled using a repetitive in vitro transcription protocol.
Differentially expressed genes were identified using the significance analysis of
microarrays program. We found 616 differentially expressed genes. Within these,
140 were also identified in PDAC by others, such as Galectin-1, Galectin-3, and
MT-SP2. We validated the differential expression of several genes (e.g., CENPF,
MCM2, MCM7, RAMP, IRAK1, and PTTG1) in PDAC by immunohistochemistry and reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction. We present a whole genome expression
study of microdissected tissues from PDAC, from microdissected normal ductal
pancreatic cells and pancreatic cancer cell lines using high-density microarrays.
Within the panel of genes, we identified novel differentially expressed genes,
which have not been associated with the pathogenesis of PDAC before.

PMCID: PMC1531666
PMID: 15548371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Gene Med. 2005 Jan;7(1):87-96.

The mouse chorionic gonadotropin beta-subunit-like (muCG beta l) molecule
produced by tumor cells elicits the switch of T-cell immunity response from TH2
to TH1 in mice immunized with DNA vaccine based on rhesus monkey homologous CG
beta (rmCG beta).

Shi SQ(1), Peng JP, Xu L, Yang Y, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100080, China.

BACKGROUND: CG beta is expressed not only in placenta, but also in a wide range
of tumors. To study DNA vaccine based on xenogeneic CG beta for cancer
immuno-therapy, we investigated whether rhesus monkey CG beta (rmCG beta) DNA
vaccine could induce protective T-cell responses and humoral responses in mouse.
METHODS: We constructed a plasmid containing the rmCG beta coding sequence. Two
cloned syngeneic SP2/0 myeloma cell lines that stably express muCG beta l
(SP2/0-muCG beta l) and HN (SP2/0-HN) protein were established. Inoculation of
these cell lines was made into mice that had been immunized with DNA vaccine.
Specific IgG and IgG type were measured by ELISA and the cytokine expression was 
detected with RT-PCR. To measure the lymphocyte metabolic activity, the MTS assay
was used.
RESULTS: After injection of SP2/0-muCG beta l into mice that had been immunized
with DNA vaccine, a significant increase in the IgG2a specific to the antigen (p 
< 0.05) and a decrease in the specific IgG1 (p < 0.05) were measured. The
expression of T(H)1 but not T(H)2 cytokines, including IFN-gamma and IL-2, were
detected in the splenocytes. However, injection of tumor cells expressing
irrelevant or mock molecules into immunized mice could not induce these changes. 
The survival rate of vaccine-immunized mice injected with SP2/0-muCG beta l was
as high as 58.3% after 55 days.
CONCLUSIONS: The rmCG beta DNA vaccine has proved to be a potential strategy for 
protection against tumors with homologous molecules. The muCG beta l produced by 
tumors is able to elicit an immunity switch from T(H)2 to T(H)1 in vaccinated
mice.

PMID: 15517553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Eur J Hum Genet. 2005 Feb;13(2):154-60.

Supernumerary marker chromosomes in man: parental origin, mosaicism and maternal 
age revisited.

Crolla JA(1), Youings SA, Ennis S, Jacobs PA.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, UK. john.crolla@salisbury.nhs.uk

The details of all cytogenetic abnormalities diagnosed in the Wessex Regional
Genetics Laboratory (WRGL) since 1967 to the present day have been recorded in
the Salisbury Treasury of Interesting Chromosomes (STOIC). From this resource, we
identified 137 patients with constitutional autosomal supernumerary marker
chromosomes (SMC) ascertained in four principal groups: (i) 37% with abnormal
phenotypes; (ii) 7% couples with reproductive difficulties; (iii) 47% antenatal
diagnoses and (iv) 9% miscellaneous. Overall, 81 (59%) SMCs were mosaics and 56
(41%) nonmosaics. Of the 109 cases with known parental origins, 70% were de novo,
19% maternally and 11% paternally inherited. The chromosomal origins of 112/137
(82%) of the SMCs have been determined by fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH). In all, 36/112 (32%) were derived from nonacrocentric autosomes, and
76/112 (68%) from the acrocentric autosomes 13/21, 14, 15 and 22. Of these
acrocentric SMCs, 39 (51%) were derived from chromosome 15, so that SMC(15)
constituted 39/112 (35%) of all SMCs with known chromosomal origins. The
frequencies with which mosaicism was observed varied considerably according to
the chromosomal origin of the SMCs and accounted for 8/39 (20%) SMC(15), 13/37
(35%) SMCs from other acrocentrics and 25/36 (69%) of nonacrocentric SMCs. The
data were analysed for parental age effects, and only de novo SMC(15)s were found
to be associated with a significantly increased maternal age.

PMID: 15508017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Zhonghua Gan Zang Bing Za Zhi. 2004 Oct;12(10):620-2.

[Adenovirus mediated expression of interleukin 12 regulating hepatitis C virus E2
gene immunization-induced immune response].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu CD(1), Li HG, Tao QM, Wei L.

Author information: 
(1)Hepatology Institute, Peking University People's Hospital, Beijing 100044,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the regulating effect of hepatitis C virus (HCV) envelop
(E) 2 gene immunization-induced immune responses by adenovirus mediated
interleukin 12 (IL-12).
METHODS: HCV E2 protein was expressed and purified from NIH 3T3 and then used as 
an antigen to detect antibodies against HCV E2. With 51Cr release, SP2/0
expressing HCV E2 was used as target cell to detect specific cytotoxic T
lymphocytes (CTL) response; adenovirus recombined IL-12 was propagated by 293
cell. HCV E2 recombinant and adenovirus recombined IL-12 were injected into the
quadriceps femoris muscles and abdominal cavities of 6-8 weeks old BALB/C mice.
Sera were collected at 2, 3, and 4 weeks and detected for antibodies for E2.
Spleen cells isolated at 4 weeks were analyzed for specific CTL response.
RESULTS: It was found that expression of IL-12 at an undetectable level did
enhance HCV E2 gene immunization-induced CTL activity and there was no effect on 
its hormonal immune response.
CONCLUSION: Using adenovirus to express interleukin 12 was helpful for regulation
of HCV E2 gene immunization-induced immune response. Combined HCV E2 and IL-12
can render a strong anti-HCV CTL activity and may be of use in the development of
HCV gene vaccine in the future.

PMID: 15504296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Org Lett. 2004 Oct 28;6(22):4037-9.

Oxygen-promoted palladium(II) catalysis: facile C(sp2)-C(sp2) bond formation via 
cross-coupling of alkenylboronic compounds and olefins.

Yoon CH(1), Yoo KS, Yi SW, Mishra RK, Jung KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of South Florida (SCA 400), 4202 East
Fowler Avenue, Tampa, Florida 33620, USA.

[reaction: see text] Oxygen-promoted Pd(II) catalysis facilitated the synthesis
of conjugated dienes by cross-coupling of alkenylboronic compounds and various
olefins including highly substituted alkenes and cyclohexenone. Under mild
conditions, these versatile reactions were efficient and highly stereoselective.

PMID: 15496093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2004 Dec;66(3):285-90.

Carbon isotope fractionation during cis-trans isomerization of unsaturated fatty 
acids in Pseudomonas putida.

Heipieper HJ(1), Neumann G, Kabelitz N, Kastner M, Richnow HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioremediation, Centre for Environmental Research (UFZ)
Leipzig-Halle, Permoserstr. 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany. hermann.heipieper@ufz.de

The molecular mechanism of the unique cis to trans isomerization of unsaturated
fatty acids in the solvent-tolerant bacterium Pseudomonas putida S12 was studied.
For this purpose, the carbon isotope fractionation of the cis-trans isomerase was
estimated. In resting cell experiments, addition of 3-nitrotoluene for activation
of the cis-trans isomerase resulted in the conversion of the cis-unsaturated
fatty acids into the corresponding trans isomers. For the conversion of C16:1 cis
to its corresponding trans isomer, a significant fractionation was measured. The 
intensity of this fractionation strongly depended on the rate of cis-trans
isomerization and the added concentration of 3-nitrotoluene, respectively. The
presence of a significant fractionation provides additional indication for a
transition from the sp carbon linkage of the cis-double bond to an intermediate
sp3 within an enzyme-substrate complex. The sp2 linkage is reconstituted after
rotation to the trans configuration has occurred. As cytochrome c plays a major
role in the catabolism of Cti polypeptide, these findings favour a mechanism for 
the enzyme in which electrophilic iron (Fe(3+)), provided by a heme domain,
removes an electron of the cis double bond thereby transferring the sp2 linkage
into sp3.

PMID: 15480634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Br J Cancer. 2004 Sep 13;91(6):1155-9.

Dosage analysis of cancer predisposition genes by multiplex ligation-dependent
probe amplification.

Bunyan DJ(1), Eccles DM, Sillibourne J, Wilkins E, Thomas NS, Shea-Simonds J,
Duncan PJ, Curtis CE, Robinson DO, Harvey JF, Cross NC.

Author information: 
(1)National Genetics Reference Laboratory (Wessex), Salisbury District Hospital, 
Salisbury SP2 8BJ, UK.

Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) is a recently described
method for detecting gross deletions or duplications of DNA sequences,
aberrations which are commonly overlooked by standard diagnostic analysis. To
determine the incidence of copy number variants in cancer predisposition genes
from families in the Wessex region, we have analysed the hMLH1 and hMSH2 genes in
patients with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC), BRCA1 and BRCA2 
in families with hereditary breast/ovarian cancer (BRCA) and APC in patients with
familial adenomatous polyposis coli (FAP). Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal
cancer (n=162) and FAP (n=74) probands were fully screened for small mutations,
and cases for which no causative abnormality were found (HNPCC, n=122; FAP, n=24)
were screened by MLPA. Complete or partial gene deletions were identified in
seven cases for hMSH2 (5.7% of mutation-negative HNPCC; 4.3% of all HNPCC), no
cases for hMLH1 and six cases for APC (25% of mutation negative FAP; 8% of all
FAP). For BRCA1 and BRCA2, a partial mutation screen was performed and 136
mutation-negative cases were selected for MLPA. Five deletions and one
duplication were found for BRCA1 (4.4% of mutation-negative BRCA cases) and one
deletion for BRCA2 (0.7% of mutation-negative BRCA cases). Cost analysis
indicates it is marginally more cost effective to perform MLPA prior to point
mutation screening, but the main advantage gained by prescreening is a greatly
reduced reporting time for the patients who are positive. These data demonstrate 
that dosage analysis is an essential component of genetic screening for cancer
predisposition genes.

PMCID: PMC2747696
PMID: 15475941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. J Biochem Mol Biol. 2004 May 31;37(3):314-9.

Characterization of monoclonal antibodies against heavy and light chains of
flounder (Paralichthys olivaceus) immunoglobulin.

Jang HN(1), Woo JK, Cho YH, Kyong SB, Choi SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Marine Biomedical Science, Kunsan National University, Kunsan
573-400, Korea.

Flounder (Paralichthys olivaceus) Immunoglobulins (Igs) were purified from the
serum of mouse IgG-immunized flounder by using affinity chromatography. Under
denaturing conditions in SDS-PAGE, the flounder Igs appeared to be composed of 2 
heavy (H) chains (72 and 77 kDa) and two light (L) chains (26 and 28 kDa).
Monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) were produced by the fusion of myeloma cells (SP2/0)
with Balb/c mouse spleen cells that were previously sensitized against
affinity-purified flounder Igs. In a Western blot analysis, the produced MAbs,
FIM511, FIM519, and FIM562 recognized both the 72 and 77 kDa H chains, 26 kDa,
and 28 kDa L chain, respectively. Mouse antiserum against flounder Igs reacted
more strongly with the L chain of 28 kDa than with 26 kDa, suggesting that the 28
kDa molecule is more immunogenic than the 26 kDa L chain molecule. In a FACS
analysis, the ratios of the Ig+ cell population in the flounder head kidney and
spleen cells were 49% and 24%, respectively. Unexpectedly, however, the ratios of
the Ig+ B-like cell population in the flounder were not significantly augmented, 
even after the immunization of an immunogenic antigen. This suggests that the
humoral immune response in fish could be considerably different from that in
mammals. The produced MAbs in this study would be useful in characterizing
flounder Ig+ B-like cells and in developing flounder Ig detecting an immunoassay 
system.

PMID: 15469712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Am Chem Soc. 2004 Oct 13;126(40):12792-3.

Ru3(CO)12-catalyzed silylation of benzylic C-H bonds in arylpyridines and
arylpyrazoles with hydrosilanes via C-H bond cleavage.

Kakiuchi F(1), Tsuchiya K, Matsumoto M, Mizushima E, Chatani N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Chemistry, Faculty of Engineering, Osaka University,
Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. kakiuchi@chem.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp

Ruthenium-catalyzed silylation of sp3 C-H bonds at a benzylic position with
hydrosilanes gave benzylsilanes. For this silylation reaction, Ru3(CO)12 complex 
showed high catalytic activity. This silylation proceeded at the methyl C-H bond 
selectively. For this silylation reaction, pyridyl and pyrazolyl groups, and the 
imino group in hydrazones, can function as a directing group. Several
hydrosilanes involving triethyl-, dimethylphenyl-, tert-butyldimethyl-, and
triphenylsilanes can be used as a silylating reagent. Coordination of an sp2
nitrogen atom to the ruthenium complex is important for achieving this silylation
reaction.

PMID: 15469271  [PubMed]


343. World J Gastroenterol. 2004 Nov 1;10(21):3197-200.

Antitumor immunity induced by DNA vaccine encoding alpha-fetoprotein/heat shock
protein 70.

Wang XP(1), Liu GZ, Song AL, Li HY, Liu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Capital University of Medical Sciences, Beijing
100054, China. wxpphd@yahoo.com.cn

AIM: To construct a DNA vaccine encoding human alpha-fetoprotein (hAFP)/heat
shock protein 70 (HSP70), and to study its ability to induce specific CTL
response and its protective effect against AFP-expressing tumor.
METHODS: A DNA vaccine was constructed by combining hAFP gene with HSP70 gene.
SP2/0 cells were stably transfected with pBBS212-hAFP and pBBS212-hAFP/HSP70
eukaryotic expression vectors. Mice were primed and boosted with DNA vaccine
hAFP/HSP70 by intramuscular injection, whereas plasmid with hAFP or HSP70 was
used as controls. ELISPOT and ELISA were used to detect IFN-gamma-producing
splenocytes and the level of serum anti-AFP antibody from immunized mice
respectively. In vivo tumor challenge was measured to assess the immune effect of
the DNA vaccine.
RESULTS: By DNA vaccine immunization, the results of ELISPOT and ELISA showed
that the number of IFN-gamma-producing splenocytes and the level of serum
anti-AFP antibody were significantly higher in rhAFP/HSP70 group than in hAFP and
empty plasmid groups (95.50+/-10.90 IFN-gamma spots/10(6) cells vs 23.60+/-11.80 
IFN-gamma spots/10(6) cells, 7.17+/-4.24 IFN-gamma spots/10(6) cells, P<0.01;
126.50+/-8.22 microg/mL vs 51.72+/-3.40 microg/mL, 5.83+/-3.79 microg/mL,
P<0.01). The tumor volume in rhAFP/HSP70 group was significantly smaller than
that in pBBS212-hAFP and empty plasmid groups (37.41+/-7.34 mm(3) vs
381.13+/-15.48 mm(3), 817.51+/-16.25 mm(3), P<0.01).
CONCLUSION: Sequential immunization with a recombinant DNA vaccine encoding AFP
and heat shock protein70 could generate effective AFP-specific T cell responses
and induce definite antitumor effects on AFP-producing tumors, which may be
suitable for some clinical testing as a vaccine for HCC.

PMCID: PMC4611272
PMID: 15457574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Am Chem Soc. 2004 Oct 6;126(39):12264-5.

Mechanism of substitution reaction on sp2-carbon center with lithium
organocuprate.

Yoshikai N(1), Nakamura E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033,
Japan.

Theory and experiments suggest that the substitution reaction of a lithium
dialkylcuprate(I) with an alkenyl bromide takes place through a pi-complex
(cuprio(III)cyclopropane) that directly breaks down to the alkenylated product
rather than via a conventional three-centered transition state. This mechanism is
consistent with the broader mechanistic picture of the organocuprate reactions
and accounts for the retentive stereochemistry and the kinetic isotope effect
observed in the experiments.

PMID: 15453749  [PubMed]


345. J Cell Physiol. 2005 Mar;202(3):912-21.

Rapid induction of the intrinsic apoptotic pathway by L-glutamine starvation.

Paquette JC(1), Guérin PJ, Gauthier ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Laurentian University, Sudbury,
Ontario, Canada.

While the amino acid L-glutamine is known to play a role in the survival of
several cell types, the underlying molecular mechanisms are still poorly defined.
We show in this report that L-glutamine starvation rapidly triggered apoptosis in
Sp2/0-Ag14 hybridoma cells. This process involved the activation of both
caspases-9 and -3, suggesting that L-glutamine deprivation initiated an intrinsic
apoptotic pathway in Sp2/0-Ag14 cells. Supporting this idea, the cytosolic
release of the mitochondrial proteins SMAC/DIABLO and cytochrome c (Cyt c) was
observed, with an initial limited leakage occurring during the first 30 min of
L-glutamine deprivation, followed by a greater release after 60 min. The latter
occurred simultaneously with the translocation of the pro-apoptotic protein Bax
to the mitochondria. Finally, a decline in XIAP levels and the activation of
caspases-3 and -9 were observed. Thus, L-glutamine deprivation of Sp2/0-Ag14
cells rapidly triggers intracellular events, which target the mitochondria,
leading to the cytosolic release of apoptogenic factors, the activation of
caspases-9 and -3, and the commitment to the death program. This work introduces 
the Sp2/0Ag14 hybridoma as a unique model for the study of the molecular events
underlying the pro-survival function of L-glutamine.

2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15389638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Cells Tissues Organs. 2004;177(3):169-84.

Genetic immunization with multiple HIV-1 genes provides protection against
HIV-1/MuLV pseudovirus challenge in vivo.

Hinkula J(1), Rollman E, Lundholm P, Benthin R, Okuda K, Wahren B.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Tumor Biology Center, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm,
Sweden.

Superinfection by HIV-1 of a cell line containing the complete murine leukemia
virus (MuLV) genome was shown to give rise to pseudotyped HIV-1/MuLV. Such
superinfection was successful with certain strains of HIV-1 subtypes A-D. Primary
spleen cells and cells of the peritoneal cavity of immunocompetent mice of the
C57Bl/6 strain were infectable with the pseudotype HIV-1/MuLV and secreted HIV-1 
in vitro and in vivo. In contrast, the murine cell lines, NIH 3T3, myeloma cell
line Sp2/0, and two murine hybridoma cell lines were relatively resistant to
infection and produced no or little HIV. After primary murine spleen cells had
been infected with pseudotyped HIV-1 and transferred to C57Bl/6 mice,
replication-competent HIV-1 was obtained from the peritoneal cavity for at least 
10-14 days. High amounts (> 10(5) vRNA copies/ml) of HIV-1 vRNA could be measured
in the peritoneal fluid. Presence of HIV-1 proviral DNA was detectable in cells
from the peritoneal cavity for up to 24 days after infected cell transfer. Active
reverse transcriptase representing both HIV-1 and C-type murine retroviruses was 
detected in the peritoneal washes. The HIV-infected spleen cells injected into
the peritoneal cavity elicited HIV-1-specific cellular immune responses to
p24gag, gp160Env, Nef, Tat and Rev. Mice immunized with HIV-1 DNA, but not with
HIV-1 protein, cleared their HIV-1-infected cells within 10-14 days after
challenge with HIV-1/MuLV-infected syngeneic spleen cells. This novel model
system of primarily cellular reactivity to HIV-1-infected cells in vivo may
become useful for assaying experimental HIV-1 immunization schedules.

Copyright 2004 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 15388991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. J Immunol Methods. 2004 Aug;291(1-2):109-22.

High efficiency creation of human monoclonal antibody-producing hybridomas.

Dessain SK(1), Adekar SP, Stevens JB, Carpenter KA, Skorski ML, Barnoski BL,
Goldsby RA, Weinberg RA.

Author information: 
(1)The Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 9 Cambridge Center,
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. Scott.Dessain@jefferson.edu

The native human antibody repertoire holds unexplored potential for the
development of novel monoclonal antibody therapeutics. Current techniques that
fuse immortal cells and primary B-lymphocytes are sub-optimal for the routine
production of hybridomas that secrete human monoclonal antibodies. We have found 
that a murine cell line that ectopically expresses murine interleukin-6 (mIL-6)
and human telomerase (hTERT) efficiently forms stable human antibody-secreting
heterohybridomas through cell fusion with primary human B-lymphocytes. The hybrid
cells maintain secretion of human antibodies derived from the primary
B-lymphocytes through multiple rounds of cloning. Using splenic B-lymphocytes
from a patient immunized with a Streptococcus pneumoniae capsular polysaccharide 
vaccine, we have succeeded in creating hybridomas that secrete human monoclonal
antibodies specific for S. pneumoniae antigens. Using peripheral blood
lymphocytes, we have similarly cloned a human antibody that binds a viral
antigen. These experiments establish that SP2/0-derived cell lines ectopically
expressing mIL-6 and hTERT will enable the rapid cloning of native human
monoclonal antibodies.

PMID: 15345310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. J Chem Phys. 2004 Sep 8;121(10):4820-5.

Selective bonding of pyrazine to silicon(100)-2x1 surfaces: the role of nitrogen 
atoms.

Huang HG(1), Huang JY, Ning YS, Xu GQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, National University of Singapore, 10 Kent Ridge,
Singapore 119260, Singapore.

The covalent binding of pyrazine on Si(100) have been investigated using
high-resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy (HREELS) and x-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy. Experimental results clearly suggest that the
attachment occurs exclusively through the bonding of the two para-nitrogen atoms 
with the surface without the involvement of the carbon atoms, as evidenced from
the retention of the (sp2) C-H stretching mode in HREELS and a significant down
shift of 1.6 eV in the binding energy of N 1s. The binding mechanism for pyrazine
on Si(100) demonstrates that reaction channels for heteroatomic aromatic
molecules are strongly dependent on the electronic properties of the constituent 
atoms.

Copyright 2004 American Institute of Physics

PMID: 15332916  [PubMed]


349. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2004 Sep;24(3):279-83.

Antiviral property and mode of action of a sulphated polysaccharide from
Sargassum patens against herpes simplex virus type 2.

Zhu W(1), Chiu LC, Ooi VE, Chan PK, Ang PO Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, NT, Hong
Kong, China.

A sulphated polysaccharide (SP2) was isolated from the brown alga Sargassum
patens. SP2 inhibited the replication of herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2)
dose-dependently by 38.5-96.1% of the control level, after incubations with
0.78-12.5 microg/ml of the polysaccharide. SP2 exhibited extracellular virucidal 
activity only in high concentrations (>/=12.5 microg/ml) but significantly
inhibited the virus attachment to its host cells by 45.1%, at concentration as
low as 1 microg/ml. All the results from this study suggested that the antiviral 
mode of action of SP2 could be ascribed to the inhibition of virus adsorption,
which is different from that of the current drug of choice acyclovir.

PMID: 15325432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2004 Nov;36(11):2334-43.

Proteins are major initial cell targets of hydroxyl free radicals.

Du J(1), Gebicki JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW 2109,
Australia.

The principal aim of the current study was to identify the initial cell targets
of hydroxyl free radicals. Our recent report showed that proteins were oxidized
before lipids in U937 cells exposed to peroxyl radicals. Extending this finding, 
we investigated whether a similar oxidation sequence occurs in other lines of
cells, whether hydroxyl radicals can also initiate cell protein oxidation, and
whether DNA fragmentation is an early event in radical-induced cell damage. Mouse
myeloma Sp2/0-Ag14 and U937 cells were exposed to hydroxyl radicals generated in 
solution by gamma irradiation and the formation of protein peroxides measured by 
a ferric-xylenol orange assay. No lipid peroxidation or DNA damage was evident by
the time of significant formation of protein peroxides. DNA fragmentation was
detectable after prolonged incubation at 37 degrees C and was characteristic of
enzymatic action rather than of random scission by the radicals. Yields of
protein hydroperoxides in the irradiated cells were independent of composition of
the medium, suggesting that only the radicals produced within the cells or
immediately near the cell surface were effective in oxidizing the cell proteins. 
The results are consistent with the hypothesis that proteins are major initial
targets of free radicals in cells and suggest that treatments leading to the
prevention of protein oxidation or to harmless reduction of protein peroxides is 
likely to result in alleviation of radical-induced biological damage.

PMID: 15313477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Hum Mutat. 2004 Sep;24(3):272.

RNA analysis reveals splicing mutations and loss of expression defects in MLH1
and BRCA1.

Sharp A(1), Pichert G, Lucassen A, Eccles D.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, UK. asharp@u.washington.edu

The classical paradigm of mutation screening seeks to relate alterations in DNA
sequence to their effect at the protein level. However, the majority of missense 
mutations are problematic as their pathological significance is often unclear. In
order to test the hypothesis that many missense mutations primarily cause defects
at the RNA rather than the protein level, we have performed retrospective RNA
analysis of 12 individuals carrying missense mutations in the cancer
predisposition genes APC, BRCA1, BRCA2, MLH1, and MSH2. RNA was extracted from
peripheral blood samples and RT-PCR performed in order to assess the splicing and
expression of the mutant allele in each case. Four of the 12 missense mutations
analysed were associated with RNA defects. We detected two cases of exon skipping
and one case of partial intron inclusion with activation of a cryptic intronic
splice site in MLH1. A fourth case was associated with monoallelic expression of 
BRCA1. In addition, allele-specific analysis of common coding polymorphisms
identified a further case of monoallelic BRCA1 expression in one of two
individuals who had previously screened as mutation-negative. Although we were
unable to identify the underlying cause of this loss of expression, it strongly
suggests the presence of a pathogenic defect in BRCA1 in this case, highlighting 
the use of allelic expression studies as a method of mutation scanning. Finally, 
we used our dataset to test the ability of several in silico sequence analysis
tools to identify splicing defects. Our results suggest that a significant number
of missense mutations in cancer predisposition genes are associated with defects 
of RNA splicing, and that the use of gene- and splice site prediction software
can aid in identifying such mutations.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15300854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Auton Neurosci. 2004 Jun 30;113(1-2):16-23.

New monoclonal antibody (AIC) identifies interstitial cells of Cajal in the
musculature of the mouse gastrointestinal tract.

Torihashi S(1), Yokoi K, Nagaya H, Aoki K, Fujimoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Molecular Cell Biology, Nagoya University Graduate
School of Medicine, 65 Tsurumai, Showa Nagoya, 466-8550 Japan.
storiha@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp

Interstitial cells of Cajal (ICC) are pacemaker cells for the spontaneous
muscular contractions and neuromodulators that mediate neurotransmission from
enteric neurons to smooth muscle cells in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. They
express c-Kit, and the antibody for c-Kit (especially ACK2) has been a useful
tool for functional and morphological studies. ACK2, however, does not work on
tissues fixed with paraformaldehyde, and not all ICC express c-Kit in human.
Therefore, in order to find a new marker of ICC and/or new antibody resisting
aldehyde fixation, we produced a new monoclonal antibody that identifies ICC and 
then investigated the properties of its antigen. Isolated ICC were used for
immunization. Hybridomas fused with myeloma SP2 were screened by
immunohistochemistry. ACK2 and each antibody were applied on serial sections, and
the clone producing anti-ICC antibody (AIC) that stains ICC was established. The 
distribution of AIC immunopositive cells was examined in other organs and also GI
muscles of W/Wv mice. The biochemical properties were studied using dot blot
analysis. AIC recognized ICC; however, distribution of immunopositive cells in
W/Wv mice and other organs was different from that of c-Kit. The immunoreactivity
was stable for paraformaldehyde but was blocked by either Triton X-100 or SDS. In
conclusion, new antibody AIC recognized ICC but the antigen was not c-Kit, which 
confirms the existence of good markers of ICC besides c-Kit. Although the antigen
has not been isolated, AIC is suitable for morphological study and is useful for 
investigation of ICC in c-Kit mutants.

PMID: 15296791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2004 Apr;4(4):433-40.

Single-walled carbon nanotube diameter.

Jost O(1), Gorbunov A, Liu X, Pompe W, Fink J.

Author information: 
(1)Dresden University of Technology, Dresden, Germany.

Two different single-walled carbon nanotube (SWNT) growth modes (cap growth mode 
and circumference growth mode) are shown to exist. General SWNT diameter windows 
are derivable from catalyst particle size considerations. In addition, an almost 
complete picture of nanotube diameter dependencies for the cap growth mode is
drawn from experiment. The nanotube diameter always scales linear with
temperature, but the degree of dependence varies with the catalyst element. The
nanotube diameter scales logarithmically with the gas pressure and catalyst
composition. Very few or exactly one atom of a catalyst additive is sufficient to
induce SWNT diameter changes. The experimental data allow the conclusion that the
observed nanotube diameter is based on materials properties of sp2-bonded
carbon/graphene sheets, on individual properties of the catalyst elements, and on
additional kinetic components from temperature and pressure changes. Indications 
are found for a specific and maybe decisive role of adsorbate atoms at the
surface of a catalyst particle on the nanotube diameter and therefore on the
process of nanotube nucleation and growth.

PMID: 15296234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. J Org Chem. 2004 Aug 6;69(16):5395-8.

Gas electron diffraction analysis on S-methyl thioacetate, CH3C(O)SCH3.

Della Védova CO(1), Romano RM, Oberhammer H.

Author information: 
(1)CEQUINOR (CONICET), Departamento de Química, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas,
Universidad Nacional de La Plata, 47 esq. 115, (1900) La Plata, República
Argentina. carlosdv@quimica.unlp.edu.ar

The molecular structure of S-methyl thioacetate, CH3C(O)SCH3, was determined by
gas electron diffraction (GED) with the assistance of quantum chemical
calculations (B3LYP/6-31G and MP2/6-31G). Experimental and theoretical methods
result in a structure with syn conformation (C=O double bond syn with respect to 
the S-C(H3) single bond). The following skeletal geometric parameters were
derived from the GED analysis (ra values with 3sigma uncertainties): C=O =
1.214(3), C-C = 1.499(5), S-C(sp2) = 1.781(6), S-C(sp3) = 1.805(6) angstroms,
O=C-C = 123.4(8) degrees, O=C-S = 122.8(5) degrees and C-S-C = 99.2(9) degrees.

Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society

PMID: 15287787  [PubMed]


355. J Chem Phys. 2004 Feb 22;120(8):3817-21.

Phase stability of nanocarbon in one dimension: nanotubes versus diamond
nanowires.

Barnard AS(1), Snook IK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Physics, Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology
University, GPO Box 2476V, 3001 Australia. amanda.barnard@physics.org

Since their discovery in 1990, the study of sp2 bonded carbon nanotubes has grown
into a field of research in it's own right; however the development of the sp3
analog, diamond nanowires, has been slow. A number of theoretical models have
been proposed to compare the relative stability of diamond and graphite at the
nanoscale; and more recently, to compare nanodiamonds and fullerenes. Presented
here is a study of the phase stability of nanocarbon in one-dimension. The
structural energies of carbon nanotubes and diamond nanowires have been
calculated using density functional theory within the generalized gradient
approximation, and used to determine the atomic heat of formation as a function
of size.

(c) 2004 American Institute of Physics.

PMID: 15268546  [PubMed]


356. Chemistry. 2004 Jul 19;10(14):3411-22.

Weak hydrogen bridges: a systematic theoretical study on the nature and strength 
of C--H...F--C interactions.

Hyla-Kryspin I(1), Haufe G, Grimme S.

Author information: 
(1)Organisch-Chemisches Institut der Universität Münster, Corrensstrasse 49,
48149 Münster, Germany. ihk@uni-muenster.de

We present a comparative study on the nature and strength of weak hydrogen
bonding between the C(sp3)-H, C(sp2)-H, and C(sp)-H donor bonds and F-C(sp3)
acceptors. The series of molecules CH3F.CH4 (2 a, 2 b), CH3F.C2H4 (3), CH3F.C2H2 
(4), as well as model complexes of experimentally characterized
2-fluoro-2-phenylcyclopropane derivatives, C3H6.C3H5F (5 a, 5 b) and C3H5F.C3H5F 
(6) were investigated. Comparative studies were also performed for two conformers
of the methane dimer (1 a, 1 b). The calculations were carried out in hierarchies
of basis sets [SV(d,p), TZV(d,p), aug-TZV(d,p), TZV(2df,2pd), aug-TZV(2df,2pd),
QZV(3d2fg,2pd), aug-QZV(3d2fg,2pdf)] by means of ab initio [HF, MP2, QCISD,
QCISD(T)] methods and density functional theory (DFT/B3LYP, DFT/PBE). It is shown
that well-balanced basis sets of at least TZV(2df,2pd) quality are needed for a
proper description of the weakly bonded systems. In the case of 2, 3, 5, and 6,
the dispersion interaction is the dominant term of the entire attraction, which
is not accounted for at the B3LYP level. Significant electrostatic contributions 
are observed for 6 and 3. For 4, these forces have a dominating contribution to
the hydrogen bonding. The C(sp)--H...F--C(sp(3)) interaction in 4, though weak,
exhibits the same characteristics as conventional hydrogen bridges. Despite
showing longer H.F/H contacts compared to 1 a, 2 a, and 5 a the bifurcated
structures, 1 b, 2 b, 5 b, are characterized by larger dispersion interactions
leading to stronger bonding. For the systems with only one H.F contact, the
MP2/QZV(3d2fg,2pd) interaction energy increases in the order 2 a (-1.62 kJ
mol(-1)), 3 (-2.79 kJ mol(-1)), 5 a (-5.97 kJ mol(-1)), 4 (-7.25 kJ mol(-1)), and
6 (-10.02 kJ mol(-1)). This contradicts the estimated proton donor ability of the
C--H bonds (2 a<5 a<3<6<4).

PMID: 15252787  [PubMed]


357. Magn Reson Chem. 2004 Aug;42(8):667-70.

Electronic influences on 3J(C,H) coupling constants via -S-, -S(O)- and -SO2-:
their determination, calculation and comparison of detection methods.

Heydenreich M(1), Koch A, Kovács J, Tóth G, Kleinpeter E.

Author information: 
(1)Chemisches Institut der Universität Potsdam, P.O. Box 69 15 53, D-14415
Potsdam, Germany.

3J(C,H) coupling constants via a sulfur atom in two series of compounds, both
including a sulfide, a sulfoxide and a sulfone, were detected experimentally and 
calculated by quantum mechanical methods. In the first series (1-3) the coupling 
between a hydrogen, bonded to an sp3 carbon, and an sp2 carbon is treated; the
second series (4-6) deals with the coupling between a hydrogen, bonded to an sp3 
carbon, and an sp3 carbon. Different pulse sequences (broadband HMBC, SelJres, 1D
HSQMBC, J-HMBC-2, selective J-resolved long-range experiment and IMPEACH-MBC)
proved to be useful in determining the long-range 3J(C,H) coupling constants.
However, the dynamic behaviour of two of the compounds (4 and 6) led to weighted 
averages of the two coupling constants expected (concerning equatorial and axial 
positions of the corresponding hydrogens). DFT calculations proved to be useful
to calculate not only the 3J(C,H) coupling constants but also the different
contributions of FC, PSO, DSO and SD terms; the calculation of the Fermi contact 
term (FC) was found to be sufficient for the correct estimation of 3J(C,H)
coupling constants.

Copyright 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 15248254  [PubMed]


358. Horm Metab Res. 2004 Jun;36(6):411-4.

Cytotoxic T-cell response against steroidogenic acute regulatory protein using
DNA vaccination followed by vaccinia virus infection in a mouse adrenal carcinoma
model.

Reincke M(1), Ortmann D, Hausmann J, Beuschlein F.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik-Innenstadt, Klinikum der Maximilians-Ludwigs-Universität
München, Ziemssenstrasse 1, 80336 Munich, Germany.
martin.reincke@med.uni-muenchen.de

Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) is still one of the most devastating human tumors 
with a five year survival as low as 20 %. In a previous study, we showed that DNA
vaccination followed by vaccinia virus was able to break immune tolerance against
murine steroidogenic acute regulatory (mStAR). Prophylactic vaccination in
syngenic mice resulted in protective immunity against Sp2-0 tumor cells
expressing mStAR. However, approximately a third of the animals developed tumors 
despite vaccination. This prompted us to investigate whether vaccination failure 
is responsible for this phenomenon. BALB/cBALB/c mice (in groups of 6 - 9
animals) were vaccinated intramuscularly by injection of cDNA expression vectors 
encoding mStAR three times at weekly intervals. This was followed by a
recombinant vaccinia virus (rVV-mStAR) infection to boost immune response. Ten
days after the last vaccination, Sp2-mStAR or parental Sp2-0 cells (as controls) 
were injected s. c. Tumor development was monitored by daily palpation.
Approximately two weeks later, the animals were sacrificed and the spleens
removed. After restimulation with the cell lines expressing mStAR, the
splenocytes were tested for presence of mStAR self-reactive cytotoxic
T-lymphocytes using ELISPOT analysis. With this approach, we were able to show
that those animals protected from tumor growth had a specific T-cell response
against StAR whereas mice without a specific T-cell response developed Sp2-mStAR 
tumors. Our data demonstrate that vaccination failure, probably due to the low
antigenicity of mStAR, is responsible for tumor growth in our model system.

PMID: 15241733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Chirality. 2004 Aug;16(7):405-13.

Structure and unexpected chiroptical properties of chiral 4-pyrrolidinyl
substituted 2(5H)-furanones.

Gawronski J(1), Gawronska K, Kwit M, Kacprzak K, Rychlewska U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, A. Mickiewicz University, Poznan, Poland.
gawronsk@amu.edu.pl

Planar 2(5H)-furanones substituted at C4 with a chiral pyrrolidinyl group show CD
spectra which are apparently due to the distortion of the C4-N1 bond of sp2
character from the plane defined by the 2(5H)-furanone ring atoms and/or due to
the presence of substituents in the pyrrolidine ring. This is a new, previously
not encountered structural factor determining the chiroptical properties of
2(5H)-furanones and emerging from the analysis of X-ray diffraction data and
quantum mechanical DFT computations. In the presence of a C5 pseudoaxial
substituent in the furanone ring, the sign of the furanone n-pi* and pi-pi*
transition Cotton effects is determined primarily by the previously postulated
allylic helicity rule.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15236340  [PubMed]


360. Eur J Orthod. 2004 Jun;26(3):321-6.

Cephalometric comparison of pharyngeal changes in subjects with upper airway
resistance syndrome or obstructive sleep apnoea in upright and supine positions.

Ingman T(1), Nieminen T, Hurmerinta K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pedodontics and Orthodontics, Institute of Dentistry, Biomedicum
Helsinki, University of Helsinki, Finland.

The aim of the present study was to cephalometrically compare pharyngeal changes 
between upright and supine positions in patients with upper airway resistance
syndrome (UARS) or obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA). Eighty-two OSA patients, 70
men (mean age 49 +/- 11.8 years) and 12 women (45.9 +/- 8.3 years), underwent
cephalometric sleep apnoea analysis. One upright and one supine radiograph were
taken of each patient (a total of 164 cephalometric radiographs). The results
showed no significant changes either in naso- or hypopharyngeal soft tissues
between the two positions. In contrast, the shortest distance from the soft
palate (ve1-ve2) and the tip of the soft palate (u1-u2) to the posterior
oropharyngeal wall was significantly narrower (P < 0.001) in the supine position.
Furthermore, in the supine position a slight thickening in the soft palate
(sp1-sp2, P < 0.05) was detected with no change in the length of the soft palate 
(PNS-u1). The form of the tongue changed significantly: it was shorter (Tt-Tgo, P
< 0.001; Tt-va, P < 0.001) and thicker (Ts/Tt-Tgo, P < 0.05) in the supine
position. The present results suggest that OSA patients are prone to significant 
narrowing of their oropharyngeal, but not of their naso- or hypopharyngeal,
airways in the supine position. Thus, treatment of OSA and UARS patients should
mainly be aimed at preventing further oropharyngeal airway narrowing as a result 
of supine-dependent sleep.

PMID: 15222718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 17;278(42):41047-58. Epub 2003 Jul 31.

Glucose metabolism in cancer: importance of transcription factor-DNA interactions
within a short segment of the proximal region og the type II hexokinase promoter.

Lee MG(1), Pedersen PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, The Johns Hopkins University, School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205-2185, USA.

A common signature of many cancers is a high glucose catabolic rate frequently
dependent on the overexpression of Type II hexokinase (HKII), a mitochondrial
bound enzyme that also suppresses cell death. As the tumor HKII promoter plays a 
significant role in HKII overexpression, studies reported here were undertaken to
identify both the major regions and transcription factors involved under
tumor-like conditions. Reporter gene assays following transfection of hepatoma
cells with decreasing segments of the HKII promoter traced its known strength to 
the proximal region (-281 to -35). Mutational analyses showed that in this short 
region GC boxes 1, 2, 5, and 6, a CCAAT box, an inverted CCAAT box, and CRE are
involved in promoter activation. Other studies demonstrated binding of
transcription factors Sp1, Sp2, and Sp3 to GC boxes 1 and 6, Sp1 and Sp2 to GC
boxes 2 and 5, NF-Y to CCAAT boxes, and CREB, ATF1, and CREM to CRE. In addition,
transfection studies involving Sp1, Sp2, Sp3, CREB, and NFY (dominant negative
form) provided evidence that these proteins are promoter activators. Finally,
alignment of available HK proximal promoters showed strong conservation only
among HKII sequences. These findings implicate signaling pathways directed to a
short segment of the proximal region of the HKII promoter as major contributors
to HKII overexpression in many cancers.

PMID: 12893819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Aug 15;308(1):139-47.

Identification of a short PIASx gene promoter that directs male germ
cell-specific transcription in vivo.

Santti H(1), Mikkonen L, Hirvonen-Santti S, Toppari J, Jänne OA, Palvimo JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedicum Helsinki, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Helsinki,
FIN-00014 Helsinki, Finland.

PIASx gene encodes two SUMO E3 ligases that are highly expressed in the testis.
We have isolated and analyzed the promoter of the murine PIASx gene.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays with testicular nuclear extracts showed
that the proximal promoter forms a major DNA-protein complex containing Sp1, Sp2,
and Sp3 transcription factors. Reporter gene assays in cultured cells indicated
that a fragment comprising nucleotides from -168 to +76 relative to transcription
start site is sufficient for basal promoter activity in cultured cells, but these
in vitro assays failed to reveal clear differences in promoter activity between
testis- and non-testis-derived cell lines. Interestingly, however, the proximal
promoter encompasses the elements necessary for a testis-specific transcription
in vivo, as it directed beta-galactosidase expression exclusively to male germ
cells in transgenic mice. In conclusion, we have characterized the minimal PIASx 
promoter that can be used for highly specific targeting of transgene expression
to male germ cells.

PMID: 12890492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Immunol Lett. 2003 Aug 5;88(2):135-40.

Expression of a prototypic anti-colorectal cancer polyclonal antibody library in 
mammalian cells.

Chen L(1), Liebman MA, Teodorescu-Frumosu S, Schnitzler AC, Sharon J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Boston University, School of 
Medicine, Boston, MA 02118, USA.

We describe the production of a prototypic polyclonal antibody library (PCAL), a 
standardized mixture of full-length IgG polyclonal antibodies for which the genes
are available. The PCAL was generated by mass transfer of heavy and light chain
variable region gene pairs, selected for binding to human colorectal cancer
cells, from a Fab phage display vector to a mammalian IgG expression vector.
Following transfection of the IgG vector library into Sp2/0 myeloma cells, clones
were characterized for IgG expression and binding to the colorectal cancer cells 
by ELISA, and for diversity by DNA fingerprinting, nucleotide sequencing, and
immunoblot analysis. The results showed that 76-84% of the library clones produce
IgG and of those 72-79% bind antigen. Furthermore, preliminary analysis showed
clonal diversity at both the DNA and antigen-binding levels. When depleted of
reactivity to normal tissue, polyclonal antibody libraries to cancer cells may be
efficacious for cancer therapy.

PMID: 12880683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Chin Med J (Engl). 2003 Jun;116(6):947-50.

Analysis of TRAIL receptor expression using anti-TRAIL death receptor-5
monoclonal antibodies.

Ma Y(1), Yang D, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan
430030, China. myf369@yahoo.com

OBJECTIVE: To establish hybridomas that produce anti-death receptor-5 (DR5)
monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) and check the surface expression of DR5 (sDR5) on
cell lines.
METHODS: The cDNA of human DR5 was cloned into pGAPZalpha. Recombinant Pichia
pastoris clones generated via homologous recombination secreted high levels of
sDR5. The sDR5 was purified using a nickel ion column. BALB/c mice were immunized
with sDR5 and spleen cells were fused with the SP2/0-Ag 14. Monoclonal antibodies
were tested by ELISA for their abilities binding to sDR5 and by flow cytometry
for the reactivities to surface DR5 of Jurkat cells. Surface expression of the
TRAIL receptor was determined by flow cytometric analysis measuring the binding
of anti-DR5 mAb.
RESULTS: Isotypes of mAbs were determined to be IgG(1) and IgM, all of which were
reactive to sDR5 as observed through ELISA. It was discovered using flow
cytometry that only IgG was able to bind to DR5 on the plasma membrane of Jurkat 
cells. sDR5 was found to completely inhibit anti-DR5 mAb binding to Jurkat cells.
Approximately 95% of Jurkat cells, 98% SW480, 99% U937, 100% U87, 86% HCT116, 64%
HL-60, 47% HeLa and 13% K562 cells express membrane DR5.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate that anti-DR5 mAb is able to specifically 
bind to DR5 and that DR5 is expressed at high levels on Jurkat, SW480, U87, U937 
and HCT116 cell lines, and at medium levels on HL-60 and HeLa cell lines. The
expression of DR5 on K562 cell line is low.

PMID: 12877814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Neurol Sci. 2003 Jun;24(2):53-6.

Masseteric silent period and reflex before and after dentomaxillofacial surgery.

Jandolo B(1), Galiè E, Badia D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Regina Elena Cancer Institute, Via Chianesi 53,
I-00144 Rome, Italy.

The aim of this study was to evaluate massetteric silent period and reflex in
patients affected by progenia, before and after maxillofacial surgery, in order
to determine their clinical utility. The electrophysiological changes generated
by malocclusion secondary to prognatism have been evaluated before and after
maxillofacial corrective surgery in 14 patients aged between 18 and 36 years. The
masseteric reflex and the silent period (SP) of the masseteric muscles elicited
by stimulation of the mental nerve were recorded. A correspondence between the
neurophysiological and clinical findings was present in 12 of 14 patients, in
particular concerning the latency of SP2. This study demonstrates that the
masseteric silent period may be used as a diagnostic and prognostic support,
before and after surgery for malocclusion.

PMID: 12827538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Photochem Photobiol Sci. 2003 May;2(5):585-90.

Excited state dynamics and rapid internal conversion in a stable dipole molecule.

Reid GD(1), Whittaker DJ, Roth W, Whitaker BJ, Williamson MJ, Beddard GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Leeds, Woodhouse Lane, Leeds, UK LS2
9JT.

The excited singlet state of an azomethine ylide or 'stable dipole' exhibits an
ultrafast radiationless relaxation after femtosecond laser excitation. These
transients are observed before the excited state decays in an almost
activationless manner, the barrier is 440 cm-1, to the ground state with a 1.5 ps
lifetime. Cooling of the hot ground state is also apparent in the transient
absorption data and in methanol decays with a 5.7 ps lifetime. The viscosity
dependence of the fluorescence yield and lifetime in different solvents is small 
and far less pronounced than in triphenylmethane dyes. Surprisingly, the excited 
state decay is not due to twisting about the C-N bond of the ylide but it is
caused by buckling of one of the rings as the nitrogen atom changes character
from sp2 to sp3 hybridisation.

PMID: 12803082  [PubMed]


427. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2003 May;996:222-6.

CDCP1 is a novel marker for hematopoietic stem cells.

Conze T(1), Lammers R, Kuci S, Scherl-Mostageer M, Schweifer N, Kanz L, Buhring
HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, Division of Hematology, Immunology, and
Oncology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

CDCP1 is a transmembrane protein that contains three CUB domains within the
extracellular region and a hexalysine stretch within the cytoplasmic region.
CDCP1 mRNA is highly expressed in lung and colon tumors and in the
erythroleukemic cell line K562. To analyze CDCP1 protein expression, monoclonal
antibodies against the extracellular domain of CDCP1 were raised. For this
purpose, CDCP1 was overexpressed in NIH-3T3 cells. Balb/c mice were then
immunized with the resultant cell line NIH-3T3/huCDCP1. After fusion of SP2/0
cells with immune spleen cells, hybridoma clones were selected that secreted
antibodies reacting with NIH-3T3/huCDCP1 cells but not with parental cells. Four 
antibodies (CUB1-CUB4) were obtained that fulfilled these criteria. Screening of 
peripheral blood cells revealed that the antibodies did not recognize mature
lymphocytes, monocytes, granulocytes, erythrocytes, or platelets. In contrast,
multi-color analyses revealed that CDCP1 protein is almost exclusively expressed 
on a subset of CD34(+) stem/progenitor cells in bone marrow. Transplantation of
purified CDCP1(+) cells into NOD/SCID mice resulted in engraftment of human cells
with multi-lineage differentiation potential, suggesting that CDCP1 is a novel
marker for hematopoietic stem cells.

PMID: 12799299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2003 Oct;95(4):1632-7. Epub 2003 Jun 6.

Maximal intermittent cycling exercise: effects of recovery duration and gender.

Billaut F(1), Giacomoni M, Falgairette G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Ergonomie Sportive et Performance-EA 3162, Université de
Toulon-Var, Ave. de l'Université, BP 132, 83957 La Garde Cedex, France.

This study aimed to evaluate potential gender differences in recovery of power
output during repeated all-out cycling exercise. Twenty men and thirteen women
performed four series of two sprints (Sp1 and Sp2) of 8 s, separated by 15-, 30-,
60-, and 120-s recovery. Peak power (Ppeak), power at the 8th s, total mechanical
work, and time to Ppeak were calculated for each sprint. Ppeak and mechanical
work decreased significantly between Sp1 and Sp2 after 15-s recovery in both men 
(-6.4 and -9.4%, respectively) and women (-7.4 and -6.8%, respectively). Time to 
Ppeak did not change between recovery durations, but women reached their peak
power more slowly than men (on average 5.15 +/- 1.2 and 3.8 +/- 1.2 s,
respectively; P < 0.01). During Sp1 and Sp2, linear regressions from Ppeak to
power at the 8th s showed a greater power decrease (%Ppeak) in women compared
with men (P < 0.05). In conclusion, patterns of power output recovery between two
consecutive short bouts were similar in men and women, despite lower overall
performance and greater fatigability during sprints in women.

PMID: 12794037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Biochem J. 2003 Sep 15;374(Pt 3):723-9.

Modulation of DNA topoisomerase II alpha promoter activity by members of the Sp
(specificity protein) and NF-Y (nuclear factor Y) families of transcription
factors.

Magan N(1), Szremska AP, Isaacs RJ, Stowell KM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular BioSciences, Massey University, Private Bag 11-222,
Palmerston North, New Zealand.

Topo IIalpha (topoisomerase IIalpha) is a major target of several commonly used
anticancer drugs and is subject to down-regulation at the transcriptional level
in some drug-resistant cell lines and tumours in response to chemotherapy.
Clinical resistance to such drugs has been correlated with down-regulation of
topo IIalpha at transcription in some drug-resistant cell lines and tumours.
Putative binding sites for a variety of transcription factors, including Sp1
(specificity protein 1) and NF-Y (nuclear factor Y) have previously been
identified in the topo IIalpha promoter, but their functional significance and
interactions have not been described following exposure to anti-cancer drugs. The
binding of these factors to specific putative regulatory elements in the topo
IIalpha promoter was studied using electrophoretic-mobility-shift assays. Sp1 was
found to bind strongly to both distal and proximal GC-rich elements and NF-Y to
ICB1 (the first inverted CCAAT box). The functional significance of
transcription-factor binding was studied using transient transfection of HeLa
cells using a luciferase reporter driven by a 617-bp minimal promoter containing 
point mutations in putative regulatory elements. Sp1 and NF-Y were both found to 
be transcriptional modulators with activator or repressor functions depending on 
protein/DNA context. Moreover, a functional interaction between Sp1 and NF-Y
bound at proximal elements was observed.

PMCID: PMC1223628
PMID: 12769819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Arch Insect Biochem Physiol. 2003 Jun;53(2):49-65.

Molecular cloning, expression, and characterization of a cDNA encoding the
arylphorin-like hexameric storage protein from the mulberry longicorn beetle,
Apriona germari.

Kim SR(1), Yoon HJ, Park NS, Lee SM, Moon JY, Seo SJ, Jin BR, Sohn HD.

Author information: 
(1)College of Natural Resources and Life Science, Dong-A University, Busan,
Korea.

We describe here the cloning, expression, and characterization of a cDNA encoding
the arylphorin-like hexameric storage protein from the mulberry longicorn beetle,
Apriona germari (Coleoptera, Cerambycidae). The complete cDNA sequence of A.
germari hexamerin (AgeHex) is comprised of 2,160 bp with 720 amino acid residues.
The deduced protein sequence of AgeHex is most similar to Tenebrio molitor
hexamerin2 (65.3%). Phylogenetic analysis further confirmed the AgeHex is more
closely related to T. molitor hexmerin2 and T. molitor early-staged encapsulation
inducing protein than to the other insect storage proteins. Southern blot
analysis suggested the presence of A. germari hexamerin gene as a single copy and
Northern blot analysis confirmed fat body-specific expression at the
transcriptional level. The cDNA encoding AgeHex was expressed as a 80-kDa protein
in the baculovirus-infected insect cells. Western blot analysis using the
polyclonal antiserum against recombinant AgeHex indicated that the AgeHex
corresponds to storage protein 2 (SP2) present in the A. germari larval
hemolymph.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12761873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Transfusion. 2003 Jun;43(6):758-64.

Production of recombinant murine-human chimeric IgM and IgG anti-Js(b) for use in
the clinical laboratory.

Huang TJ(1), Reid ME, Halverson GR, Yazdanbakhsh K.

Author information: 
(1)Immunochemistry Laboratory, New York Blood Center, New York, New York 10021,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Directly agglutinating MoAbs are more useful than IgG MoAbs of murine
origin for typing RBCs from donors and patients. The molecular manipulation and
conversion of a murine IgG MoAb into mouse- human chimeric IgM and IgG antibodies
are described.
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: cDNA encoding the variable heavy- and light-chain genes
of a murine hybridoma anti-Jsb cell line (MIMA-8) were cloned into human IgM or
IgG expression vectors, which were then separately stably transfected into
SP2/0-Ag14 B-cells. The secreted antibodies were screened by ELISA and analyzed
by flow cytometry and hemagglutination.
RESULTS: Forty percent (16 of 40) of the stable clones secreted IgM and 66
percent (12 of 18) of the stable clones secreted IgG. The chimeric IgM from the
highest expressing clone reacted 4+ in LISS at room temperature. The chimeric IgG
from one clone reacted 4+ by the IAT, resembling the specificity of the original 
murine antibody. Both manipulated MoAbs reacted specifically with RBCs as
assessed by flow cytometry.
CONCLUSION: Human-mouse chimeric IgM and IgG from a murine IgG MoAb anti-Jsb has 
been successfully engineered for use in the clinical laboratory. This approach
can potentially be used to manipulate other murine MoAbs to blood group antigens 
into more clinically useful human isotypes.

PMID: 12757527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Int J Toxicol. 2003 Mar-Apr;22(2):73-80.

Effects of brevetoxins on murine myeloma SP2/O cells: aberrant cellular division.

Han TK(1), Derby M, Martin DF, Wright SD, Dao ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida 33620-5150,
USA.

Massive deaths of manatees (Trichechus manatus latirostris) during the red tide
seasons have been attributed to brevetoxins produced by the dinoflagellate
Karenia brevis (formerly Ptychodiscus breve and Gymnodinium breve). Although
these toxins have been found in macrophages and lymphocytes in the lung, liver,
and secondary lymphoid tissues of these animals, the molecular mechanisms of
brevetoxicosis have not yet been identified. To investigate the effects of
brevetoxins on immune cells, a murine myeloma cell line (SP2/O) was used as a
model for in vitro studies. By adding brevetoxins to cultures of the SP2/O cells 
at concentrations ranging from 20 to 600 ng/ml, an apparent increase in
proliferation was observed at around 2 hours post challenge as compared to the
unchallenged cell cultures. This was followed by a drop in cell number at around 
3 hours, suggesting an aberrant effect of brevetoxins on cellular division, the
cells generated at 2 hours being apparently short-lived. In situ immunochemical
staining of the SP2/O cells at 1 and 2 hour post challenge showed an accumulation
of the toxins in the nucleus. A 21-kDa protein was subsequently isolated from the
SP2/O cells as having brevetoxin-binding properties, and immunologically
identified as p21, a nuclear factor known to down-regulate cellular proliferation
through inhibition of cyclin-dependent kinases. These data are the first on a
possible effect of brevetoxins on the cell cycle via binding to p21, a phenomenon
that needs to be further investigated and validated in normal immune cells.

PMID: 12745987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. J R Army Med Corps. 2003 Mar;149(1):76-8.

Prepare for an SpR interview.

Garner JP(1), Heppell PS.

Author information: 
(1)Odstock Centre for Burn, Plastic and Maxillo-Facial Surgery, Salisbury
District Hospital, Salisbury, Wilts, SP2 8BJ.

By the time you attend an interview for a military SpR number you should have no 
real problems but it pays to be prepared. Begin preparations early, reading
widely and talk to as many people as possible. Your consultants will have a
useful viewpoint on the proceedings and may be able to help you refine your
answers to the common questions. Arrive at your interview in a smart and timely
fashion and answer questions with confidence and common sense. Avoid
confrontation and bluff and be courteous at all times, whatever you may be
feeling inside and thank the interview panel as you leave.

PMID: 12743934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Chem Commun (Camb). 2003 Apr 7;(7):904-5.

A novel approach to carbon hollow spheres and vessels from CCl4 at low
temperatures.

Xiong Y(1), Xie Y, Li Z, Wu C, Zhang R.

Author information: 
(1)Structure Research Laboratory, University of Science and Technology of China, 
Hefei, Anhui 230026, PR China.

Carbon hollow spheres (400-600 nm) and vessels (400 nm x 3000 nm) have been
synthesized from sp3-CCl4 at 190 and 230 degrees C, respectively. The HRTEM
images and Raman spectra reveal the sp2 nature of the as-obtained products,
indicating that the transformation from carbon sp3 to sp2 occurs in the
reactions. The possible mechanism has also been proposed.

PMID: 12739670  [PubMed]


435. Wei Sheng Yan Jiu. 2000 Jan 30;29(1):59-60.

[Establishment of monoclonal antibodies against aflatoxin M1].

[Article in Chinese]

Li Y(1), Han C, Zhang J, Luo X.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Food Safety Control and Inspection, Ministry of Health, Beijing
100021, China.

The monoclonal antibodies against aflatoxin M1 were established. Spleen cells
from Balb/c mice immunized with AFM1-oxime-BSA conjugate were fused with murine
Sp2/0 myeloma cells. Three hybridoma cell lines secretine monoclonal antibodies
against AFM1 were established after the fusion cells subcloned for 3-4 cycles.
These antibodies were disignated as 3G2, 3G3 and 6G8, respectively. All of them
belonged to the subtype of IgG1. The titres of the antibody in ascites ranged
from 1:3.2 x 10(6)-1:20 x 10(6). There was no cross reaction between 6G8
monoclone antibody and other types of aflatoxin.

PMID: 12725048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Mov Disord. 2003 May;18(5):587-92.

Trigemino-facial inhibitory reflexes in idiopathic hemifacial spasm.

Pavesi G(1), Cattaneo L, Chierici E, Mancia D.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Clinica Neurologica, Università degli Studi di Parma, Parma,
Italy. neurophy@unipr.it

We investigated trigemino-facial excitatory and inhibitory responses in perioral 
muscles in hemifacial spasm (HFS). We examined 15 patients affected with
idiopathic HFS and 8 healthy controls. Five patients had spasms mostly limited to
the periocular region and 10 had spasms also involving the perioral muscles.
Responses were recorded from the resting orbicularis oculi (OOc), levator labii
superioris (LLS) and orbicularis oris (OOr) muscles, after supraorbital (SO)
nerve stimulation and during isolated voluntary contraction of LLS muscle. Eight 
patients showed complete or partial preservation of the late silent period (SP2) 
in activated LLS muscle. The remaining 7 patients showed absence of SP2. Early
and late excitatory responses were variably present in LLS muscle at rest.
Patients with HFS clinically restricted to periocular muscles had at least
partial preservation of the SP2. In conclusion, in HFS patients inhibitory
trigemino-facial reflexes are impaired and excitatory trigemino-facial responses 
are elicited in perioral muscles. These two phenomena seem to develop
independently; the degree of trigemino-facial reflex impairment parallels the
extension of involuntary movements to the lower facial muscles.

Copyright 2003 Movement Disorder Society

PMID: 12722175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. World J Gastroenterol. 2003 May;9(5):1111-3.

Cloning of HBsAg-encoded genes in different vectors and their expression in
eukaryotic cells.

Qin S(1), Tang H, Zhao LS, He F, Lin Y, Liu L, He XM.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Molecular Biology of Infectious Diseases of Sichuan
Province, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China.
shanqin@hotmail.com

AIM: To compare the efficiency of different plasmids as DNA vectors by cloning
three HBsAg-encoded genes into two eukaryotic expression vectors, pRc/CMV and
pSG5UTPL/Flag, and to express HBsAg S, MS, and LS proteins in SP2/0 cells, and to
establish monoclone SP2/0 cell strains that are capable of expressing S or S2S
proteins stably.
METHODS: Segments of S, preS2-S, preS1-preS2-S genes of Hepatitis B virus were
amplified by routine PCR and preS1-S fragment was amplified by Over-Lap Extension
PCR. The amplified segments were cleaved with restricted endonuclease Hind
III/Not I followed by ligation with pRc/CMV, or BamHI/EcoR I followed by ligation
with pSG5UTPL/Flag. After the plasmid vectors were cleaved with the correspond
enzymes, the amplified segments were inserted into pRc/CMV or pSG5UTPL/Flag
plasmid vectors with T4 DNA ligase. KOZAK sequence was added before the initial
ATG code of each fragment using specific primer. The inserted segments in the
recombinant plasmids were sequenced after subcloning. BALB/c mice myeloma cells
(SP2/0 cell line) were transfected with the recombinant plasmids. The expressions
of the different recombinants were Compared by Western-blot, using a monoclonal
anti-HBs antibody as the primary antibody and peroxidase-labeled multi-linker as 
the secondary. Stable SP2/0-pRc/CMV-S or SP2/0- pRc/CMV-MS clones were
established through clone screening with G418.
RESULTS: Fragments with anticipated size were harvested after PCR. After
recombination and screening, the sequences of the inserted segments in the
recombinants were confirmed to be S, preS2S, preS1-preS2S and preS1S encoding
genes, determined by sequencing. The results of Western-blot hybridization were
positive for the anticipated proteins. Among them, pRc/CMV-S or pRc/CMV-MS
demonstrated the highest expressing their respective antigen.
CONCLUSION: Eight recombinant plasmids expressing S, M, L or preS1S proteins are 
obtained. For hepatitis surface antigen expression in eukaryotic cells, the
vector pRc/CMV is superior to pSG5UTPL/Flag, and pRc/CMV-S and pRc/CMV-MS are the
most efficient in the pRc/CMV clones. SP2/0 cells stably expressing HBsAg are
established, and may be used as target cells for evaluating the CTL activity of a
DNA vaccine in vitro.

PMCID: PMC4611384
PMID: 12717868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Hybrid Hybridomics. 2003 Feb;22(1):33-9.

Generation and characterization of a mouse monoclonal antibody with specificity
similar to staphylococcal protein A (SPA).

Hadji-Ghasemi F(1), Gharagozlou S, Ghods R, Roohi A, Khoshnoodi J, Shokri F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Public Health, Tehran University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Human IgG is comprised of four subclasses (IgG(1), IgG(2), IgG(3), and IgG(4)).
Each subclass possesses different biological properties. One of the differential 
specificities of human IgG subclasses is binding of Fc fragment of IgG(1), 2, and
4 but, not IgG(3) to staphylococcal protein A (SPA). This study was conducted to 
produce, select and characterize a monoclonal antibody (MAb) recognizing human
IgG subclasses with specificity similar to SPA. Splenocytes from Balb/c mice
immunized with Fc fraction of a human IgG(1) myeloma protein were fused with
Sp2/0 myeloma cells. Fused cells were grown in hypoxanthine, aminopterine, and
thymidine (HAT) selective medium and cloned by limiting dilution assay.
Antibody-secreting cells were screened by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) and the specificity of secreted MAb was further analyzed, using a panel
of purified myeloma proteins by ELISA and immunoblotting. A murine hybridoma
designated 6F11E1 was obtained that secretes an MAb specific for the Fc fragment 
of the immunizing protein. This MAb reacts with isotypic epitope common to
IgG(1), 2 and 4 subclasses. An allelic epitope linked to IgG(3) molecules is also
recognized by 6F11E1. This pattern of reactivity was found to be highly similar
to that of SPA. Our findings imply that similar or overlapping epitopes are
recognized by 6F11E1 and SPA.

PMID: 12713688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Hybrid Hybridomics. 2003 Feb;22(1):11-6.

Recognition of multiple Mycoplasma bovis antigens by monoclonal antibodies.

Dénes B(1), Tenk M, Tekes L, Varga I, Ferenczné IP, Stipkovits L.

Author information: 
(1)Central Veterinary Institute, Budapest, Hungary. denesbela@yahoo.com

To produce monoclonal antibodies (MAbs), Balb/c AnN Crl BR mice were inoculated
with the cell suspension of a Hungarian Mycoplasma bovis strain designated 26034.
Three days after the last immunization the spleen of the immunized mouse was
removed aseptically. The fusion of spleen cells with Sp2/0-Ag14 murine myeloma
cells was performed in the presence of polyethylene glycol. The obtained hybrid
cells were selected with hipoxantine, aminopterine and thymidine (HAT) medium.
Two weeks after the fusion, the supernatants of the grown cells were tested by a 
self-developed indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The results
showed that 63 antibody-producing hybridomas had been obtained. For accurate
determination of the molecular weight of antigen determinants, the supernatants
giving positive reaction in the ELISA were tested by Western blotting. According 
to the results, the obtained MAbs recognize the antigen determinants of the
following molecular weights: 1B11: 63 kDa, 1C7: 63 kDa, 2C5: 22, 25 and 27 kDa,
2C9: 69 kDa, 3G12: 67, 69 and 72 kDa, 4H9: 63 kDa, 5B8: 22, 25 and 27 kDa, 5D3:
22, 25 and 27 kDa, 5C11: 69 kDa, 5E5: 22, 25 and 27 kDa, 6F11: 63 kDa, and 6H10: 
22, 25 and 27 kDa. The 12 cell groups selected on the basis of the Western
blotting were cloned twice by end-point dilution method. The cloned cells were
propagated, and with 5 cell lines antibodies were produced in the CELLine
bioreactor (Integra Biosciences, Zurich, Switzerland). Cell line 3G12 showed the 
highest productivity with an average daily output of 1.5 mg immunoglobulin. Cell 
line 5E5 produced 1.1 mg, 6H10 0.8 mg, 2C9 0.47 mg and 6F11 0.4 mg antibody per
day. The isotype of the antibodies was determined by ELISA. The antibodies
produced by the 12 cell lines tested were assigned to the IgG(1) subclass
according to the heavy chain. Ten cell lines produced kappa and two produced
lambda light-chain antibody. Possible cross-reactions of the produced monoclonal 
anti-M. bovis antibodies with certain Mycoplasma, Ureaplasma and Acholeplasma
species were tested by an indirect ELISA procedure. All of the 12 antibodies
tested gave a reaction with the antigen of M. bovis strain designated 26034. MAbs
3G12 (67, 69, and 72 kDa) and 5B8 (22, 25, and 27 kDa) gave no cross-reaction
with antigens other than strains of the homologous Mycoplasma species. The other 
antibodies reacted with the M. bovigenitalium F7, M. anseris 8389, M. oculi, and 
M. gallisepticum s6 Holland antigens. Owing to its high specificity and affinity,
the antibody produced by the cell line 3G12 is primarily considered suitable for 
use in immunodiagnostic tests of M. bovis infections.

PMID: 12713685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Wei Sheng Yan Jiu. 1999 Sep 30;28(5):297-9.

[Preparation and identification of anti-fumonisin B1 monoclonal antibody].

[Article in Chinese]

Guo Y(1), Liu X, Liu J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Nutrition and Food Hygiene, Chinese Academy of Preventive
Medicine, Beijing 100050, China.

Spleen cells from Balb/c mice immunized with an artificially KLH-glutaraldehyde
fumonisin B1(FB1) conjugate were fused with murine Sp2/0 myeloma cells. One
hybridoma cell line secreting monoclonal antibody against FB1 was established
after the fusion cells subcloned for 4 cycles. This antibody was designated as
FB(1)4G4. The titer of the antibody from ascites was 1:1 x 10(7).

PMID: 12712702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Chem Commun (Camb). 2003 Mar 21;(6):710-1.

New thermally stable cationic eta3-allyl(1,4-diphospha-(1,3)-butadiene)nickel
complexes for ethylene polymerization.

Ionkin A(1), Marshall W.

Author information: 
(1)DuPont Central Research & Development, Experimental Station, Wilmington, DE
19880-0328, USA. alex.s.ionkin@usa.dupont.com

Nickel ethylene polymerization catalysts 1a,b bearing a P,P-ligand with two
sp2-hybridized phosphorus atoms have been synthesized; their structure and
polymerization studies have been reported for the first time.

PMID: 12703785  [PubMed]


442. J Cell Biochem. 2003 May 1;89(1):203-11.

Induction of cellular necrosis by the glutathione peroxidase mimetic ebselen.

Guérin PJ(1), Gauthier ER.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular Biochemistry Research Laboratory, Department of
Chemistry-Biochemistry, Laurentian University, Sudbury, Ontario, Canada, P3E 2C6.

The selenium-based compound ebselen is a powerful antioxidant, a potent
anti-inflammatory agent and a potential neuroprotective compound. Several studies
have demonstrated that part of the biological effect of ebselen is the result of 
the inhibition of apoptosis. We show in this report that ebselen induced the
necrotic cell death of Sp2/0-Ag14 hybridoma cells. This process was rapid, with
over 90% of the cells being dead after a 2 h exposure to 50 microM ebselen. The
toxic effect of ebselen could not be prevented by the caspase inhibitor Z-VAD-fmk
but could be blocked with thiol-containing compounds. Interestingly, ebselen
addition completely prevented caspase activation in cycloheximide-treated
Sp2/O-Ag14 cells, indicating that this antioxidant interferes with the apoptotic 
machinery. Our results indicate that some cell types are acutely sensitive to the
toxic effect of ebselen, and that ebselen-induced cell death interferes with
apoptotic processes. These observations are of particular importance since
ebselen is currently used in clinical trials for possible use as therapeutic
agent for stroke.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12682920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2003 Apr 11;42(14):1566-8.

Evolution in the palladium-catalyzed cross-coupling of sp- and sp2-hybridized
carbon atoms.

Tykwinski RR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2G2, Canada. 
rik.tykwinski@ualberta.ca

PMID: 12698450  [PubMed]


444. J Microsc. 2003 Apr;210(Pt 1):53-9.

An EELS-based study of the effects of pyrolysis on natural carbonaceous materials
used for activated charcoal preparation.

Jeanne-Rose V(1), Golabkan V, Mansot JL, Largitte L, Césaire T, Ouensanga A.

Author information: 
(1)Chimie des Matériaux - Connaissance et Valorisation (COVACHIMM - EA 3592),
Groupe de Technologie des Surfaces et Interfaces (GTSI-EA 2432), Université des
Antilles et de la Guyane, Pointe à Pitre Cedex Guadeloupe (FWI).
valerie.jeanne-rose@univ-ag.fr

Electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS) has been used to characterize the
electronic structure of charcoal phases at the nanoscale, thus demonstrating that
the technique can be applied to environmental science. Activated charcoal is
extensively used to remove pollutants from liquid and gaseous sewage. It is
mainly obtained by activation of coke or charcoal produced from ligneous
precursors. The present study concerns the use of by-products of local Caribbean 
agriculture, such as sugar cane bagasse, fruit stones and seeds, for use as
activated charcoal precursors. Charcoal phases are prepared by high-temperature
pyrolysis of lignocellulosic raw materials under a nitrogen gas flow. With the
aim of optimizing the pyrolysis temperature and duration and oxygen content, the 
concentration of carbon sp2 hybridized chemical bonds and structural ordering
have been followed by EELS for different treatment temperatures. To quantify the 
carbon sp2 content, near edge structure (NES) at the carbon K edge has been
measured to determine the strength of pi --> pi* and 1s --> pi* transitions.
Three precursors of plant origin, shells of Terminalia catappa and Acrocomia
karukerana and seeds of Psidium guajava, with the pyrolysis temperatures between 
600 and 900 degrees C, were investigated. The fraction of carbon sp2 bonding is
found to increase when the temperature rises from 600 degrees C to the range
700-750 degrees C and becomes stable at higher temperatures. For temperatures in 
excess of 700 degrees C, structural ordering probably occurs and well-defined 1s 
--> sigma* NES is present, whose intensity increases with increasing preparation 
temperature. For the highest temperature of around 900 degrees C, the structure
of the final product is less well organized than graphitized carbon but a few per
cent of a highly ordered phase is found.

PMID: 12694416  [PubMed]


445. Mol Ecol. 2003 May;12(5):1217-23.

Candidate gene analysis of metamorphic timing in ambystomatid salamanders.

Voss SR(1), Prudic KL, Oliver JC, Shaffer HB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40506, USA.
srvoss@uky.edu

Although much is known about the ecological significance of metamorphosis and
metamorphic timing, few studies have examined the underlying genetic architecture
of these traits, and no study has attempted to associate phenotypic variation to 
molecular variation in specific genes. Here we report on a candidate gene
approach (CGA) to test specific loci for a statistical contribution to variation 
in metamorphic timing. Three segregating populations (SP1, SP2 and SP3) were
constructed utilizing three species of paedomorphic Mexican ambystomatid
salamander, including the axolotl, Ambystoma mexicanum. We used these replicated 
species to test the hypothesis that inheritance of alternate genotypes at two
thyroid hormone receptor loci (TRalpha, TRbeta) affects metamorphic timing in
ambystomatid salamanders. A significant TRalpha*SP effect indicated that
variation in metamorphic timing may be influenced by TRalpha genotype, however,
the effect was not a simple one, as both the magnitude and direction of the
phenotypic effect depended upon the genetic background. These are the first data 
to implicate a specific gene in contributing to variation in metamorphic timing. 
In general, candidate gene approaches can be extended to any number of loci and
to any organism where simple genetic crosses can be performed to create
segregating populations. The approach is thus of particular value in ecological
studies where target genes have been identified but the study organism is not one
of the few well-characterized model systems that dominate genetic research.

PMID: 12694285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Acta Crystallogr C. 2003 Apr;59(Pt 4):M141-3. Epub 2003 Mar 21.

N-fluoropyridinium trifluoromethanesulfonate and
1-fluoro-2,4,6-trimethoxy-1,3,5-triazinium hexafluoroantimonate: the first
experimental determination of the F-N+ bond length involving sp2 nitrogen.

Banks RE(1), Besheesh MK, Pritchard RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, UMIST, PO Box 88, Manchester M60 1QD, England.

The structures of N-fluoropyridinium trifluoromethanesulfonate,
C(5)H(5)FN(+).CF(3)O(3)S(-), (I), and 1-fluoro-2,4,6-trimethoxy-1,3,5-triazinium 
hexafluoroantimonate, (C(6)H(9)FN(3)O(3))[SbF(6)], (II), are presented. The N-F
bond lengths in (I), a well known electrophilic fluorinating agent, and its novel
analogue, (II), are 1.357 (4) and 1.354 (4) A, respectively.

PMID: 12682394  [PubMed]


447. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2003 Mar;14(3):187-206.

The generation of monoclonal antibodies by genetic immunisation: antibodies
against trout TCRalpha and IgL isotypes.

Timmusk S(1), Jansson E, Pilström L.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Programme, Department of Cell & Molecular Biology, BMC, Uppsala
University, Box 596, S-751 24 Uppsala, Sweden.

Production of monoclonal antibodies (mAb) using genetic immunisation is a
potential alternative when purified antigen is difficult to obtain, or when
induction of an antibody response to a limited part of an antigen is wanted. DNA 
immunisation using only the constant parts of trout immunoglobulin light chains
coding regions was attempted here, because mAbs against the variable (V) part of 
immunoglobulins do not recognise the whole repertoire of the isotype. After
positive results with the light chains and establishing of a proper screening
system (ELISA), generation of monoclonal antibodies against trout T cell receptor
was also performed. The DNA constructs were used both for immunisation of mice
and for protein expression in EBNA 293 cells. Mice were immunised with the
constructs 3-5 times by intramuscular injection, with or without adjuvants during
1-3 months. Spleens of positive mice were fused with myeloma Sp2/0 cells and
clones were screened by ELISA using double-screening (recombinant protein/trout
cells).MAbs 46E5 (anti-IgL2C), 4F2 (anti-TCRalpha), 18B3 (anti-TCRalphaC) and 4E5
(anti-TCRalphaC) show specific binding to its antigen in Western blot, mAb 18B3
and 7H7(anti-TCRalpha) shows specific staining of trout splenocytes in flow
cytometry and mAb 7H7 induces proliferation of trout peripheral blood leucocytes 
(PBL) in vitro.

PMID: 12681276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. J Med Chem. 2003 Apr 10;46(8):1330-6.

A model for predicting likely sites of CYP3A4-mediated metabolism on drug-like
molecules.

Singh SB(1), Shen LQ, Walker MJ, Sheridan RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Systems Merck Research Laboratories, 126 E. Lincoln
Avenue, RY50SW-100, Rahway, New Jersey 07065-0900, USA. suresh_singh@merck.com

We have developed a rapid semiquantitative model for evaluating the relative
susceptibilities of different sites on drug molecules to metabolism by cytochrome
P450 3A4. The model is based on the energy necessary to remove a hydrogen radical
from each site, plus the surface area exposure of the hydrogen atom. The energy
of hydrogen radical abstraction is conventionally measured by AM1 semiempirical
molecular orbital calculations. AM1 calculations show the following order of
radical stabilities for the hydrogen atom abstractions: sp2 centers > heteroatom 
sp3 centers > carbon sp3 centers. Since AM1 calculations are too time intensive
for routine work, we developed a statistical trend vector model, which is used to
estimate the AM1 abstraction energy of a hydrogen atom from its local atomic
environment. We carried out AM1 and trend vector calculations on 50 CYP3A4
substrates whose major sites of metabolism are known in the literature. A plot of
the lowest hydrogen radical formation energy versus its sterically accessible
surface area exposure for these 50 substrates shows that only those hydrogen
atoms with solvent accessible surface area exposure > or = 8.0 A(2) are
susceptible to CYP3A4-mediated metabolism. This approach forms the basis for our 
general model, which predicts sites on drugs that are susceptible to cytochrome
P450 3A4-mediated hydrogen radical abstraction followed by a hydroxylation
reaction. This model, in conjunction with specific enzyme site binding
requirements, can aid in identifying possible sites of metabolism catalyzed by
other cytochrome P450 enzymes.

PMID: 12672233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Zhonghua Shi Yan He Lin Chuang Bing Du Xue Za Zhi. 2002 Sep;16(3):288-91.

[Establishment of a double-antigen sandwich ELISA for detecting total antibodies 
to human immunodeficiency virus type 1/2].

[Article in Chinese]

He H(1), Mao P, Hou J, Hong S, Zhu L, Hu Y, Bai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, The 302nd Hospital of PLA, Beijing 100039, China.

OBJECTIVE: To describe and evaluate a double-antigen sandwich ELISA for detecting
human immunodeficiency virus type 1/2 (HIV-1/2) specific antibodies.
METHODS: The peptides gp41.1(sp1), gp41.2(sp2), gp120(sp3) and p24(sp4) of HIV-1 
and gp36(sp5) of HIV-2 were artificially synthesized. Then sp1, sp3, sp4 and sp5 
were used as coating antigens; sp1, sp2, sp4 and sp5 labeled with HRP were used
as conjugates in this sandwich ELISA.
RESULTS: The specificity and sensitivity of the assay were both 100% in detecting
anti-HIV of 40 control sera of the second generation panel, higher than indirect 
ELISA (specificity 90% and sensitivity, 65%, respectively). All of 210 sera from 
individuals with other diseases were negative for anti-HIV. The consistency rate 
was 100% when our sandwich ELISA and Abbott HIVAB were used to detect anti-HIV in
90 healthy blood donors and 88 HIV infected individuals.
CONCLUSIONS: The results showed that this sandwich ELISA for detection of
anti-HIV is specific, sensitive and convenient, and it is suitable for screening 
blood donors and detecting HIV infection.

PMID: 12665944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Placenta. 2003 Apr;24(4):403-11.

Functional analysis of murine uterine natural killer cells genetically devoid of 
oestrogen receptors.

Borzychowski AM(1), Chantakru S, Minhas K, Paffaro VA, Yamada AT, He H, Korach
KS, Croy BA.

Author information: 
(1)Receptor Biology Section, Laboratory of Reproductive and Developmental
Toxicology, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National
Institute of Health, P.O. Box 12233, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.

Uterine Natural Killer (uNK) cell differentiation in vivo requires oestrogen (E) 
priming prior to progesterone (P). Hybridomas between uNK precursor and SP2/0
cells express message for E receptor (ER)alpha but nor PR. However, mature,
rodent and human uNK cells lack these receptors. To functionally assess
requirements for uNK cell expression of ERalpha or ERbeta during precursor
differentiation, marrow was transplanted from either ERalpha(o/o) (alphaERKO) or 
ERbeta(o/o) (betaERKO) mice into alymphoid RAG-2(o/o)/gammac(o/o) females.
Recipients were mated and their implantation sites were examined by light
microscopy, morphometry and ultrastructure. High numbers of uNK cells were
established from each donor strain. Graft-derived uNK cells were similar in
number and morphology to uNK cells of normal mice, suggesting that neither alpha-
nor beta-ER is required for uNK precursor cell differentiation. Induction of
spiral artery modification in the transplant recipients indicated that
graft-derived uNK cells had functional properties. A novel technique for rapid
isolation of highly purified uNK cells from normal mice using Dolichos biflorus
agglutinin (DBA) lectin-conjugated magnetic beads was employed to obtain RNA.
Expression of alpha- and beta-ER was absent by RT-PCR from NK cells isolated from
the uterus, supporting the conclusions from the in vivo study.

PMID: 12657515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. J Electron Microsc (Tokyo). 2002;51(6):391-400.

Mapping of sp2/sp3 in DLC thin film by signal processed ESI series energy-loss
image.

Yan JY(1), Chen FR, Kai JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Engineering and System Science, National Tsing-Hua University,
HsinChu, Taiwan 300, Republic of China. d887101@oz.nthu.edu.tw

A set of signal processing methods comprising fast Fourier transform
interpolation, maximum entropy deconvolution and wavelet transformation has been 
successfully integrated to improve the equality of the extracted C K-edge spectra
from electron spectroscopic imaging (ESI) series. Fast Fourier transform
interpolation is used to improve the dispersion arising from discrete sampling of
ESI series in the energy space. The maximum entropy method is used to dispel the 
convolution effect resulting from that ESI series acquired with a finite energy
window. Wavelet transformation is applied to de-noise the extracted ESI spectrum.
The post-processed ESI spectrum has quality as good as that of a probe-acquired
spectrum and makes semi-quantitative analysis of the two-dimensional sp2/sp3
ratio map in diamond-like carbon thin film possible. In general, this method is
applicable for reconstructing good quality core-loss electron energy-loss spectra
from a nanometre-sized area, so that it may be possible to quantitatively analyse
two-dimensional information about electronic structure in materials with near
nanometre resolution.

PMID: 12630782  [PubMed]


452. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2003 Mar;24(3):241-6.

Antitumor effects of curcin from seeds of Jatropha curcas.

Lin J(1), Yan F, Tang L, Chen F.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610064, China.

AIM: To study the antitumor effects of curcin from Jatropha curcas.
METHODS: Antitumor activity of curcin was tested by MTT assay. The N-glycosidase 
activity of curcin was determined by characterization of R-fragment in gel. A
cell-free system, rabbit reticulocyte lysate, was introduced to quantify the
inhibitory activity of curcin on protein biosynthesis.
RESULTS: The curcin had a powerful inhibitory action upon protein synthesis in
reticulocyte lysate with an IC50 (95 % confidence limits) value of 0.19
(0.11-0.27) nmol/L. The IC50 (95 % confidence limits) of curcin on SGC-7901,
Sp2/0, and human hepatoma was 0.23 (0.15-0.32) mg/L, 0.66 (0.35-0.97) mg/L, 3.16 
(2.74-3.58) mg/L, respectively. Curcin was found to have no toxic to Hela cells
and normal cells (MRC). After the rRNA of ribosome was treated with curcin and
aniline at acidic condition, a cleaved R-fragment of approximately 450 nt
appeared, but this fragment did not occur after treatment with curcin only. A
comparison of the amino acid sequences of curcin, ricin A-chain and trichosanthin
revealed that there were relatively high similarities among them. The percentages
of homology between curcin and ricin A chain, between curcin and trichosanthin
were found to be 54 % and 57 % respectively. Especially, the conserved residues
forming the active sites of the A chain of ricin and trichosanthin occurred in
curcin.
CONCLUSION: Curcin has an obvious antitumor effect and its mechanisms are related
to the N-glycosidase activity.

PMID: 12617773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Chem Commun (Camb). 2003 Feb 7;(3):358-9.

N-PtIV-H/N-H...PtII intramolecular redox equilibrium in a product of H-C(sp2)
cleavage and unusual alkane/arene C-H bond selectivity of
([2.1.1]pyridinophane)PtII(CH3)+.

Vedernikov AN(1), Caulton KG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana 47405, USA.

T-shaped 14 valence electron (eta2-L)PtMe+ (based on DFT geometry optimization, L
= [2.1.1]-2,6-pyridinophane) reacts with benzene to give (eta3-L) PtIV(Ph)2H+ and
methane; the latter cation is in thermal equilibrium with the N-protonated PtII
tautomer (eta2-L-H)Pt(Ph)2+, and these complexes react with ethane or
cyclopentane to produce benzene and (L)PtH(olefin)+.

PMID: 12613611  [PubMed]


454. Gene. 2003 Feb 27;305(2):205-15.

The Xenopus B2 factor involved in TFIIIA gene regulation is closely related to
Sp1 and interacts in a complex with USF.

Penberthy WT(1), Griffin D, Hall RK, Taylor WL.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA
90095-1606, USA. wtpenber@ucla.edu

In the Xenopus laevis oocyte there is a million fold more transcription factor
IIIA (TFIIIA) and its corresponding mRNA than in a somatic cell. These high
levels of TFIIIA gene expression are achieved primarily by transcriptional
regulation. The TATA box along with three positive cis-elements in the control
region of the TFIIIA gene located at positions -269 to -264 (E1), -235 to -220
(E2), and -669 to -636 (E3) are required for this high level of expression in
oocytes. The proteins that bind E1 and E3 of the TFIIIA gene have been identified
as Xenopus USF (Xl-USF) and B3 (homolog of Vg1 RBP/VERA). In this study the B2
protein was found to bind E2 in a zinc-dependent fashion and anti-human Sp1 (but 
not Sp2, Sp3, nor Sp4) supershifted the B2:element 2 complex. The E2 binding
protein was purified by DNA affinity chromatography. Based on supershift
analysis, molecular weight estimation experiments, and purified human Sp1 DNA
binding affinity tests the data strongly support the idea that the B2 protein is 
the Xenopus ortholog of Sp1, but not Sp2, Sp3, nor Sp4. Xl-USF binds to element 1
of the TFIIIA gene which is immediately adjacent to element 2.
Coimmunoprecipitation experiments using crude whole oocyte extracts revealed that
Xenopus Sp1 and USF or closely related factors are present together in a
high-affinity complex. This structure contributes positively to the initiation of
TFIIIA gene transcription in Xenopus oocytes.

PMID: 12609741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Chin Med J (Engl). 2002 Nov;115(11):1645-9.

Experimental study on mechanism and rarity of metastases in skeletal muscle.

Luo C(1), Jiang Y, Liu Y, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, 301 Hospital, Beijing 100853, China.
chenghua-L@301hospital.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the reasons for the rarity of metastases in skeletal
muscle.
METHODS: By injecting tumor cells (Walker256 rat carcinosarcoma) through the
iliac artery (experimental group) and the tail vein (control group), animal
models of blood-borne metastases were established. The quadriceps femoris muscle 
and lungs were observed grossly and microscopically. Immunohistochemistry was
applied to investigate the expression of vascular cell adhesion molecule-1
(VCAM-1) in the microvascular endothelium of these organs. Primary culture of rat
skeletal muscle cells was established and conditioned medium (MCM) was collected.
Effects of MCM on several tumor cell lines and the biochemical characteristics of
skeletal muscle delivered tumor factor(s) were tested by MTT assay. Apoptosis and
morphological examination were carried out to investigate the antitumor
mechanisms of MCM.
RESULTS: In the experimental group, there were no definite metastases observed in
muscle cells. In the control group, lung metastases were present in the lungs of 
all rats that were sacrificed at the 14th day or died spontaneously (17 rats in
all). There was no significant difference between the increase in VCAM-1 in
quadriceps femoris muscle 7 days after iliac artery injection and that in lungs 7
days after tail vein injection (P > 0.05). In vitro studies showed that the
proliferation of tumor cell lines of mouse SP2/0 myeloma, rat Walker256
carcinosarcoma or human chronic granulocytic leukemia K562, human acute lymphatic
leukemia HL-60, LS-174-T colon adenocarcinoma, PC3-M prostatic carcinoma and lung
giant cell carcinoma with different metastatic potency (PLA801-C with low
metastatic potency, PLA801-D with high metastatic potency) was significantly
inhibited when cultured with MCM (P < 0.01 - 0.05). Proliferation of malignant
cells showed a dose-dependent decrease, to a certain degree. Proliferation of
normal rabbit joint epiphysial disk cells (RGP-2) were not affected by MCM.
Proliferation of lung giant cell carcinoma cells with high metastatic potency
showed a significant decrease even when cultured in highly diluted MCM (6.25% of 
primary MCM), when compared with the strain of low metastatic potency. Following 
ultrafiltration, boiling at 100 degrees C, and treatment with trypsin, skeletal
muscle delivered tumor factor(s) were found to be a low molecular weight (MW <or=
10.0 KDa) component which was trypsin resistant but not heat resistant. The
factor(s) did not induce apoptosis in K562 cells but caused direct destruction of
the cytoplasmic membrane.
CONCLUSIONS: The rarity of metastases in skeletal muscles, generally accepted in 
the clinical setting, can be reproduced in an animal model. It does not seem to
be related to VCAM-1 expression in the microvessels of these organs. Skeletal
muscle delivered factor(s) play a key role in the mechanism of the rarity of
metastases in skeletal muscle.

PMID: 12609079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Hybrid Hybridomics. 2002 Dec;21(6):479-85.

Production and characterization of monoclonal antibodies against asexual stages
of Plasmodium yoelii nigeriensis.

Kinhikar AG(1), Singh PP.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, S.A.S. Nagar,
India.

Swiss mice vaccinated with Plasmodium yoelii nigeriensis-soluble antigen and
saponin, following a homologous 100% lethal challenge, showed 60% protection (6
out of 10 mice survived). Monoclonal antibodies (MAbs), generated by hybridizing 
the Sp2/0 myeloma cells with the splenocytes of each of these ten mice,
separately, were screened using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and
were characterized by using merozoite (Mz) invasion inhibition assay in vitro,
immunofluorescence assay (IFA), passive transfer of protection and ELISA-based
isotyping. Curiously, purified MAbs from each of the six protected mice showed a 
distinct dichotomy: only two or three of them inhibited >86% Mz invasion, whereas
the remaining six to nine showed <58% Mz invasion inhibition. However, none of
the purified MAbs from the nonprotected mice could inhibit >58% Mz invasion.
Furthermore, the ability of the MAbs to inhibit Mz invasion appeared to correlate
with their IFA-reactivity with the free-Mz, suggesting that these MAbs were
directed against the Mz surface antigens involved in invasion. In passive
transfer of protection experiments, pooled purified MAbs from protected mice,
that inhibited >86% Mz invasion, transferred 60% protection from challenge; the
remaining pooled purified MAbs from protected mice, and those from nonprotected
mice, when transferred separately, imparted only 30 and 10% protection,
respectively. Isotypically, the MAbs belonged to IgG(1), IgG(2a), IgG(2b), and
IgG(3) subclasses. Our results indicate that purified MAbs against P. yoelii
nigeriensis, produced from the hybrids generated using the splenocytes of
vaccinated and protected mice, belonged to two distinct groups: a small group
that inhibited >86% Mz invasion, strongly cross-reacted with free-Mz, transferred
up to 60% passive protection, and belonged to IgG(2a) and IgG(3) subclasses,
whereas the other relatively larger group inhibited <58% Mz invasion, weakly
cross-reacted with free-Mz, and transferred only 30% passive protection.

PMID: 12573112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Hybrid Hybridomics. 2002 Dec;21(6):457-62.

Monoclonal antibodies KN-02 and KN-03 against the heavy chain of kinesin.

Macurek L(1), Dráberová E, Richterová V, Böhm KJ, Dráber P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic,
Vídenská 1083, 142 20 Prague 4, Czech Republic.

The present paper describes two new monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) KN-02 and KN-03 
against the heavy chain of conventional kinesin. The kinesin was purified from
porcine brain by a combined procedure of ion exchange chromatography,
tripolyphosphate-supported microtubule affinity-binding, and gel filtration.
Hybridoma cell lines producing antibodies were obtained after immunization of a
Balb/c mouse with kinesin and subsequent fusion of the spleen cells with Sp2/0
myeloma cells. The specificity was verified by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA) and further confirmed by immunoblotting and immunoprecipitation analysis.
The antibodies recognize different epitopes on the heavy chain of the kinesin
molecule as demonstrated by chymotryptic cleavage of kinesin followed by
immunoblotting. Differential location of relevant epitopes was also documented by
in vitro binding experiments with purified kinesin and taxol-stabilized
microtubules. While the KN-03 antibody decorated microtubules, no such staining
was observed with KN-02 antibody. The antibodies have a lower affinity to sodium 
dodecyl sulfate (SDS)-denatured kinesin, but immunofluorescence on fixed cells
gave strong dot-like staining characteristic for localization of kinesin on
vesicles. The same staining pattern was observed in different cell types.
Double-label fluorescence with polyclonal anti-tubulin antibody revealed a
co-distribution of stained vesicles with microtubules on the cell periphery. The 
antibodies KN-02 and KN-03 are therefore valuable tools for localization of
kinesins in cells of different tissue origin.

PMID: 12573109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Hybrid Hybridomics. 2002 Dec;21(6):433-43.

Anti-idiotypic antibody as the surrogate antigen for cloning scFv and its fusion 
proteins.

Cheung NK(1), Guo HF, Modak S, Cheung IY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
10021, USA. cheungn@mskcc.org

Single-chain variable fragment (ScFv) is a versatile building block for novel
targeting constructs. However, a reliable screening and binding assay is often
the limiting step for antigens that are difficult to clone or purify.
Anti-idiotypic antibodies may be useful as surrogate antigens for cloning scFv
and their fusion proteins. 8H9 is a murine IgG(1) monoclonal antibody (MAb)
specific for a novel antigen expressed on the cell surface of a wide spectrum of 
human solid tumors, but not in normal tissues. Rat anti-8H9-idiotypic hybridomas 
(clones 2E9, 1E12, and 1F11) were produced by somatic cell fusion between rat
lymphocytes and mouse SP2/0 myeloma. In direct binding assays enzyme-linked
immunosorbant assay--(ELISA)--they were specific for the 8H9 idiotope. Using 2E9 
as the surrogate antigen, 8H9-scFv was cloned from hybridoma cDNA by phage
display. 8H9scFv was then fused to human-gamma1-CH2-CH3 cDNA for transduction
into CHO and NSO cells. High expressors of mouse scFv-human Fc chimeric antibody 
were selected. The secreted homodimer reacted specifically with antigen-positive 
tumor cells by ELISA and by flow cytometry, inhibitable by the anti-idiotypic
antibody. The reduced size resulted in a shorter half-life in vivo, while
achieving comparable tumor to nontumor ratio as the native antibody 8H9. However,
its in vitro activity in antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity was
modest.

PMID: 12573107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Zhongguo Ji Sheng Chong Xue Yu Ji Sheng Chong Bing Za Zhi. 2001;19(1):33-6.

[Effects of anti-idiotypic antibody NP30 on modulation of egg granuloma formation
and hepatic fibrosis of schistosomiasis].

[Article in Chinese]

Feng ZQ(1), Zhu R, Li YH, Qiu ZN, Li YQ, Wang ZM, Xue WF, Guan XH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029.

OBJECTIVE: To study the effects of the monoclonal anti-idiotypic antibody NP30
active immunization on egg granuloma formation and hepatic fibrosis in
Schistosoma japonicum infection.
METHODS: ICR mice were actively immunized with NP30 100 micrograms x 3 i.p. every
10 days while the mice in control group were injected with SP2/0 ascites i.p.
simultaneously. After cercariae challenging, the mice were killed at the 4th,
8th, 12th, 16th, 20th and 24th week, respectively. Mouse livers were removed and 
stained histochemically with VG and subjected to immunohistochemical assay of
collagen type I, III and fibronectin(FN). The volume of egg granulomas and the
content of collagen type I, III and FN were determined quantitatively by NYD-1000
Image Analysis System.
RESULTS: The volume of egg granulomas in NP30 immunized group was much smaller
than that of control group from the 12th week after cercariae challenge. The
cellular components of egg granulomas in NP30 immunized group were significantly 
different from those of the control group, exhibiting two types of atypical egg
granulomas were found. VG stain revealed that the average optical density of
collagen in hepatic granulomas of experimental group was lower than that of
control group. Immunohistochemical assay revealed that the contents of collagen
type I, III and fibronectin in egg granulomas of experimental group were lower
than those of control group.
CONCLUSION: NP30 vaccination may induce both cellular and humoral protective
immunity to modulate egg granulomas and suppress liver fibrosis of
schistosomiasis japonica.

PMID: 12572021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Zhonghua Shi Yan He Lin Chuang Bing Du Xue Za Zhi. 1999 Jun 30;13(2):128-9.

[Establishment of hybridomas secreting monoclonal antibodies to HIV-gp41 and
HCV-NS3].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang S(1), Pi G, Gu S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of Preventive Medicine, Beijing 100052.

OBJECTIVE: To establish the monoclonal antibodies of HIV and HCV for developing
serological diagnostic method.
METHODS: The antigens of HIV gp41 and HCV NS3 expressed from bacteria were mixed 
to immunize BALB/c mice. The hybridoma cell lines were obtained by fusing SP2/0
myeloma cells with spleen cells from immunized mice.
RESULTS: Four hybridoma cell lines secreting specific antibodies against gp41 of 
HIV and six hybridoma cell lines secreting antibodies to NS3 of HCV were
obtained. ELISA sandwich method for detection of viral antigens with McAbs was
developed.
CONCLUSION: A quick and convenient method for obtaining McAbs was developed using
mixture of different antigens for immunizition of mice. The monoclonal antibodies
had high senusitivity and were stably secreted by hybridoma cell lines. This
technique is worthy to be popularized.

PMID: 12569777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Am J Med Genet A. 2003 Mar 1;117A(2):161-3.

Somatic instability of the androgen receptor CAG repeat in a normal female.

Sharp A(1), Hurst J.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, United Kingdom. asharp@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk

The polyglutamine repeat disorders represent a family of degenerative
neurological diseases which are characterized by expansions of tandemly repeated 
CAG repeats. Investigations have demonstrated that in Huntington disease,
dentatorubral pallidoluysian atrophy, and the spinocerebellar ataxias type 1, 2, 
and 3, the polyglutamine expansions show both meiotic and mitotic instability.
However, previous studies have suggested that the polyglutamine motif within exon
1 of the androgen receptor gene (AR) which expands in cases of spinobulbar
muscular atrophy differs in that it is apparently mitotically stable. During
linkage analysis in a family with FG syndrome, a rare condition mapped to
Xq12-q22.1, we detected the presence of an unusually small AR allele segregating 
within the pedigree. Sequencing, cytogenetic analysis, and PCR of flanking
markers indicate that this allele arose by a somatic contraction of seven CAG
repeats in the proband's mother, representing the first report of mitotic
instability of an AR CAG repeat of normal size.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12567414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Wei Sheng Yan Jiu. 2002 Apr;31(2):108-11.

[Production and characterization of monoclonal antibody against the O antigen of 
Enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao Z(1), Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Nutrition and Food Hygiene, Chinese Academy of Preventive
Medicine, Beijing 100050, China.

Spleen cells collected from Balb/c mice immunized with the somatic antigen of
Enterohaemorrhagic E. coli O157:H7 are fused with murine Sp2/0 myeloma cells. A
hybridoma cell line specific to E. coli O157 is established after screening and
sub-cloning and is designated as 3A5. It belongs to a subtype of IgM and the
ascetic titer of the antibody is 1:1 x 10(6). The detection limit is 10(5)-10(6) 
cfu/ml. This monoclonal antibody(McAb) also has activity with Enterohaemorrhagic 
E. coli O113:H21.

PMID: 12561544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2002 Sep;18(5):644-7.

[The PTD domain of Tat protein enhance GFP protein delivering into myeloma cell
SP2/0].

[Article in Chinese]

Li ZQ(1), Hu XB, Yang SL, Gong Y.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Research Center of Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai 200233, China.

In order to detect the protein delivery mediated by the PTD (protein transduction
domain) of TAT Protein, a expression vector, named pT7460-GFP, was constructed by
insert the PTD DNA Sequence, followed by a GFP (green fluorescent protein) gene
fused in-frame, into the pT7450 vector. The TAT-GFP fusion protein was expressed 
in the E. coli ER2566. Most of the fusion protein was presented in the inclusion 
body. The protein was purified by Ni2+ affinity chromatography under denature
conditions, then by a Sepharose Q column to remove urea. The soluble denatured
protein was added directly to medium containing the Myeloma Cell SP2/0. It came
out that the fusion protein could be detected delivered into the cells under
fluorescent microscope in a short time.

PMID: 12561218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Feb 1;31(3):833-43.

Selective inhibition of transcription of the Ets2 gene in prostate cancer cells
by a triplex-forming oligonucleotide.

Carbone GM(1), McGuffie EM, Collier A, Catapano CV.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Genomics, Hollings Cancer Center, Medical University of
South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA. carbonep@musc.edu

The transcription factor Ets2 has a role in cancer development and represents an 
attractive therapeutic target. In this study, we designed a triplex-forming
oligonucleotide (TFO) directed to a homopurine:homopyrimidine sequence in the
Ets2 promoter. Transcription factors of the Sp family bound to this sequence and 
mutation of the Sp1 site reduced Ets2 promoter activity. The Ets2-TFO had high
binding affinity for the target sequence and inhibited binding of Sp1/Sp3 to the 
overlapping site. This effect occurred with a high degree of sequence
specificity. Mismatched oligonucleotides did not inhibit Sp1/Sp3 binding and
mutations in the target sequence that abolished triplex formation prevented
inhibition of Sp1/Sp3 binding by the TFO. The Ets2-TFO inhibited Ets2 promoter
activity and expression of the endogenous gene in prostate cancer cells at
nanomolar concentrations. The TFO did not affect reporter constructs with
mutations in the TFO binding site and promoters of non-targeted genes. Expression
of non-targeted genes was also not affected in TFO-treated cells. Collectively,
these data demonstrated that the anti-transcriptional activity of the Ets2-TFO
was sequence- and target-specific, and ruled out alternative, non-triplex
mediated mechanisms of action. This anti-transcriptional approach may be useful
to examine the effects of selective downregulation of Ets2 expression and may
have therapeutic applications.

PMCID: PMC149218
PMID: 12560478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Wei Sheng Wu Xue Bao. 2002 Aug;42(4):453-7.

[Production of monoclonal antibodies to tomato mosaic virus and application in
virus detection].

[Article in Chinese]

Yu C(1), Wu J, Zhou X.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310029, China.

Four hybridoma cell lines secreting monoclonal antibodies(MAbs) against Tomato
mosaic virus(ToMV) were produced by fusing mouse myeloma cells(SP2/0) with spleen
cells from BAL B/c immunized by the ToMV particle. The four MAbs could
specifically react with ToMV, and the MAbs from two cell lines can react with
ToMV and TMV simultaneously. The titres of ascitic fluids of four MAbs ranged
from 1:32,000 to 1:1,024,000 with ELISA, and the sensitivity for detection virus 
from the plant sap reached over 1:2000 dilution. The MAbs didn't crossreact with 
other plant viruses. The result of Western-blot showed that two MAbs can react
with the 17.6 kD ToMV coat protein submit specifically, while the other two MAbs 
can not react with it, they are supposed to against conformational determinants
of ToMV CP.

PMID: 12557552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Shi Yan Sheng Wu Xue Bao. 2001 Jun;34(2):131-5.

[High-level expression of human calmodulin in E. coli and its effects on cell
proliferation].

[Article in Chinese]

Li XJ(1), Wu JG, Si JL, Guo DW, Xu JP.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Medical Laboratory Science of PLA, Nanjing General Hospital of
Nanjing Command, Nanjing, 210002.

The gene coding for human CaM was amplified by PCR in which pUC/hCaM3 cDNA was
usd as template. After inserting the hCaM III cDNA into the expression plasmid
pBV220, we constructed the hCaM3 cDNA-recombinant expression
vector(hCaM3/pBV220). The recombinant plasmid was then transformed into E. coli
DH5 alpha. After heat induction, a high level expression of CaM protein was
obtained. SDS-PAGE analysis showed that the recombinant E. coli could express a
17 kD protein which accounted for about 20% of the total cellular protein.
Western blot analysis showed that anti-CaM monoclonal antibody(McAb) specifically
bound to the 17 kD band of expression product. rhCaM was purified by
Phenyl-sepharose CL-4B affinity chromatography from recombinant bacterial lysate.
3-4 mg of the purified protein were obtained from 1 liter of bacterial culture.
The rhCaM was able to activate NAD kinase to the same extent as the standard
human brain CaM (Sigma). K562 cells and SP2/0 cells were seeded in 24-well or
96-well plate and cultured for 48 h with rhCaM and CaM-antagonist
trifluoperazine(TFP). Cell proliferation rates was determined by MTT assay. There
was a significant positive correlation between the concentrations of rhCaM and
the cell proliferation rates. CaM-antagonist TFP had an inhibitory effect on cell
proliferation rate. The inhibition could be corrected by the addition of
extracellular rhCaM.

PMID: 12549106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Wei Sheng Wu Xue Bao. 2000 Dec;40(6):638-45.

[Studies on monoclonal antibodies of Magnaporthe grisea and its interfering
effect on appressorium formation].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu J(1), Liu F, Li D, Chen Z, Lou Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310029.

Selecting by indirect ELISA eleven hybridoma cell lines, secreting monoclonal
antibodies (McAbs) against Magnaporthe grisea were produced by fusing mouse
myeloma cells(SP2/0) with spleen cells from BALB/c mice immunized with the
mixture of conidia, germ tubes and appressoria of M. grisea using 50% PEG. The
result of IFTC test showed that four of McAbs, named as 2B4, 4A1, 1D1, and 2H4
specifically bound to the cell wall surface of the fungus; Western blotting
revealed that 2B4, 4A1, 1D1 were recognized different protein antigens from the
surface of conidia and germ tubes; These four McAbs could effectively interfere
with the appressorium formation both on cellophane membrane and the surface of
onion epidermis and inhibit the disease leaf lesions development in vitro test.

PMID: 12549060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Wei Sheng Wu Xue Bao. 2000 Aug;40(4):389-93.

[Preparation of monoclonal antibodies against malaria through immunization of
mice with recombinant plasmid DNA].

[Article in Chinese]

Xie W(1), Zhong P, Pan W, Chen Q, Wang Q, Lu D.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Plant Physiology, Academia Sinica, Shanghai 200032.

BALB/c mice were immunized by injection of recombinant plasmid DNA carrying
MSP1-31 fragment of Plasmodium falciparum. After antiserum was induced, McAbs
were prepared by fusing SP2/0 myeloma cells with spleen cells. Specific McAbs
were detected in hybridoma culture supernatant and mouse ascites by ELISA,
positive hybridomas were cloned by technique of limiting dilutions. Two McAbs,
9H9 and 8A2, against the malaria protein were produced and characterized. The
titers of the two McAbs in acites were 1:10,000 and 1:2500 respectively. The Ig
subclass of these McAbs was IgG1. Western blot test showed that the McAb
specifically reacted with MSP1-31 antigen. These results proved that monoclonal
antibodies could be produced by use of immunization of mice with plasmid DNA or
DNA vaccine.

PMID: 12548960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Brain Topogr. 2002 Winter;15(2):87-94.

Task-specific expectation is revealed in scalp-recorded slow potentials.

Mnatsakanian EV(1), Tarkka IM.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Research and Rehabilitation Center Neuron, Kuopio, Finland.
mnazak@aha.ru

The contingent negative variation (CNV) is known as an electrical manifestation
of expectancy, readiness and attention. The purpose of this study was to evaluate
whether slow potentials recorded from the human scalp during the expectation to
perform different tasks or during the expectation of the second stimulus in the
pair demonstrate specificity regarding the type of visual stimuli. Participants
were nineteen healthy adults. Each trial began with one of the two cues (S1)
followed by consecutive pictures (S2 and S3). Each picture of this pair was a
photograph of a familiar face with superimposed abstract dot pattern. One cue
directed attention to compare faces and another to compare patterns. EEG was
recorded with a 128-channel net. Slow potentials following S1 and S2 presentation
(SP1 and SP2) are reported here for Face and Pattern tasks. The duration of each 
segment of the trial was 1500 ms from the stimulus onset, and here the last 1000 
ms was analyzed. Statistical comparisons of amplitudes and current density
mapping were performed. Within the same task, SP1-SP2 differences were complex,
implying multiple dissimilarities in the processes during the two expectation
periods. Slow potentials in SP1 differed between the tasks mostly in the anterior
recording sites in 700-1500 ms. These latencies corresponded to the late CNV (or 
stimulus preceding negativity, SPN) showing task-specificity during SP1. For SP2,
the differences were located centrally in 500-900 ms, the period that reflects
the superimposition of processes generating the early CNV and the late positive
complex. Task-specific differences appeared only in SP1.

PMID: 12537304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Hunan Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2001 Apr 28;26(2):98-102.

[Infection of mutated mouse complement receptor type II by Epstein-Barr virus].

[Article in Chinese]

Ren CP(1), Lan K, Liu WD, He ZW, Wang H, Yao KT.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Xiangya Medical College, Central South University, 
Changsha 410078, China.

Site-directed mutagenesis method was used to introduce two desired mutations,
which were confirmed by DNA sequencing, into mouse complement receptor Type II
gene(MCR2). Then the constructed eukaryotic expression vectors containing wild
type mouse CR2/1(wtMCR2/1), mutant type mouse CR2/1 (mtMCR2/1) and human CR2
(hCR2) cDNA were transferred into mouse SP2/0 cells by electroporation. After
two-week screening by G418, the stably transfected clones were obtained. Several 
ways including PCR, RT-PCR, and immunohistochemistry were utilized to screen
those clones with interesting genes integrated and expressed. Then Epstein-Barr
virus(EBV) was used to infect these transfected cells and EBER-1 (EBV encoded
RNAs) hybridization results showed that only hCR2 and mtMCR2 transfected SP2/0
cells could be infected by EBV, but positive rate of the former was much higher
than the latter. This study sets groundwork for elucidating the mechanism by
which EBV enters the cells and for establishing the animal model of EBV-related
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC).

PMID: 12536634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Phys Rev Lett. 2002 Dec 31;89(28 Pt 1):285506. Epub 2002 Dec 31.

Cluster-beam deposition and in situ characterization of carbyne-rich carbon
films.

Ravagnan L(1), Siviero F, Lenardi C, Piseri P, Barborini E, Milani P, Casari CS, 
Li Bassi A, Bottani CE.

Author information: 
(1)INFM-Dipartimento di Fisica, Universitá di Milano, Via Celoria 16, 20133
Milano, Italy.

Nanostructured carbon films produced by supersonic cluster beam deposition have
been studied by in situ Raman spectroscopy. Raman spectra show the formation of a
sp2 solid with a very large fraction of sp-coordinated carbyne species with a
long-term stability under ultrahigh vacuum. Distinct Raman contributions from
polyyne and cumulene species have been observed, as well as different stabilities
under gas exposure. Our experiments confirm theoretical predictions and
demonstrate the possibility of producing a carbyne-rich pure carbon solid. The
stability of the sp2-sp network has important implications for astrophysics and
for the production of novel carbon-based systems.

PMID: 12513160  [PubMed]


472. Zhonghua Yan Ke Za Zhi. 2002 Nov;38(11):691-4.

[Preparation of anti-human retinoblastoma monoclonal antibody by solid tumor cell
immunization and study on characteristics of its antigen].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhong X(1), Li Y, Ning B, Yan J, Li Y, Luo G, Lin J, Ying F, Feng G.

Author information: 
(1)Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-sen University, Eye Laboratory of
Ministry of People's Health, Guangzhou 510060, China.

OBJECTIVE: To prepare anti-human retinoblastoma (Rb) monoclonal antibody (McAb)
by immunization with solid tumor cells and preliminarily study the
characteristics of its antigen.
METHODS: Three Balb/C mice were immunized by intraperitoneal injection of Rb
solid tumor cells acquired from enucleation. Spleen lymphocytes were separated
from them and fused with myeloma cell line SP2/0. The anti-human Rb McAb was
selected by Rb solid tumor cell, SO-Rb(50), SO-Rb(70), etc as antigens. The
characteristics of its antigen were preliminarily studied by immunofluorescence, 
immunohistochemistry and Western blot.
RESULTS: After repeatedly cloning them with micro-manipulation equipment, we
successfully established 3 hybridoma cell lines secreting anti-human Rb McAb. Of 
all, 3C6 hybridoma cells could steadily secrete anti-human Rb McAb after they
were frozen, resuscitated and passaged repeatedly for 2 years. Its subgroup was
IgG(1). Both immunofluorescence and immunohistochemistry examinations
demonstrated that the corresponding antigen of McAb 3C6 was specifically and
highly expressed in Rb tumor cell membrane and cytoplasm. The other tumor tissues
and human normal eye tissues were negative. Western blot analysis preliminarily
demonstrated that McAb 3C6 could bind 25 000 protein band of Rb antigen.
CONCLUSIONS: The anti-human Rb McAb 3C6 established by immunization of solid
tumor cells is specifically and highly expressed in Rb tumor cells and has no
cross-response with other tumor tissues and normal eyeballs. The antigen
molecular weight bounded to this antibody is 25 000 or so, which further shows
that it is a possibility for a new unidentified gene to be concerned with the
tumor formation of Rb.

PMID: 12487903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. J Tissue Viability. 2002 Oct;12(4):132-4, 136-7, 140-6.

The measurement of interface pressure and its role in soft tissue breakdown.

Swain ID(1), Bader DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering, Salisbury District
Hospital, Salisbury SP2 8BJ.

Comment in
    J Tissue Viability. 2003 Jan;13(1):40; author reply 40.

This paper describes the effect of applied pressure on soft tissue and its
possible role in the development of pressure ulcers. It concentrates on the
quantification of the applied pressure at the patient-support interface and the
limitations and variability of current techniques, measurement systems and data
presentation. It then describes the effects of interface pressures at the tissue 
and cellular level, and attempts that have been made to describe and model the
tissue mechanics. Finally it sets a challenge to medical engineers to improve the
present measurement systems and tissue models, thus increasing understanding,
both clinically and at the cellular level, so that the incidence of pressure
ulcers can be reduced.

PMID: 12476502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. J Am Chem Soc. 2002 Dec 18;124(50):14822-3.

The first silastannene >si=sn<: a new doubly-bonded system of heavier group 14
elements.

Sekiguchi A(1), Izumi R, Lee VY, Ichinohe M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8571,
Japan. sekiguch@staff.chem.tsukuba.ac.jp

The reaction of bis[di-tert-butyl(methyl)silyl]dilithiosilane 1 with
dichlorobis(2,4,6-triisopropylphenyl)stannane in THF at room temperature yielded 
highly air- and moisture-sensitive deep violet crystals of
1,1-bis[di-tert-butyl(methyl)silyl]-2,2-bis(2,4,6-triisopropylphenyl)-1-sila-2-st
annaethene 2 with a Si=Sn double bond. The molecular structure of 2 was
established by X-ray crystallography, which showed a trans-bent structure
(bending angles of 26.2 degrees for the sp2 Si atom and 9.6 degrees for the sp2
Sn atom) with a >Si=Sn< bond length of 2.4188(14) A and a twisting angle of 34.6 
degrees . The geometry and regioselectivity of the addition reaction of PhEH (E =
O and S) corresponds to the polarity of the double bond Sidelta-=Sndelta+, which 
is also supported by theoretical calculations on the model silastannene
(H3Si)2Si=SnPh2.

PMID: 12475304  [PubMed]


475. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2003 Feb 5;81(3):279-90.

Bcl-xL expression interferes with the effects of L-glutamine supplementation on
hybridoma cultures.

Charbonneau JR(1), Furtak T, Lefebvre J, Gauthier ER.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular Biochemistry Research Laboratory, Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry, Laurentian University, 935 Ramsey Lake Road, Sudbury, Ontario,
Canada P3E 2C6.

While feeding protocols and ectopic expression of anti-apoptotic genes have been 
used to improve the viability of hybridoma cell lines, the effect of the
expression levels of survival genes on the behavior of hybridomas following
nutrient supplementation is unknown. In this study, we compared the behavior of
the Sp2/0-Ag14 hybridoma (Bcl-xL(low)) and the P3x63-Ag8.653 myeloma
(Bcl-xL(high)) following culture supplementation with the amino acid L-glutamine 
(L-Gln). Our data revealed that L-Gln addition substantially increased Sp2/0-Ag14
cell viability and total cell density, concomitant with a decrease in the rate of
cell death. This effect was not seen when other amino acids or D-glucose (D-Glc) 
replaced L-Gln. The improvement in the culture behavior of Sp2/0-Ag14 cells was
attributed to a reduction in the rate of accumulation of apoptotic cells. On the 
other hand, L-Gln supplementation had only a limited effect on the growth of the 
P3x63-Ag8.653 cells. Interestingly, Sp2/0-Ag14 cells over-expressing Bcl-xL
showed a culture behavior upon L-Gln complementation that was similar to the
P3x63-Ag8.653 myeloma. These results suggest that the anti-apoptotic gene
expression profile of hybridoma cells can markedly impact on the beneficial
effects afforded by nutrient supplementation.

Copyright 2003 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Biotechnol Bioeng 81: 279-290, 2003.

PMID: 12474250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Hybrid Hybridomics. 2002 Oct;21(5):375-9.

Preparation and characterization of monoclonal antibody against digoxin.

Kashanian S(1), Rasaee MJ, Paknejad M, Omidfar K, Pour-Amir M, Rajabi BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, School of Medical Sciences,
Tarbiat-Modarres University, Tehran, Iran.

Mouse-mouse hybridoma cell lines producing stable, highly specific and with good 
affinity monoclonal antibody (MAb) against the cardiac glycoside digoxin were
established. Balb/c mice were immunized via injection of digoxin-3'-bovine serum 
albumin (BSA). The spleens of which were fused with myeloma cells of SP2/0
origin. Three clones designated as BBA, MBE, and BMG producing good antibodies
displayed different patterns of fine specificity for digoxin and low
cross-reaction with several digoxin analogues as elucidated by inhibition
enzyme-linked immunosorbant assay (ELISA). All three MAbs were of the same class 
and subclass (IgG(1)). Affinity purification was performed for the selected clone
BBA displaying the highest affinity and nearly no cross-reactivity with any of
the structurally related molecules. Ultrafiltered concentrated hybrid cell
supernatant was also purified by polyethylene glycol (PEG) 6000 precipitation for
large-scale preparation and coated onto the wells of microtiter plates. The
standard curve was constructed with a sensitivity of 10 pg/well covering up to 10
ng/well.

PMID: 12470480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 2003 Jan;33(1):73-80.

Complete sequence, expression and evolution of two members of the hexamerin
protein family during the larval development of the rice moth, Corcyra
cephalonica.

Nagamanju P(1), Hansen IA, Burmester T, Meyer SR, Scheller K, Dutta-Gupta A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, School of Life Sciences, University of
Hyderabad, 500 046, Hyderabad, India.

Three distinct types of storage hexamerins are expressed in the "last-instar"
larvae of the rice moth, Corcyra cephalonica. A cDNA expression library was
constructed from fat body-RNA and screened with a polyclonal antibody raised
against purified hexamerin (SP2) of Corcyra cephalonica. Two slightly different
"full-length" hexamerin cDNA clones (Hex2a and Hex2b) were isolated and
sequenced. Both include open reading frames of 2109 bp which are translated into 
polypeptides of 703 amino acids with 92.5% identity. Signal peptides of 19 amino 
acids are present at the N-termini. The 684 amino acids native proteins have a
high content of aryl groups (17.6%). According to both the criteria for amino
acid composition and the phylogenetic analysis, Hex2a and Hex2b belong to the
lepidopteran arylphorins. Northern blot studies revealed that the Hex2 genes are 
species- and tissue-specifically expressed in fat body cells of "last-instar" (= 
5th) larvae.

PMID: 12459202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Biomed Tech (Berl). 2002;47 Suppl 1 Pt 1:393-6.

[Calcium-oxygen modified amorphous and nanocrystalline carbon layers as
biomaterials].

[Article in German]

Dorner-Reisel A(1), Schürer C, Nischan C, Klemm V, Irmer G, Müller E.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Keramische Werkstoffe, TU Bergakademie Freiberg, Deutschland.
dorner@ikw.tu-freiberg.de

Undoped and Ca-O-modified diamond-like carbon coatings were deposited by a direct
current discharge. Hardness and Young's modulus of Ca-O-modified DLCs were
reduced in comparison with the undoped DLC, but the adherence of the
Ca-O-modified films is improved. Ca-O-modified DLCs have a higher fraction of
nano-crystalline regions with carbon in sp2 hybridisation. In addition, an
increased oxygen content and CaCO3 was identified in Ca-O-modified DLCs. While
mouse fibroblasts of the type L929 attach and grow on unmodified diamond-like
carbon coatings synthesized by the decomposition of hydrocarbon, the addition of 
CaO-H2O into the precursor gas improves the coatings biological acceptance by the
cells.

PMID: 12451874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Hum Mol Genet. 2002 Dec 1;11(25):3145-56.

Molecular and cytogenetic analysis of the spreading of X inactivation in
X;autosome translocations.

Sharp AJ(1), Spotswood HT, Robinson DO, Turner BM, Jacobs PA.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wiltshire, SP2 8BJ, UK. asharp@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk

We have performed detailed studies of the spreading of X inactivation in five
unbalanced human X;autosome translocations. Using allele-specific RT-PCR we
observed long-range silencing of autosomal genes located up to 45 Mb from the
translocation breakpoint, directly demonstrating the ability of X inactivation to
spread in cis through autosomal DNA. Spreading of gene silencing occurred in
either a continuous or discontinuous fashion in different cases, suggesting that 
some autosomal DNA is resistant to the X inactivation signal. This spread of
inactivation was accompanied by, but not dependent upon, CpG island methylation. 
Observations of late-replication, histone acetylation and histone methylation
show that X inactivation can spread in the absence of cytogenetic features
normally associated with the inactive X. However, the distribution of histone
modifications which distinguish the inactive X are more accurate cytogenetic
measures of the spread of X inactivation than late-replication. Overall, despite 
remarkable variation in the spread of X inactivation among the five cases there
was good correlation between the pattern of gene silencing and the attenuation of
clinical phenotype associated with each partial autosomal trisomy. We discuss our
observations in the context of hypotheses which address the spread of X
inactivation.

PMID: 12444099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. J Hum Genet. 2002;47(11):567-75.

A high-density SNP map for the FRAX region of the X chromosome. Single-nucleotide
polymorphisms.

Brightwell G(1), Wycherley R, Potts G, Waghorn A.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, UK. galebrightwell@hotmail.com

Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are the most common type of genetic
variation within the human genome, occurring approximately once every kilobase.
However, for association studies, SNPs are not as informative as microsatellite
markers and a large number of SNPs and substantial population sizes are required 
for linkage and mapping studies. A SNP map was generated for the FRAX region of
the X chromosome, approximately 0.8 Mb proximal and 1.8 Mb distal to the FRAXA
repeat, at a density of at least 1 SNP every 100 kb. SNPs were identified in a
population of 28 women with a FRAXA expan-sion (including three women with a
FRAXE expansion) on a background of different DXS548, CA1 and CA2 haplotypes, and
a normal X chromosome with a different microsatellite haplotype. Fifty-four
polymorphisms were identified in a total of 52 257 bp distributed over 2.6 Mb.
This represented about 1 SNP every 1024 bp, which was consistent with a nondesert
region (1 : 1000 bp). Because the SNPs identified in this study have haplotype
and frequency data from an affected population, they should provide a useful
resource for researchers to investigate the genetic mechanisms behind instability
and expansion of both FRAXA and FRAXE triplet repeats.

PMID: 12436192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Cell Immunol. 2002 May-Jun;217(1-2):12-22.

Synergistic effect of adoptive T-cell therapy and intratumoral interferon
gamma-inducible protein-10 transgene expression in treatment of established
tumors.

Huang H(1), Liu Y, Xiang J.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit, Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, Department of Microbiology,
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada S7N 4H4.

The lack of efficient T-cell infiltration of tumors is a major obstacle to
successful adoptive T-cell therapy. We have previously shown that transplanted
SP2/0 myeloma tumors engineered to express lymphotactin invariably induced tumor 
regress mediated by SP2/0 tumor-specific T cells. Herein, we further systemically
characterize these activated T cells and investigate their therapeutic efficacy, 
either alone or with the chemokine interferon gamma (IFN-gamma)-inducible
protein-10 (IP-10) gene therapy. Following stimulation with SP2/0 cells, these
activated T cells were CD25(+)FasL(+) L-selectin(low), expressed CXCR3 receptor
and were chemoattracted by IP-10 in vitro. They comprised 64% CD4(+) Th1 and 36% 
CD8(+) Tc1 cells, both of which expressed IFN-gamma, perforin, and TNF-alpha, but
not IL-4. The activated T cells were strongly cytotoxic for SP2/0 tumor cells
(79% specific killing; E:T ratio, 50), mainly via perforin-mediated pathway. Cell
tracking using labeled T cells confirmed that these T cells infiltrated better
into the IP-10-expressing tumors than non-IP-10-expressing ones. In vivo,
combined intratumoral IP-10 gene transfer and adoptive T-cell immunotherapy for
well-established SP2/0 tumors eradicated the tumors in 7 of the 8 mice. Control
or IP-10 adenoviral treatments by themselves neither alter the lethal outcome for
tumor-bearing mice nor did T-cell therapy by itself, although the latter two
treatments did slow its time-frame. Taken together, our data provide solid
evidence of a potent synergy between adoptive T-cell therapy and IP-10 gene
transfer into tumor tissues, which culminated in the eradication of
well-established tumor masses.

PMID: 12425997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Solid State Nucl Magn Reson. 2002 Aug;22(1):29-49.

Carbonates, thiocarbonates, and the corresponding monoalkyl derivatives: III. The
13C chemical shift tensors in potassium carbonate, bicarbonate and related
monomethyl derivatives.

Stueber D(1), Orendt AM, Facelli JC, Parry RW, Grant DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Utah, Salt Lake City 84112-0850, USA.

The principal values of the 13C chemical shift tensors in potassium carbonate
(K2CO3), trithiocarbonate (K2CS3), bicarbonate (KHCO3), methylcarbonate
(KO2COCH3), S-methyl-monothiocarbonate (KO2CSCH3), O-methyl-monothiocarbonate
(KOSCOCH3), S-methyl-dithiocarbonate (KOSCSCH3), and O-methyl-dithiocarbonate
(KS2COCH3), were measured in solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance experiments. 
Chemical shift tensor calculations on the corresponding isolated anions were used
to assign the chemical shift tensor orientations in the molecular frames of all
anions. The correlation between experimental and calculated principal values
improves significantly when the calculations are performed on isolated anions
with proton-optimized X-ray geometries rather than on isolated anions with fully 
optimized geometries. Further considerable improvement in the correlation is
achieved by utilizing the embedded ion method, which was recently developed to
include electrostatic crystal potentials in chemical shift tensor calculations on
ionic compounds. Similarities and differences in the chemical shift tensor
orientations and principal values of the trigonal sp2 carbon atoms in the
carbonate and thiocarbonate anions are compared with those known for condensed
polyaromatic hydrocarbons.

PMID: 12421088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Spinal Cord. 2002 Nov;40(11):560-6.

The functional impact of the Freehand System on tetraplegic hand function.
Clinical Results.

Taylor P(1), Esnouf J, Hobby J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering, Salisbury District
Hospital, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, UK.

STUDY DESIGN: A B design with subjects acting as their own control when the
device is turned off.
OBJECTIVE: Evaluation of the efficacy of the NeuroControl Freehand System.
SETTING: A supra regional spinal unit in the UK.
METHODS: The Freehand system is an implanted Functional Electrical Stimulation
(FES) device for restoration of lateral and palmar grasps following C5 or C6
tetraplegia. Its use was assessed using the Grasp Relies Test (GRT), Activities
of Daily Living (ADL), Grip strength and two-point discrimination.
RESULTS: Seven out of nine subjects are currently daily users of the device.
There were statistically significant increases in the number of types of task
achieved and the number of repetitions of those tasks in the Grasp Release Test. 
The system produced a functionally strong grasp where no grip strength at all was
possible prior to implantation. Three of the four subjects who had sensory
ability prior to implant showed improvements in two-point discrimination. Most of
the selected tasks were achieved in the ADL assessment indicating a significant
improvement in independence.
CONCLUSION: The Freehand system can significantly improve the functional ability 
of C5 and C6 lesion tetraplegics.
SPONSORSHIP: This study was funded by the charity INSPIRE.

PMID: 12411963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Eur J Hum Genet. 2002 Nov;10(11):707-14.

An 11p;17p telomeric translocation in two families associated with recurrent
miscarriages and Miller-Dieker syndrome.

Joyce CA(1), Dennis NR, Howard F, Davis LM, Thomas NS.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wiltshire, SP2 8BJ, UK.

Translocations occur in a proportion of couples affected by recurrent
miscarriages. We describe two such families in which the underlying cause was a
cryptic subtelomeric 11p;17p translocation detected only after the birth of an
affected child carrying an unbalanced form of the rearrangement. Unbalanced
subtelomeric rearrangements are now recognised as a significant cause of mental
impairment and we believe that these rearrangements may also be an important
cause of recurrent miscarriages. In these two families the translocation is most 
likely to have arisen from a single ancestral event because all translocation
carriers shared almost identical haplotypes around the breakpoints on both
chromosomes.

PMID: 12404102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. J Mol Graph Model. 2002 Oct;21(2):89-99.

A large scale molecular dynamics simulation code using the fast multipole
algorithm (FMD): performance and application.

Lupo JA(1), Wang Z, McKenney AM, Pachter R, Mattson W.

Author information: 
(1)Materials Directorate, Air Force Research Laboratory, Wright-Patterson, AFB,
OH 45433-7702, USA.

We present the performance of the fast classical molecular dynamics (MD) code,
fast molecular dynamics (FMD), designed for efficient, object-oriented, and
scalable large scale simulations, and summarize its application to a liquid
crystalline cluster. FMD uses an implementation of the three-dimensional fast
multipole method, developed in our group. The fast multipole method offers an
efficient way (order O(N)) to handle long range electrostatic interactions, thus,
enabling more realistic simulations of large molecular systems. Performance
testing was carried out on IBM SP2, SGI Origin 2000, and CRAY T3E massively
parallel systems using the MPI massage passing library. The electrostatic forces 
were tested on models of up to 100,000 randomly placed charges, and on protein
and liquid crystalline molecular systems of over 99,000 atoms. Tests on the
stability of the method are presented, along with comparisons with direct
calculations, the NAMD2 code, and the physical multipole-based cell-multipole
method.

PMID: 12398340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Chem Commun (Camb). 2002 Oct 7;(19):2218-9.

First anionic silyl migration from sp2 carbon to carbonyl oxygen. Stereospecific 
allylation of (Z)-beta-trimethylsilyl-alpha,beta-unsaturated ketones.

Taguchi H(1), Miyashita H, Tsubouchi A, Takeda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Chemistry, Tokyo University of Agriculture and
Technology, Koganei, Tokyo 184-8588, Japan.

1,4-Silyl migration from sp2 carbon to carbonyl oxygen proceeded by the treatment
of (Z)-beta-trimethylsilyl-alpha,beta-unsaturated ketones with copper(I)
tert-alkoxide to afford vinylmetal species, which reacted with allylic halides to
produce enol trimethylsilyl ethers of beta-alk-2-enyl-alpha,beta-unsaturated
ketones with complete retention of configuration.

PMID: 12397986  [PubMed]


487. J Am Chem Soc. 2002 Oct 30;124(43):12806-15.

Asymmetric crotylation reactions in synthesis of polypropionate-derived
macrolides: application to total synthesis of oleandolide.

Hu T(1), Takenaka N, Panek JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Center for Molecular Library Design, Metcalf
Center for Science and Engineering, 590 Commonwealth Avenue, Boston University,
Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Complete details of a convergent asymmetric synthesis of oleandolide (1), the
aglycon of the macrolide antibiotic oleandomycin, is described. The synthesis has
been achieved through the assembly and coupling of the left- and right-hand
subunits 12 and 38, respectively. These subunits were prepared from chiral
silane-based asymmetric crotylation reactions to control the stereochemical
relationships. The left- and right-hand subunits (C1-C7 and C8-C14) were brought 
together through a Pd(0)-catalyzed sp3-sp2 cross-coupling reaction between the
zinc intermediate 40 and vinyl triflate 38 to give 27. This product was converted
to seco acid 42a and cyclized to lactone 35 under Yamaguchi conditions. This
material was then epoxidized with m-chloroperbenzoic acid (m-CPBA) to install the
correct C8 epoxide as a single diastereomer, which after a short deprotection
sequence completed the synthesis of oleandolide.

PMID: 12392427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Biol Reprod. 2002 Nov;67(5):1509-21.

Expression of steroidogenic factor 1 in the testis requires an interactive array 
of elements within its proximal promoter.

Scherrer SP(1), Rice DA, Heckert LL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas 66160, USA.

Steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1) is an orphan nuclear receptor that is important for
expression of genes involved in sexual differentiation, testicular and adrenal
development, and hormone synthesis and regulation. To better understand the
mechanisms required for SF-1 production, we employed transient transfection
analysis and electrophoretic mobility shift assays to characterize the elements
and proteins required for transcriptional activity of the SF-1 proximal promoter 
in testicular Sertoli and Leydig cells and adrenocortical cells. Direct
comparison of SF-1-promoter activity in testis and adrenal cell types established
that a similar set of regulatory elements (an E box, CCAAT box, and Sp1-binding
sites) is required for proximal promoter activity in these cells. Further
evaluation of the E box and CCAAT box revealed a novel synergism between the two 
elements and identified functionally important bases within the elements.
Importantly, DNA/protein-binding studies uncovered new proteins interacting with 
the E box and CCAAT box. Thus, in addition to the previously identified USF and
NF-Y proteins, newly described complexes, having migration properties that
differed between Sertoli and Leydig cells, were observed bound to the E box and
CCAAT box. Transient transfection analysis also identified several
Sp1/Sp3-binding elements important for expression of SF-1 in the testis, one of
which was previously described for expression in the adrenal gland whereas the
other two were newly disclosed elements.

PMCID: PMC1586108
PMID: 12390883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Life Sci. 2002 Nov 8;71(25):3005-17.

DNA microarray analysis of the gene expression profiles of naïve versus activated
tumor-specific T cells.

Zhang X(1), Chen Z, Huang H, Gordon JR, Xiang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Research Unit, Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, University 
of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon Cancer Center, 20 Campus Drive CM200, Saskatoon,
Saskatchewan, Canada S7N 0W0.

T cells are a key element in effective cancer immunity, recognizing MHC-antigen
peptide complexes on the surface of antigen presenting cells and translating
these signals into cytotoxic effector T cell responses. In this study, we
systematically investigated by DNA array analysis the expression profiles of 514 
immunologically relevant genes in naïve and SP2/0 tumor-specific activated mouse 
T cell populations. Our data shows that naïve T cells expressed 37 (i.e., 7.6% of
the 514) transcripts with expression level (EL) values of > or =2.0, while the
activated T cells expressed 101 such transcripts. The expression levels of 9
(1.75% of 514) of the shared transcripts were equivalent in the two populations
of T cells. Ninety-six genes were differently expressed upon T cell activation,
with 71 (13.81%) being up-regulated and 25 (4.86%) down-regulated. The list of
significantly affected genes includes numerous cytokines and their receptors
(e.g., IL-2Ralpha, IL-6Ralpha, IL-7Ralpha, IL-16, IL-17R, TGF-beta), chemokines
and chemokine receptors (e.g., RANTES, CCR7, CXCR4), alternate surface proteins
(e.g., 4-1BB, GITR, integrins-alphaL and -beta7, L-selectin, CD6, CD45 and
EMMPRIN), cytoplasmic signaling intermediates (e,g., GATA-3, 14-3-3-eta, CIS1,
SMAD4 and JAK1) and an array of other molecules (e.g., NFkappa-B inducing kinase,
LTBP3 and persephin), several of which are associated with Th1 responses, and T
cell self-regulation or migration. Taken together, our data contribute to our
understanding of the generalized processes that accompany T cell activation and, 
more specifically, to our understanding of the processes associated with T cell
activation during antitumor responses.

PMID: 12384184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Biochemistry. 2002 Oct 22;41(42):12771-84.

The role of Sp1 family members, the proximal GC-rich motifs, and the upstream
enhancer region in the regulation of the human cell cycle inhibitor p21WAF-1/Cip1
gene promoter.

Koutsodontis G(1), Moustakas A, Kardassis D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Sciences, University of Crete Medical School and Institute
of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation of Research and Technology of 
Hellas, Herakleion GR-71110, Greece.

In the present study we establish that specific members of the Sp1 family of
transcription factors (Sp1 and Sp3) bind to all six GC-rich motifs (elements 1-6)
present in the proximal promoter of the human cell cycle inhibitor
p21(WAF-1/Cip1) gene. Competition analysis showed that Sp1 and Sp3 bound with
high affinity to elements 1, 3, 4, and 5/6 and with lower affinity to element 2. 
Transfection experiments in the Sp1-deficient Drosophila SL2 cells established
that Sp1 and Sp3 but not Sp2 are potent transactivators of the p21 promoter.
Transactivation by Sp1 was compromised either by deletion of element 1
(-119/-114) or by using a truncated Sp1 form lacking the C-terminal regulatory
domain D. Point mutagenesis of the -2325/+8 p21 promoter, targeting individual
elements 1-6, showed that mutations in element 3 (-82/-77) caused a dramatic
reduction (90%) in p21 promoter activity whereas mutations in other elements had 
a less severe effect. The mutations in element 3 abolished p21 promoter induction
by upstream enhancer elements in HepG2 cells. Sp1, but not Sp3, mediated the
transactivation of the p21 promoter by the TGFbeta signaling mediator Smad3 and
Smad4 proteins whereas none of the individual mutations in elements 1-6 affected 
the transactivation of the p21 promoter by Smad proteins in HepG2 cells. Our
results suggest that functional interactions between Sp1 family members bound to 
specific elements of the proximal promoter and factors bound to distal enhancer
elements govern the hepatic activity of the human p21 promoter under basal or
inducible conditions.

PMID: 12379120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. World J Gastroenterol. 2002 Oct;8(5):808-14.

Preparation of monoclonal antibody against apoptosis-associated antigens of
hepatoma cells by subtractive immunization.

Yang LJ(1), Wang WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Institute of Cancer Research, The Fourth Military
Medical University, Xi'an 710032, Shaanxi Province, China.

AIM: To elucidate the expression of the apoptosis-associated molecules in human
primary hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells, and prepare the monoclonal
antibodies (mAb) against the apoptosis-associated antigens of HCC cells.
METHODS: Human HCC cell line HCC-9204 cells were induced apoptosis with 60 mL x
L(-1) ethanol for 6 h and their morphological changes were observed by
transmission electron microscope. The cell DNA fragmentations were detected by
Terminal Deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL)
assay, and the cell DNA contents by flow cytometry. Ten mice were immunized with 
ethanol-induced apoptotic HCC-9204 cells with the method of subtractive
immunization, while the other 10 mice used as the control were immunized by the
routine procedures. The tail blood of all the mice were prepared after the last
immunization, and the produced antibodies were determined by the
immunocytochemical ABC staining. The splenic cells of the mice whose tail blood
sera-HCC-9204 cells serum reactions were most different between the apoptotic and
the non-apoptotic were prepared and fused with the mouse myeloma cell line SP2/0 
cells. The positive antibodies were selected by ELISA assay. The fusion rates of 
hybridoma cells and the producing rates of antibodies were calculated. The fused 
cells that secreted candidate objective antibody were cloned continually with the
of limited dilution method, and then selected and analyzed further by the
immunocytochemical ABC staining. The chromosomes of the cloned hybridoma cells
that secreted objective mAb and the mAb immunoglobulin (Ig) subtype of the
prepared mAb were also determined. The molecular mass of the mAb associated
antigen was analyzed by Western blot assay.
RESULTS: HCC-9204 cells treated with 60 mL x L(-1) ethanol for 6 h, manifested
obvious apoptotic morphological changes, the majority of the cells were
TUNEL-positive, and the sub-G1 apoptotic peak was evident. There were 2 mice in
the experimental group whose tail blood serum reacted strongly with the apoptotic
HCC-9204 cells, but weakly with their non-apoptotic counterparts. In the fusion
rates of hybridoma cells as well as the producing rates of the antibody described
above, there did not show significant difference between the experimental and the
control group, but weakly with non-apoptotic HCC-9204. However, the total
producing rate of antibodies in the experimental group was significantly lower
compared with the control (P<0.01), and so was the producing rate of the
antibodies which reacted strongly with both apoptotic and non-apoptotic HCC-9204 
cells(P<0.01). After cloned continually for several times the cell that produce
mAb which reacted strongly with the nuclei of ethanol-induced apoptotic HCC-9204 
cells, but very weakly with that of non-apoptotic cells was selected out.
Chromosome analysis revealed that the selected cell was with the universal
characteristics of the monoclonal hybridoma cells which secreted mAb, and the Ig 
subtype of the prepared mAb was IgG1. The molecular mass of this mAb associated
antigen of was about 75 ku.
CONCLUSION: Subtractive immunization is a useful method to prepare the mAb
against the apoptosis-associated antigens of cells. The expression of some
molecules increases to some extent in HCC-9204 cells in the process of apoptosis 
induced by low-concentration ethanol. The mAb that may be against ethanol-induced
apoptosis-associated antigens of HCC cells was successfully prepared and
primarily identified.

PMCID: PMC4656566
PMID: 12378620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. J Org Chem. 2002 Oct 18;67(21):7557-60.

Ru3(CO)12-catalyzed C-H/CO/olefin coupling of N-pyridylindolines. Direct
carbonylation at a C-H bond delta to the pyridine nitrogen.

Chatani N(1), Yorimitsu S, Asaumi T, Kakiuchi F, Murai S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Chemistry, Faculty of Engineering, Osaka University,
Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. chatani@chem.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp

The reaction of N-pyridylindolines with CO and ethylene in the presence of
Ru3(CO)12 results in direct carbonylation at a C-H bond delta to the pyridine sp2
nitrogen, which represents a new type of C-H/CO/olefin coupling. The presence of 
a pyridine ring as a directing group on the substrates is essential for the
reaction to proceed. The choice of N,N-dimethylacetamide (DMA) as the solvent is 
crucial for the reaction to proceed efficiently.

PMID: 12375998  [PubMed]


493. Analyst. 2002 Sep;127(9):1261-6.

Principal components analysis for the visualisation of multidimensional chemical 
data acquired by scanning Raman microspectroscopy.

Malecha M(1), Bessant C, Saini S.

Author information: 
(1)Cranfield Centre for Analytical Science, Cranfield University, Bedfordshire,
UK.

Raman microspectroscopy is ideally suited to surface analysis as it allows
detailed chemical information to be acquired from surfaces at a relatively high
spatial resolution (typically 1 microm). Using a motorised sample table or probe,
it is possible to raster scan a surface to obtain spatially resolved chemical
information. Visualisation of the acquired data is a problem, however, as the
spectrum acquired at each point can contain several hundred individual intensity 
measurements. Existing visualisation methods are limited to plotting each scanned
point with an intensity determined from the measured intensity at a single
wavenumber, or the similarly between the point's spectrum and a reference
spectrum. Such methods are wasteful as a lot of acquired information is
discarded, and results are prone to misinterpretation due to background variance 
and instrumental noise. In this paper we introduce a new method that uses
principal components analysis (PCA) to reduce the spectrum at each point to three
factors that are then used to define the red, green and blue components of the
corresponding point on a false colour map. To increase the effective resolution, 
interpolation is used to approximate the colours corresponding to points between 
those actually scanned. To demonstrate the technique, the internal surface of a
beverage can, contaminated with a 40 microm diameter carbonised oven impurity,
consisting mainly of sp2- and sp3-hybridised saturated carbon bonds, has been
used as a case study.

PMID: 12375854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Haematologica. 2002 Oct;87(10):1087-94.

Co-immunization with M-CSFR and mM-CSF DNA vaccines is better than M-CSFR-mM-CSF 
fusion DNA vaccine.

Wang MH(1), Zheng GG, Wu KF, Li G, Lin YM, Rao Q, Song YH.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Institute of Hematology,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences Peking Union Medical College (CAMS PUMC),
Tianjin, PR China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: DNA vaccine against macrophage colony-stimulating
factor receptor (M-CSFR) has shown both protective and therapeutic effects. In
this study, we explore the possibility of using DNA vaccines against both M-CSFR 
and membrane-bound macrophage colony-stimulating factor (mM-CSF) to achieve
better effects.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Three plasmids were constructed by inserting either
extracellular and transmembrane region of mM-CSF (pM), or extracellular region of
M-CSFR (pR), or extracellular region of M-CSFR linked with extracellular and
transmembrane regions of mM-CSF by a (Gly Gly Ser)2 flexible linker (pF), into
pcDNA3.1. A SP2/0 cell line stably expressing pF (SP2/0-F) was established to
evaluate humoral and cytotoxic immune responses as well as therapeutic and
preventive effects induced by pM, pR, pF or pM+pR vaccination in BALB/c mice. The
mechanisms of these vaccinations were also studied by monitoring the release of
interleukin (IL)-4 and interferon (IFN)-g by splenocytes upon activation.
RESULTS: Vaccination against two epitopes had better effects than against a
single epitope while vaccination by pM+pR had the greatest effects on inducing
humoral and cytotoxic immune responses, prolonging survival of mice challenged
with SP2/0-F, and inducing IL-4 and IFN-g release by splenocytes.
INTERPRETATION AND CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that co-immunization of
M-CSFR and mM-CSF DNA vaccines is better than M-CSFR-mM-CSF fusion DNA vaccine.

PMID: 12368165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Biomed Environ Sci. 2002 Jun;15(2):103-12.

Production and characterization of anti-estrone monoclonal antibody.

Wang YC(1), Guo ZQ, Li YZ, Chang WB.

Author information: 
(1)College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing
100871, China. ychwang@chemms.chem.pku.edu.cn

OBJECTIVE: Determination of estrone (E1) levels has a significant meaning in
evaluating physiological effect and diagnosing some diseases. In order to detect 
free E1 in biological fluids, a monoclonal antibody specific for E1 was prepared 
after the complete antigen of E1 was synthesized. The purified monoclonal
antibody was fully characterized for later immunoassay.
METHODS: 3-O-carboxymethyl ether derivative of E1 was synthesized and in turn
coupled to bovine serum albumin (BSA) to form complete antigen E1-BSA. A
monoclonal antibody (McAb) specific for E1 was produced both in vitro and in vivo
by a hybridoma anti-E1. Anti-E1 was prepared by fusion of SP2/0 murine myeloma
cells with spleen cells isolated from immunized BALB/c mouse. The McAb was
characterized by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), SDS-PAGE and
Western-blotting. The specificity of the immunoassay was investigated by
determining the cross-reactions of E1 analogs when free E1 was detected by
competitive indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (CI-ELISA).
RESULTS: Analysis revealed that anti-E1 McAb (E1-McAb) was of the IgG1 type, the 
molecular weight of E1-McAb was 164,000 daltons. The affinity constant of E1-McAb
with coated complete antigen was 8.2 x 10(8) L/mol. The linear range for free E1 
determined by CI-ELISA was 10 pg/mL-10 ng/mL. The detection limit was 21.4 pg/mL 
(defined as twice the standard deviation of the blank).
CONCLUSION: The CI-ELISA developed with E1-McAb was both sensitive and specific. 
The prepared E1-McAb can be used in some immunoassays.

PMID: 12244751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 22;277(47):44613-22. Epub 2002 Sep 13.

The Kruppel-like factor Zf9 and proteins in the Sp1 family regulate the
expression of HSP47, a collagen-specific molecular chaperone.

Yasuda K(1), Hirayoshi K, Hirata H, Kubota H, Hosokawa N, Nagata K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Institute for Frontier Medical
Sciences, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8397, Japan.

In several cells and tissues the synthesis of HSP47, a collagen-specific
molecular chaperone in the endoplasmic reticulum, is closely correlated with the 
synthesis of collagen. We previously reported that the Sp1 binding site at -210
bp in the promoter region and the first and second introns are required for the
tissue-specific expression of HSP47 in transgenic mice (Hirata, H., Yamamura, I.,
Yasuda, K., Kobayashi, A., Tada, N., Suzuki, M., Hirayoshi, K., Hosokawa, N., and
Nagata, K. (1999) J. Biol. Chem. 274, 35703-35710). Here, we analyze how these
introns influence the transcriptional regulation of the hsp47 gene in BALB/c 3T3 
cells, which produce high levels of HSP47. In vitro promoter analysis using a
luciferase reporter and gel mobility shift analysis revealed that two cis-acting 
elements in the first and second introns, BS5-B and EP7-D, respectively, are
required for the activation of hsp47 in BALB/c 3T3 cells. Several members of the 
Kruppel-like factor (KLF) family of proteins were identified as BS5-B-binding
proteins by yeast one-hybrid analysis using these elements as baits. One of these
proteins, KLF-6/Zf9, binds to the BS5-B element and activates expression of the
reporter construct when transfected into cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
assay analysis revealed that the endogenous KLF-6/Zf9 binds the BS5-B elements
that contain the CACCC motif, which is a consensus recognition sequence for other
proteins in the KLF family. We also showed that BS5-B and EP7-D are bound by two 
members of the Sp1 family, Sp2 and Sp3. These results suggest that at least three
sequences are required for the constitutive expression of hsp47 in BALB/c 3T3
cells: the -210 bp Sp1 binding site, the BS5-B element in the first intron, and
the EP7-D element in the second intron. We suggest that KLF proteins regulate the
transcription of hsp47 by binding the BS5-B element in cooperation with Sp2
and/or Sp3.

PMID: 12235161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. J Am Chem Soc. 2002 Sep 18;124(37):10968-9.

(Pi-allyl)palladium complexes bearing diphosphinidenecyclobutene ligands (DPCB): 
highly active catalysts for direct conversion of allylic alcohols.

Ozawa F(1), Okamoto H, Kawagishi S, Yamamoto S, Minami T, Yoshifuji M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Chemistry, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka City
University, Osaka 558-8585, Japan. ozawa@a-chem.en-g.osaka-cu.ac.jp

The (pi-allyl)palladium complex bearing an sp2-hybridized phosphorus ligand
(DPCB-OMe:
1,2-bis(4-methoxyphenyl)-3,4-bis[(2,4,6-tri-tert-butylphenyl)phosphinidene]cyclob
utene) efficiently catalyzes direct conversion of allylic alcohols in the absence
of activating agents of alcohols such as Lewis acids. N-Allylation of aniline
proceeds at room temperature to afford monoallylated anilines in 90-97% yields.
C-Allylation of active methylene compounds is also successful at 50 degrees C
using a catalytic amount of pyridine as a base, giving monoallylation products in
85-95% yields. The catalytic mechanism involving hydrido- and (pi-allyl)palladium
intermediates has been proposed on the basis of stoichiometric examinations using
model compounds of presumed intermediates.

PMID: 12224930  [PubMed]


498. Hum Genet. 2002 Sep;111(3):290-6. Epub 2002 Jul 20.

Duplications of chromosome 11p15 of maternal origin result in a phenotype that
includes growth retardation.

Fisher AM(1), Thomas NS, Cockwell A, Stecko O, Kerr B, Temple IK, Clayton P.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
SP2 8BJ, UK. wessex.genetics@dial.pipex.com

Paternal duplications of distal 11p result in Beckwith Wiedemann syndrome (BWS), 
whereas maternal duplications have not, to our knowledge, been reported
previously in the literature. We present three unrelated patients with maternal
duplications of distal 11p. Patient 1 is a 31-year-old female with a de novo
inverted duplication of distal 11p, i.e. inv dup
del(11)(qter-->p15.5::p15.5-->15.3); this rearrangement was shown to be maternal 
in origin by microsatellite analysis and methylation-specific polymerase chain
reaction. Patient 2 is a 4-year-old female with a derived chromosome 20, which
arose from adjacent 1 malsegregation of a maternal t(11;20)(p15.3;q13.33).
Patient 3 presented as an intrauterine death with trisomy for the majority of
chromosome 11p as a result of 3:1 segregation of a maternal
t(11;15)(p11.2;q11.2). In view of the imprinted status of this region, it is
pertinent that none of our patients showed features of BWS; indeed, all had
growth retardation, in contrast to the overgrowth characteristic of BWS. It is of
note that, of the living patients, Patient 1 went into early puberty at 9.5 years
and Patient 2 showed breast development in infancy. Both patients shared some
dysmorphological features, namely short palpebral fissures, a prominent nasal
tip, a short philtrum and 5th finger clinodactyly.

PMID: 12215843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. J Clin Microbiol. 2002 Sep;40(9):3358-63.

Detection of Rickettsia prowazekii in body lice and their feces by using
monoclonal antibodies.

Fang R(1), Houhamdi L, Raoult D.

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Rickettsies, CNRS UMR 6020, IFR 48, Faculty of Medicine, 13385
Marseille, France.

In order to identify Rickettsia prowazekii in lice, we developed a panel of 29
representative monoclonal antibodies selected from 187 positive hybridomas made
by fusing splenocytes of immunized mice with SP2/0-Ag14 myeloma cells.
Immunoblotting revealed that 15 monoclonal antibodies reacted with the
lipopolysaccharide-like (LPS-L) antigen and 14 reacted with the epitopes of a
120-kDa protein. Only typhus group rickettsiae reacted with the monoclonal
antibodies against LPS-L. R. felis, a recently identified rickettsial species,
did not react with these monoclonal antibodies, confirming that it is not
antigenically related to the typhus group. Monoclonal antibodies against the
120-kDa protein were highly specific for R. prowazekii. We successfully applied a
selected monoclonal antibody against the 120-kDa protein to detect by
immunofluorescence assay R. prowazekii in smears from 56 wild and laboratory
lice, as well as in 10 samples of louse feces infected or not infected with the
organism. We have developed a simple, practical, and specific diagnostic assay
for clinical specimens and large-scale epidemiological surveys with a sensitivity
of 91%. These monoclonal antibodies could be added to the rickettsial diagnostic 
panel and be used to differentiate R. prowazekii from other rickettsial species.

PMCID: PMC130794
PMID: 12202579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2002 May;18(3):365-8.

[Cloning and expression of canine interferon-gamma gene in mouse SP2/0 cell
line].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang Q(1), Xia C, Zhao DM, Wang M.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100094,
China.

Canine Interferon-gamma (CaIFN-gamma) cDNA was cloned from spleen T cells of dog 
by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). CaIFN-gamma cDNA
were digested with Hind III and Not I, and inserted into pRc/CMV2 expression
vector. The pRc/CMV2/CaIFN-gamma vector was sequenced, and predicted to produce a
signal peptide of 23 amino acids and a mature protein of 143 amino acids with a
molecular weight of 19 kD. Two potential N-glycosylation sites are located at
positions 16 and 83 of the mature protein. Comparison of the CaIFN-gamma protein 
sequence with that of CaIFN-gamma reported from DDBJ/GenBank revealed a homology 
of 99%. To establish a long time expression system, pRc/CMV2/CaIFN-gamma vector
was transfected into mouse SP2/0 cell line. The SP2/0 cells culture supernatants 
was harvested and the antiviral activity was measured following cytopathic-effect
inhibition assay using Madin-Darby Canine Kidney (MDCK)-vesicular stomatitis
virus(VSV) system. Initial transformants with G418 phenotype produced recombinant
CaIFN-gamma titers ranging from 2,500 to 5,000 u/mL of culture medium.

PMID: 12192876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Chem Commun (Camb). 2002 Jul 21;(14):1490-1.

New phases of sp2-bonded boron nitride: the 12R and 24R polytypes.

Xu FF(1), Bando Y, Hasegawa M.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Materials Science, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305, Japan.
xu.fangfang@nims.go.jp

sp2-Bonded polytypes of graphite-like boron nitride are evidenced in the
approximately twin-related bicrystal-like BN nanofibres synthesized by a
high-temperature substitution reaction between carbon nanofibres and boron oxides
in N2 atmosphere; the material shows a main 12R phase of A'ABC/C'CAB/B'BCA
packing and a minor 24R phase with an A'ABC/BB'C'A'/C'CAB/ ... packing sequence.

PMID: 12189858  [PubMed]


2. J Am Chem Soc. 2002 Aug 21;124(33):9865-9.

Isolable silyl and germyl radicals lacking conjugation with pi-bonds: synthesis, 
characterization, and reactivity.

Sekiguchi A(1), Fukawa T, Nakamoto M, Lee VY, Ichinohe M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8571,
Japan. sekiguch@staff.chem.tsukuba.ac.jp

The one-electron oxidation reaction of tris[di-tert-butyl(methyl)silyl]silyl and 
-germyl anions with dichlorogermylene-dioxane complex results in the formation of
stable tris[di-tert-butyl(methyl)silyl]silyl and -germyl radicals 1 and 2,
representing the first isolable radical species of heavier Group 14 elements
lacking stabilization by conjugation with pi-bonds. The crystal structures of
both silyl and germyl radicals 1 and 2 showed a completely planar geometry around
the radical centers. The ESR spectra of 1 and 2 showed strong signals with
characteristic satellites due to the coupling with the 29Si and 73Ge nuclei. The 
small values of the hyperfine coupling constants a(29Si) and a(73Ge) clearly
indicate the pi-character of both radicals, corresponding to a planar geometry
and sp2 hybridization of the radical centers. Both 1 and 2 easily undergo
halogenation reactions with carbon tetrachloride, 1,2-dibromoethane, and benzyl
bromide to form the corresponding halosilanes and halogermanes.

PMID: 12175246  [PubMed]


3. J Am Chem Soc. 2002 Aug 21;124(33):9756-67.

Elucidation of the mechanism of polysaccharide cleavage by chondroitin AC lyase
from Flavobacterium heparinum.

Rye CS(1), Withers SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of British Columbia, 2036 Main Mall,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, V6T 1Z1.

Chondroitin AC lyase from Flavobacterium heparinum degrades chondroitin sulfate
glycosaminoglycans via an elimination mechanism resulting in disaccharides or
oligosaccharides with delta4,5-unsaturated uronic acid residues at their
nonreducing end. Mechanistic details concerning the ordering of the bond-breaking
and -forming steps of this enzymatic reaction are nonexistent, mainly due to the 
inhomogeneous nature of the polymeric substrates. The creation of a new class of 
synthetic substrates for this enzyme has allowed the measurement of defined and
reproducible k(cat) and K(m) values and has expanded the range of mechanistic
studies that can be performed. The primary deuterium kinetic isotope effect upon 
k(cat)/K(m) for the abstraction of the proton alpha to the carboxylic acid was
measured to be 1.67 +/- 0.07, showing that deprotonation occurs in a
rate-limiting step. Using substrates with leaving groups of differing reactivity,
a flat linear free energy relationship was produced, indicating that the C4-O4
bond is not broken in a rate-determining step. Taken together, these results
strongly suggest a stepwise mechanism. Consistent with this was the measurement
of a secondary deuterium kinetic isotope effect upon k(cat)/K(m) of 1.01 +/- 0.03
on a 4-[(2)H]-substrate, indicating that no sp2 character is developed at C4
during the rate-limiting step, thereby ruling out a concerted syn-elimination.

PMID: 12175234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. BMJ. 2002 Aug 10;325(7359):319-22.

Recent developments in plastic surgery.

Johnson D(1), Whitworth IH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Salisbury District Hospital,
Salisbury SP2 8JB. davidjohnson_plastic@lycos.co.uk

PMCID: PMC1123831
PMID: 12169510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Hybrid Hybridomics. 2002 Jun;21(3):197-201.

Preparation and identification of specific and high-affinity monoclonal
antibodies against morphine.

Yang TB(1), Zhong P, Nie JL, Li JS, Qu LN, Li YH, Kan GH.

Author information: 
(1)13th Department, Institute of Space Medico-Engineering, Beijing, China.
y_t_b@hotmail.com

A C6-hemisuccinate derivative of morphine was prepared and conjugated to bovine
serum albumin and ovalbumin. High titer antibody producing spleen cells were
removed and fused with myeloma cells of SP2/0 origin. Using a conventional
immunization protocol generated twenty-six stable murine monoclonal antibodies
(MAbs) producing cell lines to morphine. The donor mouse produced antiserum with 
a high titer of 1/640,000. Twelve MAbs were selected for further characterization
since they showed high sensitivities (53 pg/well to inhibit 50% of the tracer) in
improved group-selective immunoassay (IGSI). The assay, which maintains high
sensitivity, high precision, and a wide range of optical density (OD) values, was
developed using the conjugate M-6-S-OVA to screen and characterize the
anti-morphine MAbs. After four successive limiting dilutions, antibodies produced
by 12 clones had high affinities ranging from 10(9) to 10(10) M(-1). These clones
were found to be of Ig(G) class and IgM class with kappa and lambda light chain. 
Subclass determination showed that the clones produced IgG1, IgG2a, IgG3, and IgM
types of antibody. One clone (2F8B11F2A12) was used to establish the calibration 
curve with a sensitivity of 400 pg/mL covering up to 25.6 ng/mL in urine.

PMID: 12165146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Chin Med J (Engl). 2002 Apr;115(4):576-9.

Protective immunity induced by the anti-idiotypic monoclonal antibody NP30 of
Schistosoma japonicum.

Feng Z(1), Qiu Z, Li Y, Li Y, Zhu C, Xue W, Guan X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the protective immunity induced by the anti-idiotypic
monoclonal antibody NP30 of Schistosoma japonicum in mice.
METHODS: An orthogonal table L(16) (4 x 2(12)) was selected as the experimental
design. Eight-week-old Kunming outbred mice (male and female) were randomly
divided into 16 experimental groups and 2 control groups. Control groups were
injected with SP2/0 ascites intraperitoneally. Mice from each group were infected
with 100 +/- 2 cercariae of Schistosoma japonicum in the abdominal skin and were 
sacrificed on the thirtieth day postchallenge. Adult worms were recovered and
counted by perfusion of the left ventricle-portal vein. The SP2/0 ascites
injected mice were used as controls and the percentage of protection was
calculated.
RESULTS: Active immunization of mice with NP30 could produce protection levels
ranging from 22.36% to 50.46% depending on the different immunity protocols. The 
best immunization protocol was established from the results.
CONCLUSIONS: Active immunization with NP30 can induce a degree of protection to
infection with Schistosoma japonicum cercariae and NP30 is a potential vaccine
candidate against Schistosoma japonicum.

PMID: 12133302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 30;277(35):31863-70. Epub 2002 Jun 27.

Lipopolysaccharide down-regulates Sp1 binding activity by promoting Sp1 protein
dephosphorylation and degradation.

Ye X(1), Liu SF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Long
Island Jewish Medical Center, Long Island Campus for the Albert Einstein College 
of Medicine, New Hyde Park, New York 11040, USA.

We examined the in vivo effect of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) on Sp1
(promoter-selective transcription factor 1) DNA binding activity and studied the 
mechanisms involved in mouse lungs. The Sp1 DNA complex displayed a major band
composed of Sp1, Sp2, and Sp3 trimer and a minor band composed of Sp3 homodimer. 
Compared with control, nuclear proteins from lungs challenged with LPS for 60,
90, 120, 150, 180, and 240 min, respectively, showed a markedly reduced Sp1
binding activity. Down-regulation of Sp1 binding activity was accompanied by a
reduced expression of two Sp1-dependent genes (endothelial nitric oxide synthase 
and cyclooxygenase-1). Immunoprecipitation-Western blot experiments demonstrated 
that LPS dephosphorylated Sp1 protein at serine and threonine residues but not at
the tyrosine residue. Dephosphorylation of Sp1 protein in vitro significantly
reduced Sp1 DNA binding activity. Deglycosylation of Sp1 protein also reduced Sp1
binding activity. However, LPS did not cause Sp1 deglycosylation. LPS markedly
reduced nuclear Sp1 protein level but had no significant effect on Sp1 mRNA
abundance and on Sp1 protein nuclear translocation. Both Sp1 protein
dephosphorylation and Sp1 protein degradation are temporally correlated to the
reduced Sp1 binding activity. Our results demonstrate that challenge of mice with
LPS in vivo down-regulates Sp1 DNA binding activity through promoting Sp1 protein
dephosphorylation and degradation.

PMID: 12089157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Zhongguo Ji Sheng Chong Xue Yu Ji Sheng Chong Bing Za Zhi. 1998;16(1):42-4.

[Preparation and characterization of monoclonal antibodies against Clonorchis
sinensis].

[Article in Chinese]

Pan S(1), Zhou J, Huang J, Huang Z, Ruan C, Pan P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Parasitic Diseases of Guangdong Province, Guangzhou, 510300.

AIM: To develop and identify monoclonal antibody (McAb) against adult Clonorchis 
sinensis.
METHODS: BALB/c mice were immunized with soluble antigen of adult Clonorchis
sinensis, the spleen cells of immunized mice were fused with myeloma cell line
SP2/0. Then the hybridoma cell lines secreting high titer of McAbs were screened.
The Ig subtypes and titer of the McAbs were assayed with ELISA. The antigens
recognized by the McAbs were examined with IFAT and identified by immunoblot
analysis. The cross reactions between the McAbs and antigens of Schistosoma
japonicum, Paragonimus westermani and Cysticercus cellulosae were detected.
RESULTS: 5 hybridoma cell lines secreting high titer of McAbs against adult
Clonorchis sinensis were established. All five clones of McAbs belonged to IgM
subtype. The antigens recognized by the McAbs were located at the intestinal
tract wall of adult Clonorchis sinensis. The McAbs had no cross reactions with
antigens of Schistosoma japonicum, Paragonimus and Cysticercus cellulosae.
CONCLUSION: 5 hybridoma cell lines against adult Clonorchis sinensis secreting
high titer of McAbs with high specificity were established.

PMID: 12078207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Circ J. 2002 May;66(5):489-93.

Impact of the cross-sectional geometry of the post-deployment coronary stent on
in-stent neointimal hyperplasia: an intravascular ultrasound study.

Murata T(1), Hiro T, Fujii T, Yasumoto K, Murashige A, Kohno M, Yamada J, Miura
T, Matsuzaki M.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Medical Bioregulation, Yamaguchi University School of
Medicine, Ube, Japan.

To establish the relationship between the cross-sectional geometry of the
post-deployment stent and the degree of in-stent neointimal hyperplasia (INH),
intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) was used to examine cross-sections of the
coronary arteries from 23 patients with coronary stents 6 months after
implantation. Stent cross-sectional area (Sa) and stent perimeter (Sp) from 200
stent cross-sections, and the stent radius (Sr) and thickness of INH (Id) of
2,880 radial axes, were measured, and the mean degree of roundness (Rd) of stent 
cross-section was calculated for each stent as Rd=4piSa/Sp2. The degree of
deformity (Df) of the stent cross-section was also calculated by comparing it
with a hypothetical circle (the area of this hypothetical circle was equal to the
Sa): Df=Sr/R, where R is the radius of the hypothetical circle. The area of INH
was significantly larger in the Rd<0.87 group (n=84) than in the Rd> or =0.87
group (n=116) (3.83+/-1.26 vs 3.16+/-1.32 mm2, p<0.0005). There were significant 
differences in the thickness of INH among the 3 groups classified by the value of
Df (Df<0.95: n=425, 0.21+/-0.12mm; 0.95< or =Df<1.05: n=2008, 0.29+/-0.15mm; Df> 
or =1.05: n=447, 0.34+/-0.15mm, overall p<0.0001). These data suggest that
in-stent neointimal proliferation is more likely to occur in stented coronary
arteries with a more oval than rounded cross-section, and particularly within the
more pronounced and curved portion of the oval.

PMID: 12030346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Jun;22(12):4293-308.

Dissection of a complex enhancer element: maintenance of keratinocyte specificity
but loss of differentiation specificity.

Kaufman CK(1), Sinha S, Bolotin D, Fan J, Fuchs E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

In this report, we explored the mechanisms underlying keratinocyte-specific and
differentiation-specific gene expression in the skin. We have identified five
keratinocyte-specific, open chromatin regions that exist within the 6 kb of 5'
upstream regulatory sequence known to faithfully recapitulate the strong
endogenous keratin 5 (K5) promoter and/or enhancer activity. One of these, DNase 
I-hypersensitive site (HSs) 4, was unique in that it acted independently to drive
abundant and keratinocyte-specific reporter gene activity in culture and in
transgenic mice, despite the fact that it was not essential for K5 enhancer
activity. We have identified evolutionarily conserved regulatory elements and a
number of their associated proteins that bind to this compact and complex
enhancer element. The 125-bp 3' half of this element (referred to as 4.2) is by
far the smallest known strong enhancer element possessing keratinocyte-specific
activity in vivo. Interestingly, its activity is restricted to a subset of
progeny of K5-expressing cells located within the sebaceous gland. The other half
of HSs 4 (termed 4.1) possesses activity to suppress sebocyte-specific expression
and induce expression in the channel (inner root sheath) cells surrounding the
hair shaft. Our findings lead us to a view of keratinocyte gene expression which 
is determined by multiple regulatory modules, many of which contain AP-2 and/or
Sp1/Sp3 binding sites for enhancing expression in skin epithelium, but which also
harbor one or more unique sites for the binding of factors which determine
specificity. Through mixing and matching of these modules, additional levels of
specificity are obtained, indicating that both transcriptional repressors and
activators govern the specificity.

PMCID: PMC133856
PMID: 12024040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Hum Mol Genet. 2002 Jun 1;11(12):1391-7.

The t(4;22)(q12;q11) in atypical chronic myeloid leukaemia fuses BCR to PDGFRA.

Baxter EJ(1), Hochhaus A, Bolufer P, Reiter A, Fernandez JM, Senent L, Cervera J,
Moscardo F, Sanz MA, Cross NC.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury
SP2 8BJ, UK.

Chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML) is characterized by the presence of the BCR-ABL
fusion gene, usually in association with the t(9;22)(q34;q11) translocation. We
report here the identification and cloning of a rare variant translocation,
t(4;22)(q12;q11), in two patients with a CML-like myeloproliferative disease
(MPD). RT-PCR indicated that both patients were negative for BCR-ABL, but FISH
analysis suggested that the BCR gene was rearranged. Since other translocations
in MPDs frequently involve tyrosine kinases, we designed a multiplex PCR to
search for mRNA fusions between BCR and three potential partner genes at 4q12:
KIT, KDR and PDGFRA. An unusual inframe BCR-PDGFRA fusion mRNA was identified in 
both patients, with either BCR exon 7 or exon 12 fused to short BCR
intron-derived sequences, which were in turn fused to part of PDGFRA exon 12.
Sequencing of the genomic breakpoint junctions showed that the chromosome 22
breakpoints fell in BCR introns whereas the chromosome 4 breakpoints were within 
PDGFRA exon 12. This is the first report of a fusion gene that involves PDGFRA.
Our findings indicate that apparently simple cytogenetic variants of t(9;22) do
not always mask a cryptic BCR-ABL fusion, even when found in association with
clinical and haematological indications of CML.

PMID: 12023981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2002 Jan 25;82(2):77-80.

[Expression and immune response to hepatitis C virus core gene combined hepatitis
B virus core gene with two multiple cloning sites vector].

[Article in Chinese]

Deng T(1), Fan G, Chen T, Chen N, Hu D, Wang M, Jia K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Liver Diseases, PLA, Beijing 100700, China.

OBJECTIVE: To develop a HCV combined HBV DNA-based therapeutic vaccine.
METHODS: The HBV core gene and HCV core cDNA were inserted into the eukaryotic
expression vector with two multiple cloning sites mammalian expression vector,
which can be used for expression of two foreign genes, under the CMV promoter and
RSC promoter respectively (named pRSC-HBV/HCV). Cellular expression of
pRSC-HBV/HCV was assessed following transfection into SP2/0 cells. The Balb/c
mice were immunized by multiple sites intramuscular injection with pRSC-HBV/HCV
and the immune responses were detected.
RESULTS: The 21-kd and 14-kd core protein was observed. Both anti-HBc IgG and
anti-HCV core Ab were detected in all immunized mice. Strong CTL activity of
splenocytes against SP2/0 cells expressing both HBV and HCV core proteins were
measured in immunized mice both in vitro and in vivo.
CONCLUSION: The investigation demonstrated that pRSC-HBV/HCV could generated both
humoral immune response and Strong CTL activity against HBcAg and HCV
nucleocapsid in mice.

PMID: 11953132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Biochem J. 2002 Apr 15;363(Pt 2):263-71.

Transcriptional regulation of human 3'-phosphoadenosine 5'-phosphosulphate
synthase 2.

Shimizu C(1), Fuda H, Lee YC, Strott CA.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Steroid Regulation, Endocrinology and Reproduction Research Branch,
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of 
Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892-4510, U.S.A.

Sulphonation is a fundamental process that is essential for normal growth and
development as well as maintenance of the internal milieu. The universal
sulphonate donor molecule essential for all sulphoconjugation reactions is
adenosine 3'-phosphate 5'-phosphosulphate (PAPS), which is produced from ATP and 
inorganic sulphate by the action of bifunctional PAPS synthase. There are two
isozymes encoded by genes located on chromosome 4 (PAPS synthase 1) and
chromosome 10 (PAPS synthase 2). The promoter for PAPS synthase 2 contains
neither a TATAAA nor a CCAAT box, although a consensus initiator motif is
present. Three human cell lines were used to examine promoter activity after
transfection with various lengths of the 5'-flanking region of the PAPS synthase 
2 gene fused to a reporter gene. Proximal promoter activity was located between
bp -84 and bp -124 upstream of the purported transcription start site. This
region contains two GC/GT boxes that are essential for full promoter activity, as
indicated by deletion analysis and supported further by mutagenesis. A nuclear
extract of SW13 cells, which highly express PAPS synthase 2, contained proteins
that bound to probes possessing promoter-specific GC/GT boxes. Furthermore, the
presence of specificity protein (Sp) 1, Sp2 and Sp3 proteins in the nuclear
extract was confirmed by supershift analysis. Co-transfection experiments using
SL2 cells yielded additional support for the involvement of Sp1 in
transcriptional regulation of the PAPS synthase 2 gene; the involvement of Sp2
and/or Sp3 remains to be clarified further.

PMCID: PMC1222474
PMID: 11931653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Cancer Res. 2002 Apr 1;62(7):2043-51.

Synergistic enhancement of antitumor immunity with adoptively transferred
tumor-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and intratumoral lymphotactin transgene
expression.

Huang H(1), Li F, Gordon JR, Xiang J.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit, Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, Departments of Oncology, University
of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, S7N 4H4 Canada.

The lack of efficient T-cell infiltration of tumors is a major obstacle to
successful adoptive T-cell therapy. We have shown that transplanted SP2/0 myeloma
tumors that have been engineered to express lymphotactin (Lptn) invariably
regress under the influence of infiltrating XCR1+T cells and neutrophils. Herein,
we characterize these T cells and investigate their therapeutic efficacy, either 
alone or with Lptn gene therapy. After stimulation with SP2/0 cells, these T
cells were CD25+FasL+L-selectin-, expressed XCR-1, and were chemoattracted by
Lptn in vitro. They comprised 66% CD4+ Th1 and 33% CD8+ Tc1 cells, both of which 
expressed significant amounts of IFN-gamma, perforin, and tumor necrosis
factor-alpha, but not interleukin-4. The CD4+ Th1 and CD8+ Tc1 cells, which were 
inhibited and stimulated, respectively, for proliferation with Lptn signaling,
displayed 38 and 84% specific killing, respectively, for Ia(d)/H-2K(d)-expressing
SP2/0 tumor cells (E:T ratio, 100). In vivo, combined intratumoral Lptn gene
transfer and adoptive immunotherapy with these CD4+ and CD8+ T cells eradicated
well-established SP2/0 tumors in six of eight mice, and dramatically slowed tumor
growth in the other two mice. Cell tracking using labeled T cells confirmed that 
these cells infiltrated better into the Lptn-expressing tumors than
non-Lptn-expressing ones. Control or Lptn adenoviral treatments by themselves did
not alter the lethal outcome for tumor-bearing mice, nor did T-cell therapy by
itself, although the latter two treatments did slow its time frame. Combined Lptn
gene transfer and adoptive CD4+ or CD8+ cell transfers were not nearly as
efficacious as the combined Lptn gene and unfractionated T-cell transfers. Taken 
together, our data provide solid evidence of a potent synergy between adoptive
CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell therapy and Lptn gene transfer into tumor tissues, which
culminated in the eradication of well-established tumor masses.

PMID: 11929823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Eur J Biochem. 2002 Mar;269(6):1790-7.

Structures of two histidine ammonia-lyase modifications and implications for the 
catalytic mechanism.

Baedeker M(1), Schulz GE.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Organische Chemie und Biochemie, Albert-Ludwigs-Universität,
Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany.

Histidine ammonia-lyase (EC 4.3.1.3) catalyzes the nonoxidative elimination of
the alpha-amino group of histidine using a 4-methylidene-imidazole-5-one (MIO),
which is formed autocatalytically from the internal peptide segment
142Ala-Ser-Gly. The structure of the enzyme inhibited by a reaction with
l-cysteine was established at the very high resolution of 1.0 A. Five active
center mutants were produced and their catalytic activities were measured. Among 
them, mutant Tyr280-->Phe could be crystallized and its structure could be
determined at 1.7 A resolution. It contains a planar sp2-hybridized 144-N atom of
MIO, in contrast to the pyramidal sp3-hybridized 144-N of the wild-type. With the
planar 144-N atom, MIO assumes the conformation of a putative intermediate
aromatic state of the reaction, demonstrating that the conformational barrier
between aromatic and wild-type states is very low. The data led to a new proposal
for the geometry for the catalyzed reaction, which also applies to the closely
related phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (EC 4.3.1.5). Moreover, it suggested an
intermediate binding site for the released ammonia.

PMID: 11895450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Poult Sci. 2002 Jan;81(1):30-3.

Fatty acid composition and egg components of specialty eggs.

Cherian G(1), Holsonbake TB, Goeger MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Oregon State University, Corvallis 97331-6702, 
USA. Gita.Cherian@orst.edu

Egg components, total fat, and fatty acid content of specialty eggs were
compared. One dozen eggs were collected and analyzed from each of five different 
brands from hens fed a diet free of animal fat (SP1), certified organic
free-range brown eggs (SP2), uncaged unmedicated brown eggs (SP3), cage-free
vegetarian diet brown eggs (SP4), or naturally nested uncaged (SP5). Regular
white-shelled eggs were the control. A significant (P < 0.05) difference was
observed in the egg components and fatty acid content in different brands. The
percentage of yolk was lower (P < 0.05) in SP2 and SP4 with a concomitant
increase (P < 0.05) in the percentage of white. The percentage of shell was lower
(P < 0.05) in SP4 and SP5. The total edible portion was greater in SP4 and SP5.
The yolk:white ratio was greater (P < 0.05) in SP3. The total lipid content was
lower in SP4 eggs. The content of palmitic (C16:0), stearic (C18:0), and total
saturated fatty acids were lower (P < 0.05) in SP1. No difference was observed in
the content of palmitoleic (C16:1), oleic (C18:1), or total monounsaturated fatty
acids. The content of n-3 fatty acids in SP2, SP4, and SP5 were similar to
control eggs. The ratio of total n-6:n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids ranged from 
39.2 for SP5 to 11.5 for SP1 (P < 0.05). No difference was observed in the total 
polyunsaturated fatty acid content of eggs (P > 0.05).

PMID: 11885896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Plant Cell. 2002 Feb;14(2):387-406.

The abscisic acid-related SNARE homolog NtSyr1 contributes to secretion and
growth: evidence from competition with its cytosolic domain.

Geelen D(1), Leyman B, Batoko H, Di Sansebastiano GP, Moore I, Blatt MR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Plant Physiology and Biophysics, Imperial College of Science,
Technology, and Medicine at Wye, Kent TN25 5AH, United Kingdom.

Erratum in
    Plant Cell 2002 Apr;14(4):963. Di Sansabastiano Gian-Pietro [corrected to Di
Sansebastiano Gian-Pietro].

Syntaxins and other SNARE proteins are crucial for intracellular vesicle
trafficking, fusion, and secretion. Previously, we isolated the syntaxin-related 
protein NtSyr1 (NtSyp121) from tobacco in a screen for abscisic acid-related
signaling elements, demonstrating its role in determining the abscisic acid
sensitivity of K(+) and Cl(-) channels in stomatal guard cells. NtSyr1 is
localized to the plasma membrane and is expressed normally throughout the plant, 
especially in root tissues, suggesting that it might contribute to cellular
homeostasis as well as to signaling. To explore its functions in vivo further, we
examined stably transformed lines of tobacco that expressed various constructs of
NtSyr1, including the full-length protein and a truncated fragment, Sp2,
corresponding to the cytosolic domain shown previously to be active in
suppressing ion channel response to abscisic acid. Constitutively overexpressing 
NtSyr1 yielded uniformly high levels of protein (>10 times the wild-type levels) 
and was associated with a significant enhancement of root growth in seedlings but
not with any obvious phenotype in mature, well-watered plants. Similar
transformations with constructs encoding the Sp2 fragment of NtSyr1 showed
altered leaf morphology but gave only low levels of Sp2 fragment, suggesting a
strong selective pressure against plants expressing this protein. High expression
of the Sp2 fragment was achieved in stable transformants under the control of a
dexamethasone-inducible promoter. Sp2 expression was correlated positively with
altered cellular and tissue morphology in leaves and roots and with a cessation
of growth in seedlings. Overexpression of the full-length NtSyr1 protein rescued 
the wild-type phenotype, even in plants expressing high levels of the Sp2
fragment, supporting the idea that the Sp2 fragment interfered specifically with 
NtSyr1 function by competing with NtSyr1 for its binding partners. To explore
NtSyr1 function in secretion, we used a green fluorescent protein (GFP)-based
section assay. When a secreted GFP marker was coexpressed with Sp2 in tobacco
leaves, GFP fluorescence was retained in cytosolic reticulate and punctate
structures. In contrast, in plants coexpressing secreted GFP and NtSyr1 or
secreted GFP alone, no GFP fluorescence accumulated within the cells. A new
yellow fluorescent protein-based secretion marker was used to show that the
punctate structures labeled in the presence of Sp2 colocalized with a Golgi
marker. These structures were not labeled in the presence of a dominant Rab1
mutant that inhibited transport from the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi. We
propose that NtSyr1 functions as an element in SNARE-mediated vesicle trafficking
to the plasma membrane and is required for cellular growth and homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC152920
PMID: 11884682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Biotechnol. 2002 Apr 25;95(1):39-48.

Measurement of hydrophobic interactions of mammalian cells grown in culture.

Ghebeh H(1), Gillis J, Butler M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Manitoba, 118 Buller Bldg.,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada R3T 2N2.

An assay was developed to measure the hydrophobic interactions of commonly used
mammalian cell lines grown in culture. The assay depends on the loss of cells
from an aqueous suspension following vortexing with a hydrophobic oil phase. This
allowed the determination of a hydrophobicity index, which was significantly
higher for Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO) cells than either a murine hybridoma
(CC9C10) or a myeloma (SP2/0). This suggests that CHO cells may have a higher
intrinsic cell surface hydrophobicity. The assay was also used to study the
effect of different additives on the hydrophobic interactions of the cells. A
dose-dependent effect was shown for the non-ionic surfactant, Pluronic F68, in
reducing the hydrophobic interaction of the CHO cells. However, the pattern of
the decrease due to Pluronic F68 was different for each cell line. A higher
concentration of Pluronic F68 (0.2%) was required to eliminate the hydrophobic
interactions of CHO cells compared to either myelomas or hybridomas, where only
0.05% was required to reduce these interactions to a similar level. Several oils 
were found suitable for this assay although canola oil maximized the sensitivity 
of the measured changes. The assay may be useful in monitoring changes in the
hydrophobic interactions of mammalian cells during growth in bioreactors. This
may be important in optimizing the concentration of cell protectants such as
Pluronic F68 in agitated cultures.

PMID: 11879710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Mol Biol Evol. 2002 Mar;19(3):216-22.

Evolution of Sp transcription factors.

Kolell KJ(1), Crawford DL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, School of Biological Science, 
University of Missouri-Kansas City.

The Sp family of transcription factors binds GC-rich DNA sequences. The
ubiquitously expressed Sp1 and Sp3 have been well characterized in mammals.
Presented here is the characterization of the only Sp protein expressed in the
liver or heart tissue of the teleost fish Fundulus heteroclitus. This protein,
fSp3, is most similar to and homologous with mammalian Sp3 proteins. The
evolution of the Sp transcription family is described, with Sp1 and Sp3
representing the most recent duplication of the Sp family. Sp4 appears to be the 
most ancestral member. Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 form a monophyletic group without Sp2.
Sp2 is the least similar of the Sp family and is more similar to the non-Sp
transcription factors. These results suggest that Sp2 should not be considered a 
member of the Sp family. Only two domains (zinc fingers and B domain) share
similarity outside the Sp family. The zinc fingers are homologous to other
GC-binding domains, yet the B domain is homologous to protein-protein interacting
domains in the CCAAT-binding/NF-Y transcription factor families. These results
suggest that these different domains have different evolutionary histories.

PMID: 11861880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Eur J Hum Genet. 2001 Dec;9(12):887-91.

Evidence from skewed X inactivation for trisomy mosaicism in Silver-Russell
syndrome.

Sharp A(1), Moore G, Eggermann T.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wilts., SP2 8BJ, UK. asharp@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk

The finding of maternal uniparental disomy for chromosome 7 (matUPD7) in
approximately 7% of Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) cases has lead to the
assumption that imprinted gene(s) on chromosome 7 are responsible for at least
some cases. However, the observation in a familial case that both maternal and
paternal inheritance of proximal 7p results in an SRS-like phenotype suggests
that the causative genes may not be imprinted, and that an extra copy of genes
within this region cause SRS. As all cases of complete matUPD7 could have arisen 
by trisomy rescue, it is possible that undetected trisomy 7 mosaicism contributes
towards the phenotype of SRS, and that the matUPD7 seen in some cases is a
consequence of trisomy rescue. Previous studies in cases of trisomy rescue for a 
number of autosomes have shown a strong association with skewed X inactivation in
diploid tissues. Thus, we hypothesised that if trisomy mosaicism was involved in 
SRS, the frequency of skewed X inactivation should be increased in a population
of non-matUPD7 SRS patients. Consistent with this hypothesis, results showed a
significant increase in the frequency of completely skewed X inactivation in SRS 
patients (three of 29) when compared to controls (three of 270), suggesting the
possible presence of undetected trisomy 7 in SRS patients and/or their placentas.

PMID: 11840189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Hybrid Hybridomics. 2001;20(5-6):361-8.

The nucleotide sequence of dinitrophenyl-specific IgE and Fc(epsilon)RI
alpha-subunit obtained from FE-3 hybridoma cells.

Tokeshi Y(1), Shimada S, Hanashiro K, Sunagawa M, Nakamura M, Kosugi T.

Author information: 
(1)1st Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, University of the Ryukyus,
Okinawa 903-0215, Japan.

FE-3 cells were established by Hanashiro et al. by hybridizing mouse myeloma
cells (Sp2/0-Ag14/SF) with rat spleen cells that were freshly isolated from
Brown-Norway rats sensitized with DNP-As. FE-3 cells can constitutively secrete
IgE without stimulation by cytokines. Our preliminary experiments demonstrated
that the IgE secretion was decreased at 3 days after start of culture and the
addition of exogenous IgE into culture media depressed the secretion of IgE.
Thus, we hypothesized that the IgE production in FE-3 cells may be regulated by a
signal transduction through the binding of IgE to its high affinity receptor
(Fc(epsilon)RI) or to an IgE binding protein on the cell surface. In this study, 
we aimed to identify the nucleotide sequence of IgE FE-3 and compared with those 
of mouse IgE and IgE IR162 to find a structural heterogeneity in the Fc region of
IgE FE-3. We also tested if the mRNA of Fc(epsilon)RI was expressed in FE-3 cells
using the reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) method with
the combination of sequencing analysis. Consequently, the cDNA sequence of IgE
FE-3 was identical to that of the CH3 and CH4 domains in the epsilon-chain of rat
IgE IR162, whereas the cDNA of Fc(epsilon)RI was identical to that of mouse,
suggesting that the genes of IgE FE-3 and Fc(epsilon)RI was derived from that of 
rat spleen cells and mouse myeloma cells, respectively.

PMID: 11839254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Hybrid Hybridomics. 2001;20(5-6):333-41.

A new monoclonal antibody, P2A8(6), that specifically recognizes a novel epitope 
on the multidrug resistance-associated protein 1 (MRP1), but not on MRP2 nor
MRP3.

Connolly L(1), Moran E, Larkin A, Scheffer G, Scheper R, Sarkadi B, Kool M,
Clynes M.

Author information: 
(1)National Cell and Tissue Culture Centre/Bioresearch Ireland, D.C.U.,
Glasnevin, Dublin 9, Ireland.

Multidrug resistance (MDR) is a major problem in the chemotherapeutic treatment
of cancer. Overexpression of the multidrug resistance-associated protein 1
(MRP1), is associated with MDR in certain tumors. A number of MRP1-specific MAbs,
which facilitate both clinical and experimental investigations of this protein,
are available. To add to this panel of existing antibodies, we have now generated
an additional MRP1-specific monoclonal antibody (MAb), P2A8(6), which detects a
unique heat stable epitope on the MRP1 molecule. Female Wistar rats were
immunized via footpad injections with a combination of two short synthetic
peptides corresponding to amino acids 235-246 (peptide A) and 246-260 (peptide B)
of the MRP1 protein. Immune reactive B cells were then isolated from the
popliteal lymph nodes for fusion with SP2/O-Ag14 myeloma cells. Resultant
hybridoma supernatants were screened for MRP1-specific antibody production.
Antibody P2A8(6) was characterized by Western blotting and immunocytochemistry on
paired multidrug resistant (MRP1 overexpressing) and sensitive parental cell
lines. The antibody detects a protein of 190 kDa in MRP1-expressing cell lines
but not in MRP2- or MRP3-transfected cell lines. P2A8(6) stains drug-selected and
MRP1-transfected cell lines homogeneously by immunocytochemistry and recognizes
MRP1 by immunohistochemistry on formalin-fixed paraffin wax-embedded tissue
sections. Peptide inhibition studies confirm that P2A8(6) reacts with peptide B
(amino acids 246-260), therefore recognizing a different epitope from that of all
currently available MRP1 MAbs. This new MAb, chosen for its specificity to the
MRP1 protein, may be a useful addition to the currently available range of
MRP1-specific MAbs.

PMID: 11839251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Med Genet. 2002 Feb;39(2):E9.

A patient with a supernumerary marker chromosome (15), Angelman syndrome, and
uniparental disomy resulting from paternal meiosis II non-disjunction.

Roberts S(1), Maggouta F, Thompson R, Price S, Thomas S.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, UK. ser@soton.ac.uk

PMCID: PMC1735048
PMID: 11836378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Neurotoxicology. 2001 Dec;22(6):767-74.

Inhibition of catalase activity with 3-amino-triazole enhances the cytotoxicity
of the Alzheimer's amyloid-beta peptide.

Milton NG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology and Clinical Biochemistry, Royal Free and
University College Medical School, University College London, UK.
nmilton@rfc.ucl.ac.uk

Amyloid-beta, (Abeta) is a cytotoxic peptide implicated in the pathology of
Alzheimers disease. The antioxidant enzyme catalase has been suggested to protect
against Abeta cytotoxicity in both neuronal and non-neuronal cell types.
Inhibition of endogenous catalase using 3-amino-1,2,4-triazole (3AT) in neuronal 
(NT-2) and myeloma (SP2/0-Ag-14) cell lines increases Abeta toxicity, suggesting 
that any protective role for endogenous catalase requires active enzyme. In Abeta
treated mveloma cells there was a significant decrease in the total cell catalase
activity and immunoreactivity. However, when the surviving live cell population
was isolated following Abeta treatment the levels of catalase were significantly 
increased. The surviving live cell population from groups treated with both 3AT
and Abeta contain elevated immunoreactive catalase levels suggesting that the
protective role for endogenous catalase may have a component independent of the
antioxidant activity, possibly by acting as an Abeta binding protein.
Amyloid-beta (Abeta) cytotoxicity can be prevented by Vitamin E treatment or an
anti-Abeta monoclonal antibody (ALIOI), both of which also prevent Abeta
cytotoxicity in cells treated with 3AT These observations suggest that Abeta
mediated cell death in both neuronal and non-neuronal cells is mediated in part
by actions to increase hydrogen peroxide. Catalase has a protective role, as a
hydrogen peroxide-degrading enzyme and catalase inhibition by Abeta is not the
direct cause of cytotoxicity.

PMID: 11829410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Spinal Cord. 2002 Jan;40(1):34-6.

Electrical stimulation of abdominal muscles for control of blood pressure and
augmentation of cough in a C3/4 level tetraplegic.

Taylor PN(1), Tromans AM, Harris KR, Swain ID.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering, Salisbury District
Hospital, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, UK.

OBJECTIVES: Evaluation of a FES (Functional Electrical Stimulation) device for
the relief of postural hypertension and augmentation of cough in a C3
ventilator-dependent tetraplegic.
STUDY DESIGN: A single case study.
SETTING: A supra regional spinal unit in the UK.
METHOD: A dual channel stimulator was designed that allowed selection and
initiation of two predetermined stimulation intensities using a chin controlled
joystick. Two sets of 70 mm diameter electrodes were placed either side of the
abdomen. Approximately 80 mA, 300 micros, 40 Hz was required for assisted cough
while about 40 mA was required for maintenance of blood pressure. After eating,
the lower level stimulus is self-administered every 3 to 5 min gradually
increasing the time between groups of burst to once every hour after 90 min.
RESULTS: Following eating, a blood pressure of 60/45 mmHg was recorded. After
five 1 s bursts of stimulation in quick repetition, this was increased to 133/92 
mmHg. After 2 min blood pressure had fallen to 124/86 mmHg and to 93/66 after a
further 4 min. The electrical stimulation was then repeated, returning the blood 
pressure to the previous higher level. Measurement of peak expiratory flow showed
an increase from 275 l/min for an unassisted cough to 425 l/min when using the
device.
CONCLUSION: The device is used every day. The user is now independent in coughing
function and no longer requires suction or manual assistance. Maintenance of
blood pressure has significantly improved his quality of life.

PMID: 11821968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. World J Gastroenterol. 1998 Feb;4(1):41-44.

Cloning of 3H11 mAb variable region gene and expression of 3H11 human-mouse
chimeric light Chain.

Li J, Wang Y, Li QX, Wang YM, Xu JJ, Dong ZW.

AIM:To clone mouse anti-human gastric cancer mAb(3H11) variable genes and to
construct 3H11 human-mouse chimeric antibody.METHODS: The entire VH and VL genes 
of anti-gastric cancer mAb 3H11 were cloned by RT-PCR method from 3H11 hybridoma 
cells, using 5' primers for leader sequences. The 3H11 VL gene was then inserted 
into human-mouse chimeric light chain expression vector and transfected into
murine Sp2/0 myeloma cells.RESULTS: DNA sequence analysis indicated that the
cloned genes included the whole leader sequences and the mature Ig variable
region encoding sequences. After gene transfection, transient expression of
chimeric light chain protein was detected.CONCLUSION: DNA sequences and transient
expression indicated that the cloned gene was functional. This work laid basis
for constructing 3H11 human mouse chimeric antibody in the future.

PMCID: PMC4767761
PMID: 11819228  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


27. Acta Orthop Scand. 2001 Dec;72(6):572-84.

Bone cement with reduced proportion of monomer in total hip arthroplasty:
preclinical evaluation and randomized study of 47 cases with 5 years' follow-up.

Nivbrant B(1), Kärrholm J, Röhrl S, Hassander H, Wesslén B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, NUS, University Hospital of Northern Sweden, Umeå. 
Bo.Nivbrant@Orthop.umu.se

Bone cement with reduced amount of monomer and low curing temperature may improve
implant fixation due to reduced toxicity. We analyzed the mechanical, chemical
and thermal properties of such a cement (Cemex Rx) using Palacos R as control.
The in vivo performance of the 2 cements was also evaluated in a prospective
randomized study of 47 hips, where either of the cement types was used to fixate 
Lubinus SP2 prostheses with the stem made of titanium alloy. Cemex Rx had a
reduced tensile strength, probably because this cement was manually mixed, as
recommended by the manufacturer. A standardized labor tory test showed lower
curing temperature for Cemex, but measurements at 37 degrees and with prechilled 
Palacos R and Cemex Rx, as in clinical work, showed no difference. In the
clinical study radiostereometric measurements of cup and stem migration showed
similar values in the 2 groups up to 5 years after the operation. The cement
mantle was stable in both groups, but the stems migrated similarly inside the
cement mantle regardless of the type of cement used. Proximal wear was low
(0.04-0.05 mm/year) and tended to be lower in the Cemex group (p = 0.02).
Aluminum and vanadium levels in serum increased 5 years after the operation, but 
no difference was noted between the 2 groups. Collagen markers (PICP, ICTP)
showed similar increases in bone turnover 6 weeks and 6 months after operation in
both groups.

PMID: 11817871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2002 Feb;67(2):115-24.

A parallel Monte Carlo code for planar and SPECT imaging: implementation,
verification and applications in (131)I SPECT.

Dewaraja YK(1), Ljungberg M, Majumdar A, Bose A, Koral KF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Division of Nuclear Medicine, The University of
Michigan Medical Center, 3480 Kresge III, 204 Zina Pitcher Place, Ann Arbor, MI
48109-0552, USA. yuni@umich.edu

This paper reports the implementation of the SIMIND Monte Carlo code on an IBM
SP2 distributed memory parallel computer. Basic aspects of running Monte Carlo
particle transport calculations on parallel architectures are described. Our
parallelization is based on equally partitioning photons among the processors and
uses the Message Passing Interface (MPI) library for interprocessor communication
and the Scalable Parallel Random Number Generator (SPRNG) to generate
uncorrelated random number streams. These parallelization techniques are also
applicable to other distributed memory architectures. A linear increase in
computing speed with the number of processors is demonstrated for up to 32
processors. This speed-up is especially significant in Single Photon Emission
Computed Tomography (SPECT) simulations involving higher energy photon emitters, 
where explicit modeling of the phantom and collimator is required. For (131)I,
the accuracy of the parallel code is demonstrated by comparing simulated and
experimental SPECT images from a heart/thorax phantom. Clinically realistic SPECT
simulations using the voxel-man phantom are carried out to assess scatter and
attenuation correction.

PMCID: PMC2831216
PMID: 11809318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Am Chem Soc. 2002 Jan 30;124(4):662-71.

Effect of geminal substitution at silicon on 1-sila- and 1,3-disilacyclobutanes' 
strain energies, their 2+2 cycloreversion enthalpies, and Si=C pi-bond energies
in silenes.

Gusel'nikov LE(1), Avakyan VG, Guselnikov SL.

Author information: 
(1)Topchiev Institute of Petrochemical Synthesis, Russian Academy of Sciences, 29
Leninsky Prospect, 119991 GSP-1, Moscow, Russia. guselnikov@ips.ac.ru

To evaluate the effect of geminal substitution at silicon on 1-sila- and
1,3-disilacyclobutanes' strain energies, their 2+2 cycloreversion enthalpies, and
Si=C pi-bond energies in silenes, an ab initio MO study of silenes, R2Si=CH2 (1),
1-silacyclobutanes, cyclo-R2Si(CH2)3 (2), and 1,3-disilacyclobutanes,
cyclo-(R2SiCH2)2 (3), was performed using the level of theory denoted
MP4/TZ(d)//MP2/6-31G(d) (TZ means the 6-311G(d) basis set for elements of the
second period and hydrogen, and the McLean-Chandler (12s,9p)/[6s,5p](d) basis set
for the third period elements). In the series R = H, CH3, SiH3, CH3O, NH2, Cl, F,
the growth of the reaction enthalpies and strain energies is proportional to the 
substituents' electronegativities. 2+2 cycloreversion of 2 is endothermic by
40.6-63.1 kcal/mol, whereas that of 3 is endothermic by 72.7-114.2 kcal/mol. On
going from a silicon to a fluorine substituent at the sp2-hybridized silicon
atom, the pi-bond energy in 1 weakens by 11.3 kcal/mol, and the Si=C bond length 
shortens by 0.053 A. The effect of substituents' electronegativities at the
double-bonded silicon atom in silenes is formulated as follows: the higher
electronegativity, the shorter and the weaker the Si=C pi-bond. The latter is
rationalized in terms of more strained geometry resulting from the energetic cost
for planarizing the R2SiC moiety. The enthalpies of the ring-opening reaction are
68.0-80.1 kcal/mol (a cleavage of the Si-C bond in 3), 65.0-76.4 kcal/mol (a
cleavage of the Si-C bond in 2), and 58.0-64.9 kcal/mol (a cleavage of the C-C
bond in 2). The pronounced difference in the enthalpies of 2+2 cycloreversion of 
1-sila- and 1,3-disilacyclobutanes is mainly due to the difference in the
enthalpies of diradicals' decomposition. The decomposition of diradicals
resulting from a cleavage of C-C and Si-C bonds in 2 is exothermic by 24.3-3.3
kcal/mol (apart from the difluoro derivative which is endothermic by 5.1
kcal/mol) and 27.0-13.3 kcal/mol, respectively. The decomposition of a
1,4-diradical resulting from ring opening of 3, apart from the disilyl
derivative, is the endothermic process for which the enthalpy varies from 10.6 to
40.4 kcal/mol.

PMID: 11804497  [PubMed]


30. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2000 Jun;80(6):411-3.

[Protective immunity induced by anti-idiotypic monoclonal antibody NP30 of
Schistosoma japonicum in goats].

[Article in Chinese]

Feng Z(1), Li Y, Qiu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the protective immunity in goats induced by active
immunization with anti-idiotypic monoclonal antibody NP30 of S. japonicum.
METHODS: Goats were randomly divided into two groups. Experimental group had 12
goats. The NP30 was intramuscularly injected with a dosage of 1 000 microgram
into the hind leg for three dosages continuously. The goats were challenged with 
cercariae eight weeks after the third immunization. Ten goats in the control
group were intramuscularly injected with SP2/0 ascites and challenged with
cercariae at the same time as the experimental group. All goats were killed at
the twelfth week post-challenge.
RESULTS: Active immunization with NP30 could produce a protection rate of 42.78% 
in goats. The number of eggs in liver and feces in the goats immunized with NP30 
was decreased by 35.83% and 25%, respectively. The size and number of egg
granulomas in the liver were lessened obviously and the weight of the goats
increased significantly.
CONCLUSION: Active immunization with NP30 could induce a good protection in goats
against the infection with Schsitosoma cercariae.

PMID: 11798794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Zhonghua Nei Ke Za Zhi. 1999 Jul;38(7):462-5.

[Immune responses to recombinant expression plasmid encoding hepatitis C virus
core antigen].

[Article in Chinese]

Feng Z(1), Zhou Y, Jia Z, Lian J, Li J, Li W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Tangdu Hospital, The Fourth Military
Medical University, Xi'an 710038.

OBJECTIVE: To study the feasibility of DNA immunization with recombinant
expression plasmid containing hepatitis C virus (HCV) core gene against HCV
infection.
METHODS: The recombinant plasmid containing HCV C gene was constructed and
expressed transiently by using lipofectamine in the mouse SP2/0 cells. After
appraisal and purification, these plasmid and control DNA were directly injected 
intramuscularly into BALB/c mice, HCV C specific antibody in the sera was checked
with ELISA. Proliferative responses of spleen cells from experimental and control
mice were determined by (3)H thymidine incorporation and cytotoxicity T
lymphocyte (CTL) activity was measured by standard 4-h (51)Cr release assays.
RESULTS: All immunized mice developed anti-HCV core antibodies and this antibody 
was dose and immune number dependent. Lymphoproliferative responses for HCV core 
antigen were higher in immunized mice than in control mice (P < 0.05),
stimulation indices (SI) were 2.42 - 6.10. CTLs might induce approximately 63.13%
lysis of pcDNA HCV C transfected SP2/0 target cells.
CONCLUSION: It is suggested that HCV C gene immunization is a promising method of
vaccination against HCV infection.

PMID: 11798682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2001 Sep;17(5):575-8.

[Studies on lignocellulolytic enzymes production and biomass degradation of
Pleurotus sp2 and Trametes gallica in wheat straw cultures].

[Article in Chinese]

Xie J(1), Sun X, Ren L, Zhang YZ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Laboratory, College of Life Science, Sichuan University,
Chengdu 610064, China.

Pleurotus sp2 and Trametes gallica were selected in this assay because of their
high activities of lignocellulolytic enzymes and the enzyme peaks appeared at the
early stage of liquid state fermentation. Solid state fermentation was also
investigated for their abilities and behaviors of enzyme-production. The
capabilities and characteristics of the two strains in degrading biomass were
studied. When Pleurotus sp2 was incubated in wheat straw powder containing the
liquid medium of low-nitrogen, no-carbon and high inorganic salt, the activities 
of MnP and Lac reached the peaks on the tenth day, but the activities of
hemicellulases reached the peak on the 40th day. Pleurotus sp2 caused 17.6% of
biomass loss. When T. gallica was incubated in wheat straw powder containing the 
liquid medium of hlig-nitrogen, or low-nitrogen, no-carbon and high inorganic
salt, the activities of MnP reached the peaks on the tenth day, the lac and
hemicelluloses on the 40th day, and the lignin peroxidases reached the peaks on
the 50th day, and it caused more than 64% of biomass loss. Among them the
hemicellulose was degraded by 71.96%, and the cellulose 66.21%. T. gallica was
very capable of degrading lignin of wheat straw and caused 34.37% loss during 20 
days, 46. 71% loss during 30 days and 70.14% loss during 60 days. It was
interesting that T. gallica degraded lignin preferentially with respect to
cellulose, which was very beneficial to biopulping of paper industry.

PMID: 11797225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2001 Jan;23(1):17-20.

[Preliminary study on skeletal muscle derived tumor suppressor].

[Article in Chinese]

Luo C(1), Jiang Y, Liu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, PLA 301 Hospital, Beijing 100853, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of new born rat skeletal muscle conditioned 
medium (MCM) on proliferation of tumor cells, and its physicochemical
characteristics and mechanisms of action.
METHODS: The effects of MCM were tested on a variety of cells by MTT assay. MCM
was also tested following ultrafiltration, boiling at 100 degrees C and treatment
with trypsin. Morphology and apoptosis of the MCM-treated cells were examined.
RESULTS: Proliferation of mouse myeloma SP2/0, rat carcino-sarcoma Walker 256,
and tumor cell lines of human origin, including leukemia K562 and HL-60, colon
adenocarcinoma LS-174-T, prostatic carcinoma PC3-M, and lung adenocarcinoma with 
low(PLA801-C) and high(PLA801-D) metastatic potential were significantly
decreased when cultured with MCM(P < 0.01-0.05) in a dose-dependent manner. The
proliferation of normal cells(RGP-2 rabbit joint epiphysial disk cells) was not
affected by MCM. Proliferation of the lung adenocarcinoma with high metastatic
potential was more susceptible to the growth inhibitory effect of MCM as compared
to that with low metastatic potential. On ultrafiltration, the inhibitory
activity of MCM existed in the fraction with a molecular weight < or = 10,000. It
was trypsin resistant but thermolabile. Apoptosis was not seen but the
cytoplasmic membrane of tumor cells was destroyed after cultured in MCM.
CONCLUSION: Rat skeletal muscle cells produce low molecular weight tumor
suppressor(s) capable of selectively inhibiting tumor cell proliferation in
vitro. Its activity is neither species- nor tumor-specific. The skeletal muscle
derived tumor suppressor(s) may play a key role in the rarity of tumor metastases
in skeletal muscles.

PMID: 11783061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Chin Med J (Engl). 2001 Sep;114(9):962-6.

Monoclonal anti-idiotype antibody bearing the internal image of nasopharyngeal
carcinoma associated antigen.

Li G(1), Hu J, Zhou G, Zhu J, Sun Q.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Xiang-Ya School of Medicine, Central South
University, Changsha 410078, China.

OBJECTIVE: To generate and characterize anti-idiotypic monoclonal antibody (Ab2) 
that bears the internal image of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) associated
antigen.
METHODS: Using NPC monoclonal antibody (Ab1) as immunogen, hybridoma cells were
obtained by fusion of SP2/0 myeloma cells with immunized murine spleen cells.
Positive clones were screened by Sandwich ELISA and a binding inhibition test. To
determine whether Ab2 possess the internal image of the original antigen or not, 
mice were immunized with Ab2. ELISA and the competitive inhibition assay tested
anti-anti-idiotypic antibodies (Ab3) in anti-sera. Cell-mediated immunity to
tumors induced by Ab2 was investigated by a delayed-type hypersensitivity
response and the mouse T-cell proliferation assay.
RESULTS: Anti-idiotypic monoclonal antibodies against the monoclonal anti-NPC
antibodies FC2 and HNL5 were generated that recognize NPC associated antigens.
These Ab2, which were designated 2H4 and 5D3, could inhibit the binding of FC2 or
HNL5 to NPC cell lines. Anti-sera from the immunized mice, which contained Ab3,
could compete with FC2 or HNL5 for binding with NPC cell by a competitive
inhibition assay. Mice immunized with 2H4 or 5D3 coupled with keyhole limpet
hemocyanin (KLH), showed a positive and specific delayed-type hypersensitivity
(DTH) reaction after stimulation by NPC cells. The mouse T cell proliferative
assay indicated that there was a significantly higher proliferative response of
the splenocytes in the experimental groups than that in control groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Anti-idiotypic antibodies 2H4 and 5D3 are Ab2 beta bearing the
internal image of the epitope of NPC associated antigen. Either 2H4 or 5D3
expressing three-dimensional shapes that resemble the structure of natural
antigens could induce humoral and cellular immune response.

PMID: 11780392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Chin Med J (Engl). 2000 Mar;113(3):265-8.

Anti-fecundity immunity in mice immunized with anti-idiotypic monoclonal antibody
NP30 of Schistosoma japonicum.

Feng Z(1), Li Y, Qiu Z, Li Y, Xue W, Guan X, Wu G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the effects of anti-fecundity and anti-embryonation
immunity of anti-idiotypic monoclonal antibody NP30 of Schistosoma japonicum on
female adult worm.
METHODS: The active immunization of C57BL/6 mice was conducted by means of three 
intraperitoneal injections of NP30. The control group was injected with SP2/0
ascites intraperitoneally.
RESULTS: On the twenty-seventh day after challenge infection, the number of eggs 
in the liver tissue and in uterus of the group immunized with NP30 decreased by
30.91% and by 38.55%, respectively. On the thirty-ninth day after the challenge
infection, the number of mature eggs in the liver tissue of the group immunized
with NP30 decreased by 66.63% and the number of dead eggs increased by 60.66%.
CONCLUSIONS: NP30, with which mice were actively immunized, possesses double
effects of anti-fecundity and anti-embryonation immunity on female adult worm of 
Schistosoma japonicum, therefore it can be used as a promising candidate of
anti-pathologic vaccine molecule against Schistosomiasis japonica.

PMID: 11775261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. DNA Res. 2001 Oct 31;8(5):215-9.

Characterization of expressed genes in the SLL2 region of self-compatible
Arabidopsis thaliana.

Takada Y(1), Ito A, Ninomiya C, Kakizaki T, Takahata Y, Suzuki G, Hatakeyama K,
Hinata K, Shiba H, Takayama S, Isogai A, Watanabe M.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Agriculture, Iwate University, Morioka, Japan.

Self-incompatibility in Brassica species is regulated by a set of S-locus genes: 
SLG, SRK, and SP11/SCR. In the vicinity of the S-locus genes, several expressed
genes, SLL2 and SP2/ClpP, etc., were identified in B. campestris. Arabidopsis
thaliana is a self-compatible Brassica relative, and its complete genome has been
sequenced. From comparison of the genomic sequences between B. campestris and A. 
thaliana, microsynteny between gene clusters of Arabidopsis and Brassica SLL2
regions was observed, though the S-locus genes, SLG, SRK, and SP11/SCR were not
found in the region of Arabidopsis. Almost all genes predicted in this region of 
Arabidopsis were expressed in both vegetative and reproductive organs, suggesting
that the genes in the SLL2 region might not be related to self-incompatibility.
Considering the recent speculation that the S-locus genes were translocated as a 
single unit between Arabidopsis and Brassica, the translocation might have
occurred in the region between the SLL2 and SP7 genes.

PMID: 11759841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Biomech. 2002 Jan;35(1):69-79.

The precision of radiostereometric measurements. Manual vs. digital measurements.

Börlin N(1), Thien T, Kärrholm J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computing Science, Umeå University, S-901 87, Umeå, Sweden.
niclas.borlin@cs.umu.se

The precision of digital vs. manual radiostereometric measurements in total hip
arthroplasty was evaluated using repeated stereoradiographic exposures with an
interval of 10-15 min. Ten Lubinus SP2 stems cemented into bone specimens and 12 
patients with the same stem design were used to evaluate the precision of stem
translations and rotations. The precision of translations and rotations of the
cup and femoral head penetration was studied in 12 patients with whole
polyethylene cups. The use of a measurement method based on digitised radiographs
improved the precision for some of the motion parameters, whereas many of them
did not change. A corresponding pattern was observed for both the intra- and
interobserver error. Of the wear parameters, the most pronounced improvements
were the 3D wear and in the proximal-distal direction, although the
anterior-posterior precision was also improved. The mean errors of rigid body and
elliptic fitting decreased in all evaluations but one, consistent with a more
reproducible identification of the markers centres and the edge of the femoral
head. Increased precision of radiostereometric measurements may be used to
increase the statistical power of future randomised studies and to study new
fields in orthopaedics requiring higher precision than has been available with
RSA based on manual measurements.

PMID: 11747885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Am J Med Genet. 2001 Nov 1;103(4):289-94.

FISH characterisation of dynamic mosaicism involving an inv dup(15) in a patient 
with mental retardation.

Cockwell AE(1), Dávalos IP, Rivera HR, Crolla JA.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wiltshire, SP2 8BJ, UK. wessex.genetics@dial.pipex.com

We report on a man with mental retardation and a complex karyotype with cells
containing up to three morphologically distinct supernumerary marker chromosomes 
(SMCs) in most metaphases. Fluorescence in situ hybridisation studies using
chromosome 15-specific probes characterised the presence of seven SMCs all
derived from chromosome 15. The results suggest that the patient originally had a
large inv dup(15) containing two copies of the Prader-Willi/Angelman critical
region which became mitotically unstable, and by a process of dynamic mosaicism
various morphologically distinct SMCs arose.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11746008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Acta Crystallogr C. 2001 Dec;57(Pt 12):1371-3. Epub 2001 Dec 6.

The optical sensor fac-tricarbonylchloro(di-2-pyridylmethanone
p-nitrophenylhydrazone)rhenium(I) dimethyl sulfoxide solvate.

Bakir M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The University of the West Indies, Mona Campus,
Kingston 7, Jamaica, West Indies. mbakir@uwimona.edu.jm

The first metal complex of di-2-pyridylmethanone p-nitrophenylhydrazone (dpknph),
i.e. the title compound, fac-[ReCl(C17H13N5O2)(CO)3]*C2H6OS, crystallizes as well
separated pseudo-tetrahedral DMSO (DMSO is dimethyl sulfoxide) and
pseudo-octahedral fac-[ReCl(dpknph)(CO)3] moieties. Two N atoms from dpknph,
three C atoms from the carbonyl groups and one chloride ion occupy the
coordination sphere around rhenium. The coordinated dpknph ligand forms a
six-membered ring in a boat conformation, with the pyridine rings in a butterfly 
formation. The p-nitrophenylhydrazone moiety is planar, with all C and N atoms in
sp2-hybridized forms. The molecules pack as stacks of interlocked
fac-[ReCl(dpknph)(CO)3]*DMSO units via a network of non-covalent bonds that
include solute-solute, solvent-solute and pi-pi interactions.

PMID: 11740085  [PubMed]


40. Space Med Med Eng (Beijing). 2001 Feb;14(1):57-9.

[Study on induced mutation of sorghum seeds on recoverable satellites].

[Article in Chinese]

Li JG(1), Liu GQ, Zhang J, Jiang XC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, Academia Sinica, Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe and investigate the variation and heredity of the offspring
of dry seeds of sorghum carried by satellite hence to select excellent mutants
and to cultivate directivity new varieties for production application.
METHOD: Dry seeds of Tanghui 28, a sorghum restorer line, were carried to the
space on board a recoverable satellite for 15 d. After recovery the seeds were
planted in the field to study the growth dynamics and change of agricultural
characters.
RESULT: Variations of characters such as dwarfing of stalk, significant increase 
grain weight per spike etc were observed in SP1 generation. Wide separation
occurred in SP2 generation. Regardless that only non-significant separation of
disease resistance and a very little variation of glum color were observed, the
other characters varied significantly, and a super large panicle type varied line
was obtained. Its spike length was 4 cm longer, and grain weight per spike was
58.5 g more than the control.
CONCLUSION: It may be considered that the variation of sorghum seeds induced by
the space conditions was heritable to the offsprings. Therefore, exposure to the 
space environment could be used as a method for mutagenic seeds breeding.

PMID: 11712559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Hum Genet. 2001 Oct;109(4):440-51.

Subtelomeric rearrangements: results from a study of selected and unselected
probands with idiopathic mental retardation and control individuals by using
high-resolution G-banding and FISH.

Joyce CA(1), Dennis NR, Cooper S, Browne CE.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wilts., SP2 8BJ, UK. wessex.genetics@dial.pipex.com

The cause of mental retardation, present in approximately 3% of the population,
is unexplained in the majority of cases. Recent reports have suggested that
cryptic telomeric rearrangements resulting in segmental aneuploidy and
gene-dosage imbalance might represent a significant cause of idiopathic mental
retardation (IMR). Two groups of patients with unexplained developmental delay
(unselected and selected) and a group of control individuals have been
investigated to determine the frequency of submicroscopic telomeric
rearrangements associated with IMR and the frequency within the normal
population. In contrast to current thinking, our data have shown that true
cryptic telomeric rearrangements are not a significant cause of IMR. No fully
cryptic abnormalities were detected in our IMR groups, although a semi-cryptic
unbalanced telomeric translocation was identified in one selected patient by
high-resolution G-band analysis. This abnormality was confirmed and characterised
by fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) with telomere-specific probes. A
further 13 cytogenetically detected subtle terminal rearrangements were
characterised by using multi-telomere FISH. Seven of these had previously been
reported as normal, three of which were shown to be interstitial deletions. These
cases illustrate the importance of high-resolution analysis to exclude subtle but
cytogenetically visible abnormalities prior to subtelomere FISH screening when
determining the frequency of cryptic telomeric rearrangements. Unexpectedly, two 
cryptic telomeric abnormalities were detected among our control individuals,
suggesting that submicroscopic telomeric abnormalities may be a not uncommon
finding in the general population. Hence, our data have important implications
when defining the significance of cryptic telomeric rearrangements detected
during screening programmes.

PMID: 11702226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Hum Genet. 2001 Sep;109(3):295-302.

Absence of correlation between late-replication and spreading of X inactivation
in an X;autosome translocation.

Sharp A(1), Robinson DO, Jacobs P.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
SP2 8BJ, UK. asharp@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk

We have analysed the spread of X inactivation in an individual with an unbalanced
46,X,der(X)t(X;10)(q26.3;q23.3) karyotype. Despite being trisomic for the region 
10q23.3-qter, both the proband and her aunt with the same karyotype presented
only with secondary amenorrhoea and lacked any features normally associated with 
trisomy of distal 10q. Cytogenetic and molecular studies showed that the
derivative X;10 chromosome was exclusively inactive. Transcribed polymorphisms
were identified in five genes contained within the translocated region of
chromosome 10 and were used to perform allele-specific transcription studies. We 
showed that four of the genes studied are inactive on the derivative chromosome, 
directly demonstrating the spread of X inactivation over some 30 Mb of autosomal 
DNA. However, the most distal gene examined remained active, indicating that this
spreading was incomplete. In contrast to the gene expression data, replication
timing studies showed no spreading of late replication into the translocated
portion of 10q. We conclude that silencing of autosomal genes by X inactivation
can occur without a delay in the replication timing of the surrounding chromatin.
Our findings support the hypothesis that autosomal chromatin lacks certain
features present on the X chromosome that are required for the effective spread
and/or maintenance of X inactivation.

PMID: 11702210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Immunol. 2001 Nov 15;167(10):5838-44.

A common single nucleotide polymorphism in the CD14 promoter decreases the
affinity of Sp protein binding and enhances transcriptional activity.

LeVan TD(1), Bloom JW, Bailey TJ, Karp CL, Halonen M, Martinez FD, Vercelli D.

Author information: 
(1)Arizona Respiratory Center, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85724, USA.
Tricia.LeVan@resp-sci.arizona.edu

CD14 is a pattern recognition receptor that plays a central role in innate
immunity through recognition of bacterial lipoglycans, primarily LPS. Recently,
our group has identified a common single nucleotide polymorphism, -159C-->T, in
the CD14 proximal promoter. Homozygous carriers of the T allele have a
significant increase in soluble CD14, but a decreased total serum IgE. This
epidemiologic evidence led us to investigate the molecular basis for the effects 
of CD14/-159C-->T on CD14 regulation in monocytes and hepatocytes, the two major 
cell types known to express this gene in vivo. EMSA analysis showed that the T
allele results in decreased affinity of DNA/protein interactions at a GC box that
contains a binding site for Sp1, Sp2, and Sp3 transcription factors. In reporter 
assays, the transcriptional activity of the T allele was increased in monocytic
Mono Mac 6 cells, which express low levels of Sp3, a member of the Sp family with
inhibitory potential relative to activating Sp1 and Sp2. By contrast, both
alleles were transcribed equivalently in Sp3-rich hepatocytic HepG2 cells. Our
data indicate that the interplay between CD14 promoter affinity and the
[Sp3]:[Sp1 + Sp2] ratio plays a critical mechanistic role in regulating
transcription of the two CD14 alleles. Variation in a key gene of innate immunity
may be important for the pathogenesis of allergy and inflammatory disease through
gene-by-gene and/or gene-by-environment interactions.

PMID: 11698458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 2001 Oct;96(7):955-9.

Black flies (Diptera: Simuliidae) of French Guiana: cytotaxonomy and a
preliminary list of species.

Hamada N(1), Fouque F.

Author information: 
(1)Coordenação de Pesquisas em Entomologia, Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da
Amazônia, 69011-970 Manaus, AM, Brasil. nhamada@inpa.gov.br

The objectives of the present study were to broaden the survey of simuliid
species in French Guiana and to cytologically analyze the species in the Simulium
perflavum species group. Twelve species of Simulium were collected from which S. 
goeldii, S. quadrifidum, S. trombetense, S. near incrustatum, S. metallicum
(s.l.) sp1, S. metallicum (s.l.) sp2 and S. ochraceum (s.l.) are reported for the
first time for this region. The only species collected in the S. perflavum group 
was S. rorotaense; 34 larvae of this species were cytologically analyzed, all of 
which had the standard sequence. S. metallicum (s.l.), S. ochraceum (s.l.), S.
guianense (s.l.) and S. oyapockense (s.l.) are involved with transmission of
onchocerciasis in Central and South America, however, in French Guiana these
species were not found biting humans during the sampling period. With the few
collections made during this study, we increase the number of simulid species
known in French Guiana from 6 to 13. It is clear that more simuliid species can
be expected to be found when more sampling is done, including collections in
other ecoregions in French Guiana.

PMID: 11685261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Am Chem Soc. 2001 Oct 31;123(43):10560-70.

Dopamine interaction in the absence and in the presence of Cu2+ ions with
macrocyclic and macrobicyclic polyamines containing pyrazole units. Crystal
structures of [Cu2(L1)(H2O)2](ClO4)4 and [Cu2(H-1L3)](ClO4)3*2H2O.

Lamarque L(1), Navarro P, Miranda C, Arán VJ, Ochoa C, Escartí F, García-España
E, Latorre J, Luis SV, Miravet JF.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Química Médica, Centro de Química Orgánica Manuel Lora Tamayo,
CSIC, Juan de la Cierva 3, 28006 Madrid, Spain.

The interaction with Cu2+ and dopamine of three polyazacyclophanes containing
pyrazole fragments as spacers is described. Formation of mixed complexes
Cu2+-macrocycle-dopamine has been studied by potentiometric methods in aqueous
solution. The crystal structures of the complexes [Cu2(L1)(H2O)2](ClO4)4*2H2O (4)
(L1 =
13,26-dibenzyl-3,6,9,12,13,16,19,22,25,26-decaazatricyclo[22.2.1.1(11,14)]octacos
a-1(27),11,14(28),24-tetraene) and [Cu2(H-1L3)](HClO4)(ClO4)2*2H2O (6) (L3 =
1,4,7,8,11,14,17,20,21,24,29,32,33,36-tetradecaazapentacyclo[12.12.12.1(6,9).1(19
,22).1(31,34)]hentetraconta-6,9(41),19(40),21,31,34(39)-hexaene) are presented.
In the first one (4), each Cu2+ coordination site is made up by the three
nitrogens of the polyamine bridge, a sp2 pyrazole nitrogen and one water molecule
that occupies the axial position of a square pyramid. The distance between the
copper ions is 6.788(2) A. In the crystal structure of 6, the coordination
geometry around each Cu2+ is square pyramidal with its base being formed by two
secondary nitrogens of the bridge and two nitrogen atoms of two different
pyrazolate units which act as exobidentate ligands. The axial positions are
occupied by the bridgehead nitrogen atoms; the elongation is more pronounced in
one of the two sites [Cu(1)-N(1), 2.29(2) A; Cu(2)-N(6), 2.40(1) A]. The Cu-N
distances involving the deprotonated pyrazole moieties are significantly shorter 
than those of the secondary nitrogens. The Cu(1)...Cu(2) distance is 3.960(3) A. 
The pyrazole in the noncoordinating bridge does not deprotonate and lies to one
side of the macrocyclic cavity. One of the aliphatic nitrogens of this bridge is 
protonated and hydrogen bonded to a water molecule, which is further connected to
the sp2 nitrogen of the pyrazole moiety through a hydrogen bond. The solution
studies reveal a ready deprotonation of the pyrazole units induced by
coordination to Cu2+. In the case of L2 (L2 =
3,6,9,12,13,16,19,22,25,26-decaazatricyclo[22.2.1.1(11,14)]octacosa-1(27),11,14(2
8),24-tetraene), deprotonation of both pyrazole subunits is already observed at
pH ca. 4 for 2:1 Cu2+:L2 molar ratios. All three free receptors interact with
dopamine in aqueous solution. L3 is a receptor particularly interesting with
respect to the values of the interaction constants over five logarithmic units at
neutral pH, which might suggest an encapsulation of dopamine in the macrocyclic
cage. All three receptors form mixed complexes Cu2+-L-dopamine. The affinity for 
the formation of ternary dopamine complexes is particularly high in the case of
the binuclear Cu2+ complexes of the 1-benzyl derivative L1.

PMID: 11673988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Best Pract Res Clin Haematol. 2001 Sep;14(3):553-71.

Cytogenetics of chronic myeloid leukaemia.

Chase A(1), Huntly BJ, Cross NC.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wilts SP2 8BJ, UK.

The standard Philadelphia (Ph) translocation t(9;22), its variants and a
proportion of Ph-negative cases are positive for the BCR-ABL fusion gene, as
determined by molecular analysis. Extensive deletions of chromosome 9 and 22
derived sequences around the translocation breakpoints on the derivative 9 are
seen in 10-30% of patients at diagnosis and may confer a worse prognosis.
Additional cytogenetic changes can occur in the few months before or during
disease progression and are often specific for blast morphology; however, the
molecular basis of the most common additional cytogenetic abnormalities is
largely unknown. Cytogenetics is important for monitoring patient response to
treatment but is increasingly being replaced by the more sensitive and less
invasive techniques of RT-PCR and FISH.

Copyright 2001 Harcourt Publishers Ltd.

PMID: 11640869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2001 Sep-Oct;35(5):920-7.

[Expression of a cloned hemagglutinin-neuraminidase gene from Newcastle disease
virus in murine myeloma cells].

[Article in Russian]

Risinskaia NV(1), Fegeding KV, Vasilenko OV, Sudarikov AB.

Author information: 
(1)risinska@blood.ru

Vaccination with autologous cancer cells expressing a potent foreign antigen is
promising for immunotherapy of tumors. A construct was obtained to transfect
cancer cells with the hemagglutinin-neuraminidase (HN) gene of the Newcastle
disease virus (NDV). Specific primers were designed, and the HN cDNA was
amplified from RNA isolated from the allantoid fluid of NDV-infected embryonated 
chicken eggs. The amplified fragment was cloned in pCR2.1, sequenced, and
recloned in expression vector pCDNA3.1/Zeo(+). The resulting construct was used
to transfect mouse myeloma cells SP2/0. Production of HN was checked by ELISA and
by a neuraminidase activity assay. Cell agglutination on ice was proposed as a
test for surface HN.

PMID: 11605546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Hybridoma. 2001 Aug;20(4):273-9.

A monoclonal antibody specific for Pseudomonas aeruginosa amidase.

Novo C(1), Karmali A, Clemente A, Brown PR.

Author information: 
(1)INETI, Departmento de Biotecnologia, UTPAM, Estrada do Paço do Lumiar,
1649-038, Lisboa, Portugal. carlos.novo@mail.ineti.pt

Amidase from Pseudomonas aeruginosa was purified by anionic exchange
chromatography and used to immunise female Balb/c mice. Monoclonal antibodies
(MAbs) were raised by hybridoma technology using Sp2/0 myeloma cells as fusion
partner. A selected IgM subclass MAb was purified from in vitro hybridoma cell
line supernatant by a two-step anionic exchange chromatography. The MAb was
specific for amidase from P. aeruginosa as determined by Western blotting and
recognized the native and denatured forms of the enzyme.

PMID: 11604114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo). 2001 Sep;49(9):1066-71.

Quantitative study of the structural requirements of phthalazine/quinazoline
derivatives for interaction with human liver aldehyde oxidase.

Ghafourian T(1), Rashidi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, School of Pharmacy, Tabriz Medical Sciences
University, Iran. ghafourt@tbzmed.ac.ir

Aldehyde oxidase is a molybdenum-containing enzyme distributed throughout the
animal kingdom. Although this enzyme is capable of metabolizing a wide range of
aldehydes and N-heterocyclic compounds, there is no reported detailed study of
physicochemical requirements of the enzyme-substrate interactions. The aim of
this study, therefore, was to investigate quantitatively the relationships
between the kinetic constants of aldehyde oxidase-catalyzed oxidation of some
phthalazine and quinazoline derivatives (as substrates) and their structural
parameters. Multiple regression and stepwise regression analyses showed that
polarity of phthalazines (expressed as dipole moment mu, cohesive energy density 
deltaT and an indicator variable for hydrogen-bond acceptor ability of R1
substituent, HBA) had a negative effect on the enzyme activity (leading to the
reduction of Vmax and increase of Km). Electron withdrawing substituents in the
quinazoline series are favorable for interaction with the enzyme. This finding
and also the relationships of 1/Km of phthalazines with the energy of the lowest 
unoccupied molecular orbital and log Vmax/log Km of phthalazines with degree of
bonding of the two nitrogen atoms in the molecules are consistent with the
mechanism of action. The reaction involves a nucleophilic attack on an
electron-deficient sp2-hybridized carbon atom and formation of an epoxide
intermediate following the disruption of the aromatic structure.

PMID: 11558587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Adv Space Res. 1999;24(4):527-30.

Structure and NIR feature of QCC: a laboratory analog of carbon dust.

Goto M(1), Maihara T, Terada H, Wada S, Kaito C, Kimura S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Kyoto University, Kitashirakawa-Oiwakecho, Sakyo,
Kyoto, Japan.

We have produced thin films of quenched carbonaceous composite (QCC) by
hydrocarbon plasma deposition. The effect of thermal annealing on QCC has been
investigated to understand how QCC, as a laboratory analog of carbon dust, is
transformed in the warm environment around evolved stars. Spectroscopic
measurements have indicated that, by heating, the proportion of aromatic sp2 CH
bonds increases relative to sp3 CH bonds. Carbon onion-like spherules of
approximately 10 nm in diameter are found with electron microscopic images after 
"graphitization" of thermal annealing.

PMID: 11543342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Space Med Med Eng (Beijing). 2000 Apr;13(2):114-8.

[Effects of space conditions on mutation and inheritance of tomato].

[Article in Chinese]

Li JG(1), Liu M, Wang PS, Zhang J, Xue H, Guo YH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, Academia Sinica, Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the effects of space conditions on mutation and inheritance
of tomato.
METHOD: Air-dried seeds of tomato were carried by a satellite for 7-15 d. These
seeds were planted after returning. The mutagenic effects of space conditions on 
some of their variations of the botanical characteristics were studied.
RESULT: Tomato dry seeds were carried to the outer space by satellite. After
returned to the earth it was found that SP1 generation was of their germination
percentage lower than the control. This physiological damage returned to normal
in SP2 generation. Seeding isoenzyme, plant growth, resistance, and output,
showed variation, and profitable variation had been expressed in later
generations. The characters were expressed in the progenies. By observation and
screen, promising line of tomato TF873, was obtained.
CONCLUSION: It was suggested that space conditions induce profitable mutation of 
crop and it a possible way for plant mutation breeding.

PMID: 11543049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Space Med Med Eng (Beijing). 1998 Feb;11(1):21-5.

[A study on the induction of mutation of paddy rice under space conditions].

[Article in Chinese]

Li Y(1), Jiang X, Li J, Qiu H, Li G, Xie J.

Author information: 
(1)Agricultural Science Research Institute of Fuzhon Prefexture Jiangxi Province,
Linchuan, China.

Rice seeds were carried into space by the recoverable satellite. After recovery
the seeds were sowed on the earth so as to observe the character performance and 
genetic variation of their later generations. The preliminary results showed that
the main characters of the SP1 generation didn't show significant difference from
the control. Among the individual plants of the SP2 generation strong
broad-spectrum segregation appeared in the 9 main agronomic characters. Mutation 
frequency is 4.66%. The individual plants of the SP3 generation were obviously
correlated with the SP4 generation in the average character values of the 5 main 
characters. Stable plant strains were obtained in the SP4 generation. The SP5 and
SP6 generations were put into control and polt tests. As a conclusion, it may be 
considered that certain variations of rice seeds induced by the space conditions 
are heritable to the offsprings, therefore, it can be used as a new method for
mutagenic seed breeding.

PMID: 11541262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Zhonghua Gan Zang Bing Za Zhi. 2001 Aug;9(4):203-5.

[Cytotoxic T lymphocyte activity induced by genetic immunization with NV-HC/NS].

Zhao L(1), Zhou T, Qin S, Liu L, Liu C, Tang H, Lei B.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Infectious Diseases of Sichuan
Province, First University Hospital, West China Medical Center, Sichuan
University, Chengdu 610041, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the immunoprophylactic and immunotherapeutic effects of
DNA vaccine (NV-HC/NS(3)) after inoculation of mice by target tumor loading
technique.
METHODS: Before or after inoculation with NV-HC/NS(3) intramuscularly, BALB/c
mice in the experimental group were planted with target tumor cells
(SP2/0-NS(3)), which were derived from BALB/c mice and stably transfected with
the recombinant plasmid NV-HC/NS(3). Tumor growth and survival rate of the mice
immunized with NV-HC/NS(3) were compared with those in the control group.
RESULTS: Tumor mass grew well in all mice in the control group in a few days,
while no visible tumor mass growth in 40% mice immunized with NV-HC/NS(3) could
be seen. The survival rate and life span of mice in the experimental group were
significantly longer than those in the control group.
CONCLUSIONS: Specific immune activity could be induced by immunization with
NV-HC/NS(3). Such effects are immunoprophylactic and immunotherapeutic.

PMID: 11532235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. BMJ. 2001 Aug 25;323(7310):428-9.

Rationing in the NHS: audit of outcome and acceptance of restriction criteria for
minor operations.

O'Boyle CP(1), Cole RP.

Author information: 
(1)Odstock Centre for Burns, Plastic and Maxillofacial Surgery, Salisbury
District Hospital, Salisbury SP2 8BJ. ciaranoboyle@saintly.com

PMCID: PMC37553
PMID: 11520840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Synchrotron Radiat. 2001 Mar 1;8(Pt 2):145-9.

X-ray absorption studies of carbon-related materials.

Pong WF(1), Yueh CL, Chang YD, Tsai MH, Chang YK, Chen YY, Lee JF, Wei SL, Wen
CY, Chen LC, Chen KH, Lin IN, Cheng HF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Tamkang University, Tamsui, Taiwan.
wfpong@mail.tku.edu.tw

X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) measurements have been performed on 
nitrogen-doped diamond films with three different dopant concentrations and
iron-layer-stabilized carbon nanotube (CNT) structures with various diameters at 
the C K-absorption edge using the sample drain current mode. The C K-edge XANES
spectra of these N-doped diamond films resemble that of the undoped diamond
regardless of the dopant concentration, which suggest that the overall bonding
configuration of the C atom is unaltered. N dopants are found to reduce the
intensities of both the sp2- and sp3-bond-derived resonance features in the XANES
spectra. On the other hand, the C K-edge XANES spectra of CNTs indicate that the 
intensities of the pi* and sigma* bands and the interlayer-state features vary
with the diameter of the CNT. This phenomenon may be caused by the
Fe-layer-catalysed bending of the graphite sheet and the interaction between C
and Fe atoms.

PMID: 11512713  [PubMed]


56. Anticancer Res. 2001 May-Jun;21(3B):1673-80.

Targeting of LAK activity to CEA-expressing tumor cells with an anti-CEA
scFv/IL-2 fusion protein.

Liao S(1), Khare PD, Arakawa F, Kuroki M, Hirose Y, Fujimura S, Tomita Y, Kuroki 
M.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Fukuoka University,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Fusion of tumor-specific monoclonal antibody (MAb) and cytokines has 
proved to be an efficient way to target cytokines to tumor cells and hence
focuses the killing activity of effector cells to the target cells. We previously
produced a high affinity MAb, F11-39, against carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA),
which is often overexpressed on the surface of various tumor cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: To target the cytotoxicity of effector cells to
CEA-expressing tumor cells, we employed recombinant DNA techniques to fuse
recombinant human interleukin-2 (rhIL-2) to a single chain variable fragment
(scFv) antibody derived from F11-39. The resulting fusion protein, designated
F39scFv/IL-2, was expressed in the Sp2/0-Ag14 mouse hybridoma cells, purified by 
CEA-affinity chromatography and characterized for the CEA-binding specificity and
the IL-2 biological activity.
RESULTS: F39scFv/IL-2 protein effectively targeted rhIL-2 onto the surface of
CEA-expressing tumor cells and consequently introduced a specific cytotoxicity of
lymphokine-activated killer cells to the tumor cells.
CONCLUSIONS: This approach may be used for in vivo administration to localize
IL-2 to tumor tissues, maximizing the immune response to CEA-expressing tumors
while keeping systemic side effects to a minimum.

PMID: 11497246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Lipids. 2001 Jun;36(6):649-54.

Fullerenoid lipids: first synthesis of structured triacylglycerols containing an 
Aza-[60]fullerene unit.

Jie MS(1), Cheung SW, Ho JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, SAR, China.
hrsclkj@hkucc.hku.hk

Some 1,2- and 1,3-diacyl glycerols (with acyl groups as stearyl, oleyl, linoleyl,
or stearolyl) were synthesized by conventional methods. The diacyl glycerols were
esterified with 6-bromo-hexanoic acid to give the corresponding
bromo-triacylglycerols (of the type AAB and ABA containing a bromo group at the
distal part of the hexanoate chain). The bromo function was transformed to an
azide group by reaction of the bromo-triacylglycerols with sodium azide. The
resulting azido-triacylglycerols were then reacted with [60]fullerene to give the
requisite aza-fullerenoid triacylglycerol of the type ABA or AAB (45-62% yield
based on the amount of [60]fullerene reacted). The nitrogen atom attached to the 
carbon cage formed a "[5,6]open" type aza substructure, which was confirmed by
the appearance of 31-32 signals in the region of deltaC 133-148 (carbon shifts of
Sp2 carbons of the cage) in the 13C nuclear magnetic resonance spectra. The
spectroscopic and mass spectrometric properties of these novel fullerenoid
triacylglycerols are reported.

PMID: 11485170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2001 Jul 25;1540(1):32-42.

Distinct patterns of protein binding to the MAT2A promoter in normal and leukemic
T cells.

Halim AB(1), LeGros HL Jr, Chamberlin ME, Geller A, Kotb M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Tennessee, Memphis 38104, USA.

The metabolism of S-adenosylmethionine (AdoMet), a key molecule in regulating T
cell differentiation and proliferation, is different in normal and leukemic T
cells. To delineate the basis for these differences we studied the
transcriptional regulation of human methionine adenosyltransferase II (MAT II),
which catalyzes AdoMet synthesis in these cells. Recently, we identified an Sp1
site in the proximal promoter of the MAT2A gene, which encodes the alpha2
catalytic subunit of MAT II, that is essential for the in vitro and in vivo
promoter activity in Jurkat leukemic T cells, and that involves binding of the
nuclear factors Sp2 and Sp3, but not Sp1. Here, the in vitro and in vivo activity
of the proximal MAT2A promoter in normal resting, PHA-stimulated, and leukemic
human T cells was compared. Significantly different patterns of protein factor
interaction in the proximal region of the MAT2A promoter were found. Normal
resting and activated T cells produced complexes of significantly lower molecular
weight than those formed in leukemic T cells. Supershift studies coupled with
analysis of proteins bound to the proximal promoter suggest that low levels of
expression of Sp2 and Sp3 in normal T cells may be responsible for the difference
in the in vitro promoter activity between normal and leukemic cells. Mutation of 
the key Sp1 site equally reduced the in vivo promoter activity in normal and
malignant T cells; by contrast, it had significantly different effects on
protein-DNA interactions in normal and leukemic T cells. Together, the data
support the idea that differences in protein-DNA interactions may contribute to
significant differences in MAT2A regulation in normal and malignant cells.

PMID: 11476892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Nat Struct Biol. 2001 Aug;8(8):689-94.

X-ray snapshots of serine protease catalysis reveal a tetrahedral intermediate.

Wilmouth RC(1), Edman K, Neutze R, Wright PA, Clifton IJ, Schneider TR, Schofield
CJ, Hajdu J.

Author information: 
(1)The Dyson Perrins Laboratory and Oxford Centre for Molecular Sciences,
University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QY, UK.

Studies on the catalytic mechanism and inhibition of serine proteases are widely 
used as paradigms for teaching enzyme catalysis. Ground-breaking work on the
structures of chymotrypsin and subtilisin led to the idea of a conserved
catalytic triad formed by the active site Ser, His and Asp residues. An oxyanion 
hole, consisting of the peptide amide of the active site serine and a
neighbouring glycine, was identified, and hydrogen bonding in the oxyanion hole
was suggested to stabilize the two proposed tetrahedral intermediates on the
catalytic pathway. Here we show electron density changes consistent with the
formation of a tetrahedral intermediate during the hydrolysis of an acyl-enzyme
complex formed between a natural heptapeptide and elastase. No electron density
for an enzyme-product complex was observed. The structures also suggest a
mechanism for the synchronization of hydrolysis and peptide release triggered by 
the conversion of the sp2 hybridized carbonyl carbon to an sp3 carbon in the
tetrahedral intermediate. This affects the location of the peptide in the active 
site cleft, triggering the collapse of a hydrogen bonding network between the
peptide and the beta-sheet of the active site.

PMID: 11473259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2001 Aug;34(8):1033-6.

Production and characterization of a monoclonal antibody against an Ascaris suum 
allergenic component.

Pires RR(1), Oshiro TM, Itami DM, Fernandes I, Macedo-Soares MF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Immunopatologia, Instituto Butantan, Av. Vital Brazil 1500,
05503-900 São Paulo SP, Brazil.

Ascaris suum allergenic components (PIII) separated by gel filtration
chromatography of an adult worm extract were used to immunize BALB/c mice.
Popliteal lymph node cells taken from the immunized animals were fused with SP2/O
myeloma cells using polyethylene glycol (MW 1450) as fusogen. The hybridomas were
cultured in HAT-containing medium and cloned at limiting dilutions. Supernatants 
from the growing hybrids were screened by ELISA using plates coated with PIII or 
the A. suum crude extract. The monoclonal antibody obtained, named MAC-3 (mouse
anti-A. suum allergenic component), is an IgG1 kappa mouse immunoglobulin that
specifically recognizes a 29,000 molecular weight protein (called allergenic
protein) with an affinity constant of 1.7 x 10(9) M-1. The A. suum components
recognized by MAC-3 induce specific IgE antibody production in immunized BALB/c
mice. Ascitic fluid induced in Swiss mice by injecting ip the hybridoma cells and
incomplete Freund's adjuvant was purified by affinity chromatography using a
protein A-Sepharose column. The purified monoclonal antibody was then coupled to 
activated Sepharose beads in order to isolate the A. suum allergenic component
from the whole extract by affinity chromatography.

PMID: 11471042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Burns. 2001 Aug;27(5):517-22.

Burn wound healing and skin substitutes.

Shakespeare P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laing Laboratory for Burn Injury Investigation, Salisbury District Hospital,
Wiltshire, SP2 8BJ, Salisbury, UK. pgs@burnsjournal.demon.co.uk

Burn wound healing is a complex process in the biological objectives and
mechanisms defined by the initial injury. In this paper the use of keratinocytes 
as a skin substitute is used to illustrate some of the problems associated with
the development and use of skin substitutes. Skin substitute development must
always be viewed against the biological and clinical background in order to
provide maximum assistance to the challenging task of treating burn wounds.

PMID: 11451610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Spectrochim Acta A Mol Biomol Spectrosc. 2001 Jun;57(7):1369-75.

The infrared fundamental intensities and polar tensor of allene.

Haiduke RL(1), Hase Y, Bruns RE.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Química, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Brazil.
haiduke@iqm.unicamp.br

The polar tensor of allene was calculated from the infrared fundamental band
intensities of C3H4 and C3D4. The ambiguities in the signs of the dipole moment
derivatives with respect to their normal coordinates were resolved by comparison 
of tensor elements with ab initio calculations at the B3LYP, MP2(FC) and CCD(FC) 
levels with a 6/311 + + G(3d,3p) basis set. The results are similar to those
previously obtained by Koga and co-workers except for the choice of an average of
two sign combinations for the E symmetry elements. The values of the mean dipole 
moment derivatives for the sp and sp2 carbon atoms obtained in this work, 0.032
and -0.133 e, respectively, are in good agreement with the CCD(FC)/6-311 + +
G(3d,3p), 0.061 and -0.128 e, and MP2(FC)/6-311 + + G(3d,3p), 0.072 and -0.153 e,
theoretical results. The mean dipole moment derivatives are shown to be
consistent with potential models relating 1s electron ionization energies and
atomic charges.

PMID: 11446692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Magn Reson. 2001 Jul;151(1):65-77.

Precision measurement of the quadrupole coupling and chemical shift tensors of
the deuterons in alpha-calcium formate.

Schmitt H(1), Zimmermann H, Körner O, Stumber M, Meinel C, Haeberlen U.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Medizinische Forschung, AG Molekülkristalle,
Jahnstrasse 29, Heidelberg, 69120, Germany.

Using calcium formate, alpha-Ca(DCOO)2, as a test sample, we explore how
precisely deuteron quadrupole coupling (QC) and chemical shift (CS) tensors Q and
sigma can currently be measured. The error limits, +/-0.09 kHz for the components
of Q and +/-0.06 ppm for those of sigma, are at least three times lower than in
any comparable previous experiment. The concept of a new receiver is described. A
signal/noise ratio of 100 is realized in single-shot FT spectra. The measurement 
strategies and a detailed error analysis are presented. The precision of the
measurement of Q is limited by the uncertainty of the rotation angles of the
sample and that of sigma by the uncertainty of the phase correction parameters
needed in FT spectroscopy. With a 4-sigma confidence, it is demonstrated for the 
first time that the unique QC tensor direction of a deuteron attached to a carbon
deviates from the bond direction; the deviation found is (1.2+/-0.3 degrees ).
Evidence is provided for intermolecular QC contributions. In terms of Q, their
size is roughly 4 kHz. The deuteron QC tensors in alpha-Ca(DCOO)2 (two
independent deuteron sites) are remarkable in three respects. For deuterons
attached to sp2 carbons, first, the asymmetry factors eta and, second, the
quadrupole coupling constants C(Q), are unusually small, eta1=0.018, eta2=0.011, 
and C(Q1)=(151.27+/-0.06) kHz, C(Q2)=(154.09+/-0.06) kHz. Third, the principal
direction associated with the largest negative QC tensor component lies in and
not, as usual, perpendicular to the molecular plane. A rationalization is
provided for these observations. The CS tensors obtained are in quantitative
agreement with the results of an earlier, less precise, line-narrowing
multiple-pulse study of alpha-Ca(HCOO)2. The assignment proposed in that work is 
confirmed. Finally we argue that a further 10-fold increase of the measurement
precision of deuteron QC tensors, and a 2-fold increase of that of CS tensors,
should be possible. We indicate the measures that need to be taken.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11444938  [PubMed]


64. J Autoimmun. 2001 Jun;16(4):373-82.

Cytotoxic effect of an anti-liver monoclonal autoantibody obtained after neonatal
thymectomy in mice.

Yoshida Y(1), Myozaki M, Kuroda E, Yamashita U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Occupational and Environmental Health,
School of Medicine, Kitakyushu, 807-8555, Japan.

A monoclonal autoantibody, LSA-1, against murine liver antigen was obtained by
fusing spleen cells from a neonatally thymectomized BALB/c mouse with SP2/0
murine myeloma cells. The LSA-1 isotype was IgG2b and kappa. LSA-1 was specific
to the liver, especially, to a liver-specific membrane lipoprotein (LSP)
fraction. By Western blotting analysis, LSA-1 mainly detected a 100 kDa protein
of LSP fraction. LSA-1 stained cytoplasm of the cryostat sections of liver in
immunohistochemical analysis. Furthermore, the antigen recognized with LSA-1 was 
highly expressed on the surface of a murine hepatoma cell line, MH134, slightly
on a murine normal liver cell line, C1469, and on freshly prepared hepatocytes,
but not on spleen cells. LSA-1 had a cytotoxic activity on liver cell lines in
the presence of a complement in vitro. Furthermore, injection of LSA-1 into
mice-induced liver injury. These results suggest that anti-liver autoantibody
plays an important role in the induction of autoimmune hepatitis. Accordingly,
this antibody will be a useful tool for the analysis of the pathogenesis of
autoimmune hepatitis.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11437485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Histopathology. 2001 Jun;38(6):542-9.

Monoclonal antibody SM047 as an immunohistochemical marker of ovarian
adenocarcinoma.

McCluggage WG(1), Maxwell P, Veenstra H, Fick CE, Laeng RH, Tiltman AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Royal Group of Hospitals Trust, Belfast, Northern
Ireland, UK.

AIMS: This study describes the generation of a monoclonal antibody designated
SM047 which binds to an epitope that is displayed by a multivalent antigen
associated with the glycocalyx of ovarian adenocarcinoma cells. The study also
investigates SM047 staining in adenocarcinomas of diverse sites in order to
determine whether the antibody is specific for ovarian adenocarcinoma and of
value in the confirmation of an ovarian origin when the site of primary tumour is
unknown.
METHODS AND RESULTS: SM047, an IgM monoclonal antibody, was the product of
hybridoma cells derived from fusion of SP2 myeloma cells with splenocytes of a
mouse that had been immunized with a membrane preparation of tumour (ovarian
serous cystadenocarcinoma) and boosted with cells from a cell line established
from a similar tumour in a different patient. Sixty-two primary ovarian
adenocarcinomas (28 serous, 23 mucinous, five endometrioid and six clear cell),
69 adenocarcinomas arising primary at other sites and 10 mesotheliomas were
stained with SM047. There was positive membrane staining, which was usually
strong and widespread, in 27 of 28 ovarian serous carcinomas and in all ovarian
endometrioid and clear cell carcinomas. Most ovarian mucinous tumours were
negative or exhibited weak cytoplasmic staining. Staining was variable in the
other tumours but there was positive staining of most endometrial, endocervical
and pancreatic adenocarcinomas. Most colonic adenocarcinomas were negative or
exhibited weak cytoplasmic staining.
CONCLUSIONS: SM047 is strongly expressed in most ovarian serous adenocarcinomas
and in other female genital tract adenocarcinomas, with the exception of ovarian 
mucinous tumours. The antibody may be useful in confirming the ovarian origin of 
an adenocarcinoma when used as part of a larger panel. This is especially so in
the distinction between a non-mucinous ovarian adenocarcinoma, which usually
exhibits strong membranous staining, and a colonic adenocarcinoma which is
usually negative or exhibits weak cytoplasmic staining. These findings need to be
confirmed by further study of larger numbers of cases.

PMID: 11422498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Ultramicroscopy. 2001 Jul;88(2):111-25.

TEM-simulation of amorphous carbon films: influence of supercell packaging.

Schultrich H(1), Schultrich B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Angewandte Physik, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany.
helga.schultrich@physik.tu-dresden.de

Recent developments in thin film technology allow to prepare deliberately
amorphous carbon films with structures widely varying between graphite-like (sp2)
and diamond-like (sp3) atomic bonds. This leads to amorphous structures with
correspondingly varying densities. By periodically changing deposition
conditions, nanometer multilayers may be prepared consisting of carbon layers of 
different density. Simulation of the electron microscopic imaging allows to
differentiate between such real structural details (on the nanometer scale) and
artefacts induced by the imaging procedure. But it must be assured that the
modeled structure reflects the real one with sufficient accuracy. Thorough
comparison of different simulation strategies shows that for the adequate
simulation of TEM imaging of amorphous materials, the thickness of the layer with
independently distributed atoms has to exceed a certain limit. Then, the
statistical scattering of the randomly distributed atoms will be averaged.
Otherwise, if the model of the transmission electron microscopy sample is
constructed as iteration of thin identical supercells, the superposition of
scattering waves with constant phase differences results in enhanced local
fluctuations burying the multilayer structure. For thicker packages of supercells
with independent random distributions, the effect of statistical atomic
arrangements is more and more leveled off. Hence, nanometer structures based on
regions with different density will be visible more distinctively in the random
background. For carbon, this critical thickness amounts to about 4 nm. This is of
special importance for the visualization of nanoscaled heterogeneities like
multilayers or nanotube-like inclusions in amorphous matrices.

PMID: 11419873  [PubMed]


67. J Immunol. 2001 Jul 1;167(1):57-65.

Lymphotactin expression by engineered myeloma cells drives tumor regression:
mediation by CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and neutrophils expressing XCR1 receptor.

Cairns CM(1), Gordon JR, Li F, Baca-Estrada ME, Moyana T, Xiang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Saskatoon Cancer Center, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, 
Canada.

The C chemokine lymphotactin has been characterized as a T cell chemoattractant
both in vitro and in vivo. To determine whether lymphotactin expression within
tumors could influence tumor growth, we transfected an expression vector for
lymphotactin into SP2/0 myeloma cells and tested their ability to form tumors in 
BALB/c and nude mice. Transfection did not alter cell growth in vitro. Whereas
SP2/0 cells gave rise to a 100% tumor incidence, lymphotactin-expressing
SP2/0-Lptn tumors invariably regressed in BALB/c mice and became infiltrated with
CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells and neutrophils. Regression of the SP2/0-Lptn tumors
was associated with a type 1 cytokine response and dependent on both CD4(+) and
CD8(+) T cells, but not NK cells. Both SP2/0 and SP2/0-Lptn tumors grew in nude
mice, but growth of the latter tumors was retarded and associated with heavy
neutrophil responses; this retardation of SP2/0-Lptn tumor growth was reversed by
neutrophil depletion of the mice. Our data also indicate that mouse neutrophils
express the lymphotactin receptor XCR1 and that lymphotactin specifically
chemoattracts these cells in vitro. Thus, lymphotactin has natural adjuvant
activities that may augment antitumor responses via effects on both T cells and
neutrophils and thereby could be important in gene transfer immunotherapies for
some cancers.

PMID: 11418632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Viral Immunol. 2001;14(2):119-24.

Homology of ab1 and ab3 monoclonal antibodies that neutralize Semliki Forest
virus.

Fernández IM(1), Bos NA, Harmsen M, Verheul AF, Snippe H, Kraaijeveld CA.

Author information: 
(1)Eijkman-Winkler Institute for Microbiology, Infectious Diseases and
Inflammation, University Hospital Utrecht, The Netherlands.

A noninternal image monoclonal antiidiotypic antibody (ab2 mAb), designated
1.13A321, that had proved its efficacy as vaccine against infection with Semliki 
Forest virus (SFV) in BALB/c mice, was used as immunogen to generate a panel of
SFV-neutralizing monoclonal anti-anti-idiotypic antibodies (ab3 mAbs) to compare 
them genetically with ab1 mAb 1.13 (IgG2a). There are various studies that
compare ab1 and ab3 mAbs but none that compare virus-neutralizing ab1 and ab3
mAbs. Five SFV-neutralizing ab3 MAbs, all IgG1, were obtained. The Vh gene
(36-60), the D gene (Sp2), and the J gene (Jh2) encoding the heavy chain variable
regions of all six mAbs, were similar and showed a high homology in the
nucleotide sequence. The CDR3 amino acid sequences of four of five ab3 mAbs were 
identical to that of mAb1. One ab3 differed one amino acid in the CDR3 region.
The results suggest that a strict selection criterion (virus neutralization) is
sufficient to reach complete homology in the CDR3 region of mAb3. Future
experiments are focused on selection of synthetic peptides in the CDR3 region as 
neutralizing mini-antibodies.

PMID: 11398807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Jun 15;284(3):763-70.

Transcriptional regulation of human 3'-phosphoadenosine 5'-phosphosulfate
synthase 1.

Shimizu C(1), Fuda H, Lee YC, Strott CA.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Steroid Regulation, Endocrinology and Reproduction Research Branch,
NICHD, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Sulfonation, which is essential for normal growth, development and maintenance of
the internal milieu, requires the universal sulfonate donor molecule
3'-phosphoadenosine 5'-phosphosulfate (PAPS) produced from ATP and inorganic
sulfate by two bifunctional PAPS synthase isozymes. The gene for PAPS synthase 1 
containing neither a TATA nor a CCAAT box was found to be under the influence of 
the Sp1 family of transcription factors. Multiple GC/GT boxes are present in the 
proximal promoter region and deletion analysis implicated their involvement in
transcription, a finding supported by mutational analysis of specific GC/GT
boxes. Nuclear extract of SW13 cells, which highly express PAPS synthase 1,
contains proteins that bind to probes possessing specific GC/GT boxes;
furthermore, the presence of Sp1, Sp2, and Sp3 proteins in nuclear extracts was
confirmed by supershift analysis. Cotransfection experiments using SL2 cells
yielded additional support for the involvement of Sp1 in transcriptional
regulation of the PAPS synthase 1 gene; the involvement of Sp2 and/or Sp3 is
presently unclear.

PMID: 11396968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Mol Biotechnol. 2001 Feb;17(2):119-28.

Purification and characterization of monoclonal antibodies against the free
alpha-subunit of human chorionic gonadotrophin.

Novo C(1), Domingos A, Karmali A.

Author information: 
(1)Serviço de Bioquímica II do Departamento de Biotecnologia e Química Fina do
INETI, Estrada do Paço do Lumiar, 1699 Lisboa.

Monoclonal antibodies (Mabs) against human chorionic gonadotropin hormone (hCG)
were raised by hybridoma technology using Sp2/0 myeloma cells as fusion partner. 
Sixty-five percent of the total culture wells exhibited hybrid growth and 8% of
the total wells (13 culture wells) contained anti-hCG secreting hybrids. A
positive hybrid cell line secreting antibodies against the free alpha-subunit of 
hCG was cloned twice by limiting dilution method and eighty four clones were
obtained that secreted monoclonal antibodies anti-alpha hCG. One of these
hybridoma clones (1C4) secreting monoclonal antibodies against the free
alpha-subunit of hCG was selected for purification and characterization purposes.
This hybridoma cell line secreted monoclonal antibodies of IgG1 subclass, which
were purified by affinity chromatography on Protein A Sepharose CL-4B column with
a final relative recovery of antibody activity of 75% and a purification factor
of about 12. The purified preparation was analyzed by SDS-PAGE, native PAGE, and 
IEF. Specificity studies of this Mab revealed that it recognized specifically an 
epitope on the free alpha-subunits of hCG, FSH, LH, and TSH as determined by
enzyme immunoassays. On the other hand, this Mab exhibited crossreactivity with
other pituitary hormones either as free subunits or intact molecules as follows: 
alpha hCG 100%; intact hCG 1.8%; beta hCG 0.14%; alpha FSH 24.5%; intact FSH
0.8%; beta FSH 0.09%; alpha LH 20.5%; intact LH 0.9%; beta LH 0.08%; alpha TSH
50.5%; intact TSH 3.7%; beta TSH 0.07%; The affinity constant (K) of this Mab
with respect to free alpha-subunit of hCG was found to be 1.5 x 10(7) I/mol as
determined by the simple antibody dilution analysis method.

PMID: 11395860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Hybridoma. 2001 Apr;20(2):117-21.

Characterization of a monoclonal antibody against neopterin using an
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay with penicillinase as label.

Malakaneh M(1), Rasaee MJ, Rahbarizadeh F, Madani R, Forozandeh MM, Khabiri K,
Alimohammadian MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Birjand University of Medical
Sciences, Khorasan, Iran.

An active ester derivative of neopterin was prepared using 4-(N-maleimidomethyl) 
cyclohexan 4-carboxilic acid N-hydroxy succinimide ester (MCH-NHS), conjugated to
bovine serum albumin (BSA) and injected for antibody production (for both
monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies). High titer antibody producing spleen cells
were removed and fused with myeloma cells of Sp2/0 origin. Neopterin was
conjugated to the enzyme penicillinase by a one-step glutaraldehyde method, which
was used as tracer. A novel enzyme immunoassay was developed using this conjugate
to screen and characterize the monoclonal antibody (MAb) produced in these
experiments. After limiting dilutions, it was found that antibody produced by one
clone with a Ka value of 7.6 x 10-7 mol/L was specific for a number of
structurally related molecules. This clone was found to be of IgG class and IgG2a
subclass. The standard curvewas constructed with a sensitivity of 10 pg/well (100
pg/mL) covering up to 1 ng/mL.

PMID: 11394530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Lipids. 2001 Apr;36(4):421-6.

Fullerene lipids: synthesis of novel nitrogen-bridged.

Jie MS(1), Cheung SW, Ho JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The University of Hong Kong, SAR, China.
hrsclkj@hkucc.hku.hk

Reactions of methyl 6-azido-hexanoate, 8-azidooctanoate, and 12-azido-dodecanoate
with [60]fullerene (1) gave the corresponding aza-[60]fullerene ester derivatives
(2a-2c, 22-35% based on the amount of [60]fullerene reacted). The nitrogen atom
is bonded to the [60]fullerene cage to yield a "[5,6]-open" type aza
substructure. This was confirmed by the appearance of 30-31 sp2 signals at deltac
133-147 in the carbon nuclear magnetic resonance spectra. Reaction of methyl
11-azido-7-undecynoate with [60]fullerene furnished a mixture of
aza-[60]fullerene (2d, 53%) and aziridine-[60]fullerene (2e, 38%) ester
derivatives. Compound 2e was identified as the "[6,6]-closed" type
aziridine-[60]fullerene derivative, which displayed 10 sp2 signals in the region 
deltac 140-145 and one signal at deltac 85.05 for the sp3 carbons of the cage.
Refluxing a solution of compound 2d in toluene for 50 h gave about 50% yield of
compound 2e, but not vice versa.

PMID: 11383696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Cancer Res. 2001 May 15;61(10):4048-54.

Monoclonal antibody 8H9 targets a novel cell surface antigen expressed by a wide 
spectrum of human solid tumors.

Modak S(1), Kramer K, Gultekin SH, Guo HF, Cheung NK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York
Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Tumor-restricted surface antigens may be targets for diagnosis and immune-based
therapies. Monoclonal antibody 8H9 is a murine IgG1 hybridoma derived from the
fusion of mouse myeloma SP2/0 cells and splenic lymphocytes from BALB/c mice
immunized with human neuroblastoma. By immunohistochemistry, 8H9 was highly
reactive with human brain tumors, childhood sarcomas, and neuroblastomas, and
less so with adenocarcinomas. Among primary brain tumors, 15 of 17 glioblastomas,
3 of 4 mixed gliomas, 4 of 11 oligodendrogliomas, 6 of 8 astrocytomas, 2 of 2
meningiomas, 3 of 3 schwannomas, 2 of 2 medulloblastomas, 1 of 1 neurofibroma, 1 
of 2 neuronoglial tumors, 2 of 3 ependymomas, and 1 of 1 pineoblastoma tested
positive. Among sarcomas, 21 of 21 Ewing's/primitive neuroectodermal tumor, 28 of
29 rhabdomyosarcomas, 28 of 29 osteosarcomas, 35 of 37 desmoplastic small round
cell tumors, 2 of 3 synovial sarcomas, 4 of 4 leiomyosarcomas, 1 of 1 malignant
fibrous histiocytoma, and 2 of 2 undifferentiated sarcomas tested positive with
8H9. Eighty-seven of 90 neuroblastomas, 12 of 16 melanomas, 3 of 4
hepatoblastomas, 7 of 8 Wilms' tumors, 3 of 3 rhabdoid tumors, and 12 of 27
adenocarcinomas also tested positive. In contrast, 8H9 was nonreactive with
normal human tissues including bone marrow, colon, stomach, heart, lung, muscle, 
thyroid, testes, pancreas, and human brain (frontal lobe, cerebellum, pons, and
spinal cord). Reactivity with normal cynomolgus monkey tissue was restricted
similarly. Indirect immunofluorescence localized the antigen recognized by 8H9 to
the cell membrane. The antigen is proteinase sensitive and is not easily
modulated off the cell surface. 8H9 immunoprecipitated a M(r) 58,000 band after
N-glycanase treatment, most likely a protein with a heterogeneous degree of
glycosylation. This novel antibody-antigen system may have potential for tumor
targeting.

PMID: 11358824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Spinal Cord. 2001 Mar;39(3):156-60.

Pattern of use and user satisfaction of Neuro Control Freehand system.

Taylor P(1), Esnouf J, Hobby J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering, Salisbury District
Hospital, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP2 8BJ, UK.

OBJECTIVES: Evaluation of the use and acceptability of the Neuro Control Freehand
system.
STUDY DESIGN: A questionnaire was sent in a single mail shot to users of the
system. Administration was by a 3rd party with anonymous returns.
SETTING: A supra regional spinal unit in the UK.
METHODS: The Freehand system is an implanted Functional Electrical Stimulation
(FES) device for restoration of lateral and palmar grasps following C5 or C6
tetraplegia.
RESULTS: Replies were received from seven users of the system who had an average 
experience of 23 months use. All used the system daily and had increased their
range of activities of daily living skills. Some problems had been experienced
with equipment reliability and skin allergy to the tape used to secure external
components. Six users felt more confident when using the system and seven felt
their quality of life had improved.
CONCLUSION: The Freehand system provides increased function that is considered by
its users to be of benefit.

PMID: 11326326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Inorg Chem. 2001 Apr 23;40(9):2156-60.

Synthesis, structural characterization, and conformational bias in solution of a 
sterically congested pyrophosphite: experimental and computational evidence for
restricted rotation about an sp3-sp3 P-O single bond.

DeBellis AD(1), Pastor SD, Rihs G, Rodebaugh RK, Smith AR.

Author information: 
(1)Additives Division Research Department, Ciba Specialty Chemicals Corporation, 
540 White Plains Road, P.O. Box 2005, Tarrytown, New York 10591, USA.

The synthesis and structural characterization of the sterically congested
pyrophosphite
6-[(2,4,8,10-tetrakis(1,1-dimethylethyl)-dibenzo[d,f][1,3,2]dioxaphosphepin-6-yl)
oxy]-2,4,8,10-tetrakis(1,1-dimethylethyl)-dibenzo[d,f][1,3,2]dioxaphosphepin, 3, 
is described. In solution at room temperature, a single species was observed that
was consistent with a pyrophosphite structure without any evidence for the
tautomeric diphosphine monoxide. Below the coalescence temperature (T(C)), 0
degrees C, three atropisomers were observed with relative absolute configurations
of (R,R,R), (R,S,R), and (R,R,S). Ring inversion of the seven-membered rings
below the T(C) is slow on the NMR time scale, which leads to observable
diastereoisomerism because of the presence of two independent stereoaxes (sp2-sp2
C-C single bond connecting the two aryl rings). Additionally, a rotation about an
exocyclic P-O single bond connecting the two seven-membered rings, which
constitutes a third stereoaxis, is slowed on the NMR time scale. In the X-ray
crystal structure of 3, the solid-state conformation was found to be the same as 
the major conformation in solution below the T(C), namely, the (R,R,S)
atropisomer. The results of a conformational search, performed with a
specifically parametrized AMBER force field, were in agreement with the 31P NMR
assignment of the major (R,R,S) atropisomer, which was found to be an energy
minimum. Additionally, we could independently assign the relative configuration
of the minor isomers based on the calculated results.

PMID: 11304161  [PubMed]


76. Hybridoma. 2001 Feb;20(1):47-52.

Establishment of hybridoma cell lines producing monoclonal antibodies against
hepatitis B virus surface antigens (a, d, and r) and development of sensitive
ELISA diagnostic test.

Tang X(1), Zhang X, Xu H.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Biological and Immune Reagents Center, PR China.

A new treble-coated enzyme-linked immunoadsorbent assay (ELISA) kit of detecting 
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) surface antigen subtypes a, d and r (HBsAg-a, -d, -r) was
developed by using four established hybridoma cell lines, of which two
specifically secrete monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) against HBsAg-a (anti-HBsAg-a),
one against -d (anti-HBsAg-d), and one against -r (anti-HBsAg-r). The approach of
hybridoma cell lines' establishment were by fusing myeloma cells (SP2/0) with
splenocytes from BALB/c mice immunized with a mixture of HBsAg-a, -d, -r. The
ascitic MAb productivity of the four cell lines was at the titres of
1:10(6)-1:10(8). A treble-coated ELISA based HBV diagnostic kit was developed for
detecting all of the three responding subtypes of HBsAgs. A 96-well ELISA
microplate was coated with anti-HBSAg-a, -d, -r at a ratio of 3: 1: 0.5, with a
horseradish peroxidase (HRP) conjugated anti-HBsAg-a as the labelled antibody.
For clinical application, the new developed diagnostic kit detected HBsAgs of
adr, adw, ayr, and ayw at a rate of lower than 0.25, 0.25, 0.5, and 0.5 ng/mL,
respectively. Results indicated that this kit was more rapid and sensitive than
that other current ELISA-based kits coated with a single MAb (e.g.,
anti-HBsAg-a).

PMID: 11289227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Anaesthesia. 2001 Apr;56(4):365-9.

Patient-controlled analgesia and postoperative nausea and vomiting: efficacy of a
continuous infusion of ondansetron.

White LA(1), Vanarase M, Brockbank K, Barrett RF.

Author information: 
(1)Pain Relief Service, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP2
8BJ, UK.

A continuous infusion of ondansetron was compared with a placebo infusion in 80
patients undergoing major breast reconstructive surgery. All patients received a 
standard anaesthetic and a bolus dose of ondansetron after induction. They were
then randomly allocated to receive an intravenous infusion of ondansetron or a
placebo infusion for 24 h in a double-blind fashion. Postoperative analgesia was 
provided by patient-controlled subcutaneous diamorphine. In the ondansetron
group, the severity of nausea, measured by a 10-point verbal rating scale, was
reduced (p = 0.01) and fewer patients stated at postoperative interview that
nausea and vomiting was a problem (p = 0.01).

PMID: 11284826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Chem Inf Comput Sci. 2001 Mar-Apr;41(2):451-6.

Modeling of nontraditional structures of carbon.

Scholtzová E(1), Turi Nagy L, Putyera K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Inorganic Chemistry, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Dúbravská cesta 
9, Bratislava, Slovak Republic. uacheva@savba.sk

The present contribution deals with one of the possible structure types of
nongraphitic carbon adsorbents. The proposed structure consists of infinite
strips of condensed aromatic rings arranged into a hexagonal honeycomb-like
structure with the edge formed only by sp2 carbon atoms. Quantum chemical
calculations were performed at the UHF/STO-3G level using the CRYSTAL95 program
package for periodical approach. The extremely high adsorption ability of some
low-density paramagnetic carbon forms can be elucidated by the presence of the
sp2 honeycomb carbon structure and the specific properties of its electronic
structure.

PMID: 11277736  [PubMed]


79. Inorg Chem. 2000 Feb 21;39(4):843-50.

Pentafluorosulfanylnitramide salts.

Sitzmann ME(1), Gilardi R, Butcher RJ, Koppes WM, Stern AG, Thrasher JS, Trivedi 
NJ, Yang ZY.

Author information: 
(1)Naval Surface Warfare Center, Indian Head Division, Maryland 20640, USA.

The synthesis and properties of a new class of inorganic salts, named
pentafluorosulfanylnitramide salts (or pentafluorosulfanylnitraminic acid salts) 
[Z+SF5NNO2-], are described. A number of SF5-nitramide salts (Z+SF5NNO2-) were
successfully prepared via nucleophilic displacements from carbamates and/or ion
exchange techniques, but some salts [M(SF5NNO2)x; M = Li, Mg, Al] decomposed
during isolation procedures and appear to be unstable in the solid state.
Single-crystal X-ray diffraction was used to fully characterize the Z+SF5NNO2-,
and their properties/structures are compared with those of the corresponding
dinitramide salts (or dinitraminic acid salts), Z+N(NO2)2-. X-ray crystallography
revealed major structural differences between N(NO2)2- and SF5N(NO2)- salts
concerning the N-N distances and the angles subtended at the central nitrogen
atom. In the N(NO2)2- salts, there are two nonequivalent N-N (average lengths
1.372(2) and 1.354(2) A) distances and an average N-N-N angle of 115.8(3) degrees
(falls between sp3 and sp2 hybridization). In the SFsNNO2- salts, the average N-N
distance is much shorter, 1.308(9) A, and the average N-N-S angle is 120.0(5)
degrees (closely fits sp2 hybridization). The SF5NNO2- salts show a remarkable
metrical similarity for the SF5 moiety in all structures, indicating a lack of
sensitivity to its steric and electronic environment. This is in marked contrast 
to N(NO2)2-, where there is a wide variation in conformations adopted by these
anions which can be related to their environment.

PMID: 11272586  [PubMed]


80. Arch Inst Pasteur Alger. 1998;62:118-37.

[Production of monoclonal antibodies specific for the ABO blood group and rhesus 
D antigens].

[Article in French]

Raache R(1), Rapaille A, Sondag-Thull D, Abbadi MC.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Immunologie, Institut Pasteur d'Algérie.

We report, in this work, the techniques to obtain four monoclonal antibodies
specific of erythrocytes antigens. Three of this antibodies, react with the ABO
Blood Groupe System (A,B and AB), are produced by three mouse hybridomas
(M18-2F11, M18-4F6 et M19-45D6), obtained by fusion of Sp2/0 mouse myeloma cell
with spleen cell of balb/c mice immunized with human red blood cells and selected
on selectif medium (Hypoxanthin, Aminoptérin, Thymidin) (HAT) and cloned by four 
limiting dilutions. Where as the fourth, it is an human monoclonal antibodies
against Rhesus (D) produced by heterohybridomas, realized by fusion of X63 mouse 
myeloma cell with human B lymphocytes, from actively immunized persons by D
antigen, that are purified and transformed by Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), and
selected on selectif medium (HAT), presence of ouabain and then cloned by four
limiting dilutions. The specificity of the antibodies produced, has been
determined by direct hemagglutinin for the mouse monoclonal antibodies and
artificial for the human anti-D. The determination of isotype the heavy and light
chains is released by the technique immunoenzymatique (ELISA) and immunofixation 
has shown that mouse monoclonal antibodies belong to class IgM kappa, and human
monoclonal antibodies anti-D belong to class IgG lambda.

PMID: 11256302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Neuropsychologia. 2001;39(5):521-4.

Decision making in patients with spinal cord damage: afferent feedback and the
somatic marker hypothesis.

North NT(1), O'Carroll RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department Clinical Psychology, Salisbury District Hospital, SP2 8BJ,
Salisbury, UK.

Damasio has proposed an influential model of human decision making - the somatic 
marker hypothesis (Damasio AR. Descates' Error. London: Papermac/Macmillan,
1994), where he argues that somatic feedback to the brain influences decision
making in man. It is proposed that when choosing between options that differ in
relative risk, a somatic marker (e.g. a 'gut feeling') feeds back to the brain
and influences cognitive appraisal. In the present study patients who had
suffered a complete tetraplegia at the level of the sixth cervical vertebra were 
compared with matched healthy control subjects. As the spinal injury group have
reduced somatic/peripheral feedback via the spinal cord, it was predicted, based 
on the somatic marker hypothesis, that they may demonstrate riskier behaviour
than controls. All subjects completed the Iowa Gambling Task, a computerised card
playing game where the player is instructed to try and win as much money as
possible over 100 selections from one of four decks. The rules are not disclosed 
in advance, and the player gradually 'learns' that two of the decks are 'high
risk' and lead to significant financial losses. Healthy individuals have
previously been shown to learn to avoid the risky decks, whereas patients with
medial frontal lobe damage (Bechara A, Damasio AR, Damasio H, Anderson SW.
Insensitivity to future consequences following damage to human prefrontal cortex.
Cognition 1994;50:7-15) and those with peripheral neuropathy (Bechara A, Tranel
D, Wilson J, Heberlein AS, Ross M, Damasio AR, 1998. Impaired decision-making in 
peripheral neuropathy. Society for Neuroscience Abstracts 24:1176) select an
excessive number from the risky decks, and consequently lose money. In the
present study there were no significant differences between the spinal sectioned 
and healthy control groups in either card selection strategy or net financial
outcome. This result suggests that in terms of the somatic marker hypothesis,
feedback to the brain from the periphery via the cranial vagus and other nerves
and the hormonal route may be equally or more influential than afferent feedback 
transmitted via the spinal cord.

PMID: 11254934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Endocrinology. 2001 Apr;142(4):1427-41.

Characterization of 5'-flanking region of rat somatostatin receptor sst2 gene:
transcriptional regulatory elements and activation by Pitx1 and estrogen.

Kimura N(1), Tomizawa S, Arai KN, Osamura RY, Kimura N.

Author information: 
(1)Tokyo Metropolitan Institute for Neuroscience, Tokyo Metropolitan Organization
for Medical Research, Fuchu, Tokyo 183-8526, Japan. kimura@tmin.ac.jp

The sst2 somatostatin receptor mediates the inhibitory effects of somatostatin on
secretive and proliferative processes. We previously showed that sst2 is one of
the major subtypes expressed in the rat pituitary, and its messenger RNA level is
up-regulated by chronic treatment with estrogen. To investigate the molecular
mechanisms regulating sst2 gene expression, we cloned the upstream region (9.5
kb) from the translation initiation codon of the rat sst2 gene. It contained a
single intron (5.0 kb) at the 5'-untranslated region, lacked TATA and CCAAT
boxes, and had multiple transcriptional start sites. Transient transfection
analysis with deleted mutants of a luciferase reporter construct showed that the 
promoter activity was regulated negatively and positively in the distal and
proximal promoter regions, respectively. The promoter activity of each construct 
was more efficient in GH(3) pituitary cells than in nonpituitary cells. The
construct (-77/+172/luc) containing a cAMP response element (CRE; -54/-47)
provided maximum promoter activity, but a further 5'-deleted construct
dramatically reduced the activity. Competitive gel shift and supershift assays
indicated that Sp2 and Sp3 were bound to an Sp1 site (-40/-31), and activating
transcription factor-2 and c-Jun were bound to a CRE site. Both Sp1 and CRE sites
were essential for the full promoter activity. Overexpression of the pituitary
homeoprotein Pitx1 activated the promoter activity of the -4066/+172/luc
construct, and mapping analysis indicated the existence of two Pitx1 response
sites, including the CRE site. Estrogen also increased the promoter activity of
-77/+172/luc in GH(3) cells or in HeLa cells overexpressing both the estrogen
receptor and c-Jun. These studies demonstrated the nature of the rat sst2 gene
and the functional importance of both Sp1 and CRE sites in regulating sst2 gene
expression and suggest that the CRE site mediates, at least partly, the promoter 
activity activated by Pitx1 or estrogen.

PMID: 11250922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Cell Growth Differ. 2001 Feb;12(2):61-83.

Gene array analysis of osteoblast differentiation.

Beck GR Jr(1), Zerler B, Moran E.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Temple University
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19140, USA.

We have used gene array technology to chart changes in gene expression during
differentiation of the mouse calvarial-derived MC3T3-E1 cell line to an
osteoblast-like phenotype. Expression was analyzed on a mouse gene array panel of
588 cDNAs representing tightly regulated genes with key roles in various
biological processes. When compared with NIH3T3 fibroblasts, MC3T3-E1 cells
showed generally higher expression of cyclins and Bcl-2 family members, as well
as specific expression of products such as the CD44 antigen, which is consistent 
with their calvarial origin. MC3T3-E1 cells also showed a surprisingly high level
of p53. Differentiation in MC3T3-E1 cells involves withdrawal from the cell cycle
by day 7, accompanied by matrix accumulation and, ultimately, mineralization.
Gene expression patterns in induced MC3T3-E1 cells generally reflected these
stages. Cyclins were sharply down-regulated, and expression of certain
antiproliferative factors and tissue-restricted genes was induced. Many of the
observed changes, such as the induction of follistatin, bone morphogenetic
protein receptor 1A, transforming growth factor beta, and matrix remodeling
factors, reflect expected patterns and support the physiological relevance of the
results. Other observed changes were not anticipated and offer new insight into
the osteoblast differentiation process. An example is the sharp induction of the 
Tob antiproliferative factor, which has previously been associated specifically
with terminal differentiation in muscles. Another example is the induction of the
DNA damage-associated proteins EI24 and Gadd45, apparently as a normal aspect of 
osteoblast differentiation. The oxidative stress-induced protein A170 and the
transcription factor Nrf2, which regulates metabolic responses to oxidative
stress, were also induced. This response may reflect the in vivo requirement for 
vascularization during bone growth and fracture repair. Other induced factors
include tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor-1 (1-TRAF), which is a
nuclear factor kappaB activator, cellular retinoic acid-binding protein II
(CRABP-II), and the transcription factors S-II, SP2, and SEF2 (ITF2/E2:2). SEF2
is the first basic helix-loop-helix protein found to be up-regulated during
osteoblast differentiation. Northern blots confirm the induction of SEF2.

PMID: 11243467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Immunol Lett. 2001 Feb 1;76(1):1-6.

New monoclonal antibody specific for a 6.5 kDa glycoprotein which presents mainly
on a B cell of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL).

Sahín S(1), Karsli F, Dogan H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Marmara University, Medical School, Altunizade
81190, Istanbul, Turkey.

Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) is a most common form of adult leukemia. No
specific marker for CLL has been defined until today. We attempt to produce a
specific monoclonal antibody (mAb) to CLL B cells. For this purpose, Balb-C mice 
were immunised with peripheral blood lymphocytes of a patient with CLL. After the
fusion, the immunised mouse spleen cells and SP2/0 myeloma cell line, antibody
secreting clones were selected by ELISA and specific antibody was determined by
flow cytometry. Leukemic cells from different patients, different cell line and
lymphoid tissue were tested with this mAb using flow cytometry and
immunoperoxidase methods. Ligand of the mAb on cell surface was identified using 
epitope analysing method. We have shown that this mAb is specific to a molecule
with 6.5 kDa molecular weight, which is present mainly on B CLL cells
(63.7+/-16.4%). It has also been shown that this molecule was a glycoprotein.
Amongst the different cell lines that were tested, Raji cell, Molt-3 and P3HR-1
cells were expressing this molecule. We, therefore, suggest that it is a novel
molecule with unknown function and is mainly present on the B cells of CLL.

PMID: 11222906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Inorg Chem. 2000 Jul 24;39(15):3205-12.

Selective imidazolidine ring opening during complex formation of iron(III),
copper(II), and zinc(II) with a multidentate ligand obtained from
2-pyridinecarboxaldehyde N-oxide and triethylenetetramine.

Boca M(1), Baran P, Boca R, Fuess H, Kickelbick G, Linert W, Renz F, Svoboda I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Inorganic Chemistry, Slovak Technical University, SK-812 37
Bratislava, Slovakia.

The condensation of 2-pyridinecarboxaldehyde N-oxide and triethylenetetramine
yields a product with two imidazolidine rings, as proven by a solid-state X-ray
structure analysis as well as by NMR solution spectra. This ligand, L1, undergoes
a ring-opening reaction on complex formation with Cu(II), yielding [CuL2]2+ where
L2 functions as a pentadentate ligand, containing only one imidazolidine ring. On
complexation with Zn(II) and Fe(III), both rings are opened and the complexes
[ZnL3]2+ and [FeL3]3+ with a hexadentate L3 ligand are formed. The
recrystallization of [ZnL3]2+ from DMSO solution results in the complex
[ZnL1(DMSO)2]2+ in which L1 behaves as a tetradentate ligand. Thus L1, L2, and L3
are structural isomers with two, one, or no imidazolidine rings, as confirmed by 
X-ray structure analyses. The intramolecular ring formation is the result of the 
nucleophilic addition of the N(amino) group to the electrophilic sp2-hybridized
-HC delta+=N site. Owing to the absence of the chelate effect on the
sp3-hybridized carbon atom belonging to the imidazolidine ring, the ring opening 
is facilitated and readily observed upon complex formation with Cu(II), Zn(II),
and Fe(III).

PMID: 11196855  [PubMed]


86. Hum Mol Genet. 2001 Feb 1;10(3):243-50.

Maternal sex chromosome non-disjunction: evidence for X chromosome-specific risk 
factors.

Thomas NS(1), Ennis S, Sharp AJ, Durkie M, Hassold TJ, Collins AR, Jacobs PA.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, UK. wessex.genetics@dial.pipex.com

Human trisomy is attributable to many different mechanisms and the relative
importance of each mechanism is highly chromosome specific. The association
between altered recombination and maternal non-disjunction is well documented:
reductions in recombination have been reported for maternal meiosis I (MI) errors
involving chromosomes 15, 16, 18 and 21 and increased recombination has been
reported for meiosis II (MII) errors involving chromosome 21. We therefore
investigated maternal X chromosome non-disjunction, to determine whether the
effects of recombination are unique to the X chromosome or similar to any of the 
autosomes thus far studied. We genotyped 45 47,XXX females and 95 47,XXY males of
maternal origin. Our results demonstrate that 49% arose during MI, 29% during MII
and 16% were postzygotic events; a further 7% were meiotic but could not be
assigned as either MI or MII because of recombination at the centromere. Among
the MI cases, a majority (56%) had no detectable transitions and so absent
recombination is an important factor for X chromosome non-disjunction. However,
similar to trisomy 15 and unlike trisomy 21, we observed a significant increase
in the mean maternal age of transitional MI errors compared with
nullitransitional cases. In our studies of MII errors, recombination appeared
normal and there was no obvious effect of maternal age, distinguishing our
results from MII non-disjunction of chromosomes 18 or 21. Thus, surprisingly, the
risk factors associated with both MI and MII non-disjunction appear to be
different for virtually every chromosome that has been adequately studied.

PMID: 11159943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Biol Chem. 2001 Apr 6;276(14):10817-23. Epub 2001 Jan 9.

Transcriptional regulation of the mouse uncoupling protein-2 gene. Double E-box
motif is required for peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma-dependent 
activation.

Medvedev AV(1), Snedden SK, Raimbault S, Ricquier D, Collins S.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences and Pharmacology and Cancer 
Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

Uncoupling protein-2 (UCP2) is present in many tissues with relevance to fuel
metabolism, and its expression is increased in fat and muscle in response to
elevated circulating free fatty acids resulting from fasting and high fat
feeding. We proposed a role for peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma 
(PPARgamma) as a mediator of these physiological changes in UCP2, because
thiazolidinediones also increase expression of UCP2 in these cell types (). To
determine the molecular basis for this regulation, we isolated the 7.3-kilobase
promoter region of the mouse UCP2 gene. The -7.3-kilobase/+12-base pair fragment 
activates transcription of a reporter gene by 50-100-fold. Deletion and point
mutation analysis, coupled with gel shift assays, indicate the presence of a
43-base pair enhancer (-86/-44) that is responsible for the majority of both
basal and PPARgamma-dependent transcriptional activity. The distal (-86/-76) part
of the enhancer specifically binds Sp1, Sp2, and Sp3 and is indistinguishable
from a consensus Sp1 element in competition experiments. Point mutation in this
sequence reduces basal activity by 75%. A second region (-74/-66) is identical to
the sterol response element consensus and specifically binds ADD1/SREBP1.
However, deletion of this sequence does not affect basal transcriptional activity
or the response to PPARgamma. The proximal portion of the enhancer contains a
direct repeat of two E-Box motifs, which contributes most strongly to basal and
PPARgamma-dependent transcription of the UCP2 promoter. Deletion of this region
results in a 10-20-fold reduction of transcriptional activity and complete loss
of PPARgamma responsiveness. Point mutations in either E-Box, but not in the
spacer region between them, eliminate the stimulatory response to PPARgamma.
However, gel shift assays show that PPARgamma does not bind to this region. Taken
together, these data indicate that PPARgamma activates the UCP2 gene indirectly
by altering the activity or expression of other transcription factors that bind
to the UCP2 promoter.

PMID: 11150307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Hybridoma. 2000 Dec;19(6):473-9.

Anti-TNP monoclonal antibodies as reagents for enzyme immunoassay (ELISA).

Léo P(1), Ucelli P, Augusto EF, Oliveira MS, Tamashiro WM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Microbiologia e Imunologia, Instituto de Biologia,
Universidade Estadual de Campinas, SP, Brazil.

The aim of this study was to produce anti-TNP monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) that
could be conjugated and used for the detection of antigen-antibody reactions, in 
which the antigen specific-antibody had been previously bound to trinitrophenyl
(TNP). For hybridoma production, SP2/0-Ag14 cells were fused with spleen cells
from mice previously immunized with TNP-ovalbumin (TNP-OVA). After 10 days,
enzyme-linked immunoadsorbent assay (ELISA) was used to detect anti-TNP
antibodies in the supernatants, and five cultures were found to be strictly
positive for TNP. Three of these were subsequently cloned by limiting dilution,
and 15 clones were chosen for expansion based on the criterion of high reactivity
against TNP. Anti-TNP MAbs produced by those clones were isotyped as IgG1, and
purified by Sepharose-protein G affinity cromatography from ascites developed in 
BALB/c mice. Two purified MAbs (1B2.1B6 and 1B2.1E12) were coupled to horseradish
peroxidase (HRPO). The resulting conjugates were evaluated in ELISA tests for
interferon-gamma and interleukin-4 detection, in which the secondary
anti-cytokine antibodies were coupled either to TNP or biotin. The performance of
anti-TNP conjugates in these assays were compared with a
biotin-streptavidin/peroxidase system. Both types of conjugates were similarly
able to detect cytokines with r2 (linear correlation coefficient) close to unity 
value. Growth studies of one of those hybridomas (1B2.1B6) yielded a specific
growth rate of 0.042 h(-1) and a doubling time of 16.5 h. Data discussed here
show that at least two MAbs against TNP raised in this work can be used as a
reagent for enzyme immunoassays.

PMID: 11152399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Br J Ophthalmol. 2001 Jan;85(1):70-3.

X linked dominant congenital isolated bilateral ptosis: the definition and
characterisation of a new condition.

McMullan TF(1), Tyers AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wiltshire, SP2 8BJ, UK. TFWMCM@aol.com

AIMS: To characterise the inheritance of ptosis in one particular pedigree.
METHODS: The pedigree was analysed clinically and genetically to assess the mode 
of inheritance and to ascribe a gene locus for the condition.
RESULTS: Affected members of the pedigree have bilateral symmetrical congenital
isolated ptosis, a condition which is linked to genetic markers on the X
chromosome in this family.
CONCLUSION: A pedigree with dominantly inherited congenital bilateral ptosis is
presented. The pedigree exhibits X linked dominant inheritance. A new ophthalmic 
condition was thereby characterised-namely, X linked dominant congenital isolated
bilateral ptosis.

PMCID: PMC1723675
PMID: 11133715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 30;276(13):9784-91. Epub 2000 Dec 21.

Regulation of the human MAT2A gene encoding the catalytic alpha 2 subunit of
methionine adenosyltransferase, MAT II: gene organization, promoter
characterization, and identification of a site in the proximal promoter that is
essential for its activity.

Halim AB(1), LeGros L, Chamberlin ME, Geller A, Kotb M.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Surgery, The University of Tennessee, Memphis 38163, USA.

Mammalian methionine adenosyltransferase II (MAT II) consists of a catalytic
alpha2/alpha2' and a regulatory beta subunit. Up-regulation of alpha2 subunit
expression is associated with increased intracellular levels of
S-adenosylmethionine, the major methyl group donor and a key compound in cell
metabolism and polyamine synthesis. Previous studies have shown that expression
of the alpha2 subunit is differentially regulated in normal and malignant cells. 
To delineate the molecular basis for the differential regulation of alpha2
subunit expression, we cloned and characterized the human MAT2A gene and its
promoter and defined regions that contain enhancer and repressor elements.
Detailed functional characterization of the proximal promoter of the MAT2A gene
revealed the formation of three major protein-DNA complexes with probes
containing three Sp1 sites (Sp1-1 at -14, Sp1-2 at -47, and Sp1-3 at -69).
Competition with a probe copying sequence between -76 and -54, which contains the
Sp1-3 site only, or mutation of this site, abolished complex formation.
Furthermore, mutation of the Sp1-3 site, but not the Sp1-1 or Sp1-2 sites,
inhibited the in vivo promoter activity by approximately 85%. Supershift assays
showed that the transcription factors Sp2 and Sp3 are part of the complexes
formed at the Sp1-3 site, and that Sp1 does not appear to be directly involved.
The data indicate that complex formation is initiated at site Sp1-3, which
appears to be essential for promoter activity. However, other regions of the
proximal promoter may also contribute to the regulation of MAT2A gene expression.
These studies may lead to the delineation of the molecular basis for the
differential regulation of MAT2A expression in normal and leukemic T cells.

PMID: 11124935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Hybridoma. 2000 Oct;19(5):413-7.

Preparation and characterization of specific and high-affinity monoclonal
antibodies against morphine.

Rahbarizadeh F(1), Rasaee MJ, Madani R, Rahbarizadeh MH, Omidfar K.

Author information: 
(1)Tarbiat Modarres University, School of Medical Sciences, Biochemistry
Department, Tehran, IR Iran.

A C6-hemisuccinate derivative of morphine was prepared and conjugated to bovine
serum albumin. High titer antibody producing spleen cells were removed and fused 
with myeloma cells of Sp2/0 origin. A C3-hemisuccinate derivative of morphine was
prepared and conjugated to enzyme penicillinase used as a tracer molecule. A
novel enzyme-linked immunoadsorbent assay was developed using this conjugate to
screen and characterize the monoclonal antibody produced in these experiments.
After two successive limiting dilutions, antibodies produced by 5 clones with
good affinities ranging from 10(8) to 10(12) M(-1) and less cross-reaction (least
for codeine and other structurally related molecules) were selected. These clones
were found to be of IgG class with kappa light chain. Subclass determination
showed that two of the clones produced IgG2b and three of them produced IgG1 type
of antibody. Affinity purifications were performed for the selected clone
(MOR-I). Purified antibody was coated onto the wells of microtiter plate. The
standard curve was constructed with a sensitivity of 100 pg/mL covering up to 10 
ng/mL in buffer and urine. The slope of the standard curve for selected clone in 
buffer and urine was calculated to be -0.7 and -0.64, respectively.

PMID: 11128031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Anaesthesia. 2000 Dec;55(12):1216.

Unusual pulse oximetry waveform.

Brownlow H(1), Bell J.

Author information: 
(1)Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury SP2 BJ, UK.

PMID: 11121940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Vet Diagn Invest. 2000 Nov;12(6):503-9.

Production and evaluation criteria of specific monoclonal antibodies to the
hemagglutinin of the H7N2 subtype of avian influenza virus.

Wang X(1), Castro AE, Castro MD, Lu H, Weinstock D, Soyster N, Scheuchenzuber W, 
Perdue M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Veterinary Diagnostics and Investigation, Department of Veterinary 
Science, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park 16802, USA.

To enhance the rapidity in diagnosing the spread of avian influenza virus (AIV)
in chicken layer flocks, studies were initiated to develop more sensitive and
specific immunological and molecular methods for the detection of AIV. In this
study, the purification of the hemagglutinin protein (H) from field isolates of
H7N2, the production of monoclonal antibodies (MAbs), and their evaluation as
diagnostic reagents are reported. Hybridomas were generated by fusion of
SP2/0-Ag14 myelomas and spleen cells from immunized mice. Hybridomas secreting
antibodies specific for the H protein were assayed by an ELISA and cloned using
limiting dilution. The MAbs produced were characterized by hemagglutination
inhibition (HI), immunohistochemistry (IHC), indirect fluorescent antibody assay 
(IFA), Western blots, and IFA flow cytometry using various AIV subtypes (i.e.,
H4N2, H5N3, H7N2). Of the various MAbs assayed, 6 had consistent and reproducible
results in each of the assays used. The results obtained in this investigation
enhanced the usage of the MAbs to viral H protein in the surveillance of AIV in
chickens.

PMID: 11108449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Support Care Cancer. 2000 Nov;8(6):479-86.

Toxicity and/or insufficient analgesia by opioid therapy: risk factors and the
impact of changing the opioid. A retrospective analysis of 273 patients observed 
at a single center.

Kloke M(1), Rapp M, Bosse B, Kloke O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine (Cancer Research), University of Essen,
Medical School, Germany. ttu070@sp2.power.uni-essen.de

The charts of 273 cancer patients were retrospectively analyzed in order (1) to
evaluate the frequency of opioid change (OCH) when adjuvants
(antiemetics/laxatives) were administered on a regular basis and co-analgesic
medication as indicated by the specific type of pain, (2) to define risk factors 
for the request of OCH, and (3) to reveal settings in which OCH may not be
recommended as a first-line therapeutic intervention. Opioids used included
morphine, fentanyl, 1-methadone, and buprenorphine. Out of 273 patients, 103
changed opioids at least once, with a success rate of 65%. The indications for
the OCH were insufficient analgesia in 43%, intolerable side effects in 20%, both
in 15%, and other reasons in 22% of patients. The frequency of OCH was not
influenced by the routine use of adjuvants or co-analgesics except
corticosteroids, which raises queries about the concept of an opioid-sparing
effect of co-analgesics. The occurrence of intolerable side effects is thought
not to be dose dependent so much as to reflect differences in the individual
tolerability of a distinct opioid for whatever reason (genetically fixed or
individually acquired pharmacodynamic or kinetic properties). Moreover, there was
strong evidence for the existence of an unpredictable and incomplete
cross-tolerance between opioids, which meant careful titration of the new opioid 
was required after OCH. The overall frequency of OCH was similar to that observed
in previous studies in spite of the documented addition of adjuvants and
co-analgesics. This retrospective study supports the notion that opioid rotation 
must be retained as an essential therapeutic option even with optimized adjuvant 
and co-analgesic regimens.

PMID: 11094993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Clin Densitom. 2000 Fall;3(3):215-25.

Comparison of absorptiometric evaluations from total-body and local-regional
skeletal scans.

Hangartner TN(1), Skugor M, Landoll JD, Matkovic V.

Author information: 
(1)BioMedical Imaging Laboratory, Wright State University, Dayton, OH 45409, USA.
thangart@cs.wright.edu

The most common measurement sites for dual-energy absorptiometry (DXA) in
clinical practice are posteroanterior (PA) spine and femur. However, other
skeletal regions may provide different bone density information. The purpose of
this study was to establish the least number of DXA measurements needed to obtain
complete information about bone. A total of 262 normal female subjects, 8-50,
were measured on a Lunar DPX-L scanner under total body, PA spine, lateral spine,
and femur protocol. Forearm measurements were performed with a Lunar SP2
single-photon absorptiometry scanner. The various measurements were compared
based on a linear regression model. The correlation coefficients for bone mineral
density (BMD) between adjacent vertebrae were 0.92-0.95, and the associated
standard errors of the estimate (SEE) were 4.5-5.5%. Total-body BMD can best
predict BMD of the trunk, arms, and legs (SEE<4.3%), but least that of the
lateral view of the spine (SEE>13.9%). BMD values of the leg from total-body
scans predict those from the femoral neck with an error of 9.0%, and those of the
trochanteric region with 11.1%. The error between adjacent vertebrae (6%) is
considered acceptable, then a total-body measurement combined with a lateral view
of the spine and a femur scan are adequate.

PMID: 11090228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Chemistry. 2000 Oct 2;6(19):3622-35.

Monodisperse poly(triacetylene) oligomers extending from monomer to hexadecamer: 
joint experimental and theoretical investigation of physical properties

Martin RE(1), Gubler U, Cornil J, Balakina M, Boudon C, Bosshard C, Gisselbrecht 
JP, Diederich F, Gunter P, Gross M, Bredas JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorium fur Organische Chemie, ETH-Zentrum, Zurich, Switzerland.

A series of monodisperse Et3-Si-end-capped poly(triacetylene) (PTA) oligomers
ranging from monomer to hexadecamer was prepared by a fast and efficient
statistical deprotection-oxidative Hay oligomerization protocol. The PTA
oligomers exhibit an increasingly deep-yellow color with lengthening of the
pi-conjugated backbone, feature excellent solubility in aprotic solvents, and
exhibit melting points up to > 22 degrees C for the hexadecameric rod. This new
dramatically extended oligo(enediyne) series now enables to investigate the
evolution of the physico-chemical effects in PTAs beyond the linear 1/n versus
property regime into the higher oligomer region where saturation becomes
apparent. We report the results of joint experimental and theoretical studies,
including analysis of the 13C NMR spectra, evaluation of the linear (UV/ Vis) and
nonlinear [third-harmonic generation (THG) and degenerate four-wave mixing
(DFWM)] optical properties, and characterization of the redox properties with
cyclic and steady-state voltammetry. Up to the hexadecameric rod, an increasingly
facile one-electron reduction step is observed, showing at the stage of the
dodecamer, a leveling off tendency from the linear correlation between the
inverse number of monomer units and the first reduction potential. The effective 
conjugation length (ECL) determined by means of UV/Vis spectroscopy revealed a
pi-electron-delocalization length of about n = 10 monomeric units, which
corroborates well with the oligomeric length for which in the 13C NMR spectrum
C(sp2) and C(sp) resonances start to overlap. Third-harmonic generation (THG) and
degenerate four-wave mixing (DFWM) measurements revealed for the second-order
hyperpolarizability gamma a power law increase gammma-alpha-n(a) for oligomers up
to the octamer with exponential factors a= 2.46+/-0.10 and a=2.64+/-0.20,
respectively, followed by a smooth saturation around n = 10 repeating units. The 
power law coefficient a calculated with the help of the valence effective
Hamiltonian (VEH) method combined to a sum-over-states (SOS) formalism
corroborates well with the values found by both THG and DFWM experiments. Up to
the PTA heptamer, INDO (intermediate neglect of differential overlap)-calculated 
gas-phase ionization potentials and electron affinities obey a linear
relationship as a function of the inverse number of monomer units displaying a
strong electron-hole symmetry. The onset of saturation for the electron affinity 
is calculated to occur around the octamer, in accordance with experimentally
obtained results from electrochemical measurements.

PMID: 11072828  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


97. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2000 May;16(3):349-52.

[Expression of prourokinase in different mammalian cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Qian F(1), Xiao CZ, Gao LH, Zhang ZG, Guo ZX, Yu WY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, Beijing.

Comparison studies of recombinant prourokinase(pro-UK) in various host cells, and
expression vectors were carried out. Expression levels of vectors constructed in 
this study in different cell lines were compared. Mammalian cells expressing
pro-UK were established. The levels of pro-UK expression in recombinant Namalwa, 
Vero and Sp2/0 cells are 200, 12.5 and 50 IU/(10(6) cells 24 h). pro-UK purities 
separated by immunoaffinity chromatograph are above 90%. Immunoabsorbent assay
showed the ratio of pro-UK in CHO cells is lower than that from Vero and Namalwa 
cells. This study provide new host cells for pro-UK production.

PMID: 11059279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Oct 14;94(21):11159-62.

Comparison of structures and energies of CH5(2+*) with CH4(+*) and their possible
role in superacidic methane activation.

Rasul G(1), Prakash GK, Olah GA.

Author information: 
(1)Donald P. and Katherine B. Loker Hydrocarbon Research Institute and Department
of Chemistry, University of Southern California, University Park, Los Angeles, CA
90089-1661, USA.

Contrary to previous theoretical studies at the UHF/6-31G* level, the methonium
radical dication CH5(2+) is not a Cs symmetrical structure with a 2e-3c bond but 
a C2v symmetrical structure 1 with two 2e-3c bonds (at the UHF/6-31G**,
UMP2/6-31G**, and UQCISD(T)/6-311G** levels). The Cs symmetrical structure is not
even a minimum at the higher level of calculations. The four hydrogen atoms in 1 
are bonded to the carbon atom by two 2e-3c bonds and the fifth hydrogen atom by a
2e-2c bond. The unpaired electron of 1 is located in a formal p-orbital (of the
sp2-hybridized carbon atom) perpendicular to the plane of the molecule. Hydrogen 
scrambling in 1 is however extremely facile, as is in other C1 cations. It is
found that the protonation of methane to CH5(+) decreases the energy for
subsequent homolytic cleavage resulting in the exothermic (24.1 kcal/mol)
formation of CH4(+*). Subsequent reaction with neutral methane while reforming
CH5(+) gives the methyl radical enabling reaction with excess methane to ethane
and H2. The overall reaction is endothermic by 11.4 kcal/mol, but offers under
conditions of oxidative removal of H2 an alternative to the more energetic
carbocationic conversion of methane.

PMCID: PMC23401
PMID: 11038583  [PubMed]


99. Chemistry. 2000 Aug 18;6(16):2994-3005.

Alkali and alkaline-earth metal ketyl complexes: isolation, structural diversity,
and hydrogenation/protonation reactions

Hou Z(1), Jia X, Fujita A, Tezuka H, Yamazaki H, Wakatsuki Y.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN, The Institute of Physical and Chemical Research, Wako, Saitama, Japan. 
houz@postman.riken.go.jp

The use of hexamethylphosphoric triamide (HMPA) as a stabilizing ligand allowed
successful isolation of a series of structurally characterizable alkali metal and
calcium ketyl complexes. Reaction of lithium and sodium with one equivalent of
fluorenone and reaction of sodium with one equivalent of benzophenone in THF,
followed by addition of two equivalents of HMPA, yielded the corresponding ketyl 
complexes 1, 2, and 11, respectively, as microketyl-bridged dimers. If one
equivalent of HMPA was used in the reaction of sodium with fluorenone, a further 
aggregated complex, the mu3-ketyl-bridged tetramer 3, was isolated, whereas
analogous reaction of benzophenone with sodium afforded the trimeric ketyl
complex 13, rather than a simple benzophenone analogue of 3. In the reaction of
potassium with fluorenone, the use of two equivalents of HMPA gave the tetramer
4, rather than a dimeric complex analogous to 1 or 2. Compared to the tetrameric 
sodium complex 3, there is an extra HMPA ligand that bridges two of the four K
atoms in 4. When 0.5 equiv of HMPA was used in the above reaction, complex 5, a
THF-bridged analogue of 4, was isolated. In the absence of HMPA, the reaction of 
sodium with an excess of fluorenone yielded the tetrameric ketyl complex 6, in
which two of the four Na atoms are each terminally coordinated by a fluorenone
ligand, and the other two Na atoms are coordinated by a THF ligand. Two bridging 
THF ligands are also observed in 6. Reaction of
1,2-bis(biphenyl-2,2'-diyl)ethane-1,2-diol (7) with two equivalents of
LiN(SiMe3)2 or NaN(SiMe3)2 in the presence of four equivalents of HMPA easily
afforded 1 or 2, respectively, via C-C bond cleavage of a 1,2-diolate
intermediate. The reaction of calcium with two equivalents of fluorenone or
benzophenone in the presence of HMPA gave the corresponding complexes that bear
two independent ketyl ligands per metal ion. In the presence of 3 or four
equivalents of HMPA, the fluorenone ketyl complex was isolated in a
six-coordinate octahedral form (10), while the benzophenone ketyl complex was
obtained as a five-coordinate trigonal bipyramid (13). The radical carbon atoms
in both benzophenone ketyl and fluorenone ketyl complexes are still in an
sp2-hybrid state. However, in contrast with the planar configuration of the whole
fluorenone ketyl unit, the radical carbon atom in a benzophenone ketyl species is
not coplanar with any of the phenyl groups; this explains why benzophenone ketyl 
is more reactive than fluorenone ketyl. Hydrolysis of 2 or 11 with 2N HCI yielded
the corresponding pinacol-coupling product, while treatment of 2 or 11 with
2-propanol, followed by hydrolysis, gave the pairs fluorenone and fluorenol or
benzophenone and benzhydrol, respectively. A possible mechanism for these
reactions is proposed.

PMID: 10993260  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


100. J Org Chem. 2000 Jul 28;65(15):4523-8.

Stereoselective synthesis of cyclic ethers using vinylogous sulfonates as radical
acceptors: effect of E/Z geometry and temperature on diastereoselectivity.

Evans PA(1), Manangan T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Delaware, Newark,
19716, USA. paevans@udel.edu

Erratum in
    J Org Chem 2000 Sep 22;65(19):6291.

Treatment of the E-vinylogous sulfonates 1a-g with tris(trimethylsilyl)silane and
triethylborane, in the presence of air, furnished the cyclic ethers 2/3a-g with
good to excellent diastereoselectivity favoring the cis-isomer 2. This study
demonstrated the level of stereocontrol in a 6-exo radical cyclization and may be
attributed to the type of radical intermediate. Hence, the modest selectivity
obtained for the cyclization of 1e may be a function of the acyl radical geometry
(sp2) and high inversion barrier (29 kcal/mol) as compared to the alkyl (1
kcal/mol) and vinyl (2.9 kcal/mol) radicals. This is consistent with the acyl
radical cyclization having an earlier transition state than the corresponding
alkyl and vinyl radicals. The modest diastereoselectivity can be improved
dramatically using the Z-vinylogous sulfonate (> or =34:1; R = Ph) to promote
kinetic trapping of the s-trans rotamer I and III, respectively (Figure 1). The
5-exo alkyl radical cyclization reaction under nonreductive Keck-allylation
conditions was also examined, in which 8 was formed in 91% overall yield. This
transformation provides a convenient method for in situ homologation and should
be applicable to target directed synthesis.

PMID: 10959853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Anal Chem. 2000 Aug 15;72(16):3793-804.

Standard electrochemical behavior of high-quality, boron-doped polycrystalline
diamond thin-film electrodes

Granger MC(1), Witek M, Xu J, Wang J, Hupert M, Hanks A, Koppang MD, Butler JE,
Lucazeau G, Mermoux M, Strojek JW, Swain GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Utah State University, Logan
84322-0300, USA.

Standard electrochemical data for high-quality, boron-doped diamond thin-film
electrodes are presented. Films from two different sources were compared (NRL and
USU) and both were highly conductive, hydrogen-terminated, and polycrystalline.
The films are acid washed and hydrogen plasma treated prior to use to remove
nondiamond carbon impurity phases and to hydrogen terminate the surface. The
boron-doping level of the NRL film was estimated to be in the mid 1019 B/cm3
range, and the boron-doping level of the USU films was approximately 5 x 10(20)
B/cm(-3) based on boron nuclear reaction analysis. The electrochemical response
was evaluated using Fe-(CN)6(3-/4-), Ru(NH3)6(3+/2+), IrCl6(2-/3-), methyl
viologen, dopamine, ascorbic acid, Fe(3+/2+), and chlorpromazine. Comparisons are
made between the apparent heterogeneous electron-transfer rate constants,
k0(app), observed at these high-quality diamond films and the rate constants
reported in the literature for freshly activated glassy carbon. Ru(NH3)6(3+/2+), 
IrCl6(2-/3-), methyl viologen, and chlorpromazine all involve electron transfer
that is insensitive to the diamond surface microstructure and chemistry with
k0(app) in the 10(-2)-10(-1) cm/s range. The rate constants are mainly influenced
by the electronic properites of the films. Fe(CN)6(3-/4-) undergoes electron
transfer that is extremely sensitive to the surface chemistry with k0(app) in the
range of 10(-2)-10(-1) cm/s at the hydrogen-terminated surface. An oxygen surface
termination severely inhibits the rate of electron transfer. Fe(3+/2+) undergoes 
slow electron transfer at the hydrogen-terminated surface with k0(app) near
10(-5) cm/s. The rate of electron transfer at sp2 carbon electrodes is known to
be mediated by surface carbonyl functionalities; however, this inner-sphere,
catalytic pathway is absent on diamond due to the hydrogen termination. Dopamine,
like other catechol and catecholamines, undergoes sluggish electron transfer with
k0(app) between 10(-4) and 10(-5) cm/s. Converting the surface to an oxygen
termination has little effect on k0(app). The slow kinetics may be related to
weak adsorption of these analytes on the diamond surface. Ascorbic acid oxidation
is very sensitive to the surface termination with the most negative Ep(ox)
observed at the hydrogen-terminated surface. An oxygen surface termination shifts
Ep(ox) positive by some 250 mV or more. An interfacial energy diagram is proposed
to explain the electron transfer whereby the midgap density of states results
primarily from the boron doping level and the lattice hydrogen. The films were
additionally characterized by scanning electron microscopy and micro-Raman
imaging spectroscopy. The cyclic voltammetric and kinetic data presented can
serve as a benchmark for research groups evaluating the electrochemical
properties of semimetallic (i.e., conductive), hydrogen-terminated,
polycrystalline diamond.

PMID: 10959965  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


102. Mol Immunol. 2000 Apr;37(5):241-52.

The novel human IgE epsilon heavy chain, epsilon tailpiece, is present in plasma 
as part of a covalent complex.

Chan LA(1), Lyczak JB, Zhang K, Morrison SL, Saxon A.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, University 
of California, Los Angeles 90095, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Immunol 2000 Dec;37(18):1151.
    Mol Immunol 2001 Sep;38(5):409.

Several splice variants of the secreted human epsilon heavy chain have previously
been identified by reverse transcription-PCR. The heavy chain of one isoform, IgE
tailpiece, differs from the originally identified IgE, IgE classic, by the
replacement of the 2 carboxy-terminal amino acids by 8 novel amino acids
including a carboxy-terminal cysteine residue. Recombinant human epsilon
tailpiece and epsilon classic heavy chains were expressed and secreted as H2L2
monomers in Sp2/0 murine myeloma cells. We have investigated the in vitro
function and in vivo occurrence of epsilon tailpiece heavy chains using receptor 
binding assays, granule release assays, flow cytometry, half-life studies,
immunoprecipitation, SDS-PAGE, two-dimensional SDS-PAGE, and Western blotting.
IgE tailpiece and IgE classic exhibited similar in vivo half-lives in BALB/c
mice, bound the human high- and low-affinity IgE receptors with similar
affinities and triggered equivalent levels of high affinity IgE receptor induced 
degranulation. In humans, IgE classic is present as a 190 kD circulating protein 
in vivo. In contrast, we found that in plasma epsilon tailpiece was primarily
present as part of covalent complexes of approximately 300 and 338 kD.
Dissociation of the complexes revealed that two species of epsilon tailpiece
heavy chains were present therein and surprisingly, these in vivo derived epsilon
tailpiece heavy chains were approximately 5 and 10 kD smaller than the
recombinant expressed epsilon tailpiece or epsilon classic heavy chains. These
results show that epsilon tailpiece is present in novel covalent complexes in
humans.

PMID: 10930631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Anal Chem. 2000 Jul 1;72(13):2919-24.

Electron transfer from diamond electrodes to heme peptide and peroxidase.

Tatsuma T(1), Mori H, Fujishima A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Chemistry, School of Engineering, University of Tokyo,
Japan.

Direct electron transfer from boron-doped diamond electrodes to heme
undecapeptide and horseradish peroxidase (HRP) was examined and evaluated for the
application to H2O2 biosensors. As-grown and oxygen plasma-treated diamond
electrodes on which heme peptide is adsorbed exhibited cathodic current responses
to H2O2 on the basis of the direct electron transfer. In a comparative study of
carbon electrodes on which heme peptide was adsorbed, an oxygen plasma-treated
diamond electrode exhibited responses comparable with those of an edge-oriented
pyrolytic graphite (EOPG) electrode, despite much smaller roughness. However,
electron transfer to compounds I and II of HRP from the diamond electrodes was
much slower than that from EOPG or glassy carbon, suggesting that the pi
electrons of an sp2 carbon may play an important role in the direct electron
transfer to the heme moiety of HRP. To examine the applicability of heme
peptide-modified diamond electrodes to oxidase-based biosensors, anodic current
responses of the oxygen plasma-treated diamond electrode to possible interfering 
agents, ascorbic acid and uric acid, were examined and compared with those of
EOPG. Since the diamond electrode exhibited much less sensitivity to those
interfering agents, the heme peptide-modified diamond electrode should be a
promising H2O2 biosensor for the application to oxidase-based biosensors.

PMID: 10905328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2000 Apr;125(4):473-82.

Monoclonal antibodies to plasma high density lipoprotein (HDL) of eel (Anguilla
japonica).

Ndiaye D(1), Katoh H, Ge YP, Iijima N, Hayashi S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Food Chemistry, Faculty of Fisheries, Kagoshima University,
Japan.

Six week-old female mice (Balb/c) injected intraperitonealy with 50 micrograms of
eel high density lipoprotein (HDL) emulsified with equal volume of adjuvant three
times every two weeks. Three weeks after the third injection, hyperimmunized mice
were boosted by injection of 100 micrograms of HDL. After 5 days, the best
responding mouse to injected HDL was sacrificed, and spleen cells were fused with
mouse myeloma cells (Sp2/O-Ag14), and hybridomas were cultured in a selection
medium. Monoclonal antibodies specific to apolipoprotein A-I or A-II (apoA-I or
apoA-II) of HDL were obtained by cloning and recloning the hybridomas. Eighteen
monoclonal antibodies specific to apoA-I and/or apoApII were isolated. Antibodies
in the culture medium were purified by a HiTrap Protein G or an eel-HDL column.
These purified antibodies belong to the subclass IgG1. The monoclonal antibodies 
specific to eel apoA-I and apoA-II secreted by clone 10D12 and 2G3, respectively,
interact with serum proteins of some fish species such as red-sea bream and carp.
The anti-eel apoA-I antibody of 10D12 did not bind to serum proteins of rat,
rabbit, and chicken, while the anti-eel apoA-II of 2G3 antibody did.

PMID: 10904860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Virol Methods. 1999 Oct;82(2):185-200.

High throughput detection of retrovirus-associated reverse transcriptase using an
improved fluorescent product enhanced reverse transcriptase assay and its
comparison to conventional detection methods.

Lovatt A(1), Black J, Galbraith D, Doherty I, Moran MW, Shepherd AJ, Griffen A,
Bailey A, Wilson N, Smith KT.

Author information: 
(1)Q-One Biotech Ltd, Glasgow, UK.

The development and application of a novel, sensitive TaqMan fluorescent
probe-based product enhanced RT test (F-PERT) for the detection of retrovirus are
described. The assay allows discrimination between the amplification signals
generated by genuine positive signals that result from retroviral RT activity and
the RT-like activity from DNA polymerases. The RT-like activity from DNA
polymerases was suppressed by the addition of activated calf-thymus DNA with no
reduction in the RT activity. A linear relationship between threshold cycle
(C(T)) and the number of virus particles was demonstrated, allowing
quantification of retroviruses in unknown samples. The F-PERT assay was able to
detect a wide range of retroviral RT activities, including that from porcine
endogenous retrovirus (PoERV), murine leukaemia virus (MLV), simian foamy virus
(SFV), simian immunodeficiency virus (SIVmac) and squirrel monkey retrovirus
(SMRV). The detection limit of SMRV, MLV and PoERV was approximately 100 virion
particles and the test was able to detect at least 10(2) molecules of purified RT
enzyme. RT activity was not detected in cellular lysates and supernatants from
MRC-5, BT, VERO, or Raji cells, whereas RT activity was detected in C1271, Mus
dunni, K-Balb, BHK-21, CHO-K1, SP2/0-Ag14 and NSO cell supernatants. RT activity 
was also detected in the Spodoptera cell line Sf9.

PMID: 10894635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2000 Jun 19;10(12):1307-10.

sp2-bridged diaryl retinoids: effects of bridge-region substitution on retinoid X
receptor (RXR) selectivity.

Dawson MI(1), Hobbs PD, Jong L, Xiao D, Chao WR, Pan C, Zhang XK.

Author information: 
(1)Medicinal Chemistry Department, Molecular Medicine Research Institute,
Mountain View, CA 94043, USA. mdawson@mmrx.org

RXR class selectivity and RXR transcriptional activation activity compared to
those for the retinoic acid receptor subtypes were enhanced on the
4-(5,6,7,8-tetrahydro-5,5,8,8-tetramethyl-2-naphthalenylethenyl)be nzoic acid
scaffold and its 3-methyl analogue by replacing their 1,1-ethenyl bridge by a
1,1-(2-methylpropenyl) or cyclopropylidenylmethylene group.

PMID: 10890152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Zh Mikrobiol Epidemiol Immunobiol. 1999 Nov-Dec;(6):70-4.

[The isolation of monoclonal antibodies to Cryptococcus neoformans antigens].

[Article in Russian]

Khrapova NP(1), Lesovoi VS, Prokhvatilova EV, Stupenko LN, Zharkova SF.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Plague Control, Volgograd, Russia.

In this work conditions for the reproduction of hybridoma technology, specially
adapted to C. neoformans, for obtaining monoclonal hybridomas (McAb) to
diagnostically significant antigens of C. neoformans, the infective agent of
cryptococcosis, are presented. The advantages of using the short-time cycle of
stimulation of mouse B lymphocytes with low doses of C. neoformans capsular
polysaccharide and the effectiveness of the hybridization of mouse spleen cells
with myeloma cells, line Sp2/0, are shown. Four lines of stable hybridomas,
producing McAb to different epitopes of C. neoformans surface antigens, have been
obtained. The specific activity of McAb has been studied in the indirect
immunofluorescence assay, the cytochemical and solid-phase enzyme immunoassays
(EIA). McAb 3E2, Cr2 and 2G9 have been shown to be suitable for use in diagnostic
EIA systems.

PMID: 10876856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Virus Res. 1999 Jan;59(1):61-74.

Four genotypic variants of a Spodoptera exigua Nucleopolyhedrovirus (Se-SP2) are 
distinguishable by a hypervariable genomic region.

Muñoz D(1), Murillo R, Krell PJ, Vlak JM, Caballero P.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Producción Agraria, Universidad Pública de Navarra, Pamplona, 
Spain.

Four genotypes named SP2A, SP2B, SP2C and SP2D were obtained in vivo by infecting
S. exigua larvae with limiting dilutions of the Spanish field isolate Spodoptera 
exigua Nucleopolyhedrovirus (Se-SP2) of SeMNPV. The cloning of variants SP2A,
SP2B and SP2C took 1, 6, and 3 passages, respectively, before the DNA profiles
showed all bands in equimolar concentrations, and they remained constant for at
least six further passages indicating the stability of their genotypes. The SP2D 
variant isolation took over ten passages and it was genetically less stable.
Physical maps of their genomes were constructed for the restriction enzymes
BamHI, BglII, PstI, and XbaI. The region between 8-10 m.u. was highly variable
and characteristic of each cloned genotype and, hence, can be used as RFLP
markers for all four genotypic variants. This region, included in the PstI-MB
fragment, was cloned and sequenced showing that all the Se-SP2 variants contained
a homologous region (hr) with a variable number of 98 bp sequences tandemly
repeated, which were used to distinguish genotypic variants from each other. The 
biological activity of the genotypic variants SP2A, SP2B, and SP2C when compared 
in terms of LD50 and LT50, were not significantly different. However, the SP2D
genotypic variant was found to be significantly less infective (higher LD50). The
emergence of new genotypes in the Se-SP2 field populations is discussed.

PMID: 10854166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Med Genet. 2000 Jun;37(6):415-21.

FRAXA and FRAXE: the results of a five year survey.

Youings SA(1), Murray A, Dennis N, Ennis S, Lewis C, McKechnie N, Pound M,
Sharrock A, Jacobs P.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, UK.

We report the results of a five year survey of FRAXA and FRAXE mutations among
boys aged 5 to 18 with special educational needs (SEN) related to learning
disability. We tested their mothers using the X chromosome not transmitted to the
son as a control chromosome, and the X chromosome inherited by the son to provide
information on stability of transmission. We tested 3738 boys and 2968 mothers
and found 20 FRAXA and one FRAXE full mutations among the boys and none among the
mothers. This gives an estimated prevalence of full mutations in males of 1 in
5530 for FRAXA and 1 in 23 423 for FRAXE. We found an excess of intermediate and 
premutation alleles for both FRAXA and FRAXE. For FRAXA this was significant at
the 0.001 level but the excess for FRAXE was significant only at the 0.03 level. 
We conclude that the excess of intermediate and premutation sized alleles for
FRAXA may well be a contributing factor to the boys' mental impairment, while
that for FRAXE may be a chance finding. We studied approximately 3000
transmissions from mother to son and found five instabilities of FRAXA in the
common or intermediate range and three instabilities of FRAXE in the intermediate
range. Thus instabilities in trinucleotide repeat size for FRAXA and FRAXE are
rare, especially among alleles in the common size range.

PMCID: PMC1734610
PMID: 10851251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Chemistry. 2000 May 15;6(10):1757-62.

Synthesis of "sugar-rods" with phytohemagglutinin cross-linking properties by
using the palladium-catalyzed Sonogashira reaction

Roy R(1), Das SK, Santoyo-Gonzalez F, Hernandez-Mateo F, Dam TK, Brewer CF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Ottawa, ON, Canada.
rroy@science.uottawa.ca

A palladium-catalyzed Sonogashira reaction has been applied for the syntheses of 
divalent "sugar-rods" which exhibited excellent lectin cross-linking properties. 
The procedure, which involves a tetrakis(triphenylphosphine)palladium-catalyzed
cross-coupling reaction between an alkyne and a halogen-bearing sp2-carbon in DMF
at 60 degrees C, is very efficient and the dimeric or heterobifunctional
"sugar-rods" (8-13, 15-17) were isolated in 65-100% yields. Dimers 8a and 15a
were both shown to form insoluble cross-linked lattices when mixed with the
tetrameric plant lectin from Canavalia ensiformis (Concavalin A, Con A).
Moreover, the relative inhibitory properties of the synthetic dimannosides were
determined by means of the hemagglutination of rabbit erythrocytes, whereby dimer
15a was shown to be 20-fold more potent than monomeric methyl
alpha-D-mannopyranoside.

PMID: 10845633  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


111. Muscle Nerve. 2000 Jun;23(6):939-45.

Trigemino-facial reflex inhibitory responses in some lower facial muscles.

Pavesi G(1), Macaluso GM, Marchetti P, Cattaneo L, Tinchelli S, de Laat A, Mancia
D.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Neurologia, University of Parma, Strada del Quartiere 4, I-43100
Parma, Italy. neurophy@unipr.it

The effects of electrical trigeminal stimulation on activated facial muscles were
studied in 20 normal subjects in order to evaluate whether excitatory or
inhibitory responses are present and to investigate whether the reflex
organization is similar in all the facial muscles. No inhibition was observed in 
frontalis, orbicularis oculi, orbicularis oris, and mentalis muscles. By
contrast, a clear suppression of electromyographic (EMG) activity (late silent
period or SP2) was present in the levator labii superioris, depressor anguli
oris, and depressor labii inferioris muscles, with a mean latency ranging from
41.8 to 50.2 ms, and a mean duration ranging from 27.5 to 40.9 ms. An early
suppression of EMG activity (early silent period or SP1) was observed, with a
latency of 16 to 20 ms and a duration of 10 ms, mainly in inferior perioral
muscles. Our findings show a selective trigeminal inhibitory influence upon some 
specific lower facial muscles.

Copyright 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

PMID: 10842272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Org Lett. 2000 Feb 24;2(4):481-4.

CuCl-mediated intramolecular oxidative coupling of aryl- and
alkenyltrimethylstannane functions

Piers E(1), Yee JG, Gladstone PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
epier@interchange.ubc.ca

[reaction: see text] The syntheses of bis-trimethylstannanes 8, 10, 12-14, 16,
18, 21, and 22 are described. Treatment of these substances with approximately 5 
equiv of CuCl in DMF at rt for 30-60 min effects, in each case, oxidative
coupling between the two sp2 carbon centers bearing the Me3Sn function to produce
good-to-excellent yields of tricyclic products 23-31, respectively.

PMID: 10814356  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


113. J Pept Res. 2000 Apr;55(4):308-17.

Structural features of the Pip/AzPip couple in the crystalline state: influence
of the relative AzPip location in an azadipeptide sequence upon the induced
chirality and conformational characteristics.

Didierjean C(1), Aubry A, Wyckaert F, Boussard G.

Author information: 
(1)Université Henri Poincaré, Vandoeuvre lès Nancy, France.

Azapipecolic (AzPip) is a pipecolic (Pip) residue analogue containing a nitrogen 
atom in place of the C(alpha)H group. AzPip was introduced into two reverse
dipeptide sequences, Piv-AzPip-L-Ala-NHiPr I and Boc-L-Ala-AzPip-NHiPr II in
order to evaluate, in the crystalline state, the influence of the L-Ala-induced
chirality upon the prochiral AzPip residue, and therefore the resulting
conformational characteristics, according to the relative position of the AzPip
residue. Piv-DL-Pip-NHMe III served as a control derivative for comparison
between the properties of the two different heterocycles of Pip and AzPip
residues. Piperidine and hexahydropyridazine rings have a few characteristics in 
common: chair conformation, axial disposition of the C-terminal backbone
substituent and the cisoid form of the N-terminal tertiary amide function. An
almost pure sp3 hybridization state is observed for the substituted nitrogen atom
N(alpha), so that L-Ala induces an AzPip (R) or (S) chirality when it follows or 
precedes, respectively, the azaresidue in such a pseudodipeptide sequence. If
both I and II compounds present a short NH...N contact between the sp2 tertiary
amide nitrogen atom and the NH of the next secondary amide function, whatever the
chiral nature of the sequence, the heterochiral azadipeptide I adopts a rather
totally extended conformation while the homochiral azadipeptide II is folded by a
beta-VI turn-like structure stabilized by a classical 4-->1 intramolecular
hydrogen bond.

PMID: 10798376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Anaesthesia. 2000 May;55(5):481-5.

Carotid endarterectomy. A survey of UK anaesthetic practice.

Knighton JD(1), Stoneham MD.

Author information: 
(1)Specialist Registrar in Anasthesia, Department of Anasthesia, Salisbury
District Hospital NHS Trust, Salisbury, Wilts. SP2 8BJ, UK.

We conducted a postal questionnaire survey of the members of the Vascular
Anasthesia Society of Great Britain and Ireland, asking questions about the
provision of anasthesia for carotid endartectomy. Of 215 respondents, 187 were
currently providing anasthesia for carotid endarterectomy. The majority of
respondents (69%) always use general anasthesia for this operation but 99/215
(46%) had some experience of regional anasthesia for carotid endartectomy.
Amongst those currently using regional anasthesia, combined deep and superficial 
cervical plexus block was the technique used by 71%. Other regional techniques
used included local infiltration and superficial block alone. During regional
anasthesia, most (66%) anasthetists used cerebral monitoring techniques such as
stump pressure or transcranial Doppler as well as keeping the patient awake.
However, in a significant proportion of cases (37%) under general anasthesia no
cerebral monitoring was used. Reported surgical shunt insertion rates were lower 
in awake (mean 42%) patients than those receiving general anasthesia (61%).
Respondents using regional anasthesia were more likely to feel that their
technique was appropriate than those using general anasthesia.

PMID: 10792144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Altern Lab Anim. 2000 May-Jun;28(3):473-6.

Cytotoxicity of cadmium, selenium, zinc and copper to mouse myeloma sp2/0 cells
as measured by the MTT assay.

Remez I(1), Rabkin L(1), Veksler H(1), Baumane M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Occupational and Environmental Health, Medical Academy of Latvia,
16 Dzirciema Street, 1007 Riga, Latvia. (2)National Register of Potentially Toxic
Chemicals, Centre of Disaster Medicine, 2 Hipokrata Street, 1038 Riga, Latvia.

As part of our general programme to test the toxicity in vitro of heavy metals
and, in particular, the interactive cytotoxicity of combinations of these metals,
the MTT (tetrazolium) assay was used to test the cytotoxicities of cadmium [Cd
(O2CCH3)2], selenium (Na2SeO3), zinc (ZnSO4) and copper (CuSO4) with an
established mouse myeloma cell line (Sp2/0). The influence on the cytotoxicity of
cadmium of added subtoxic concentrations of the other three metals was also
studied. The IC50 values (50% inhibitory concentrations) to the Sp2/0 cells were 
as follows: Cd - 10µM, Se - 1µM, Zn - 10µM and Cu - 100µM. When selenium, zinc
and copper at high, subtoxic concentrations (10nM, 1µM and 1µM, respectively)
were each combined with clearly toxic concentrations of cadmium (10µM and 100µM),
the cytotoxicity increase was significant for the cadmium-zinc combination.
Previous studies showed that cadmium-zinc combinations at low concentration (5 × 
10-9M) had a synergistic stimulatory effect on cell proliferation in vitro. The
present study showed that a toxic concentration of cadmium (0.1mM) and a
sub-toxic concentration of zinc (1µM) have a synergistic cytotoxic effect in
vitro.

2000 FRAME.

PMID: 25419928  [PubMed]


116. J Physiol Paris. 2000 Jan-Feb;94(1):67-70.

Evidence for the involvement of oxygen free radicals in the ethanol-induced late 
cellular injury in mouse myeloma cells.

Bódis B(1), Karádi O, Szabó I, Németh P, Belágyi J, Mózsik G.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Medicine, University Medical School of Pécs, Hungary.

In this study, we analysed the ethanol-induced long term cell injury on a general
cell model (Sp2/0-Ag14 cell line). Cells were incubated in 1, 5, 10, 15 and 20%
of ethanol (EtOH) for 5 min. After washing cell viability was tested by the
Trypan Blue exclusion test in 5, 60 min, 4 and 24 h after EtOH exposure. Free
radicals were monitored every 30 min by electron spin resonance (ESR) with
alpha-phenyl-N-tert-butylnitrone (PBN) spin trapping technique. Scavenger
compounds such as glutathione (GSH), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and
5,5-dimethyl-1-pyrroline N-oxide (DMPO) were applied for 24 h incubation after
EtOH exposure. EtOH concentration dependently decreased the cell viability
immediately after 5 min exposure, but with 4 and 24 h, a secondary cell
destruction was found. Using ESR-spin trapping technique, an increased free
radical activity could be detected. DMPO, DMSO and GSH significantly, but in
different period protected the cells against free-radical induced cellular
damage. EtOH produces an early (immediately after EtOH exposure) and a late (in
about 4 h) cellular damage on Sp2/0-Ag14 cells. The oxygen free radicals can be
detected in a short time after EtOH exposure, its biological effect manifested as
a secondary cell destruction at 4 and 24 h. This phenomenon can be prevented by
scavenger compounds.

PMID: 10761692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Lipid Res. 2000 Apr;41(4):583-94.

Functional significance of Sp1, Sp2, and Sp3 transcription factors in regulation 
of the murine CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase alpha promoter.

Bakovic M(1), Waite KA, Vance DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and CIHR Group on Molecular and Cell Biology of
Lipids, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, T6G 2S2, Canada.

The transcription factor Sp1 has been implicated in regulation of the expression 
of the murine CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase alpha (CTalpha) gene, Ctpct
(M. Bakovic, K. Waite, W. Tang, I. Tabas, and D. E. Vance. 1999. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta. 1438: 147;-165). We have utilized transient transfections,
mutation analysis, electromobility gel-shifts, and immunoblot analysis to test
the hypothesis that expression of the CTalpha gene is controlled in part by the
binding of three trans-acting nuclear factors, Sp1, Sp2, and Sp3. Sp1 and Sp3
activate CTalpha gene transcription through sequence specific binding within
three promoter domains. In Sp1-mediated transcription, Sp3 acts as an activator
in a dose-dependent manner and vice versa. Sp2 represses Sp1- and Sp3-driven
transcription in Drosophila SL2 cells, but stimulates transcription in C3H10T1/2 
mammalian cells. Our results suggest that the predominant action of Sp proteins
is a direct function of local organization of three cis-acting elements in the
regions A (-31/-9), B (-88/-50), and C (-148/-128). The ability of distal C
(-148/-128) and proximal A (-31/-9) regions to activate or repress transcription 
depends upon the cellular background. The multiple binding elements at position B
(-88/-50) confer a positive regulation independent of the cell context. However, 
the effectiveness of Sp proteins at this site is strongly governed by neighboring
sites A and C. The results suggest that the level of expression of the CTalpha
gene will depend on the cell type, the availability of Sp proteins, and the
structure and organization of three cis-acting elements.

PMID: 10744779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Am J Hum Genet. 2000 Apr;66(4):1455-60. Epub 2000 Mar 14.

A novel X-linked dominant condition: X-linked congenital isolated ptosis.

McMullan TF(1), Collins AR, Tyers AG, Robinson DO.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, United Kingdom. TFWMCM@aol.com

We present a large family with a previously undescribed condition: X-linked
dominant congenital bilateral isolated ptosis. Linkage analysis defined a
critical region between Xq24 and Xq27.1, with a maximum single-point LOD score of
2.88 at DXS1047 and DXS984. Male and female family members are equally affected, 
providing an example of an X-linked, truly dominant condition.

PMCID: PMC1288214
PMID: 10739771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Br J Ophthalmol. 2000 Apr;84(4):437-8.

Painful blind eye: efficacy of enucleation and evisceration in resolving ocular
pain.

Shah-Desai SD(1), Tyers AG, Manners RM.

Author information: 
(1)Eye Department, Salisbury District Hospital, Odstock, Salisbury SP2 8BJ, UK.

AIMS: To assess the effectiveness of enucleation or evisceration in relieving
pain from painful blind eyes.
METHODS: 24 patients with intractable ocular pain underwent enucleation or
evisceration with or without an orbital implant.
RESULTS: Complete pain relief was achieved in all patients at an average time of 
3 months (range 1-15 months). Seven patients required further medical or surgical
treatment in addition to removal of the globe.
CONCLUSION: Enucleation and evisceration were effective in relieving ocular pain 
in all patients with a painful blind eye in our study. However, complications of 
surgery and orbital implants can cause recurrent pain.

PMCID: PMC1723427
PMID: 10729307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo). 2000 Mar;48(3):428-32.

Novel potassium channel activators. III. Synthesis and pharmacological evaluation
of 3,4-dihydro-2H-1,4-benzoxazine derivatives: modification at the 2 position.

Matsumoto Y(1), Uchida A, Nakahara H, Yanagisawa I, Shibanuma T, Nohira H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Drug Discovery Research, Yamanouchi Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd.,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

A new series of 3,4-dihydro-2H-1,4-benzoxazine derivatives, where various
substituents were introduced into one of the geminal dimethyl groups at the 2
position, were synthesized and their potassium channel-activating activity was
evaluated. Introduction of a hydroxyl group, as in compound 5, resulted in good
solubility in water and a long duration of action compared with the parent
compound 1. Introduction of a nitrato group, as in compound 8, produced typical
nitrate activity such as exhibited by nitroglycerine in addition to potassium
channel-activating activity. X-ray structural analysis of compound 5 showed that 
the sum of the bond angles around the N atom at the 4 position was 357.8 degrees,
suggesting that the N atom had an approximately sp2-like planar bond
configuration.

PMID: 10726871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2000 Mar;278(3):L477-84.

Identification of functional TTF-1 and Sp1/Sp3 sites in the upstream promoter
region of rabbit SP-B gene.

Margana R(1), Berhane K, Alam MN, Boggaram V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Health Science Center at 
Tyler, Tyler, Texas 75708-3154, USA.

Surfactant protein B (SP-B) is essential for the maintenance of biophysical
properties and physiological function of pulmonary surfactant. SP-B mRNA is
expressed in a cell type-restricted manner in alveolar type II and bronchiolar
(Clara) epithelial cells of the lung and is developmentally induced. In NCI-H441 
cells, a lung cell line with characteristics of Clara cells, a minimal promoter
region comprising -236 to +39 nucleotides supports high-level expression of
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter activity. In the present
investigation, we characterized the upstream promoter region, -236 to -140
nucleotides, that is essential for promoter activity. Deletion mapping identified
two segments, -236 to -170 and -170 to -140 nucleotides, that are important for
promoter activity. Mutational analysis and gel mobility shift experiments
identified thyroid transcription factor-1, Sp1, and Sp3 as important trans-acting
factors that bind to sequences in the upstream promoter region. Our data suggest 
that SP-B promoter activity is dependent on interactions between factors bound to
upstream and downstream regions of the promoter.

PMID: 10710519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Acta Paediatr. 2000 Feb;89(2):148-53.

Effects of growth during infancy and childhood on bone mineralization and
turnover in preterm children aged 8-12 years.

Fewtrell(1), Prentice A, Cole TJ, Lucas A.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Childhood Nutrition Research Centre, Institute of Child Health, London,
UK. m.fewtrell@ich.ucl.ac.uk

To investigate the effect of growth on later bone mass and turnover, bone mineral
content (BMC) and density (BMD: dual X-ray absorptiometry (QDR 1000W) and single 
photon absorptiometry (Lunar SP2)) and bone turnover (plasma osteocalcin, urine
deoxypyridinoline) were measured at 8-12 y in 244 preterm children who had weight
and height measured at 18 mo and 7.5-8 y corrected age. Weight and length at
birth, 18 mo, 7.5-8 y and current follow-up showed increasingly strong, positive 
correlations with bone area, BMC and BMD. After adjusting for current size, there
were significant negative associations between earlier size measurements and
later whole body and lumbar spine bone mass which were stronger for length than
for weight, and a negative relationship between birthweight for gestation and
later radial bone mass; but no relationship with bone turnover. Current calcium
intake and activity level had no independent effect on bone mass. Bone mass at
8-12 y is related to current bone and body size, which tracks throughout
childhood. However, amongst children of the same current size, those who have
shown the greatest increase in size, particularly in height, have the highest
bone mass. These findings raise the hypothesis that improving linear growth in
vulnerable children may be important in maximizing bone mass.

PMID: 10709882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Therapie. 1999 Nov-Dec;54(6):753-8.

Antitumour principles from Peganum harmala seeds.

Lamchouri F(1), Settaf A, Cherrah Y, Zemzami M, Lyoussi B, Zaid A, Atif N, Hassar
M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Pharmacologie et Toxicologie, Faculté de médecine et de
Pharmacie de Rabat, Maroc.

From ancient times, Peganum harmala was claimed to be an important medicinal
plant. Its seeds were known to possess hypothermic, and essentially
hallucinogenic properties. Various authors have undertaken studies on the
antibacterial, antifungal and antiviral effects of Peganum harmala seeds, but
studies on the antitumour activity are not to be found in the literature. In
Moroccan traditional medicine, seed powder is sometimes used on skin and
subcutaneous tumours. This work was designed to investigate some aspects of the
antineoplastic properties of the plant Peganum. Varying concentrations (10 to 120
micrograms/ml) of total alkaloid extracts of Peganum harmala seeds (collected in 
Morocco) were tested in vitro on four tumoural cell-lines: Med-mek and UCP-Med
carcinoma, UCP-Med sarcoma and Sp2/O-Ag14. In vivo experiments were performed
with the Sp2/O cell-line grafted subcutaneously in syngenic BALB/c mice. In
vitro, proliferation of tumoural cell lines was significantly reduced by all
tested concentrations of the Peganum alkaloid extracts during the first 24 h of
contact. A cell lysis effect occurred after 24 h and progressed to complete cell 
death within 48 to 72 h depending on the alkaloid concentration. Results obtained
indicate that alkaloids of Peganum have a high cell toxicity in vitro. The active
principle at a dose of 50 mg/kg given orally to mice for 40 days was found to
have significant antitumoural activity. Peganum harmala alkaloids thus possess
significant antitumour potential, which could prove useful as a novel anticancer 
therapy.

PMID: 10709452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2000 Mar 20;67(6):853-71.

A kinetic analysis of hybridoma growth and metabolism in batch and continuous
suspension culture: effect of nutrient concentration, dilution rate, and pH.
Reprinted from Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Vol. 32, Pp 947-965 (1988).

Miller WM, Blanch HW, Wilke CR.

Hybridomas are finding increased use for the production of a wide variety of
monoclonal antibodies. Understanding the roles of physiological and environmental
factors on the growth and metabolism of mammalian cells is a prerequisite for the
development of rational scale-up procedures. An SP2/0-derived mouse hybridoma has
been employed in the present work as a model system for hybridoma suspension
culture. In preliminary shake flask studies to determine the effect of glucose
and glutaminE, it was found that the specific growth rate, the glucose and
glutamine metabolic quotients, and the cumulative specific antibody production
rate were independent of glucose concentration over the range commonly employed
in cell cultures. Only the specific rate of glutamine uptake was found to depend 
on glutamine concentration. The cells were grown in continuous culture at
constant pH and oxygen concentration at a variety of dilution rates. Specific
substrate consumption rates and product formation rates were determined from the 
steady state concentrations. The specific glucose uptake rate deviated from the
maintenance energy model(1) at low specific growth rates, probably due to changes
in the metabolic pathways of the cells. Antibody production was not
growth-associated; and higher specific antibody production rates were obtained at
lower specific growth rates. The effect of pH on the metabolic quotients was also
determined. An optimum in viable cell concentration was obtained between pH 7.1
and 7.4. The viable cell number and viability decreased dramatically at pH 6.8.
At pH 7.7 the viable cell concentration initially decreased, but then recovered
to values typical of pH 7.1-7.4. Higher specific nutrient consumption rates were 
found at the extreme pH values; however, glucose consumption was inhibited at low
pH. The pH history also influenced the behavior at a given pH. Higher antibody
metabolic quotients were obtained at the extreme pH values. Together with the
effect of specific growth rate, this suggests higher antibody production under
environmental or nutritional stress.

PMID: 10699863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Hum Mol Genet. 2000 Mar 1;9(4):589-96.

An imprinted locus associated with transient neonatal diabetes mellitus.

Gardner RJ(1), Mackay DJ, Mungall AJ, Polychronakos C, Siebert R, Shield JP,
Temple IK, Robinson DO.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, UK.

Recently, we reported the localization of a gene for transient neonatal diabetes 
mellitus (TNDM), a rare form of childhood diabetes, to an approximately 5.4 Mb
region of chromosome 6q24. We have also shown that TNDM is associated with both
paternal uniparental disomy (UPD) of chromosome 6 and paternal duplications of
the critical region. The sequencing of P1-derived artificial chromosome clones
from within the region of interest has allowed us to further localize the gene
and to investigate the methylation status of the region. The gene is now known to
reside in a 300-400 kb region of 6q24 which contains several CpG islands. At one 
island we have demonstrated differential DNA methylation between patients with
paternal UPD of chromosome 6 and normal controls. In addition, two patients with 
TNDM, in whom neither paternal UPD of chromosome 6 nor duplication of 6q24 have
been found, show a DNA methylation pattern identical to that of patients with
paternal UPD of chromosome 6. Control individuals show a hemizygous methylation
pattern. These results show that TNDM can be associated with a methylation change
and identify a novel methylation imprint on chromosome 6 associated with TNDM.

PMID: 10699182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Thromb Res. 2000 Feb 1;97(3):133-41.

A recombinant antibody-targeted plasminogen activator with high affinity for
activated platelets increases thrombolytic potency in vitro and in vivo.

Wan H(1), Liu Z, Xia X, Gu J, Wang B, Liu X, Zhu M, Li P, Ruan C.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Institute of Haematology, First Affiliated Hospital of Suzhou Medical 
College, People's Republic of China.

To increase thrombolytic specificity of urokinase (uPA), we engineered a
recombinant chimeric plasminogen activator SZ51Hu-scuPA, which consists of a
humanized monoclonal antibody (SZ-51Hu) specifically against P-selectin on
activated human platelet and a single-chain urokinase (scuPA). The cDNA, encoding
scuPA amino acids 1-411, was inserted in 5' end to 3' end orientation immediately
after the CH3 of SZ-51Hu heavy-chain sequence in the expression vector
alphaLys30. The resulting construct alphaLys30-SZ51VH/Hu-scuPA was used to
transfect into SP2/0 murine myeloma cell line, which was pretransfected with
SZ51Hu light chain. The fusion protein SZ51Hu-scuPA was expressed at 5 mg/L in
the supernatant of cell culture. The fusion protein purified by affinity
chromatography had a molecular weight of 160 kDa with fibrinolytic activity of
39,000 IU/mg and its affinity to activated human platelet was 67% of the parent
murine mAb SZ-51. The thrombolytic property of the fusion protein was first
characterized in an in vitro system, which consists of a 125I-fibrin-labeled
human plasma clot containing different concentrations of human platelets
suspended in citrated human plasma. Fifty percent lysis was reached with
SZ51Hu-scuPA in 1 hour at a concentration of 20 IU/mL or in 2 hours at a
concentration of 10 IU/ mL, which was much faster than uPA at the same
concentration. The maximal lysis of the clots by SZ51Hu-scuPA was 4.1 to 8.4
times more potent than that by uPA. The fusion protein was further characterized 
in the hamster pulmonary embolism model with clots prepared from fresh
platelet-rich human plasma containing 125I-labeled fibrinogen. The thrombolytic
activity of SZ51-scuPA was 3.9 times more potent than that of uPA at 2,000 IU/kg 
in this model. Almost no significant fibrinogen breakdown was observed either in 
vitro and in vivo.

PMID: 10680644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2000 Feb;20(2):507-15.

New functional promoter polymorphism, CETP/-629, in cholesteryl ester transfer
protein (CETP) gene related to CETP mass and high density lipoprotein cholesterol
levels: role of Sp1/Sp3 in transcriptional regulation.

Dachet C(1), Poirier O, Cambien F, Chapman J, Rouis M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), Unité 321,
Hopital de la Pitié-Salpétrière, Paris, France. cdachet@infobiogen.fr

A new polymorphism located at position -629 (CETP/-629A/C) in the promoter of the
cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) gene is described. The -629A allele was
associated with lower CETP mass (P<0. 0001) and higher high density lipoprotein
cholesterol (P<0.001) than the C allele in a sample of 536 control subjects from 
the ECTIM study. Transfection studies in HepG2 cells with a luciferase expression
vector incorporating a 777-bp fragment of the CETP promoter and containing either
A or C at position -629 showed significantly lower luciferase activity with the
promoter fragment of the A allele (-25%, P<0.05). By gel-shift assay, DNA-protein
interactions were evaluated in nuclear extracts of HepG2 cells with the use of 2 
probes (A or C probe) composed of 20 bp of the promoter sequence surrounding the 
polymorphic site. Two specific complexes of distinct migration rate were
identified with the A and the C probe. Competition with an excess of
oligonucleotide containing the Sp1 consensus binding site showed that a
protein(s) of the Sp transcription factor family was implicated in complex
formation with the A probe but not with the C probe. Incubation with specific
antibodies indicated that Sp1 and Sp3 bound specifically to the A probe. We
introduced mutations in the -629-Sp1 binding site to test its functionality and
to define the characteristics of transcription factor binding. We showed, by
gel-shift assay, that no nuclear proteins bound to the mutated sequence.
Transient transfection of HepG2 cells revealed that the expression of the mutated
fragment was significantly increased compared with that of the A promoter
fragment (25%, P<0.05). The mutated fragment displayed the same activity as that 
of the C promoter. These results indicate that Sp1 and/or Sp3 repress CETP
promoter activity, whereas nuclear factors binding the C allele are without
effect on promoter expression.

PMID: 10669650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Fam Pract. 2000 Feb;17(1):36-41.

A study of factors associated with cost and variation in prescribing among GPs.

Carthy P(1), Harvey I, Brawn R, Watkins C.

Author information: 
(1)Research and Development Support Unit, Salisbury Healthcare NHS Trust,
Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, UK.

BACKGROUND: Inappropriate prescribing has the potential to harm both the
individual and society. Previous research has identified doctor or demographic
characteristics that influence prescribing variation but which were not amenable 
to change.
OBJECTIVES: To identify modifiable factors associated with GP prescribing
variance and cost.
METHOD: Qualitative research methods were used in semi-structured taped
interviews with 17 GPs in Avon, South West NHS Region, UK.
RESULTS: GPs considered themselves cautious and conservative prescribers.
Prescribing decisions often were justified by the prescriber, despite conflicting
clinical or cost arguments. A personally developed drug formulary was used to
reduce dilemmas potentially associated with prescribing uncertainty. Willingness 
to reflect upon, and measure, prescribing habits against set professional
standards varied considerably. The absence of monitoring mechanisms of
prescribing decisions, coupled with under utilization of the community
pharmacist, resulted in uncertain prescribing outcomes. Some GPs found it
difficult to keep up to date professionally due to perceived time constraints.
Excessive patient demand was considered to influence their prescribing, but GPs
stated that they were not unduly influenced by the drug representative.
CONCLUSIONS: Prescribing makes a considerable impact on health and budgets and
yet remains a contentious issue. Improved partnerships between patient, doctor
and pharmacist must be established. Better prescribing decision monitoring and
support through policy development and educational intervention is needed to
reduce prescribing uncertainty. Newly established Primary Care Groups may need to
reflect upon the difficulties facing prescribers, particularly when prescribing
within cash-limited budgets, to avoid discord between prescribing behaviour and
local policy development.

PMID: 10673486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Acta Orthop Scand. 1999 Dec;70(6):569-77.

Increased migration of the SHP prosthesis: radiostereometric comparison with the 
Lubinus SP2 design in 40 cases.

Nivbrant B(1), Kärrholm J, Söderlund P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Northern University Hospital, Umeå, Sweden.
Bo.Nivbrant@Orthop.umu.se

40 patients with primary arthrosis were randomized to receive either a cemented
SHP (Scientific Hip Prosthesis) or Lubinus SP2 prosthesis. At 2 years
radiostereometric measurements showed increased proximal migration (0.4/0.2 mm; p
= 0.02) and more proximal wear (0.3/0.1 mm, p = 0.01) of the SHP socket. The SHP 
stem also subsided (-O.6/-0.1 mm, p<0.001) and rotated more into retroversion
(2.6/0.3 degrees ) than did the SP2 design. This subsidence mainly occurred
inside the cement mantle in 17 of 18 cases (13 SHP, 4 SP2), where this type of
motion could be measured. The changes in bone mineral density evaluated with DEXA
and the clinical results did not differ between the 2 groups. The subsidence of
the SHP stem is the most pronounced so far recorded with radiostereometry in
stems without a completely polished surface. This subsidence and the rotational
instability imply a substantial risk of abrasive wear and increased stresses in
the cement mantle.

PMID: 10665721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Vet Microbiol. 2000 Jan;71(1-2):149-59.

Monoclonal antibodies suitable for incorporation into a competitive enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for detection of specific antibodies to Leptospira
interrogans serovar pomona.

Surujballi O(1), Elmgren C.

Author information: 
(1)Canadian Food Inspection Agency, Animal Diseases Research Institute, Nepean,
Ont. surujballio@em.agr.ca

Monoclonal antibodies (mAb) were produced by fusing Sp2/0-Ag14 myeloma cells with
spleen cells from BALB/c and ND4 mice that were immunized with killed Leptospira 
interrogans serovar pomona whole cells. Thirty hybridomas which produced
antibodies (of the IgG1, IgG2a, IgG2b, or IgG3 isotype) that bound to epitopes on
the serovar pomona whole cell antigen were identified by an indirect
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Twenty-eight of these 30 mAbs
cross-reacted in the indirect ELISA with at least one whole cell antigen prepared
from 12 other pathogenic Leptospira serovars, and/or with whole cell antigen from
the non-pathogenic Leptospira biflexa serovar patoc. The two serovar
pomona-specific mAbs, which were designated M897 and M898, were obtained from the
ND4 mouse and were both of the IgG1 isotype. In competitive ELISAs, M897 and M898
were inhibited from binding to the pomona antigen by bovine sera with
anti-serovar pomona microscopic agglutination test (MAT) titres ranging from 100 
to 6400. No significant inhibition was observed with pomona MAT-negative sera or 
with sera from animals experimentally infected with serovars canicola,
copenhageni, grippotyphosa, hardjo type hardjobovis or sejroe. The epitopes
recognized by M897 and M898 were both highly susceptible to sodium meta-periodate
oxidation, indicating a carbohydrate composition. Neither of these mAbs reacted
in immunoblots with the separated components of the serovar pomona whole cell
antigen.

PMID: 10665542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Intensive Care Med. 1999 Nov;25(11):1222-30.

Effects of prone position on alveolar recruitment and oxygenation in acute lung
injury.

Guerin C(1), Badet M, Rosselli S, Heyer L, Sab JM, Langevin B, Philit F, Fournier
G, Robert D.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Réanimation Médicale et Assistance Respiratoire, Hôpital de la
Croix-Rousse, Lyon, France. c-guerin@cismsun.univ-lyon1.fr

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of prone position (PP) on alveolar
recruitment and oxygenation in acute respiratory failure.
DESIGN: Prospective physiologic study.
SETTING: Medical ICU two in a university hospital.
PATIENTS: Twelve adult patients intubated and mechanically ventilated with
medical primary acute lung injury/adult respiratory distress syndrome (ALI/ARDS) 
in whom PP was indicated.
MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS: We constructed the static inflation volume-pressure
curves (V-P) of the respiratory system in the 12 patients and differentiated
between lung and chest wall in ten of them. We determined the difference between 
end-expiratory lung volume on positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) and
relaxation volume of the respiratory system on zero PEEP (delta FRC). The
recruited alveolar volume was computed as the delta FRC times the ratio of static
elastance of the respiratory system to the lung. These measurements together with
arterial blood gases determination were made in supine position (SP1), after 1 h 
of PP and after 1 h of supine repositioning (SP2) at the same level of PEEP. The 
PaO2/FIO2 ratio improved from SP1 to PP (136 +/- 17 vs 204 +/- 24 mm Hg; p <
0.01). An PP-induced alveolar recruitment was found in five patients. The change 
in oxygenation correlated to the recruited volume. The static elastance of the
chest wall decreased from 4.62 +/- 0.99 cmH2O/l in SP1 to 6.26 +/- 0.54 cmH2O/l
in PP (p < 0.05) without any correlation to the change in oxygenation.
CONCLUSIONS: Alveolar recruitment may be a mechanism of oxygenation improvement
in some patients with acute hypoxemic respiratory failure. No correlation was
found between change in oxygenation and chest wall elastic properties.

PMID: 10654205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Pflugers Arch. 2000;439(3 Suppl):R79-80.

Molecular cloning and chimerisation of CDI 315B monoclonal antibody.

Kopitar-Jerala N(1), Bestagno M, Fan X, Novak-Despot D, Burrone O, Kos J, Skrk J,
Gubensek F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Jozef Stefan Institute,
Ljubljana, Slovenia.

A chimeric mouse-human antibody has been created that recognizes an antigen found
on breast cancer cells and melanoma cells. Immunoglobulin constant domains of
mouse monoclonal antibody CDI 315B Cgamma1 and CK, were substituted by the human 
Cgamma1 and Ckappa. The CDI 315B variable heavy and light chain regions were PCR 
amplified from hybridoma RNA and sequenced. Mouse variable VH and VL regions were
joint to human IgG1 and kappa constant regions and subcloned into pcDNA3
expression vectors. The Sp2/0 murine myeloma cells were transfected with
expression vectors pcDNA3L and pcDNA3H and the reactivity of chimeric antibodies 
was tested by indirect ELISA using B16F1 murine melanoma cells as well as MCF7
human breast cancer cells, as antigen.

PMID: 10653149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2000 Mar 5;67(5):585-97.

A high-yielding, generic fed-batch cell culture process for production of
recombinant antibodies.

Sauer PW(1), Burky JE, Wesson MC, Sternard HD, Qu L.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Culture Development, Protein Design Labs, 34801 Campus Drive, Fremont,
California 94555, USA. psauer@pdl.com

A fed-batch cell culture process was developed that has general applicability to 
all evaluated Sp2/0 (n = 8) and NS0 (n = 1) antibody-producing cell lines. The
two key elements of this generic process were a protein-free concentrated feed
medium, and a robust, metabolically responsive feeding strategy based on the
off-line measurement of glucose. The fed-batch process was shown to perform
equivalently at the 15 L development scale and 750 L manufacturing scale.
Compared to batch cultures, the fed-batch process yielded a 4. 3 fold increase in
the average integral of viable cell concentration and a 1.7 fold increase in
average specific antibody production rate, equivalent to a 7.6 fold increase in
average final antibody concentration. The highest producing cell line reached a
peak viable cell concentration of 1.0 x 10(7) cell mL(-1) and a final antibody
concentration of 750 mg L(-1) in a 10 day process. For all lines evaluated,
reducing bioreactor pH set point from 7.2 to 7.0 resulted in an additional 2.4
fold increase in average final antibody concentration. The optimized fed-batch
process consistently yielded a volumetric productivity exceeding 50 mg L(-1)
day(-1). This generic, high-yielding fed-batch process significantly decreased
development time, and increased manufacturing efficiency, thereby facilitating
the clinical evaluation of numerous recombinant antibodies.

Copyright 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

PMID: 10649233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Hybridoma. 1999 Dec;18(6):505-11.

A novel biological-based assay for the screening of neutralizing antibodies to
ricin.

Furukawa-Stoffer TL(1), Mah DC, Cherwonogrodzky JW, Weselake RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Lethbridge, Alberta,
Canada.

A novel approach to screen hybridomas producing antibodies directed against ricin
was developed. Anti-ricin antibodies were produced and characterized based on
protection of Sp2/mIL6 myeloma cells and in vivo studies demonstrating
neutralization of the toxic effects of ricin in mice. During the production of
hybridomas, cells were plated in media supplemented with hypoxanthine,
aminopterin, and thymidine supplement (HAT), HAT + ricin, or ricin. Three
hybridomas, designated HRF4, HHRD7 and HHRD9, were selected from the media
supplemented with ricin and were shown to produce antibodies directed against
ricin. Intraperitoneal injection of hybridoma supernatant containing anti-ricin
antibodies combined with 0.5 microg ricin (a toxic dosage) protected Balb/C mice 
from the deleterious effects of the ricin. Hybridoma, HHRD9, did not contain high
titre antibodies to ricin but appeared to neutralize the toxic effects of ricin
in mice.

PMID: 10626679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Virol Methods. 1999 Dec;83(1-2):83-9.

Characterization of monoclonal antibodies against bovine herpesvirus 1 gD fusion 
protein expressed in E. coli.

Lyaku JR(1), McKenna PK, Fredrickson RA, Kibenge FS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, Atlantic Veterinary College,
University of Prince Edward Island, Charlottetown, Canada.

A total of 20 hybridoma cell lines secreting monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) against
E. coli expressed bovine herpesvirus-1 (BHV-1) gD fusion protein were produced
following the fusion of Sp2/0 myeloma cells with splenocytes from BALB/c mice
immunized previously with immunoaffinity purified BHV-1 gD fusion protein. An
indirect fluorescent antibody test (IFAT) using BHV-1 infected MDBK cells was
used for the selection of positive hybridomas secreting specific antibody. The
monoclonal antibody isotypes were 11 IgM, six IgG2b, one IgG1 and two IgG3. All
MAbs reacted positively with the E. coli expressed BHV-1 gD fusion protein, BHV-1
infected MDBK cell lysates and PCR BHV-1 gD transcription-translation polypeptide
antigens by an ELISA.

PMID: 10598086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Microbes Infect. 1999 Dec;1(14):1193-201.

Identification of Ebola virus sequences present as RNA or DNA in organs of
terrestrial small mammals of the Central African Republic.

Morvan JM(1), Deubel V, Gounon P, Nakouné E, Barrière P, Murri S, Perpète O,
Selekon B, Coudrier D, Gautier-Hion A, Colyn M, Volehkov V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire des arbovirus et virus des fièvres hémorragiques, Institut Pasteur
de Bangui Bangui, Central African Republic.

The life cycle of the Ebola (EBO) virus remains enigmatic. We tested for EBO
virus in the organs of 242 small mammals captured during ecological studies in
the Central African Republic. EBO virus glycoprotein or polymerase gene sequences
were detected by reverse transcription PCR in RNA extracts of the organs of seven
animals and by PCR in DNA extract of one animal. Neither live virus nor virus
antigen was detected in any organ sample. Direct sequencing of amplicons
identified the virus as being of the Zaire/Gabon subtype. Virus-like
nucleocapsids were observed by electron microscopy in the cytoplasm of the spleen
cells of one animal. The animals belonged to two genera of rodents (Muridae; Mus 
setulosus, Praomys sp1 and P. sp2) and one species of shrew (Soricidae;
Sylvisorex ollula). These preliminary results provide evidence that common
terrestrial small mammals living in peripheral forest areas have been in contact 
with the EBO virus and demonstrate the persistence of EBO virus RNA and DNA in
the organs of the animals. Our findings should lead to better targeting of
research into the life cycle of the EBO virus.

PMID: 10580275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Gen Virol. 1999 Nov;80 ( Pt 11):2889-900.

Human herpesvirus-8-encoded LNA-1 accumulates in heterochromatin- associated
nuclear bodies.

Szekely L(1), Kiss C, Mattsson K, Kashuba E, Pokrovskaja K, Juhasz A, Holmvall P,
Klein G.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Tumor Biology Center, Karolinska Institute, S171 77,
Stockholm, Sweden. lassze@ki.se

Subnuclear distribution of the human herpesvirus-8 (HHV-8)- encoded nuclear
protein LNA-1 was analysed at high resolution in body cavity (BC)
lymphoma-derived cell lines, in cell hybrids between BC cells and various human
and mouse cells and in freshly infected K562 and ECV cell lines.
Three-dimensional reconstruction of nuclei from optical sections and quantitative
analysis of the distribution of LNA-1 fluorescence in relation to chromatin
showed that LNA-1 associates preferentially with the border of heterochromatin in
the interphase nuclei. This was further confirmed in the following systems: in
endo- and exonuclease-digested nuclei, in human-mouse (BC-1-Sp2- 0) hybrids and
on chromatin spreads. LNA-1 was found to bind to mitotic chromosomes at random.
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), but not HHV-8, was rapidly lost from mouse-human hybrid
cells in parallel with the loss of human chromosomes. HHV-8 could persist on the 
residual mouse background for more than 8 months. In early human-mouse hybrids
that contain a single fused nucleus, LNA-1 preferentially associates with human
chromatin. After the gradual loss of the human chromosomes, LNA-1 becomes
associated with the murine pericentromeric heterochromatin. In human-human
hybrids derived from the fusion of the HHV-8-carrying BCBL-1 cells and the
EBV-immortalized lymphoblastoid cell line IB4, LNA-1 did not co-localize with
EBNA-1, EBNA-2, EBNA-5 or EBNA-6. LNA-1 was not associated with PML containing
ND10 bodies either. DNase but not RNase or detergent treatment of isolated nuclei
destroys LNA-1 bodies. In advanced apoptotic cells LNA- 1 bodies remain intact
but are not included in the apoptotic bodies themselves.

PMID: 10580050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Gene. 1999 Oct 1;238(2):291-300.

The Sp-family of transcription factors.

Suske G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Philipps-Universität
Marburg, Germany. suske@imt.uni-marburg.de

GC-boxes and related motifs are frequently occurring DNA-elements present in many
promoters and enhancers. In contrast to other elements it was generally thought
that the transcription factor Sp1 is the only factor acting through these motifs.
The cloning of paralogous genes of the Sp1 factor uncovered the existence of a
small protein family consisting of Sp1, Sp2, Sp3 and Sp4. All four proteins
exhibit very similar structural features. They contain a highly conserved
DNA-binding domain composed of three zinc fingers close the C-terminus and
serine/threonine- and glutamine-rich domains in their N-terminal regions. The
high degree of structural conservation between these four proteins suggested that
they do exert similar functions. Molecular, genetic and biochemical analyses,
however, demonstrated that Sp2, Sp3 and Sp4 are not simply functional equivalents
of Sp1. Here, I will summarize and discuss recent advances which have been made
towards understanding the mode of action and biological function of individual
family members.

PMID: 10570957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Clin Microbiol. 1999 Dec;37(12):4107-12.

Production of monoclonal antibodies directed against the microsporidium
Enterocytozoon bieneusi.

Accoceberry I(1), Thellier M, Desportes-Livage I, Achbarou A, Biligui S, Danis M,
Datry A.

Author information: 
(1)Unité INSERM 511, Laboratoire de Parasitologie-Mycologie, Centre
Hospitalier-Universitaire de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, 75013 Paris, France.

Several hybridomas producing antibodies detected by indirect immunofluorescence
antibody test (IFAT) were established by fusion of mouse myeloma SP2/O with
spleen cells from BALB/c mice immunized against whole spores (protocol 1) or
chitinase-treated spores (protocol 2) of Enterocytozoon bieneusi and were cloned 
twice by limiting dilutions. Two monoclonal antibodies (MAbs), 3B82H2 from
protocol 1, isotyped as immunoglobulin M (IgM), and 6E52D9 from protocol 2,
isotyped as IgG, were expanded in both ascites and culture. IFAT with the MAbs
showed that both MAbs reacted exclusively with the walls of the spores of E.
bieneusi, strongly staining the surface of mature spores, and produced titers of 
greater than 4,096. Immunogold electron microscopy confirmed the specific
reactivities of both antibodies. No cross-reaction, either with the spores of the
other intestinal microsporidium species Encephalitozoon intestinalis or with
yeast cells, bacteria, or any other intestinal parasites, was observed. The MAbs 
were used to identify E. bieneusi spores in fecal specimens from patients
suspected of having intestinal microsporidiosis. The IFAT was validated against
standard staining methods (Chromotrope 2R and Uvitex 2B) and PCR. We report here 
the first description and characterization of two MAbs specific for the spore
wall of E. bieneusi. These MAbs have great potential for the demonstration and
species determination of E. bieneusi, and their application in immunofluorescence
identification of E. bieneusi in stool samples could offer a new diagnostic tool 
for clinical laboratories.

PMCID: PMC85891
PMID: 10565939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 1999 Nov 1;180(1):45-53.

Evidence for a novel Chlorella virus-encoded alginate lyase.

Suda K(1), Tanji Y, Hori K, Unno H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259
Nagatsuta-cho, Midori-ku, Yokohama, Japan.

To clone the genes encoding lysis protein from a Chlorella virus, water samples
were collected from 13 aquatic environments located in the Kanto area of Japan.
Eight water samples contained plaque-forming viruses on Chlorella sp. NC64A, but 
no virus was detected in the other five samples. A novel Chlorella virus, CVN1,
was isolated from the Inba-numa marsh sample. CVN1 genomic DNA was partially
digested and shotgun cloned into pUC118 to identify the genomic region
responsible for the lytic phenotype on Chlorella sp. NC64A. A DNA fragment which 
encoded two ORFs, ORF1 and ORF2, was obtained by antialgal assay. The ORF2 gene
product, CL2, consisted of 333 amino acids showing antialgal activity not only on
the original host of Chlorella sp. NC64A, but also on the heterogeneous hosts of 
Chlorella vulgaris C-27 and C. vulgaris C-207. CL2 showed a weak homology (19.8% 
amino acid identity) to mannuronate lyase SP2 from Turbo cornutus. CL2 in
Escherichia coli cells was purified using a nickel chelate column. Lyase activity
of purified CL2 on alginic acid was observed in an enzyme assay. The specific
activity of purified CL2 was 2.1x10(-2) U mg(-1), the optimum pH for enzymatic
activity was 10.5, and Ca(2+) was required for enzyme activity. This is the first
report of a Chlorella virus protein with lyase activity.

PMID: 10547443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Mol Biol. 1999 Nov 12;293(5):1005-15.

Transcription factors of the Sp1 family: interaction with E2F and regulation of
the murine thymidine kinase promoter.

Rotheneder H(1), Geymayer S, Haidweger E.

Author information: 
(1)Vienna Biocenter, University of Vienna, Austria. jr@mol.univie.ac.at

Promoters of growth and cell cycle regulated genes frequently carry binding sites
for transcription factors of the E2F and Sp1 families. We have demonstrated
recently that direct interaction between Sp1 and a subgroup of the E2F factors is
essential for the regulation of certain promoters. We show here that the amino
acids necessary for this interaction in both cases are located within the DNA
binding domain. This is in line with the assumption, that the interaction between
E2F and Sp-factors contributes to promoter-specificity. Cyclin A, which binds to 
E2F-1 in close vicinity to Sp1 does not interfere with this interaction. Moreover
we have investigated the ability of other members of the Sp1 family to interact
with E2F-1 and to regulate the activity of the E2F and Sp1 dependent murine
thymidine kinase promoter. All four factors of the Sp1 family are able to bind
E2F-1 in co-immunoprecipitation and GST-pull down experiments. Mobility shift
assays with oligonucleotides comprising the Sp1, or both the Sp1 and the E2F
binding site suggest that Sp1 and Sp3 supply most if not all activity binding to 
the GC-box of the thymidine kinase promoter in murine fibroblasts. Reporter gene 
assays in Drosophila melanogaster SL2 cells and murine fibroblast 3T6 cells
demonstrate that the thymidine kinase promoter is activated strongly by Sp1 and
Sp3, weakly by Sp4, and not at all by Sp2. Co-expression of E2F-1 results in
synergistic activation in 3T6 but not in SL2 cells.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10547281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Hum Mol Genet. 1999 Nov;8(12):2205-9.

The origin of the extra Y chromosome in males with a 47,XYY karyotype.

Robinson DO(1), Jacobs PA.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, UK. drobinso@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk

The presence of an extra Y chromosome in males is a relatively common occurrence,
the 47,XYY karyotype being found in approximately 1 in 1000 male births. The
error of disjunction must occur either during paternal meiosis II or as a
post-zygotic mitotic error, both of which are rare events for other chromosomes. 
It is therefore of interest to determine when errors of Y chromosome disjunction 
occur. It is possible to distinguish between the different mechanisms of
non-disjunction by analysing DNA polymorphisms at the distal tip of the Xp/Yp
pseudoautosomal region in 47,XYY males, their parents and in some cases paternal 
grandparents. A cohort of 28 non-mosaic 47,XYY males was analysed. The results
show that there are at least two mechanisms causing non-disjunction of the Y
chromosome. In 16 of the 19 cases from which parents were available, the extra Y 
was generated by non-disjunction at meiosis II after a normal chiasmate meiosis
I. Three cases were due to either a post-zygotic mitotic error or non-disjunction
at meiosis II after a nullichiasmate meiosis I. Of the nine cases with no
parental DNA available, at least four were due to meiosis II non-disjunction
following a normal chiasmate meiosis I.

PMID: 10545600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Leukemia. 1999 Oct;13(10):1617-9.

Identification of false-positive CBFbeta/MYH11 RT-PCR results.

Hackwell SM(1), Robinson DO, Harvey JF, Ross FM.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury
SP2 8BJ, UK.

Comment in
    Leukemia. 2000 May;14(5):944-5.

Persistent problems with false positive results were encountered when carrying
out a published RT-PCR method to detect the CBFbeta/MYH11 transcripts associated 
with the inv(16)(p13q22) cytogenetic abnormality in acute myeloid leukaemia.
These were shown to be due to amplification of part of the intronic MYH11
sequence, presumably from very small amounts of contaminating DNA or unspliced
primary RNA transcripts, amplified because of partial homology of the CBFbeta3
primer to intronic MYH11 sequence.

PMID: 10516764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Mol Biol. 1999 Sep 24;292(3):669-84.

Recruiting Zn2+ to mediate potent, specific inhibition of serine proteases.

Katz BA(1), Luong C.

Author information: 
(1)Axys Pharmaceutical Corporation, 385 Oyster Point Boulevard, South San
Francisco, CA 94080, USA. bak@axyspharm.com

As regulators of ubiquitous biological processes, serine proteases can cause
disease states when inappropriately expressed or regulated, and are thus rational
targets for inhibition by drugs. Recently we described a new inhibition mechanism
applicable for the development of potent, selective small molecule serine
protease inhibitors that recruit physiological Zn2+ to mediate high affinity
(sub-nanomolar) binding. To demonstrate some of the structural principles by
which the selectivity of Zn2+-mediated serine protease inhibitors can be
developed toward or against a particular target, here we determine and describe
the structures of thrombin-BABIM-Zn2+, -keto-BABIM-Zn2+, and -hemi-BABIM-Zn2+
(where BABIM is bis(5-amidino-2-benzimidazolyl)methane, keto-BABIM is
bis(5-amidino-2-benzimidazolyl)methane ketone, and hemi-BABIM is
(5-amidino-2-benzimidazolyl)(2-benzimidazolyl)methane), and compare them with the
corresponding trypsin-inhibitor-Zn2+ complexes. Inhibitor binding is mediated by 
a Zn ion tetrahedrally coordinated by two benzimidazole nitrogen atoms of the
inhibitor, by N(epsilon2)His57, and by O(gamma)Ser195. The structures of
Zn2+-free trypsin-BABIM and -hemi-BABIM were also determined at selected pH
values for comparison with the corresponding Zn2+-mediated complexes. To assess
some of the physiological parameters important for harnessing Zn2+ as a
co-inhibitor, crystal structures at multiple pH and [Zn2+] values were determined
for trypsin-keto-BABIM. The Kdvalue of Zn2+ for the binary trypsin-keto-BABIM
complex was estimated to be <12 nM at pH 7.06 by crystallographic determination
of the occupancy of bound Zn2+ in trypsin-keto-BABIM crystals soaked at this pH
in synthetic mother liquor containing inhibitor and 100 nM Zn2+. In synthetic
mother liquor saturated in Zn2+, trypsin-bound keto-BABIM is unhydrated at pH
9.00 and 9.93, and has an sp2 hybridized ketone carbon bridging the
5-amidinobenzimidazoles, whereas at pH 7.00 and 8.00 it undergoes hydration and a
change in geometry upon addition of water to the bridging carbonyl group. To show
how Zn2+ could be recruited as a co-inhibitor of other enzymes, a method was
developed for locating in protein crystals Zn2+ binding sites where design of
Zn2+-mediated ligands can be attempted. Thus, by soaking trypsin crystals in high
concentrations of Zn2+ in the absence of a molecular inhibitor, the site where
Zn2+ mediates binding of BABIM and analogs was identified, as well as another
Zn2+ binding site.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10497030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Sep 24;263(2):366-71.

The human luteinizing hormone receptor gene promoter: activation by Sp1 and Sp3
and inhibitory regulation.

Geng Y(1), Tsai-Morris CH, Zhang Y, Dufau ML.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology and Reproduction Research Branch, National Institutes of Child
Health and Human Development, Bethesda, Maryland, 20892, USA.

To understand the transcriptional mechanism(s) of human LH receptor (LHR) gene
expression, we have identified the dominant functional cis-elements that regulate
the activity of the promoter domain (-1 to -176 bp from ATG). Mutagenesis
demonstrated that the promoter activity was dependent on two Sp1 domains (-79 bp,
-120 bp) in a transformed normal placental cell (PLC) and the choriocarcinoma JAR
cell. Both elements interacted with endogenous Sp1 and Sp3 factors but not with
Sp2 or Sp4. In Drosophila SL2 cells, the promoter was activated by either Sp1 or 
Sp3. An ERE half-site (EREhs) at -174 bp was inhibitory (by 100%), but was
unresponsive to estradiol and did not bind the estrogen receptor or orphan
receptors ERR1 and SF-1. The 5' upstream sequence (-177 to -2056 bp) inhibited
promoter activity in PLC by 60%, but only minimally in JAR cells. Activation of
the human LHR promoter through Sp1/3 factors is negatively regulated through
EREhs and upstream sequences to exert control of gene expression.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10491299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Nucl Med. 1999 Aug;40(8):1381-91.

Methods to avoid adverse effect of circulating antigen on biodistribution of
125I-labeled antiTac dsFv: preinjection of intact antibody versus clearance of
antigen with adivin-biotin system.

Kobayashi H(1), Sun BF, Yoo TM, Le N, Kim MK, Paik CH, Pastan I, Waldmann TA,
Carrasquillo JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Warren G. Magnuson Clinical Center, National
Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1180,
USA.

The presence of circulating antigen may adversely affect the biodistribution of a
radiolabeled antibody. The alpha subunit of the interleukin-2 receptor
(IL-2Ralpha) is a cell-surface receptor that is overexpressed in various
hematologic malignancies and in benign disorders. This receptor is cleaved from
the cell surface and can be found in high concentrations in serum. Radiolabeled
antiTac antibodies are being evaluated to target this receptor. Previous studies 
have shown that circulating soluble IL-2Ralpha (slL-2Ralpha) adversely affected
the biodistribution of radiolabeled antiTac disulfide-stabilized (ds)Fv. In this 
study, we compared blocking and clearing sIL-2Ralpha to see which better
minimized its interference with the biodistribution of radiolabeled antiTac
dsFv.METHODS: Two models of sIL-2Ralpha were used: one consisted of mice given
intravenous sIL-2Ralpha and the other consisted of mice bearing SP2/Tac tumor
xenografts (IL-2Ralpha positive), which shed sIL-2Ralpha. We biotinylated
humanized antiTac monoclonal antibody (bt-HuTac) and radiolabeled it with 125I.
We then compared its biodistribution with that of humanized antiTac monoclonal
antibody IgG (HuTac). We examined the biodistribution of an injected dose of
125I-labeled antiTac dsFv after a preinjection of HuTac to block the sIL-2Ralpha 
epitope and after a preinjection of bt-HuTac, followed by an avidin chase.
RESULT: The 125I-labeled bt-HuTac cleared from the serum at a rate similar to
that of HuTac. The avidin chase effectively cleared >92% of circulating
125I-labeled bt-HuTac within 20 min and was also effective in clearing
sIL-2Ralpha. In comparison, HuTac prolonged the retention of 125I-labeled
sIL-2Ralpha in the circulation, and the avidin chase decreased 125I-labeled
sIL-2Ralpha to <18% of control. Although the two-step antigen-clearing system
effectively cleared the antigen from the circulation and improved the
biodistribution of 125I-labeled dsFv, the HuTac preinjection method had a similar
but longer lasting beneficial effect on 125I-labeled dsFv biodistribution.
CONCLUSION: Preinjection of either HuTac or bt-HuTac with avidin chase improved
the biodistribution of subsequently administered 125I-labeled antiTac dsFv by
preventing the dsFv from binding to the sIL-2Ralpha, but the HuTac blocking
method is simpler and longer lasting.

PMID: 10450692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Ethnopharmacol. 1999 Jul;66(1):57-69.

Evaluation of anti-inflammatory-related activity of essential oils from the
leaves and resin of species of Protium.

Siani AC(1), Ramos MF, Menezes-de-Lima O Jr, Ribeiro-dos-Santos R,
Fernadez-Ferreira E, Soares RO, Rosas EC, Susunaga GS, Guimarães AC, Zoghbi MG,
Henriques MG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratórios de Química de Produtos Naturais e Farmacologia Aplicada,
Far-Manguinhos, FIOCRUZ, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil. siani@gene.dbbm.fiocruz.br

The resins and leaves of species of Protium are commonly used by folk medicine.
In the present study, we analyse the pharmacological effects of essential oils
obtained by steam distillation (leaves and resin) from Protium species. Analysis 
by gas chromatography (GC) coupled to mass spectrometry and retention indices
calculations demonstrate that the resin oil is constituted mainly of monoterpenes
and phenylpropanoids: alpha-terpinolene (22%), p-cymene (11%), p-cimen-8-ol
(11%), limonene (5%) and dillapiol (16%), whereas sesquiterpenes predominate as
the volatile constituents of the leaves. The resin of Protium heptaphyllum (PHP) 
and leaves of P. strumosum (PS), P. grandifolium (PG), P. lewellyni (PL) and P.
hebetatum (PHT) were screened for anti-inflammatory activity by the use of mouse 
pleurisy model induced by zymosan (500 microg/cavity) and lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) (250 ng/cavity), for antinociceptive effect (by means of preventing mice
abdominal writhings), as well as NO production from stimulated macrophages and
proliferation of neoplasic cell lines: Neuro-2a (mouse neuroblastoma), SP2/0
(mouse plasmocytoma) and J774 (mouse monocytic cell line). The oils from PHP, PS 
and PL were able to inhibit protein extravasation but no sample inhibited total
or differential leucocyte counts after administrating p.o. (100 mg/kg) 1 h before
stimulation with zymosan. The oils from PG, PL and PHT inhibited neutrophil
accumulation whereas PHP and specially PL inhibited LPS-induced eosinophil
accumulation in mouse pleural cavity. PHT was also able to inhibit mononuclear
cells accumulation. Antinociceptive effect was not observed, when animals
received oral administration of the essential oils (100 mg/kg). In vitro
treatment with essential oils (100 microg/well) changed the NO production from
stimulated mouse macrophages. PHP inhibited in 74% and PS in 46% the LPS-induced 
NO production. In contrast, treatment with PL was able to increase in 49% the NO 
production. Cell lines proliferation was affected by the oils assayed in the
range of 60-100% for Neuro-2a, 65-95% for SP2/0 and 70-90% for J774. Taken
together these results showed that essential oils could be useful as efficient
pharmacological tools.

PMID: 10432208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Acta Pharm Hung. 1999 Jun;69(3):115-22.

[Preparation and characterization of potential antineoplastic agents].

[Article in Hungarian]

Orfi L(1), Wáczek F, Szabó M, Kövesdi I, Mészáros G, Idei M, Horváth A, Hollósy
F, Mák M, Szegedi Z, Szende B, Kéri G, Noszál B.

Author information: 
(1)Semmelweis Orvostudományi Egyetem, Gyógyszerészi Kémiai Intézet, Budapest.

A parallel combinatorial library of over sixteen hundred compounds has been
designed and synthesized for the development of new potential peptidomimetic
protein tyrosine kinase (PTK) inhibitor leads that is aimed for intervening with 
the substrate binding site of the pp60c-src enzyme. The new structures were based
on known PTK inhibitors having at least two variously substituted aromatic
moieties attached by spacer groups of different length and flexibility. Eleven
bis-aryl type inhibitory compounds were found in the range of 18-100 micromolar
IC50 concentrations from combinations of twelve different substituents. Molecular
modeling of the active compounds showed a characteristic distance of 13-14 A
between the farthest sp2 carbon atoms of the two aromatic rings. Conformational
analysis of several peptide substrates recently found for pp60c-src PTK [5,6,7]
showed that the energy minimized conformers had the same distance between two
aromatic moieties. Several compounds in the library not only showed remarkable
PTK inhibitory activity but also a significant apoptosis inducing effect on HT-29
human colon tumor cells.

PMID: 10401154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Hybridoma. 1999 Apr;18(2):203-9.

Production and characterization of a specific rubisco monoclonal antibody, and
its use in rubisco quantification during Zantedeschia aethiopica spathe
development.

Tavares RM(1), Karmali A, Clemente A, Pais MS.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biologia, Universidade do Minho, Campus de Gualtar, Braga,
Portugal.

Ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase was purified from leaves of
Zantedeschia aethiopica and used to immunize female Balb/c mice. Monoclonal
antibodies (MAbs) were raised by hybridoma technology using Sp2/0 myeloma cells
as fusion partner. A random selected IgG2a subclass MAb was purified from ascitic
fluid by affinity chromatography on Protein A-Sepharose CL-4B, with a recovery of
84.3% and it was apparently homogeneous on native PAGE. The monoclonality of the 
purified MAb was determined by IEF. The MAb was highly specific for Rubisco from 
leaves of Z. aethiopica as determined by Western blotting and was used to
determine the concentration of Rubisco protein by enzyme-linked immunoadsorbent
assay (ELISA), at three distinct stages of Z. aethiopica spathe development and
in the leaf. The results suggest de novo synthesis of Rubisco during the spathe
regreening, which could explain, at least in part, the increase of photosynthetic
activity observed during regreening.

PMID: 10380020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Biotechnol. 1999 Apr 15;69(2-3):151-62.

Glucose 1- and 2-oxidases from fungal strains: isolation and production of
monoclonal antibodies.

Karmali A(1), Oliveira P.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Engenharia Química do Instituto Superior de Engenharia de
Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.

Monoclonal antibodies (Mabs) against purified glucose 2-oxidase (EC 1.1.3.10)
from Coriolus versicolor were raised by hybridoma technology using Sp2/0 myeloma 
cells as a fusion partner. Hybrid growth was observed in 42% of culture wells and
30% of these (i.e. 30 culture wells) contained anti-glucose 2-oxidase activity.
Three positive wells containing hybrid cell lines were selected and cloned twice 
by the limiting dilution method and two hybridoma clones (E1A5 and E1A6)
secreting Mabs were selected at random for purification and characterisation
purposes. Both cell lines secreted Mabs of IgM class which were purified by gel
filtration chromatography on a Sephacryl S-200 column with a final recovery of
80% and a purification factor of 16. The purified preparations were apparently
homogeneous on native PAGE running with a M(r) of 950 kDa. Mabs were highly
specific for glucose 2-oxidase as determined by Western blotting. These Mabs also
crossreacted with glucose 1- and 2-oxidases from other fungal sources
(Phanerochaeta chrysosporium, Penicillium amagasakiense and Aspergillus niger) as
determined by Western blotting and by ELISA. Both glucose 1- and 2-oxidases from 
C. versicolor, P. chrysosporium, P. amagasakiense and A. niger were purified by
hydrophobic interaction chromatography on Sepharose 4B-triazine dye with a
recovery of enzyme activity in the range 85-92%. Purified preparations of glucose
oxidases from fungal strains were apparently homogeneous on native PAGE. Glucose 
2-oxidases were more hydrophobic than glucose 1-oxidases as determined by their
chomatographic behaviour on Sepharose 4B-Cibacron Red G-E which could be used to 
study their roles in lignin biodegradation.

PMID: 10361723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Bioconjug Chem. 1999 May-Jun;10(3):447-53.

Chemical modification to reduce renal uptake of disulfide-bonded variable region 
fragment of anti-Tac monoclonal antibody labeled with 99mTc.

Kim IS(1), Yoo TM, Kobayashi H, Kim MK, Le N, Wang QC, Pastan I, Carrasquillo JA,
Paik CH.

Author information: 
(1)Nuclear Medicine Department, Warren G. Magnuson Clinical Center, Building 21, 
Room 136, and Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The anti-Tac disulfide-bonded variable region fragment (dsFv) is a genetically
engineered, 25 kDa, murine monoclonal antibody fragment that recognizes the alpha
subunit of the interleukin-2 receptor (IL-2Ralpha). The dsFv radiolabeled with
the tetrafluorophenyl ester (TFP) of [99mTc]mercaptoacetyltriglycine
([99mTc]MAG3-TFP) showed rapid tumor uptake and fast blood clearance in mice,
resulting in high tumor-to-nontumor background ratios. However, its high renal
uptake was a problem. In this study, we tested the effect of lowering the
isoelectric point (pI) of dsFv to <9.3 on renal and tumor uptake. To lower the
pI, dsFv was acylated simultaneously with both [99mTc]MAG3-TFP and TFP-glycolate.
The acylation of dsFv decreased its pI and its immunoreactivity inversely
proportional to the molar ratio of TFP-glycolate to dsFv, whereas the conjugation
of [99mTc]MAG3-TFP alone did not. When biodistribution studies were performed in 
nude mice, the effect of the lowered pI was reflected primarily in decreased
kidney uptake and whole-body retention, with its highest effect seen at the
earliest time point (15 min) after injection. In tumor-bearing nude mice,
glycolated [99mTc]MAG3-dsFv with a pI range of 4.9 to 6.5 accumulated selectively
into IL-2 receptor-positive SP2/Tac tumor similar to that of the control
[125I]dsFv labeled by the Iodo-Gen method, whereas its renal uptake was 25% of
[125I]dsFv at 15 min. At 90 min, the ratios of tumor to receptor-negative SP2/0
tumor, liver, kidney, stomach, and blood had peaked at 10.9, 8.5, 0.3, 5.0, and
6.2, respectively, for the glycolated [99mTc]MAG3-dsFv. The corresponding ratios 
for [125I]dsFv were 3.7, 5.0, 0.1, 1.5, and 2.1, respectively.

PMID: 10346877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Eur J Biochem. 1999 Jun;262(2):435-46.

Optimized expression and catalytic properties of a wheat obtusifoliol
14alpha-demethylase (CYP51) expressed in yeast. Complementation of erg11Delta
yeast mutants by plant CYP51.

Cabello-Hurtado F(1), Taton M, Forthoffer N, Kahn R, Bak S, Rahier A,
Werck-Reichhart D.

Author information: 
(1)Département dEnzymologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire, Institut de Biologie
Moléculaire des Plantes, Strasbourg, France.

CYP51s form the only family of P450 proteins conserved in evolution from
prokaryotes to fungi, plants and mammals. In all eukaryotes, CYP51s catalyse
14alpha-demethylation of sterols. We have recently isolated two CYP51 cDNAs from 
sorghum [Bak, S., Kahn, R.A., Olsen, C. E. & Halkier, B.A. (1997) Plant J. 11,
191-201] and wheat [Cabello-Hurtado, F., Zimmerlin, A., Rahier, A., Taton, M.,
DeRose, R., Nedelkina, S., Batard, Y., Durst, F., Pallett, K.E. &
Werck-Reichhart, D. (1997) Biophys. Biochem. Res. Commun. 230, 381-385]. Wheat
and sorghum CYP51 proteins show a high identity (92%) compared with their
identity with their fungal and mammalian orthologues (32-39%). Data obtained with
plant microsomes have previously suggested that differences in primary sequences 
reflect differences in sterol pathways and CYP51 substrate specificities between 
animals, fungi and plants. To investigate more thoroughly the properties of the
plant CYP51, the wheat enzyme was expressed in yeast strains overexpressing
different P450 reductases as a fusion with either yeast or plant (sorghum)
membrane targeting sequences. The endogenous sterol demethylase gene (ERG11) was 
then disrupted. A sorghum-wheat fusion protein expressed with the Arabidopsis
thaliana reductase ATR1 showed the highest level of expression and activity. The 
expression induced a marked proliferation of microsomal membranes so as to obtain
70 nmol P450.(L culture)-1, with CYP51 representing 1.5% of microsomal protein.
Without disruption of the ERG11 gene, the expression level was fivefold reduced. 
CYP51 from wheat complemented the ERG11 disruption, as the modified yeasts did
not need supplementation with exogenous ergosterol and grew normally under
aerobic conditions. The fusion plant enzyme catalysed 14alpha-demethylation of
obtusifoliol very actively (Km,app = 197 microm, kcat = 1.2 min-1) and with very 
strict substrate specificity. No metabolism of lanosterol and eburicol, the
substrates of the fungal and mammalian CYP51s, nor metabolism of herbicides and
fatty acids was detected in the recombinant yeast microsomes. Surprisingly
lanosterol (Ks = 2.2 microM) and eburicol (Ks = 2.5 microm) were found to bind
the active site of the plant enzyme with affinities higher than that for
obtusifoliol (Ks = 289 microM), giving typical type-I spectra. The amplitudes of 
these spectra, however, suggested that lanosterol and eburicol were less
favourably positioned to be metabolized than obtusifoliol. The recombinant enzyme
was also used to test the relative binding constants of two azole compounds,
LAB170250F and gamma-ketotriazole, which were previously reported to be potent
inhibitors of the plant enzyme. The Ks of plant CYP51 for LAB170250F (0.29
microM) and gamma-ketotriazole (0.40 microM) calculated from the type-II sp2
nitrogen-binding spectra were in better agreement with their reported effects as 
plant CYP51 inhibitors than values previously determined with plant microsomes.
This optimized expression system thus provides an excellent tool for detailed
enzymological and mechanistic studies, and for improving the selectivity of
inhibitory molecules.

PMID: 10336628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Hum Antibodies. 1999;9(1):1-7.

Improved fusion partners transfected with DNA fragment encoding IL-11 on
generation of human B lymphocyte hybridomas.

Zhu Y(1), Jin B, Jiang S, Sun K, Sun C, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Fourth Military Medical University, Shaanxi, P.R.
China. zhuyong@ihw.com.cn

IL-11, a less identified cytokine, possesses some overlapping functions with IL-6
that are able to facilitate the growth and antibody secretion of B lymphocyte
hybridomas. In this report, a DNA fragment encoding human IL-11 was transduced
into fusion partners (mouse myelomas Ag8.653 and SP2/0, and human lymphoblastoid 
cell line HF2) mediated by lipofection. The transfected cells selected with G418 
secreted IL-11 constitutively over the range of 32.4 +/- 10.5 units/ml to 76.6
+/- 18.4 units/ml, which could be inhibited by an IL-11 neutralizing MAb up to
80%. The fusion frequency of PBMC doubled, while that of LCLs displayed a 2.4- or
3.3-fold increase, when fused with the transfected fusion partners, respectively.
The derived hybridomas from IL-11 secreting fusion partner secreted 3 or 4 times 
as many immunoglobulins as that from its ancestor. Our data indicate that IL-11
gene transfected fusion partners are improved cell lines for generation of human 
B lymphocyte hybridomas, and IL-11 may contribute to the increased fusion
frequency and antibody secretion of B lymphocyte hybridomas.

PMID: 10331181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Hum Reprod. 1999 May;14(5):1217-8.

Serum concentrations of follicle stimulating hormone may predict premature
ovarian failure in FRAXA premutation women.

Murray A(1), Webb J, MacSwiney F, Shipley EL, Morton NE, Conway GS.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury, Wiltshire,
SP2 8BJ, UK.

It is now recognized that female carriers of fragile X premutations are at
increased risk of premature ovarian failure. We have studied 51 premenopausal
women from fragile X families, to determine whether premutation carriers have
variations in the hormonal markers of menopause, compared to full mutations and
controls. We found a significant increase in serum follicle stimulating hormone
in premutation carriers, suggesting that as a group they will enter menopause
before full mutation carriers and unaffected controls. These results have
important implications for fertility in these women.

PMCID: PMC3728645
PMID: 10325264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Acta Paediatr. 1999 Mar;88(3):275-83.

Mutation distribution and CYP21/C4 locus variability in Brazilian families with
the classical form of the 21-hydroxylase deficiency.

Paulino LC(1), Araujo M, Guerra G Jr, Marini SH, De Mello MP.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biologia Molecular e Engenharia Genética, Universidade Estadual de
Campinas, Brazil.

Deficiency of adrenal steroid 21-hydroxylase is the most common form of
congenital adrenal hyperplasia and it is considered to be responsible for 90% of 
the disease. This paper describes for the first time the CYP21B mutation profile 
in Brazilian patients. We genotyped 41 families with at least one individual
affected with the classical form of the 21-hydroxylase deficiency, representing
74 unrelated alleles. In order to characterize different disease-causing alleles,
genotyping was performed by Southern blot analysis with three restriction
enzymes, allele-specific oligonucleotide hybridization, and allele-specific PCR. 
Different alleles were distinguished by TaqI C4B RFLP, gene duplications or
deletions of either CYP21A + C4B or CYP21B + C4B, large gene conversions and
eight mutations that might have been introduced into CYP21B from CYP21A by
microconversion events. At least one mutation was detected in 24 different
disease-causing alleles, which represents about 85% of the affected alleles in
those families. The frequency of the 30 kb deletion of CYP21B was lower than that
described for Caucasians. The mutation Sp2 showed the highest frequency (24.65%) 
and was present mainly in salt-wasting patients, although it was also detected in
some patients with the simple virilizing form of the disease. Conversely, I172N
showed a frequency of 18.91% and was found mostly in patients affected with the
simple virilizing form of the disease. Five other mutations were determined at
low frequency, but CL6 was not found in any of the tested alleles.

PMID: 10229037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Vet Microbiol. 1999 Mar 31;66(1):67-80.

Serological characterization of Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae serotype 2
strains by using polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies.

Bouh KC(1), Mittal KR.

Author information: 
(1)Départment de Pathologie et Microbiologie, Faculté de Médecine Vétérinaire,
Université de Montréal, Saint-hyacinthe, Que, Canada.

The antigenic differences between strains of serotype 2 of both biotypes I and II
of Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae were studied by using several serological
techniques. Monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) against A. pleuropneumoniae biotype I
serotype 2 were produced by fusion of spleen cells of BALb/c mice immunized with 
whole-cell (WC) suspension with SP2/O-Ag14 murine myeloma cells. Desirable MAbs
were selected by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) using WC as antigen.
MAbs MK-7 and MK-10 identified multiple bands of lipopolysaccharide in
Western-blot. Treatment of WC with proteinase K and sodium periodate indicated
that both MAb binding sites were carbohydrates in nature. In both ELISA and
Western-blot, MAbs MK-7 and MK-10 recognized only biotype I serotype 2 isolates. 
Neither MAb MK-7 nor MK-10 reacted with reference strains of remaining serotypes 
of A. pleuropneumoniae and other Gram-negative bacteria tested. The results
obtained with various serological tests showed that strains of serotype 2 biotype
I shared antigenic determinants with strain N-282 of serotype 2 biotype II, but
not with strain N-273 of serotype 1 biotype II. It is suggested that data
obtained from this study may be helpful in the development of specific serotyping
and serodiagnostic reagents of A. pleuropneumoniae strains.

PMID: 10223323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 1999 Feb;16(4):845-62.

A modified version of the Cornell et al. force field with improved sugar pucker
phases and helical repeat.

Cheatham TE 3rd(1), Cieplak P, Kollman PA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biophysical Chemistry, National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-5626, USA.

We have examined some subtle parameter modifications to the Cornell et al. force 
field, which has proven quite successful in reproducing nucleic acid properties, 
but whose C2'-endo sugar pucker phase and helical repeat for B DNA appear to be
somewhat underestimated. Encouragingly, the addition of a single V2 term
involving the atoms C(sp3)-O-(sp3)-C(sp3)-N(sp2), which can be nicely
rationalized because of the anomeric effect (lone pairs on oxygen are
preferentially oriented relative to the electron withdrawing N), brings the sugar
pucker phase of C2'-endo sugars to near perfect agreement with ab initio
calculations (W near 162 degrees). Secondly, the use of high level ab initio
calculations on entire nucleosides (in contrast to smaller model systems
necessitated in 1994-95 by computer limitations) lets one improve the chi
torsional potential for nucleic acids. Finally, the O(sp3)-C(sp3)- C(sp3)-O(sp3) 
V2 torsional potential has been empirically adjusted to reproduce the ab initio
calculated relative energy of C2'-endo and C3'-endo nucleosides. These
modifications are tested in molecular dynamics simulations of mononucleosides (to
assess sugar pucker percentages) and double helices of DNA and RNA (to assess
helical and sequence specific structural properties). In both areas, the modified
force field leads to improved agreement with experimental data.

PMID: 10217454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Biochemistry. 1999 Apr 6;38(14):4398-402.

Alpha-secondary tritium kinetic isotope effects indicate hydrogen tunneling and
coupled motion occur in the oxidation of L-malate by NAD-malic enzyme.

Karsten WE(1), Hwang CC, Cook PF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Oklahoma, Norman
73019, USA.

The NAD-malic enzyme from Ascaris suum catalyzes the divalent metal ion-dependent
oxidative decarboxylation of L-malate to give pyruvate and CO2, with NAD+ as the 
oxidant. Alpha-secondary tritium kinetic isotope effects were measured with NAD+ 
or APAD+ and L-malate-2-H(D) and several different divalent metal ions. The
alpha-secondary tritium kinetic isotope effects are slightly higher than 1 with
NAD+ and L-malate as substrates, much larger than the expected inverse isotope
effect for a hybridization change from sp2 to sp3. The alpha-secondary tritium
kinetic isotope effects are reduced to values near 1 with L-malate-2-D as the
substrate, regardless of the metal ion that is used. Data suggest the presence of
quantum mechanical tunneling and coupled motion in the malic enzyme reaction when
NAD+ and malate are used as substrates. Isotope effects were also measured using 
the D/T method with NAD+ and Mn2+ as the substrate pair. A Swain-Schaad exponent 
of 2.2 (less than the value of 3.26 expected for strictly semiclassical behavior)
is estimated, suggesting the presence of other slow steps along the reaction
pathway. With APAD+ and Mn2+ as the substrate pair, inverse alpha-secondary
tritium kinetic isotope effects are observed, and a Swain-Schaad exponent of 3.3 
is estimated, consistent with rate-limiting hydride transfer and no quantum
mechanical tunneling or coupled motion. Data are discussed in terms of the malic 
enzyme mechanism and the theory developed by Huskey for D/T isotope effects as an
indicator of tunneling [Huskey, W. P. (1991) J. Phys. Org. Chem. 4, 361-366].

PMID: 10194359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Biotechnol Bioeng. 1998 Nov 20;60(4):508-17.

Elevated glutamate dehydrogenase flux in glucose-deprived hybridoma and myeloma
cells: evidence from 1H/15N NMR.

Martinelle K(1), Doverskog M, Jacobsson U, Chapman BE, Kuchel PW, Häggström L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Royal Institute of Technology,
SE-100 44 Stockholm, Sweden.

The glutamine metabolism was studied in glucose-starved and glucose-sufficient
hybridoma and Sp2/0-Ag14 myeloma cells. Glucose starvation was attained by
cultivating the hybridoma cells with fructose instead of glucose, and the myeloma
cells with a low initial glucose concentration which was rapidly exhausted.
Glutamine used in the experiments was labeled with 15N, either in the amine or in
the amide position. The fate of the label was monitored by 1H/15N NMR analysis of
released 15NH+4 and 15N-alanine. Thus, NH+4 formed via glutaminase (GLNase) could
be distinguished from NH+4 formed via glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH). In the
glucose-sufficient cells a small but measurable amount of 15NH+4 released by GDH 
could be detected in both cell lines (0.75 and 0.31 micromole/10(6) cells for
hybridoma and myeloma cells, respectively). The uptake of glutamine and the total
production of NH+4 was significantly increased in both fructose-grown hybridoma
and glucose-starved myeloma cells, as compared to the glucose-sufficient cells.
The increased NH+4 production was due to an increased throughput via GLNase (1.6 
-1.9-fold in the hybridoma, and 2.7-fold in the myeloma cell line) and an even
further increased metabolism via GDH (4.8-7.9-fold in the hybridoma cells, and
3.1-fold in the myeloma cells). The data indicate that both GLNase and GDH are
down-regulated when glucose is in excess, but up-regulated in glucose-starved
cells. It was calculated that the maximum potential ATP production from glutamine
could increase by 35-40 % in the fructose-grown hybridoma cells, mainly due to
the increased metabolism via GDH.

Copyright 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

PMID: 10099457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Biotechnol Bioeng. 1998 Jul 5;59(1):28-39.

Fluxes and enzyme activities in central metabolism of myeloma cells grown in
chemostat culture.

Vriezen N(1), van Dijken JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Enzymology, Kluyver Laboratory for
Biotechnology, Delft University of Technology, Julianalaan 67, 2628 BC Delft, The
Netherlands. N.Vriezen@stm.tudelft.nl

Activities of enzymes in glycolysis, the pentose phosphate pathway, the
tricarboxylic acid cycle, and glutaminolysis have been determined in the mouse
myeloma SP2/0.Ag14. Cells were grown on IMDM medium with 5% serum in steady-state
chemostat culture at a fixed dilution rate of 0.03 h-1. Three culture conditions,
which differed in supply of glucose and oxygen, were chosen so as to change
catabolic fluxes in the central metabolism, while keeping anabolic fluxes
constant. In the three steady-state situations, the ratio between specific rates 
of glucose and glutamine consumption differed by more than twentyfold. The
specific rates of glucose consumption and lactate production were highest at low 
oxygen supply, whereas the specific rate of glutamine consumption was highest in 
the culture fed with low amounts of glucose. Under low oxygen conditions, the
specific production of ammonia increased and the consumption pattern of amino
acids showed large changes compared with the other two cultures. For the three
steady states, activities of key enzymes in glycolysis, the pentose phosphate
pathway, glutaminolysis, and the TCA cycle were measured. The differences in the 
in vivo fluxes were only partially reflected in changes in enzyme levels. The
largest differences were observed in the levels of glycolytic enzymes, which were
elevated under conditions of low oxygen supply. High activities of
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (E.C. 4.1.1.32) in all cultures suggest an
important role for this enzyme as a link between glutaminolysis and glycolysis.
For all enzymes, in vitro activities were found that could accommodate the
estimated maximum in vivo fluxes. These results show that the regulation of
fluxes in central metabolism of mammalian cells occurs mainly through modulation 
of enzyme activity and, to a much lesser extent, by enzyme synthesis.

Copyright 1998 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

PMID: 10099311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. FEBS Lett. 1999 Mar 5;446(1):194-8.

Interaction of tumor and normal blood cells with ethylene oxide and propylene
oxide block copolymers.

Melik-Nubarov NS(1), Pomaz OO, Dorodnych TYu, Badun GA, Ksenofontov AL,
Schemchukova OB, Arzhakov SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Polymer Science, School of Chemistry, Moscow State University,
Russia. melik-nubarov@mail.ru

Ethylene oxide and propylene oxide block copolymers (pluronics) are widely known 
as agents that promote drug penetration across biological barriers. We have
studied the interaction of normal and malignant blood cells with pluronics L61
and P85 that have different hydrophobicity. SP2/0 myeloma cells accumulated
pluronics while normal cells adsorb most of the polymer on the surface.
Interaction of pluronics with cells resulted in drastic changes of membrane
microviscosity. Tumor cell membrane microviscosity decreased after pluronics
adsorption, in contrast to normal cells, whose membrane microviscosity was
enhanced. We suppose that sensitivity of tumor cell membrane microviscosity to
the pluronics action correlates with its permeability for molecular substances.

PMID: 10100641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Immunol Methods. 1999 Mar 4;223(2):165-70.

Continuous antibody production by phytohemagglutinin-L-aggregated hybridoma
cells.

Takamatsu H(1), Kawajiri H, Takahashi Y, Ali AM, Yoshimoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Kanazawa University School of Medicine, Japan.

Phytohemagglutinin-L (PHA-L) induced aggregation of SP2 myeloma and
antibody-producing hybridoma cells. The aggregates were of diverse shapes, and
major-axis length of the hybridoma aggregates was mostly 50-80 microm at 1
microg/ml PHA-L and 100-150 microm at 5 microg/ml. PHA-L did not suppress growth 
rate at these concentrations. The aggregated cells had almost the same antibody
productivity as that of non-aggregated cells in a static culture. Essentially,
identical results were obtained with soybean agglutinin (SBA). On the other hand,
pokeweed mitogen (PWM) did not induce apparent aggregation at a concentration of 
10 microg/ml. These results suggest that lectin binding to particular
carbohydrate moiety on the cell surface is necessary for cell agglutination.
Using PHA-L, a 200-ml suspension culture of aggregated hybridoma cells was
successfully performed in a spinner flask over 10 days. The aggregates were
mainly globular with a diameter of 50-100 microm at 1-2 microg/ml PHA-L. The
aggregation greatly enhanced settlement of hybridoma cells by gravity, and medium
exchanges were thereby easily performed in a short period. During a course of the
semi-continuous culture, antibody concentrations of culture medium were
maintained at approximately 10 microg/ml which was comparable to that of static
culture of the aggregated hybridoma cells. Thus, the lectin aggregation is
applicable to the separation of culture medium from anchorage-independent cells
like hybridomas, and can be employed in a large-scale commercial production of
biologically active proteins.

PMID: 10089095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Recept Signal Transduct Res. 1999 Jan-Jul;19(1-4):355-67.

Molecular dynamics of a vasopressin V2 receptor in a phospholipid bilayer
membrane.

Czaplewski C(1), Pasenkiewicz-Gierula M, Ciarkowski J.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Chemistry, University of Gdansk, Poland.

Molecular dynamics simulations were carried out for a V2 receptor (V2R) model
embedded in a dimyristoylphosphatidylcholine (DMPC) bilayer. Both free and
ligand-bound states of V2R were modeled. Our initial V2R model was obtained using
a rule-based automated method for GPCR modeling and refined using constrained
simulated annealing in vacuo. The docking site of the native vasopressin ligand
was selected and justified upon consideration of ligand-receptor interactions and
structure-activity data. The primary purpose of this work was to investigate the 
usefulness of MD simulation of an integral membrane protein like a GPCR receptor,
upon inclusion of a carefully parameterized surrounding lipid membrane and water.
Physical properties of the system were evaluated and compared with the fully
hydrated pure DMPC bilayer membrane. The solvation interactions, individual
lipid-protein interaction and fluctuations of the protein, the lipid, and water
were analyzed in detail. As expected, the membrane-spanning helices of the
protein fluctuate less than the peripheral loops do. The protein appears to
disturb the local lipid structure. Simulations were carried out using AMBER 4.1
package upon constant number-pressure-temperature (NPT) conditions on massively
parallel computers Cray T3E and IBM SP2.

PMID: 10071770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1998 Dec;109(6):508-14.

Conditioning of the masseter inhibitory reflex by homotopically applied painful
heat in humans.

Andersen OK(1), Svensson P, Ellrich J, Arendt-Nielsen L.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Sensory-Motor Interaction, Aalborg University, Denmark.
oka@smi.auc.dk

During contraction of the jaw-closing muscles, afferent input from the intraoral 
and perioral region can elicit two bilateral suppression periods (SP1 and SP2,
respectively) in the masseter electromyogram (EMG). Non-painful electrical
stimulation 2 cm from the left labial commissure was used in the present study to
evoke these trigeminal inhibitory reflexes. The subjects maintained a level of
50% of their maximum masseter EMG. The degree of suppression was quantified as
the percentage suppression of the mean EMG activity in a fixed post-stimulus
interval (SP2, 40-90 ms). Further, brief (200 ms) painful radiant heat
conditioning stimuli were delivered to the ipsilateral cheek, in order to
investigate the influence of nociceptive input on the (non-nociceptive)
trigeminal masseter inhibitory reflex. Nine different conditions combining
radiant heat and electrical stimuli were used. Twelve stimuli were presented for 
each condition. The radiant heat preceded the electrical test stimuli by fixed
inter-stimulus intervals (ISI), ranging from 100 ms to 500 ms. At 250-350 ms
ISIs, the bilateral SP2 suppression was significantly reduced to less than 10%,
in comparison to an average suppression degree of 32.5% without conditioning
stimuli. The subjects perceived the heat stimulus before the electrical stimulus 
for a majority of the 12 pairs of stimuli at these ISIs. No differences were
found in the VAS ratings for the different conditions. For the contralateral SP1,
larger suppression was seen for the 300 ms ISI compared with stimulation without 
conditioning heat stimuli. Onset and offset for the SP1 was, however, only
detected in three subjects using a criteria of 20% suppression of the
pre-stimulus activity. A pre-pulse inhibitory effect onto inter-neurons in the
SP2 pathways or habituation of the same inter-neurons by the heat stimuli are
suggested as possible explanations for the interaction between the
non-nociceptive and nociceptive input in the present study.

PMID: 10030683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Biol Chem. 1999 Feb 5;274(6):3887-96.

Regulation of the transglutaminase I gene. Identification of DNA elements
involved in its transcriptional control in tracheobronchial epithelial cells.

Medvedev A(1), Saunders NA, Matsuura H, Chistokhina A, Jetten AM.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Section, Laboratory of Pulmonary Pathobiology, NIEHS, National
Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709, USA.

The transglutaminase I (TGase I) gene encodes an enzyme that catalyzes the
cross-linking of structural proteins involved in the formation of the cornified
envelope during squamous cell differentiation. To identify DNA elements important
for the transcriptional control of the TGase I gene, we analyzed the ability of a
2.9-kilobase pair (kb) upstream regulatory region to control the expression of a 
reporter gene in vivo and in vitro. Transgenic mice bearing the pTG(-2.9kb)CAT
construct exhibited the same pattern of tissue-specific expression of CAT as
reported for TGase I. Deletion analysis in transiently transfected rabbit
tracheal epithelial cells indicated that two sequences from bp -490 to -470 and
from -54 to -37 are involved in the activation of TGase I transcription. Point
mutation analysis and mobility shift assays showed that the sequence located
between -54 and -37 is a functional Sp1-like transcription element. Sp1 and Sp3, 
but not Sp2, are part of nuclear protein complexes from differentiated RbTE cells
binding to this site. The element TGATGTCA between bp -490 and -470 is contained 
in a larger 22-bp palindrome and resembles the consensus cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB)/AP-1 element recognized by dimeric complexes of
members of the CREB, ATF, Fos, and Jun families. Mutations in this sequence
greatly reduced promoter activity. Supershift analysis identified CREB1, JunB,
c-Fos, Fra-1, and c-Jun in protein complexes isolated from differentiated rabbit 
tracheal epithelial cells binding to this site. Our study shows that the Sp1- and
CREB/AP-1-like sites act in concert to stimulate transcription of the TGase I
gene. The 2.9-kb promoter region could guide expression of specific genes in the 
granular layer of the epidermis and could be useful in gene therapy.

PMID: 9920944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Jan 19;254(2):334-7.

Interaction of novel thiocolchicine analogs with the tubulin isoforms from bovine
brain.

Banerjee A(1), Kasmala LT, Hamel E, Sun L, Lee KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Health Science Center, San
Antonio, Texas, 78284-7760, USA.

The antimitotic alkaloid colchicine binds to tubulin and inhibits microtubule
assembly. Recently a new series of colchicine derivatives has been synthesized in
which the seven-membered B-ring was shortened to a six-membered ring. In an
effort to study the role of the B-ring substituents in this new series, we have
studied the interaction of two compounds of this series, THC 5 and THC 18, with
tubulin isoforms from bovine brain. We find that THC 18, which has a side chain
with a pi-bonded SP2 conformation, binds differently to the tubulin isoforms,
while THC 5 with a slightly different side chain does not. The results indicate
that the conformation of the B-ring domain plays a major role in the differential
interaction of a colchicine derivative with different tubulin isoforms. The
results will be very important in designing potent antitumor derivatives of
colchicine.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 9918839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Gen Virol. 1998 Dec;79 ( Pt 12):3091-9.

Quasispecies nature of three maize streak virus isolates obtained through
different modes of selection from a population used to assess response to
infection of maize cultivars.

Isnard M(1), Granier M, Frutos R, Reynaud B, Peterschmitt M.

Author information: 
(1)Programme Protection des Cultures, Laboratoire IGEPAM, CIRAD-AMIS, Bât. II,
Montpellier, France.

Three maize streak virus (MSV) isolates were derived from an MSV population used 
to assess the response to infection of maize cultivars. Isolate SP1 was obtained 
from this population through short acquisition and inoculation periods (1 and 5
min, respectively), using a single Cicadulina mbila vector. Isolate SP2 was
derived from SP1 after transmission to a wild perennial host (Coix lacryma-jobi),
on which it was maintained for about 4 years without insect transmission. Isolate
N2A, the most pathogenic isolate, was obtained from the initial population after 
serial passages on almost completely resistant inbred maize lines. The complexity
of each isolate was analysed by RFLP analysis and sequencing based on 120 SP1
clones, 36 SP2 clones and 40 N2A clones. All three isolates were composed of
different but related clones, consistent with a quasispecies structure. The
mutations were distributed throughout the genome. Mutation frequencies, based on 
all available sequences, were 3.8 x 10(-4) for SP1, 10.5 x 10(-4) for SP2 and 6.9
x 10(-4) for N2A. As expected from the bottleneck selection step, the
intra-isolate variability of SP1 was relatively low. Comparison between SP1 and
SP2 showed that SP1 heterogeneity increased during maintenance on the wild host. 
Furthermore, the consensus sequences of SP1 and SP2 differed by two
non-synonymous substitutions in the complementary sense gene repA. N2A had a
relatively low degree of heterogeneity, but was composed of several
sub-populations. The results reflect the influence of the mode of selection of
MSV isolates on their quasispecies organization, i.e. distribution of variants,
and master sequence.

PMID: 9880027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Mol Pharmacol. 1998 Dec;54(6):979-88.

Naturally occurring analogs of lysophosphatidic acid elicit different cellular
responses through selective activation of multiple receptor subtypes.

Fischer DJ(1), Liliom K, Guo Z, Nusser N, Virág T, Murakami-Murofushi K,
Kobayashi S, Erickson JR, Sun G, Miller DD, Tigyi G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, The University of Tennessee, Memphis,
TN 38163, USA.

Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA), plasmalogen-glycerophosphate (alkenyl-GP) and,
cyclic-phosphatidic acid (cyclic-PA) are naturally occurring phospholipid growth 
factors (PLGFs). PLGFs elicit diverse biological effects via the activation of G 
protein-coupled receptors in a variety of cell types. In NIH3T3 fibroblasts, LPA 
and alkenyl-GP both induced proliferation, whereas cyclic-PA was
antiproliferative. LPA and alkenyl-GP decreased cAMP in a pertussis
toxin-sensitive manner, whereas cyclic-PA caused cAMP to increase. LPA and
alkenyl-GP both stimulated the activity of the mitogen-actived protein kinases
extracellular signal regulated kinases 1 and 2 and c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase,
whereas cyclic-PA did not. All three PLGFs induced the formation of stress fibers
in NIH3T3 fibroblasts. To determine whether these lipids activated the same or
different receptors, heterologous desensitization patterns were established among
the three PLGFs by monitoring changes in intracellular Ca2+ in NIH3T3
fibroblasts. LPA cross-desensitized both the alkenyl-GP and cyclic-PA responses. 
Alkenyl-GP cross-desensitized the cyclic-PA response, but only partially
desensitized the LPA response. Cyclic-PA only partially desensitized both the
alkenyl-GP and LPA responses. We propose that pharmacologically distinct subsets 
of PLGF receptors exist that distinguish between cyclic-PA and alkenyl-GP, but
are all activated by LPA. We provide evidence that the PSP24 receptor is
selective for LPA and not activated by the other two PLGFs. RT-PCR and Northern
blot analysis indicate the co-expression of mRNAs encoding the EDG-2, EDG-4, and 
PSP24 receptors in a variety of cell lines and tissues. However, the lack of mRNA
expression for these three receptors in the LPA-responsive Rat-1 and Sp2-O-Ag14
cells suggests that a number of PLGF receptor subtypes remain unidentified.

PMID: 9855625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Immunol Methods. 1998 Oct 1;219(1-2):151-9.

Monoclonal antibodies raised to paraffin wax embedded archival tissue;
feasibility study of their potential to detect novel antigenic markers.

Moran E(1), Larkin A, Cleary I, Barnes C, Kennedy SM, Kelehan P, Clynes M.

Author information: 
(1)National Cell and Tissue Culture Centre, BioResearch Ireland, Dublin City
University, Ireland. moranl@ccmail.dcu.ie

A study to determine the feasibility of using archival paraffin wax embedded
tissue to generate monoclonal antibodies is described. Specifically, monoclonal
antibodies were raised to paraffin wax embedded normal human kidney tissue to
test the possibility of producing antibodies to such tissue samples prior to
attempting generation of antibodies to valuable archival tissue. Multiple
sections (10 x 5 microm) were pooled and dewaxed as for immunohistochemical
procedures and combined with Freund's adjuvant for immunization of BALB/c mice in
vivo. Immunized spleen cells were fused with SP2 myeloma cells and subsequent
clones screened on paraffin wax embedded normal human kidney sections, a range of
cell lines and normal mouse tissue. Supernatants from 11 wells (from a total of
90 wells screened) showed different staining patterns on sections of paraffin wax
embedded kidney. One clone, 1/11C, (isotype IgG1) which exhibited strong staining
on all kidney tubules by immunohistochemical studies (glomeruli interstitium and 
vessels were unstained) and identified a band at 52 kDa on immunoblots of dewaxed
kidney tissue (as used for immunogen) was chosen for further characterization.
Immunoblotting of five mammalian cell lines showed differential expression of
this 52 kDa band (distinct expression on 3/5, weak expression on 2/5 cell lines) 
whereas, all cell lines displayed a band at 44 kDa and a third band at 70 kDa was
observed on 2/5 cell lines. In mouse tissue extracts, the 52 kDa band was
identified in kidney tissue only (not in the lung, liver or spleen) with the 44
kDa and 70 kDa bands weakly expressed in all tissues. This preliminary
investigation of a novel approach to identifying possible new antigenic markers
or producing monoclonal antibodies which react better to known antigens on
sections of paraffin wax embedded tissue showed that this method is feasible. The
need to have a comprehensive screening system in place and the ability to
identify potentially useful clones after the initial screening is paramount due
to the relative scarcity of screening material (archival tissue sections) and the
tedious nature of the screening method.

PMID: 9831396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Biotechniques. 1998 Nov;25(5):824-30.

Rapid hybridoma screening method for the identification of monoclonal antibodies 
to low-abundance cytoplasmic proteins.

O'Reilly LA(1), Cullen L, Moriishi K, O'Connor L, Huang DC, Strasser A.

Author information: 
(1)Royal Melbourne Hospital, VIC, Australia.

Screening assays are the most time-consuming and labor-intensive part of
generating monoclonal antibodies (MAbs). Antibodies identified by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) screening often are not suitable for their intended
application such as immunofluorescence staining. We describe here a rapid and
efficient flow cytometric screening procedure for the identification of MAbs
directed against low-abundance cytoplasmic proteins, in our case, the
pro-apoptotic molecule Bim. Cells from an equal mixture of a parental cell line
and a subline expressing Bim were fixed, permeabilized and incubated with
hybridoma supernatants. The supernatants were derived from a fusion of Sp2/0
plasmacytoma cells and spleen cells from a rat immunized with recombinant
glutathione-S-transferase (GST)-BimL fusion protein. Secondary staining with
fluorochrome-labeled anti-rat Ig antibodies allowed detection of clones
expressing Bim-specific antibodies. The screening procedure was rapid and
efficient, and most monoclonal antibodies identified were proven to be useful for
immunofluorescence staining and other applications.

PMID: 9821584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Virol Methods. 1998 Nov;75(1):9-20.

A colorimetric reverse transcriptase assay optimized for Moloney murine leukemia 
virus, and its use for characterization of reverse transcriptases of unknown
identity.

Malmsten A(1), Ekstrand DH, Akerblom L, Gronowitz JS, Källander CF, Bendinelli M,
Matteucci D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, BMC, Sweden.
anders.malmsten@bmc.uu.se

A non-radioactive reverse transcriptase (RT) assay, reported as useful for
lentivirus RTs, was optimized for the measurement of Moloney murine leukemia
virus (MMuLV) RT. The optimized assay could detect 0.3 microU of MMuLV RT. The
specificities of the MMuLV and lenti RT assays were demonstrated using the RTs of
human immunodeficiency virus type 1, simian immunodeficiency virus, feline
immunodeficiency virus (FIV), visna virus, human T-cell lymphotropic virus type
1, MMuLV and feline leukemia virus (FeLV). An RT activity blocking antibody
(RTb-ab) assay was standardized for Mn2+ dependent MuLV-related RTs. The assay
was used to demonstrate the distinct antigenic properties of RTs from mammalian
MuLV-related retroviruses and lentiviruses. Cross-reactivity between MMuLV RTb-ab
and FeLV RT but not between MMuLV RTb-ab and e.g. FIV RT was demonstrated. An RT 
activity found in the murine myeloma cell line SP2/0 was found to have similar
assay preferences as MMuLV RT, and the MMuLV-RT hyperimmune sera reacted strongly
against this RT, indicating the RT to be of MuLV-related etiology. The use of the
RT and RTb-ab assays for detection and characterization of RTs of known or
unknown identity is discussed.

PMID: 9820570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Development. 1998 Dec;125(23):4757-65.

Cell type-specific regulation of the Drosophila FMRF-NH2 neuropeptide gene by
Apterous, a LIM homeodomain transcription factor.

Benveniste RJ(1), Thor S, Thomas JB, Taghert PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, USA.

We describe the direct and cell-specific regulation of the Drosophila FMRFa
neuropeptide gene by Apterous, a LIM homeodomain transcription factor. dFMRFa and
Apterous are expressed in partially overlapping subsets of neurons, including two
of the seventeen dFMRFa cell types, the Tv neuroendocrine cells and the SP2
interneurons. Apterous contributes to the initiation of dFMRFa expression in Tv
neurons, but not in those dFMRFa neurons that do not express Apterous. Apterous
is not required for Tv neuron survival or morphological differentiation. Apterous
contributes to the maintenance of dFMRFa expression by postembryonic Tv neurons, 
although the strength of its regulation is diminished. Apterous regulation of
dFMRFa expression includes direct mechanisms, although ectopic Apterous does not 
induce ectopic dFMRFa. These findings show that, for a subset of neurons that
share a common neurotransmitter phenotype, the Apterous LIM homeoprotein helps
define neurotransmitter expression with very limited effects on other aspects of 
differentiation.

PMID: 9806924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Immunol. 1998 Nov 1;161(9):4917-23.

Genetic immunization generates cellular and humoral immune responses against the 
nonstructural proteins of the hepatitis C virus in a murine model.

Encke J(1), zu Putlitz J, Geissler M, Wands JR.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Hepatology Laboratory, Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center,
Harvard Medical School, Charlestown 02129, USA.

Exposure to hepatitis C virus (HCV) is associated with a high prevalence of
persistent viral infection and the development of chronic liver disease and
hepatocellular carcinoma. Recovery from acute infection may depend upon the
generation of broad-based cellular immune responses to viral structural and
nonstructural proteins. We used the DNA-based immunization approach in BALB/c
mice to determine whether the HCV nonstructural proteins NS3, NS4, and NS5 will
induce Ab responses, CD4+ Th cell proliferation, and cytokine release in response
to stimulation by recombinant proteins as well as generate CD8+ CTL activity both
in vitro and in vivo. We found that the nonstructural proteins were particularly 
good immunogens and produced cellular immune responses when administered as a DNA
construct. Indeed, a tumor model was established following inoculation of
syngenic SP2/0 cells stably transfected with NS5. We observed protection against 
tumor formation and growth only in mice immunized with the NS5-encoding DNA
construct, establishing the generation of significant CTL activity in vivo by
this technique. The results indicate that genetic immunization may define the
cellular immune response of the host to HCV nonstructural proteins and is a
promising approach for vaccine development.

PMID: 9794426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Am J Vet Res. 1998 Oct;59(10):1203-8.

Establishment of a monoclonal antibody (1/14/16H9) for detection of equine
keratan sulfate.

Okumura M(1), Fujinaga T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: To establish a sensitive and specific monoclonal antibody (MAB)
against equine keratan sulfate (KS) and to develop an enzyme immunoassay for
measurement of the concentration of KS in serum and synovial fluid from horses.
SAMPLE POPULATION: 18 synovial fluid and 48 serum samples were obtained from
clinically normal horses and horses with arthritis.
PROCEDURE: BALB/c mice were immunized with chondroitinase-ABC-digested
proteoglycan monomer from equine joint cartilage, and MAB were raised, using
Sp2/O cells as a fusion partner. A competitive ELISA was optimized, using one of 
the established MAB, and KS concentration in synovial fluid and sera from horses 
was measured.
RESULTS: The high-titer MAB1/14/16H9, which specifically recognizes the epitope
on equine KS, was identified. This antibody had no reactivity with chondroitin
sulfate and core protein of proteoglycan monomers, hyaluronan, heparin, dermatan 
sulfate, and heparan sulfate. A competitive ELISA for determination of KS
concentration was optimized, using this antibody. Precision data were obtained
for the range of 10 to 160 ng/ml. The within- and between-assay coefficients of
variation were 10.0 and 12.7%, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: MAB 1/14/16H9 that specifically recognized equine KS was established
and was used to develop an enzyme immunoassay for measurement of the
concentration of KS in synovial fluid and sera from horses. It is expected that
the assay system using MAB 1/14/16H9 will contribute to evaluation of cartilage
metabolic activity in horses.

PMID: 9781448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 1998 Sep 15;23(18):1937-45.

Importance of the intersegmental trunk muscles for the stability of the lumbar
spine. A biomechanical study in vitro.

Quint U(1), Wilke HJ, Shirazi-Adl A, Parnianpour M, Löer F, Claes LE.

Author information: 
(1)Orthopaedic Clinic University of Essen, Germany. tok030@sp2.power.uni-essen.de

STUDY DESIGN: A biomechanical study was performed to determine the consequences
of a simulation of muscle forces on the loads imposed on the functional spinal
units.
OBJECTIVES: No biomechanical study has investigated the effect of incorporation
of agonist and antagonist muscle forces on the loading of functional spinal
units.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: Spinal disorders and low back pain are increasingly
becoming a worldwide problem. Traditional conservative therapies are intended to 
strengthen the muscles of the trunk using a judicious regimen of physical
exercises.
METHODS: Eighteen whole, fresh-frozen human cadaveric lumbar spine specimens
(L2-S2; average age, 53.4 years) were tested in a spine tester using pure
flexion-extension, lateral bending, and axial moments. The effects of
coactivation of psoas and multifidus muscles on L4-L5 mobility were simulated in 
vitro by applying two pairs of corresponding force vectors to L4. The segmental
stability was defined by the correlation of an applied moment to the resultant
deformation as shown in load-displacement curves, and the range of motion was
defined as the angular deformation at maximum load.
RESULTS: The coactivation of muscles was accompanied by a 20% decrease in the
range of motion (i.e., a significant increase in stability) during lateral
bending and axial moments. Application of flexion-extension moments and muscle
coactivation resulted in a 13% increase in the sagittal range of motion.
CONCLUSIONS: The action of the intersegmental agonist and antagonist muscles
biomechanically increases the overall stiffness (stability) of the intervertebral
joints in axial torque and lateral bending, whereas it may destabilize the
segment in flexion.

PMID: 9779525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. DNA Cell Biol. 1998 Sep;17(9):811-22.

Regulation of mouse Ah receptor (Ahr) gene basal expression by members of the Sp 
family of transcription factors.

Fitzgerald CT(1), Nebert DW, Puga A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Environmental Genetics and Department of Environmental Health,
University of Cincinnati Medical Center, OH 45267-0925, USA.

The aromatic hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a ligand-activated transcription
factor that regulates the expression of several drug-metabolizing enzymes and has
been implicated in immunosuppression, teratogenesis, cell-specific hyperplasia,
and certain types of malignancies and toxicities. The mouse Ahr gene 5' proximal 
promoter region, which contains four potential Sp1 motifs, is required for
efficient basal expression. Using a fragment spanning the region from nt -174 to 
+70 of the Ahr promoter, we found that four regions corresponding to four Sp1
sites were protected from DNase I digestion using nuclear extracts from MLE-12
(lung), F9 (embryonal carcinoma), Hepa-1 (hepatoma), and 41-5a (epidermal) cells.
The Hepa-1 and F9 cell lines were shown by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction and Western blot to contain mRNA and protein for Sp1 and Sp3, but not
Sp2 and Sp4. In electrophoretic mobility shift assays using oligonucleotide
probes corresponding to the four Ahr Sp1 sites, nuclear extracts from Hepa-1 and 
F9 cells formed complexes that were determined immunologically to contain both
Sp1 and Sp3 protein. The two Ahr proximal Sp1 sites (A and B) were shown to bind 
both Sp1 and Sp3 proteins, whereas the more distal sites (C and D) bound only
Sp1. Competition gel shift experiments showed that sites A and B had 10-fold
higher affinity for Sp factors than did sites C and D. To determine the
transactivation potential of each of the four Ahr Sp1 sites, we fused the Ahr
promoter to a luciferase (LUC) reporter gene and transfected the construct into
the Drosophila cell line Schneider-2, which contains no Sp1 or Sp1-like factors. 
Cotransfection of this construct with expression plasmids for each of the Sp
factors revealed that Sp3 was approximately 1.6-fold more efficient than Sp1 in
Ahr transactivation. Mutation of the four Sp1 sites individually and in
combination demonstrated that each site contributes to the overall level of
expression of the reporter gene and that interactions between these sites play a 
minor role in regulation of the Ahr-LUC construct. These results suggest that
basal Ahr expression may be regulated by the expression and distribution of
Sp1-like factors.

PMID: 9778040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 1998 Aug 31;64(4):299-312.

Development of monoclonal antibodies to erythroid progenitors in feline bone
marrow.

Gengozian N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Tennessee, Graduate School of Medicine
and The Thompson Cancer Survival Center, Knoxville 37916, USA.

Feline bone marrow cells can be enriched for erythroid and myeloid progenitors by
counterflow centrifugal elutriation (CCE) and subsequent treatment of the CCE
fractions with the soybean agglutinin (SBA) lectin. Separation of CCE fractions
into SBA(-) and SBA(+) populations yielded cells enriched for BFU-E and CFU-GM
progenitors, respectively. Differential analyses revealed a high percentage of
erythroid lineage cells in the SBA(-) fractions and in the SBA(+) fractions a
high concentration of myeloid cells of varying maturation stages. The latter
cells, but not the CFU-GM progenitors, could be removed by immunomagnetic
depletion from CCE fractions using a monoclonal antibody (MAb) specific for CD13 
cells in feline bone marrow, resulting also in a population containing
predominantly erythroid differentiating cells. Mice were immunized with CCE
fractions enriched for erythroid lineage cells and the splenocytes fused with
SP2/O cells for hybridoma development. Supernatant culture fluids from 400
hybridomas were analyzed by flow cytometry with whole bone marrow and select
CCE/SBA fractions as the target cells. Those hybridomas suggestive of containing 
the desired antibodies as indicated by the percentage staining were subcloned and
the MAbs utilized in clonogenic assays. Treatment of bone marrow cells or CCE
fractions with the MAbs followed by immunomagnetic depletions led to
identification of two, K-1 and Q-3, reactive with the BFU-E progenitor and one,
K-7, reactive only with late-differentiating erythroid lineage cells. Thus,
removal of cells from a CCE/SBA suspension reactive with K-1 or Q-3 led to
greater than 80% reductions of the BFU-E progenitors and a population enriched
for CFU-GM. Removal of cells reactive with MAb K-7, however, led to a marked
enrichment, 5-8-fold, of both BFU-E and CFU-GM progenitors.

PMID: 9764723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1998;81(3-4):273-4.

Assignment1 of Sp genes to rat chromosome bands 7q36 (Sp1), 10q31-->q32.1 (Sp2), 
3q24-->q31 (Sp3) and 6q33 (Sp4) and of the SP2 gene to human chromosome bands
17q21.3-->q22 by in situ hybridization.

Scohy S(1), Van Vooren P, Szpirer C, Szpirer J.

Author information: 
(1)Université Libre de Bruxelles, Département de Biologie Moléculaire,
Rhode-Saint-Genèse, Belgium. ssohy@dbm.ulb.ac.be

PMID: 9730617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Virology. 1998 Aug 1;247(2):160-9.

Morphopoietic determinants of HIV-1 Gag particles assembled in
baculovirus-infected cells.

Gay B(1), Tournier J, Chazal N, Carrière C, Boulanger P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Virologie et Pathogénèse Moléculaire (CNRS UMR 5812), Faculté
de Médecine, Montpellier, France.

The determinants for HIV-1 particle morphology were investigated using various
deletion and insertion mutants of the Gap precursor protein (Gag) expressed in
baculovirus-infected cells and ultrastructural analysis of membrane-enveloped Gag
particles under the electron microscope. Five discrete regions were found to
influence the size, the variability in dimension, and the sphericity of the
particles: (i) the matrix (MA) N-terminal domain, within residues 10-21, the
junctions of (ii) MA-CA (capsid), (iii) CA-spacer peptide SP1 and (iv)
nucleocapsid (NC)-SP2, and (v) the p6gag C-terminus. Internal regions (ii),
(iii), and (iv) contained HIV-1 protease cleavage sites separating major
structural domains. No particle assembly was observed for am276, a MA-CA
polyprotein mutant lacking the C-terminal third of the CA domain. However, MA-CA 
domains including the MHR (residues 277-306), or downstream sequence to CA
residue 357, resulted in the assembly into tubular or filamentous structures,
suggesting a helical symmetry of Gag packing. Mutant amb374, derived from amb 357
by further addition of the heptadecapeptide motif HKARVLAEAMSQVTNSA, overlapping 
the CA-SP1 junction and the SP1 domain, showed a drastic change in the pattern of
Gag assembly, compared to amb357, with formation of spherical particles. These
data suggested a novel function for the spacer domain SP1, acting as a spherical 
shape determinant of the Gag particle which would negatively affect the helical
symmetry of assembly of the Gag precursor molecules conferred by the MHR and the 
downstream CA sequence, within residues 307-357.

PMID: 9705909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Eur J Biochem. 1998 Jul 1;255(1):125-32.

31P-NMR spectroscopy of human and Paracoccus denitrificans electron transfer
flavoproteins, and 13C- and 15N-NMR spectroscopy of human electron transfer
flavoprotein in the oxidised and reduced states.

Griffin KJ(1), Degala GD, Eisenreich W, Müller F, Bacher A, Frerman FE.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Colorado, Denver
80262, USA.

Human and Paracoccus denitrificans wild-type electron transfer flavoproteins have
been investigated by 31P-NMR in the oxidised and reduced states. The 31P chemical
shifts of the diphosphate moiety of the protein-bound FAD were similar in the
proteins and were independent of the redox state. The chemical shifts were
remarkably similar to those of ferredoxin-NADP+ reductase and, to a lesser
degree, with those of NADPH-cytochrome P-450 reductase. The wild-type human
electron transfer apoprotein was reconstituted with [2,4a-13C2]FAD,
[4,10a-13C2]FAD, or [U-15N4]FAD. The reconstituted proteins were studied by 13C- 
and 15N-NMR techniques in the oxidised and reduced states. The chemical shifts
were compared with those of free flavin in aqueous solution or in chloroform, and
those of flavoproteins published in the literature. In the oxidised state, strong
hydrogen bonds exist between residues of the apoprotein and C(2)O and N(5) of
FAD. The N(1) atom is also hydrogen bonded and, as shown by X-ray data, involves 
the C'(4)-OH group of FAD. The sp2 hybridisation of N(10) is small compared to
other flavoproteins. In the reduced state, there are strong hydrogen bonds
involving C(2)O and N(5) of FAD. The N(1) atom is ionised as observed also in
other flavoproteins when investigated by NMR. The intramolecular hydrogen bond
between the C'(4)-OH group and the N(1) atom of FAD is maintained in the reduced 
state, suggesting an involvement in the stabilisation of a certain configuration 
of the diphosphate group of protein-bound FAD in both redox states. The N(10)
atom in the reduced protein is highly sp3 hybridised in comparison to those of
other flavoproteins.

PMID: 9692910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Shock. 1998 Jul;10(1):7-12.

Local and systemic reactions after lung contusion: an experimental study in the
pig.

Obertacke U(1), Neudeck F, Majetschak M, Hellinger A, Kleinschmidt C, Schade FU, 
Høgasen K, Jochum M, Strohmeier W, Thurnher M, Redl H, Schlag G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Trauma Surgery, University Hospital Essen, Germany.
tuc140@sp2.power.uni-essen.de

The present study was designed to investigate the consequences of isolated
unilateral lung contusion on local alveolar and systemic inflammatory responses
in an animal model in the pig. Isolated unilateral lung contusion was induced by 
bolt shot in eight mechanically ventilated animals under general anesthesia
(sham: n=4). Plasma and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid were collected during a
period of 8 h following lung contusion. Leukocytes, leukocyte neutral protease
inhibitor (LNPI), terminal complement complex (TCC),
thrombin-antithrombin-complex (TAT) as well as pulmonary microvascular
permeability and surfactant function were determined. Within 30 min, lung
contusion was found to cause a significant local and systemic increase in TCC and
TAT concentrations and a systemic increase in LNPI concentrations. The latter was
accompanied by a sequestration of leukocytes in the contused lung. Complement
activation and leukocyte sequestration in the contused lung progressively
increased during the investigation period. Although surfactant function decreased
in the entire lung 30 min after contusion, TCC, TAT, and leukocyte sequestration 
was unchanged in the contralateral lung. The first indication of an involvement
of the contralateral lung was obtained by an increase in leukocyte sequestration 
8 h after lung contusion. Unilateral lung contusion initiates an early systemic
activation of humoral and cellular defense systems. Involvement of the
contralateral lung appears to be a secondary event caused by a systemic
inflammatory reaction.

PMID: 9688084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Eur Spine J. 1998;7(3):229-38.

Laminectomy and functional impairment of the lumbar spine: the importance of
muscle forces in flexible and rigid instrumented stabilization--a biomechanical
study in vitro.

Quint U(1), Wilke HJ, Löer F, Claes L.

Author information: 
(1)Orthopaedic Clinic University of Essen, Germany. tok030@sp2.power.uni-essen.de

Comment in
    Eur Spine J. 1998;7(3):238.

Laminectomy is the accepted treatment for spinal canal stenosis in cases where
conservative treatment has failed. Opinions diverge on the resulting clinical
instability and the necessity of instrumented stabilization. The present
biomechanical study was performed to determine the functional impairment
following laminectomy and the stabilizing effect of flexible and rigid devices.
This was the first time that the effects of agonist and antagonist intersegmental
lumbar muscle forces acting on intact, unstable and instrumentally stabilized
functional spinal units have been investigated. Six human cadaveric lumbar spines
were tested in a spine tester. The coactivation of agonist and antagonist muscle 
forces resulted in increased stability under the load conditions of bending and
rotation; a slight increase in the range of motion was noted during flexion. The 
functional impairment following laminectomy was corrected by ligamentoplasty and 
by means of muscle forces. Ligamentoplasty appears to be an alternative to
decompression with spondylodesis, especially in patients with well-developed
muscles.

PMCID: PMC3611246
PMID: 9684957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Biochem Mol Biol Int. 1998 Jun;45(2):215-25.

Cross-species reactivity of a monoclonal antibody against glutathione
S-transferase fusion protein of human beta 2-adrenergic receptor.

Shin CY(1), Kang SJ, Song MR, Park KH, Seo DO, Cheong JH, Ko KH.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Seoul National University, Korea.

The purpose of the present study was to produce and characterize a monoclonal
antibody against human beta 2-adrenergic receptor. Male BALB/c mice were
immunized with glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusion protein of the C-terminal
portion of the human beta 2-adrenergic receptor which was expressed in E.Coli.
The immunized splenocytes were fused with myeloma SP2/0-Ag14 cells and the
resulting monoclonal antibody was named as mAb beta C02. The monoclonal antibody 
beta C02 was determined as IgM subtype and then purified by anti-mouse
IgM-agarose affinity chromatography. The results of ELISA, Western blot, and
immunocytochemistry showed that mAb beta C02 recognized human beta 2-adrenergic
receptor in the beta 2-adrenergic receptor-GST fusion protein and human
epidermoid carcinoma cell line A431 with highly specific immunoreactivity. In
addition, mAb beta C02 showed cross-species reactivity against beta-adrenergic
receptor of hamster lung and rat brain as revealed by Western blot and
immunohistochemistry. The monoclonal antibody beta C02 may provide useful tools
for the study of the beta-adrenergic receptor of human and other species
including rats.

PMID: 9678242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1998 Jul 15;355(2):291-300.

3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase kinase and sucrose-phosphate
synthase kinase activities in cauliflower florets: Ca2+ dependence and substrate 
specificities.

Toroser D(1), Huber SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Crop Science, Agricultural Research Service, Raleigh, North
Carolina, 27695-7631, USA.

Plant 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase(HMGR; EC 1.1.1.34) and
sucrose-phosphate synthase (SPS; EC 2.4.1.14) and synthetic peptides designed
from the known phosphorylation sites of plant HMGR (SAMS*: KSHMKYNRSTKDVK), rat
acetyl-CoA carboxylase (SAMS: HMRSAMSGLHLVKRR), spinach SPS (SP2:
GRRJRRISSVEJJDKK), and spinach NADH:nitrate reductase (NR6: GPTLKRTASTPFJNTTSK)
were used to characterize kinase activities from cauliflower (Brassica oleracea
L. ) inflorescences. The three major peaks of protein kinase activity resolved by
anion-exchange FPLC are homologs of those observed previously in spinach leaves
and thus are designated PKI, PKIV, and PKIII, listed in order of elution. PKIV
was the most active in terms of phosphorylation and inactivation of recombinant
Nicotiana HMGR and was also strictly Ca2+ dependent. The novel aspects are that
PKIII has not been detected in previous cauliflower studies, that SAMS* is a more
specific peptide substrate to identify potential HMGR kinases, and that the major
HMGR kinase in cauliflower is Ca2+ dependent. Of the three major kinases that
phosphorylated the SP2 peptide only PKI (partially Ca2+ sensitive) and PKIII
(Ca2+ insensitive) inactivated native spinach leaf SPS. Cauliflower extracts
contained endogenous SPS that was inactivated by endogenous kinase(s) in an
ATP-dependent manner and this may be one of the substrate target proteins for PKI
and/or PKIII. The substrate specificity of the three kinase peaks was studied
using synthetic peptide variants of the SP2 sequence. All three kinases had a
strong preference for peptides with a basic residue at P-6 (as in SP2 and SAMS*; 
SAMS has a free amino terminus at this position) or a Pro at P-7 (as in NR6).
This requirement for certain residues at P-6 or P-7 was not recognized in earlier
studies but appears to be a general requirement. In plant HMGR, a conserved His
residue at P-6 is involved directly in catalysis and this may explain why
substrates reduced HMGR phosphorylation in vitro.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9675040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Gene. 1998 Jul 17;215(1):101-10.

Modulation of human alpha1(I) procollagen gene activity by interaction with Sp1
and Sp3 transcription factors in vitro.

Chen SJ(1), Artlett CM, Jimenez SA, Varga J.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology, University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago, 
IL 60607, USA.

In previous work, we delineated a proximal region of the human alpha1(I) collagen
gene (COL1A1) promoter necessary to direct its basal transcription in
fibroblasts. This region has potential recognition sites for a variety of
DNA-binding proteins. Here, we show that the -129/-107-bp sequence in this region
of the promoter, which harbors an inverted CCAAT motif closely linked to a
GC-rich direct repeat and is perfectly conserved between mouse and human,
specifically bound the transcription factors Sp1, Sp3, and CTF/NF-1 in nuclear
extracts from human skin and lung fibroblasts. Drosophila Schneider L2 cells
lacking endogenous Sp activity were used to investigate the effect of expression 
of Sp or CTF/NF-1 transcription factors on COLlAl promoter activity. Expression
of Sp1 caused potent trans-activation of a COL1A1 promoter (-174 to +42bp). In
contrast, expression of Sp3, which binds to the same recognition sites as Sp1,
and CTF/NF-1 stimulated COL1A1 promoter activity only at higher concentrations,
and Sp2 did not transactivate. Expression of a 10-fold excess of Sp3, but not
CTF/NF-1 or Sp2, abrogated the stimulation of COL1A1 promoter activity induced by
Sp1. TGF-beta at concentrations previously shown to increase COL1A1 transcription
caused a decrease in the relative amount of Sp3 in fibroblast nuclear extracts.
These results suggest that both Sp1 and Sp3 bind to the proximal COL1A1 promoter 
and stimulate its activity; however, their interaction with each other may result
in repression of Sp1-induced COL1A1 transcription. Alterations in the relative
amounts or DNA-binding activities of these transcription factors in a cell- or
signal-specific manner may contribute to the control of transcription from the
COL1A1 promoter. The present findings, and recent observations implicating Sp1
and its homologs in regulating the expression of several collagen genes, suggest 
that the family of Sp1 transcription factors play a role in physiological and
pathological modulation of connective tissue accumulation.

PMID: 9666093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Cancer Res. 1998 Jul 1;58(13):2863-8.

Human chromosome 21 determines growth factor dependence in human/mouse B-cell
hybridomas.

Ebeling SB(1), Bos HM, Slater R, Overkamp WJ, Cuthbert AP, Newbold RF, Zdzienicka
MZ, Aarden LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Autoimmune Diseases, Central Laboratory of The Netherlands Red
Cross Transfusion Service, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam.
s.ebeling@lab.azu.nl

Interleukin 6 (IL-6) serves as a growth factor for mouse plasmacytomas. As a
model for IL-6-mediated growth of plasmacytomas, we study IL-6-dependent B-cell
hybridomas, which can be generated through fusion of B lymphocytes with a
plasmacytoma cell line, e.g., SP2/0. In the present report, we have investigated 
the peculiar behavior of B-cell hybridomas with respect to IL-6 dependence. We
demonstrate that although newly generated hybridomas are IL-6 dependent, many
hybridomas lose this dependency at frequencies as high as 50%, shortly after
fusion. We speculated that the loss of IL-6-dependent growth is due to the
well-known chromosomal instability of B-cell hybridomas. Consequently, loss of
IL-6 dependence is the result of loss of a specific chromosome(s). This model
implies the existence of an "IL-6 dependency" gene, the loss of which makes
hybridomas capable of proliferating in the absence of IL-6. Because SP2/0 is IL-6
independent, the IL-6-dependent phenotype of B-cell hybridomas, and hence the
IL-6 dependency gene, must be derived from the B lymphocyte. We have tested this 
model by generating human/mouse B-cell hybridomas through fusion of human B
lymphocytes with SP2/0. We then analyzed the human chromosome content of 10
IL-6-dependent and 14 IL-6-independent subclones. From that analysis we concluded
that the presence of human chromosome 21 correlated with IL-6 dependence. This
correlation was confirmed by microcell fusion experiments in which a single copy 
of chromosome 21 was introduced into IL-6-independent hybridomas, resulting in
reconstitution of the IL-6-dependent phenotype. We therefore conclude that
chromosome 21 carries an IL-6 dependency gene.

PMID: 9661903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Biotechnol. 1998 Mar 26;61(1):43-56.

Subcellular localization of enzyme activities in chemostat-grown murine myeloma
cells.

Vriezen N(1), van Dijken JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Enzymology, Kluyver Laboratory for
Biotechnology, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands.
N.Vriezen@stm.tudelft.nl

As part of the development of structured models for the metabolism of myeloma
cells in suspension culture, a study was made of the subcellular localization of 
key enzymes of glucose and glutamine metabolism. Steady state chemostat cultures 
of the mouse myeloma SP2/0-Ag14 were used as a reproducible source of biomass.
Homogenates of the cells, obtained via mechanical disruption, were separated into
a mitochondrial and a cytosolic fraction via differential centrifugation. The
following conclusions are drawn: (1) approximately one fifth of the hexokinase
activity of cell-free homogenates is associated with the mitochondria; (2) a
malate-aspartate shuttle may operate for oxidation of cytosolic NADH, as
indicated by high levels of malate dehydrogenase and aspartate aminotransferase
in both particulate and soluble fractions; (3) the pentose phosphate pathway and 
isocitrate dehydrogenase may contribute to the provision of cytosolic NADPH; (4) 
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase and pyruvate kinase, which are present in high 
activities, are exclusively cytosolic and probably play a key role in glutamine
metabolism; (5) oxidation of glutamine via these enzymes leads to the formation
of pyruvate that enters the same pool as pyruvate generated by glycolysis. As a
result, lactate and alanine formation can occur from both glucose and glutamine.

PMID: 9650285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 1998 Jun;24(2):183-98.

DNA-protein interactions in the proximal zeta-globin promoter: identification of 
novel CCACCC- and CCAAT-binding proteins.

Sabath DE(1), Koehler KM, Yang WQ, Phan V, Wilson J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Washington School of
Medicine, Seattle 98195, USA. dsabath@u.washington.edu

The human zeta-globin gene is expressed in a tissue- and developmental-specific
pattern, with expression confined to primitive erythroid cells of the embryonic
yolk sac blood islands. Transgenic mouse studies have shown that the proximal
zeta-globin promoter contains sequences that contribute to the stage-specificity 
of expression, but no systematic functional studies of the cis elements in the
proximal zeta-globin promoter have been reported. In this paper, we show that a
number of conserved sequence elements in the zeta-globin promoter are important
for promoter activity in transiently transfected K562 erythroleukemia cells,
which constitutively express zeta-globin. These include a GATA site at -105, a
CCACC site at -93, a CCAAT box at -65, and a TATA box at -29. A highly conserved 
CCTCC sequence at -78 is not important for zeta-globin promoter activity in this 
system. Mutations at these sites do not result in increased promoter activity in 
OCIM1 cells, an erythroid line that does not express zeta-globin, suggesting none
of these sites is a developmental silencer. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays
show that K562 and OCIM1 nuclear extracts contain DNA-binding activities that
interact with the -105 GATA, -65 CCAAT, and -29 TATA sites. In addition K562
cells, but not OCIM1 cells, have an activity that binds the -93 CCACC site.
GATA-1 interacts with the GATA site. The K562 CCACC-binding protein is distinct
from Sp1, Sp2, Sp3, Sp4, EKLF, and BKLF. A specific -65 CCAAT-binding activity is
present in K562 and OCIM1 nuclear extracts that is distinct from other
CCAAT-binding proteins including CBF/NF-Y, C/EBP, NF-1, and CP2. Thus, we have
identified two novel factors that may contribute to the tissue or developmental
stage-specific expression of zeta-globin.

PMID: 9642099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Biochem J. 1998 Jun 1;332 ( Pt 2):573-82.

Regulation of the human protein C inhibitor gene expression in HepG2 cells: role 
of Sp1 and AP2.

Hayashi T(1), Usui M, Nishioka J, Zhang ZX, Suzuki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathobiology, Mie University School of Medicine,
Tsu-city, Mie 514, Japan.

Protein C inhibitor (PCI) is the plasma inhibitor of activated protein C, which
is the main protease of the anticoagulant protein C pathway. In this study the
transcriptional regulation of human PCI gene in the human hepatoma cell line,
HepG2, was characterized by evaluating the transient expression of a luciferase
reporter gene. The 5' flanking region (residues -1587 to +2) of the PCI gene
showed an adequate transcriptional activity, the maximum transcriptional activity
being in a region between residues -452 and -94, which contains an Sp1-binding
site, two AP2-binding sites and an inverted AP2-binding site. Transient
expression assays with various deletion mutants and site-directed mutants showed 
that the Sp1-binding site (residues -302 to -294) has a potent promoter activity 
and that the upstream AP2-binding site (residues -350 to -343) has a potent
enhancer activity; no activity was detected in the inverted (residues -413 to
-404) and downstream (residues -136 to -127) AP2-binding sites. In addition, a
region of the PCI gene (residues -452 to -414) containing the STATx-binding site,
the A-activator (AA)-binding site, and the interferon alpha (IFN-alpha) response 
element, and another region of the PCI gene (residues -176 to -147) containing
the GATA-1 and the IFN-gamma response element showed potent silencer activities. 
Gel mobility-shift assays with various DNA fragments indicated that the
Sp1-binding site, the upstream AP2-binding site, the AA-binding site and the
IFN-gamma response element interact with nuclear protein(s) of HepG2 cells. These
findings suggest that the Sp1-binding site is the promoter, the AP2-binding site 
(residues -350 to -343) the enhancer, and both the AA-binding site and the
IFN-gamma response element are the silencers of human PCI gene expression in
HepG2 cells.

PMCID: PMC1219515
PMID: 9601089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1998 Jun;31(7):1547-54.

Intravenous electron-beam computed tomographic coronary angiography for segmental
analysis of coronary artery stenoses.

Schmermund A(1), Rensing BJ, Sheedy PF, Bell MR, Rumberger JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic and Foundation, Rochester,
Minnesota, USA. tka0i0@sp2.power.uni-essen.de

OBJECTIVES: We sought to identify and localize significant coronary stenoses on a
segmental basis by electron-beam computed tomography (EBCT) and intravenous
administration of a contrast agent.
BACKGROUND: The clinical applicability and limitations of intravenous EBCT
coronary angiography have not been defined.
METHODS: EBCT was performed within 24 h of selective coronary angiography (SCA)
in 28 patients (19 men and 9 women, mean [+/-SD] age 60 +/- 10 years). After
examination for coronary calcium, EBCT coronary angiography was performed using
overlapping slices (in-plane resolution 0.34 to 0.41 mm) with a nominal slice
thickness of 1 mm. Based on quantitative analysis of SCA, lumen diameter
narrowing > or = 50% (i.e., significant stenoses) was evaluated in 8 (major) or
12 (including side branches) coronary artery segments, using both two-dimensional
(tomographic) and three-dimensional (volume) data sets.
RESULTS: Of the 330 segments assessable by SCA, 237 (72%) were visualized by
EBCT. The sensitivity (+/-SE) for detection of significant stenoses was 82 +/-
6%; specificity was 88 +/- 2%; positive and negative predictive values were 57
+/- 7% and 96 +/- 2%, respectively; and overall accuracy was 87 +/- 2%. If only
eight (major) coronary artery segments were considered, 194 (88%) of 221 segments
were visualized, and the overall accuracy was 90 +/- 2%. Seven (18%) of 38
significantly stenotic segments were classified as having < 50% stenoses by EBCT.
Six of these segments (86%), but only 9 (29%) of the 31 correctly classified
stenotic segments, were severely calcified (area > 20 mm2, p = 0.02). In 23 (12%)
of 199 nonstenotic segments falsely classified as having > or = 50% stenosis by
EBCT, the lumen diameter was significantly smaller than that of the segments
correctly classified as negative (mean [+/-SD] 1.5 +/- 0.8 vs. 2.9 +/- 1.1 mm, p 
< 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Intravenous EBCT coronary angiography allows for accurate segmental 
evaluation of significant disease in the major coronary arteries and may be of
value for ruling out significant disease. The main determinant of false negative 
results is substantial segmental calcification, whereas the main determinant of
false positive results is small vessel size.

PMID: 9626833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Jpn J Cancer Res. 1998 Apr;89(4):436-44.

Epitope blocking: positive and negative effects on the biodistribution of
125I-labeled anti-Tac disulfide-stabilized Fv fragment of two antibodies against 
different epitopes of the circulating antigen.

Kobayashi H(1), Sun BF, Han ES, Kim MK, Le N, Wang QC, Nelson DL, Pastan I,
Waldmann TA, Paik CH, Carrasquillo JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Warren G. Magnuson Clinical Center, National
Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1180, USA.

Prior in vivo studies using the 125I-labeled anti-Tac disulfide-stabilized
variable region fragment (125I-anti-Tac dsFv) of monoclonal antibody in the
presence of the circulating soluble alpha subunit of the interleukin-2 receptor
(sIL-2R alpha) have shown formation of complexes which interfere with
biodistribution. In this study we evaluated the effects of preinjecting HuTac and
7G7/B6, two immunoglobulin Gs (IgGs) that recognize different epitopes of sIL-2R 
alpha, on the biodistribution of 125I-anti-Tac dsFv in mice bearing SP2/Tac tumor
xenografts, which produce sIL-2R alpha, or on nude mice injected with 500 ng of
sIL-2R alpha. We also evaluated the biodistribution in mice of 125I-labeled
sIL-2R alpha injected alone or with HuTac and 7G7/B6. Injection of either HuTac
or 7G7/B6 resulted in complexes with the sIL-2R alpha in serum. Injection of
HuTac before 125I-anti-Tac dsFv, in SP2/Tac tumor-bearing mice, resulted in
faster clearance of the dsFv from the blood (7.6% ID/g at 30 min), compared to
23.2% ID/g for the no-antibody control; preinjection of 7G7/B6 prolonged the
retention of 125I-anti-Tac dsFv to 35.3% ID/g, with more complexes in serum. In
mice pre-injected with 7G7/B6 the concentration of 125I-anti-Tac dsFv in tumor
was lower (5.2 +/- 0.3% ID/g) than in mice preinjected with HuTac (7.9 +/- 1.2%
ID/g) or in the control group (5.6 +/- 0.7% ID/g). In conclusion, while both IgGs
formed complexes with sIL-2R alpha and prolonged its retention, preinjection of
7G7/B6 was detrimental, because the increased circulating sIL-2R alpha still had 
the epitope recognized by the dsFv available for binding and neutralized the
anti-Tac dsFv upon injection, whereas preinjection of HuTac blocked the epitope.

PMID: 9617350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Gen Virol. 1998 May;79 ( Pt 5):1069-81.

Interaction and co-encapsidation of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Gag and
Vif recombinant proteins.

Huvent I(1), Hong SS, Fournier C, Gay B, Tournier J, Carrière C, Courcoul M,
Vigne R, Spire B, Boulanger P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Virologie Moléculaire et Pathogénèse Virale (CNRS UMR-5812),
Institut de Biologie, Faculté de Médecine, Montpellier, France.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) wild-type (WT) virion infectivity
factor (Vif) protein (Vifwt) and full-length Gag precursor (Pr55Gag) were found
to be co-encapsidated into extracellular, membrane-enveloped virus-like particles
released by budding from Sf9 cells co-expressing the two recombinant proteins in 
trans, with an average copy number of 3.5+/-0.6 Vifwt per 100 Pr55Gag molecules. 
No preferential localization at the plasma membrane was observed for recombinant 
Vif in the absence of Gag expression, and a significant proportion of Vif
accumulated within the nucleus. Two conserved motifs, W89RKRRY94 and
P156KKIKP161, seemed to act as nuclear addressing signals. The Pr55Gag and Vifwt 
interacting domains were analysed by biopanning of a phage-displayed hexapeptide 
library. The Vif-binding domain, which spanned residues H421-T470 in Pr55Gag,
corresponded to the C-terminal region of nucleocapsid (NC), including the second 
zinc finger, the intermediate spacer peptide sp2 and the N-terminal half of the
p6 domain. Deletions in these Gag domains significantly decreased the Vif
encapsidation efficiency, and complete deletion of NC abolished Vif
encapsidation. In Vif, four discrete Gag-binding sites were identified, within
residues T68-L81 (site I) and W89-P100 (site II) in the central domain, and
within residues P162-R173 (III) and P177-M189 (IV) at the C terminus.
Substitutions in site I and deletion of site IV were detrimental to Vif
encapsidation, whereas substitution of basic residues for alanine in sites III
and IV had a positive effect. The data suggest a direct intracellular Gag-Vif
interaction and the occurrence of a Pr55Gag-mediated membrane-targeting pathway
for Vif in Sf9 cells.

PMID: 9603321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 1998 Feb;34(2):170-3.

The presence of transcription factors in fetal bovine sera.

Knepper PA(1), Mayanil CS, Goossens W, McLone DC, Hayes E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Oculo-Cerebrospinal Investigation, Children's Memorial Medical 
Center, Chicago, Illinois 60614, USA.

Three sources of fetal bovine serum (FBS) were fractionated by ammonium sulfate
precipitation and by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS-PAGE), transferred to Immobilon-P membranes, immunoblotted with a panel of
transcription factor antibodies, and detected by enhanced chemiluminescence. Nine
transcription factors were detected--ATF-2, SRE-ZBP, GATA-2, TFIID, Ets-1/Ets-2, 
E2F-1, Oct-2, p53, and AP-2; four transcription factors were not detected--Myo D,
CREB, Sp2, and Wilms' tumor. The results indicated the presence of varying
amounts of several transcription factors in three commercial sources and may
represent heretofore unrecognized factors influencing cell culture.

PMID: 9542656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Biochem J. 1998 Apr 1;331 ( Pt 1):61-8.

Characterization of human involucrin promoter distal regulatory region
transcriptional activator elements-a role for Sp1 and AP1 binding sites.

Banks EB(1), Crish JF, Welter JF, Eckert RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Case Western Reserve University
School of Medicine, 2109 Adelbert Road, Cleveland, OH 44106-4970, USA.

Human involucrin (hINV) is an important precursor of the keratinocyte cornified
envelope that is specifically expressed in the suprabasal layers of stratifying
epithelia. Previous truncation and mutagenesis experiments have shown that an
activator protein 1 (Ap1) site, AP1-5, located 2100bp upstream of the
transcription start site, is required for optimal promoter activity. These
previous studies suggest that AP1-5 is part of a distal regulatory region
spanning nucleotides -2473 to -2088. In the present report, we study the distal
regulatory region (DRR), which surrounds AP1-5. Our studies show that this region
contains weak and strong activator elements spanning nucleotides -2473/-2216 and 
-2140/-2088, respectively. The strong activator element contains AP1-5 and an
adjacent specificity protein 1 (Sp1) site. The AP1-5 site is absolutely required 
for DRR activity, as its mutation reduces transcription to basal levels.
Mutagenesis studies of the AP1-5 and Sp1 sites in the presence or absence of the 
weak activator element indicate that the Sp1 site and the weak activator element 
synergistically activate the AP1-5 site-dependent transcription. The cooperation 
between the Sp1 and AP1-5 sites is also observed in the context of the
full-length promoter. Gel mobility shift and supershift studies show that Sp1,
but not Sp2, Sp3 or Sp4 binds to the Sp1 site. When the Sp1 site is mutated or
the distance between the AP1-5 and Sp1 site is increased, the binding of AP1
factors to AP1-5 is markedly reduced. Surprisingly, gel shift studies suggest
that activation does not require the formation of a stable AP1/Sp1/DNA ternary
complex. These studies suggest that the AP1-5 site is absolutely required for
transcriptional activation, that the weak activator element and Sp1 sites serve
to enhance this activation, and that the Sp1 site is required for optimal AP1
factor binding at the AP1-5 site.

PMCID: PMC1219321
PMID: 9512462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Clin Microbiol. 1998 May;36(5):1277-84.

Recombinant mouse-human chimeric antibodies as calibrators in immunoassays that
measure antibodies to Toxoplasma gondii.

Hackett J Jr(1), Hoff-Velk J, Golden A, Brashear J, Robinson J, Rapp M, Klass M, 
Ostrow DH, Mandecki W.

Author information: 
(1)Abbott Diagnostics Division, Abbott Laboratories, North Chicago, Illinois
60064, USA. john.hackett@add.ssw.abbott.com

In the present study, we examined the feasibility of using recombinant antibodies
containing murine variable regions and human constant regions as calibrators or
controls in immunoassays. As a model system, we chose the Abbott IMx Toxo
immunoglobulin M (IgM) and Toxo IgG assays designed to detect antibodies to
Toxoplasma gondii. Two mouse monoclonal antibodies were selected based on their
reactivity to the T. gondii antigens P30 and P66. Heavy- and light-chain
variable-region genes were cloned from both hybridomas and transferred into
immunoglobulin expression vectors containing human kappa and IgG1 or IgM constant
regions. The constructs were stably transfected into Sp2/0-Ag14 cells. In the IMx
Toxo IgG assay, immunoreactivity of the anti-P30 chimeric IgG1 antibody
paralleled that of the positive human plasma-derived assay calibrators. Signal
generated with the anti-P66 chimeric IgG1 antibody was observed to plateau below 
the maximal reactivity observed for the assay calibrator. Examination of the IgM 
chimeric antibodies in the IMx Toxo IgM assay revealed that both the anti-P30 and
anti-P66 antibodies matched the assay index calibrator manufactured with human
Toxo IgM-positive plasma. When evaluated with patient samples, the correlation
between results obtained with the chimeric antibody calibrators and the positive 
human plasma calibrators was > or =0.985. These data demonstrate that chimeric
mouse-human antibodies are a viable alternative to high-titer positive human
plasma for the manufacture of calibrators and controls for diagnostic assays.

PMCID: PMC104814
PMID: 9574691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 1997 Dec;29(12):1313-23.

Transcriptional regulation by the Sp family proteins.

Lania L(1), Majello B, De Luca P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Molecular and General Biology, University of Naples,
Federico II, Italy.

Sp1 is one of the very first cellular transcription factors to be identified and 
cloned in virtue of its binding to a G-rich motif in the SV40 early promoter. Sp1
protein binds to the G-rich sequences present in a variety of cellular and viral 
promoters and stimulates their transcriptional activity. Recently, a number of
other GC and/or GT box-binding factors homologous to Sp1 have been isolated,
namely Sp2, Sp3 and Sp4, and the two more distantly related factors, BTEB and
BTEB2. The discovery of this family highlights a previously unknown level of
complexity of transcriptional regulation of promoters containing GC and/or GT box
motifs. This review focuses primarily on strategies aimed to elucidate the
transcription properties of the Sp1-like factors and discusses the experimental
problems inherent in the attempt to define their respective functions.

PMID: 9570130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Immunobiology. 1998 Feb;198(4):396-407.

Human IL-6 enhances human lymphocyte engraftment and activation but not human
antibody production in SCIDhu PBL mice.

Coccia MA(1), Weeks SJ, Knott CL, Kuus-Reichel K.

Author information: 
(1)Hybritech Incorporated, San Diego, CA, USA.

The SCIDhu PBL model of human Ig production was modified by using human
interleukin-6 (hIL-6) secreting tumors for continuous hIL-6 production, in vivo. 
On day one, SCID mice were injected subcutaneously with 200 microliters PBS
(control mice), 10(4) SP2/0-Ag14 cells (IL-6+ mice) or 10(4) hIL-6 secreting
SP2/0-hIL6.17 cells (IL-6- mice). The mice were reconstituted with human PBMC on 
day two and immunized with 100 micrograms of tetanus toxoid (TT) on days two and 
fifteen. Serum hIL-6 concentrations in IL-6+ mice ranged between 2.9 and 38.1
ng/ml by days 26-33. IL-6+ mice had enlarged spleens and lymph nodes (LN). Flow
cytometry and histology showed that SCIDhu PBL mouse spleen, LN and peritoneal
exudate cells (PEC) contained mostly murine myeloid lineage cells. In addition,
many more human B cells, T cells and IL-2R(+)-activated lymphocytes were present 
in spleen, LN and PEC of IL-6+ mice. Despite enhanced lymphocyte engraftment and 
activation, by day 14 IL-6+ mice produced up to 6-fold less TT-specific IgG
relative to total IgG than either control group. TT-specific and total Ig sera
concentrations were equivalent in all three groups on days 26-33. Our results
suggest that sustained circulating hIL-6 enhanced human delayed-type
hypersensitivity (DTH)-like inflammatory responses with consequential inhibition 
of TT-specific IgG production in SCIDhu PBL mice.

PMID: 9562865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Virol. 1998 May;72(5):3635-45.

Cellular transcription factors enhance herpes simplex virus type 1 oriS-dependent
DNA replication.

Nguyen-Huynh AT(1), Schaffer PA.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Department of Microbiology and Molecular
Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) origin of DNA replication, oriS, contains
three binding sites for the viral origin binding protein (OBP) flanked by
transcriptional regulatory elements of the immediate-early genes encoding ICP4
and ICP22/47. To assess the role of flanking sequences in oriS function, plasmids
containing oriS and either wild-type or mutant flanking sequences were tested in 
transient DNA replication assays. Although the ICP4 and ICP22/47 regulatory
regions were shown to enhance oriS function, most individual elements in these
regions, including the VP16-responsive TAATGARAT elements, were found to be
dispensable for oriS function. In contrast, two oriS core-adjacent regulatory
(Oscar) elements, OscarL and OscarR, at the base of the oriS palindrome were
shown to enhance oriS function significantly and additively. Specifically,
mutational disruption of either element reduced oriS-dependent DNA replication by
60 to 70%, and disruption of both elements reduced replication by 90%. The
properties of protein-DNA complexes formed in gel mobility shift assays using
uninfected and HSV-1-infected Vero cell nuclear extracts demonstrated that both
OscarL and OscarR are binding sites for cellular proteins. Whereas OscarR does
not correspond to the consensus binding site of any known transcription factor,
OscarL contains a consensus binding site for the transcription factor Sp1. Gel
mobility shift and supershift experiments using antibodies directed against
members of the Sp1 family of transcription factors demonstrated the presence of
Sp1 and Sp3, but not Sp2 or Sp4, in the protein-DNA complexes formed at OscarL.
The abilities of OscarL and OscarR to bind their respective cellular proteins
correlated directly with the efficiency of oriS-dependent DNA replication.
Cooperative interactions between the Oscar-binding factors and proteins binding
to adjacent OBP binding sites were not observed. Notably, Oscar element mutations
that impaired oriS-dependent DNA replication had no detectable effect on either
basal or induced levels of transcription from the ICP4 and ICP22/47 promoters, as
determined by RNase protection assays. The Oscar elements thus appear to provide 
binding sites for cellular proteins that facilitate oriS-dependent DNA
replication but have no effect on transcription of oriS-flanking genes.

PMCID: PMC109584
PMID: 9557644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 1998 Feb 27;123(9):244-9.

[Aortic rupture after blunt chest trauma. Rapid diagnosis using transesophageal
echocardiography when radiographic and computed tomographic findings are
unclear].

[Article in German]

Bruch C(1), Baumgart D, Görge G, Pink R, Schaar J, Schönfelder B, Markgraf G,
Olivier L, Drochner D, Kabatnik M, Erbel R.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Kardiologie, Universität Gesamthochschule Essen.
tka020@sp2.power-uni-essen.de

HISTORY AND CLINICAL FINDINGS: A 37-year-old woman who was not wearing a
seat-belt while driving a car had a head-on collision at 70 km/h. On arrival of
the emergency physician she was awake and responsive but complained of pain with 
bruising over the sternum and the epigastrium. Pressure on the sternum was
painful. Arterial pressure was 95/60 mm Hg, heart rate 112/min. On admission the 
heart sounds were unremarkable and peripheral pulses normal. Vesicular sounds
were heard over both lungs. In addition to multiple facial abrasions voluntary
movements were impaired and the right knee-joint was swollen.
INVESTIGATIONS: The ECG showed sinus tachycardia (103 beats/min) with left axis
deviation, but was otherwise unremarkable. Initially the haemoglobin was 12.6
g/dl with normal white cell and platelet counts. Clotting tests, serum
transaminases, creatine kinase, lactate dehydrogenase and other routine
laboratory tests were within normal limits.
TREATMENT AND COURSE: Because the haemoglobin level had fallen to 7.7 g/dl within
the first 4 hours erythrocytes concentrate was infused. The chest radiogram and
subsequent computed tomography showed a mediastinal and paraaortic haematoma of
unclear origin. Transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) demonstrated rupture of
the descending aorta with free floating intraluminal parts of the intima in the
isthmal region, just distal to the origin of the left subclavian artery, which
was not occluded. Colour Doppler echocardiography revealed abnormal flow into
mediastinal and paraaortic tissues. At operation the echocardiographic findings
were confirmed and part of the descending aorta was replaced by a 3 cm dacron
tube during an aortic crossclamping time of 37 min. The patient was discharged
after a postoperative stay of average length, during which her other injuries
were treated.
CONCLUSION: After blunt thoracic or deceleration trauma earliest possible TEE is 
indicated, because it can at once provide details of extent and degree of injury 
to heart and/or aorta.

PMID: 9524534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Microsc Res Tech. 1998 Feb 15;40(4):243-50.

Structural evolution in boron nitrides during the hexagonal-cubic phase
transition under high pressure at high temperature.

He LL(1), Akaishi M, Horiuchi S.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Research in Inorganic Materials, Tuskuba, Ibaraki,
Japan.

Structural evolution during the phase transition from h (hexagonal)- to c
(cubic)-boron nitrides (BN) under high pressure (6.5-7.7 GPa) at high temperature
(1,700-2,150 degrees C) was examined by using high-resolution transmission
electron microscopy (HRTEM) and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS). At the 
initial stage of the evolution, some starting h-BN plates were strongly folded,
while others were slightly bent. As a result, a strong texture was formed. HRTEM 
revealed that the interplanar distance between sp2 sheets became slightly
shortened and they were slightly sheared to each other during the folding and
bending. As a result, m (monoclinic)-BN was formed near the folding plane with
lattice parameters; a = 0.433 nm, b = 0.250 nm, c = 0.32-0.33 nm, and beta =
90-92 degrees. In a succeeding stage, the value of beta increased to 92-95
degrees. c-BN grains appeared with nano-scale twins and sometimes partly included
wurtzite-type BN. They started to grow with secondary twins at higher
temperature. EELS analysis revealed that the band structure of sp2 sheets changed
during the transition from h-BN to m-BN; the density of state for the pi* bond
became prominently high in m-BN as compared to that in h-BN.

PMID: 9523758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Exp Brain Res. 1998 Feb;118(4):564-8.

Jaw-opening reflex after CO2 laser stimulation of the perioral region in man.

Cruccu G(1), Romaniello A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento Scienze Neurologiche, Viale Università 30, Rome, Italy.
cruccu@axrma.uniroma1.it

CO2 laser pulses selectively excite A-delta and C mechano-thermal nociceptors in 
the superficial layers of the skin. To study the jaw-opening reflex elicited by a
purely nociceptive input, we delivered laser pulses to the perioral region in 15 
subjects. Sensory threshold was very low (9 mJ/mm2). High-intensity noxious laser
pulses (more than 4 x sensory threshold) evoked a single phase of electromyogram 
suppression (laser silent period, LSP) at an onset latency of 70 ms in the
contracted masseter and temporal muscles, bilaterally. Even maximum-intensity
laser pulses failed to activate the suprahyoid muscles. The recovery curves to
paired laser stimuli showed that at short interstimulus intervals the test LSP
was strongly suppressed. At about 380 ms it recovered to 50%, i.e. its recovery
curve resembled that of the masseter late silent period after electrical mental
nerve stimulation (SP2). In experiments studying the interaction with heterotopic
stimuli and non-nociceptive responses, chin-taps or electrical shocks delivered
to the supraorbital, infraorbital or mental nerves before laser stimulation
strongly suppressed the LSP. A preceding perioral laser pulse strongly suppressed
the masseter SP evoked by supraorbital stimulation and the SP2 evoked by mental
stimulation, but left SPI unaffected. We conclude that the perioral A-delta fibre
input elicits a jaw-opening reflex simply by inhibiting the jaw-closers. The LSP 
response is mediated by a multisynaptic chain of brainstem interneurons and
shares with the masseter SP2 part of the central circuit in the ponto-medullary
region. We also propose that a common centre processes the various inputs for jaw
opening.

PMID: 9504851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Med Klin (Munich). 1998 Jan 15;93(1):22-6, 58.

[Comparison between PTCA and bypass operation. Results of large randomized
studies].

[Article in German]

Dagres N(1), Erbel R.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung für Kardiologie, Universitätklinik-GH-Essen.
tka020@sp2.power.uni-essen.de

BACKGROUND: The percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) and the
coronary artery bypass surgery (CABG) are established therapy modalities for the 
coronary artery disease. Meanwhile, first results of randomized trials comparing 
both therapy forms have been published.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The results of the 6 large randomized trials (GABI, RITA
CABRI, BARI, EAST, and ERACI) were compared and summarized. Inclusion criterium
was coronary multivessel disease (in RITA also one-vessel-disease). Patients with
left main stem stenosis, previous PTCA or CABG, severely depressed ejection
fraction and total coronary occlusions were excluded in most trials. Between 127 
and 1829 patients were randomized. Follow-up was 1 to 5 years.
RESULTS: There was no significant difference in mortality between the PTCA and
the CABG-group, except in the diabetic patients of the BARI trial, who showed a
significantly better survival after CABG. Mortality was 3 to 7% in most trials.
The rate of myocardial infarction in the follow-up did not differ significantly. 
The prevalence of angina was higher in the PTCA-group in the first months after
the procedure, but the difference became less marked during the follow-up. One
year after the procedure, approximately 75% of the patients in the CABG-group and
70% in the PTCA-group were free from angina. The rate of additional
revascularization procedures was significantly higher in the PTCA-group (32 to
54%) than in the CABG-group (3.2 to 13%). Treatment costs were significantly
higher in the CABG-group.
CONCLUSION: Both therapy forms were very effective concerning treatment of angina
without a significant difference in mortality or frequency of myocardial
infarction. The PTCA patients required more revascularization procedures, the
costs for their treatment were lower than in the CABG-group. The question,
whether coronary stent implantation will influence these conclusions
significantly, remains open.

PMID: 9505075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Acta Crystallogr C. 1998 Jan 15;54 ( Pt 1):109-11.

(Z)-3-benzylidene-1-ethynyl-1-phenyl-1,3-dihydroisobenzofuran.

Thalji RK(1), Ramos B, Garcia JG, Fronczek FR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge 70803-1804,
USA.

The title compound, C23H16O, has two independent molecules in the asymmetric
unit. The bond lengths and angles of the two molecules are identical. The
conformation of the isobenzofuran ring systems of the molecules, however, differ 
slightly; in molecule A, the sp2-C atom of the five-membered ring deviates the
greatest distance [0.034(2)A] from the benzo plane, while in molecule B, it is
the sp3-C atom of the five-membered ring which has the greatest deviation
[0.027(2)A] from the benzo plane.

PMID: 9485573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Biologicals. 1997 Dec;25(4):373-80.

Quantitation of group-specific a antigen in hepatitis B vaccines by anti-HBs/a
monoclonal antibody.

Yamamoto H(1), Satoh T, Kiyohara T, Totsuka A, Moritsugu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Disease and Vaccine Control, National Institute of
Infectious Diseases, Tokyo, Japan.

Balb/c mice were immunized with aluminium hydroxide [alum, Al (OH)3]-adjuvanted
hepatitis B (HB) vaccines of subtypes adr, ayw or adw. Spleen cells from the
immune animals were fused with SP2/O cells. Eight hybridoma clones producing
antibodies specific for HB surface antigen (HBsAg) were selected. Monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs) of four clones were specific for group-specific antigen/a, and 
the other of four clones were specific for subtype antigen/d, y, r, or w. The
anti-HBs/a mAbs were classified into three non-competitive groups. Quantitation
of group-specific determinant a of HBsAg (HBsAg/a) was performed by sandwich
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), in which a solid phase of anti-HBs
guinea-pig polyclonal antibodies (pAb), the HBsAg for testing, anti-HBs/a mouse
mAb and horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated anti-mouse IgG were used. The
unadsorbed HBsAg was used to establish the standard curve of HBsAg/a. The lower
detection limits were 0.5 to 1 ng/ml of HBsAg. Methods of solubilization of alum 
were investigated to quantify HBsAg/a in adsorbed HB vaccines. The recovery rate 
was more than 60% if vaccines were prediluted. The recovery of HBsAg/a in HB
vaccines produced by the same manufacturer showed the similar recovery rate, and 
the contents of HBsAg/a in adsorbed HB vaccines could be estimated by the
recovery rate determined for adsorbed HB vaccines.

PMID: 9467033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Biochemistry. 1997 Dec 16;36(50):15555-60.

Slowed enzymatic turnover allows characterization of intermediates by solid-state
NMR.

Studelska DR(1), McDowell LM, Espe MP, Klug CA, Schaefer J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri 63130,
USA.

EPSP (5-enolpyruvylshikimate-3-phosphate) synthase catalyzes condensation of
shikimate 3-phosphate (S3P) and phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) to form EPSP, a
precursor to the aromatic amino acids. S3P and [2-13C]POP were bound to mutant or
wild type E. coli forms of the enzyme prior to lyophilization. CPMAS-echo and
rotational-echo double-resonance (REDOR) NMR experiments, employing a slow
catalytic EPSP synthase mutant and a long prelyophilization incubation interval, 
allowed our observation of the gradual formation of a strong 31P-13C coupling
consistent with the well characterized tetrahedral intermediate. However, after
shorter low temperature incubation intervals of substrates with mutant or
wild-type enzymes, carbon CPMAS-echo NMR spectra showed the 13C label at 155 ppm,
consistent with sp2 geometry of this carbon. REDOR revealed that the phosphorus
of PEP was cleaved. However, phosphorus at a distance of 7.5 A was observed, due 
to the phosphate of a nearby bound S3P. Heating the sample allowed the reaction
to progress, as shown by the diminution of the 155 ppm peak and growth of a peak 
at 108 ppm. The sp3 geometry implied by the 108 ppm peak strongly suggested
formation of a S3P-PEP condensation product. REDOR indicated that phosphorus was 
still distant, but now only 6.1 (wild type) or 5.9 A (mutant) distant. We think
that the early intermediates with peaks at 155 and 108 ppm are covalently bound
to the enzyme. We also think that the tetrahedral intermediate that we observed
was formed after product was generated.

PMID: 9445553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Immunother. 1997 Nov;20(6):496-504.

Chimeric bispecific OC/TR monoclonal antibody mediates lysis of tumor cells
expressing the folate-binding protein (MOv18) and displays decreased
immunogenicity in patients.

Luiten RM(1), Warnaar SO, Sanborn D, Lamers CH, Bolhuis RL, Litvinov SV, Zurawski
VR Jr, Coney LR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Leiden, The Netherlands.

The bispecific OC/TR monoclonal antibody (mAb) cross-links the CD3 molecule on T 
cells with the human folate-binding protein (FBP), which is highly expressed on
nonmucinous ovarian carcinomas. Clinical trials of patients with ovarian
carcinoma with the OC/TR mAb have shown some complete and partial responses. Most
patients developed human anti-murine immunoglobulin antibodies (HAMA), which can 
inhibit OC/TR mAb-mediated lysis. We generated a chimeric version of the OC/TR
mAb to decrease the immunogenicity of the OC/TR mAb and to allow more extended
treatment schedules. Sp2/0 myeloma cells were transfected with chimeric heavy-
and light-chain genes encoding the anti-CD3 mAb and the MOv18 mAb, respectively, 
which are reactive with FBP. The resulting cell line produced 80 micrograms/ml of
total immunoglobulin G (IgG), of which 11.5% was the functionally active chimeric
OC/TR mAb. Chimeric OC/TR F(ab')2 fragments mediated lysis of IGROV-1 ovarian
carcinoma cells by human T cells at antibody concentrations of > or = 1 pg/ml.
Specific lysis was still detectable at an effector-to-target cell ratio as low as
0.4. Two patients with ovarian carcinoma treated with F(ab')2 fragments of the
murine OC/TR developed distinct HAMA titers, which were mainly anti-idiotypic and
only partly directed against the murine antibody constant regions. However, of
the two patients that were treated with the F(ab')2 fragments of the chimeric
OC/TR mAb, only one developed a low transient HAMA response just above background
level. In conclusion, the generation of chimeric OC/TR may allow more extended
clinical studies of bispecific mAb-mediated immunotherapy of ovarian carcinoma.

PMID: 9409456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Cancer. 1997 Dec 15;80(12 Suppl):2660-6.

Generation of a high-producing clone of a humanized anti-B-cell lymphoma
monoclonal antibody (hLL2).

Losman MJ(1), Hansen HJ, Dworak H, Krishnan IS, Qu Z, Shih LB, Zeng L, Goldenberg
DM, Leung SO.

Author information: 
(1)Immunomedics, Inc., Morris Plains, New Jersey 07950, USA.

BACKGROUND: LL2 is a murine immunoglobulin (Ig)G2a-kappa anti-B-cell monoclonal
antibody with proven targeting and therapeutic efficacy in the management of
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL). The authors had previously generated a humanized
LL2 (hLL2) that demonstrated binding properties identical to those of LL2.
Nevertheless, the productivity of the cell line was insufficient for large-scale 
production of the antibody for clinical studies. Therefore, the authors chose an 
amplifiable system for the generation of hLL2.
METHODS: The hLL2 sequences were ligated into the expression vector pdHL2, which 
has a dhfr amplifiable gene, and were incorporated into the SP2/0 cells by
electroporation. A methotrexate (MTX) resistant clone producing hLL2 was
identified. Stepwise increases in MTX concentrations, from 0.1 to 5 microM, and
subcloning of the cells by limiting dilution were performed.
RESULTS: By amplifying the dhfr and hLL2 genes with stepwise increases in the MTX
concentration, the antibody production was enhanced from its original 1.4 to 70
+/- 5 mg per liter of culture media. Subsequent subcloning further improved the
productivity. Immunoreactivity of the antibody was conserved, as proven by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and cell-binding assays. By isoelectrofocusing,
the isoelectric point (pI) of the antibody was measured at approximately 9.6. The
productivity of the clone was not affected by culture conditions or storage of
the cells in liquid nitrogen.
CONCLUSIONS: By means of gene amplification, the authors have generated a
high-producing hLL2-IgG clone suitable for production of the quantity of antibody
necessary for clinical diagnostic and therapeutic trials of NHL patients.

PMID: 9406722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1997 Nov;100(5):649-55.

A new amplified monoclonal rat allergen assay used for evaluation of ventilation 
improvements in animal rooms.

Renström A(1), Larsson PH, Malmberg P, Bayard C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Occupational Health, National Institute for Working Life, Solna,
Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Available methods for the measurement of airborne laboratory animal
allergens are not standardized and are often insufficiently sensitive for
measurements in laboratories or in undisturbed animal rooms. Although low, the
levels may be clinically relevant, because many scientists not involved in
cleaning out cages or handling animals have rodent allergies.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to develop a sensitive monoclonal assay 
to determine airborne rat allergen and test it in the evaluation of a sliding
curtain system installed in refurbished rat rooms, with perforated, transparent
polycarbonate screens, behind which were the cage racks.
METHODS: Monoclonal antibodies were produced against male rat urine by
immunization in mice and fusion with mouse cell line Sp2/0. A novel biotinylated 
phenol compound was synthesized for immunoassay signal amplification in
conjunction with horseradish peroxidase. Air filter samples were collected at a
rate of 2 L/min, and allergen content in the filter eluates was determined.
RESULTS: Two monoclonal antibodies were produced and used in a sandwich ELISA,
which bound alpha2u-globulin (Rat n 1.02). The assay detection limit was 3.2
pg/ml, about tenfold increased sensitivity compared with the unamplified assay.
Allergen levels were lower in rooms when curtains were closed (median, 0.2 ng/m3)
than behind the curtains (0.9 ng/m3, p = 0.01) or if the curtains were open (0.9 
ng/m3, p = 0.001). However, allergen levels during cage cleaning, when curtains
were drawn apart, were high (18 ng/m3).
CONCLUSION: We have developed a method for measurement of airborne rat allergen
that can be standardized, measures an important allergen, and is sufficiently
sensitive to measure low allergen levels with personal samplers.

PMID: 9389295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Nihon Rinsho. 1997 Oct;55(10):2780-7.

[Development of new cell fusion technique by laser device and application to
bio-medical field].

[Article in Japanese]

Itagaki H(1), Doi H, Ohkohchi N, Satomi S.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Surgery, Tohoku University, School of Medicine.

We developed a new cell fusion method which was sterile, noncontact, and
selective technique under the microscope, using the micro-processing device by
LASER. By this technique, we succeeded in fusing myeloma cell (SP2) and
lymphocyte in mouse. We also defined the proliferation of the fused cells in HAT 
medium and the function of the fused cells in the Ouchterlony method, i.e.
production of IgG. This method enable us to make hybridomas from very small
number of cells and to fuse target cells selectively. This method is applicable
to fuse cells which are difficult to be fused by conventional methods.

PMID: 9360406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Bioorg Med Chem. 1997 Sep;5(9):1839-46.

Functionalized analogues of 5,8,10-trideazafolate: development of an
enzyme-assembled tight binding inhibitor of GAR Tfase and a potential
irreversible inhibitor of AICAR Tfase.

Boger DL(1), Haynes NE, Warren MS, Ramcharan J, Kitos PA, Benkovic SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

A set of inhibitors 3 and 4 of GAR and AICAR Tfase based on the TDAF core which
contain an sp2 C-10 carbon atom replacing N-10 of the natural cofactor are
detailed. Both possess electrophilic olefins and the potential of trapping the
reacting amine of the substrates GAR and AICAR by a Michael addition at the
enzyme active site to provide an enzyme-assembled tight binding inhibitor. While 
these agents did not display such characteristics and served as simple
competitive inhibitors of GAR Tfase and AICAR Tfase, inhibitor 15 prepared in the
conversion of 3 to 4 may provide an enzyme-assembled tight binding inhibitor of
GAR Tfase upon reaction with the substrate GAR and may inactivate AICAR Tfase by 
virtue of alkylation of an active site residue.

PMID: 9354239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Biol Chem. 1997 Oct 10;272(41):25976-82.

Sp1 and Sp3 regulate expression of the neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor 
beta4 subunit gene.

Bigger CB(1), Melnikova IN, Gardner PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Biotechnology, University of
Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, Texas 78245-3207, USA.

Neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors play important roles in signal
transduction within the nervous system. The receptors exist in a variety of
functionally distinct subtypes that are determined by their subunit structures.
The subunits are encoded by 11 genes, alpha2-alpha9 and beta2-beta4. Three of the
genes, alpha3, alpha5, and beta4, are tightly clustered, and their encoded
proteins make up the predominant receptor subtype in the peripheral nervous
system. The tight linkage of the genes suggests there may be a common regulatory 
mechanism underlying their expression. However, although their expression
patterns significantly overlap, they are not identical, indicating that
independent regulatory mechanisms must also exist. Our studies have focused upon 
the gene encoding the beta4 subunit for which we have identified several
transcriptional regulatory elements. One of these elements, E2, specifically
interacts with the general transcription factor Sp1. Here we show that another
member of the Sp family of factors, Sp3, can specifically interact with E2
whereas two other members, Sp2 and Sp4, cannot. Co-transfection experiments
indicate that Sp3 can transactivate a beta4 promoter/reporter gene construct and,
furthermore, that Sp1 and Sp3 can transactivate the beta4 reporter construct
synergistically. The transactivation is dependent upon an intact E2 and may
involve direct interactions between Sp1 and Sp3.

PMID: 9325332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Med Chem. 1997 Oct 10;40(21):3336-45.

Effect of a chemical modification on the hydrated adenosine intermediate produced
by adenosine deaminase and a model reaction for a potential mechanism of action
of 5-aminoimidazole ribonucleotide carboxylase.

Groziak MP(1), Huan ZW, Ding H, Meng Z, Stevens WC, Robinson PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Southern Illinois University,
Carbondale 62901-4409, USA.

Using the hydrated adenosine intermediate (6R)-6-amino-1,
6-dihydro-6-hydroxy-9-(beta-D-ribofuranosyl)purine (2) produced by adenosine
deaminase (ADA, EC 3.5.4.4) as a starting point, the active site probe and
inhibitor platform 5-(formylamino)imidazole riboside (FAIRs, 4) was designed by
removal of the-C6(OH)(NH2)-molecular fragment of 2 generated by the early events 
of the enzyme-catalyzed hydrolysis. FAIRs was synthesized directly from the
sodium salt of 5-amino-1-(beta-D-ribofuranosyl)imidazole-4-carboxylic acid (CAIR)
along a reaction sequence involving a tandem N-formylation/decarboxylation that
may have a mechanistic connection to the Escherichia coli purE-catalyzed
constitutional isomerization of N5-CAIR to CAIR. The physical and spectral
properties of FAIRs were elucidated, its X-ray crystal and NMR solution
structures were determined, and its interaction with ADA was investigated.
Crystalline FAIRs exists solely as the Z-formamide rotamer and exhibits many of
the same intramolecular hydrogen bonding events known to contribute to the
association of Ado to ADA. In water and various organic solvents, however, FAIRs 
exists as NMR-distinct, slowly interconverting Z and E rotamers. This truncated
enzymatic tetrahedral intermediate analog was determined to be a competitive
inhibitor of ADA with an apparent Ki binding constant of 40 microM, a value quite
close to that (33 microM) of the natural substrate's K(m). The actual species
selected for binding by ADA, though, is likely the minor hydroxyimino prototropic
form of Z-FAIRs possessing a far lower true Ki value. As the structural features 
of FAIRs appear well-suited to support its use as a template for constructing
active site probes of both ADA and AIR carboxylases, a variety of
carbohydrate-protected versions of FAIRs suitable for facile aglycon elaborations
were synthesized. The N3-alkylation, N3-borane complexation, and C4-iodination of
some of these were investigated in order to assess physicochemical properties
that may assist in the elucidation of mechanisms for the AIR carboxylases. The
survey of these properties taken together with a reasonable mechanism for the
model CAIRs-->FAIRs synthetic transformation is interpreted to support a
mechanism for the purE-catalyzed N5-CAIR-->CAIR biosynthetic one that involves a 
carboxylative sp3-rehybridization of the imidazole C4 atom rather than one
possessing a dipole-stabilized C4 sp2 carbanionic intermediate.

PMID: 9341908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. J Immunol. 1997 Oct 1;159(7):3189-94.

NK cell receptor calibration: effects of MHC class I induction on killing by
Ly49Ahigh and Ly49Alow NK cells.

Olsson-Alheim MY(1), Salcedo M, Ljunggren HG, Kärre K, Sentman CL.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Tumor Biology Center, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm,
Sweden.

NK cells from C57BL/6 (B6) mice and H-2Dd transgenic B6 (D8) mice express
different levels of the inhibitory receptor Ly49A, and they also differ in their 
target cell specificity. Here, we examined this differential specificity with
respect to the role of the Ly49A receptor expression on effector cells and levels
of H-2Dd inhibitory ligands on target cells. NK cells from D8 mice express low
levels of Ly49A receptor (Ly49Alow), and are able to kill SP2/0 tumor cells in
spite of their expression of H-2Dd. H-2Dd is expressed at reduced levels on SP2/0
cells; when these were increased three- to fivefold after IFN-gamma treatment,
the killing by Ly49Alow NK cells from D8 mice was markedly reduced. Efficient
killing was restored when the effectors were preincubated with anti-Ly49A F(ab')2
Abs. A separate experimental system was based on D8 TAP1-deficient Con A blasts
exogenously loaded with H-2Dd-specific peptides. In this system, higher levels of
cell surface H-2Dd had to be induced by peptide to inhibit D8 Ly49Alow NK cells
to an extent similar to that of B6 Ly49Ahigh NK cells. Ly49A receptors on NK
cells from H-2Dd transgenic mice are thus functional, although they require high 
levels of ligand to inhibit progression of the NK-target cell interaction. The
data are in favor of the "receptor-calibration" model, which suggests that
down-regulation of inhibitory receptors on NK cells may be useful in order for NK
cells to discriminate between normal and reduced levels of MHC class I molecules.

PMID: 9317116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Biol Reprod. 1997 Oct;57(4):707-14.

Cell-type expression, immunolocalization, and deoxyribonucleic acid-binding
activity of basic transcription element binding transcription factor, an
Sp-related family member, in porcine endometrium of pregnancy.

Wang Y(1), Michel FJ, Wing A, Simmen FA, Simmen RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, University of Florida, Gainesville 32611-0910,
USA.

Basic transcription element binding (BTEB) protein is a newly identified member
of the C2H2 zinc finger family that also includes the transcription factors, Sp1,
Sp2, Sp3, and Sp4. This family of proteins binds GC-rich motifs widely
distributed in gene promoters, resulting in distinct activation or repression of 
transcriptional activities. Whereas Sp proteins are ubiquitously expressed,
expression of BTEB appears more limited and has not been documented in the female
reproductive tract of any mammalian species. This study was designed to identify 
and characterize the cellular distribution of BTEB in the porcine endometrium and
placenta at known stages of pregnancy. Northern analysis of uterine endometrium
detected BTEB mRNA that corresponds in size (5 kilobases) to that of the major
BTEB transcript in rat brain. The steady-state levels of BTEB mRNA were higher (p
< 0.05) in endometrium than placenta at corresponding days of pregnancy, although
for each tissue, the levels did not change with pregnancy stage (p > 0.05).
Luminal epithelial (LE), glandular epithelial (GE), and stromal (ST) cells
isolated from pregnancy endometrium expressed the BTEB gene, but mRNA abundance
varied with cell type (LE, GE > ST). Western blot analysis using an antiserum
generated against the N-terminal region of a porcine BTEB fusion protein produced
in Escherichia coli revealed the presence of BTEB protein only in endometrium,
not in placenta. Immunohistochemical studies localized BTEB predominantly to the 
nuclei of endometrial GE and LE cells. Consistent with the presence of functional
BTEB protein, binding to a double-stranded oligonucleotide containing multiple GC
motifs was demonstrated in nuclear extracts prepared from endometrium and from
endometrial LE and GE, but not ST, cells by electrophoretic mobility shift assay.
These results demonstrate the preferential endometrial cell-type expression of
BTEB and suggest its regulatory role in pregnancy-associated endometrial
epithelial gene expression.

PMID: 9314570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Chromosoma. 1997 Sep;106(4):199-206.

Centromeric inactivation in a dicentric human Y;21 translocation chromosome.

Fisher AM(1), Al-Gazali L, Pramathan T, Quaife R, Cockwell AE, Barber JC,
Earnshaw WC, Axelman J, Migeon BR, Tyler-Smith C.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wiltshire, SP2 8BJ, UK.

A de novo dicentric Y;21 (q11.23;p11) translocation chromosome with one of its
two centromeres inactive has provided the opportunity to study the relationship
between centromeric inactivation, the organization of alphoid satellite DNA and
the distribution of CENP-C. The proband, a male with minor features of Down's
syndrome, had a major cell line with 45 chromosomes including a single copy of
the translocation chromosome, and a minor one with 46 chromosomes including two
copies of the translocation chromosome and hence effectively trisomic for the
long arm of chromosome 21. Centromeric activity as defined by the primary
constriction was variable: in most cells with a single copy of the Y;21
chromosome, the Y centromere was inactive. In the cells with two copies, one copy
had an active Y centromere (chromosome 21 centromere inactive) and the other had 
an inactive Y centromere (chromosome 21 centromere active). Three different
partial deletions of the Y alphoid array were found in skin fibroblasts and one
of these was also present in blood. Clones of single cell origin from fibroblast 
cultures were analysed both for their primary constriction and to characterise
their alphoid array. The results indicate that (1) each clone showed a fixed
pattern of centromeric activity; (2) the alphoid array size was stable within a
clone; and (3) inactivation of the Y centromere was associated with both
full-sized and deleted alphoid arrays. Selected clones were analysed with
antibodies to CENP-C, and staining was undetectable at both intact and deleted
arrays of the inactive Y centromeres. Thus centromeric inactivation appears to be
largely an epigenetic event.

PMID: 9254721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Structure. 1997 Aug 15;5(8):1033-46.

Defining GC-specificity in the minor groove: side-by-side binding of the
di-imidazole lexitropsin to C-A-T-G-G-C-C-A-T-G.

Kopka ML(1), Goodsell DS, Han GW, Chiu TK, Lown JW, Dickerson RE.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, University of California at Los Angeles 90095,
USA. kopka@ewald.mbi.ucla.edu

BACKGROUND: Polyamide drugs, such as netropsin, distamycin and their lexitropsin 
derivatives, can be inserted into a narrow B-DNA minor groove to form 1:1
complexes that can distinguish AT base pairs from GC, but cannot detect
end-for-end base-pair reversals such as TA for AT. In contrast, 2:1 side-by-side 
polyamide drug complexes potentially are capable of such discrimination.
Imidazole (Im) and pyrrole (Py) rings side-by-side read a GC base pair with the
Im ring recognizing the guanine side. But the reason for this specific G-Im
association is unclear because the guanine NH2 group sits in the center of the
groove. A 2:1 drug:DNA complex that presents Im at both ends of a GC base pair
should help unscramble the issue of imidazole reading specificity.
RESULTS: We have determined the crystal structure of a 2:1 complex of a
di-imidazole lexitropsin (DIM), an analogue of distamycin, and a DNA decamer with
the sequence C-A-T-G-G-C-C-A-T-G. The two DIM molecules sit antiparallel to one
another in a broad minor groove, with their cationic tails widely separated. Im
rings of one drug molecule stack against amide groups of the other. DIM1 rests
against nucleotides C7A8T9G10 of strand 1 of the helix, whereas DIM2 rests
against G14G15C16C17 on strand 2. All DIM amide nitrogens donate hydrogen bonds
to N and O atoms on the floor of the DNA groove and, in addition, the two Im
rings on DIM2 accept hydrogen bonds from guanine N2 amines, thereby providing
specific reading. The guanine N2 amine can bond to Im on its own side of the
groove, but not on the cytosine side, because of limits on close approach of the 
two Im rings and the geometry of sp2 hybridization about the amide nitrogen.
CONCLUSIONS: Im and Py rings distinguish AT from GC base pairs because of steric 
factors involving the bulk of the guanine amine, and the ability of Im to form a 
hydrogen bond with the amine. Side-by-side Im and Py rings differentiate GC from 
CG base pairs because of tight steric contacts and sp2 hybridization at the amine
nitrogen atom, with the favored conformations being G/Im,Py/C and C/Py,Im/G.
Discrimination between AT and TA base pairs may be possible using bulkier rings, 
such as thiazole to select the A end of the base pair.

PMID: 9309219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Immunol Methods. 1997 Aug 7;206(1-2):107-13.

Characterization of anti-human interleukin-18 (IL-18)/interferon-gamma-inducing
factor (IGIF) monoclonal antibodies and their application in the measurement of
human IL-18 by ELISA.

Taniguchi M(1), Nagaoka K, Kunikata T, Kayano T, Yamauchi H, Nakamura S, Ikeda M,
Orita K, Kurimoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Fujisaki Institute, Hayashibara Biochemical Laboratories Inc., Okayama, Japan.
fujih@po.harenet.or.jp

Interleukin-18 (IL-18)/interferon-gamma-inducing factor (IGIF) is a novel
cytokine, which is a potent inducer of IFN-gamma production and plays an
important role in Th1 responses. In order to develop a specific ELISA for the
measurement of human IL-18, we established 13 anti-human IL-18 monoclonal
antibodies and characterized them. 7 murine anti-human IL-18 mAbs and 6 rat
anti-human IL-18 mAbs were obtained by fusion of splenocytes from mice or rats
immunized with human IL-18, with SP2/0 myeloma cells. These antibodies were
classified into 4 groups according to competitive binding ELISAs to the human
IL-18 molecule. 1 murine mAb and all 6 rat mAbs neutralized IFN-gamma production 
induced by IL-18. A specific human IL-18 ELISA was developed using two
neutralizing mAbs (#125-2H and #159-12B). This ELISA detects human IL-18 with a
minimum detection limit of 10 pg/ml, but does not react with heat-denatured human
IL-18. The ELISA does not show any cross-reactivity with other cytokines. Using
this assay, human IL-18 was measurable in the plasma of leukemia patients. This
ELISA would become a powerful tool for investigating the relationship between
IL-18 and various diseases or analyzing the control mechanisms of IL-18
production from IL-18 producing cells.

PMID: 9328573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Kansenshogaku Zasshi. 1997 Aug;71(8):738-44.

[Anti-bacterial activities of a sulfonated human immunoglobulin preparation
against penicillin resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae and Pseudomonas
aeruginosa].

[Article in Japanese]

Matsuda K(1), Arai T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Meiji College of Pharmacy.

Anti-bacterial activities of a sulfonated human immunoglobulin preparation
against penicillin resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae and Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
were examined. Five week old CBA/J mice were challenged by 10 times of 50% lethal
doses of penicillin sensitive (SP1) and resistant (SP2) strains of Streptococcus 
pneumniae serotype 19, and were treated with a sulfonated human immunoglobulin
preparation (hIg). Fifty % protective dose (ED50) were 2-4 mg hIg/ mouse. These
doses were parallel with the challenged doses despite of the challenged bacteria,
and it was calculated that 6 x 10(6) bacteria were killed by one mg of hIg in
both bacteria. Minimal inhibitory concentrations (MIC) of piperacillin, flomoxef,
imipenem, amikacin and ofloxacin against SP1 and SP2 were estimated under the
presence of various concentrations of hIg. It was found that under the presence
of over 10-20 mg/ml of hIg, SP1 and SP2 were not grown even without any
antibiotic. That is, MIC of hIg itself against penicillin sensitive and resistant
Streptococcus pneumoniae serotype 19 were 10-20 mg/ml. Since about 10(6)
bacteria/ml were used for this test, it was calculated that 5-10 x 10(4) bacteria
were killed by one mg of hIg in vitro. This result suggested that in vivo
anti-bacterial activities of hIg could be 100 times higher than that in vitro.
Synergistic or at least additive effects between hIg and all antibiotics tested
were seen by the MIC. If hIg was 100 times effective in in vivo, these results
suggested that hIg could improve the effect of chemotherapy in clinical cases.
Similar in vitro test were carried out for Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and
synergistic or at least additive effects between hIg and all antibiotics tested
were also confirmed in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. This result suggested that hIg
could be effective for clinical pseudomonas infection.

PMID: 9311190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. J Vet Med Sci. 1997 Aug;59(8):641-9.

Monoclonal antibodies against pig ovarian follicular granulosa cells induce
apoptotic cell death in cultured granulosa cells.

Myoumoto A(1), Manabe N, Imai Y, Kimura Y, Sugimoto M, Okamura Y, Fukumoto M,
Sakamaki K, Niwano Y, Miyamoto H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Kyoto University, Japan.

Two monoclonal antibodies capable of inducing granulosa cell apoptosis were
produced against granulosa cells prepared from antral follicles of pig ovaries.
The healthy follicles, 4-5 mm in diameter, were dissected from the ovaries of
gilts, and then granulosa cells were isolated. BALB/c female mice were immunized 
with the isolated granulosa cells. Antibodies against the granulosa cells were
detected by immunofluorescent staining using frozen ovarian sections. The
isolated spleen cells prepared from immunized mice producing antibodies against
the granulosa cells were fused with Sp2/O-Ag 14 mouse myeloma cells by standard
hybridization techniques. Two hybridoma clones, PFG-1 and PFG-2, which produced
specific IgM antibodies against granulosa cells were selected. Western blotting
analysis revealed that PFG-1 and PFG-2 antibodies specifically recognized
cell-membrane proteins with molecular weights of 55 and 70 kD and isoelectric
points of 5.9 and 5.4, respectively. The monoclonal antibodies
immunohistochemically reacted with granulosa cells of healthy follicles. When the
isolated granulosa cells prepared from healthy follicles were cultured in medium 
containing 0.1 or 10 micrograms/m/PFG-1 or PFG-2 antibodies, respectively, the
cells underwent apoptosis as determined by nuclear morphology, DNA
electrophoresis and flow cytometric analysis. In conclusion, these two monoclonal
antibodies against granulosa cells have cell-killing activity in cultured
granulosa cells.

PMID: 9300359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Brain Res. 1997 Aug 1;764(1-2):214-20.

Nociceptive masseter inhibitory reflexes evoked by laser radiant heat and
electrical stimuli.

Ellrich J(1), Hopf HC, Treede RD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Johannes Gutenberg University,
Mainz, Germany.

Electrical stimulation of the mental nerve evokes two suppression periods SP1 and
SP2 in masseter muscle activity bilaterally. In order to investigate a possible
nociceptive origin of the suppression periods, we compared the reflex responses
evoked by electrical stimulation and by selective activation of nociceptors in
hairy skin using painful infrared laser stimuli. The SP was elicited during more 
than 90% maximal voluntary contraction. Thresholds for detection, pain, and SP in
the mental nerve area were determined by the method of limits. A suppression
period was evoked by laser stimuli in nine of ten subjects bilaterally. The mean 
onset latency was 46.9 ms, the mean duration 58.9 ms. The electrical threshold of
SP1 (9 mA) was 7.7 x I(0), about 20% smaller than I(P), and significantly higher 
than I(SP2) (4.7 mA). The onset latencies and durations were 11.7 ms and 21 ms
for SP1, and 45 ms and 42.7 ms for SP2 (stimulus intensity 2 x I(P)). The mean
difference in onset latencies between laser SP and electrically evoked SP1 was
35.1 +/- 6.2 ms, which closely matches the nociceptor response latency to a laser
heat pulse. Based on the threshold and the onset latency we conclude that at
least SP1 and laser SP are nociceptive in origin and mediated by group III
fibers.

PMID: 9295212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1997 Aug;63(8):3025-31.

In vivo recombination between two strains of the genus Nucleopolyhedrovirus in
its natural host, Spodoptera exigua.

Muñoz D(1), Vlak JM, Caballero P.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Producción Agraria, Universidad Pública de Navarra, Pamplona, 
Spain.

The DNA restriction map for the enzymes BamHI, BglII, PstI, and XbaI of SeMNPV-US
(Se-US), the best-studied Nucleopolyhedrovirus strain isolated from Spodoptera
exigua in California, was used as a reference to construct that of SeMNPV-SP2
(Se-SP2), a closely related Spanish strain of the same virus. After coinfection
of S. exigua with both the Se-US and Se-SP2 strains per os, a recombinant virus
(SeMNPV-SUR1 [Se-SUR1]) was detected after one passage which quickly replaced the
parental viruses. A physical map of Se-SUR1 DNA was constructed for BamHI, BglII,
PstI, and XbaI and compared to that of the parental viruses, Se-US and Se-SP2.
Se-SUR1 is the result of at least four crossover events between Se-US and Se-SP2 
and not of selection of a minor variant in one of the parental viruses. Bioassays
of the recombinant and parental strains against L2 beet armyworm larvae
demonstrated that their 50% lethal dose values were not significantly different. 
The differences in median lethal time values are too small to explain the
replacement of the parental viruses by the recombinant virus upon successive
passage in vivo, although it cannot be ruled out as an explanation for the
selective advantage of the recombinant strain, Se-SUR1. The consequences of the
release of nonindigenous or recombinant baculovirus strains in agro-ecosystems
are discussed.

PMCID: PMC168602
PMID: 9251191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Immunol. 1997 Aug 1;159(3):1543-56.

Bispecific humanized anti-IL-2 receptor alpha beta antibodies inhibitory for both
IL-2- and IL-15-mediated proliferation.

Pilson RS(1), Levin W, Desai B, Reik LM, Lin P, Korkmaz-Duffy E, Campbell E, Tso 
JY, Kerwin JA, Hakimi J.

Author information: 
(1)Roche Research Center, Inflammation and Autoimmune Diseases, Hoffmann-La
Roche, Inc., Nutley, NJ 07110, USA.

Humanized anti-Tac (HAT) and Mik beta1 (HuMik beta 1) Abs directed at IL-2R alpha
and IL-2R beta, respectively, inhibit IL-2 binding and biological activity and
together act synergistically in vitro. The Abs have been used successfully in
primate models of allograft rejection, graft-vs-host disease, and autoimmunity.
We produced bifunctional humanized anti-IL-2R alpha beta Abs (BF-IgG) to combine 
the specificity of the two Abs into one entity by fusing HAT-producing NSO cells 
and HuMik beta 1-producing Sp2/0 cells. BF-IgG was purified using protein
G-Sepharose affinity chromatography, followed by IL-2R alpha and IL-2R beta
affinity chromatography and hydrophobic interaction chromatography. BF-IgG
exhibited both anti-IL-2R alpha and anti-IL-2R beta specificities in binding
assays. While the Ab binds the IL-2R with intermediate affinity (Kd = 2.82 nM),
it does not inhibit IL-15 binding to its high affinity IL-15R. In Kit225/K6
(IL-2R alpha beta gamma+) cells, BF-IgG was 10-fold more potent than a HAT/HuMik 
beta 1 equimolar mixture in blocking IL-2-induced proliferation and,
unexpectedly, was at least 65-fold more active than the mixture in blocking
IL-15-induced proliferation. This dual inhibitory activity may be due to
cross-linking of the IL-2R alpha and IL-2R beta, thus blocking IL-2 binding and
possibly impeding the association of IL-2R beta with IL-15R. BF-IgG has potent
immunosuppressant activities against both IL-2- and IL-15-mediated responses, and
this antagonist could be more efficacious than HAT and/or HuMik beta 1 for the
treatment of autoimmunity and the prevention of allograft rejection.

PMID: 9233654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Biotechnol Bioeng. 1997 Jul 20;55(2):439-46.

Extension of Sp2/0 hybridoma cell viability through interleukin-6
supplementation.

Chung JD(1), Zabel C, Sinskey AJ, Stephanopoulos G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

Sp2/0 hybridoma cells die principally by apoptosis in batch culture. We have
found that cultures of the Sp2/0 hybridoma exhibit increased viability in
response to interleukin 6 (IL-6) supplementation relative to control cultures
during serum shiftdown experiments. When shifted from a medium containing 10%
fetal bovine serum (FBS) to a medium with 1% FBS, IL-6 supplemented cultures
displayed viabilities and viable cell densities similar to control cultures
containing 10% FBS. The degree of the survival response induced varied in
accordance with the severity of the shiftdown, as cells resuspended in a high
serum medium showed little observable enhancement in viability. The extension in 
culture viability was not accompanied by an observable decrease in growth
relative to control cultures, indicating that the effect was not a consequence of
growth inhibition. These results suggest the existence of serum components with
behavior functionally similar to IL-6, with respect to enhancing cell survival,
and that under certain experimental conditions IL-6 serves as a survival factor. 
In contrast to the extended viability displayed by cultures supplemented with
IL-6, Sp2/0 cultures transfected with IL-6 cDNA expression vectors displayed a
growth inhibitory response relative to control cultures. This inhibitory response
was characterized by an extended lag phase following inoculation, and a decrease 
in batch culture cell yield. The depression in cell yield varied with serum
concentration, with the largest depression occurring at high serum
concentrations. We conclude that interactions between components in serum,
presumably growth factors, and cytokines play an important role in altering the
behavior of industrially relevant cell lines in culture. (c) 1997 John Wiley &
Sons, Inc. Biotechnol Bioeng 55: 439-446, 1997.

PMID: 18636502  [PubMed]


224. Cancer Gene Ther. 1997 Jul-Aug;4(4):253-9.

In vivo gene inoculation of a recombinant single-chain antitumor antibody induces
anti-immunoglobulin response.

Prasad GL(1), Lee HS, Iwahashi M, Milenic DE, Abrams S, Schlom J, Kashmiri SV.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Immunology and Biology, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

While in vivo gene inoculation is being increasingly exploited to express genes
of choice and elicit specific immune responses in animal models, the utility of
this method has not been explored extensively for the expression of antibody
genes. The primary constraint of this method is the need to deliver to, and
express in, a single cell two functional genes, i.e., those encoding heavy and
light chains of an antibody molecule. Several single-gene constructs encoding
variants of the monoclonal antibody (MAb) CC49 have been developed, MAb CC49
recognizes a tumor-associated glycoprotein, TAG-72. SP2/O myeloma cells,
transfected with the CC49 single gene, express a single-chain protein which is
secreted by the transfectoma as a homodimer. Following intramuscular injection of
mice with the expression plasmids of the single-gene constructs, the encoded CC49
antibody (AB1) was detected in the plasma of the host. In addition, cellular and 
humoral immune responses to AB1 have been demonstrated. Antibodies (AB2) to the
in vivo-produced variable region of AB1 have been detected and persisted for at
least 70 days post-inoculation of the recombinant plasmid. Thus, in vivo gene
inoculation of single-chain immunoglobulins may be an alternative or
complimentary approach to the induction of anti-idiotypic responses in
immunotherapy protocols.

PMID: 9253511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Chem Res Toxicol. 1997 Jul;10(7):795-801.

Regiospecificity of peroxyl radical addition to (E)-retinoic acid.

Samokyszyn VM(1), Freyaldenhoven MA, Chang HC, Freeman JP, Compadre RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology (Division of Taxicology), University
of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock 72205, USA. victors@biomed.uams.edu

The regiochemistry of peroxyl radical addition to (E)-retinoic acid (RA) was
investigated. Peroxyl radicals, generated by reaction of
13-hydroperoxy-(9Z,11E)-octadecadienoic acid with hydroxo(porphyrinato)iron(III) 
in Tween 20 micelles, were reacted with RA. The major, and virtually exclusive,
RA oxidation product was 5,6-epoxy-RA which was identified on the basis of
cochromatography with the synthetic synthetic oxirane (in a reverse phase HPLC
system), electronic absorption spectroscopy, high-field 1H-NMR, and EI mass
spectrometry. These results suggest that peroxyl radicals react with RA by
regioselective addition to either C5 or C6 yielding an endocyclic tertiary
allylic or tertiary carbon-centered radical adduct, respectively. Subsequent
beta-elimination of an alkoxyl radical yields the oxirane. Computational studies 
were carried out in order to gain mechanistic insights into the observed
regiospecificity of the peroxyl radical-dependent epoxidation reaction; molecular
mechanics and semiempirical quantum mechanical calculations were carried out
using Tripos force field parameters and AM1, respectively. The results suggest
that the regiospecific epoxidation may be influenced by the 5,6-olefinic function
behaving as a partially-isolated double bond as well as inherent allylic A1,2
strain in the substituted cyclohexene ring as a consequence of substitutions at
C1 and C6. In addition, calculated heats of formation indicated preferential
peroxyl radical addition to C5 versus C6; this may reflect differences in the
geometries of sp2-orbitals containing the radical densities rather than resonance
contributions by the highly conjugated polyene system.

PMID: 9250414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Clin Microbiol. 1997 Jul;35(7):1715-21.

Production of monoclonal antibodies against Rickettsia massiliae and their use in
antigenic and epidemiological studies.

Xu W(1), Raoult D.

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Rickettsies, CNRS UPRES-A 6020, Faculté de Médecine, Université de
la Mediterranée, Marseille, France.

Rickettsiae are gram-negative, obligate intracellular bacteria which have
historically been divided into three groups: the typhus group, the scrub typhus
group, and the spotted fever group (SFG). Recently, several new SFG rickettsiae
have been characterized, and most of these species are associated with ticks and 
have, as yet, no known pathogenicity toward humans. Rickettsia massiliae, which
is widely distributed in Europe and Africa, is one such rickettsia. In order to
investigate the antigenic relationships between R. massiliae and other
rickettsial species and to develop a more convenient methodology for identifying 
R. massiliae, we produced monoclonal antibodies against the type strain (Mtu1T)
of R. massiliae by fusing immunized splenocytes with SP2/0-Ag14 myeloma cells. A 
panel of 16 representatives were selected from the 163 positive hybridomas
identified on initial screening, and their secreted monoclonal antibodies were
further characterized. The reactivities of these 16 monoclonal antibodies with a 
large panel of rickettsial species were assessed by the microimmunofluorescence
assay. All species of the SFG rickettsiae reacted with the monoclonal antibodies 
directed against epitopes on lipopolysaccharide, which is the common antigen
among the SFG rickettsiae. Some closely related species of the SFG, such as
Bar29, "R. aeschlimanni," and R. rhipicephali, showed strong cross-reactivities
with the monoclonal antibodies directed against epitopes on the two major
high-molecular-mass heat-labile proteins (106 and 120 kDa). In addition,
species-specific monoclonal antibodies demonstrated that R. massiliae is
antigenically different from other rickettsial species. Moreover, these
species-specific monoclonal antibodies were successfully used for identifying R. 
massiliae in the ticks collected from southern France, and are therefore
potentially useful tools in the identification and investigation of R. massiliae 
in ticks in large-scale field work.

PMCID: PMC229828
PMID: 9196180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1997 Jun 26;1352(3):311-24.

Promoter of the Na,K-ATPase alpha3 subunit gene is composed of cis elements to
which NF-Y and Sp1/Sp3 bind in rat cardiocytes.

Murakami Y(1), Ikeda U, Shimada K, Kawakami K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Jichi Medical School, Kawachi, Tochigi, Japan.

Na,K-ATPase alpha subunit has three isoforms whose expression is regulated
developmentally and hormonally. Na,K-ATPase alpha3 subunit gene (Atpla3) is
expressed only in brain and neonatal heart in a rat. The purpose of this study is
to analyze cis-acting elements and trans-acting factors regulating the
transcription of Atpla3 in cultured neonatal rat cardiocytes. Transient
transfection assays with Atpla3-luciferase chimeric construct and a series of 5' 
sequential deletion mutations revealed the existence of positive regulatory
elements from -74 to -59 and from -59 to -39. A factor was identified to bind
across -59 by gel retardation assay. Methylation interference and DNase I
footprinting analyses revealed the binding region from -74 to -53 (positive
regulatory element (PRE) 1). The binding factor was identified to be NF-Y by gel 
retardation assay using specific antibody. Gel retardation and methylation
interference analyses revealed that factors bind to two other elements from -54
to -43 (PRE2) and from -25 to -13 (PRE3). The binding factors were identified to 
be Sp1/Sp3 using specific antibodies. The functions of above-mentioned three
elements were examined by transient transfection assay with various combinations 
of mutations. They all regulated the transcription positively and a synergistic
enhancement of it was observed. Roles of NF-Y in the transcriptional activation
and synergy are discussed.

PMID: 9224955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Lab Invest. 1997 Jun;76(6):859-71.

Genetic immunization with the free human chorionic gonadotropin beta subunit
elicits cytotoxic T lymphocyte responses and protects against tumor formation in 
mice.

Geissler M(1), Wands G, Gesien A, de la Monte S, Bellet D, Wands JR.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Hepatology Laboratory, Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center,
Charlestown 02129, USA.

The free beta subunit of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG beta) is produced and 
secreted by human lung, bladder, and pancreatic tumors. We attempted to generate 
cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) with activity against free hCG beta-producing
tumors by genetic immunization using a construct containing a beta subunit
expressing cDNA. To assess CTL activity in vivo, a cloned syngeneic SP2/O myeloma
call line was established that constitutively expresses the free hCG beta
protein. Inoculation of this cell line into BALB/c mice produced large tumors
within 2 weeks. However, mice immunized with the free hCG beta expression
construct demonstrated a marked reduction of tumor size and weight compared with 
animals immunized with mock DNA ("empty" plasmid). Indeed, 30% of immunized mice 
were tumor-free after 3 months and thus considered long-term survivors.
Inhibition of tumor growth was strongly associated with the level of CTL activity
present in CD8+ cells derived from the spleen. In addition, immunized mice
developed high titer anti-hCG beta antibodies that neutralized the biologic
effects of the intact hCG glycoprotein hormone on its cellular receptor as well. 
These results illustrate that substantial cellular and humoral immune responses
to the free hCG beta subunit may be generated by DNA immunization. This study
thus presents a potential approach to inhibiting growth of human tumor cells that
produce and secrete the free hCG beta protein.

PMID: 9194861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Bacteriol. 1997 Jun;179(12):3858-65.

Oxidation of aliphatic olefins by toluene dioxygenase: enzyme rates and product
identification.

Lange CC(1), Wackett LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Biological Process Technology Institute, and
Center for Biodegradation Research and Informatics, University of Minnesota, St. 
Paul 55108, USA.

Toluene dioxygenase from Pseudomonas putida F1 has been studied extensively with 
aromatic substrates. The present work examined the toluene dioxygenase-catalyzed 
oxidation of various halogenated ethenes, propenes, butenes and nonhalogenated
cis-2-pentene, an isomeric mix of 2-hexenes, cis-2-heptene, and cis-2-octene as
substrates for toluene dioxygenase. Enzyme specific activities were determined
for the more water-soluble C2 to C5 compounds and ranged from <4 to 52 nmol per
min per mg of protein. Trichloroethene was oxidized at a rate of 33 nmol per min 
per mg of protein. Products from enzyme reactions were identified by gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry. Proton and carbon nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy of compounds from whole-cell incubation confirmed the identity of
products. Substrates lacking a halogen substituent on sp2 carbon atoms were
dioxygenated, while those with halogen and one or more unsubstituted allylic
methyl groups were monooxygenated to yield allylic alcohols.
2,3-Dichloro-1-propene, containing both a halogenated double bond and a
halogenated allylic methyl group, underwent monooxygenation with allylic
rearrangement to yield an isomeric mixture of cis- and
trans-2,3-dichloro-2-propene-1-ol.

PMCID: PMC179193
PMID: 9190800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. J Lipid Mediat Cell Signal. 1997 Jun;16(2):75-113.

A pharmacophore for high affinity PAF antagonists. II. Hydrophobicity study using
the molecular lipophilicity potential.

Le Solleu H(1), Laguerre M, Saux M, Dubost JP.

Author information: 
(1)G.E.R.S.A.A.C., Laboratoire de Chimie Analytique, UFR des Sciences
Pharmaceutiques, Université de Bordeaux II, France.

Platelet-activating factor (PAF) is a powerful phospholipid-derived autacoid
involved in many physiopathological mechanisms. Many PAF antagonists have been
synthesized and evaluated as therapeutic candidates. In a previous report, we
have described an electronic pharmacophore of PAF antagonists using the molecular
electrostatic potential. In the present study, a molecular lipophilicity
potential is used to compare the hydrophobic properties of 49 "heterocyclic sp2
nitrogen' highly potent PAF antagonists, belonging to six structurally different 
series (nine hetrazepines, five pyrrolo[1,2-c]thiazoles, 14 carboxamides, nine
dihydropyridines, nine pyridinyl-thiazolidines and three
imidazo[4,5-c]pyridines). Their common features consist of three hydrophilic
(HYD2, HY14(3)B and HYD3) and two lipophilic zones (LIP3 and LIP4), defining the 
lipophilic pharmacophore of the antagonists. This pharmacophore is also
characterized by several zone-to-zone distances: HYD3-HYD2 = 1.3 +/- 1.0 A,
HY3B-HYD2 = 7.8 +/- 1.1, HYD3-HY3B = 5.1 +/- 1.1 A, LIP4-LIP3 = 5.4 +/- 1.1 A,
LIP3-HYD2 = 11.3 +/- 1.6 A, LIP3-HY3B = 5.9 +/- 1.0 A, LIP3-HYD3 = 4.3 +/- 0.9 A,
LIP4-HYD2 = 14.7 +/- 1.6 A, LIP4-HY3B = 8.1 +/- 1.2 A and LIP4-HYD3 = 3.9 +/- 1.1
A. These results represent a new step in the determination of a global
pharmacophore for PAF antagonists.

PMID: 9172050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Cancer Res. 1997 May 15;57(10):1955-61.

Improved biodistribution of 125I-labeled anti-Tac disulfide-stabilized Fv
fragment by blocking its binding to the alpha subunit of the interleukin 2
receptor in the circulation with preinjected humanized anti-Tac IgG.

Kobayashi H(1), Yoo TM, Drumm D, Kim MK, Sun BF, Le N, Webber KO, Pastan I,
Waldmann TA, Paik CH, Carrasquillo JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892-1180, USA.

Animal studies using radiolabeled anti-Tac disulfide-stabilized Fv (dsFv)
monoclonal antibody have shown formation of complexes in serum with the soluble
alpha subunit of the interleukin 2 receptor alpha (sIL-2R alpha). In this study, 
we improved the targeting of 125I-labeled anti-Tac dsFv to receptor-positive
tumors in the presence of circulating receptor by preinjecting unlabeled
humanized anti-Tac IgG antibody (HuTac IgG). We used mice bearing SP2/Tac tumor
xenografts that express the IL-2R alpha. A positive correlation was seen between 
tumor size and the concentration of circulating receptor. Tumor-bearing mice were
injected with 125I-labeled anti-Tac dsFv (400 ng), either alone or 15 min after
injection of HuTac IgG. The 125I-labeled anti-Tac dsFv formed high molecular
weight complexes with the sIL-2R alpha. The fraction of the dsFv present in the
complexes increased as tumor size increased (greater sIL-2R alpha levels). The
fractions of dsFv in the complexes were 9.9- to 11.6-fold higher when sIL-2R
alpha was not blocked with preinjected HuTac IgG. The administration of a 12-fold
molar excess of HuTac IgG over sIL-2R alpha resulted in >80% of the 125I activity
present as the dsFv rather than in the complexes. Furthermore, the
biodistribution of 125I-labeled anti-Tac dsFv was improved by blocking its
binding to sIL-2R alpha by preinjecting HuTac IgG. Specifically, in the
preinjected group, at 15 min postinjection, the 125I-labeled anti-Tac dsFv levels
in tumor increased to 10.8% compared to 5.6% injected dose per gram in the
non-preinjected group. In summary, our studies showed that preinjection of HuTac 
IgG can block the formation of complexes of circulating sIL-2R alpha and
125I-labeled anti-Tac dsFv. This blockade is associated with faster blood
clearance, higher tumor uptake, and greater tumor:nontumor ratios of the
radiolabeled antibody fragment.

PMID: 9157991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Biotechnol Bioeng. 1997 May 5;54(3):272-86.

Effects of glutamine supply on growth and metabolism of mammalian cells in
chemostat culture.

Vriezen N(1), Romein B, Luyben KC, van Dijken JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Enzymology, Kluyver Laboratory for
Biotechnology, Delft University of Technology, Julianalaan 67, 2628BC Delft, The 
Netherlands. N.Vriezen@stm.tudelft.nl

Glutamine is a major source of energy, carbon, and nitrogen for mammalian cells. 
The amount of glutamine present in commercial mammalian cell media is, however,
not necessarily balanced with cell requirements. Therefore, the effects of
glutamine limitation on the physiology of two mammalian cell lines were studied
in steady-state chemostat cultures fed with IMDM medium with 5% serum. The cell
lines used were MN12, a mouse-mouse hybridoma, and SP2/0-Ag14, a mouse myeloma
often used in hybridoma fusions. Cultures, grown at a fixed dilution rate of 0.03
h(-1), were fed with media containing glutamine concentrations ranging from 0.5
to 4 mmol L(-1). Biomass dry weight and cell number were linearly proportional to
the glutamine concentrations fed, between 0.5 and 2 mmol L(-1), and glutamine was
completely consumed by both cell lines. From this it was concluded that glutamine
was the growth-limiting substrate in this concentration range and that the
standard formulation of IMDM medium contains a twofold excess of glutamine. In
glutamine-limited cultures, the specific rates of ammonia and alanine production 
were low compared to glutamine-excess cultures containing 4 mmol L(-1) glutamine 
in the feed medium. The specific consumption rates of nearly all amino acids
decreased with increasing glutamine feed, indicating that, in their metabolic
function, they may partially be replaced by glutamine. Both cell lines reacted
similarly to differences in glutamine feeding in all aspects investigated, except
for glucose metabolism, In SP2/0-Ag14 glutamine feed concentrations did not
affect the specific glucose consumption, whereas in MN12 this parameter increased
with increasing amounts of glutamine fed. This systematic study using controlled 
culture conditions together with a detailed analysis of culture data shows that, 
although cells may react similarly in many aspects, cell-line-specific
characteristics may be encountered even with respect to fundamental physiological
responses like the interaction of the glutamine and glucose metabolism.

PMID: 18634093  [PubMed]


233. J Biol Chem. 1997 Apr 4;272(14):9120-2.

Aberrant methylation of an imprinted gene U2af1-rs1(SP2) caused by its own
transgene.

Hatada I(1), Nabetani A, Arai Y, Ohishi S, Suzuki M, Miyabara S, Nishimune Y,
Mukai T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, National Cardiovascular Center Research Institute,
5-7-1, Fujishiro-dai, Suita, Osaka 565, Japan. hatada@ri.ncvc.go.jp

Genomic imprinting refers to the parental allele-specific expression of genes.
The precise mechanism underlying this phenomenon, which may involve DNA
methylation, is not yet known. U2af1-rs1(SP2) is an imprinted gene expressed from
the paternal allele and is methylated on the maternal allele. Here we report an
artificial system in which expression and methylation of the endogenous imprinted
gene U2af1-rs1 can be affected by interaction with its own transgene in the
testis. We suggest that there is a mechanism in male gametogenesis by which the
U2af1-rs1 gene is kept unmethylated to be expressed in the offspring in addition 
to a mechanism in female gametogenesis by which the U2af1-rs1 gene is methylated 
and is not expressed in the offspring.

PMID: 9083040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 1997 Apr;18(4):183-5.

[Serum G-CSF levels in patients with chronic aplastic anemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu W(1), Sun G, Wu W, Chen H, Yang Z, Zhang F, Shen Z, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Second Medical University, Shanghai 200025.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the pathogenesis of aplastic anemia.
METHODS: The spleen cells of BALB/c miceimmunized with rhG-CSF were fused with
myeloma cell line SP2/0. Three murine hybridomas producing monoclonal antibody
(McAb) against rhG-CSF were obtained. Serum levels of G-CSF in 54 cases of
chronic aplastic anemia (CAA) were detected by ELISA method.
RESULTS: Serum G-CSF levels in 70.4% (38 of 54 cases) of the CAA patients were
increased (272.76 +/- 58.39ng/L). There was a negative correlation between blood 
neutrophil counts and serum G-CSF levels (r = -0.535, P<0.01). CFU-GM were
detected in 12 cases of CAA, and all was decreased (17.92 +/- 10.28/2 x 10(5)
nucleated cell). Serum G-CSF levels in almost 30% (12 of 54 cases) of the CAA
patients were not increased.
CONCLUSION: The hematopoietic progenitor cells of CAA patients were impaired, and
some CAA could be treated with rhG-CSF and immunosuppressive agents.

PMID: 15622763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Space Med Med Eng (Beijing). 1997 Apr;10(2):79-83.

Mutation effect of high altitude balloon flight on rice and green pepper seeds.

Li J(1), Wang P, Han D, Chen F, Deng L, Guo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, Academia Sinica, Beijing, China.

Dry seeds of rice and green pepper were carried in the basket of a high altitude 
balloon to 30-40 km for 8 h. The treated seeds were planted on the ground and
characters of these seeds and their progenies, such as development, fruiting,
disease resistance were observed. The results showed that the SP2 generation of
the treated rice showed strong mutation. A Japonica male fertility restorer rice 
line was found out. It could be hybridized with sterile line of Indica rice, and 
their progeny had strong hybrid vigor, high setting percentage and good plumpness
of grain. Disease resistance, high-yield, big-fruit and high vitamin C content
strains were selected from the progenies of treated green pepper seeds. The above
results indicated that the special conditions in high altitude could produce a
variety of mutations and most of them are hereditable. Therefore, high altitude
balloon flight can be used as a new method of mutation breeding.

PMID: 11539903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. DNA Cell Biol. 1997 Apr;16(4):485-92.

The promoter activity of the phospholipase C-gamma2 gene is regulated by a
cell-type-specific control element.

Lee SJ(1), Bahk YY, Yun DH, Lee HJ, Lee YH, Ryu SH, Suh PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Pohang University of Science and Technology,
Korea.

We have cloned and characterized a genomic DNA spanning the 5'-flanking region,
the first and second exons, and the first intron of the human PLC-gamma2 gene.
The proximal upstream region is highly GC-rich and lacks a TATA box, whereas the 
distal region contains several AT-rich tracts. Multiple transcription initiation 
sites were identified by primer extension analysis. Based on the transient
transfection assays, the major transcriptional activation element was identified 
between -183 and +43 (G2SE) and a transcriptional repressive element was found
between -303 and -184 (G2RE). The expression of PLC-gamma2 in various cell lines 
was examined using monoclonal anti-PLC-gamma2 antibody. PLC-gamma2 was highly
expressed in B-cell lines such as Daudi, SP2, and Ramos cells, whereas it existed
at very low levels in Jurkat, 3T3-L1, NBL-7, and C6Bu-1 cells. Moderate levels of
PLC-gamma2 were also detected in C2C12, P19, U937, HL60, A431, and PC12 cells.
The 4-kb genomic fragment upstream of -1,654 was able to activate transcription
from the PLC-gamma2 promoter in Daudi and C2C12 cells, but not in Jurkat cells,
which is consistent with the PLC-gamma2 protein expression levels in those cell
lines. These results suggest that the cell-type-specific expression of PLC-gamma2
might be attributed to the transcriptional regulation by the upstream
cis-element.

PMID: 9150436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Hybridoma. 1997 Apr;16(2):195-9.

Detection of two isotypically different antibodies produced by a murine
hybridoma.

Chen D(1), Altmann K, Hanna PJ, Tammer A, Underwood JR.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological and Chemical Sciences, Deakin University, Geelong, VIC,
Australia.

A hybridoma, F31P46B, secreting monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) comprised of mu and 
gamma heavy chains in association with a single kappa light chain, has been
characterized. This hybridoma was prepared by fusing splenocytes, derived from a 
BALB/c mouse immunized with Vibrio vulnificus and SP2/O-Ag-14 mouse myeloma
cells. The specificity of this hybridoma was determined by ELISA screening on a
large number of bacterial strains. Hybridoma cells of F31P46B were cloned by
limiting dilution to an average cell density of 0.1 cells/well and repeated 3
times to ensure monoclonality. Isotyping of 7 subclones was then performed by
Ouchterlony gel double diffusion, as well as a Bio-Rad isotyping kit, and both
methods showed that both IgM and IgG2b were secreted. PAGE and immunoblotting
showed the presence of mu, gamma, and kappa chains with respective molecular
weights of 80, 50, and 25kDa. A series of fractions, collected from F31P46B
ascites during Superose 12 gel chromatography, were tested by the two isotyping
methods and each confirmed the presence of two immunoglobulin products. These
data indicated that the hybridoma secreted two separate immunoglobulins,
IgM/kappa and IgG2b/kappa.

PMID: 9145323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Thromb Haemost. 1997 Apr;77(4):755-9.

Construction and expression of mouse-human chimeric antibody SZ-51 specific for
activated platelet P-selectin.

Gu J(1), Liu Y, Xia L, Wan H, Li P, Zhang X, Ruan C.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Institute of Haematology, Thrombosis and Hemostasis Research Unit,
Suzhou Medical College, P. R. China.

A murine monoclonal (mAb) SZ-51 specific for human P-selectin may be used for in 
vivo thrombus imaging and for the targeting of fibrinolytic agents to thrombi. In
order to reduce the immunogenicity of the murine mAb SZ-51 in humans, we cloned
and sequenced the cDNAs encoding the variable region of mAb SZ-51 in order to
develop mouse/human chimeric reagents. The E. coli expression vector
pHEN1-SZ51Fab/Hu was constructed by fusing the variable regions of mAb SZ-51 with
human IgG gamma 1CH1 and C kappa genes. The constructs were introduced into E.
coli HB2151 for expression of soluble chimeric Fab fragment. We also constructed 
two fusion products by joining the variable regions of mouse antibody to the
appropriate constant regions of human Ig gamma 1 and kappa. These chimeras were
cloned into two eukaryotic selectable expression vectors separately, which were
then contransfected into a non-Ig secreting murine myeloma line SP2/0 with
lipofectin reagent. Six cell lines remained positive for Ig secretion. The
highest producing cell line, which showed stable integration and expression at 5 
mg/l of culture, was selected for the large scale production of chimeric
antibody. Immunoblotting analysis demonstrated that both of the chimeric
antibodies (SZ51Fab/Hu, SZ51/Hu) in the culture supernatants, like the native mAb
SZ-51, bind P-selectin. In addition, the whole chimeric antibody can compete for 
binding to activated platelets with murine SZ-51. Therefore, the SZ-51 chimeric
antibody may be a potential agent for diagnosis and treatment of thrombotic
diseases in the future.

PMID: 9134655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Nucleic Acids Res. 1997 Apr 1;25(7):1333-8.

Developmental activation of an episomic hsp70 gene promoter in two-cell mouse
embryos by transcription factor Sp1.

Bevilacqua A(1), Fiorenza MT, Mangia F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology and Department of Histology and Medical Embryology,
La Sapienza University of Rome, Via Borelli 50, 00161 Rome, Italy.

To investigate the control of zygotic genome expression in two-cell mouse
embryos, we studied transcription factors required for transient expression of
microinjected DNA constructs driven by the promoter of one of the earliest genes 
activated after fertilization in this system, the heat shock gene hsp70.
Cis-acting elements required for hsp70 activation were first investigated by
mutational analysis. Mutation of the TATA box and a proximal GC box strongly
inhibited construct expression, while that of a CCAAT box had no effect.
Transcription factors binding the wild-type hsp70 promoter were then titrated in 
vivo by coinjecting the construct with double-stranded oligodeoxyribonucleotides 
containing definite consensus sequences. Wild-type GC box oligonucleotides
strongly inhibited construct expression, while those containing mutated GC boxes,
wild-type CCAAT boxes, and heat shock elements had no effects. Finally, construct
expression was challenged by coinjecting antibodies to specific transcription
factors. Antibodies to factor Sp1 depressed construct expression in a
dose-dependent manner, while those to Sp2, HSF1 and HSF2 were ineffective. These 
results pinpoint the Sp1 transcription factor as an absolute requirement for
activation of the hsp70 gene promoter in two-cell mouse embryos, and make this
factor a candidate for a major regulator of the onset of murine zygotic genome
expression.

PMCID: PMC146604
PMID: 9060426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Mar 17;232(2):367-72.

Identification of the tumor antigen 90K domains recognized by monoclonal
antibodies SP2 and L3 and preparation and characterization of novel anti-90K
monoclonal antibodies.

Tinari N(1), D'Egidio M, Iacobelli S, Bowen M, Starling G, Seachord C, Darveau R,
Aruffo A.

Author information: 
(1)Cattedra di Oncologia Medica, Universita G. D'Annunzio, Chieti, Italy.

The tumor antigen 90K (Mac-2BP, L3 antigen), which has been shown to have T cell 
costimulatory activity, is a approximately 90 kDa secreted protein found in high 
levels in plasma, saliva, breast milk and other human fluids. The 90K antigen can
be divided into three domains: an amino terminal scavenger receptor cysteine-rich
(SRCR)-like domain (D1), followed by a heavily glycosylated mucin-like domain
(D2) and a approximately 27 kDa carboxy-terminal domain (D3). In this study we
report on the construction of six different 90K immunoglobulin (Ig) fusion
proteins containing different 90K domain combinations. Initially these fusion
proteins were used to identify which 90K domain contains the epitopes recognized 
by the anti-90K monoclonal antibodies (mAb) SP2 and L3. Both of these mAbs were
found to recognize 90K-D2. A new panel of anti-90K mAb was then generated by
immunizing mice with ascites derived 90K protein. The 90K domain specific fusion 
proteins were then used to identify novel anti-90K mAbs which recognize the amino
terminal SRCR domain and the carboxy terminal approximately 27 kDa domain of 90K.
Two novel anti-90K SRCR (D1) and one anti-90 27 kDa domain (D3) mAbs were
obtained. These 90K-Ig fusion proteins, as well as the novel and existing
anti-90K mAbs, provide a set of tools which will allow further dissection of the 
structure and function of this immune modulatory protein.

PMID: 9125183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Magn Reson. 1997 Mar;125(1):8-19.

New Semi-empirical Approach for the Calculation of 13C Chemical-Shift Tensors

Sternberg U(1), Priess W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut fur Optik und Quantenelektronik, Friedrich-Schiller-Universitat Jena,
Max-Wien-Platz 1, Jena, D-07743, Germany

The semi-empirical bond polarization theory is applied to the calculation of 13C 
chemical-shift tensors. This method allows prediction of shift tensors with
deviations from experiment comparable to the errors of the ab initio methods. In 
contrast to ab initio calculations, a set of empirical parameters is needed,
which can be estimated from experimental chemical-shift tensors solving a set of 
linear equations. The coefficients of this overdetermined set of equations are
bond polarization energies that must be calculated within the framework of this
theory. The parameters for C-C, C-H, and C-O bonds of sp3 and sp2 hybridized
carbons and C-N bonds of sp3 carbons were obtained from 606 equations formed from
experimental data from 20 substances taken from the literature. The substances
include sugars, aromatic compounds, amino acids, and organic acids. The mean
deviation of calculated from experimental 13C chemical-shift tensor components is
9 ppm.

PMID: 9245355  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


242. Immunotechnology. 1997 Mar;3(1):31-43.

Cloning and expression of human V-genes derived from phage display libraries as
fully assembled human anti-TNF alpha monoclonal antibodies.

Mahler SM(1), Marquis CP, Brown G, Roberts A, Hoogenboom HR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, University of New South Wales, Kensington,
Sydney, Australia. s.mahler@unsw.edu.au

BACKGROUND: With the advent of phage antibody libraries, access to completely
human antibody fragments is feasible, either by direct selection from human
antibody libraries, or by guided selection. After selection, Fabs and scFvs may
need to be expressed as complete antibodies in mammalian cells for further
characterisation, or if effector functions are required.
OBJECTIVES: To rebuild and express the human anti-TNF alpha antibody Fab-P3A2
(isolated as a Fab fragment from phage display libraries by guided selection) as 
a fully assembled, functional human antibody (gamma-1, lambda) in Sp2/0 myeloma
cells, and to perform preliminary characterisation studies of the secreted IgG1
molecule. A further objective was to investigate the kinetics of human antibody
production and the stability of antibody secretion in transfectomas cultured in
various media formulations.
STUDY DESIGN: A tripartite strategy was employed for cloning heavy chain gene
(VH)-P3 and light chain gene V lambda-A2-C lambda into mammalian cell expression 
vectors p alpha Lys-30 and p alpha Lys-17 respectively. The cell line P3A2.B5 was
isolated after co-transfection of Sp2/0 mouse myelomas with the constructs,
expanded and weaned into a protein free medium. Fully assembled Ig-P3A2 antibody 
was purified by Protein A affinity chromatography and characterised with respect 
to size of antibody chains, and affinity for human TNF alpha. Stability of
secretion was investigated by extended serial sub-culture and analysis of P3A2.B5
sub-clones. Strategies of media enrichment were tested for any effect on antibody
productivity by selected P3A2.B5 sub-clones.
RESULTS: The cell line P3A2.B5 secreted an assembled, human antibody Ig-P3A2,
with heavy and light chains of molecular weight 55 and 28 KD respectively.
Equilibrium capture studies showed Ig-P3A2 to have a dissociation constant of
approximately 1.5 x 10(-8) M. The mean specific productivity of the cell line
increased from 1.2 pg/cell/day to 7.8 pg/cell/day by a combination of medium
enrichment and serum reduction. Prolonged serial sub-culture of P3A2.B5 showed
the cell line to be unstable with respect to antibody secretion.
CONCLUSIONS: We have outlined a method for expression of human V genes as
assembled antibodies in Sp2/0 myeloma cells. A cloning strategy for the stable
expression of scFv or Fab genes isolated from phage display libraries as
assembled human antibodies of the IgGl subclass in Sp2/0 myeloma cells has been
described. For maximising specific productivity of antibody-producing cell lines,
supplementation of culture media with glucose, glutamine and amino acids
increases antibody yield significantly compared to that in conventional media,
indicating the latter is stoichiometrically limiting for production purposes.

PMID: 9154466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Bioorg Med Chem. 1997 Mar;5(3):497-500.

A chemoenzymatic synthesis of UDP-(2-deoxy-2-fluoro)-galactose and evaluation of 
its interaction with galactosyltransferase.

Hayashi T(1), Murray BW, Wang R, Wong CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Uridine 5'-diphospho-(2-deoxy-2-fluoro)galactose (UDP-2FGal), prepared and
characterized for the first time by a chemoenzymatic method, was found to be a
competitive inhibitor of beta-1,4-galactosyltransferase with a Ki value of 149
microM. This study supports that the glycosyltransferase reaction mechanism
proceeds through a glycosidic cleavage transition state with sp2 character
developed at the anomeric center.

PMID: 9113327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Korean J Parasitol. 1997 Mar;35(1):55-62.

[Immunological properties of the 30 kDa antigen of toxoplasma gondii].

[Article in Korean]

Shin DW(1), Lee YH, Rho TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, College of Medicine, Chungnam National University,
Taejon, Korea.

The molecular weight 30 kDa membrane protein of Toxoplasma gondii (Toxoplasma 30 
kDa) apparently conserved in most strains of T. gondii and sera of infected
hosts. The present study aimed to elucidate Toxoplasma 30 kDa as a useful
diagnostic antigen for serodiagnosis of toxoplasmosis by ELISA and for induction 
of protective immunity. Murine spleen cells immunized with the membrane antigen
of T. gondii were fused with mouse Sp2/O-Ag14 myeloma cells. Out of 8 clones
selected, five were IgG2b, the others belonged to IgG1 and IgG2a. The 30 kDa
antigen was distributed mainly on the surface membrane of tachyzoites by indirect
fluorescence method. Murine peritoneal macrophages which were activated by 30 kDa
antigen produced more amounts of NO2 compared with crude antigen-treated group,
however there were no significant differences in toxoplamacidal activity between 
the two groups. Higher specificity of Toxoplasma 30 kDa antigen was recognized
for serodiagnosis of toxoplasmosis than the crude antigen. From these results,
Toxoplasma 30 kDa antigen enhances the cytotoxic effect of macrophages as well as
a more reliable means for the serodiagnosis of toxoplasmosis by ELISA.

PMID: 9100440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Biochem J. 1997 Mar 1;322 ( Pt 2):615-23.

Unsaturated fatty acids enhance cell yields and perturb the energy metabolism of 
an antibody-secreting hybridoma.

Butler M(1), Huzel N, Barnabé N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada.

Growth of the murine B-lymphocyte cell line CC9C10 and the myeloma SP2/0 was
enhanced significantly by the presence of the unsaturated fatty acids, oleic and 
linoleic acids in serum-free culture. The cellular content of linoleic and oleic 
acids gradually increased during continuous culture passage, with no evidence of 
regulatory control. Over 10 culture passages in the presence of these fatty
acids, the unsaturated/saturated fatty acid ratio of all cellular lipid fractions
increased substantially. Most of the fatty acid accumulated in the polar lipid
fraction (more than 74%) and only a small proportion was oxidized to CO2 (0.5%). 
Linoleic acid caused a decrease to one-eighth in the rate of metabolism of
glutamine and a 1.4-fold increase in the rate of metabolism of glucose. There was
no change in the relative flux of glucose through the pathways of glycolysis,
pentose phosphate or the tricarboxylic acid cycle. The changes in energy
metabolism were reversed when the cells were removed from fatty acid-supplemented
medium. The most plausible explanation for these effects is the observed decrease
in the rate of uptake of glutamine into cells loaded with linoleic acid. Growth
of the CC9C10 cells in linoleic acid caused the Km of glutamine uptake to
increase from 2.7 to 23 mM, whereas glucose uptake was unaffected.

PMCID: PMC1218234
PMID: 9065785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1997 Mar;82(3):925-31.

Recombinant thyroid peroxidase-specific Fab converted to immunoglobulin G (IgG)
molecules: evidence for thyroid cell damage by IgG1, but not IgG4,
autoantibodies.

Guo J(1), Jaume JC, Rapoport B, McLachlan SM.

Author information: 
(1)Thyroid Molecular Biology Unit, Veterans Administration Medical Center, San
Francisco, USA.

A recombinant autoantibody Fab (SP1.4) to thyroid peroxidase (TPO), cloned from
intrathyroidal B cell immunoglobulin genes, interacts with an epitope on TPO
recognized by all patients with autoimmune thyroid disease. To compare the
biological properties of IgG1 and IgG4 TPO autoantibodies, we converted Fab SP1.4
to full-length immunoglobulins. The SP1.4 heavy and kappa light chain variable
region genes, spliced by overlap PCR to a mammalian signal peptide, were
transferred to expression vectors for human IgG1, IgG4, and kappa L chains.
Plasmids containing the IgG1 (or IgG4) heavy chain and the kappa L chain were
cotransfected into SP2/0 mouse myeloma cells. Cells secreting TPO autoantibodies 
were cloned, and IgG1-SP and IgG4-SP were affinity purified from medium using
protein G. Their subclass specificities were confirmed by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay and fluorometry after binding to Chinese hamster ovary cells 
expressing cell surface TPO. Further confirmation of SP1.4 Fab conversion to
full-length molecules was the ability of protein A to precipitate IgG1-SP and
IgG4-SP complexed to [125I]TPO. IgG1-SP1.4, IgG4-SP1.4, and Fab SP1.4 had similar
high affinities for TPO (Kd = approximately 2 x 10(-10) mol/L). Complexes of
[125I]TPO and IgG1-SP (but not IgG4-SP) bound to peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMC), but not to a B cell line. Flow cytometry demonstrated Fc receptors 
Fc gamma RI, Fc gamma RII, and Fc gamma RIII on PBMC, but only Fc gamma RII on
the B cell line. Together, these data indicate that IgG1-SP/TPO complexes bind to
either Fc gamma RI on monocytes or RIII on natural killer cells. In assays for
antibody-dependent cytotoxicity using PBMC, 51Cr release was higher for thyroid
cells preincubated with IgG1-SP (13.4%) than with IgG4-SP (2.5%) or with culture 
medium alone (-0.7%). No specific 51Cr release was observed when either
fibroblasts or Chinese hamster ovary cells expressing cell surface TPO were used 
as target cells. In conclusion, a human TPO-specific Fab converted to IgG1, but
not IgG-4, can mediate cytotoxic effects on human thyroid cells in vitro. These
observations support the clinical relevance of TPO autoantibody subclass
distribution and emphasize the likelihood that, as opposed to being simple
markers of thyroid damage, TPO autoantibodies may play a role in the induction of
thyroid dysfunction in vivo.

PMID: 9062508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Biol Chem. 1997 Feb 21;272(8):4869-82.

The human POLD1 gene. Identification of an upstream activator sequence,
activation by Sp1 and Sp3, and cell cycle regulation.

Zhao L(1), Chang LS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio 43205, USA.

The promoter of the human POLD1 gene encoding the catalytic subunit of DNA
polymerase delta is G/C-rich and does not contain a TATA box. Transient
transfection analysis in HeLa cells employing POLD1-luciferase chimeric plasmids 
revealed a core promoter region extending 328 base pairs (bp) from the major
transcription initiation site. Multiple elements in this region including two
11-bp direct repeats located between nucleotide positions -92 and -22, play an
important role in POLD1 promoter activity. Deletion or linker-replacement
mutations of the repeats drastically reduced the promoter activity. A 70-bp DNA
fragment containing the two repeats could stimulate the expression of the POLD1
or a heterologous promoter in an orientation-independent manner. DNase I
footprinting and band-shift assays showed that HeLa nuclear extracts contained
proteins specifically binding to the repeat sequences. Southwestern blot and UV
cross-linking analyses identified Sp1 and two 85-kDa proteins that bound to the
repeats. Additionally, screening of HeLa cDNA expression libraries for the
sequence-specific DNA-binding protein using the 11-bp repeat sequences as the
probe, identified a cDNA that corresponds to Sp3, a member of the Sp1 family.
Cotransfection studies in Drosophila SL2 cells showed that both Sp1 and Sp3, but 
not Sp2, could activate the POLD1 promoter through the repeat sequences. The
POLD1 promoter activity was induced about 4-fold at the late G1/S boundary in
serum-stimulated cells. The 11-bp repeats together with an E2F-like sequence,
located adjacent to the major transcription initiation site, were important for
the stimulation. Taken together, this study provides a direct evidence for
transcriptional regulation of the human POLD1 gene.

PMID: 9030545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Transplantation. 1997 Feb 15;63(3):444-9.

Murine marrow coexpressing H2-Dsp2 and H2-Db on host natural killer cell
rejection.

Liu J(1), Sentman CL, Kumar V, Bennett M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at
Dallas, 75235, USA.

BACKGROUND: Class I molecules may inhibit or activate natural killer (NK) cells. 
H2-Dd, -Ld, or -Dsp2 (the latter derived from spretus mice) on bone marrow cells 
(BMC) are recognized and rejected by NK1.1+ NK cells. BMC of intra-H2
recombinants between H2sp2 and H2b were analyzed. The 9347 and R40
KbIbBat2b/Tnf(sp2)Dsp2 BMC were rejected by B6 hosts. However, B6 hosts reject
and accept KbDsp2Db R40 x B6 and 9347 x B6 BMC, respectively. Thus, Db and/or
H2-Bat2/Tnf interval genes may regulate the immunogenicity of H2-Dsp2+ BMC.
METHODS: R40 or 9347 mice were crossed with DBA.Db (H2d, Db) transgenic mice to
produce F1 and F2 progeny. DNA synthesis (proliferation) in host spleens was the 
measure of marrow graft success. Results. (1) BMC of H2(9347 or R40)+ H2d-Db+
(but not Db-) F2 progeny grew in B6 hosts. (2) BMC of H2(9347 or R40) x DBA.Db F1
Kb/dDsp2/dDb progeny were rejected by B6, but not by B6D2F1 (H2b/d) or D8 (H2b,
Dd) hosts. (3) NK cells were the effectors.
CONCLUSIONS: Db can reduce the immunogenicity of Dsp2+ BMC (F2 data), but not of 
Dd+ BMC (F1 data). Growth of F2 H2(R40) Db+, but not F1 R40 x B6, BMC grafts in
B6 hosts could be based on gene(s) differences in the H2-Bat2/Tnf region.
Alternatively, non-H2 genes of DBA/2 might be involved. The genes would provide
peptides for Db heavy chains to form "protective motifs" that send negative
signals to host NK cells.

PMID: 9039937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Inorg Biochem. 1997 Feb 15;65(3):207-18.

The crystal and molecular structure of (HgL2)n (L =
4,6-dimethylpyrimidine-2-thiolate)--an unusual helical supramolecular assembly in
solid phase: in search of a new antidote to mercury poisoning.

Das AK(1), Seth S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Presidency College, Calcutta, West Bengal, India.

An X-ray crystallographic study reveals that in solid phase,
4,6-dimethylpyrimidine-2-thiol (4,6Me2 Pm2SH) forms a multinuclear complex with
mercury, containing an open HgN3S2 core and exhibiting a helix-like
polymerization through repetitive distant Hg(sp3d) ... N(sp2) interactions along 
the b axis of the lattice. The complex, therefore, exemplifies a supramolecular
assembly, generated by successive vacant ligand site promoted self-associations. 
It crystallizes in the monoclinic space group P2(1)/c, a = 11.808(2), b =
9.198(2), and c = 14.702(3) A, beta = 112.19(3)0, Z = 4 (monomers). Such
self-associative distant interactions are absent in solution phase, as observed
from the 1H NMR spectrum (acetone-d6, TMS). A preliminary toxicological study of 
the pyrimidinethiol ligand reveals a high toxicity at substantially higher doses 
and appreciably low toxic effects at lower doses. The ligand is also highly
potent in inhibiting all common gram negative bacteria (except the acid fast
group, which was not tested) and this property may endow it with some side
therapeutic uses when considered as an antidote to mercury poisoning following
some functional modifications in order to reduce the toxic effects, even when
administered at higher doses.

PMID: 9025272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1997 Feb;105(1):53-7.

A fully automated system for the evaluation of masseter silent periods.

Connemann BJ(1), Urban PP, Lüttkopf V, Hopf HC.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik und Poliklinik für Neurologie, Johannes Gutenberg Universität, Mainz,
Germany.

Exteroceptive suppression of masseter muscle activity, 'masseter inhibitory
reflex', comprises one or 2 silent periods (SP1 and SP2) interrupting the
voluntary activation. The main problem when evaluating exteroceptive suppression 
is the lack of an objective and precise measure for the onset and end of the
silent period which so far has not been overcome by various automated systems. We
describe a new fully automated system for determining the onset and end of the
masseter silent period. The decision approach is essentially based upon
deterministic properties of median filters which are used to partition the local 
variances of the EMG traces into constant segments and edges between them. The
system was tested in 13 healthy volunteers with 2 subjects tested serially 10
times each to get estimates of the inter- and intra-individual variability. The
performance of the system compared favourably to that of a simpler approach and
to earlier results from our laboratory. The inter-individual variability of the
SP1 onset was 17 times smaller than when based on a subjective decision process.

PMID: 9118839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. DNA Cell Biol. 1997 Feb;16(2):127-35.

Expression of exogenous NF-IL6 induces apoptosis in Sp2/0-Ag14 myeloma cells.

Zhu MS(1), Liu DG, Cheng HQ, Xu XY, Li ZP.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry, Academia Sinica, People's Republic of
China.

NF-IL6 (or C/EBP beta) is a multifunctional transcription factor of the C/EBP
family. To study the effects of exogenous expression of NF-IL6 on the growth of
cells of hematopoietic tumors, we infected SP2/0-Ag14 myeloma cells with pLXSN
recombinant retrovirus harboring the NF-IL6 cDNA. We found that the transfected
cells revealed changes typical of the apoptosis and finally died. The expression 
of NF-IL6 protein was shown by a "supershift" assay in the NF-IL6-transfected
cells. In controls, where cells were infected by the retroviral vector with a
mutant NF-IL6 coding region as well as the vector without insert, no sign for
expression of NF-IL6 and apoptosis was observed. Therefore, our work shows that
the apoptosis of this myeloma cell line was induced by the exogenous NF-IL6
expression. This is significantly different from the apparent effects of NF-IL6
in leukemia cells and in fibroblasts. These facts indicate that NF-IL6 exerts
different functions in different cell types. We discuss possible mechanisms for
the NF-IL6-induced apoptosis.

PMID: 9052733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Biochemistry. 1997 Jan 28;36(4):823-31.

Mechanism of human alpha-1,3-fucosyltransferase V: glycosidic cleavage occurs
prior to nucleophilic attack.

Murray BW(1), Wittmann V, Burkart MD, Hung SC, Wong CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California
92037, USA.

alpha-1,3-Fucosyltransferase V (FucT V) catalyzes the transfer of 1-fucose from
the donor sugar guanosine 5'-diphospho-beta-1-fucose (GDP-Fuc) to an acceptor
sugar. A secondary isotope effect on the fucosyltransfer reaction with guanosine 
5'-diphospho-[1-2H]-beta-1-fucose (GDP-[1-2H]-Fuc) as the substrate was observed 
and determined to be Dv = 1.32 +/- 0.13 and DV/K = 1.27 +/- 0.07. Competitive
inhibition of FucT V by guanosine 5'-diphospho-2-deoxy-2-fluoro-beta-1-fucose
(GDP-2F-Fuc) was observed with an inhibition constant of 4.2 microM which
represents the most potent inhibitor of this enzyme to date. Incubation of
GDP-2F-Fuc with FucT V and an acceptor molecule prior to the addition of GDP-Fuc 
had no effect on the potency of inhibition, indicating that GDP-2F-Fuc is neither
an inactivator nor a slow substrate. Both the observed secondary isotope effect
and the inhibition by GDP-2F-Fuc are consistent with a charged, sp2-hybridized,
transition-state structure. A convenient and efficient synthesis of
GDP-[1-2H]-Fuc and GDP-2F-Fuc and a nonradioactive, fluorescence assay for
fucosyltransferase activity have been developed.

PMID: 9020780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Science. 1997 Jan 10;275(5297):187-91.

Diameter-Selective Raman Scattering from Vibrational Modes in Carbon Nanotubes

Rao AM(1), Richter E, Bandow S, Chase B, Eklund PC, Williams KA, Fang S,
Subbaswamy KR, Menon M, Thess A, Smalley RE, Dresselhaus G, Dresselhaus MS.

Author information: 
(1)A. M. Rao and P. C. Eklund, Department of Physics and Astronomy and Center for
Applied Energy Research, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40506-0055, USA.
E. Richter, K. A. Williams, S. Fang, K. R. Subbaswamy, Department of Physics and 
Astronomy, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40506-0055, USA. S. Bandow,
Instrument Center, Institute for Molecular Science, Myodaiji, Okazaki 444, Japan.
B. Chase, Dupont Experimental Station, E328163, P.O. Box 80328, Wilmington, DE
19880-0328, USA. M. Menon, Department of Physics and Astronomy and Center for
Computational Sciences, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40506-0055, USA. A.
Thess and R. E. Smalley, Department of Chemistry, Rice University, Houston, TX
77005, USA. G. Dresselhaus, Francis Bitter Magnet Laboratory, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. M. S. Dresselhaus, Department 
of Physics and Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Single wall carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) that are found as close-packed arrays in
crystalline ropes have been studied by using Raman scattering techniques with
laser excitation wavelengths in the range from 514.5 to 1320 nanometers. Numerous
Raman peaks were observed and identified with vibrational modes of armchair
symmetry (n, n) SWNTs. The Raman spectra are in good agreement with lattice
dynamics calculations based on C-C force constants used to fit the
two-dimensional, experimental phonon dispersion of a single graphene sheet.
Calculated intensities from a nonresonant, bond polarizability model optimized
for sp2 carbon are also in qualitative agreement with the Raman data, although a 
resonant Raman scattering process is also taking place. This resonance results
from the one-dimensional quantum confinement of the electrons in the nanotube.

PMID: 8985007  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


254. Hum Antibodies. 1997;8(4):169-80.

Chimeric immunoglobulin E reactive with tumor-associated antigen activates human 
Fc epsilon RI bearing cells.

Luiten RM(1), Warnaar SO, Schuurman J, Pasmans SG, Latour S, Daëron M, Fleuren
GJ, Litvinov SV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Leiden, The Netherlands.

Crosslinking of immunoglobulin E molecules that are bound to the Fc epsilon
receptors expressed on mast cells or basophils triggers activation of these
cells, resulting in the development of a type I hypersensitivity. Targeting this 
potent immune reaction towards tumors by using IgE that reacts with a
tumor-associated antigen, may induce a local inflammation at the tumor site, and 
may therefore promote tumor regression. We have previously shown that murine IgE 
bound to tumor cells can activate murine mast cells to release TNF-alpha and
histamine. To further investigate the therapeutic potential of IgE-mediated
immunotherapy of carcinomas, we have developed human/murine chimeric versions,
containing the murine variable regions and human constant regions, of both G250
and 323/A3 IgE. These chimeric IgEs are reactive respectively with the G250 renal
cell carcinoma antigen and the Ep-CAM molecule, which is highly expressed by most
carcinomas. Transfection of the respective chimeric heavy and light chain genes
into recipient Sp2/0 myeloma cells yielded chimeric IgE-producing clones.
Chimeric G250 and 323/A3 IgE reacted with tumor cells expressing the G250 antigen
or Ep-CAM, respectively. To generate a cell line that expresses Fc receptors for 
human or chimeric IgE, the rat basophilic leukemia cell line RBL-7 was
transfected with the human Fc epsilon RI alpha chain (RBL-7TZ) and subsequently
tested for binding of chimeric IgE. Functional assays showed that both chimeric
IgEs activated RBL-7TZ cells to release TNF-alpha when cultured with tumor cells 
that express the respective specific antigen. Furthermore, both chimeric IgEs
were able to activate freshly isolated human basophils.

PMID: 9395919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Life Sci. 1997;61(16):PL 243-8.

Evidence for direct cellular protective effect of PL-10 substances (synthesized
parts of body protection compound, BPC) and their specificity to gastric mucosal 
cells.

Bódis B(1), Karádi O, Németh P, Dohoczky C, Kolega M, Mózsik G.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Medicine, University Medical School of Pécs, Hungary.

The direct gastric mucosal cellular effect of four PL-10 substances (a
synthesized part of human body protection compound, BPC containing 14 or 15 amino
acids) was studied on freshly isolated rat gastric mucosal cells and on a mouse
myeloma cell line (Sp2/0-Ag14) in an ethanol-induced cell injury model. The
examined substances were not toxic for the cells. Two of them proved to be
significantly protective against the direct cellular damaging effect of ethanol
(PL 10.1.15AK-3 in 5 microg/ml dose and PL 10.1.AK14-2 dose-dependently, ED50=50 
ng/ml) on gastric mucosal cells. This cytoprotective effect was failured on mouse
myeloma cells. Based on these results a part of the in vivo protection induced by
BPC seems to be a direct cellular protective effect to gastric mucosal cells.

PMID: 9353174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Hum Antibodies. 1997;8(1):26-32.

Incorporation of T cell counterparts in the fusion partners for generation of
human monoclonal antibodies from Staphylococcus aureus stimulated B lymphocytes.

Gore MM(1), Singhania SS, Basu A, Banerjee K.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute Virology, Pune, India.

B cell growth and differentiation into immunoglobulin secreting cells is
controlled by various cytokines and cell to cell contact with T cells. Fusion
partner for human hybridoma therefore should accommodate all or some of these
signaling systems to overcome the unique situation of MHC incompatibility, need
for specific growth factors simultaneously taking into consideration the
downstream processing of the product for the clinical use. We have thus directed 
our efforts towards the development of a fusion partner which would not need
Epstein-Barr virus transformation of B cells prior to fusion. A nontransforming
mitogen, formalinized Staphylococcus aureus (FSTA) was used for stimulating human
B cells. Successful production of human IgM monoclonal antibody was achieved by
incorporating Jurkat-4 cells in existing mouse human heterohybrid through fusion 
of these cells followed by fusion with human B cells. To accommodate chromosomes 
of both T and B cells after fusion, human myeloid precursor cells KG1a, and to
incorporate T cell, HuT78 cells were fused. CD34+ and CD4+ hybrid of KG1a and HuT
78 cells-434 AM-when used as fusion partner could allow secretion of MAbs,
however growth potential was low. SP2/0 cells were then incorporated in 434 AM
cells to give myeloma environment to fused human B cells. Rabies virus
neutralizing human IgG MAb secreting clone was generated by fusing FSTA
stimulated human B cells with this fusion partner.

PMID: 9265502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Clin Microbiol. 1997 Jan;35(1):64-70.

Characterization of and application of monoclonal antibodies against Rickettsia
africae, a newly recognized species of spotted fever group rickettsia.

Xu W(1), Beati L, Raoult D.

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Rickettsies, Faculté de Médecine, Marseille, France.

Rickettsia africae is a newly described species which causes African tick bite
fever. Mediterranean spotted fever caused by R. conorii is endemic in the same
regions of Africa as tick bite fever, and differentiation of the two syndromes by
characterization of their etiological agents is important for epidemiological
studies. R. africae and R. conorii are, however, difficult to distinguish, and
therefore, our aim was to produce monoclonal antibodies to address this problem. 
Monoclonal antibodies were produced against R. africae by fusing splenocytes from
BALB/C mice immunized with purified rickettsial organisms and SP2/0-Ag14 myeloma 
cells. A total of 355 hybridomas producing monoclonal antibodies to R. africae
were identified by initial screening with six different antigens by
microimmunofluorescence assay. A panel of 23 representative monoclonal antibodies
were selected and subcloned. This panel was screened with a further 17 different 
spotted fever group (SFG) rickettsial reference antigens. Of these 23 monoclonal 
antibodies, 1 cross-reacted with only R. parkeri, whereas the others
cross-reacted with more than two different antigens. Immunoblotting indicated
that all the monoclonal antibodies were directed against the epitopes on two
major high-molecular-mass heat-labile proteins, of which the molecular masses
were 128 and 135 kDa, respectively. This monoclonal antibody panel was used
successfully to identify R. africae in the blood culture of an infected patient, 
in infected cells within shell vials, and in infected ticks collected from
Africa. Furthermore, the cross-reactivity of each SFG rickettsia with each of
these 23 monoclonal antibodies was scored and was used to build a dendrogram of
taxonomic relatedness between R. africae and the other SFG rickettsiae on the
basis of Jaccard coefficients and unweighted pair group method with arithmetic
mean analysis. The relatedness was generally consistent with that obtained by
other methods of comparison.

PMCID: PMC229513
PMID: 8968882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Braz J Med Biol Res. 1996 Dec;29(12):1625-8.

Monoclonal antibodies against low density lipoprotein with various degrees of
oxidative modifications.

Gidlund(1), Damasceno NR, Lindoso JA, Abdalla DS, Goto H.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Patologia, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de São Paulo,
Brasil. gidlundm@usp.br

Oxidative processes leading to the generation of oxidized low density lipoprotein
(oxLDL) particles have been suggested to be an important factor in the
pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. After initiation of the oxidative process, LDL
undergoes a progressive protein and lipid fragmentation. To understand this
process and the role of oxLDL in various diseases of inflammatory origin, we have
generated mouse monoclonal antibodies against copper-oxidized human LDL. Mice
were immunized intrasplenically and after one intravenous boost the spleen cells 
were fused with the Sp2/0 hybridoma fusion partner. The hybridoma clones obtained
after selection and cloning were analyzed for reactivity against oxLDL with
various degrees of copper-mediated oxidative modifications. Three hybridoma
clones were purified and further characterized. The following observations were
made: 1) the intrasplenic route of immunization, avoiding the use of
mycobacterial adjuvants, yielded a high frequency of positive clones; 2) the
individual hybridomas reacted against LDL with various degrees of oxidative
modifications; 3) the monoclonal antibodies could be used in ELISA and to detect 
oxLDL in immunohistochemical tissue staining, and 4) the monoclonal antibodies
also detected oxLDL from hamsters and rabbits. We conclude that these monoclonal 
antibodies could be useful to further investigate the role of oxLDL in
inflammation and in the immune response.

PMID: 9222422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Environ Health Perspect. 1996 Dec;104 Suppl 6:1159-63.

Phenylguanine found in urine after benzene exposure.

Norpoth KH(1), Müller G, Schell C, Jorg E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hygiene and Occupational Medicine, University Medical Center,
Essen, Germany. tha020@sp2.power.uni-essen.de

Comparative investigations with synthetic N7-phenylguanine were carried out to
clarify whether this compound is eliminated via the urine of rats as a
benzene-derived nucleic acid adduct. As sensitive methods for detecting trace
amounts of the compound, gas chromatography-mass spectroscopy, high performance
liquid chromatography, and two immunoassays (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
and fluoroimmunoassay) with appropriate monoclonal antibodies were used. The
results indicate the excretion of several benzene-related guanine adducts
slightly different from N7-phenylguanine that may possibly be hydroxylated. These
adducts differ also from (O6-, N2- and C8-phenylguanine, respectively.

PMCID: PMC1469737
PMID: 9118887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Eur J Cancer Prev. 1996 Dec;5(6):512-9.

Immunotherapy for cancer: construction, expression and functional
characterization of chimeric antibodies.

Motmans K(1), Thirion S, Heyligen H, Janssens J, Raus J, Vandevyver C.

Author information: 
(1)Dr L Willems-Instituut, Diepenbeek, Belgium.

Monoclonal antibodies (Mabs) are a potential key component for the treatment of
cancer, because of their specificity and multiple effector functions. Hybridoma
technology and progress in genetic engineering made it possible to customize
antibody molecules, rendering them more suitable for selective application. A
widely used technique is the construction of mouse-human hybrid molecules by
recombinant DNA techniques. These so-called chimeric antibodies contain the
murine variable (V) regions fused to the human constant (C) regions. In this
report, a general approach is described for the production of chimeric
antibodies. The gene segments encoding the murine variable heavy and light chain 
are isolated by the polymerase chain reaction and cloned into expression vectors 
containing the human gamma 1 heavy chain gene and the human K light chain gene,
respectively. Subsequently, these constructs are transfected into a
non-Ig-producing murine hybridoma, eg SP2/0 cells. The in vitro study of the
functional characteristics and biological properties of the thus obtained
chimeric antibodies are discussed.

PMID: 9061286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. J Protein Chem. 1996 Nov;15(8):709-19.

Primary structure of mannuronate lyases SP1 and SP2 from Turbo cornutus and
involvement of the hydrophobic C-terminal residues in the protein stability.

Muramatsu T(1), Komori K, Sakurai N, Yamada K, Awasaki Y, Fukuda K, Oda T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry, Faculty of Fisheries, Nagasaki University, Japan.

The complete amino acid sequences of two isoforms, SP1 and SP2, of mannuronate
lyase from a wreath shell, Turbo cornutus, were determined to elucidate amino
acid residues responsible for causing the more stable protein conformation of
SP2. The sequences of the two isoforms were identical except for two hydrophobic 
C-terminal amino acid residues of SP2, Ile and Leu, which were additionally
attached to Thr of the C-terminal residue of SP1 (253 residues in total). The
molecular weight of SP2 was calculated to be 28,912 from the amino acid sequence 
data. Two disulfide bond cross-linkages were found to be between 106 and 115 and 
between 145 and 150, and a partially buried single SH group was located at 236. A
carbohydrate chain that consisted of 3 GlcNAc, 3 Fuc, and 1 Man was anchored on
Asn-105 in a typical carbohydrate-binding motif of Asn-X-Ser. This is the first
evidence of the primary structure of mannuronate lyase, and no significant
homology of the amino acid sequence among other proteins was found. The
C-terminal truncated SP2, which was produced by digestion with carboxypeptidase Y
and corresponded structurally to SP1, showed a thermal stability identical to
that of SP1. These results indicate that the higher stability of SP2 than SP1
arises from the presence of the C-terminal two hydrophobic amino acid residues.

PMID: 9008294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Protein Expr Purif. 1996 Nov;8(3):271-82.

Eukaryotic expression systems: a comparison.

Geisse S(1), Gram H, Kleuser B, Kocher HP.

Author information: 
(1)Sandoz Pharma Ltd., Basel, Switzerland.

Eukaryotic expression systems are frequently employed for the production of
recombinant proteins as therapeutics as well as research tools. Most commonly
used expression systems are based on stably transfected adherent CHO cells or
nonadherent lymphoid cell lines. An efficient alternative is the infection of
insect cells by recombinant baculoviruses. Transient expression in mammalian
cells, e.g., COS cells, is often used for the production of smaller quantities of
proteins. The choice of a suitable expression system depends largely on the
biochemical and biological properties of the protein of interest, as well as on
the nature of the planned experiments and the amount of recombinant protein
required. We summarize here the expression of the cytokine human Leukemia
Inhibitory Factor (hu-LIF) in five of the most commonly used systems, namely in
CHO, Sp2/0, MEL, COS, and insect cells, in conjunction with an outline of the
principles and characteristics of each of these expression systems. In result,
the stably transfected cell lines, CHO, Sp2/0, and MEL cells, gave rise to
production of fully glycosylated hu-LIF at variable product titers; incompletely 
glycosylated, albeit biological action hu-LIF could be rapidly produced by
transient expression in COS cells or by baculovirus-mediated infection of insect 
cells.

PMID: 8936588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Br J Cancer. 1996 Nov;74(10):1545-52.

Anthracycline antibiotics non-covalently incorporated into the block copolymer
micelles: in vivo evaluation of anti-cancer activity.

Batrakova EV(1), Dorodnych TY, Klinskii EY, Kliushnenkova EN, Shemchukova OB,
Goncharova ON, Arjakov SA, Alakhov VY, Kabanov AV.

Author information: 
(1)Moscow Institute of Biotechnology, Inc., and Russian Research Center of
Molecular Diagnostics and Therapy.

The chemosensitising effects of poly(ethylene oxide)-poly(propylene
oxide)-poly-(ethylene oxide) (PEO-PPO-PEO) block copolymers (Pluronic) in
multidrug-resistant cancer cells has been described recently (Alakhov VY,
Moskaleva EY, Batrakova EV, Kabanov AV 1996, Biocon. Chem., 7, 209). This paper
presents initial studies on in vivo evaluation of Pluronic copolymers in the
treatment of cancer. The anti-tumour activity of epirubicin (EPI) and doxorubicin
(DOX), solubilised in micelles of Pluronic L61, P85 and F108, was investigated
using murine leukaemia P388 and daunorubicin-sensitive Sp2/0 and -resistant
Sp2/0(DNR) myeloma cells grown subcutaneously (s.c.). The study revealed that the
lifespan of the animals and inhibition of tumour growth were considerably
increased in mice treated with drug/copolymer compositions compared with animals 
treated with the free drugs. The anti-tumour activity of the drug/copolymer
compositions depends on the concentration of the copolymer and its
hydrophobicity, as determined by the ratio of the lengths of hydrophilic PEO and 
hydrophobic PPO segments. The data suggest that higher activity is associated
with more hydrophobic copolymers. In particular, a significant increase in
lifespan (T/C> 150%) and tumour growth inhibition (> 90%) was observed in animals
with Sp2/0 tumours with EPI/P85 and DOX/L61 compositions. The effective doses of 
these compositions caused inhibition of Sp2/0 tumour growth and complete
disappearance of tumour in 33-50% of animals. Future studies will focus on the
evaluation of the activity of Pluronic-based compositions against human
drug-resistant tumours.

PMCID: PMC2074856
PMID: 8932333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Carbohydr Res. 1996 Oct 4;292:103-15.

N1-alkyl-D-gluconamidines: are they 'perfect' mimics of the first transition
state of glucosidase action?

Legler G(1), Finken MT.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Universität Köln, Germany.

The inhibition of four beta-glucosidases of plant, fungal, and mammalian origin
by N1-butyl- and N1-dodecyl-D-gluconamidine was determined. Comparison with the
inhibition by the corresponding N-alkyl-D-glucosylamines revealed that the
strongly basic amidines (pKa 10.8) were at the most 10-times more inhibitory than
the weakly basic glucosylamines (pKa 6.5). The small enhancement of inhibitory
potency, resulting from transforming the tetrahedral C-1 geometry of the
glucosylamines to the planar sp2-geometry of the amidines, was ascribed to the
inability of the fully protonated amidines to function as hydrogen bond acceptors
with the catalytic acid of the enzyme. Additional evidence for the importance of 
a hydrogen bond for strong inhibition came from the comparison of K1-values of
the weakly basic 5-amino-5-deoxyhexopyranoses and 1,5-iminohexitols with those of
the corresponding glyconamidrazones (pKa 8.4), which also have a planar C-1
geometry but are largely protonated under the assay conditions and which had
similar or up to 10(4)-times larger K1-values than the former. Transition state
resemblance was judged from the ratio KS(alkyl beta-glucoside)/K1(alkyl
gluconamidine) relative to the rate acceleration factor kcat/kuncat (Wolfenden,
Acc, Chem. Res., 5 (1972) 10-16). Compared to ratios of kcat/kuncat from > or =
10(11) to > or = 10(13), the ratios for KS/K1 were only from 10(3) to 2 x 10(4)
except for beta-glucosidase A3 from Asp. wentii which had KS/K1 2.8 x 10(6). This
enzyme differs from the others by being strongly inhibited by cationic glycon and
substrate analogues rather than by basic ones. The pH-dependence of 1/K1 and the 
'slow' approach to the inhibition is discussed with respect to transition state
resemblance.

PMID: 8870240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Int J Biol Markers. 1996 Oct-Dec;11(4):183-9.

delta IK17: an antigen expressed on human lymphocytes.

Sotiriadou R(1), Kokkinopoulos D, Stinios J, Dimas C, Trangas T, Perez S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology Regional Anticancer, Oncologic Hospital of Athens,
Saint Savas, Greece.

Anti delta IK17 monoclonal antibody was produced by fusing SP2/0/Ag 14 myeloma
with spleen cells of BALB/c mice immunized with normal human thymocytes. a delta 
IK17 antibody recognizes a 44kD cell surface protein detected on human
lymphocytes. delta IK17 is expressed on human thymocytes, CD4+ and CD8+ T cell
subsets, B, NK cells, as well as on activated cells. The antigen is detected on
cells during the early, intermediate and late stages of lymphocyte maturation. In
addition, the expression of the antigen is correlated with ontogenesis. A T+
delta IK17+ subpopulation responded poorly to TPA stimulation and provided a
better helper signal for PWM-induced IgM synthesis than T+ delta IK17- cells. In 
addition, different levels of delta IK17 expression were detected in several
hematological diseases tested.

PMID: 9017440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Hybridoma. 1996 Oct;15(5):359-64.

Mouse monoclonal antipeptide antibodies specific for cholesteryl ester transfer
protein (CETP).

Thomas AP(1), Smith AM, Cumming RI, Jones C, Thomas RC, Pleasants KT, Barakat H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, East Carolina University School of 
Medicine, Greenville, North Carolina 27858-4354, USA.

A synthetic peptide whose amino acid sequence corresponds to residues 131-142 of 
human cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) was used as an immunogen to
generate a panel of monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) specific for the intact CETP
molecule. Spleen cells from BALB/c mice immunized with the peptide conjugated
with keyhole limpet hemocyanin (KLH) were fused with SP2/0 myeloma cells. Two
MAbs that bound fixed peptide in an enzyme-linked immunoabsorbent assay (ELISA)
were partially characterized regarding their specificity and biological activity.
ATM192 of the IgG1 subclass and J16-14 of the IgG3 subclass were used in a
Western blot assay as well as in the ELISA. We have also shown through the use of
immunoprecipitation that ATM192 can remove CETP enzyme activity from human serum 
without destroying the enzyme's activity. We have also shown that the antibodies 
can bind CETP from rabbits. The specificity studies and the lack of inhibition of
enzymatic activity suggest that the MAbs bind a structural area of the CETP
molecule not a part of the active binding site of the enzyme. We conclude that
these antibodies can be valuable as tools for studying CETP levels in human serum
as well as in tissue homogenates from rabbits and humans.

PMID: 8913785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Neurol Sci. 1996 Oct;142(1-2):85-92.

Silent period evoked by transcranial magnetic stimulation in unilateral thalamic 
infarcts.

Faig J(1), Busse O.

Author information: 
(1)Neurologische Abteilung, Weserbergland-Klinik, Höxter, Germany.

We studied 9 patients with isolated, unilateral thalamic infarcts of different
location and size imaged by MRI and (in one case) by CCT. The cortical silent
period (c-SP) of thenar muscles evoked by transcranial magnetic stimulation was
evaluated on both sides with low (c-SP1) and high (c-SP2) stimulus intensity.
Additionally, the motor-evoked thenar potentials by transcranial magnetic
stimulation (MEP) and the central motor conduction time (CMT), the silent period 
of thenar muscles evoked by electrical median nerve stimulation (p-SP),
electrically evoked short- (HR) and long-latency reflexes (LLR) of the thenar and
somatosensory evoked potentials of the median nerve were investigated
bilaterally. The c-SP1 was prolonged contralateral to the thalamic infarcts in 7 
patients and c-SP2 in all 9 patients. Prolongation of c-SP did not correlate with
location and size of the infarct, clinical symptoms or with the other parameters,
which are based on pyramidal motor system (MEP, CMT), thalamocortical circuits
(SEP, LLR), or spinal excitability level (p-SP, HR). These results suggest the
central pathways of the c-SP to be independent from those of the remaining
parameters and indicate the c-SP as a sensitive parameter reflecting
thalamocortical modulation of cortical inhibition.

PMID: 8902725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Biochem Pharmacol. 1996 Sep 27;52(6):857-62.

Azidothymidine induces apoptosis in mouse myeloma cell line Sp2/0.

Sailaja G(1), Nayak R, Antony A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore, India.

Azidothymidine (AZT), which has been extensively used as an antiviral agent in
the treatment of AIDS, showed strong inhibition of growth of Sp2/0 cells in
vitro. AZT-treated cells showed a decrease in viability in a dose-dependent
manner. AZT specifically induced typical apoptotic cell death with DNA
double-strand cleavage and subsequent formation of apoptotic bodies. The
induction of DNA double-strand cleavage into the oligonucleosomal ladder by AZT
was protected in the presence of thymidine or uridine. An increase in
endonuclease activity from nuclear extract of AZT-treated cells was observed. The
enzyme activity was found to be Ca(2+)-and Mg(2+)-dependent and was inhibited by 
zinc acetate. A marked enhancement of PARP activity was observed in AZT-treated
cells. These observations show that AZT can trigger both morphological and
biochemical changes typical of apoptosis in the mouse myeloma cell line Sp2/0.

PMID: 8781503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Phys Rev B Condens Matter. 1996 Sep 15;54(11):8064-8069.

Separation of the sp3 and sp2 components in the C1s photoemission spectra of
amorphous carbon films.

Díaz J, Paolicelli G, Ferrer S, Comin F.

PMID: 9984485  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


270. J Immunol Methods. 1996 Sep 9;195(1-2):81-92.

Autoantibody-mediated capture and presentation of autoantigen to T cells via the 
Fc epsilon receptor by a recombinant human autoantibody Fab converted to IgE.

Guo J(1), Quaratino S, Jaume JC, Costante G, Londei M, McLachlan SM, Rapoport B.

Author information: 
(1)Thyroid Molecular Biology Unit (111T), Veterans' Administration Medical
Center, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Fc epsilon receptor (CD23)-mediated capture of IgE-antigen complexes by B cells
provides a powerful antigen presenting system. Our goal was to develop a system
using high affinity, human, organ-specific monoclonal autoantibodies for antigen 
capture by B cells. For this purpose, we converted a recombinant human
autoantibody to TPO from a Fab (SP1.4) to an IgE molecule. Sera from all patients
with autoimmune thyroid disease contain autoantibodies with the same epitope as
SP1.4. The SP1.4 H and L chain V region genes were spliced by overlap PCR to a
mammalian, non-immunoglobulin signal peptide and transferred to expression
vectors for human IgG1 and kappa, respectively. After inserting the IgE constant 
region genes into the H chain vector, the kappa and IgE H chain vectors were
expressed in SP2/0 cells. SP1.4-IgE retains its high affinity (Kd) for TPO
(approximately 2 x 10(-10) M), recognizes the same epitope as Fab SP1.4 and,
importantly binds to a different epitope than does Fab TR1.9. Binding of
preformed complexes of SP1.4-IgE and biotinylated TPO to EB virus transformed B
cells (EBVL) was weakly detectable by flow cytometry and was displaced by
unlabeled TPO. SP1.4-IgE/125I-TPO complex binding to EBVL was much more clearly
evident, was also inhibited by the addition of unlabeled TPO, and was greatly
reduced by preincubation of the EBVL with anti-CD23. Further, autologous EBVL
preincubated with SP1.4-IgE/TPO complexes stimulated proliferation of
TPO-specific T cells. IgE autoantibody-mediated antigen focusing to B cells is
unlikely to operate in vivo but is, instead, a powerful investigative tool. In
conclusion, SP1.4-IgE is the first monoclonal human autoantibody to be developed 
for IgE-mediated antigen presentation to T cells by EBVL. Recombinant human
autoantibodies converted to IgE, possibly in combinations if their epitopes
permit simultaneous binding to the same molecule, provide a unique system to
generate human T cell lines and clones specific for peptides naturally processed 
from internalized high affinity autoantibody/autoantigen complexes.

PMID: 8814323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. J Biochem. 1996 Sep;120(3):657-62.

Cloning and sequencing of the VH and V kappa genes of an anti-CD3 monoclonal
antibody, and construction of a mouse/human chimeric antibody.

Arakawa F(1), Kuroki M, Kuwahara M, Senba T, Ozaki H, Matsuoka Y, Misumi Y, Kanda
H, Watanabe T.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Fukuoka University.

Mouse monoclonal antibodies against CD3 on human T lymphocytes have been used for
therapy in organ-transplant patients as a potent immunosuppressive agent or for
treatment of cancer as a potent T cell activating agent. However, an inherent
problem in their in vivo application is the human anti-mouse antibody response.
In this study, we cloned and sequenced the variable region genes of the heavy and
light chains (VH and V kappa) of a mouse anti-human CD3 monoclonal antibody
(OKT3) using the reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction method. Then, we
constructed a mouse/human chimeric antibody, designated as Ch OKT3, by fusing the
OKT3 VH and V kappa genes to the human heavy and light chain constant region
genes (C gamma 1 and C kappa) derived from a human plasma cell leukemia line
(ARH77), respectively. The chimeric gene constructs were sequentially
co-transfected into mouse non-Ig-producing hybridoma cells (Sp2/0) by
electroporation. The Ch OKT3 antibody thus prepared bound to human peripheral
blood mononuclear cells and competitively inhibited the binding of the parental
MAb OKT3 to the blood mononuclear cells, indicating that this chimeric antibody
seems to be suitable for in vivo therapeutic approaches.

PMID: 8902633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Cancer Res. 1996 Aug 15;56(16):3788-95.

L-lysine effectively blocks renal uptake of 125I- or 99mTc-labeled anti-Tac
disulfide-stabilized Fv fragment.

Kobayashi H(1), Yoo TM, Kim IS, Kim MK, Le N, Webber KO, Pastan I, Paik CH,
Eckelman WC, Carrasquillo JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1180, USA.

In this study, we investigated the ability of L-lysine to block renal uptake of
125I- or 99mTc- labeled Fv fragments. Anti-Tac disulfide-stabilized Fv fragment
(dsFv) was derived from a murine monoclonal antibody that recognizes the alpha
subunit of the interleukin-2 receptor (IL-2R alpha). The 125I- or 99mTc-labeled
dsFv was injected i.v. into non-tumor-bearing nude mice or into nude mice bearing
SP2/Tac (IL-2R alpha positive) and SP2/0 (IL-2R alpha negative) tumor. We then
evaluated the pharmacokinetics of L-[3H]lysine and the effect of L-lysine dose,
timing of administration, and route of delivery on catabolism and biodistribution
of i.v. dsFv. Peak renal uptake of i.v. or i.p. injected L-[3H]lysine occurred
within 5 and 15 min, respectively. The kidney uptake of L-lysine exhibited a
dose-response effect. When L-lysine was coinfused or injected shortly before
dsFv, renal uptake of dsFv was blocked to < 5% of the control, but longer
intervals were less effective. Aminosyn II and Travasol 10% (parenteral amino
acid solutions) also blocked renal uptake of radiolabeled dsFv. Administration of
L-lysine did not alter the blood kinetics and slightly increased the tumor uptake
of dsFv, but it did prevent catabolism in the kidney and resulted in lower
amounts of catabolites in the serum and urine. In conclusion, we have shown that 
a blocking dose of lysine, injected with or immediately before the injection of
radiolabeled dsFv, is most effective in blocking the renal uptake of dsFv. This
is consistent with the rapid uptake of L-[3H]lysine by the kidney and is further 
substantiated by the relative ineffectiveness of lysine injected immediately
after the radiolabeled dsFv injection.

PMID: 8706025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Gen Physiol Biophys. 1996 Aug;15 Suppl 1:5-56.

Classification, oscillatory and alternating oscillatory firing of alpha 1 (FF)
and alpha 2-motoneurons (FR) in patients with spinal cord lesion.

Schalow G(1), Bersch U, Zäch GA, Warzok R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Research, Swiss Paraplegic Centre Nottwil, Switzerland.

Single-nerve fibre action potentials (APs) were recorded extracellularly from
sacral nerve roots of people with spinal cord lesion (patients with paraplegia). 
Single-fibre APs of certain fibres were identified by the conduction velocity and
the AP waveform, and simultaneous impulse patterns were extracted from the summed
impulse traffic and analysed with respect to spacio-temporal relationships. The
velocity values of components of compound APs, induced by electrical nerve root
stimulation or electrical intravesical stimulation, were similar to the group
conduction velocity values obtained from single-nerve fibre APs of natural
impulse traffic. When changing the root temperature in one case from 32 degrees C
to 35.5 degrees C, the group conduction velocities changed in the following way: 
secondary muscle spindle afferents (SP2): 40 m/s (32 degrees C) to 50 m/s (35.5
degrees C); bladder stretch afferents (S1): 31.3 to 40 m/s; bladder tension
afferents (ST): 25 to 33.8 m/s; mucosal afferents (M): 12.5 to 13.8 m/s; alpha
1:-; alpha 2-motoneurons: 40 to 50 m/s; alpha 3: 33 to 40 m/s. The group
conduction velocities showed different temperature dependence apart from SP2
fibres and alpha 2-motoneurons, which were therefore used for calibration. The
distance between two Pacinian corpuscle (PC) receptors in a sacral dermatome of
one paraplegic patient was calculated to be approximately 20 mm. A similar
distance between PC receptors was found in a brain-dead individual. Receptor
densities seem therefore to remain unchanged following spinal cord lesion.
Motoneurons fired irregularly repeatedly with impulse trains. In paraplegics the 
oscillation periods and the interspike intervals of the impulse trains varied
much more than observed for brain-dead and normal individuals. Motoneurons could 
therefore not always be identified by their pattern of oscillatory firing.
Alternating long and short oscillation periods (T) could be measured in an
oscillatory firing alpha 1 (T = 125 ms) and alpha 2-motoneuron (T = 150 ms). In
both cases the average difference between the alternating oscillation periods was
5 ms. Tremor, alternating long and short oscillation periods, cellular oscillator
properties, and recurrent excitation and inhibition are discussed with respect to
the oscillator theory of the functioning of the human central nervous system.
Mathematical predictions from populations of interacting biological oscillators
are compared to measurements on neuronal network data.

PMID: 8934196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Vet Microbiol. 1996 Aug;51(3-4):257-66.

Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV): monoclonal
antibodies detect common epitopes on two viral proteins of European and U.S.
isolates.

Wieczorek-Krohmer M(1), Weiland F, Conzelmann K, Kohl D, Visser N, van Woensel P,
Thiel HJ, Weiland E.

Author information: 
(1)Federal Research Centre for Virus Diseases of Animals, Tübingen, Germany.

Sixteen hybridoma cell lines secreting monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) directed
against two dutch isolates of the causative virus of Porcine Reproductive and
Respiratory Syndrome (PRRSV) were produced. The hybridoma cells resulted from
fusions of SP2/0 myeloma cells with splenocytes of STU mice immunized with
purified PRRSV after induction of immunotolerance against host cell constituents.
Screening of supernatant fluids was performed by an indirect immunofluorescence
assay on PRRSV-infected porcine alveolar macrophages. Immunoblotting studies
revealed that the mAbs had different protein specificities. One mAb reacted with 
a viral 15 kD protein, eleven were directed against a 40-50 kD protein, and four 
against a 30-40 kD protein. The mAb against the 15 kD putative nucleocapsid
protein as well as five mAbs against the 40-50 kD protein recognized epitopes on 
these proteins which are conserved in various European and U.S. isolates of
PRRSV.

PMID: 8870188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 1996 Aug;110(4):371-9.

Production of a monoclonal dinitrophenyl-specific rat IgE and establishment of an
IgE capture ELISA for estimating the concentration of rat IgE antibodies to
dinitrophenyl-Ascaris suum.

Hanashiro K(1), Nakamura M, Tamaki N, Kosugi T.

Author information: 
(1)1st Department of Physiology, University of the Ryukyus, Okinawa, Japan.

A hybridoma producing monoclonal rat IgE antibodies of antidinitrophenyl
(anti-DNP) specificity was generated by fusion of Sp2/0-Ag 14 (SP2) mouse myeloma
cells and spleen cells from a DNP-Ascaris-sensitized Brown-Norway rat.
Subsequently, the supernatant of the hybridoma (FE-3) was applied to an affinity 
column of DNP-bovine serum albumin-Sepharose 4B. The adsorbed protein fraction
was pooled, concentrated, and further purified using Sephadex G-200. The
molecular weight of the isolated protein was approximately 200,000 by SDS-PAGE,
and the protein reacted with peroxidase (POD) mouse antirat myeloma IgE on
Western blotting. Rabbit antibodies against DNP-specific rat IgE were also
prepared by immunizing Japanese white rabbits with monoclonal DNP-specific rat
IgE. These antibodies against DNP-specific rat IgE were applied to an affinity
column of normal rat serum-Sepharose 4B and monoclonal DNP-specific rat
IgG2b-Sepharose 4B to remove any other reactive substances apart from IgE
contained in the serum proteins of the rat sensitized with DNP-Ascaris. On ELISA,
it was found that the specificity of POD rabbit antibodies against DNP-specific
rat IgE for monoclonal DNP-specific rat IgE was the same as that for rat myeloma 
IgE (IR 162). In addition, determinations of the monoclonal DNP-specific rat IgE 
revealed that the sensitivity of ELISA using POD-rabbit antibodies against
DNP-specific rat IgE [POD-RA(DNP)RE] was higher than that using POD goat
antibodies against rat myeloma IgE. Furthermore, an IgE capture ELISA employing
the above-mentioned RA(DNP)RE was established for estimating the rat IgE
antibodies to DNP-Ascaris suum. A good correlation was found between the
antigen-specific IgE antibodies in the serum of Wistar rats estimated by this IgE
capture ELISA and those estimated by passive cutaneous anaphylaxis.

PMID: 8768805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Dev Comp Immunol. 1996 Jul-Aug;20(4):265-72.

Induction of a putative serine protease transcript in immune challenged
Drosophila.

Coustau C(1), Rocheleau T, Carton Y, Nappi AJ, ffrench-Constant RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, University of Wisconsin, Madison 53706, USA.

In an effort to identify serine proteases involved in the insect's immune
response, we used a degenerate PCR approach to amplify putative serine protease
gene fragments in Drosophila. Sequencing of the cloned PCR products identified
one serine protease previously isolated in D. melanogaster (SER1/SER2), as well
as two novel putative serine protease gene fragments (SP2, SP3). The involvement 
of the corresponding genes in the immune response was examined by analyzing their
expression in larval mRNA following both parasitic and bacterial exposures. The
overexpression of one of the serine proteases-related mRNAs in immune challenged 
larvae suggests its involvement in the Drosophila immune response.

PMID: 8915628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Biophys J. 1996 Jul;71(1):479-86.

Electrofusion between heterogeneous-sized mammalian cells in a pellet: potential 
applications in drug delivery and hybridoma formation.

Li LH(1), Hensen ML, Zhao YL, Hui SW.

Author information: 
(1)Membrane Biophysics Laboratory, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, New
York 14263 USA.

High-efficiency electrofusion between cells of different sizes was achieved by
application of fusing electric pulses to cells in centrifuged pellets. Larger
target cells (Chinese hamster ovary or L1210 cells) were stacked among smaller
human erythrocytes or erythrocyte ghosts by sequential centrifugation at 700 g to
form five-tier pellets in a specially designed centrifugation-electrofusion
chamber. The membranes of erythrocytes and ghost were labeled with fluorescent
membrane dye (1,1' dioctadecyl-3,3,3'3'-tetramethylindocarbocyanine (Dil)), and
the contents of ghosts were loaded with water-soluble fluorescent dye (42-kDa
fluorescein isothiocyanate dextran (FITC-dextran)), to monitor heterogeneous cell
fusion. Fusion efficiency was assayed by the extent of either membrane dye mixing
or contents (FITC-dextran) mixing with target cells. Four rectangular electric
pulses at 300 V and 80 microseconds each were found to give the optimal fusion
results of approximately 80% heterogeneous fusion by the content-mixing assay and
approximately 95% by the membrane-dye-mixing assay. Cell viability remained
greater than 80% after electrofusion. Because of the electric breakdown of cell
membranes at the beginning of the pulse, the pellet resistance and hence the
partial voltage across the pellet reduced rapidly during the remaining pulse
time. This voltage redistribution favored the survival of fused cells. The
limited colloidal-osmotic swelling of cells in pellets enhanced cell-cell contact
and increased the pellet resistance after each pulse. As a result, the partial
voltage across the pellet was restored when the next pulse was applied. This
redistribution of pulse voltage in the pellet system permitted the breakdown of
cell membranes at a lower applied voltage threshold than that required for
electrofusion of cells in suspension or in dielectrophoretic cell chains. The
cell viability and soluble dye retention within cells (FITC-dextran) remained at 
the same high levels for 3 h when the cells were incubated in respective culture 
media with serum at 37 degrees C. Viability and dye retention decreased
significantly within 30 min when cells were incubated in phosphate-buffered
saline without serum. The pellet technique was applied to form hybridomas by
fusion of larger SP2/0 murine myelomas with smaller naive mouse lymphocytes. An
optimum of 173 +/- 70 hypoxanthine aminopterin thymidine (HAT)-selected clones of
the hybridomas was obtained from 40,000 SP2/0 cells and 1.5 x 10(6) lymphocytes
used in each trial. This high-efficiency fusion technique may be adapted to
mediate drug and gene transfer to target cells ex vivo as well as to form hybrid 
cells with limited cell sources.

PMCID: PMC1233498
PMID: 8804630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Hepatology. 1996 Jul;24(1):14-20.

Expression and immune response to hepatitis C virus core DNA-based vaccine
constructs.

Tokushige K(1), Wakita T, Pachuk C, Moradpour D, Weiner DB, Zurawski VR Jr, Wands
JR.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Hepatology Laboratory, Massachusetts General Hospital, Cancer
Center, Charleston, MA 02129, USA.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a major worldwide cause of acute and chronic
hepatitis, cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma. The development of vaccines
against HCV have been complicated by the high variability of the envelope region,
and it is likely that the cellular immune responses to viral structural proteins 
may be important for eradicating persistent viral infection. Recently, it was
reported that the injection into muscle cells of plasmids encoding viral genes
resulted in the generation of strong cellular immune responses. We constructed
vectors that express the highly conserved HCV core gene. In this regard, the pHCV
2-2 construct contained the entire HCV core region and pHCV 4-2 contained both
the 5' noncoding region and the core gene. Cellular expression of HCV core
protein was assessed following transfection into human and murine cell lines, and
higher intracellular levels of the 21-kd core protein were observed with pHCV
2-2. These HCV core DNA constructs were used to immunize BALB/c mice and produced
low-level anti-HCV core humoral immune responses. To assess cytotoxic
T-lymphocyte (CTL) activity generated in vivo, a cloned syngeneic SP2/O myeloma
cell line constitutively expressing HCV core protein was established and
inoculated into BALB/c mice to produce growth of plasmacytomas. Strong CTL
activity was generated because the tumor size and weight in pHCV 2-2-immunized
mice were remarkably reduced compared with mice injected with mock DNA.
Spontaneous CTL activity was also exhibited by splenocytes in an in vitro
cytotoxicity assay. These investigations demonstrate that plasmid constructs
expressing HCV core protein generate strong CTL activity, as assessed both in
vivo and in vitro, and are promising candidates as antiviral agents.

PMID: 8707253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1996 Jun 11;1281(2):157-63.

Effects of ethanol on lateral and rotational mobility of plasma membrane vesicles
isolated from cultured mouse myeloma cell line Sp2/0-Ag14.

Kang JS(1), Choi CM, Yun I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Dentistry
and Research Institute for Oral Biotechnology, Pusan National University, South
Korea.

Intramolecular excimerization of Py-3-Py and fluorescence polarization of DPH
were used to evaluate effects of ethanol on the rate and range of the lateral
mobility and the range of the rotational mobility of bulk bilayer structures of
the Sp2/0-PMV. In a concentration-dependent manner, ethanol increased the rate
and range of the lateral mobility and the range of the rotational mobility of
bulk bilayer structures of Sp2/0-PMV. Selective quenching of DPH by
trinitrophenyl groups was utilized to examine the range of transbilayer
asymmetric rotational mobility of the Sp2/0-PVM. The anisotropy (r), limiting
anisotropy (r(infinity)) and order parameter (S) of DPH in the inner monolayer
were 0.022, 0.029 and 0.063, respectively, greater than calculated for the outer 
monolayer of the Sp2/0-PMV. Selective quenching of DPH by trinitrophenyl groups
was also used to examine the transbilayer asymmetric effects of ethanol on the
range of the rotational mobility of the Sp2/0-PMV. Ethanol had a greater
increasing effect on the range of the rotational mobility of the outer monolayer 
as compared to the inner monolayer of the Sp2/0-PMV. It has been proven that
ethanol exhibits a selective rather than nonselective fluidizing effect within
the transbilayer domains of the Sp2/0-PMV.

PMID: 8664314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Cytotechnology. 1996 Jun;21(2):171-82. doi: 10.1007/BF02215667.

Biological activity and metabolic clearance of recombinant human follicle
stimulating hormone produced in Sp2/0 myeloma cells.

Chin CK(1), Schofield PR, Robertson DM, Gray PP, Chotigeat W, Mahler SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, University of New South Wales, 2033, Kensington, 
Sydney, Australia.

Human follicle stimulating hormone is a pituitary glycoprotein that is essential 
for the maintenance of ovarian follicle development and testicular
spermatogenesis. Like other members of the glycoprotein hormone family, it
contains a common a subunit and a hormone specificß subunit. Each subunit
contains two glycosylation sites. The specific structures of the oligosaccharides
of human follicle stimulating hormone have been shown to influence both thein
vitro andin vivo bioactivity. Since the carbohydrate structure of a protein
reflects the glycosylation apparatus of the host cells in which the protein is
expressed, we examined the isoform profiles,in vitro bioactivity and metabolic
clearance of a preparation of purified recombinant human follicle stimulating
hormone derived from a stable, transfected Sp2/0 myeloma cell line, and pituitary
human follicle stimulating hormone. Isoelectric focussing and chromatofocussing
studies of human follicle stimulating hormone preparations both showed a more
basic isoform profile for the recombinant human follicle stimulating hormone
compared to that of pituitary human follicle stimulating hormone. The recombinant
human follicle stimulating hormone had a significantly higher radioreceptor
activity compared to that of pituitary human follicle stimulating hormone,
consistent with a greaterin vitro potency. Pharmacokinetic studies in rats
indicated a similar terminal half life (124 min) to that of the pituitary human
follicle stimulating hormone (119 min). Preliminary carbohydrate analysis showed 
recombinant human follicle stimulating hormone to contain high mannose and/or
hybrid type, in addition to complex type carbohydrate chains, terminating with
botha2,3 anda2,6 linked sialic acids. These results demonstrate that recombinant 
human follicle stimulating hormone made in the Sp2/0 myeloma cells is sialylated,
has a more basic isoform profile, and has a greaterin vitro biological potency
compared to those of the pituitary human follicle stimulating hormone.

PMID: 22358666  [PubMed]


281. Immunol Cell Biol. 1996 Jun;74(3):245-54.

Gene family use and somatic mutation in primary and secondary
fluorescein-specific IgM antibody responses.

Van der Keyl H(1), Hsu C, Tolat A, Kansil S, Dalesandro MR, Dorer DR, Caton A,
Owen JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Haverford College, Pennsylvania 19041-1392, USA.

A comparative analysis of the DNA sequences of primary and secondary IgM,
fluorescein-specific antibodies was performed. These antibodies were secreted by 
hybridomas generated following fusion of immunized BALB/c mouse lymphocytes and
SP2/0 myeloma cells. Our results show that primary and secondary
fluorescein-specific IgM antibodies use a variety of segments from the variable
region of the immunoglobulin heavy chain locus (VH), with members of the J558 and
7183 VH gene families predominating in both populations. D regions from the DF116
and DSP2 families were used exclusively in our primary antibody sample and
predominated in the secondary response. In the primary antibodies, 15 out of 18
definable D regions were transcribed in reading frame one, but in the secondary
antibodies the three reading frames were used stochastically. Secondary IgM
antibodies showed a higher frequency of somatic mutation than their primary
counterparts, but we could detect no evidence of selection for mutations in the
complementarity determining regions as compared with the framework regions. It
appears that fusion of secondary cells, 3-6 days after immunization, is able to
'capture' the IgM-producing population of B cells at a stage in their development
following mutation but prior to antigenic selection.

PMID: 8799724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1996 May 22;1281(1):5-14.

Forces on biological cells due to applied alternating (AC) electric fields. II.
Electro-rotation.

Mahaworasilpa TL(1), Coster HG, George EP.

Author information: 
(1)UNESCO Centre for Membrane Science and Technology, Department of Biophysics,
School of Physics, University of New South Wales, Kensington, Australia.

Measurements are presented of angular velocities of rotation of mammalian cells
of K562 (human) and SP2 (mouse) in external alternating electric fields over a
frequency range of 0.5 kHz to 12 MHz. Electro-rotation of the cells was observed 
for the case of "two cells in contact' using two parallel, cylindrical
electrodes; only one cell was located on the electrode. A theoretical analysis is
also presented which shows that the cell rotation arises from a torque produced
by the interaction between the primary electric dipole moment induced in the
spinning cell and the secondary electric fields, generated by the primary dipole 
induced in the adjacent cell. These secondary fields are out of phase with the
applied electric field. The results show that (a) only the cell not located on
the electrode rotates, (b) maximal electro-rotation occurs at two different
excitation field frequency domains for the frequency range employed here, (c) the
spin speed of the rotating cell at each frequency domain is much less than the
excitation frequency, (d) the rotation direction of the cell depends on the angle
(theta) between the external electric field and the line joining the centres of
the two cells and (e) for a given angle theta, the rotation direction is the same
for both excitation frequency domains. The experimental measurements allowed us
to estimate the conductivities of the cytoplasms and membrane capacitances of the
cells of K562 and SP2. The conductivities of the cytoplasms of the cells of K562 
and SP2 were estimated to be 0.2 and 0.3 Sm-(1), respectively, whereas the
membrane capacitances of these cells were found to be 2.7 +/- 0.8 and 9.8 +/- 0.6
mFm-(2), respectively.

PMID: 8652604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Biochemistry. 1996 May 14;35(19):6037-47.

Trypanosomal nucleoside hydrolase. Resonance Raman spectroscopy of a
transition-state inhibitor complex.

Deng H(1), Chan AW, Bagdassarian CK, Estupiñán B, Ganem B, Callender RH, Schramm 
VL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, City College of the City University of New York, New
York 10031, USA.

The transition state for hydrolysis of the N-ribosidic bond of inosine by
nucleoside hydrolase has oxocarbenium character and a protonated leaving group
hypoxanthine with an sp2-hybridized C1' of the ribosyl [Horenstein, B. A.,
Parkin, D. W., Estupinan, B., & Schramm, V. L. (1991) Biochemistry 30,
10788-10795]. These features are incorporated into
N-(p-nitrophenyl)-D-riboamidrazone, a transition state analogue which binds with 
a dissociation constant of 2 nM [Boutellier, M., Horenstein, B. A., Semenyaka,
A., Schramm, V. L., & Ganem, B. (1994) Biochemistry 33, 3994-4000]. Resonance
Raman and ultraviolet-visible absorbance spectroscopy has established that the
inhibitor binds as the neutral, zwitterionic species. The enzyme stabilizes a
specific resonance state characterized by the quinonoid form of the p-nitrophenyl
group with evidence for ion pairing at the nitro group. Incorporation of 15N into
a specific position of the amidrazone reveals that the exo-ribosyl nitrogen
bonded to the C1' position carries the proton while that bonded to the
p-nitrophenyl carbon is unprotonated. This tautomer carries a distributed
positive charge centered at the position analogous to C1' of the ribosyl group at
the transition state. The molecular electrostatic potentials for the substrate
inosine, the transition state, and the transition state inhibitor are compared at
the van der Waals surface of the molecules. The tautomer of the inhibitor bound
to the enzyme bears a striking electrostatic resemblance to the transition state 
determined by kinetic isotope effect analysis. The spectral and resonance Raman
properties of free and enzyme-bound inhibitor have permitted tautomeric
assignment of these species and establish that the enzyme substantially changes
the electronic distribution of the bound inhibitor toward that of the
enzyme-stabilized transition state.

PMID: 8634245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Lipid Mediat Cell Signal. 1996 May;13(3):249-82.

A pharmacophore for high affinity PAF antagonists. I. Electronic model using
molecular electrostatic potential.

Le Solleu H(1), Laguerre M, Saux M, Dubost JP.

Author information: 
(1)G.E.R.S.A.A.C., Laboratoire de Chimie Analytique, UFR des Sciences
Pharmaceutiques, Université de Bordeaux II, France.

PAF is a powerful phospholipid-derived autacoid involved in many
physio-pathological mechanisms. Many PAF antagonists have been synthesized and
assayed for therapeutic purposes. In this study, molecular electrostatic
potential is used to compare the electronic properties of 48 'heterocyclic sp2
nitrogen' highly potent PAF antagonists, belonging to six series (nine
hetrazepines, five pyrrolo[1,2-c]thiazoles, 14 carboxamides, nine
dihydropyridines, nine pyridinylthiazolidines and two imidazo[4,5-c]pyridines).
Their common features consist of three main electronegative zones (A, B1 and B2) 
describing the electronic pharmacophore of these ligands. The high affinity of
these PAF antagonists seems to be related to this electronegative system A-B(x), 
which is characterized by three distances A-B1 (9.3 +/- 1.0 A), A-B2 (13.4 +/-
0.7 A) and B1-B2 (4.9 +/- 0.9 A). Moreover, B1 and B2 may surround a common
anchorage point in the binding site of the receptor.

PMID: 8816988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Biochemistry. 1996 Apr 16;35(15):4697-703.

Enzyme-substrate complexes of adenosine and cytidine deaminases: absence of
accumulation of water adducts.

Shih P(1), Wolfenden R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, 27599-7260, USA.

Adenosine deaminase has been reported to bind the product inosine (the substrate 
for the reverse reaction) as inosine 1,6-hydrate considered similar in structure 
to the transition state for adenosine deamination (Wilson & Quiocho, 1994)
Accumulation on the enzyme of inosine 1,6-hydrate would be surprising, because
this compound is an actual intermediate, probably approaching the transition
state, in oxygen exchange between water and the C==O group of inosine, a reaction
previously shown to be catalyzed by adenosine deaminase (Wolfenden & Kirsch,
1968). The equilibrium constant for conversion of ES to ES*, in the oxygen
exchange reaction, is less than 10-12. To investigate the structure of
enzyme-bound inosine in a different way, we labeled deoxyinosine with 13C,
excepting an upfield shift of 70-110 ppm if significant rehybridization to sp3
had occurred at the carbonyl group. Instead, the results show a very small shift 
(1.3 ppm), indicating that C-6 of 2'-deoxyinosine retains its sp2 hybridization
after binding by calf intestinal adenosine deaminase. In a separate series of
experiments, [4,5-13C]-2'-deoxyuridine was synthesized and found to retain its
sp2 hybridization at C-4, after binding by Escherichia coli cytidine deaminase,
an enzyme that catalyzes 18O exchange from water into uridine. These findings are
consistent with the general expectation, based on the unfavorable equilibrium of 
activation of enzyme-bound substrates, that enzymes should not accumulate
appreciable concentrations of intermediates whose free energies approach that of 
the transition state in substrate transformation.

PMID: 8664259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Biol Chem. 1996 Apr 5;271(14):8170-5.

Identification of the peptides that stimulate the phosphoinositide hydrolysis in 
lymphocyte cell lines from peptide libraries.

Baek SH(1), Seo JK, Chae CB, Suh PG, Ryu SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Pohang University of Science and Technology, San
31 Hyojadong, Pohang Kyungbuk 790-784, Korea.

Peptides which stimulate the formation of inositol phosphates (InoPs) in
lymphocyte cell lines were identified by screening synthetic peptide libraries
composed of random sequences of hexapeptides. The peptides containing the
consensus sequence XKYX(P/V)M were found to be most active in the phospholipase C
(PLC)-mediated formation of InoPs in a human B myeloma cell line, U266. The
peptides also stimulated the phosphoinositide hydrolysis and the release of
[Ca2+]i in HL60 and U937 cell lines. On the other hand, these peptides showed no 
effect in the following cell lines: NIH3T3, PC12, Daudi, Sp2, Jurkat, H9, Molt-4,
SupT-1, K562, and RBL-2H3. The result suggests the possibility that the peptides 
may have cell type specificity. Experiments with one of the active peptides,
WKYMVM-NH2 showed that its action mimics the effect of AlF4- which is a G-protein
activator in the InoPs generation, and pertussis toxin partially blocked the
InoPs accumulation and [Ca2+]i release induced by the peptide in the U266 cells. 
Binding assays with the peptide labeled with 125I showed that U266 cells have a
saturable number of binding sites for the peptide. Taken together, these results 
suggest that the peptides could activate PLC-mediated signal transduction via a
pertussis toxin-sensitive G-protein coupled receptor in certain cell types.

PMID: 8626507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J Mol Graph. 1996 Apr;14(2):62-72, 92-3.

Molecular modeling of substrate-enzyme reactions for the cysteine protease
papain.

Lin Y(1), Welsh WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Missouri-St. Louis 63121, USA.

AM1 quantum mechanical reaction coordinate (RC) calculations were run to simulate
the rate-limiting deacylation (hydrolysis) reaction for a series of
para-X-PhC(O)NHCH2-C(Y)-S-papain intermediates, where X = OCH3, CH3, H, Cl, NO2
and Y = O (thioester) or S (dithioester), for which a large body of structural,
kinetic, and spectroscopic data is available. Several reaction zones, in
particular the so-designated Large Zone and Small Zone, were extracted for these 
RC simulations from the fully solvated and energy-minimized X-ray crystal
structure of papain (pdb9pap) bound to the appropriate substrate moiety. The
major structural difference between these two zones was the absence of the
oxyanion hole in the latter. For both the thioester and dithioester cases, the
calculated Ea value associated with the parent (X = H) acyl-enzyme intermediate
was lower by ca. 10 kcal/mol for the Large Zone than for the Small Zone. The
magnitude of this difference suggests that the oxyanion hole plays a functional
if not essential role in stabilizing the anionic tetrahedral intermediate with
the cysteine proteases. The calculated Ea value was lower by ca. 10 kcal/mol for 
the thioester [-C(O)-S-] than for the corresponding dithioester [-C(S)-S-], in
qualitative agreement with kinetic data for this series of substrates which
reveal that the specific rate constant for deacylation k3 is ca. 60 times larger 
for the former. This difference is also consistent with both AM1 and 6-31G*
calculations on model intermediates, which indicate that the weaker polarity of
the dithioester compared with the thioester [i.e., -C(<--S)-S-versus-C(-->O)-S-] 
renders the former a much poorer site for nucleophilic attack. The anionic
tetrahedral intermediate is energetically more stable for the dithioester than
for the corresponding thioester, a finding that is discussed in terms of its
kinetic and mechanistic implications. The mode of attack by the H2O nucleophile
is "concerted" rather than "sequential" in terms of the order of proton
abstraction by His-159 and nucleophilic attack on the acyl-enzyme intermediate.
While the presumably key Sthiol . . . N nonbonded contact remained almost
constant (ca. 2.90 A) up to formation of the [TS] structure, the substrate
torsion angles phi and psi rotated significantly as the hybridization around the 
reaction site transforms from sp2 to sp3 during formation of the tetrahedral
intermediate. The AM1-calculated frontier molecular orbitals for model thioester 
and dithioester acyl-enzyme intermediates generally associate the HOMOs with the 
reaction site and the LUMOs with the benzamide moiety. Computer graphics images
corroborate our view that, in relation to the Sthiol . . . N interaction, the
HOMOs and LUMOs should be identified, respectively, with Sthiol and N rather than
the reverse, as suggested by other workers.

PMID: 8835773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Hybridoma. 1996 Apr;15(2):155-8.

Cloning and expression of cDNAs encoding the variable domains of the antibreast
carcinoma antibody Mc5.

Christian RB(1), Couto JR, Peterson JA, Ceriani RL.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Fund of Contra Costa, Walnut Creek, California 94596, USA.

Mc5, a murine monoclonal antibody that binds to human breast epithelial mucin
(BEM), has been shown to be a promising reagent in the diagnosis of breast
cancer. We have cloned cDNAs encoding both variable regions of Mc5 (VL and VH) as
well as the CL and CH1 constant regions. Mc5 is an IgG1, kappa antibody. We have 
constructed an IgG1, kappa human/mouse chimeric antibody (by inserting the murine
VH and VL-encoding cDNAs into plasmids encoding human constant domains), and
expressed it in SP2/0-Ag14 mouse myeloma cells. The affinity of chimeric Mc5
(chMc5) for BEM is 4.4 x 10(8) M-1. Mc5 binds BEM with an affinity constant of
2.8 x 10(8) M-1. Purified chMc5 and purified Mc5 gave similar competition curves 
when tested against either 125I-labeled Mc5 or 125I-labeled chMc5 for binding to 
BEM in a competition radioimmunodetection format. Additionally, chMc5 used in
breast carcinoma tissue staining stained as well as the original Mc5.

PMID: 8743296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Cancer Res. 1996 Mar 15;56(6):1451-6.

Role of bcl-X(L) in the control of apoptosis in murine myeloma cells.

Gauthier ER(1), Piché L, Lemieux G, Lemieux R.

Author information: 
(1)Canadian Red Cross Blood Transfusion Service, Quebec, Canada.

The development of an increasing number of tumors has been shown to involve the
deregulation of not only cell proliferation but also normal cell death by
apoptosis. Expression of the bcl-2 proto-oncogene has been shown to inhibit the
apoptotic cell death of many types of cells. Recent work also has revealed the
existence of several bcl-2-related genes that also can inhibit (e.g., bcl-X(L)
and Mcl-1) or activate (e.g., bax, bcl-X(s), bag, and bad) apoptosis in several
systems. Myelomas are antibody-secreting tumor cells derived from terminally
differentiated B lymphocytes, and previous work from our laboratory showed that
murine SP2/0 myeloma cells and derived B-cell hybridomas were highly sensitive to
apoptosis induction by a block of gene expression (cycloheximide). Additional
work revealed that a related murine myeloma cell line, P3X63Ag8.653, was
resistant to apoptosis induction in similar conditions. To understand the genetic
basis of this differential susceptibility, we examined the expression of
apoptosis-related genes in these cell lines. Northern blot experiments showed no 
significant difference in the expression of myc and bax apoptosis-promoting genes
in susceptible (SP2/0 and D5) and resistant (P3X63) cell lines. Also, no
significant expression of the bcl-2 gene could be detected in these cell lines.
However, a much higher expression level of bcl-X(L) mRNA was observed in
apoptosis-resistant P3X63Ag8.653 cells. The role of bcl-X(L) was supported by the
finding that expression of bcl-X(L) cDNA in transfected, apoptosis-sensitive D5
cells increased the viability of these cells greatly and reduced DNA
fragmentation following apoptosis induction. Significant bcl-X(L) but not bcl-2
expression was also detected in three other murine myeloma cell lines (MOPC 315, 
RPC 5.4, and J558) derived from different plasmacytoma tumors. These results
indicate a predominant role of bcl-X(L) in preventing apoptosis in myeloma cells 
and suggest that the expression of bcl-2 or bcl-X(L) genes in B-cell tumors
depends on the differentiation stage of the precursor normal cell.

PMID: 8640839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Calcif Tissue Int. 1996 Mar;58(3):135-43.

Radial cortical and trabecular bone densities of men and women standardized with 
the European Forearm Phantom.

Reeve J(1), Kröger H, Nijs J, Pearson J, Felsenberg D, Reiners C, Schneider P,
Mitchell A, Ruegsegger P, Zander C, Fischer M, Bright J, Henley M, Lunt M,
Dequeker J.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Clinical Research Centre, Harrow, UK.

We previously showed that it is possible to cross-calibrate peripheral bone
densitometers using the European Spine Phantom (ESP). We have now performed a
multinational study of cross-calibrated radius bone density based on normal
subjects of both sexes in eight European centers. Six centers were equipped with 
machines made by Scanco or Stratec for determining distal radial trabecular bone 
density by quantitative computed tomography (QCT) and two were equipped with
Lunar SP2 single photon absorptiometry (SPA) equipment for measuring midshaft
cortical bone density. Subjects recruited ranged from 20 to over 80 years of age.
Over one hundred and fifteen men were studied by QCT and a different cohort of
104 men were studied with SPA; the equivalent figures for women were 235 and 123.
Reference ranges were derived for bone density against age for each of the four
groups, and their applicability is discussed in relation to between-center
differences in the results obtained. There were insignificant differences (P >
0.05 with Bonferroni correction) between centers in the values obtained by QCT in
the different populations. However, there were considerably larger and highly
statistically significant differences between midshaft cortical bone density
values of about 10% of overall means between subjects from eastern Finland and
central Belgium (P < 0.001), with higher Finnish values. Women had considerably
lower radial trabecular bone density values than men at all ages, a result that
differentiates the radius from the spine. This sex difference widened after
menopause. These results have important implications for understanding the
contribution of bone density to the differential risk of Colles' fracture in the 
two sexes and suggest that further work is needed to establish young normal
reference ranges for radial bone density in Europe.

PMID: 8852567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. J Biochem. 1996 Mar;119(3):512-9.

C-NMR study on the interaction of medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase with
acetoacetyl-CoA.

Miura R(1), Nishina Y, Fuji S, Shiga K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Kumamoto University School of Medicine.

The change-transfer interaction in the complex of pig kidney medium-chain
acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) with acetoacetyl-CoA was investigated by 13C-NMR
spectroscopy and molecular orbital treatment. The acyl carbons of acetoacetyl-CoA
were separately 13C-labeled and 13C-NMR spectra of the complexes of MCAD with the
13C-labeled acetoacetyl-CoA were measured. Each 13C-carbon atom was observed as a
distinct peak and easily distinguished from the protein background. The chemical 
shift values for free acetoacetyl-CoA were 198.5, 59.9, 208.8, and 32.8 ppm for
C(1), C(2), C(3), and C(4), respectively, which shifted to 181.3, 103.4, 192.3,
and 29.9 ppm, respectively, when acetoacetyl-CoA was complexed with MCAD. While
C(4) underwent a small upfield shift, the other carbons complexed with MCAD.
While C(4) underwent a small upfield shift, the other carbons experienced
significant shifts; both the C(1) and C(3) carbonyl carbons shifted upfield by
about 17 ppm, and the C(2) carbon was observed as a very broad peak at a position
shifted downfield by more than 40 ppm. These results were compared with 13C-NMR
spectra of the keto-, enol-, and enolate forms of ethyl acetoacetate labeled with
13C at the acyl carbons, and interpreted with reference to the charge-transfer
model based on the optimum overlap between the lowest unoccupied molecular
orbital (LUMO) of flavin and the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the
enolate state of the acetoacetyl moiety of acetoacetyl-CoA. The C(2) carbon of
acetoacetyl-CoA takes on the sp2 configuration in the bound form, indicating that
one of the protons at C(2) of acetoacetyl-CoA is abstracted when bound to MCAD.
C(1) = O is substantially polarized in the bound form of acetoacetyl-CoA,
implying the presence of a machinery that polarizes this carbonyl group at the
binding site, which thereby lowers the pKa value of the alpha-proton at C(2).
This machinery is of fundamental importance in the initial step of MCAD
catalysis.

PMID: 8830047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Biomed Environ Sci. 1996 Mar;9(1):17-25.

Production and characterization of a monoclonal antibody against
sterigmatocystin.

Lou JL(1), Guo ZQ, Meng ZH.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China.

A monoclonal antibody, McAb-ST, specific for sterigmatocystin (ST) was produced
in vitro and in vivo by a hybridoma anti-ST1. Anti-ST1 was prepared by fusion of 
SP2/0 murine myeloma cells with spleen cells isolated from BALB/c mouse that had 
been immunized with a complete antigen BSA-ST (ST conjugated to bovine serum
albumin). Analysis revealed that McAb-ST was of the IgG1 type, the molecular
weight of McAb-ST was 168,000 daltons (53,000 for each heavy chain, 31,000 for
each light chain), and the apparent affinity constant of McAb-ST with H-ST
(Hemocyanin and ST conjugate) was 1.29 x 10(9) mol/L. The relative cross
reactivities of McAb-ST with ST analogs were less than 2% when determined by a
competitive indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (CI-ELISA). The minimal
0.5 pg of ST in 50 microliters of solution could be detected with CI-ELISA using 
McAb-ST, with a linear range of 0.1-10 ng/mL.

PMID: 8721623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. J Biol Chem. 1996 Feb 16;271(7):3428-36.

Expression of novel secreted isoforms of human immunoglobulin E proteins.

Lyczak JB(1), Zhang K, Saxon A, Morrison SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, School of Medicine,
University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.

Four human IgE isoforms produced by alternative splicing of the epsilon primary
transcript were expressed as chimeric mouse/human anti
5-dimethylamino-1-naphthalenesulfonyl antibodies in the murine myeloma cell line 
Sp2/0. The four isoforms include the classic secreted form and three novel
isoforms with altered carboxyl termini. All of these isoforms lack the
transmembrane region encoded by the M1/M1' exon and are therefore predicted to be
secreted proteins. When expressed in Sp2/0 cells, three of the IgE isoforms are
assembled into complete molecules of two Ig heavy chains and two Ig light chains,
whereas the fourth isoform is predominately assembled into half-molecules of one 
Ig heavy chain and one Ig light chain. All four isoforms are secreted with
similar kinetics. In contrast, when the isoform containing the C epsilon4 domain 
joined directly to the M2 exon (IgE grandé) is expressed in the J558L cell line, 
it is degraded intracellularly, suggesting a cell line-dependent regulation of
secretion. These data show that these novel isoforms of human IgE, predicted to
occur from in vivo and in vitro mRNA analysis, can be produced and secreted by
mammalian cells. The different forms of IgE may have physiologically relevant but
distinct roles in human IgE-mediated immune inflammation. The availability of
purified recombinant human IgE isoforms makes it possible to analyze the
functional differences among them.

PMID: 8631944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Scand J Immunol. 1996 Feb;43(2):134-9.

Expression and characterization of a divalent chimeric anti-human CD3 single
chain antibody.

Ma S(1), Thompson J, Hu H, Neville DM Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Mental Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892-4034, USA.

Murine anti-CD3 monoclonal antibodies (MoAbs) are used in clinical practice for
immunosuppression. However, there are two major drawbacks to this treatment: the 
associated cytokine release syndrome and human anti-mouse antibody response. To
overcome these side-effects, the authors generated a chimeric anti-human CD3
single chain antibody, scUCHT1. It is an IgM variant of UCHT1, a mouse IgG1 MoAb 
directed against human CD3. scUCHT1 consists of the light and heavy variable
chain binding domains of UCHT1 and a human IgM Fc region (CH2 to CH4). scUCHT1
was produced by COS-7 and SP2/0 transfectants, and mainly assembled in a dimeric 
form. It retained the binding specificity and affinity of the parental MoAb
UCHT1. In contrast to UCHT1, scUCHT1 did not induce T-cell proliferation and
cytokine release (TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma) in in vitro assays. These results
suggest that the engineered chimeric anti-CD3 single chain antibody (scUCHT1) may
be useful in clinical immunosuppressive treatment.

PMID: 8633192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Int J Risk Saf Med. 1996;8(1):79-83. doi: 10.3233/JRS-1996-8114.

The United kingdom breast implant registry.

Shakespeare PG(1), Bazire N, McNeill DC, Gerrett A.

Author information: 
(1)Plastic Surgery Department, Salisbury District General Hospital, Salisbury
Wilts, Salisbury SP2 8Bl, UK.

PMID: 23511887  [PubMed]


296. Sheng Wu Hua Xue Yu Sheng Wu Wu Li Xue Bao (Shanghai). 1996;28(2):145-152.

The Pellucida Glycoprotein ZP 3-Binding Protein of the Boar Spermatozoa.

Zhao M(1), Sun C.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry, Academia Sinica, Shanghai 200031, China.

Four protein components have been isolated from the CHAPS extract of boar
spermatozoa by chromatography on PSL-Sepharose affinity column and cellulose
CM-52 ion exchange column sequentially. Both boar sperm protein SP1and SP2
exhibited binding activity with the zona pellucida glycoprotein ZP3 by
immobilized zona pellucida glycoprotein binding assay (IZPGBA), and SP2 also
showed hemagglutinating activity. The protein SP1 obviously inhibited
sperm-oocyte binding when it was preincubated with oocytes. The inhibitory
activity of SP1 was related to its concentration. By using Western blot technique
and biotinylated ZP3, a Zp3-binding spermatozoa protein with molecular weight of 
68 kD was identified, which may be a protein involved in sperm-oocyte binding.

PMID: 12237695  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


297. Sheng Wu Hua Xue Yu Sheng Wu Wu Li Xue Bao (Shanghai). 1996;28(5):464-470.

Construction and Expression of Mouse-human Chimeric Antibody SZ-51 Specific for
Human Activated Platelets.

Gu JM(1), Liu Y, Wan HY, Li PX, Ruan CG.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Institute of Haematology, Suzhou Medical College, Jiangsu 215007,
China.

SZ-51, a murine monoclonal antibody (McAb) specific for alpha-granule membrane
protein (GMP-140) on the surface of the activated human platelets, has shown
promise for thrombus imaging and thrombolysis. In order to reduce the
immunogenicity of the murine McAb SZ-51 in man and to obtain a high level of
antibody production, we constructed two chimeras (alpha-Lys17-51BVK/Hu,
alpha-Lys30-51VH/Hu) by joining the variable regions gene of mouse antibody to
the constant regions gene of human immunoglobulin (Ig)(gamma1,k). Both chimeric
genes were cloned into two selectable expression vectors separately, which were
co-transfected into a non-Ig secreting murine myeloma cell line SP2/0 with the
Lipofectin reagent. One transfectoma, which showed stable antigen (GMP-140)
binding ability and a high level expression of 5 mg/L, was obtained.
Immunoblotting analysis demonstrated that the chimeric antibody in the
supernatant, like the native mouse SZ-51, had the characteristic of binding to
GMP-140. In addition, the chimeric antibody can bind competitively to activated
platelets with (125)I-labeled mouse SZ-51. Therefore, the SZ-51 chimeric antibody
may be a potential agent for the diagnosis and therapy of thrombotic diseases in 
future.

PMID: 12232606  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


298. Pac Symp Biocomput. 1996:191-202.

Parallel discrete event simulation of Lyme disease.

Deelman E(1), Caraco T, Szymanski BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY
12180, USA. deelmane@cs.rpi.edu

Our research concerns the dynamic processes underlying the rapid increase in the 
geographic distribution of Lyme disease, currently the most frequently reported
vector-borne disease of humans in the United States [10, 1]. More specifically,
we ask how spatially localized ecological interactions drive the Lyme disease
epidemic at extended spatial and temporal scales. We have developed a parallel
discrete event simulation system in C++ for the IBM SP2. The simulation model
discussed here models the mouse-tick interaction, an essential element of the
epidemic's ecology. The main entities of the simulation are ticks in various
stages of development (larval, nymphal, and adult) and mice. We track the
behavior of mice and the spread of disease over the course of 180 days (late
spring, summer, and early fall). Our goal is to understand patterns in the Lyme
disease epidemic at the regional scale through studying the spread of the
pathogen across a single white-footed mouse deme.

PMID: 9390232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Tsitologiia. 1996;38(6):611-5.

[The nuclease activity of the cell nuclei in 2 lines of murine myeloma sp2/0
differing in their resistance to cytostatics in adriamycin-induced apoptosis].

[Article in Russian]

Meliksetian MB, Chirkova IV, Aleksanian IuT.

The endonuclease activity of two drug-sensitive and drug-resistant mouse myeloma 
cell lines during cytotoxic drug-induced apoptosis was studied. It was shown that
internucleosomal fragmentation of DNA in drug-sensitive line sp2/0, undergoing
apoptosis in the presence of adriamycin and colchicine, was not dependent on
intracellular calcium content and was associated with activation of both
Ca(2+)-Mg(2+)-dependent and acidic cation-independent endonucleases. In contrast,
in multidrug resistant spEBR-5 cells, treated with the same drugs, only
Ca(2+)-Mg(2+)-dependent endonuclease activity was detected. These data suggest
that the differences in the pattern of endonuclease activity revealed in these
cells are linked to drug-resistant phenotype and do not depend on the
apoptosis-inducing agent used.

PMID: 9027004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Bioorg Med Chem. 1996 Jan;4(1):61-71.

Using SAR and QSAR analysis to model the activity and structure of the
quinolone-DNA complex.

Llorente B(1), Leclerc F, Cedergren R.

Author information: 
(1)Départment de Biochimie, Université de Montréal, Canada.

A set of 78 quinolone derivatives were used in a structure-activity study to
identify structural features correlating with antibacterial activity. Distinct
combinations of functional properties were identified for Gram-negative and
Gram-positive bacteria. 3-D Quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR)
studies identified specific hydrophobic, topologic and electronic properties of
the molecules for both in vitro and in vivo activities. From these results, a
three-dimensional model of a DNA-quinolone complex was built using molecular
modeling techniques. It was based on the intercalation of quinolone into the
double helix of DNA. We conclude that the intercalation model is consistent with 
most available data on the structure of the quinolone complex. This predicted
structure is stabilized by the binding of magnesium ion with the sp2 oxygens
present in quinolone, a phosphate and a purine base of the DNA. Substituents R1
and R7 are predicted to make hydrophobic interactions in the major and minor
groove of DNA, respectively. R7 could also form hydrogen bonds with amino groups 
of guanines and the aspartic acid residue at position 87 in DNA gyrase subunit A.

PMID: 8689241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Anticancer Res. 1996 Jan-Feb;16(1):113-20.

In vitro and in vivo evaluation of carboranyl uridines as boron delivery agents
for neutron capture therapy.

Liu L(1), Barth RF, Tjarks W, Soloway AH, Anisuzzaman AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Ohio State University, Columbus 43210, USA.

The purpose of the present study was to evaluate 2' and
5'-O-(o-carboran-1-ylmethyl)uridine (CBU-2' and CBU-5') as delivery agents for
Boron Neutron Capture Therapy (BNCT) of brain tumors. The in vitro cellular
uptake, persistence, subcellular distribution and cytotoxicity, and in vivo
biodistribution of CBU-2' have been studied as follows. Cellular uptake studies
were carried out with the F98 rat glioma, U-87 MG human glioma, B16 melanoma,
SP2/0 myeloma and MDCK fibroblasts. All tumor and non-tumor cell lines had high
uptake of CBU-2' (46-75 ppm), indicating that uptake was not selective for
neoplastic cells and was independent of cell proliferation. In vitro persistence 
studies showed high cellular retention of CBU-2' compared to sodium borocaptate
(BSH), when cells were transferred from boron-containing to boron-free medium and
cultured for an additional 24-48 hours. Subcellular fractionation revealed 75.6% 
of the recoverable boron was cell membrane associated, 15.6% was in the cytosol, 
and 8.8% was in the nuclear fraction, but no boron was detectable in the RNA and 
DNA fractions. F98 glioma cells were cultured in the presence of 3 metabolic
inhibitors (rotenone, dipyridamole and NBMPR
¿6-[(4-nitrobenzyl)thio]-9-beta-D-ribofuranosylpurine¿) and none of these blocked
the cellular uptake of CBU-2' suggesting that uptake was neither energy nor
nucleoside transport dependent. In vivo studies in F98 glioma bearing rats showed
that CBU-2' in tumor attained concentrations of 8.0 +/- 2.1 micrograms B/g
tissue, which was 13 x greater than that in normal brain of the ipsilateral and
contralateral cerebral hemispheres (0.6 +/- 0.2 microgram B/g). The B levels,
however, were still lower than the minimum 20-35 microgram B/g, which are
required for in vivo BNCT. In summary, our in vitro and in vivo data indicate
that CBU-2' was not sufficiently selective for in vivo targeting of brain tumors.
However, CBU-2' and CBU-5' were highly toxic for F98 glioma cells in vitro (IC50 
= 3 - 13 x 10(-5) M), as determined by measuring the uptake of 3H-thymidine, and 
the survival of F98 glioma cells using a clonogenic assay, which suggests that
these compounds should be further evaluated as potential cytoreductive
chemotherapeutic agents.

PMID: 8615595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1995 Dec 28;34(2):283-93.

Oligodendrocyte-reactive O1, O4, and HNK-1 monoclonal antibodies are encoded by
germline immunoglobulin genes.

Asakura K(1), Miller DJ, Pogulis RJ, Pease LR, Rodriguez M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic and Foundation, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Natural or physiologic autoantibodies are present normally in serum, are
polyreactive, are frequently of the IgM subtype, and are encoded by unmutated
germline genes. We tested whether the oligodendrocyte-reactive O1, O4, A2B5, and 
HNK-1 IgM kappa monoclonal antibodies are natural autoantibodies by sequencing
immunoglobulin (Ig) cDNAs and comparing these with published germline sequences. 
O1 VH was identical with unrearranged VH segment transcript A1 and A4. O4 VH had 
three and HNK-1 VH had six nucleotide differences from germline VH101 in the VH
coding region. The D segment of O1 was derived from germline SP2 gene family. The
D segments of O4 and HNK-1 were derived from DFL16 gene family. O4 JH and HNK-1
JH were encoded by unmutated germline JH4, whereas O1 JH was encoded by germline 
JH1 with one silent nucleotide change. O1 and O4 light chains were identical with
myeloma MOPC21 except for one silent nucleotide change. HNK-1 V kappa was
identical with germline V kappa 41 except for two silent nucleotide changes. O1 J
kappa, O4 J kappa and HNK J kappa were encoded by unmutated germline J kappa 2.
In contrast, A2B5 VH showed seven nucleotide differences from germline V1,
whereas no germline sequence encoding A2B5 V kappa was identified. O1 and O4, but
not A2B5 were polyreactive against multiple antigens by direct ELISA. Therefore, 
O1, O4 and HNK-1 Igs are encoded by germline genes, and have the genotype and
phenotype of natural autoantibodies.

PMID: 8750831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Proteins. 1995 Dec;23(4):472-90.

An automated method for dynamic ligand design.

Miranker A(1), Karplus M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Harvard University, Cambridge Massachusetts 02138,
USA.

An automated method for the dynamic ligand design (DLD) for a binding site of
known structure is described. The method can be used for the creation of de novo 
ligands and for the modification of existing ligands. The binding site is
saturated with atoms (sp3 carbon atoms in the present implementation) that form
molecules under the influence of a potential function that joins atoms to each
other with the correct stereochemistry. The resulting molecules are linked to
precomputed functional group minimum energy positions in the binding site. The
generalized potential function allows atoms to sample a continuous parameter
space that includes the Cartesian coordinates and their occupancy and type, e.g.,
the method allows change of an sp3 carbon into an sp2 carbon or oxygen. A
parameter space formulated in this way can then be sampled and optimized by a
variety of methods. In this work, molecules are generated by use of a Monte Carlo
simulated annealing algorithm. The DLD method is illustrated by its application
to the binding site of FK506 binding protein (FKBP), an immunophilin. De novo
ligands are designed and modification of the immunosuppressant drug FK506 are
suggested. The results demonstrate that the dynamic ligand design approach can
automatically construct ligands which complement both the shape and charge
distribution of the binding site.

PMID: 8749844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 1995 Dec;15(12):1095-102.

Polymerase chain reaction cloning and expression of the rat
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor.

Oaks MK(1), Penwell RT, Suh CH, Tector AJ.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin Medical School, Milwaukee 53215, USA.

We used reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) to clone a rat
complementary DNA that encoded the PVG rat granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). PCR products were cloned into a eukaryotic
expression vector and transfected into the mouse myeloma cell line Sp2/0-Ag14.
Cell culture supernatants of two of these transfectants supported proliferation
of the growth factor-dependent cell line, DA-3, and promoted myeloid colony
formation in rat and mouse bone marrow cell (BMC) cultures. The GM-CSF activity
in these supernatants was neutralized by a polyclonal antibody to mouse GM-CSF.
The cloning and expression of rat GM-CSF provides a valuable reagent for the
study of the biology and clinical applications of the GM-CSFs.

PMID: 8746792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Cancer Res. 1995 Dec 1;55(23 Suppl):5957s-5967s.

Biological properties of chimeric domain-deleted anticarcinoma immunoglobulins.

Slavin-Chiorini DC(1), Kashmiri SV, Schlom J, Calvo B, Shu LM, Schott ME, Milenic
DE, Snoy P, Carrasquillo J, Anderson K, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Immunology and Biology, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

CC49 is a second-generation monoclonal antibody (MAb) that has high affinity for 
the tumor-associated pancarcinoma antigen tumor-associated glycoprotein-72. In
clinical trials using gamma scanning, radiolabeled CC49 has facilitated the
detection of more than 90% of carcinomas. We report here the development of a
constant heavy-chain 2 (CH2) domain-deleted chimeric (c) CC49 MAb by transfecting
an expression construct consisting of the CC49 murine variable region and a CH2
domain-deleted human IgG1 constant region into cCC49 kappa producing SP2/0 murine
myeloma cells. As determined by SDS-PAGE, the intact cCC49 delta CH2 has a
molecular weight of 153,000 and, under reducing conditions, molecular weights of 
43,000 and 27,000. The plasma clearance and tumor-targeting properties of cCC49
delta CH2 were evaluated and compared with those of mouse/human chimeric forms
cCC49 delta CH1 and intact cCC49. Previous studies have shown that the in vitro
antigen-binding properties of cCC49 delta CH1 are similar to those of cCC49.
Biodistribution studies reported here, using 131I-labeled cCC49 delta CH1 and
125I-labeled cCC49 in athymic mice bearing human colon carcinoma xenografts,
demonstrated that both cMAbs localized to the tumor and cleared from the normal
tissues similarly. However, in comparison with 125I-labeled cCC49, 131I-labeled
cCC49 delta CH2 localized to tumors earlier and had a significantly lower
percentage of the injected dose of cMAb/g (%ID/g) in normal tissues than cCC49.
Immunoscintigraphy of 131I-labeled cCC49 delta CH2 and 125I-labeled cCC49 in
athymic mice bearing human tumor xenografts demonstrated a clear image of the
tumor by 24 h after i.v. administration of the delta CH2 cMAb versus the 72 h
required for cCC49. Biodistribution studies using 177Lu-conjugated cCC49 delta
CH1 and cCC49 showed no significant difference between the radiolocalization
indices (% ID/g in tumor divided by % ID/g in normal tissue). 177Lu-conjugated
cCC49 delta CH2, however, had lower % ID/g values in tumor xenografts and lower
radiolocalization indices than either 177Lu-conjugated cCC49 delta CH1 or
177Lu-conjugated cCC49. Pharmacokinetic studies in non-tumor-bearing athymic mice
using cCC49 delta CH1 and cCC49 revealed no significant difference between these 
cMAbs. However, the plasma clearance of cCC49 delta CH2 in non-tumor-bearing mice
was significantly faster than that of cCC49. These results were similar when the 
cMAbs were labeled with either iodine or lutetium. In nonhuman primates,
131I-labeled cCC49 delta CH2 cleared significantly faster than 125I-labeled
cCC49. The similar plasma clearance and tumor localization of cCC49 and cCC49
delta CH1 suggest that these two cMAbs may be used in similar clinical settings. 
However, because of the unique pharmacokinetics and tumor targeting of cCC49
delta CH2 versus cCC49 or cCC49 delta CH1, this chimeric immunoglobulin form may 
be useful in clinical settings that require efficient tumor targeting and rapid
serum and whole-body clearance.

PMID: 7493377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Toxicology. 1995 Nov 30;103(2):121-5.

Effects of bolesatine on a cell line from the SP2/O thymic lymphosarcoma.

Basset L(1), Ennamany R, Portail JP, Kretz O, Deffieux G, Badoc A, Guillemain B, 
Creppy EE.

Author information: 
(1)University of Bordeaux 2, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Laboratory of
Toxicology and Applied Hygiene, France.

Bolesatine, a toxic protein isolated from Boletus satanas Lenz inhibits in vitro 
protein synthesis in a concentration-dependent manner in a cell line from a
radiation-induced thymic lymphosarcoma (SP2/O) with a 50% inhibitory
concentration (IC50) of 9.5 nM (0.6 microgram/ml). In vivo, an i.p. single
injection of bolesatine, corresponding to 1/6 and 1/10 of 24-h 50% lethal dose,
in Balb/c mice having ascitic tumour induced by the i.p. preinjection of SP2/O
cells allows a remission of 50% and 30%, respectively. Treated mice survived 120 
days after the treatment, i.e. 90 days after the death of control animals.

PMID: 8545844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 1995 Nov-Dec;6(6 Pt 2 Suppl):8S-18S.

Fibrinolytic mechanism, biochemistry, and preclinical pharmacology of recombinant
prourokinase.

Credo RB(1), Burke SE.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Products Division, Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, Ill
60064-3500, USA.

The purpose of this review is to provide a biochemical characterization of
recombinant prourokinase (r-ProUK [ABT-187]), including a description of its
clot-specific fibrinolytic mechanism. In addition, the preclinical data will be
briefly reviewed, demonstrating the efficacy of r-ProUK as a potent therapeutic
plasminogen activator. r-ProUK was purified to homogeneity from the culture
medium of SP2/0 mouse hybridoma cells. The fibrinolytic potency of r-ProUK was
characterized by both in vitro clot lysis experiments in human plasma and a
canine femoral artery thrombosis model. In the in vitro clot lysis system, with
use of clots prepared from fresh frozen human plasma, r-ProUK exhibits a lag
phase to the onset of lysis and a concentration-dependent threshold effect due to
the presence of the inhibitors alpha 2-antiplasmin and plasminogen activator
inhibitor (PAI-1). Effective clot lysis can be achieved without degradation of
the fibrinogen in the surrounding plasma. Over a dose range of 50,000-220,000 IU,
the canine femoral artery thrombosis model shows a dose-dependent relationship
for r-ProUK and effective clot lysis. The lytic activity of r-ProUK is
significantly enhanced in this model by the concomitant administration of heparin
as an adjunctive agent for thrombolytic treatment. Fibrinogen, plasminogen, and
alpha 2-antiplasmin levels in the systemic circulation were unaltered during the 
30-minute infusion period and a 4-hour observation period, in which 85% lysis was
achieved with r-ProUK (100,000 IU) and heparin. Moreover, restoration of blood
flow in the previously fully occluded femoral artery was achieved within minutes 
of the start of the r-ProUK infusion. The experimental findings presented here
are consistent with the clot-specific fibrinolytic mechanism of r-ProUK.
Effective clot lysis can be achieved without alteration of the systemic
coagulation and fibrinolytic parameters.

PMID: 8770836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Maturitas. 1995 Nov;22(3):247-53.

Prevention of post-oophorectomy bone loss with Tibolone.

Lyritis GP(1), Karpathios S, Basdekis K, Grigoriou O, Katostaras T, Paspati I,
Stamatopoulos T, Siampalioti G, Lyritis PG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory For The Research Of The Musculoskeletal System, Athens, Greece.

The results of a 1-year placebo-controlled study in 25 women who had hysterectomy
and bilateral oophorectomy receiving a daily oral dose of 2.5 mg of Tibolone (Org
OD 14) are presented. Tibolone is a steroid compound with mild oestrogenic in
additional to progestagenic effects. Post-oophorectomy bone loss has been
reported to accelerate, at least during the first year after surgery. The
efficacy of Tibolone to prevent this accelerated bone loss is questionable. All
patients were scheduled to participate in the study before oophorectomy. Patients
had a detailed pre-operative examination, including measurement of forearm bone
density with an SP2 Lunar single photon absorptiometer and haematological and
biochemical investigation. After surgery, patients were randomly allocated in two
groups; 15 women received an oral dose of 2.5 mg of Tibolone and 1000 mg of
Calcium, while 10 women had only 1000 mg of calcium daily. Patients were examined
at the end of 6 and 12 months of observation. Bone density of the radial shaft
was found to decrease significantly in the calcium group up to 6.12% (P < 0.01)
at the end of 6 months and 12.4% (P < 0.001) at the end of 12 months. On the
other hand, bone density of the radial shaft remained unchanged in the
Tibolone-treated group during the 12 months of treatment. Bone density of the
distal radius was found to decrease in the calcium-treated group up to 10.2% (P <
0.014) at the end of 6 months and up to 15.8% (P < 0.002) at the end of 12
months. Bone density of the distal radius remained almost unchanged in the
Tibolone-treated group during the whole period of treatment. Urine
hydroxyproline/creatinine ratio was found to increase in the calcium group at the
end of 6 and 12 months (P < 0.009) and to decrease significantly (P < 0.05) in
the Tibolone-treated group. It is concluded that Tibolone is effective in the
prevention of the post-ovariectomy accelerated bone loss and in retaining the
initial premenopausal bone mass, at least during the first post-oophorectomy
year. As this period is the most crucial in developing osteoporosis, it seems
that Tibolone is effective in preventing the post-oophorectomy bone loss. HRT is 
not obligatory in these patients, as Tibolone seems to cover the whole spectrum
of post-oophorectomy consequences.

PMID: 8746883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Cytometry. 1995 Nov 1;21(3):230-40.

Electropermeabilization and fluorescent tracer exchange: the role of whole-cell
capacitance.

Sukhorukov VL(1), Djuzenova CS, Frank H, Arnold WM, Zimmermann U.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl für Biotechnologic, Biozentrum der Universität Würzburg, Federal
Republic of Germany.

Transmembrane crossing of charged fluorescent tracers such as propidium iodide
(PI) and carboxyfluorescein+ (CF) can be used to quantitate membrane
permeabilization. Murine myeloma Sp2/0-Ag14 cells were loaded with CF (0.1
fmol/cell) before electropulsation (0.5-3.0 kV/cm, 40 microseconds) in medium
containing 25-50 micrograms/ml PI at 21-23 degrees C. Cytograms of PI vs. CF
fluorescence showed three readily distinguishable subpopulations: 1) intact
living cells with CF but without PI (these form > 95% of the prepulsed
population), 2) transiently electropermeabilized but resealed cells showing both 
CF and low-level PI fluorescence, and 3) permanently permeabilized cells without 
CF but with very high PI fluorescence. Despite the ready influx of PI, the efflux
of CF from transiently permeabilized cells was negligible and was insensitive to 
pulse parameters; however, electrically killed cells (subpopulation 3) lost all
CF fluorescence and probably lost their cytoplasm. This difference in
transmembrane passage of the dyes is best explained by binding of intracellular
CF to macromolecules (and/or organelles). In isotonic "pulse medium," the
membranes resealed after electropulsing with a time constant (tau R) of about 2
min. In 150 mOsm medium, resealing was faster (typically tau R approximately 0.5 
min). The population distribution of PI uptake [coefficient of variation (CV) >
40%] was very broad and could not be accounted for by the radius dependence of
pulse-induced voltage (CVradius approximately 10%). The variability in PI uptake 
could be explained if the electrical energy of the charged membrane, which
depends on the whole-cell capacitance (Cc), was taken into account. Evaluation of
the Cc values with single-cell resolution was based on measurement of the
electrical charging time constant of the plasma membrane by electrorotation.

PMID: 8582245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Biochemistry. 1995 Oct 31;34(43):14037-50.

Refined solution structure of 8,9-dihydro-8-(N7-guanyl)-9-hydroxyaflatoxin B1
opposite CpA in the complementary strand of an oligodeoxynucleotide duplex as
determined by 1H NMR.

Johnston DS(1), Stone MP.

Author information: 
(1)Center in Molecular Toxicology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee
37235, USA.

The solution structure of d(CCATCAFBGATCC).d(GGATCAGATGG), containing the
8,9-dihydro-8-(N7-guanyl)-9-hydroxyaflatoxin B1 adduct, was refined using
molecular dynamics restrained by NOE data obtained from 1H NMR. The modified
guanosine was positioned opposite cytosine, while the aflatoxin moiety was
positioned opposite adenosine in the complementary strand. Sequential 1H NOEs
were interrupted between C5 and AFBG6, but intrastrand NOEs were traced through
the aflatoxin moiety, via H6a of aflatoxin and H8 of the modified guanine.
Opposite the lesion, the NOE between A16 H1' and G17 H8 was weak. A total of 43
NOEs were observed between DNA protons and aflatoxin protons. Molecular dynamics 
calculations restrained with 259 experimental and empirical distances, and using 
sp2 hybridization at AFBG6 N7, refined structures with pairwise rms differences <
0.85 A, excluding terminal base pairs. Relaxation matrix calculations yielded a
sixth root rms difference between refined structures and NOE intensity data of
7.3 x 10(-2). The aflatoxin moiety intercalated on the 5'-face of the modified
guanine. The extra adenine A16 was inserted between base pair AFBG6.C15 and the
aflatoxin moiety. A 36 degree bending between the plane of base pair AFBG6.C15
and the plane of the aflatoxin moiety was predicted. The aflatoxin moiety stacked
below the top domain of the oligodeoxynucleotide, which consisted of base pairs
C1.G21, C2.G20, A3.T19, T4.A18, and C5.G17. The bottom domain consisted of base
pairs AFBG6.C15, A7.T14, T8.A13, C9.G12, and C10.G11. The average winding angle
between base pair C5.G17, the intercalated aflatoxin moiety, A16, and base pair
AFBG6.C15 was reduced to 10 degrees. The preponderance of base pair substitutions
in the aflatoxin B1 mutational spectrum, particularly G-->T transversions,
suggests that the stability of this modified oligodeoxynucleotide, which models a
templated +1 addition mutation, does not reliably predict the frequency of frame 
shifts.

PMID: 7578001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Virol. 1995 Oct;69(10):6077-89.

Human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 peptides in chimeric and multivalent constructs
with promiscuous T-cell epitopes enhance immunogenicity and overcome genetic
restriction.

Lairmore MD(1), DiGeorge AM, Conrad SF, Trevino AV, Lal RB, Kaumaya PT.

Author information: 
(1)Center For Retrovirus Research, College of Veterinary Medicine, Ohio State
University, Columbus 43210, USA.

Conventional strategies of viral peptide immunizations often elicit low-affinity 
antibody responses and have limited ability to elicit immune responses in outbred
animals of diverse major histocompatibility (MHC) haplotypes. This genetically
restricted T-cell-stimulatory activity of peptides is a serious obstacle to
vaccine design. However, the use of promiscuous T-cell epitopes may circumvent
this problem. Promiscuous T-cell epitopes from tetanus toxin (amino acids [aa]
580 to 599) and the measles virus F protein (aa 288 to 302) that bind to several 
isotypic and allotypic forms of human MHC class II molecules have been identified
and have been used in highly immunogenic constructs to overcome
haplotype-restricted immune responses. Chimeric and beta-template peptide
constructs incorporating known human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1) B- and 
T-cell epitopes from the surface envelope protein gp46 (SP2 [aa 86 to 107] and
SP4a [aa 190 to 209]) and promiscuous T-cell peptides were synthesized, and their
immunogenicities were evaluated in both rabbits and mouse strains of divergent
haplotypes (C3H/HeJ [H-2k], C57BL/6 [H-2b], and BALB/c [H-2d]). In addition,
peptide preparations were structurally characterized by analytical
high-performance liquid chromatography, mass spectrometry, and circular
dichroism. In contrast to their linear forms, the chimeric constructs of both the
SP2 and SP4a epitopes displayed alpha-helical secondary structures.
Immunogenicity of the peptide constructs was evaluated by direct and competitive 
enzyme-linked immunosorbant assay (ELISA), as well as by
radioimmunoprecipitation, syncytium inhibition, and antigen-induced lymphocyte
proliferation assays. Immunization with the SP4a peptide without conjugation to a
carrier protein produced antibodies specific for SP4a in two mouse strains
(C3H/HeJ and C57BL/6). However, BALB/c mice failed to respond to the peptide,
indicating that the T-cell epitope of the SP4a sequence is MHC restricted. In
contrast, the chimeric constructs MVF-SP2 and SP4a-measles virus F protein were
highly immunogenic, producing elevated ELISA titers after only two immunizations.
Elicited antibodies recognized native forms of gp46 in ELISAs and
radioimmunoprecipitation assays, as well as inhibited HTLV-1-mediated syncytium
formation. In addition, chimeric constructs were effective at induction of
lymphocyte proliferation to the T-cell epitope, SP4a, in each strain of immunized
mice. Our data demonstrate that the antibody response to retroviral peptides is
enhanced by promiscuous peptide constructs, in part because of the ability of
such constructs to promote appropriate secondary structural forms of viral
epitopes. In addition, these constructs promote virus-specific helper T-cell
responses, thereby overcoming genetically restricted immune responses to the
synthetic peptides.

PMCID: PMC189504
PMID: 7545241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1995 Aug 31;1268(2):200-8.

Sensitivity to inhibition by N-ethylmaleimide: a property of
nitrobenzylthioinosine-sensitive equilibrative nucleoside transporter of murine
myeloma cells.

Lee CW(1), Goh LB, Tu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, National University of Singapore.

Murine myeloma SP2/0-Ag14 cells possess both nitrobenzylthioinosine
(NBMPR)-sensitive and NBMPR-insensitive equilibrative uridine transport systems. 
No Na(+)-dependent uridine transport system was detected. The NBMPR-insensitive
transport system is similarly insensitive to inhibition by dilazep and
dipyridamole. Dose-response curve for the inhibition of equilibrative uridine
transport by N-ethylmaleimide (NEM), a sulfhydryl reagent, in these cells was
biphasic. About 30-40% of the uridine transport was inhibited by NEM at IC50
value of 0.15 mM. The other 60-70% of the transport activity remained insensitive
to NEM at concentration as high as 3 mM. The decrease in NBMPR-sensitive uridine 
transport in the presence of 0.3 mM NEM was due to a 3-fold decrease in transport
affinity. Apparent Km values of 500 and 1600 microM and Vmax values of 13 and 12 
microM/s were obtained for untreated and NEM-treated cells, respectively. NEM
(0.3 mM) has little effect on the Km of NBMPR-insensitive transporter, with
apparent Km values of 100 and 110 microM and Vmax values of 3.0 and 2.5 microM/s 
for untreated and NEM-treated cells, respectively. High sensitivity of
NBMPR-sensitive transporter to NEM inhibition was also observed in HL-60 and
MCF-7 cells. Decrease in specific 3H-NBMPR equilibrium binding affinity in
myeloma cells was observed after treatment with 0.3 mM NEM. Apparent Kd values of
0.32 and 2.3 nM with Bmax values of 48,000 and 44,000 sites/cell were obtained
for untreated and NEM-treated cells, respectively. NBMPR, dilazep and
dipyridamole at 30 microM, and uridine at 10 mM failed to protect the
NBMPR-sensitive transporter against NEM inhibition. It is possible that a
critical sulfhydryl residue is closed to substrate binding/transporting site of
the NBMPR-sensitive transporter. NEM, a sulfhydryl reagent containing an
activated double bond, hinders the affinity of this transporter by forming a
stable thiol ether bond with the reactive residue.

PMID: 7662709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1995 Aug;61(8):3088-91.

Genetic Diversity of Algal Viruses Which Lyse the Photosynthetic Picoflagellate
Micromonas pusilla (Prasinophyceae).

Cottrell MT, Suttle CA.

The genetic similarity among eight clones of Micromonas pusilla virus (MpV)
isolated from five geographic locations was measured by DNA hybridization. Our
objective was to explore the existence of genetically distinct populations of MpV
by comparing the similarity among MpVs isolated from a single water sample to the
similarity among viruses isolated from geographically distant locations. The
highest and lowest similarities we observed were 70% (plusmn) 1.1% (mean (plusmn)
standard error [SE], n = 3) for virus strains SP1 and SP2 isolated from a
California coastal water sample and 13% (plusmn) 1.9% for strains SP2 and PB6;
the latter was isolated from New York estuarine water. However, the similarity
between MpV isolated from a single water sample was not always greater than the
similarity between viruses isolated from different locations. Viruses PB7 and PB8
were isolated from a single New York estuarine sample but were only 16% (plusmn) 
0.5% similar, whereas PB7 was quite similar (43% (plusmn) 2.9%) to PL1, a virus
from Texas coastal water. Overall, the similarity among MpVs isolated from a
single geographic location, 34% (plusmn) 12.6% (mean (plusmn) SE, n = 4), was not
significantly different from the similarity among MpVs isolated from
geographically distant locations, 26.6% (plusmn) 2.7% (mean (plusmn) SE, n = 24) 
(P = 0.92, Mann-Whitney U test). Clones of MpV were more similar to each other
than they were to the related algal virus PBCV-1, and three groups of MpVs
consisting of (i) PL1, SG1, PB6, and PB7, (ii) PB8, and (iii) GM1, SP1, and SP2
were resolved. The genetic variation among MpVs isolated from a single water
sample was as large as the variation between viruses isolated from different
oceans. If MpVs within a geographic location share genetic characteristics not
shared with MpVs from geographically distant locations, this was not reflected in
the overall similarity of their genomes.

PMCID: PMC1388559
PMID: 16535105  [PubMed]


314. Biotechnology (N Y). 1995 Aug;13(8):779-86.

Human IgA monoclonal antibodies specific for a major ragweed pollen antigen.

Sun LK(1), Fung MS, Sun WN, Sun CR, Chang WI, Chang TW.

Author information: 
(1)Tanox Biosystems, Inc., Houston, Texas 77025, USA.

Human hybridoma cell lines secreting IgG specific for the major allergen in the
pollen of short ragweed, Amb a I, were established from patients who had been
receiving antigen injections for immunotherapy. Recombinant Ig genes were then
constructed by cloning the heavy and light chain variable region genes of the
human hybridoma cell line and joining them to the human alpha or kappa constant
region genes in mammalian expression vectors. Amb a I-specific IgA was expressed 
in two mouse myeloma cell lines, NS0 and Sp2/0. In both systems, transfected
alpha and kappa chains were assembled into IgA monomers or into dimers covalently
linked by the endogenous murine J chains. We propose that recombinant IgA
monoclonal antibodies specific for airborne allergens may be applied to the
mucosal surface of the nasal linings or of the lower airway of sensitized
individuals to inhibit the entry of allergenic molecules across the mucosal
epithelium and, therefore, to prevent the development of allergic responses.

PMID: 9634808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Hybridoma. 1995 Aug;14(4):391-6.

Optimizing production of human monoclonal IgG antibodies by in vitro-primed human
PBMC: influence of CD56+ NK cell depletion.

Puhlmann CM(1), Anderer FA.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich-Miescher-Laboratorium, Max-Planck-Gesellschaft, Tübingen, Germany.

Freshly isolated human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were
immunomagnetically depleted of CD56+ cells. When these CD56- PBMC populations
were cultured in the presence of autologous donor serum, polyclonal activation
with IL-2 and pokeweed mitogen (PWM) generally resulted in exclusive production
of IgG antibodies. Fusion with SP2/O-Ag14 mouse myeloma cells was highly
efficient and yielded a great number of IgG-producing heterohybridomas. These
conditions were used for in vitro immunization with viable human HT29 tumor
cells. After fusion, an increase in hybridoma clones producing IgG monoclonal
antibodies (MAb) with HT29 specificity showing a higher portion of MAb binding to
the surface of viable HT29 cells was recorded. This immunizing efficiency was not
observed with HT29 membrane protein fractions or HT29 proteins integrated into
ISCOM particles. Investigations with human anti-alpha Gal antibodies showed that 
the IgG antibodies produced by the human/mouse heterohybridomas did not contain
the mouse-specific Gal alpha 1-3Gal epitope.

PMID: 8522352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Biochem J. 1995 Jul 15;309 ( Pt 2):529-34.

Squid spermiogenesis: molecular characterization of testis-specific
pro-protamines.

Wouters-Tyrou D(1), Martin-Ponthieu A, Ledoux-Andula N, Kouach M, Jaquinod M,
Subirana JA, Sautière P.

Author information: 
(1)URA 1309 CNRS, Institut Pasteur de Lille, France.

Cuttlefish spermiogenesis is characterized by a two-step nuclear protein
transition: histones-->spermatid-specific protein (protein T)-->sperm protamine
(protein Sp). A similar situation can be observed in another Cephalopod species, 
the squid Loligo pealeii. The protein T from Loligo consists of two structural
variants, T1 and T2 (molecular masses: 10788 and 10791 Da respectively),
phosphorylated to different degrees (2-6 phosphate groups). The primary
structures of these two variants and of the protamine variant Sp2 were
established from sequence analysis and mass spectrometric data of the proteins
and their fragments. T1 and T2 are closely related proteins of 79 residues. The
complete structural identity of the C-terminal domain (residues 22-79) of protein
T2 with the sperm protamine Sp2 (molecular mass 8562 Da, 58 residues) strongly
suggests that the testis-specific protein T2 is indeed the precursor of the
protamine. The transition between the precursor protein T and protein Sp results 
from a hydrolytic cleavage similar to that found in many proteins that are
synthesized as precursors. The processing mechanism involves the specific
cleavage of a Gly-Arg bond in the sequence Met/Leu18-Lys-Gly-Gly-Arg-Arg23.
Furthermore, the study provides molecular evidence on the taxonomic relationship 
between Loligo and Sepia.

PMCID: PMC1135763
PMID: 7626016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Mol Recognit. 1995 Jul-Aug;8(4):258-69.

High-affinity rat anti-fluorescein monoclonal antibody with unique fine
specificity properties including differential recognition of dynamic ligand
analogues.

Miklasz SD(1), Gulliver GA, Voss EW Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Resource Center, University of Illinois, Urbana 61801, USA.

The ability of antibodies to specifically select and stabilize through binding
one or more isomers of highly dynamic ligands remains a relatively unexplored
immunochemical problem. The experimental strategy employed in this study was to
elicit homogeneous antibodies to polyaromatic fluorescein which exists in one
isomeric form. The binding properties of a monoclonal rat antifluorescein
antibody specific to a given isomer were quantitatively studied to determine the 
capacity to bind dynamic analogues of fluorescein which exists in multiple
isomers. To generate monoclonal anti-fluorescein antibodies that reacted with
specific dynamic analogues of fluorescein possessing unconjugated aromatic ring
systems, immune spleenocytes from Lou/M rats immunized with FITC(I)-KLH were
fused with Balb/c SP2/0-Ag14 murine myeloma cells forming rat-mouse hybridomas.
Cell line P2A12-1-C8 was selected for further characterization from the original 
23 stable rat hybrids, since it produced a monoclonal antibody with a binding
affinity 2.0 x 10(10)/M for fluorescein based on dissociation rate measurements. 
P2A12-1-C8 exhibited significant reactivity with HPF and phenol red, which are
dynamic structural analogues of the homologous fluorescein ligand. No reactivity 
was demonstrated with phenolphthalein, which based on relative chemical
structures was expected to be more reactive than phenol red. Computer-based
molecular modeling and energy minimization studies of fluorescein, HPF, phenol
red, and phenolphthalein showed that in terms of the most energetically favorable
orientation of the three aromatic rings, phenol red more closely simulated
fluorescein than phenolphthalein. The results were analyzed in terms of the
mechanisms of dynamic ligand stabilization and binding involving accommodation of
specific ligand isomers by energetically permissible conformational states
exhibited by an antibody active site. Thus, antibody reactivity of an
anti-fluorescein antibody with phenol red and phenolphthalein was dictated more
by ligand dynamics and aromatic orientation than by chemical structure
similarities.

PMID: 8588943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Immunol Lett. 1995 Jul-Aug;47(1-2):39-43.

Tissue-specific expression in mouse P815 mastocytoma cells of the cloned rat
alpha-subunit gene of the high-affinity receptor for immunoglobulin E.

Witthuhn BA(1), Faust C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center, Lubbock 79430, USA.

The high-affinity multisubunit receptor for IgE, Fc epsilon RI, is expressed in
vivo in a tissue-specific manner, being found only on mast cells, basophils and
epidermal Langerhans cells. The expression of the rat Fc epsilon RI alpha-subunit
transcript has been examined here in the mouse mastocytoma cell line, P815, which
does not express the endogenous mouse Fc epsilon RI alpha- or beta-subunit
transcripts. These studies indicate that an exogenously introduced rat
alpha-subunit gene can be faithfully expressed in P815 cells, while no
transcripts are produced in the mouse or rat B-lymphoid cell lines, SP2/0 and
IR162, respectively. Therefore, in contrast to both B-cell lines, factors
necessary for the tissue-specific expression of the alpha-subunit mRNA are
present in the P815 cell line, yielding a correctly processed mRNA transcript;
nevertheless, this tissue-specific expression is not rigorously species specific.
Although the mechanism responsible for these observations is unknown, these
results do imply that a specific cis-trans element interaction occurs between
this transcriptional unit and factors in the P815 cells that control fidelity of 
tissue-specific mRNA synthesis and processing from the Fc epsilon RI
alpha-subunit gene. Consequently, this reconstructed rat Fc epsilon RI
alpha-subunit gene contains minimally sufficient cis elements for tissue-specific
expression of mRNA, and so, the P815 cell line should be useful to define these
requisite DNA cis elements of the gene, as well as the trans factors from P815
necessary for this process.

PMID: 8537099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 1995 Jul;41(1):53-60.

In vitro and in vivo antitumor activity of a chimeric anti-CD19 antibody.

Pietersz GA(1), Wenjun L, Sutton VR, Burgess J, McKenzie IF, Zola H, Trapani JA.

Author information: 
(1)Austin Research Institute, Austin Hospital, Heidelberg, Victoria, Australia.

Mouse monoclonal antibodies to CD19 detect an antigenic determinant expressed
exclusively on the surface of B lymphocytes, and have previously been shown to be
potentially useful therapeutic reagents for human B cell lymphoma. We report the 
production and characterization of a mouse/human chimeric antibody, cCD19, with
potent in vivo antitumour activity. The genes encoding the variable domains for
heavy (VH) and light (VL) chains were subcloned into eukaryotic expression
vectors containing human constant region genes (IgG1 and kappa), and
co-transfected into non-secreting Sp2/0 mouse myeloma cells. Intraperitoneal
administration of cCD19 produced inhibition of growth of subcutaneous CD19+
Sultan human B lymphoma tumours in scid/scid mice. When the antibody was
administered 18 and 20 days after subcutaneous tumour inoculation, an
approximately 30% reduction in tumour size was noted by day 29. cCD19 faithfully 
mimicked the in vitro binding characteristics of mCD19 as (a) the chimeric
antibody was shown by flow cytometry to bind exclusively to cell lines that
expressed CD19, (b) cCD19 was able to inhibit the binding of mCD19 on CD19+ cells
completely and (c) the affinity of binding of the two antibodies was not
significantly different [Ka = (2.03 +/- 1.5) x 10(8)]. In bio-distribution
studies, up to 14.8% of the total injected antibody dose per gram of tissue was
localized in CD19+ Sultan tumours at 24 h approximately, 14.4% was present in the
tumors at 48 h, and about 13.7% at 72 h. These levels were comparable to mCD19
administered in the same fashion. cCD19 conjugated to idarubicin was specifically
and strongly cytotoxic to CD19+ cells cultured in vitro, and demonstrated an IC50
of 0.17 microM, similar to that of mCD19 (0.32 microM) and approximately 14-fold 
greater than the IC50 of free idarubicin. The specific cytotoxic capacity of
cCD19 and its likely reduced immunogenicity suggest that it may potentially be of
use in the treatment of refractory B cell lymphoma in humans.

PMID: 7543822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Hybridoma. 1995 Jun;14(3):285-90.

Production and characterization of monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies against
thyrotropin-releasing hormone.

Klootwijk W(1), Vaessen LM, Bernard BF, Rondeel JM, De Greef WJ, Visser TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, Erasmus University Medical School,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

In this article, two mouse monoclonal antibodies (83-7B5-A1 and 83-6B6-A10) and
three rabbit polyclonal antibodies (1118, 8572, and 8577) directed against
thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH; pGlu-His-Pro-NH2) are described. The anti-TRH
antibodies were raised by immunization with a TRH-bovine serum albumin conjugate 
obtained by coupling of the CO2H group of pGlu-His-Pro-OH to NH2 groups in the
protein. The monoclonal antibodies were produced by hybridoma clones obtained by 
the fusion of SP2/0 myeloma cells with spleen cells of an immunized BALB/c mouse.
Both monoclonal antibodies were of the IgG1 (kappa) subclass. Characterization of
the anti-TRH antibodies showed that in general they are specific for the pGlu-His
moiety. The cross-reactivities for the TRH-like peptides [Glu1]TRH, [Glu2]TRH,
and [Phe2]TRH are low, while alterations at the Pro-NH2 moiety of TRH are
recognized to varying extents. The specificities of these antibodies are markedly
different from those previously obtained using TRH coupled through the histidine 
residue to protein as the immunogen.

PMID: 7590793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Glycoconj J. 1995 Jun;12(3):318-30.

Variation in N-linked carbohydrate chains in different batches of two chimeric
monoclonal IgG1 antibodies produced by different murine SP2/0 transfectoma cell
subclones.

Bergwerff AA(1), Stroop CJ, Murray B, Holtorf AP, Pluschke G, Van Oostrum J,
Kamerling JP, Vliegenthart JF.

Author information: 
(1)Bijvoet Center, Department of Bio-Organic Chemistry, Utrecht University, The
Netherlands.

Two chimeric human/murine monoclonal antibodies were constructed by substitution 
of the murine constant regions with human gamma 1 and kappa constant regions for 
heavy and light chains, respectively. The chimeric human/murine molecules are
anti-idiotypic antibodies, meaning that they were directed against the antigen
binding site in the variable region of another antibody. Antibody batches were
produced under identical production conditions, using two selected SP2/0 myeloma 
cell subclones, which produce chimeric antibodies with different variable
regions, but identical constant regions. Several samples were collected during
the production of the antibodies in hollow-fibre reactors. The heavy chain, but
not the light chain, of the two different chimeric IgG1 antibodies is
glycosylated. Structural analysis of the enzymically released N-linked
carbohydrate chains by 1H-NMR spectroscopy, as well as by chromatographic
profiling, demonstrated that the collection of N-glycans comprises a small amount
of monoantennary, and for the greater part diantennary structures. The N-glycans 
are completely (alpha 1-->6)-fucosylated at the innermost GlcNAc residue. The
antennae of the neutral diantennary N-glycans are built up from GlcNAc beta
1-->2, Gal beta 1-->4GlcNAc beta 1-->2 or Gal alpha 1-->3G alpha 1 beta
1-->4GlcNAc beta 1-->2 elements, whereas the antennae of the neutral
monoantennary carbohydrate chains have only (beta 1-->2)-linked GlcNAc residues. 
Galactosylation of the GlcNAc beta 1-->2Man alpha 1-->6 branch occurs four times 
more frequently than that of the GlcNAc beta 1-->2Man alpha 1-->3 branch,
independently of the production batch. A small amount of the diantennary
N-glycans are mono- or disialylated, carrying N-acetylneuraminic acid (Neu5Ac) or
N-glycolylneuraminic acid (Neu5Gc), exclusively (alpha 2-->6)-linked to beta Gal.
Analysis of the different production batches demonstrates that the structures of 
the N-linked carbohydrate chains are identical in the two chimeric antibodies,
but that the relative amounts of the major oligosaccharide components, the degree
of sialylation and the molar ratio of Neu5Ac to Neu5Gc varies with the SP2/0 cell
subclone, and only slightly with cell age.

PMID: 7496147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Transplantation. 1995 May 27;59(10):1452-9.

Bone marrow cell transplants involving donors and hosts with haplotypes derived
from spretus mice.

Bennett M(1), D'Orazio T, Kumar V, Stenoien D, Blömer KC, Lindahl KF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas 75235, USA.

Intra-H2 recombinant inbred mice derived from matings between B10 (H2b) and
B10.SP2 (H2sp2) mice, with an H2 haplotype derived from Mus spretus, have been
used to map genes at H2. Recombinants 10115, 10484, R40, 9347, and 9950 were used
as donors or hosts in bone marrow cell (BMC) transplants in irradiated mice. From
previous studies of Mus musculus mice, the antigens (Ag) on BMC appear to be
inherited recessively. The mechanisms offered include codominant inheritance of
transacting genes that regulate expression of BMC Ag (Hh hypothesis) and
codominant inheritance of class I Ag motifs capable of sending "negative signals"
to effector natural killer (NK) cells (missing self hypothesis). Our results
indicate that stem cell donors that express the same class I Ag, but differ at
genes between Bat2 and Tnfa in the H2-S/D interval, can differ in immunogenicity 
of transplanted stem cells. The structural gene for the H2sp2 Ag appears to map
telomeric of Bat2 and is codominantly inherited. An H2b gene capable of
inhibiting expression of the H2sp2 Ag (or contributing to class I motifs capable 
of inhibiting NK cell mediated lysis of H2sp2 BMC) maps in the Bat2/Tnfa gene
segment, but requires homozygosity for this function and may require the H2-Db
gene as well. Although H2sp2 hosts reject H2b BMC, hosts (10115, 10484, R40, and 
9347 strain) that are H2b in the centromeric, and H2sp2 in the telomeric, portion
of H2 accept H2b BMC grafts. These two observations have not been made with
haplotypes entirely of Mus musculus origin. The data do not support the Hh
hypothesis, and are consistent with the missing self hypothesis only if the gene 
(requiring homozygozity for function) in the Bat2/Tnfa region codes for a
particular protein or peptide that associates with Db to generate a "protective
motif."

PMID: 7770933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Biochemistry. 1995 May 23;34(20):6883-91.

Electron spin echo envelope modulation study of oxygenated iron-cobalt hybrid
hemoglobins reveals molecular features analogous to those of the oxy ferrous
protein.

Lee HC(1), Peisach J, Tsuneshige A, Yonetani T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine of
Yeshiva University, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

Two oxygenated iron-cobalt hybrid hemoglobins (Hbs), (alpha Co-O2 beta Fe-O2)2
and (alpha Fe-O2 beta Co-O2)2, were studied by electron spin echo envelope
modulation (ESEEM) spectroscopy in order to measure (i) electron-nuclear
hyperfine and nuclear quadrupole coupling to the N epsilon of the proximal
histidyl imidazole and (ii) nuclear hyperfine coupling to exchangeable 2H in the 
oxyCo subunits. 14N couplings were found to be smaller in the oxyCo alpha
subunits than in the oxyCo beta subunits, suggesting a more ionic and shorter
Co-O2 bond in the alpha subunits [Lee et al. (1994) Biochemistry 33, 7609], which
correlates with the higher O2 affinity found for (alpha Co beta Fe-O2)2 Hb than
for (alpha Fe-O2 beta Co)2 Hb [Imai et al. (1980) J. Mol. Biol. 138, 635]. A
smaller nuclear quadrupole coupling constant found for the proximal histidyl N
epsilon in the oxyCo alpha subunits also suggests an increase in the overlap
between the N epsilon sp2 hybrid and the Co dz2 orbital, i.e., a shorter Co-N
epsilon bond, than in the oxyCo beta subunits. On the other hand, the relative
orientation of the g and 14N epsilon nuclear quadrupole tensors, obtained by
spectral simulation, suggests that the Co-O-O bond angle is similar in the two
types of oxyCo subunits. An X-ray crystallographic study of oxyFe Hb A [Shaanan, 
B. (1982) Nature 296, 683] has also reported similar Fe-O-O bond angles in both
alpha and beta subunits, but with shorter Fe-N epsilon and Fe-O2 bonds in the
alpha subunits.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7756320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Genomics. 1995 May 20;27(2):337-40.

Cloning and mapping of the U2af1-rs2 gene with a high transmission distortion in 
interspecific backcross progeny.

Yamaoka T(1), Hatada I, Kitagawa K, Wang X, Mukai T.

Author information: 
(1)National Cardiovascular Center Research Institute, Osaka, Japan.

We have cloned and analyzed the mouse U2af1-rs2 gene based on its sequence
similarity to the imprinted gene U2af1-rs1 (SP2). Sequence analysis of this
U2af1-rs2 cDNA revealed that it contained an open reading frame encoding a
protein of 462 amino acid residues. The predicted amino acid sequence showed 72.7
and 35.8% identity to the U2af1-rs1 and U2 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein
auxiliary factor, respectively. Interspecific backcross analysis showed this gene
to map to the distal region of the X chromosome and also indicated that there was
significant distortion of transmission ratio of the U2af1-rs2 allele in the
backcrossed progeny from (C57BL/6J x Mus spretus)F1 females mated to Mus spretus 
males.

PMID: 7558001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Biochemistry. 1995 May 16;34(19):6552-61.

Allosteric linkages between beta-site covalent transformations and alpha-site
activation and deactivation in the tryptophan synthase bienzyme complex.

Leja CA(1), Woehl EU, Dunn MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of California, Riverside 92521, USA.

This work examines two aspects of the catalytic mechanism and allosteric
regulation of the tryptophan synthase bienzyme complex from Salmonella
typhimurium: (a) the chemical mechanism by which indole and other nucleophiles
react with the enzyme-bound alpha-aminoacrylate Schiff base intermediate, E(A-A),
to form quinonoidal intermediates, E(Q), and (b) the effects of covalent
transformations at the beta-site on the catalytic activity of the alpha-site.
Transient kinetic studies in combination with alpha-secondary deuterium isotope
effects are undertaken to determine the mechanism of nucleophile addition to
E(A-A). These studies establish that nucleophilic attack is best described by a
two-step reaction sequence consisting of a binding step that is followed by
Michael addition to the conjugated double bond of E(A-A). Analysis of isotope
effects suggests that the transition state for indole addition gives an E(A-A)
beta-carbon that resembles an sp3 center, while the stronger nucleophiles,
indoline and beta-mercaptoethanol, have transition states that appear to more
closely resemble an sp2 beta-carbon. The effects of beta-site covalent
transformations on alpha-site catalysis were studied using quasi-stable beta-site
intermediates and the alpha-site substrate analogue 3-[6-nitroindole]-D-glycerol 
3'-phosphate (6-nitro-IGP). It was found that the cleavage of 6-nitro-IGP is
strongly activated by the formation of E(A-A) and various E(Q) species at the
beta-site but not by external aldimine species. Therefore, we conclude that the
conversion of the L-Ser external aldimine to E(A-A) is the beta-site process
which activates the alpha-site, while conversion of E(Q) to the L-Trp external
aldimine triggers deactivation of the alpha-site. These findings are discussed
within the context of allosteric regulation of substrate channeling in tryptophan
synthase catalysis.

PMID: 7756286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Protein Eng. 1995 May;8(5):481-9.

Expression and secretion of a recombinant ricin immunotoxin from murine myeloma
cells.

Krek CE(1), Ladino CA, Goldmacher VS, Blättler WA, Guild BC.

Author information: 
(1)ImmunoGen Inc., Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Expression plasmids carrying a humanized N901 immunoglobulin heavy chain gene
(hN901HC) fused to a gene encoding the native B chain of ricin toxin (RTB),
hN901HC-RTB, or a sugar binding mutant of RTB, hN901HC-RTB delta gly, were
constructed. In each case, the fused gene constructions were co-expressed in
murine myeloma cells (Sp2/0) with the gene for humanized N901 immunoglobulin
light chain to produce the secreted recombinant products hN901-RTB and hN901-RTB 
delta gly, respectively. When purified by affinity chromatography, both the
hN901-RTB and hN901-RTB delta gly products were found to have an apparent
molecular mass of M(r) = 210,000 and to be composed of two hN901 antibody heavy
chains each fused to a full-length copy of RTB and two hN901 antibody light
chains. In each of the recombinant fusions the hN901 antibody moiety retained the
full binding affinity and specificity for its cognate antigen, CD56. Moreover,
when mixtures of hN901-RTB and native ricin A chain were incubated in the
presence of the antigen-positive target cell line SW-2, antigen-specific
potentiation of ricin A chain cytotoxicity was observed. It has been demonstrated
previously that lectin activity of the B chain is essential for A chain
cytotoxicity, and we conclude that the fused wild-type B chain was properly
folded and maintained lectin activity. These data demonstrate that feasibility of
using recombinant ricin B chain in an immunotoxin and of using mammalian cell
culture for its expression. The use of recombinant hN901-RTB fusion protein to
evaluate the contribution of the lectin activity of ricin B chain in the
penetration of cell membranes by ricin A chain is proposed.

PMID: 8532670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Toxicon. 1995 May;33(5):615-26.

Fractionation of Bothrops pirajai snake venom: isolation and characterization of 
piratoxin-I, a new myotoxic protein.

Mancuso LC(1), Correa MM, Vieira CA, Cunha OA, Lachat JJ, de Araujo HS, Ownby CL,
Giglio JR.

Author information: 
(1)Departmento de Bioquímica, Faculdade de Medicina de Riberão Preto,
Universidade de São Paulo, Brazil.

Whole desiccated venom of Bothrops pirajai was fractionated on a gel filtration
(Sephadex G-75) column. Phospholipase A2, arginine esterase and clotting activity
profiles of the six fractions (SI to SVI) obtained were determined. Fraction SIV 
from the gel filtration column was subjected to chromatography on SP-Sephadex
C-25. It was resolved into five subfractions (SIV-SP1, to SIV-SP5). Fractions
SIV-SP1, SIV-SP2 and SIV-SP3 showed phospholipase A2 activity but, among these
fractions, only SIV-SP3 was homogeneous. Induction of myonecrosis by SIV-SP3,
SIV-SP4 and SIV-SP5 was demonstrated by their ability to release serum creatine
kinase, and for SIV-SP5, to induce histological alterations in the injected mouse
muscle. Chemical characterization by determination of mol. wts, isoelectric
focusing and direct manual sequencing of the N-terminal region was performed for 
SIV-SP3, SIV-SP4 and SIV-SP5. When compared with bothropstoxin-I, the myotoxin
SIV-SP5 showed the same total number of amino acid residues (121) and constant
molar ratio for all but three amino acids. We have named this toxin piratoxin-I
(PrTX-I).

PMID: 7660366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Gene. 1995 Apr 14;156(1):151-2.

A new vector-host system for construction of lacZ transcriptional fusions where
only low-level gene expression is desirable.

Podkovyrov SM(1), Larson TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Anaerobic Microbiology, Virginia Polytechnic
Institute and State University, Blacksburg 24061-0308, USA.

We improved a multicopy vector, pRS415 [Simons et al., Gene 53 (1987) 85-96], for
use in operon fusion constructions by introducing a new multiple cloning site
(MCS) containing eight unique restriction sites upstream from the promoterless
reporter gene lacZ. In order to reduce plasmid copy number, a new Escherichia
coli strain SP2 (pcnB, delta lac, recA) was constructed. This strain permits
analysis of fusions in cases where high gene dosage may be detrimental.

PMID: 7737510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Auton Nerv Syst. 1995 Apr 8;52(2-3):181-202.

Detrusor-sphincteric dyssynergia in humans with spinal cord lesions may be caused
by a loss of stable phase relations between and within oscillatory firing
neuronal networks of the sacral micturition center.

Schalow G(1), Bersch U, Michel D, Koch HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Research, Swiss Paraplegic Centre Nottwil.

(1) Single-fibre action potentials (APs) were recorded with 2 pairs of wire
electrodes from lower sacral nerve roots during surgery in patients with spinal
cord lesions and in a brain-dead human. Conduction velocity distribution
histograms were constructed for afferent and efferent fibres, nerve fibre groups 
were identified and simultaneous impulse patterns of alpha and gamma-motoneurons 
and secondary muscle spindle afferents (SP2) were constructed. Temporal relations
between afferent and efferent APs were analysed by interspike interval (II) and
phase relation changes. (2) In a paraplegic with hyperreflexia of the bladder,
urinary bladder stretch (S1) and tension receptor afferents (ST) fired already
when the bladder was empty, and showed a several times higher bladder afferent
activity increase upon retrograde bladder filling than observed in the brain-dead
individual. Two alpha 2-motoneurons (FR) innervating the external bladder
sphincter were already oscillatory firing to generate high activity levels when
the bladder was empty. They showed activity levels with no bladder filling,
comparable to those measured at a bladder filling of 600 ml in the brain-dead
individual. A bladder storage volume of 600 ml was thus lost in the paraplegic,
due to a too high bladder afferent input to the sacral micturition center,
secondary to inflammation and hypertrophy of the detrusor. (3) In a brain-dead
human, 2 phase relations existed per oscillation period of 160 ms between the APs
of a sphincteric oscillatory firing alpha 2-motoneuron, a dynamic fusimotor and a
secondary muscle spindle afferent fibre. Following stimulation of mainly somatic 
afferent fibres, the phase relations changed only little. (4) In a paraplegic
with dyssynergia of the urinary bladder also 2 phase relations existed per
oscillation period of 110 ms in a functional unit between the APs of a
sphincteric alpha-motoneuron, a fusimotor and a secondary spindle afferent fibre.
The phase relations changed with time following stimulation of mainly somatic
afferents. A second functional unit organized by phase-related interactions was
phase related to the first functional unit. (5) Following painful bladder
catheter pulling, the parasympathetic division was transiently activated several 
times in the paraplegic. At times of activation of the parasympathetic division, 
3 broad phase relations occurred within and between the two functional units,
indicating that the parasympathetic division in the sacral micturition and
defecation center channeled an additional input to the somatic oscillatory firing
neuronal networks driving motoneurons which innervate the external bladder and/or
anal sphincters.

PMID: 7615897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Auton Nerv Syst. 1995 Apr 8;52(2-3):151-80.

Detrusor-sphincteric dyssynergia in paraplegics compared with the synergia in a
brain-dead human by using the single-fibre action potential recording method.

Schalow G(1), Bersch U, Göcking K, Zäch GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Research, Swiss Paraplegic Centre Nottwil.

(1) Humans with spinal cord lesions often show detrusor-sphincteric dyssynergia
of the urinary bladder which is reflected urodynamically in the detrusor pressure
and a simultaneous increase in electromyographic pelvic floor activity. (2) The
time-course of the increase in the secondary muscle spindle afferent activity,
induced by the parasympathetic nervous system in muscle spindles contributing to 
continence, is very similar to that of detrusor pressure. The
detrusor-sphincteric dyssynergia is therefore analysed by comparing the natural
impulse patterns of secondary muscle spindle afferents (SP2) and sphincteric
motoneurons in a brain-dead human with those in patients with spinal cord lesion.
The parasympathetic nervous system was activated by painful bladder catheter
pulling. (3) In a brain-dead human the sphincteric motoneurons subserving
continence were inhibited at a time, when preganglionic parasympathetic efferents
increased their activity for 10 s and an SP2 fibre increased its activity for
several minutes. In a paraplegic with a strong bladder dysfunction, the SP2 fibre
activity increased, due to parasympathetic activation, lasted for approx. 1 min, 
showed undulations and its amplitude was smaller than that measured in a
brain-dead human. The sphincteric motoneurons were not inhibited. (4) In the
brain-dead human, an SP2 fibre showed doublet firing with interspike intervals
(IIs) of a duration between 10 and 14 ms for low level parasympathetic
activation. For high level parasympathetic activation this single parent spindle 
afferent fibre showed multi-ending regular firing of up to 6 endings with IIs of 
a duration of predominantly 15 to 25 ms. In one paraplegic with a strong bladder 
dysfunction the doublet firing was less regular, even though two II peaks at 10.2
and 11.2 ms occurred in a II distribution similar to the brain-dead human. The
multi-ending regular firing was replaced by a repeated burst firing. In a second 
paraplegic with strong detrusor-sphincteric dyssynergia the burst firing
consisted of up to 6 impulses with increasing IIs and a first II of approx. 0.2
ms (transmission frequency 5000 Hz). In a third paraplegic with a lesser
dysfunction of the bladder a highly activated SP2 fibre showed an activity
pattern intermediate to those of multi-ending regular firing and burst firing.
(5) The time constant for the activity decrease of a spindle afferent fibre
following parasympathetic activation was to 31 s in a paraplegic and approx. 40 s
in a brain-dead human. It is concluded that the muscle spindles are unchanged
following spinal cord lesion.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 7615896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Auton Nerv Syst. 1995 Apr 8;52(2-3):125-50.

Classification of human peripheral nerve fibre groups by conduction velocity and 
nerve fibre diameter is preserved following spinal cord lesion.

Schalow G(1), Zäch GA, Warzok R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Research, Swiss Paraplegic Centre Nottwil.

(1) Single nerve fibre action potentials (APs) of lower sacral nerve roots were
recorded extracellularly with two pairs of wire electrodes during an operation in
which an anterior root stimulator for bladder control was implanted in 9 humans
with a spinal cord lesion and dyssynergia of the urinary bladder. Roots that were
not saved and that were used to record from were later used for morphometry. (2) 
Nerve fibre groups were identified by conduction velocity distribution histograms
of single afferent and efferent fibres and partly by nerve fibre diameter
distribution histograms, and correlation analysis was performed. Group conduction
velocity values were obtained additionally from compound action potentials (CAPs)
evoked by electrical stimulation of nerve roots and the urinary bladder. (3) The 
group conduction velocities and group nerve fibre diameters had the following
pair-values at 35.5 degrees C: Spindle afferents: SP1 (65 m/s/13.1 microns), SP2 
(51/12.1); touch afferents: T1 (47/11.1), T2 (39/10.1), T3 (27/9.1), T4 (19/8.1);
urinary bladder afferents: S1 (41 m/s/-), ST (35/-); alpha-motoneurons: alpha 13 
(-/14.4), alpha 12 (65m/s/13.1 microns), alpha 11 (60?/12.1)(FF), alpha 2
(51/10.3)(FR), alpha 3 (41/8.2)(S); gamma-motoneurons: gamma beta (27/7.1), gamma
1 (21/6.6), gamma 21 (16/5.8), gamma 22 (14/5.1); preganglionic parasympathetic
motoneurons: (10 m/s/3.7 microns). (4) The values of group conduction velocity
and group nerve fibre diameter measured in the paraplegics were very similar to
those obtained earlier from brain-dead humans and patients with no spinal cord
lesions. Also, the number and the density of myelinated fibres were preserved in 
the roots. Thus, the classification and identification of nerve fibre groups
remained preserved following spinal cord lesion. A direct comparison can thus be 
made of natural impulse patterns of afferent and efferent nerve fibres between
paraplegics (pathologic) and brain-dead humans (supraspinal destroyed CNS, in
many respects physiologic). (5) When changing the root temperature from 32
degrees C to 35.5 degrees C, the group conduction velocities changed in the
following way in one case: SP2: 40 m/s (32 degrees C) to 50 m/s (35.5 degrees C),
S1: 31.3 to 40, ST: 25 to 33.8, M: 12.5 to 13.8; alpha 2: 40 to 50, alpha 3: 33
to 40. The group conduction velocities showed different temperature dependence
apart from SP2 fibres and alpha 2-motoneurons. (6) Upon retrograde bladder
filling the urinary bladder stretch (S1) and tension receptor afferent (ST)
activity levels were undulating and increased.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 7615895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Virol. 1995 Apr;69(4):2366-77.

Sequence requirements for encapsidation of deletion mutants and chimeras of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 Gag precursor into retrovirus-like particles.

Carrière C(1), Gay B, Chazal N, Morin N, Boulanger P.

Author information: 
(1)Faculté de Médecine, Laboratoire de Virologie et Pathogénèse Moléculaires
(CNRS URA-1487), Montpellier, France.

Interacting domains in human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) Gag precursor 
(Pr55gag) expressed in recombinant baculovirus-infected cells were investigated
by three different methods: (i) trans rescue and coencapsidation of C-terminal
deletion (amber) Gag mutants and Gag chimeras into retrovirus-like particles in
complementation experiments with HIV-1 wild-type (WT) Pr55gag, (ii) Gag-Gag
interactions in vitro in Gag ligand affinity blotting assays, and (iii)
quantitative immunoelectron microscopy of retrovirus-like Gag particles, using a 
panel of monoclonal antibodies to probe the epitope accessibility of encapsidated
HIV-1 WT Pr55gag. Four discrete regions, within residues 210 to 241, 277 to 306
(major homology region), and 307 to 333 in the capsid (CA) protein and residues
358 to 374 at the CA-spacer peptide 2 (sp2) junction, were found to have a
significant influence on Gag trans-packaging efficiency. A fifth region, within
residues 375 to 426, overlapping the sp2-nucleocapsid (NC) protein junction and
most of the NC, seemed to be essential for stable inter-Gag binding in vitro. The
coincidence of the two regions from 358 to 374 and 375 to 426 with an
immunologically silent domain in WT Gag particles suggested that they could
participate in direct Gag interactions.

PMCID: PMC188909
PMID: 7884882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. J Clin Microbiol. 1995 Apr;33(4):952-7.

Identification and characterization of outer membrane proteins of Pasteurella
multocida serotype D by using monoclonal antibodies.

Marandi MV(1), Mittal KR.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Pathologie et Microbiologie, Faculté de Médecine Vétérinaire,
Université de Montréal, Saint-Hyacinthe, Québec, Canada.

Monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) against Pasteurella multocida serotype D were
obtained by fusion of spleen cells from BALB/c mice immunized with outer membrane
proteins (OMPs) with SP2/0-Ag 14 murine myeloma cells. Desirable MAbs were
selected by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) with OMP as the antigen.
MAbs MT1 and MT2 identified two different proteins (H [heavy] and W [weak]), each
with a molecular mass of 32 kDa, in Western blots (immunoblots). Treatment of the
OMPs with proteolytic enzymes and sodium periodate indicated that the binding
sites of MAbs MT1 and MT2 are of protein and glycoprotein natures, respectively. 
The epitopes reactive with MAbs were surface exposed, as visualized by
immunoelectron microscopy. Among field isolates of P. multocida serotype D, two
distinct OMP patterns were recognized by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis, and these patterns were designated types I and II. In both
the ELISA and the Western blot, MAb MT1 recognized only type I isolates, whereas 
MAb MT2 recognized both type I and II isolates. Neither MAb MT1 nor MAb MT2
reacted with either reference strains of capsular serotypes A, B, E, and F or
field isolates of capsular serotype A of P. multocida. This is the first report
of MAbs identifying the serotype D-specific OMP of P. multocida.

PMCID: PMC228074
PMID: 7790467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Int J Biol Markers. 1995 Apr-Jun;10(2):94-9.

CA 549 and SP2 in postoperative breast cancer patients. Comparison with CA 15.3, 
CEA and TPA.

Torres M(1), Pacheco C, Valverde A, Rebollo AC, Moral A, Vallejo JA, Mateo A.

Author information: 
(1)Nuclear Medicine Service, Hospital Reina Sofía, Córdoba, Spain.

The levels of CA 549 and SP2 were measured in 430 subjects: 100 healthy blood
donors, 130 patients with benign diseases and 200 postoperative breast cancer
patients. In the latter group, the serum levels of CA 15.3, CEA and TPA were also
measured. The Kolmogorov-Smirnov, Mann Whitney and McNemar tests were used for
statistical analysis. The upper normal limits were established on the basis of
the values obtained in the healthy blood donors group, the benign diseases group 
and R.O.C. analysis of the breast cancer group. They were: CA 549 = 13 U/ml, SP2 
= 14 U/ml, CA 15.3 = 35 U/ml, CEA = 5 ng/ml and TPA = 110 U/ml. The sensitivity, 
specificity and accuracy in the breast cancer group were, respectively: CA 549 = 
78.1%, 97.1% and 88%; SP2 = 21.9%, 90.4% and 57.5%; CEA = 66.7%, 95.2% and 81.5%;
CA 15.3% = 80.2%, 98.1% and 89.5%, and TPA = 73.9%, 78.8% and 76.5%. Statistical 
analysis showed significant differences only between CA 15.3, the marker which
gave the best results, and SP2 (p < 0.001). There was no significant differences 
with the association of two or three tumor markers.

PMID: 7561245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Zhonghua Yu Fang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 1995 Mar;29(2):92-5.

[Preparation and identification of monoclonal antibody against sterigmatocystin].

[Article in Chinese]

Lou J(1), Guo Z, Meng Z.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Nutrition and Food Hygiene, Chinese Academy of Preventive
Medicine, Beijing.

Compound antigen, bovine serum albumin-sterigmatocystin (BSA-ST) or hemocyanin
sterigmatocystin (H-ST) was prepared by converting ST to its hemiacetal group in 
ST and taking ST conjugated to BSA or H. Balb/c mice were immunized with BSA-ST, 
and then their spleen cells were isolated and fused with SP2/0 murine myeloma
cells. A hybridoma cell strain that could stably secrete monoclonal antibody
against ST (McAb-ST) was selected, and both of their ascites and serum were rich 
in McAb-ST induced by cells of this strain. McAb-ST was identified as Ig-Gi with 
a molecular weight of 168,000 kd (53,000 for heavy chain and 31,000 for light
one), and with an affinity constant of H-ST reaction of 1.29 x 10(9) mol/L
measured by indirect competitive enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (IC-ELISA).
Relative cross reaction of McAb-ST with ST analogues was less than 2%. The
minimal 0.5 pg/25 microliters of ST can be detected with IC-ELISA using McAb-ST
and ST simultaneously, with a linear range of 0.1-10 ng/ml.

PMID: 7796690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 1995 Mar;75(3):159-60, 190-1.

[Establishment of hybridoma lines and protective study of monoclonal antibodies
against lipid A of endotoxins].

[Article in Chinese]

Fu W(1), Xiao G, Yu P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Burn Research, Southwestern Hospital, Third Military Medical
College, Chongqing.

For developing monoclonal antibodies (MAb) that bound to lipid A of the LPS
molecule, we established several hybridomas cell lines by fusion of SP2/0 and
spleen cells from BALB/c mice immunized by J5 mutant strain of E. coli 0111:B4.
Each MAb exhibited a high titer by ELISA assay. Six of MAb were of immunoglobulin
G isotype and another one immunoglobulin M. All of these MAb demonstrated
different capacity to cross-react with several gram-negative bacteria and their
endotoxins. Among them, 9G6 MAb improved the survival rate of mice significantly 
when administered 2 hours before the challenge by pseudomonas A and E. coli.
These findings suggest that MAb will probably be useful in the treatment of
sepsis caused by a wide variety of gram-negative bacteria.

PMID: 7780823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. J AOAC Int. 1995 Mar-Apr;78(2):381-5.

Production of monoclonal antibodies specific to Clostridium botulinum type B
neurotoxin.

Noah CW(1), Poteet SS, Ramos NC, Perez JC, Huang SY.

Author information: 
(1)U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Dallas, TX 75204, USA.

Four monoclonal antibodies were produced for use in a rapid method to detect
Clostridium botulinum type B neurotoxin. Cells of mouse myeloma cell line SP2/0
were fused with splenocytes of immunized BALB/c mice. An immunoblot assay of
semipurified commercial neurotoxins of C. botulinum types A, B, C, D, E, and F
was used to show specificity. All the monoclonal antibodies reacted with type B
neurotoxin but did not cross-react with the other types. The monoclonal
antibodies, separately and combined, did not neutralize the toxin in mice, and
all showed specificity to the whole neurotoxin molecule and the heavy-chain
component by immunoblot. No evidence of specific binding to the hemagglutinin
molecule was noted. When tested against concentrated cultured supernatants of C. 
botulinum types A, B, E, and F, the 4 monoclonal antibodies reacted only against 
type B strains. They will be incorporated into a rapid assay with other specific 
monoclonal antibodies to detect C. botulinum neurotoxins from pure cultures or
suspect foods.

PMID: 7756853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Hear Res. 1995 Mar;83(1-2):101-13.

Monoclonal antibody induced hearing loss.

Nair TS(1), Raphael Y, Dolan DF, Parrett TJ, Perlman LS, Brahmbhatt VR, Wang Y,
Hou X, Ganjei G, Nuttall AL, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Laboratory, Kresge Hearing Research Institute, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor 48109-0506, USA.

Monoclonal antibodies KHRI-3 and KHRI-5 identify antigens expressed on inner ear 
supporting cells and auditory hair cells respectively. To determine if these
antibodies affect inner ear function groups of syngeneic Balb/c mice were
inoculated with hybridomas KHRI-3, KHRI-5 and other Ig-secreting hybridomas.
Hybridomas UM-A9, UM-7F11, the non-secreting SP2/0 myeloma and mice with no
hybridoma were used as controls. Animals were tested for auditory brainstem
responses (ABR) for frequencies of 4, 8, 16 and 24 kHz, before the inoculation of
the hybridomas and at intervals of 6 to 10 days thereafter or daily once tumors
became palpable. In normal mice there were no changes in ABR thresholds over the 
course of the experiment. Other control animals showed little change in ABR even 
when the growth of the hybridoma or myeloma tumors were far advanced. Of the
KHRI-5 hybridoma bearing animals only one of seven animals exhibited threshold
shifts greater than 15 dB. In contrast, most mice bearing the KHRI-3 hybridoma
exhibited high frequency threshold shifts of 40-50 dB that coincided temporally
with the growth of the hybridoma, the presence of circulating KHRI-3 antibody,
and greatly increased immunoglobulin titers. Ears from KHRI-3-bearing mice that
developed high frequency hearing loss also had a novel type of lesion in the
basal turn of the cochlea that was characterized by loss of outer hair cells and 
absence of typical supporting cell scars. Such changes were not found in control 
hybridoma-bearing mice. These findings suggest that KHRI-3 antibody has an effect
on hearing that is secondary to damage to the organ of Corti and loss of outer
hair cells. Our results have important implications for antibody-mediated
mechanisms of hearing loss and provide an animal model in which to study this
phenomenon.

PMID: 7607976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Feb 28;92(5):1649-53.

Altered phenotype and function of natural killer cells expressing the major
histocompatibility complex receptor Ly-49 in mice transgenic for its ligand.

Olsson MY(1), Kärre K, Sentman CL.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Tumor Biology Center, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm,
Sweden.

The Ly-49 molecule has been shown to interact with major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) class I molecules, and the lytic function of Ly-49+ natural killer 
(NK) cells from C57BL/6 (H-2b) mice is inhibited by the recognition of H-2Dd on
tumor target cells. Introduction of a Ly-49 ligand, H-2Dd, into C57BL/6 mice did 
not alter the percentage of Ly-49+ NK cells (13-18%), but it led to three
functional effects on this subset. (i) The Ly-49 expression in the positive
population was reduced by 30-50% compared to C57BL/6 control mice. (ii) While
this Ly-49+ subset (Ly-49lo) in the transgenic mice failed to kill BALB/c
concanavalin A (Con A) blasts, which have high H-2Dd expression, it was capable
of killing SP2/0 tumor cells, which have low H-2Dd expression. Ly-49+ NK cells
(Ly-49hi) from nontransgenic mice failed to kill both of these H-2Dd-expressing
target cells. (iii) In the transgenic mice, the Ly-49+ subset acquired the
ability to kill C57BL/6 Con A blasts, in contrast to the Ly-49+ NK cells of
C57BL/6 mice. We propose a "receptor-calibration" hypothesis, where low receptor 
density on the effector cells imposed by selection or adaptation to the
environment allows higher sensitivity for detection of reduced self-MHC ligands
on potential target cells.

PMCID: PMC42577
PMID: 7878033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1995 Feb 27;108(1-2):51-65.

Multiple upstream promoter elements of the gene for the pregnancy-associated
tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase, uteroferrin bind human endometrial nuclear
proteins.

Gonzalez BY(1), Perera OP, Michel FJ, Simmen RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, University of Florida, Gainesville 32611, USA.

The endometrial expression of the gene encoding porcine uteroferrin (UF), during 
pregnancy is presumed to be mediated by cis-regulatory regions distinct from
those that confer its limited expression to other mammalian tissues and cell
types. In the present study, chimeric DNA constructs of native and progressive 5'
deleted promoter regions fused to the promoter chloramphenicol acetyl-transferase
reporter gene were transiently transfected in the human endometrial carcinoma
cell line ECC-1 to examine their ability to direct UF promoter activity. The
region between -1935 and -831 bp contained negatively acting elements which
drastically reduced basal promoter activity. In contrast, the region between -831
and -484 bp contributed significantly to high level basal activity. Gel
retardation and footprinting assays identified factor-binding sites between -1601
and -484 bp for human endometrial nuclear proteins. One binding site corresponds 
to a heptamer motif (TGCTAGA) present twice within the -1601 to -831 bp region
and previously shown to bind an 80 kDa porcine endometrial protein. This heptamer
bound an 80 kDa nuclear protein from human ECC-1 and human Ishikawa endometrial
cells and a 92 kDa protein from human placental JEG-3 cells. The other binding
region within -831 to -484 bp contained GC-rich sequences, which bind human Sp1. 
The protected GC-rich sequence (GC-Box 1) between -768 and -749 bp also binds a
24 kDa M(r) protein. Nuclear proteins of molecular weight 40-60 kDa and distinct 
from Sp1, Sp2 and Sp3 bound a second GC-rich sequence (GC-Box 3) between -628 and
-616 bp. These studies demonstrate that multiple elements within the UF gene
promoter bind nuclear proteins which are similarly expressed in other endometrial
cells and suggest that common transactivating factors may functionally mediate
expression of endometrial-associated genes.

PMID: 7758840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Biotechnol Bioeng. 1995 Feb 20;45(4):310-9.

Development of optimized transfectoma cell lines for production of chimeric
antibodies in hollow fiber cell culture systems.

Schläpfer BS(1), Scheibler M, Holtorf AP, Van Nguyen H, Pluschke G.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceuticals Research Division, K-681.5.42, Ciba-Geigy Ltd., CH-4002 Basel,
Switzerland.

Methods for the selection of transfectoma cells that express large quantities of 
mouse-human chimeric antibodies have been develped. SP2/0 mouse myeloma cells
were transfected with pSV2-gpt and pSV2-neo based immunoglobulin expression
vectors. Double transfectants were selected using the xanthine-guanine
phosphoribosyl transferase (gpt)and the neomycin (neo) selection marker genes.
ELISA-based screening of transfectoma clones resulted in the isolation of
IgG-producing transfectomas. Introduction of the kappa light-chain 3'-enhancer
into the light-chain expression vector significantly increased immunoglobulin
expression, but only when the enhancer was located at its physiological site, 9
kb downstream of the kappa constant region exon. With some of the transfectomas, 
final yields of up to 80 mg/L of chimeric IgG were obtained in conventional flask
cultures using serum-free growth medium. A pilot-scale AcuSyst Maximizer hollow
fiber cell culture system was used for the production of gram amounts of chimeric
IgG. Results obtained with different transfectoma clones in conventional culture 
were not fully predictive for yields in the hollow fiber system. In contrast,
differences in productivity between individual clones in the laboratory-scale
Tecnomouse cell culture unit were comparable with those in the Maximizer system. 
Up to 200 mg of chimeric IgG were produced per day in one Maximizer bioreactor.
(c) 1995 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

PMID: 18623184  [PubMed]


342. J Cell Physiol. 1995 Feb;162(2):191-8.

Effects of glucose supply on myeloma growth and metabolism in chemostat culture.

Meijer JJ(1), van Dijken JP.

Author information: 
(1)Kluyver Laboratory of Biotechnology, Delft University of Technology,
Department of Microbiology and Enzymology, The Netherlands.

The effects of the glucose supply on growth and metabolism of an SP2/0 derived
recombinant myeloma cell line were studied in chemostat culture during growth on 
IMDM medium at a fixed dilution rate of 0.032 h-1. Lowering of the feed medium
glucose concentration from 25.0 to 1.4 mmol/L resulted in a decrease of
steady-state viable cell concentration from 1.9 x 10(9) to 1.0 x 10(9) L-1,
whereas viability remained above 90%. Mass balances indicated that only a minor
amount of glucose was utilized via the TCA cycle irrespective of the glucose
concentration in the feed medium. The apparent biosynthetic yield of cells from
ATP was independent of the ratio between the specific glucose and glutamine
consumption rate. It is concluded that the primary role of glucose is the
provision of intermediates for anabolic reactions. In addition, glucose may play 
an indirect catabolic role in the process of glutaminolysis by providing the
pyruvate for the transamination of glutamate to alanine and alpha-ketoglutarate. 
At low glucose concentrations in the feed medium, glutamine is probably the sole 
energy source for this myeloma in chemostat culture.

PMID: 7822430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Jan 11;23(1):36-41.

Allele-specific methylation and expression of an imprinted U2af1-rs1 (SP2) gene.

Hatada I(1), Kitagawa K, Yamaoka T, Wang X, Arai Y, Hashido K, Ohishi S, Masuda
J, Ogata J, Mukai T.

Author information: 
(1)National Cardiovascular Center Research Institute, Osaka, Japan.

The mouse U2af1-rs1(SP2) gene, which was cloned by a two-dimensional genome
scanning method, is expressed exclusively from the paternally inherited
chromosome. This gene has significant similarity to U2AF and located in
chromosome 11, of which maternal duplication/paternal deficiency results in a
small body. In this report, we cloned genomic U2af1-rs1(SP2) and found its
promoter was methylated in a maternal-allele-specific manner. This allelic
methylation was not established in parental gametes, but established between 1.5 
d.p.c. and 12.5 d.p.c. on the contrary, the allele-specific expression occurred
in the two-cell stage when transcription initiates. Absence of the methylation of
the upstream region in this stage indicates that methylation is not necessary for
inactivation of the expression.

PMCID: PMC306627
PMID: 7870588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Mol Biol Rep. 1995;21(3):141-6.

Mammalian expression of single chain variable region fragments dimerized by Fc
regions.

Kato T(1), Sato K, Suzuki S, Sasakawa H, Kurokawa M, Nishioka K, Yamamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Science, St. Marianna University School of Medicine,
Japan.

To promote application of a single chain variable region fragment (sFv) in
immunoglobulins, a sFv gene was connected to an IgGi Fc gene, designated as a
sFvc gene, and used for transfection of Sp2/0. As a result, the sFvc protein was 
found to be secreted in a dimeric form. It is thus felt that the sFvc protein,
which mimicks the shape of a naturally occurring antibody, can be simple and
useful to reproduce divalency and Fc-associated effecter functions as seen in a
natural antibody.

PMID: 8832902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Zhongguo Ji Sheng Chong Xue Yu Ji Sheng Chong Bing Za Zhi. 1995;13(4):249-54.

[The sensitizing role of the anti-idiotypic monoclonal antibody-NP30 of
Schistosoma japonicum in egg granuloma formation].

[Article in Chinese]

Feng Z(1), Xue W, Li Y, Guan X, Qiu Z, Wu Y, Zhou J, Zhao W.

Author information: 
(1)Nanjing Medical University, Department of Pathology.

C57BL/6 mice sensitized intraperitoneally with the anti-idiotypic monoclonal
antibody-NP30 of Schistosoma japonicum and then injected with vital egg
suspension directly into spleen were used as the experimental models of hepatic
egg granulomas in this study. The soluble egg antigen(SEA) sensitized group was
used as positive control and the SP2/0 ascites injected group as negative
control. The results showed that the size and volume of hepatic egg granulomas in
the NP30 sensitized group increased obviously 4 days after egg injection and that
a large number of eosinophiles appeared in egg granulomas. The size and volume of
egg granulomas reached the peak values at d8 and d15 after egg injection,
respectively. The peak values of the NP30 sensitized group were similar to those 
of the SEA sensitized group (P > 0.05). The size and volume of egg granulomas in 
the SP2/0 ascites injected group did not reach the peak values, which were less
than those of the group sensitized with NP30 (size: P < 0.05; volume: P < 0.01), 
until d32 after egg injection. Our study suggests that NP30 may play a
sensitizing role in the formation of hepatic egg granulomas.

PMID: 8732075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Hum Antibodies Hybridomas. 1995;6(4):161-6.

A genetically engineered single-gene-encoded anti-TAG72 chimeric antibody
secreted from myeloma cells.

Qi Y(1), Xiang J.

Author information: 
(1)Saskatoon Cancer Center, Department of Microbiology, University of
Saskatchewan, Canada.

SP2/0Ag14 murine myeloma cells transfected with the expression vector
mpSV2neo-EP-FV-CH2-3-PA containing the single gene FV-CH2-3 secreted a
single-gene-encoded chimeric antibody molecule FV/M4. This single-chain protein
consisted of the heavy- and light-chain variable (VH and VL) domains covalently
joined through a flexible linker peptide, while the carboxyl end of VL domain was
connected to the amino terminus of hinge region of the ccM4 heavy-chain. Our data
showed that the FV/M4 retained both its immunoreactivity for tumor-associated
TAG72 antigen and its cytolytic activity to tumor cells as did the parental ccM4 
antibody. Therefore, this single-gene-construct approach circumvents
inefficiencies inherent in delivering two genes into a mammalian cell for
assembly of a functional chimeric antibody and provides an alternative for
construction of chimeric antibodies. It is particularly attractive for ex vivo
transfection of cells from patients for certain gene-therapy modalities not only 
for cancer but also for a range of diseases in which immunotherapeutic approaches
are used.

PMID: 8688499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Cancer Biother. 1995 Summer;10(2):157-76.

Inhibition of the growth of a murine and various human tumor cell lines in
culture and in mice by mixture of certain substances of the circulatory system.

Kulcsár G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, University Medical School of Pécs, Hungary.

It is well documented that despite global abnormalities of the immune system in
AIDS and other immune deficiency diseases or in immunosuppressed patients, the
incidence of only a few kinds of tumor increases, and that the degree of
immunosuppression seems not to be a critical factor in the development of even
these tumors. The fact that tumors do not develop in the majority of population
during their lifetime, despite the ineffectiveness of the known immune system
against the majority of tumors, can only be explained by hypothesizing that the
living system has an additional defense mechanism against tumors. On the bases of
literary data, it can be assumed that the effective agents of this defense
mechanism are certain substances of the circulatory system. We proved this
hypothesis by being able to select thirteen substances of the circulatory system 
from 71 compounds tested, using the synergistic tumor cell-killing effect as
criteria. The mixture containing the thirteen substances (L-tryptophan,
L-tyrosine, L-methionine, L(-)-malate, L-ascorbate, L-arginine, L-phenylalanine, 
L-histidine, 2-deoxy-D-ribose, d-biotin, pyridoxine, adenine and riboflavin) had 
a cytotoxic effect against Sp2/0-Ag14 mouse and K562, HEp-2, HeLa and Caco-2
human tumor cell lines in well-controlled conditions, but it was not cytotoxic
against Vero normal cell line. The mixture of the above substances increased
significantly the survival time of mice (T/C% 148.1) injected i.p. with
Sp2/0-Ag14 mouse myeloma cells by killing more than 2 logs (99%) of the cells.
Approximately the same 2 logs cell kill was found counting the Sp2/0-Ag14 cells
in the ascitic fluid of control and treated animals after finishing treatment.
The above mixture slowed down the growth of HeLa solid tumor significantly (T/C%,
the least value 35.7). The weight loss of control and treated group during
treatment did not differ significantly.

PMID: 7663576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Arch Virol. 1995;140(1):127-43.

Japanese encephalitis virus infection of mouse cell lines: ability to prime mice 
for generation of virus specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes and differences in CTL
recognisable viral determinants.

Murali-Krishna K(1), Ravi V, Manjunath R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, India.

Ten different mouse cell lines were examined for Japanese encephalitis virus
(JEV) infection in vitro and then tested for their ability to generate virus
specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL). Among all cell lines examined, Neuro 2a
(a neuroblastoma) was readily infected with JEV as examined by immunofluorescence
and viral replication. Among other cells, P388D1, RAW 264.7 (Macrophage origin), 
Sp2/0 (B-cell Hybridoma), YAC-1 (T-cell lymphoma), and L929 (Fibroblast) were
semipermissive to JEV infection. The cytopathic effects caused by progressive JEV
infection varied from cell line to cell line. In the case of YAC-1 cells
long-term viral antigen expression was observed without significant alterations
in cell viability. Intermediate degrees of cytopathicity are seen in RAW 264.7
and L929 cells while infection of PS, Neuro 2a, P388D1 and Sp2/0 caused major
viability losses. All infected cell lines were able to prime adult BALB/c (H-2d) 
mice for the generation of secondary JEV specific CTL. In contrast to YAC-1, the 
permissive neuroblastoma cell line Neuro 2a (H-2KkDd) was found to be least
efficient in its ability to stimulate anti-viral CTL generation. Cold target
competition studies demonstrated that both Neuro 2a and YAC-1 (H-2KkDd) cells
expressed similar viral determinants that are recognised by CTL, suggesting that 
the reason for the lower ability of Neuro 2a to stimulate anti-viral CTL was not 
due to lack of viral CTL determinants. These findings demonstrate that a variety 
of mouse cell lines can be infected with Japanese encephalitis virus, and that
these infected cells could be utilised to generate virus specific CTL in BALB/c
mice.

PMID: 7646337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Tsitologiia. 1995;37(1-2):118-25.

[The kinetics of rhodamine 123 efflux from cells with multiple drug resistance
under the action of energy metabolism inhibitors].

[Article in Russian]

Gamalei IA, Berezkina EV, Kovaleva ZV, Ignatova TN.

A study was made of the effects of inhibitors of ATP synthesis on the process of 
rhodamine 123 (R-123) release from sensitive sp2/0-Ag14 cells,
multidrug-resistant mouse myeloma spEBR-5 cells and hybridoma IF7, derived from
spEBR-5 cells. It has been shown that IF7 cells are cross-resistant to ethidium
bromide, colchicine, actinomycin D and adriamycin. However, hybridoma IF7 cells, 
compared to parental spEBR-5 cells, show a lower resistance index. When studying 
the dependence of the R-123 efflux rate on glycolysis intensity (effect of 2 mM
2-deoxyglucose) and on the level of oxidative phosphorylation activity (effect of
2 mM KCN and 30 microM dinitrophenol), the following distinctive properties of
the R-123 transport system of IF7 cells (compared to spEBR-5 cells) were
detected: 1) uptake of R-123 into IF7 cells is similar to that observed for the
sensitive sp2/0-Ag14 cells; 2) efflux of R-123 from IF7 cells takes place more
intensely; 3) R-123 transport is dependent on the rate of glycolysis and may be
inhibited by KCN. It is found that 2,4-dinitrophenol inhibits the R-123 efflux
from all the cells. Verapamil reverses the multidrug resistance both in spEBR-5
and IF7 cells. The mechanisms of multidrug resistance of cells are discussed.

PMID: 7571015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Tumori. 1994 Dec 31;80(6):473-9.

Cloning and expression of functional cDNA genes of a mouse/human chimeric
antibody rcM4.

Boyd M(1), Xiang J.

Author information: 
(1)Saskatoon Cancer Center, Department of Microbiology, University of
Saskatchewan, Canada.

AIM: The purpose of this study was to clone and express cDNA genes of heavy and
light chains of the mouse/human chimeric antibody rcM4, which recognize the
sialosyl-Tn epitope of the TAG72 antigen.
METHODS: The cDNA genes of chimeric heavy-chain M4H2 and light-chain M4K4 were
cloned from the cDNA library of the ccM4 transfectoma. The M4H2 and M4K4 genes
were modified in polymerase chain reaction and ligated into mpSV2neo-EP-PA and
mpSVgpt-EP-PA to form the heavy- and the light-chain expression vectors
mpSV2neo-EP-M4H2-PA and mpSV2gpt-EP-M4K4-PA, respectively. These two expression
vectors were then co-transfected into the myeloma cell line SP2/0Ag14.
Transfectants were selected in media containing G418 and mycophenolic acid. The
rcM4 antibody was purified from transfectant culture supernates by protein A
affinity chromatography.
RESULTS: The yield of the recombinant chimeric antibody rcM4 from its culture
supernates was 6 micrograms/ml. We demonstrated that the rcM4 antibody retained
its binding reactivity for sialosyl-Tn and that it was able to mediate effective 
antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity to the human ovarian cancer cell line
OVCAR 3 in a manner comparable to the original ccM4 antibody.
CONCLUSION: The cDNA genes of chimeric heavy-chains (M4H2) and light-chains
(M4K4) could be functionally expressed in the SP2/0Ag14 myeloma cell line. They
thus have potential utility in the construction of some novel hybrid proteins
such as those containing both antitumor immunoglobulins and cytokine molecules
for use in cancer immunotherapy.

PMID: 7900239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. J Immunol Methods. 1994 Dec 28;177(1-2):225-34.

Characterisation of monoclonal antibodies against human interleukin-10 and their 
use in an ELISA for the measurement of this cytokine.

De Groote D(1), Marchant A, Fauchet F, Jadoul M, Dehart I, Gérard C, Gevaert Y,
Lopez M, Gathy R, Franssen JD, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, University of Liège, Belgium.

Biological and biochemical characteristics of monoclonal antibodies (MABs) raised
against human interleukin-10 (IL-10) are described as well as their use in the
design of a specific ELISA for the measurement of the cytokine. 21 murine
anti-human interleukin-10 (IL-10) MABs were obtained by fusion of splenocytes
from mice immunized against human recombinant IL-10 with SP2/0 myelomatous cells.
These antibodies define three major antigenic areas on the IL-10 molecule, one of
which comprises epitopes involved in receptor binding and induction of biological
activity. They recognize recombinant human IL-10 with affinities ranging from 1.3
x 10(-7) to 3 x 10(-11), as well as natural IL-10. Most of them also recognize
viral IL-10 (vIL-10) encoded by the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). A specific
human-IL-10 ELISA has been developed using two MABs (18 and 19) as capture
antibody and one MAB (17) as detector. The sensitivity (3 pg/ml), precision
(intra-assays < 4%), reproducibility (interassay < 3%), and accuracy (recoveries,
ranging between 84 and 107%, in several fluids) of the assay, plus its excellent 
performance in dilution tests, and the lack of interference when in the presence 
of possible cross-reactive substances, permits accurate cytokine measurement in
biological fluids such as serum, plasma, bronchoalveolar lavage, urine and
culture supernatants. Using the assay, IL-10 was measurable in the plasma of
patients with septic shock (range 11-2740 pg/ml) whereas IL-10 plasma levels were
< 7.8 pg/ml in healthy volunteers.

PMID: 7822830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Dec 11;22(24):5433-8.

Elimination of endogenous aberrant kappa chain transcripts from sp2/0-derived
hybridoma cells by specific ribozyme cleavage: utility in genetic therapy of
HIV-1 infections.

Duan L(1), Pomerantz RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Dorrance H. Hamilton Laboratories, Department of Medicine, Jefferson Medical
College, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107.

The pooled degenerate-primer polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technology is now
widely used in the amplification and cloning of murine hybridoma-specific
immunoglobulin gene cDNAs. The design of primers is mainly based on the highly
conserved 5' terminus of immunoglobulin gene variable regions and the constant
region in the 3' terminus. Of note, most murine hybridoma cell lines are derived 
from the Sp2/0 cell line, which is demonstrated to express endogenous aberrant
kappa chains (abV kappa). This high-level endogenous abV kappa mixes with
specific kappa chains in the hybridomas and interferes with the efficiency of the
reverse transcriptase (RT)-PCR cloning strategy. In this report, during the
cloning of murine anti-human immunodeficiency virus type I (HIV-1) hybridoma
immunoglobulin cDNAs, a specific primer-PCR screening system was developed, based
on the abV kappa complementarity-defining region (CDR), to eliminate abV
kappa-carrying plasmids. Furthermore, an abV kappa sequence-specific derived
ribozyme was developed and packaged in a retroviral expression vector system.
This abV kappa ribozyme can be transduced into different murine hybridomas, and
expressed intracellularly to potently eliminate endogenous abV kappa RNA.

PMCID: PMC332093
PMID: 7816635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Mol Immunol. 1994 Dec;31(17):1313-9.

Dimeric recombinant IgA directed against carcino-embryonic antigen, a novel tool 
for carcinoma localization.

Terskikh A(1), Couty S, Pèlegrin A, Hardman N, Hunziker W, Mach JP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, University of Lausanne, CH-1066 Epalinges,
Switzerland.

Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) has been shown to be one of the best markers for
in vivo tumor targeting of radiolabeled antibodies, despite the fact that it is
localized predominantly at the apical side of human colon carcinoma cells within 
the fairly closed pseudolumen structures formed by these tumors. Due to this
particular histological localization, a large proportion of the CEA molecules may
remain inaccessible to the intravenously injected radiolabeled anti-CEA
antibodies of IgG isotype, which are widely used in the clinic. In order to
improve targeting, we made a recombinant dimeric IgA, which should have the
capacity to translocate from the basolateral to the apical side of the
pseudolumen formed by colon carcinoma cells after binding to the polyIg receptor 
(pIgR). A genomic chimeric mouse-human IgA2 construct was made using one of our
most specific anti-CEA hybridomas, CE-25. The chimeric IgA (chIgA) was expressed 
in the Sp2/0 myeloma cell line. The secreted recombinant antibody was found to
consist mostly of a dimeric form of IgA with a molecular weight of about 350 kDa.
The dimeric chIgA was shown to translocate efficiently in vitro across a
monolayer of epithelial cells expressing the pIgR and to retain full CEA binding 
activity.

PMID: 7997243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Infect Immun. 1994 Dec;62(12):5470-6.

Immunological characteristics of a synthetic peptide associated with a catalytic 
domain of mutans streptococcal glucosyltransferase.

Smith DJ(1), Taubman MA, King WF, Eida S, Powell JR, Eastcott J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Forsyth Dental Center, Boston, Massachusetts 02115.

The immunogenicity of a multiple antigenic peptide construct consisting of four
copies of the synthetic 21-mer peptide DANFDSIRVDAVDNVDADLLQ was measured. The
composition of this peptide was derived from a sequence in the N-terminal region 
of mutans streptococcal glucosyltransferases (GTFs) containing an aspartic acid
implicated in catalysis. The peptide (CAT) construct was synthesized as a
tetramer on a lysine backbone and subcutaneously injected into Sprague-Dawley
rats for polyclonal antibody formation or intraperitoneally injected into BALB/c 
mice, and then spleen cell fused with Sp2/0Ag14 murine myeloma cells for
monoclonal antibody formation. The resulting rat antisera and mouse monoclonal
antibodies reacted with CAT and with native GTF isozymes from Streptococcus
sobrinus and Streptococcus mutans (in enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and
Western blot [immunoblot] analyses). Functional inhibition of the water-insoluble
glucan synthetic activity of S. sobrinus GTF-I was demonstrated with an
immunoglobulin M anti-CAT monoclonal antibody (> 80% inhibited) and with rat sera
(approximately 17% inhibited). The monoclonal antibody preparation also modestly 
inhibited the water-soluble glucan synthetic activity of an S. mutans GTF
mixture. These results suggest that the CAT peptide contains B-cell epitopes that
are similar to those of intact mutans streptococcal GTFs and has the potential to
elicit antibody that can inhibit GTF function. Thus, sequences within this
peptide construct may have value for inclusion in a synthetic dental caries
vaccine.

PMCID: PMC303290
PMID: 7960128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Cancer Res. 1994 Dec 1;54(23):6160-6.

Chimeric (mouse/human) anti-colon cancer antibody c30.6 inhibits the growth of
human colorectal cancer xenografts in scid/scid mice.

Mount PF(1), Sutton VR, Li W, Burgess J, McKEnzie IF, Pietersz GA, Trapani JA.

Author information: 
(1)Austin Research Institute, Austin Hospital, Heidelberg, Australia.

The mouse monoclonal antibody, m30.6 (IgG2b), detects an antigenic determinant
expressed predominantly on the surface of colorectal adenocarcinoma cells and has
been shown previously to be a potentially useful therapeutic and diagnostic
reagent for human colon cancer. We report the production and characterization of 
a mouse/human chimeric antibody, c30.6, with potent in vitro and in vivo
antitumor activity. The genes encoding the variable domains for heavy and light
chains were amplified by thermal cycling using degenerate oligonucleotide primers
complementary to conserved immunoglobulin framework sequences. The gene segments 
were sequenced, subcloned into eukaryotic expression vectors containing human
constant region genes (IgG1 and kappa), and cotransfected into nonsecreting Sp2/0
mouse myeloma cells. There were significant differences in the biological
activities of the murine and chimeric antibodies. The i.p. administration of
c30.6 but not of m30.6 produced a marked growth inhibition of s.c. 30.6+ COLO 205
tumors in scid/scid mice (approximately 40% reduction in tumor size, measured 21 
days after tumor inoculation). Reduced tumor growth was not due to altered
binding characteristics of c30.6 because: (a) the chimeric antibody was shown by 
flow cytometry to bind exclusively to cell lines that expressed the 30.6
determinant; (b) c30.6 was able to completely inhibit the binding of m30.6 on
30.6+ cells; and (c) the affinity of binding of the two antibodies was the same
(Ka, approximately 1.50 x 10(8)). Up to 15% of the total injected antibody dose/g
tissue was localized in 30.6+ tumors at 24 h, approximately 13% was present in
the tumors at 48 h, and approximately 10% was present at 72 h. Furthermore, c30.6
demonstrated a shorter circulating half-life (53 h; m30.6, 72 h) when given i.p. 
to C57BL6 x BALB/cF1 mice. Unlike m30.6, c30.6 was also strongly active in
antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity against a range of 30.6+ tumor
target cells in vitro. Up to 80% specific 51Cr release was achieved using either 
freshly isolated human peripheral blood mononuclear cells or 2-day-old
interleukin 2-stimulated human peripheral blood mononuclear cells as effectors.
The enhanced antitumor activity of c30.6 suggests that it might be a useful
immunotherapeutic reagent for colorectal carcinoma.

PMID: 7954462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Hua Xi Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 1994 Dec;25(4):380-3.

[Development of a monoclonal antibody (AF9) to human breast carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Zeng W, Cai G, Cai M, Chen P, Wang C, Wei D, Chen G.

A monoclonal antibody AF9 (IgG1) was raised against human breast carcinoma by
fusing murine myeloma SP2/0 cells with spleen cells from BALB/c mice immunized
with cell membrane extracts from primary breast carcinoma. Immunohistochemical
staining using the antibody showed reactivity in 19 out of 20 breast carcinoma
tissues and in some nonbreast carcinomas such as hepatic, ovarian, lung, colon,
and gastric carcinoma tissues. But no staining was observed in either normal
tissues or other carcinomas. By immunological treatment, the antigen recognized
by AF9 was referred to be glycoprotein with lipid component, and Western blotting
revealed that its molecular weight is 51, 56, 67 and 73kd.

PMID: 7744377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Hybridoma. 1994 Dec;13(6):469-76.

Chimerization of LL2, a rapidly internalizing antibody specific for B cell
lymphoma.

Leung SO(1), Shevitz J, Pellegrini MC, Dion AS, Shih LB, Goldenberg DM, Hansen
HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Immunomedics, Inc., Morris Plains, New Jersey 07950, USA.

LL2 is a murine monoclonal antibody (MAb) that has been shown to be effective for
the diagnosis and treatment of patients with non-Hodgkin's B cell lymphoma.
Studies have also shown that radiolabeled murine LL2 (mLL2) or mLL2 and fragments
thereof coupled to Pseudomonas exotoxin (PE) can effectively target human B cell 
lymphoma in mice. We have obtained the DNA sequences encoding the VK and VH
domains of mLL2, an IgG2a MAb, which were combined with their respective human
kappa and IgG1 constant region domains and expressed in SP2/0 cells. Like its
murine counterpart, the chimeric LL2 (cLL2) antibody is glycosylated in the light
chain variable region. Chimerization did not interfere with the immunoreactivity 
of the antibody, as determined by a competitive binding assay, where either
antibody shows equivalent inhibition of the binding of its counterpart to the
Raji cell membrane surface antigen, CD22. Both antibodies bind and are rapidly
internalized by Raji cells, whereas an irrelevant humanized antibody did not bind
and was not internalized under similar conditions. The internalization rates of
the bound murine or chimeric antibodies were nearly identical, with Ke values of 
0.106 and 0.118 min-1 for mLL2 and cLL2, respectively. The observed close
equivalence between the murine and chimeric antibodies suggests potential
advantages of the latter as a less immunogenic agent. Studies are currently
underway to evaluate the chimeric antibody as a potential therapeutic
immunoconjugate.

PMID: 7737671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Biochemistry. 1994 Nov 8;33(44):13049-56.

Kinetic and equilibrium alpha-secondary tritium isotope effects on reactions
catalyzed by dCMP hydroxymethylase from bacteriophage T4.

Graves KL(1), Hardy LW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Massachusetts Medical Center,
Worcester 01655.

Deoxycytidylate (dCMP) hydroxymethylase (CH) catalyzes the formation of
5-(hydroxymethyl)-dCMP, essential for DNA synthesis in phage T4, from dCMP and
methylenetetrahydrofolate (CH2THF). The nucleotide analog 5-fluorodeoxuridylate
(FdUMP) stoichiometrically inactivates CH by formation of a covalent complex
containing enzyme, FdUMP, and CH2THF. Similar FdUMP complexes are formed by dTMP 
synthase and dUMP hydroxymethylase, enzymes which are homologous to CH. Both the 
association and the dissociation rate of the FdUMP complex are shown to be
increased by the mutation of active site Asp179 to Asn. The mutated enzyme,
CH(D179N), has an altered substrate preference, favoring dUMP rather than dCMP
[Graves, K. L., et al. (1992) Biochemistry 31, 10315]. A value of 0.8 was
determined for the alpha-secondary tritium equilibrium isotope effect on the
binding of [6-3H]FdUMP to wild-type CH and to CH(D179N), using a mixture of
2-14C- and 6-3H-labeled FdUMP. These effects, similar to that found for TS,
indicate that C6 of the nucleotide is saturated (i.e., sp3 hybridized) in the
covalent complex of CH, FDUMP, and CH2THF. This strongly suggests that catalysis 
by CH proceeds via sequential sp2-->sp3-->sp2 hybridization changes at C6 of
substrate nucleotides, and it is consistent with a transient covalent linkage of 
C6 to the thiol of an essential CH residue, Cys148. The values of the
alpha-secondary 3H kinetic isotope effect (KIE) on kcat/KM for CH-catalyzed
formation of Hm5dCMP caused by 6-3H-substitution of dCMP, with both wild-type CH 
and CH(D179N), were very close to 1.0. However, the KIE for CH-(D179N) with dUMP 
was 0.82.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7947710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Biotechnol Bioeng. 1994 Nov 5;44(9):1140-54.

Induction of apoptosis in nutrient-deprived cultures of hybridoma and myeloma
cells.

Mercille S(1), Massie B.

Author information: 
(1)Biomira Inc, 3100 Avenue Royalmount, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

In the present study, cell death was investigated in cultures of NS/0 myelomas
and SP2/0-derived D5 hybridomas through morphological examination of cells
stained with acridine orange and ethidium bromide. The relative contribution of
elevated levels of lactic acid and ammonia, as well as deprivation of glutamine, 
cystine, and glucose on the induction of necrosis or apoptosis, was investigated.
In batch culture of D5 hybridoma cells, induction of apoptotic cell death
correlated with the exhaustion of glutamine, while in the case of NS/0 myelomas, 
it coincided with exhaustion of cystine. To determine whether limiting nutrients 
were the actual triggering factors for apoptosis in batch culture, exponentially 
growing cells were resuspended in glutamine or cystine-free media. Within 30 to
40 h, viability decreased to 50% and the nonviable cell population displayed
typical apoptotic morphology, with crescents of condensed chromatin around the
periphery of the nucleus, or with the entire nucleus present as one or a group of
featureless, brightly staining spherical beads. Similarly, D5 hybridomas and NS/0
myelomas cultivated in glucose-free medium died mainly from apoptosis. Cells were
also cultivated in fresh medium supplemented with elevated concentrations of
ammonia (3.0 mM) and/or lactate (35 mM, 50 mM). This resulted in decreased
viabilities and necrotic death in both cell lines. From these results, we
conclude that D5 hybridomas and NS/0 myelomas deprived of essential nutrients die
by apoptosis, whereas incubation in the presence of elevated levels of metabolic 
byproducts such as ammonia and lactate will induce necrotic cell death in these
cells.

PMID: 18623032  [PubMed]


360. Mol Immunol. 1994 Nov;31(16):1219-31.

The amino acid composition of 350 lymphocyte proteins.

Frey JR(1), Kuhn L, Kettman JR, Lefkovits I.

Author information: 
(1)Basel Institute for Immunology, Switzerland.

We determined the amino acid composition of proteins of Sp2 hybridoma cells by a 
procedure which assembles the information on the polypeptides upon
two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, such that biosynthetic labeling with 20
different 3H amino acids provides the data--spot intensities--on the relative
representation of the detected polypeptides. The gels were impregnated with
2,5-diphenyloxazol (PPO) and suitably exposed radiofluorographs were selected for
analysis. The images originating from the 12 cultures labeled with amino acids R,
A, H, I, L, K, M, F, P, S, T and Y were analysed with the Kepler image analysis
system. The spot volume data of the 12 analysed patterns were corrected for the
unequal labeling efficiencies of the 3H amino acids and for the various exposure 
times. This correction is performed by applying calibration factors based on the 
amino acid determination of a hydrolysate of the analysed cells. After the
calibration step was applied to the data files we used the amino acid
compositions of nine proteins taken from a database to establish for each of
these proteins the correlation coefficients with the image analysis derived amino
acid compositions of all spots. The correlation coefficients allow us to
tentatively identify polypeptide spots on two-dimensional gels, while the amino
acid composition of 350 investigated two-dimensional gel spots is usable as an
identification tag in the gene retrieval from our cDNA libraries.

PMID: 7969183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Eur J Immunol. 1994 Nov;24(11):2682-90.

An immortalized cell line with features of human follicular dendritic cells.
Antigen and cytokine expression analysis.

Orscheschek K(1), Merz H, Schlegelberger B, Feller AC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Lübeck, FRG.

Follicular dendritic cells (FDC) are specialized cells residing primarily within 
lymphoid follicles. They bind immunocomplexes and play an important role in the
presentation of antigen to follicular B cells. Isolation of FDC for in vitro
studies, however, is difficult because they constitute only about 1% of the cells
in lymphoid tissue and form tight clusters entrapping lymphocytes within their
dendritic processes. The monoclonal antibody (mAb) Ki-M4, which is highly
restricted in its binding to FDC, is used to identify these cells. In order to
establish a new immortalized cell line with features of FDC, we applied a
modified procedure to isolate and enrich FDC from human tonsils and fused them
with the myeloma cell line SP2/0-Ag14. The new hybrid cell line, designated
FDC-H1, is of both mouse lymphoid and human FDC origin. FDC-H1 was found to have 
unlimited growth potential and to consistently express the Ki-M4 antigen and
other surface antigens of human FDC. Semiquantitative reverse-transcribed
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) of enriched FDC and FDC-H1 revealed the same
highly restricted cytokine/mRNA profile for both, with detectable levels of
interleukin (IL)-1 alpha and surface CD23 and a lack of mRNA for IL-1 beta, IL-2,
IL-3, IL-4, IL-7, IL-9, IL-10, interferon-gamma, tumor necrosis factor-alpha,
transforming growth factor-beta and granulocyte/macrophage-colony-stimulating
factor. Additionally a weak but constant IL-6 mRNA expression was found in the
cell line FDC-H1 by RT-PCR. In situ hybridization experiments in tonsils revealed
IL-6 transcripts in cells with a staining pattern characteristic of a dendritic
cell only in a few germinal centers. To our knowledge, FDC-H1 is the first cell
line that constantly expresses surface antigens and a cytokine profile
characteristic of FDC. It is, therefore, well suited for studying the biology of 
FDC and the functional relationship between FDC and normal or neoplastic
lymphatic cells.

PMID: 7957561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Biomed Mater Res. 1994 Nov;28(11):1289-94.

Inhibition of Staphylococcus adherence to biomaterials by extracellular slime of 
S. epidermidis RP12.

Giridhar G(1), Kreger AS, Myrvik QN, Gristina AG.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Sciences Research Institute, Herndon, Virginia 22070.

Adherence of selected strains of coagulase-negative staphylococci to various
biomaterials, and the inhibition of their adherence by extracellular slime
obtained from the RP12 strain of Staphylococcus epidermidis were studied in
vitro. S. epidermidis RP12 adhered considerably more to polymethylmethacrylate
(PMMA) discs than did the SP2 strain of S. hominis and the SE-360 strain of S.
hyicus. Strain RP12 was less adherent to titanium alloy, ultrahigh molecular
weight polyethylene (UHMWPE), and Teflon discs than to PMMA discs. Exposure of
PMMA discs to extracellular slime extracted from strain RP12 greatly reduced
adherence of strain RP12, SP2, SE-360, and S. epidermidis RP-62A. The active
component(s) was present in the > 10 kD mol wt fraction obtained by Amicon YM10
ultrafiltration of crude slime; heat treatment of the fraction did not affect its
inhibitory activity. When the bacteria and RP12 slime fractions were added
simultaneously to the PMMA discs, the > 10 kD mol wt fraction of slime
competitively inhibited adherence of strain RP12 to PMMA discs; in contrast, the 
< 10 kD mol wt fraction enhanced adherence of strain RP12 to PMMA discs.

PMID: 7829558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. J Med Chem. 1994 Oct 14;37(21):3492-502.

Synthesis and structure-activity relationships of peptidyl alpha-keto
heterocycles as novel inhibitors of prolyl endopeptidase.

Tsutsumi S(1), Okonogi T, Shibahara S, Ohuchi S, Hatsushiba E, Patchett AA,
Christensen BG.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Research Laboratory, Meiji Seika Kaisha, Ltd, Yokohama, Japan.

The preparation and in vitro prolyl endopeptidase (PEP) inhibitory activity of a 
series of alpha-keto heterocyclic compounds is described. The design is based on 
the introduction of alpha-keto heterocycles at the C-terminal end of
substrate-like peptides. Many of the compounds including those substituted with
thiazole, benzothiazole, benzoxazole, imidazole, and pyridine groups exhibit IC50
potencies of PEP inhibition at nanomolar levels. Structure-activity studies of
the C-terminal heterocyclic groups indicate the importance of an sp2 nitrogen
atom at a beta-position from the adjoining ketone carbonyl group. This
heterocyclic nitrogen atom would provide a critical hydrogen-bond interaction
with the histidine residue of the catalytic triad in PEP. Our inhibitors would
extend the generality of the alpha-keto heterocycle design to another serine
protease.

PMID: 7932578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Phys Rev B Condens Matter. 1994 Oct 1;50(14):10311-10314.

High-pressure transformations of C60 to diamond and sp3 phases at room
temperature and to sp2 phases at high temperature.

Hodeau JL, Tonnerre JM, Bouchet-Fabre B, Núñez Regueiro M, Capponi JJ, Perroux M.

PMID: 9975115  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


365. Biochem Mol Biol Int. 1994 Oct;34(3):587-94.

Monoclonal antibodies against the Fc fragment of IgA alpha-chain: preparation and
clinical application.

Yan PH(1), Ahmad S, He Q.

Author information: 
(1)Zhong Shan Hospital, Shanghai, P.R. China.

Fragments of the heavy alpha-chain of IgA (IgA Fc alpha) were prepared and
purified from the serum of patients with heavy chain disease. It was used to
immunize BALB/c mice. The immunized mouse spleen cells were then fused with
myeloma cells Sp2/O. Through successive recloning of the hybridoma cell lines by 
the limiting dilution method, four subclonal hybridoma cells (D2, E4, F5 and G10)
capable of screening IgA Fc alpha were found. Intraperitoneal transplantation of 
these cells induced ascites in the BALB/c mice, from which four types of
monoclonal antibodies (McAb-IgA Fc alpha) were obtained. The highest McAb titer
was as high as 1:16348 by the hemagglutination inhibition (HAI) test. These
McAb's reacted specifically with IgA Fc alpha, but not with IgG, IgM, IgD, kappa 
or lambda. Serum samples from 92 normal subjects and 73 patients with various
diseases were tested for Ig genetic markers by means of HAI. The family trees of 
three positive cases were surveyed. Results showed that the McAb-IgA Fc alpha may
be used to determine the genetic marker of IgA allotypes.

PMID: 7833836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Membr Biol. 1994 Oct;142(1):77-92.

DNA, protein, and plasma-membrane incorporation by arrested mammalian cells.

Sukhorukov VL(1), Djuzenova CS, Arnold WM, Zimmermann U.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl für Biotechnologie, Universität Würzburg, Germany.

Incorporation of DNA, protein, and plasma membrane during blockage by aphidicolin
or by doxorubicin was studied by flow cytometry and electrorotation of three cell
lines (mouse-myeloma Sp2/0-Ag14, hybridoma H73C11, and fibroblast-like L929
cells). Drug-mediated arrest at the G1-S boundary (aphidicolin) or in G2/M
(doxorubicin) did not arrest synthesis of either protein or total membrane area, 
the increases in which outstripped growth in cell volume and apparent cell area, 
respectively. Measurements of membrane capacity in normal and hypo-osmotic media 
showed that the drugs had not changed the fundamental bilayer, but that an
increase in the number or size of microvilli must have occurred.
Aphidicolin-arrested cells withstood hypo-osmotic stress better than untreated
cells could, indicating that the membrane excess can be utilized as a reserve
during rapid cell expansion. Hypo-osmotically treated cell populations exhibited 
only about half the coefficient of variance (CV) in membrane properties of cells 
at physiological osmolality. Populations of arrested cells exhibited the same
high CV as asynchronous cells, indicating that chemical arrest does not give
uniformly villated cell populations. However, the lowest CV values were given by 
some synchronized (aphidicolin-blocked, then released) populations. Removal of
aphidicolin allowed most cells to progress through S and G2, and then divide.
During these processes, the membrane excess was reduced. After removal of
doxorubicin, the cells did not divide: some continued protein synthesis, grew
abnormally large, and further increased their membrane excess. Membrane breakdown
by electric pulsing (3 x 5kV/cm, 40 microseconds decay time) of
aphidicolin-synchronized L cells in G2/M led to a 22% loss of plasma membrane
(both the area-specific and the whole-cell capacitance were reduced), presumably 
via endocytosis-like vesiculation.

PMID: 7707355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. J Biol Chem. 1994 Sep 16;269(37):23280-5.

Inhibition of Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD)-mediated cell adhesion to osteopontin by a
monoclonal antibody against osteopontin.

Bautista DS(1), Xuan JW, Hota C, Chambers AF, Harris JF.

Author information: 
(1)London Regional Cancer Center, Ontario, Canada.

Osteopontin (OPN), a secreted phosphoprotein, has been implicated in various
biological phenomena (e.g. bone development, sepsis, tumor progression, and
metastasis). Its role in any context is poorly understood. OPN contains a
conserved Gly-Arg-Gly-Asp-Ser (GRGDS) sequence, and binds to cells via
integrin-mediated mechanisms. Using recombinant human osteopontin-glutathione
S-transferase fusion protein and our improved hybridoma fusion partner
(Sp2/mIL6), we raised murine monoclonal antibodies against osteopontin. We
characterized two antibodies that recognize not only recombinant but also native 
human osteopontin. These antibodies do not cross-react with mouse osteopontin
(recombinant protein or that secreted by ras-transformed NIH 3T3 cells), or
bovine bone osteopontin, suggesting that they recognize epitopes unique to human 
OPN. One antibody specifically inhibited adhesion of MDA-MB-435 human breast
cancer cells and ras-transformed NIH 3T3 cells to human osteopontin. This
antibody failed to recognize osteopontin cleaved by thrombin, which cleaves
adjacent to the cell binding domain. We previously showed that thrombin cleavage 
reduces osteopontin cell binding activity. Thus we postulate that this monoclonal
antibody recognizes and interferes with the function of the RGD/thrombin cleavage
region of human OPN.

PMID: 8083234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Eur J Immunol. 1994 Sep;24(9):2073-80.

Human granzyme B is essential for DNA fragmentation of susceptible target cells.

Su B(1), Bochan MR, Hanna WL, Froelich CJ, Brahmi Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis.

We have partially characterized the granules of the human NK cell line, YT-INDY, 
and assessed granule-mediated lysis and DNA fragmentation of assorted targets.
Biochemical studies demonstrated significant quantities of granzyme B (asp-ase)
and a heretofore undescribed chymase but no tryptase (i.e., granzyme A or 3) or
distinct met-ase. YT-INDY expressed mRNA for granzyme B, perforin and CCPX. The
existence of perforin was confirmed by immunoblot. The granules lysed both human 
and murine NK-sensitive and NK-resistant targets. YT-INDY and NK3.3, two human
cytotoxic cells, were also lysed. EGTA reduced lysis by only 50%, suggesting that
a perforin-independent lytic pathway is associated with the granules. In
addition, 4-(2-aminoethyl) benzenesulfonylfluoride hydrochloride (AEBSF), an
inhibitor that selectively blocked the chymase and 3,4-dichloroisocoumarin (DCI),
an inhibitor that inactivated both chymase and asp-ase activities, marginally
affected lysis. By gel electrophoresis and 125I-labeled deoxyuridine release
assay, only murine cells (SP2/0 and YAC-1) underwent DNA fragmentation, and
cleavage was completely inhibited by DCI, whereas EGTA, AEBSF and
aurintricarboxylic acid (ATA) had no effect. The results, therefore, underscore
the central role of granzyme B in granule-mediated DNA fragmentation, emphasize
that the protease acts via an ATA-resistant endonuclease pathway and stress that 
nucleolysis does not invariably accompany granule-mediated cytolysis. Finally,
ATA inhibited the asp-ase activity of isolated but not granule-associated
granzyme B. ATA, therefore, is not a specific endonuclease inhibitor and results 
obtained with ATA should be viewed cautiously.

PMID: 8088328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Biotechnology (N Y). 1994 Sep;12(9):890-7.

Mammalian cell expression of single-chain Fv (sFv) antibody proteins and their
C-terminal fusions with interleukin-2 and other effector domains.

Dorai H(1), McCartney JE, Hudziak RM, Tai MS, Laminet AA, Houston LL, Huston JS, 
Oppermann H.

Author information: 
(1)Creative BioMolecules, Inc., Hopkinton, MA 01748.

The production of several single-chain Fv (sFv) antibody proteins was examined by
three modes of mammalian cell expression. Our primary model was the 741F8
anti-c-erbB-2 sFv, assembled as either the VH-VL or VL-VH, and expressed alone,
with C-terminal cysteine for dimerization, or as fusion proteins with
carboxyl-terminal effector domains, including interleukin-2, the B domain of
staphylococcal protein A, the S-peptide of ribonuclease S, or hexa-histidine
metal chelate peptide. Constructs were expressed and secreted transiently in 293 
cells and stably in CHO or Sp2/0 cell lines, the latter yielding up to 10 mg per 
liter. Single-chain constructs of MOPC 315 myeloma and 26-10 monoclonal
antibodies were also expressed, as were hybrids comprising unrelated VH and VL
regions. Our results suggest that mammalian expression is a practical and
valuable complement to the bacterial expression of single-chain antibodies.

PMID: 7765352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Cancer Res. 1994 Aug 15;54(16):4362-70.

Radioimmunotherapy of nude mice bearing a human interleukin 2 receptor
alpha-expressing lymphoma utilizing the alpha-emitting radionuclide-conjugated
monoclonal antibody 212Bi-anti-Tac.

Hartmann F(1), Horak EM, Garmestani K, Wu C, Brechbiel MW, Kozak RW, Tso J,
Kosteiny SA, Gansow OA, Nelson DL, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolism Branch, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

The efficacy, specificity, and toxicity of bismuth (212Bi) alpha
particle-mediated radioimmunotherapy was evaluated in nude mice bearing a murine 
lymphoma transfected with the human CD25 [human Tac; interleukin 2 receptor alpha
(IL-2R alpha)] gene. The therapeutic agent used was the tumor-specific humanized 
monoclonal antibody anti-Tac conjugated to 212Bi. The human IL-2R
alpha-expressing cell line was produced by transfecting the gene encoding human
Tac into the murine plasmacytoma cell line SP2/0. The resulting cell line,
SP2/Tac, expressed approximately 18,000 human IL-2R alpha molecules/cell.
Following s.c. or i.p. injection of 2 x 10(6) SP2/Tac cells into nude mice,
rapidly growing tumors developed in all animals after a mean of 10 and 13 days,
respectively. The bifunctional chelate cyclohexyldiethylenetriaminepentaacetic
acid was used to couple 212Bi to the humanized anti-Tac monoclonal antibody. This
immunoconjugate was shown to be stable in vivo. Specifically, in pharmacokinetic 
studies in nude mice, the blood clearance patterns of i.v. administered
205/206Bi-anti-Tac and coinjected 125I-anti-Tac were comparable. The toxicity and
therapeutic efficacy of 212Bi-anti-Tac were evaluated in nude mouse ascites or
solid tumor models wherein SP2/Tac cells were administered either i.p. or s.c.,
respectively. The i.p. administration of 212Bi-anti-Tac, 3 days following i.p.
tumor inoculation, led to a dose-dependent, significant prolongation of
tumor-free survival. Doses of 150 or 200 microCi prevented tumor occurrence in
75% (95% confidence interval, 41-93%) of the animals. In the second model, i.v.
treatment with 212Bi-anti-Tac 3 days following s.c. tumor inoculation also
resulted in a prolongation of the period before tumor development. However,
prevention of tumor occurrence decreased to 30% (95% confidence interval,
11-60%). In both the i.p. and s.c. tumor trials, 212Bi-anti-Tac was significantly
more effective for i.p. (P2 = 0.0128 50/100 microCi 212Bi-anti-Tac versus 50/100 
microCi Mik beta; P2 = 0.0142 150/200 microCi anti-Tac versus 150/200 microCi Mik
beta) and for s.c. tumors (P2 = 0.0018 100 microCi anti-Tac versus 100 microCi
Mik beta; P2 = 0.0042 200 microCi anti-Tac versus 200 microCi Mik beta 1) than
the control antibody Mik beta 1 coupled to 212Bi at comparable dose levels. In
contrast to the efficacy observed in the adjuvant setting, therapy of large,
established s.c. SP-2/Tac-expressing tumors with i.v. administered 212Bi-anti-Tac
(at doses up to 200 microCi/animal) failed to induce tumor regression.(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 8044783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. J Exp Med. 1994 Aug 1;180(2):577-86.

Defective secretion of an immunoglobulin caused by mutations in the heavy chain
complementarity determining region 2.

Chen C(1), Martin TM, Stevens S, Rittenberg MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Oregon Health Sciences University, 
Portland 97201.

We have investigated four secretion-deficient antibodies (Abs) derived from a
panel of 46 mutant T15 anti-phosphocholine Abs, all of which have point mutations
in the heavy chain (H) complementarity determining region 2 (CDR2). The level of 
secretion for these four Abs was < 10% of wild type when expressed together with 
the T15 light chain (L) in either SP2/0 or P3X63Ag8.653 myeloma cells although
normal levels of H and L chain mRNA were produced. Moreover, abundant
intracellular H and L chain proteins were detected. Three of the four mutants had
little or no assembled H and L complexes intracellularly whereas one had a
significant amount of intracellular immunoglobulin (Ig) which was shown to be
capable of binding Ag. Thus, we demonstrate for the first time that point
mutations confined to CDR2 of the H chain variable (V) region can impede Ab
assembly and secretion. We then introduced the same CDR2 mutations into a related
H chain which is encoded by the same T15 VH gene but different diversity (D) and 
joining (J) genes. When these H chains were expressed with a non-T15 L chain, the
resulting Abs were secreted normally. The results thus suggest that the effects
of the CDR2 mutations on Ab secretion are dependent on their interactions with L 
and/or H chain D-J sequences. These results also reveal a novel mechanism that
could contribute to B cell wastage.

PMCID: PMC2191617
PMID: 8046334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao. 1994 Aug;16(4):290-5.

[Expression of HPV16E6 gene and preparation of monoclonal antibody against the
expression product].

[Article in Chinese]

Gui C(1), Song G, Li K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, CAMS and PUMC, Beijing.

The recombinant plasmid PAS1-HPV16E6 containing the HPV16E6 gene was expressed in
E. coli AR120 under nalidixic acid induction. A 19KD expression protein was
isolated, purified and identified. Mice were immunized with the purified E6
expression protein. A murine hybridoma, RAC6, was obtained by fusing splenic
cells from an immunized BABL/c mouse with mouse myeloma cell line SP2/0-Ag14
cells, followed by screening in HAT medium, cloning and recloning in methyl
cellulose. The hybridoma RAC6 stably produces specific monoclonal antibody
against the E6 expression protein.

PMID: 7867098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1994 Jul 13;1193(1):118-26.

Forces on biological cells due to applied alternating (AC) electric fields. I.
Dielectrophoresis.

Mahaworasilpa TL(1), Coster HG, George EP.

Author information: 
(1)UNESCO Centre for Membrane Science and Technology, Department of Biophysics,
University of New South Wales, Australia.

Measurements are presented of dielectrophoretic forces for SP2 (mouse) and K562
(human) cells in external alternating electric fields over a frequency range of
10 kHz to 2 MHz. Using a spherical shell model of the cell, the dielectrophoretic
force is derived from the interaction between the induced electric dipole moment 
in the cell and the external electric field. The frequency dependence of the
force has its origin in the dispersion with frequency of the impedances of the
cell membrane, the cytoplasm and the external medium (a Maxwell-Wagner
dispersion). The predicted tri-phasic form of the variation of the
dielectrophoretic force is in good agreement with the experimental results
presented. Using the theoretical model, the experimental measurements also
provided an estimation of 0.18 +/- 0.03 S m-1 and 0.12 +/- 0.04 S m-1 for the
conductivities of the cytoplasm of cells of SP2 and K562, respectively, and 6.0
+/- 2.0 mF m-2 and 2.0 +/- 1.0 mF m-2 for the capacitances of the plasma membrane
of these cells.

PMID: 8038181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. J Neuroimmunol. 1994 Jul;52(2):127-37.

Generation and characterization of a mouse/human chimeric antibody directed
against extracellular matrix protein tenascin.

He X(1), Archer GE, Wikstrand CJ, Morrison SL, Zalutsky MR, Bigner DD, Batra SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710.

The murine anti-tenascin monoclonal antibody 81C6, following iodination, has been
shown to be an efficient localizing and therapeutic agent in both subcutaneous
and intracranial human glioma xenograft models in athymic mice and rats.
Similarly, effective monoclonal antibody 81C6 localization has been demonstrated 
in glioma patients, and Phase I trials with the intact murine IgG2b kappa
molecule are currently in progress. In order to maximize the potential for
repeated administration by minimizing murine Fc-mediated immunogenicity and
reducing Fc-mediated immune effects, we created murine 81C6 variable region/human
IgG2 chimeric monoclonal antibodies by the molecular cloning of the variable
region genes of mouse 81C6 and their genetic linkage to human constant region
exons. The resulting chimeric constructs were introduced into SP2/0 cells, and
stable transfectomas were selected by G418 and mycophenolic acid resistance. The 
resistant clones were screened for anti-tenascin activity on tenascin-coated
plates by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The N-terminal amino acid sequence
of both heavy and light chains of the purified chimeric 81C6 antibody matched
exactly with that of the native mouse 81C6 as well as with that deduced from the 
nucleotide sequence. The production level of chimeric 81C6 (13.9 mg/ml) from
ascites in the highest expressing transfectoma was much higher than that of
native mouse 81C6 (2.5 mg/ml). The chimeric antibody showed the same specificity 
and equivalent affinity for human intact tenascin or tenascin-expressing cells as
the native mouse 81C6 antibody. Direct comparison of radioiodinated chimeric and 
radioiodinated mouse 81C6 biodistribution in subcutaneous and intracranial
xenograft-bearing mice showed higher tumor-to-normal tissue ratios for chimeric
81C6 as compared with native mouse 81C6. The improved localizing and clearance
characteristics of chimeric 81C6 in xenograft model systems suggests that
chimeric 81C6 would be an improved reagent for intracompartmental therapy of
tenascin-expressing tumors in the human central nervous system.

PMID: 7518471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1994 Jul;92(4):291-302.

SEP topographies elicited by innocuous and noxious sural nerve stimulation. I.
Identification of stable periods and individual differences.

Dowman R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY 13699-5825.

Scalp potential topographies evoked by innocuous and noxious sural nerve
stimulation were obtained from 15 human subjects. The SEP scalp topography could 
be separated into 6 different stable periods (SP), that is, consecutive time
points where there were no major changes in the topographic pattern. SP1
(occurring 58-90 msec post stimulus) was characterized by a contralateral frontal
positivity and a central negativity oriented ipsilateral to the evoking stimulus;
SP2 (92-120 msec) by a bilateral frontal positivity and a symmetrical central
negativity; SP3 (135-158 msec) by a widespread negativity with a minimum at the
contralateral temporo-frontal region; and SP4 (178-222 msec), SP5 (223-277 msec) 
and SP6 (282-339 msec) by a widespread positivity with a maximum located along
the centro-parietal midline. SP4, SP5, and SP6 could be distinguished by changes 
in the orientation of the isovoltage contour lines and/or by changes in the
location of the maximum. The stable periods had similar onset and offset
latencies and the same major features across subjects. However, the topographic
patterns were not identical across subjects. These individual differences are
likely due to the expected variability in the orientation of the equivalent
regional dipole sources generating these potentials.

PMID: 7517851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Acta Crystallogr C. 1994 Jun 15;50 ( Pt 6):950-2.

An unusual C-4a hydroxylated decahydroquinolone.

Joseph SP(1), Comins DL, Singh P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, North Carolina State University, Raleigh 27695-8204.

The crystal structure and the relative stereochemistry of the four asymmetric
centers of an unusual C-4a hydroxylated decahydroquinolone, phenyl 1,2
alpha,3,4,-4a alpha,5 beta,6,7,8,8a
alpha-decahydro-4a-hydroxy-4-oxo-2-propyl-5-vinylquinoline-1 -carboxylate,
C21H27NO4, are reported. The H and OH groups at the ring juncture are cis to each
other as are the two H atoms alpha to the N atom. The vinyl and OH groups are
also cis to each other. The N atom is sp2 hybridized.

PMID: 8043242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Mol Biol. 1994 Jun 3;239(2):315-31.

Amino/aromatic interactions in proteins: is the evidence stacked against hydrogen
bonding?

Mitchell JB(1), Nandi CL, McDonald IK, Thornton JM, Price SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University College London,
U.K.

We investigate the suggestion that aromatic rings can act as hydrogen-bond
acceptors in proteins, by an analysis of 55 non-homologous high-resolution
protein chain structures. Approximately 10% of interactions between sp2
hybridized nitrogen atoms, from either side-chains or main-chains, and
phenylalanine or tyrosine rings have the nitrogen atom positioned above the ring.
In these instances, however, the sp2 nitrogen atoms tend to form stacked
interactions with the aromatic rings, these geometries outnumbering
amino/aromatic hydrogen bonds by around 2.5:1. The statistically expected
distribution, in contrast, would have only a few stacked structures and many more
with larger interplanar angles, corresponding to amino/aromatic hydrogen bonds.
Thus, although we do find some of these unconventional hydrogen bonds, they are
clearly disfavoured relative to stacked geometries. In stacked geometries, the
nitrogen-bearing groups are observed to fulfil their hydrogen-bonding potential
by forming conventional, energetically stronger, hydrogen bonds with other groups
in protein or solvent. This may explain the favourability of stacking. Thus,
although ab initio calculations of the gas phase interaction energies for three
model systems generally favour the amino/aromatic hydrogen-bonded over the
stacked geometries, the differences are small enough to be outweighed easily by
the additional conventional hydrogen bonding in stacked structures.

PMID: 8196060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Mol Immunol. 1994 Jun;31(9):683-92.

Chimeric immunoglobulin light chains are secreted at different levels: influence 
of framework-1 amino acids.

Horwitz AH(1), Nadell R, Preugschat F, Better M.

Author information: 
(1)XOMA Corporation, Santa Monica, CA 90404.

Immunoglobulin light chain proteins are generally thought to be readily secreted 
without their corresponding heavy chains; non-secreted light chains have been
viewed as aberrant forms. We have re-examined this assumption by expressing
chimeric mouse-human light chains constructed for 12 mouse antibodies (mouse
variable regions fused to a human kappa light chain constant region) in Sp2/0 and
CHO cells. Five of the 12 light chains were either poorly secreted or not
secreted at all. There was approximately a five-fold difference in the levels of 
secreted light chain between the highest poor secretor and the lowest good
secretor. All of these light chains formed functional chimeric IgGs, which were
secreted at similar levels, when co-expressed with their respective chimeric
mouse-human heavy chains (mouse variable regions fused to a human gamma-1 heavy
chain constant region). The influence of variable region amino acids on light
chain secretion was examined by replacing the Framework-1 region of three
poorly-secreted chimeric light chains with that of a readily-secreted light
chain. For two of the light chains, secretion levels increased approximately 30- 
and 100-fold relative to that of the unmodified light chains. Comparison of the
Framework-I amino acid sequence of the poorly- and readily-secreted light chains 
revealed an asparagine (N) and proline (P) at positions 11 and 12, respectively
of these poorly-secreted light chains and a leucine (L) and serine (S) in the
same region for some of the readily secreted light chains. Alteration of the NP
to LS for one of the poorly-secreted light chains resulted in an approximately
seven-fold increase in light chain secretion over that of the native form of the 
poorly-secreted light chain. We conclude from these studies that poor secretion
can be a naturally occurring state for normal light chains and that amino acids
within Framework-1 contribute to poor secretion for some of the light chains.

PMID: 8028603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Hybridoma. 1994 Jun;13(3):237-40.

Generation of heterohybridomas capable of releasing swine monoclonal antibody
specific to porcine growth hormone.

Lumanglas AL(1), Sadeghi H, Wang BS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunoendocrinology, Agricultural Research Division, American
Cyanamid Company, Princeton, New Jersey 08543-0400.

An effort was made to generate stable swine hybridomas capable of releasing
monoclonal antibodies (MAb) with antigenic specificity. Crossbred pigs were
immunized with recombinant porcine growth hormone (r-pGH) and the splenic cells
were harvested from these animals. B lymphocytes enriched by gradient
centrifugation and nylon wool adherence were briefly stimulated in vitro with
r-pGH prior to hybridization with murine SP2/0 myeloma cells. The fused hybrids
were screened for their ability to produce anti-pGH antibody and the positive
ones were subcloned by a limiting dilution procedure. The stable cell lines were 
maintained by serial passages in cultures for further analysis. One such
hybridoma, designated PM20/20, was found to secrete swine IgM. It recognized not 
only the immunizing r-pGH but also the native pGH extracted from the swine
pituitary glands, as demonstrated by Western analysis. It also recognized two
smaller fragments with m.w. of 10 kD and 5 kD of r-pGH following trypsin
digestion. In addition to pGH, PM20/20 immunoreacted with several other GH
species including bovine, chicken, and human origins, but not with ovine
prolactin nor rat GH binding protein. The binding association rate constant and
dissociation rate constant of PM20/20 to pGH were 5.3 x 10(4) M-1 s-1 and 1.0 x
10(-4) s-1, respectively, thus producing a dissociation constant of 1.9 x 10(-9) 
M. Therefore, stable swine-mouse heterohybridoma lines have been established and 
shown to continuously release swine mAb in cultures. These mAb may serve as
useful alternatives to murine mAb in certain areas of research.

PMID: 7927368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Hybridoma. 1994 Jun;13(3):215-9.

Humanization of KC4G3, an anti-human carcinoma antibody.

Couto JR(1), Padlan EA, Blank EW, Peterson JA, Ceriani RL.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Fund of Contra Costa, Walnut Creek, California 94596.

We have previously constructed a chimeric version of KC4G3, a murine antibody
that reacts with several human epithelial cancers and binds to the human breast
epithelial mucin. We have now successfully humanized KC4G3 using positional
consensus data, previously compiled after examining several other antibody
structures, listing residues in the VH and V kappa frameworks that could
influence antigen binding. We have previously showed that a fraction of the kappa
chains of murine and chimeric KC4G3 migrates abnormally on SDS-PAGE most likely
due to N-linked glycosylation in V kappa. The glycosylation signal has now been
removed from V kappa, as a consequence of humanization. As expected, the
humanized kappa chain migrates normally on SDS-PAGE. We detected no significant
differences either in the affinities (1.6 x 10(9) M-1 vs. 1.4 x 10(9) M-1,
respectively) or in the ability to compete for antigen binding, between the
murine and the humanized antibodies. The humanized version is an IgG1, kappa
immunoglobulin produced by mouse myeloma SP2/0-Ag14 cells and is designated
HuKC4v2. The HuKC4v2 frameworks conform to the V kappa II and VHIII human
consensus in all but six positions in V kappa and three positions in VH.

PMID: 7927365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Acta Virol. 1994 Jun;38(3):151-6.

Replication and persistence of murine herpesvirus 72 in lymphatic system and
peripheral blood mononuclear cells of Balb/C mice.

Mistríková J(1), Remenová A, Lesso J, Stanceková M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Virology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius
University, Bratislava, Slovak Republic.

After intranasal inoculation of murine herpesvirus 72 (MHV-72) to Balb/c mice the
virus persisted in adherent lung mononuclear cells (AMC). Infectious virus was
occasionally detected during a period of eight months after infection in
lymphatic organs (thymus, spleen, lymph nodes), bone marrow, alveolar and
peritoneal AMC, and lymphocytes and macrophages of peripheral blood by indirect
immunofluorescence and cocultivation with permissive VERO cells. Mouse B-cell
lines NS0 and SP2/0 were permissive for MHV-72 infection when inoculated in
vitro. Virus-neutralizing antibodies have been detected during one year period in
the sera of infected mice, and their levels correlated with activation of the
latent MHV-72.

PMID: 7817896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Indian J Exp Biol. 1994 Jun;32(6):371-5.

Monoclonal antibodies against antigenic epitopes common between Setaria cervi and
Brugia malayi.

Kaushal NA(1), Kaushal DC, Ghosh S, Talwar GP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Central Drug Research Institute,
Lucknow, India.

Several common antigens between the bovine (Setaria cervi) and human (Brugia
malayi) filarial parasites have been demonstrated [Immunol Investig, 16 (1987)
139]. Hybridoma cell lines producing monoclonal antibodies against such common
antigenic epitopes were obtained by immunizing the BALB/c mice with S. cervi
antigen, fusing the spleen cells with Sp2/0 myeloma cells and screening the
culture supernatants for antibody against both S. cervi and B. malayi antigens by
ELISA. Nine monoclonal antibodies directed against antigenic epitopes common
between the bovine and human filarial parasites were identified. Two monoclonal
antibodies (I3B4 and I5D6) showed reactivity with the antigen(s) present in
filariasis patients serum and thus may have potential for detecting circulating
antigen in filaria infected individuals.

PMID: 7525468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. J Med Chem. 1994 May 13;37(10):1518-25.

The [(methyloxy)imino]methyl moiety as a bioisoster of aryl. A novel class of
completely aliphatic beta-adrenergic receptor antagonists.

Macchia B(1), Balsamo A, Breschi MC, Chiellini G, Macchia M, Martinelli A,
Martini C, Nardini C, Nencetti S, Rossello A, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Chimica Farmaceutica e Tossicologica, Universitá di Pisa, Italy.

Previous studies in the field of beta-adrenergic drugs had supported the
hypothesis of the existence of a bioisosterism between the
[(methyleneamino)oxy]methyl moiety (C = NOCH2, MAOMM) of type B beta-blocking
drugs and the aryl (Ar) of type A beta-blocking agents. In the MAOMM, however,
the carbon of the CH2 linked to the oximic oxygen possesses a hybridization (sp3)
and a geometry different from those of the corresponding carbon of Ar which
possesses an sp2 hybridization. Furthermore, in the MAOMM, in its preferred
conformation, the unsaturated portion (C = N) is situated in a spatial area which
does not correspond exactly to the area occupied by Ar. The formal inversion of
the atomic sequence C = NOCH2 of the MAOMM leads to a different type of group,
the [(methyloxy)imino]methyl moiety (CH2ON = C, MOIMM), which, in the E
configuration, appears to present greater steric and electronic analogies with an
Ar, with respect to the MAOMM. On the basis of these observations, some
completely aliphatic (E)-N-(3-amino-2- hydroxypropylidene)(alkyloxy)amino
derivatives of type C (11a,b and 12a, b) were synthesized, the their
beta-adrenergic properties were compared with those of the corresponding
[(methyleneamino)oxy]-methyl isomers of type B (19a, b and 20a, b). The similar
beta-adrenergic properties of 11, 12 and 19, 20 evaluated in vitro both by
radioligand binding assays and by functional tests on isolated preparations, are 
discussed on the basis of considerations regarding the spatial correspondences
and electronic analogies between the MOIMM and the MAOMM.

PMID: 7910217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Oncogene. 1994 May;9(5):1469-72.

The mdm-2 oncogene is translocated and overexpressed in a murine plasmacytoma
cell line expressing wild-type p53.

Berberich S(1), Cole M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Wright State University,
Dayton, Ohio.

The cellular p53 protein has been demonstrated to possess growth-inhibitory
activity. Recent work suggests that the murine double minute gene (mdm-2) encodes
a protein that may function as a cellular regulator or mediator of p53 function. 
We were interested in determining if the mdm-2 gene was overexpressed in mouse
tumor cells, in particular mouse plasmacytomas that harbor wild type-p53 protein.
A novel chromosomal translocation of the mdm-2 gene was detected in the SP2 cell 
line, that is derived from plasmacytoma MOPC21. The translocation results in a
head-to-head arrangement of the mdm-2 gene (chromosome 10) with the
immunoglobulin C kappa gene (chromosome 6), analogous to the translocations that 
activate the c-myc gene in murine plasmacytomas. Based on Northern blot analysis,
the translocation induces a 10-fold elevation of mdm-2 RNA. Primer extension
assays demonstrate that the 5' end of the mdm-2 RNA from the translocated gene is
colinear with the 5' mdm-2 mRNA from an unrearranged gene, suggesting that the
mRNA and encoded protein are unaltered. This chromosomal translocation represents
the first example in which mdm-2 overexpression is activated by a genetic
alteration other than gene amplification.

PMID: 8152809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Plant Mol Biol. 1994 May;25(2):241-57.

A hydroxyproline-containing class IV chitinase of sugar beet is glycosylated with
xylose.

Nielsen KK(1), Bojsen K, Roepstorff P, Mikkelsen JD.

Author information: 
(1)Danisco Biotechnology, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Two acidic chitinase isoforms, SP1 and SP2, have been purified to homogeneity
from leaves of sugar beet (Beta vulgaris) infected with Cercospora beticola. SP1 
and SP2 are extracellular proteins with an apparent molecular mass of 35 kDa and 
an approximate pI of 4.2. Since the only major difference was slightly diverging 
M(r)'s, only the SP2 chitinase was further characterized. Partial amino acid
sequence data for SP2 was used to generate a polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
clone employed for the isolation of a cDNA clone encoding SP2. SP2 exhibits
significant structural identity with the class IV chitinases from sugar beet,
rapeseed, bean and maize, but differs from the other members of this class in
having a longer hinge region, comprising 22 amino acid residues, with a repeated 
'TTP' motif. Western blotting analyses, using antibody raised against SP2,
demonstrated an induction of SP protein during infection with C. beticola. The
induction was very local, with high protein accumulation found close to the
infection site only. Amino acid compositional analysis of SP2 revealed that five 
out of fourteen prolines are hydroxylated. No glucosamine or galactosamine
residues are present. Evidence was obtained that SP2 is glycosylated with a
limited number (< or = 7) of xylose residues: (1) SP2 was stained with the
periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) reagent, (2) electrospray mass spectrometry on SP2
gave a series of M(r)'s with a consistent increase between two molecular masses
of 132 Da, (3) SP2 was recognized by an antibody specific for
beta-1,4-D-xylopyranose. The vacuolar class I chitinases A and B in tobacco have 
recently been shown to comprise a new class of hydroxyproline-containing proteins
(Sticher et al., Science 257 (1992) 655-657). The SP2 chitinase differs from
these in being glycosylated and, thus, represents a novel type of
hydroxyproline-containing glycoproteins in plants.

PMID: 8018873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 1994 May-Jun;47(2-3):143-54; discussion 154-5.

Expression of immunoglobulin genes tandem in eukaryotic cells under the control
of T7 bacteriophage RNA polymerase.

Deyev SM(1), Lieber A, Radko BV, Polanovsky OL.

Author information: 
(1)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences,
Moscow.

A tandem of recombinant mouse/human immunoglobulin (Ig) genes was constructed and
inserted into the plasmid pGEM1 under the control of T7 phage RNA polymerase
promoter. Sp2/0 lymphoid cell line and Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO) cells were
used as the targets for gene transfection. Both cell lines contained in their
genomes a T7 RNA polymerase gene modified with a nuclear-located signal derived
from SV40 large T-antigen. Cell lines transfected with the gene tandem
effectively synthesized mRNA (up to 9 x 10(3) bp) that hybridized with epsilon-
and kappa-gene probes. Separate transcripts corresponding to mRNAs of individual 
heavy and light chains were not detected in either transfected cell line. It
follows from these data that transcription in the transfected cells is controlled
mainly by the T7 phage polymerase promoter. Both lymphoid and nonlymphoid cell
lines transfected with the gene tandem synthesized the epsilon-heavy (70 kDa) and
kappa-light (25 kDa) Ig polypeptide chains. Production of chimeric antibodies by 
the myeloma Sp2/0 cells was higher than that by the CHO cells. Individual clones 
synthesized up to 150 ng/mL chimeric IgE. However, only lymphoid Sp2/0 cells were
capable of efficient secretion of the recombinant antibodies. The mechanism of
translation of mRNA synthesized in eukaryotic cells by T7 phage RNA polymerase is
discussed.

PMID: 7944334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Cancer Res. 1994 May 1;54(9):2448-55.

Chimeric murine-human antibodies directed against folate binding receptor are
efficient mediators of ovarian carcinoma cell killing.

Coney LR(1), Mezzanzanica D, Sanborn D, Casalini P, Colnaghi MI, Zurawski VR Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Centocor, Malvern, Pennsylvania 19355.

The MOv18 (gamma 1, kappa) and MOv19 (gamma 2a, kappa) murine monoclonal
antibodies (MAbs) recognize different epitopes on the human folate binding
receptor which is overexpressed on 90% of nonmucinous epithelial ovarian tumors. 
A chimeric murine-human (human gamma 1, kappa) version of both antibodies was
constructed and expressed. The genes encoding the murine heavy and light chain
variable regions of the MOv18 and MOv19 MAbs were cloned from the parental
hybridomas, fused with genes encoding the human heavy (gamma 1) and light (kappa)
chain constant regions, respectively, and expressed in the SP2/0 murine myeloma
cell line. Using human peripheral blood mononuclear cells as effector cells and
conditions that provide for maximum lysis (effector target = 50:1, saturating
antibody concentration), the murine MOv18 MAb (IgG1) mediated variable levels of 
specific cytolysis of the target ovarian cancer cell line IGROV1. In contrast,
the chimeric MOv18 MAb mediated higher and more consistent lysis even at a
10-100-fold lower antibody concentration. The murine MOv19 MAb (IgG2a) mediated
specific lysis of IGROV1 cells, and the chimeric version of this antibody
mediated an amount of lysis at least equal to that mediated by its murine
counterpart. A comparison of the ED50 values obtained for the murine MOv19 and
chimeric MOv19 antibodies indicates that the chimeric MOv19 MAb was 3 to 10 times
more potent than the murine MOv19 antibody. In addition, the ED50 values obtained
for the chimeric MOv18 and chimeric MOv19 MAbs were similar, indicating that
these MAbs are equally potent. The level of maximal lysis obtained was dependent 
on the number of target molecules/cell; the same high level of lysis mediated by 
cMOv18, MOv19, and cMOv19 was observed with both IGROV1 and OvCA432 target cells.
However, only low levels of lysis were obtained when the SW626 cell line, which
expresses 1 x 10(4) folate binding protein sites/cell, was used as a target. An
equimolar mixture of the chimeric MOv18 and MOv19 MAbs was no more effective in
the mediation of lysis than an equivalent amount of either chimeric MAb alone.
These data suggest that the folate binding receptor is expressed on IGROV1 cells 
at a density sufficient to provide for optimal levels of antibody-mediated lysis 
using a single chimeric antibody directed at the folate binding receptor.

PMID: 7512887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. J Immunol Methods. 1994 Apr 15;170(2):211-24.

A new rapid and simple non-radioactive assay to monitor and determine the
proliferation of lymphocytes: an alternative to [3H]thymidine incorporation
assay.

Ahmed SA(1), Gogal RM Jr, Walsh JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary
Medicine (VMRCVM), Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University (VPI&SU), 
Blacksburg 24061.

A one-step non-radioactive assay to determine the proliferation of murine
lymphocytes, lymphoid tumor cells and hybridoma cells is described. This assay
requires the addition of Alamar Blue dye to cell cultures and the degree of
change in its color, which is reflective of the extent of cellular proliferation,
can be determined by an ELISA plate reader. Alamar Blue must be added during the 
initial phase of cell culture. The pattern of concanavalin A (ConA) or anti-CD3
antibody-induced proliferative response of murine lymphocytes as assessed by
Alamar Blue was similar to that of a [3H]thymidine assay. Similarly, the
spontaneous proliferation curve of anti-CD3 antibody secreting cell line
(YCD3-1), monocytic macrophage cell lines (PU5-1.8, P388D1, J774.1) and myeloma
cells (Sp2/0) as determined by Alamar Blue closely resembled that of the
[3H]thymidine assay. The minimum detectable number of proliferating cells was
comparable in Alamar Blue and [3H]thymidine assays. Since cell lysis/extraction
and washing procedures are not involved in the Alamar Blue assay, this approach
has several distinct advantages over currently available assays (eg.
[3H]thymidine). First, it allows daily monitoring of proliferation without
compromising the sterility of cultures. An indication of proliferation can be
evaluated (spectrophotometrically or visually) as early as 24 h after ConA
stimulation. Second, unlike previously reported assays, Alamar Blue permits
further analysis of proliferating cells by other methods. Analysis of cells in
culture with Alamar Blue for various surface antigens (CD44, CD45RB, CD4, heat
stable antigen) by flow cytometry revealed that the fluorescent profile and
relative percentage of cells in cultures with the Alamar Blue were comparable to 
those without this reagent. The salient advantages of Alamar Blue assay over the 
[3H]thymidine assay include: (i) non-radioactivity; (ii) simplicity; (iii) less
costly; (iv) non-labor intensive; (v) rapidity of assessment of proliferation of 
large number of samples; (vi) non-toxicity; (vii) usefulness in determining the
kinetics of cell growth of hybridomas; and (viii) non-interference of secretion
of antibodies by a hybridoma cell line.

PMID: 8157999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. J Gen Virol. 1994 Apr;75 ( Pt 4):799-807.

Cytotoxic T lymphocytes raised against Japanese encephalitis virus: effector cell
phenotype, target specificity and in vitro virus clearance.

Murali-Krishna K(1), Ravi V, Manjunath R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore.

Several H-2 defined cell lines were examined for their ability to support
infection and replication of Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) before their use
in in vitro and in vivo stimulation protocols for generating cytotoxic T
lymphocytes (CTLs) against JEV. Among 11 different cell lines tested, two H-2d
macrophage tumour lines (P388D1, RAW 264.7), an H-2d hybridoma (Sp2/0), an
H-2KkDd neuroblastoma (Neuro 2a), and H-2k fibroblast cell line (L929) were found
to support JEV infection and replication. These cell lines were used to generate 
anti-JEV CTLs by using in vivo immunization followed by in vitro stimulation of
BALB/c mice. We observed that not only syngeneic and allogeneic infected cells
but also JEV-infected xenogeneic cells could prime BALB/c mice for the generation
of JEV-specific CTLs upon subsequent in vitro stimulation of splenocytes with
JEV-infected syngeneic cells. Although infected xenogeneic cells were used for
immunization, the anti-JEV effectors that were generated lysed infected syngeneic
targets but not JEV-infected xenogeneic or allogeneic target cells in a 5 h 51Cr 
release assay. These anti-JEV effectors recognized syngeneic target cells
infected with West Nile virus to a lesser extent and were shown to be Lyt-2.2+ T 
cells. The results of unlabelled cold target competition studies suggested
alterations in the cell surface expression of viral antigenic determinants
recognized by these CTLs. We further demonstrate that the JEV-specific CTLs
generated could virtually block the release of infectious virus particles from
infected P388D1 and Neuro 2a cells in vitro.

PMID: 8151296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Hybridoma. 1994 Apr;13(2):87-97.

Mouse/human chimeric Me1-14 antibody: genomic cloning of the variable region
genes, linkage to human constant region genes, expression, and characterization.

Batra SK(1), Niswonger ML, Wikstrand CJ, Pegram CN, Zalutsky MR, Morrison SL,
Bigner DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina 27710.

Murine monoclonal antibody Me1-14, which recognizes an epitope on chondroitin
proteoglycan sulfate expressed in malignant glioma and melanoma, has been used
for radioimmunolocalization and therapy both in animal models and in patients.
Here, we report the generation, characterization, and in vivo biodistribution of 
mouse/human chimeric Me1-14. Rearranged immunoglobulin genes from the Me1-14
hybridoma were identified by Southern blot analysis. Putative rearranged light-
and heavy-chain genes were cloned from Lambda-ZapII Me1-14 genomic libraries and 
sequenced for nucleotide analysis. One of the putative heavy-chain Eco RI
fragments (3.5 kb) had all the features of an intact variable region, including a
functional leader sequence, in-frame V-D and D-J junctions, and cysteines 22 and 
92. The deduced amino acid sequence from the heavy-chain variable region gene
showed considerable homology with the invariant protein sequence of the mouse
heavy-chain subgroup IIIB. Like the heavy-chain gene, one of the putative
rearranged kappa-chain Hind III fragments (4 kb) had all of the characteristics
of the functional variable region, and the deduced amino acid sequence showed
homology to the invariant sequence of kappa-chain group V. The variable region
genes for heavy- and light-chains were linked to human constant region exons in
the expression vectors at the unique sites and cotransfected into mouse SP2/0
cells. The production level of chimeric Me1-14 from ascites in the highest
expressing transfectoma was 1.8 mg/ml. The chimeric Me1-14 antibody exhibited the
same specificity and similar affinity as that of parent Me1-14. Direct comparison
of radioiodinated chimeric and murine Me1-14 in paired-label biodistribution
analysis in subcutaneous xenograft-bearing mice showed higher tumor-to-normal
organ ratios for chimeric Me1-14 IgG2, suggesting that this chimeric Me1-14 may
be potentially useful in vivo for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes in
patients.

PMID: 8050781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Ther Immunol. 1994 Apr;1(2):83-93.

The production and preclinical characterization of a chimeric anti-breast-cancer 
antibody, cBC2.

Sutton VR(1), Burgess J, Pietersz GA, Li WJ, McKenzie IF, Trapani JA.

Author information: 
(1)Austin Research Institute, Austin Hospital, Heidelberg, Victoria, Australia.

A chimeric (mouse-human) BC2 antibody (cBC2) was produced which may be used in
the diagnosis and treatment of breast cancer. The BC2 variable region genes were 
amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR), using oligonucleotide primers
homologous to the framework sequences of mouse VH and V kappa genes. The PCR
products were used to create cBC2 expression vectors containing the mouse BC2 VH 
and V kappa and human constant region (IgG1 and K) genes. Chimeric antibody was
produced following transfection of these constructs into Sp2/0 myeloma cells.
Binding assays in vitro demonstrated that cBC2 had the same specificity for human
milk fat globule membrane (HMFGM) and MUC1+ cells as mBC2, and bound antigen with
a similar affinity (cBC2, Ka 5.53 +/- 2.09 x 10(8); mBC2, Ka 1.44 +/- 0.98 x
10(9)). Functionally, only cBC2 (5-25 micrograms ml-1), was able to mediate
antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) with human effector cells, with
25% maximal specific lysis of MUC1+ cells at an E/T ratio of 100:1. Human
complement-mediated lysis was minimal (10-15% specific lysis) with both mBC2 and 
cBC2. Neither cBC2 nor mBC2 was able to inhibit tumour growth in vivo in the
absence of covalently coupled anticancer drugs. However, biodistribution studies 
demonstrated that both antibodies preferentially targeted MUC1+ tumour cells,
with 17% of the injected dose of cBC2, as compared to 27% of mBC2, localized to
the MUC1+ tumour at 24 h (less than 6% detected in any other tissue).

PMID: 7584487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Mol Reprod Dev. 1994 Apr;37(4):446-51.

Characterization of mouse-hamster-human cross-reacting antioocyte monoclonal
antibodies produced by intrasplenic immunization of mice with 12 zona-free mouse 
oocytes.

Jin M(1), Johansson L, Sundström P, Nilsson BO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, Uppsala University, Sweden.

Several intrasplenic immunizations with batches of approximately 15 or
approximately 30 zona-free, unfertilized mouse oocytes resulted in 200-300
hybrids, respectively, among which about 20 positive clones were selected from
each fusion between splenic plasma cells and SP2/0 myeloma cells. When
nonimmunized splenic plasma cells were used, only one antibody, showing weak
immunoreaction, was obtained from approximately 370 hybrids collected from 2
fusions. From one immunization with a total of 12 zona-free, unfertilized mouse
oocytes, 15 positive clones were selected for further study. Eleven of these 15
antibodies reacted with antigens only in unfertilized oocytes but not in
fertilized, pronuclear stage oocytes. Three antibodies, which recognized antigens
in paraffin-embedded oocyte sections, did not label growing ovarian oocytes,
indicating that the antibodies were specific to ovulated, unfertilized oocytes.
These antibodies did not detect any antigen epitopes in the panel of tissues
examined. The molecular weight of one antigen, corresponding to a IgM antibody
that is present both in ooplasma and zona pellucida, was approximately 116 kDa.
Cross-reactivity to blots of unfertilized zona-free hamster oocytes was
demonstrated by 6 antibodies and to unfertilized human oocytes by 7 antibodies.
Three antibodies cross-reacted with both hamster and human oocytes. The study
indicates that the intrasplenic immunization is an appropriate means of raising
antibodies against unfertilized, zona-free mouse oocytes and that the method
applied offers an easy way to select antibodies against human oocytes for
functional studies.

PMID: 7516684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Mutat Res. 1994 Apr 1;306(1):35-44.

tert.-butyl hydroperoxide-mediated DNA base damage in cultured mammalian cells.

Altman SA(1), Zastawny TH, Randers L, Lin Z, Lumpkin JA, Remacle J, Dizdaroglu M,
Rao G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, University of Maryland
Baltimore County 21228.

tert.-Butyl hydroperoxide has been utilized to study the effect of oxidative
stress on living cells; however, its effect on DNA bases in cells has not been
characterized. In the present work, we have investigated DNA base damage in
mammalian cells exposed to this organic hydroperoxide. SP2/0 derived murine
hybridoma cells were treated with 4 concentrations of tert.-butyl hydroperoxide
for varying periods of time. Chromatin was isolated from treated and control
cells and subsequently analyzed by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry with
selected-ion monitoring for DNA base damage. Quantification of damaged DNA bases 
was achieved by isotope-dilution mass spectrometry. The amounts of 8 products
were significantly higher than control levels in cells treated with tert.-butyl
hydroperoxide at a concentration range of 0.01-0.1 mM. At concentrations from 1.0
to 10 mM, product formation was inhibited and the amounts of products were
similar to those in control cells. The bimodal nature of the dose-response may be
qualitatively analogous to previous reports of bimodal killing of E. coli
bacteria by hydrogen peroxide. The nature of the identified DNA base lesions
suggests the involvement of the hydroxyl radical in their formation. tert.-Butyl 
hydroperoxide is known to produce the tert.-butoxyl radical in reactions with
metal ions. However, it is unlikely that the tert.-butoxyl radical produces these
DNA lesions. It is suggested that DNA base damage arises from tert.-butyl
hydroperoxide-mediated oxidative stress in cells, resulting in formation of
hydroxyl radicals in close proximity to DNA. The inhibition of product formation 
at high concentrations of tert.-butyl hydroperoxide may be explained by the
scavenging of tert.-butoxyl radical by tert.-butyl hydroperoxide resulting in
inhibition of oxidative stress. The plausibility of the scavenging mechanism was 
evaluated with a mathematical simulation of the dose-response for DNA damage in
solutions containing hydrogen peroxide. The simulation model predicted a bimodal 
dose-response which agreed qualitatively with the results in this study and with 
other in vivo and in vitro studies reported in the literature.

PMID: 7512201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Int Immunol. 1994 Mar;6(3):393-9.

Monoclonal anti-lambda 5 antibody FS1 identifies a 130 kDa protein associated
with lambda 5 and Vpre-B on the surface of early pre-B cell lines.

Shinjo F(1), Hardy RR, Jongstra J.

Author information: 
(1)Toronto Hospital Research Institute, Ontario, Canada.

mAbs specific for mouse lambda 5 protein were prepared by fusion of spleen cells 
from a hamster immunized with recombinant lambda 5 protein synthesized in
bacteria and the mouse myeloma cell line SP2/0-Ag14. Here we report the
characteristics of the antibodies produced by the FS1 hybridoma. FS1 antibody
stains a variety of mouse pre-B cell lines but not B cell lines or T cell lines. 
The staining of the pre-B cell lines A-1 and C-7 by phycoerythrin (PE)-conjugated
FS1 (FS1-PE) can be blocked by preincubation of these cells with unconjugated FS1
antibody or with affinity purified polyclonal lambda 5 specific Ig but not with
normal hamster or mouse IgG or with affinity purified polyclonal anti-Mb-1 Ig.
From these experiments we concluded that FS1 specifically recognizes lambda 5
protein. We used FS1-PE to probe for surface (s) lambda 5+ cells in normal BALB/c
mouse bone marrow. Such cells were undetectable when total bone marrow or FACS
sorted subpopulations were analyzed. However, when B220+, CD43+, s lambda 5-bone 
marrow cells were cultured for 4 days on the stromal cell line FLST2 in the
presence of IL-7, s lambda 5 expression became apparent. Further expansion of
these cells in IL7 alone augmented the s lambda 5 expression to readily
detectable levels. This modulation may indicate that s lambda 5 expression on
normal bone marrow cells in vivo is transient and that at any given moment only a
small fraction of bone marrow cells expresses low levels of lambda 5 protein on
the surface.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 8186191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Mol Biol (Mosk). 1994 Mar-Apr;28(2):429-36.

[Expression of "chimeric" (murine/human) immunoglobulin genes in lymphoid and
nonlymphoid cells].

[Article in Russian]

Deev SM, Liber A, Rad'ko BV, Polianovskii OL.

A recombinant tandem of mouse/human immunoglobulin (Ig) genes was constructed and
inserted in the plasmid pGEM1 under the control of the T7 RNA polymerase
promoter. Constant Ig genes of murine origin were replaced with human genomic
ones. Isotype IgG1 was changed for IgE. Lymphoid cell line Sp2/0 and CHO (chinese
hamster ovary) cells were used for transfection. Both cell lines contained the
semisynthetic gene of T7 RNA polymerase in their genomes and stably expressed
this polymerase. Transfected clones of Sp2/0 and CHO cells synthesized k-light
(25 kD) and epsilon-heavy (70 kD) chains of Ig and the corresponding mRNAs. Both 
lymphoid and nonlymphoid transfected cell lines synthesized functionally active
antibodies interacting with the antigen (pig transferrin). Particular clones
synthesized up to 150 ng/ml of chimeric antibodies. However, only lymphoid Sp2/0 
cells were capable of efficient secretion. Nonlymphoid CHO cells were able to
produce antibodies, but incapable of their efficient secretion.

PMID: 8183275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Mar 1;91(5):1908-12.

Lysophosphatidic acid possesses dual action in cell proliferation.

Tigyi G(1), Dyer DL, Miledi R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychobiology, University of California, Irvine 92717-4550.

Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) induces mitogenic responses in cultured fibroblasts
through a pertussis toxin-sensitive signaling pathway. In contrast, we have shown
that LPA inhibits the proliferation of Sp2/0-Ag14 myeloma cells. To resolve this 
apparent controversy, LPA-elicited responses in cell proliferation and the
underlying second messenger mechanisms were compared in Sp2/0-Ag14 myeloma and
NIH 3T3 fibroblast cells. The antimitogenic response was not elicited by
micromolar concentrations of phosphatidic acid, phosphatidylglycerol, or
diacylglycerol. In NIH 3T3 and Sp2 cells, LPA elicited an increase in inositol
trisphosphate and a subsequent transient increase in free cytoplasmic Ca2+.
Unlike the mitogenic response in NIH 3T3 cells, the antimitogenic effect was not 
affected by pertussis toxin; on the contrary, it was accompanied by an increase
in cAMP. In Sp2 cells, cAMP analogs, forskolin, and isobutylmethylxanthine
inhibited cell proliferation and enhanced LPA action in an additive manner,
suggesting that an LPA-elicited increase in cAMP-mediated signaling was
responsible for the antimitogenic response. In addition to the mitogenic response
in fibroblasts and the antimitogenic response in tumor cell lines, there are some
cell types (Jurkat T-cell lymphoma and primary astrocytes) in which LPA is
ineffective in altering cell proliferation. The cell-type-specific dual action of
LPA suggests that this endogenous lipid mediator when released from activated
cells might play an important role as a regulator, rather than a ubiquitous
inducer, of cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC43273
PMID: 8127904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Vopr Virusol. 1994 Mar-Apr;39(2):80-2.

[The isolation and characteristics of monoclonal antibodies to the structural
proteins of Coxsackie B5 virus].

[Article in Russian]

Boss A, Piirsoo A.

Five hybridomas secreting monoclonal antibodies (MCA) to Coxsackie B5 virus were 
generated by fusion of Sp2/0 myeloma cells with BALB/c mouse immune splenocytes. 
Most MCA belonged to the IgG and one to the IgM class. Out of 4 MCA binding the
structural protein VP2, two MCA showed type specificity in neutralization test
and cross-reactivity with other enteroviruses, one MCA reacted with all
enteroviruses tested, and the one showing type specificity among Coxsackie B
group "recognized" an epitope on poliovirus type 1 as well. The MCA belonging to 
VP4 proved to be Coxsackie B group specific. It was assumed that MCA could be
used for studies of the antigenic structure and serodifferentiation of Coxsackie 
B5 virus.

PMID: 8017060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol. 1994 Mar;8(3):213-7.

Immunochemical study of polysaccharide antigen in Streptococcus sobrinus and
Streptococcus downei with a cross-reactive monoclonal antibody.

Ota F(1), Kato H, Hirota K, Inoue H, Tomotake H, Uchiyama C, Minato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Microbiology, School of Medicine, University of Tokushima, 
Japan.

A monoclonal antibody (mAb h-448) was prepared after cell fusion of mouse myeloma
cells (SP2/0-Ag-14) to the spleen cells of mice immunised with serotype h strain 
(MF25) of Streptococcus downei. The antibody (IgM class) reacted in enzyme
immunoassay only with whole cells as well as purified polysaccharide (PS) antigen
of Streptococcus sobrinus (types d and g) and Streptococcus downei (serotype h), 
but not with cells or purified PS antigen from any other serotypes of the mutans 
group of streptococci. mAb h-448 also quantitatively precipitated in solution
with the purified antigens. Competitive hapten inhibition tests demonstrated that
beta-methylgalactopyranoside inhibited the reaction most strongly. Although
rhamnose also showed a substantial inhibitory effect, the results of this study
indicate that the antigenic determinant of the PS antigen has a structure similar
to the beta-methylgalactopyranoside molecule.

PMID: 8004057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. J Biochem. 1994 Mar;115(3):608-14.

Expression of recombinant mouse/human chimeric antibody specific to human
GMP-140/P-selectin.

Kurome T(1), Katayama M, Murakami K, Hashino K, Kamihagi K, Yasumoto M, Kato I.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Laboratories, Takara Shuzo Co., Ltd., Shiga.

To construct a mouse/human chimeric antibody, we cloned the genomic DNAs for Ig
from a murine hybridoma that produces PL7-6 monoclonal antibody specific to human
P-selectin and expressed them in SP2/0 myelomas using a series of pSV2 vectors.
Transfected cells that produce the mouse/human chimeric anti-human P-selectin
antibody were geneticin-selected and screened by an immunoassay using immobilized
antigen. The chimeric antibody, cPL-2R1, expressed by the resultant clone has the
murine Ig variable region and the human Ig constant region. The native antibody
PL7-6 and the chimeric antibody cPL-2R1 react equally with purified P-selectin
and thrombin-stimulated platelets. Competitive inhibition tests demonstrated that
the native antibody PL7-6 and the chimeric antibody cPL-2R1 had identical
affinity for purified human P-selectin. Thus, although human IgG1 constant region
was substituted for the murine counterpart in this chimeric antibody, its
specificity and binding affinity for P-selectin was not altered. This chimeric
antibody may prove useful when employed in combination with imaging reagents or
therapeutic drugs for targeting activated platelets or endothelium in patients
with thrombosis or intravascular inflammation.

PMID: 7520038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Phys Rev B Condens Matter. 1994 Feb 15;49(7):4987-4992.

Electronic and transport properties of perfect sp2-bonded amorphous graphitic
carbon.

Huang MZ, Ching WY.

PMID: 10011433  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


401. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 1994 Feb;40(6):851-6.

Expression of recombinant antibody and secreted alkaline phosphatase in mammalian
cells. Influence of cell line and culture system upon production kinetics.

Racher AJ(1), Moreira JL, Alves PM, Wirth M, Weidle UH, Hauser H, Carrondo MJ,
Griffiths JB.

Author information: 
(1)PHLS CAMR, Biologics Division, Salisbury, Wiltshire, UK.

The growth and productivity of an Sp2/0 cell line, F3b10, expressing a
recombinant antibody (rAb) and BHK21 cells expressing either the same rAb from
the same plasmids (BHK.IgG) or secreted alkaline phosphatase (SEAP) (BHK.SEAP)
were investigated. The F3b10 line was grown as a single cell suspension. The BHK 
lines were grown either as suspended natural aggregates or on Cytodex 3
microcarriers. The data for F3b10 showed that the cell-specific rAb production
rate (QsrAb) increased in parallel with increases in the specific growth rate
(mu). A similar result was obtained for suspended aggregate cultures of both
recombinant BHK cell lines. In contrast, for microcarrier cultures of both BHK
cell lines, Qsproduct increased as mu decreased. This report shows that the
relationship between cell growth and Qsproduct for the cell lines and products
studied is dependent upon the culture process. In systems where recombinant cells
are growing as a single cell suspension or within a natural suspension
aggregrate, Qsproduct increased with increases in mu. In such systems, the cells 
have a rounded morphology. When cells were grown on microcarriers. Qsproduct
decreased as mu increased. Cells growing attached to a surface are flat and
elongated. The observed differences in the relationship of Qsproduct to mu are
correlated with changes in cell morphology. The relationship between Qsproduct
and mu is also affected by the choice of cell line.

PMID: 7764571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. J Immunol Methods. 1994 Jan 3;167(1-2):271-8.

A new vector for the high level expression of chimeric antibodies in myeloma
cells.

Shitara K(1), Nakamura K, Tokutake-Tanaka Y, Fukushima M, Hanai N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Tokyo Research Laboratories, Kyowa Hakko Kogyo Co.
Ltd., Japan.

We previously reported the expression of a mouse/human chimeric anti-ganglioside 
GD3 antibody, KM871 (IgG1,kappa) in mouse myeloma SP2/0 cells under the control
of the ecotropic Moloney virus long terminal repeat by the co-transfection of
chimeric heavy (H) and light (L) chain vectors (Shitara et al. (1993) Cancer
Immunol. Immunother.). To establish an efficient and high level expression system
for the chimeric antibody, we did comparative study on vector systems and host
cells. An improved expression vector, named 'a tandem vector, pChi641HLGM4' was
constructed, in which both of the chimeric H and L chain gene transcription units
and a dihydrofolate reductase (dhfr) gene transcription unit were inserted. When 
two kinds of mouse myeloma cell lines, SP2/0 and P3U1, were used as host cells,
frequency of the incidence of antibody-producing transfectants was markedly
increased by the use of the tandem vector compared with the use of the mixture of
each chimeric H vector and L chain vector. To select out appropriate host cells, 
transfection frequency and antibody production level were compared among SP2/0,
P3U1 and rat myeloma YB2/0 cells by transfection of the tandem vector. YB2/0 cell
was shown to have the highest potential in both the transfection frequency and
the antibody production. Introduction of the tandem vector into YB2/0 cells and
the subsequent amplification with 50-200 nM methotrexate gave rise to several
clones that stably secreted 70-100 micrograms/10(6) cells per 24 h of the
chimeric antibody. This productivity of the antibody is one of the highest levels
which have been achieved by other investigators using transfected myeloma cells. 
Using this system it took only 2-3 months to establish the transfectant clones
which stably produced the chimeric antibody.

PMID: 8308283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Zhongguo Ji Sheng Chong Xue Yu Ji Sheng Chong Bing Za Zhi. 1994;12(1):56-8.

[Study on the effect of monoclonal antibodies on Giardia lamblia in vitro].

[Article in Chinese]

Jia KD(1), Zhu YG, Lu SQ, Wang FR, Li GP, Wen PE.

Author information: 
(1)Shandong Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Jining.

Monoclonal antibodies (McAbs) were generated by fusion of SP2/0 myeloma cells
with spleen cells from BALB/c mice immunized with Giardia lamblia trophozoites.
To define the effect of the McAb on Giardia lamblia, trophozoites were
subcultured axenically after contact with McAb for 1 h at 37 degrees C. The McAbs
1G5 and 1E2 (both IgG1) were able to inhibit the growth of trophozoite at the
rate of 63.4% and 35%, respectively. The inhibitory effect was decreased along
with the decreasing quantity of McAb (from dilution 1:45 to 1:225) added to the
TYI-S-33 medium. The actions of McAbs could be eliminated by absorption with
trophozoites and not be influenced by complement in fresh guinea-pig serum, thus 
the actions of McAbs appeared to be specific and complement independent.

PMID: 8044909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Tsitologiia. 1994;36(7):687-95.

[The isolation and genetic characteristics of the new cell line of mouse myeloma 
spEBR-5 selected for ethidium bromide resistance and characterized by multiple
drug resistance].

[Article in Russian]

Berezkina EV, Lipskaia LA, Grinchuk TM, Kovaleva ZV, Sorokina EA, Vasiukhin VI,
Ignatova TN.

Stable mutant cells spEBR-5, resistant to ethidium bromide in concentration of 5 
micrograms/ml, have been isolated by multistep selection in mouse myeloma cells
sp2/0-Ag14. The spEBR-5 cells, selected with ethidium bromide, appeared to be
cross resistant to unrelated drugs in connection with mdr/lb gene amplification
and overexpression. Five specific chromosomal markers were detected in the
karyotype of spEBR-5 cells as a result of chromosome structural rearrangement. No
cytological manifestation of gene amplification such as HCR of chromosomes or DMs
was found. A diffuse location of amplified sequences in chromosome(s) is
suggested. The new mutant cell lines spEBR-5 can be used as a model for
investigation of multidrug resistance mechanisms.

PMID: 7900209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Acta Vet Hung. 1994;42(2-3):343-6.

Determination of the antigenic variability of pseudorabies virus field isolates
with monoclonal antibodies.

Matisová J(1), Lesko J, Gallo J, Subr Z, Sabo A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava.

Five stable hybridoma cell lines secreting monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) were
obtained by fusing spleen cells of pseudorabies virus (strain BUK) immunized
BALB/c mice with mouse myeloma cell line SP2/0. Plate-trapped and
antibody-trapped antigen ELISAs were done to compare the interaction of MAbs with
TOP and "K" strains and 7 Slovak field isolates. Only 2 Slovak isolates reacted
with all the MAbs, 3 MAbs reacted with TOP and "K" strains. One Slovak isolate
gave no reaction with any MAbs.

PMID: 7810429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Chin J Biotechnol. 1994;10(2):121-8.

Preparation, characterization and application of monoclonal antibodies against
PAI-1.

Ding H(1), Wu X, Zhou X, Zhu Y, Song H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Shanghai Medical University, China.

Six hybridoma cell lines (AP1-AP6) secreting monoclonal antibodies (McAb) against
PAI-1 were obtained by fusing the murine myeloma cell line SP2/0 with the spleen 
cells from Balb/c mouse immunized with recombinant PAI-1 expressed in E. coli.
These antibodies were purified by SPA affinity chromatography. All McAbs
recognized rPAI-1 and PAI-1 from the human hepatoma cell line HepG2. The titers
of ascites were more than 10(6). The antibody-antigen affinity constants (Kaff)
for anti-PAI-1 McAb measured by EIA were between 3.45 x 10(7)-1.05 x 10(10) M.
AP2 and AP3 McAbs were effective in quenching the activity of PAI-1. Partial
quenching of PAI-1 activity was achieved with AP4, AP5 and AP6 McAbs
respectively. AP1 McAb had no effect upon PAI-1 activity. Three of the six McAbs 
(AP1, AP4 and AP5) bound to the PAI-1/t-PA complex, while the others did not. The
PAI-1 was purified 51 folds to homogeneity from serum free medium of HepG2 with
the recovery rate of 92% by one-step procedure using Sepharose 4B conjugated with
anti-PAI-1 McAb (AP1, AP3 and AP4). A sandwich ELISA for the measurement of PAI-1
antigen in human plasma was developed, based on anti-PAI-1 McAb against
non-overlapping epitopes. The mean value of plasma PAI-1 for the healthy donors
was 24.7 +/- 7.75 ng/ml measured by ELISA.

PMID: 7803688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Cytotechnology. 1994;15(1-3):117-28.

Induction of apoptosis in oxygen-deprived cultures of hybridoma cells.

Mercille S(1), Massie B.

Author information: 
(1)Biomira Inc., Montréal, Québec, Canada.

It is now well documented that apoptosis represents the prevalent mode of cell
death in hybridoma cultures. Apoptotic or programmed cell death occurs
spontaneously in late exponential phase of batch cultures. Until lately, no
specific triggering factors had been identified. Recently, we observed that
glutamine, cystine or glucose deprivation induced apoptosis in both hybridoma and
myeloma cell lines whereas accumulation of toxic metabolites induced necrotic
cell death in these cells. Other triggering factors such as oxygen deprivation
might also be responsible for induction of apoptosis. In the present study,
induction of cell death by exposure to anoxia was examined in batch culture of
the SP2/0-derived hybridoma D5 clone. The mode of cell death was studied by
morphological examination of acridine orange-ethidium bromide stained cells in a 
1.5 L bioreactor culture grown under anoxic conditions for 75 hours. Under such
conditions, viable cell density levelled off rapidly and remained constant for 25
hours. After 45 hours of anoxia, cell viability had decreased to 30% and the dead
cell population was found to be 90% apoptotic. In terms of cellular metabolism,
anoxia resulted in an increase in the utilization rates of glucose and arginine, 
and in a decrease in the utilization rate of glutamine. The lactate production
rate and the yield of lactate on glucose increased significantly while the MAb
production rate decreased. These results demonstrate that glycolysis becomes the 
main source of energy under anoxic conditions. Cells incubated for 10 hours or
less under anoxic conditions were able to recuperate almost immediately and
displayed normal growth rates when reincubated in oxic conditions whereas cells
incubated for 22 hours or more displayed reduced growth rates. Nonetheless, even 
after 22 h or 29 h of anoxia, cells reincubated in oxic conditions showed no
further progression into apoptosis. Therefore, upon removal of the triggering
signal, induction of apoptosis ceased.

PMID: 7765924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Hum Antibodies Hybridomas. 1994;5(3-4):98-104.

Antibody production of a human EBV-transformed B cell line and its
heterohybridoma and trioma cell line descendants in different culture systems.

Gustafsson B(1), Hinkula J.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Tumorbiology Center, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden.

Cells of an EBV-transformed human lymphoblastoid B cell line, producing
antibodies directed against tetanus toxin, were fused with mouse myeloma cells
(SP2/0) and with mouse-human heteromyeloma cells (SPAM-8) resulting in the
formation of heterohybridoma and trioma cells, respectively. Antibody production 
of the three cell lines were studied under different culture conditions. All
three cell lines produced antibodies in concentrations ranging from 2.6 to 6.4
micrograms ml-1 in spent medium from stationary flask cultures. Dialysis cultures
of trioma and heterohybridoma cells resulted in concentrations of 36 and 20
micrograms ml-1, respectively, whereas no significant increase was obtained with 
the EBV-transformed cells. Trioma cells, cultured in a hollow fiber cartridge
bioreactor produced antibodies in concentrations of average of 303 micrograms
ml-1, whereas the EBV-transformed cells did not adapt to this system.
Furthermore, trioma and heterohybridoma cells injected into the intraperitoneal
cavity of SCID-mice, produced antibodies in ascites fluid in concentrations of
500 and 640 micrograms ml-1 respectively.

PMID: 7756584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Hum Antibodies Hybridomas. 1994;5(3-4):105-15.

Recombinant mouse/human chimeric anti-colorectal carcinoma antibody cACT19.

Xiang J(1), Moyana T, Liu E.

Author information: 
(1)Saskatoon Cancer Center, Department of Microbiology, University of
Saskatchewan, Canada.

A mouse/human chimeric antibody cACT19 derived from the murine ACT19 antibody was
constructed; it recognizes an epitope different from the sialosyl-Tn on the TAG72
antigen as defined by the B72.3 antibody. This chimeric cACT19 antibody was
constructed by using two expression vectors, the heavy chain expression vector
mpSV2neo-EP1-VHC gamma 1 and the light chain expression vector mpSV2gpt-EP1-VKCK.
These vectors contain the following: (i) the neo or gpt gene as a selection
marker, (ii) the murine immunoglobulin promoter and enhancer (EP1), (iii) the
genomic DNA fragments of human immunoglobulin constant region (CK and C gamma 1) 
and (iv) the murine cDNA fragments of VH or VK region cloned from the murine
ACT19 cDNA library. These two vector DNAs were sequentially transfected into the 
SP2/0Ag14 cell line. Transfectants were selected in media containing both G418
and mycophenolic acid. The chimeric cACT19 antibody was purified from the
transfectant supernate by Protein A Sepharose chromatography. We confirmed that
the chimeric cACT19 antibody was reactive for an epitope that differed from the
sialosyl-Tn on the TAG72 antigen. This was achieved by using the TAG72-binding
inhibition ELISA utilizing various monosaccharides and disialyllato-N-tetraose
with the latter containing the NeuAc2-6 alpha Ga1NAc structure. The
immunohistochemical double-staining technique provided further evidence of the
difference between the epitope defined by the chimeric cACT19 antibody and the
sialosyl-Tn epitope by illustrating complementary as well as noncomplementary
expression of these two epitopes in different areas of colon carcinoma tissues.
We also demonstrated that the chimeric cACT19 antibody displayed much more
effective ADCC and CDC for the human OVAR3 tumor cells than the murine ACT19
antibody. Therefore, the mouse/human chimeric anti-colorectal carcinoma cACT19
antibody may prove to be useful in cancer immunotherapy in its own right, or
especially when used in combination with the chimeric B72.3 antibody.

PMID: 7756575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Microbiol Immunol. 1994;38(3):177-82.

Monoclonal antibodies to spirosin of Yersinia enterocolitica and analysis of the 
localization of spirosome by use of them.

Yamato M(1), Takahashi Y, Tomotake H, Ota F, Hirota K, Yamaguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Microbiology, School of Medicine, University of Tokushima, 
Japan.

Two hybridomas producing monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) were prepared by fusing
myeloma cells (Sp2/0-Ag14) with mouse spleen cells immunized with purified
spirosin from Yersinia enterocolitica SYT-11-72 (YE72). The antibodies produced
by them were designated MAbs-S5 and S27. They were IgG2a and IgG1, respectively, 
both with kappa light chains. MAbs-S5 and S27 reacted specifically with spirosin 
from YE72. On Western blotting after limited proteolysis with Staphylococcus
aureus V8 protease, YE72 spirosin revealed peptide fragments of 35 and 37 kDa
reacting markedly with MAb-S5, which suggested the presence of an antigenic
determinant on these fragments. By cellular fractionation of YE72 and subsequent 
EIA and Western blot analysis, spirosome was shown to be present in the cytoplasm
of YE72.

PMID: 7521508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Isr J Med Sci. 1994 Jan;30(1):1-6.

Inoculation of BCL1 lymphoma cells into CSJL/J F1 mice inhibits acute
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Abramsky O(1), Karussis DM, Mizrachi-Koll R, Lehmann D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Hadassah University Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel.

T cell vaccination, which protects rodents against experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis (EAE), has been shown to induce anti-idiotypic response in the 
T cell compartment. CD5 B cells (B1 cells) are the main source of natural
autoantibodies, and are often characterized by high idiotypic connectivity. In
this study we examined the possibility that idiotypic connectivity in the B cell 
compartment may also play a role in the regulation of EAE. We inoculated CSJLF1
mice (H-2d,s) with a CD5 B cell line, the BCL1 lymphoma cells (H-2d), and
subsequently induced EAE. The injection of as few as 1,000 BCL1 lymphoma cells
significantly blocked the development of EAE. Injection of CD5-negative myeloma
cells (SP2) had no effect on the pathogenesis of the disease. Unlike control
animals, lymphocytes from BCL1 lymphoma-injected mice significantly proliferate
in response to interleukin-5, a growth factor to CD5 B cells. The proliferative
response of lymphocytes from BCL1 inoculated mice to mitogenic stimulation was
rather unchanged, indicating that no general immunosuppression has been induced
by inoculating BCLJ lymphoma. These experiments suggest that CD5 B cells may be
involved in the regulation of EAE.

PMID: 7511133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. J Exp Med. 1994 Jan 1;179(1):195-202.

Recognition of an immunoglobulin VH epitope by influenza virus-specific class I
major histocompatibility complex-restricted cytolytic T lymphocytes.

Cao W(1), Myers-Powell BA, Braciale TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Beirne B. Carter Center for Immunology Research, University of Virginia Health
Sciences Center, Charlottesville 22908.

There are two immunogenic sites on the type A influenza A/Japan/57 (H2N2)
hemagglutinin (HA) that can be recognized by class I major histocompatibility
complex (MHC), H-2Kd-restricted cytolytic T lymphocytes (CTLs). One of these
sites encompasses two distinct partially overlapping epitopes, which span HA
residues 204-212 and 210-219. During the analysis of the fine specificity of CTL 
clones directed to the HA 210-219 epitope, we found that one clone 40-2 also
recognized the myeloma cell line P3x63-Ag8. P3x63-Ag8 is derived from the MOPC 21
myeloma and expresses an immunoglobulin (Ig) heavy chain variable region (VH)
gene which is a member of the murine 7183 VH gene family. Recognition was
specific for the endogenously processed MOPC 21 heavy chain in association with
the Kd molecules, since the SP2/0 derivative of P3x63-Ag8, which does not make a 
functional Ig H chain, is not recognized. The VH epitope recognized by clone 40-2
could be mapped to a 10 amino acid peptide spanning MOPC 21 VH residues 49-58.
Cross-reactivity for the VH gene product was also demonstrable in some
heterogeneous populations of CTL generated in response to influenza virus
infection. These results represent the first demonstration of cross-reactivity
for an endogenously processed product of a self-Ig by the CTL directed to a
foreign antigen and raise the possibility that the Ig VH expression may regulate 
the CD8+ T cell response to foreign antigens.

PMCID: PMC2191332
PMID: 7505798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Mol Immunol. 1993 Dec;30(18):1647-54.

Cloning, expression and characterization of a murine-human chimeric antibody with
specificity for pre-S2 surface antigen of hepatitis B virus.

Jin BR(1), Ryu CJ, Park SS, Namgung U, Hong HJ, Han MH.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Engineering Laboratory, Genetic Engineering Research Institute, KIST, 
Taejon, Korea.

The cloning, expression and characterization of a murine-human chimeric antibody 
with specificity for the pre-S2 surface antigen (Ag) of hepatitis B virus (HBV)
is described. The heavy and light chain variable region (VH and VL) genes
encoding the murine monoclonal antibody (mAb) were isolated and combined with
human gamma 1 and kappa constant region genes, respectively. The expression
vectors containing the chimeric heavy and light chain genes were sequentially
electroporated into murine Sp2/0 hybridoma cells and transfectomas secreting
chimeric antibody were isolated. The chimeric antibody was purified and
characterized by ELISA, Western analysis and competition immunoassay,
demonstrating that the transfectoma functionally express and secrete murine-human
chimeric antibody which retained the specificity and affinity of the parental
murine mAb.

PMID: 8272078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. J Clin Invest. 1993 Dec;92(6):2821-33.

Naturally occurring anti-i/I cold agglutinins may be encoded by different VH3
genes as well as the VH4.21 gene segment.

Jefferies LC(1), Carchidi CM, Silberstein LE.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, Philadelphia 19104.

In the current study, we wished to determine if the V regions encoding the
naturally occurring anti-i/I Cold Agglutinins (anti-i/I CA) differ from
pathogenic anti-i/I CA that are exclusively encoded by the VH4.21 gene. After EBV
transformation of B lymphocytes, we generated one anti-I secreting clone from
each of two individuals; clone 4G (individual CM, PBL) and clone Sp1 (individual 
SC, spleen). Clone 4G expresses a VH3 gene sequence that is 92% homologous to the
germline gene WHG26. Clone Sp1 also expresses a VH3 gene that is 98% homologous
to the fetally rearranged M85/20P1 gene. Another clone, Sp2 (anti-i specificity),
from individual SC is 98% homologous to the germline gene VH4.21. For
correlation, we studied anti-i/I CA fractions purified from 15 normal sera and
found no or relatively small amounts of 9G4 (VH4.21 related idiotype) reactive
IgM. Five cold agglutinin fractions contained large amounts of VH3-encoded IgM
(compared to pooled normal IgM) by virtue of their binding to modified protein
Staph A (SPA), and absorption of three CA fractions with modified SPA
specifically removed anti-i/I binding specificity entirely. Collectively, the
data indicate that naturally occurring anti-i/I CA may be encoded to a large
extent by non-VH4.21-related genes, and that the VH4.21 gene is not uniquely
required for anti-i/I specificity.

PMCID: PMC288483
PMID: 8254037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. J Med Chem. 1993 Nov 26;36(24):3784-94.

Synthesis and anti-HIV-1 activity of a series of imidazo[1,5-b]pyridazines.

Livermore DG(1), Bethell RC, Cammack N, Hancock AP, Hann MM, Green DV, Lamont RB,
Noble SA, Orr DC, Payne JJ, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Chemistry II Department, Glaxo Group Research Ltd., Greenford,
Middlesex, U.K.

A series of substituted imidazo[1,5-b]pyridazines have been prepared and tested
for inhibitory activity against the reverse transcriptase of HIV-1 (RT) and their
ability to inhibit the growth of infected MT-4 cells. Crystal data are reported
on two compounds, 15c and 33. From the structure-activity relationships developed
within this and other series, it is proposed that key features of the interaction
with RT include hydrogen-bond acceptor and aromatic pi-orbital bonding with the
imidazopyridazine nucleus and a benzoyl function separated from the heterocycle
by a suitable spacer group. Exceptional activity against the reverse
transcriptase of HIV-1 (IC50 = 0.65 nM) was obtained with a
2-imidazolyl-substituted derivative, 7-[2-(1H-imidazol-1-
yl)-5-methylimidazo-[1,5-b]pyridazin-7-yl]-1-phenyl-1-heptanone (33) which is
attributed to additional binding of the imidazole sp2 nitrogen atom. A number of 
the compounds in this series also inhibit the replication of HIV-1 in vitro in
MT-4 and C8166 cells at levels observed with the nucleoside AZT.

PMID: 7504733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. DNA Cell Biol. 1993 Oct;12(8):675-83.

Genetic infection induces protective in vivo immune responses.

Williams WV(1), Boyer JD, Merva M, Livolsi V, Wilson D, Wang B, Weiner DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia.

Drug-induced abortive retroviral infection has been reported to induce both
T-cell and B-cell immunity in vivo. We sought to analyze if
replication-incompetent retroviruses could induce the development of similarly
protective in vivo immune responses in a more desirable fashion. To evaluate
retroviral transduction vaccination (genetic infection), a plasmid encoding human
CD4 in a retroviral vector was transfected into the pA317 amphotropic retroviral 
packaging system. The resulting replication defective retrovirus was used to
transduce BALB/c mice prior to tumor challenge with human CD4. Immunization
elicited specific humoral and cellular anti-human CD4 responses. We evaluated
anti-cell responses using a tumor model system. We observed that BALB/c mice
challenged with SP2/0 lymphoma cells develop lethal tumors and die within 7 weeks
of challenge. Cloned SP2/0 cells stably transfected with the human cell-surface
antigen CD4 also develop tumors in naive mice and succumb to the tumors in a
similar manner to SP2/0 inoculated animals. In contrast, CD4
retrovirus-transduced animals, when challenged with the CD4-expressing SP2/0
cells, demonstrated a low incidence of tumors and significantly enhanced survival
compared to the mice immunized similarly with human CD8 retrovirus. These results
establish an in vivo tumor challenge system with relevance to the development of 
protective in vivo immune responses, and indicate that genetic infection is a
useful technique for inducing protective immunity.

PMID: 8397826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Int Immunol. 1993 Oct;5(10):1301-7.

Priming of cytotoxic T lymphocytes at various stages of ontogeny with
transfectoma cells expressing a chimeric Ig heavy chain gene bearing an influenza
virus nucleoprotein peptide.

Kuzu Y(1), Kuzu H, Zaghouani H, Bona C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY
10029.

The amino acid residues 147-161 of the nucleoprotein (NP) of influenza virus
represent a T cell epitope recognized by cytotoxic T cells (CTLs) in association 
with Kd class I molecules. When SP2/0 myeloma B cells are transfected with a
chimeric heavy chain gene bearing this particular NP(147-161) peptide, they are
lysed by CTLs specific for the NP(147-161) peptide. Cells that are transfected
with this heavy chain chimera and the parental light chain secreted a soluble
Ig-NP chimera and were also lysed by the CTLs. Herein, we present evidence that
transfectoma cells are able to induce in vitro proliferation of NP specific CTL, 
whereas immobilized Ig-NP chimeras do not. Furthermore, the transfectoma cells
expressing the chimeric heavy chain prime NP specific CTLs in adult as well as in
newborn mice, while SP2/0 cells coated with NP(147-161) synthetic peptide do not.
These data indicate that the NP peptide needs to be cleaved from the Ig context
in order to be presented to T cells and that only endogenously generated NP
peptide is immunogenic.

PMID: 8268136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Mov Disord. 1993 Oct;8(4):495-500.

Blink reflex and the masseter inhibitory reflex in patients with dystonia.

Pauletti G(1), Berardelli A, Cruccu G, Agostino R, Manfredi M.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Neurologiche, Università di Roma La Sapienza, Italy.

The excitatory and inhibitory interneuronal pathways in the brainstem are tested 
by examining the blink reflex and the masseter inhibitory reflex, respectively.
We studied the R2 component of the blink reflex and the SP2 component of the
masseter inhibitory reflex and their recovery cycle in 56 patients with various
forms of dystonia. In patients with cranial, cervical, and generalized dystonia, 
but not in patients with extracranial segmental dystonia, the recovery cycle of
both reflexes was enhanced. The recovery cycle of R2 and SP2 can demonstrate
subclinical changes in excitability of brainstem interneurons. The degree of
enhancement of the recovery cycles did not correlate, however, with the severity 
of clinical facial muscle impairment. In addition, the recovery cycles correlated
positively with each other, showing that excitatory as well as inhibitory
interneuronal pathways in the brainstem are perturbed in dystonia. Study of the
trigemino-facial and trigemino-trigeminal reflexes provides an objective tool for
assessing functional abnormalities in dystonia.

PMID: 8232360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Biochemistry. 1993 Sep 28;32(38):9917-25.

Correlation of the molecular electrostatic potential surface of an enzymatic
transition state with novel transition-state inhibitors.

Horenstein BA(1), Schramm VL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva
University, Bronx, New York 10461.

The transition state stabilized by nucleoside hydrolase from Crithidia
fasciculata is characterized by nearly complete glycosidic bond cleavage and
oxycarbonium character in the ribosyl group [Horenstein, B. A., Parkin, D. W.,
Estupinan, B., & Schramm, V. L. (1991) Biochemistry 30, 10788-10795]. The
electrostatic potential surface of the transition state provides detailed
information which should be useful in the design of transition-state analogues
[Horestein, B. A., & Schramm, V. L. (1993) Biochemistry 32, 7089-7097]. The
electrostatic potential surface of inosine at the transition state contains a
distributed positive charge resulting from the oxycarbonium ion character of the 
ribosyl ring. The ribosyl ring pucker is 3'-exo as a result of the near sp2
hybridization at Cl' of the ribose ring. A series of transition-state analogues
have been synthesized which incorporate single or combined features of the
transition state. Each feature of the transition state was analyzed for its
contribution to binding energy. Kinetic inhibition constants correlate with the
similarity of the inhibitor to the experimentally determined transition-state
structure. Dissociation constants for the substrate and products of the reaction 
of inosine, hypoxanthine, and ribose are 380, 6200, and 700 microM, respectively.
A transition-state analogue was synthesized which contains the required hydroxyl 
groups of the ribose ring, the positive charge feature of the oxycarbonium ion,
and a hydrophobic mimic of the purine ring. The inhibitor
1(S)-phenyl-1,4-dideoxy-1,4-iminoribitol acts as a competitive inhibitor with
respect to inosine with a dissociation constant of 0.17 microM. In addition, the 
inhibitor exhibits slow-onset inhibition which provides a final equilibrium
dissociation constant of approximately 0.03 microM.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250
WORDS)

PMID: 8399161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. FEBS Lett. 1993 Sep 13;330(2):111-3.

Production of recombinant antibodies in lymphoid and non-lymphoid cells.

Deyev SM(1), Lieber A, Radko BV, Polanovsky OL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetic Immunology, Engelhardt Institute of Molecular 
Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences.

A recombinant tandem of 'chimeric' mouse/human immunoglobulin (Ig) genes was
constructed and inserted into plasmid pGEM1 under the control of the T7
bacteriophage RNA polymerase promoter. Lymphoid (Sp2/0) and non-lymphoid (CHO)
cell lines used for transfection contained in their genomes a semisynthetic gene 
of T7 RNA polymerase and steadily expressed this enzyme. It was shown for the
first time that a stable polycystronic transcription of the Ig gene tandem occurs
under the control of a single T7 phage promoter, both in lymphoid and
non-lymphoid cells. Synthesis of kappa-light and epsilon-heavy Ig chains and
functionally active antibodies was observed in the above-mentioned transfected
cell lines.

PMID: 8365479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. J Clin Microbiol. 1993 Sep;31(9):2343-9.

Immune response to synthetic peptides of hepatitis delta antigen.

Poisson F(1), Baillou F, Dubois F, Janvier B, Roingeard P, Goudeau A.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Microbiologie Médicale et Moléculaire, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique, Tours, France.

Hepatitis delta antigen (HDAg) is the only viral protein known to be expressed
during hepatitis delta virus (HDV) infection. Detection of antibody to HDAg
(anti-HD) is the usual method for diagnosis of HDV infection since viremia lasts 
only a few weeks. In an effort to identify the major epitopes recognized by
humans during natural infection, four oligopeptides including residues 2 to 17
(SP1), 155 to 172 (SP2), 168 to 182 (SP3), and 189 to 211 (SP4) of the HDAg
molecule were synthesized and probed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay with a 
panel of 80 serum specimens from 45 patients suffering from either HDV-hepatitis 
B virus coinfections (n = 17) or HDV superinfections (n = 28). Sera from infected
patients recognized these relatively short peptides. Peptide SP2 was the most
antigenic; 71% of serum specimens reacted. Antibody to SP2 was also the commonest
in sera taken early in the course of the disease. Peptide SP2 corresponds to one 
of the two regions which is highly conserved between different isolates. Among
the 63 serum specimens which scored anti-HD positive by a commercial assay, all
but 3 reacted to at least one of the peptides (95% agreement). Peptide assays
appeared to be significantly more sensitive than the commercial assay with native
HDAg early in the course of HDV infection since 14 of 17 (82%) serum specimens
which scored anti-HD negative in the commercial assay reacted to one or more
peptides. All serum specimens giving one or more positive results with the
various peptides were confirmed as being HDV positive by an inhibition assay with
free peptide in solution. The immune response to HDAg peptides vared greatly
between individuals. No specific reactivity profile could be assigned to those
with either HDV-hepatitis B virus coinfections or HDV superinfections. Overall,
HDAg peptides appeared to be convenient reagents in addition to native antigen
for the development of new and improved diagnostic tests for HDV infection.

PMCID: PMC265758
PMID: 8408553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Sep 1;90(17):7995-9.

Secretion of a single-gene-encoded immunoglobulin from myeloma cells.

Shu L(1), Qi CF, Schlom J, Kashmiri SV.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Immunology and Biology, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.

We describe construction of a single gene encoding a single-chain
immunoglobulin-like molecule. This single-gene approach circumvents
inefficiencies inherent in delivering two genes into a mammalian cell and in the 
assembly of a functional immunoglobulin molecule. It would also facilitate ex
vivo transfection of cells for gene-therapy protocols. SP2/0 murine myeloma cells
transfected with the single gene SG delta CLCH1 expressed a single-chain protein,
SC delta CLCH1, comprising approximately 60 kDa of the anti-carcinoma monoclonal 
antibody (mAb) CC49. The single-chain protein consisted of the heavy- and
light-chain variable (VH and VL) domains of the mAb covalently joined through a
short linker peptide, while the carboxyl end of the VL domain was linked to the
amino terminus of the human gamma 1 Fc region through the hinge region. The
single-chain protein assembled into a dimeric molecule, termed SCA delta CLCH1,
of approximately 120 kDa and was secreted into the tissue culture fluid. SDS/PAGE
analysis of the secreted immunoglobulin purified by protein G affinity
chromatography confirmed the size of the molecule. The native mAb CC49 and SCA
delta CLCH1 of CC49 showed similar binding to the tumor-associated glycoprotein
TAG-72, and the chimeric mAb CC49 and SCA delta CLCH1 showed similar cytotoxic
activity. This single-gene construct approach provides a way of generating an
immunoglobulin-like molecule which retains the specificity, binding properties,
and cytolytic activity of the chimeric mAb CC49. The immunoglobulin-like molecule
SCA delta CLCH1 is potentially a therapeutic and diagnostic reagent against a
range of human carcinomas.

PMCID: PMC47274
PMID: 8367454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Hua Xi Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 1993 Sep;24(3):254-7.

[Production and identification of monoclonal anti-idiotype antibodies against
anti-phenolic glycolipid-I antibody of Mycobacterium leprae].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu X, Wang D, Mu J.

Hybridoma (4C4) secreting monoclone anti-idiotype antibody (McAb2) against
anti-phenolic glycolipid-I (PGL-I) antibody (Ab1) was produced by fusion of SP2/0
myeloma cells and spleen cells of syngeneic mice which had been previously
tolerant to human IgM 4C4 monoclone anti-idiotype antibody was identified with a 
series of experiments including competitive and neutralizing inhibition ELISA. It
was found that the binding of McAb2 with rabbit anti-PGL-I antibody could be
competitively inhibited by NT-O-BSA (synthetic analog of PGL-I) and neutralized
by polyclonal anti-PGL-I antibody derived from various origins (human or rabbit);
McAb2 could block the binding of purified human Ab1 with NT-O-BSA. The assay of
McAb2 as mimic antigen demonstrated that McAb2 could substitute for NT-O-BSA in
leprosy serodiagnosis. These results show that anti-idiotype antibody produced by
4C4 is a monoclone anti-idiotype antibody bearing internal image of PGL-I and
possibly can be used in leprosy serodiagnosis.

PMID: 8288191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Hua Xi Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 1993 Sep;24(3):250-3.

[Development of hybridomas secreting monoclonal anti-idiotypic antibodies that
bear the internal image of the terminal trisaccharide of PGL-I].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang D, Jiang Z, Mu J, Li M, Wang B.

Two hybridomas designated as F7B7 and F7B9 secreting monoclonal anti-idiotypic
antibodies against terminal trisaccharide of PGL-I were developed by fusion of
SP2/0 cells and spleen cells of BALB/c mouse immunized with mouse monoclonal
anti-trisaccharide of PGL-I (MAb1-E10F1). To characterize the F7B7, the following
results were obtained. First, F7B7 reacted with MAb1-E10F1 specifically.
Secondly, the cross ELISA neutralizing tests gave positive results. The binding
of anti-trisaccharide positive serum with trisaccharide (contained in
semi-synthetic antigen, NT-O-BSA) was inhibited F7B7 and the degree of inhibition
showed dose-dependent manner. The binding of anti-trisaccharide positive serum
with F7B7 was inhibited by NT-O-BSA and the degree of inhibition also showed
dose-dependent manner. It was concluded that the hybridoma F7B7 is able to
secrete monoclonal anti-idiotypic antibodies that bear the internal image of
trisaccharide of PGL-I. The potentials and advantages of monoclonal
anti-idiotypic antibody F7B7 as surrogate antigen in the serodiagnosis of leprosy
have been discussed.

PMID: 8288190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. J Biotechnol. 1993 Sep;30(3):339-50.

Mechanisms of ammonia and ammonium ion toxicity in animal cells: transport across
cell membranes.

Martinelle K(1), Häggström L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Royal Institute of Technology,
Stockholm, Sweden.

A model for transport of ammonia and ammonium ions across cell membranes is
presented. The model suggests that ammonium ions compete with potassium ions for 
inward transport, over the cytoplasmic membrane, via potassium transport proteins
like the Na+/K(+)-ATPase and the Na+K+2Cl(-)-cotransporter. It also explains the 
difference between the ammonia/ammonium that is added to the cells and which is
formed by the cells during metabolism of amino acids, especially glutamine and
glutamate. The ammonium transport and subsequent events lead to predictable
intracellular and extracellular pH (pHe) changes. Experiments which verified the 
model and the predicted consequences were performed by measurements of the pHe in
concentrated cell suspensions. Addition of ammonium ions caused a time-dependent 
pHe increase which was inhibited by potassium ions. The test system is not per se
specific for transport measurements but the effect of potassium ions on the pHe
strongly favors our suggested model. Simple diffusion of ammonium ions would not 
be counteracted by potassium ions. The results show that ammonium ion transport
in the murine myeloma cell line (Sp2/0-Ag14) used is inhibited by an excess of
potassium ions. Results from experiments with specific inhibitors of suggested
transport proteins were not conclusive. It is postulated that one important toxic
effect of ammonia/ammonium is an increased demand for maintenance energy, caused 
by the need to maintain ion gradients over the cytoplasmic membrane. The results 
also suggest that potassium ions can be used to detoxify ammonia/ammonium in
animal cell cultivations.

PMID: 7764110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Biotechniques. 1993 Aug;15(2):286-92.

An extended primer set for PCR amplification of murine kappa variable regions.

Leung SO(1), Dion AS, Pellegrini MC, Goldenberg DM, Hansen HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Garden State Cancer Center, Center for Molecular Medicine and Immunology,
Newark, NJ.

The design and successful usage of an extended primer set for the PCR
amplification of murine variable kappa light chain sequences from mouse
hybridomas are described. Since some of these primer pairs also amplify the
endogenous SP2/0 aberrant light chain sequence, strategies to distinguish the
irrelevant SP2/0 from the sequence of interest are also provided.

PMID: 8373597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Mol Immunol. 1993 Aug;30(11):1003-11.

Elicitation of distinct populations of monoclonal antibodies specific for the
variable domains of monoclonal anti-fluorescein antibody 4-4-20.

Weidner KM(1), Denzin LK, Kim ML, Mallender WD, Miklasz SD, Voss EW Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Illinois, Urbana 61801.

Armenian hamsters were immunized with non-liganded, partially liganded or
affinity-labeled anti-fluorescein Mab 4-4-20. Seventeen hybridoma producing
monoclonal anti-4-4-20 antibodies were characterized from chemically-mediated
fusions of immune hamster lymphocytes with murine Sp2/O-Ag14 myeloma cells.
Distinct populations of anti-4-4-20 monoclonal antibodies were isolated from
hamsters receiving immunizations with partially liganded Mab 4-4-20 relative to
those receiving affinity-labeled 4-4-20. Two of the three monoclonal antibodies
produced in response to partially liganded 4-4-20 were inhibited in their
interaction with 4-4-20 by fluorescyl ligand. These two clones, 1F4 and 1B7,
recognized unique epitopes on the 4-4-20 molecules, as demonstrated by
non-reactivity with members of the 4-4-20 idiotype family. Additionally, 1F4 and 
1B7 demonstrated the ability to delay the association of fluorescein with Mab
4-4-20. The 14 characterized non-ligand-inhibitable Mabs elicited to
affinity-labeled 4-4-20 were classified into four separate groups based on
various binding properties with members of the 4-4-20 idiotype family and binding
to resolved H- and L-chains in a western blot. Members of three of the four
groups showed strong reactivity with both 04-01 Ig and 04-01 SCA, which utilizes 
the same L-chain as Mab 4-4-20. Six non-ligand-inhibitable Mabs, 4A6, P1E11,
3A5-1, 2C3, 2C4, and 1A4, delayed the dissociation rate of ligand from Mab 4-4-20
and mutant 4-4-20 SCA L32phe.

PMID: 8350870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Microb Pathog. 1993 Aug;15(2):103-20.

Development of an anti-idiotype monoclonal antibody mimicking the structure of
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) inner-core determinants.

Field S(1), Pollack M, Morrison DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Molecular Genetics and Immunology, University of
Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City 66160.

An anti-idiotype antibody has been developed which is specific for idiotypic
determinants of a BALB/c mouse IgG3 monoclonal antibody (MAbY1-4A6) directed
against the inner-core Kdo region of lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Armenian hamsters 
were immunized with MAbY1-4A6 and splenocytes from immunized animals fused with
Sp2/0 myeloma cells. Eight clones secreting antibodies that bound to MAbY1-4A6,
but not control IgG3, were identified and subcloned. Culture supernatants from
one hybridoma, termed MAb4G2, contain monoclonal antibody that binds to the
variable region of MAbY1-4A6 and dose-dependently inhibits binding of MAbY1-4A6
to Re chemotype rough mutant LPS (Re-LPS). This antibody also inhibits binding of
three additional mouse monoclonal antibodies specific for the inner-core of
Re-LPS. MAb4G2 also recognizes a significant proportion of antibodies present in 
polyclonal R-chemotype antisera generated in mice (Re-LPS) and rabbits (J5
Rc-LPS). Mice and hamsters immunized with MAb4G2 or Re-LPS generate antibodies
which cross-react with both immunogens. Cumulatively, these data suggest that
MAb4G2 can function as an internal image of the Kdo-specific monoclonal antibody,
MAbY1-4A6, mimicking the antigenic structure and immunogenicity of a portion of
the LPS inner-core Kdo region.

PMID: 8255205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Hybridoma. 1993 Aug;12(4):485-9.

Cloning of cDNAs encoding the variable domains of antibody KC4G3 and construction
of a chimeric antibody.

Couto JR(1), Blank EW, Peterson JA, Ceriani RL.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Fund of Contra Costa, Walnut Creek, CA 94596.

We have cloned and sequenced cDNAs encoding the variable regions of the light
(VL) and heavy (VH) chains of monoclonal antibody KC4G3. VL belongs to group II
and resulted from a V kappa-J kappa 2 recombination. VH belongs to group IIId and
arose from a V-D9-JH3 recombination. The VL and VH frameworks are respectively
84% and 83% identical to the corresponding VL and VH human consensus frameworks. 
The deduced amino acid sequence of VL contains an asparagine-linked glycosylation
site in framework 3 (N74 I75 S76). We have determined that a large fraction of
the light chains are indeed glycolysated. We constructed an IgG1, kappa
human/mouse chimeric antibody (by inserting the murine KC4G3 Fv-encoding cDNAs
into plasmids encoding a human IgG1, kappa Fc domain) and expressed it in
SP2/0-Ag14 mouse myeloma cells. This chimeric monoclonal antibody is designated
ChiKC4. We have determined that the murine monoclonal antibody KC4G3 binds the
human breast mucin with an affinity constant of 1.1 x 10(9) M-1. ChiKC4 binds the
same antigen with an affinity constant of 1.2 x 10(9) M-1. ChiKC4 binds the
carcinoma tissue sections by the ABC immunoperoxidase method in an identical
manner as does KC4G3.

PMID: 8244420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Hybridoma. 1993 Aug;12(4):365-79.

Construction and expression of two mouse-human chimeric antibodies with high
specificity and affinity for carcinoembryonic antigen.

Arakawa F(1), Haruno M, Kuroki M, Kanda H, Watanabe T, Misumi Y, Matsuoka Y.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Fukuoka University,
Japan.

We have previously reported that a group of monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) to
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), designated Group F MAbs, are able to discriminate
CEA in tumor tissues from the CEA-related normal antigens and that CEA assay
systems utilizing at least one Group F MAb show the improved cancer diagnosis. In
this study, we cloned the genes coding for two Group F MAbs (F11-35 and F11-39)
and deduced the amino acid sequences of the variable regions for their heavy and 
light chains. The variable region for the heavy chain of F11-35 contained a
possible N-glycosylation site (Asn/Asp/Thr) at amino acid positions 89-91. Then, 
we constructed two mouse-human chimeric antibodies by using the F11-35 and F11-39
variable region genes of heavy and light chains (VH and V kappa) and human heavy 
and light chain constant region genes (gamma 1 and kappa) derived from a human
plasma cell leukemia line (ARH77). The chimeric gene constructs were sequentially
co-transfected into murine non-Ig-producing myeloma (P3-U1) or hybridoma (Sp2/0) 
cells by electroporation. The resulting chimeric heavy chain of F11-35 showed a
slightly but significantly higher molecular weight than that of F11-39, but the
molecular weights of their unglycosylated peptides synthesized in the presence of
tunicamycin were similar, indicating the glycosylation at the possible
N-glycosylation site in the variable region of the Ch F11-35 heavy chain. Both
chimeric antibodies exhibited the same specificity and affinity for CEA as those 
of the parental murine hybridoma antibodies, respectively. Ascites production of 
Sp2/0 transfectomas is sufficiently high (600-900 micrograms/ml) for initial
clinical studies with the chimeric antibodies.

PMID: 8244416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Immunology. 1993 Aug;79(4):568-73.

Anti-mouse red blood cell monoclonal antibodies use functionally rearranged genes
from the VH J558 family and are derived from the CD5- B-lymphocyte subpopulation.

Scott BB(1), Sadigh S, Stow M, Mageed RA, Andrew EM, Maini RN.

Author information: 
(1)Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, Hammersmith, London, U.K.

The NZB mouse strain is genetically predisposed to develop, at approximately 6
months of age, a spontaneous and severe autoimmune anaemia caused by the
production of pathogenic anti-mouse red blood cell (MRBC) autoantibodies.
Although it is believed that the predisposition to autoimmune anaemia is
multigenic in nature, the main pathogenic mechanism is attributed to anti-MRBC
autoantibodies. We have generated eight anti-MRBC monoclonal antibody
(mAb)-producing hybridomas derived from splenocytes of 9- and 12-month-old NZB
mice with spontaneous autoimmune anaemia to dissect the molecular and cellular
mechanisms resulting in the production of these pathogenic antibodies. The
predominant immunoglobulin isotype was IgG2a, produced by five out of eight
hybridomas (63%), while IgM, IgG1 and IgG2b were each produced by one hybridoma
cell line (12%). Antigen specificity analysis of all eight hybridomas revealed
that antibodies from seven out of eight hybridomas were monospecific for MRBC
antigen(s). Only one hybridoma (clone 4-16-1) cross-reacted with rat RBC. None of
the hybridomas produced antibodies reactive with single- or double-stranded DNA
(ss- or dsDNA). Surface and cytoplasmic staining for the CD5 antigen revealed
that none of the hybridomas was derived from CD5+ B lymphocytes. All hybridomas
cause anaemia when implanted intraperitoneally into normal BALB/c mice. Molecular
studies of five of the eight anti-MRBC mAb reveal that all use functionally
rearranged genes from the VH J558 gene family. Three of these five mAb used
FL16.1 DH genes while one had a CDR3 that resulted from a fusion between two DH
genes (SP2.3 and SP2.2) from the SP family.

PMCID: PMC1421910
PMID: 7691732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. J Cell Physiol. 1993 Aug;156(2):286-93.

Rapid apoptotic cell death of B-cell hybridomas in absence of gene expression.

Perreault J(1), Lemieux R.

Author information: 
(1)Canadian Red Cross Blood Transfusion Service, Quebec City.

Apoptosis is an active form of cell death which plays an important role in
different biological processes. The induction of apoptosis usually requires de
novo gene expression but has also been observed in certain types of cells in
absence of gene expression or following a block of gene expression. We show here 
that inhibition of macromolecular synthesis induced the rapid apoptotic death of 
most antibody-secreting B-cell hybridomas. The effect was observed in presence of
both protein synthesis (cycloheximide [CHX]) and transcription (actinomycin D
[Act D]) inhibitors and was characterized by extensive degradation of nucleic
acids (DNA and RNA) within 2-3 h of treatment. The CHX treatment not only
severely impaired the proliferation of the cells but also resulted in the loss of
cell viability (MTT assay) without the need of de novo gene expression. The
susceptibility to apoptosis varied among different B-cell hybridomas and was
inherited from the SP2/0 myeloma cell fusion partner. These results indicate the 
constitutive activation of a death program in B-cell hybridomas and its
inhibition at a late stage by the continuous expression of gene(s) coding for
short-lived protein(s). The occurrence of this phenomenon may well be related to 
the abundant and deregulated (translocation) expression, in this type of cells,
of the c-myc gene which has recently been shown to be a potent inducer of
apoptosis in growth-arrested fibroblasts.

PMID: 7688371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. J Med Chem. 1993 Jul 9;36(14):1964-70.

Quinolone antibacterials: synthesis and biological activity of carbon isosteres
of the 1-piperazinyl and 3-amino-1-pyrrolidinyl side chains.

Laborde E(1), Kiely JS, Culbertson TP, Lesheski LE.

Author information: 
(1)Parke-Davis Pharmaceutical Research, Division of Warner-Lambert Company, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48105.

A series of 6-fluoro-1,4-dihydro-4-oxo-3-quinoline- and
1,8-naphthyridinecarboxylic acids, substituted at the 7-position with
carbon-linked side chains, was synthesized and evaluated for antibacterial
activity and DNA-gyrase inhibition. Structural modifications focused on
replacement of the heterocyclic nitrogen of the frequently found 1-piperazinyl
and 3-amino-1-pyrrolidinyl side chains by an sp2- or an sp3-hybridized carbon.
All new compounds displayed high in vitro and in vivo antibacterial activity.
Potency relative to the standard nitrogenated agents was dependent on ring size
and hybridization of the linking carbon atom of the side chain. Compounds with a 
1,2,3,6-tetrahydro-4-pyridinyl substituent at C-7 were equipotent with their
1-piperazinyl analogs, whereas those having a 4-piperidinyl or a
3-amino-1-cyclopentenyl ring at C-7 were less active than the 1-piperazinyl or
3-amino-1-pyrrolidinyl substituted agents, respectively. This relative difference
in antibacterial potency did not correlate with the observed activity against
gyrase, where the majority of the new compounds were equally or more potent than 
their nitrogenated counterparts.

PMID: 8393112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. J Laryngol Otol. 1993 Jul;107(7):593-6.

Audit of the incidence of persistent perforation of the tympanic membrane
following grommet removal or extrusion.

Todd GB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP2 8BJ.

The incidence of persistent perforation following grommet removal or extrusion in
210 ears was assessed, and found to be zero per cent. Collar button grommets were
retained longer than Shepard grommets, and the percentage of ears requiring two
or more tube insertions was 51.9 per cent.

PMID: 15125273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. J Laryngol Otol. 1993 Jul;107(7):590-2.

Audit of the incidence of persistent perforation of the tympanic membrane
following T-tube removal or extrusion.

Todd GB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP2 8BJ.

Audit of the incidence of persistent perforation of the tympanic membrane
following T-tube removal or extrusion was carried out on 100 patients (151 ears).
The incidence was found to be 11.9 per cent. This was independent of whether the 
tube was surgically removed or extruded; of the grade of surgeon carrying out the
operation; and whether the patient treatment was carried out privately or on the 
N.H.S. Changes of practice have resulted from the audit.

PMID: 15125272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Am J Clin Pathol. 1993 Jul;100(1):67-74.

Production and immunodiagnostic applications of antihuman light chain monoclonal 
antibodies.

Abe M(1), Goto T, Kennel SJ, Wolfenbarger D, Macy SD, Weiss DT, Solomon A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Tennessee Medical Center/Graduate School
of Medicine, Knoxville 37920.

Erratum in
    Am J Clin Pathol 1993 Nov;100(5):587.

Hybridomas producing antihuman light chain monoclonal antibodies (MoAbs) were
derived from fusion of SP2/O mouse myeloma cells with splenic lymphocytes from
mice repeatedly immunized with purified kappa- and lambda-type Bence Jones
proteins representative of the major V kappa (V kappa I, V kappa II, V kappa III,
V kappa IV) and V lambda (V lambda I, V lambda II/V, V lambda III, V lambda IV, V
lambda VI) subgroups or gene families. Monoclonal antibodies were obtained that
had specificity for constant-region (CL) determinants common to all kappa or
lambda light chains (C kappa and C lambda, respectively) as well as for
variable-region (VL) epitopes unique to each of the V kappa or V lambda
subgroups. The capability of these reagents to recognize CL and VL determinants
on monoclonal immunoglobulin (Ig) molecules was demonstrated in fluid-phase
antigen-capturing enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), solid-phase ELISA,
and immunoblotting. In addition, these antilight chain MoAbs were used to
establish immunocytochemically the kappa or lambda type and VL-subgroup nature of
light chains expressed by the cytoplasmic Ig of monoclonal plasma cell and
surface Ig of B-lymphocyte populations, respectively. These antibodies
facilitated the immunohistochemical detection and characterization of
light-chain-associated amyloid (AL amyloid) and other types of
light-chain-related tissue deposits. Furthermore, the anti-CL-specific MoAbs were
used to measure serum and urinary Ig kappa and Ig lambda concentrations.
Quantification of Bence Jones protein excretion, even in the presence of other
urinary proteins, was possible using the highly sensitive anti-C kappa and anti-C
lambda MoAbs reactive only with free light chains. The ability to identify and
characterize, through the use of these antihuman light chain MoAbs,
light-chain-related epitopes at the protein, cellular, and tissue level has
clinical importance in the diagnosis and treatment of patients with monoclonal
plasma cell and related B-cell immunoproliferative diseases.

PMID: 7688492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 1993 Jun;36(6):373-80.

A mouse/human chimeric anti-(ganglioside GD3) antibody with enhanced antitumor
activities.

Shitara K(1), Kuwana Y, Nakamura K, Tokutake Y, Ohta S, Miyaji H, Hasegawa M,
Hanai N.

Author information: 
(1)Tokyo Research Laboratories, Kyowa Hakko Kogyo Co. Ltd., Japan.

Ganglioside GD3, which is one of the major gangliosides expressed on the cell
surface of human tumors of neuroectodermal origin has been focused on as a target
molecule for passive immunotherapy. We have cloned the cDNA encoding the
immunoglobulin light and heavy chains of an anti-GD3 monoclonal antibody KM641
(murine IgG3, kappa), and constructed the chimeric genes by linking the cDNA
fragments of the murine light and heavy variable regions to cDNA fragments of the
human kappa and gamma 1 constant regions, respectively. The transfer of these
cDNA constructs into SP2/0 mouse myeloma cells resulted in the production of the 
chimeric antibody, designated KM871, that retained specific binding activity to
GD3. Indirect immunofluorescence revealed the same staining pattern for chimeric 
KM871 and the mouse counterpart KM641 on GD3-expressing melanoma cells. When
human serum and human peripheral blood mononuclear cells were used as effectors
in complement-mediated cytotoxicity and antibody-dependent cell-mediated
cytotoxicity respectively, the chimeric KM871 was more effective in killing
GD3-expressing tumor cells than was the mouse counterpart KM641. Intravenous
injection of chimeric KM871 markedly suppressed tumor growth in nude mice. The
chimeric KM871, having enhanced antitumor activities and less immunogenicity than
the mouse counterpart, would be a useful agent for passive immunotherapy of human
cancer.

PMID: 8500110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. J Biochem. 1993 Jun;113(6):687-91.

T cell receptor-extracellular constant regions as hetero-cross-linkers for
immunoglobulin variable regions.

Seimiya H(1), Naito M, Mashima T, Yasui H, Kuwana Y, Kurosawa Y, Tsuruo T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Applied Microbiology, University of Tokyo.

The T cell receptor alpha and beta chains are covalently linked via a disulfide
bond in their extracellular constant regions. To use these domains as specific
hetero-cross-linkers of two different polypeptides, we created genetic constructs
encoding a chimeric antibody Fab fragment in which mouse immunoglobulin constant 
regions from a phosphorylcholine-specific antibody were substituted for human
alpha beta-T cell receptor (TCR) extracellular constant regions (for
solubilization, the transmembrane- and cytoplasmic-regions of the receptor were
deleted). These constructs, i.e., chimeric heavy (VHC beta C kappa) and light
(VLC alpha) chains, were cotransfected into murine SP2/0 myeloma cells for
expression. Cells transfected with the genes expressed mRNAs for chimeric heavy
and light chains. Without CD3 molecules, the two chimeric chains specifically
associated via a disulfide bond to form a chimeric Fab fragment in the cells.
These data indicate that the TCR C alpha- and C beta-regions might be used as
potent specific hetero-cross-linkers for protein engineering.

PMID: 8370665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Hybridoma. 1993 Jun;12(3):285-95.

Production of stable rabbit-mouse heterohybridomas: characterization of a rabbit 
monoclonal antibody recognizing a 180 kDa human lymphocyte membrane antigen.

Verbanac KM(1), Gross UM, Rebellato LM, Thomas JM.

Author information: 
(1)East Carolina University School of Medicine, Department of Surgery,
Greenville, NC 27858.

Polyclonal rabbit antihuman thymocyte globulin (RATG) remains a key component of 
immunosuppressive strategies in transplantation. The human thymus immunization
regimen that produces highly immunosuppressive RATG induces unique antibody
specificities in the rabbit. Rabbit monoclonal antibodies (RAb MAbs) to human T
cell antigens would be of value in the effort to investigate and reproduce the
multiple specificities of RATG. We have fused mouse Sp2/0 cells with splenocytes 
from rabbits immunized with human thymus and have identified 52 rabbit-mouse
heterohybridomas which secrete RAb MAbs directed against human lymphocyte surface
antigens. The technical aspects of hybridoma isolation, stabilization and
characterization are presented. Analysis by flow cytometry, preabsorption and
immunoprecipitation suggests that RAb MAb 1A8 IgG may recognize LFA-1, one of the
principal lymphocyte surface antigens recognized by RATG. The 1A8 antigen is 180 
kDa and is expressed by 80-90% human PBL and thymocytes. LFA-1 and the 1A8
antigen exhibit 100% co-expression in two-color FACS analysis using four
different murine anti-LFA-1 MAbs. 1A8 markedly inhibits the mitogenic response of
lymphocytes to PHA, as do murine anti-LFA-1 MAbs. A combination of rabbit
antilymphocyte MAbs may potentially reproduce the multiple specificities found in
polyclonal RATG and lead to the production of a superior immunosuppressive
clinical agent.

PMID: 8359823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Infect Immun. 1993 Jun;61(6):2732-6.

Partial characterization of an external polysaccharide of Helicobacter pylori by 
using an immunoglobulin M monoclonal antibody.

Drouet EB(1), De Montclos HP, Andujar M, Boude M, Grimaud JA, Denoyel GA.

Author information: 
(1)Infectiology Unit, Institut Pasteur, Lyon, France.

A monoclonal immunoglobulin M antibody, HP15/36, was produced by a hybridoma cell
line prepared by fusion of mouse myeloma cell line Sp2/O with spleen cells of
mice immunized with Helicobacter pylori D273 (French strain). Immunoelectron
microscopy of whole bacteria and ultrathin sections showed that the determinant
was located outside the bacterial cell, possibly in the outermost areas. This
external reactivity was observed by immunofluorescence and immunoperoxidase
assays and was confirmed by immunogold study at the ultrastructural level. The
reactive epitope was formol and picric acid resistant and allowed the detection
of the bacterium on fixed tissue biopsy specimens. The reactive component was
extracted with phenol-water. Immunoblotting with such an antigen exhibited a
clearly positive reactivity at a molecular mass between 50 and 120 kDa. This
reactivity was suppressed by periodate oxidation, suggesting a carbohydrate
epitope. The diagnostic value and significance of this polysaccharide in
microbe-host interactions remain to be determined.

PMCID: PMC280910
PMID: 7684730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Int J Cancer. 1993 May 28;54(3):499-505.

Disialoganglioside GD2 anti-idiotypic monoclonal antibodies.

Cheung NK(1), Canete A, Cheung IY, Ye JN, Liu C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
10021.

Disialoganglioside GD2 is widely expressed among neuroblastomas, melanomas,
small-cell lung carcinoma, sarcomas and brain tumors. Immunity directed against
this antigen may have anti-tumor utility. Since GD2 is poorly immunogenic,
anti-idiotypic antibodies may serve as alternative tumor vaccines. Monoclonal
antibody 3F8, a murine IgG3 specific for GD2, has shown excellent tumor-targeting
ability in vitro and in vivo. LOU/CN rats were immunized with 3F8 and their
spleens were used in somatic-cell hybridization, using SP2/0, P3 and Y3 as fusion
partners. Six anti-idiotypic (anti-id) MAbs (C2D8, Idio-2, AIG4, C2H7, C4E4,
A2A6) were selected based on their reactivity with 3F8 and non-reactivity with
murine IgG3 myelomas. Specificity of each anti-id was demonstrated by using
various ELISA: (i) lack of direct binding to solid phase myelomas and serum
proteins; (ii) inability of other myelomas to inhibit anti-id binding to 3F8;
(iii) absence of cross-reactivity of other myelomas to solid-phase anti-id; (iv) 
lack of inhibition by anti-id of binding of other ganglioside antibodies to their
antigens. Antigen specificity was further examined by inhibition of binding of
3F8 to GD2 on immuno-thin-layer chromatography, and by inhibition of 3F8
immunostaining of neuroblastoma cell lines. These 6 antibodies were demonstrated 
to be distinct, in view of their cross-reactivity, fusion partners and relative
strength of binding to 3F8. Anti-GD2 antibodies were induced after immunization
with these anti-id antibodies in C57Bl/6 mice. These rat anti-3F8-idiotypic
antibodies with exquisite specificity for anti-GD2 antibodies may be useful in
vaccine construction.

PMID: 8509225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Pancreas. 1993 May;8(3):289-94.

Radioimmunoimaging of xenograft pancreatic cancer with 131I-monoclonal antibody
P2.

Yao CZ(1), Poston GJ, Ishizuka J, Townsend CM Jr, Thompson JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston 77550.

Monoclonal antibodies (McAbs) to pancreatic cancer were developed by fusing SP2/0
cells and splenocytes from Balb/c mice immunized with CH-2 cells. The specific
binding rates of McAb P1 and P2 were 40.1 and 43.8%, respectively, shown by
binding radioreactivity assay in vitro, which were in sharp contrast with those
of control groups (p < 0.05). The biodistribution of radioiodinated McAb P2 was
studied by measuring parameters of tumor-specific radioreactivity in nude mice
bearing CH-2 tumors. The ratios of tumors to nontumors were all > 2 at 48 h. The 
localization index of cancer and the ratio of tumor to pancreas were 4.05 and
4.16, respectively, at 72 h. Therefore, 131I-McAbs may be useful for
radioimmunoimaging (RII) of pancreatic cancer. After intraperitoneal injection of
131I-McAb P2 into tumor-bearing nude mice, imaging of xenograft pancreatic cancer
became increasingly distinct with the nonspecific background fading, especially
in the period of 72-96 h. Examination of pancreatic cancer tissues by
immunohistochemical methods revealed that McAb P2 was strongly positive (86%) in 
comparison with other tumors and normal tissues. The results demonstrated that
clinical RII of pancreatic cancer was feasible with McAb P2.

PMID: 8483870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Pancreas. 1993 May;8(3):279-88.

Characterization of new monoclonal antibodies directed against normal human
exocrine pancreas and pancreatic adenocarcinomas.

Sinn HP(1), Brown SA, Thompson JS.

Author information: 
(1)Pathologishes Institut, Universität, Heidelberg, Germany.

A series of 12 cell fusions of BALB/c mice spleen cells with the SP2/O-Ag14 mouse
myeloma cell line were performed after immunizations with normal human pancreas
to generate monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) with high affinity against antigens of
the exocrine pancreas. The immunohistologic tissue screening resulted in the
selection of 14 clones that were further characterized on frozen tissues, tumor
cell lines, and lectin binding assays. Four mAbs reacting with pancreatic acini
detected granular antigens and three mAbs reacted with acinar cell membrane
antigens. Six other clones reacted with pancreatic ducts; among these were three 
clones positive with antigens in both acini and ducts. Among the clones reactive 
with secretory products, there was one pair of mAbs identified as pancreas
specific (P78C9/P79D4); the other secretory antigens (identified by P97F3 and
P109H1) were also detectable in other exocrine organs, but were absent from the
gastrointestinal mucosa. Two clones reactive with acinar cell membranes (P96H2
and P100H1) were also positive with hepatocytes. All but four antigens were
detectable in pancreatic cancer cell lines Capan-1, Capan-2, and DAN-G. On the
whole, immunizations were more effective using whole pancreatic tissues (eight
clones selected) compared with single-cell suspensions as immunogen (four clones)
or cell membrane preparations (two clones). Therefore, the immunization and
screening strategies used in this study resulted in the generation of new mAbs
against specific substructures of the exocrine pancreas. The shared expression of
some of these antigens with other exocrine organs and pancreatic adenocarcinoma
cell lines suggests that these mAbs detect antigens that are characteristic for
the exocrine system and could therefore be useful for the study of the exocrine
pancreas and pancreatic adenocarcinomas.

PMID: 8483869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Bioorg Khim. 1993 May;19(5):555-61.

[Preparation and characteristics of monoclonal antibodies to
N-acetylglucosaminyl-(beta1-4)-N-acetylmuramoyl-alanyl-D-isoglutamine].

[Article in Russian]

Mareeva TIu, Kotova OV, Makarov EA, Andronova TM, Nesmeianov VA.

Hybridoma E6/1.2 was produced by fusion of splenocytes from mice immunized with
N-acetylglucosaminyl-(beta 1-4)-N-acetylmuramyl-alanyl-D-isoglutamine (GMDP),
conjugated to methylated BSA, with SP2/0 myeloma cells. GMDP-specific monoclonal 
antibody was IgG1 subtype and had affinity constant 2.10(9) M-1. According to
competitive ELISA, the presence of the intact disaccharide fragment and the
alanyl residue was critical for the GMDP-antibody interaction.

PMID: 8318024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Biochemistry. 1993 Apr 27;32(16):4420-9.

Properties of a high-potential flavin analogue and its use as an active site
probe with clostridial flavodoxin.

Raibekas AA(1), Ramsey AJ, Jorns MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Hahnemann University School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19102.

The reduction potential of flavin bearing a methylsulfonyl moiety (MeSO2) in
place of a methyl group at position 8 is increased by more than 150 mV as
compared with normal flavin. This substitution is accompanied by a substantial
increase in reactivity with various reductants, including NADH, and greatly
(10(3)-fold) enhanced susceptibility toward nucleophilic attack by sulfite at
N(5). 1,5-Dihydro-8-(methylsulfonyl)riboflavin exhibits two intense,
well-resolved absorption bands (lambda max = 310, 362 nm) in a region where most 
other reduced flavins exhibit weak, characterless absorption. This unusual
spectrum is attributable to a shift of pi-electron density from the N(5) atom
into the benzene ring. It is observed only with reduced flavins bearing a
strongly electronegative substituent (MeSO2, CN) at the 8-position. The effect is
abolished by replacing the hydrogen at N(5) with a bulky group, like sulfite,
which interferes with sp2 hybridization at N(5). Reaction of 8-MeSO2-substituted 
flavins with thiols results in nucleophilic displacement of MeSO2- in a reaction 
that is about 10(3)-fold faster than an analogous nucleophilic displacement
reaction observed with 8-halo-substituted flavins. The flavin ring acts as a
redox switch in controlling electrophilicity at the 8-position, as judged by the 
fact that the displacement reactions are observed only with the oxidized flavins.
Initial studies to evaluate 8-MeSO2-substituted flavins as active site probes
were conducted with flavodoxin from Clostridium beijerinckii MP. 8-MeSO2FMN is
rapidly bound to apoflavodoxin, accompanied by absorbance and fluorescence
changes similar to those observed for FMN binding. 1,5-Dihydro-8-MeSO2FMN
flavodoxin exhibits spectral properties (lambda max = 323, 382 nm) similar to
those of the corresponding free flavin, except for a bathochromic shift due to a 
change in the polarity of the flavin environment. As judged by peak resolution
and intensity, the spectral properties of 1,5-dihydro-FMN flavodoxin (lambda max 
= 311, 362 nm) appear to lie about midway between those observed for the free
1,5-dihydro forms of FMN versus 8-MeSO2FMN. This suggests that the protein
environment may favor enhanced resonance delocalization of pi-electron density
into the benzene ring of bound 1,5-dihydro-FMN, as compared with the free flavin.
This hypothesis is consistent with previous NMR studies and with a proposal that 
electron transfer from reduced flavodoxin to other redox proteins occurs through 
this region of the ring. 8-MeSO2FMN bound to flavodoxin reacts readily with
exogenous thiols but does not react with sulfite.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400
WORDS)

PMID: 8476868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Apr;13(4):2141-51.

The murine myeloperoxidase promoter contains several functional elements, one of 
which binds a cell type-restricted transcription factor, myeloid nuclear factor 1
(MyNF1).

Suzow J(1), Friedman AD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Johns Hopkins Oncology Center, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, Maryland 21287.

The myeloperoxidase (MPO) gene is expressed specifically in myeloid cells. There 
is significant homology between the murine and human MPO genes in the 1.6-kb
region located upstream of the murine MPO transcription initiation sites. 5',3', 
and internal deletions of this DNA segment localized several cis-acting DNA
elements in the murine MPO promoter which are functional in 32D cl3 cells, a
murine myeloblast cell line which expresses MPO. These DNA elements did not
function well in mouse L-cell fibroblasts. Additional mutagenesis of the most
active promoter region allowed the delimitation of a functional 20-bp segment.
Mutation of the enhancer core motif within this segment was functionally
deleterious, and an oligonucleotide containing these base pairs increased the
activity of a minimal promoter. This same oligonucleotide, but not a mutant
variant, could bind a set of nuclear proteins, myeloid nuclear factors 1 alpha
and 1 beta (MyNF1 alpha and -1 beta), present in 32D cl3 cells but absent from L 
cells, murine erythroleukemia cells, and SP2 lymphoid cells.

PMCID: PMC359535
PMID: 8384306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Hybridoma. 1993 Apr;12(2):215-20.

Monoclonal antibodies suitable for plum pox virus determination.

Hilgert I(1), Cikánek D, Kristofová H, Karesová R, Navrátil M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics, Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences, Prague.

Monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) to plum pox virus (PPV) were obtained after
immunization of BALB/c mice with purified PPV-W isolate. Spleen cells from a
mouse showing a high serum titer were used for fusion with Sp2/0-Ag14 myeloma
cells. Culture supernatants were screened for specific antibody production
against PPV-W isolate using indirect ELISA. A total of six stable hybridoma lines
producing MAbs of IgG class were obtained. All four PPV isolates tested (W, A, D 
and M) can be distinguished by these MAbs. Two highly efficient antibodies were
chosen for practical purposes, and their applicability in PPV diagnostics has
been studied since 1989 in parallel with polyclonal antibodies and commercial
kits (Boehringer, Bioreba). The experiments have proven comparable sensitivity
with a detection limit ranging between 10 and 50 ng of virus per ml sample. In
routine diagnostics of plums, peaches and apricots our MAbs ranked at least as
high as the commercial kits.

PMID: 8314598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. J Pharmacokinet Biopharm. 1993 Apr;21(2):145-61.

Stereoselective, competitive, and nonlinear plasma protein binding of ibuprofen
enantiomers as determined in vivo in healthy subjects.

Paliwal JK(1), Smith DE, Cox SR, Berardi RR, Dunn-Kucharski VA, Elta GH.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 48109-1065.

The plasma protein binding and competitive inhibition parameters of R(-)- and
S(+)-ibuprofen were determined in vivo in 12 healthy subjects. Subjects
participated in a 4 x 4 Latin square design in which oral solutions of drug were 
administered as 300 mg R(-)-ibuprofen, 300 mg S(+)-ibuprofen, 300 mg R(-)- + 300 
mg S(+)-ibuprofen, and 300 mg R(-)- + 600 mg S(+)-ibuprofen. Unlabeled ibuprofen 
enantiomers were quantitated using a stereospecific reversed-phase HPLC assay,
and plasma protein binding experiments were performed using radiolabeled
14C-enantiomers and an ultrafiltration method at 37C. At therapeutic drug
concentrations, the protein binding of each enantiomer was greater than 99%.
Furthermore, the binding of ibuprofen enantiomers was stereoselective and
mutually competitive, as well as nonlinear. The bound-free data were fitted to a 
model in which the non-linearity of plasma protein binding and competition
between enantiomers for binding sites could be accommodated. There were
substantial differences in the affinity of ibuprofen enantiomers for protein
binding sites (RP2 = 0.358 +/- 0.185 vs. SP2 = 0.979 +/- 0.501 micrograms/ml;
mean +/- SD) but no differences in their binding capacity (RP1 = 160 +/- 86 vs.
SP1 = 161 +/- 63 micrograms/ml). Although statistically significant, the
differences in competitive inhibition parameters were more modest (SKI = 0.661
+/- 0.363 vs. RKI = 0.436 +/- 0.210 micrograms/ml). As a result, the intrinsic
binding (i.e., P1/P2) of R(-)-ibuprofen was greater than S(+)-ibuprofen, and the 
unbound fraction was significantly greater for S-enantiomer vs. R-enantiomer
after a given dose of R-ibuprofen or racemate.

PMID: 8229677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao. 1993 Apr;15(2):148-51.

[Study on monoclonal antibodies against porcine serum E receptor].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Beijing.

Three hybridoma cell lines producing monoclonal antibodies (McAbs) against
porcine serum E receptor (PSER) were established by fusing mouse myeloma SP2/o
cells with spleen cells of BALB/c mouse immunized with PSER. The ascites McAbs
were purified by ammonium sulfate precipitation and DEAE-cellulose
chromatography. The McAbs were found to belong to the IgG1 and IgG2b subclasses, 
respectively. These McAbs inhibited reverse E-rosette formation and enhanced or
depressed lymphocyte proliferation induced by PHA or ConA. The specificity of
these McAbs was proved by immuno-dot blot and Western blot assay. The potential
application of these McAbs in the study of structure and biological function of
the E-receptor is discussed.

PMID: 7902218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Biochem Mol Biol Int. 1993 Mar;29(3):451-66.

Base specificity and binding of anti-ss/dsDNA monoclonal antibody. Application to
the determination of ssDNA.

Batova IN(1), Kyurkchiev SD, Kehayov IR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Sofia.

An anti-DNA murine hybridoma was generated and selected in a fusion of Sp2/0
myeloma cells with splenocytes derived from BALB/c mice immunized with
DNA/protein complex. The monoclonal antibody designated as 4C7 was assessed by
competitive immunoassay for binding to denatured, structurally single-stranded
(ss)DNA, double-stranded (ds)DNA and oligodeoxynucleotides. The monoclonal
antibody exhibited a marked preference for the ss conformation. Competitive
inhibition assay performed with nucleosides and homopolynucleotides indicated
that the deoxyadenosine residue was essential for antibody recognition and
binding. The monoclonal antibody was purified by poly(A)-Sepharose chromatography
and biotinylated. The ssDNA detection limit in the enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay with the biotinylated antibody ranged from 1 to 16 ng/ml. A dot
immunobinding test was developed which was sensitive for the quantitation of
picogram amounts of single-stranded DNA deposited on nitrocellulose filters and
applied to the immunoenzymatic detection in human sera of target DNA.

PMID: 8485463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. J Med Microbiol. 1993 Mar;38(3):177-82.

Antigenic diversity in flagellar epitopes among Bacillus piliformis isolates.

Boivin GP(1), Hook RR, Riley LK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathology, College of Veterinary Medicine, University
of Missouri-Columbia 65211.

Monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) were developed to Bacillus piliformis
isolate-specific flagellar epitopes and used to group B. piliformis isolates on
the basis of epitope expression. BALB/c mice immunised with flagella purified
from various B. piliformis isolates served as the source of immune spleen cells
for fusion with SP2/0Ag14 myeloma cells. Evaluation of hybridoma culture medium
by ELISA against various bacterial species and B. piliformis isolates indicated
that 482 of 2127 hybridomas secreted antibodies specific for B. piliformis.
Specificity of MAbs for flagellar epitopes was demonstrated by indirect
fluorescent antibody assays and Western blot analyses. Probing of 10 B.
piliformis isolates with MAbs indicated that four B. piliformis isolates each
possessed a distinct and isolate-specific flagellar epitope; five other isolates 
shared a common flagellar epitope. One isolate did not react with any of the MAbs
specific for flagellar epitopes. Thus, B. piliformis isolates could be grouped
into six antigenically distinct groups based upon flagellar epitope expression.
Additionally, a MAb reactive with a cell-associated component recognised all but 
one isolate. This serological grouping of B. piliformis isolates agrees with the 
grouping of isolates based upon genetic and physiological characteristics, and
supports the assertion that there are different strains among B. piliformis
isolates.

PMID: 7681111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. J Membr Biol. 1993 Feb;132(1):27-40.

Hypotonically induced changes in the plasma membrane of cultured mammalian cells.

Sukhorukov VL(1), Arnold WM, Zimmermann U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, University of Würzburg, Germany.

Cells from three cell lines were electrorotated in media of osmotic strengths
from 330 mOsm to 60 mOsm. From the field-frequency dependence of the rotation
speed, the passive electrical properties of the surfaces were deduced. In all
cases, the area-specific membrane capacitance (Cm) decreased with osmolality. At 
280 mOsm (iso-osmotic), SP2 (mouse myeloma) and G8 (hybridoma) cells had Cm
values of 1.01 +/- 0.04 microF/cm2 and 1.09 +/- 0.03 microF/cm2, respectively,
whereas dispase-treated L-cells (sarcoma fibroblasts) exhibited Cm = 2.18 +/-
0.10 microF/cm2. As the osmolality was reduced, the Cm reached a well-defined
minimum at 150 mOsm (SP2) or 180 mOsm (G8). Further reduction in osmolality gave 
a 7% increase in Cm, after which a plateau close to 0.80 microF/cm2 was reached. 
However, the whole-cell capacities increased about twofold from 200 mOsm to 60
mOsm. L-cells showed very little change in Cm between 280 mOsm and 150 mOsm, but 
below 150 mOsm the Cm decreased rapidly. The changes in Cm correlate well with
the swelling of the cells assessed by means of van't Hoff plots. The apparent
membrane conductance (including the effect of surface conductance) decreased with
Cm, but then increased again instead of exhibiting a plateau. The rotation speed 
of the cells increased as the osmolality was lowered, and eventually attained
almost the theoretical value. All measurements indicate that hypo-osmotically
stressed cells obtain the necessary membrane area by using material from
microvilli. However, below about 200 mOsm the whole-cell capacities indicate the 
progressive incorporation of "extra" membrane into the cell surface.

PMID: 8459447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Hybridoma. 1993 Feb;12(1):45-53.

Monoclonal ligand binding site related anti-idiotypic antibodies elicited with a 
polyclonal kinin antibody.

Odya CE(1), Yapa R, Soltani-Tehrani B, Carlin RJ, Lee CH.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Sciences Program, Indiana University School of Medicine, Bloomington
47405.

Splenocytes from mice immunized with homogenous, polyclonal, rabbit kinin
antibody (BK21) were fused using polyethylene glycol with the mouse myeloma cell 
line SP2/o. Eleven monoclonal antibodies, whose binding to BK21 could be
inhibited by bradykinin, were obtained from 3 fusions. All of these
anti-idiotypic antibodies were of the IgG1k isotype, except for one, which was an
IgG2ak. An IgMk, auto-anti-idiotypic antibody, reactive with BK21 was obtained
from a fusion of SP2/o cells and splenocytes from a mouse immunized with
bradykinin conjugated with carbodiimide to keyhole limpet hemocyanin. Bradykinin 
could completely inhibit the binding of all of the anti-idiotypic antibodies to
BK21 in an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. This result is consistent with the 
anti-idiotypic antibodies being reactive with the ligand binding sites of BK21.
It was possible to separate the anti-idiotypic antibodies into 2 groups. The
first group, 10 of the 12 antibodies tested, was more sensitive to inhibition by 
bradykinin than the second group and was not readily inhibited by
des-Arg9-bradykinin. The second group was about 7 times more sensitive to
inhibition by des-Arg9-bradykinin than by bradykinin. Further experiments will be
needed to determine whether or not these monoclonal anti-idiotypic antibodies are
"internal image" antibodies.

PMID: 8454303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Hybridoma. 1993 Feb;12(1):15-23.

Cloning of cDNAs encoding the variable domains of antibody BrE-3 and construction
of a chimeric antibody.

Couto JR(1), Blank EW, Peterson JA, Ceriani RL.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Fund of Contra Costa, Walnut Creek, CA 94596.

BrE-3 is an IgG1,kappa murine monoclonal antibody that binds to human breast
epithelial mucin and that has been shown to be promising for imaging and
treatment of breast cancer. We have cloned and sequenced cDNAs encoding the
variable regions of the light (VL) and heavy (VH) chains of BrE-3. VL belongs to 
group II and resulted from a V kappa-J kappa 1 fusion. VH belongs to group IIIc
and arose from a V-D-JH3 non-conservative fusion which left little or nothing of 
the original D minigene. Thus, the third VH CDR contains only 4 amino-acids. We
constructed an IgG1,kappa human/mouse chimeric antibody (by joining the murine
variable domains to human constant domains) and expressed it in SP2/0 myeloma
cells. This chimeric monoclonal antibody stains breast carcinoma tissue sections 
by the ABC immunoperoxidase method. Its affinity for the BrE-3 antigen is 2.68 x 
10(8) M-1, which, considering the experimental error, is indistinguishable from
the affinity of the original murine antibody (3.75 x 10(8) M-1). The VL and VH
domains alone are respectively 73%, and 63% identical to the human V kappa II and
VHIII consensus sequences. If the CDRs are excluded, these numbers become
respectively 82% and 80%. Therefore, we expect the reported chimeric BrE-3 to be 
considerably less immunogenic to humans than the original murine antibody, while 
retaining the original binding properties.

PMID: 8454302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Hybridoma. 1993 Feb;12(1):127-33.

Effect of murine ascites on the ability of hybridoma cells to produce antibody
and proliferate in vitro.

Lumanglas AL(1), Wang BS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunoendocrinology, American Cyanamid Co., Princeton, NJ
08543-0400.

Murine ascites has been shown to contain a variety of growth promoting
activities. In this study, we examined the effects of ascites fluid on the
efficiency of hybridoma production and cell growth. SP2/0 mouse myeloma cells
were injected into peritoneal cavities of mice and ascitic fluid was collected.
Lymphocytes from mice immunized with porcine growth hormone (pGH) were fused with
myeloma cells in a standard hybridization procedure. These cells were then
dispensed in 96-well plates in medium containing either 2.5% ascites or 20% fetal
calf serum (FCS) and cultured for few days. Supernatants from these cultures were
collected and analyzed for anti-pGH antibodies. It was demonstrated that
ascites-supplemented medium increased the efficiency in generating specific
antibody-secreting hybridomas by 4-fold over FCS-supplemented medium.
Furthermore, hybridoma cells were cultured in microtiter plate and found to
proliferate in response to ascites in a dose dependent manner. This effect was
abolished by prior digestion of ascites with trypsin, indicating its protein
nature. B-lymphocyte related cytokines seemed less likely involved because
antibodies to IL-4 and IL-6 failed to alter the stimulatory effect of ascites.
Ascites was fractionated by FPLC using Superose 12 column and the active moiety
was found to be a small m.w. peptide (< 1,000 dalton). Therefore, murine ascites 
is capable of substituting for conventional FCS in culture medium in the area of 
hybridoma technology.

PMID: 8454299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Zhonghua Wai Ke Za Zhi. 1993 Feb;31(2):79-81.

[Generation and characterization of monoclonal antibody GCF-5 to human giant cell
tumor of bone].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou L(1).

Author information: 
(1)People's Hospital, Beijing Medical University.

Hybrid cell line has been derived from fusion of mouse myeloma (Sp2/0-Ag14) cell 
and spleen cell from mouse which was immunized with cultured cells of giant cell 
tumor of bone (GCT). Hybrid cells produce monoclonal antibody against GCT
associated antigen in the surface of the tumor cells. The monoclonal antibody was
detected by immunoperoxidase staining and was designated by GCF-5. There were
more than eighty per cent of tested GCT which showed this antigen. It had no
cross reaction with many kinds of normal tissue, HLA antigen, alpha-Fetal
Protein, Carcino-Embryonic Antigen and beta-Microglobulin. The subclass of the
antibody is IgG1. The hybridoma has been cultured and stored under -196 degrees C
for more than eight months and its secretion remains stable.

PMID: 8223010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Int J Cancer. 1993 Jan 2;53(1):147-52.

Production and characterization of a mouse/human chimeric antibody directed
against human neuroblastoma.

Amstutz H(1), Rytz C, Novak-Hofer I, Spycher M, Schubiger PA, Blaser K,
Morgenthaler JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Central Laboratory, Blood Transfusion Service of the Swiss Red Cross, Bern.

Hybridoma CE7 produces a murine antibody (gamma 1/kappa) which binds to a 190-kDa
cell-surface glycoprotein of human neuroblastoma. Because of its tumor
specificity, it has been used routinely in clinical pathology to confirm
diagnosis of neuroblastoma. We have isolated the gene segments coding for the
variable regions of the immunoglobulin H and L chain of this hybridoma. These V
genes were used to construct mouse/human chimeric H and L chain genes (gamma
1/kappa) which were then expressed in SP2/0 cells. A cell-binding inhibition
assay showed that the specificity of the chimeric CE7 antibody (chCE7) is
identical to that of the original CE7. Radioiodinated chCE7 binds to
approximately 43,000 sites per neuroblastoma cell with an affinity of 10(10) M-1.
In neuroblastoma-bearing nude mice, biodistribution studies with [125I]chCE7 were
performed and tumor accumulations of up to 32% of injected dose/g tissue together
with low blood and organ uptake were found.

PMID: 8416200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Vaccine. 1993;11(6):629-36.

Adjuvant-independent enhanced immune responses to recombinant herpes simplex
virus type 1 glycoprotein D by fusion with biologically active interleukin-2.

Hazama M(1), Mayumi-Aono A, Asakawa N, Kuroda S, Hinuma S, Fujisawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Research Laboratories, Takeda Chemical Industries Ltd, Osaka, Japan.

A truncated herpes simplex virus (HSV) type 1 glycoprotein D (t-gD) gene was
fused to the human interleukin-2 (IL-2) gene (t-gD-IL-2 gene) and introduced into
mouse myeloma Sp2/0 cells. The gene product, t-gD-IL-2, secreted from the cells
was immunoprecipitated with five monoclonal antibodies specific for native gD.
Purified t-gD-IL-2 supported the growth of IL-2-dependent cells, with a specific 
activity almost comparable to that of recombinant human IL-2. Mice immunized with
t-gD-IL-2 in an adjuvant-free form showed superior anti-HSV antibody responses,
and were completely protected against HSV challenge, whereas immunization with
t-gD adsorbed onto aluminum hydroxide (alum) partially failed to prevent the
virus infection. The high immunogenicity of t-gD-IL-2 was due to the biological
activity of the fused IL-2 rather than to a hapten-carrier effect of the IL-2
moiety, because mice primed with t-gD-IL-2 showed delayed-type hypersensitivity
against stimulation with gD, but not against that with IL-2 antigen, and because 
a booster immunization with t-gD-IL-2 extensively augmented the response of
anti-gD antibody, but not that of the anti-human IL-2 antibody. The serological
half-life of IL-2 activity in mice injected with t-gD-IL-2 was prolonged to about
four times that of rIL-2. However, when t-gD-IL-2 was co-administered with human 
albumin (HSA), the mouse anti-HSA antibody response was slightly
enhanced.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 8391739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Arch Virol. 1993;133(1-2):85-95.

Expression of two bovine rotavirus non-structural proteins (NSP2, NSP3) in the
baculovirus system and production of monoclonal antibodies directed against the
expressed proteins.

Aponte C(1), Mattion NM, Estes MK, Charpilienne A, Cohen J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Virologie et Immunologie Moléculaires INRA, C.R.J. Domaine de
Vilvert, Jouy-en-Josas, France.

Studies on rotavirus non-structural proteins have been hampered in the past by
difficulties in obtaining monospecific reagents. To make such reagents available,
we have expressed in the baculovirus system NSP2 and NSP3 (formerly called NS35
and NS34, respectively) of the bovine rotavirus RF and produced hybridomas
against these proteins. Full-length DNA copies of RNA segments 7 (coding for
NSP3) and 8 (coding for NSP2) of the virus strain RF were cloned and sequenced.
Each cDNA was inserted in the transfer vector pVL941 and used to transfect
Spodoptera frugiperda cells (Sf9). Recombinant baculoviruses encoding these
proteins were obtained. Infection of Sf9 cells with these recombinant viruses
resulted in a high level of expression of NSP2 and NSP3 (range of 1 microgram per
10(6) cells). Monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) were elicited by immunization of
BALB/c mice with adjuvented, unpurified recombinant proteins in the rear foot
pads. Fusion was performed using lymphocytes from popliteal lymph nodes with
SP2/O-Ag14 myeloma line. Screening was by differential indirect immunofluorescent
staining on monolayers of Sf9 cells infected with each recombinant virus. Two
MAbs proved to be reactive against NSP3 and a single one against NSP2. They
showed high specificity by immunofluorescence, immunoprecipitation and Western
blot. The isotype of these MAbs was IgG1. Oligomeric forms of NSP3 and NSP2
proteins were detected and the existence of intra-chain disulfide bridge in NSP2 
protein was suggested. The levels of synthesis and cellular localization of NSP3 
and NSP2 proteins were different as shown by immunoprecipitation and
immunofluorescence.

PMID: 8240020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Biochimie. 1993;75(11):1001-6.

Monoclonal antibodies against urease from Canavalia ensiformis.

Karmali A(1), Domingos A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Engenharia Química do Instituto Superior de Engenharia de
Lisboa, Portugal.

Monoclonal antibodies against purified urease (EC 3.5.1.5) from Canavalia
ensiformis were raised by hybridoma technology using Sp2/0 myeloma cells as a
fusion partner. All culture wells exhibited hybrid growth and 25% of these (ie 45
culture wells) contained anti-urease activity. Two positive hybrid cells were
cloned twice by the limiting dilution method and three hybridoma clones (B6F, C4F
and B18) secreting monoclonal antibodies were selected at random for purification
and characterisation purposes. All three cell lines secreted monoclonal
antibodies of IgM class which were purified by gel filtration chromatography on
Sephacryl S-200 column with a final recovery of 85% and a purification factor of 
about 18. The purified preparations were apparently homogeneous on native PAGE
running with a M(r) of 920,000 Da. mAbs were highly specific for jack bean urease
as determined by Western blotting. The affinity constants (K) for these mAbs
ranged from 10(8) to 10(9) l mol-1. mAb B6F inhibited about 65% of urease
activity whereas C4F and B18 stimulated the enzyme activity slightly by 20%. The 
presence of 2-mercaptoethanol in incubation mixtures protected urease from
inactivation by B6F. Urease inactivation by B6F could be reversed by addition of 
2-mercaptoethanol which reactivated most of the partially inactive enzyme. Gel
filtration chromatography of purified urease exhibited two protein peaks with
M(r) values of 290,000 and 90,000 Da which revealed antibody activity. This
result suggests that the mAb B6F recognizes the trimeric as well as the monomeric
forms of urease.

PMID: 8123699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Bull Inst Marit Trop Med Gdynia. 1993-1994;44-45(1-4):89-93.

Monoclonal antibodies against Vi antigen production and characterization.

Pienkowska D, Kunikowska D, Glosnicka R.

As a result of fusion of in vitro immunized mouse splenocytes and myeloma Sp2/0
cells, stable hybridomas secreting monoclonal antibodies against Vi antigen were 
obtained. The monoclonal antibodies were of IgM class. Reactivity of monoclonal
antibodies to Vi antigen of different origin was tested. The reactivity was found
to be independent of O-acetylation degree of Vi antigen.

PMID: 7580356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Biochemistry. 1992 Dec 29;31(51):12713-8.

A practical method for uniform isotopic labeling of recombinant proteins in
mammalian cells.

Hansen AP(1), Petros AM, Mazar AP, Pederson TM, Rueter A, Fesik SW.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Discovery Division, Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, Illinois 
60064.

A method to obtain uniformly isotopically labeled (15N and 15N/13C) protein from 
mammalian cells is described. The method involves preparation of isotopically
labeled media consisting of amino acids isolated from bacterial and algal
extracts supplemented with cysteine and enzymatically synthesized glutamine. The 
approach is demonstrated by producing 15N-labeled and 15N/13C-labeled urokinase
from Sp2/0 cells and successfully growing Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells on
the labeled media. Thus, using the procedures described, isotopically labeled
proteins that have been expressed in mammalian cells can be prepared, allowing
them to be studied by heteronuclear multidimensional NMR techniques.

PMID: 1463742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 1992 Dec;10(3):533-50.

Aflatoxin B1 and DNA adducts. Proposed model for surface noncovalent and covalent
complexes with N(7) of guanine. II.

Taylor ER(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Southwestern Louisiana, Lafayette
70504-44370.

An alternate model for surface noncovalent and surface covalent binding of
aflatoxin B1 to N(7) of guanine in DNA is proposed. This model considers the
out-of-plane motions of C(8) of aflatoxin B1 in those interactions. The covalent 
intercalated fit of aflatoxin B1 into DNA arises from steric adjustments made by 
DNA at the covalent intercalation site as well as local strain in the bond angles
about N(7) of guanine and C(8) of aflatoxin B1. The bond angle about N(7)
deviates modestly from the sp2 value toward the sp3 value. This study suggests
that the surface covalent aflatoxin B1-DNA complex serves only a minor role in
aflatoxin's precarcinogenic interaction with DNA and is a likely correctable
error.

PMID: 1492923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Mol Biother. 1992 Dec;4(4):174-83.

Construction and characterization of a high-affinity chimeric anti-colorectal
carcinoma antibody ccM4.

Xiang J(1), Moyana T, Kalra J, Hamilton T, Qi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Saskatoon Cancer Center, Department of Microbiology, Saskatchewan, Canada.

We have produced a high-affinity chimeric anti-colorectal carcinoma antibody,
ccM4, chimerized in both heavy and light chains by the construction of two
expression vectors, the chimeric heavy-chain expression vector
mpSV2neo-EP1-Vm4Cr1 and chimeric light-chain vector mpSV2gpt-EP1-VKCK. These
vectors contained the neo or gpt gene as a selection marker, the murine
immunoglobulin promoter and enhancer (EP1), the genomic DNA fragments of human
immunoglobulin constant region (CK and C gamma 1), and murine cDNA fragments of
VH and VK region amplified and cloned directly from the B72.3 hybridoma RNA by
the polymer chain reaction technique. These two vector DNAs were sequentially
transfected into the SP2/0Ag14 cell line. Transfectants were selected in media
containing both G418 and mycophenolic acid. The ccM4 antibody was purified from
transfectant supernatants with positive binding reactivity for the TAG72 antigen 
on a protein A column. We demonstrated that ccM4 antibody retained the same high 
binding reactivity for the TAG72 antigen as its counterpart, the high-affinity
chimeric heavy-chain cB72.3m4 antibody. The ccM4 antibody bound specifically to
human colon cancer cells, displayed biodistribution patterns similar to cB72.3m4 
antibody, and mediated effective antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity to
human OVCAR3 tumor cells. Therefore, the high-affinity chimeric ccM4 antibody
should be useful in cancer immunotherapy.

PMID: 1476671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1992 Dec;58(12):3868-72.

Monoclonal antibodies that detect live salmonellae.

Torensma R(1), Visser MJ, Aarsman CJ, Poppelier MJ, van Beurden R, Fluit AC,
Verhoef J.

Author information: 
(1)Eijkman-Winkler Laboratory for Medical Microbiology, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Nine immunoglobulin G and nine immunoglobulin M murine monoclonal
antibody-producing hybridomas reactive with live Salmonella bacteria were
obtained from several fusions of immune spleen cells and Sp2/0 myeloma cells. The
antibodies were selected by the magnetic immunoluminescence assay. The monoclonal
antibodies were reactive with serogroups A, B, C1, C2, D, E, and K and Salmonella
choleraesuis subsp. diarizonae. Each monoclonal antibody proved to be reactive
with a distinct serotype. Clinical isolates belonging to these Salmonella
serogroups could be detected. Reactivity with non-Salmonella bacteria proved to
be minor.

PMCID: PMC183196
PMID: 1476430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Am Rev Respir Dis. 1992 Dec;146(6):1589-97.

In vivo detection of a novel macrophage-derived protein involved in the
regulation of mucus-like glycoconjugate secretion.

Sperber K(1), Gollub E, Goswami S, Kalb TH, Mayer L, Marom Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai Medical Center, New York, New York.

We previously described a novel 68,000 D macrophage-derived protein (MMS-68) that
can stimulate mucus-like glycoconjugate (MLGC) secretion from cultured human
airways, respiratory epithelial cells, and the ishikawa adenocarcinoma cell line.
To better characterize this mucus secretagogue, we generated monoclonal
antibodies against MMS-68 by injecting crushed SDS-PAGE gel slices containing
this protein into Balb-C mice followed by fusion with SP2/0, a nonsecreting mouse
myeloma cell line. A panel of monoclonal antibodies was produced that identified 
the 68,000 D MMS by immunoblot analysis and immunoprecipitation. The monoclonal
antibodies detected MMS-68 in normal peripheral blood monocytes and pulmonary
macrophages by cytofluorographic analysis and in human airways as determined by
immunohistochemistry. Utilizing the monoclonal antibodies, an antigen-capture
ELISA assay was developed. Statistically significant elevations in levels of
MMS-68 were detected in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) of chronic bronchitic
subjects and cigarette smokers and in monocyte culture supernatants from
steroid-dependent asthmatic patients compared to normal control subjects. The
68,000 D MMS is a potent secretagogue and may play an important role in the
regulation of mucus secretion, especially in chronic bronchitis and
steroid-dependent asthma.

PMID: 1456580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Chem Biol Interact. 1992 Dec;85(2-3):255-63.

In vitro and in vivo toxicity of 2',3'-dideoxycytidine in mice.

Rossi L(1), Brandi G, Schiavano GF, Chiarantini L, Albano A, Magnani M.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Chimica Biologica G. Fornaini, Università degli Studi 61029,
Urbino, Italy.

3T3 mouse embryo fibroblast cell growth was inhibited in a concentration
dependent manner by 2',3'-dideoxycytidine (ddCyd), a strong inhibitor of human
immunodeficiency virus. Cell growth inhibition was associated with an increased
incorporation of ddCyd into cell DNA. In contrast SP2/0-Ag14 (a mouse myeloma)
cell growth is not inhibited by 100 microM ddCyd both in the presence or absence 
of hypoxanthine and thymidine. Furthermore, in vitro spleen cell proliferation,
upon phytohemagglutinin (PHA) addition, was much more affected by ddCyd in
C57BL/6 mice than in Swiss albino mice. That indeed ddCyd affects spleen cell
proliferation was confirmed by studies on splenocytes obtained from C57BL/6 mice 
that received ddCyd for 2 weeks in drinking water. These results suggest that
ddCyd toxicity in mice is cell and strain dependent and that the toxicity
mechanism is related to the incorporation of the drug in cell DNA.

PMID: 1337313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Biochimie. 1992 Dec;74(12):1117-20.

20-alpha-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase from pseudopregnant rat ovary: obtention
and characterization of a monoclonal antibody against the enzyme activity.

De La Llosa-Hermier MP(1), Nocart M, Paly J, Hermier C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie des Hormones, CNRS, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

The enzyme 20-alpha-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (20-alpha-HSD) was purified from
pseudopregnant rat ovaries and used as antigen for the development of a
monoclonal antibody by the hybridoma technique. Spleen cells of BALB/c mice
immunized with purified 20-alpha-HSD were fused with SP2/0 mouse myeloma cells.
Among the colonies of hybrid cells, one (designated mAb-HSD 11) was found to be
secreting antibodies (IgM) able to inhibit 20-alpha-HSD activity. The
antibody-secreting hybridome was amplified by ascitic fluid production and the
monoclonal antibody purified by Bakerbond ABx procedure. Purified mAb-HSD 11 was 
able to inhibit 20-alpha-HSD activity in a dose-dependent manner. Studies of
Michaelis constants of 20-alpha-HSD indicate that this monoclonal antibody
increases the Km for 20-alpha-dihydroprogesterone and decreases the Vmax.

PMID: 1292619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Gene. 1992 Nov 16;121(2):365-9.

The use of a wild-type dihydrofolate reductase-encoding cDNA as a dominant
selectable marker and induction of expression by methotrexate.

Lo KM(1), Lynch CA, Gillies SD.

Author information: 
(1)Abbott Biotech Inc., Needham Heights MA 02194.

The cDNA (DHFR) encoding the wild-type (wt) dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) was
used as a dominant selectable marker in the transfection of murine hybridoma
Sp2/0-Ag14 cells by protoplast fusion. The initial clones contained 100-400
copies of integrated plasmid DNA, and the high level of wt DHFR protein produced 
enabled the cells to survive the drug selection at 100 nM methotrexate (MTX). The
expression of the gene of interest was several fold higher than when the mutant
DHFR with decreased MTX binding was used as the selection marker, presumably
because the clones were more sensitive to the stress induced by MTX. When the
clones were propagated at higher concentrations of MTX, expression of both DHFR
and the gene of interest increased. This induction is freely reversible, and we
have shown that it is controlled at the transcriptional level, by nuclear run-off
transcription assays.

PMID: 1446834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. FEBS Lett. 1992 Nov 16;313(1):19-22.

Utrophin, the autosomal homologue of dystrophin, is widely-expressed and
membrane-associated in cultured cell lines.

Nguyen TM(1), Le TT, Blake DJ, Davies KE, Morris GE.

Author information: 
(1)Research Division, N.E. Wales Institute, Deeside, Clwyd, UK.

Utrophin, the autosomal dystrophin-related protein (DRP), is expressed in HeLa
cells, smooth muscle-like BC3H1 cells from mouse brain, COS monkey kidney cells, 
the P388D1 monocyte-macrophage cell line and untransformed human skin
fibroblasts, as well as in rat C6 glioma and Schwannoma cells. It was
undetectable, however, in the Sp2/O mouse myeloma cell line and in hybridoma
lines derived from it. Dystrophin was not detected in any of these cell lines.
Although all utrophin-containing cells were capable of forming monolayers in
culture, no major effects of either attachment to substratum or length of time in
culture (2-17 days) on utrophin levels were observed. After subcellular
fractionation of BC3H1 or glioma cells, nearly all of the utrophin was found in
the Triton-soluble fraction, suggesting an association with cell membranes.

PMID: 1426262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. J Chem Neuroanat. 1992 Nov-Dec;5(6):503-9.

Production and immunohistochemical application of monoclonal antibodies against
delta sleep-inducing peptide.

Charnay Y(1), Golaz J, Vallet PG, Bouras C.

Author information: 
(1)Service de la Recherche Biologique, Institutions Universitaires de Psychiatrie
de Genève, Switzerland.

Monoclonal antibodies were produced following immunization of rats with delta
sleep-including peptide (DSIP). The spleen cells of the rats were fused with the 
myeloma cell line SP2/0. The supernatants of hybridomas were screened on a
solid-phase immunoassay using dot-immunobinding of DSIP and some DSIP fragments. 
The supernatants of six stable producer clones were found to react with DSIP.
From this procedure it was also deduced that all these monoclonal antibodies
recognized epitope(s) of the penta carboxy-terminal region of DSIP (DSIP5-9).
Application of these monoclonal antibodies to rat median eminence sections gave a
strong immunolabelling of a large population of fibres and terminal-like
structures, mainly localized through the lateral areas. Elution-restaining
experiments using a monoclonal antibody to DSIP and a polyclonal antiserum to
luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) showed that the patterns of
immunoreactivity respectively visualized overlap almost completely. Although
numerous LHRH-immunoreactive neuronal elements were also easily demonstrated in
the median eminence of the mouse, the hamster and the gerbil species, incubation 
of sections with monoclonal antibodies to DSIP failed to give any immunoreaction.
Taken together these data argue for the independence of the DSIP/LHRH
immunolabelling systems. Furthermore, it was demonstrated that DSIP5-9-related
epitopes detected in the rat median eminence have no counterpart in the three
other rodent species investigated. These species differences may reflect the fact
that the carboxy-terminal sequence of the nonapeptide DSIP originally discovered 
in the rabbit is not conserved in all rodent species.

PMID: 1476667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Epilepsia. 1992 Nov-Dec;33(6):1029-35.

Pre- and postoperative auditory event-related potentials in temporal lobe
epilepsy.

Mervaala E(1), Nousiainen U, Kinnunen J, Vapalahti M, Riekkinen P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, Vaajasalo Hospital, Kuopio, Finland.

We studied auditory event-related potentials (ERPs) in 11 surgically treated
patients with intractable temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) pre- and postoperatively. 
ERPs through sphenoidal electrodes (Sp1-T3, Sp2-T4) provided clinically relevant 
and correctly lateralizing electrophysiologic evidence of temporal lobe
dysfunction in 9 of 11 patients, confirmed by EEGs, electrocorticograms,
neuroradiologic, and neuropsychological results, and clinical follow-up.
Lateralizing asymmetries were noted in P300 amplitude, but latencies were
prolonged bilaterally. Sphenoidal ERPs might serve as a new functional indicator 
of temporal lobe dysfunction in patients evaluated for epilepsy surgery.

PMID: 1464259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 1992 Nov;72(11):683-5, 703.

[Production of monoclonal antibodies against Mycobacterium leprae].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu QX(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Dermatology, CAMS, Nanjing.

A series of hybridoma cell lines, which secrete monoclonal antibodies (McAbs),
were produced by means of fusion between mouse myeloma cells SP2/O and spleen
cells from BALB/C mice immunized with whole M. leprae plus unique phenolic
glycolipid I(PGL-I) of M. leprae and M. leprae sonicates supernatant fluid (MLSS)
as immunogen. Primary identification indicated that H2 cell line can secrete McAb
against the epitope of PGL-I; IIIE10 cell line can secrete McAb against PGL-I and
MLSS and (5) 24 D6C8 cell line only against whole M. leprae. The uses of these
McAbs in serodiagnosis of leprosy, identification of M. leprae, analysis and
purification of M. leprae antigens, and key problems in technology for producing 
McAbs against M. leprae were also discussed.

PMID: 1338709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Bull Tokyo Dent Coll. 1992 Nov;33(4):171-85.

Analysis of cell surface antigens of Campylobacter rectus.

Kaneko T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tokyo Dental College, Japan.

Campylobacter rectus is one of the predominant bacteria in the lesions of human
periodontitis. The surface antigens of the bacterium contain several components
which may play significant roles in colonization and pathogenesis. A
high-molecular-weight protein was selectively isolated from the cell surface of
C. rectus by acid extraction and purified by DEAE Sepharose. Sodium dodecyl
sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis analysis showed that the extracted
protein was 150 kDa. The protein was not found in Campylobacter curvus ATCC 35224
or Wolinella succinogenes ATCC 29543. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) was extracted from
various C. rectus strains by the hot phenol-water method. SDS-PAGE patterns
revealed that C. rectus LPS was the smooth type in nature. Monoclonal antibodies 
against C. rectus were generated by the fusion of SP2/0 myeloma cells with
splenocytes from BALB/c mice immunized with whole cells of C. rectus ATCC 33238
strain. An Immunoglobulin G1 monoclonal antibody reacted with the
high-molecular-weight proteins from 4 of 9 C. rectus strains, indicating that the
150 kDa protein exhibits antigenic heterogeneity. Immunoelectron microscopic
study revealed that the monoclonal antibody recognized the S-layer of C. rectus
cells. An IgM monoclonal antibody reacted with LPSs from C. rectus strains at
molecular weights between approximately 20.0 kDa and 24.0 kDa. The monoclonal
antibody did not react with any other LPSs from C. curvus ATCC 35224 or W.
succinogenes ATCC 29543. The reactivities of this monoclonal antibody indicate
that it recognizes an O-specific side chain epitope of C. rectus LPS. Sera from
patients with adult periodontitis showed strong reactivity with the 150 kDa
protein antigen and LPS from C. rectus strains. As determined by immunoblotting
analysis, sera from periodontally healthy individuals, however, showed little or 
no reactivity. The levels of serum IgG antibodies of patients with periodontitis 
to the protein antigen and LPS were statistically significantly higher than those
of periodontally healthy individuals, as assessed by an enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay.

PMID: 1303324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Biochemistry. 1992 Oct 20;31(41):9961-9.

Mechanism of Agrobacterium beta-glucosidase: kinetic studies.

Kempton JB(1), Withers SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

The beta-glucosidase from Agrobacterium faecalis (previously Alcaligenes
faecalis) has been subjected to a detailed kinetic investigation with a range of 
substrates to probe its specificity and mechanism. It has a relatively broad
specificity for the substrate sugar moiety and exhibits a classical pH dependence
for its kinetic parameters with three different substrates and an identical pH
dependence for its inactivation by a mechanism-based inactivator, cyclophellitol.
Measurement of kcat and Km values for a series of aryl glucoside substrates has
allowed construction of a Bronsted plot, the concave-downward shape of which is
consistent with the anticipated two-step mechanism involving a glucosyl-enzyme
intermediate which is formed and hydrolyzed via oxocarbonium ion-like transition 
states. The slope of the leaving group-dependent portion of the Bronsted plot
(beta 1g = -0.7) indicates a large degree of bond cleavage at the transition
state. Secondary deuterium kinetic isotope effects measured for five different
aryl glucosides are also consistent with this mechanism and further suggest that 
the transition state for formation of the glucosyl-enzyme intermediate, probed
with the slower substrates for which kH/kD = 1.06, is more SN2-like than that for
its hydrolysis (for which kH/kD = 1.11). Reasons for this difference are
proposed, and values of Ki for several ground-state and transition-state analogue
inhibitors are presented which support the concept of sp2-hybridized transition
states.

PMID: 1390780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Plant Physiol. 1992 Oct;100(2):868-73.

Cytochrome p-450-dependent hydroxylation of lauric Acid at the subterminal
position and oxidation of unsaturated analogs in wheat microsomes.

Zimmerlin A(1), Salaün JP, Durst F, Mioskowski C.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'Enzymologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire, Institut de Biologie
Moléculaire des Plantes, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique UPR 406,
28, rue Goethe, F-67083 Strasbourg Cedex, France.

Microsomes from etiolated wheat (Triticum aestivum L. cv Etoile de Choisy) shoots
catalyzed the reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate-dependent
hydroxylation of lauric acid predominantly at the subterminal or (omega-1)
position (65%). Minor amounts of 10-hydroxy- (31%) and 9-hydroxylaurate (4%) were
also formed. The reaction was catalyzed by cytochrome P-450, since enzyme
activity was strongly inhibited by tetcyclacis, carbon monoxide, and antibodies
against NADPH-cytochrome c (P-450)-reductase. The apparent K(m) for lauric acid
was estimated to be 8.5 +/- 2.0 mum. Seed treatment with the safener naphthalic
acid anhydride or treatment of seedlings with phenobarbital increased cytochrome 
P-450 content and lauric acid hydroxylase (LAH) activity of the microsomes. A
combination of both treatments further stimulated LAH activity. A series of
radiolabeled unsaturated lauric acid analogs (8-, 9-, 10-, and 11-dodecenoic
acids) was used to explore the regioselectivity and catalytic capabilities of
induced wheat microsomes. It has been found that wheat microsomes catalyzed the
reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate-dependent epoxidation of sp2 
carbons concurrently with hydroxylation at saturated positions. The
regioselectivity of oxidation of the unsaturated substrates and that of lauric
acid were similar. Preincubation of wheat microsomes with reduced nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide phosphate and 11-dodecenoic acid resulted in a partial loss 
of LAH activity.

PMCID: PMC1075637
PMID: 16653069  [PubMed]


477. J Pathol. 1992 Oct;168(2):221-7.

Isologous monoclonal antibodies can induce anti-GBM glomerulonephritis in rats.

Sado Y(1), Kagawa M, Rauf S, Naito I, Moritoh C, Okigaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Shigei Medical Research Institute, Okayama, Japan.

Injection of isologous monoclonal antibodies (SR2, SR3) caused anti-glomerular
basement membrane antibody-induced glomerulonephritis (anti-GBM nephritis) in
WKY/NCrj rats. The antibodies were obtained from hybridoma cells derived from
fusion of the spleen of a nephritic WKY/NCrj rat injected with rat solubilized
renal basement membranes with adjuvant, and mouse SP2-myeloma cells. They
belonged to the rat IgG2a subclass and bound to rat kidney in a linear pattern
along the glomerular and tubular basement membranes. Histological changes in
glomeruli were detected at day 1 after the injection; proteinuria with haematuria
appeared on day 2; and proteinuria became severe and reached a plateau by day 5. 
These results demonstrate that anti-GBM nephritis can even be induced by an
isologous monoclonal antibody and that the rat IgG2a subclass is at least
nephritogenic. The experimental model of anti-GBM nephritis with isologous
monoclonal antibodies makes it possible and easier to analyse further the
mechanism of anti-GBM nephritis.

PMID: 1460540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Oct;12(10):4251-61.

Cloning of GT box-binding proteins: a novel Sp1 multigene family regulating
T-cell receptor gene expression.

Kingsley C(1), Winoto A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley
94720.

Analysis of a T-cell antigen receptor (TCR) alpha promoter from a variable gene
segment (V) revealed a critical GT box element which is also found in upstream
regions of several V alpha genes, TCR enhancer, and regulatory elements of other 
genes. This element is necessary for TCR gene expression and binds several
proteins. These GT box-binding proteins were identified as members of a novel Sp1
multigene family. Two of them, which we term Sp2 and Sp3, were cloned. Sp2 and
Sp3 contain zinc fingers and transactivation domains similar to those of Sp1.
Like Sp1, Sp2 and Sp3 are expressed ubiquitously, and their in vitro-translated
products bind to the GT box in TCR V alpha promoters. Sp3, in particular, also
binds to the Sp1 consensus sequence GC box and has binding activity similar to
that of Sp1. As the GT box has also previously been shown to play a role in gene 
regulation of other genes, these newly isolated Sp2 and Sp3 proteins might
regulate expression not only of the TCR gene but of other genes as well.

PMCID: PMC360348
PMID: 1341900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Prostaglandins. 1992 Oct;44(4):329-38.

Separation and concentration of delta 17-6-keto-PGF1 alpha using monoclonal
antibody to omega 3-olefin structure of trienoic prostanoids.

Hishinuma T(1), Shimomura K, Nishikawa M, Ohyama Y, Ishibashi M, Mizugaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University Hospital, Sendai,
Japan.

A monoclonal antibody against cis-3-hexen-1-ol was prepared and used to separate 
and/or concentrate delta 17-6-keto-prostaglandin F1 alpha (PGF1 alpha) in the
human sera. cis-3-Hexen-1-ol was conjugated with the human serum albumin (HSA)
according to the N-succinimidylester method and hyperimmunized to BALB/c mouse.
The monoclonal antibodies were obtained from hybridoma clones established by a
fusion between SP2/0-Ag14-k13 mouse myeloma cells and splenocytes of a mouse. A
monoclonal antibody, named 4G9-12B, recognized the epitope characteristic for
omega 3-olefin structure. The 4G9-12B antibody became more specific for delta
17-6-keto-PGF1 alpha than 6-keto-PGF1 alpha by applying inhibition ELISA using
amino-residue coating plates. Using the prepared immunoaffinity columns of this
antibody, delta 17-6-keto-PGF1 alpha was clearly detected in 6 pg/ml of the human
blood sera by GC/MS analysis. These results suggest that the monoclonal antibody 
to the partial structure of trienoic prostanoid, omega 3-olefin unit, and that
its immunoaffinity columns are useful in separating and concentrating delta
17-6-keto-PGF1 alpha in the human blood or urine.

PMID: 1279746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Phys Rev B Condens Matter. 1992 Sep 15;46(11):7169-7174.

Raman scattering from sp2 carbon clusters.

Yoshikawa M, Nagai N, Matsuki M, Fukuda H, Katagiri G, Ishida H, Ishitani A,
Nagai I I.

PMID: 10002424  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


481. J Exp Med. 1992 Sep 1;176(3):855-66.

Generation and analysis of random point mutations in an antibody CDR2 sequence:
many mutated antibodies lose their ability to bind antigen.

Chen C(1), Roberts VA, Rittenberg MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Oregon Health Sciences University, 
Portland 97201.

We have investigated the impact of mutations on the binding functions of the
phosphocholine (PC)-specific T15 antibody in the absence of antigen selection
pressure. The H chain complementarity determining region 2 (CDR2) sequence of T15
antibody was saturated with point mutations by in vitro random mutagenesis. From 
the mutant library, 289 clones were screened by direct DNA sequencing. The point 
mutations generated by this method were randomly distributed throughout the CDR2 
region and included all kinds of substitutions. 46 unique mutant antibodies,
containing one to four point mutations each, were expressed in SP2/0 myeloma
cells. Functional analysis on these antibodies has provided insights into several
aspects of somatic mutation. (a) The majority (26/46) of mutant antibodies either
lost (20/46) or had reduced (6/46) ability to bind PC-protein conjugates or R36a,
a PC-expressing strain of Streptococcus pneumoniae. In contrast, none of the
mutant antibodies displayed increased binding for these PC antigens. Taken
together with calculations of destructive mutations elsewhere in the V region,
the data suggest that somatic mutation may cause extensive wastage among B cells 
during clonal expansion after antigen stimulation. (b) The frequency of
binding-loss mutants increased sharply when a second mutation was introduced into
the CDR2 sequence; it appears that, in some cases, two or more mutations are
needed to destroy binding. (c) The mutant antibodies were tested for their
reactivity to 11 non-PC antigens as well as to three PC analogues. None of the
mutants gained new reactivity or changed their ability to discriminate structural
analogues, supporting the notion that the major role of somatic mutation is to
increase or decrease affinity rather than to create new specificities. (d)
Mutations in at least five different positions in CDR2 were deleterious,
suggesting that these residues may be essential for antigen binding. Three of
these positions are novel in that they had not been identified to be important
for binding PC by previous crystallographic analysis. (e) Introduction of
mutations into two highly conserved residues in CDR2 did not alter the overall
conformation of the V region as judged by antiidiotypic analysis, and, in some
cases, did not affect the antigen binding function. The results thus indicate
that even nonconservative substitutions of invariant residues need not be
deleterious, suggesting that their conservation may be due to reasons other than 
maintaining antibody structure or specificity.

PMCID: PMC2119366
PMID: 1512548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. J Histochem Cytochem. 1992 Sep;40(9):1339-52.

Isolation of monoclonal antibodies recognizing rat bone-associated molecules in
vitro and in vivo.

Turksen K(1), Bhargava U, Moe HK, Aubin JE.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Group in Periodontal Physiology, University of
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Knowledge of the number and kinds of differentiation steps that characterize
cells of the osteoblast lineage is inadequate. To further analyze osteoblast
differentiation, we generated a series of monoclonal antibodies (MAb) to
osteogenic cells. Spleen cells from mice immunized with whole-cell populations
enriched for expression of osteoblast-associated properties or bone formation in 
vitro were fused with the SP2/0 myeloma cell line. Supernatants from growing
hybridomas were screened by indirect immunofluorescence on frozen sections of a
portion of 21-day fetal rat heads that included the calvaria bone, periosteum,
muscle, fibrous connective tissue, and skin. Six MAb were selected with
bone-associated staining and limited ability to label other tissues. Either cell 
surface or cytoplasmic molecules were recognized by five of the MAb; one
recognized a molecule detectable both in the cytoplasm, on the cell surface, and 
in the extracellular matrix. Of the antibodies selected, one identified both
preosteoblasts and osteoblasts and has been found to be against alkaline
phosphatase. The others recognized the mature osteoblasts, osteocytes, and
chondrocytic cells. The pattern and distribution of the labeling in vivo extended
to primary cells and cell lines in vivo. These results support earlier
observations on molecules differentially expressed by cells at different stages
of the osteoblast lineage and extend the available cell surface and cytoplasmic
epitopes identifiable as marker molecules.

PMID: 1506671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Mol Microbiol. 1992 Sep;6(17):2517-24.

Quantitative determination of FtsA at different growth rates in Escherichia coli 
using monoclonal antibodies.

Wang H(1), Gayda RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge.

FtsA is an essential cell division protein in Escherichia coli. Its synthesis in 
low amounts makes the investigation of its functions difficult. Partially
purified FtsA protein was obtained by solubilizing cellular inclusion bodies
after overexpression of the ftsA gene for the purpose of raising monoclonal
antibodies. Mice were immunized with this FtsA protein fraction and their spleen 
cells were fused to Sp2/0-AG14 mouse myeloma cells. Hybrid cells were screened
and two clones were positively identified as FtsA monoclonal antibody producers
by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and Western blotting. A quantitative assay
using these monoclonal antibodies indicated that the average number of FtsA
molecules per cell to be between 50 and 200. However, the concentration of FtsA
protein normalized to total cell protein was constant over a wide range of growth
rates. This finding is in agreement with the hypothesized role of FtsA protein as
a stoichiometric component of the septum.

PMID: 1406287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Clin Invest. 1992 Sep;90(3):720-6.

Recognition by recombinant autoimmune thyroid disease-derived Fab fragments of a 
dominant conformational epitope on human thyroid peroxidase.

Portolano S(1), Chazenbalk GD, Seto P, Hutchison JS, Rapoport B, McLachlan SM.

Author information: 
(1)Thyroid Molecular Biology Unit, Veterans' Administration Medical Center, San
Francisco, California 94121.

To characterize the nature of thyroid peroxidase (TPO) autoantibodies present in 
the sera of patients with autoimmune thyroid disease, we cloned three IgG1/kappa 
Fab fragments which bind 125I-TPO. This was accomplished by the molecular cloning
and expression in bacteria of IgG gene fragments from B cells infiltrating the
thyroid of a patient with Graves' disease. The three Fab fragments (SP2, SP4, and
SP5) are coded for by a common heavy chain (VH1, D, JH3) and three related, but
different, light chains (VK1, JK2). The SP Fab fragments bind specifically to TPO
with high affinities (6 x 10(-11)-2 x 10(-10) M) comparable to those of serum TPO
autoantibodies. TPO autoantibodies represented by the SP Fab fragments are
present in all 11 patients studied, constitute a high proportion (36-72%) of
serum TPO autoantibodies in individual patients and interact with a
conformational epitope on TPO.

PMCID: PMC329922
PMID: 1381722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 1992 Sep;14(5):340-4.

[Stable and efficient expression of human interleukin-6 cDNA in mammalian cells
after gene transfer].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen QY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Institute, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing.

Following reverse transcription and PCR amplification, the human interleukin-6
(IL-6) cDNA was cloned from total RNA of activated human tonsillar mononuclear
cells. Southern blot showed the presence of specific band, and its DNA sequence
demonstrated that the fragment was 650 bp in length, spanning the complete coding
region and part of 5' and 3'-untranslated regions. The human IL-6 sequence seemed
to be well conserved. One nucleotide change at 429 position was observed, but
this change did not affect the amino acid composition. After inserting the cloned
cDNA into retroviral vector XM-6, the recombinant was packaged in PA317 cells and
the amphotropic virus titer reached 5 x 10(5) CFU/ml. Human IL-6 was expressed in
mammalian cell line SP2/0 cells, after being infected by the constructed
retrovirus. The G418 resistant SP2/0 cells secreted IL-6. Its supernatant was
able to maintain in vitro growth of the IL-6 dependent T1165 cell line. Northern 
blot analysis of the transfected SP2/0 cells showed significantly elevated IL-6
message, being consistent with the result of T 1165 bioassay. The expression was 
stable during the 12 month period of observation. The hybridoma cells, formed
after fusion of the transfected SP2/0 cells and lymphocytes, exhibited
accelerated growth.

PMID: 1291290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Hua Xi Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 1992 Sep;23(4):349-52.

[The production and identification of partial serogroup--specific monoclonal
antibodies against leptospires hebdomadis serogroup].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang M, Dai B.

Hebdomadis is one of the major serogroups found in China. In Sichuan, this
serogroup appears to have a close relationship with local outbreak of
leptospirosis. BALB/c mice were immunized intrasplenically with outer envelope of
serogroup Hendomadis serovar hebdomadis strain 245. Spleen cells were fused with 
SP2/0 myeloma cells, two monoclonal antibodies Af2 and Bb2 were produced by
hybridoma technique. McAb Af2 and McAb Bb2 were identified to be IgG1 and IgG3 by
immunodiffusion respectively. Specificities of these two McAbs were determined by
MAT; both reacted to 8 serovars (hebdomadis, nona, kambale, kremastos, worsfoldi,
jules, maruborincana) of Hebdomadis serogroup. The agglutination titres of McAb
Af2 and McAb Bb2 were 1:640-1:2,500,000 and 1:320-1:2,500,000, respectively. The 
two McAbs did not agglutinate with serovar kabura of Hebdomadis serogroup, they
did not agglutinate with 11 serovars of Sejroe serogroup, 4 serovars of Mini
serogroup, 18 representive serovars of L. interrogans in 18 serogroups, L.
biflexa strain Patoc I and Leptonema illini. So it was found that McAb Af2 and
McAb Bb2 showed partial serogroup specificity for Hebdomadis by agglutination.

PMID: 1284791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. J Exp Zool. 1992 Aug 15;263(2):210-4.

Xenopus laevis sperm proteins, previously identified as surface proteins with egg
coat binding capability, are indeed histone H4, histone H3, and sperm specific
protein SP2.

Bernardini G(1), Donne ID, Norreri S, Negri A, Milzani A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia, Università di Milano, Italy.

Recently, four Xenopus sperm proteins thought to be involved in binding to the
egg envelope were identified (Lindsay and Hedrick, J. Exp. Zool., 245:286-293,
'88). We have studied the three more abundant ones of apparent molecular weight
of 14, 19, and 25 kd in SDS-PAGE. We have shown that these proteins are indeed
nuclear basic proteins: the 14 kd is the histone H4, the 19 kd is the histone H3,
and the 25 kd is the sperm-specific protein SP2.

PMID: 1500885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon). 1992 Aug;7(3):188-9. doi:
10.1016/0268-0033(92)90040-B.

Author's response.

Robertson JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Salisbury General Infirmary, Fisherton Street, Salisbury SP2 7SX, UK.

PMID: 23915733  [PubMed]


489. Acta Virol. 1992 Aug;36(4):376-82.

Interferon-neutralizing or enhancing activities in hybridoma cell fluids after in
vitro immunization.

Stancek D(1), Stanceková M, Pimenta JK, Reis D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Preventive and Clinical Medicine, Commenius University,
Bratislava, Czechoslovakia.

Several hybridomas supernatants capable of interferon beta (IFN-beta) or "IFN
epsilon" ("IFN-eps") neutralizing or enhancing activities were obtained after in 
vitro immunization of BALB/c and C57 mice spleen cells and their fusion with
Sp2/0 plasmacytoma cells. Besides rather low anti-IFN-beta or "eps" antibody
secretion several cloned hybridoma fluids contained a factor potentiating
anti-viral activity of the both IFNs. It is speculated that this activity is due 
to production by some hybridomas of another lymphokine.

PMID: 1282778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. J Bone Miner Res. 1992 Jul;7(7):841-6.

Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry of the forearm: reproducibility and correlation 
with single-photon absorptiometry.

Leboff MS(1), Fuleihan GE, Angell JE, Chung S, Curtis K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.

Although single-photon absorptiometry (SPA) has been the predominant tool used to
assess bone mineral density (BMD) in the forearm, the development of dual-energy 
x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) provides the benefits of greater source stability,
reduced scanning time, and improved image resolution compared to SPA. In the
present study we used the DEXA bone densitometer (Hologic, Inc., Waltham, MA) to 
(1) measure BMD in the one-third radius and ultradistal radius; (2) examine the
reproducibility of these BMD measurements; and (3) compare the BMD at the
one-third radius with SPA (SP2, Lunar Corp., Madison, WI). In 65 normal women
(ages 22-74 years) we examined changes in the forearm DEXA BMD with age,
revealing significant quadratic regression equations. The reproducibility of DEXA
BMD (mean +/- SEM) in 7 normal subjects aged 22-50 years is 0.85 +/- 0.16% for
the predominantly cortical one-third radius site and 0.97 +/- 0.15% for the more 
trabecular ultradistal site. The regression relationship between DEXA and SPA of 
the one-third radius in 26 subjects (ages 22-68 years) is DEXA BMD = 0.105 +
0.826 (SPA BMD); R = 0.97, R2 = 0.94, p less than 0.0001. Bone densitometry of
the forearm using DEXA may be performed relatively rapidly, providing
reproducibility and image resolution that are generally superior to those
observed with SPA.

PMID: 1642152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. FEMS Microbiol Immunol. 1992 Jul;4(5):247-54.

Murine monoclonal antibodies against staphylococcal enterotoxin B: production and
characterization.

Goyache J(1), Orden JA, Blanco JL, Hernández J, Doménech A, Suárez G, Gómez-Lucía
E.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Patología Animal I, Facultad de Veterinaria, Universidad
Complutense, Madrid, Spain.

A group of 14 monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) to staphylococcal enterotoxin B (SEB) 
were obtained by fusion of Sp2/O myeloma cells with spleen cells from female
BALB/c mice immunized with commercial SEB. The antibodies belonged to IgG1 and
IgG2b subclasses. We evaluated the anti-SEB titres, competition assays and
sensitivity of detection by indirect ELISA. Reactivity and cross-reactivity were 
also studied by indirect ELISA and confirmed by immunoblotting. All the mAbs
reacted with SEB and with a second band which had a different electrophoretic
mobility and probably represents an aggregate of SEB or SEB bound to membranes.
Three mAbs reacted only with SEB and the rest showed cross-reactions with SEC1.
No reactions were observed against any other serovar (SEA, SED and SEE) or other 
proteins.

PMID: 1515153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Rev Fr Transfus Hemobiol. 1992 Jul;35(4):239-54.

[Characterization of murine monoclonal antibodies against fetal erythrocytes].

[Article in French]

Blanchard D(1), Bernard D, Loirat MJ, Frioux Y, Guimbretière J, Guimbretière L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre Régional de Transfusion Sanguine, Nantes.

Balb/c mice were immunized against papain-treated fetal erythrocytes and
splenocytes were fused with Sp2/0-Ag-14 myeloma cells. Several hybrids secreting 
antibodies directed against antigenic determinants predominantly exposed on fetal
and cord cells were selected and cloned twice. Antibodies NaM61-1A2 and NaM61-768
(IgM class) were shown to be specific for an endo-beta-galactosidase-sensitive
oligosaccharide chain. The antigen, strongly expressed on fetal and cord cells,
was identified as the i blood group antigen. The antibodies represent powerful
blood group reagents to be use in conventional agglutination techniques as well
as in the gel typing system and in indirect flow cytometry. The antibody
NaM46-4A8 (IgG class) is specific for an antigenic structure expressed on fetal
cells and accessible only after papain, ficin, bromelin and endo-beta
galactosidase treatment. The antigen was not identified.

PMID: 1476583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Cancer Lett. 1992 Jun 15;64(2):163-9.

Generation of cytotoxic monoclonals against AK-5 histiocytoma: conjugation with
daunomycin and use in chemotherapy.

Khar A(1), Varalakshmi C, Pardhasaradhi BV, Ali AM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cellular & Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, India.

We have successfully generated cytotoxic monoclonal antibodies against a rat
histiocytoma, AK-5. Monoclonal antibodies obtained after fusing immunized rat
splenocytes with SP2/0 myeloma, were cytotoxic to AK-5 cells in the presence of
complement. These monoclonals were highly specific and did not show any cross
reactivity with normal cells and ascitic tumors such as Zajdela ascites hepatoma 
or Meth A. One of the antibodies was conjugated to daunomycin and used in the
chemotherapeutic treatment. Total regression of AK-5 histiocytoma was obtained
after injection of daunomycin-MAb conjugate into tumor bearing animals suggesting
the specific targeting of the antineoplastic drug to the tumor. The histology of 
the tumor sections showed extensive necrosis of the tumors after treatment of the
animals with drug-MAb conjugate.

PMID: 1319280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Plant Physiol. 1992 Jun;99(2):548-52.

A gymnosperm extensin contains the serine-tetrahydroxyproline motif.

Fong C(1), Kieliszewski MJ, de Zacks R, Leykam JF, Lamport DT.

Author information: 
(1)Halfhollow Hills East High School, Dix Hills, New York 11746.

The extensin family is a diverse group of hydroxyproline-rich glycoproteins
located in the cell wall and characterized by repetitive peptide motifs
glycosylated to various degrees. The origin of this diversity and its
relationship to function led us earlier to compare extensins of the two major
groups of angiosperms from which we concluded that the highly glycosylated
Ser-Hyp(4) motif was characteristic of advanced herbaceous dicots, occurring
rarely or not at all in a representative graminaceous monocot (Zea mays) and a
chenopod (Beta vulgaris) representative of primitive dicots. Because these
results could arise either from loss or acquisition of a characteristic feature, 
we chose a typical gymnosperm representing seed-bearing plants more primitive
than the angiosperms. Thus, salt eluates of Douglas fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii)
cell suspension cultures yielded two monomeric extensins differing in size and
composition. The larger extensin reported earlier lacked the Ser-Hyp(4) motif,
was rich in proline and hydroxyproline, and contained peptide motifs similar to
the dicot repetitive proline-rich proteins. The smaller extensin monomer reported
here (Superose-6 peak 2 [SP2]) was compositionally similar to typical dicot
extensins such as tomato P1, mainly consisting of Hyp, Thr, Ser, Pro, Val, Tyr,
Lys, His, abundant arabinose, and a small but significant galactose content. A
chymotryptic peptide map (on Hamilton PRP-1) of anhydrous hydrogen
fluoride-deglycosylated SP2 yielded eight peptides sequenced after further
purification on a high-resolution fast-sizing column (polyhydroxyethyl
aspartamide; Poly LC). Significantly, two of the eight peptides contained the
Ser-Hyp(4) motif, consistent both with the SP2 amino acid composition as well as 
the presence of hydroxyproline tetraarabinoside as a small (4% of total Hyp)
component of the hydroxyproline arabinoside profile; thus, hydroxyproline
tetraarabinoside corroborates the presence of Ser-Hyp(4), in agreement with our
earlier observation that Hyp contiguity and Hyp glycosylation are positively
correlated. Interestingly, other peptide sequences indicate that SP2 contains
motifs such as Ser-Hyp(3)-Thr-Hyp-Tyr, Ser-Hyp(4)-Lys, and (Ala-Hyp)(n) repeats
that are related to and typify dicot extensins P1, P3, and arabinogalactan
proteins, respectively. Overall, these peptide sequences confirm our previous
prediction that Ser-Hyp(4) is indeed an ancient motif and also strongly support
our suggestion that the extensins comprise an extraordinarily diverse, but
nevertheless phylogenetically related, family of cell wall hydroxyproline-rich
glycoproteins.

PMCID: PMC1080498
PMID: 16668921  [PubMed]


495. Phys Rev B Condens Matter. 1992 Jun 1;45(22):12746-12751.

Comparison of carbon and boron nitride in a hypothetical all-sp2-bonded
tetragonal phase.

Corkill JL, Liu AY, Cohen ML.

PMID: 10001331  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


496. J Immunol. 1992 Jun 1;148(11):3631-5.

Specific VDJ gene combinations contribute to the specificity of memory antibodies
to the phosphorylcholine hapten.

Lötscher M(1), Amstutz H, Heusser CH, Blaser K.

Author information: 
(1)Swiss Institute of Allergy and Asthma Research, Davos.

Based on their fine specificity, two groups of antibodies against the
phosphorylcholine (PC) hapten have been described. Group I antibodies react
predominantly with the PC moiety of the hapten and group II are directed against 
the entire hapten including the azophenyl spacer to the protein carrier. We have 
analyzed the VH gene segment utilization of hybridomas from the memory response
to PC by Southern blot analysis and nucleotide sequencing of the functional VDJ
rearrangements. Three main specificities of anti-PC antibodies could be
distinguished. Anti-PC hybridomas with group I fine specificity utilize the
VH1-DFL 16.1-JH1 rearrangement. A major portion of group II antibodies recognized
the phenyl-PC part and expressed the same VH1 gene in combination with a member
of the SP2 family and JH1 or JH2. The other anti-PC antibodies either used the
PJ14-DFL16-JH3 rearrangement in combination with a lambda 1 L chain or a member
of the VGam3.8 VH family rearranged to the DFL16.1 and the JH3 gene segments. The
PJ14 and VGam3.8 V gene expressing antibodies were directed to the phenyl group
and were either not or barely inhibitable by PC chloride. Thus, specific VDJ gene
combinations contribute to the fine specificity of antibodies in the memory
response to the PC hapten. The use of the S107, Q52, and VGam3.8. VH gene
families, together with FL16.1 or SP2 D segments and JH1, JH2, or JH3 results in 
different fine specificities to the PC, phenyl-PC, or the azophenyl moiety of the
PC hapten. These fine specificities of the memory response use V, D, and J
segments of the initial T15Id+ response in combination with gene segments usually
related to phenyl specificity.

PMID: 1588049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Mol Biother. 1992 Jun;4(2):70-6.

Genetic engineering of anticolorectal carcinoma Fv molecule in myeloma cells.

Xiang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Canada.

The anti-TAG72 Fv molecule composed of a heterodimer of both heavy- and
light-chain variable domains was produced by the construction of the expression
vector mpSV2neo-EP1-Fv72.3. This vector contained the neo gene as a selection
marker, the murine immunoglobulin heavy chain promoter (P1), enhancer (E), the
SV40 polyadenylation signal region, and the murine cDNA fragments of VH and VL
regions amplified and cloned directly from the B72.3 hybridoma RNA by the
polymerase chain reaction technique. Termination codons were introduced into the 
3' end of both VH and VL regions. The expression vector was transfected into the 
SP2/0 cell line. The Fv72.3 molecules were purified by the rabbit anti-B72.3
idiotype antibody affinity column, and retained the binding reactivity for the
TAG72 antigen. The small size of Fv72.3 molecule (25 kD) makes it attractive for 
structural studies and immunodetection of cancers.

PMID: 1515097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. J Immunol. 1992 Jun 1;148(11):3604-9.

Cells expressing an H chain Ig gene carrying a viral T cell epitope are lysed by 
specific cytolytic T cells.

Zaghouani H(1), Krystal M, Kuzu H, Moran T, Shah H, Kuzu Y, Schulman J, Bona C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY
10029.

The epitope corresponding to amino acid residues 147-161 of the nucleoprotein
(NP) of influenza A virus is recognized by CTL in association with H-2Kd class I 
Ag. Herein, we engineered an Ig molecule carrying this CTL epitope by replacing
the diversity gene segment of the H chain V region of an anti-arsonate antibody
with an oligonucleotide that encodes the CTL epitope. The chimeric H chain gene
was expressed either alone or together with the parental L chain in the
nonsecreting BALB/c myeloma B cell line, SP2/0. The Ig produced by cells
transfected with both the chimeric H chain and parental L chains genes expressed 
the NP epitope but lost the original arsonate binding activity. In addition,
SP2/0 cells expressing the chimeric H chain either alone or together with the
parental L chain were lysed by class I restricted NP-epitope specific CTL. By
contrast, SP2/0 cells pulsed with soluble chimeric Ig molecules were not lysed by
the specific CTL. These observations indicate that: 1) this particular CTL
epitope can be expressed on Ig molecules without altering the H and L chain
pairing; 2) this CTL epitope can be generated from this chimeric Ig in which it
is surrounded by flanking regions distinct from those of the viral NP; and 3) the
generation of this CTL epitope from the Ig molecule requires the endogenous
pathway as do viral proteins.

PMID: 1375250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. J Bone Miner Res. 1992 May;7(5):547-53.

Bone mineral density in elderly men and women: results from the Framingham
osteoporosis study.

Hannan MT(1), Felson DT, Anderson JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Boston University Arthritis Center, Massachusetts.

Our study investigated bone mineral density of the proximal femur and ultradistal
and proximal radius in a population of elderly men and women. The Framingham
study started in 1948, following a population-based sample for evaluation of
cardiovascular risk factors and events. During the 20th biennial Framingham
examination (1988-89) we conducted the Framingham osteoporosis study, measuring
bone mineral density in the proximal femur and distal and proximal radius for
1154 study participants. Ages ranged from 68 to 98 years, with a mean age of 76
years. Bone mineral density was measured using Lunar SP2 and DP3 densitometers.
This cross-sectional study evaluates mean bone mineral density measurements at
each site by 5 year age intervals for men and women, testing for trends in bone
density with age. Analyses were repeated adjusting for weight and height. Among
the 446 and 708 women, bone mineral density of the femur and bone mineral content
of the proximal radius were inversely and significantly related to age in both
sexes and were considerably higher in men than women at all sites. The linear
decline with age group in our cross-sectional study remained after multivariate
adjustment for height and weight. The ultradistal radius showed no significant
correlation with age for either sex. There were significant correlations between 
the bone measurements made at different sites for both men and women (range in r 
= 0.27-0.89). Cross-sectional curves of bone mineral density with age showed no
significant differences in slope between males and females.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT
250 WORDS)

PMID: 1615761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Clin Chem. 1992 May;38(5):658-62.

International Federation of Clinical Chemistry standardization project for
measurements of apolipoproteins A-I and B. II. Evaluation and selection of
candidate reference materials.

Albers JJ(1), Marcovina SM, Kennedy H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle 98103.

The first phase of an international collaborative study for standardization of
test systems for measuring apolipoprotein (apo) A-I and apo B demonstrated that
uniformity of apo A-I and apo B measurements can be achieved if suitable common
reference materials are used to calibrate the different systems. The objective of
the second phase was to evaluate the linearity and parallelism or proportionality
of the candidate reference materials selected in phase one and to determine
whether any of them could be proposed as international reference materials. We
evaluated the proposed reference materials with 37 test systems for apo A-I and
38 for apo B, involving 23 manufacturers and five research laboratories. Two
lyophilized preparations were proposed for apo A-I, SP1 from Behringwerke AG and 
SP2 from Daiichi Pure Chemicals Co., and two liquid preparations were proposed
for apo B, SP3 from Behringwerke AG and SP4 from Reagents Applications. The
linearity of the candidate reference materials was compared with the linearity of
a frozen serum pool or interim serum reference material distributed to all the
participants and with that of a fresh serum pool prepared by each participant.
SP1 and SP3 exhibited linearity and parallelism similar to that of the fresh
frozen serum pool and had among-laboratory CVs less than or similar to those
obtained on normolipidemic serum samples (approximately 6% for apo A-I and
approximately 7% for apo B).

PMID: 1582016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Eur J Biochem. 1992 Apr 15;205(2):759-65.

Glutamate mutase from Clostridium cochlearium. Purification, cobamide content and
stereospecific inhibitors.

Leutbecher U(1), Böcher R, Linder D, Buckel W.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorium für Mikrobiologie, Fachbereich Biologie, Philipps-Universität,
Marburg, Federal Republic of Germany.

Both components, E and S, of the adenosylcobalamin-(coenzyme B12)-dependent
glutamate mutase from Clostridium cochlearium were purified. Component S (16 kDa)
must be added to component E to obtain activity, although the latter contains
substoichiometric amounts of component S besides the major 50-kDa subunit. The
enzyme proved to be very similar to that of C. tetanomorphum as described by
Barker et al. [Barker, H. A., Rooze, V., Suzuki, F. & Iodice, A. A. (1964) J.
Biol. Chem. 239, 3260-3266] but component E of C. cochlearium was more stable and
led to the first pure preparation. The pink component E showed a cobamide-like
absorbance spectrum with a characteristic maximum at 470 nm indicating the
presence of a cob(II)amide, probably Co alpha-[alpha-(aden-9-yl)]-cob(II)amide. A
typical cob(II)amide signal at g = 2.23 with hyperfine and superhyperfine
splitting was observed by EPR spectroscopy. A cobamide content of about 0.43
mol/mol 50-kDa subunit was determined by cyanolysis. Substitution of the
migrating hydrogen at C-4 of glutamate by fluorine yielded the potent competitive
inhibitor (2S,4S)-4-fluoroglutamate (Ki = 70 microM). (2R,3RS)-3-Fluoroglutamate 
(Ki = 600 microM) was also inhibitory. The competitive inhibition by
2-methyleneglutarate (Ki = 400 microM) and (S)-3-methylitaconate (Ki = 100
microM) but not by (RS)-2-methylglutarate suggested the transient formation of an
sp2 center during catalysis. However, the presence of an N-terminal pyruvoyl
residue was excluded and no evidence for the participation of another
electrophilic center in the reaction was obtained.

PMID: 1315276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Immunol Methods. 1992 Apr 8;148(1-2):199-207.

Increased frequency of both total and specific monoclonal antibody producing
hybridomas using a fusion partner that constitutively expresses recombinant IL-6.

Harris JF(1), Hawley RG, Hawley TS, Crawford-Sharpe GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, University of Western Ontario, London, Canada.

The addition of auxiliary feeder cells or conditioned medium has been shown to
augment the yield of mouse hybridomas obtained following the cell-cell fusion of 
myeloma and B lymphocytes. The addition of one of these factors, interleukin-6
(IL-6) has been found to increase the proportion of hybridomas secreting
monoclonal antibodies of desired specificity. As an alternative genetic approach,
we have examined the efficacy of a retroviral infectant of Sp2/0 cells that
constitutively expresses recombinant murine IL-6 (Sp2/mIL-6) as fusion partner.
The results demonstrated that the yields of both viable Ig-secreting hybridomas, 
and antigen-specific monoclonal antibodies were increased 3-15-fold and 5-9-fold,
respectively, with the Sp2/mIL-6 relative to Sp2/0 or Sp2/neo cells as fusion
partner. Sp2/mIL-6 cells generated hybridomas with comparable growth rates,
stability, and Ig production. The results of staining nascent hybridoma colonies 
immunohistochemically for Ig production suggest that Sp2/mIL-6 cells as a fusion 
partner increased the viability and/or stability of nascent hybrid cells that are
producing Ig. Thus the Sp2/mIL-6 cells are an improved myeloma parent for the
generation of large numbers of antibody-producing hybridomas against specific
antigens.

PMID: 1373425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Electromyogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1992 Apr-May;32(4-5):215-9.

Silent periods in the abductor pollicis brevis muscle in patients with
Parkinson's disease.

Nakashima K(1), Takahashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurology, Tottori University School of Medicine, Yonago, Japan.

Silent periods in the abductor pollicis brevis muscle, produced by electrical
stimulation of the median nerve at the wrist or the palmar side of the index
finger, were studied in 14 patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) and eight
control subjects. Prior to the stimulation, background electromyographic activity
showed no differences between normal subjects and patients with PD. Following the
H-reflex after median nerve stimulation, two suppressive phases were observed:
early (SP1) and late (SP2). Electrical stimulation of the palmar side of the
index finger elicited two suppressive phases at almost the same latencies. The
latency and duration of SP1 and SP2 and the degree of SP1, produced by electrical
stimulation of the median nerve and the palmar side of the index finger in
patients with PD, were normal. The degree of SP2 produced by electrical
stimulation of the palmar side of the index finger in patients with PD was lower 
than that in normal subjects, although the degree of SP2 produced by median nerve
stimulation in patients with PD did not differ from that in normal subjects.
Suppression produced by cutaneous stimulation in the Parkinsonian hand may be
low.

PMID: 1600885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Anim Sci. 1992 Apr;70(4):1146-52.

Evaluation of the Hennessy grading probe to predict yields of lamb carcasses
fabricated to multiple end points.

Garrett RP(1), Edwards JW, Savell JW, Tatum JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, Texas A&M
University System, College Station 77843-2471.

Lamb carcasses (n = 278) were selected immediately after slaughter and fat
thickness was measured with the SP2 Hennessy grading probe (HP) at the interface 
of the 12th and 13th ribs, 3.8 cm from the backbone. After a 24-h chilling
period, carcasses were graded by a USDA grader and probed with the HP to obtain a
fat thickness measure on the chilled carcass. One hundred sixty-five carcasses
were fabricated into wholesale cuts (.64 cm of external fat trim), and 113
carcasses were fabricated into tray-ready retail cuts (.25 cm of external fat
trim). Carcass weight, fat thickness (metal probe), adjusted fat thickness, hot
and chilled carcass HP fat measures, as well as kidney and pelvic fat percentage 
and USDA yield grade, were highly correlated to cutting yield for both
fabrication methods. Regression models developed to predict wholesale cut yields 
using HP or grader-collected measures were similar with respect to predictive
accuracy. Fat thickness explained most of the variation in wholesale and
tray-ready cut yields among the variables collected by the grader. Kidney and
pelvic fat accounted for more of the variation in yield of wholesale cuts during 
stepwise regression to determine HP equations, but for predicting tray-ready
yields, fat thickness taken with the HP accounted for the largest amount of
variation. Equations developed to predict tray-ready retail cut yields using the 
HP or USDA grader-collected carcass measures were similar in the amount of
variation explained. Kidney and pelvic fat percentage must be included in
equations to maximize predictive accuracy when this depot site is left in
carcasses.

PMID: 1582945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Neurosurg. 1992 Apr;76(4):660-9.

Human antiglioma monoclonal antibodies from patients with astrocytic tumors.

Dan MD(1), Schlachta CM, Guy J, McKenzie RG, Dorscheid DR, Sandor VA, Villemure
JG, Price GB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, McGill Cancer Centre, McGill
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

The current management of malignant gliomas is unsatisfactory compared to that of
other solid tumors; the expected median survival period is less than 1 year with 
the patient undergoing conventional surgery, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy
treatment. Immunological reagents could be a useful adjunct. Human monoclonal
antibodies derived from patients with astrocytic tumors might recognize subtle
antigenic specificities that would differ from those recognized by xenogeneic
(murine) systems. Five hybridomas, designated as BT27/1A2, BT27/2A3, BT32/A6,
BT34/A5, and BT54/B8, were produced from the fusion of peripheral blood
lymphocytes of four patients with astrocytic tumors to the human myeloma-like
cell line TM-H2-SP2. This cell line has a 46, XX karyotype and is negative for
hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyltransferase. All five human monoclonal
antibodies produced 2.4 to 44 micrograms/ml of immunoglobulin M, had a similar
but not identical pattern of reactivity against a panel of human tumor cell
lines, and failed to react with normal human astrocytes. Labeling of four
neuroectodermal tumor explant cultures by BT27/2A3 was demonstrated by flow
cytometry. Karyotyping of three of the five hybridomas demonstrated that two were
pseudodiploid (2-3n) and one hypodiploid (less than 2n). The monoclonality of the
hybridomas was evaluated by Southern blot analysis of JH gene rearrangements,
revealing two types of rearrangements for each hybridoma, both consistent with
monoclonality. Preliminary antigen characterization indicated that at least four 
of the five human monoclonal antibodies were directed to cell-surface
glycolipids.

PMID: 1545260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Immunol. 1992 Mar 1;148(5):1547-53.

Formation of a bispecific antibody by the use of leucine zippers.

Kostelny SA(1), Cole MS, Tso JY.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Design Labs, Inc., Mountain View, CA 94043.

A new method is described for the production of bispecific F(ab')2 heterodimers
using leucine zippers. Two heterodimer-forming "zipper" peptides derived from the
Fos and Jun proteins were respectively linked to the Fab' portions of two
different mAb by gene fusion. The antibodies used were 145-2C11, which binds to
murine CD3, and anti-Tac, which binds to the p55 chain of the human IL-2R.
Anti-Tac Fab'-Jun and anti-CD3 Fab'-Fos were expressed individually as
F(ab'-zipper)2 homodimers in the mouse myeloma cell line Sp2/0. When these
homodimers were reduced at the hinge region to form monomers and then reoxidized 
together, the resulting end products were mostly F(ab'-zipper)2 heterodimers.
Bispecific anti-CD3 x anti-Tac F(ab'-zipper)2 heterodimers produced by this
method were shown to be highly effective in recruiting cytotoxic T cells to lyse 
IL-2R-bearing HuT-102 cells in vitro.

PMID: 1531669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Pathologica. 1992 Mar-Apr;84(1090):187-95.

Morphology of non A-non B hepatitis (HNANB). A study of 104 cases.

Sonzogni A(1), Curshellas E, Liehr H, Schell T, Bianchi L.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Anatomia Patologica degli Ospedali Riuniti di Bergamo.

A series of 104 liver biopsies from patients with clinical HNANB were classified 
under code into established histologic groups. Activity and basic features were
semiquantitatively assessed using a score system. In 23/104 cases non viral
lesions were diagnosed. After breaking the code the remaining 81 hepatic biopsies
were ranged into three groups: post-transfusional cases (PT) (n. 20), sporadic
cases with clinically documented initial "acute hepatitis" (SP1) (n. 44),
sporadic cases without determined onset of disease (SP2) (n. 17). There were no
statistically significant features discriminating histologically PT group from SP
1 + 2 group. However, aggressive forms of hepatitis (acute hepatitis with
piecemeal necrosis [AVH+PMN] and chronic aggressive hepatitis [CAH]) were more
frequent in PT group (11/20 = 55% in PT versus 28/61 = 45.9% in SP 1+2 groups).
No statistical significant differences were detected for the scored basic pattern
(i.e. acidophilic body type, mononucleosis-like bead file pattern, etc.). Bile
duct lesions were observed approximately with the same frequency in PT and SP1
groups. Prevalence of fatty change was striking: 55% in PT group and 54.1% in SP1
group.

PMID: 1437307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Chin Med Sci J. 1992 Mar;7(1):23-6.

The quantitative alteration of 5s rRNA during the development of mammalian
erythroid cells and its effect on DNA synthesis in SP2/0 mouse myeloma cells.

Xu Y(1), Hu X, Tang J, Xue S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, CAMS, Beijing.

Mouse myeloma cells (SP2/0) were incubated with 125I-5s rRNA from rabbit
reticulocytes and processed for autoradiography. The results indicated that 5s
rRNA could pass into the nuclei of mouse myeloma cells. In a separate experiment,
SP2/0 were incubated with cold 5s rRNA, then with 3H-TdR and processed for
autoradiography. It was found that in the mouse myeloma cells, DNA synthesis and 
cell division were obviously suppressed. In another series of experiments, rRNA
was extracted from rabbit bone marrow, reticulocytes and erythroid cells and from
rat embryonic liver and erythroid cells. The rRNA was analyzed by agarose
electrophoresis. It was found that the amount of 5s rRNA in various stages of
erythroid development changed along with the denucleating process. Thus it seems 
likely that 5s rRNA from mammalian erythroid cells could play a role in reversing
the malignant phenotype of tumor cells and denucleation of mammalian erythroid
cells through inhibiting DNA synthesis.

PMID: 1421358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Acta Physiol Scand. 1992 Mar;144(3):369-78.

Production of monoclonal antibodies against gastric parietal cell antigens.

Cabero JL(1), Sasaki T, Song YH, Holmdahl R, Mårdh S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Physiological Chemistry, Uppsala University, Sweden.

Two mice DBA/1 were each immunized with a single injection of one million
enriched parietal cells in the hind foot pads. Monoclonal antibodies to be used
as research tools in studies on regulatory mechanisms in gastric parietal cells
were obtained after fusion of mouse myeloma cells (SP2) with cells from the
popliteal lymph nodes of the mice. Twelve hybridomas produced antibodies reactive
with structures only present in parietal cells as assessed by
immunohistochemistry of oxyntic mucosa sections. Three hybridomas were subcloned 
and the antibodies produced by them, designated as PC4, PC8, and PC117, were
characterized. In an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, all antibodies reacted
with H,K-ATPase-containing vesicles. The antibody PC8 recognized a 94 kDa protein
after immunoblotting of H,K-ATPase-containing vesicles and all antibodies
precipitated a 94 kDa protein from [125I]H,K-ATPase-containing vesicles. The
antibodies PC4 and PC117 recognized extracellular structures with a polarized
distribution in viable, purified parietal cells. The results suggest that the
structure recognized by all three antibodies is the alpha-subunit of the
H,K-ATPase. The antibodies produced by another hybridoma, PC43, recognized a
structure present in parietal and surface epithelial cells of the oxyntic mucosa.
In an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, they reacted with a high-activity
carbonic anhydrase which had been affinity-purified from pig oxyntic mucosa and
they recognized a 30 kDa protein after immunoblotting. Thus, monoclonal
antibodies against both intracellular and extracellular parietal cell structures 
were obtained after immunization with a small number of parietal cells.

PMID: 1316714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Anal Chem. 1992 Feb 15;64(4):395-404.

Empirical procedure that uses molecular structure to predict enantioselectivity
of chiral stationary phases.

Berthod A(1), Chang SC, Armstrong DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Missouri-Rolla 65401.

A total of 121 racemic compounds were separated in the normal-phase mode on a
(S)-(1-naphthylethyl)carbamoylated beta-cyclodextrin (S-NEC-beta-CD) bonded phase
and 74 on the R equivalent (R-NEC) chiral stationary phase (CSP). All compounds
are of the type that have four substituents on a stereogenic center, rather than 
an "axis of chirality". It is shown that the binary solvent pair used as the
mobile phase has a significant influence on chiral recognition. However, the
proportions of the components of a specific pair have little effect. From the
results, the individual contributions to chiral recognition by these CSPs were
estimated for 81 different substituents of the stereogenic center. Varying the
arrangement of these 81 substituents could produce over 1.6 million compounds.
Hydrogen was chosen as the reference substituent and was assigned a 0 cal/mol
free energy. The chiral recognition increased when sp2-hybridized carbons were
connected to the stereogenic center. Conversely, sp3-hybridized carbons decreased
the enantioselectivity. Amido groups increased the chiral recognition, especially
when associated with pi-acid (3,5-dinitrobenzoyl) or pi-basic (naphthyl) groups. 
This approach does not allow one to know which enantiomer elutes first. However, 
the "substituent energy" list for chiral compounds can be used to obtain an
estimated value for the enantioselectivity of a compound by adding the energy
contributions of the four substituents connected to the stereogenic center. In
this way one can predict a priori whether or not a compound will separate on a
CSP and estimate its separation factor (alpha). Theoretically, this approach can 
be used for most CSPs, provided a sufficient data base is generated on them.

PMID: 1616129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1992 Feb 14;293(1):85-92.

Analysis of stable protein methylation in cultured cells.

Najbauer J(1), Johnson BA, Aswad DW.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of California, Irvine 92717-4550.

It was demonstrated recently that substrates for protein N-methyltransferases (J.
Najbauer and D. W. Aswad, 1990, J. Biol. Chem. 265, 12,717-12,721) and protein
carboxyl methyltransferases (J. Najbauer, B. A. Johnson, and D. W. Aswad, 1991,
Anal. Biochem. 197, 412-420) accumulate when rat PC12 cells are cultured in the
presence of the methylation inhibitor, adenosine dialdehyde. In the present
report, we have further characterized this phenomenon in PC12 cells and in two
other, widely used cell types. Adenosine dialdehyde was found to increase the
methyl-accepting capacity of proteins in human skin fibroblasts and mouse Sp2/0
myeloma cells. However, both the level of methyl incorporation in untreated cells
and the amount of stimulation afforded by inhibitor treatment were substantially 
lower in these cells than in PC12 cells. All three cell lines accumulated methyl 
acceptor(s) at 17-21 kDa. The PC12 cells and the fibroblasts also exhibited
stimulation of three apparently similar proteins in the 33- to 38-kDa region,
where several arginine-methylated proteins involved in RNA processing would be
expected. The optimal conditions for methylation of PC12 cell extracts with
regard to pH, time of methylation, and S-[methyl-3H]adenosyl-L-methionine
concentration were characterized. Increased methyl incorporation was detected
after adenosine dialdehyde treatments as short as 2 h, and methylation of most
substrates continued to increase as the time of treatment was extended to 72 h.
The kinetics of accumulation varied from substrate to substrate. Fluorograms of
two-dimensional gels of extracts from untreated PC12 cells incubated in the
presence of S-[methyl-3H]adenosyl-L-methionine revealed patterns of methyl
incorporation similar to those of treated cells, but longer exposure times were
necessary (e.g., 35 days vs 7 days). These findings suggest that the inhibitor
treatment works mainly by inhibiting the post- or cotranslational methylation of 
a "normal" array of cellular proteins.

PMID: 1731643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Methods Mol Biol. 1992;10:43-63. doi: 10.1385/0-89603-204-3:43.

Preparation and testing of monoclonal antibodies to recombinant proteins.

Dean CJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Haddow Laboratories, Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, Surrey, UK.

Monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) are useful, often essential, reagents for the
isolation, identification, and cellular localization of specific gene products
and for the determination of macromolecular structure. The ability to clone and
sequence specific genes has revolutionized our understanding of cellular
structure and function, and the ability to prepare recombinant proteins or to
synthesize peptides based on protein sequences derived from cDNA clones provides 
sufficient material for generating specific antibodies. The recombinant proteins 
may be derived from prokaryotic systems, such as E. coli, or from eukaryotic
expression systems, such as Chinese hamster ovary cells (CHO) or insect cells
expressing constructs in baculovirus. The eucary-otic systems are being used
increasingly for expression of glycoproteins because the recombinant material is 
glycosylated. A number of protocols will be described here that we have used
successfully with both rat (Y3 and IR983F) and mouse (SP2/0) myelomas to generate
MAbs to recombinant material or peptides based on cDNA sequences.

PMID: 23150295  [PubMed]


13. Methods Mol Biol. 1992;80:43-63. doi: 10.1385/0-89603-204-3:43.

Preparation and testing of monoclonal antibodies to recombinant proteins.

Dean CJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Haddow Laboratories, Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, Surrey, UK.

Monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) are useful, often essential, reagents for the
isolation, identification, and cellular localization of specific gene products
and for the determination of macromolecular structure. The ability to clone and
sequence specific genes has revolutionized our understanding of cellular
structure and function, and the ability to prepare recombinant proteins or to
synthesize peptides based on protein sequences derived from cDNA clones provides 
sufficient material for generating specific antibodies. The recombinant proteins 
may be derived from prokaryotic systems, such as E. coli, or from eukaryotic
expression systems, such as Chinese hamster ovary cells (CHO) or insect cells
expressing constructs in baculovirus. The eucary-otic systems are being used
increasingly for expression of glycoproteins because the recombinant material is 
glycosylated. A number of protocols will be described here that we have used
successfully with both rat (Y3 and IR983F) and mouse (SP2/0) myelomas to generate
MAbs to recombinant material or peptides based on cDNA sequences.

PMID: 22351198  [PubMed]


14. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 1992;35(3):165-74.

Comparative biological properties of a recombinant chimeric anti-carcinoma mAb
and a recombinant aglycosylated variant.

Hand PH(1), Calvo B, Milenic D, Yokota T, Finch M, Snoy P, Garmestani K, Gansow
O, Schlom J, Kashmiri SV.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Immunology and Biology, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.

It has been demonstrated previously that the degree of glycosylation of a
molecule may alter its pharmacokinetic properties and, in the case of an
antibody, its metabolism and other biological properties. Transfectomas producing
aglycosylated chimeric B72.3(gamma 1) pancarcinoma monoclonal antibody (mAb) were
developed by introduction of the eukaryotic expression construct pECMgpB72.3
HuG1-agly, into SP2/0 murine myeloma cells producing the chimeric kappa chain of 
mAb B72.3. After cell cloning, one subclone with the highest binding to the
TAG-72-positive human colon carcinoma was designated mAb aGcB72.3, and its
biological and biochemical properties were compared with those of the chimeric
B72.3(gamma 1), designated mAb cB72.3. Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis showed 
that under non-reducing conditions, the molecular masses of the aGcB72.3 and
cB72.3 mAbs were 162 kDa and 166 kDa respectively. The heavy chain of mAb
aGcB72.3 had a slightly faster mobility than that of cB72.3, while the mobility
of the light chains of the two chimeric mAbs was similar. No difference was
observed in the isoelectric points of either chimeric mAb. Liquid competition
radioimmunoassays demonstrated that the aGcB72.3 and cB72.3 mAbs have comparable 
binding properties to TAG-72. These studies demonstrate that aglycosylation of
the chimeric IgG1 mAb B72.3 at the CH2 domain, as has been shown for other mAbs
[Dorai H., Mueller B., Reisfeld R. A., Gillies S. D. (1991) Hybridoma 10:211;
Morrison S. L., Oi V. T. (1989) Adv Immunol 44:65], eliminates antibody-dependent
cell-mediated cytotoxicity activity, but does not substantially alter affinity or
plasma clearance in mice. These studies also demonstrate for the first time (a)
no difference in plasma clearance of an aglycosylated and a chimeric mAb in a
primate after i.v. inoculation; (b) a difference (P less than or equal to 0.05)
in mice in the more rapid peritoneal clearance of a chimeric mAb versus an
aglycosylated chimeric mAb; (c) higher (0.05 less than or equal to P less than or
equal to 0.1) tumor: liver ratios at 24, 72 and 168 h using 111In-labeled
aglycosylated chimeric mAb versus chimeric mAb. Since the liver is the major site
of metastatic spread for most carcinomas, slight differences in tumor to normal
liver ratios may be important in diagnostic applications. These studies thus
indicate that comparative analyses of a novel recombinant construct (i.e.,
aglycosylated) and its standard chimeric counterpart require documentation in
more than one system and are necessary if one is ultimately to define optimal
recombinant/chimeric constructs for diagnosis and therapy in humans.

PMID: 1638552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Hum Antibodies Hybridomas. 1992 Jan;3(1):25-31.

Isolation of human monoclonal antibodies binding to B fragment of diphtheria
toxin.

Gupta KC(1), Agha R, Santos E, Brodeur BR.

Author information: 
(1)Ryerson Polytechnical Institute, Toronto, Canada.

Human tonsillar lymphocytes immunized in vitro with diphtheria toxoid were fused 
with the heteromyeloma cell line SP2/HPT. Hybrids were selected on
hypoxanthine-thymidine aminopterin (HAT) medium and assayed for antibody
production both by ELISA and Western blotting. Four stable hybridoma cell lines
producing 3-7 micrograms/mL of human IgG1 antibodies were isolated. In Western
blotting studies these antibodies show binding to the B fragment of diphtheria
toxin. Cells from the subclone P2-13/G35 were injected i.p. in pristane-primed
nude mice, and ascites fluid was collected after 4-6 weeks. The monoclonal
antibody neutralized the cytotoxicity of diphtheria toxin in the Vero cell assay 
system. This human monoclonal antibody may have a potential in the immunotherapy 
of diphtheric disease.

PMID: 1576320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Vet Diagn Invest. 1992 Jan;4(1):13-8.

Production and characterization of monoclonal antibodies to psittacine beak and
feather disease virus.

Ritchie BW(1), Niagro FD, Latimer KS, Steffens WL, Pesti D, Aron L, Lukert PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Small Animal Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Georgia, Athens 30602.

Monoclonal antibodies specific for the virus that causes psittacine beak and
feather disease (PBFD) were produced by fusing spleen cells from mice immunized
with purified concentrated PBFD virus with mouse myeloma cell line Sp2/0. The
resulting hybridomas were tested for reactivity against whole purified virus by
an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) system. Four clones, designated
15H8, 8E3, 11G12, and 2C3, were subcloned by limiting dilution. Isotyping
indicated that clone 15H8 was secreting IgG, whereas the remaining clones
secreted IgM. The secreted immunoglobulins were characterized by reactivity
against purified PBFD virus using immunoblotting procedures, by
immunohistochemical staining of virus-induced lesions in infected tissues, and by
inhibition of PBFD virus agglutination of cockatoo erythrocytes. Antibodies
secreted by clones 15H8 and 8E3 had the strongest activity against purified whole
virus. Only immunoglobulin secreted by the clone 15H8 could be used to detect
viral antigen in infected tissues. None of the monoclonal antibodies had
hemagglutination-inhibition activity.

PMID: 1554764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Yi Chuan Xue Bao. 1992;19(2):169-76.

[Screening and distinguishing heavy chain variable region genes of McAb against
encephalitis type B virus].

[Article in Chinese]

Huang H(1), Gui J, Song H, Wang Y, Shang F, Lin Q, Chen B, Ye Q, Wu M, Liu Q, et 
al.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, Academia Sinica, Beijing.

In order to prepare human-mouse chimeric antibody against encephalitis type B
virus, hybridoma 51-8 cells secreting monoclonal antibody against the virus were 
used as material for isolating heavy-chain variable region gene of the McAb. High
molecular weight DNA of the hybridoma cell was partially digested by BamHI, and
then constructed a gene library containing 2 x 10(7) pfu with lambda EMBL-3 as
vector. With cDNA of heavy-chain variable region of the monoclonal antibody as
probe, nine positive plaques were screened from 360,000 plaques, which have been 
proven that they contained a fragment of heavy-chain variable region genes by dot
hybridization and Southern hybridization. Four recombinants among the nine
positive plaques were further distinguished with J11 probe containing J3, J4 and 
heavy-chain enhancer. After cutting by EcoR1, there was a 3.8 kb fragment in
three recombinants as similar to that in liver cell and Sp2/0 cell, but not in
the fourth recombinant (lambda 8a4) which contained a 4.5 kb fragment that did
not present in liver cell and Sp2/0 cell. The results showed that the inserts in 
former 3 recombinants were non-rearranged fragment of heavy-chain variable region
genes, but the insert in lambda 8a4 contained a rearranged functional variable
region gene. The 4.5 kb fragment could not be hybridized with a probe containing 
J1 and J2, but contained VH, J3 or/and J4 and enhancer, that further proved it
was a functional variable region gene. Therefore, the 4.5 kb fragment was
isolated and subcloned in pUC 19, and its physical map was made.(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 1524846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Biotechnol. 1992 Jan;22(1-2):41-50.

Effect of specific growth rates on productivity in continuous open and partial
cell retention animal cell bioreactors.

Robinson DK(1), Widmer J, Memmert K.

Author information: 
(1)Sandoz Research Institute, East Hanover, New Jersey.

A clonal derivative of a transfectant of the SP2/0 myeloma cell line producing a 
chimeric monoclonal antibody was cultivated in both continuous open and
continuous partially-closed bioreactors. Using an open system for the
determination of kinetic parameters, we showed that the production of this
chimeric mAb was growth associated. As such, the volumetric productivity
increased linearly with increasing dilution rate up to the maximum dilution rate.
Three continuous cultivations employing partial cell retention were conducted. In
agreement with mathematical predictions, the product titer and volumetric
productivity were independent of the degree of cell retention when the total
dilution was held constant. When cells were maintained at a low specific growth
rate, the product titer was independent of dilution rate and the volumetric
productivity increased with increasing dilution rate, again in agreement with
mathematical predictions. Since the partially-closed bioreactor could be operated
at dilution rates in excess of the maximum specific cellular growth rate,
volumetric productivities were greater than those achievable in the open
bioreactor. However, when cells were maintained at a high specific growth rate,
cell accumulation was limited and product titers decreased at high dilution
rates. Therefore, the volumetric productivity in this latter case did not
increase at higher dilution rates.

PMID: 1367817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Chin J Biotechnol. 1992;8(4):277-81.

Construction of hybridomas secreting monoclonal antibody against sweet potato
feathery mottle virus and use of antibody for detection of SPFMV.

Li R(1), Xue A, Zhu X, Cai S.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Center, CAAS (Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences), Beijing.

Two hybridomas stably secreting monoclonal antibodies (McAb) against sweet potato
feathery mottle virus (SPFMV) were constructed by fusing mouse myeloma
(Sp2/0-Ag14) with mouse splenocytes immunized with SPFMV-LF. The McAb secreted by
the two hybridomas specifically reacted with both SPFMV-LF (China strain) and
SPFMV-RC (American strain) in dot-blot-ELISA. A large amount of McAb was produced
with BALB/c mice. The titer of hybridoma cultured supernatant was 1:256, and that
of the ascitic fluids was 1:1 x 10(4); and the immunoglobulins of McAb were IgG2a
and IgG3 respectively. The detection of SPFMV-infected sweet potato plants with
McAb confirmed that the McAb obtained in this test were desirable for large-scale
routine surveys of SPFMV. This study on construction of hybridomas and detection 
of SPFMV using McAb is the first report in the world.

PMID: 1343832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Chin J Biotechnol. 1992;8(4):247-54.

Establishment of hybridoma cell line secreting specific monoclonal antibodies
against turnip mosaic virus and analysis of properties of the McAb.

Yang F(1), Cai S, Xu L, Feng L.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Center, CAAS (Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences), Beijing.

Monoclonal antibodies (McAb) of hybridomas derived from the fusing of the mouse
splenocytes immunized by TuMV with BALB/c mouse myeloma cells (SP2/0-Ag14). Five 
kinds of hybridoma cell line were produced by indirect-ELISA screening and
cloning three times with limiting dilution. Four kinds of hybridoma produced
antibodies respectively reactive to TuMV C1, C3, C4 and C5. One kind was reactive
to all five strains of TuMV. In indirect-ELISA and sandwich-ELISA tests, TuMV
specific monoclonal antibodies did not react with CaMV, CMV, TMV, PVX, and PVY.
Antibody titers of ascitic fluids were about 1:256,000 to 2,048,000 in
indirect-ELISA. The biological, physical, and chemical properties of the
hybridoma cell lines and McAb were identified. The identification of TuMV
strains, the specificity and stability of McAb, the coat proteins, and the
antigenic site of TuMV were discussed and analyzed with SDS-PAGE and
western-blotting.

PMID: 1343828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Tsitologiia. 1992;34(8):88-95.

[The cultivation of mouse and human lymphoid cells on serum-free media].

[Article in Russian]

Nikolaenko NS, Tsupkina NV, Pinaev GP.

The optimum composition of several serum-free media has been established for a
long-term cultivation of hybridomas, lymphoid and erythroleukemic cells. The
medium DME/F12 appeared to be the medium of choice. It is necessary to supplement
the basic medium with lipid and iron transport proteins (bovine serum albumin,
transferrin) and peptide hormone (insulin) for obtaining stable results. However,
there are differences in successful growth of examined cell lines under
serum-free conditions: some of them acquire saturation density comparable with
that of the control medium (hybridomas derived from myeloma Sp2/0-Ag14, cell
lines K-562, Raji) but other lines do not (hybridoma derived from myeloma NS0/1, 
cell lines Namalwa, RPMI 1788, Molt-4). Thus, these serum-free media are not
universal, therefore each new hybridoma and cell line should be tested to
determine the suitability for them of some proposed media. The high effectiveness
of cultivation under serum-free conditions can be presumably achieved by
optimization of both qualitative and quantitative composition of the serum
replacement and of the basic medium.

PMID: 1293879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Chin J Biotechnol. 1992;8(2):139-44.

The production of hybridoma cell line secreting monoclonal antibodies against
Xanthomonas campestris pv. oryzae and its application in the classification of
strains.

Huang B(1), Zhu H, Hu G, Li Q, Gao J, Liu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Protection, Jiangsu Agricultural College, China.

By the fusion of mouse myeloma cells (SP2/0-Ag14) and spleen cells derived from
BALB/c mice immunized with the preparation of Xanthomonas campestris pv. oryzae
Ks-6-6, Os-213, Yz-32 and Yz-24, we obtained 12 hybridoma cell lines secreting
monoclonal antibodies. None of the McAbs cross-reacted with the other varieties
of plant pathogenetic and non-pathogenetic bacteria. The McAbs could distinguish 
three variant serotypes of strains. Antibody titers of ascites were about
1:10(3)-1:10(6) when measured by ELISA method. The McAbs could differentiate 6
epitopes. Based on the epitopes, the 63 strains of X. campestris pv. oryzae we
collected were grouped into nine groups.

PMID: 1284289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Arch Virol. 1992;127(1-4):185-94.

Production, characterization and use of monoclonal antibodies to grapevine virus 
A.

Boscia D(1), Aslouj E, Elicio V, Savino V, Castellano MA, Martelli GP.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Protezione delle Piante, Università degli Studi, Bari, Italy.

Four stable hybridoma cell lines secreting monoclonal antibodies to grapevine
closterovirus A (GVA) were obtained by fusing spleen cells of immunized BALB/c
mice with mouse myeloma cell line Sp2/0-Ag 14. In ELISA all MAbs reacted with
virus in leaf extracts from Nicotiana benthamiana, glass-house-, field-, or in
vitro-grown grapevines, or with cortical shavings from mature grape canes. In IEM
tests, only one of the MAbs (PA3.F5) decorated virus particles on the entire
surface. This MAb was likely induced by a surface antigenic determinant, whereas 
the other three MAbs (PA3.D 11, PA3.C 6, and PA3.B 9) were originated by
cryptotopes. Coupling polyclonal antibodies for coating protein A-sensitized
plates, and monoclonal antibody conjugates for antigen detection, gave highly
efficient and reproducible results for identification of GVA in field-grown
grapevines.

PMID: 1280942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Immunol. 1991 Dec 15;147(12):4366-73.

Construction, expression and characterization of humanized antibodies directed
against the human alpha/beta T cell receptor.

Shearman CW(1), Pollock D, White G, Hehir K, Moore GP, Kanzy EJ, Kurrle R.

Author information: 
(1)Genzyme Corporation, Framingham, MA 01701.

Completely humanized antibodies with specificity for the human alpha/beta TCR
have been produced by genetic engineering. The L and H chain V region exons
encoding the murine mAb BMA 031 CD regions and human EU framework regions were
synthesized and replaced into previously isolated genomic fragments. These
fragments were inserted into mammalian expression vectors containing the human
kappa and gamma 1 C region exons. Two variants were constructed each containing
selected BMA 031 amino acids within the human frameworks. The humanized genes
were transfected into Sp2/0 hybridoma cells by electroporation and transfectomas 
secreting humanized antibody were isolated. Levels of antibody expression up to 7
pg/cell/24 h were obtained. The humanized antibody, BMA 031-EUCIV2, competed
poorly with murine BMA 031 for binding to T cells. BMA 031-EUCIV3, however, bound
specifically to T cells and competed effectively with both the murine BMA 031
antibody and a previously constructed chimeric BMA 031 antibody for binding to
these cells. The relative affinity of BMA 031-EUCIV3 was about 2.5 times lower
than BMA 031. The ability to promote antibody dependent cell-mediated cytolysis
was significantly enhanced with the engineered antibodies as compared to murine
BMA 031. Humanized BMA 031 is a clinically relevant, genetically engineered
antibody with potential uses in transplantation, graft vs host disease, and
autoimmunity.

PMID: 1836485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao. 1991 Dec;13(6):456-8.

[Indirect immunofluorescence method using anticentromere antibodies and its
application in the study of chromosome aberrations in tumor cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Beijing.

The discovery that individuals with CREST-syndrome scleroderma (calcinosis cutis,
Raynaud phenomenon, eosinophilia, telangiectasia) have anticentromere antibodies 
(ACA) in their peripheral blood has made it possible to visualize centromeres
using indirect immunofluorescence staining. We have studied two tumor cells lines
(k562 and SP2/0) using ACA and immunofluorescence techniques. In SP2/0 cells, two
abnormal chromosomes were observed: One had a Robertsonian translocation and the 
other had a tandem translocation. Both were dicentric chromosomes, and the
centromeres were functionally active. C-banding cannot reveal these
specificities. It has been proposed that abnormal active dicentric chromosomes
are mitotically unstable. This indirect immunofluorescence method may have its
use in clinical cytogenetics.

PMID: 1838965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Hybridoma. 1991 Dec;10(6):745-51.

Increased proportion of antigen-specific antibody-producing hybridomas following 
an in vitro immunization with in vivo immunized mouse spleen cells.

Enriquez FJ(1), Bradley-Dunlop D, Joens L.

Author information: 
(1)Hybridoma Technology, Arizona Health Sciences Center, Tucson.

Development of murine monoclonal antibodies to weakly immunogenic antigens was
accomplished by combining both in vivo and in vitro immunizations. Following
immunization of mice with Treponema hyodysenteriae outer membrane antigens,
Manduca sexta apolipoproteins, and Drosophila melanogaster DNA polymerase,
respectively, a significant increase in percentage of antibody-producing hybrids 
were identified when immune spleens were subjected to an in vitro immunization
prior to fusion with SP2/0 myeloma cells. The hybrids developed, produced Abs to 
a T. hyodysenteriae 14 Kd carbohydrate, M. sexta apolipoproteins I, II, and III, 
and D. melanogaster DNA polymerase. The use of both in vivo and in vitro
immunizations may increase the likelihood of generating monoclonal antibodies to 
weakly immunogenic antigens.

PMID: 1816073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Int J Parasitol. 1991 Dec;21(8):969-74.

Specific monoclonal antibodies to Opisthorchis viverrini.

Chaicumpa W(1), Ruangkunaporn Y, Kalambaheti T, Limavongpranee S, Kitikoon V,
Khusmith S, Pungpak S, Chongsa-nguan M, Sornmani S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Tropical Medicine,
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.

A Balb/c mouse was immunized with a crude soluble antigen of Opisthorchis
viverrini adult worms (OVAA) over a period of 7 months. Spleen cells from the
immune mouse were fused with Sp2/0 myeloma cells. Among the 264 tissue culture
wells containing the fused cells, cells of 96 wells (36%) produced antibodies to 
the immunizing agent. Antibodies produced by cells in several wells reacted with 
antigens from other species of parasite. Cells of 17 wells produced antibodies
specific only to OVAA, thus cells from three representative wells were cloned by 
limiting dilution. Hybrids obtained produced antibodies which could be classified
according to their tissue specificities into three groups. The first group of
antibodies reacted strongly to the worm integument and weakly with the muscles
while those belonging to the second group reacted only to muscles of the worms.
The monoclonal antibodies of the third group gave a positive reaction to both
muscles and tegument.

PMID: 1787041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Chin Med Sci J. 1991 Dec;6(4):212-6.

Studies on monoclonal antibody against recombinant human granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor.

Guo X(1), Wang A, Li X, Guo Z, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)PUMC Hospital, CAMS, Beijing.

Three hybridoma cell lines producing monoclonal antibodies (McAb) against
recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (rhG-CSF) have been
established by fusing mouse myeloma cell line SP2/0 cells with spleen cells from 
a BALB/c mouse immunized with rhG-CSF. Ascites was obtained from BALB/c mice by
injecting the hybridoma cells intraperitoneally. Three McAbs were purified by the
caprylic acid-ammonium sulfate method. For each, the IgG subclass, valence and
activity, molecular weight, specificity and affinity were determined. The
applications of McAbs against rhG-CSF in the clinic and laboratory are discussed.

PMID: 1725968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Biochemistry. 1991 Nov 19;30(46):11025-8.

Carbon-13 nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy of lipids: differential line
broadening due to cross-correlation effects as a probe of membrane structure.

Oldfield E(1), Adebodun F, Chung J, Montez B, Park KD, Le HB, Phillips B.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemical Sciences, University of Illinois, Urbana 61801.

We have obtained proton-coupled carbon-13 nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectra of a variety of lipid-water and lipid-drug-water systems, at 11.7 T, as a
function of temperature, using the "magic-angle" sample-spinning (MAS) NMR
technique. The resulting spectra show a wide range of line shapes, due to
interferences between dipole-dipole and dipole-chemical shielding anisotropy
interactions. The differential line-broadening effects observed are particularly 
large for aromatic and olefinic (sp2) carbon atom sites. Coupled spectra of the
tricyclic antidepressants desipramine and imipramine, in
1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine-water mesophases, show well-resolved 
doublets having different line shapes for each of the four aromatic methine
groups, due to selective averaging of the four C-H dipolar interactions due to
rapid motion about the director (or drug C2) axis. 2H NMR spectra of
[2,4,6,8-2H4]desipramine (and imipramine) in the same
1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine-water mesophase exhibit quadrupole
splittings of approximately 0-2 and approximately 20 kHz, indicating an
approximate magic-angle orientation of the C2-2H(1H) and C8-2H(1H) vectors with
respect to an axis of motional averaging, in accord with the 13C NMR results.
Selective deuteration of imipramine confirms these ideas. Spectra of digalactosyl
diglyceride [primarily 1,2-di[(9Z,12Z,15Z)-octadeca-9,12,15-trienoyl ]-3-
(alpha-D-galactopyranosyl-1-6-beta-D-galactopyranosyl)-sn-glycerol]-H2O (in the L
alpha phase) show a large differential line broadening for C9 but a reduced
effect for C10, consistent with the results of 2H NMR of specifically 2H-labeled 
phospholipids [Seelig, J., & Waespe-Saracevic, N. (1978) Biochemistry 17,
3310-3315].(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 1932027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Immunol. 1991 Nov 15;147(10):3587-94.

Early changes in cytosolic calcium and membrane potential induced by
Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans leukotoxin in susceptible and resistant
target cells.

Taichman NS(1), Iwase M, Lally ET, Shattil SJ, Cunningham ME, Korchak HM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Pennsylvania, School of Dental Medicine, Department of
Pathology, Philadelphia 19104.

Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans produces a cytolytic peptide leukotoxin
which kills susceptible target cells, including human neutrophils, monocytes,
lymphocytes, and HL-60 promyelocytic leukemia cells. Cell death occurs as a
consequence of colloid osmotic lysis. In the present investigation early
leukotoxin-induced changes in membrane permeability were studied by flow
cytometry and quantitative spectrofluorimetry in leukotoxin-susceptible and
resistant targets. Within 5 s toxin-susceptible cells exhibited
concentration-dependent, sustained increases in systolic free Ca2+, and this was 
rapidly followed by a progressive fall in membrane potential. These early
manifestations of membrane injury occurred approximately 10-15 min before cell
death, as reflected by flow cytometric analysis of propidium iodide stained
cells. The rise in cytosolic Ca2+ was almost entirely due to an influx of
extracellular Ca2+. The results of Hill plots for the action of leukotoxin on
Ca2+ permeability in human neutrophils or HL-60 cells suggested that two or more 
toxin molecules participate in the assembly of an ion conducting pore in the
plasma membrane. Changes in membrane permeability or cell viability were not
observed in response to heat-inactivated toxin. Under appropriate conditions
toxin-induced membrane abnormalities were inhibited by leukotoxin-neutralizing
mAb or relatively high concentrations (greater than or equal to 2.5 mM) of
extracellular Ca2+. Leukotoxin-resistant target cells showed no evidence of
membrane injury even when exposed to high concentrations of leukotoxin for
prolonged periods of time. These included resistant human K562 erythroleukemia
cells and murine SP2 myeloma cells which have previously been shown to adsorb the
toxin, suggesting that they possess a protective mechanism(s) which impedes toxin
insertion or assembly in the lipid bilayer. These data support the concept that
A. actinomycetemcomitans leukotoxin acts as a cell-specific, pore-forming protein
which permeabilizes the plasma membrane of susceptible target cells.

PMID: 1940358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Biotechnol Bioeng. 1991 Nov;38(9):972-6.

Kinetics of recombinant immunoglobulin production by mammalian cells in
continuous culture.

Robinson DK(1), Memmert KW.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical and Biotechnological Production Pharma, Sandoz Pharma Ltd., CH-4002
Basel, Switzerland.

A clonal derivative of a transfectant of the SP2/O myeloma cell line producing a 
chimeric monoclonal antibody was maintained in steady-state, continuous culture
at dilution rates ranging from 0.21 to 1.04 day(-1). The steady-state values for 
nonviable and total cell concentrations increased as the dilution rate decreased,
while the viable cell concentration was roughly independent of the dilution rate.
At steady state, the specific growth rate increased and the specific death rate
decreased as the dilution rate increased. The maximum specific growth rate was
1.15 day(-1). Antibody production was growth associated and the specific rate of 
antibody production increased linearly as the specific growth rate increased.

PMID: 18600859  [PubMed]


32. Immunology. 1991 Nov;74(3):559-60.

The first monoclonal anti-G1m(x) antibody: production and usefulness in
haemagglutination-inhibition assay.

De Lange GG(1), van Leeuwen AM.

Author information: 
(1)Central Laboratory, The Netherlands Red Cross Blood Transfusion Service,
University of Amsterdam.

Murine monoclonal anti-human Ig allotype antibodies have been described for a
limited number of specificities. Now the first monoclonal anti-G1m(x) antibody
has been produced by fusion of lymph gland cells of a mouse injected with
G1m(zax)-positive myeloma proteins with cells of the myeloma cell line SP2/0.
Several limiting dilutions resulted in one antibody-producing hybridoma, clone
3A12. The specificity of monoclonal antibody (mAb) 3A12 in the direct
haemagglutination assay, as well as in the haemagglutination-inhibition (HAI)
assay, is described. Neither cross-reactivity nor nonspecific inhibition with
G1m(x)-negative Ig was seen. Typing for the G1m(x) allotype with mAb 3A12 gave
results which are identical to those obtained with the conventional human
antisera. With the production of this mAb, it now is possible to discriminate
between the four main G1m alleles not only by HAI assay but also by other assay
systems, of which the preliminary results are promising.

PMCID: PMC1384655
PMID: 1769703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Med Lab Sci. 1991 Oct;48(4):244-55.

Human monoclonal antibodies: analysis of two antibodies derived from lymphocytes 
of a patient with acute rheumatic fever.

Hughes EJ(1), Eichbaum Q, Beatty DW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Child Health, Red Cross War Memorial Children's Hospital, Cape
Town, South Africa.

Human monoclonal antibodies were produced by fusion of peripheral blood
lymphocytes from a patient with acute rheumatic fever, with the
HGPRT-non-secreting murine (Balb-c) cell line SP2/0Ag14. Heterohybridomas were
selected by screening against rheumatic fever-associated group A streptococci
using an ELISA, and against paraffin wax-embedded human heart sections using an
immunoperoxidase technique. Two human IgM monoclonal antibodies were selected for
further analysis by Western blotting and ELISA. Both antibodies demonstrated
multispecificity by immunoblotting and ELISA. One of the monoclonals bound to 48 
kD and 83 kD bands common to group A streptococcal and heart antigen
preparations. Both human monoclonal antibodies bound to a 43 kD constituent band 
common to human heart and sarcolemma membrane extract. Inhibition studies
performed using a competitive solid phase immunoassay confirmed shared epitopes
between group A streptococci and human heart. The significance of these
monoclonal antibodies to the pathogenesis of rheumatic fever is uncertain.

PMID: 1811117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Hybridoma. 1991 Oct;10(5):625-31.

Generation of monoclonal antibodies against surface antigens of Moraxella bovis.

Aleixo JA(1), Barbosa RC, Gil-Turnes C.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biotecnologia, Universidade Federal de Pelotas, UFPel, RS, Brazil.

Six hybridoma lines producing monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) against Moraxella
bovis were established from fusions between the SP2/0 myeloma cells and BALB/c
mice splenocytes. Three antibodies were of the IgG1 isotype, two were IgG2a, and 
one was IgG2b. The specificity of the antibodies was determined by indirect
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) using whole cells of M. bovis and of
other Gram-negative bacteria, and lipopolysaccharide (LPS) from M. bovis JUR2 and
E. coli as antigens. Ascitic fluid produced by the six hybridoma lines inhibited 
hemagglutination by M. bovis GF9. One MAb (35F) reacted specifically with
purified M. bovis LPS in the ELISA test. The MAb panel detected heterogeneity
among the isolates recovered from different geographical regions.

PMID: 1804773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Comput Aided Mol Des. 1991 Oct;5(5):475-504.

COSMIC(90): an improved molecular mechanics treatment of hydrocarbons and
conjugated systems.

Morley SD(1), Abraham RJ, Haworth IS, Jackson DE, Saunders MR, Vinter JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Nottingham, University
Park, U.K.

Four modifications to the COSMIC molecular mechanics force field are described,
which greatly increase both its versatility and the accuracy of calculated
conformational energies. The Hill non-bonded van der Waals potential function has
been replaced by a two-parameter Morse curve and a new H-H potential, similar to 
that in MM3, incorporated. Hydrocarbon energies in particular are much improved. 
A simple iterative Hückel pi-electron molecular orbital calculation allows
modelling of conjugated systems. Calculated bond lengths and rotational barriers 
for a series of conjugated hydrocarbons and nitrogen heterocycles are shown to be
as accurate as those determined by the MM2 SCF method. Explicit hydrogen-bonding 
potentials for H-bond acceptor-donor atom pairs have been included to give better
hydrogen bond energies and lengths. The van der Waals radii of protonic hydrogens
are reduced to 0.5 A and the energy well depth is increased to 1.0 kcal mol-1.
Two new general atom types, N+sp2 and O-sp3, have been introduced which allow a
wide variety of charged conjugated systems to be studied. A minimum of
parameterisation is required, as the new types are easily included in the Hückel 
scheme which automatically adjusts bond and torsional parameters according to the
defined bond-order relationships.

PMID: 1770382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Int J Parasitol. 1991 Oct;21(6):735-8.

Monoclonal antibody to a diagnostic Mr 24,000 antigen of Gnathostoma spinigerum.

Chaicumpa W(1), Ruangkunaporn Y, Nopparatana C, Chongsa-Nguan M, Tapchaisri P,
Setasuban P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Mahidol University, Bangkok,
Thailand.

Crude water extract (CA) was prepared from the advanced third-stage larvae of
Gnathostoma spinigerum collected from livers of naturally infected eels. The
extract was partially purified by chromatofocussing column chromatography and the
fraction which contained specific antigen of G. spinigerum which was an Mr 24,000
glycoprotein was used to immunize five Balb/c mice for preparing immune
splenocytes. Spleen cells were collected from one mouse which showed high serum
titre by indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and contained specific
antibody to the Mr 24,000 antigen as checked by Western blot analysis. The spleen
cells were fused with myeloma Sp2/0 cells at a ratio of 10 spleen cells per one
myeloma cell using polyethylene glycol 3350 as a fusogen. Thirteen out of 174
growing polyclones (7.5%) produced antibodies to the partially purified CA
fraction. Among them, two polyclones produced antibody directed to the Mr 24,000 
protein. These two polyclones were subjected to monocloning by limiting dilution 
and a monoclone GN6/24 which produced monoclonal antibody to the specific Mr
24,000 protein of G. spinigerum was obtained.

PMID: 1757204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Hum Antibodies Hybridomas. 1991 Oct;2(4):194-9.

Biological activity of a human monoclonal antibody to Bordetella pertussis
lipooligosaccharide.

Brodeur BR(1), Hamel J, Martin D, Rondeau P.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory for Immunology, Laboratory Centre for Disease Control,
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

The heterohybridoma cell line HBp2 secreting human monoclonal antibody (hMAb)
directed against Bordetella pertussis was generated by fusing SP2/HPT
heteromyeloma cells with human spleen lymphocytes, after in vitro stimulation for
6 days. The hybridoma was maintained in culture for more than 1 year with
continuous antibody secretion. The hMAb HBp2, an IgM, reacted with untreated and 
proteinase K-treated B. pertussis outer membrane antigens, whereas the reactivity
was lost when the antigen was treated with sodium periodate. Human MAb HBp2 was
shown to be specific to B. pertussis LOS by immunoblotting of whole cell extracts
after SDS-PAGE. In a dot enzyme immunoassay, HBp2 reacted with all B. pertussis
strains and clinical isolates tested except for four atypical variant strains of 
the LOS B phenotype. Human MAb HBp2 also reacted with a clinical isolate of B.
bronchiseptica. No reaction was observed against B. parapertussis and other
gram-negative species. Together these studies suggested that HBp2 is reactive
with carbohydrate epitopes present on the LOS A. Binding assays with live
bacteria demonstrated that hMAb HBp2 reacted with cell surface exposed epitopes
on B. pertussis but the antibody did not bind significantly to the surface on
intact B. bronchiseptica cells. When examined for bactericidal activity in the
presence of complement, hMAb HBp2 showed high lytic capability against B.
pertussis while no killing was obtained against B. bronchiseptica. These
experiments established that LOS A is a target for human bactericidal antibodies.
This antigen merits further investigation as a potentially important component in
human immunity to B. pertussis infection.

PMID: 1721552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Eur J Biochem. 1991 Sep 15;200(3):731-8.

NMR studies on p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase from Pseudomonas fluorescens and
salicylate hydroxylase from Pseudomonas putida.

Vervoort J(1), Van Berkel WJ, Müller F, Moonen CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Agricultural University, Wageningen, The
Netherlands.

p-Hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase from Pseudomonas fluorescens and salicylate
hydroxylase from Pseudomonas putida have been reconstituted with 13C- and
15N-enriched FAD. The protein preparations were studied by 13C-NMR, 15N-NMR and
31P-NMR techniques in the oxidized and in the two-electron-reduced states. The
chemical shift values are compared with those of free flavin in water or
chloroform. It is shown that the pi electron distribution in oxidized free
p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase is comparable to free flavin in water, and it is
therefore suggested that the flavin ring is solvent accessible. Addition of
substrate has a strong effect on several resonances, e.g. C2 and N5, which
indicates that the flavin ring becomes shielded from solvent and also that a
conformational change occurs involving the positive pole of an alpha-helix
microdipole. In the reduced state, the flavin in p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase is
bound in the anionic form, i.e. carrying a negative charge at N1. The flavin is
bound in a more planar configuration than when free in solution. Upon binding of 
substrate the resonances of N1, C10a and N10 shift upfield. It is suggested that 
these upfield shifts are the result of a conformational change similar, but not
identical, to the one observed in the oxidized state. The 13C chemical shifts of 
FAD bound to apo(salicylate hydroxylase) indicate that in the oxidized state the 
flavin ring is also fairly solvent accessible in the free enzyme. Addition of
substrate has a strong effect on the hydrogen bond formed with O4 alpha. It is
suggested that this is due to the exclusion of water from the active site by the 
binding of substrate. In the reduced state, the flavin is anionic. Addition of
substrate forces the flavin ring to adopt a more planar configuration, i.e. a
sp2-hybridized N5 atom and a slightly sp3-hybridized N10 atom. The NMR results
are discussed in relation to the reaction catalyzed by the enzymes.

PMID: 1915345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Biol Chem. 1991 Sep 15;266(26):17388-95.

Cuttlefish spermatid-specific protein T. Molecular characterization of two
variants T1 and T2, putative precursors of sperm protamine variants Sp1 and Sp2.

Wouters-Tyrou D(1), Chartier-Harlin MC, Martin-Ponthieu A, Boutillon C, Van
Dorsselaer A, Sautière P.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Lille II, Unité de Recherche Associée 409 au Centre National de 
la Recherche Scientifique, Institut de Recherches sur le Cancer, France.

In cuttlefish, as in selachians and mammals, spermiogenesis is characterized by
the double nuclear protein transition histones----intermediate protein (protein
T)----protamine (protein Sp). The cuttlefish protein T, which consists of two
structural variants phosphorylated at different degrees, is the first
invertebrate spermatid-specific protein to be fully characterized and sequenced. 
The primary structures of these two variants were established from sequence
analysis and mass spectrometric data of the proteins and their fragments. T1 and 
T2 are two highly related proteins of 78 and 77 residues, respectively, which
differ only by four conservative substitutions, two inversions Ser in equilibrium
with Arg, and the deletion of 1 residue of arginine in variant T2. The
asymmetrical distribution of the hydrophobic and basic residues determines two
well defined domains: an amino-terminal domain (residues 1-21) devoid of arginine
and aromatic residues and containing all the aliphatic hydrophobic residues and a
highly basic carboxyl-terminal domain (residues 22-77 or 78) that contains 77% of
arginine, all the tyrosine residues, and most of the phosphorylated serine
residues present in the protein. The complete structural identity of the basic
carboxyl-terminal domain of spermatidal proteins T1 and T2 with the protamine
variants Sp1 and Sp2 isolated from cuttlefish spermatozoa strongly suggests that 
T1 and T2 could be precursors of Sp1 and Sp2, respectively.

PMID: 1894625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Electromyogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1991 Sep;31(6):323-55.

Oscillatory firing of single human sphincteric alpha 2 and alpha 3-motoneurons
reflexly activated for the continence of urinary bladder and rectum. Restoration 
of bladder function in paraplegia.

Schalow G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ernst-Morizt-Arndt University Greifswald (Neurosurgery, Anesthesiology),
Germany.

1. By recording with 2 pairs of wire electrodes from human sacral nerve roots
(S3-S5) rhythmic as well as occasional firing was observed in alpha 2 and alpha
3-motoneurons in response to physiologic stimulation of the urinary bladder and
the anal canal. The rhythmic firing consisted of periodically occurring impulse
trains, most likely produced by true spinal oscillators which drove the
motoneurons. 2. Alpha 2-motoneurons, innervating fast fatigue-resistant muscle
fibres, were observed to fire with impulse trains of about 2 to 4 action
potentials (Ap's). These impulse trains occurred every 110 to 170 msec (5-9 Hz). 
Alpha 3-motoneurons, innervating slow fatigue-resistant muscle fibres, fired
about every 1400 msec (approximately 0.7 Hz) with impulse trains of about 11 to
60 Ap's. Alpha 1-motoneurons, innervating fast fatigue muscle fibres, and
gamma-motoneurons were not observed in the continuous oscillatory firing mode. 3.
Sphincteric motoneurons were observed most likely in the oscillatory firing mode 
in response to the sustained stretch (reflex) of the external and sphincter or to
retrograde filling of the bladder (urethro-sphincteric guarding reflex), in order
to preserve continence. A urethral sphincteric alpha 2-motoneuron increased its
mean activity from 0.5 to 18 Ap's/sec during retrograde filling by changing its
firing pattern from the occasional spike mode via the transient oscillatory
firing mode to the continuous oscillatory mode. Up to a filling of the bladder of
500 ml the mean activity of the stretch receptors, measuring probably mural
tension, increased roughly proportionally and the sphincteric motoneuron
increased its activity to about 1 Ap/sec in the occasional spike mode. Up to 600 
ml, the motoneuron responded in the transient oscillatory mode with mean
activities of up to 5 Ap's/sec. With higher bladder fillings, the flow receptors 
afferents fired additionally, probably according to pressure symptoms, and the
motoneuron switched into the continuous oscillatory firing mode and increased its
activity up to 18 Ap's/sec at 700 ml. When the bladder was about 800 ml full, the
stretch afferent activity decreased, the flow receptor activity increased
strongly and the alpha 2-motoneuron activity decreased; the overflow incontinence
had probably started. Micturition was not observed, probably because of brain
death. 4. It is suggested that one adequate stimulus for an alpha 2-motoneuron of
the external anal sphincter to jump into the oscillatory firing mode, was the
activity from secondary spindle afferent (SP2) fibres from external anal
sphincter muscle spindles.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 1935758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Chin Med J (Engl). 1991 Sep;104(9):711-5.

Anti-FD4 idiotypic antibody mimicking human gastric cancer-associated antigen.

Shou CC(1), Dong ZW, Liu PN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute for Cancer
Research, Beijing.

Rabbits were immunized with the Fab fragment of a murine monoclonal antibody
(McAb) PD4 against human gastric cancer to produce anti-PD4-idiotypic antibody
(alpha PD4-Ab2). The alpha PD4-Ab2 could not only competitively inhibit binding
of McAb PD4 to gastric cancer cell MGC803, but also induce delayed-type
hypersensitivity (DTH) to MGC803 in mice. Spleen cells of mice immunized with
alpha PD4-Ab2 were fused with myeloma cell SP2/0 to form hybridoma secreting Ab3 
which could be bound to target cell MGC803. McAb C7-Ab3, one of the Ab3, could
selectively react with a 40 kD tumor-associated antigen located on MGC803 cell
membrane, as well as McAb PD4. The results indicate that alpha PD4-Ab2 possesses 
determinants (internal image antigen) similar to those on MGC803, and could mimic
human gastric cancer-associated antigen.

PMID: 1935349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Hua Xi Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 1991 Sep;22(4):372-5.

[Preparation of monoclonal antibodies against chorionic gonadotropin receptor and
study of its characteristics].

[Article in Chinese]

Han S, Chen M, Peng Z, Liu S, Cao Z.

We reported the production of monoclonal antibodies (McAbs) against chorionic
gonadotropin hormone (CG) receptor by fusing spleen cells of BALB/c mice which
had been immunized by purified bacteria (Pseudomonas maltophilia) CG receptor
with mouse myeloma line SP2/0. Four hybridoma cell lines secreting CG receptor
McAbs were obtained (ED490 DG390, AB890 and GE590). The titers of specific
antibodies of both mice ascites and culture supernatant were 10(-2)-10(-6) and
1-10(-2) respectively, by solid phase ELISA. Double-Immunodiffusion test showed
that the McAb GE590 was IgG1, and the McAbs ED490, DG390 and AB890 were IgG2b
Immunoprecipitation indicated that 125I-HCG could bind the HCG receptor which had
reacted with McAbs ED490, AB890 and DG390, suggesting that they may recognize the
receptor with different antigenic determinant. Interaction of McAb GE590 with the
receptor showed that the increased concentration of GE590 was in inverse
proportion to the amount of 125I-HCG binding receptor, indicating that both the
McAb and 125I-HCG could recognize a common site of receptor and that increased
concentration of McAb GE590 may induce some change in conformation and structure 
of the receptor. Our study suggested that these McAbs may be used for studying
structure of CG receptor.

PMID: 1814814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Gen Virol. 1991 Sep;72 ( Pt 9):2097-103.

Antigenic variation of European haemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome virus
strains characterized using bank vole monoclonal antibodies.

Lundkvist A(1), Fatouros A, Niklasson B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, National Bacteriological Laboratory, Stockholm,
Sweden.

Monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) against Puumala (PUU) virus, the aetiological agent 
of nephropathia epidemica, were produced by fusing activated spleen cells from a 
bank vole (Clethrionomys glareolus) with the mouse myeloma cell line SP2/0. This 
novel approach, utilizing the natural vector of PUU virus for hybridoma
production, proved to be highly efficient, and eight stable PUU virus-specific
heterohybridomas were isolated and characterized. The bank vole MAbs were all
specific for the nucleocapsid protein (N) of PUU virus, as determined by
immunoprecipitation. When evaluated by additivity immunoassays, the MAbs were
found to recognize several different, distinct or overlapping, epitopes on N. The
MAbs were used in immunofluorescence assays to compare eight PUU-related virus
isolates, and the prototype Hantaan, Urban rat and Prospect Hill viruses. The
reactivity varied among the different MAbs and could be classified into five
groups. One MAb reacted exclusively with PUU-related viruses; two MAbs reacted
with all PUU-related virus strains tested, as well as Prospect Hill virus, but
did not react with Urban rat virus and Hantaan virus; one MAb reacted with all
PUU-related virus strains tested and weakly with Hantaan virus, but not with
Urban rat and Prospect Hill viruses; two MAbs reacted with all the virus strains 
tested. Two virus strains, K-27 and CG-1820, isolated in the western U.S.S.R.,
were distinguished from the other PUU-related virus strains by two MAbs,
suggesting that the large group of independently isolated PUU-related viruses may
be more heterogeneous than previously believed.

PMID: 1716651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1991 Aug 30;179(1):372-7.

A human Fab fragment specific for thyroid peroxidase generated by cloning thyroid
lymphocyte-derived immunoglobulin genes in a bacteriophage lambda library.

Portolano S(1), Seto P, Chazenbalk GD, Nagayama Y, McLachlan SM, Rapoport B.

Author information: 
(1)Thyroid Molecular Biology Laboratory Unit, V. A. Medical Center, San
Francisco, California 94121.

A human Fab fragment (SP2) which binds specifically to human thyroid peroxidase
has been generated by expressing random combinations of heavy and light chain
immunoglobulin genes (derived from Graves' thyroid cDNA) in a bacteriophage
lambda library. In common with many serum TPO autoantibodies, the cloned Fab
fragment is IgG1 kappa and has a high affinity for TPO (approximately 10(-9) M). 
On the basis of their nucleotide sequences, the heavy and light chain genes
coding for SP2 belong to families VHI, (D), JH3 and VKI, JK2, respectively. These
data provide the first characterization at a molecular level of a human thyroid
peroxidase antibody associated with autoimmune thyroid disease.

PMID: 1831977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Electromyogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1991 Aug;31(5):265-96.

Conduction velocities and nerve fibre diameters of touch, pain, urinary bladder
and anal canal afferents and alpha and gamma-motoneurons in human dorsal sacral
roots.

Schalow G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ernst-Moritz-Arndt University Greifswald, (Neurosurgery, Anesthesiology),
Germany.

1. Single action potentials were recorded extracellularly at 2 sites from human
sacral dorsal nerve roots, and their conduction time measured. Conduction
velocity frequency distribution histograms were constructed from afferent and
efferent nerve fibres. Conduction velocity distribution peaks could be identified
from afferents of mechanoreceptors of the skin, the bladder, the anal canal, of
stretch and flow receptors of the urinary bladder, from spindle afferents and
from the 3 alpha (extrafusal) and 3 gamma-motoneuron (intrafusal) classes. The
electrophysiologically measured roots were removed and morphometrically analysed.
Nerve fibre diameter frequency distribution histograms were constructed with
respect to 3 myelin sheath thickness ranges. Nerve fibre diameter distribution
peaks could partly be correlated to the corresponding conduction velocity
distribution peaks. 2. Identified nerve fibre classes, characterized by their
group peak values of conduction velocity and fibre diameter were at about 36
degrees C (age 30 years): Spindle afferents: SP1 (60 msec-1/13.2 microns) SP2
(50/12.0?); touch afferents: TO (49 msec-1/13.0 microns), T1 (44/11.2), T2
(39/10.1), T3 (31/9.1), T4 (20/8.3); pain afferents: P (13 msec-1/?); mucosa
touch afferents from bladder and anal canal: M (12.5 msec-1/?); bladder afferents
from stretch receptors measuring probably mural tension: S1 (42.5 msec-1/?), ST
(38/?) and from flow receptors: S2 (12.5/?); alpha-motoneurons: alpha 1 (60
msec-1/13.1 microns) [FF], alpha 11 (?/12.0) [F (int)], alpha 2 (50/10.2) [FR],
alpha 3 (37/8.3) [S]; gamma-motoneurons: gamma beta (27 msec-1/7.2 microns),
gamma 1 (20/6.7), gamma 2 (15/6.2). 3. Because of the strong temperature
dependence of the conduction velocities a calibration of the structure of the
velocities, which was almost independent of temperature, is defined by the
condition that the alpha 2-motoneurons have the same peak conduction velocity
then the secondary spindle afferents (SP2); the T1 touch afferents have about 10%
lower velocity values. 4. Touch afferents and alpha-motoneurons had a different
velocity-diameter relation, which indicated differences in the myelin sheath
thickness and/or membrane properties. The conduction velocities of the touch
afferents were more temperature-dependent than those of the alpha-motoneurons.
Within the classes of touch afferents and alpha-motoneurons the temperature
dependence increased towards smaller class peak values. 5. Through the use of
action potential wave form comparisons it was possible to identify action
potentials from single nerve fibres in each class of touch afferents (T0 to T4). 
Activity patterns of single touch units could partly be analysed.(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 1915037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Immunol Cell Biol. 1991 Aug;69 ( Pt 4):243-51.

Temporal variations in the fine specificity of IgM anti-fluorescyl antibodies.

Dalesandro MR(1), Skeath JB, Dorer DR, Snyder MM, Owen JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Haverford College, Pennsylvania 19041.

This study compares the fine specificities of the primary and secondary
fluorescein (FITC)-specific immunoglobulin M (IgM) repertoires in BALB/c mouse
serum and monoclonal antibodies (MoAb) and has found reproducible,
immunization-dependent differences. FITC and four of its homologues;
iodoacetamido fluorescein (IAF), dichlorotriazinyl aminofluorescein (DTAF),
substituted rhodamine isothiocyanate (XRITC) and tetramethyl rhodamine
isothiocyanate (TRITC), each conjugated to bovine serum albumin (BSA), were used 
to determine reactivity patterns of serum IgM from mice immunized once or twice
with FITC-haemocyanin (FITC-Hy). Reactivity patterns were also obtained for 20
IgM MoAb, eight of which were produced by fusions of SP2/0 myeloma cells with
splenocytes from mice immunized once (primary) and 12 from mice immunized twice
(secondary) with FITC-Hy. Each MoAb exhibited a unique fine specificity pattern, 
evidence of extensive heterogeneity in the FITC-specific repertoire. Reactivities
of IgM MoAb with certain homologues were found to be more characteristic of
either the primary or secondary response. Polyclonal serum IgM also showed
reproducible immunization-dependent variations in fine specificity. Such a
pattern could result from idiotypic suppression of primary antibodies, from the
expansion of subsets of IgM memory cells utilizing novel genes and/or from
somatic mutation absent in primary IgM antibodies.

PMID: 1786995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Clin Microbiol. 1991 Aug;29(8):1684-8.

Identification of Vibrio vulnificus O serovars with antilipopolysaccharide
monoclonal antibody.

Martin SJ(1), Siebeling RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge
70803-1715.

A serotyping scheme for Vibrio vulnificus predicated on the detection of
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) antigens is proposed. The serovar O typing scheme used
to type V. vulnificus employs polyclonal antisera raised in rabbits immunized
with heat-killed whole-cell vaccines. Polyclonal typing sera produced in this
manner cross-react with heterologous strains. Affinity purification of polyclonal
antisera with LPS affinity columns resolved some of these cross-reactions;
however, affinity-purified polyclonal antisera still showed cross-reactions that 
were nonreciprocal. On the basis of the serological patterns that were obtained
with affinity-purified polyclonal antisera, V. vulnificus strains were selected
as vaccine strains for production of monoclonal antibody. Spleen cells harvested 
from BALB/c mice immunized with formalin-killed V. vulnificus cells were fused
with SP2/O-Ag 14 myeloma cells. Hybridomas were screened by using LPS and
whole-cell enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay to identify clones secreting
LPS-specific antibodies. Monoclonal antibodies identified five LPS serological
varieties of V. vulnificus and a single serovar each for Vibrio damsela and
Vibrio hollisae. No cross-reactions between V. vulnificus and V. hollisae or V.
damsela were observed.

PMCID: PMC270184
PMID: 1761690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Biologicals. 1991 Jul;19(3):171-5.

Rapid isolation of monoclonal hybridoma cultures by a 'fusion-cloning' method:
the requirement for aminopterin.

Butcher RN(1), Obi TU, McCullough KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Animal Virus Research Institute Pirbright, Working, 
Surrey, U.K.

Hybridomas were generated by fusing the Balb/c SP2/0 myeloma-like cell line with 
either: (i) splenocytes from Balb/c mice immunized with foot-and-mouth disease
virus (FMDV), rinderpest virus (RPV), peste des petits ruminants virus (PPRV),
African swine fever virus (ASFV) or pig thymocytes; or (ii) lymph node cells from
cattle immunized with FMDV. If the fusion mixtures were plated in cloning medium 
of methyl cellulose and HAT medium, small hybridoma colonies developed which
rarely survived. Fusion mixtures were then plated in liquid HT medium on to
3T3/A31 feeder layers in 75 cm2 flasks, incubated at 37 degrees C for 24 h before
adding aminopterin, and incubated for a further 2 to 4 days before cloning in
methyl cellulose/HT medium. Without the aminopterin in the cloning medium,
colonies of hybridomas, which could be cultured, developed from the majority of
fusions. These colonies were isolated in HT medium over feeder layers and given
two subcultures in HAT medium as a precaution against any reversion to
aminopterin sensitivity during the cloning. No evidence of such reversions were
seen, and recloning results suggested that the initial cloning was highly
efficient at generating monoclonal cultures.

PMID: 1954000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Vopr Virusol. 1991 Jul-Aug;36(4):318-21.

[The isolation and characteristics of hybridomas producing monoclonal antibodies 
to the structural proteins of the Vnukovo-32 strain of the rabies virus].

[Article in Russian]

Gribencha SV, Vasilenko OV, Furalev VA, Kliushnik SIu, Kuz'mitskaia TM,
Sveshinkov PG, Barinskii IF.

A series of hybridomas secreting monoclonal antibodies (MCA) to glycoprotein and 
nucleocapsid proteins of rabies virus strain Vnukovo-32 was selected as a result 
of fusion of splenocytes from immune BALB/c mice with cells of myeloma line
Sp2/OAq14, screening and cloning by limiting dilution methods in semi-liquid
agar. Four hybridomas secreted MCA to glycoprotein in high titres (5.0 x
10(5)-2.2 x 10(6)) and had marked virus-neutralizing and therapeutic properties. 
Eight hybridomas produced MCA to the nucleocapsid complex: five hybridomas
secreted MCA of the G class in high titres (2.4 x 10(5)-1.6 x 10(6)) and three
hybridomas secreted MCA of the M class in low titres.

PMID: 1796588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Clin Microbiol. 1991 Jul;29(7):1472-9.

Epitope analysis of capsid and matrix proteins of North American ovine lentivirus
field isolates.

Marcom KA(1), Pearson LD, Chung CS, Poulson JM, DeMartini JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Colorado State University, Fort Collins 80523.

Monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) directed against two phenotypically distinct ovine
lentivirus (OvLV) strains were generated by fusion of BALB/c SP2/0-Ag 14 myeloma 
cells with spleen cells from mice immunized with purified OvLV. Hybridomas were
selected by indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and analysis of
reactivity on immunoblots. The majority (17 of 21) of the MAbs recognized the
gag-encoded capsid protein, CA p27, of both strains. Four other MAbs recognized a
smaller structural protein, presumably a matrix protein, MA p17. Three distinct
epitopes on CA p27 and one on MA p17 were distinguished by the MAbs with
competition ELISA. MAbs from each epitope group were able to recognize 17 North
American field isolates of OvLV and the closely related caprine
arthritis-encephalitis virus (CAEV). Analysis of the data indicated that these
epitopes were highly conserved among naturally occurring isolates. A
representative MAb from each epitope group of anti-CA p27 MAbs reacted with four 
field strains of OvLV and CAEV on immunoblots. An anti-MA p17 MAb recognized the 
same OvLV strains on immunoblots but failed to recognize CAEV. MAbs which
recognize conserved epitopes of gag-encoded lentivirus proteins (CA p27 and MA
p17) are valuable tools. These MAbs can be used to develop sensitive diagnostic
assays and to study the pathogenesis of lentivirus infections in sheep and goats.

PMCID: PMC270137
PMID: 1715884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Immunol Cell Biol. 1991 Jun;69 ( Pt 3):151-7.

Hybrid myeloma cells which secrete heterodimeric IgG: a model to study the
N-linked glycan.

Lee SO(1), Poretz RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Rutgers University,
Piscataway, NJ 08855-1059.

Fundamental questions remain unanswered regarding the effect of the acceptor
polypeptide structure on the fine structure of the N-linked glycan of
glycoproteins and conversely, the effect of the glycan structure of IgG on the
function and structure of the protein. The construction of myeloma hybrids
capable of secreting multiple IgG which differ with regard to the fine structure 
of their N-linked oligosaccharides would be a valuable model for studying these
questions. P3X63Ag8 analogous glycan of the IgG2b secreted by Sp2/HLBu. Fusion
hybrids of these cells secrete parental IgG1, and to a lesser degree IgG2b, as
well as a heterodimeric IgG containing both the gamma 1 and gamma 2b chains. The 
oligosaccharide of each chain is identical in structure to the appropriate
parental IgG. Such cells allow for the analysis of acceptor properties that
influence glycan fine structure, as well as the role of glycan structure on the
stability of the IgG.

PMID: 1959932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Neurochem. 1991 Jun;56(6):1897-904.

A monoclonal antibody recognizing kappa- but not mu- and delta-opioid receptors.

Maderspach K(1), Németh K, Simon J, Benyhe S, Szücs M, Wollemann M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Biological Research Center, Hungarian Academy of
Sciences, Szeged.

A monoclonal antibody (mAb), KA8 that interacts with the kappa-opioid receptor
binding site was generated. BALB/c female mice were immunized with a partially
purified kappa-opioid receptor preparation from frog brain. Spleen cells were
hybridized with SP2/0AG8 myeloma cells. The antibody-producing hybridomas were
screened for competition with opioid ligands in a modified enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay. The cell line KA8 secretes an IgG1 (kappa-light chain)
immunoglobulin. The mAb KA8 purified by affinity chromatography on protein
A-Sepharose CL4B was able to precipitate the antigen from a solubilized and
affinity-purified frog brain kappa-opioid receptor preparation. In competition
studies, the mAb KA8 decreased specific [3H]ethylketocyclazocine ([3H]EKC)
binding to the frog brain membrane fraction in a concentration-dependent manner
to a maximum to 72%. The degree of the inhibition was increased to 86% when mu-
and delta-opioid binding was suppressed by 100 nM
[D-Ala2,NMe-Phe4,Gly-ol]-enkephalin (DAGO) and 100 nM [D-Ala2,L-Leu5]-enkephalin 
(DADLE), respectively, and to 100% when mu-, delta-, and kappa 2-sites were
blocked by 5 microM DADLE. However, the mu-specific [3H]DAGO and the
delta-preferring [3H]DADLE binding to frog brain membranes cannot be inhibited by
mAb KA8. These data suggest that this mAb is recognizing the kappa- but not the
mu- and delta-subtype of opioid receptors. The mAb KA8 also inhibits specific
[3H]naloxone and [3H]EKC binding to chick brain cultured neurons and rat brain
membranes, whereas it has only a slight effect on [3H]EKC binding to guinea pig
cerebellar membranes.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 1851205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Infect Immun. 1991 Jun;59(6):2175-80.

Production and characterization of a monoclonal antibody to the complement
fixation antigen of Coccidioides immitis.

Dolan MJ(1), Cox RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research Immunology, San Antonio State Chest Hospital, Texas
78223.

Detection of complement-fixing antibody to coccidioidin by using the complement
fixation test or an immunodiffusion assay for complement-fixing antibody (IDCF)
is widely viewed as the most useful immunodiagnostic test for coccidioidomycosis.
In this investigation, we report the production of an immunoglobulin G subclass 1
(IgG1) monoclonal antibody (MAb) to the IDCF antigen for use as a biospecific
ligand for purifying the IDCF antigen on solid-phase immunosorbents and for use
as a reagent for screening genomic or cDNA expression libraries from Coccidioides
immitis. BALB/c mice were immunized by intramuscular injections of coccidioidin
in adjuvant, followed by an intrasplenic booster injection of coccidioidin in
saline. The spleen cells were fused with SP2/0 Ag14 myeloma cells, and the fusion
products were screened for IgG antibody to coccidiodin by using an enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay. Positive hybridomas were cloned and evaluated for reactivity
to the IDCF antigen by two-dimensional immunoelectrophoresis and by
immunoblotting. An IgG1 Mab was produced that was specific for the IDCF antigen
when evaluated by two-dimensional immunoelectrophoresis and immunoblotting. The
epitope recognized by the MAb was heat labile (60 degrees C, 30 min) and
susceptible to enzymatic digestion with pronase but was resistant to treatment
with lipase, alpha-mannosidase, glucose oxidase, and endoglycosidase H. This
heat-labile peptide epitope appears to be specific to C. immitis, as judged by
the fact that the MAb was not reactive in immunoblots or enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assays of histoplasmin or blastomycin.

PMCID: PMC257983
PMID: 1709921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Exp Cell Res. 1991 May;194(1):90-4.

Synthesis of sperm-specific basic nuclear proteins (SPs) in cultured spermatids
from Xenopus laevis.

Abé S(1), Hiyoshi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Faculty of Science, Kumamoto University,
Japan.

The accumulation and synthesis of sperm-specific basic nuclear proteins (SPs) in 
Xenopus spermatids in vitro were studied by acid-urea-Triton polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis and fluorography. In synchronous cultures of round spermatids,
the amount of SP2 and SP3-5 accumulated almost linearly with time, while that of 
SP1 remained almost constant. Fluorography showed that round spermatids
incorporated [14C]arginine mostly into SP1 and SP3-5, very little into SP2, and
none into histones. When [14C]arginine was incorporated into cells for 24 h on
Days 0, 3, and 6, followed by immediate extraction of basic nuclear proteins, the
SP1 band was detected faintly on Day 0 and the intensity increased to the maximum
level by Day 3 and remained constant on Day 6; the SP3-5 bands were first
detected on Day 3 and their intensity increased by Day 6. Thus, SP1 and SP3-5
were synthesized differentially during the culture period. When [14C]arginine or 
[14C]lysine was incorporated into round spermatids on Days 0, 3, and 6 for 15 h
and chased for 3-12 days, the intensity of the SP2 band increased significantly, 
while the intensity of the SP1 band decreased concomitantly. This result
indicates that SP2 was processed from a precursor protein which is probably SP1.

PMID: 1901796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Parasite Immunol. 1991 May;13(3):251-9.

Characteristics and specificity of hybridoma antibodies against oocyst antigens
of Cryptosporidium parvum from man.

McDonald V(1), Deer RM, Nina JM, Wright S, Chiodini PL, McAdam KP.

Author information: 
(1)London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Department of Clinical
Sciences.

Hybridoma antibodies (HAbs) against oocyst antigens of a human isolate of
Cryptosporidium parvum were developed by fusion of SP2/0 mouse myeloma cells and 
spleen cells from BALB/c mice immunized with oocyst homogenates. In an indirect
immunofluorescence antibody test (IFAT), using as antigen a mixture of air-dried 
sporozoites and oocysts, HAbs labelled either the oocyst wall or areas of the
sporozoite, including the whole organism, the entire surface, a polar region or
the interior. Most of the HAbs were specific for the sporozoite surface, and few 
of them recognized the oocyst wall. In Western blot analysis of oocyst antigens, 
sporozoite surface-reactive monoclonal antibodies (MoAbs) recognized one or more 
of seven polypeptide bands with molecular weights in the range 47- greater than
200 kD, and all reacted with the 47 kD band. Each of four heterologous parasite
isolates had a unique recognition pattern with a panel of MoAbs in IFAT,
suggesting antigenic differences may exist between strains of C. parvum. The
ability to differentiate between parasite isolates by immunological methods might
be of value in epidemiological studies of cryptosporidiosis.

PMID: 1712929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Biol Reprod. 1991 Apr;44(4):681-6.

Monoclonal antibodies to luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone: production,
characterization, and immunocytochemical application.

Urbanski HF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuroscience, Oregon Regional Primate Research Center, Beaverton
97006.

Luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) was conjugated to bovine
thyroglobulin and used to immunize a BALB/c mouse. Spleen lymphocytes were
subsequently fused to SP2/0 myeloma cells and two of the resulting hybridoma
clones were found to produce high titer antibodies to LHRH (HU4H and HU11B); both
belonged to the IgG1 subclass. Characterization of the monoclonal antibodies
revealed that HU4H and HU11B have conformational and sequential specificity to
LHRH, respectively, and that neither one shows significant immunoactivity with
pro-LHRH. The value of these antibodies in immunocytochemical applications is
demonstrated by their ability to cause intense specific staining of LHRH neuronal
cell bodies and fibers in brain sections from several mammalian species.

PMID: 2043738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao. 1991 Apr;13(2):137-40.

[Preparation and characterization of monoclonal antibody against human uterine
cervical carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Song G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Beijing.

A murine Hybridoma, CEB9, which stably produces monoclonal antibody against human
uterine cervical carcinoma is described. CEB9 was obtained by fusing splenic
cells from a BALB/c mouse immunized with human uterine cervical carcinoma cell
line CC-801 cells with mouse myeloma cell line SP2/0 -Ag14 cells, followed by
cloning and subcloning. The antibody is identified as IgG. The results of
immunocytochemistry and fluorescence analysis show that the antibody reacted
strongly with human uterine cervical carcinoma cells only among the following
tested cell lines: PLC/RF/5, 7402, LETP-78, Scle, Hep-2, 2BS, as well as primary 
cultured human fibroblast cells. Pancreatic carcinoma cells were reactive.

PMID: 1831711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Hum Antibodies Hybridomas. 1991 Apr;2(2):67-73.

Human monoclonal antibodies to cytomegalovirus recognize viral epitopes on the
surface of virus-infected cells.

Larose Y(1), Tackaberry ES, Brodeur BR.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory for Immunology, Laboratory Centre for Disease Control,
Ottawa, Canada.

Four human monoclonal antibodies directed against human cytomegalovirus were
produced by fusing Sp2/HPT heteromyeloma cells with peripheral blood lymphocytes,
after stimulation in vitro for 6 days. The human hybridomas have been maintained 
in culture for one year and secrete, when cultured in serum-free medium, between 
3.1 and 8.1 micrograms/ml of antibodies/10(6) cells/24 hours. HCV-1 and HCV-2 are
IgG kappa, while HCV-3 and HCV-4 are IgG3 lambda. The four monoclonal antibodies 
immunoprecipitate a viral protein of 64 kD. Kinetic studies using indirect
immunofluorescence indicate that this antigen appears late in the viral
infectious cycle. All four monoclonal antibodies recognize human cytomegalovirus 
prototype strains AD-169, Davis and Towne, and 14 clinical isolates collected
between 1984 and 1987. No reactivity was observed with other human herpesviruses.
While no neutralizing activity could be observed with the human monoclonal
antibodies, binding assays on unfixed infected cells showed that they recognized 
viral epitopes located on the cell surface membrane. These hybridomas may be
useful for future therapy of immunocompromised patients.

PMID: 1714785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Eur J Biochem. 1991 Mar 28;196(3):663-72.

15N- and 13C-NMR investigations of glucose oxidase from Aspergillus niger.

Sanner C(1), Macheroux P, Rüterjans H, Müller F, Bacher A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biophysikalische Chemie, Universität Frankfurt, Federal Republic 
of Germany.

The apoprotein of glucose oxidase from Aspergillus niger was reconstituted with
specifically 15N- and 13C-enriched FAD derivatives and investigated by 15N- and
13C-NMR spectroscopy. On the basis of the 15N-NMR results it is suggested that,
in the oxidized state of glucose oxidase, hydrogen bonds are formed to the N(3)
and N(5) positions of the isoalloxazine system. The hydrogen bond to N(3) is more
pronounced than that to N(5) as compared with the respective hydrogen bonds
formed between FMN and water. The resonance position of N(10) indicates a small
decrease in sp2 hybridization compared to free flavin in water. Apparently the
isoalloxazine ring is not planar at this position in glucose oxidase. Additional 
hydrogen bonds at the carbonyl groups of the oxidized enzyme-bound FAD were
derived from the 13C-NMR results. A strong downfield shift observed for the C(4a)
resonance may be ascribed in part to the decrease in sp2 hybridization at the
N(10) position and to the polarization of the carbonyl groups at C(2) and C(4).
The polarization of the isoalloxazine ring in glucose oxidase is more similar to 
FMN in water than to that of tetraacetyl-riboflavin in apolar solvents. In the
reduced enzyme the N(1) position is anionic at pH 5.6. The pKa is shifted to
lower pH values by at least 1 owing to the interaction of the FAD with the
apoprotein. As in the oxidized state of the enzyme, a hydrogen bond is also
formed at the N(3) position of the reduced flavin. The N(5) and N(10) resonances 
of the enzyme-bound reduced FAD indicate a decrease in the sp2 character of these
atoms as compared with that of reduced FMN in aqueous solution. Some of the 15N- 
and 13C-resonance positions of the enzyme-bound reduced cofactor are markedly
pH-dependent. The pH dependence of the N(5) and C(10a) resonances indicates a
decrease in sp2 hybridization of the N(5) atom with increasing pH of the enzyme
solution.

PMID: 2013289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Phys Rev B Condens Matter. 1991 Mar 15;43(8):6742-6745.

Structural properties of a three-dimensional all-sp2 phase of carbon.

Liu AY, Cohen ML, Hass KC, Tamor MA.

PMID: 9998119  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


61. Exp Cell Res. 1991 Mar;193(1):219-22.

Patterns of protein synthesis in various cells after extreme heat shock.

Margulis BA(1), Zhivotovski BD, Pospelova TV, Smagina LV.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cytology, Academy of Sciences USSR, Leningrad.

The analysis of proteins synthesized in rat thymocytes and mouse teratocarcinoma 
PCC-4 Aza 1 and myeloma Sp2/0 cells after 1 h of treatment at 42 or 44 degrees C 
was carried out. Shock at 42 degrees C reduced the total synthetic rate of
proteins in all three cell lines and induced "classical" heat-shock protein with 
a mass of 70 kDa (hsp 70). Heat shock at 44 degrees C resulted in almost complete
inhibition of protein synthesis; only a small amount of hsp 70 was synthesized.
Meanwhile a new 48-kDa polypeptide (pI = 7.5) was found in the cells exposed to
severe heat shock. This protein was compared by peptide mapping with other known 
polypeptides of the same size: heat-shock protein from chicken embryo cells and
mitogen-stimulated polypeptide from human lymphoid cells. The peptide maps were
not identical. It was also shown that after a shock at 44 degrees C
teratocarcinoma cells were able to accumulate anomalous amounts of hsp 70 despite
hsp 70 synthesis inhibition. The data show that reaction of various cells to
extreme heat shock depends heavily on cell type.

PMID: 1995297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Hua Xi Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 1991 Mar;22(1):24-6.

[The production of human monoclonal antibodies against Pseudomonas aeruginosa by 
human-mouse hybridoma technique].

[Article in Chinese]

Ye D(1), Yan R, Li S, Peng H, Xu X.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit of Leptospirosis.

The fusion of peripheral B lymphocytes from human immunized with P. aeruginosa
polyvalent vaccine and mouse myeloma cell line SP2/0 was successfully performed. 
The rate of fusion was 74%(71/96) and the positive rate of antibody was 19.7%.
Two hybridoma cell lines (A3 and F8) secreting McAb against P. aeruginosa were
obtained after three times cloning by limiting dilution. The human chromosomes
together with mouse chromosomes were discovered in karyotype assay of the
hybrids. A3 and F8McAbs were human IgG by class determination. These MrcAbs could
recognize 43 kd and 36 kd MW specific components of P. aeruginosa antigen by
enzyme linked immuno-transfer blot technique.

PMID: 1774030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Hua Xi Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 1991 Mar;22(1):21-3.

[Screening and identification of monoclonal antibodies against human neutrophil
and detection of inhibiting opsonic phagocytic activity].

[Article in Chinese]

Xu L, Gao J, Wang B.

Using Ficoll-Hypaque gradient centrifugation, we have successfully obtained the
neutrophils from normal human donors, which can be used as particle antigens for 
immunizing BALB/c mice. Hybridomas were produced through the fusion of SP2/0
myeloma cells and splenocytes from immunized BALB/c mice. The ratio of fusion was
1:5. The cells were fused with 30% polyethylene glycol (MW 4000). The rate of
fusion was 90%. The antibody producing colonies against the membrane of
neutrophils in HAT medium were selected by indirect immunofluorescence assay.
Antibody positive rate was 60% (102/170). Limiting dilution was used for
colonization of the antibody-producing hybridoma cells. After colonization for
three times, one hybridoma cell line was obtained, which could inhibit
complement-mediated phagocytosis. Culture supernatant was used against class- and
subclass- specific rabbit antisera (rabbit anti-mouse IgM, IgG, IgG1, IgGd22,
IgG2b, IgG3) in an agar immunodiffusion system, it was shown to be IgG22.

PMID: 1774029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Kansenshogaku Zasshi. 1991 Mar;65(3):293-8.

[Monoclonal antibodies to herpes simplex viruses antigens--specificity and
utility in rapid serotyping of clinical isolates].

[Article in Japanese]

Kojima T(1), Tagami K, Shiga S, Hagiwara T, Yamazaki S.

Author information: 
(1)Eiken Chemical Co., Ltd.

Sixteen hybridomas secreting antibodies to HSV-1 and 22 hybridomas secreting
antibodies to HSV-2 were derived from fusion of SP2/0 myeloma cells with spleen
cells from BALB/c mice immunized with each respective virus. Four of the former
16 hybridomas and seven of the latter 22 hybridomas were subcloned and injected
into pristane-primed mice to obtain high titers of monoclonal antibodies. Antigen
specificity of these monoclonal antibodies were determined by the Western
blotting (WB) assay. Two out of four monoclonal antibodies that showed selective 
reactivity for HSV-1 in IFA, reacted with HSV-1 specific proteins; #1 reacted
with 100 KD and 70 KD proteins and #4 with a 150 KD protein, respectively, while 
the remaining two antibodies reacted only with a 50 KD protein that is
type-common antigen. On the other hand, two out of seven antibodies which showed 
selective reactivity for HSV-2 in IFA, reacted with HSV-2 specific proteins: #5
with a 100 KD protein and #10 with three proteins of 30, 25, and 20 KD, and the
other two antibodies reacted with a 50 KD protein that is a type-common antigen. 
The remaining three antibodies, two of which were found to be immunoglobulin type
IgM, reacted with neither HSV-1 nor HSV-2 antigens in WB assay. In order to
determine their utility in serotyping, 11 monoclonal antibodies were examined by 
IFA test for reactivity to cells that were infected with 20 HSV-1 or 16 HSV-2
isolates which had been typed by neutralization test.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250
WORDS)

PMID: 1649232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Immunol Methods. 1991 Feb 15;136(2):247-57.

Two distinct monoclonal antibodies raised against mouse beta nerve growth factor.
Generation of bi-specific anti-nerve growth factor anti-horseradish peroxidase
antibodies for use in a homogeneous enzyme immunoassay.

Kenigsberg RL(1), Elliott PJ, Cuello AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, McGill University, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada.

Two hybridomas producing monoclonal antibodies against mouse beta nerve growth
factor (NGF) were obtained from the fusion of hyperimmune splenocytes from rats
immunized with polymerized beta-NGF and Sp2/0.Ag mouse myeloma cells. The
monoclonal antibodies coded IgG 24 and 30 produced and secreted by the hybrid
cells are both of the IgG2a subclass. Both monoclonal antibodies are capable of
recognizing native NGF coated on microassay plates as well as the denatured
factor on Western blots. However, only IgG 30 has been found to block NGF-induced
process outgrowth from the rat pheochromocytoma cell line (PC12) as well as
NGF-induced increase in choline acetyltransferase activity in rat primary septal 
cell cultures. In addition, only IgG 30 was able to detect immunocytochemically
NGF-immunoreactive sites in fixed tissue. And, finally, IgG 24 could not compete 
for IgG 30 binding to immobilized native NGF. Consequently, it appears that these
antibodies are recognizing different epitopes on the NGF molecule. Neither
monoclonal antibody displayed any crossreactivity with serum albumin, aprotinin, 
epidermal growth factor or insulin. A hybrid-hybridoma producing bi-specific
anti-NGF anti-horseradish peroxidase (HRP) monoclonal antibodies was generated
from the fusion of an azaguanine resistant anti-HRP hybridoma, coded RAP2.Ag and 
the anti-NGF IgG 30 hybridoma treated with emetine. The potential merits of using
these bi-specific antibodies in combination with their mono-specific anti-NGF
parent in a homogeneous sandwich immunoassay for the quantitation of NGF are
discussed.

PMID: 1999653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Eur J Biochem. 1991 Feb 14;195(3):611-9.

Cuttlefish sperm protamines. 1. Amino acid sequences of two distinct variants.

Martin-Ponthieu A(1), Wouters-Tyrou D, Bélaïche D, Sautière P, Schindler P, Van
Dorsselaer A.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recherche Associée, Université de Lille II, France.

The amino acid sequences of two cuttlefish protamine variants Sp1 and Sp2 have
been established from automated sequence analysis and mass spectrometry data. Sp1
(57 residues) and Sp2 (56 residues) have molecular masses of 8410 and 8253 Da,
respectively. They are almost identical proteins which differ only by one residue
of arginine and the position of two of the serine residues (14 and 37 in Sp1; 13 
and 35 in Sp2). With an arginine content of about 77%, cuttlefish protamine is
one of the most basic proteins which have ever been characterized and the first
typical protamine sequenced in invertebrates. It is closely similar to sperm
basic proteins identified in squids but strongly differs from the protamine-like 
components isolated from the sperm of bivalve molluscs.

PMID: 1999185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Hum Reprod. 1991 Feb;6(2):259-62.

Immunochemical localization and characterization of proteins from mouse cauda
epididymis using human sperm specific monoclonal antibody.

Hegde UC(1), Khole V, Premachandran S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Reproduction, Bombay, India.

Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) to sperm specific antigens were generated by fusion 
of mouse myeloma cells (SP2/0) with splenocytes of female BALB/c mice
hyperimmunized with washed human spermatozoa. The resultant hybridomas producing 
antisperm antibodies were first screened by ELISA. Out of these, one of the mAbs 
(D2G4) which recognized target antigens restricted to the acrosomal cap was
chosen for these studies. The mAb D2G4 was found to be an agglutinating antibody 
and was also found to cross-react with mouse epididymal spermatozoa in ELISA and 
indirect immunofluorescence. The origin of antigens reacting with monoclonal
antibody D2G4 was investigated. When frozen sections of murine testis and various
regions of epididymis were reacted with mAb D2G4, only the cauda epididymal
region was stained. Western blot of proteins from the epididymal spermatozoa and 
fluid indicated the presence of two bands of mol. wt 45 and 26 kd. These bands
were identical under reducing and non-reducing conditions. These observations
suggest that the two proteins are structurally similar or at least have a common 
epitope. These data indicate that the proteins recognized by D2G4 are acquired by
spermatozoa during their passage and storage in the cauda epididymis.

PMID: 2056023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Res Immunol. 1991 Feb;142(2):109-15.

Translocation of alkaline phosphatase during the activation of B cells.

Pezzi L(1), Marquez C, Toribio ML, Martinez C.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biologia Molecular CSIC, Universidad Autonoma de Madrid.

The association of alkaline phosphatase (ALPase) with the cytoskeleton in
lymphoid cells was investigated. Extracting cells with non-ionic detergents such 
as Triton, we determined that ALPase is present in the cytoskeletal fraction in
fully differentiated B lymphocytes, X63 myeloma cells and Sp2/O hybridoma cells. 
During the course of B-lymphocyte activation, the ALPase shifted from a soluble
to a Triton-insoluble form. Changes in the phosphorylation of Triton-insoluble
proteins with molecular weights of 120, 100, 90, 75, 34 and 31 kDa were detected,
coinciding with the appearance of the ALPase in this fraction. The possible role 
of ALPase in the differentiation of B cells is discussed.

PMID: 1866487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Immunol. 1991 Feb 1;146(3):928-35.

Construction, expression, and biologic activity of murine/human chimeric
antibodies with specificity for the human alpha/beta T cell receptor.

Shearman CW(1), Kanzy EJ, Lawrie DK, Li YW, Thammana P, Moore GP, Kurrle R.

Author information: 
(1)Genzyme Corporation, Framingham, MA 01701.

Murine/human chimeric antibodies with specificity for the human TCR-alpha/beta
have been produced by genetic engineering. The L and H chain V region exons
encoding the murine mAb BMA 031 were isolated and inserted into mammalian
expression vectors containing the human kappa and gamma 1 or gamma 4 C region
exons. The chimeric genes were transfected into murine Sp2/O hybridoma cells by
electroporation and transfectomas secreting chimeric antibody were isolated.
Secretion levels ranged from 1 to 7 pg/cell/24 h. The chimeric antibodies bound
specifically to T cells and competed effectively with the parental murine mAb for
binding to these sites. The ability to promote antibody-dependent cell-mediated
cytolysis was significantly enhanced in the chimeric antibodies as compared with 
murine BMA 031. C-dependent cytolysis, however, was not detectable with any of
the antibodies. Chimeric BMA 031 is a clinically relevant, genetically engineered
antibody with potential uses in transplantation, graft-vs-host disease,
autoimmune diseases and other T cell-related disorders.

PMID: 1824850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Hybridoma. 1991 Feb;10(1):121-35.

A mouse monoclonal antibody specific for an allotypic determinant of the Igha
allele of murine IgM: genetic and functional analysis of Igh-6a epitopes using
anti-IgM monoclonal antibodies.

Sieckmann DG(1), Stall AM, Subbarao B.

Author information: 
(1)Naval Medical Research Institute, Bethesda, MD 20814-5055.

An IgG1 mouse monoclonal antibody (MAb) specific for a mouse IgM allotypic
determinant in the a, c, f, g, h, and j haplotypes was derived from a fusion of
SP2/O-Ag14 mouse myeloma cells with C57BL/6 mouse spleen cells (Igh-Cb) immune to
TC31, a MAb of the IgMa allotype. MAb from one hybridoma derived from this fusion
(designated DS1) was demonstrated to bind in an ELISA to immunoglobulin bearing
the IgMa allotype (TC31, MOPC104E), but not to immunoglobulin bearing the IgMb
allotype (C.BPC112). Fluorescein-conjugated DS1 was shown to bind to the surface 
of BALB/cByJ splenic B cells, but was shown to have negligible binding on
C57BL/6J cells. Similarly, DS1-conjugated Sepharose beads were able to stimulate 
in vitro proliferation of BALB/c, but not C57BL/6 splenic B cells. DS1 was unable
to bind to spleen cells from BALB/c allotype congenic strains, BAB/14 (Igh-Cb)
and C.AL-20 (Igh-Co), demonstrating that DS1 recognizes a determinant under the
control of a gene linked to the Igh-C gene complex. Using sera from recombinant
inbred lines, the determinant defined by DS1 was shown to be linked to the Igh-1 
locus. Furthermore, the determinant was localized to the CH1 domain of the mu
heavy chain. Sera from BALB/cByJ, NMRI, CBA/J, SEA/GnJ, RIIIs/J, and CE/J mouse
strains were shown to bind to DS1 in an ELISA, while sera from A/J, SJL/J,
NZB/B1NJ, AKR/J, C57BL/6J, and C57BL/10SnJ mouse strains did not bind to DS1.
From these data we propose that DS1 is reactive with specificity Igh-6.1, which
was originally defined by an allotypic antiserum developed by Black et al.
(Immunogenetics 7:213, 1978).

PMID: 1709612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1991 Feb;81(1):24-30.

Masseter inhibitory reflex in movement disorders. Huntington's chorea,
Parkinson's disease, dystonia, and unilateral masticatory spasm.

Cruccu G(1), Pauletti G, Agostino R, Berardelli A, Manfredi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of Rome La Sapienza, Italy.

Evoked by electrical stimulation of the mental nerve, the masseter inhibitory
reflex consists of an early and a late silent period (SP1 and SP2), which
interrupt the voluntary electromyographic (EMG) activity in the masseter muscle. 
We recorded the masseter inhibitory reflex and measured its latency, depth of
suppression, duration and recovery cycle to paired stimuli, in patients with
Huntington's chorea. Parkinson's disease, dystonia, or unilateral masticatory
spasm. In patients with Huntington's chorea the reflex data and recovery cycle
were normal. In patients with Parkinson's disease or dystonia, although the
reflex data were normal, SP2 recovered far more rapidly than it did in control
subjects. This is possibly due to hypoactivity of an inhibitory control of the
polysynaptic chain of ponto-medullary interneurons that mediate SP2. In patients 
with unilateral masticatory spasm, both SP1 and SP2 were absent. Suppression is
probably absent because this involuntary movement originates at a point along the
peripheral course of the nerve.

PMID: 1705216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1991 Jan 23;1073(1):33-42.

Reversible binding of peptide aldehydes to papain. Structure-activity
relationships.

Hanzlik RP(1), Jacober SP, Zygmunt J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, University of Kansas, Lawrence 66045-2506.

The hydration of eleven peptide and hipuryl aldehydes has been measured as a
function of temperature by means of NMR spectroscopy. In all cases the aldehydes 
were strongly hydrated (i.e., 90-95%) in aqueous solution. Dehydration of the
hydrates was strongly endothermic, but this was partly offset by a positive
entropy for dehydration. The binding of the aldehydes to papain was measured by
fluorescence titration, and from these data dissociation constants for the
hemithioacetal enzyme adducts were derived. Binding of N-Ac-L-PheNHCH2CHO (1) was
particularly tight (Kd,corr = 0.00043 micro M) whereas that of its D-enantiomer
(2) was 300-fold weaker (Kd,corr = 0.129 microM). The binding constants of the
eleven aldehydes correlated with those for the reversible covalent binding of the
analogous nitriles according to the equation log Kd(CHO) = -2.687 +/- 1.016 log K
d(CN) (r = 0.99), lending support to previous suggestions that both peptide
aldehydes and peptide nitriles behave as transition-state- or reactive
intermediate analogs for papain. This finding is particularly striking in view of
the obvious differences in hybridization (sp2 vs. sp3) and geometry (trigonal vs.
tetrahedral) at the reactive P1 carbon center in their covalent adduct forms
(thioimidate ester vs. hemithioacetal, respectively). A model for the binding of 
substrates, their transition states and analogs thereof is proposed. A key
feature of the model is an obligatory covalent (or developing covalent)
interaction between Cys-25-SH and the carbonyl or equivalent carbon of P1,
augmented by intermolecular P1NH--OC(Asp-158), P2CO--HN(Gly-66) and
P2NH--OC(Gly-66) hydrogen bonds and a hydrophobic P2-S2 interaction. The latter
three interactions are optimum or nearly optimum when P2 is a hydrophobic L-amino
acid with an N-acyl substituent. Data presented suggest that hippuryl derivatives
are relatively non-specific substrates or inhibitors for papain and,
consequently, are of diminished value as probes for binding and catalytic
studies.

PMID: 1991144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Immunol. 1991 Jan 1;146(1):199-205.

Transfectomas expressing both secreted and membrane-bound forms of chimeric IgE
with anti-viral specificity.

Sun LK(1), Liou RS, Sun NC, Gossett LA, Sun C, Davis FM, MacGlashan DW Jr, Chang 
TW.

Author information: 
(1)Tanox Biosystems, Inc., Houston, TX 77025.

Because of the lack of a cell line expressing on surface and secreting human IgE 
of known Ag specificity, the construction of a transfectoma line possessing such 
properties would be useful for studying the roles of surface IgE and the effects 
of anti-IgE antibodies on IgE-producing B cells. Toward this goal, the human
genomic DNA segment encompassing the two exons encoding the membrane anchor
peptide of epsilon-chain and their flanking regions was sequenced. Hybrid epsilon
and kappa genomic DNA comprising the C regions of human epsilon- and kappa-chains
and the H and L chain V regions of the murine mAb BAT123, which reacts with the
gp120 envelope protein of HIV-1, were constructed. Mammalian expression vectors
containing these fusion genes were used to transfect murine myeloma Sp2/0 cells, 
and transfectants stably expressing on surface and secreting into culture medium 
chimeric IgE were obtained. The chimeric IgE showed identical Ag-binding
properties as the murine mAb BAT123. Acting in concert with the specific peptide 
Ag polyvalently coupled to a protein carrier, the chimeric antibody could induce 
histamine release from human blood basophils. These results demonstrate the
potential utility of the transfectoma cells and the chimeric IgE in studying the 
roles of membrane-bound IgE and effects of anti-IgE antibodies on IgE-producing B
cells.

PMID: 1701791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Complement Inflamm. 1991;8(1):33-42.

Monoclonal antipeptide antibodies against amino acid residues 1101-1106 of human 
C4 distinguish C4A from C4B.

Reilly BD(1), Levine P, Rothbard J, Skanes VM.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John's, Canada.

Comparison of amino acid sequences of the alpha-chain fragment of human C4, C4d, 
has shown C4A- and C4B-specific sequences at residues 1101-1106 in which the
aspartic acid-histidine substitution at position 1106 may be related to the amide
and ester bond forming properties of these molecules. Peptides containing twelve 
amino acid residues of the C4A- or C4B-specific sequences were synthesized and
injected into female Balb/c mice. Serum from 2 mice, one immunized with the
C4A-specific peptide and the other with the C4B-specific peptide, gave strong
isotype-specific responses in an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay against
affinity-purified C4A3 and C4B2B1. Spleen cells from these mice were fused with
the mouse myeloma SP2/0-Ag 14, and two cloned cell lines, AII-1 and BII-1, were
established from hybrids. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and western blotting 
of monoclonal antibodies AII-1 and BII-1 show that the former reacts with the C4A
but not with the C4B alpha-chain and the latter with C4B but not with the C4A
alpha-chain. Furthermore, immunoblotting of C4 allelic variants showed that AII-1
reacted with all C4A allotypes tested, including A6, A4, A3 and A2, whereas BII-1
reacted with all C4B allotypes tested, including B5, B3, B2, and B1.

PMID: 2049934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Cancer Res. 1991 Jan 1;51(1):181-9.

Generation and characterization of a recombinant/chimeric B72.3 (human gamma 1).

Hutzell P(1), Kashmiri S, Colcher D, Primus FJ, Hand PH, Roselli M, Finch M,
Yarranton G, Bodmer M, Whittle N, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Immunology and Biology, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

We report here the generation and characterization of a recombinant/chimeric
construct of murine gamma 1 monoclonal antibody (MAb) B72.3, containing the
murine variable region and a human gamma 1 constant region [designated
cB72.3(gamma i)]. cB72.3(gamma 1) was generated by first isolating functionally
rearranged VH and VL genes of B72.3 from partial genomic libraries in phage
vectors. Construction of mouse-human chimeric heavy and light chain genes was
performed by inserting restriction fragments carrying VL and VH regions of B72.3 
into unique sites of expression vectors which contains sequences encoding
constant regions of human kappa and gamma 1, respectively. The expression
constructs were subsequently electroporated into SP2/0 cells. The transfected
SP2/0 murine cell line has been shown to synthesize cB72.3(gamma 1) at a level of
10-20 micrograms/ml. Reciprocal competition radioimmunoassays demonstrated that
cB72.3(gamma 1), a previously described cB72.3(gamma 4), and native B72.3
(designated nB72.3) competed similarly. A rat anti-idiotype MAb made against
nB72.3 was shown to bind equally well to cB72.3(gamma 1) and to the nB72.3.
Immunochemical studies of the nB72.3, cB72.3(gamma 4), and cB72.3(gamma 1)
revealed slight differences in size among the three MAb forms on sodium dodecyl
sulfate gels and revealed a higher isoelectric point for the cB72.3(gamma 1).
Antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity experiments using human
lymphokine-activated killer effector cells indicated better tumor cell killing by
the cB72.3(gamma 1) than the nB72.3 or cB72.3(gamma 4). Dual label studies of
coinjected cB72.3(gamma 1) and nB72.3 revealed that both MAbs could efficiently
localize human tumor xenografts in athymic mice. Pharmacokinetic studies,
analyzing the blood clearance of cB72.3(gamma 1), cB72.3(gamma 4), and nB72.3 in 
mice, showed that the nB72.3 beta phase of clearance was slower than that of
other MAb forms. However, when the pharmacokinetic patterns of these three MAbs
forms were analyzed in monkeys, the cB72.3(gamma 1) and the nB72.3 showed similar
clearance curves, while the cB72.3(gamma 4) showed a much slower plasma
clearance. In view of the binding properties of nB72.3 and its ability to
localize a range of carcinomas in clinical trials, the studies reported here
demonstrate that the cB72.3(gamma 1) may serve as a potentially useful diagnostic
and/or therapeutic reagent.

PMID: 1988082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Scand J Rheumatol. 1991;20(5):326-35.

Concentration of substance P, neurokinin A, calcitonin gene-related peptide,
neuropeptide Y and vasoactive intestinal polypeptide in synovial fluid from knee 
joints in patients suffering from rheumatoid arthritis.

Larsson J(1), Ekblom A, Henriksson K, Lundeberg T, Theodorsson E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology II, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.

We have studied the presence of five neuropeptides in knee joint synovial fluid
from either patients suffering from rheumatoid arthritis and pain (n = 18) or
being subjected to arthroscopy due to meniscal/cruciate ligament injuries (n =
13). Radioimmunoassay technique was used for peptide analysis using antisera SP2 
against substance P (SP), K12 against neurokinin A (NKA), CGRPR8 against
calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), NPY1 against neuropeptide Y (NPY) and
VIP2 against vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP). No SP could be detected,
and lower levels of NKA was found in arthritic joints vs controls. CGRP and NPY
was found in higher concentrations in arthritic patients vs controls. VIP was
found sporadically in both arthritis and control patients. Our data show some
quantitative differences between patients suffering rheumatoid arthritis and
pain, and patients with non-inflamed joints without pain; indicating an
involvement of peptidergic fibers in arthritis in humans.

PMID: 1947895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Zhongguo Ji Sheng Chong Xue Yu Ji Sheng Chong Bing Za Zhi. 1991;9(4):261-4.

[The establishment and characterization of the anti-idiotypic monoclonal
antibody-NP30 of Schistosoma japonicum].

[Article in Chinese]

Guan XH(1), Qiu ZN, Ma L, Tao RH, Wu YQ, He Q, Wu GL, Zhao WX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Nanjing Medical College.

A hybridoma cell line secreting an IgM monoclonal antibody designated NP30 was
obtained from a fusion of SP2/o and spleen cells of a BALB/c mouse chronically
infected with schistosoma japonicum for one and a half year and identified by
screening with immunized rabbit sera against gut-associated antigen (GAA) and
soluble egg antigen (SEA) of S. japonicum, indicating that the NP30 was an
anti-anti-antigen or anti-antibody. NP30 was further determined to be an
anti-idiotypic antibody (anti-id) which was serologically and functionally
identical to GAA, so that it could be portrayed as the internal image of GAA,
which might have the potential to be used as an antigenic reagent in
immunodiagnostic assays of schistosomiasis japonica.

PMID: 1802449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Dokl Akad Nauk SSSR. 1991;320(4):1000-2.

[Selection for decreased and increased spontaneous karyotype instability in SP2/0
murine myeloma cell populations].

[Article in Russian]

Kravtsov VIu, Iakovlev AF, Fedorova EV, Vakhtin IuB.

PMID: 1786772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Int Rev Immunol. 1991;7(3):189-203.

Malignant CD5 B cells--biased immunoglobulin variable gene usage and autoantibody
production.

Mayer R(1), Stone K, Han A, Bona C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York
10029.

Malignant CD5 B cells obtained from patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(CLL) and small lymphocytic lymphoma (SLL) were analyzed for immunoglobulin
variable gene usage, CD5 gene expression and autoantibody production. A
statistically significant biased usage of the VH5, VH6 and VKIII immunoglobulin
variable gene families was observed. It is important to point out that both VH5
and VH6 are extremely small families which are located at the 3' extremity of the
immunoglobulin variable gene locus. We determined that the transcription of the
CD5 gene in T cell malignancies, CLL, SLL and a selected group of EBV transformed
lines was identical. Autoantibody production was studied in a panel of
heterohybridomas obtained by the fusion of CLL cells with mouse myeloma line
SP2/0. A large fraction of these heterohybridomas secrete autoantibodies; some
were monospecific, some bispecific and some polyspecific.

PMID: 1721931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Hum Antibodies Hybridomas. 1991 Jan;2(1):26-32.

SPAM-8, a mouse-human heteromyeloma fusion partner in the production of human
monoclonal antibodies. Establishment of a human monoclonal antibody against
cytomegalovirus.

Gustafsson B(1), Jondal M, Sundqvist VA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

A heteromyeloma (mouse x human) cell line (SPAM-8) was produced by fusing mouse
myeloma cells (SP2/0) with human peripheral blood lymphocytes. The cells were
sensitive to aminopterin and resistant to ouabain. The cells showed a doubling
time of about 19 hours and a cloning efficiency of 0.8 cells/well (to obtain
growth in 50% of wells seeded) using mouse thymocytes as feeder cells. The number
of chromosomes was about 86 and 1% of the total DNA was of human origin. Fusion
of SPAM-8 cells with lymphocytes prepared from human spleens resulted in
approximately one hybridoma per 10(5) seeded lymphocytes. A trioma (human x
[mouse x human]) cell line was established by fusing cells of an Epstein-Barr
virus-transformed B cell line with SPAM-8 cells. The trioma cells produced
antibodies (IgG1, K) against cytomegalovirus, in a concentration of 7
micrograms/ml in spent medium, over a period of six months of continuous culture.
The results obtained indicate that the heteromyeloma SPAM-8 may be used as a
fusion partner in the production of human monoclonal antibodies.

PMID: 1651784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Immunology. 1990 Dec;71(4):592-4.

Equine monoclonal antibodies recognize common epitopes on variants of equine
infectious anaemia virus.

Perryman LE(1), O'Rourke KI, Mason PH, McGuire TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman 99164-7040.

Equine-murine xenohybridoma cells were produced using SP2/0 murine myeloma cells 
and splenic lymph node cells obtained from horses infected with 10(6) TCID50 of
single cloned variants of equine infectious anaemia virus (EIAV). The
xenohybridomas secreted equine IgG monoclonal antibodies reactive with EIAV in
enzyme immunoassays employing purified virus. Seven antibodies were studied in
detail. They bound to viral glycoproteins (gp90 or gp45) in
radioimmunoprecipitation assays, and reacted with homologous EIAV as well as five
other cloned variants of EIAV. When evaluated against a single cloned variant of 
EIAV (EIAV-WSU5), two antibodies bound to different epitopes on gp90. The five
remaining antibodies reacted with the same or overlapping epitopes on gp45. None 
of the antibodies exhibited viral neutralizing activity.

PMCID: PMC1384884
PMID: 1703988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Antibiot (Tokyo). 1990 Nov;43(11):1464-70.

Improved antitumor effects of 3'-deamino-3'-morpholino derivatives of
pirarubicin.

Ajito K(1), Ikeda D, Nosaka C, Komuro K, Kondo S, Takeuchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbial Chemistry, Tokyo, Japan.

The preparation and antitumor effects of 3'-deamino-3'-morpholino derivatives of 
pirarubicin are described. Di-N-alkylation of pirarubicin with
bis(2-iodoethyl)ether gave 3'-morpholino-pirarubicin, which was converted into
its 13-tosylhydrazone, 13-deoxy derivative and 13-(S)- and 13-(R)-dihydro
derivatives. Intraperitoneal administration to murine tumors indicated that the
effective dose ranges of the compounds having sp3 carbon at C-13 position were
broader than those of the compounds having sp2 carbon. By oral administration,
13-(S)-dihydro isomer was more effective than 13-(R)-dihydro isomer.

PMID: 2272921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Kansenshogaku Zasshi. 1990 Oct;64(10):1355-60.

[Production and characterization of a monoclonal antibody specific for Salmonella
O19-antigen].

[Article in Japanese]

Yamaura N(1), Komagata Y, Saku K, Okubo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Nursing, Kitasato University.

A monoclonal antibody, SBY1 (IgM, kappa), against the Salmonella O-antigen was
generated by using the myeloma cell line Sp2/O-Ag14 as a fusion partner with
spleen cells from BALB/c mice immunized with S. senftenberg 963 K. SBY1 was
characterized by the slide agglutination and absorption test. SBY1 was believed
to show the specificity to O1-, O3- or O19-antigens of Salmonella because S.
Senftenberg 963 K (O1, 3, 19) was used as the antigen for immunization. The slide
agglutination test with the Salmonella serovars indicated the responsiveness of
SBY1. SBY1 was reactive only with strains that possessed O19-antigen. The
agglutinating ability of SBY1 was absorbed completely with bacilli possessing
O19-antigen. These finding indicates that SBY1 is specific for O19-antigen.
Polyclonal factor sera for he serotyping of the O3, 10 group of Salmonella
cross-reacted with Salmonella group O1, 3, 19 in the slide agglutination test. In
contrast, SBY1 did not cross-react with serovars from several other Salmonella
groups. These data suggest the usefulness of SBY1 as a serodiagnostic tool for
serotyping of Salmonella.

PMID: 2258652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Hybridoma. 1990 Oct;9(5):511-8.

Spontaneous fusion between splenocytes and myeloma cells induced by bacterial
immunization.

Verschoor JA(1), Boshoff CH, Coetzee L, Van Wyngaardt S, Visser L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Pretoria, Republic of South Africa.

Spontaneous fusion between lymphoid and carcinoma cells in vivo has been
described previously. Splenocytes from mice treated with LPS or mitogen have been
reported to fuse better with myeloma cells using PEG as fusion agent than
splenocytes from untreated mice. We report a phenomenon where immunization of
mice with formalin treated, whole Haemophilus paragallinarum bacteria induced
spontaneous fusion of splenocytes with myeloma cells in vitro, without the aid of
any fusion agent. Co-immunization of mice with H. paragallinarum and an unrelated
antigen (hen's egg white lysozyme), followed by co-culturing of the immune
splenocytes with SP2/0 myeloma cells, yielded stable hybridoma cell lines
producing anti-lysozyme antibodies. H. paragallinarum may be used in adjuvants to
simplify the production of monoclonal antibodies, and the discovery of a
promotional activity of a gram negative bacterium on cell fusion and hybridoma
formation may shed new light on spontaneous fusion as a natural immune phenomenon
in cancer.

PMID: 2258187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao. 1990 Oct;12(5):318-24.

[Construction, expression and characterization of a murine/human chimeric
antibody with specificity for hepatitis B surface antigen].

[Article in Chinese]

Li Y(1), Shearman CW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Oncology, Beijing.

A murine/human chimeric antibody with specificity for hepatitis B surface antigen
has been produced by genetic engineering. The light and heavy chain variable
region exons encoding the murine monoclonal antibody 2H1 were isolated and
inserted into mammalian expression vectors containing the human kappa and gamma 1
constant region exons. The chimeric genes were transfected into murine SP2/0
hybridoma cells by electroporation, and transfectomas secreting chimeric antibody
were isolated. Secretion levels ranged from 1-7pg/(cell.24hr). The chimeric
antibody bound specifically to hepatitis B surface antigen and competed
effectively with the parental murine monoclonal antibody for binding to these
sites. Chimeric 2H1 is the first clinically relevant, genetically engineered
anti-viral antibody and may represent an improved agent for the prevention of
hepatitis B virus transmission.

PMID: 2151688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Endocrinology. 1990 Sep;127(3):1167-75.

Monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies to human progesterone receptor
peptide-(533-547) recognize a specific site in unactivated (8S) and activated
(4S) progesterone receptor and distinguish between intact and proteolyzed
receptors.

Traish AM(1), Wotiz HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine,
Massachusetts 02118.

We have synthesized three peptides with amino acid sequences corresponding to
amino acids 533-547, 597-611, and 765-779 of the human progesterone receptor
(hPR). These peptides were conjugated to keyhole limpet hemocyanin and injected
into mice and rabbits to develop antibodies to hPR. Antibodies to the undenatured
form of PR were elicited only by the peptide with amino acid sequence 533-547.
Fusion of SP2/0 myeloma cells with spleen cells from mice immunized with this
peptide produced several active clones. Rabbit sera from immunized animals
produced one antiserum that reacted with the undenatured form of PR. One
monoclonal antibody (PR-AT 4.14) and one antiserum (PR-AT533) raised against
peptide-(533-547) were characterized. Binding of these antibodies to the
undenatured form of PR was demonstrated by analysis of the antibody-receptor
complexes on sucrose density gradients and by immunoprecipitation techniques.
Binding of PR to the antibodies was inhibited by excess peptide. The antibodies
did not react with estrogen, glucocorticoid, or androgen receptors, but
recognized PR from human breast cancer as well as calf, rabbit, mouse, and rat
uteri, indicating that this epitope was conserved among these species. Based on
sucrose density gradient analysis of PR prepared and labeled in the presence of
proteolysis inhibitors and sodium molybdate, the antibodies bound to a site on
the intact undenatured PR, but failed to bind to partially degraded
steroid-binding form of the receptor, suggesting that the antibody-binding domain
is at or near a site sensitive to proteolysis.

PMID: 2201532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. New Biol. 1990 Sep;2(9):801-11.

Enhancer sequences located 3' of the mouse immunoglobulin lambda locus specify
high-level expression of an immunoglobulin lambda gene in B cells of transgenic
mice.

Eccles S(1), Sarner N, Vidal M, Cox A, Grosveld F.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Collaborative Centre, London, UK.

In contrast to the mouse immunoglobulin heavy chain and kappa light chain genes, 
very little is known about the regulation of expression of the immunoglobulin
lambda light chain locus. To identify elements responsible for lambda gene
regulation we mapped DNaseI hypersensitive sites associated with a functionally
rearranged lambda 1 gene in nuclei from the myeloma cell line J558L.
Tissue-specific hypersensitive sites were identified 2.3 to 2.5 kb upstream of
the CAP site of both the lambda 1 gene and the unrearranged variable (V) lambda 2
gene segments. DNA sequences flanking the lambda 1 gene were isolated and tested 
for their influence on expression of the lambda 1 gene after transfection into
myeloma cells and after injection into fertilized mouse eggs. Two enhancer
elements were identified downstream of the lambda 1 gene. A proximal element
(located 4 to 10 kb 3' of the gene) enhanced expression of a lambda 1 gene in
stable myeloma cell transfectants but had no effect on the expression of a
heterologous reporter gene in transient assays. A second, distal element, located
approximately 30 kb 3' of the gene, enhanced heterologous expression in J558L
cells expressing a lambda gene but not in a non-lambda myeloma cell line
(SP2/0-Ag14). Co-injection of cosmids containing the lambda 1 gene and both the
proximal and distal downstream elements into fertilized mouse eggs resulted in
high-level expression of the lambda 1 transgene in B cells of transgenic mice.
The identification of these lambda regulatory elements, in addition to
contributing to an understanding of lambda gene regulation per se, will
facilitate the study of the regulation of differential expression of kappa and
lambda light chain genes in the immune system.

PMID: 2126202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Hua Xi Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 1990 Sep;21(3):239-41.

[Investigation on the immunoprotection of monoclonal antibodies against outer
envelopes of serogroup Icterohaemorrhagiae serovar lai strain 017 leptospires].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao H, Li S, Yan R, Dai B.

BALB/c mice were immunized intraperitoneally with outer envelopes of serogroup
icterohaemorrhagiae lai serovar strain 017 leptospires. Monoclonal antibodies
against outer envelopes (IgG, agglutinating titre 1:25,600) were produced by
hybridoma technique. The monoclonal antibodies ascites (diluted 1:100) 1 ml
administered intraperitoneally 1 hour before the intraperitoneal injection of 2 x
10(8) leptospires of strain 017 and the subsequent daily administration of McAb
in similar doses for five days protected 80% of guinea pigs. Survival rates of
three control groups which received physiological saline, ascites of BALB/c mouse
myeloma cell lines SP2/0, and monoclonal antibodies against Pseudomonas
aeruginosa in place of monoclonal antibodies against outer envelopes of strain
017 leptospires were 10%, 20% and 10% respectively. When killed 20 days after
challenge, guinea pigs of experiment group were normal at autopsy. Old pulmonary 
haemorrhage were present in the animals of three control groups. Passive
immunoprotection experiments have demonstrated immunoprotection of monoclonal
antibodies against outer envelopes of strain 017 leptospires. It will be valuable
for separating protective antigen fraction of outer envelopes and studying new
vaccine of leptospira.

PMID: 2093058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Hua Xi Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 1990 Sep;21(3):234-8.

[Study on the production, identification of serogroup-specific monoclonal
antibodies against leptospires of Australis serogroup and detection of its
antigen].

[Article in Chinese]

Liang J, Dai B.

Spleen cells of BALB/c mice immunized with whole Leptospira interrogans serogroup
Australis serovar australis strain 620 were fused with myeloma cells line SP2/0. 
Specificities of four McAbs determined by MAT. 2E1 McAb (IgG3) reacted with 11
serovars, of the Australis serogroup, but did not react with 22 representative
serovars of L. interrogans in 20 serogroups, L. biflexa strain patoc I and
Leptonema illini strain 3055. 2E1 McAb showed serogroup specificity for Australis
by agglutination and the other 3 McAbs showed partial serogroup specificity. We
compared the outer envelope (OE) protein profiles of serovar australis strain 620
with those of two pathogenic L. interrogans serovar lai strain 601 and serovar
hebdomadis strain 156 by SDS-PAGE. 63kd protein profile was only found in the OE 
of strain 620, and the quantity of 42kd protein of strain 620 was greater than
that of strain 601 and 156. The immunoblotting revealed that 2E1 McAb reacted
with a 34kd band in the OE preparation of serovar australis strain 620, but did
not react with that of other two L. interrogans. 2E1 McAb also did not react with
OE of non-pathogenic leptospires. It was suggested that 34kd protein might
contain the antigenic determinants which were shared by leptospires of Australis 
serogroup.

PMID: 1709413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Immunol. 1990 Aug 15;145(4):1200-4.

Expression and characterization of a chimeric bifunctional antibody with
therapeutic applications.

Phelps JL(1), Beidler DE, Jue RA, Unger BW, Johnson MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Hybritech, Inc., San Diego, CA 92121.

A simple method is described for the generation of a biologically produced
mouse/human chimeric hetero-bifunctional antibody that has dual specificity for
human carcinoembryonic Ag and metal chelate haptens. Two large compound chimeric 
vectors each containing the genetic information to produce a single antibody
specificity were sequentially electroporated into the murine nonsecreting
hybridoma SP2/0. This led to the isolation of a clone expressing high levels of
total IgG (up to 25 micrograms/ml/10(6) cells), 10 to 20% of which showed
simultaneous reactivity with both Ag. Binding studies showed that the
immunoreactivities and affinity constants for the individual arms of the
bifunctional antibody were equivalent to those seen with the parental antibodies.

PMID: 2116477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Biochemistry. 1990 Aug 14;29(32):7491-500.

Studies of the mechanism of the delta 5-3-ketosteroid isomerase reaction by
substrate, solvent, and combined kinetic deuterium isotope effects on wild-type
and mutant enzymes.

Xue LA(1), Talalay P, Mildvan AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205.

delta 5-3-Ketosteroid isomerase (EC 5.3.3.1) catalyzes the isomerization of delta
5-3-ketosteroids to delta 4-3-ketosteroids by a conservative tautomeric transfer 
of the 4 beta-proton to the 6 beta-position using Tyr-14 as a general acid and
Asp-38 as a general base [Kuliopulos, A., Mildvan, A. S., Shortle, D., & Talalay,
P. (1989) Biochemistry 28, 149]. On deuteration of the 4 beta-position (97.0%) of
the substrate, kcat(H)/kcat(4 beta-D) is 6.1 in H2O and 6.3 in D2O. The solvent
isotope effect, kcat(H2O)/kcat(D2O), is 1.6 for both the 4 beta-H and 4 beta-D
substrates. Mutation of Tyr-55 to Phe lowers kcat 4.3-fold; kcat(H)/kcat/4
beta-D) is 5.3 in H2O and 5.9 in D2O, and kcat(H2O)/kcat(D2O) with the 4 beta-H
and 4 beta-D substrates is 1.5 and 1.7, respectively, indicating concerted
general acid-base catalysis in either the enolization or the ketonization step of
both the wild-type and the Tyr-55----Phe (Y55F) mutant enzymes. An additional
slow step occurs with the Y55F mutant. Smaller isotope effects on Km are used to 
estimate individual rate constants in the kinetic schemes of both enzymes. On
deuteration of the 4 alpha-position (88.6%) of the substrate, the secondary
isotope effect on kcat/Km corrected for composition is 1.11 +/- 0.02 with the
wild-type enzyme and 1.12 +/- 0.02 with the Y55F mutant. These effects decrease
to 1.06 +/- 0.01 and 1.07 +/- 0.01, respectively, when the 4 beta-position is
also deuterated, thereby establishing these to be kinetic (rather than
equilibrium) secondary isotope effects and to involve a proton-tunneling
contribution. Deuteration of the 6-position of the substrate (92.0%) produces no 
kinetic isotope effects on kcat/Km with either the wild-type (1.00 +/- 0.01) or
the Y55F mutant (1.01 +/- 0.01) enzyme. Since a change in hybridization from sp3 
to sp2 occurs at C-4 only during enolization of the substrate and a change in
hybridization at C-6 from sp2 to sp3 occurs only during reketonization of the
dienol intermediate, enolization of the substrate constitutes the concerted
rate-limiting step. Concerted enolization is consistent with the right angle or
antarafacial orientations of Tyr-14 and Asp-38 with respect to the enzyme-bound
substrate and with the additive effects on kcat of mutation of these catalytic
residues [Kuliopulos, A., Talalay, P., & Mildvan, A. S. (1990) Biophys. J. 57,
39a].

PMID: 2223781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Biochem Pharmacol. 1990 Jul 15;40(2):245-51.

Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays for kinins using high-affinity monoclonal
kinin antibodies.

Odya CE(1), Lee CH.

Author information: 
(1)Casualty Care Research Department, Naval Medical Research Institute, Naval
Medical Command, Bethesda, MD 20814-5055.

Splenocytes from mice immunized either with bradykinin conjugated with
carbodiimide to keyhole limpet hemocyanin or ovalbumin were fused using
polyethylene glycol with the mouse myeloma cell line SP2/o. Nine monoclonal
antibodies reactive with kinins were obtained from two fusions. All of the
antibodies were of the IgG1k isotype, except for one, which was an IgG2ak. Based 
on their reactivities with biologically active kinins and biologically inactive
degradation products, the antibodies were separated into three groups. The first 
group, which had the highest affinities for bradykinin, displayed about equal
reactivities for bradykinin and des-Arg9-bradykinin, but little reactivities for 
the kinin fragments, des-Arg1-bradykinin and des-Phe8-Arg9-bradykinin, or for
lysyl-bradykinin and methionyl-lysyl-bradykinin. The second group was similar to 
the first except that it showed about a 2.5- to 3.5-fold greater reactivity for
des-Arg9-bradykinin than for bradykinin. The third group, which had the lowest
affinities for bradykinin [50% inhibition of antibody binding to an enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) plate occurring with bradykinin concentrations
ranging from about 8 to 39 nM], showed little reactivities with
des-Arg1-bradykinin, des-Arg9-bradykinin and des-Phe8-Arg9-bradykinin, but
50-100% cross-reactivities with lysyl-bradykinin and methionyl-lysyl-bradykinin. 
The useful ranges for bradykinin detection (ng/well, 50 microL assay volume)
using the highest affinity antibody in each group in ELISAs were: 0.01 to 0.5,
0.03 to 3, and 0.1 to 3 for groups 1, 2, and 3, respectively.

PMID: 2375767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Med Chem. 1990 Jul;33(7):1929-32.

5-Hydroxytryptamine (5-HT3) receptor antagonists. 2. 1-Indolinecarboxamides.

Bermudez J(1), Dabbs S, Joiner KA, King FD.

Author information: 
(1)Beecham Pharmaceuticals Research Division, Harlow, Essex, England.

Indazole 1 has previously been shown to be a potent and selective 5-HT3 receptor 
antagonist. A novel series of potent 5-HT3 receptor antagonists,
1-indolinecarboxamides 2a-q and 1-indolecarboxamides 3b,i,j,k, is described. The 
activity of the indolines suggests that aromaticity of the 5-membered ring is not
an essential requirement for potency provided that an "in plane" orientation of
the carbonyl group is favored. Upon the basis of this hypothesis indene 9 was
prepared in which the "in plane" orientation of the carbonyl group is maintained 
by conjugation with the aromatic ring through the sp2 hybridized carbon. It was
also found to be a potent 5-HT3 receptor antagonist.

PMID: 2362271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Immunol. 1990 Jul 1;145(1):233-7.

Activation of the alternative pathway of complement by twelve different
rabbit-mouse chimeric transfectoma IgA isotypes.

Schneiderman RD(1), Lint TF, Knight KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Illinois, Chicago
60680.

Previous experiments have resulted in the identification and cloning of 13
nonallelic genes encoding the constant region of rabbit IgA H chains. The genes, 
C alpha 1 to C alpha 13, were each cloned into an expression vector containing
the VDJ gene of a dansyl (DNS)-binding murine hybridoma and the constructs were
then transfected into SP2/0 cells that were producing murine kappa-L chains from 
the DNS-binding hybridoma. Of the 13 resulting transfectomas, 12 were shown, by
ELISA, to secrete DNS-binding chimeric rabbit-mouse IgA molecules. These
transfectoma antibodies, representing 12 different isotypes, are of high affinity
and provide a unique source of Ag-specific IgA for comparison of the functions of
the multiple IgA isotypes. One such function for antibodies is activation of C by
either the classical or alternative pathway. We have used the DNS-binding IgA
transfectoma antibodies in C assays based on binding of rabbit C3 to IgA-Ag
complexes in an ELISA. The results demonstrated that all 12 IgA isotypes are
capable of activating C by the alternative pathway but that none can activate C
by the classical pathway. Control experiments demonstrated that activation was
hapten dependent and was not caused by endotoxin contamination. These data
demonstrate that Ag-specific IgA molecules, unmodified by heat or chemical
aggregation, activate C by the alternative pathway but not by the classical
pathway.

PMID: 2358675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Infect Immun. 1990 Jul;58(7):2105-14.

Production and characterization of monoclonal antibodies to cell wall antigens of
Aspergillus fumigatus.

Ste-Marie L(1), Sénéchal S, Boushira M, Garzon S, Strykowski H, Pedneault L, de
Repentigny L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Two murine monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) against Aspergillus fumigatus were
produced and characterized. Splenocytes from cell wall-immunized BALB/c mice were
fused with SP2/0 myeloma cells. The hybridomas were screened with a cold alkali
(CA) extract of mycelium containing protein, mannose, and galactose, and two MAbs
of the immunoglobulin M class were purified from ascites fluid. MAbs 1 and 40
were characterized by double immunodiffusion against CA antigen, indirect enzyme 
immunoassay with mannans of Candida albicans serotypes A or B or Candida
tropicalis, indirect immunofluorescence with C. albicans- or A.
fumigatus-infected tissues, indirect immunofluorescence with smears of other
pathogenic fungi, Western blotting (immunoblotting) with the lectin concanavalin 
A or BS-1 from the seeds of Bandeirea simplicifolia, and immunoelectron
microscopy. MAb 1 did not cross-react with Candida mannan and recognized a
periodate-sensitive, pronase- and heat-resistant epitope in CA antigen and three 
mannose- and galactose-containing components (80, 62, and 49 kilodaltons) of a
mycelial homogenate. Immunoelectron microscopy demonstrated binding of MAb 1 to
the inner cell wall and intracellular membranes of hyphae and conidia of A.
fumigatus. Circulating antigen was detected in experimental invasive
aspergillosis by inhibition enzyme immunoassay with MAb 1 and CA antigen. MAb 40 
was a nonprecipitating antibody cross-reactive with Candida species, and
competition for an epitope located diffusely in the cell wall of A. fumigatus
hyphae was demonstrated by incubating MAb 40 with mannan of C. albicans serotype 
A. These results suggest that MAb 1 recognizes immunodominant oligogalactoside
side chains of A. fumigatus galactomannan, while MAb 40 binds to mannopyranosyl
side chains common to A. fumigatus galactomannan and C. albicans mannan.

PMCID: PMC258783
PMID: 2194959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Biotechnol. 1990 Jul;15(1-2):71-89.

Methods for increasing monoclonal antibody production in suspension and entrapped
cell cultures: biochemical and flow cytometric analysis as a function of medium
serum content.

Heath C(1), Dilwith R, Belfort G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY
12180-3590.

The growth and antibody production of the SP2/0-derived hybridoma HB124 (ATCC)
grown in media containing varying amounts of fetal bovine serum (FBS) were
monitored using biochemical and flow cytometric methods. Hybridomas grown in 100 
ml spinner flasks with RPMI-1640 containing varying amounts of serum demonstrated
that cell growth, viability and IgG production show significant changes when
serum content is decreased from 10.0 to 5.5 to 1.0 and 0.5%. A longer lag phase
resulted when the lower serum content media were used. Cellular rates of glucose 
uptake showed a significant increase as serum levels were lowered. Similarly,
exponential phase IgG production rates increased as the amount of serum was
decreased, probably as a result of the decreased rate of exponential growth. Flow
cytometric analysis showed a similar increase in cellular IgG content as medium
serum levels declined. In contrast, the maximum IgG concentrations were found in 
flasks containing 1% FBS or above with the lowest concentration in the 0.5% FBS
flask being due to the lower numbers of viable cells. Cells grown in microporous 
hollow fiber reactors were fed with medium containing serum which was decreased
stepwise with time. Decreasing medium serum content stepwise from 10 to 2.5%
resulted in increased antibody production. However, complete removal of serum
from the medium resulted in a significant drop in antibody productivity.
Cumulative antibody production was equivalent for cells grown entirely in medium 
containing 10% FBS and for those which experienced a drop to 2.5% FBS. To compare
a defined serum-free medium preparation with medium containing 10% FBS, cells
were again grown in batch suspension culture and analyzed. The growth rates were 
similar but there was a significant difference in IgG production rates. The
serum-free culture exhibited both higher cellular production rates and higher IgG
concentrations. These results indicate that decreasing medium serum content can
adversely affect antibody yield because of lower cell viabilities, not because of
lower production rates. Use of a defined serum-free medium, as done in this
study, results in higher yields because of a higher IgG production rate as well
as good cell growth and viability.

PMID: 1366689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Acta Crystallogr C. 1990 Jun 15;46 ( Pt 6):1155-7.

Dendrobine support studies. The structure of a novel
3-azatricyclo[6.2.1.0(4,11)]-undecane derivative.

Lynch VM(1), Li W, Martin SF, Davis BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Texas, Austin 78712.

(1S*, 4R*, 8S*, 11R*)-3-Diphenylmethyl-11-methyl-3-
azatricyclo[6.2.1.0(4,11)]undec-5-en-2-one, C24H25NO, Mr = 343.47, monoclinic,
P2(1), a = 10.248 (3), b = 8.859 (2), c = 10.344 (2) A, beta = 99.816 (14)
degrees, V = 925.4 (3) A3, Z = 2, D chi = 1.23 g cm-1 (163 K), lambda(Mo K alpha)
= 0.7107 A, mu = 0.6927 cm-1, F(000) = 368, T = 163 K, R = 0.0423 for 2569
reflections. The compound is spontaneously resolved upon crystallization. The N
atom appears to be sp2 hybridized [N is 0.0901 (13) A from plane through three
ligand atoms] and in conjugation with the carbonyl group [short N--C bond 1.351
(2) A]. The tricyclic ring system is concave. Ring strain appears to affect C--C 
bond lengths of the central atom of the 3-ring system. The average C--C bond
length for this atom to other ring atoms is 1.551 (2) while the average for all
other sp3 C--sp3 C bonds is 1.530 (2) A.

PMID: 1975499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Hua Xi Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 1990 Jun;21(2):137-40.

[Study on the characteristics of agglutination reaction of McAb with Leptospira
interrogans outer envelope].

[Article in Chinese]

Yan R, Zhao H, Li S, Dai B.

Three McAb were produced against an outer envelope preparation from Leptospira,
interrogans, serovar Lai by fusion of SP2/0 myeloma cells with immune BALB/c mice
spleen cells. The fusion rate was 96% and the antibody positive rate was 50%. One
of the hybridomas, E4B11C9, reacted with 13 of the 13 serovars of the
Icterohaemorrhagiae serogroup in microscopic agglutination test (MAT) but did not
react with the 18 representative serovars of L. interrogans and L. biflexa
serovar patoc and Leptonema illini. For all non-reactive serovars the MAT titres 
were greater than 1:25. The McAb, E4B7G5, reacted similarly with all serovars
except smithi and tonkini. E4B7D4 reacted also similarly with all serovars except
serovars birkini, ndambari, bogvere, smithi and tonkini. Therefore, 3 McAb showed
serogroup specificity and partial serogroup specificity by agglutination. The
agglutination titres were high and hybridomas were stable, so it might be useful 
in providing a simple, rapid method for the classification and identification of 
clinical isolates such as pathogenic L. interrogans in place of the complicated
and time-consuming conventional methods.

PMID: 2391093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao. 1990 Jun;12(3):173-7.

[McAb-ELISA for detection of circulating antigen from schistosoma. I.
Preparation, selection of monoclonal antibody and preliminary testing].

[Article in Chinese]

Yan ZZ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Academy of Preventive Medicine,
Shanghai.

Fusions between spleen cells from BALB/c mice infected with Schistosoma japonicum
or mansoni cercariae and SP2/0 myeloma were carried out. More than 30 hybridoma
cell lines secreting monoclonal antibodies were obtained. Their target antigens
were integument, gut and egg respectively. The preliminary tests showed that the 
antibody against gut-associated polysaccharide antigen had the highest activity
of all antibodies obtained. This antibody can be used in the sandwich ELISA to
detect trichloroacetic acid soluble antigen at a level of less than 1 ng/ml, A
positive reaction was found in a group of infected rabbits, negative in normal
and the circulating antigen level correlated with the number of infecting
cercariae. Three months after treatment antigen titers of 6/8 rabbits became
negative. This report shows that the McAb sandwich ELISA for the detection of
circulating antigen is better than other antibody detecting methods. It is also a
potential immunodiagnostic method.

PMID: 2150353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Chin Med J (Engl). 1990 Jun;103(6):478-84.

A human monoclonal antibody HMD4 against ovarian carcinoma associated antigen.

Cui H(1), Qian HN, Feng J, Fu TY, Wei P, Fu ZY.

Author information: 
(1)Gynecologic Oncology Research Laboratory, People's Hospital, Beijing Medical
University.

Lymphocytes from regional lymph nodes of patients with ovarian carcinoma were
immortalized by fusing them with a nonsecreting cell line of murine myeloma
(Sp2/0-Ag14). The fusion rate was 0-87.5%. By early cloning and recloning, a
hybrid cell line, named HMD4, was established. It has stably secreted human IgG
for more than 15 months. Chromosome analysis showed the characteristics of
human-mouse hybridoma. The cells of HMD4 were injected into the abdominal
cavities of nude mice and 2-3 weeks later large quantities of ascites were
obtained. Human IgG of lambda light chain was detected and purified from the
ascites. The specificity of HMD4 human McAb was tested by ABC or PAP
immunoperoxidase stainings of paraffin-embedded tissue sections, cryostat
sections, cell smears of various tissues and different cancer cell lines. 60.5%
(26/43) of epithelial ovarian cancers was positive, while nonepithelial ovarian
cancers, most cancers from other organs and almost all nonmalignant and normal
tissues were negative. The molecular weight of the antigen recognized by HMD4 was
55 KDa determined by Western blotting. The problems of maintaining the IgG
secreting function of human-mouse hybridoma and its screening were also
discussed.

PMID: 2119960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Hybridoma. 1990 Jun;9(3):275-83.

The use of immunodeficient male (CBA/N x BALB/c) F1 mice to produce monoclonal
antibodies directed to proteins of Leptospira interrogans rather than to
immunodominant lipopolysaccharides.

Segers RP(1), De Nijs A, van Kooten PJ, Gaastra W, van der Zeijst BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology, State University of Utrecht, The Netherlands.

A method, using an immunodeficient mouse strain, for the production of monoclonal
antibodies directed exclusively against the proteins in an antigen mixture also
containing immunodominant LPS, is described. Male (CBA/N x BALB/c) F1 mice were
immunized with an outer envelope antigen mixture from Leptospira interrogans
strain Wijnberg containing both lipopolysaccharides and proteins. The immune
response in these mice was shown to be predominantly directed against protein
antigens. Hybridoma cell lines were generated by fusing spleen cells from a
(CBA/N x BALB/c) F1 mouse with BALB/c Sp2/0 plasmacytoma cells. Hybridoma cell
lines producing monoclonal antibodies reacting with the outer envelope
preparation were identified by ELISA. All epitopes recognized by the monoclonal
antibodies are sensitive to proteinase K degradation and resistant to oxidation
by periodate indicating that they are located on proteins. All epitopes are
located on a 35 kDa protein and specific for the pathogenic L. interrogans
species.

PMID: 1694817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Sci China B. 1990 May;33(5):572-83.

Studies on the cell phenotype characteristics of hybrid cells crossed between rat
nucleated erythroblasts and mouse plasmocytoma (SP2/O) cell line.

Zhang QY(1), Xue SP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences,
Beijing.

The present study is designed to investigate the regulatory effect of mammalian
erythroblasts, prior to naturally-occurring denucleation, on malignancy of mouse 
plasmocytoma cells and the possibility of reactivation of the pyknotic late
erythroblast nuclei in hybrid cells crossed between rat intermediate or late
erythroblasts of 15-day Wistar rat embryonic livers, and mouse plasmocytoma
(SP2/O) cell lines. Results indicated that: (i) Suppression of tumorigenicity and
reversion of the malignant phenotype were observed in hybrid cells in a similar
way as those of cybrid cells crossed between reticulocytes and myeloma cells as
we reported previously, thus providing further evidence to support the hypothesis
that some regulatory substances already existed in mammalian intermediate and
late erythroblasts long before nuclear extrusion. (ii) Appearance of positive
histochemical reaction for hemoglobins in cytoplasm and electrophoretic bands of 
rat and mouse globin chains in hybrid cell lysate were identified. The
transcripts of mouse globin genes could be readily detected by nucleic acid
hybridization technique with mouse beta-globin gene probes. (iii) Reassuming of
rat chromosome and globin gene products synthesis in hybrid cell indicates that
the originally pyknotic nuclei of late erythroblasts could be reactivated to
assume functional activity after cell hybridization. The mechanism of regulatory 
effect and its possible relation to naturally occurring denucleation in
developing mammalian red blood cells were discussed.

PMID: 2390164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Arch Pharm (Weinheim). 1990 May;323(5):295-9.

[Potentially CNS-active tricyclic compounds with a bridged central ring. 3.
Synthesis of partially hydrogenated 9,10-epithioanthracenes].

[Article in German]

Linde HF(1), Krämer NH.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pharmazeutische Chemie, Johann Wolfgang Goethe-Universität,
Frankfurt am Main.

The synthesis of 9,10-epithio-9,10-dihydroanthracenes is presented. Since the
direct synthesis from benzo[c]thiophene and dehydrobenzene was not possible,
benzo[c]thiophene and 1,4-benzoquinone were reacted by means of Diels-Alder
cyclization to 9,10-epithio-1,4,9,10-tetrahydro-1,4-dioxoanthracene, which we
intended to convert into 9,10-epithio-9,10-dihydroanthracene after intermediate
transfer to suitable derivatives. The configurations at the connection points 4a 
and 9a of the partly or completely hydrogenated derivatives in one ring were
ascertained, as were those in positions 1 and 4, Sp2-hybridisation of both the
C-atoms 4a and 9a resulted in the elimination of the sulphur atom.

PMID: 2383172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Virol Methods. 1990 May;28(2):165-9.

Monoclonal antibodies against hepatitis B e antigen: production,
characterization, and use for diagnosis.

Korec E(1), Dostálová V, Korcová J, Mancal P, König J, Borisova G, Cibinogen V,
Pumpen P, Gren E, Hlozánek I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics, Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences, Prague.

Five different hybridoma clones secreting anti-HBeAg antibody were constructed by
fusing cells of mouse myeloma line SP2/0 with splenocytes from BALB/c mice
immunized with recombinant HBeAg. The monoclonal antibodies obtained were
characterized immunologically and one was used to develop ELISA for detection of 
HBeAg and anti-HBeAg antibody. These monoclonal assays enabled the detection of 3
U HBeAg/ml and 1 U anti-HBeAg/ml with reference to standards of the Paul Ehrlich 
Institute, Frankfurt, F.R.G. Both assays compared well with a commercially
available kit (Abbott Laboratory) and were used for detection of HBeAg and
anti-HBeAg antibody in clinical serum samples.

PMID: 2370287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Biochimie. 1990 May;72(5):369-74.

Human alfa-fetoprotein: isolation and production of monoclonal antibodies.

Karmali A(1), Novo C.

Author information: 
(1)LNETI-DTIQ Bioquímica, Estrada das Palmeiras, Portugal.

Alfa-fetoprotein from human cord serum was purified in a single step by
hydrophobic interaction chromatography on Phenyl Sepharose CL-4B with a final
recovery of alfa-fetoprotein of about 90% and a purification factor of 900. The
purified preparation was homogeneous on SDS-PAGE and native PAGE running with a
relative molecular weight of 72,000. Monoclonal antibodies against this purified 
preparation were raised by hybridoma technology using Sp2/0 myeloma cells as a
fusion partner. 50% of culture wells exhibited hybrid growth and 7% of these
wells contained anti-AFP secreting hybrids. Positive hybrid cells were cloned
twice by the limiting dilution method and 8 clones were obtained that secreted
monoclonal antibodies. Five of these cell lines (3F6H10, 3F6H4, 3F6H1, 3F6G5 and 
3F6G10) were selected at random for purification and characterization purposes.
All 5 cell lines secreted monoclonal antibodies of IgG1 subclass which were
purified by affinity chromatography on Protein A- Sepharose CL-4B column with a
final recovery of 80% and a purification factor of about 13. The purified
preparations were homogeneous on SDS-PAGE, native PAGE and IEF. The monoclonal
antibodies were highly specific for human alfa-fetoprotein as determined by
Western blotting. The affinity constants (K) of these Mab ranged from 10(6) to
10(9) l/mol.

PMID: 1698462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Jpn J Exp Med. 1990 Apr;60(2):57-65.

Antitumor activity of T-2 toxin-conjugated monoclonal antibody to murine thymoma.

Ohtani K(1), Murakami H, Shibuya O, Kawamura O, Ohi K, Chiba J, Otokawa M, Ueno
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology and Microbial Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Science University of Tokyo, Japan.

T-2 toxin (T-2(4)), one of the trichothecene mycotoxins produced by various
gerera of Fusarium spp., is a potent inhibitor to the syntheses of protein and
DNA in mammalian cells. The selective cytotoxicity of T-2 toxin-conjugated
anti-EL-4 monoclonal antibodies (T-2-mAb) was investigated against murine thymoma
EL-4 cells in vitro and in vivo systems. At first T-2 was converted to T-2
hemiglutarate by glutaric anhydride. Then T-2 hemiglutarate was activated to
3-[4-(N-succinimidoxycarbonyl)-butyryl]-T-2 (T-2-G-OSu) by N-hydroxysuccinimide. 
Thus obtained T-2-G-OSu was conjugated with mAb specific for EL-4 cells. The
T-2-mAb markedly inhibited the proliferation of cultured EL-4 cells, but no such 
cytotoxic effect was observed against irrelevant SP2/0 cells. The cytotoxicity of
T-2-conjugated normal gamma globulin (T-2-nGG) against EL-4 cells was far less
than that of the above T-2-mAb. Ammonium chloride and monensin, inhibitors of
lysosomal enzymes, enhanced the cytotoxicity of T-2-mAb. The presence of both
2-deoxyglucose together with sodium azide, inhibitors of energy-dependent
reaction, reduced the cytotoxicity of T-2-mAb. Therefore, the selective binding
to the target cells followed by an energy-dependent endocytosis and an
intracellular liberation of T-2 by hydrolysis may account for the cytotoxicity of
the T-2-mAb. In mice pre-transplanted with EL-4 cells, T-2-mAb increased the mean
survival time (MST) with a direct dosage dependence.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250
WORDS)

PMID: 2384978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1990 Apr;56(4):1103-8.

Cross-reactive and specific monoclonal antibodies against cellobiohydrolases I
and II and endoglucanases I and II of Trichoderma reesei.

Nieves RA(1), Himmel ME, Todd RJ, Ellis RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Colorado State University, Fort Collins 80525.

Splenocytes derived from mice inoculated with a commercial cellulase preparation 
or purified cellulases were fused with a stable myeloma cell line (SP2/0).
Specific monoclonal antibodies to cellobiohydrolases I and II and endoglucanases 
I and II were established. In addition to specific monoclonal antibodies, we were
also able to establish stable hybridoma cell lines which produced monoclonal
antibodies that recognized similar epitopes possessed by two or more of the above
cellulases. By obtaining monospecific antibodies for all four individual
cellulases, the role and function of the individual cellulases can thus be
studied in greater detail.

PMCID: PMC184349
PMID: 2339871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Am J Vet Res. 1990 Apr;51(4):543-5.

Bovine monoclonal antibodies specific for bovine herpesvirus-1 glycoprotein gIII.

Srikumaran S(1), Onisk DV, Zamb TJ, Osorio FA, Rice DN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Science, University of Nebraska, Lincoln 68583-0905.

Spleen cells from a calf immunized with bovine herpesvirus-1 (BHV-1) were fused
with the nonsecreting murine cell line SP2/0. Several bovine-murine hybridomas
secreting bovine immunoglobulins were stabilized. Of these, 9 hybridomas secreted
bovine monoclonal antibodies that specifically bound to BHV-1 in a
radioimmunoassay. Two of these monoclonal antibodies reacted specifically with
BHV-1 in an indirect fluorescent antibody test and immunoprecipitated a BHV-1
glycoprotein with molecular mass of 97 kilodaltons.

PMID: 2327611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Histochem Cytochem. 1990 Apr;38(4):493-502.

Production and characterization of monoclonal antibodies to
N-acetyl-aspartyl-glutamate.

Frondoza CG(1), Logan S, Forloni G, Coyle JT.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Center, Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21205.

N-acetyl-aspartyl-glutamate (NAAG) is a putative neuromodulator/neurotransmitter 
in the mammalian nervous system. Immunohistochemical studies with polyclonal NAAG
antisera have revealed immunoreactive neurons and processes in several brain
regions. However, these antisera crossreact to some degree with
N-acetyl-aspartate (NAA), which is present in mM concentrations in brain,
prompting the development of monoclonal antibodies (MAb) more specific for NAAG. 
By fusing spleen lymphocytes obtained from BALB/c mice pre-immunized with NAAG
covalently linked to bovine serum albumin by carbodiimide with SP2/0-Ag 14 mouse 
myeloma cells, we produced three IgG2a (kappa) MAb which specifically reacted
with NAAG. These MAb exhibited negligible crossreactivity with NAA or with
structurally similar peptides, as shown by solid-phase radioimmunoassay. Antibody
activity was absorbed out selectively by both NAAG-thyroglobulin conjugate and
free NAAG. These MAb stained many nuclei of the medulla-pons and midbrain, mitral
cells in the olfactory bulb, pyramidal neurons in sensorimotor cortex, locus
ceruleus, and several cholinergic cranial nuclei. The staining pattern strongly
correlated with NAAG levels determined by HPLC. Monoclonal antibodies
significantly enhanced sensitivity of staining, allowing visualization of dorsal 
horn neurons in spinal cord, which were not readily detectable with polyclonal
antiserum. Availability of these MAb now facilitates further clarification of the
role of NAAG in the brain.

PMID: 2319120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Int J Biol Markers. 1990 Apr-Jun;5(2):97-8.

CA 549 and SP2: new tumor markers in breast cancer.

Torres M, Jiménez-Heffernan A, García A, Valverde A, Mateo A.

PMID: 2283484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Cell Sci. 1990 Apr;95 ( Pt 4):587-98.

Cells of the cellular immune and hemopoietic system of the mouse lack lamins A/C:
distinction versus other somatic cells.

Röber RA(1), Sauter H, Weber K, Osborn M.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Goettingen, FRG.

Almost all somatic cells in adult murine tissues express all three nuclear lamins
(A, B, C). Here we demonstrate that cells of the hemopoietic system of the adult 
mouse are an exception in that they express only lamin B. Thus T and B
lymphocytes as well as granulocytes and monocytic cells directly isolated from
spleen, thymus, blood or bone marrow do not express lamin A/C but only lamin B.
In agreement with this observation the murine hemopoietic cell lines EL4, BW5147,
HK22, 70Z/3, SP2/0 and PAI express only lamin B. In immunoblotting experiments
used to confirm the immunofluorescence data no lamin A/C expression was detected.
However, we noticed that murine lamin B occurs in two isoforms, which can be
distinguished immunologically. These results reinforce the idea that a functional
nuclear lamina can be formed from lamin B alone. They also pose the question of
whether cells lacking lamin A/C are more plastic in their developmental programs 
than those that express all three lamins.

PMID: 2200797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Cancer Res. 1990 Apr 1;50(7):2128-34.

Cloning of the genes for T84.66, an antibody that has a high specificity and
affinity for carcinoembryonic antigen, and expression of chimeric human/mouse
T84.66 genes in myeloma and Chinese hamster ovary cells.

Neumaier M(1), Shively L, Chen FS, Gaida FJ, Ilgen C, Paxton RJ, Shively JE,
Riggs AD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, Duarte,
California 91010.

Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) is one of the best characterized tumor-associated 
antigens and is extensively used in the in vitro immunodiagnosis of human colon
adenocarcinomas. Among a number of anti-CEA monoclonal antibodies, the murine
monoclonal antibody T84.66 shows the highest specificity and affinity for CEA and
has been used successfully for in vivo tumor imaging in mice and humans. We
report here the cloning and sequencing of the genes coding for monoclonal
antibody T84.66 and the amino acid sequence of the variable regions for the heavy
and light chains. We also report the construction of mouse/human chimeric IgG1
antibody genes using T84.66 variable region genes and human constant region
genes. The resulting chimeric gene constructs were transfected into murine
myeloma cells (Sp2/0) by electroporation and into Chinese hamster ovary cells by 
lipofection. The chimeric antibodies obtained exhibited the same specificity and 
affinity for CEA as that of the T84.66 immunoglobulin produced by the murine
hybridoma cell line. Antibody concentrations in culture medium supernatants were 
clonally variable but similar (15-480 ng/ml) for both Sp2/0 and Chinese hamster
ovary transfectants; the average production by Chinese hamster ovary
transfectants was only 3-5-fold less than Sp2/0 transfectants. Ascites production
of Sp2/0 transfectants is sufficiently high (900 micrograms/ml) for initial in
vivo studies with humanized T84.66.

PMID: 2107969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Hua Xi Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 1990 Mar;21(1):12-6.

[Establishment of hybridoma cell lines producing monoclonal antibodies
against-p30 antigen].

[Article in Chinese]

Li Y, Wu M, Zhang L, Zhao Q, Zeng Y.

BALB/c mice were immunized with the purified p30 antigen. SP2/0 myeloma cells and
immune spleen cells were fused with 50% PEG (Sigma, MW 3,350-4,000). The cell
fusion rate was 93.95%, and the antibody producing rate 21.01%. The technique of 
limiting dilution was used for cloning of the hybridoma cells. Two hybridoma cell
lines E8 and G1 secreting McAb against p30 antigen were obtained. The number of
chromosome of both E8 and G1 cell lines was 98.7 +/- 6.54 and 97.7 +/- 7.77,
respectively. Results of the PAGE of the ascites generated by the hybridoma cell 
lines E8 and G1 showed a thick protein band at the gamma-region which was absent 
from the ascites generated by the SP 2/0 myeloma cells. The immunoglobulin of the
McAb E8 and G1 belonged to IgG2 subclass. The results of the immunohistochemical 
method using the horseradish peroxidase conjugated antibody showed that both E8
and G1 McAb only reacted with epithelial cells of the normal human prostatic
glands and their ducts, but did not cross-react with other thirty-four different 
kinds of normal human tissues. The results of inhibiting ELISA test showed that
both E8 and G1 McAb were only inhibited by the human seminal plasma and p30,
weakly inhibited by the adult male's urine, but were not inhibited by other eight
different kinds of human body fluids and secretions as well as semen from eight
different species of animals. It was concluded that McAb of E8 and G1 were organ 
and species specific.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 2365336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Hua Xi Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 1990 Mar;21(1):1-4.

[Preparation of monoclonal antibodies against Trichinella spiralis and
localization of antigens].

[Article in Chinese]

Feng R, Yan H, Liu Y.

BALB/c mice were infected per os with the infective larvae (L1) of Trichinella
spiralis, and challenged by injecting 0.2ml soluble L1 antigen 3 days before cell
fusion. SP2/0 myeloma and immune spleen cells were fused at the ratio of 1:5 in
the presence 30%PEG (MW 4,000). The fusion rate and antibody positive rate were
92.1% and 16.6% respectively using ELISA. Among these the chromosomes of 4
strains were 2n greater than 100 and that of the SP2/0 myeloma cells 2n less than
or equal to 70. The titer of McAb in the ascites was found to be 1/640 or
1/1,280. Eight strains were of IgG1, 1 IgG2a and 3 IgM in an agar system. Three
strains of McAbs, which could recognize specifically the L1 antigen fractions by 
immuno-blotting technique, were used as probes to localize the target antigens in
sections of T. spiralis L1. Staining was performed using an indirect technique
consisting of goat anti-mouse IgG-conjugated horseradish peroxidase on
de-paraffin sections, and substrate DAB. The results revealed that the antigens
reacted most strongly with the specific McAbs were located in the cuticle and
stichosome, followed by the lining of gut. Among the 3 strains of McAbs used,
2E5F11A5 reacted most strongly with the antigen, followed by 2E5E9E4. 2E5E9G5 was
the weakest.

PMID: 2365331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Mol Immunol. 1990 Mar;27(3):303-11.

Construction, expression and characterization of a murine/human chimeric antibody
with specificity for hepatitis B surface antigen.

Li YW(1), Lawrie DK, Thammana P, Moore GP, Shearman CW.

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Genetics, Inc., Framingham, MA 01701.

A murine/human chimeric antibody with specificity for Hepatitis B surface antigen
has been produced by genetic engineering. The light and heavy chain variable
region exons encoding the murine monoclonal antibody 2H1 were isolated and
inserted into mammalian expression vectors containing the human kappa and gamma 1
constant region exons. The chimeric genes were transfected into murine Sp2/0
hybridoma cells by electroporation and transfectomas secreting chimeric antibody 
were isolated. Secretion levels ranged from 1-7 pg/cell/24 hr. The chimeric
antibody bound specifically to Hepatitis B surface antigen and competed
effectively with the parental murine monoclonal antibody for binding to these
sites. Chimeric 2H1 is the first clinically relevant, genetically engineered
anti-viral antibody and may represent an improved agent for the prevention of
hepatitis B virus transmission.

PMID: 2342491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 1990 Mar;24(3):199-209.

Development of monoclonal antibodies against canine glomerular antigens.

Krawiec DR(1), Felsburg PJ, Gelberg HB, Dugan SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Clinical Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Illinois, Urbana 61801.

Monoclonal antibody producing hybridomas were developed by fusing spleen cells
from BALB/c mice immunized against canine glomeruli with SP2 myeloma cells.
Monoclonal antibody reactivity was tested using an indirect immunofluorescence
assay on various normal canine tissues and canine kidney affected with
glomerulonephritis. Two of the hybridomas developed (3H2 and 3A5) reacted with
glomeruli and not with renal tubules. Antibody produced by hybridoma 3A5 also
reacted with smooth muscle of all other tissues tested and 3H2 with lung tissue. 
Antigens recognized by monoclonal antibodies were studied by assessing their heat
stability and susceptibility to proteolysis and neuraminidase digestion. Antigen 
and antibody molecular weights were determined by using a western blotting
technique. Glomerular proteins that reacted with antibody produced by hybridoma
3H2 had molecular weights ranging from approximately 92,500 daltons to 200,000
daltons. Antigens reacting with both monoclonal antibodies were likely protein
antigens. It was concluded that monoclonal antibodies would be useful in the
study of glomerular antigens in normal dogs and dogs with glomerulonephritis.

PMID: 2187299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Biochemistry. 1990 Feb 20;29(7):1823-8.

13C and 15N NMR studies on the interaction between 6,7-dimethyl-8-ribityllumazine
and lumazine protein.

Vervoort J(1), O'Kane DJ, Müller F, Bacher A, Strobl G, Lee J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Agricultural University, HA Wageningen, The
Netherlands.

The interaction between the prosthetic group
6,7-dimethyl-8-(1'-D-ribityl)lumazine and the lumazine apoproteins from two
marine bioluminescent bacteria, one from a relatively thermophilic species,
Photobacterium leiognathi, and the other from a psychrophilic species,
Photobacterium phosphoreum, was studied by 13C and 15N NMR using various
selectively enriched derivatives. It is shown that the electron distribution in
the protein-bound 6,7-dimethyl-8-ribityllumazine differs from that of free
6,7-dimethyl-8-ribityllumazine in buffer. The 13C and 15N chemical shifts
indicate that the protein-bound 6,7-dimethyl-8-ribityllumazine is embedded in a
polar environment and that the ring system is strongly polarized. It is concluded
that the two carbonyl groups play an important role in the polarization of the
molecule. The N(3)-H group is not accessible to bulk solvent. The N(8) atom is
sp2 hybridized and has delta+ character. Nuclear Overhauser effect studies
indicate that the 6,7-dimethyl-8-ribityllumazine ring is rigidly bound with no
internal mobility. The NMR results indicate that the interaction between the ring
system and the two apoproteins is almost the same.

PMID: 2331466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Immunol Methods. 1990 Feb 20;127(1):39-42.

Increased yield of antibody-producing murine spleen cell hybridomas from fusions 
cultured in medium supplemented with mouse serum.

Persson MA(1), Lerner RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Research Institute of Scripps Clinic, La
Jolla, CA 92037.

The number of monoclonal antibody-producing murine hybridomas were increased
7-10-fold in three separate fusions when supplementing the FBS-containing, or
serum-free, growth factor-containing, culture medium with 5% normal mouse serum. 
The beneficial effect was seen in fusions of A/J and 129GIX+ spleen cells, from
primary and secondary responses, and when using SP2/0 or P3X63Ag8U.1 as the
fusion partner.

PMID: 2319141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Sci China B. 1990 Feb;33(2):178-87.

Studies on specific serological antigens in metacercariae and juveniles of
Paragoniums westermani and its monoclonal antibodies.

Jiang ZJ(1), Shen YP, Zhao WX.

Author information: 
(1)Nanjing Medical College, PRC.

The polyclonal antibodies to juveniles of Paragoniums westermani (PwJ-PcAbs) from
sera of Wistar rats infected with Paragoniums westermani (P.w.) were purified by 
Sephadex G 200 chromatography. Next the shared serological antigens of P.w.
metacercaria and juveniles (PwMJ-SAg) from the crude antigens of the
metacercariae (M-NS-Ag) were purified with immuno-affinity chromatography on
cyanogen bromide-activated cross-linked Sepharose 4B beads coupled with
PwJ-PcAbs. PwMJ-SAg, a group of glycoprotein molecules shown by the staining
test, were specific serological antigens of P.w. metacercariae and juveniles,
identified by the immunoabsorb test and immunoelectrophoresis. By SDS-PAGE,
PwMJ-SAg were fractionated to seven bands, including major bands A (27.5 K) and
Bi (19.5 K), the two major serological antigen molecules. 20 sera samples from
the patients with the nonpulmonary type of P. w. paragonimiasis were detected
using PwMJ-SAg and M-NS-Ag by Dot-ELISA, and the difference of sensitivity
between two antigens was highly statistically significant (P less than 0.001).
BALB/c mice, in the early stage of infection with P. w. metacercaria, were
immunized with PwMJ-SAg. The spleen cells of the mice were isolated and fused
with SP2/o, a murine myeloma cell line. After three subclonal cultures, eight
cell lines secreting monoclonal antibodies (McAbs) to PwMJ-SAg were prepared from
384 wells of hybridoma cells. All McAbs were IgG1 subclass.

PMID: 2340088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Scand J Immunol. 1990 Feb;31(2):159-65.

Blocking by anti-idiotypic antibodies of monoclonal antibody-mediated protection 
against lethal Semliki Forest virus in mice.

Oosterlaken TA(1), Harmsen M, Kraaijeveld CA, Snippe H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology and Medical Biotechnology, Eykman-Winkler
Laboratorium for Medical Microbiology, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Semliki Forest virus-(SEV) neutralizing monoclonal antibodies (MoAbs), produced
after fusion of spleen cells from BALB/c mice and myeloma cell line P3-X63-AG8.
653 or SP2/0, were used for anti-idiotypic immunization of female BALB/c mice.
Two intracutaneous immunizations (2 x 40 micrograms per animal), 3 weeks apart,
with keyhole limpet haemocyanin-conjugated MoAbs mixed with the saponin Quil A
were sufficient to induce high levels of anti-idiotypic antibodies in the
circulation of these mice with the capacity to block specifically in vitro
MoAb-mediated virus neutralization. Anti-idiotypic antibodies against
SFV-neutralizing MoAbs, either passively transferred or actively acquired by
immunization, are also able to abrogate (specifically) passive immunity, mediated
by critical protective doses of MoAb, in mice against infection with a lethal
strain of SFV. Furthermore we confirmed by intervention with anti-idiotypic serum
in vivo that an SFV-neutralizing MoAb exerts its greatest protective effect
during the first 2 days of infection.

PMID: 2155475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Am J Vet Res. 1990 Feb;51(2):232-8.

Characterization and reactivity of monoclonal antibodies to the Miller strain of 
transmissible gastroenteritis virus of swine.

Zhu XL(1), Paul PS, Vaughn E, Morales A.

Author information: 
(1)Veterinary Medical Research Institute, College of Veterinary Medicine, Iowa
State University, Ames 50011.

Hybridomas secreting monoclonal (MAB) to transmissible gastroenteritis virus
(TGEV) were produced by fusion of SP2/0 myeloma cells and splenic lymphocytes of 
BALB/c mice immunized with the virulent cell-passaged Miller strain of TGEV. The 
MAB secreted by these hybridomas were partially characterized; 4 of them (MA4,
MA5, MH11, MB2) had high-neutralization titer for TGEV. The remaining 7 (MC6,
MD9, ME5, MG5, MF2, ME9, MG7) did not neutralize TGEV at 1:25 dilution. All 4
neutralizing and 2 of the nonneutralizing MAB reacted with the E2 protein of TGEV
in a radioimmunoprecipitation assay. The remaining 5 MAB reacted with the E1
protein of TGEV. Reactivity of the MAB was tested in an indirect
immunofluorescent assay with 3 cell culture-adapted strains of TGEV (Miller,
Purdue, and Illinois) and 13 wild-type isolates of TGEV. Neutralizing MAB reacted
with all 13 wild-type isolates and the 3 cell culture-adapted strains of TGEV. In
contrast, nonneutralizing MAB that reacted with the Miller strain of TGEV varied 
in their reactivity with the wild-type TGEV isolates. Reactivity of neutralizing 
MAB was also tested, using plaque-reduction neutralization assays with Miller,
Purdue, and Illinois strains and 5 wild-type isolates. All 4 neutralizing MAB
neutralized the 8 virus isolates, but the neutralization titer was higher with
the homologous virus than with the heterologous virus isolates. However,
neutralization titers of the 4 neutralizing MAB were 4 to 16 times higher for the
homologous Miller strain of TGEV than for the heterologous Illinois and Purdue
strains, and were 4 to 1,000 times higher than for the wild-type
isolates.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 1689128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Neurochem Int. 1990;16(4):501-6.

Monoclonal antibodies to rat brain astroglial cells-Their characterization and
application for isolation of astroglial subpopulations.

Sil M(1), Mandal C, Sarkar PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, 4 Raja S. C.
Mullick Road, Jadavpur, Calcutta 700032, India.

Three monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) specifically recognizing rat astrocyte cell
surface proteins have been characterized and their antigen binding specificities 
determined. One of these MAbs has been employed to isolate a distinct
subpopulation of astroglial cells using immunoaffinity chromatography. MAbs to
rat astroglial cell surface proteins, generated by fusion of mouse Sp2/O-Ag 14
myeloma cells and spleen cells from Balb/C mice immunized with purified
astroglial cells, were screened for their cell binding specificities using ELISA 
and indirect immunofluorescence assay. The antigen binding specificity of three
of these clones, which displayed specific binding to astrocytes, was determined
by radioiodination of whole astrocytes and precipitation of the iodinated surface
proteins by the MAbs. Immunoaffinity chromatography, using IgG from one of the
clones coupled to CNBr activated Sepharose 6MB, demonstrated the potential
usefulness of such MAbs in isolating a specific subpopulation of astroglial
cells.

PMID: 20504588  [PubMed]


123. Neurochem Int. 1990;16(2):163-71.

Monoclonal antibodies against ?-bungarotoxin.

Quik M(1), Geertsen S, Kenigsberg RL, Cuello AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, McIntyre Medical Building, McGill University, 3655
Drummond St, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3G 1Y6.

Hybridomas secreting monoclonal antibodies against ?-bungarotoxin were produced
from the fusions of mice lymphocytes from hyperimmune animals with two mice
myeloma cell lines ((NSI/1 or Sp2/0). Several anti-?-bungarotoxin monoclonal
antibodies were derived and characterized. One of these (spB57) belonged to the
IgG(1) subclass and bound potently to ?-bungarotoxin in a radioimmunoassay. This 
effect was specific to the anti-?-bungarotoxin antibody; a control series of
antibodies (against tyrosine hydroxylase, enkephalin, neurofilament and the nerve
growth factor receptor) did not bind radiolabelled toxin. Furthermore, the
anti-?-bungarotoxin antibody did not interact with other radiolabelled receptor
ligands. Using autoradiographic techniques, spB57 was shown to block the binding 
of [(125)I]?-bungarotoxin to brain sections. Similarly, spB57 blocked
radiolabelled toxin binding to brain membranes; again this was an effect specific
to the anti-?-bungarotoxin antibody. The decrease in [(125)I]?-bungarotoxin
binding suggested that spB57 specifically bound the toxin molecule such that it
could no longer interact with its receptor. Since the ?-BGT site has the
characteristics of a nicotinic receptor, the effect of the antibody was also
tested on the inhibition of [(125)I]?-bungarotoxin binding by cholinergic
ligands. SpB57 partially reversed the inhibition of ?-toxin binding observed with
nicotinic agonists and d-tubocurarine, but not with other nicotinic antagonists
nor with muscarinic receptor ligands. These effects appeared to be specific for
spB57, as they occurred to a much lesser extent with two other anti-?-BGT mAbs,
nsB8 and spB28. These results suggest that an antibody against the ?-toxin can
affect the interaction of nicotinic receptor ligands at the ?-BGT site.

PMID: 20504554  [PubMed]


124. Nihon Hinyokika Gakkai Zasshi. 1990 Jan;81(1):37-44.

[Preparation and characterization of monoclonal antibody to gamma seminoprotein].

[Article in Japanese]

Fujino A(1), Ishibashi A, Koshiba K, Hoshiai O, Aiso S, Yasuda K, Sogo T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, School of Medicine, Kitasato University, Kanagawa,
Japan.

Gamma seminoprotein (gamma Sm), a glycoprotein isolated from human seminal plasma
with a molecular weight of 29,000 and possibly a serine protease, has been
demonstrated to be one of the prostate organ-specific antigens. We established a 
murine monoclonal antibody (MoAb) to gamma-Sm in order to prove the presence and 
localization of this protein in the prostate. The hybrid clones were obtained by 
fusing mouse SP2/O-Ag-14 myeloma cells with splenocytes from Balb/c mouse
immunized with the major fractions of gamma-Sm. The enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay was done for antibody screening. After cloning twice in soft agarose, the
stable clone, termed 43-21-1-1, was finally chosen. This MoAb, IgG1(kappa),
recognized gamma-Sm specifically, which was verified by an immunoblotting assay. 
The specificity of the MoAb was further evaluated by immunohistochemical study by
the avidin biotin complex method. Periodate-lysine-paraformaldehyde-fixed
surgical specimens, including the prostate associated with fibromuscular
hyperplasia, seminal vesicles, bladder, testis and epididymis, were examined.
Formaldehyde (10%)-fixed surgical specimens from patients with adenocarcinoma of 
the prostate and primary transitional cell carcinoma arising from the
periurethral prostatic ducts were also examined. Positive reactions of gamma-Sm
were recognized only in the cytoplasm of prostatic glandular epithelial cells and
along the luminal surface. Fibrous and muscular tissues always given negative
staining. Neither nonprostatic tissues nor transitional cell carcinoma of the
prostate were stained positively for gamma-Sm. These results show that this MoAb 
(43-21-1-1) is quite specific to gamma-Sm and may be useful for the
immunohistochemical study with prostatic tissue.

PMID: 2406488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Biotherapy. 1990;2(1):51-61.

Successful adoptive immunotherapy with OK432-inducible activated natural killer
cells in tumor-bearing mice.

Yamaue H(1), Tanimura H, Iwahashi M, Tsunoda T, Tani M, Inoue M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Wakayama Medical College, Japan.

We had demonstrated that the NK cell mediated cytotoxicity of murine spleen cells
could be augmented by in vivo priming and subsequent in vitro challenge with a
streptococcal preparation OK432, and the cell surface phenotype of induced killer
cells was Thy-1+, asialo GM1+, suggesting that the activated cells were of NK
lineage (OK-NK cell). We had also clarified that IL-2 played a major role in
inducing the OK-NK cells via the production of IFN-gamma. In this study, we
examined the effect of adoptive transfer of OK-NK cells on syngeneic tumors in
mice. Mice were implanted with SP2 myeloma cells intraperitoneally (i.p.), or C26
colon adenocarcinoma cells subcutaneously to make the models of peritonitis
carcinomatosa or solid tumor, and the OK-NK cells were transferred i.p. or
intratumorally, adoptively. By the adoptive transfer of OK-NK cells, 92% of mice 
bearing SP2-tumor had be cured. The tumor growth of C26-solid tumor was
inhibited, and the survival rate of mice bearing C26-tumor was significantly
increased. The intratumoral remnants of 125I-labelled OK-NK cells were 61, 27 and
8% at 4, 12 and 36h after intratumoral transfer, respectively. By multiple
transfer of OK-NK cells, the antitumor effect was more effectively augmented than
that of a single transfer. Results in this study suggested that OK-NK cells could
be useful for the therapy of cancer patients.

PMID: 2400628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 1990 Jan;12(1):37-9.

[Alpha 1-antitrypsin in clinical diagnosis of primary hepatic carcinoma--an
appraisal of monoclonal antibody-rate nephelometry].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang SX(1).

Author information: 
(1)Changzheng Hospital, Second Military Medical College, Shanghai.

This study was undertaken to evaluate the use of serum alpha 1-antitrypsin (alpha
1AT) in clinical diagnosis of primary hepatic carcinomas with monoclonal
antibody-rate nephelometry. BALB/c mice were injected with human alpha 1AT.
Spleen cells of the immunized mice and SP2/0 myeloma cells were hybridized in
vitro. Monoclonal antibodies against alpha 1AT so obtained were used as detection
agents in immuno-chemical monitor system (ICS). In 50 healthy individuals, serum 
alpha 1AT was 209 +/- 46.04 mg/dl. Serum alpha 1AT was determined in 49 patients 
with primary hepatic carcinoma, 26 with chronic active hepatitis and 26 with
cirrhosis. Their positive rates were 43%, 3.8% and 0, respectively. Serum alpha
1AT level was significantly higher in primary hepatic carcinoma than in chronic
active hepatitis and cirrhosis patients (P less than 0.001). No difference was
found in alpha 1AT between patients with benign liver diseases and healthy adults
(P greater than 0.05). The results indicate that alpha 1AT is useful in the
diagnosis of primary hepatic carcinomas.

PMID: 2364869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Zhonghua Wai Ke Za Zhi. 1990 Jan;28(1):43-7, 62.

[Preparation of monoclonal antibodies for radioimmunoimaging of xenografted
pancreatic cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Yao CZ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Beijing.

Monoclonal antibodies (McAb) to pancreatic cancer were developed by fusing SP2/0 
cells and splenocytes from Balb/C mouse immunized with Pan-2 cells. The specific 
binding rate of McAb P1 and McAb P2 were 40.1% and 43.8% respectively when shown 
by binding radioactivity assay in vitro, which were in sharp contrast with
control groups (less than 5%). The biodistribution of radioiodinated McAb P2 was 
studied by measuring parameters of tumor specific radioactivity in nude mice
bearing Pan-2 tumor. The ratios of tumor to non-tumor (T/NT) were all more than 2
at 48-hour. Localization index (LI) of cancer and the ratio of Tumor/Pancreas
were 4.05 and 4.16 respectively at 72-hour. So 131I McAbs may be useful for
radioimmunoimaging of pancreatic cancer. After intraperitoneal injection of
131I-McAb P2 into tumor-bearing nude mice, imaging of xenograft pancreatic cancer
became increasingly distinct with nonspecific background fainting, especially in 
the period of 72-96 hours. Pancreatic cancer tissues were examined by
immunohistochemistry with McAb P2 and revealed strongly positive (86%), in
comparison with other tumors and normal tissues. The results demonstrated that
clinical radioimmunoimaging of pancreatic cancer was feasible with McAb P2.

PMID: 2364816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Tongji Med Univ. 1990;10(1):15-8.

Monoclonal anti-human T cell antibody and PAP-s conjugate--preparation and
selective cytotoxic properties on leukemic cell.

Chu JY(1), Yang AD, Wang BM, Hu Z, Zhu XM, Zhang HJ, Qu JH, Luo LY, Guo R, Shi
LR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hematology, Xiehe Hospital, Tongji Medical University, Wuhan.

Pokeweed antiviral protein (PAP-s) was prepared from seeds of Phytolacca
americana. Monoclonal antibody against human pan-T lymphocyte Wu71 was linked to 
PAP-s by a disulfide bond. The results of SDS-PAGE, double immunodiffusion of
active monoclonal antibody and PAP-s showed that the conjugate was highly
cytotoxic to the human T-leukemic cell line CEM, but not to antigen-negative cell
line SP2/O. At a concentration of 10(-9) mol/L, 76.4% of the target cells were
killed, as compared with 10.1% at 10(-9) mol/L of free PAP-s. Treatment of the
CEM cells with conjugate at 10(-9) mol/L reduced their rate of protein synthesis 
by 72.4%, as determined with 14C-leucine incorporation. The immunotoxin may be
useful for the in-vitro eradication of leukemic cells in autologous bone marrow
transplantation to leukemia patients.

PMID: 2348483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Anticancer Res. 1990 Jan-Feb;10(1):271-7.

Production of immunohistochemical reactivity of mouse anti-epithelial monoclonal 
antibodies raised against human breast cancer cells.

Plessers L(1), Bosmans E, Cox A, op de Beeck L, Vandepitte J, VanVuchelen J, Raus
J.

Author information: 
(1)Limburgs Universitair Centrum, Diepenbeek, Belgium.

Mouse monoclonal antibodies (Mabs) against the human breast cancer cell line
MCF-7 were obtained by fusing spleen cells from immunized mice with SP2/0 myeloma
cells. The Mabs obtained show a high degree of specificity for epithelial cells. 
They react in a heterogeneous way with neoplastic and non-neoplastic tissues.
Mabs 5D10, 2B4, and 3B7 recognize the same antigen (MW 80,000-90,000) in fresh
tissue and in paraffin embedded sections. Mab 11F9 recognizes another antigen
which can only be detected in unfixed tissue and not in paraffin sections. A
preliminary study suggests a glycolipid nature of all recognized antigens. At
least one of the monoclonal antibodies (5D10) developed can be used in an in
vitro and in vivo model for the study of the invasiveness of MCF-7 cells.

PMID: 2334139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Growth Factors. 1990;3(3):181-90.

Characterization of 5B12.1, a monoclonal antibody specific for IL-6.

Sawamura M(1), Everson MP, Shrestha K, Ghanta VK, Miller DM, Hiramoto RN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Alabama, Birmingham.

A monoclonal antibody (MAb) specific for interleukin-6 (IL-6) was generated by
fusing SP2/0 cells with spleen cells from a mouse immunized with rat spleen cell 
derived plasmacytoma growth factor (rat PCT-GF). This MAb inhibited the growth of
an IL-6-sensitive murine plasmacytoma clone, MD90, in the presence of the
immunogen, rat PCT-GF. More interesting, however, this MAb demonstrated species
cross-reactivity by neutralizing murine (recombinant and P388D1 cell
line-derived) and human (recombinant) IL-6. IL-6 neutralization activity was also
established in other IL-6 bioassays, such as the proliferation of spleen cells,
plasmacytoma T1165, and a B-cell hybridoma 7TD1. IL-6 neutralization was overcome
partially by increasing the concentration of PCT-GF. The MAb had no effect on
PCT-GF-independent plasmacytoma KI81 proliferation. Plastic petri dish-bound MAb 
removed rmIL-6 activity. These results suggest that this MAb specifically binds
IL-6 and neutralizes bioactivity of various PCT-GF, rmIL-6, and rhIL-6.

PMID: 2245041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Epilepsia. 1990;31 Suppl 3:S55-66.

Mesial temporal sclerosis: pathogenesis, diagnosis, and management.

Gates JR(1), Cruz-Rodriguez R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, University of Minnesota Medical
School, Minneapolis.

Mesial temporal sclerosis (MTS) is probably the most common symptomatic
pathologic entity--alone or mixed with other pathologic features--for seizures of
temporal lobe origin. The pathophysiology of MTS, including any genetic
influence, needs clarification. A characteristic ictal expression for seizures of
MTS origin appears not to exist. The majority of patients (78%) with
postresection MTS who are seizure-free have tightly localized interictal
abnormalities restricted to F7/F8, Sp1/Sp2, T3/T4, and T5/T6 more than 96% of the
time. MRI abnormalities may be seen in 55% of patients with MTS if both "hard"
and "soft" criteria are used or in 20% when only "hard" criteria are used. The
neuropsychologic evaluation of patients with MTS, which includes intracarotid
amobarbital test (IAT), may prove to be increasingly useful in identifying
patterns of cognitive deficit that correlate with enhancement of both
lateralizing and localizing preoperative information.

PMID: 2226372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 1990;9(3):253-62.

Immunohistochemical characterization of a monoclonal antibody detecting an
endometrioid ovarian cancer-associated antigen.

Giancotti FR(1), Dorsett BH, Kim KT, Ioachim HL, Barber HR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Lenox Hill Hospital, New York, NY 10021.

Murine monoclonal antibody FEN-1 was derived by immunizing Balb/c mice with an
affinity-purified endometrioid ovarian cancer-associated antigen recovered from
ascites-derived immune complexes. Splenic lymphocytes from the immunized mouse
were fused with the myeloma cells SP2/0-AG14 in the presence of PEG 1500. The
hybrid cultures were screened for production of immunoglobulins reactive with an 
extract preparation of an endometrioid ovarian tumor by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay and flow cytometry. One of the hybrids secretes a monoclonal 
antibody of the IgG3 subtype designated FEN-1, which reacts with 100% of
endometrioid ovarian cancer containing adenoacanthoma by indirect
immunoperoxidase on paraffin-embedded tissue. No detectable levels of antigen
were found in squamous metaplasia associated with nonendometrioid tumors, and no 
reactivity occurred against endometrial adenocarcinomas, endometriosis, or normal
ovary and endometrium. The antibody does not cross-react with mucinous tumors,
nonepithelial tumors of the ovary, or gastrointestinal tissue. This antibody may 
be used as an aid in the diagnosis of nonmucinous ovarian carcinomas by
immunohistology.

PMID: 2197240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 1990 Jan;12(1):75-7.

[Improved argon laser photodynamic therapy for superficial bladder
tumor--experimental research and clinical analysis].

[Article in Chinese]

Guo YC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an.

The killing effects of 514.5 nm argon laser and 630 nm dye laser radiation on the
murine SP2/0 myeloma cells cultured in thin layer containing HPD were measured by
clonogenic assay. It was found that the former was 3.34 fold higher than the
latter. Improved argon laser photodynamic therapy was used in the treatment of
104 superficial bladder tumors in 40 patients. Firstly, high output (6-7 W/cm2)
argon laser contact and interstitial radiation were used to eradicate visible
tumors, and then cylindrical optic fiber was used to deliver argon laser
(2.1-3.47 W/cm2) for whole bladder mucosal scattered irradiation to destroy small
multi-focal tumors and reduce recurrence. In this series, the follow-up was 7-34 
months. All patients achieved complete response and only 7 (17.5%) recurred.

PMID: 2142071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Chin J Biotechnol. 1990;6(3):223-7.

Production and characterization of monoclonal antibodies against tissue-type
plasminogen activator.

Ding H(1), Wang JY, Song HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Shanghai Medical University.

Four hybridoma clones, TA1, TA2, TA3 and TA4, producing monoclonal antibodies
against t-PA were obtained by fusion of mouse myeloma cells (SP2/0 or NS-1) with 
mouse spleen cells previously immunized with purified t-PA. The antibody titers
of the four hybridoma ascites were higher than 1 x 10(5) determined by ELISA. The
double immune diffusion test showed that all hybridoma supernatants contained
mouse IgG1. These monoclonal antibodies reacted only with t-PA, and rt-PA
prepared by genetic engineering, but not with UK. t-PA, activity was inhibited by
these monoclonal antibodies completely.

PMID: 2129498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Zhongguo Ji Sheng Chong Xue Yu Ji Sheng Chong Bing Za Zhi. 1990;8(4):267-9.

[Dot-ELISA using monoclonal antibody for detecting schistosome circulating
antigen].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou R(1), Miao DQ, Zhang SH, Zhang YW, Zhu RS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Antiparasitic Diseases, Sichuan Academy of Medical Sciences.

Monoclonal antibodies were produced by the fusion of splenic lymphocytes from
BALB/c mice immunized with Schistosoma japonicum excretory/secretory antigen and 
the myeloma cell line SP2/0. The 1B2E7B8 McAb was proved to be specific against
the gut antigen of adult worm in IFA. The McAb labelled with HRP was used in
Dot-ELISA to detect schistosome circulating antigen. Schistosome circulating
antigen was detected in 152 out of 188 proven cases of schistosomiasis,
accounting for a positive rate of 80.9%. The positive rates for circulating
antigen in cases with 1-24, 25-99 and greater than or equal to 100 EPG were
76.8%, 86.6% and 100% respectively. 10 out of 11 cases who had been checked 2
months after effective treatment became ELISA negative. No circulating antigen
was detected in cases with other parasitosis nor in normal individuals. In
addition, the McAb-Dot-ELISA showed good reproducibility. The results indicated
that McAb-Dot-ELISA might be used for diagnosis of schistosomiasis and evaluation
of cure.

PMID: 2129159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Hum Antibodies Hybridomas. 1990;1(2):104-10.

Generation and characterization of human monoclonal antibody HMD4 against ovarian
carcinoma and the study of radioimmunoimaging in nude mice.

Qian HN(1), Cui H, Feng J, Fu TY, Wei P, Fu ZY.

Author information: 
(1)Gynecologic Oncology Research Laboratory, People's Hospital, Beijing Medical
University, People's Republic of China.

Lymphocytes from regional lymph nodes of patients with ovarian carcinoma were
immortalized by fusing them with a nonsecreting cell line of murine myeloma
(Sp2/0-Ag14). By early cloning and recloning a hybrid cell line, named HMD4, was 
established. It has secreted human IgG for more than 15 months stably. Chromosome
analysis corresponded with the characterization of human-mouse hybridoma. Large
quantities of ascites were obtained after hybrid cells injection into the primed 
nude mice. Human IgG of light chain was detected and purified from the ascites.
Twenty-six of 43 (60.5%) epithelial ovarian cancers were positively stained with 
HMD4 by ABC immunoperoxidase methods while nonepithelial ovarian cancers and
almost all benign tumors and normal tissues were negative. The molecular weight
of the antigen recognized by HMD4 was 55KDa determined by Western blotting. 131I 
labeled HMD4 was administered intraperitoneally to nude mice bearing human
ovarian epithelial adenocarcinoma; 131I labeled normal human IgG and normal
murine IgG were used as controls. Measurements of T/NT and T/B ratios of
131I-HMD4 were done. Radioimaging showed HMD4 clearly localized on tumor regions 
at 48 and 72 hours and the biodistribution and metabolism of the labeled HMD4
corresponded with the images. The above results indicate that HMD4 was specific
to ovarian carcinoma, a hopeful clue for clinical applications.

PMID: 2103352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Tsitologiia. 1990;32(12):1225-30.

[The demonstration of proliferating cells by using monoclonal antibodies to
5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine in the peroxidase-antiperoxidase method].

[Article in Russian]

Morenkov OS, Mantsygin IuA.

Monoclonal antibodies (MAb) to the thymidine analog 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine
(BrdUrd) and to horseradish peroxidase (HRPO) have been produced and
characterized. On the basis of Mab to HRPO, complexes of the antibodies and HRPO 
(PAP-complexes) for immunochemical investigations are prepared. The possibility
to identify proliferating cells in cultures of mouse myeloma Sp2/0 and mouse
fibroblasts NIH 3T3 using Mab to BrdURd by the PAP-method is shown. The
conditions of performing the analysis were optimized. The effect of various
techniques ot cell fixation and cell DNA denaturation on cell morphology and on
specific staining of nuclei of BrdUrd-containing cells in investigated.

PMID: 2103085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Zhongguo Ji Sheng Chong Xue Yu Ji Sheng Chong Bing Za Zhi. 1990;8(3):177-80.

[Detection of circulating antigen and/or antigen-antibody complex by using McAb
against surface membrane antigen of adult Schistosoma japonicum].

[Article in Chinese]

Qiu LS(1), Xue HC, Lu J, Zhang YH, Zhu ZX, Li H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Academy of Preventive Medicine.

In the present paper, the results of detecting circulating antigen and/or
antigen-antibody complexes by McAb against surface membrane antigen of adult
Schistosoma japonicum were reported. The McAb, coded as 8SE4, was prepared by
fusion of SP2/0 myeloma cells with spleen cells of the BALB/c mice immunized with
the saline extract of adult S. japonicum. The 8SE4- directed antigen was proved
to be located on the surface of the adult worm. After being purified by a DE52
column, 8SE4 was labelled with HRP and the conjugate (HRP-8SE4) was used in the
test. For testing, the serum sample was first incubated with HRP-8SE4, then PEG
(mw. 6,000) was added to precipitate the antigen-antibody complex. Upon
centrifugation, OPD was added to the precipitate. Results were read by ELISA
reader at 492nm. The OD value was found to be proportional to the amount of
circulating antigen and/or antigen-antibody complexes. Results from 5 heavily
infected (1,500-2,000 cercariae) rabbits showed that the OD values were raised
significantly at the 6th week post infection, being 1.9-4.5 times higher than
those before infection. The OD values of the 5 rabbits each lightly infected with
10-500 cercariae were also markedly raised 6 weeks post infection and reached the
peak at the 8th week, then maintained in high levels until 11th week post
infection. The worm burden of the 5 lightly infected rabbits were 4-326. No
obvious correlations between OD values and worm loads were observed. The results 
suggested the existence of surface membrane-related antigen and/or
antigen-antibody complexes in the circulation of infected rabbits.

PMID: 2095994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Braz J Med Biol Res. 1990;23(3-4):293-6.

Monoclonal antibody-based immunoenzymometric assay for serum human growth
hormone.

Vieira JG(1), Lombardi MT, Nishida SK.

Author information: 
(1)Setor de Desenvolvimento Técnico (SDT), Laboratório Fleury, São Paulo, Brasil.

A monoclonal antibody-based immunoenzymometric assay (IEMA) for the measurement
of human serum growth hormone is described. Two high-affinity and complementary
monoclonal antibodies were selected from a panel of 9 obtained upon fusion of
SP2/O myeloma cells with spleen cells from a Balb/c mouse immunized against human
growth hormone of pituitary origin. One monoclonal antibody was immobilized by
attaching it to the walls of microtiter wells and the second was biotinylated.
The reaction was quantitated by the addition of streptavidin-peroxidase. The
sensitivity of the assay was 0.2 mIU/l and the intra- and interassay coefficients
of variation for 4.6 to 46 mIU/l were less than 8.3 and 17.3%, respectively.
Cross-reaction with human placental lactogen, human prolactin and rat growth
hormone was less than 0.1% (w/w). Comparison of results obtained for 180 routine 
serum assays by radioimmunoassay and the assay described here had a correlation
coefficient of 0.94 with a mean value of 16.3 +/- 1.3 (mean +/- SEM) and 13.3 +/-
1.2 mIU/l, with the IEMA providing values 18% lower than the RIA. The discrepancy
emphasizes the necessity of redefining normal ranges before immunometric assays, 
like the one described, can be used routinely.

PMID: 2094541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Eicosanoids. 1990;3(3):171-4.

CD 18 monoclonal antibody inhibits neutrophil diapedesis in the murine dermis
induced by leukotriene B4 and 12(R)-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid.

Fretland D(1), Widomski D, Anglin C, Gaginella T.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Diseases Research, Searle Research and Development, Skokie,
IL 60077.

Neutrophil accumulation is a hallmark of the inflammatory process. The ability of
neutrophils to release lipid mediators, toxic oxygen metabolites, proteolytic
enzymes and cationic proteins may contribute to the tissue pathology seen in
inflammatory diseases such as inflammatory bowel disease and psoriasis. The first
step in the process of neutrophil diapedesis in a gradient of chemoattraction is 
adhesion to the microvascular endothelium, a phenomenon mediated by the
stimulated activation of the neutrophil CD11a-c/CD18 cell surface glycoprotein
complex. We assessed the ability of a monoclonal antibody (MoAb) (hybridoma:
SP2/0-Ag. 14XBALB/c spleen cells; isotype: murine IgG1) to CD18 that recognizes
the beta chain of LFA1(CD11a/CD18), MAC-1(CD11b/CD18) and CD11c/CD18 to effect
the neutrophils response to the proinflammatory chemotaxins leukotriene B4 (LTB4)
and 12(R)-hydroxy-5,8,11,14-eicosatetraenoic acid [12(R)-HETE] in the mouse
dermis. LTB4 and 12(R)-HETE induce a time and concentration dependent
infiltration of s when applied intradermally. LTB4 (100 ng) and 12(R)-HETE (50
micrograms) were injected intradermally in CD-mice (18 g body weight) and
assessed for chemotactic activity four h later by the dermal levels of
myeloperoxidase (MPO), a neutrophil marker enzyme. CD18 MoAb(0.02 mg) was given
intravenously 10 min ahead of dermal chemotaxin injection. LTB4 increased (p less
than .01) dermal levels of MPO at 4 h, a neutrophil accumulation inhibited (p
less than .005) by CD18 MoAb pretreatment (Mean MPO +/- SEM: Vehicle, 0.049 +/-
0.006U vs LTB4, 0.309 +/- 0.033U vs MoAb, 0.137 +/- 0.012U) (n =
12/group).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 1978685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Arch Invest Med (Mex). 1990;21 Suppl 1:15-22.

[Obtaining monoclonal antibodies against outer membrane glycoproteins of
Entamoeba histolytica].

[Article in Spanish]

Agundis C(1), Isibasi A, Ortíz V, Reyes JL, Paniagua J, Ramírez A, Kumate J.

Author information: 
(1)Lab. de Inmunoquímica Unidad de Inv. biomédica, C.M.N.-IMSS, México, D.F.

The goal of this paper was the production of monoclonal antibodies capable of
detecting relevant antigens from the surface of Entamoeba histolytica
trophozoites, with the purpose of using them as a diagnostic test. The cellular
fusion for obtaining the monoclonal antibodies (mAb) was done with spleen cells
from BALB/c mice, previously immunized with glycoproteins from the membrane, as
well as Sp2/0 cells. The hybridoma supernatants were tested with ELISA, using
glycoproteins and lipopeptide phosphoglycans (LPPG) as antigens. Seven hybridomas
producing mAb against the glycoproteins were found. Among these, three recognize 
LPPG. The ability of reacting with the mAb against two molecules disappeared for 
all the LPPG positive ones when were treated with meta-periodate, and only three 
reacted against the glycoproteins. All of the mAb were of the Ig M isotypes. They
were characterized by Dot blot and Western blot assays. From the results, one may
deduce that some mAb recognize as epitopes the polysaccharide portion, and thus
infer that they are directed of against the surface and therefore, in the future,
could be used with a diagnostic purpose.

PMID: 1726661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Nihon Gan Chiryo Gakkai Shi. 1989 Dec 20;24(11):2546-55.

[Successful adoptive immunotherapy with OK432-inducible activated natural killer 
cells on tumor-bearing mice].

[Article in Japanese]

Yamaue H, Tanimura H, Iwahashi M, Tani M, Tsunoda T, Tabuse K.

We had demonstrated that the NK cell mediated cytotoxicity of murine spleen cells
could be augmented by in vivo prime and subsequent in vitro challenge with the
streptococcal preparation OK432, and the cell surface phenotype of induced killer
cells was Thy 1+, asialo GM1+, suggesting the activated NK cells (OK-NK cell).
The culture supernatants of spleen cells with OK432 possessed the activity of
IL-2 and IFN-gamma, and the IL-2 played a major role to induce the OK-NK cells
via the production of IFN-gamma. In this study, we examined the effect of
adoptive transfer of OK-NK cells on tumor-bearing mice. The mice were implanted
SP2 myeloma cells intraperitoneally (i.p.), or C26 colon adenocarcinoma cells
subcutaneously (s.c.) to make the models of peritonitis carcinomatosa or solid
tumor, and the OK-NK cells were transferred i.p. or i.t., adoptively. By the
adoptive transfer of OK-NK cells, the 92% of mice bearing SP2-tumor had be cured.
The tumor growth of C26-solid tumor was inhibited, and the survival rate of mice 
bearing C26-tumor was increased, significantly. The intratumoral remnants of
125I-labelled OK-NK cells were 61.27 and 8% after intratumoral transfer,
respectively. By multiple transfer of OK-NK cells the anti-tumor effect was more 
augmented than that of a single transfer. Thus we recognized the anti-tumor
effect of adoptive transfer of OK-NK cells on tumor-bearing mice, and suggested
that OK-NK cells could be useful for the therapy of cancer patients.

PMID: 2614190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 1989 Dec;41(6):674-9.

Fasciola hepatica:Sp2/0 (helminth:myeloma) hybridoma expressing parasite antigen.

Hillyer GV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Parasite Immunology and Pathology, University of Puerto Rico
School of Medicine, San Juan.

Cells from adult Fasciola hepatica were fused with cells from a murine BALB/c
myeloma Sp2 line. The hybrid cells were grown in HAT (hypoxanthine, aminopterin, 
and thymidine) medium, cloned and subcloned, and shown to express parasite
antigen for 1 year after fusion. Expression of parasite antigen was demonstrated 
by the following: 2 histogram flow cytometric analyses, in which a population of 
hybrid cells in the population of 7 month cultured hybrid cells showed 57% more
fluorescence when treated with an anti-F. hepatica serum followed by anti-rabbit 
immunoglobulin G coupled to fluorescein isothiocyanate as compared with the same 
hybrid cells washed and treated with normal rabbit serum; Sp2 myeloma cells
treated with an anti-F. hepatica serum or normal rabbit serum followed by
fluorescein-labeled anti-rabbit IgG had the same negative fluorescence; BALB/c
mice immunized with PBS-washed cells from a subclone of these hybridomas
developed anti-F. hepatica antibodies (shown by the Falcon assay screening test
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay); and antibodies recognized an F. hepatica
antigenic polypeptide of 57,000 Mr in a Western immunoblot. These
helminth:myeloma hybrids expressed murine host markers, further confirming the
hybrid nature of this cell line. F. hepatica cells alone, like their Sp2 fusion
partners, die in HAT supplemented medium by 9 days of culture. F. hepatica:Sp2
hybridomas have been grown continuously in HAT medium for greater than 1 year.

PMID: 2641645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Hua Xi Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 1989 Dec;20(4):373-6.

[Preparation and identification of monoclonal antibodies against Echinococcus
granulosus hydatid cyst fluid antigen].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang QL, Liu BW, Miao DQ, Wang FL.

McAbs were prepared by fusing SP2/0 cells with spleen cells of BALB/c mice
immunized with hydatid cyst fluid (HCF) antigen. Antibodies in hybrid culture
supernatant were detected by ELISA, and positive hybrids were cloned by technique
of limiting dilutions. Numbers of chromosomes of five hybridoma cell lines (1D1, 
1D8, 2D6, 4B10, 4F4) were demonstrated in the range of 99-108. The immunoglobulin
class/subclass of McAb 4F4 was IgM and the others belonged to IgG1. IHA, ELISA
and I-ELISA were used for identifying titer and specificity of five McAbs. The
titers of two McAbs (1D1, 1D8) reached 1:10(6)-10(7) in IHA and ELISA. Two of
these McAbs (1D1, 4F4) with other parasitic antigens revealed cross-reactions.
This indicated that the McAbs 1D1 and 4F4 were against common antigen determiners
of different parasitic antigens and the McAbs 1D8, 2D6, 4B10 against specific
antigen determiners of HCF.

PMID: 2630414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Immunol. 1989 Dec 1;143(11):3589-97.

Characterization of a human T cell-specific chimeric antibody (CD7) with human
constant and mouse variable regions.

Heinrich G(1), Gram H, Kocher HP, Schreier MH, Ryffel B, Akbar A, Amlot PL,
Janossy G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, SANDOZ Ltd., Basle, Switzerland.

A chimeric human-mouse anti-T lymphocyte mAb (CHT2; SDZ 214-380) has been
constructed by cloning the variable region exons of both the L and H chains from 
the murine hybridoma RFT2 which have CD7 specificity and reactivity with a 40-kDa
Ag. The variable L chain exon was joined to the human C kappa, and the variable H
chain exon was joined to the human IgG1 region exon encoding the human allotype
nGlm(z), nGlm(a). The gene constructs were introduced by electroporation into
SP2/0, a non-Ig-producing murine myeloma. The identical tissue reactivity of the 
newly made CHT2 and the original murine RFT2 mAb (CD7) was confirmed by blocking 
experiments as well as by immunohistology and flow cytometry. Because this new
mAb may have clinical use, the CD7 Ag expression of T lineage cells has also been
quantitated in double and triple immunofluorescence assays in combinations with
mAb to restricted forms of leukocyte common Ag that designate unprimed (CD45R+)
and primed T lymphocyte populations (UCHL1+). CHT2 shows very strong reactivity
with large thymic blast cells and cortical thymocytes from which T-ALL
originates. Strong staining is seen on CD45R+ unprimed "virgin" T lymphocytes,
whereas the expression on UCHL1+ primed "memory" cell types is weaker unless
these cells are reactivated by mitogens or Ag. Thus CHT2 may spare a substantial 
population of resting memory T cells which is relevant to its potential
therapeutic use. In addition the chimeric antibody had a greater in vitro
antibody dependent cytotoxicity and a prolonged half-life (4.2 to 5.0 days) in
Rhesus monkeys.

PMID: 2479683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Immunol Methods. 1989 Nov 30;124(2):225-30.

A new and rapid method for the selection and cloning of antigen-specific
hybridomas with magnetic microspheres.

Horton JK(1), Evans OM, Swann K, Swinburne S.

Author information: 
(1)Amersham International plc, Forest Farm Industrial Estate, Cardiff, Wales,
U.K.

A new and highly selective procedure is described for the rapid selection and
cloning of antibody-secreting hybridomas with antigen-coated magnetic beads.
Immune splenocytes were fused to Sp2 myeloma cells with a PEG/DMSO mixture. Cells
were cultured in HAT and screened for the presence of specific antibody after
7-10 days. Hybridomas from the positive colonies were mixed with antigen-coated
magnetic polymer beads and antigen-specific cells separated on a magnet. Cloning 
was carried out directly by limiting dilution with the magnetic beads still bound
on the cells. No obvious toxic effects were observed. The antibodies established 
by this technique were of a high affinity (greater than 10(9) l/mol) and were
generated in 50% of the usual process time. The procedure described here should
greatly facilitate the process of obtaining hybridomas and expand the range of
monoclonal antibodies available.

PMID: 2480979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Acta Crystallogr C. 1989 Nov 15;45 ( Pt 11):1794-7.

Structure of strychnine hydrochloride sesquihydrate.

Ghosh R(1), Roychowdhury P, Chattopadhyay D, Iitaka Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics (X-ray Laboratory), Calcutta University, University
College of Science, India.

C21H23N2O2+.Cl-.1.5H2O, Mr = 397.90, monoclinic, P2(1), a = 7.617 (1), b = 32.463
(2), c = 7.849 (1) A, beta = 90.40 (2) degrees, V = 1940.8 (4) A3 Z = 4, Dm =
1.39, Dx = 1.36 g cm-3, lambda (Cu K alpha) = 1.5418 A, mu = 19.724 cm-1, F(000) 
= 844, final R = 0.047 for 3368 observed reflections. Strychnine hydrochloride is
a naturally occurring alkaloid in its protonated form. One of the N atoms accepts
the proton from hydrochloric acid changing its hybridization to sp3. The indole N
atom is sp2 hybridized with its lone-pair electron involved in conjugation with
the carbonyl group. The hydrogen bonds form a complex zigzag network which
stabilizes the structure.

PMID: 2610965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Xenobiotica. 1989 Nov;19(11):1327-36.

Quaternary ammonium glucuronide of croconazole in rabbits.

Takeuchi M(1), Nakano M, Mizojiri K, Iwatani K, Nakagawa Y, Kikuchi J, Terui Y.

Author information: 
(1)Shionogi Research Laboratories, Shionogi & Co., Ltd., Osaka, Japan.

1. A water-soluble croconazole glucuronide was isolated from the urine of rabbits
dosed intravenously with croconazole, using XAD-2 column chromatography,
reversed-phase RP-8 column chromatography and h.p.l.c. 2. beta-Glucuronidase
hydrolysis liberated unchanged croconazole from the glucuronide. 3. Secondary ion
mass spectra, i.r. and n.m.r. spectroscopic studies, including two-dimensional
n.m.r. techniques (ROESY and HETCOR), showed the metabolite to be a quaternary
ammonium glucuronide of croconazole: i.e. a chemical bond exists between a
nitrogen, having sp2 type orbital, in the imidazole ring of croconazole and the
anomeric carbon of glucuronic acid. 4. The urinary excretion of the glucuronide
amounted to 2.8 +/- 0.7% of dose (mean +/- SD, n = 4) in rabbits.

PMID: 2618084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Biomaterials. 1989 Nov;10(9):625-9.

Application of an empirically derived growth curve model to characterize
Staphylococcus epidermidis biofilm development on silicone elastomer.

Holmes CJ(1), Evans RC, Vonesh E.

Author information: 
(1)Baxter Healthcare Corporation, Round Lake, IL 60073.

An in vitro model permitting the development of a staphylococcal biofilm on
silicone elastomer is described. Biofilm was determined over time by viable cell 
quantitation for S. epidermidis strains 8-14B, RP62 and SP2. The log10 viable
count data were analysed empirically as a function of time using a negative
exponential growth curve model. Although initial colonization and biofilm 72 h
cell density of silicone was significantly higher for strain RP62 than SP2,
biofilm growth rates did not differ. Strain 8-14B demonstrated a faster biofilm
growth rate for the initial 24 h than did RP62 or SP2. The statistical model
described was sensitive enough to detect strain differences in biofilm
development on silicone elastomer and can be further employed to evaluate the
ability of selected biomaterials to retard biofilm development, and the ability
of various antimicrobial agents to influence biofilm microbe development.

PMID: 2611313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Clin Lab Immunol. 1989 Nov;30(3):135-9.

Study of a monoclonal antibody specific to epithelial cells of mammalian
thymuses.

Parvaz P(1), Auger C, Giraud F, Fabien N, Faure JR, Monier JC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Immunologie UFR Alexis Carrel, Lyon, France.

Hybridomas between spleen cells from BALB/c mice and Sp2/O-Ag14 mycloma cell line
are performed by PEG fusion. An in vitro booster is realized with human thymic
reticulo-epithelial cell cultures as antigen. A monoclonal antibody (3H9)
directed against the thymic epithelium and stratified epithelia of mammals has
been obtained and characterized.

PMID: 2518390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Zh Mikrobiol Epidemiol Immunobiol. 1989 Oct;(10):83-7.

[Monoclonal antibodies to Legionella pneumophila cytolysin].

[Article in Russian]

Spitsyn SV, Barkhatova OI AL, Drobyshevskaia EI, Belyi IuF, Tartakovskii IS.

The fusion of spleen cells, taken from BALB/c mice immunized with the purified
preparation of L. pneumophila cytolysin, with cells Sp2/0 and NP has been carried
out. As a result, hybridoma cells producing IgG1, IgG3 and IgM antibodies to this
protein have been obtained. All monoclonal antibodies (McAb) thus obtained react 
with L. pneumophila strain lysates in the precipitation test, while IgG3 and IgM 
antibodies react with erythrocyte diagnostic agents prepared from the lysate of
L. pneumophila cells in the hemagglutination test. In the Western blot assay,
McAb react with the 37 KD protein (cytolysin) and a number of other proteins from
L. pneumophila cultures and L. pneumophila cell lysate, but do not react with the
species-specific protein with a molecular weight of 29 KD, contained in the outer
membrane of L. pneumophila, as well as with other species: L. bozemanii, L.
dumoffii, L. longbeachae, L. micdadei. The possibility of using these McAb
conjugated with FITC and peroxidase for the rapid diagnosis of Legionella
infection is shown.

PMID: 2692353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol. 1989 Oct;25(10):934-8.

Production of monoclonal antibodies against avian LHRH-I.

Alston-Mills B(1), Li QC, Ottiner MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Maryland, College Park 20742.

Production of antibodies against peptides or poorly antigenic proteins by
conventional methods often requires either large quantities of the native
immunogen or some chemical modification to increase their antigenicity. In this
study an in vivo and in vitro immunization protocol has been used to generate
monoclonal antibodies against the decapeptide luteinizing hormone-releasing
hormone (LHRH). Two injections of 100 micrograms of avian LHRH-I into BALB/c mice
were given 7 d apart. Dissociated splenocytes were collected under sterile
conditions. They were incubated with 100 micrograms of the immunogen in 75-cm2
tissue culture flasks in thymocyte-conditioned media. After 5 to 8 d exposure to 
the antigen, splenocytes were fused with SP2/O myeloma cells by polyethylene
glycol. The cells were plated into 24 wells and then incubated in hypoxanthine
aminopterin and thymidine selective media. After 14 d an initial screening was
done by enzyme immunoassay. The positive wells (6/24) were expanded into 96-well 
plates and rescreened. Selected lines were cloned out 3 times by limiting
dilution and the most positive expanded for ascites production. The antibody was 
affinity purified in a protein A column. The antibody cross-reacted with LHRH-I
and II but preferentially to LHRH-I, as shown by competitive assay. A
hypothalamic extract from a mature chick showed a higher response than
preparations from whole brain explants of 1- to 3-d posthatched chicks, mature
quail, and mature mouse.

PMID: 2681131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Immunol Invest. 1989 Oct;18(8):937-50.

Protection against a syngeneic mammary adenocarcinoma by administration of
idiotypic and anti-idiotypic antibodies.

Myers WL(1), el-Zein A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Southern Illinois
University School of Medicine, Springfield, 62794-9230.

A hybridoma secreting a monoclonal antibody (mAb) with specificity for
tumor-associated cell surface antigens of a transplantable murine mammary
adenocarcinoma (SMC-168) was prepared by fusion of syngeneic C3H/He spleen cells 
with SP2 myeloma cells. Mice which were pretreated with this mAb (C-73) were
significantly resistant to the outgrowth of a tumorigenic dose of SMC-168 cells
when compared to controls. The treated mice developed tumor-specific
cell-mediated immunity, measured by leukocyte adherence inhibition (LAI), which
was equal to that of mice immunized with live tumor cells. The IgG fraction from 
serum of mice receiving mAb C-73 contained antibodies which would bind to that
mAb suggesting the presence of anti-idiotypic antibodies (anti-Id). This binding 
could be partially inhibited by a soluble 1-butanol cell surface extract of
SMC-168. Rabbits were immunized with mAb C-73 to produce a polyclonal anti-Id.
The purified and absorbed IgG fraction of this serum would bind only to mAb C-73 
and not to other mAbs of the same isotype or normal C3H/HeN IgG. Binding of the
rabbit anti-Id to mAb C-73 could be partially inhibited by soluble
tumor-associated antigen extracted from SMC-168. Mice immunized with this
polyclonal anti-Id vaccine developed tumor-specific cell-mediated immunity and
were significantly resistant to the outgrowth of a tumorigenic dose of SMC-168.

PMID: 2583749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1989 Oct;86(19):7561-5.

Expression of 12 rabbit IgA C alpha genes as chimeric rabbit-mouse IgA
antibodies.

Schneiderman RD(1), Hanly WC, Knight KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Illinois, College of 
Medicine, Chicago 60680.

Serologic analysis of rabbit secretory IgA initially identified two subclasses of
IgA, IgA-f and IgA-g. Recent molecular genetic studies have resulted in the
identification and cloning of 13 genes encoding the constant region (C) of rabbit
IgA heavy chains. Each of these 13 C alpha genes, C alpha 1-C alpha 13, was
subcloned into an expression vector containing the VDJ (V, variable; D,
diversity; J, joining) gene of a dansyl (DNS)-binding hybridoma antibody. The
alpha heavy-chain constructs were transfected into SP2/0 cells producing murine
light chains with specificity for DNS. Of the 13 resulting transfectomas, 12 were
shown by ELISA to secrete DNS-binding chimeric rabbit-mouse IgA molecules. By
immunoblot analysis, the 12 IgA-producing transfectomas were shown to secrete
alpha chains ranging in size from 60 to 72 kDa. These data suggest that rabbit
IgA may be composed of as many as 12 IgA isotypes. This is in marked contrast to 
mouse and human, in which only 1 and 2 IgA isotypes, respectively, are found.
Serologic analyses, using anti-IgA-f and anti-IgA-g alloantisera, revealed that
11 of the 12 transfectoma IgAs reacted with anti-IgA-f and not with anti-IgA-g
antibodies and that one reacted with anti-IgA-g and not with anti-IgA-f
antibodies. Each of the IgA-producing transfectomas was cocultured with a
Madin-Darby canine kidney cell line expressing the rabbit polymeric
immunoglobulin receptor, and the transcytosed IgA antibodies were analyzed by
immunoblots to determine whether they associated with secretory component (SC)
through covalent or noncovalent interactions. Each of the 11 IgA-f isotypes was
shown to bind SC by a disulfide linkage, whereas the single IgA-g isotype
appeared to bind SC through noncovalent interactions only.

PMCID: PMC298105
PMID: 2508091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Arch Invest Med (Mex). 1989 Oct-Dec;20(4):315-20.

[Monoclonal antibodies against the lipopolysaccharide of Salmonella typhi
9,12,VI:d. Analysis of passive protection in a mouse model of typhoid fever].

[Article in Spanish]

Paniagua J(1), Isibasi A, Pelayo R, Ortiz V, Muy M, González C, García JA, Islas 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Inmunoquímica, Unidad de Investigación Biomédica, CMN, México, 
D. F.

The current work was undertaken in order to assess the role of the monoclonal
antibodies (Mabs) to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) of Salmonella typhi in the
induction of passive protection against the challenge with the bacteria in a mice
model. BALB/c mice were immunized with the whole bacteria, mice with high
anti-LPS antibody titers were killed, the spleens were removed and splenocytes
were fused with the mouse plasmocytoma SP2/0. Two IgM monoclonal antibodies
against porins were developed. Each one of these Mabs recognized the
polysaccharide region of LPS. Passive immunization with supernatant fluid of mice
with one of these monoclonal antibodies did not protect against challenged with
20 LD50 and 100 LD50 of Salmonella typhi. The results suggest that LPS is not
valuable immunogen for the induction of a protective status against typhoid
fever.

PMID: 2488771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Tissue Antigens. 1989 Oct;34(4):250-9.

Characterization of a monoclonal antibody recognizing a polymorphic epitope
mainly on HLA-DPw2 and DPw4 molecules.

Viken HD(1), Gaudernack G, Thorsby E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Transplantation Immunology, Rikshospitalet, University of Oslo,
Norway.

A monoclonal antibody (MAb), 13.3.B4, was obtained from a murine hybridoma after 
fusing Sp2/0 myeloma cells with spleen cells from C3H mice immunized with mouse L
cells transfected with the A1 and B1 genes of HLA-DPw4. In radiobinding-assays,
MAb 13.3.B4 bound to HLA transfectants expressing DPw2 or DPw4 as well as DPw2 or
DPw4 homozygous B-cell lines, while most cell lines expressing other DP
determinants were negative. MAbs with known DP or other HLA class
II-specificities were used to inhibit binding of MAb 13.3.B4 in a
radioimmunoassay. Three MAbs demonstrated inhibition, but their pattern of
reactivity with HLA homozygous B cell lines differed from that of MAb 13.3.B4. An
evaluation of DNA sequence data showed that MAb 13.3.B4 reacts with all cell
lines expressing DP beta-chains of type 2.1, 2.2, 4.1 or 4.2. No correlation
between 13.3.B4-reactivity and expression of DP alpha-chain variants was found.
The results indicate that MAb 13.3.B4 defines a polymorphic epitope which may be 
determined by the sequence gly-gly-pro-met at residues 84-87 of the DP
beta-chain.

PMID: 2482551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Immunol Methods. 1989 Sep 29;123(1):45-53.

Enhancement of hybridoma production by medium supplemented with murine ascitic
fluid.

Stewart SS(1), Fuller SA.

Author information: 
(1)ADI Diagnostics, Rexdale, Ontario, Canada.

We have greatly improved the yield after cell fusion of antigen-specific
monoclonal antibody-secreting murine hybridomas by substitution of Sp2/0 ascites 
for fetal bovine serum (FBS) in the culture medium. As a medium supplement for
established cultures, Sp2/0 ascites at 2.5% in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium
(DMEM) provided growth characteristics similar to media containing 10% or 20%
FBS. All culture parameters associated with hybridoma fusion experiments,
however, were advantageously affected in ascites-supplemented cultures. Clonal
growth of hybridomas from the single cell stage was enhanced at least two-fold
over 20% FBS-supplemented medium. Following fusion, both the number of colonies
and hybridoma growth rates were substantially increased for ascites-containing
cultures. Most importantly, the number of antigen-specific antibody-secreting
hybridomas was increased in Sp2/0 ascites supplemented cultures, five-fold in the
eight fusion experiments presented here. This improved performance compared to
FBS-supplemented medium is reproducible from lot to lot of ascites.

PMID: 2794529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Am J Epidemiol. 1989 Sep;130(3):578-87.

Reliability, dependability, and precision of anthropometric measurements. The
Second National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 1976-1980.

Marks GC(1), Habicht JP, Mueller WH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nutritional Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853.

The components of reliability for eight anthropometric measures were studied in
95 male and 134 female subjects from the Second National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey (NHANES II). The contributions to unreliability variance (Sr2)
that occur as a result of measuring errors (Sp2, imprecision variance) and of
intrasubject fluctuations in a measurement due to physiologic factors (Sd2,
undependability) were estimated (Sr2 = Sp2 + Sd2). Unreliability was then related
to the between-subject variance (S2) to estimate the reliability (R = 1 -
(Sr2/S2)) of the measurement. Four of the anthropometric measurements (weight,
height, sitting height, and arm circumference) had reliabilities in excess of R =
0.97. In the first three of these, measurement imprecision made up two thirds or 
less of unreliability, and undependability (Sd2) was stable by two weeks. Lesser 
but still acceptable reliabilities were obtained for triceps and subscapular
skinfolds, bitrochanteric breadth, and elbow breadth (R = 0.81-0.95). For these
variables imprecision (Sp2) was the major source of error. Furthermore, the
unreliability (Sr2) between observers was twice as high or more than the
unreliability within observers for these variables, evidence that imprecision
(Sp2) is the single most important source of unreliability in these
anthropometric measurements. Unreliability standard deviations of skinfolds
increased in a linear manner with skinfold thickness corresponding to an
unreliability coefficient of variation of 13-19 per cent. None of the other
measurements showed such scale effects. Analyses of the kind suggested will help 
epidemiologists decide whether reliability can be increased by improving
precision, and whether there is a need to improve reliability in the first place.
Reliability appears to be adequate for all anthropometry in the NHANES II.

PMID: 2764002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Cell Sci. 1989 Sep;94 ( Pt 1):43-9.

Growth of mammalian cells at high oxygen concentrations.

Oller AR(1), Buser CW, Tyo MA, Thilly WG.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Environmental Health Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge 02139.

Oxygen, although essential to the growth of mammalian cells in vitro and in vivo,
has been widely reported to be toxic at concentrations at or above the oxygen
concentration in culture medium equilibrated with air (approximately 200 microM).
We were therefore surprised to note that a diploid human B-cell line (TK6) was
able to proliferate normally while exposed to 380 microM-oxygen. This observation
was extended to Vero (African Green monkey kidney) cells, and Sp2/0-derived
murine transfectomas producing antibody. Using an experimental system with a high
capacity for oxygen transfer, we determined the growth rates of the three cell
lines at controlled oxygen concentrations ranging from 80 microM to 910 microM.
Each of these cell types was able to grow normally at oxygen concentrations up to
360-380 microM. At oxygen concentrations above 380 microM, a significant increase
in the apparent doubling times of the cells was observed. No adverse effect of
oxygen on TK6 cell survival was seen for concentrations ranging from 60 microM to
410 microM. We conclude that exponential growth at nearly maximum growth rates
was observed for Sp2/0-derived cells, TK6, and Vero cells at constant oxygen
concentrations up to 400 microM (twice air saturation). These findings have
substantial implications for process control in the production of cells and
cell-derived materials. The intrinsic oxygen transfer rate of any cell culture
vessel can be increased severalfold by raising the oxygen gas
concentration.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 2613768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Neurochem. 1989 Sep;53(3):849-55.

Antiproliferative action of benzodiazepines in cultured brain cells is not
mediated through the peripheral-type benzodiazepine acceptor.

Gorman AM(1), O'Beirne GB, Regan CM, Williams DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland.

The benzodiazepines, Ro 5-4864, diazepam, clonazepam, and also PK-11195,
inhibited, at micromolar concentrations, the proliferation of rat C6 glioma and
mouse neuro-2A neuroblastoma cells in culture. The cells possessed high levels of
"peripheral-type" high-affinity benzodiazepine binding sites as judged by binding
assays and displacement potencies. However, the different potencies and
specificities of compounds for the antiproliferative actions and binding
affinities for the binding site suggest that the antiproliferative actions were
not mediated through the peripheral-type binding site. In support of this, these 
compounds have also been shown to inhibit proliferation of some nonneuronal
cultured cell lines, e.g., mouse SP2/O-Ag 14 hybridoma and rat NCTC epithelial
cells, which have no detectable high-affinity peripheral-type benzodiazepine
binding sites.

PMID: 2547904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Scand J Immunol. 1989 Aug;30(2):271-5.

Comparison between thymus- and spleen-derived B-cell hybridomas.

Zöller M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Radiology and Pathophysiology, German Cancer Research Centre,
Heidelberg.

When fusing thymocytes and spleen cells (SC) of 7- and 28-day-old BALB/c mice
with Sp2/0, comparable numbers of clones were obtained. Immunoglobulin secretion 
was observed in 53-79% of splenic, but only 10-18% of thymic hybridomas. This was
irrespective of tolerization through prenatal treatment with
trinitrobenzenesulphonic acid (TNBS). Differences between control and tolerant
mice were observed with respect to the frequency of anti-trinitrophenol
(TNP)-producing hybridomas: in 7-day-old tolerant litters their frequency was
increased in thymus and spleen as compared with controls, but it was decreased in
28-day-old tolerant mice. It is concluded that the majority of thymic B cells are
in an activated, but non-producing state and that the repertoire of thymic B
cells is influenced by prenatal contact with nominal antigen.

PMID: 2788304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Neurochem. 1989 Aug;53(2):383-91.

Monoclonal anti-conjugated acetylcholine antibody and immunohistochemical
applications in rat nervous system.

Chagnaud JL(1), Souan ML, Charrier MC, Geffard M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Immunologie, IBCN-CNRS, Bordeaux, France.

Acetylcholine (ACh) conjugates were injected into AKR and DBA mice over a period 
of 10 weeks. The polyclonal antisera were tested at various immunization times
for affinity and specificity using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). 
The most immunoreactive compound was found to be choline-glutaryl-bovine serum
albumin (or conjugated ACh). The AKR and DBA mice yielding the highest apparent
affinity were killed, and the spleen cells were fused with X63 or SP2/O/Ag mouse 
myeloma cells. Supernatants of confluent cultures were tested for the presence of
anti-conjugated ACh antibodies using the same ELISA method. The best results were
obtained with the hybridomas from AKR spleen cells and X63 mouse myeloma cells.
Monoclonal antibody affinity and specificity were then evaluated by a
radioimmunological procedure using iodinated monoclonal anti-conjugated ACh
antibody. From competition experiments, the most immunoreactive compound was
choline-glutaryl-protein. The other related compounds were recognized either
poorly or not at all. The high affinity and specificity of our monoclonal
antibody enabled us to visualize ACh molecules on fixed rat brain sections. ACh
was fixed with a mixture of nitrobenzyl alcohol and glutaraldehyde. Many
ACh-immunoreactive cell bodies and fibers were seen on sections from the basal
forebrain and spinal cord. Preadsorption and other immunohistochemical tests
demonstrated that the ACh staining was highly specific.

PMID: 2746227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Clin Immunol Immunopathol. 1989 Aug;52(2):313-22.

Isolation of self-recognizing IgG2a monoclonal rheumatoid factors.

Wolfowicz CB(1), Lyons S, Mahon CA, Marshak-Rothstein A, Rothstein TL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Boston University Medical Center, Massachusetts
02118.

Hybridoma cell lines were produced by fusing spleen cells from 11 mice that
expressed the lpr mutation to nonsecreting SP2/0 myeloma cells. Five to 20% of
the hybridoma cell lines so derived were found to secrete antibodies that
recognized autologous IgG2a. Out of 168 anti-IgG2a clones tested, 4 clones
produced anti-IgG2a rheumatoid factor (RF) that was itself IgG2a. Two clones
recognized self IgG2a while the other two clones each recognized a nonself IgG2a 
allotypic determinant. These findings indicate that self-recognizing antibodies
are a component, albeit a minor one, of the RF repertoire of lpr/lpr mice.

PMID: 2736811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Arch Invest Med (Mex). 1989 Jul-Sep;20(3):263-72.

[Increase of lymphocytes producing antibodies against rabies virus, using
intrasplenic adoptive transfer in mice treated with cyclophosphamide].

[Article in Spanish]

Lara-Sagahon V, Ciprian CA, Aguilar-Setien A.

Spleen lymphocytes from donor mice immunized against rabies virus were
transferred into non immunised cyclophosphamide treated syngeneic mice. Antibody 
producing cells against rabies antigens were increased in the cyclosphosphamide
treated recipient mice (p less than 0.01) as compared to then non treated
recipient mice. A fusion was made with the splenic cells of cyclophosphamide
treated recipient mice and SP2 murine myeloma cells 30 of 144 hypridoma plated
welles were positive. There results suggest that cyclophosphamide
immunosuppression inhibits the regulation of antibody production.

PMID: 2633721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Lab Invest. 1989 Jul;61(1):98-106.

New monoclonal antibody that specifically recognizes murine interdigitating and
Langerhans cells.

Maruyama T(1), Tanaka S, Bozóky B, Kobayashi F, Uda H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kagawa Medical School, Japan.

A new monoclonal antibody, M1-8, that recognizes murine interdigitating cells
(IDC) and Langerhans cells was obtained from a hybridoma prepared by fusion of
SP2/0 mouse myeloma cells with splenic cells of rats immunized with IDC-rich cell
suspension obtained from lymph nodes of athymic nude mice (BALB/c nu/nu). The
specificity was assessed immunohistochemically on frozen sections of lymph nodes 
and epidermal sheets from both nude and normal mice. M1-8 reacted with
paracortical IDC, veiled cells of the marginal sinus, and epidermal Langerhans
cells in both normal and nude mice. In simultaneous staining by M1-8 and
nonspecific esterase or anti-Ia or anti-Thy-1,2 antibody, the same epidermal
dendritic cells were positive for all these antigens except Thy-1,2.
Immunoelectron microscopy of the lymph node suspension using gold colloid
particles revealed the attachment of gold particles to the cell membrane of IDC. 
Analysis by flow cytometry of the lymph node cell suspension showed 14 or 6% of
M1-8-positive cells in nude or normal mouse, respectively. Immunohistochemical
analysis showed that M1-8 also reacted with dendritic cells in the thymus and
spleen and had a different distribution from F4/80. M1-8 also reacted with
monocytes in bone marrow and peripheral blood, alveolar macrophages, and
thioglycollate-stimulated peritoneal exudate macrophages. The antibody belongs to
the immunoglobulin M class, reacts immunochemically with a glycoprotein in the
cell membrane, and has a molecular mass of approximately 15 kDa.

PMID: 2473279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Gen Virol. 1989 Jul;70 ( Pt 7):1725-41.

Antigenic and polypeptide structure of turkey enteric coronaviruses as defined by
monoclonal antibodies.

Dea S(1), Tijssen P.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Médecine Comparée, Université du Québec,
Laval-des-Rapides, Canada.

Twenty-nine hybridoma cells lines, producing monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) to the 
Minnesota strain of turkey enteric coronavirus (TCV), have been established by
fusion of Sp2/0 myeloma cells with spleen cells from BALB/c mice immunized with
purified preparations of the egg-adapted or tissue culture-adapted virus. The
hybridomas produced mainly IgG2a or IgG1 antibodies. Western immunoblotting
experiments with purified virus, and immunoprecipitation tests with
[35S]methionine-labelled infected cell extracts, allowed assessment of the
polypeptide specificity of the MAbs. Sixteen hybridomas secreted antibodies
directed to the peplomeric protein (E2, gp200/gp100) and putative intracellular
precursors of apparent Mr 170K to 180K and 90K. Four hybridomas produced
antibodies that selectively reacted with a glycoprotein with an Mr of 140K (E3). 
This polypeptide species corresponded to the major structural component of small 
granular projections, located near the base of the larger bulbous peplomers, and 
was found to be responsible for haemagglutination. The major
neutralization-mediating determinants were found to be carried by both E2 and E3 
glycoproteins. Eight hybridomas produced MAbs directed to the major nucleocapsid 
protein (N, 52K), and only one MAb reacted with a low Mr structural glycoprotein 
(24K), corresponding to the matrix (E1) protein. By indirect immunofluorescence, 
MAbs of different specificity also revealed distinct patterns of distribution of 
the viral antigens within the cells. The location on the virion of the antigenic 
determinants recognized by MAbs of different specificity was determined by the
use of an immunogold electron microscopy technique. Comparison of nine TCV Quebec
strains, using MAbs directed to peplomer and haemagglutinin proteins of the
prototype Minnesota strain, confirmed their close antigenic relationship, but
also revealed the occurrence of at least two distinct antigenic groups.

PMID: 2472464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Hua Xi Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 1989 Jun;20(2):134-6.

[Development and application of hybridoma secreting monoclonal antibody against
poly-human serum albumin].

[Article in Chinese]

Cai MY, Zhang ZK, Mu JW, Wang CX, Yin TY, Li MY, Liu L, Zhao ZR, Wang DR.

Two hybridomas which secrete monoclonal antibody (McAb) against polymerized human
serum albumin (PHSA) were obtained by the fusion of SP2/0 myeloma cell with
immune murine spleen cells. One of the McAb was identified as mouse IgG1, the
other was IgM. The titers of these purified McAb was 1:16 364 with passive
hemagglutination assay (PHA). After labelling with 125I by chloramine-T method, a
solid phase radioimmune assay for detecting the PHSA has yielded in 21 positive
results, out of 126 HBsAg positive sera, but 53 HBsAg negative sera were all
negative. At present we have not seen any report of PHSA present in circulation. 
PHSA may be as a bridge bind receptor between HBV and hepatocytes and then
initiate infection. The appearance of PHSA in HBsAg positive sera could be the
result of the damage of the liver during virus infection. More work should be
done for this explanation.

PMID: 2591920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Gen Virol. 1989 Jun;70 ( Pt 6):1465-72.

Target and effector cell fusion accounts for B lymphocyte-mediated lysis of mouse
hepatitis virus-infected cells.

Wysocka M(1), Korngold R, Yewdell J, Bennink J.

Author information: 
(1)Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104.

In confirmation of previous reports, we observed lysis of mouse hepatitis virus
(MHV)-infected target cells in the presence of spleen and lymph node cells from
nonimmunized mice possessing a B cell surface phenotype (IgM+, IgG+, J11d+, Ia+, 
Fc+, Thy1-, MAC-1- and asialo-GM1-). Lysis was inhibited by MHV-specific
antisera. The presence of immunoglobulin at the surface of B cells is not
required for cytolysis since MHV-infected target cells are lysed in the presence 
of the B cell hybridoma Sp2/0, which fails to synthesize immunoglobulin. Using
51Cr-labelled Sp2/0 cells, both target and effector cells were shown to undergo
cytolysis. Direct observation of target and effector cells co-incubated after
labelling with different fluorescent dyes demonstrated that lysis correlates with
the fusion of B cells and MHV-infected cells. These findings are consistent with 
the idea that the E2 protein of MHV, which is expressed on the infected cell
surface and has receptor and membrane-fusion activities at neutral pH,
selectively mediates fusion with cells of B lymphocyte lineage. This may
represent a general mechanism by which enveloped viruses with fusion proteins
that function at neutral pH can interfere with the function of subsets of immune 
cells.

PMID: 2543786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Neurosci Lett. 1989 May 22;100(1-3):326-30.

Immunoreactive tachykinins, calcitonin gene-related peptide and neuropeptide Y in
human synovial fluid from inflamed knee joints.

Larsson J(1), Ekblom A, Henriksson K, Lundeberg T, Theodorsson E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology II, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.

We have analysed the concentrations of substance P (SP), neurokinin A (NKA),
calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) and neuropeptide Y (NPY) in the synovial
fluid from 5 patients suffering from arthritis with inflamed knee joints as well 
as from 5 healthy control subjects with an earlier traumatic meniscal or cruciate
ligament injury. Competitive radioimmunoassay was done using antisera SP2 (SP),
K12 (NKA), R8 (CGRP), and NPY1 (NPY). No SP-like immunoreactivity (-LI) was
detected in any patient. NKA-LI was found in all control patients but in none of 
the arthritis patients. CGRP-LI was seen in all arthritis patients as well as in 
3/5 control patients, a non-significant difference. NPY-LI was found in a
significantly higher concentration in the arthritis group vs the control
patients. The results support an involvement of neuropeptides in human joint
inflammation.

PMID: 2788254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Acta Crystallogr C. 1989 May 15;45 ( Pt 5):757-60.

Structure of 1-amidino-3-(3-sulfamoylphenyl)urea hydrochloride.

Sutton PA(1), Cody V.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Foundation of Buffalo, NY 14203.

1-(Diaminomethylene)-3-(3-sulfamoylphenyl)uronium chloride, C8H12N5O3S+.Cl, Mr = 
293.71, monoclinic, P21/c, a = 10.148 (1), b = 7.881 (1), c = 15.286 (3) A, beta 
= 94.77 (1) degrees, V = 1218.2 A3, Z = 4, Dx = 1.601 g cm-3, lambda(Mo K alpha) 
= 0.71069 A, mu = 4.838 cm-1, F(000) = 608, T = 294 K, R = 0.069 for 1779 data.
The molecular conformation of the protonated arylamidinourea is completely planar
and all amidinourea N atoms have considerable sp2 hybridization. The stable
tautomeric form has an intramolecular hydrogen bond between the ureido O atom and
an amidino N atom. All N atoms in the molecular packing make contact with the Cl-
ion.

PMID: 2604940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Res Microbiol. 1989 May-Jun;140(4-5):311-24.

[Specific monoclonal antibodies to the Mycoplasma-type pathogenic agent of
grapevine flavescence dorée].

[Article in French]

Schwartz Y(1), Boudon-Padieu E, Grange J, Meignoz R, Caudwell A.

Author information: 
(1)INRA, Station de Recherches sur les Mycoplasmes et les Arbovirus des Plantes, 
Dijon, France.

Three hybridomas producing monoclonal antibodies specific for the mycoplasma-like
organism (MLO), pathogenic agent of grapevine flavescence dorée, were obtained
after fusion between spleen cells from a mouse immunized against flavescence
dorée MLO and Sp2/O-Ag-14 mouse myeloma cells. These hybridomas were selected in 
an indirect sandwich ELISA in which antibodies from two different animal species 
were used (rabbit and mouse). This assay is convenient for anti-MLO monoclonal
antibody screening, because of its sensitivity, specificity and good preservation
of antigens. The three monoclonal antibodies were examined for reactivity towards
the MLO causal agents of 15 plant yellows. None of the three were implicated in a
serological relationship between the MLO of these plant yellows and flavescence
dorée-MLO. Reactivity of the three monoclonal antibodies was checked towards two 
other isolates of flavescence dorée. One of the three antibodies detected the
wild isolates.

PMID: 2799068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 1989 May;11(3):162-4.

[Monoclonal antibodies against gastric cancer and their selective reaction on
various tissues].

[Article in Chinese]

Wei SM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Institute for Cancer Research.

Spleen cells from Balb/c mice immunized in sequence with five human gastric
cancer cell lines were fused with murine myeloma cell line SP2/0. Hybridomas 3F4,
3G9 and 3H11 secreting monoclonal antibodies (mAb) against gastric cancer were
obtained through selective culture and screening. These mAb produced by the
immunization procedure have good selectivity and high positive rate in reaction
on gastric cancer. The positive rate of reaction on gastric cancer cells and
tissues could reach 5/5 and 84.8-93.5%, respectively, whereas there was almost no
positive reaction on normal cells and tissues As there was no correlation between
the positive reaction of gastric cancer and their histopathologic typing, and the
cross reaction of mAb with other tumors and fetal gastrointestinal tissues was
quite high, the corresponding antigens of these mAb were considered as extensive 
oncofetal antigens.

PMID: 2558869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 1989 May;50(1-2):173-6.

Monoclonal antibodies against alpha toxin of Clostridium perfringens.

Sato H(1), Chiba J, Sato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Immunology, National Institute of Health, Tokyo, Japan.

Ten distinct monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) against alpha toxin of Clostridium
perfringens were produced by the fusion of SP2/O with spleen cells of mice
immunized with alpha toxoid, and alpha toxin mixed with or without
ethylenediamine-tetraacetate (EDTA). The antibody activity was evaluated by
antigen-binding activity in an enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), by
phospholipase C (PLC)-neutralizing activity using both egg yolk lecithin and
p-nitrophenylphosphoryl-choline (PNPPC) hydrolysis reactions and by anti-lethal
activity in mice. Since the toxin-neutralizing activities of each MAb were not
parallel, it has been suggested that the three biological activities may not be
located in the same site in the toxin molecule. This report also describes the
development of a simple purification of the toxin by affinity chromatography and 
a sensitive immunoassay for quantitation of the toxin using the monoclonal
antibody.

PMID: 2544482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Vet Microbiol. 1989 Apr;19(4):305-15.

Production and characterization of monoclonal antibodies to bovid herpesvirus-4.

Dubuisson J(1), Thiry E, Bublot M, Sneyers M, Boulanger D, Guillaume J, Pastoret 
PP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology-Immunology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University 
of Liège, Brussels, Belgium.

Thirty-five hybridoma cell lines secreting monoclonal antibodies (Mabs) against
bovid herpesvirus-4 (BHV-4) strain V. Test were produced. These hybrid cells
resulted from the fusion of SP2/0 myeloma cells with splenocytes of BALB/c mice
previously immunized with purified BHV-4. A modified indirect fluorescent
antibody test (IFAT) was applied as a screening procedure and was compared with
an indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The selected Mabs were tested by
the same IFAT against a panel of BHV-4 field isolates and against bovine
herpesvirus-1, bovine herpesvirus-2 and alcelaphine herpesvirus-1 (AHV-1).
Comparison of BHV-4 field isolates with Mabs confirmed their close antigenic
relationships, but slight antigenic differences were observed between different
isolates. One of the Mabs also reacted against AHV-1, indicating an antigenic
relationship between BHV-4 and AHV-1. None of the Mabs reacting with BHV-4
possessed neutralizing activity against the strain used for immunization.

PMID: 2546320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Leukoc Biol. 1989 Apr;45(4):311-21.

Production and characterization of monoclonal antibodies to Fc gamma 2a-binding
protein isolated from the detergent lysate of a murine macrophagelike cell line, 
P388D1.

Kagami M(1), Funatsu Y, Suzuki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Molecular Genetics, and Immunology, University of 
Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City 66103.

Hybridoma cell lines were produced by fusion of SP2/0 murine myeloma cell line
with the spleen cells of Wister rats which were immunized with IgG2a-binding
protein isolated from the detergent lysate of a murine macrophagelike cell line, 
P388D1, by affinity chromatography on IgG-Sepharose 4B. A monoclonal clone
(designated as 3A2) out of a total of 13 different antibody-secreting cell lines 
was found to secrete IgG1 class antibodies, which inhibited more than 70% of the 
binding of radio-iodinated myeloma IgG2a protein to P388D1 cells. The 3A2 Fab
fragments bound specifically to P388D1 cells at 4 degrees C with a KD of 1.9 x
10(-8) M and Bmax of 2.9 x 10(5) per cell. This Fab fragment also specifically
bound to Fc gamma 2a receptor (R)-positive T cell line (S49) with a KD of 4.4 x
10(-9) M and a Bmax of 1.0 x 10(4) but did not bind to Fc gamma 2a-negative S49
variant cell line, cyc-. The flow cytometric analysis with the use of
fluorescein-isothiocyanate-tagged 3A2 F(ab')2 also showed that this antibody
binds to Fc gamma 2aR-positive cells, P388D1 and S49, but not to Fc gamma
2aR-negative cells, cyc-. Monomeric and heat-aggregated IgG2a (13-fold molar
excess) inhibited the binding of the radioiodinated 3A2 F(ab')2 to P388D1 cells
by 70 and 49%, respectively, whereas the inhibition by monomeric and
heat-aggregated IgG2b was 17 and 39%, respectively; 3A2 F(ab')2 (100-fold molar
excess) inhibited the binding of IgG2a and IgG2b to P388D1 cells by 90 and 24%,
respectively, whereas the inhibition of binding of these IgG to S49 cells was 79 
and 49%, respectively. Western blotting analysis showed that 3A2 antibody
recognizes a major protein (Mr = 100,000) and a minor component (Mr = 80,000)
separated by SDS-PAGE of P388D1 or S49 cell lysates under nonreducing condition, 
whereas under reducing condition, this antibody recognized a major protein (Mr = 
50,000) and two additional minor components (Mr = 40,000 and 35,000). Fc gamma
2aR may thus exist at the cell surface as a disulfide linked dimer of a subunit
of Mr of 50,000, which could be partially degraded during the isolation to
smaller fragments of 40,000 and 35,000 Mr peptides which are still held together 
by interchain disulfide bond.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 2522980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Infect Immun. 1989 Apr;57(4):1035-9.

Development and characterization of a monoclonal antibody against the tube
precipitin antigen of Coccidioides immitis.

Dolan MJ(1), Cox RA, Williams V, Woolley S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research Immunology, San Antonio State Chest Hospital, Texas
78223.

Primary infection with Coccidioides immitis is commonly accompanied by the
production of an immunoglobulin M precipitin antibody which is detected by the
tube precipitin (TP) assay or by the immunodiffusion assay for TP antibody (IDTP 
assay). In the present investigation, spleen cells from spherulin-immunized
BALB/c mice were fused with SP2/O Ag14 myeloma cells, and the resulting
hybridomas were screened for antibody to the IDTP antigen by using an
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Positive hybridomas were cloned by limiting
dilution and injected into pristane-primed mice for ascites production.
Characterization of antibody reactivity was accomplished with the IDTP assay,
two-dimensional immunoelectrophoresis, and immunoblotting. An immunoglobulin G1
monoclonal antibody which reacts with the IDTP antigen of C. immitis is
described. The epitope that is recognized by the monoclonal antibody is also
present, but to a lesser extent, on a second coccidioidal antigen which has been 
designated antigen 2. The monoclonal antibody was not reactive in immunoblots of 
histoplasmin or blastomycin, indicating that the epitope recognized by this
antibody may be specific for C. immitis.

PMCID: PMC313225
PMID: 2494108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Am J Vet Res. 1989 Apr;50(4):471-9.

Production and characterization of monoclonal antibodies to porcine
immunoglobulin gamma, alpha, and light chains.

Paul PS(1), Mengeling WL, Malstrom CE, Van Deusen RA.

Author information: 
(1)Veterinary Medical Research Institute, College of Veterinary Medicine, Iowa
State University, Ames 50011.

Monoclonal antibodies (MAB) to porcine immunoglobulins were produced by fusion of
SP2/0 cells with splenic lymphocytes of mice that had been immunized with porcine
IgG or IgA. Of 16 MAB selected for detailed study, 13 reacted with heavy chains
(7 anti-gamma, 6 anti-alpha) and 3 reacted with light chains of native
immunoglobulin. Several of the same MAB (3 anti-gamma chain, 1 anti-alpha chain, 
3 anti-light chain) also reacted with denatured immunoglobulin by use of
immunoblotting analysis. Collective results of competitive ELISA,
immunodiffusion, and immunoblotting analysis indicated that the 7 MAB of
anti-gamma chain specificity were directed to 3 epitopes, the 6 MAB of anti-alpha
chain specificity were directed to at least 2 epitopes, and the 3 MAB of
anti-light chain specificity were directed to at least 2 epitopes that may have
been located of different types of light chains. When tested by immunodiffusion
with 5% polyethylene glycol incorporated in the agar matrix, all anti-gamma chain
and antilight chain MAB, but no anti-alpha chain MAB, had precipitating activity.
When polyethylene glycol was not used, only 4 MAB (all of the anti-gamma chain
specificity and of IgM isotype) had precipitating activity. These MAB, with
specificity for gamma and alpha chains and those reported earlier with mu-chain
specificity, should be invaluable in the detection and quantification of porcine 
immunoglobulin isotypes. These MAB have potential applications in delineating the
porcine immune response to selected immunogens.

PMID: 2469366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Biochemistry. 1989 Mar 7;28(5):2106-11.

Alpha-secondary isotope effects in the lipoxygenase reaction.

Wiseman JS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Merrell Dow Research Institute, Cincinnati, Ohio 45215.

Isotope effects for the oxidation of [5,6,8,9,11,12,14,15-3H]arachidonic acid
catalyzed by soybean lipoxygenase and by 5-lipoxygenase were measured. This
labeling pattern represents substitution at each of the vinylic hydrogens of the 
substrate. The observed isotope effect for soybean lipoxygenase was 1.16 +/- 0.02
and for 5-lipoxygenase was 1.11 +/- 0.05. These isotope effects are inconsistent 
with any change in hybridization (sp2 to sp3) at the vinylic carbons prior to or 
during the rate-determining step and are concluded to be most consistent with the
formation of a carbanion-like intermediate or transition state. In contrast, the 
oxidation of arachidonic acid by Ce(IV), which is thought to proceed via a cation
radical intermediate, exhibited at most a small isotope effect (1.02 +/- 0.01).
The reduction potential for the cation radical formed from arachidonic acid in
this reaction is estimated to be 2.7 V vs NHE by comparison of the rates of
oxidation of arachidonic acid and cyclohexene by Ce(IV). This is similar to the
potential for the cation radical of 2-butene. No isotope effect (1.00 +/- 0.03)
was observed in the 5-lipoxygenase reaction for conversion of the initially
formed product 5-hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoic acid to the epoxide leukotriene A4. 
From this it is concluded that there is little carbon-oxygen bond formation prior
to or during the rate-determining step for epoxide formation.

PMID: 2497775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Hiroshima J Med Sci. 1989 Mar;38(1):7-11.

A monoclonal anti-platelet antibody which recognizes p55 antigen.

Takaishi M, Murakami Y, Ishioka S, Yamakido M, Tsubokura T, Fu SM.

A monoclonal antibody (MoAb) H229(IgGl) was obtained by fusion between SP2/0,
mouse myeloma cell line and spleen cells from BC3Fl mice immunized with HEL, a
erythroleukemia cell line. MoAb H229 precipitated a 55 kilodalton(KD) molecule in
reduced condition. It reacted with platelets and megakaryocytes, but not with
monocytes, granulocytes, lymphocytes, thymocytes, red blood cells (RBC),
colony-forming units-granulocyte/monocyte (CFU-GM), and burst forming units-
erythroid (BFU-E). These findings suggest that MoAb H229 reacts with platelets
specifically. However, MoAb H229 did not inhibit platelet aggregation induced by 
ristocetin, ADP, epinephrine and collagen.

PMID: 2753747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Acta Virol. 1989 Mar;33(2):121-30.

Hybridoma cell lines secreting monoclonal antibodies to foot-and-mouth disease
virus type Asia-1.

Butchaiah G(1), Rao BU.

Author information: 
(1)Southern Regional Station, Indian Veterinary Research Institute Bangalore.

Various immunizing regimens, cell culture requirements and cell fusion conditions
were examined for efficient production of hybridomas secreting
anti-foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV) antibodies. A highly sensitive
streptavidin-biotin-based enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was used for 
screening of hybridomas for specific antibody production as well as for
determining the serotype specificity of the antibodies. Six hybridoma cell lines 
generating antibodies to FMDV type Asia-1 (vaccine strain 63/72) were produced by
fusion of SP2/0 mouse myeloma cells and spleen cells from mice immunized with the
inactivated viral antigen. The monoclonal antibodies (MoAb) from four producer
clones reacted in ELISA specifically with the intact virus antigen of type Asia-1
without any cross-reactivity with strains of other virus types 0, A and C. Two
other clones positive for anti-Asia-1 virus antibodies in ELISA cross-reacted
with type C virus strain. The MoAb from three of the four Asia-1 virus type
specific clones neutralized the infectivity of the immunizing viral strain. One
neutralizing MoAb reacted with the separated VP1 from the immunizing viral strain
in immunoblotting.

PMID: 2569807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. FEBS Lett. 1989 Feb 27;244(2):301-6.

Convenient plasmid vectors for construction of chimeric mouse/human antibodies.

Kameyama K(1), Imai K, Itoh T, Taniguchi M, Miura K, Kurosawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Comprehensive Medical Science, Fujita-Gakuen Health University, 
Aichi, Japan.

Chimeric antibodies composed of mouse-derived variable regions and human-derived 
constant regions have been developed for clinical use. However, construction of
chimeric mouse/human genes in expression vectors is time-consuming work. In this 
study, we developed convenient vectors for construction of chimeric mouse/human
antibodies. The protocols are as follows: In mouse hybridomas and B cells, most
active VH and V kappa genes can be identified as rearranged bands by Southern
hybridization of EcoRI- and HindIII-digested DNAs with JH and J kappa probes,
respectively, and such fragments can be isolated in lambda-EcoRI and
lambda-HindIII vectors, respectively. We constructed two plasmids: pSV2-HG 1 gpt 
contains human C gamma 1 and Ecogpt genes, and only one EcoRI site upstream of
the C gamma 1 gene; pSV2-HC kappa neo contains human C kappa and neo genes, and
only one HindIII site upstream of the C kappa gene. An isolated EcoRI fragment
containing a VHDHJH gene and a HindIII fragment containing a V kappa J kappa gene
are inserted into pSV2-HC kappa neo, respectively. Both resulting plasmid DNAs
are co-transfected into SP2/0 cell, a non-Ig-secreting mouse myeloma.
Transformants are selected by both mycophenolic acid and G418. With this
procedure, it takes only 2 months to obtain chimeric antibodies.

PMID: 2920830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Brain Res. 1989 Feb 27;481(1):175-80.

Monoclonal antibody directed against glutaraldehyde conjugated glutamate and
immunocytochemical applications in the rat brain.

Chagnaud JL(1), Campistron G, Geffard M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'immunologie, IBCN-CNRS, Université de Bordeaux II, France.

Like other small-sized neurotransmitter molecules, glutamate (Glu) was conjugated
to carrier proteins via glutaraldehyde (G). Human serum albumin (HSA) and
thyroglobulin (TH) conjugates were alternately injected into mice. When a
relevant immune response was obtained for antibody affinity and specificity,
hybridization of spleen activated lymphocytes with SP2/O/Ag myeloma cells was
performed. Supernatant culture media of hybridomas were tested for the presence
of anti-conjugated Glu antibodies with our ELISA method. Selected hybridomas
giving good antibody affinity and specificity were then cloned by the limiting
dilution technique. Using DEAE-chromatographed ascites fluid, Glu reactivity was 
observed on the cortex and the hippocampus. Staining obtained with this
monoclonal antibody was in agreement with that observed with previous polyclonal 
antisera directed against conjugated Glu or monoclonal anti-gamma-glutamyl-Glu
antibody.

PMID: 2565132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Immunol Methods. 1989 Feb 8;117(1):121-9.

Production and characterization of monoclonal antibodies against human
glycoalbumin.

Cohen MP(1), Hud E.

Author information: 
(1)University City Science Center, Philadelphia, PA 19104.

Hybridomas secreting monoclonal antibodies specific for nonenzymatically glycated
albumin were produced by fusion of SP2/0 myeloma cells with spleen cells from
BALB/c mice immunized with unreduced nonenzymatically glycated albumin prepared
from human plasma. Wells containing hybridomas secreting antibodies against
glycoalbumin were identified by binding, in an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay,
to glycoalbumin isolated from human plasma or to albumin that had been glycated
in vitro. The colony designated A717, which secreted antibodies discriminating
between glycated versus unglycated albumin, was cloned four times by limiting
dilution and used for further study, performed with monoclonal antibody purified 
from mouse ascites fluid. Specificity of A717 was demonstrated by immunoblotting 
and by ELISA, wherein the monoclonal antibody reacted preferentially with
glycated albumin but insignificantly with unglycated albumin. Immunoblotting of
human plasma with A717 on nitrocellulose yielded a single band, the
electrophoretic mobility of which corresponded with that of authentic glycated
albumin, indicating site specificity for glycated epitopes residing in albumin
but not in other nonenzymatically glycated serum proteins. A717 differs from
other antibodies raised against glycated albumin and other proteins, which
recognize glycated residues only after reductive conversion to glucitol-lysine
and which do not discriminate between different glycated proteins. Thus, this
report describes the establishment of the first hybridoma secreting monoclonal
antibody raised against unreduced glycated albumin, which is the physiologic form
occurring in vivo, and for the epitope when it resides in albumin but not other
proteins.

PMID: 2913157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Hybridoma. 1989 Feb;8(1):107-15.

Efficient generation of stable antibody forming hybridoma cells by electrofusion.

Schmitt JJ(1), Zimmermann U, Neil GA.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl fuer Biotechnologie der Universitaet Wuerzburg, FRG.

A variety of modified electrofusion protocols designed to improve the efficiency 
of hybridoma production have recently appeared in the literature. We undertook to
maximize the number of antibody secreting murine hybridomas by optimizing the
temperature and fusion strength parameters of the conventional electrofusion
technique. Anti-DNP secreting hybridomas were generated by fusing SP2/0 to
immunized mouse splenic lymphocytes using an unmodified electrofusion protocol
consisting of washing in a weakly conducting sorbitol fusion medium supplemented 
with bovine serum albumin, calcium and magnesium ions. This was followed by
dielectrophoretic alignment and application of 3 short duration, high intensity
field pulses in helical chambers. Optimal efficiencies of hybridomas were
generated by the application of 2000 V/cm pulses at 25 degrees C (2.45 hybridomas
x 10(-4) splenocytes) and as many as 63% of resulting hybridomas secreted
anti-DNP monoclonal antibodies, the majority of which were IgG's. These data show
that modification of the electrofusion protocol by pretreatment of fusion
partners with proteolytic enzymes or the use of antigen bridging is not required 
for the successful and efficient production of specific monoclonal antibodies by 
electrofusion.

PMID: 2925206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao. 1989 Feb;11(1):63-8.

[Preparation and characteristic analysis of monoclonal antibodies against human
growth hormone].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang EM.

Four hybridomas stably secreting monoclonal antibodies (McAbs) against human
growth hormone (hGH) have been obtained by fusion of immunized mice spleen cells 
with myeloma SP2/0 cells. After inoculation of hybridoma cells to BALB/c mice
i.p., the ascitic fluids were collected and characterized, the titre of the 4
McAbs being in the range of 0.6-10.0 X 10(5). As determined by Ouchterlony
analysis, all the 4 McAbs were IgG1. They varied in affinities, with equilibrium 
constants from 0.53 X 10(9) to 9.0 X 10(9) L/mol. McAb-1 showed 52.5%
cross-reactivity with human placental lactogen (hPL). McAb-2, McAb-3 and McAb-4
displayed no crossreactivity with hPL and human prolactin (hPRL). Antigenic
determinants recognized by the 4 McAbs were mapped through their reactions with
hGH fragment consisting of residues 1-43, cross-reaction with hPL, hPRL and
antibody-antibody competition test. The results showed that the antigenic
determinants of the McAbs are not located in the site of hGH comprising residues 
1-43 but on the three non-overlapping antigenic sites of hGH. As shown in
receptor assay, all the 4 McAbs exhibited specific inhibition on the binding of
pregnant rabbit liver GH receptor to 125I-hGH. It seems likely that
receptor-binding site is larger than the antigenic determinant or there are more 
than one site on hGH surface capable of binding to the hormone receptor. The
McAbs could only bind with the peak 2 (MW22000) but not the peak 1 (MW 45000) of 
old 125I-hGH after gel filtration.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 2475270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Biol Chem. 1989 Jan 25;264(3):1565-9.

Comparison of variable region primary structures within an anti-fluorescein
idiotype family.

Bedzyk WD(1), Johnson LS, Riordan GS, Voss EW Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Illinois, Urbana 61801.

Previous reports described the properties of a high affinity (Ka = 1.7 X 10(10)
M-1) prototype anti-fluorescein monoclonal antibody 4-4-20, an intermediate
affinity (Ka = 3.7 X 10(7) M-1) prototype 9-40, and Ig members of the 9-40
idiotype family (comprised of 3-24, 5-14, 5-27, 10-25 and 12-40). Although the
seven monoclonal anti-fluorescein antibodies expressed similar active site
structural determinants (idiotypes) as determined serologically, each was
characterized by different affinities for fluorescein and fine specificity
binding patterns. Partial heavy (H)- and light (L)-chain N-terminal amino acid
sequence analyses revealed all antibodies (except 5-27) were composed of highly
homologous VHIII(C) and V kappa II subgroup genes, respectively. Antibody 5-27
utilized a VHIII(B) and a V kappa V subgroup genes and shared low V-region
sequence homology with 4-4-20, 9-40 and the remaining 9-40 idiotype family. In
addition, complete 4-4-20, VH- and VL-region primary structures were determined
to better understand antibody-antigen interactions. Antibody 4-4-20 utilized a
VHIII(C) subgroup VH-gene, a truncated Sp2 D gene segment, JH4, a V kappa II
subgroup VL-gene, and J kappa 1. Antibody 4-4-20 VH and VL
complementarity-determining regions contained many basic and aromatic amino acid 
residues capable of interaction with fluorescein. Results are discussed in terms 
of idiotypic and fluorescein-binding characteristics as well as antibody
structural and functional diversity in the immune response.

PMID: 2492278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Biochemistry. 1989 Jan 24;28(2):516-21.

13C, 15N, and 31P NMR studies on 6-hydroxy-L-nicotine oxidase from Arthrobacter
oxidans.

Pust S(1), Vervoort J, Decker K, Bacher A, Müller F.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemisches Institut der Albert-Ludwigs-Universität, Freiburg, FRG.

The interaction between the apoprotein of 6-hydroxy-L-nicotine oxidase from
Arthrobacter oxidans and the prosthetic group FAD has been investigated by 13C,
15N, and 31P NMR techniques. The FAD prosthetic group was selectively enriched in
13C and 15N isotopes by adding isotopically labeled riboflavin derivatives to the
growth medium of riboflavin-requiring mutant cells. In the oxidized state the
chemical shift of the C(7) and C(8) atoms indicates that the xylene moiety of the
isoalloxazine ring is embedded in a hydrophobic environment. The polarization of 
the isoalloxazine ring as a whole is, however, much more comparable to that of
free flavin in a polar and protic environment than to free flavin in an apolar
environment. The polarization of the ring system can be ascribed to strong
hydrogen bonds between the apoprotein and the two carbonyl groups. The binding of
the competitive inhibitor, 6-hydroxy-D-nicotine, influences the resonances of the
C(4a) and the N(5) atoms strongly. It is suggested that these shifts are due to a
strong hydrogen-bonding interaction between the N(5) atom and the inhibitor. On
reduction all resonances, except those of the C(10a) and the N(1) atoms, shift
upfield, indicating the increased electron density in the ring system. In the
dithionite-reduced enzyme, the ring system is bent at the N(5) position. Due to
the bending of the N(5) atom and the sp2 hybridized N(10) atom, electron density 
from the N(10) atom is reallocated at the C(4) carbonyl group. In contrast, in
the substrate-reduced enzyme the N(5) atom is almost completely sp2 hybridized,
yielding a rather planar isoalloxazine ring.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 2540800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Neurophysiol. 1989 Jan;61(1):106-15.

Patterns of spontaneous discharge in primate spinothalamic neurons.

Surmeier DJ(1), Honda CN, Willis WD.

Author information: 
(1)Marine Biomedical Institute, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston
77550.

1. The spontaneous discharge of 30 spinothalamic tract (STT) neurons in the
lumbosacral spinal cord of anesthetized monkeys was studied. Interval,
correlation, and spectral analyses were performed. 2. Three patterns of discharge
were found; these were referred to as the SP1, SP2, and SP3 patterns. 3. The SP1 
group had moderately regular discharge trains that were devoid of short-interval 
spike bursts. 4. The SP2 group had spike trains dominated by short-interval
bursts without evidence of low-frequency rhythmicity. 5. The SP3 group had spike 
trains with features of both the SP1 and SP2 groups. 6. Some correlations were
found between the mean discharge rate and stimulus-response classes previously
defined by our group (25). Correlations were deduced from a parent data set of
221 STT neurons. Type 1 neurons, which were driven primarily by tactile
afferents, were found to have significantly lower mean rates than other
"within-neuron" groups. On the other hand, type C neurons, which had strong input
from afferents signalling pressure and noxious stimuli, were found to have
significantly higher mean rates than all other "across-neuron" classes. 7. A weak
relationship was found between the pattern of discharge and the within-neuron
stimulus-response classification. Neurons with a largely tactile coding
orientation (types 1 and 2) were most frequently of the SP1 and SP2 classes,
whereas neurons with a more prominent nociceptive input (types 3 and 4) were most
frequently of the SP2 and SP3 classes. No relationship was apparent between
discharge pattern and the across-neuron classes.

PMID: 2918338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Toxicon. 1989;27(10):1095-104.

Monoclonal antibodies against Vero cells that protect against diphtheria toxin.

Rönnberg BJ(1), Lidgerding BC, Middlebrook JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxinology, U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious
Diseases, Frederick, Maryland 21701.

Mice were immunized with a cell line (Vero) that possesses a high number of
membrane receptors for diphtheria toxin. Spleen cells from these mice were fused 
with SP2/0-Ag14 cells and two cell lines (1A2 and 2D2) isolated by screening for 
the ability of their secreted antibodies to inhibit binding of radiolabeled
diphtheria toxin to Vero cells. These antibodies protected Vero cells from the
inhibition of protein synthesis mediated by diphtheria toxin. The antibodies were
purified, iodinated, and their binding characteristics investigated. At 4 degrees
C, the association of 1A2 and 2D2 with Vero cells was saturable (KD approximately
10(-8) M) and indicated about 10(6) binding sites/cell. Diphtheria toxin did not 
inhibit the binding of either radiolabeled antibody. Monoclonal antibody 1A2
completely inhibited 125I-2D2 binding and vice versa. Trypsin or phospholipase C 
treatment of Vero cells had no effect on the ability of the monoclonal antibodies
to bind to the cells. These findings suggest that: (1) the two monoclonal
antibodies recognize the same or closely related epitopes and (2) the antibodies 
bind a domain distinct from the toxin binding site or to a subcomponent of the
diphtheria toxin receptor that is present at many other cell surface sites. These
antibodies offer a powerful tool to study the structure, processing and mode of
action of diphtheria toxin receptors.

PMID: 2815107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Toxicon. 1989;27(9):1011-9.

Preparation and characterization of monoclonal antibodies against
beta-bungarotoxin and its A- and B-chains.

Danse JM(1), Kempf J.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U-184, Institut de Chimie Biologique, Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, 
France.

Splenocytes from Balb/c mice immunized with beta-bungarotoxin, a protein
neurotoxin that exhibits phospholipase A2 activity, were fused with SP2/0 murine 
myeloma cells. Eighty-seven stable hybridoma cell lines were established which
secrete monoclonal antibodies of the subclass IgG1 and K light chain and react
with intact neurotoxin. Some antibodies were further analyzed. These recognize at
least two immuno-dominant regions located on the A- and B-chains of the toxin,
and the native toxin but show no crossreactivity with a protein homologous to
chain A (porcine pancreas phospholipase A2) nor to chain B (toxin 1 from
Dendroaspis polylepis). Two monoclonal antibodies inhibit phospholipase A2
activity of the neurotoxin but only one partially neutralizes its biological
activity when injected together with the toxin, delaying the time of death.

PMID: 2799834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Anim Genet. 1989;20(1):59-63.

A previously reported polymorphic plasma protein of dogs and horses, identified
as apolipoprotein A-IV.

Juneja RK(1), Gahne B, Lukka M, Ehnholm C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Breeding and Genetics, Swedish University of Agricultural
Sciences, Uppsala.

By using immunoblotting with antiserum specific to human plasma apolipoprotein
A-IV (apoA-IV), a previously reported polymorphic plasma protein of dogs viz
postalbumin-2 (Pa2) and one of horses viz serum protein 2 (SP2), were identified 
as apoA-IV of these species. This along with earlier published results implied
that: (1) both dog and horse show a high degree of polymorphism at the APOA4
locus with three common alleles in each of the two species; and (2) apoA-IV
phenotyping in these two species can be done by analysing plasma/serum samples by
a simple method of two-dimensional electrophoresis, conducted under
non-denaturing conditions, followed by general-protein staining of gels.

PMID: 2729674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Carcinogenesis. 1989 Jan;10(1):151-6.

Purification of the food-borne carcinogens 2-amino-3-methylimidazo
[4,5-f]quinoline and 2-amino-3,8-dimethylimidazo[4,5-f]quinoxaline in heated meat
products by immunoaffinity chromatography.

Turesky RJ(1), Forster CM, Aeschbacher HU, Würzner HP, Skipper PL, Trudel LJ,
Tannenbaum SR.

Author information: 
(1)Nestlé Research Centre, Nestec Ltd, Lausanne, Switzerland.

A rapid and simple scheme has been developed for the isolation and purification
of two of the major mutagenic heterocyclic amines formed in heated beef products 
by affinity chromatography using monoclonal antibodies which recognize
2-amino-3-methylimidazo[4,5-f]quinoline (IQ). Two cell lines producing IgG
antibodies were established following fusion of Sp2 or P3x.63 myeloma cells with 
spleen cells of immunized BALB/cby mice. The antigen was bovine gamma globulin
haptenized with 2-(3-carboxypropylthio)-3-methylimidazo-[4,5-f]quinoline. The
antibodies were immobilized on CNBr-activated Sepharose 4B. IQ and MeIQx formed
in heated beef products were partially purified by XAD-2 chromatography and then 
applied to the affinity columns. Purification by affinity chromatography was
adequate for subsequent quantitative analysis by HPLC with UV detection. With
this purification scheme as little as 1 g of beef extract or 15 g of fried beef
could be assayed for IQ and MeIQx at the part per billion level. Both antibodies 
had similar affinity constants for IQ (9.3 X 10(6) and 6.7 X 10(6) M-1) and for
MeIQx (7.1 X 10(5) and 2.7 X 10(5) M-1) and both were suitable for immunoaffinity
purification of IQ from complex mixtures. MAb2 could be used as well to
selectively remove MeIQx from meat products after partial purification by XAD-2. 
MAb1, despite having a 3-fold higher affinity than MAb2 for MeIQx, could not be
used for affinity chromatography for this mutagen.

PMID: 2642749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Zhongguo Ji Sheng Chong Xue Yu Ji Sheng Chong Bing Za Zhi. 1989;7(4):249-51.

[Cell line of hybridoma secreting monoclonal antibodies against Echinococcus
granulosus antigens].

[Article in Chinese]

Hu QH, Wang XQ, Zhao R.

In order to produce specific monoclonal antibodies for immunodiagnosis and
immunoprophylaxis in hydatid disease, a monoclonal antibody cell line NIA2
secreting specific antibodies was established, through fusion of myeloma cells
SP2/0 and spleen cells of BALB/c mice immunized with hydatid fluid from a local
(Ningxia) patient and repeated screenings and clonings. The specificity was
assayed via ELISA, immunoprecipitating and ultramicroscopy. Antibody titer of
1:2,560 was obtained in the supernatant of the culture medium by ELISA and a high
titer of 1:163,840 in seeded ascitic fluid of mice of the same isolate.
Immunoglobulin subclass of the NIA2 secreting antibody was determined to be IgG1 
which showed no cross reaction to Cysticercus cellulosae. Cloned cell lines from 
the hybridomas were found consistent in secreting anti-Echinococcus granulosus
antibody through serial passage in tissue culture for ten months.

PMID: 2633889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 1989;30(1):43-50.

Biological characterization of a chimeric mouse-human IgM antibody directed
against the 17-1A antigen.

Fogler WE(1), Sun LK, Klinger MR, Ghrayeb J, Daddona PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Centocor Inc., Malvern, PA 19355.

A chimeric antibody was constructed in which the murine H- and L-chain variable
regions of mAb 17-1A, raised against human colorectal cancer cells, were joined
with the human constant mu and kappa regions. Transfection of these constructs
into the murine myeloma Sp2/0 resulted in the expression and secretion of a
pentameric Ig, designated chimeric 17-1A IgM. The chimeric 17-1A IgM was
subsequently compared to a previously described chimeric 17-1A IgG1 for
biological activities. Both chimeric mAbs were equally effective (weight basis)
in competing against the binding of murine 125I-17-1A to cultures of HT-29 colon 
carcinoma cells. The calculated association constants for the chimeric 17-1A IgM 
and IgG1 were 1.63 x 10(8) l/mol and 3.41 x 10(7) l/mol, respectively. Unlike
chimeric 17-1A IgG1, the chimeric 17-1A IgM was able to render colon carcinoma
target cells susceptible to lysis by both xenogeneic (rabbit) and human
complement. The extent of complement-mediated lysis dependent upon chimeric 17-1A
IgM was correlated to 17-1A antigen expression on target cells. HT-29 colon
carcinoma cells treated with chimeric 17-1A IgM did not directly result in
antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity by human peripheral blood monocytes.
However, chimeric 17-1A IgM greatly enhanced the deposition of C3 on
complement-treated HT-29 cells, and concomitant incubation with monocytes
resulted in heightened lysis of the tumor cells. The feasibility of enhancing
host defense against gastrointestinal malignancies by the administration of this 
chimeric 17-1A IgM may have certain clinical advantages.

PMID: 2598174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 1989;29(3):219-25.

Induction of nonspecific killer cells by delayed-type hypersensitivity against
soluble protein antigens in murine peritoneal cavities.

Takao T(1), Morikawa Y, Kuribayashi K, Saito K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Wakayama Medical School, Japan.

We induced nonspecific killer cells in the local site of delayed-type
hypersensitivity against keyhole limpet hemocyanin or ovalbumin. Delayed-type
hypersensitivity was induced in the peritoneal cavities of mice, and peritoneal
exudate cells (PEC) were collected. These PEC were found to have killer activity 
toward SP2 and YAC-1 cells (target cells susceptible to natural killer cells) by 
4-h 51Cr-release assays. The induction of killer activity in PEC was observed in 
parallel with the eliciting of delayed-type hypersensitivity in the peritoneal
cavity, in which the killer activity was maximum 24-48 h after the antigen
challenge, but was not induced in nu/nu mice and was induced in an
antigen-specific way. These killer cells did not adhere to nylon wool and had
Thy1 and asialo-GM1 antigens on their surfaces. Their precursor cells were also
asialo-GM1-positive. These findings indicate that the killer cells probably
belong to the NK cell lineage. Results of tumor challenge experiments showed that
these killer cells had an antitumor effect in vivo as well as in vitro.

PMID: 2567210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Thymus. 1989;13(3-4):245-52.

A novel lymphocyte surface antigen recognized by the monoclonal antibody HIS45.

Aspinall R(1), Kampinga J.

Author information: 
(1)Quadrant Research Foundation, Cambridge Research Laboratories, England.

A hybridoma producing the monoclonal antibody HIS45 was isolated from a fusion
between spleen cells from a Balb/c mouse immunized with rat bone marrow cells and
the fusion partner SP2/0. This antibody recognizes a determinant present on the
majority of peripheral T and B cells and a small percentage of thymocytes. In a
xenogeneic mixed leucocyte reaction HIS45 completely inhibits the proliferation
of responding cells. HIS45 does not inhibit natural killer cell-mediated lysis.
Comparison with other antibodies which have been reported to effect lymphocyte
function fail to reveal any which have similar properties.

PMID: 2533416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Yi Chuan Xue Bao. 1989;16(5):399-403.

[Expression of human interferon beta gene controlled by SV40 late promoter in
mouse myeloma SP2/0 cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang X, Yu M, Wang J, Wu S, Hu Y, Hou Y.

The HindII fragment of human interferon beta (IFN-beta) gene was inserted
downstream from SV40 late promoter in pSV2-dhfr and cotransfered with pSV2-gpt
into the mouse myeloma SP2/0 cells which were hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyl
transferase (HGPRT) deficient. After the selection in HAT (Hypoxanthine
Aminopterine Thymidine) medium containing myciphenolic acid and xanthine, the
efficient constitutive expression of IFN-beta could be detected in the
supernatant of the survive cells.

PMID: 2485640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Int Immunol. 1989;1(3):289-95.

A monoclonal antibody to a determinant of the rat T cell antigen receptor
expressed by a minor subset of T cells.

Kampinga J(1), Kroese FG, Pol GH, Nieuwenhuis P, Haag F, Singh PB, Roser B,
Aspinall R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Cell Biology, University of Groningen, The
Netherlands.

A hybridoma producing the monoclonal antibody HIS42 was isolated from a fusion
between spleen cells from a BALB/c mouse immunized with rat thymocytes and the
fusion partner SP2/0. This antibody recognizes a minor subset of T cells in every
haplotype of rat tested so far. The subpopulation of HIS42 positive T cells
contains both CD4+ and CD8+ cells, in the same ratio as found in the peripheral T
cell population. When bound to Sepharose beads, HIS42 induces T cell
proliferation in the presence of interleukin-2. In contrast to lymph node T
cells, a number of thymocytes were found to express HIS42 only in the cytoplasm
or together with membrane expression. Most bright HIS42 surface labelled
thymocytes were also positive for MRC OX-44, a marker predominantly identifying
mature thymocytes. SDS-PAGE analyses of the membrane molecules immunoprecipitated
by HIS42 show two bands on unreduced gels. One of these bands (85 kd) runs as two
separate bands at 35 and 48 kd on reduction. The other much weaker broad band
(approximately 100 kd) is hardly affected by reduced conditions. Taken together
these data suggest that HIS42 is directed against a determinant on the rat T cell
receptor for antigen, which is common to a small number of T cells.

PMID: 2484884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Immunol. 1988 Dec 1;141(11):4053-60.

Cloning and high level expression of a chimeric antibody with specificity for
human carcinoembryonic antigen.

Beidler CB(1), Ludwig JR, Cardenas J, Phelps J, Papworth CG, Melcher E, Sierzega 
M, Myers LJ, Unger BW, Fisher M, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Hybritech, Inc., San Diego, CA 92121.

A mouse/human chimeric antibody has been constructed by using variable light and 
variable heavy regions from a murine hybridoma specific for human
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) (CEM231.6.7). These V regions were combined with
kappa and gamma-1 constant region genes cloned from human lymphocytes. The
chimeric constructs were sequentially electroporated into murine non-Ig-producing
myeloma (P3.653) and hybridoma (SP2/0) cell. Significant differences were seen in
expression levels between the two cell types. High levels of expression (24 to 32
micrograms/ml/10(6) cells) were seen with several of the anti-CEA SP2/0
transfectomas but not with the P3.653 cells. The SP2/0 transfectoma lines were
adapted to serum-free, chemically defined media and grown in large scale
fermentation cultures where they continued to secrete high levels of antibody.
The chimeric antibodies remain reactive against human CEA with affinity constants
comparable to that of the parental hybridoma antibody. High level expression will
make practical the production of chimeric antibodies for in vivo therapeutic and 
diagnostic purposes.

PMID: 3141512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Virology. 1988 Dec;167(2):442-50.

Antigenic analysis of Punta Toro virus and identification of protective
determinants with monoclonal antibodies.

Pifat DY(1), Osterling MC, Smith JF.

Author information: 
(1)U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases, Fort Detrick,
Frederick, Maryland 21701-5011.

Hybridomas producing monoclonal antibodies to the three major structural proteins
of Punta Toro virus (PTV) were established by fusion of spleen cells with
Sp2/0-Ag-14 mouse plasmacytoma cells. Thirty-six independently derived monoclonal
antibodies were evaluated in neutralization, hemagglutination inhibition, and
ELISA assays and the isotype, antigen specificities, and cross-reactivities were 
determined. These antibodies were also assessed for their ability to provide
protection in a murine model. Both G1- and G2-specific antibodies were obtained
which neutralized virus infectivity in vitro and inhibited hemagglutination,
whereas nucleocapsid-specific antibodies exhibited neither activity. All of the
anti-G1 antibodies were PTV-specific, whereas anti-G2 and anti-nucleocapsid
antibodies exhibited varying patterns of cross-reactivity with heterologous
phleboviruses. All of the G1-reactive monoclonal antibodies, which bound to
epitopes in two distinct topological sites as determined by competitive binding
assays, provided efficient protection to both immunocompetent and
immunosuppressed mice. In contrast, of the 23 G2-reactive antibodies, only 8 were
able to protect immunocompetent mice and only one was able to protect
immunosuppressed animals. The degree of protection achieved in vivo did not
correlate directly with the neutralization titers determined in vitro.

PMID: 2462308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Immunol Methods. 1988 Nov 25;115(1):39-43.

Mink-mouse hybridomas that secrete mink immunoglobulin G.

Galakhar NL(1), Djatchenko SN, Fomicheva II, Mechetina LV, Taranin AV, Belousov
ES, Nayakshin AM, Baranov OK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cytology and Genetics, U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk.

Optimum conditions were established to obtain mink-mouse interspecific hybridomas
secreting mink IgG in fusions of mouse myelomas with mink immune spleen cells.
Minks were immunized with allogeneic IgG, and the spleen cells were fused with
three mouse myeloma lines P3-X63-Ag8.653, NSO and Sp2/0-Ag14. Of these,
P3-X63-Ag8.653 and NSO were found to be the best fusion partners giving the
highest yield of hybrid clones and number of IgG secreting clones. Cloning of
mink-mouse hybridomas was efficient when BALB/c nu/nu peritoneal and spleen cells
were used as feeders. The ten clonal lines produced secreted intact mink IgG
molecules as shown by SDS-PAGE and subsequent immunoblotting. The secretion level
of IgG ranged from 5 to 200 ng/ml in the clonal lines.

PMID: 3192947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Chromatogr. 1988 Nov 18;432:113-26.

Optimization of high-performance liquid chromatography-radioimmunoassay protocols
for the analyses of substance P and some of its metabolic fragments.

Igwe OJ(1), Felice LJ, Seybold VS, Larson AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biology, University of Minnesota, College of
Veterinary Medicine, St Paul 55108.

A reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatographic procedure combined with 
radioimmunoassay (HPLC-RIA) was developed and optimized for the concomitant
quantitation of substance P (SP) and some of its C- and N-terminal fragments in
the extracts of the spinal cord of mice. A selective and efficient solid-phase
extraction protocol was used for preparative purification of sample homogenates
prior to analyses. The sensitivity of the HPLC assay was 18.75 ng for SP and some
of its fragments of interest. Recoveries of peptides were calculated from spiked 
aqueous standards carried through the experimental protocol and ranged from 53 to
98%. The precision of the peptide recoveries from aqueous-based standards,
expressed as coefficient of variation, ranged from 2 to 28%. The sensitivities
for the RIA procedure using SP antiserum were 1.5, 3.4 and 4.6 fmol SP1-11,
SP2-11 and SP5-11, respectively. The percentage cross-reactivity of SP1-11
antiserum with the C-terminal fragments was complete whereas the
cross-reactivities of the N-terminal fragments were essentially zero. The molar
limits of detectability of SP and some of its C-terminal fragments determined by 
HPLC alone were several orders of magnitude greater than those determined from
the same spinal cord samples using RIA after HPLC fractionation.

PMID: 2464606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1988 Nov 15;267(1):54-9.

Analysis of the galactosyltransferase reaction by positional isotope exchange and
secondary deuterium isotope effects.

Kim SC(1), Singh AN, Raushel FM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Texas A&M University, College Station 77843.

The mechanism of the galactosyltransferase-catalyzed reaction was probed using
positional isotope exchange, alpha-secondary deuterium isotope effects, and
inhibition studies with potential transition state analogs. Incubation of
[beta-18O2, alpha beta-18O]UDP-galactose and alpha-lactalbumin with
galactosyltransferase from bovine milk did not result in any positional isotope
exchange. The addition of 4-deoxy-4-fluoroglucose as a dead-end inhibitor did not
induce any detectable positional isotope exchange. alpha-Secondary deuterium
isotope effects of 1.21 +/- 0.04 on Vmax and 1.05 +/- 0.04 on Vmax/KM were
observed for [1-2H]-UDP-galactose. D-Glucono-1,5-lactone,
D-galactono-1,4-lactone, D-galactono-1,5-lactone, nojirimycin, and
deoxynojirimycin, did not inhibit the galactosyl transfer reaction at
concentrations less than 1.0 mM. The magnitude of the secondary deuterium isotope
effect supports a mechanism in which the anomeric carbon of the galactosyl moiety
has substantial sp2 character in the transition state. Therefore, the cleavage of
the bond between the galactose and UDP moieties in the transition state has
proceeded to a much greater extent than the formation of the bond between the
galactose and the incoming glucose. The lack of a positional isotope exchange
reaction indicates that the beta-phosphoryl group of the UDP is not free to
rotate in the absence of an acceptor substrate.

PMID: 3143309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Eur J Immunol. 1988 Nov;18(11):1727-32.

xid mice fail to express an anti-dextran immune response but carry
alpha(1-3)dextran-specific lymphocytes in their potential repertoire.

Selinka HC(1), Bösing-Schneider R.

Author information: 
(1)University of Konstanz, Faculty of Biology, Department of Immunology,
Konstanz, FRG.

Even after repeated immunizations with alpha(1-3)dextran (Dex) male (CBA/N x
BALB/c)F1 mice fail to produce specific antibodies whereas nondefective female
littermates express an idiotype-positive anti-Dex immune response. This failure
of xid mice to express serum anti-Dex immunoglobulins is not only limited to
immunization with the thymus-independent (TI-2) antigen Dex, since immunization
with anti-idiotypic antibodies against Dex-specific idiotypes does not overcome
this defect. When xid lymphocytes are cultured in the presence of mitogens, in
vitro anti-Dex responses are markedly reduced. We show here that
alpha(1-3)Dex-specific hybridomas can be established by fusion of splenic
lymphocytes from xid mice to Sp2/0 myeloma cells. Therefore, these mice do carry 
the potential to generate B cells specific for Dex. All hybridoma antibodies were
found to be of IgM isotype, bearing the lambda light chain typical for
alpha(1-3)Dex-specific antibodies. Whereas monoclonal anti-Dex antibodies
obtained from spleen cell hybridomas from female littermates showed variable
idiotope patterns, hybridoma proteins from the immune-defective NBF1-xid mouse
expressed only a limited pattern of Dex-specific idiotopes, suggesting that these
hybridomas derived from a common precursor.

PMID: 2462500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Biotechnol Bioeng. 1988 Oct 5;32(8):947-65.

A kinetic analysis of hybridoma growth and metabolism in batch and continuous
suspension culture: effect of nutrient concentration, dilution rate, and pH.

Miller WM(1), Blanch HW, Wilke CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of California, Berkeley,
California 94720, USA.

Hybridomas are finding increased use for the production of a wide variety of
monoclonal antibodies. Understanding the roles of physiological and environmental
factors on the growth and metabolism of mammalian cells is a prerequisite for the
development of rational scale-up procedures. An SP2/0-derived mouse hybridoma has
been employed in the present work as a model system for hybridoma suspension
culture. In preliminary shake flask studies to determine the effect of glucose
and glutamine, it was found that the specific growth rate, the glucose and
glutamine metabolic quotients, and the cumulative specific antibody production
rate were independent of glucose concentration over the range commonly employed
in cell cultures. Only the specific rate of glutamine uptake was found to depend 
on glutamine concentration. The cells were grown in continuous culture at
constant pH and oxygen concentration at a variety of dilution rates. Specific
substrate consumption rates and product formation rates were determined from the 
steady state concentrations. The specific glucose uptake rate deviated from the
maintenance energy model(1) at low specific growth rates, probably due to changes
in the metabolic pathways of the cells. Antibody production was not
growth-associated; and higher specific antibody production rates were obtained at
lower specific growth rates. The effect of pH on the metabolic quotients was also
determined. An optimum in viable cell concentration was obtained between pH 7.1
and 7.4. The viable cell number and viability decreased dramatically at pH 6.8.
At pH 7.7 the viable cell concentration initially decreased, but then recovered
to values typical of pH 7.1-7.4. Higher specific nutrient consumption rates were 
found at the extreme pH values; however, glucose consumption was inhibited at low
pH. The pH history also influenced the behavior at a given pH. Higher antibody
metabolic quotients were obtained at the extreme pH values. Together with the
effect of specific growth rate, this suggests higher antibody production under
environmental or nutritional stress.

PMID: 18587813  [PubMed]


206. Hybridoma. 1988 Oct;7(5):505-18.

Optimization of electrofusion parameters for efficient production of murine
hybridomas.

Stenger DA(1), Kubiniec RT, Purucker WJ, Liang H, Hui SW.

Author information: 
(1)Biophysics Department, Roswell Park Memorial Institute, Buffalo, NY 14263.

Several factors which affect the production of murine hybridomas by electrofusion
using SP2/0 myelomas were examined. These factors included the ionic composition,
specific resistance and osmotic strength of the fusion medium, proteolytic
pretreatment of the cells, and field strength of the single, rectangular, 15 or
20 microseconds electric pulse. Individual experiments were observed by phase
microscopy, video-recorded, and subsequently analyzed. The efficiency of
hybridoma formation was measured by the number of hybrid colonies which survived 
HAT medium selection. In most cases, the peak efficiency occurred when the pulse 
field was between 3 and 4 kV/cm. Ca++ and Mg++, in 0.1 and 0.5 mM concentrations,
respectively, helped to prevent large-scale SP2/0 lysis following pulse
application. Reduction of the osmolarity of the fusion medium allowed for an
approximate two-fold increase in the hybrid production efficiency. However, other
variations, including an increase of the specific resistance of the medium to 1.7
x 10(4) omega cm, and a reduction of the pulse width to 15 microseconds, allowed 
significantly higher efficiencies. Dispase pretreatment of the myelomas led to
additional improvements when using a 15 microseconds pulse. The data suggest that
for this system, the highest efficiencies are obtained by maximizing the
attractive polarization forces between cells, while adjusting the ionic
composition and pulse parameters to preserve myeloma viability.

PMID: 3198135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Leukemia. 1988 Oct;2(10):697-700.

Lack of differential sensitivity of normal hematopoietic stem cells and murine
lymphoblastic leukemic cells to a lysosomotropic agent, N-dodecyl morpholine.

Lopez M(1), Sainteny F, Kinsky R, Bony V.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U 76, Centre National de Transfusion Sanguine Institut, Paris, France.

The effect of N-dodecyl morpholine (NDM), a lysosomotropic compound, on the
clonogenic capacity of GK15, Sp2.0, Hb131, and L1210 lymphoblastic tumor cells
and CFU-GM and CFU-S progenitor cells from DBA/2 mice was measured in order to
evaluate the potential use of this compound for the purging of tumor-contaminated
bone marrow (BM) in autologous BM transplantation. The growth of clonogenic tumor
cells from all of the tested cell lines was inhibited with doses of NDM that also
killed 100% CFU-GM and CFU-S, and no optimal dose could be found in this animal
model to purge marrow while sparing sufficient stem cells to ensure engraftment
in syngeneic BM transplantation.

PMID: 3050295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1988 Oct;70(4):370-3.

Silent periods in single orbicularis oculi motoneurones.

Elek JM(1), Dengler R, Hermans R, Struppler A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Clinical Neurophysiology, Technical University
Munich, F.R.G.

The activity of single motor units (MUs) of the orbicularis oculi muscle was
recorded in normal volunteers. While the subject maintained a constant firing
rate, electrical stimuli were applied to the ipsilateral supraorbital nerve.
Peristimulus histograms were constructed showing 2 periods of discharge
accumulation at times corresponding to the R1 and R2 component of the blink
reflex, each followed by a silent period, called SP1 and SP2, respectively.
Whereas SP1 may merely result from the synchronisation of discharges in the
preceding R1, SP2 can only be explained by an inhibition of the motoneurone
activity. These findings confirm the existence of silent periods in the
orbicularis oculi muscle in spite of the absence of mechanisms probably
responsible for silent periods in load-bearing muscles.

PMID: 2458247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Endocrinology. 1988 Sep;123(3):1341-7.

A monoclonal antibody to the type 1 insulin-like growth factor and insulin
receptors stimulates deoxyribonucleic acid synthesis in human and murine
fibroblasts.

Cara JF(1), Stuart CA, Furlanetto RW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Metabolism, Children's Hospital,
Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine 19104.

Insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) and insulin are polypeptide hormones that
stimulate their cellular responses by binding to specific cell membrane
receptors. These receptors, while chemically distinct, have similar structural
and functional characteristics. This manuscript describes the production and
characterization of a monoclonal antibody that binds to both type I IGF and
insulin receptors. This antibody did not inhibit hormone binding to either
receptor type, but stimulated DNA synthesis in both human and murine fibroblasts.
Ten BALB/c-BYJ mice were immunized with human placental membrane fragments, and
their splenic lymphocytes were fused with SP2 AG0 mouse myeloma cells. Of
approximately 3000 hybridoma clones thus obtained, 1 viable clone, designated
V3,8 D7, was found to produce an antibody directed against the type I IGF
receptor. Solubilized radiolabeled placental membranes immunoprecipitated with
affinity-purified antibody and analyzed by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide 
gel electrophoresis under reducing conditions revealed bands with relative
molecular masses corresponding to the nonreduced intact receptor (approximately
350 x 10(3], the alpha-subunit (130-140 x 10(3], and the beta-subunit (90 x 10(3]
of the type I IGF receptor. Clonal supernatant and affinity-purified antibody
precipitated solubilized receptors affinity labeled with [125I]IGF-I. Antibody
V3,8 D7 also precipitated solubilized placental membranes affinity labeled with
[125I]insulin. However, solubilized receptors affinity purified by the monoclonal
antibody bound IGF-I much better than insulin, suggesting that this antibody has 
a higher affinity for the type I IGF receptor than for the insulin receptor.
Affinity-purified antibody did not inhibit the binding of IGF-I or insulin to
receptors on human placental membranes, suggesting that it is directed against a 
site on the type I IGF and insulin receptor not involved in hormone binding.
However, affinity-purified monoclonal antibody stimulated DNA synthesis in human 
GM 498 and murine BALB/c-3T3 clone A 31 fibroblasts, as determined by
[3H]thymidine incorporation. The combination of IGF-I and affinity-purified
antibody did not increase thymidine incorporation above levels observed with
either substrate alone, suggesting that these factors may be operating through a 
common mechanism. These results suggest that antibody V3,8 D7 can stimulate
receptor responses by binding to a site on the type I IGF and/or insulin
receptors that is not involved in hormone binding. These data support the concept
that hormone receptors themselves possess the biological information required for
stimulating specific cellular responses.

PMID: 2969801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Br J Pharmacol. 1988 Sep;95(1):121-30.

Characterization of neuropeptide-induced histamine release from human dispersed
skin mast cells.

Lowman MA(1), Benyon RC, Church MK.

Author information: 
(1)Immunopharmacology Group, Southampton General Hospital.

1. Human skin mast cells, unlike other human mast cells so far studied, released 
histamine in a concentration-related manner in response to substance P,
vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) and somatostatin (1 microM to 30 microM). In 
contrast, eledoisin, physalaemin, neurokinin A, neurokinin B, calcitonin
gene-related peptide (CGRP), neurotensin, bradykinin and Lys-bradykinin induced
negligible histamine release. 2. The low histamine releasing activity of
physalaemin, eledoisin, neurokinin A and neurokinin B relative to substance P
suggests that the human skin mast cell activation site is distinct from the
tachykinin NK-1, NK-2 or NK-3 receptors described in smooth muscle. 3. The
relative potencies of substance P and its fragments SP2-11, SP3-11, SP4-11 and
SP1-4 in releasing histamine from human skin mast cells suggests that both the
basic N-terminal amino acids and the lipophilic C-terminal portion of substance P
are essential for activity. 4. Peptide-induced histamine release, like that
induced by compound 48/80, morphine and poly-L-lysine, is rapid, reaching
completion in 10-20 s, is largely independent of extracellular calcium but
requires intact glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation. 5. The substance P
analogue, [D-Pro4,D-Trp7,9,10] SP4-11 (SPA), not only reduced substance P-induced
histamine release in a concentration-related manner but also inhibited that
induced by VIP, somatostatin, compound 48/80, poly-L-lysine and morphine but not 
anti-IgE. 6. The similar characteristics of histamine release induced by
substance P, VIP, somatostatin, compound 48/80, poly-L-lysine and morphine
suggest that they share a common pathway of activation-secretion coupling
distinct from that of IgE-dependent activation. Furthermore, the ability of human
skin mast cells to respond to basic non-immunological stimuli including
neuropeptides may reflect a specialised function for these cells.

PMCID: PMC1854121
PMID: 2464382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Immunology. 1988 Aug;64(4):599-605.

Preparation and characterization of murine monoclonal antibodies to swine
lymphocyte antigens.

Lie WR(1), Rothschild MF, Warner CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Iowa State University, Ames 50011.

A panel of monoclonal antibodies (mAb) was developed by the fusion of Sp2/0
myeloma cells and spleen cells from mice immunized with peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PMNC) or T cells from NIH swine leucocyte antigen (SLA) inbred
miniature swine. Twenty stable hybridoma clones were isolated that secreted mAb
that reacted with swine PMNC, as determined by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA). The binding profile to swine PMNC and the ability to fix
complement of these mAb were investigated by flow cytometric analyses. The
molecular weights of the antigens recognized by six of the mAb were determined by
immunoprecipitation of 125I surface-labelled PMNC, followed by SDS-PAGE under
reducing conditions. The most interesting mAb, 7-34-1 (IgG2a), precipitated a
putative MHC class I molecule composed of a 50,000 MW heavy chain and a 12,000 MW
light chain (beta 2m). This is the third SLA class I-reactive monoclonal antibody
to be described for swine. Properties of the mAb described in this paper, mAb
7-34-1, are different from the two other SLA class I-specific mAb that have been 
described elsewhere in the literature (mAb 74-11-10 and mAb PT85). Monoclonal
antibody 7-34-1 recognized class I antigens of SLA haplotypes a, c and d in an
equivalent manner. This mAb should be especially useful as a general anti-SLA
class I reagent for experiments on NIH miniature swine.

PMCID: PMC1384979
PMID: 2459049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Immunol. 1988 Aug 1;141(3):996-1005.

Specific endotoxic lipopolysaccharide-binding proteins on murine splenocytes. I. 
Detection of lipopolysaccharide-binding sites on splenocytes and splenocyte
subpopulations.

Lei MG(1), Morrison DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City
66103.

Experiments have been carried out using a unique radio-iodinated,
disulfide-reducible, photoactivatable LPS derivative (ASD-LPS) to detect specific
LPS-binding proteins on murine splenocytes. Fractionation of
LPS-photo-cross-linked, reduced, and solubilized splenocyte extracts on
two-dimensional polyacrylamide gels has allowed the identification of an 80-kDa
LPS-binding protein with approximate pI of 6.5. This LPS-binding protein is
present on partially purified populations of splenic B lymphocytes, T
lymphocytes, and macrophages. It is also the dominant LPS-binding protein on the 
murine 70Z/3 B cell line and the YAC-1 and EL4 T cell lines but is not detectable
on the undifferentiated murine Sp2/0 myeloma cell line. Of potential importance
is the fact that the 80-kDa protein appears to be indistinguishable when
photolabeled extracts of splenocytes from the C3HeB/FeJ (lpsn) and
LPS-nonresponder C3H/HeJ (lpsd) mice are compared.

PMID: 2456339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Endocrinology. 1988 Jul;123(1):180-6.

A monoclonal antibody to the rat nuclear triiodothyronine receptor: production
and characterization.

Luo M(1), Faure R, Ruel J, Dussault JH.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recherche en Ontogénèse et Génétique Moléculaires, Centre Hospitalier
de l'Université Laval, SteFoy, Québec, Canada.

The nuclear T3 receptor (NTR) was affinity-labeled with bromoacetyl-[125I]T3,
purified by preparative sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis, and used to immunize BALB/c mice. Spleen cells from one strongly
immunoreactive mouse were fused with Sp2 mouse myeloma cells, and 328 hybridomas 
were screened by a dot-blot immunoassay using as antigen, a preparation of NTR
partially purified by diethylaminoethyl-Sephadex chromatography. Four positive
cultures were thus found; three of which were confirmed by comparing Western
blotting patterns with the electrophoretic mobility of the affinity-labeled NTR. 
One of these 3 hybridomas was further subcloned by limiting dilution and gave
rise to the 2B3 clone, which produces an immunoglobulin of the immunoglobulin G1 
subclass. Several lines of evidence indicated that the 2B3 monoclonal antibody
was indeed directed against the NTR. The antibody recognized a protein with the
same electrophoretic mobility as the affinity-labeled receptor. Thus, Western
blotting revealed a predominant protein with a mol wt of 57,000 and a less
abundant 45,000 component on sodium dodecyl sulfate gels, and multiple
isoelectric variants of the 57,000 protein, with a predominant form at pI 6.2,
were detected on two-dimensional gels. Incubation of the 2B3 antibody with the
NTR labeled with [125I]T3 resulted in the formation of an antibody-receptor
complex, as indicated by a shift of the radioactivity peak upon gel filtration on
Sephacryl S-300. In contrast, control ascitic fluid did not change the elution
profile of the labeled NTR. The 2B3 antibody is able to remove the T3-binding
activity from rat liver nuclear extracts. Finally, in accordance with previous
T3-binding experiments, expected amounts of NTR were found in pituitary, liver,
brain, kidney, spleen, and testis with the use of the Western blotting technique 
and immunohistochemistry on frozen tissue sections. This antibody should prove
useful in the characterization and purification of the NTR and also in the study 
of its distribution in different tissues and cell types.

PMID: 3383772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Science. 1988 Jun 24;240(4860):1788-90.

Production of stable rabbit-mouse hybridomas that secrete rabbit mAb of defined
specificity.

Raybould TJ(1), Takahashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Allelix Inc., Diagnostics Division, Mississauga, Ontario, Canada.

Inclusion of normal rabbit serum (NRS) in culture medium after interspecific
fusion of hyperimmunized rabbit spleen cells with murine SP2/0 myeloma cells
produced 271 rabbit-mouse hybridomas (RMHs) that secreted rabbit immunoglobulin
against group A Streptococcus (GAS). Continued use of NRS-supplemented medium
during cloning yielded stabilized monoclonal RMH lines that have secreted
GAS-specific rabbit antibody at concentrations similar to murine hybridomas (3 to
8 micrograms per 10(6) cells per 24 hours), for over 4 months of culture in
vitro. The use of NRS as a medium supplement during initial culture, cloning, and
stabilization of RMHs enables production of considerably more specific rabbit
monoclonal antibody (mAb)-secreting RMHs than have previously been reported.

PMID: 3289119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Biotechnol Appl Biochem. 1988 Jun;10(3):257-72.

Characterization of anti-prostatic acid phosphatase monoclonal antibody and its
medical significance.

Kuciel R(1), Mazurkiewicz A, Ostrowski WS, Stachura J, Steuden I, Szkudlarek J,
Radzikowski C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biochemistry, Copernicus Academy of Medicine, Kraków,
Poland.

Monoclonal antibody to purified prostatic acid phosphatase from seminal plasma
was produced by fusion of spleen cells from immunized mice with the Sp2/O-Ag 14
cell line. This hybridoma-derived antibody, designated MAb-14, was classified as 
IgG1 immunoglobulin. The apparent affinity constant of phosphatase.MAb-14 complex
formation calculated by using the Langmuir isotherm is 2.4 x 10(-8) M. The
molecular weight of the complex formed under the condition of antibody excess was
found to be 350K, which suggests that 2 molecules of prostatic phosphatase bind
to 1 molecule of the antibody. The MAb-14 antibody bound to phosphatase had a
negligible effect on the catalytic activity of the enzyme. All isoenzymatic forms
of catalytically active prostatic phosphatase, resolved by isoelectric focusing
or by chromatofocusing in different pH gradients, reacted with the monoclonal
antibody. Several peptides of Mr 25K to 76K and of 13K to 76K were adsorbed from 
the prostatic tissue extract and from seminal fluid, respectively, on an
MAb-14-Sepharose column. The MAb-14 monoclonal antibody was applied to the
immunohistochemical investigation of prostatic phosphatase distribution in normal
human prostate gland, in nodular hyperplasia, and in adenocarcinoma of the
prostate. Immunostaining was observed in prostatic secretory epithelium, within
the luminal content of prostatic glands, and in the neighborhood of prostatic
cancer cells. Metastatic prostatic carcinoma was also strongly immunoreactive
with the antibody. There was no cross-reactivity with leukocytes, kidney, liver, 
pancreas, spleen, breast, stomach mucosal, and colon tissues.

PMID: 3395468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Immunol Invest. 1988 May;17(3):195-215.

Monoclonal autoantibodies recognizing histone variants.

van Hemert FJ(1), van Dam AP, Jonk LJ, Destrée OH, Smeenk RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology, Utrecht.

Balb/c mice were immunized with affinity purified Ro(SS-A) from human origin in
order to allow the preparation of monoclonal anti-Ro(SS-A) antibodies. After
fusion of mouse myeloma cells (line Sp2/0 A914) with spleen cells from one of
these mice, anti-Ro(SS-A) monoclonals were not obtained, but, instead, two IgM
producing hybridomas reactive with histone H1 and one with histone H2B. The
specificity of the anti-H1 monoclonals was investigated by means of
immunoblotting of very lysine-rich histone variants from mouse which were
separated by two-dimensional gelelectrophoresis. One of them (CLB-ANA 105) has
H1(0) specificity with respect to the histone variants of mouse and man, but
recognizes H5 as well as H1 from Xenopus laevis. Another monoclonal (CLB-ANA 108)
reacts with the variant H1c from mouse, exclusively. From the way these
monoclonals were produced, we postulate that they were not the result of
immunization, but comprise specificities of naturally occurring autoantibodies.

PMID: 3410513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Infect Immun. 1988 May;56(5):1120-7.

Development and characterization of an anti-idiotype antibody to the capsular
polysaccharide of Neisseria meningitidis serogroup C.

Westerink MA(1), Campagnari AA, Wirth MA, Apicella MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, State University of New York at
Buffalo 14215.

A monoclonal anti-idiotypic antibody (Ab2) whose antibody combining site
contained a surrogate image of the meningococcal group C capsular polysaccharide 
was developed. To accomplish this, a monoclonal antibody against the group C
capsular polysaccharide was developed by the fusion of splenocytes from mice
immunized with Neisseria meningitidis group C strain MP13 with Sp2/0-Ag14
plasmacytoma cells. Monoclonal antibody 1E4, an immunoglobulin M isotype,
demonstrated binding to the serogroup C polysaccharide in enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Monoclonal antibody 1E4 reacted with 30 of 30 group 
C strains and 1 of 36 group B strains in immunodot assay, slide agglutination,
inhibition ELISA, and bactericidal assay. This monoclonal antibody was selected
as idiotype (Ab1) for the development of hybridomas producing an anti-idiotype
antibody. One of the hybridomas developed, designated 6F9, was capable of over
70% inhibition of 1E4 in binding in the meningococcal C polysaccharide-specific
ELISA. Studies with convalescent human serum demonstrated 100% inhibition of a
serogroup C-specific ELISA with 200 micrograms of 6F9 per ml and 50% inhibition
of this ELISA was achieved with 50 micrograms of 6F9 per ml. Monoclonal
anti-idiotype antibodies (Ab3) with specificities similar to Ab1, 1E4 were
generated from BALB/c mice immunized with the Ab2 (6F9). Immunization of rabbits 
with 6F9 resulted in an immunoglobulin G response which was significantly greater
than that of control to a titer of 1:160. These studies indicate that monoclonal 
6F9 contained a surrogate image on the combining antibody site which mimicked
meningococcal C polysaccharide. This surrogate image is capable of evoking
antibodies to the meningococcal C polysaccharide in syngenic and xenogenic
species.

PMCID: PMC259772
PMID: 3128477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Clin Microbiol. 1988 May;26(5):1016-23.

Common epitope on the lipopolysaccharide of Legionella pneumophila recognized by 
a monoclonal antibody.

Barthe C(1), Joly JR, Ramsay D, Boissinot M, Benhamou N.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Microbiologie, Faculté de Médecine, Université Laval, Quebec,
Canada.

Serogroup-specificity of Legionella pneumophila is related to lipopolysaccharide 
(LPS), and few cross-reactions between serogroups have been observed with rabbit 
or monkey antisera. C57BL/6 mice were sequentially immunized with crude outer
membrane fractions of L. pneumophila serogroups 1, 5, and 7, Legionella
bozemanii, and Legionella micdadei. Spleen cells from these mice were then fused 
with the Sp2-0/Ag14 mouse myeloma cell line. Outer membrane-rich fractions and
LPS were prepared from L. pneumophila serogroups 1 to 8 and other Legionella and 
non-Legionella species. Immunoblots of these extracts were performed with
monoclonal antibody obtained from these fusions. One of these monoclonal
antibodies recognized an epitope common to all tested serogroups of L.
pneumophila and attached to the major constituent of the outer membrane, LPS.
This antibody did not react with other Legionella species and numerous
gram-negative rods other than Pseudomonas fluorescens CDC93. This monoclonal
antibody may be useful in preliminary identification of L. pneumophila as an
alternative to direct fluorescent-antibody testing.

PMCID: PMC266507
PMID: 2454935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1988 Apr 29;152(2):910-5.

A sequence-dependent monoclonal antibody specific for single-chain urokinase.

Charpie JR(1), Haber E, Matsueda GR.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Molecular Research Laboratory, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston 02114.

To mimic the sequence spanning the primary site (the Lys158-Ile159 bond) cleaved 
by plasmin in its conversion of single-chain urokinase plasminogen activator
(scuPA) to urokinase, we synthesized the peptide
Cys(Acm)-Leu-Arg-Pro-Arg-Phe-Lys-Ile-Ile-Gly-Gly-Glu-Phe-Cys
[Cys(Acm)scuPA(153-164)Cys]. Immunization of A/J mice with the
Cys(Acm)scuPA(153-164)Cys peptide linked to hemocyanin, followed by somatic cell 
fusion with a myeloma cell line (SP2/0), yielded a monoclonal antibody (SCOOP1)
that bound to single-chain urokinase but not to urokinase or plasmin-treated
single-chain urokinase. SCOOP1 could discriminate between single-chain urokinase 
and urokinase by greater than three orders of magnitude. In a radioimmunoassay,
Cys(Acm)scuPA(153-164)Cys completely inhibited SCOOP1 binding to single-chain
urokinase, whereas an equimolar mixture of two heptapeptides comprising the amino
terminal [Cys-scuPA(153-158)] and carboxy terminal [scuPA(159-164)Cys)] halves of
the cleavage site peptide did not. Thus the epitope recognized by SCOOP1 includes
the Lys158-Ile159 peptide bond.

PMID: 3365258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Immunol Methods. 1988 Apr 22;109(1):145-51.

Increased efficiency of transfection of murine hybridoma cells with DNA by
electropermeabilization.

Stopper H(1), Zimmermann U, Neil GA.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl für Biotechnologie, Universität Würzburg, F.R.G.

Dispase-treated murine hybridoma cells (SP2/0-Ag14) were transfected with the
G418 resistance gene bearing plasmid pSV2-neo by electropermeabilization with a
high degree of efficiency. The cells were subjected to intermittent multiple
high-voltage short duration (5 microsecond) DC pulses at intervals of 1 min in a 
weakly conducting medium followed by selection in G418-containing medium. The
transfection medium, temperature, pulse duration, and voltage were empirically
determined by preliminary electropermeabilization experiments. Increasing the
number of pulses resulted in a higher percentage of transfected cells, but a
decrease in the number of viable cells, with the optimal transfectant yield
resulting when five pulses of 10 kV/cm were administered. This method allows the 
rapid and efficient injection of DNA into mammalian cells, and permits the rapid 
production of stable, drug resistant hybridoma cell lines for use in subsequent
fusion experiments.

PMID: 3356910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. P R Health Sci J. 1988 Apr;7(1):35-8.

Analysis by fluorescence microscopy and flow cytometry of monoclonal antibodies
produced against cell surface antigens.

Bolaños B(1), Bodón Q, Jiménez T, García-Mayol D, Lavergne JA, Díaz AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Medical Zoology, School of Medicine, University
of Puerto Rico, San Juan 00936.

The reactivity of seven monoclonal antibodies against the surface antigens of the
murine myeloma cell line Sp2/O-Ag 14 was simultaneously analyzed by fluorescence 
microscopy and flow cytometry. To 1 X 10(6) Sp2/O-Ag 14 cells were added 200
microliters of the monoclonal antibody and the mixture was incubated at 4 degrees
C for 30 min. After washing twice with PBS, the Sp2/O-Ag 14 cells were incubated 
at 4 degrees C for 30 min with a 1:400 dilution of fluoresceinated goat
anti-mouse antibodies. Sp2/O-Ag 14 cells were ready for analysis after washing
the cells 3 X with PBS. By fluorescence microscopic analysis different patterns
of reactivity with monoclonal antibodies were detected. These patterns were
identified as: smooth annular, dot-like annular, dot-like patches, diffuse and
homogeneous. The observed patterns may represent different cell surface epitopes 
being recognized by the monoclonal antibodies. Flow cytometry analysis with the
EPICS V system showed reactivity of seven monoclonal antibodies with Sp2/O-Ag 14 
cell surface epitopes, which ranged from 79 to 90%. Compared to fluorescence
microscopy, flow cytometry provides a faster, more sensitive and more accurate
quantitative measurement of the reactivity of different monoclonal antibodies
against Sp2/O-Ag 14 cell surface antigens.

PMID: 3375422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. P R Health Sci J. 1988 Apr;7(1):31-4.

Production of monoclonal antibodies to Sp2/O-Ag 14 myeloma cells.

Zlotnik H(1), Miranda MT, Kozek WJ, Borrero GL, Lavergne JA, Díaz AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Medical Zoology, School of Medicine, University
of Puerto Rico, San Juan 00936.

The hybridoma technology developed by Kohler and Milstein allows the obtention of
antibodies of a single specificity (i.e. monoclonal antibodies). This methodology
was first introduced in the Immunology Laboratory of the Department of
Microbiology at the Medical Sciences Campus (MSC), University of Puerto Rico
(UPR) in 1986. The production of monoclonal antibodies to Sp2/O-Ag 14 reported
herein describes the procedure used and is of importance because it constitutes
the first work on monoclonal antibodies performed at our institution and in
Puerto Rico.

PMID: 3375421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Eur J Immunol. 1988 Apr;18(4):601-6.

Heterohybridomas secreting human monoclonal antibodies against Haemophilus
influenzae type b.

Martin D(1), Larose Y, Hamel J, Lagacé J, Brodeur BR.

Author information: 
(1)Hybridoma Section, Bureau of Microbiology, Laboratory Centre for Disease
Control, Ottawa, Canada.

Seven human monoclonal antibodies (HmAb) directed against outer membrane antigens
of Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) were produced by fusing Sp2/HPT
heteromyeloma cells with human tonsillar lymphocytes sensitized in vitro for 6
days. The heterohybridomas were maintained in culture for at least one year and
secreted, when cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium without fetal calf 
serum, between 1 and 15 micrograms/10(6) cells/ml/24 h. All of the HmAb were IgGs
except HiH-12 which is an IgM. Antibodies directed against the lipopolysaccharide
and proteins of apparent molecular masses of 43, 37 and 27 kDa were identified by
immunoblotting of sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
patterns of outer membrane. Binding radioimmunoassay with live bacteria showed
that five out of seven HmAb adsorbed to cell surface-exposed antigenic
determinants. HmAb HiH-6, HiH-7 and HiH-10 reacted with a surface-accessible
determinant on the 43-kDa outer membrane protein. In a dot enzyme immunoassay,
these HmAb recognized 103 out of 111 Hib strains isolated worldwide. The strains 
were selected to represent the most common genotypic variations among Hib. None
of these HmAb reacted with other bacterial species tested. These HmAb may serve
to study the bacterial surface antigens implicated in the human humoral response 
and protection to Hib infections.

PMID: 3259187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1988 Apr;85(8):2603-7.

Fluorescence-activated cell analysis and sorting of viable mammalian cells based 
on beta-D-galactosidase activity after transduction of Escherichia coli lacZ.

Nolan GP(1), Fiering S, Nicolas JF, Herzenberg LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, CA 94305.

We demonstrate that individual cells infected with and expressing a recombinant
retrovirus carrying the Escherichia coli beta-galactosidase gene (lacZ) can be
viably stained, analyzed, sorted, and cloned by fluorescence-activated cell
sorting based on the levels of lacZ expressed. To accomplish this we have devised
a method to enzymatically generate and maintain fluorescence in live mammalian
cells. Accumulation of fluorescent products in cells is linear with time, with a 
direct correlation of fluorescence to enzymatic activity. This technology for
beta-galactosidase detection is more sensitive than other available cytochemical 
or biochemical methods. We have used this procedure to show that the expression
of psi-2-MMuLVSVnlsLacZ in the T-cell lymphoma BW5147 and the B-cell hybridoma
SP2/0 is not completely stable and that subclones selected by the
fluorescence-activated cell sorter for low lacZ activity demonstrate distinctly
lower average expression of LacZ. These findings indicate the utility of
beta-galactosidase as a reporter molecule at the single-cell level for studies of
gene regulation, including studies of promoter efficacy, enhancer activity,
trans-acting factors, and other regulatory elements.

PMCID: PMC280046
PMID: 3128790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Plant Physiol. 1988 Mar;86(3):848-56.

Characterization of native and modified extensin monomers and oligomers by
electron microscopy and gel filtration.

Heckman JW(1), Terhune BT, Lamport DT.

Author information: 
(1)MSU-DOE Plant Research Laboratory, Michigan State University, East Lansing,
Michigan 48824-1312.

We isolated hydroxyproline-rich extensin precursors from suspension-cultured
tomato, cucumber, and sycamore-maple by salt-elution of intact cells and cell
wall preparations. Cation exchange chromatography and HPLC gel filtration
resolved these precursors into monomeric and oligomeric fractions, confirmed by
amino acid analysis, immunological cross-reactivity, and TEM visualization. After
rotary shadowing monomers appeared as flexuous rods with a contour length of 70
to 100 nanometers and a ;persistence length' (maximum linear displacement) of 44 
to 51 nanometers. Oligomers were larger branched assemblies with occasional
pores. Native extensin monomers gave uniform gel filtration retention times
(Rts), but the Rts of HF-deglycosylated monomers varied depending on
concentration, implying ionic interaction between the highly basic deglycosylated
monomers and a weakly cationic gel matrix. Succinylation of the deglycosylated
monomers reversed the net charge, and restored the retention time to that of
glycosylated monomers, confirming the ionic interaction. Succinylation enhanced
visualization of the deglycosylated monomers, which previously were barely
discernible flexuous rods. The persistence length:contour length ratios of
succinylated deglycosylated monomers (tomato sdP2) and glycosylated monomers
(sP2) were the same, implying a similar molecular flexibility for both
glycosylated and deglycosylated monomers at room temperature. These molecular
properties are consistent with suggestions that extensin monomers reptate into
the wall as a transmural protein ;weft' which becomes progressively cross-linked 
forming a network penetrated by the cellulose ;warp.'

PMCID: PMC1054582
PMID: 16665999  [PubMed]


226. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health. 1988 Mar;19(1):95-100.

Survival of Vero, myeloma and hybridoma cells during cold storage.

Archer LM(1), Dusanic DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Indiana State University, Terre Haute 47809.

Vero cells, SP2/O-Ag 14 myeloma cells and 4B87 hybridoma cells were stored either
at refrigeration (5 degrees C) or freezing (-18 degrees C) temperatures. Cells
were recovered every five days and percentages of viable cells were determined by
the trypan blue exclusion staining method before the cells were incubated at 37
degrees C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere. SP2/0 cells grew after 30 days of storage at 5 
degrees C. Hybridoma (4B87) cells survived 20 days of cold storage in HY medium
and maintained antibody production. For each cell type, higher percentages of
viable cells were observed among cells stored in HY medium than among cells
stored in DMEM. Vero cells stored for 40 days at 5 degrees C grew when removed to
optimal conditions of 37 degrees C and 5% CO2. There was no growth of cells
recovered after storage at -18 degrees C.

PMID: 3406808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Dent Res. 1988 Mar;67(3):548-53.

Production and characterization of monoclonal antibodies against Bacteroides
forsythus and Wolinella recta.

Werner-Felmayer G(1), Guggenheim B, Gmür R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Microbiology and General Immunology, University of Zürich, 
Switzerland.

Hybrid cell lines producing monoclonal antibodies against Bacteroides forsythus
or Wolinella recta were generated by fusion of SP2/0 or FO myeloma cells with
splenocytes from Balb/c mice immunized with formalinized cells of B. forsythus
FDC 331 or W. recta D13a-g, respectively. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays and 
indirect immunofluorescence tests were used to analyze the distribution of the
recognized antigens on a panel of 70 strains representing 35 taxa, most of which 
are members of the oral flora. All monoclonal antibodies--eight against B.
forsythus and six against W. recta--proved specific for the immunizing species.
Four of the monoclonal antibodies against W. recta recognized antigens expressed 
by only some of the tested W. recta strains, thus confirming the earlier noted
antigenic heterogeneity of this species. Antibody binding patterns consistent
with those previously described or distinct for new serogroups could not,
however, be observed. Four of the eight anti-B. forsythus monoclonal antibodies
bound to only two of the three tested B. forsythus strains. All the remaining
monoclonal antibodies detected every strain tested of the respective species
against which they were raised. Preliminary results indicated that several of
these antibodies should be very useful for the direct identification and
quantification of these organisms in subgingival plaque.

PMID: 3170894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Immunol. 1988 Feb 15;140(4):1028-33.

Expression of a 33-kDa antigen Tm 1 on lymphocyte surface after modulation of
cell surface antigens by IgM monoclonal antibody.

Hara T(1), Jung LK, Fu SM.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City.

The mAb Tm 1 was obtained from a fusion of SP2/O tumor cells with spleen cells
from CF1 mouse immunized with T cells modulated by an IgM anti-CD3 mAb.mAb Tm 1
reacted with IgM anti-CD3 modulated T cells (66.6%) but not with unmodulated T
cells (4.4%). Tm 1 was not expressed on T cells modulated with either IgG2a or
IgG1 anti-CD3 mAb. Immunoprecipitation from 125I-labeled CD3-modulated T cells
showed that Tm 1 Ag is a single polypeptide of 33 kDa under reducing and
nonreducing conditions. Kinetic studies revealed that Tm 1 was detectable on T
cells 10 min after incubation and maximally expressed after 4 h of incubation
with IgM anti-CD3 mAb. CD3 expression was markedly modulated by this anti-CD3 mAb
after the same period of incubation. Studies with cycloheximide revealed that Tm 
1 expression on T cells does not require new protein synthesis. Tm 1 expression
persisted long after CD3-reexpression 24 h later. Tm 1 was present on a small
fraction of circulating T cells, B cells, and monocytes and absent from
granulocytes, platelets, E, and thymocytes. Tm 1 was not expressed on T cells
after various activation stimuli but was expressed on B cells upon activation.
Additional studies indicate that IgM mAb against other T cell differentiation Ag 
and IgM mAb against B cell Ag also lead to the expression of Tm 1 on these cells.
Thus, modulation of surface Ag by IgM mAb externalizes this cytoplasmic Ag.
However, one exception has been noted. Purified mAb Tm 1 was not mitogenic and
was unable to block either the T cell proliferation induced by 12-O-tetradecanoyl
phorbol-13-acetate plus anti-CD3 mAb and other T cell stimuli, or the B cell
proliferation induced by B cell mitogens. The role of Tm 1 on lymphocyte function
remains to be determined.

PMID: 2963858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Arthritis Rheum. 1988 Feb;31(2):227-37.

Anti-Ro (SS-A) antibodies from Ro (SS-A)-immunized mice.

Rosario MO(1), Fox OF, Koren E, Harley JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City.

Immunization of BALB/c mice with immunoaffinity-purified bovine or human Ro
(SS-A) induces the production of antibodies reactive with Ro (SS-A). Fusion of
spleen cells from the hyperimmunized mice to SP2/0 cells resulted in hybridoma
cell lines that produced anti-Ro (SS-A) antibodies. Anti-Ro (SS-A) binding was
established by solid-phase immunosorbent assay, immunoblotting, or RNA
immunoprecipitation. Most of the anti-Ro (SS-A) antibodies bound to both human
and bovine Ro (SS-A) in the solid phase, but only one of the monoclonal
antibodies selectively bound to human Ro (SS-A); this suggests that there are
species differences between the bovine and human Ro (SS-A) antigens. Indirect
immunofluorescence studies demonstrated that most anti-Ro (SS-A) antibodies bound
to cytoplasmic or nuclear HEp-2 cellular antigens, whereas others did not bind to
fixed HEp-2 tissue culture cells. Nuclear staining of mouse substrates by one of 
the sera containing anti-Ro (SS-A) demonstrated that autoantibodies were induced 
by immunization with human Ro (SS-A).

PMID: 3348825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Hybridoma. 1988 Feb;7(1):97-104.

Monoclonal antibodies to human thyroglobulin: production and characterization.

Narkar AA(1), Shah DH, Swaroop VD, Velumani A, Dandekar SR, Sharma SM.

Author information: 
(1)Radiation Medicine Centre, c/o Tata Memorial Centre Annexe, Bombay, India.

Human thyroglobulin was used as an antigen for the development of monoclonal
antibodies by the hybridoma technique. Spleen cells of BALB/c mice immunized with
human thyroglobulin were fused with SP2/0 mouse myeloma cells. Seven clones
secreting specific monoclonal antibodies to thyroglobulin were established. Two
of these monoclonal antibodies have been purified and characterized. Their
equilibrium association constants (Ka) as determined by Scatchard analysis were
0.24 X 10(11) L/M and 1.4 X 10(11) L/M respectively. The specificity of both
these antibodies was validated by immunohistochemical staining of human tissues
(normal human thyroid, brain, salivary gland, skeletal and smooth muscle, mucous 
membrane, parathyroid, adrenal) obtained from autopsy material. Only follicles
and follicular cells of thyroid tissue were stained by both the monoclonal
antibodies. H10 I monoclonal antibody was used for constructing a standard curve 
for in vitro immunoassay using a solid phase ELISA technique. The minimum amount 
detectable was 7.8 ng/ml. Thirty six sera from patients of various thyroid
disorders were evaluated using ELISA and compared with conventional RIA. A good
agreement was seen (r = 0.92) between the two techniques. These specific
monoclonal antibodies may prove to be valuable for in vitro immunoassays and in
vivo immunoscintigraphy.

PMID: 3131234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Acta Crystallogr C. 1988 Jan 15;44 ( Pt 1):187-9.

Structure of the ABC ring synthon of dendrobine.

Lynch VM(1), Li W, Martin SF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Texas, Austin 78712.

(1R,4S,8S,11R)-11-Methyl-3-[(R)-alpha-phenyl-ethyl]-3-
azatricyclo[6.2.1.0(4.11)]undec-5-en-2-one, C19H23NO, Mr = 281.40, orthorhombic, 
P2(1)2(1)2(1), a = 9.534 (2), b = 11.055 (4), C = 14.372 (4) A, V = 1514.8 (8) A,
Z = 4, Dx = 1.23 (163 K), Dm = 1.15 g cm-3 (295 K), lambda(Mo K alpha) = 0.71069 
A, mu = 0.702 cm-1, F(000) = 608, T = 163 K, R = 0.0387 for 2310 reflections. The
absolute configuration is assigned on the basis of internal comparison with the
alpha-methylbenzylamine moiety. The tricyclic ring system is concave. The N
appears to be sp2 hybridized [N is 0.0661 (1) A from the plane through C atoms
bound to it] and conjugated through the carbonyl group [short C-N bond [1.351 (2)
A]]. Ring strain appears to cause a slight increase in the C-C bond lengths of
the center atom of the tricyclic ring system. The average bond length from this
atom to the three other ring C atoms is 1.557 (1) A while the average bond length
for all other sp3-C to sp3-C bonds is 1.529 (1) A.

PMID: 2908428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Biol Chem. 1988 Jan 5;263(1):581-7.

Monoclonal antibodies to type X collagen. Biosynthetic studies using an antibody 
to the amino-terminal domain.

Summers TA(1), Irwin MH, Mayne R, Balian G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, University of Virginia School of Medicine,
Charlottesville 22908.

Monoclonal antibodies to chick type X collagen have been used to study the
structure, biosynthesis, and location of type X in cartilage. The antibodies were
produced by injecting purified type X collagen into female SJL/J mice and then
fusing their spleen cells with Sp2/0 myeloma cells. Hybridoma culture
supernatants were screened for antibodies to type X collagen by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay and Western blots. Positive supernatants did not cross-react 
with other collagen types (I, II, IX, XI) or with fibronectin. Three monoclonal
antibodies were chosen for further characterization. Two of them (1A6 and 6F6)
recognize a pepsin-sensitive domain of type X collagen. Rotary shadowing showed
that 1A6 and 6F6 both recognize the same end of type X, probably the
aminoterminal non-triple helical domain. Amino acid sequencing of the intact
protein and of the epitope-containing peptide confirmed that the antibody
recognition sites for 1A6 and 6F6 are within the amino-terminal domain.
Monoclonal antibody 2B3 reacts with the pepsinized (45 kDa) and weakly with the
nonpepsinized (59 kDa) forms of type X collagen. The monoclonal antibodies were
used for immunolocalization of type X in hypertrophic chondrocytes and reacted
only with tissue samples from areas undergoing endochondral ossification, e.g.
growth plate and fracture callus. Antibody 6F6, when coupled to Sepharose,
selectively binds to type X collagen from cell and organ cultures. In a
pulse-chase experiment, no processing of the 59-kDa form of type X could be
detected. Two components with molecular masses of approximately 70 and 85 kDa,
arising from a disulfide-bonded aggregate, were synthesized by both the permanent
and calcifying cartilage organ cultures but did not react with the antibody,
suggesting that these proteins are not related to type X. In summary, the
pulse-chase results and the immune precipitation with monoclonal antibody 6F6 did
not detect biosynthetic precursors larger than 59 kDa or proteolytically
processed forms of type X.

PMID: 2826450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Braz J Med Biol Res. 1988;21(5):1005-11.

Monoclonal antibodies to bovine parathyroid hormone: production and
characterization.

Vieira JG(1), Federico P, Matsueda G, Neer RM.

Author information: 
(1)Mineral Metabolism Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston 02114.

1. This paper describes the production and characterization of monoclonal
antibodies against bovine parathyroid hormone (bPTH)-(1-84). 2. Spleen cells from
A/J mice successfully immunized with bPTH-(1-84) were fused with SP2/O myeloma
cells using PEG 4000 as fusogen. The screening method employed microtiter plates 
coated with sheep antimouse IgG and the presence of specific monoclonal
antibodies was demonstrated by the binding of 125I-bPTH-(1-84). 3. A detailed
study of the specificity of the three viable monoclonals with highest affinity
showed that two (6FH6 and 6CD4) were amino-terminal specific and the other (5BG9)
carboxyl-terminal specific. The two amino-terminal monoclonal antibodies appear
to recognize the same antigenic site. 4. The monoclonal antibodies produced are
potentially useful reagents for the development of new methods for the
measurement of PTH in biological fluids, studies on the interaction of PTH with
its receptor, as well as localization of PTH producing cells.

PMID: 3248228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Arch Geschwulstforsch. 1988;58(3):151-7.

Monoclonal antibody to a human osteogenic sarcoma cell line.

Lizonová A(1), Blahová S, Bízik J, Grófová M.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, CSSR.

Monoclonal antibodies against a human osteogenic sarcoma cell line were prepared 
by production of a somatic cell hybrids between the spleen cells from
U-393OS--immunized mice and the mouse myeloma cells SP2/0. From 7 producing and
well-growing clones only one--B-0S12--produced antibodies, reactive
preferentially with osteosarcoma cells as identified by binding second antibodies
and 125I-labeled Protein A. This antibody was tested against a panel of normal
and tumor cell targets to determine the pattern of the antigen detected. The
monoclonal antibody reacted strongly against U-3930S cells and another human
sarcoma in vitro and more weakly against human fibroblasts, peripheral
lymphocytes, red blood cells and was negative against mouse fibroblasts. When
tested against a panel of unrelated human tumor cell lines, B-0S12 antibody was
positive with melanoma cells and negative with cells from bladder, cervix and
mammary carcinoma. These cross reactions suggested, that the antibody is reactive
with a protein, expressed on different tumor types. This protein is not expressed
on the cell surface and is probably associated with cytoskeleton, as revealed by 
immunofluorescence experiments. Western-blot analysis of a cytoskeletal
preparation of U-3930S cells suggests, that B-0S12 antibody recognizes a protein 
with Mr 55 kD. Further studies are needed to characterize the molecules, carrying
the epitope, identified by this monoclonal antibody.

PMID: 3046555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Immunogenetics. 1988;28(4):255-9.

Immunoglobulin JH rearrangement in a T-cell line reflects fusion to the DH locus 
at a sequence lacking the nonamer recognition signal.

Gerondakis S(1), Bernard O, Cory S, Adams JM.

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Victoria, Australia.

Rearrangements of the immunoglobulin heavy chain joining region (JH) genes occur 
in some T lymphocytes, probably because the mechanism for assembly of T-cell
receptor encoded genes is very similar to that for immunoglobulins. Two such
rearrangements described previously represented proper fusion of a DH and JH
gene. We have cloned and analyzed the JH rearrangements found on both alleles in 
the T lymphoma ST4. One represents conventional recombination between a member of
the SP2 DH family and JH3. On the other allele, JH4 has recombined with a
sequence within the DH locus but not at a DH gene. This recombination involved
the heptamer but not the nonamer of the bipartite recognition signal required for
DH-JH joining. This result suggests that the heptamer may be the primary
determinant of the specificity in V-gene assembly and that the DH locus as a
whole may be preferred target for recombination.

PMID: 2843460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Mol Microbiol. 1988 Jan;2(1):135-40.

Molecular basis for the spontaneous generation of colonization-defective mutants 
of Streptococcus mutans.

Ueda S(1), Kuramitsu HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Northwestern University Medical and
Dental Schools, Chicago, Illinois 60611.

Spontaneous mutants of Streptococcus mutans GS-5 defective in sucrose-dependent
colonization of smooth surfaces are generated at frequencies above the
spontaneous mutation rate. Southern blot analysis of such mutants suggested
rearrangement of the genes coding for glucosyltransferase (GTF) activity. Two
strain GS-5 homologous tandem genes, gtfB and gtfC, coding for GTF-I and GTF-S
activities respectively, were demonstrated to undergo recombination when
introduced into recombination-proficient Escherichia coli transformants. However,
the two genes were quite stable when transformed on a single DNA fragment into a 
recA mutant of E. coli. The DNA fragment coding for GTF activity from one S.
mutans colonization-defective mutant, SP2, was isolated and shown also to have
undergone recombination between the gtfB and gtfC genes, resulting in reduced GTF
activity. These results are discussed relative to the in vivo generation of
colonization-defective mutants in cultures of S. mutans.

PMID: 2835587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Braz J Med Biol Res. 1988;21(3):507-9.

Production of anti-HBsAg monoclonal antibodies.

Vieira JG(1), Nishida SK, da-Silva SM, Ferraz ML, Granato C.

Author information: 
(1)Setor de Desenvolvimento Técnico (SDT), Laboratório Fleury, São Paulo, Brasil.

The production of monoclonal antibodies against the HBsAg is reported. Balb/c
mice immunized against a commercial vaccine were used. Upon fusion of spleen
cells from an animal having a high titer with the SP2/0 myeloma cell line, we
obtained 6 stable cell lines, all of the IgG1 subclass. They showed a wide range 
of specificities against the classical HBsAg subtypes. These monoclonal
antibodies can be used as the basis for the development of new methods for the
screening and study of the hepatitis B virus.

PMID: 2465803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Proc Chin Acad Med Sci Peking Union Med Coll. 1988;3(1):26-32.

Study on angiogenesis induced by SP2/0 and HeLa tumor cells.

Xiu RJ, Duan CG, Mu GF.

PMID: 2459696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Biochemistry. 1987 Dec 15;26(25):8450-7.

Adenosine deaminase converts purine riboside into an analogue of a reactive
intermediate: a 13C NMR and kinetic study.

Kurz LC(1), Frieden C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Washington University School of Medicine, 
St. Louis, Missouri 63110.

The 13C NMR spectra of [2-13C]- and [6-13C]purine ribosides have been obtained
free in solution and bound to the active site of adenosine deaminase. The
positions of the resonances of the bound ligand are shifted relative to those of 
the free ligand as follows: C-2, -3.7 ppm; C-6, -73.1 ppm. The binary complexes
are in slow exchange with free purine riboside on the NMR time scale, and the
dissociation rate constant is estimated to be 13.5 s-1 from the slow exchange
broadening of the free signal. In aqueous solution, protonation of purine
riboside at N-1 results in changes in 13C chemical shift relative to those of the
free base as follows: C-2, -4.9 ppm; C-6, -7.9 ppm. The changes in chemical shift
that occur when purine riboside binds to the enzyme indicate that the
hybridization of C-6 changes from sp2 to sp3 in the binary complex with formation
of a new bond to oxygen or sulfur. A change in C-2 hybridization can be
eliminated as can protonation at N-1 as the sole cause of the chemical shift
changes. The kinetic constants for the adenosine deaminase catalyzed hydrolysis
of 6-chloro- and 6-fluoropurine riboside have been compared, and the reactivity
order implies that carbon-halogen bond breaking does not occur in the
rate-determining step. These observations support a mechanism for the enzyme in
which formation of a tetrahedral intermediate is the most difficult chemical
step. Enzymic stabilization of this intermediate may be an important catalytic
strategy used by the enzyme to lower the standard free energy of the preceding
transition state.

PMID: 3442668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 1987 Dec;17(1-4):25-35.

The application of hybridoma technology to the study of bovine immunoglobulins.

Goldsby RA(1), Srikumaran S, Arulanandam A, Hague B, Ponce de Leon FA, Sevoian M,
Guidry AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for hybridoma research, Amherst College, Massachusetts 01002.

Studies are described in which hybridoma technology is used to produce a variety 
of reagents for the characterization and manipulation of the bovine humoral
immune system. Selected members of a set of murine monoclonal antibodies (MAb)
specific for each of four major isotypes of bovine Ig constant regions, one
specific for anti-bovine Ig constant regions as well as one specific for
anti-bovine light chains are discussed. Interspecific fusion of bovine
lymphocytes with the established mouse cell line, SP2/0 was used to produce a
collection of stable hybridomas among which were found secretors of bovine IgG1, 
IgG2, IgM, IgA and bovine light chain. Interspecific fusion of SP2/0 with
lymphocytes from a multiparous Holstein four days post immunization with
Streptococcus agalactiae yielded MAb with specificity for the immunizing antigen.
One of these hybridomas, LHRB 19.17, which displayed a particularly stable
secretory phenotype, was used as an immunogen for the production of a library of 
murine monoclonal anti-idiotype antibodies. Competitive antigen binding analysis 
showed that 15 of the 24 anti-LHRB 19.17 idiotype antibodies isolated blocked the
binding of the idiotype to its nominal antigen and so were candidates for
evaluation as antigen mimics. Some of the ways in which monoclonal anti-idiotypes
in particular, and monoclonal in general, might be of use in problems of animal
disease are discussed.

PMID: 3501632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Gen Virol. 1987 Dec;68 ( Pt 12):3125-35.

Preparation and characterization of monoclonal antibodies directed against five
structural components of human respiratory syncytial virus subgroup B.

Orvell C(1), Norrby E, Mufson MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, National Bacteriological Laboratory, Stockholm,
Sweden.

Mouse hybridomas producing antibodies against the structural proteins of strain
WV4843, a subgroup B strain of respiratory syncytial (RS) virus, were produced by
fusion of Sp2/0 myeloma cells with spleen cells from BALB/c mice immunized with
purified preparations of the virus. After immunoprecipitation test with
[35S]methionine-labelled extracellular virions, 35 clones found to produce
antibodies against the fusion (F) protein, six against the member (M) protein, 21
against the nucleocapsid (NP) and eight against the phospho- (P) protein were
further characterized. Immunoprecipitation with [3H]glucosamine-labelled
intracellular virus polypeptides detected nine hybridoma cell lines producing
antibodies against the large glyco- (G) protein of the virus. By competitive
binding ELISA tests with monoclonal antibodies against each of the structural
components, a minimum of two, 24, four, 15 and three epitopes were detected on
the G, F, M, NP and P proteins, respectively. Eleven monoclonal antibodies
directed against nine epitopes of the F protein could neutralize the infectivity 
of the virus. In contrast, none of the nine monoclonal antibodies against G could
neutralize the infectivity of the virus. In order to find out more about the
antigenic relationship between human and bovine RS virus strains all monoclonal
antibodies were reacted with subgroup A RS virus and also with three different
strains of bovine RS virus and one strain of caprine RS virus in
immunofluorescence, ELISA and immunoprecipitation tests. In addition, 31
previously developed monoclonal antibodies against subgroup A virus were reacted 
with the bovine and caprine strains. The numbers of monoclonal antibodies of
subgroup B specific for the B type of the two human subgroups were 9/9, 3/35,
0/6, 0/21, 0/8, for the G, F, M, NP and P proteins, respectively. No antigenic
variations were found between the three bovine strains and the caprine strain.
They did not react with the nine monoclonal antibodies against the G protein of
subgroup B, nor did they react with nine monoclonal antibodies against subgroup
A. Most but not all of the monoclonal antibodies against the other structural
proteins of the two human RS virus subgroups reacted with the four strains. All
11 monoclonal antibodies against the F protein of subgroup B that could
neutralize the infectivity of subgroup B also reacted with the bovine strains and
neutralized their infectivity. It is concluded that although the bovine strains
share many epitopes with the two human subgroups, they are antigenically distinct
from the human viruses.

PMID: 2447224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Immunol. 1987 Nov 15;139(10):3224-30.

The inhibitory effects of K+ channel-blocking agents on T lymphocyte
proliferation and lymphokine production are "nonspecific".

Schell SR(1), Nelson DJ, Fozzard HA, Fitch FW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Chicago, Pritzker School of Medicine,
IL 60637.

Erratum in
    J Immunol 1988 Mar 1;140(5):1713.

The effect of K+ channel-blocking agents, tetraethylammonium (TEA) and
4-aminopyridine (4AP), on the responses of cloned murine helper and cytolytic T
lymphocytes stimulated with mitogen, anti-T cell receptor monoclonal antibody, or
interleukin 2 was examined. The addition of TEA and 4AP reduced [3H]thymidine
incorporation and lymphokine production to levels observed in unstimulated cells.
However, thymidine incorporation by the tumor cell lines P-815 and SP2/0, which
replicate autonomously, also was inhibited by these drugs. Treatment of cloned
murine helper T lymphocyte, L2, with TEA appeared to inhibit uptake of
[3H]thymidine and [3H]phenylalanine after stimulation with interleukin 2. These
results suggest that the inhibitory effects of the K+ channel-blocking agents TEA
and 4AP may not be specific for the sequence of events that are initiated by
activation of T lymphocytes through the antigen receptor. Instead, the observed
inhibitory effects by these agents may result from inhibition of transport of
thymidine, amino acids, and other essential metabolites across the cell membrane.

PMID: 2445812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Cancer Res. 1987 Nov 1;47(21):5684-90.

Reactivity of monoclonal antibody 17.13. with human squamous cell carcinoma and
its application to tumor diagnosis.

Ranken R(1), White CF, Gottfried TG, Yonkovich SJ, Blazek BE, Moss MS, Fee WE Jr,
Liu YS.

Author information: 
(1)InTek Diagnostics, Inc., Burlingame, California 94010.

Monoclonal antibody 17.13., derived from a fusion of splenocytes of a BALB/c
mouse immunized with a surgically resected poorly differentiated human laryngeal 
recurrent squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) with mouse Sp2/0 cells, is an IgM-K which
recognizes a cytoplasmic component of basal cells. Tissue sections of malignant
and normal squamous epithelium, tumors of nonsquamous origin, and normal and
malignant cytological specimens were tested with an immunoperoxidase assay.
Seventy-nine of 81 (98%) SCC of the head and neck, 26 of 26 (100%) SCC of the
cervical and female gynecological tract, 29 of 30 (97%) SCC of the lung, 19 of 19
(100%) SCC of the oral cavity, and 17 of 17 (100%) SCC-involved neck lymph nodes 
reacted strongly. Various carcinomas from breast, colon, ovary, and others were
unreactive. In normal squamous epithelial tissues, monoclonal antibody 17.13.
reacts only with basal cells but not the cells above the basal layers. Normal
tissues from heart, liver, spleen, kidney, bladder, colon, ovary, stomach,
pancreas, breast, lung, prostate, thyroid, and lymph nodes were unreactive with
the exception of myoepithelial cells. Monoclonal antibody 17.13. may be useful in
the diagnosis and management of SCC.

PMID: 3311357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Immunol. 1987 Nov 1;139(9):3139-45.

The heavy chain genes of a lupus anti-DNA autoantibody are encoded in the germ
line of a nonautoimmune strain of mouse and conserved in strains of mice
polymorphic for this gene locus.

Trepicchio W Jr(1), Maruya A, Barrett KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Tupper Research Institute, New England Medical Center,
Boston, MA 02111.

The variable region of the heavy chain of a prototypic anti-DNA autoantibody from
the lupus-prone mouse, MRL-lpr/lpr, was cloned and sequenced. The VH and JH genes
expressed by this antoantibody were found to be identical to germ line genes from
the nonautoimmune mouse strain, BALB/c. The D gene of this autoantibody differed 
by one nucleotide from several members of the germ line SP2 family, but has been 
found in expressed D genes from several strains of mice. These results show that 
a normal mouse strain contains all of the structural information necessary for
the expression of the heavy chain variable region of a lupus autoantibody. A
fragment that is present in both BALB/c and MRL mice is highly homologous in both
coding and flanking sequences to the autoantibody VH gene (VH130) and is the same
size as the BALB/c germ line gene. This suggests that these two strains may share
the same allele of this VH gene, despite the fact that they are polymorphic for
this VH gene family. Other mouse strains that are polymorphic for this locus
contained one to three VH genes that were highly related to VH130 in both coding 
and flanking regions. Thus, VH genes that may be allelic to the antibody VH gene 
or that may have arisen by gene conversion, unequal crossing over or gene
duplication, are conserved in many mouse strains.

PMID: 3117887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Immunol Lett. 1987 Nov;16(2):151-5.

Monoclonal antibodies against an epitope common to desmin and some keratins.

Sault C(1), Auger C, Roux B, Corvee N, Monier JC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Immunologie, UFR Alexis Carrel, Lyon, France.

Hybridomas between spleen cells from autoimmune MRL/n mice and Sp2/0-Ag 14
myeloma cell line, are obtained by electric field-mediated fusion. A monoclonal
antibody directed against a common antigenic determinant of desmin and some
keratins has been obtained and characterized.

PMID: 2448236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Mol Immunol. 1987 Oct;24(10):1081-6.

Production of monoclonal antibodies to thyroglobulin by in vitro immunization
with a free synthetic peptide.

de Boer M(1), Ossendorp FA, Al BJ, Hilgers J, de Vijlder JJ, Tager JM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Biotechnology Centre, University of Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

A synthetic peptide corresponding to amino acids 1-19 of thyroglobulin was used
to test the possibility of generating protein-reactive monoclonal antibodies by
immunization in vitro with a synthetic peptide as antigen. Splenocytes from
non-immunized Balb/c mice were cultured in serum-free medium for 3 days in the
presence of thymocyte-conditioned medium and the synthetic peptide prior to
fusion with SP2/0 murine myeloma cells. The synthetic peptide was used in its
free form, i.e. not coupled to a protein carrier. Hybridomas secreting monoclonal
antibodies reactive with the synthetic peptide were obtained after immunization
in vitro with as little as 10 ng/ml of the synthetic peptide. Between 50 and 70% 
of the primary clones obtained in different experiments produced monoclonal
antibodies also reactive with the intact protein. Six stable hybridomas were
isolated; all produced antibodies of the IgM class. We conclude that immunization
in vitro with a free synthetic peptide is an efficient method for the generation 
of monoclonal antibodies reactive with the intact protein.

PMID: 3683404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Eur J Immunol. 1987 Oct;17(10):1441-6.

A phenotypically dominant regulatory mechanism suppresses major
histocompatibility complex class II gene expression in a murine plasmacytoma.

Venkitaraman AR(1), Culbert EJ, Feldmann M.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Unit, Charing Cross Sunley Research Centre, London, GB.

The expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II antigens is
down-regulated when B cells differentiate into plasma cells. We have studied the 
mechanism of down-regulation of MHC class II expression in a BALB/c
strain-derived murine plasmacytoma cell line, NS1. NS1 cells express MHC class I 
antigens but not MHC class II antigens. We tested 20 uncloned hybrid cell lines
obtained from the fusion of NS1 cells with MHC class II-expressing splenic B
cells prepared from CBA, SJL or BALB/c mice. All the hybrid cell lines expressed 
MHC class I antigens of either or both parental haplotypes but did not express
MHC class II. One NS1 X splenic B cell hybrid clone, K3, was used to further
validate these results; K3 cells expressed MHC class I but not MHC class II
antigens. K3 was fused to the MHC class II-expressing B lymphoma A20, and the
seven resulting hybrid cell lines were again found to express MHC class I but not
MHC class II antigens. Since NS1 is a subclone of the P3-X63Ag8 murine
plasmacytoma, we also tested one P3-X63Ag8 x splenic B cell hybrid, Sp2/0, and
two Sp2/0 x splenic B cell hybrids. All were found to express the appropriate MHC
class I antigens but did not express MHC class II. Thus, our results suggest that
the NS1 plasmacytoma suppresses MHC class II expression by a phenotypically
dominant regulatory mechanism. We found that NS1 cells express correctly sized
mRNA for the MHC class II genes A alpha, E alpha and the invariant chain. The
co-expression of MHC class I protein and I-A and I-E region gene transcripts
provides strong evidence that the MHC gene cluster is structurally intact, and
that lack of class II expression is due to a genetic regulatory mechanism. The
amounts of class II mRNA expressed by NS1 cells were at least equivalent to those
found in splenic lymphocytes. Therefore, this regulation must operate
post-transcriptionally.

PMID: 3500056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Cell Physiol. 1987 Sep;132(3):524-30.

Effects of dissolved oxygen concentration on hybridoma growth and metabolism in
continuous culture.

Miller WM(1), Wilke CR, Blanch HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of California, Berkeley 94720.

Oxygen transport is a major limitation in large-scale mammalian cell culture. The
effects of the dissolved oxygen concentration (DO; from 0.1 to 100% saturation
with air) on Sp2/0-derived mouse hybridomas were investigated using continuous
culture. The steady-state concentration of viable cells increased with decreasing
DO until a critical dissolved oxygen concentration of 0.5% of air saturation was 
reached. The cell concentration declined at lower DO because of incomplete
glutamine oxidation, and the specific lactate production from glucose increased
to offset the reduced energy production from glutamine. Cell viability increased 
as the DO was decreased; the viability continued to increase even when the DO was
reduced below 0.5%. The specific oxygen uptake rate was essentially constant for 
DO greater than or equal to 10% of air saturation and then decreased with
decreasing DO. The P/O ratio (ATP molecules produced per O atom consumed) appears
to change from 2 to 3 between 10 and 0.5% DO. The specific ATP production rate
calculated using this assumption decreases only slightly with decreasing DO. The 
optimum DO of 50% for antibody production is different than the optimum
(approximately 0.5% DO) for cell growth.

PMID: 3654764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Mol Immunol. 1987 Sep;24(9):969-74.

Immunological characterization of riboflavin carrier proteins using monoclonal
antibodies.

Visweswariah SS(1), Karande AA, Adiga PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore.

Monoclonal antibodies to chicken riboflavin carrier protein have been produced by
fusing immunized mouse spleen cells with myeloma SP2/O-Ag 14. The three different
monoclonal antibodies specifically bound 125I-labelled chicken riboflavin carrier
protein and were characterized with respect to their affinities to bind the
antigen, subclass and isotype. These three monoclonal antibodies had similar
affinities for holo-, apo- and SDS-denatured riboflavin carrier protein but were 
unable to recognize the reduced and carboxymethylated protein indicating that
they were directed to specific conformational epitopes on the native avian
protein. Succinylation of the vitamin carrier protein while still retaining
flavin binding characteristics totally abolished the cross-reactivity with all
the three monoclonal antibodies indicating that lysine residues were involved at 
the antigenic sites of the protein. This shows that the antigenic loci may be
distinct from the flavin binding sites in the protein. All three antibodies were 
able to recognize riboflavin carrier protein present in the sera of pregnant
rats, monkeys and humans indicating that the epitopes to which they are directed 
are conserved throughout evolution. These antibodies can therefore be effectively
used for radioimmunoassays and further studies on the functional aspects of this 
protein in higher mammals.

PMID: 3116415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. J Biol Chem. 1987 Aug 15;262(23):11167-75.

Structural organization and DNA methylation patterning within the mouse L1
family.

Tolberg ME, Funderburk SJ, Klisak I, Smith SS.

We have studied stable differences in patterns of DNA methylation seen in the
repeated sequences of mouse cells. A cloned 1330-base pair fragment of mouse
repetitive DNA (pFS-13) was used as a probe in Southern blotting experiments.
Mouse spleen and L1210 lymphoma DNA appeared to be normally methylated at HpaII
sites probed by this sequence. Friend erythroleukemia cell, and Sp2 cell DNA both
showed an abnormal banding pattern in HpaII digests. Hybridization in situ to
metaphase chromosomes showed that probed sequences were broadly interspersed
along the arms of each mouse chromosome. The DNA sequence of the 1330-base pair
insert in the clone was determined; a copy of the R sequence of L1 was found at
its 5' end. Walking experiments using M13 subclones from pFS-13 permitted the
construction of a map for d(pCCGG) sites at the 3' end of the mouse L1 family.
The unmethylated d(pCCGG) sites in Sp2 and Friend cells could then be assigned to
polymorphic-repeated sequence groups within L1, homologous to the region spanned 
by BAM5 and R. Since there are several thousand copies of each of the fragments
seen in autoradiographs, these sequences must possess a common methylation state 
at many genomic locations. Concerted (nonrandom) hypomethylation of certain
subfamilies of L1 appears to be a stable characteristic of several cell lineages.
These findings suggest that certain L1 families possess commonalities that permit
and perhaps require differential DNA methylation in established cell lineages.

PMID: 2886503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Clin Chim Acta. 1987 Aug 14;167(2):173-85.

Evaluation of the average of patients: application to endocrine assays.

Douville P(1), Cembrowski GS, Strauss JF.

Author information: 
(1)Service de biochimie, Hôpital l'Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, Canada.

Recent work (Cembrowski et al, Am J Clin Pathol 1984;81:492-499) has shown that
the average of selected patient data can theoretically be used to demonstrate
systematic errors. We formerly demonstrate that the sensitivity or power of the
'average of patients' (AOP) is related to the index (NpSw2)/Sp2 where Np is the
number of patient results averaged, Sw the within-run component of the standard
deviation of the analytical method and Sp the standard deviation of the trimmed
population. The utility of the AOP can therefore be assessed rapidly without
power function curves or the calculation of the daily AOP itself. The index
showed that, for 12 radioimmunoassays done in our laboratory, the power of the
AOP was greatest for T3 uptake, then FTI, then T4. Daily AOP were followed for
these tests with control results on parallel Shewhart plots. We also applied an
exponential smoothing procedure on the AOP and control results to improve trend
detection. These analyses demonstrated that the AOP can improve the detection of 
systematic errors and the differentiation of true errors from errors affecting
only control specimens.

PMID: 3665094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Hybridoma. 1987 Aug;6(4):371-9.

Estimation of heterokaryon formation and hybridoma growth in murine and human
cell fusions.

Alkan SS, Mestel F, Jiricka J, Blaser K.

Four mouse myelomas commonly used for cell fusions (X63.Ag8.653, SP2/0, NS1,
P3U1), 3 human myeloma-like cell lines (ARH77, U-266, GM1500) and 3 human x mouse
hybridomas (SPAZ4, SA2, SA3) were compared for their heterokaryon formation and
successful hybridoma growth after cell fusion with polyethylene glycol. The cells
were stained with different fluorescent dyes which do not alter hybridoma growth 
or antibody secretion. After fusion myeloma cells containing at least 1 nucleus
from a lymphocyte (heterokaryons) were counted from fluorescence photomicrographs
and the heterokaryon frequency was calculated. Mouse myelomas fused at a
frequency of 1-7%, whereas human myeloma lines showed a higher heterokaryon
frequency ranging from 3-25%. In mouse fusions almost every well contained
growing hybridomas showing a minimum hybridoma frequency of 2/10(6) lymphocytes. 
In human fusions the SPAZ4 and SA2 lines showed a heterokaryon frequency nearly
as good as mouse myelomas, whereas U-266 yielded no growing hybridomas despite
20% heterokaryon frequency. Furthermore, human cell lines showed a high tendency 
of multikaryon formation whereas this phenomenon was rarely observed with murine 
and murine x human heterohybrids. In individual fusion experiments no correlation
was found between heterokaryon formation and the number of growing hybridomas.
Thus, our study shows that defects in hybridoma growth may not always result from
lack of a successful fusion and human hybridomas might be more sensitive to
post-fusion conditions.

PMID: 3623581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Neurochem. 1987 Aug;49(2):487-94.

Monoclonal antibodies against glutaraldehyde-conjugated dopamine.

Chagnaud JL, Mons N, Tuffet S, Grandier-Vazeilles X, Geffard M.

Four mice were immunized with dopamine (DA)-glutaraldehyde (G)--protein
conjugates over a period of 8-10 weeks. Polyclonal antisera, obtained at various 
intervals, were tested using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). All
had anti-conjugated DA antibodies. As soon as good antibody affinity was detected
between 10(-10) and 10(-6) M, the mouse yielding the highest apparent affinity
was killed, and the spleen was dissected out. Hybridomas were obtained from
spleen cells fused with SP2/O/Ag myeloma cells. Supernatant culture media of
hybridomas were tested for the presence of anti-conjugated DA antibodies with the
ELISA method. Selected hybridomas giving good antibody affinity and specificity
were then cloned by the limiting dilution technique. The resulting supernatant
culture media were again tested by ELISA. Clones that gave a high antibody
affinity (10(-10)-10(-8)M) for G-conjugated DA were used for histochemical
localization of DA in rat brain. G-fixed rat brains were sectioned from the
telencephalon to the mesencephalon, reduced with sodium borohydride, and prepared
for peroxidase-antiperoxidase immunocytochemistry using supernatant (diluted
1:100) or ascites fluid (diluted 1:50,000). Dense networks of very fine fibers
were observed in the striatum, septum, and cortex. Numerous immunoreactive cell
bodies were found in the ventral tegmental area, the substantia nigra, the
hypothalamus, and the dorsal raphe. The ELISA tests and adsorption controls
suggested that the monoclonal antibody allowed highly specific detection of DA in
tissues.

PMID: 3110374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Jpn J Exp Med. 1987 Aug;57(4):207-15.

Monoclonal antibodies directed to different tumor-associated antigens on a murine
mammary tumor cell line, MM46.

Oshima H(1), Nishiya S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Teikyo 
University, Kanagawa, Japan.

Seven monoclonal antibodies to a murine mammary carcinoma MM46 were produced by
fusing a mouse hybridoma cell line Sp2/O-Ag14 or a myeloma cell line
P3-X63-Ag8-U1 with spleen cells from C3H/He mice immunized with MM46. Their
specificities were investigated by the complement-dependent cytotoxicity test and
binding inhibition assay using 125I-labeled monoclonal antibodies. The
complement-dependent cytotoxicity test showed that all of them reacted with MM
antigen-positive tumor cells such as MM46 and FM3A/R. Three of them reacted with 
both C57BL/6 lymph node cells and EL4 tumor cells, suggesting that these 3
antibodies recognize Ly-6.2 antigen. One reacted with all tumor cells so far
tested (MM46, FM3A/R, MM48, MH134, and Meth A) except EL4. One antibody that
cross-reacted with MH134 was also obtained. Binding inhibition assay confirmed
hat the 7 monoclonal antibodies detected at least 4 different epitopes on MM46.
These results suggest that there are at least 4 different molecules on the cell
surface of MM46: namely, molecules that are 1) restricted to MM antigen-positive 
tumor cells, 2) present on several tumor cells, 3) broadly distributed on tumor
cells, and 4) cross-reactive with Ly antigen.

PMID: 2448508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Eur J Cell Biol. 1987 Aug;44(1):135-43.

Monoclonal antibodies as markers of the endocytic and secretory pathways.

Chicheportiche Y, Tartakoff AM.

A galactosyltransferase-rich subcellular fraction and wheat germ
agglutinin(WGA)-binding microsomal proteins from rat myeloma cells have been used
to immunize BALB/c mice. Fusion of the corresponding spleen cells with the Sp2/0 
mouse myeloma has lead to the production of hybridomas secreting monoclonal
antibodies directed against four proteins of the Golgi complex (GC) and other
smooth membranes (SM). Subcellular fractionation of myeloma cells and rat liver, 
Triton X-114 partitioning, protease treatment and lectin binding studies have
permitted us to identify--by immunoblotting--the molecular weight of the proteins
involved, their topology and their mode of association with membranes.
Morphological analysis has been performed by immunocytochemistry at the light and
electron microscopic level. Judging by these criteria, the GCII antigen is a
protein of 44 kDa which is loosely associated with the endodomain of Golgi
cisternae. GCIII is a detergent-binding glycoprotein of 130 kDa whose epitope is 
on the endodomain of Golgi cisternae. SMI is a detergent-binding glycoprotein of 
58 to 90 kDa found at several stations along the endocytic path: in coated pits, 
coated vesicles, endocytic vesicles, but not in lysosomes. The epitope recognized
by the corresponding antibody faces the ectodomain. When this antibody is added
to living cells in culture, it is rapidly internalized. SMII is a
detergent-binding glycoprotein of 140 kDa. The epitope recognized is restricted
to membranes of Golgi complex cisternae and multivesicular bodies. These reagents
should be useful for dissection and perturbation of vesicular traffic.

PMID: 2441992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Neuroimmunol. 1987 Jul-Aug;15(3):251-62.

Development and characterization of five monoclonal antibodies against neuronal
cell surface antigens--evaluation of their use in cell separation by affinity
chromatography.

Chatterjee D, Mandal C, Sarkar PK.

Five monoclonal antibodies directed against rat neuronal cell surface proteins
have been isolated and characterized following fusion of mouse SP2/O-Ag-14
myeloma cells and spleen cells from BALB/c mice immunized with neuron-specific
membrane proteins. The antibodies displayed cell specificity in binding and
elicited precipitation of different polypeptides from total neuronal cell surface
proteins. These antibodies are of potential use in the isolation of a neuronal
subpopulation by immunoaffinity chromatography. The work represents the
application of hybridoma technology for the isolation of specific types of
neuronal populations.

PMID: 3298317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Immunol Methods. 1987 Jun 26;100(1-2):181-9.

Improvement in the basic technology of electrofusion for generation of
antibody-producing hybridomas.

Ohnishi K, Chiba J, Goto Y, Tokunaga T.

In order to define the optimum conditions of electrofusion technique for the
generation of antibody-producing hybridomas, mouse spleen cells or
EBV-transformed human B cells were fused with mouse myeloma cells (SP2/0) or
human fusion partner cells (KR-4 or KR-12), respectively, by electric field pulse
under various conditions. The results confirm reports that the presence of both
Ca2+ and Mg2+ in fusion medium and pretreatment of mixed cells with proteases
improve hybridoma yield. Moreover, the presence of liposome or hydrophobic
protein in the fusion medium greatly enhanced the yield. Under optimum
conditions, hybridoma yields of mouse cells and human cells were 2.5 X 10(-4) and
1 X 10(-4), respectively. These efficiencies were about ten times higher than
those obtained by the conventional polyethylene glycol technique. Microscopic
observation of the fusion-process revealed that in a human cell system 20%-50% of
the cells were physically fused, although only one in 5000 physically fused human
cells grew as a hybridoma after hypoxanthine-aminopterin-thymidine selection.

PMID: 3110294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Immunol. 1987 Jun 15;138(12):4534-8.

Characterization of a mouse/human chimeric monoclonal antibody (17-1A) to a colon
cancer tumor-associated antigen.

Shaw DR, Khazaeli MB, Sun LK, Ghrayeb J, Daddona PE, McKinney S, LoBuglio AF.

Mouse monoclonal antibody 17-1A is specific for an antigen expressed on cells of 
human gastrointestinal malignancies and has been used in radioimmune imaging and 
therapy trials for patients with colon and pancreatic cancer. The cell line SG3/5
was generated by transfection of a nonproducing mouse myeloma line (SP2/0) with a
chimeric gene construct composed of variable regions from the mouse 17-1A
immunoglobulin (gamma 2a, kappa) and constant regions of human k and gamma 3
immunoglobulin genes. The secreted immunoglobulin was bound by mouse monoclonal
antibodies to human IgG(Fc) and IgG3 but not by staphylococcal protein A. Gel
filtration HPLC profiles of purified chimeric antibody were similar to normal
human IgG3 but quite different from native 17-1A and normal human IgG1, 2, and 4.
Native and chimeric 17-1A had similar patterns of reactivity with colon cancer,
other adenocarcinoma, and leukemic cell lines. Competitive inhibition documented 
that native and chimeric 17-1A had identical capacities to inhibit radiolabeled
native 17-1A binding to colon cancer cell lines. Thus, the chimeric 17-1A
exhibits molecular characteristics of normal human IgG3 but retains the
specificity and binding affinity of the native 17-1A murine monoclonal antibody. 
The native and chimeric 17-1A mediated similar modest degrees of human lymphocyte
and monocyte ADCC in a 4-hr 51Cr release assay, and both failed to mediate
complement lysis of colon carcinoma cell lines in the presence of human
complement. This human/mouse chimeric monoclonal antibody may be a good candidate
for use in clinical trials because it retains the tumor antigen specificity and
human effector cell recognition of the native 17-1A, would presumably have a
fivefold to 10-fold longer circulating half-life in man, and should be
considerably less immunogenic as compared with native murine immunoglobulins.

PMID: 3584980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Nucleic Acids Res. 1987 Jun 11;15(11):4688.

Short gene inversion involving two adjacent heavy chain joining minigenes and one
heavy chain diversity minigene in the nonsecretor Sp2/0-Ag14 myeloma cell line.

Liu ZQ, Wu AF, Wu TT.

PMCID: PMC340890
PMID: 3108858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Isr J Med Sci. 1987 Jun;23(6):683-6.

Mosquito spiroplasmas from France and their ecology.

Chastel C(1), Devau B, Le Goff F, Simitzis-Le Flohic AM, Gruffaz R, Kerdraon G,
Gilot B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Virologie, Faculté de Médicine, Brest, France.

Spiroplasmas have been isolated previously from a number of blood-sucking
arthropods, including ticks, horseflies, and deerflies. More recently,
spiroplasmas were isolated from mosquitoes from the USA, France, and Taiwan.
Spiroplasmas isolated from mosquitoes from France belong to at least three
serogroups and are serologically different from one of the Taiwan isolates, Sp2. 
Our Ar 1343 strain is the prototype of a new serogroup (XIII). During 3
consecutive years (1983-85), the ecology of these spiroplasmas was studied in
different biotopes near, and in, the Isère River Valley in Savoia, France. A
total of 23 strains was isolated from four species or groups of mosquitoes (Aedes
sticticus/vexans, Ae. cantans/annulipes, Ae. cinereus/geminus and Coquillettidia 
richiardii). Spiroplasmas were isolated only from female mosquitoes and only
during June and July. An as yet unidentified virus was also isolated from three
mosquito pools, one of which yielded spiroplasmas. Spiroplasma viruses were not
detected. Antibody to our Ar 1357 isolate was found in 4 of 20 sera from cows
living in the areas studied, but not in sera from wild rodents or in sera from
rabbit or pigeon sentinels. Finally, preliminary results are presented on the
effects of experimental infection of Ae. aegypti with the Ar 1357 isolated
(serogroup XXII).

PMID: 2889698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Vet Microbiol. 1987 Jun;14(2):115-24.

Antigenic variation of porcine transmissible gastroenteritis virus detected by
monoclonal antibodies.

Hohdatsu T(1), Eiguchi Y, Tsuchimoto M, Ide S, Yamagishi H, Matumoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Veterinary Science of Kitasato Institute, Chiba, Japan.

Mouse myeloma cells (SP2/O) were fused with spleen cells from BALB/c mice
immunized with detergent-solubilized antigen of purified virus, and 21 monoclonal
(MC) antibodies reactive in enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay with the TO-163
strain of porcine transmissible gastroenteritis (TGE) virus were obtained. Of
these MC antibodies, 14, 6 and 1 were IgG1, IgG2a and IgM, respectively. All of
the MC antibodies contained light chains of the kappa type. Of these MC
antibodies, 8 were found to have neutralization (NT) activity against the TO-163 
strain. Comparison of 7 strains of TGE virus by NT tests using our panel of MC
antibodies confirmed their close antigenic relationships, but also revealed the
occurrence of distinct antigenic differences. These results suggest that there
may be at least 6 different epitopes involved in NT reaction on the virion of the
TO-163 strain. This notion was confirmed by the competitive binding assay.

PMID: 2444027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Immunol Methods. 1987 May 4;99(1):39-45.

Cross-reacting monoclonal anti-alpha 1-microglobulin antibodies produced by
multi-species immunization and using protein G for the screening assay.

Nilson B, Akerström B, Lögdberg L.

In order to generate monoclonal antibodies (MAb) directed against the low
molecular weight glycoprotein alpha 1-microglobulin, a BALB/c mouse was immunized
with a mixture of human, guinea pig, rat and rabbit alpha 1-microglobulin
homologues (multi-species immunization) and boosted several times. On day 194,
the mouse splenocytes were fused to SP2/0 myeloma cells. The resulting hybridomas
were screened for anti-alpha 1-microglobulin activity against the alpha
1-microglobulin mixture or against the individual homologues. For this screening,
protein G (the newly described IgG-binding streptococcal protein) was used in a
solid-phase radioimmunoassay. The binding of protein G to immobilized
antigen-antibody complexes was enhanced by pre-incubation with rabbit anti-mouse 
immunoglobulin G. The result was a panel of nine established hybridoma lines, all
producing unique monoclonal antibodies, of IgG1 or IgG2a class, to alpha
1-microglobulin. The antibodies were not only reactive in solid-phase
radioimmunoassay, but they could also immunoprecipitate 125I-labeled soluble
alpha 1-microglobulin. Moreover, they reacted specifically with the alpha
1-microglobulin band in Western blots of urinary proteins separated by sodium
dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Such monoclonal antibodies
are potentially valuable reagents for the further characterization of alpha
1-microglobulin.

PMID: 2437206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Clin Immunol. 1987 May;7(3):254-61.

Monoclonal antibodies to human malignant mesothelioma.

Anderson TM, Holmes EC, Kosaka CJ, Cheng L, Saxton RE.

Murine monoclonal antibodies were used to identify tumor-cell membrane antigens
on a new human mesothelioma cell line. Hybridomas were constructed by fusing
SP2/0 mouse myeloma cells with spleen cells from Balb/C mice immunized by the
human mesothelioma cell line MT-1. Hybridoma antibody was detected in 55/672
microculture wells that reacted to these MT-1 tumor cells by an indirect
125I-protein A binding assay. Six cultures produced antibody binding selectively 
to the MT-1 tumor cells but not to a human lymphoblastoid cell line. These six
hybridomas were cloned: three were IgG and three were IgM antibodies. One
monoclonal, MAb 45, reacted with 4 of 7 human mesothelioma cell lines but with
only 1 of 11 carcinomas, 1 of 3 sarcomas, 4 of 11 melanomas, and 0 of 5 lymphoid 
lines. The other five monoclonals had a much broader cross-reactivity. Using an
immunoperoxidase technique, MAb 45 bound to mixed-type malignant mesotheliomas
but not to normal lung and pleura. The specificity of MAb 45 for diffuse
mesotheliomas and the low cross-reactivity with carcinomas and normal adjacent
tissues suggest that this monoclonal may be clinically useful.

PMID: 3597716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Life Sci. 1987 Apr 20;40(16):1633-43.

Occurrence and effects of multiple tachykinins; substance P, neurokinin A and
neuropeptide K in human lower airways.

Martling CR, Theodorsson-Norheim E, Lundberg JM.

In the present work we have studied the occurrence of different tachykinins
(substance P (SP), neurokinin A (NKA) and neuropeptide K (NPK)) in human distal
bronchi and pulmonary arteries by means of radioimmunoassay (RIA) and high
performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). We have also compared the biological
effects of different tachykinins on isolated human bronchi and pulmonary arteries
in vitro. The concentration of immunoreactive SP using antiserum SP2 in the
pulmonary arteries was higher (1.34 +/- 0.15 pmol/g) than in the bronchi (0.56
+/- 0.05 pmol/g). The contents of other tachykinins than SP measured using
antiserum K12 was on the other hand considerably higher in the bronchi (0.33 +/- 
0.14 pmol/g) than in pulmonary arteries (0.13 +/- 0.02 pmol/g). Immunoreactive
materials corresponding to SP, NKA and NPK were identified in bronchial extracts 
by RIA combined with HPLC, which also indicated the presence of an eledoisin
(ELE)-like component. In vitro studies showed that NKA was the most potent of the
tachykinins as a bronchoconstrictor agent, being several hundred-fold more active
than SP, acetylcholine and histamine. NPK had an intermediate potency. The
bronchoconstrictor effect of NKA was unaffected by atropine, mepyramine and
cimetidine. The tachykinins SP and NKA had on the other hand, a rather equal
potency in inducing relaxation of serotonin precontracted pulmonary arteries. In 
conclusion, multiple tachykinins are present in lower airways of man. These
peptides exert different biological activities whereby NKA is a very active
bronchoconstrictor agent compared to SP while both NKA and SP have rather similar
relaxatory activities of vascular smooth muscle.

PMID: 2436021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Eur J Biochem. 1987 Apr 1;164(1):129-35.

Monoclonal antibodies against an intracellular phospholipase A2 from rat liver
and their cross-reactivity with other phospholipases A2.

de Jong JG, Amesz H, Aarsman AJ, Lenting HB, van den Bosch H.

The membrane-associated phospholipase A2 from rat liver mitochondria was
solubilized and partially purified by AcA 54 gel filtration and Matrex gel blue A
chromatography. The approximately 2500-fold purified preparation was injected
into mice to prepare monoclonal antibodies against phospholipase A2 after fusion 
of spleen cells and mouse SP2/0 myeloma cells. Hybridoma supernatants were
assayed for antibody production in enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay with
partially purified phospholipase A2 as antigen. Positive clones were tested for
their ability to bind phospholipase A2 in a specific immunoprecipitation assay
involving protein-A--Sepharose to which rabbit anti-(mouse immunoglobulins) and
monoclonal antibodies from hybridoma supernatants were complexed. Twelve clones
producing antibodies that bound mitochondrial phospholipase A2 were identified.
The binding of all of these antibodies to protein fractions eluted from AcA 54
and Matrex gel blue A columns coincided with the phospholipase A2 activity in
these fractions. All monoclonal antibodies showed cross-reactivity with rat liver
cytosolic and solubilized rat platelet phospholipase A2. Extracellular
phospholipase A2 from rat and pig pancreas or Crotalus atrox were not recognized 
by the anti-(mitochondrial phospholipase A2) antibodies.

PMID: 3830178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Steroid Biochem. 1987 Apr;26(4):509-12.

Mouse monoclonal antibodies against rat estramustine binding protein.

Pousette A, Björk P, Forsgren B, Carlström K.

Hybridomas producing antibodies against rat prostatic estramustine binding
protein (rEMBP) have been obtained by fusion of spleen lymphocytes from Balb/c
mice, immunized with rEMBP, and SP2/0 Ag 14 mouse myeloma cells. Anti-rEMBP IgG
producing cultures were identified in a solid phase ELISA using alkaline
phosphatase conjugated sheep antimouse IgG. Cultures producing specific
antibodies were subcloned and expanded. The produced immunoglobulins were
characterized according to interaction with subunits of rEMBP. No interaction was
found with [3H]estramustine-human estramustine binding protein. Following
development of a radioimmunoassay, tissue distribution of rEMBP in the rat was
studied. Despite high specificity, shown by selective interaction with rEMBP (F
and S subunits), macromolecules interacting with anti-rEMBP were found in high
concentrations in the prostrate and also in low concentrations, in other tissues 
of the male genital tract, and further in the adrenals, pancreas and submaxillary
gland. The high specificity also makes it possible to study the F and S subunit
selectively. These results show that macromolecules very similar to rEMBP are
present in hormone-sensitive tissues in the rat.

PMID: 3586668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Agents Actions. 1987 Apr;20(3-4):178-80.

Action of the SP2-11 and SP3-11 fragments of substance P on rat peritoneal mast
cells.

Piotrowski W, Mead M, Foreman JC.

The ability of the SP fragments SP2-11 and SP3-11 to release histamine from rat
peritoneal mast cells has been compared with that of the whole peptide. SP1-11
was found to be about 3.4 times more active than SP2-11 and about 10.4 times more
active than SP3-11. The substance P antagonist [D-Pro4, D-Trp7,9,10] SP4-11 was
equally effective at antagonizing the histamine releasing action of SP1-11,
SP2-11 and SP3-11. Benzalkonium chloride was found to be a competitive antagonist
of SP and SP3-11: the dissociation constants for the benzalkonium
chloride-receptor interaction being about the same when either SP1-11 or SP3-11
was used as the agonist.

PMID: 2440265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Hybridoma. 1987 Apr;6(2):183-90.

A unique epitope on human serum albumin recognized by monoclonal antibody HSA-1: 
a probe for identification of the human origin of blood or tissue.

Benjamin DC, Herr JC, Sutherland WM, Woodward MP, DeCourcy K, Condon TP.

A panel of monoclonal antibodies was raised against human serum albumin from
fusions of BALB/c splenocytes and SP2/0-Ag14 murine myeloma cells. This panel was
screened against purified albumins from 21 species including chimpanzee, gorilla,
and orangutan. A monoclonal antibody (HSA-1) specific for human albumin was
identified. The epitope recognized by HSA-1 was shown to be conserved in all
human blood samples tested. A double antibody ELISA assay was developed using
biotinylated HSA-1 as the specific probe for human albumin. This assay was
capable of detecting as little as 30 nanograms or less albumin/ml. This assay was
used to verify the presence of human albumin in blood, tissue extracts, and other
body fluids. These results show that the HSA-1 monoclonal antibody can be used in
determining the human origin of blood, tissue, and a variety of other body
fluids.

PMID: 2437011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Infect Immun. 1987 Apr;55(4):909-15.

Effect of monoclonal antibody to pertussis toxin on toxin activity.

Sato H, Sato Y, Ito A, Ohishi I.

Two distinct monoclonal antibodies, one to pertussis toxin subunit S2, called
9G8, and another to subunits S2 and S3, called 11E6, were generated from the
hybridomas of myeloma SP2/0 and spleen cells of BALB/c mice immunized mainly with
the subunit S234 complex. Binding ability of 9G8 and 11E6 to the subunits was
confirmed by the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and immunoblotting analysis.
Generation of 11E6 bound to both S2 and S3 might mean that there is common
antigenicity between S2 and S3. Neutralizing activities of 9G8 and 11E6 on
various biological activities of pertussis toxin, including
ADP-ribosyltransferase and leukocytosis-promoting, islet-activating,
permeability-increasing. Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cell-clustering, and
hemagglutinating activities, were compared with those of anti-S1 monoclonal
antibodies 1B7 and 3F10, which were isolated and characterized in a previous
study (H. Sato, A. Ito, J. Chiba, and Y. Sato, Infect. Immun. 46:422-428, 1984). 
1B7 and 3F10 neutralized ADP-ribosyltransferase activity of pertussis toxin or
S1, but 9G8 and 11E6 did not. 1B7 showed very potent neutralization against
leukocytosis-promoting, islet-activating, permeability-increasing, and CHO
cell-clustering activities of pertussis toxin, but 3F10 did not, although
anti-ADP-ribosyltransferase activities of both antibodies were identical. 11E6
neutralized leukocytosis-promoting, islet-activating, CHO cell-clustering, and
hemagglutinating activities but not permeability-increasing activity. 9G8 showed 
slight neutralization of leukocytosis-promoting and CHO cell-clustering
activities. Specific activities of 1B7 and 11E6 in each neutralization test were 
higher than or almost comparable to those of polyclonal antibodies to pertussis
toxin. The neutralizing mechanism of 1B7 and 11E6 in leukocytosis-promoting
activity was compared. 11E6 seemed to interfere with the binding of pertussis
toxin to receptors on mouse spleen cells.

PMCID: PMC260437
PMID: 2435660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 1987 Mar;9(2):81-4.

[Localization of oncoprotein P21ras in the human liver cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Hong JX(1), Wei MH, Zhang X, Liu YW, Wan DF, Gu JR, Yu XS, Shi DR, Zhang HZ.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Cancer Institute.

Using the human liver cancer DNA transfected NIH/3T3 cell line, the human N-ras
oncogene and the over expression of the oncoprotein P21ras was demonstrated,
BALB/C mice were immunized. The spleen cells from the immunized mice were fused
with SP2/0 myeloma cells. After the HAT medium selection and screening, two
hybridoma cell lines, SCI-Oncogema 1 and 2, were established. In the
immunoprecipitation test, the molecular weight of the protein reacting to
Oncogema 1 was 21,000. This M.W 21,000 protein possessed the capability to bind
with GTP, i.e. the character of P21ras. These data indicate that the Oncogema 1
is the monoclonal antibody against P21ras. Using Oncogema 1, specimens from 6
liver cancer patients were studied by immunopathology. With ABC stain, it was
observed that the malignant cells in all the samples showed dark staining; the
P21ras revealed over expression. Although the staining was heterogeneous, it
implied that the ras oncogene was involved in the carcinogenesis of these six
samples. No over expression was seen in the normal liver cells even in those
around the cancerous lesion. However, dysplastic cells were moderately stained
which means that the ras oncogene was activated and P21ras over expressed in
these cells. The results suggest that the ras oncogene and P21ras play an
important role in the early stage of liver cancer carcinogenesis.

PMID: 3308383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. J Clin Microbiol. 1987 Mar;25(3):516-21.

Production and characterization of monoclonal antibodies to toxic shock syndrome 
toxin 1 and use of a monoclonal antibody in a rapid, one-step enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay for detection of picogram quantities of toxic shock syndrome 
toxin 1.

Wells DE, Reeves MW, McKinney RM, Graves LM, Olsvik O, Bergan T, Feeley JC.

Twenty-six hybridoma cell lines that produced monoclonal antibodies to toxic
shock syndrome toxin 1 (TSST-1) were generated by immunizing mice with a highly
purified preparation of TSST-1 and fusing their splenic lymphocytes with
SP2/0-Ag-14 cells. One monoclonal antibody of the immunoglobulin G1 isotype,
designated as PEC-1 10-2SCH, was selected for extensive study. The specificity of
this antibody was determined by testing spent culture fluid filtrates of TSST-1- 
and non-TSST-1-producing strains of Staphylococcus aureus by sodium dodecyl
sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and enzyme-linked
immunoelectrotransfer blot techniques. Monoclonal antibody PEC-1-10-2SCH was
specific for TSST-1-producing strains of S. aureus, reacting with TSST-1 and two 
other proteins which appear to be unique to S. aureus strains that produce
TSST-1. Monoclonal antibody PEC-1-10-2SCH was used in conjunction with polyclonal
rabbit antibodies to TSST-1 in a rapid, one-step, sensitive, specific, and
quantitative enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. This assay was shown to be more
sensitive, faster, and simpler to perform than previously described isoelectric
focusing, immunodiffusion, and solid-phase radioimmunoassays for TSST-1.
Monoclonal antibody PEC-1-10-2SCH was not reactive with Staphylococcus protein A 
under the conditions of the test.

PMCID: PMC265972
PMID: 3106406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 1987 Mar;9(2):95-8.

[Angiogenesis induced by SP2/0 and HeLa tumor cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Xiu RJ(1), Duan CG, Mu GF.

Author information: 
(1)Microcirvalation Research Center, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences,
Beijing.

Cheek pouches of Syrian golden hamsters and transparent access chambers of BALB/C
mice were implanted with SP2/0 and HeLa tumor cells separately. Observation was
done by continual photo and video from D 1 through the D 10 after implantation.
It was found by the development of angiogenesis and the density of microvessels
that both kinds of tumor cells could induce angiogenesis. On D 2 after
implantation, there appeared leakage and hemorrhage from the microvessels near
the tumor cells. On D 3 and D 4, there was an increased density of new
capillaries which formed a very fine, tortuous and basketlike vascular plexus of 
irregular diameter. Most of the new microvessels came from the venules on the
edge of the implant mass and they grew toward the tumor cells to penetrate the
tumor tissue on D 4 to D 5. On D 7, the density of new microvessels reached the
maximum and they began to extend outside the tumor which was surrounded by dense 
new capillaries. Compound 36 has been proved an effective substance against some 
tumors in clinical applications in this country. Also proved by our experiments, 
a drug effective in inhibition of angiogenesis induced by SP2/0 tumor cells.

PMID: 2443328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Immunol Methods. 1987 Feb 11;96(2):247-53.

Production of IgG-producing hybridomas by in vitro stimulation of murine spleen
cells.

Takahashi M, Fuller SA, Hurrell JG.

An in vitro stimulation protocol has been established which allows production of 
IgG-secreting murine hybridomas. This procedure has been examined using jack bean
urease and human luteinizing hormone as antigens. Parameters which have been
optimized include selection of media and serum supplements, thymocyte-conditioned
media, antigen dosage, length of stimulation and the effect of medium changes
during stimulation and additions of polyclonal mitogen. Murine spleen cells (1 X 
10(8) in 10 ml) were incubated with varying doses of jack bean urease and human
luteinizing hormone in a six-well plate in supplemented DMEM with 5% normal
rabbit serum and 10% thymocyte-conditioned media. Following 5 and/or 8 days
stimulation, the spleen cells were fused with SP2/0 cells and plated in 96-well
plates. Stable hybridomas were obtained for both antigens from over 25% of the
wells identified in initial screening for specific antibody production. All
monoclonal antibodies obtained in the LH stimulation experiments, with one
exception, were of the IgM isotype. A large number of IgG-producing hybridomas
were isolated following prolonged (8 day) stimulation with high concentrations of
urease, during which time the medium remained unchanged. Addition of polyclonal
mitogen (E. coli lipopolysaccharide) at 10 micrograms/ml markedly increased the
production of hybridomas secreting anti-urease, but most were of IgM class.

PMID: 3492563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. J Biol Chem. 1987 Jan 25;262(3):1374-81.

Immunochemical and kinetic evidence for two different prostaglandin
H-prostaglandin E isomerases in sheep vesicular gland microsomes.

Tanaka Y, Ward SL, Smith WL.

Splenic lymphocytes from mice immunized with a partially purified prostaglandin
(PG) H-PGE isomerase from sheep vesicular glands were fused with SP2/0-Ag14
myeloma cells. Two spleen cell-myeloma hybrids (hei-7 and hei-26) were selected
and cloned. The mouse antibodies secreted by the two hybrids, IgG1 (hei-7) and
IgG1 (hei-26), caused immunoprecipitation of a maximum of 45 and 22%,
respectively, of the solubilized PGH-PGE isomerase activity of sheep vesicular
gland; immunoprecipitation of activity by the two antibodies was additive. The
antigens reactive with IgG1 (hei-7) and IgG1 (hei-26) were identified as proteins
with Mr = 17,500 and 180,000, respectively, by Western transfer blotting or
sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of immunoprecipitated
125I-labeled microsomes. The PGH-PGE isomerase activities precipitated by IgG1
(hei-7) and IgG1 (hei-26) exhibited different kinetic properties with respect to 
time course, Km for PGH2, and concentration dependence for GSH. No significant
GSH-S-transferase activity was present in these immunoprecipitates. These data
indicate that there are at least two different proteins in sheep vesicular gland 
microsomes capable of catalyzing GSH-dependent PGH-PGE isomerase reactions. IgG1 
(hei-7), but not IgG1 (hei-26), caused coprecipitation of PGH synthase and
PGH-PGE isomerase activities when incubated with intact right-side-out vesicular 
gland microsomes. Thus, the epitope for IgG1 (hei-7) is located on the
cytoplasmic surface of those microsomal spheres which contain PGH synthase. This 
latter finding suggests that the isomerase reactive with IgG1 (hei-7) is involved
in PGE synthesis in sheep vesicular glands.

PMID: 3100531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Neurochem Int. 1987;10(3):287-94.

Monoclonal antibodies against rat brain glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD).

Legay F(1), Henry S, Tappaz ML.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U 171 and CNRS UA 1195, Groupe de Neurochimie Fonctionnelle, Hôpital
Ste Eugénie, Pav. 4 H, 1 Av. G. Clémenceau, 69230 St Genis Laval, France.

Monoclonal antibodies against rat brain GAD have been produced and
immunochemically characterized in comparison with a traditional anti-GAD
antiserum (Oertel et al., Neuroscience6, 2689-2700, 1981). An immunopurified
fraction in which GAD represented an estimated 5% of the total protein was used
as immunogen. Out of 10 mice injected with this fraction, 6 appeared to be
immunized: their sera immunoprecipitated quantitatively GAD activity. Three cell 
fusions were performed between spleen cells of the best immunized mice and
SP2/OAg14 myeloma cells. Around 500 hybridoma were generated in each
hybridization experiment. The culture medium of 13 hybridoma significantly
trapped GAD activity. All immunoprecipitation curves established with the ascitic
fluid obtained from the positive hybridoma, showed a lower titer, at least
50-fold, than the titer of the conventional antiserum. None of these ascitic
fluids was able to stain directly any protein from a rat high speed supernatant
after western blotting. However, the electrophoretical analysis of the proteins
immunotrapped by any of the monoclonal antibodies, followed by western blotting
and immunolabelling with the anti-GAD antiserum ("cross-immunoblotting") showed
the same two stained monomers. They have the same molecular weight (respectively 
59 and 62 kDa +/- 2 kDa) as those stained directly by the anti-GAD antiserum from
a rat brain supernatant. Although all monoclonal antibodies showed a lower
affinity then the conventional antiserum, which prevents them from being used
directly in immunoblotting they permit to definitively establish that the two
monomers immunolabelled by the conventional antiserum are constitutive subunits
of the rat brain GAD.

PMID: 20501098  [PubMed]


276. J Automat Chem. 1987;9(3):129-31.

Comparison of a time-resolved fluoroimmunoassay with a solid phase
immunoradiometric assay the measurement of alphafetoprotein in amniotic fluid.

Coombes EJ(1), Moody BJ, James H, Kelly C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Pathology Salisbury General Infirmary Wiltshire
Salisbury SP2 7SX UK.

PMCID: PMC2547707
PMID: 18925167  [PubMed]


277. Folia Biol (Praha). 1987;33(5):295-300.

Monoclonal antibodies against genetically manipulated hepatitis B core antigen.

Hlozánek I(1), Korec E, Dostálová V, Stará J, König J, Bichko VV, Seichertová A, 
Gren EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics, Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences, Praha.

Four different hybridoma clones secreting anti-HBcAg antibodies were constructed 
by fusing cells of the mouse myeloma line SP2/0 with lymphocytes from mice
immunized with bacterially produced HBcAg. The monoclonal antibodies were
immunologically characterized and used for HBcAg detection by ELISA. This
monoclonal-antibody-based assay was compared with ELISA based on polyclonal human
anti-HBcAg IgG for sensitivity and specificity. The monoclonal antibody reacted
specifically both with the bacterially produced HBcAg and HBcAg isolated from
human liver, but did not react with HBeAg. The human polyclonal antibody reacted 
with HBcAg, but also with HBeAg.

PMID: 3691895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Mol Immunol. 1987 Jan;24(1):57-65.

A monoclonal antibody with reactivity to asialo GM1 and murine natural killer
cells.

Solomon FR, Higgins TJ.

A monoclonal antibody (MAb) was prepared by the fusion of murine SP2-O myeloma
cells with BALB/cByJ spleen cells that were immunized with the glycolipid asialo 
GM1 adsorbed to naked Salmonella. The specificity of the IgM antibody obtained
was defined using various glycolipids, cell extracts and saccharides in ELISA
assays and thin-layer chromatography (TLC) immunoblots. The non-reducing terminal
galactose is the immunodominant residue for this antibody; however, there is
undetectable reactivity to free galactose, galactosylceramide or compounds with
an alpha-linked galactose. The SH-34 antibody specifically lyses asialo
GM1-expressing macrophages in the presence of complement and removes NK cells in 
vitro from spleen cell populations. When the specificity of the MAb was compared 
to that of a commercially available rabbit antiserum to asialo GM1, it was found 
that both cross-reacted with GM1 and asialo GM3 at high antibody concns; however,
the MAb did not bind asialo GM2 while the rabbit antiserum showed substantial
reactivity to this glycolipid. It is anticipated that this MAb will be useful for
the study of murine and rat natural killer cells.

PMID: 3614206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Neoplasma. 1987;34(6):693-701.

A preliminary report on monoclonal antibodies against human uveal melanoma.

Kalafut F(1), Kusenda J, Novotná L, Cernák A.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava,
Czechoslovakia.

Mouse Sp2/10 myeloma cells were fused with spleen cells from mice that had been
immunized with freshly obtained primary human uveal melanoma cells. Hybrids that 
produced antibodies binding to the uveal melanoma cells, but not to fibroblasts, 
uveal or retinal cells of healthy donors, were cloned. Extensive specificity
tests showed that the antibodies produced by the ten clones bound strongly to
fresh or short-time cultures of primary human uveal melanoma tumor cells (UMEL-H,
UMEL-K). Weaker binding occurred with a human uveal melanoma cell line (VUP-1),
and with human skin melanoma cell lines (HMB-2, B-HM8), respectively. Binding
assays with carcinoma cells, fibroblasts, uveal and retinal cells were negative. 
An intensive screening of this type is now under way.

PMID: 3431609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Gene. 1987;54(1):33-40.

Expression of mouse::human immunoglobulin heavy-chain cDNA in lymphoid cells.

Liu AY, Mack PW, Champion CI, Robinson RR.

A chimeric mouse variable::human constant immunoglobulin heavy-chain gene was
expressed in transfected mouse Sp2/0 cells. The chimeric immunoglobulin genes
were integrated in tandem in the genome of stably transformed cells. These
integrated gene copies were amplified by selection with a second drug marker. The
gene amplification led to an increase in the expression of chimeric heavy-chain
protein. The level of gene expression appears to be related to the site of
integration; a few gene copies in one transfectant can yield as much heavy-chain 
protein as many copies in a second transfectant. In addition, we found that an
adventitious oligo(C) sequence, introduced by our method of gene construction at 
a site located 8 nt residues downstream from a splice acceptor, can apparently
direct splicing towards a cryptic splice acceptor downstream from the oligo(C).

PMID: 3111940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. J Immunol. 1987 Jan 1;138(1):316-23.

Novel V genes encode virtually identical variable regions of six murine
monoclonal anti-bromelain-treated red blood cell autoantibodies.

Reininger L, Ollier P, Poncet P, Kaushik A, Jaton JC.

The variable (V) region sequences of six immunoglobulin M (IgM, kappa) monoclonal
autoantibodies that recognize bromelinized isologous red blood cells, obtained by
fusions of peritoneal cells from NZB or CBA/J nonimmunized mice with BALB/c
myeloma cells, were determined by direct mRNA sequencing. The V regions of the
light chains (VL) are almost identical with one another, as are the V regions of 
the heavy chains (VH), which, however, differ by six linked-base substitutions,
depending on the strain of mice producing the autoantibodies. Such variations may
reflect allelic differences. The VH segments determined have no obvious
correspondence to any VH genes identified so far. They may belong to the small VH
group 4, where 73% homology, at the most, can be calculated at the protein level 
for codons 1 to 94. Alternatively, the VH regions may be members of a new group
of VH sequences not previously found. The V kappa regions appear closely
homologous to members of the V kappa-9 subgroup of myeloma proteins of unknown
antigen-binding specificity. The joining segments, J kappa and JH, used by the
autoantibodies investigated, originate from the J kappa 2 and JH1 germ-line gene 
segments, respectively. The nine base-long diversity segments, D, derive from one
member of the germ-line D gene SP2 family.

PMID: 3097149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1987 Jan;84(1):214-8.

Chimeric antibody with human constant regions and mouse variable regions directed
against carcinoma-associated antigen 17-1A.

Sun LK, Curtis P, Rakowicz-Szulczynska E, Ghrayeb J, Chang N, Morrison SL,
Koprowski H.

We have cloned the genomic DNA fragments encoding the heavy and light chain
variable regions of monoclonal antibody 17-1A, and we have inserted them into
mammalian expression vectors containing genomic DNA segments encoding human gamma
3 and kappa constant regions. The transfer of these expression vectors containing
mouse-human chimeric immunoglobulin genes into Sp2/0 mouse myeloma cells resulted
in the production of functional IgG that retained the specific binding to the
surface antigen 17-1A expressed on colorectal carcinoma cells.

PMCID: PMC304173
PMID: 3025856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Mol Immunol. 1987 Jan;24(1):39-46.

Hybrid polypeptide heavy chains produced by two hybridoma lines.

Colle JH, Perret R, Truffa-Bachi P.

Two anti-TNP antibodies exhibiting unusual features are described. They were
obtained in two independent fusions. Spleen cells from CB20 mice sensitized with 
TNP-Ficoll and challenged with TNP-LPS were fused with SP2/0 myeloma cells. One
of these hybridomas, CBT3, secretes antibodies which react with both monospecific
anti-gamma 2b and anti-gamma 3 anti-isotypic sera; the second hybridoma, CBT4,
secretes antibodies reacting with monospecific anti-mu and anti-gamma 2b sera.
Only one type of immunoglobulin is secreted by each hybridoma, ruling out the
hypothesis of hybrid molecules formed by distinct heavy chains. These results
imply that the two heavy chains are made up from elements encoded by gamma 3 and 
gamma 2b genes in CBT3 and by gamma 2b and mu genes in CBT4. The molecular
mechanisms underlying the production of these singular heavy chains are
discussed.

PMID: 2441246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Clin Chim Acta. 1986 Dec 30;161(3):315-25.

Quantitation of serum lactate dehydrogenase-5 with monoclonal antibodies.

Vaidya HC, Dietzler DN, Ladenson JH.

Spleen cells from BALB/cJ mice which had been immunized with human lactate
dehydrogenase-1 (LDH-1) were fused with SP2/0-Ag14. Two hybridomas were produced 
which recognized the antigen. Competitive RIA revealed that one antibody
('Smit-LDH') recognized the H subunit of LDH while the other ('Hem-LDH')
recognized both H and M subunits of LDH. With the use of these antibodies we
developed an assay for LDH-5 activity in which serum is incubated for 30 min at
room temperature with the two antibodies ('Smit-LDH' and 'Hem-LDH' in the ratio
64:1.3, micrograms/ml) immobilized on latex beads to extract LDH-1 through LDH-4.
After centrifugation, the LDH activity of the supernatant is measured and
represents LDH-5 activity. Latex beads coated with bovine serum albumin were used
as control. The LDH-5 activity as determined by our assay correlated well (r =
0.98) with the values obtained by an electrophoresis method. There was no
interference due to LDH-1 through LDH-3 up to 3,000 U/l and LDH-4 up to 350 U/l. 
Serum samples with total LDH activity above 1,000 U/l were appropriately diluted 
in order to avoid interference by LDH-4. Use of these monoclonal antibodies
allows precise, rapid and direct measurement of LDH-5 activity in serum.

PMID: 3802538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Immunol Methods. 1986 Dec 4;95(1):123-8.

Production of primate monoclonal antibodies.

Van Meurs GJ, Jonker M.

Monoclonal antibodies of primate origin were produced by direct fusion of
peripheral blood lymphocytes with two different fusion cell lines: SP2/0, a mouse
plasmacytoma line and SBC-H2O, a human-mouse heteromyeloma. The fusion of primate
lymphocytes with SP2/0 cells was not successful and only transient production of 
antibodies was found. The fusion of primate lymphocytes with SBC-H2O cells was
more successful and resulted in the establishment of stable monoclonal
antibody-producing lines especially when chimpanzee cells were used.

PMID: 3782822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Infect Immun. 1986 Dec;54(3):798-803.

The use of monoclonal antibodies to detect Bacteroides gingivalis in biological
samples.

Chen P, Bochacki V, Reynolds HS, Beanan J, Tatakis DN, Zambon JJ, Genco RJ.

Hybridomas were established which produce monoclonal antibodies specific for
Bacteroides gingivalis, a pathogen associated with human periodontal disease.
Spleen cells from BALB/c mice immunized with formalinized B. gingivalis were
fused with Sp2/0-Ag14 myeloma cells. Of 1,050 wells with positive growth, 60
contained antibody reactive with the immunizing strain of B. gingivalis by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Expansion of these cultures and cloning by
limited dilution resulted in 28 clones which reacted with B. gingivalis but not
with other orals and nonoral black-pigmented Bacteroides species or any of 29
representative strains of other oral bacteria. Of these 28 clones, 14 were also
specific for B. gingivalis by indirect immunofluorescence microscopy. One clone, 
BBG-12 producing immunoglobulin G2b(kappa), was chosen to identify B. gingivalis 
in subgingival plaque because of its high reactivity in indirect
immunofluorescence assays. This antibody reacted strongly with all 17
representative B. gingivalis strains obtained from diverse sources. Furthermore, 
when this reagent was applied to subgingival plaque samples, B. gingivalis was
stained with high specificity and low background fluorescence, indicating that it
may be useful for clinical identification of this organism.

PMCID: PMC260240
PMID: 3781626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Biken J. 1986 Dec;29(3-4):77-81.

Induction of gametocytogenesis in Plasmodium falciparum by the culture
supernatant of hybridoma cells producing anti-P. falciparum antibody.

Ono T, Nakai T, Nakabayashi T.

There have been many unsuccessful attempts to induce gametocytogenesis in vitro. 
In the present experiment, however, we found that RPMI-CS medium and RPMI-FS
medium prepared by dissolving powdered RPMI 1640 medium in the culture
supernatants of hybridoma cells, hybrid line D21 and 219.5, respectively, that
produce anti-P. falciparum antibody induced gametocytogenesis. Gametocytogenesis 
was consistently observed from 3 days after addition of these media. The culture 
supernatant of anti-P. falciparum antibody producing hybridoma cells did not
induce gametocytogenesis in the absence of RPMI 1640 medium. RPMI-MS medium,
prepared by dissolving powdered RPMI 1640 medium in the culture supernatant of
myeloma cells, SP2/O-Ag 14, which was used as a control, induced a few
gametocytes.

PMID: 3304278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Mol Immunol. 1986 Dec;23(12):1281-8.

Monoclonal antibodies to the major Lolium perenne (rye grass) pollen allergen Lol
p I (Rye I).

Kahn CR, Marsh DG.

Thirteen monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) were produced against Lol p I (Rye I), the 
major Lolium perenne (rye grass) pollen allergen. Spleen cells from A/J and SJL
mice immunized with highly purified Lol p I (Lol I) were allowed to fuse with
cells from the non-secreting Sp2/0-Ag14 myeloma cell line. Each MAb was analyzed 
for antigenic specificity by radioimmunoassay (RIA) using 125I-Lol I. The epitope
specificities of seven of the MAbs were examined by competitive binding against a
labelled standard MAb for the Lol I antigen (Ag). The dissociation constant, Kd, 
of one MAb (No. 3.2) that was studied most extensively was determined by double
Ab RIA to be 3.5 X 10(-6) L/M. This MAb recognized the related 27,000-30,000
Group I glycoproteins found in the pollens of nine other species of grass pollens
tested, including weak binding to Bermuda grass Group I (Cyn d I), which by
conventional analysis using polyclonal anti-Lol I serum shows no detectable
binding. Monoclonal antibody No. 3.2 was coupled covalently to Sepharose 4B and
used to prepare highly purified Lol I from a partially purified rye pollen
extract. Finally, an RIA was developed which permitted the analysis of the Group 
I components in rye grass and nine other grass pollen species. The latter assay
is likely to prove useful in the standardization of grass pollen extracts
according to their Group I contents.

PMID: 2434841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Asian Pac J Allergy Immunol. 1986 Dec;4(2):121-7.

Differentiation antigen on murine B lymphocytes defined by monoclonal antibodies.

Lal RB, Brown EM, Chused TM.

Spleen cells from an AKR/J X DBA/2J F1 mouse immunized with NZB/BIN spleen cells 
were fused with SP2/0-Ag14. Two hybrid cell lines, B220-1 and B220-2, were
established that secreted antibody to the B-lineage specific B220 antigen. B220-1
and B220-2 are present on 45-55% of splenic and bone marrow lymphocytes and
absent from thymus. By flow cytometry, all immunoglobulin-bearing cells were
stained by these monoclonal antibodies. Although these monoclonals do not stain
thymocytes, they do react weakly with Lyt-2+ peripheral T cells. Dual parameter
analysis of B lymphocytes using RA3-3A1 or 14.8 show that these monoclonals
recognized the same population. Prior incubation with RA3-3A1 or 14.8 was unable 
to completely block the binding of B220-1 or B220-2, implying that the epitopes
recognized are different from the previously described monoclonal antibodies.
Immunoprecipitation of the splenic lymphocyte reveals a molecule which migrates
on SDS-PAGE as a single band with MW of 220,000 daltons. Expression of the
distinct antigens recognized by B220-1 and B220-2 varied among mouse strains,
indicating previously unappreciated polymorphism of the B220 molecule. These
monoclonals are useful for cytotoxic elimination of B cells and for three-color
flow cytometry.

PMID: 2432905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Nihon Naibunpi Gakkai Zasshi. 1986 Nov 20;62(11):1244-58.

[An analysis of islet cell surface antigen defined by monoclonal islet cell
surface antibody 5C12].

[Article in Japanese]

Amano K.

Monoclonal antibody 3A4 to islet cell surface antigen has been previously
established in our laboratory, using hybridization of spleen lymphocytes from
non-obese diabetic (NOD) mice transferred into immunologically incompetent
recipient mice. In the present study, monoclonal islet cell surface antibody 5C12
could be newly obtained in the 10:1 ratio of NOD mice spleen cells and mouse
myeloma cells (SP2/0) without any modifications. Protein A radioligand assay and 
indirect immunofluorescence on living cells showed that 5C12 antibody reacted to 
normal rat islet cells and cultured rat insulinoma cells (RIN-r), but not to
cultured lymphocytes (Bri-7, IM-9) and Chang-liver cells. Analysis of
125I-labeled antibody binding revealed that unlabeled 5C12 effectively inhibited 
subsequent 125I-5C12 binding to RIN-r cells, whereas unlabeled 3A4 did not. The
scatchard plot from these data showed the curvilinearity, and about 150,000
binding sites to antibody per RIN-r cell were counted. The treatment of RIN-r
cells with papain and neuraminidase reduced the binding of 5C12 to RIN-r cells,
whereas the effect of trypsin was not observed. Immunoprecipitation of
125I-labeled insulinoma cell lysates followed by SDS-PAGE and autoradiography
indicated that 5C12 recognized 105K dalton cell surface protein in RIN-r cells.
Immunoblotting also showed that 5C12 antibody recognized 105K dalton cell surface
protein in RIN-r cells. These results demonstrated that 5C12 was an important
tool for clarifying the immunoresponse against certain antigenic determinants on 
pancreatic B cells. Furthermore, 5C12 has not only qualitatively and
quantitatively improved diagnostic methodology, but it may also provide new
reagents useful to the treatment and prevention of type 1 diabetes.

PMID: 3542594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 1986 Nov;13(3):213-26.

Production and characterization of monoclonal antibodies raised against BoLA
class I antigens.

Letesson JJ, Coppe P, Lostrie N, Greimers R, Depelchin A.

Monoclonal antibodies (MoAbs) reacting with bovine leukocyte membrane antigens
have been prepared by fusion of mouse myeloma cells (SP2/0.Ag.14) and spleen
cells of mice immunized with various cell types. Three of these MoAbs detected
membrane components showing the typical structure of class I MHC molecules;
indeed, immunoprecipitation studies revealed that these components were proteins 
composed of two subunits of 44,000 and 12,000 daltons apparent molecular weight. 
The density of these antigens in the cells of various leukocyte lineages was
determined by solid phase radioimmunoassay, immunogold staining and
cytofluorometry. Their expression seemed similar to that of class I molecules in 
other species, namely heavy on the mononuclear blood cells and weaker on the
neutrophils and platelets. The eosinophils appeared more positive than the
neutrophils, while the erythrocytes were negative. Cross-inhibition and
sequential immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrated that these MoAbs
recognised different epitopes either on a single molecule or on cross-reacting
molecules. One antibody appeared to be raised against the monomorphic bovine
beta-2-microglobulin, while the two other antibodies detected the heavy chain of 
polymorphic class I-like products. The authors propose that the BoLA class I
polymorphism should be studied by determination of the fixation ratio of the
monomorphic anti-beta 2M versus the polymorphic anticlass I antibodies amongst
the animals.

PMID: 3099453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Curr Eye Res. 1986 Nov;5(11):801-15.

Development of monoclonal antibodies recognizing collagenase from rabbit PMN; the
presence of this enzyme in ulcerating corneas.

Kao WW, Ebert J, Kao CW, Covington H, Cintron C.

Rabbit uterine collagenase was purified from the medium of involuting uterus (1-2
days postpartum) in culture using ammonium sulfate fractionation, DEAE-cellulose,
heparin-affinity, and high performance liquid chromatography. The enzyme was
purified more than 1600 fold. Hybridoma cell-lines producing monoclonal
antibodies were prepared by fusing the spleen cells of mice immunized with the
purified enzyme with mouse myeloma cells (Sp2/O-Ag14). The hybridoma cells were
selected with HAT medium, cloned, and screened by ELISA. Antibody-producing
ascites were prepared by injecting hybridoma cell-lines into the peritoneal
cavities of mice. Western-blot analysis indicated that the antibodies recognized 
a polypeptide having a molecular weight of 52,000. The IgG isolated from the
ascites inhibited the enzyme. Indirect immunofluorescent staining demonstrated
that polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs) in the superficial layer of
alkali-burned corneas contained collagenase, whereas stromal cells and PMNs
within the stroma were not stained by the antibodies. Our results suggest that
collagenases produced by rabbit PMNs are different from those produced by
fibroblasts from cornea. We hypothesize that PMNs in alkali-burned corneas
secrete all or most of their collagenases by degranulation at the anterior
surface of the cornea, and then continue to migrate into the deeper portion of
the stroma.

PMID: 2430758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1986 Oct;52(4):782-7.

Inhibition of ammonium oxidation by nitrapyrin in soil and liquid culture.

Powell SJ(1), Prosser JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Aberdeen, Marischal College,
Aberdeen AB9 1AS, Scotland.

Inhibition of growth of axenic cultures of Nitrosomonas europaea by nitrapyrin
was investigated in liquid culture and in soil. In liquid culture, exponentially 
growing cells were more sensitive than stationary-phase cells, possibly due to a 
requirement for uptake of nitrapyrin, metabolism of nitrapyrin, or both before
inhibition. Differences in sensitivity were observed between the parent strain
and two strains, sp1 and sp2, that were selected through repeated subculturing.
These differences were reflected in the length of the lag period induced by
nitrapyrin and in the specific growth rate and were due to different bactericidal
and bacteriostatic effects. Soil provided significant protection from inhibition,
with concentrations of nitrapyrin approximately one order of magnitude greater
than those required for equivalent inhibition in liquid culture. The data show
that strain differences alone do not explain differences in sensitivity between
nitrification in soil and in liquid culture and suggest that the inhibitor may be
more effective against actively nitrifying soils.

PMCID: PMC239114
PMID: 16347171  [PubMed]


294. Biol Reprod. 1986 Oct;35(3):745-60.

Temporal appearance and cyclic behavior of Sertoli cell-specific secretory
proteins during the development of the rat seminiferous tubule.

Shabanowitz RB, DePhilip RM, Crowell JA, Tres LL, Kierszenbaum AL.

Electrophoretic and morphologic methods have been used to study the time course
of [35S] methionine-labeled proteins accumulated in the incubation medium of rat 
fetal testes and seminiferous cords/tubules during their development. We have
found that Sertoli cell-specific secretory proteins S70, S45 and S35 became
progressively prominent as premeiotic, meiotic and postmeiotic spermatogenic
events were established in the seminiferous tubules. In the sexually mature rat, 
S70, S45 and S35 were expressed in a spermatogenic stage-dependent manner. While 
S70, S45 and S35 were present in Stage VII-VIII, S45 and S35 were observed in
Stages X and XIV. Neither S70, S45 nor S35 were detected in Stage IV. A relevant 
group of high molecular weight proteins, previously reported as characteristic
products of cultured peritubular cells, accumulated in the incubation medium of
seminiferous cords from postnatal Day 0-15 rats. This group of high molecular
weight proteins appears when peritubular cells are proliferative and are engaged 
in the organization of the seminiferous tubular wall. A low molecular weight
protein, designated T35, was also detected. T35 was prominent in the medium of
incubated fetal testes and seminiferous cords of postnatal rats 0- to 5-days-old 
and disappeared gradually thereafter. A set of proteins (designated SP1 and SP2) 
previously ascribed to both cultured Sertoli and peritubular cells, were
recognized during the early postnatal stages of seminiferous tubular development.
SP1 and SP2 displayed age-dependent fluctuations in their [35S] methionine
labeling. The timing of appearance of S70, S45, and S35 indicates both age- and
spermatogenic stage-related activity that, in the future, may prove to be
functionally significant in the spermatogenic process.

PMID: 3790672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Exp Cell Res. 1986 Sep;166(1):209-19.

Expression of proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA)/cyclin during the cell
cycle.

Kurki P, Vanderlaan M, Dolbeare F, Gray J, Tan EM.

The expression of proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), also called cyclin, 
was quantified in the cell lines SP2/0 and MOLT-4 and in mouse splenocytes
induced to proliferate in vitro with mitogens. Autoantibody from a patient with
systemic lupus erythematosus was used to label PCNA in cell suspensions after the
cells had been fixed and permeabilized. In the same cells DNA was stained by
propidium iodide. The cells were then analysed by flow cytometry for PCNA and DNA
content. The PCNA profiles in proliferating spleen cells and the cell lines were 
similar. Most G0-G1 cells did not express significant amount of PCNA. A dramatic 
increase in PCNA immunofluorescence was observed in late G1 cells, and further
increases were observed in S-phase cells. G2-M cells showed a reduced level of
PCNA immunofluorescence relative to S-phase cells but were still elevated
relative to G0-G1 cells. Proliferating cells arrested at the G1-S boundary by
exposure to cytosine arabinoside showed an increased PCNA immunofluorescence as
compared to unstimulated cells.

PMID: 2874992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Anticancer Res. 1986 Sep-Oct;6(5):885-8.

Specific monoclonal antibodies reacting with human breast cancer cells.

Plessers L, Bosmans E, Cox A, Raus J.

Spleen cells from Balb/c mice immunized with human breast cancer cells (MCF-7)
were fused with murine myeloma SP2/0 cells. Screening of the monoclonal
antibodies produced was carried out on glutaraldehyde fixed cells coated on
microtiterplates. An initial evaluation of the specificity was obtained by
comparing the binding of the monoclonal antibodies to MCF-7 cells with the
binding to human peripheral blood lymphocytes. Eight monoclonal antibodies
reacting with different epitopes on the MCF-7 cells were obtained. On the basis
of their clonal origin, isotype and reaction pattern towards the MCF-7 cells
these monoclonal antibodies were subdivided into two classes. Both groups of
antibodies reacted with fixed and unfixed MCF-7 cells. The cellular distribution 
of the antigens recognized by the monoclonal antibodies was determined. To check 
for specificity a panel of different cells (of human and animal origin) was
evaluated by immunocytochemical techniques.

PMID: 2432833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Eur J Biochem. 1986 Aug 15;159(1):189-94.

13C NMR evidence for bacteriochlorophyll c formation by the C5 pathway in green
sulfur bacterium, Prosthecochloris.

Oh-hama T, Seto H, Miyachi S.

The 13C NMR spectra of the pheophorbide of bacteriochlorophyll c, formed in the
presence of L-[1-13C]glutamate and [2-13C]glycine and [13C]bicarbonate in
Prosthecochloris aestaurii, were analysed. The isotope in the glutamate was
specifically incorporated into the eight carbon atoms in the tetrapyrrole
macrocycle derived from the C-5 of 5-aminolevulinic acid, while no specific
enrichment of these eight carbon atoms was observed in the spectrum of the
pigment formed in the presence of [2-13C]glycine. These labelling patterns
provide evidence for the operation of the C5 pathway of 5-aminolevulinic acid
synthesis for bacteriochlorophyll c formation in the bacterium. The labelling of 
bacteriochlorophyll c by [13C]bicarbonate is consistent with its formation from
5-[1,4,5-13C]aminolevulinic acid formed by the C5 pathway from
[1,2,5-13C]glutamic acid. It is proposed that this glutamate is the
transamination product of 2-[1,2,5-13C]oxoglutaric acid, arising by carboxylation
of [1,4-13C]succinyl-CoA with 13CO2 catalysed by 2-oxoglutaric acid synthase
activity, and that the labelled succinyl-CoA is, in turn, derived by the fixation
of 13CO2 by the reductive tricarboxylic acid cycle. The 13C chemical shifts of
two sp2 quaternary carbons of bacteriopheophorbide c methyl ester (C-2 and C-4)
were reassigned.

PMID: 3743570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Biochemistry. 1986 Aug 12;25(16):4523-34.

Monoclonal antibodies to the porcine intestinal receptor for
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3: interaction with distinct receptor domains.

Dame MC, Pierce EA, Prahl JM, Hayes CE, DeLuca HF.

Monoclonal antibodies to different domains of the porcine intestinal
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 [1,25-(OH)2D3] receptor have been produced. A nuclear
extract enriched in the 1,25-(OH)2D3 receptor was prepared from small intestinal 
mucosa of young pigs. The receptor was purified an additional 6600-fold by
chromatography on DNA-cellulose, ammonium sulfate precipitation, gel filtration
high-performance liquid chromatography, and DEAE-Sepharose chromatography, with
an overall yield of 23% and an average purity of 24%. A BALB/c mouse immunized
with this material developed serum polyclonal antibodies to the 1,25-(OH)2D3
receptor, as demonstrated by a change in sedimentation of the porcine receptor on
sucrose gradients. Spleen cells from this animal were fused with mouse myeloma
cells (P3-NSI/1-Ag4-1, SP2/0-Ag14), and 24 hybridomas secreting antibodies to the
1,25-(OH)2D3 receptor were identified by both a radiometric immunosorbent assay
and an immunoprecipitation assay. Twenty-one hybridoma lines were cloned by
limiting dilution and further characterized as subclass IgG1 antibodies with the 
exception of one which is an IgA. All but two of the antibodies cross-react with 
the 1,25-(OH)2D3 receptor from both mammalian (human, monkey, and rat) and avian 
(chicken) intestine; two antibodies recognize only porcine intestinal receptor.
All antibodies are unreactive to the vitamin D serum transport protein. Eight of 
the antibodies bind denatured receptor on an immunoblot. A solid-phase
competition assay was used to identify four groups of antibodies that bind to
distinct epitopes on the 1,25-(OH)2D3 receptor. One antibody from each of the
four groups was used to examine the effect of antibody binding on the DNA-binding
activity of the receptor-hormone complex. One antibody completely inhibited the
binding of the 1,25-(OH)2D3 receptor complex to DNA-cellulose, suggesting that
the epitope for this antibody may be located in the polynucleotide binding domain
of the protein. Antibodies from two additional groups only slightly perturbed DNA
binding, while one had no effect, suggesting that these antibodies bind to
receptor epitopes distant from the region of the polypeptide directly involved in
polynucleotide binding. These antibodies that are directed to several different
binding sites on the 1,25-(OH)2D3 receptor provide important new tools to probe
the biochemistry and topology of the 1,25-(OH)2D3 receptor and to investigate its
role in mediating target tissue response to hormone.

PMID: 2429689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Pharm Sci. 1986 Aug;75(8):772-4.

Conformation of nefopam hydrochloride, a novel analgesic.

Glaser R, Cohen S, Donnell D, Agranat I.

The solid state structures of (+/-)- and (+)-nefopam hydrochloride
(3,4,5,6-tetrahydro-5-methyl-1-phenyl-1H-2,5-benzoxazocine hydrochloride, 1) were
determined by single crystal X-ray diffraction analysis. (+/-)-Nefopam
hydrochloride gave crystals belonging to monoclinic P21/c space group, and at 298
K: a = 11.766 (1) A, b = 7.741 (1) A, c = 16.907 (3) A, beta = 97.43 (1) degrees,
V = 1527.0 (7) A3, Z = 4, R = 0.0336, and Rw = 0.0452. (+)-Nefopam hydrochloride 
monohydrate gave crystals of the orthorhombic P2(1)2(1)2(1) space group, and at
298 K: a = 9.651 (2) A, b = 19.747 (2) A, c = 8.504 (2) A, V = 1620.7(7) A3, Z = 
4, R = 0.0432, and Rw = 0.0690 for the (1S,5S)-model. The diastereoisomer found
in the chiral crystal was also found in the solid racemic modification: (1S,5S)
in the monohydrate of (+)-1 and (1R,5R)/(1S,5S) in (+/-)-1. 1H and 13C[1H] NMR
spectroscopy revealed two distinct, major and minor, N-protonated species in
CD2Cl2 solution differing in the stereochemistry of the N-methyl group. The
molecular structures of the crystals of (+/-)-1 and (+)-1 X H2O (a) indicate a
modified boat-chair conformation of the eight-membered ring with an equatorial
N-methyl group, caused by two sp2-hybridized ring atoms, and (b) correspond to
the stereochemistry of the minor species in solution.

PMID: 3772749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Neurophysiol. 1986 Aug;56(2):351-69.

Temporal features of the responses of primate spinothalamic neurons to noxious
thermal stimulation of hairy and glabrous skin.

Surmeier DJ, Honda CN, Willis WD.

Extracellular recordings were made from 81 primate spinothalamic (STT) neurons in
the L7-S1 segments of the spinal cord. The majority of the sample was recorded
from within laminae IV-V. The temporal features of the responses to noxious
thermal stimulation of glabrous and hairy skin were studied in an attempt to
determine whether natural groupings of STT neurons could be identified on the
basis of response time course alone and whether these groups were skin type
dependent. The relationship between these groups and those based on static
response features (37) was also explored in an attempt to define more fully their
potential functional roles. In most STT neurons, the thermally evoked responses
typically appeared to have two response components, particularly at stimulus
temperatures above 49 degrees C. The first response phase typically peaked within
1-12 s of stimulus onset and then adapted. The second phase slowly rose to a
maximum, typically 15-30 s following stimulus onset. The existence of natural
groupings of STT neurons based upon the characteristics of these two response
components was assessed with a k-means cluster analysis. On the basis of the
onset and early peak latencies, two well-defined short and long latency neuronal 
clusters were found in the responses evoked from both glabrous and hairy skin;
these were referred to as the SP1 and LP1 classes, respectively. The glabrous and
hairy skin SP1 classes did not differ significantly in either onset or early peak
latency for stimuli of 47-55 degrees C. However, the hairy skin LP1 class had
significantly shorter onset latencies than the glabrous skin LP1 class for
stimuli of 49-53 degrees C, as well as shorter peak latencies for stimuli of 49
and 51 degrees C. The SP1 class constituted 62% of the hairy skin subset, whereas
the LP1 class constituted 57% of the glabrous skin subset. A cluster analysis of 
the late-peak latencies also revealed two subgroups. In the responses evoked from
both glabrous and hairy skin, the longer latency classes (LP2) constituted more
than 80% of the samples. With one exception, no dependence upon the type of skin 
that was stimulated was found in the latencies of either the LP2 class or the
shorter latency SP2 class. Prior conditioning of the skin with a 30-s thermal
pulse of 51-55 degrees C led to a suppression of the early response phase and an 
enhancement of the late phase in nearly all cases examined (n = 11). This pattern
was independent of skin type.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 3760925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Biol Reprod. 1986 Aug;35(1):239-51.

Protein secretory patterns of rat Sertoli and peritubular cells are influenced by
culture conditions.

Kierszenbaum AL, Crowell JA, Shabanowitz RB, DePhilip RM, Tres LL.

An approach combining two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and autoradiography was
used to correlate patterns of secretory proteins in cultures of Sertoli and
peritubular cells with those observed in the incubation medium from segments of
seminiferous tubules. Sertoli cells in culture and in seminiferous tubules
secreted three proteins designated S70 (Mr 72,000-70,000), S45 (Mr 45,000), and
S35 (Mr 35,000). Cultured Sertoli and peritubular cells and incubated
seminiferous tubules secreted two proteins designated SP1 (Mr 42,000) and SP2 (Mr
50,000). SP1 and S45 have similar Mr but differ from each other in isoelectric
point (pI). Cultured peritubular cells secreted a protein designated P40 (Mr
40,000) that was also seen in intact seminiferous tubules but not in seminiferous
tubules lacking the peritubular cell wall. However, a large number of high-Mr
proteins were observed only in the medium of cultured peritubular cells but not
in the incubation medium of intact seminiferous tubules. Culture conditions
influence the morphology and patterns of protein secretion of cultured
peritubular cells. Peritubular cells that display a flat-stellate shape
transition when placed in culture medium free of serum (with or without hormones 
and growth factors), accumulate various proteins in the medium that are less
apparent when these cells are maintained in medium supplemented with serum. Two
secretory proteins stimulated by follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) (designated
SCm1 and SCm2) previously found in the medium of cultured Sertoli cells, were
also observed in the incubation medium of seminiferous tubular segments
stimulated by FSH. Results of this study show that, although cultured Sertoli and
peritubular cells synthesize and secrete proteins also observed in segments of
incubated seminiferous tubules anther group of proteins lacks seminiferous
tubular correlates. Our observations should facilitate efforts to achieve a
differentiated functional state of Sertoli and peritubular cells in culture as
well as to select secretory proteins for assessing their possible biological role
in testicular function.

PMID: 3741954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Immunol Methods. 1986 Jul 24;91(2):257-64.

Production of murine monoclonal antibodies against human thyroglobulin using an
in vitro immunization procedure in serum-free medium.

Ossendorp FA, De Boer M, Al BJ, Hilgers J, Bruning PF, Tager JM.

A serum-free in vitro immunization method for the generation of hybridomas
producing specific antibodies to an antigen is described. The method was tested
with human thyroglobulin as antigen. The serum-free medium used (Yssel et al.,
1984) consisted of Iscove's modification of Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium,
supplemented with albumin, transferrin, insulin, ethanolamine and linoleic, oleic
and palmitic acids. An optimal response was obtained when splenocytes from BALB/c
mice were cultured for 3 days in the presence of 1.5 nM thyroglobulin and
thymocyte-conditioned medium prior to fusion with SP2/0 myeloma cells and seeding
of the fused cells in microtitre plates. The frequency of positive wells, defined
as the number of wells secreting anti-(thyroglobulin) antibodies/number of viable
cells used for the fusion, was 1.6 X 10(-6) +/- 0.25 X 10(-6) (mean +/- SD; n =
4). Eight stable clones producing anti-(thyroglobulin) antibodies were isolated. 
One clone (3D12) produced antibodies reacting only with human thyroglobulin. The 
antibodies produced by the other clones reacted with human, murine and porcine
thyroglobulins. Seven of the clones produced antibodies of the IgM class and one 
clone produced IgG. The specificity of 3D12 (IgM) for human thyroglobulin and the
absence of any reactivity with murine thyroglobulin provides evidence for a
primary response of splenocytes in culture to the presence of an antigen.

PMID: 3488350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Res Vet Sci. 1986 Jul;41(1):102-7.

Monoclonal antibodies against ovine IgA purified from lung lavage fluid.

Chin JC, Scully C, Pang B.

Ovine secretory IgA (sIgA) has been purified to relative homogeneity by ammonium 
sulphate precipitation (to 40 per cent w/v) of lung lavage fluid from 3- or
12-month-old lambs, followed by molecular sieve chromatography on a Sephacryl
S300 matrix. Three peaks A, B and C with molecular sizes corresponding to
550,000, 400,000 and 165,000 respectively were eluted from the column.
Immunoelectrophoresis, radial immunodiffusion and enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assays (ELISAs) with class specific antiserum confirmed that peak B contained
only IgA. Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of peak B under reducing conditions 
resolved three subunits corresponding to secretory component, heavy and light
chains. Hybridomas generated by fusing spleen cells from IgA-primed Balb/C mice
with murine myeloma (Sp2/0) were screened for IgA-specific monoclonal antibodies 
against a panel of ovine IgG2, IgG1, IgA and IgM. One particular clone, F3-4B4,
identified as murine IgG1, was monospecific against ovine IgA with no cross
reactivity against bovine immunoglobulins. This hybridoma was successfully tested
as a serological probe by ELISA profiling to locate IgA containing fractions in
the course of immunoglobulin purification from biological fluids.

PMID: 3764094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Mol Immunol. 1986 Jul;23(7):717-24.

Characterization of two mouse myeloma X sheep lymphocyte cell lines secreting
sheep antibody.

Beh KJ, Haynes SE, Ward KA.

Two mouse X sheep interspecific cell hybrids were obtained by fusing mouse
myeloma cell line Sp2/O. Ag14 with sheep lymphocytes obtained from a lymph node
antigenically stimulated with azo-benzene arsonate-ovalbumin (ABA-ova). The
interspecific cell lines were characterized using immunochemical, karyotypic and 
molecular DNA techniques. Both cell lines secreted sheep IgG1 antibody specific
for the ABA haptenic determinant. Karyotypic analysis revealed that cell lines
4.11 and 11.9 had modal chromosome numbers of 91 and 106, respectively. Although 
C-banded spreads confirmed that fusion between sheep and mouse cells had
occurred, it was not possible to differentiate sheep from mouse chromosomes.
However, DNA hybridization techniques showed that each line contained sheep
repetitive sequence DNA. It was calculated that cell line 11.9 contained 17640
copies while cell line 4.11 contained 734 copies of the previously characterized 
sheep satellite DNA.

PMID: 3540617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 1986 Jul;20(1):33-43.

In vivo time course of synthesis and processing of major schizont membrane
polypeptides in Plasmodium falciparum.

Braun-Breton C, Jendoubi M, Brunet E, Perrin L, Scaife J, Pereira da Silva L.

A rapid method of separating membrane co-sedimentable and soluble components of
Plasmodium infected erythrocytes is presented. We propose a nomenclature for
major P. falciparum polypeptides, applicable to different isolates and based on
their cellular location and stage specificity. For four of these polypeptides
(185 kDa = Mp1; 120 kDa = Mp3; 76 kDa = Mp5; 90 kDa= Sp2) supposed to play a role
in protective immunity, monospecific antibodies were available. We have studied
their fate at the time of merozoïte release and reinvasion, and the possible
correlations between these polypeptides, by pulse-chase experiments.

PMID: 3526146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Tissue Antigens. 1986 Jul;28(1):57-62.

A monoclonal antibody detecting a possible public specificity of the HLA-C locus.

Dejelo CL, Braun WE, Zachary AA, Smerglia A, Clark L.

An IgM monoclonal antibody (CC-Cl 11) was produced by fusing myeloma cell line
SP2/08 with lymphocytes of a Balb/c mouse previously immunized with peripheral
blood lymphocytes of an A2, Bw44, B27, Cw1, Cw7, DR5 donor. Reactivity of CC-Cl
11 on a lymphocyte panel of 172 unrelated donors and lysostripping and absorption
experiments have shown that CC-Cl 11 recognizes an antigenic determinant common
to HLA-Cw1 and Cw3 positive lymphocytes.

PMID: 2428127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Infect Immun. 1986 Jul;53(1):103-9.

Monoclonal antibodies specific for Shigella flexneri lipopolysaccharides: clones 
binding to type I and type III:6,7,8 antigens, group 6 antigen, and a core
epitope.

Carlin NI, Lindberg AA.

Monoclonal antibodies against the Shigella flexneri lipopolysaccharide (LPS) were
generated in two fusions by using the myeloma cell line Sp2/0 as a fusion partner
with spleen cells from BALB/c mice immunized with S. flexneri serotypes 1b and 3a
bacteria. The antibodies were characterized by immunoblotting, enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA), hemagglutination, and coagglutination. Four
different types of monoclonal antibodies were isolated: antibodies specific for
the core antigen of the LPS, antibodies specific for the type I O antigen,
antibodies specific for the group 6 O antigen, and antibodies specific for the
type III:6,7,8 O antigen. The core-specific antibodies were shown to be specific 
for the Escherichia coli R3 core, which all S. flexneri LPSs tested, except for
S. flexneri serotype 6 LPS, have. The type I O antigen-specific antibodies were
shown to bind exclusively to S. flexneri serotypes 1a and 1b in ELISA. The type
III:6,7,8 O-antigen-specific antibodies were specific for S. flexneri serotype 3a
in ELISA and hemagglutination. Two different group 6 O-antigen-specific
antibodies were bound. One was bound in both ELISA and hemagglutination to LPSs
of S. flexneri serotypes 1b, 3a, 3b, and 4b, whereas the second was bound only to
LPSs of serotypes 3a, 3b, and 4b in ELISA but to LPSs of all four serotypes in
hemagglutination. The specificity of the isolated I, III:6,7,8, and group 6
monoclonal antibodies was verified by coagglutination of 363 S. flexneri clinical
isolates.

PMCID: PMC260082
PMID: 2424839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Endocrinology. 1986 Jul;119(1):77-83.

Characterization of a monoclonal antibody to human serum vitamin D binding
protein (Gc globulin): recognition of an epitope hidden in membranes of
circulating monocytes.

McLeod JF, Kowalski MA, Haddad JG.

We have developed a murine hybridoma cell line that secretes a monoclonal
antibody directed to the serum human vitamin D binding protein (hDBP), a
58,000-dalton alpha-globulin with a high avidity for 25-hydroxycholecalciferol
and globular actin. This immunoglobulin G1 kappa-light chain antibody was
produced by the fusion of the spleen cells from BALB/c mice, immunized with
purified hDBP, with SP2/0-AG4 myeloma cells. The antibody was easily removed from
the supernatant of hybridoma cultures or mouse ascites fluid by Protein A
affinity chromatography. Apparent serum monospecificity was demonstrated by
sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and isoelectric
focusing gels transblotted to nylon membranes and overlayed with purified MAK 89 
antibody and radioiodinated Protein A. The affinity of the antibody is high
[dissociation constant (Kd) = 2.6 X 10(-11) M]. Parallel displacement of tracer
by hDBP and human serum was observed. The sera from various species displaced the
hDBP tracer in the following potency: monkey more than cat more than dog more
than guinea pig. RIAs for DBP from several species are feasible with this
antibody. This antibody does not, in contrast to polyclonal anti-hDBP antiserum, 
bind to viable monocytes. However, the MAK 89 antibody does bind to the membranes
of well washed, fixed, and permeant circulating monocytes. Surface membrane
radioiodination of monocytes and immunoprecipitation of the detergent lysates
with the antibody demonstrates a protein with molecular weight equivalent to
hDBP. The epitope recognized, therefore, appears to be hidden in the viable
cells, suggesting an intimate and intricate association of the hDBP and monocyte 
plasma membrane.

PMID: 2424747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Neuroimmunol. 1986 Jul;12(1):49-55.

An epitope shared by central nervous system myelin and peripheral blood
macrophages.

Stefansson K, Reder AT, Antel JP.

Lewis rats were immunized with a homogenate of human spinal cord. Splenocytes
from the immunized rats were fused with cells from the SP2/0-Ag14 cell line to
form hybrids that were subsequently screened immunohistochemically for secretion 
of antibodies against myelin. Thirty hybrids secreting anti-myelin antibodies
were cloned. One secreted antibody (774) that immunohistochemically stained
central nervous system (CNS) myelin but not peripheral nervous system (PNS)
myelin also bound to the surface of peripheral blood macrophages. Hence we have
identified an epitope that is shared by peripheral blood macrophages and CNS
myelin.

PMID: 2423556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. J Neuroimmunol. 1986 Jun;11(4):271-6.

Specific monoclonal antibodies to glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP).

Courel MN, Girard N, Delpech B, Chauzy C.

Anti-glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) monoclonal antibody has been obtained
by fusing SP2/O myeloma cells with splenic cells from mice immunized with human
GFAP. It belongs to the IgG1 class and it recognizes an epitope on GFAP which is 
shared by each fragment of the protein. Immunohistological studies show that the 
epitope characterized is absolutely specific for GFAP.

PMID: 3711313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Immunol. 1986 Jun 1;136(11):4000-5.

Newborn Xid mice carry the genetic information for the production of natural
autoantibodies against DNA, cytoskeletal proteins, and TNP.

Dighiero G, Poncet P, Rouyre S, Mazie JC.

Spleen cells from 6-day-old unimmunized male and female (CBA/N X BALB/c)F1 mice, 
fused with the nonsecreting hybrid SP2/0, gave 184 hybrids secreting
immunoglobulins (183 IgM class; 115 from males and 69 from females) which were
screened for antibody (Ab) activity against actin, tubulin, myosin, TNP-BSA,
dsDNA, and denatured DNA. Eleven hybrids from the male series (9.65%) and eight
hybrids from the female series (11.55%) secreted immunoglobulins with significant
Ab activity against at least one of the six antigens tested. Four of these clones
reacted with a single antigen, while 15 others reacted simultaneously with at
least two antigens. Three hybrid clones exhibited Ab activity against all of the 
antigens tested. The monoclonality and specificity of the immunoglobulins from
tissue culture supernatants were respectively assessed by two-dimensional gel
electrophoresis after biosynthetic labeling and competitive enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay. These results confirm our previous findings with newborn and
adult BALB/c mice, demonstrating a high frequency of this auto-Ab repertoire,
especially in newborn mice, and widespread polyspecificity found among these
natural auto-Ab. Xid mice are characterized by the absence of a Lyb-3+,5+ B cell 
population; nevertheless, these studies suggest--but do not prove--that the
Lyb-3-,5- lymphocyte population seems to carry genetic information for the
production of natural auto-Ab, because no marked differences were observed in the
secretory patterns of hybrids obtained from male mice bearing the Xid defect and 
from normal female mice. Hence, we postulate that the Xid gene might be a
regulatory gene because Xid mice, in contrast with normal mice, are unable to
secrete anti-DNA auto-Ab on mitogenic stimulation, despite carrying the genetic
information.

PMID: 3486224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Tsitologiia. 1986 Jun;28(6):623-8.

[Karyotypic characteristics of the murine myeloma line sp2/0-Ag14].

[Article in Russian]

Sorokina EA, Kozhukharova IV, Grinchuk TM.

Using methods of G- and C-banding, a study was made of the karyotype of mouse
myeloma cell line sp2/0-Ag14. The number of chromosomes varies from 58 to 65, the
modal class being 61-62. 50 per cent of chromosomes are rearranged. Normal
chromosomes 6, 12 and X were not detected in either examined cell of this line.
Among the marker chromosomes there are an isochromosome (19/19), three dicentric 
markers and one marker with two interstitial C-bands. There is a specific marker 
t (12; 15) of mouse plasmacytomas in the karyotype sp2/0-Ag14. A possible
association of specific translocations and segregations of the normal chromosomes
with the phenotype of line sp2/0-Ag14 is discussed. The results obtained may be
useful for cytogenetic analysis of hybridomas.

PMID: 3463006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Invest Dermatol. 1986 May;86(5):563-9.

Cell differentiation in human anagen hair and hair follicles studied with
anti-hair keratin monoclonal antibodies.

Ito M, Tazawa T, Shimizu N, Ito K, Katsuumi K, Sato Y, Hashimoto K.

By a hybridoma technique using BALB/c mice and Sp2/0-Ag14 mouse myeloma cells,
monoclonal antibodies against hair fibrous proteins (HFP) were produced. Two
monoclonal antibodies, designated as HKN-5 and HKN-7, were chosen. Either HFP or 
epidermal fibrous proteins (EFP) were electrophoretically separated on
polyacrylamide gels with sodium dodecyl sulfate. By immunoblot analyses, HKN-5
and HKN-7 decorated the electrophoretic bands of HFP but not those of EFP.
Immunohistochemically, these monoclonal antibodies stained the medulla, cortex,
cuticle, and inner root sheath in the keratogenous zone of anagen hairs, but not 
hair matrix cells. HKN-5 further reacted with the innermost cells (IMC) of the
outer root sheath; these cells formed a single cell layer located outside of the 
Henle's layer. HKN-7 did not react with the outer root sheath including the IMC. 
Neither monoclonal antibody reacted with any other skin components or any tissues
of other organs examined. Ultrastructurally, the IMC of the outer root sheath
showed a unique cell differentiation forming an independent cell layer. It is
suggested that the cells in the medulla, cortex, cuticle, and inner root sheath
of anagen hair and hair follicles possess a similar keratin expression and that
the IMC of the outer root sheath display a unique keratin expression and their
own cell differentiation, resulting in 2 types of keratinization of the outer
root sheath; keratinization of IMC and trichilemmal keratinization.

PMID: 2427618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Am Chem Soc. 1986 Apr 1;108(9):2420-4. doi: 10.1021/ja00269a047.

Stereochemistry of the R1(X:)C(sp2)-N(sp3)R2R3 fragment. Mapping of the cis-trans
isomerization path by rotation around the carbon-nitrogen bond from
crystallographic structural data.

Gilli G, Bertolasi V, Bellucci F, Ferretti V.

PMID: 22175594  [PubMed]


315. Clin Chem. 1986 Apr;32(4):657-63.

Direct measurement of creatine kinase-MB activity in serum after extraction with 
a monoclonal antibody specific to the MB isoenzyme.

Vaidya HC, Maynard Y, Dietzler DN, Ladenson JH.

Fusion of splenocytes from A/J mice immunized by creatine kinase (EC 2.7.3.2)-MB 
isoenzyme (CK-MB) with SP2/0-Ag14 myeloma cell line generated hybridomas
producing monoclonal antibodies specific to CK-MB. One of these monoclonal
antibodies ("Conan-MB") was used to develop a direct assay for CK-MB activity. In
the assay, serum is incubated for 30 min at room temperature with "Conan-MB"
immobilized on latex beads. The beads are then washed, and CK-MB activity bound
to the antibody is measured after incubation with CK enzyme reagent for 30 min at
37 degrees C. Results with the assay correlated well (r = 0.997) with those for
CK-MB concentration as measured by a two-site immunoassay. Neither CK-MM, CK-BB, 
mitochondrial CK, nor a hemolysate of erythrocytes interfered. Use of this unique
monoclonal antibody allows rapid, precise, and direct determination of CK-MB
activity.

PMID: 3955814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. J Med Chem. 1986 Apr;29(4):478-82.

Kinetics and mechanism of interaction of 10-propargyl-5,8-dideazafolate with
thymidylate synthase.

Pogolotti AL Jr, Danenberg PV, Santi DV.

The interaction of Lactobacillus casei thymidylate synthase (TS) with
10-propargyl-5,8-dideazafolate (NPQ) in the presence of 2'-deoxyuridylate (dUMP) 
has been investigated. After formation of a rapidly reversible dUMP-NPQ-enzyme
complex, a slow isomerization occurs to provide a ternary complex that can be
isolated on nitrocellulose membranes or by gel filtration. Unusual features of
the isolable complex are the slow rate by which it is formed (t1/2 = 0.88 h) and 
the slow rate at which it dissociates (t1/2 = 26.5 h). The ternary complexes
contain 2 mol of dUMP and 2 mol of NPQ bound per mol of dimeric enzyme.
Ultraviolet difference spectra of the dUMP-NPQ-TS complex shows a high wavelength
maximum that has been attributed to perturbations of the enzyme and/or ligand
chromophores that occur upon binding. Data are presented that suggest that the
formation of the isolable ternary complex involves nucleophilic attack by a
catalytic thiol group of the enzyme to the 6-position of dUMP. Evidence for this 
is as follows: first, there is a decrease in the absorbance of the pyrimidine
chromophore at 265 nm that occurs at the same rate as the formation of the
isolable complex; second, using [6-3H]dUMP there is a large, inverse
alpha-secondary kinetic isotope effect (kappa H/kappa T = 0.83) upon formation of
the complex that is in accord with sp2 to sp3 rehybridization of the 6-carbon of 
the heterocycle. Treatment of the complex with sodium dodecyl sulfate (NaDodSO4) 
results in the dissociation of both ligands in an unmodified form, which is
consistent with proposed structure of the complex. Isolable ternary complexes are
also formed when the enzyme is incubated with 5-fluoro-2'-deoxyuridylate (FdUMP) 
and NPQ. Interestingly, the dissociation of FdUMP from these complexes is
biphasic, with one-half of the bound nucleotide dissociating at an exceedingly
slow rate (t1/2 congruent to 100 h). The findings are discussed with relationship
to the possible use of NPQ as an anticancer agent.

PMID: 3754285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 1986 Apr;11(4):305-17.

Monoclonal antibodies directed towards the two major cell populations in the
bursa of Fabricius of the chicken.

Domingo M, Reinacher M, Burkhardt E, Weiss E.

Two mouse monoclonal IgM antibodies, B.1 and B.2, have been produced using the
mouse myeloma cell line Sp2/0-Ag 14 and spleen cells from mice immunized with
chicken bursa cells. The binding of the monoclonal antibodies to cells in
suspension or tissue sections was demonstrated by means of the unlabeled
peroxidase-antiperoxidase method. B.1 recognizes 61% of the bursa cells, 10-14%
of the cells of spleen and of the peripheral mononuclear blood leukocytes and 1% 
of the thymus cells. The B.1+ cells are regarded as B cells. Their location in
tissue sections corresponds with the known B-dependent areas of lymphoid organs. 
Competitive binding and double marker experiments proved that the B.1 antigen is 
distinct from surface immunoglobulin (Ig). In the bursa all B.1+ cells are also
Ig+, whereas in the thymus, spleen and blood only about 90% of the B.1+ cells
show this conformity. B.2 mainly recognizes so called reticular epithelial and
reticular cells of the bursa (36%), thymus (20%) and spleen (13%). The B.2+ cells
represent the second major cell population of the bursa.

PMID: 3521065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Exp Parasitol. 1986 Apr;61(2):252-60.

Trypanosoma lewisi: stage-specific surface antigens and exoantigens recognized by
monoclonal antibodies.

Williams CL, Prasertsiriroj V, Dusanic DG.

The stage-specific expression of surface antigens by Trypanosoma lewisi was
investigated using monoclonal antibodies directed against this parasite.
Hybridomas secreting monoclonal antibodies were produced by the fusion of
SP2/0-Ag 14 mouse plasmacytomas with spleen cells from rats infected previously
with the Taliaferro strain of T. lewisi. Additivity enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assays and indirect immunofluorescent antibody tests indicated the determinant
recognized by monoclonal antibody TL40.3 (IgM) was different from those
recognized by monoclonal antibodies TL40.1 (IgA), TL40.2 (IgM), and TL40.6 (IgG2 
alpha). Monoclonal antibody TL40.3 agglutinated trypanosomes collected 3 days
after parasite inoculation while monoclonal antibodies TL40.1, TL40.2, and TL40.6
agglutinated trypanosomes collected 6 days after inoculation. Since agglutinin
titers against trypanosomes from irradiated (700 rad from a 60Co source) and
nonirradiated rats were similar, expression of the antigens recognized by the
monoclonal antibodies appeared to be independent of the immunological state of
the host and the morphology of the parasite. The reproduction of T. lewisi in in 
vitro trypanostatic assays was inhibited only when the monoclonal antibodies were
present in concentrations greater than or equal to those needed to agglutinate
the trypanosomes. Monoclonal antibodies TL40.1 and TL40.3, but not TL40.2 and
TL40.6, agglutinated erythrocytes collected later in the infection from
irradiated, infected rats. None of the monoclonal antibodies agglutinated
erythrocytes from nonirradiated, infected rats, from irradiated, noninfected rats
or from nonirradiated, noninfected rats. This suggests that immunocompetent rats 
may make blocking antibodies against the exoantigens recognized by monoclonal
antibodies TL40.1 and TL40.3.

PMID: 3514258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. J Immunol Methods. 1986 Mar 13;87(2):169-77.

A modified method to induce immune polyclonal ascites fluid in BALB/c mice using 
Sp2/0-Ag14 cells.

Lacy MJ, Voss EW Jr.

Immunized BALB/c mice were injected with 10(6) viable Sp2/0-Ag14 cells to induce 
ascites fluid concurrently with maximum serum antibody activity. Ascites fluids
developed in a systematic manner, yielded large amounts of specific polyclonal
antibody even when the mice were injected with relatively small amounts of
immunogen. A combination of an initial pristane injection prior to 3
intraperitoneal immunizations of immunogen emulsified in Freund's complete
adjuvant (total volume of 0.1-0.2 ml per injection), followed 4 days later by
injection of 10(6) viable Sp2/0-Ag14 cells, resulted in a consistent production
of ascites fluid with substantial specific antibody activity.

PMID: 3950427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Clin Microbiol. 1986 Mar;23(3):505-8.

Production of monoclonal antibody against Pneumocystis carinii by using a hybrid 
of rat spleen and mouse myeloma cells.

Lee CH, Bolinger CD, Bartlett MS, Kohler RB, Wilde CE 3rd, Smith JW.

It has been difficult to obtain pure Pneumocystis carinii antigen either from
cultures or from infected lungs for use in producing a specific antibody against 
P. carinii. This report describes an approach toward producing a monoclonal
antibody that bypasses the antigen purification steps. P. carinii infection was
developed in Sprague-Dawley rats by the method of immunosuppression with
cortisone. The infected lungs were homogenized, and the homogenate was used to
immunize Sprague-Dawley rats. Rat spleen cells were then fused with SP2/0 mouse
myeloma cells. Hybridoma clones were screened for antibody production against P. 
carinii by immunoperoxidase staining techniques and by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay, using as antigens homogenates of normal rat lung,
homogenates of P. carinii-infected rat lung, and harvests of P. carinii grown
with WI-38 cells. Out of six hybridoma clones obtained that produced antibodies
against P. carinii, one was able to produce ascitic fluid. This monoclonal
antibody reacted with two P. carinii antigens with masses of about 35,000 and
65,000 daltons in P. carinii-infected lungs and three proteins with masses of
about 35,000, 65,000, and 110,000 daltons in P. carinii that was harvested from a
WI-38 cell culture.

PMCID: PMC268683
PMID: 3514660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. J Immunol Methods. 1986 Feb 12;86(2):239-41.

High yield monoclonal antibody production in ascites.

Brodeur BR, Tsang PS.

BALB/c males were mated with Swiss Webster/HPB females to produce a first
generation cross. Hybridoma cells derived from fusing SP2/0 myeloma cells and
histocompatible spleen cells were injected intraperitoneally into these mice to
induce formation of ascites tumors and production of ascitic fluid containing
large quantities of monoclonal antibody. Mice, 80 days old weighing between 28 g 
to 35 g, were treated with 0.5 ml of pristane 18 days before inoculation of 3.2 X
10(6) hybridoma cells. The first generation crosses, (BALB/c male X SW/HPB
female)F1, produced up to 4 times more ascitic fluid of equally high antibody
level over a longer period compared to the BALB/c parent. This first generation
cross is a cost effective means for monoclonal antibody production.

PMID: 3944476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 1986 Feb;11(2):107-21.

Characterization of monoclonal antibodies directed against swine leukocytes.

Hammerberg C, Schurig GG.

Hybridomas were produced from fusions of the SP2/0 mouse myeloma with splenic
cells from: 1) an outbred Sprague Dawley rat immunized with swine peripheral
blood mononuclear (PBM) cells; 2) a (CBA/NDub X BALB/c Dub) F1 mouse immunized
with concanavalin A (Con A) activated swine PBM cells and 3) a (BALB/c Dub X
C3H/He Dub) F1 mouse immunized with swine thymocytes. The resulting supernatants 
were screened by a microcytotoxicity assay for activity against swine PBM cells. 
Four hybridomas (MSA1, MSA2, MSA3 and MSA4) were selected, cloned and
characterized by their cell reactivity and effect on mitogenic assays. MSA1 and
MSA2 belong to the rat IgG2b subclass. MSA3 and MSA4 are of the mouse IgG2a
subclass. These monoclonal antibodies reacted in the following manner: MSA1 with 
monocytes, granulocytes, red blood cells and bone marrow cells; MSA2 with subset 
of T cells; MSA3 with B cells and subsets of T cells and monocytes (class II
molecule) and MSA4, a pan-T cell reagent (E-rosette receptor). The involvement of
the various cell types reactive to the different monoclonal antibodies in the
mitogenic response of swine PBM cells to Con A, phytohemagglutinin (PHA) or
pokeweed mitogen (PWM) was investigated by cellular depletion with monoclonal
antibody plus complement. Cellular depletion of PBM cells with the following
monoclonal antibodies plus complement treatment resulted in: MSA1, almost total
reduction in the mitogenic response to low doses of Con A or PWM; MSA2, partial
reduction in the proliferative responses to any concentration of Con A, PHA or
PWM; MSA3, partial reduction in proliferative responses to low concentrations of 
Con A or PWM and 4) MSA4, total elimination of any proliferative response to Con 
A, PHA or PWM.

PMID: 3962168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1986 Feb;82(2):256-63.

Monoclonal antibodies to chlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins.

Kennel SJ, Jason C, Albro PW, Mason G, Safe SH.

A thyroglobulin conjugate of dioxin (thyroglobulin-2 adipamide,
3,7,8-trichlorodibenzo-p-dioxin) (TG-TCDD) was used to immunize BALB/c mice.
Hybridomas were produced by cell fusion between immune spleen cells and mouse
myelomas SP2/0, P3, or NS1. To screen the thousands of resultant cultures for
production of monoclonal antibodies (MoAb), a rapid, solid-phase radioimmunoassay
for antibody to dioxins was developed. This procedure involved attaching bovine
serum albumin coupled with trichlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (BSA-TCDD) to polystyrene
plates to be used as a solid-phase target antigen for reaction with MoAb.
Fourteen hybridomas were identified that produced MoAb reacting with BSa-TCDD but
not with BSA alone. Antibodies were tested for binding to BSA-aniline to
eliminate those with limited binding specificity. Initial studies indicated that 
most MoAbs bound BSA-aniline as well as BSA-TCDD. More detailed analyses
indicated that while most MoAbs showed some reaction with BSA-aniline, two showed
preferential binding to BSA-TCDD of more than 200-fold whereas rabbit antisera
demonstrated only a 5-fold discrimination. MoAb 391-1B was purified from mouse
ascites fluid and after radioiodination, was tested for direct binding to
BSA-TCDD or BSA-aniline. 125I-MoAb 391-1B showed no significant binding to
BSA-aniline while demonstrating high binding to BSA-TCDD (Ka = 4.5 X 10(8)
liters/mol).

PMID: 3945952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J Neurochem. 1986 Feb;46(2):435-9.

Schwann cell marker defined by a monoclonal antibody (224-58) with species
cross-reactivity. II. Molecular characterization of the epitope.

Goujet-Zalc C, Guerci A, Dubois G, Zalc B.

A monoclonal antibody (mAb) designated 224-58 (IgM-kappa) has been raised by
fusion of Sp2/0-Ag14 mouse hybridoma cell line with spleen cells of a mouse
immunized with human brain myelin. This mAb binds specifically to mouse, rat, and
human Schwann cells membrane. Serological tests showed that mAb 224-58 reacted
with total lipid extract, but not with total protein extract of human myelin.
Combination of ELISA, complement fixation, and immunoautoradiographic detection
on silica gel TLC allowed us to determine that mAb 224-58 reacted with
sulfomonogalactolipids, namely 3'-sulfogalactosylceramide (SGC) and
3'-sulfogalactosyl 1-O-alkyl-ether 2-O-acylglycerol (seminolipid). The fine
molecular structure of the epitope recognized by mAb 224-58 was established by
studying the cross-reactivity of this mAb toward closely related sulfolipids and 
by comparing its reactivity after submitting either purified sulfolipids or total
lipid extracts to various chemical and enzymatic treatments. The lipidic
hapten-binding site to mAb 224-58 is dependent on (1) the sulfoester on carbon 3 
of the galactose molecule, (2) the osidic bond, and (3) the carbonyl group of the
fatty acid. Interestingly enough, neither the amide bond and the long-chain base 
nor the OH group of the fatty acid belongs to the antigenic determinant
recognized by mAb 224-58.

PMID: 2416875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Int J Biochem. 1986;18(11):1005-13.

Detection of prostatic tissue and seminal plasma peptides reacting with human
seminal fluid acid phosphatase antibodies.

Kuciel R, Apostol I, Wasylewska E, Ostrowski WS, Steuden I, Szkudlarek J.

IgG1 monoclonal antibody to purified seminal fluid phosphatase was raised by
fusion of spleen cells from immunized mice with cell line Sp2/O-Ag 14 using
simple method of screening for antiphosphatase antibody secreting clones. All
molecular forms of catalytically active seminal fluid phosphatase and prostatic
tissue phosphatase, resolved by chromatofocusing in pH gradient, react with this 
monoclonal antibody and with rabbit antiserum to purified seminal fluid
phosphatase. Peptides of Mr 25,000 to 76,000 and of Mr 13,000 to 76,000 were
adsorbed from the prostatic tissue extract and from seminal plasma on the
monoclonal antibody-Sepharose column.

PMID: 3803691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Toxicon. 1986;24(6):567-73.

Isolation of antihemorrhagic factors in opossum (Didelphis virginiana) serum
using a monoclonal antibody immunoadsorbent.

Tarng SF, Huang SY, Perez JC.

The antihemorrhagic factor in opossum (Didelphis virginiana) serum isolated by
Sephadex G-200 gel filtration and DEAE A-50 ion exchange chromatography was used 
as antigen to immunize BALB/c mice. Hybrid cell lines secreting monoclonal
antibodies against antihemorrhagic factor were produced by fusion of Sp2/0
myeloma cells with spleen cells of the immunized mice. The ascites fluid was
produced in BALB/c mice. The monoclonal antibody in the ascites fluid was
partially purified by DEAE A-50 ion exchange and coupled to CNBr-activated
isolation of isolation of antihemorrhagic factor. The neutralization capacity of 
the conventionally isolated antihemorrhagic factor was 14.6 times and the
affinity isolated antihemorrhagic factor was 16.8 times that of crude opossum
serum. Both antihemorrhagic factors were homogeneous, with one fast migrating
band in the area of albumin shown by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. However,
the antihemorrhagic factor showed one heavy band and one faint band in
SDS-polyacrylamide electrophoresis, as well as in isoelectric focusing. The
molecular weight of the heavy band was estimated to be 65,000 with a value of p1 
4.8 and the faint band was 57,000 with a value of pI 4.1.

PMID: 3750345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Hybridoma. 1986 Winter;5(4):339-46.

Production of a monoclonal antibody against a human osteosarcoma xenograft.

Chin C, Marks A, Yeger H, Kahn H, Baumal R.

Monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) against a human sarcoma xenograft carried in BALB/c 
nu/nu mice were produced by immunizing BALB/c mice with tumor cells and fusing
their spleens with the SP2/O-Ag 14 mouse myeloma cell line. Hybridoma
supernatants were screened using cryostat tissue sections and an immunoperoxidase
reaction for ability to stain osteosarcoma xenograft tumor cells but not tonsil
lymphocytes. Of 73 supernatants tested, 19 reacted with both osteosarcoma tumor
cells and lymphocytes, while three reacted only with osteosarcoma. One of the
latter hybridomas was cloned by limiting dilution to establish a line producing
an IgG1 MAb (OS-1). By immunoperoxidase, this MAb stained tumor cells in surgical
biopsies of primary (6 of 7) and metastatic (1) osteosarcomas and showed limited 
cross-reactivity with other tumors. It also cross-reacted with some basement
membranes, endothelium and muscular media of blood vessels, and smooth muscle,
but not with parenchymal cells of various normal tissues. This MAb may prove
useful for the immunohistochemical confirmation of a diagnosis of osteosarcoma in
surgical pathology.

PMID: 3542807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Folia Biol (Praha). 1986;32(4):282-5.

Preparation and characterization of a monoclonal antibody against boar acrosin.

Peknicová J, Capková J, Cechová D, Sulcová B.

BALB/c mice were immunized with the crude fraction of boar acrosin. Immune spleen
cells were fused with myeloma cells SP2/0-Ag14. One of the 6 hybridomas produced 
was cloned and characterized by ELISA and SDS-PAGE. Possible uses of the
monoclonal antibody against acrosin for immunological detection of the amount of 
acrosin liberated after manipulations with spermatozoa and for selection of
undamaged spermatozoa for insemination are discussed.

PMID: 3530827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Folia Biol (Praha). 1986;32(3):167-77.

Monoclonal antibodies to hepatitis B surface antigen: production and
characterization.

Hlozánek I, Dostálová V, Korec E, Zelený V, König J, Nemecek V.

Hybridomas secreting anti-HBsAg antibodies were produced by fusion of the mouse
myeloma cell line SP2/0 with lymphocytes from mice immunized with purified HBsAg.
All clones produced antibodies of the IgG1 idiotype that react with the subtype a
determinant of HBsAg. An enzyme immunoassay for detection of HBsAg in human sera 
using monoclonal antibodies was developed and compared with commercial Sevatest
ELISA HBsAg/micro I kit for detection of HBsAg in clinical serum samples.

PMID: 3527770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Rheumatol Int. 1986;6(1):19-24.

Establishment of monoclonal antibodies which possess the same characteristics as 
the naturally occurring thymocytotoxic autoantibodies (NTA).

Tani K, Sakamoto H, Katoh K, Matsunagai K, Yamada S, Okuda K, Handwerger BS.

Autoantibody-secreting hybrid cell lines were obtained by fusion of spleen cells 
from unimmunized (NZB X NZW) F1 mice with the HAT-sensitive mouse myeloma cell
line SP2/0-Ag14. Eight hybridoma cell lines producing autoantibodies to mouse
thymocytes were cloned and the resultant antibodies were partially characterized.
All eight monoclonal antibodies lysed mouse thymocytes in the presence of rabbit 
complement. The anti-thymocyte cytotoxic antibody activities were absorbed with
thymocytes, lymph node cells, unfractionated spleen cells, and splenic T cells;
but not with bone marrow cells, splenic B cells, or homogenates of mouse kidney, 
liver, or striated muscle cells. In addition, the cytotoxic activities of culture
supernatants from seven of the eight hybrid clones were absorbed with mouse brain
tissue homogenates. Isotyping of the monoclonal antibodies revealed that five
were IgM and three were IgG2a. Mouse thymocytes sensitized with each of the eight
monoclonal antibodies in vitro became highly susceptible to phagocytosis by
syngeneic macrophages. The monoclonal antithymocyte antibodies, thus, appear to
be similar to the naturally occurring, (NZB X NZW) F1 thymocytotoxic
autoantibodies (NTA) described by Shirai et al.

PMID: 3491409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Arch Dermatol Res. 1986;278(5):377-81.

Monoclonal antibodies to the beta-adrenergic receptor: modulation of
catecholamine-sensitive adenylate cyclase by the antibody.

Itami S, Tsutsui M, Kino J, Koizumi H, Katayama H, Halprin KM, Adachi K.

We have developed two types of hybridomas producing monoclonal antibodies to the 
turkey erythrocyte beta 1-adrenergic receptor in order to study the
beta-adrenergic-cAMP system of epidermis. Splenic cells from BALB/c mice
immunized with partially purified turkey erythrocyte beta 1-receptors were fused 
with mouse myeloma cell line SP2/0-Ag14. Five hybridomas of 17 positive cells
producing antibodies which could precipitate soluble turkey erythrocyte beta
1-receptors were cloned by the limiting dilution method. The antibodies
cross-reacted with beta 1- and beta 2-adrenergic receptors and stained epidermal 
basal cells with immunocytochemical techniques. Neither type of antibody
interfered with the antagonist binding, i.e., all antibodies bound to sites other
than the ligand binding site on the surface. One type of antibody inhibited
epinephrine-stimulated adenylate cyclase activity in our "leaky" epidermal cell
system. The data suggest that the antibody interferes with the coupling of the
receptor to the regulatory protein.

PMID: 3019255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Acta Neuropathol. 1986;71(3-4):311-5.

Monoclonal antibody selectively reactive with myelin sheaths of the peripheral
nervous system in paraffin-embedded material.

van Dijk WR, van Haperen MJ, Stefanko SZ, van der Kamp AW.

We have produced a monoclonal antibody (PM43) selectively reactive with
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded peripheral nervous system (PNS) myelin. The
hybridomas were generated by fusion of mouse myeloma cell line Sp2/0 with spleen 
cells of BALB/c mice immunized with cultured human melanocytes. Hybridomas were
screened by the indirect immunoperoxidase assay. Ouchterlony analysis showed the 
immunoclass of PM43 to be IgM. By the immunoaffinity chromatography technique,
among others a 43-kDa protein was isolated from PNS myelin. The antigenic
determinant of PM43 in the mouse is expressed with a similar tissue distribution 
as observed in man. Expression of the antigenic determinant does not become
visible until after birth in mice. PM43 opens further possibilities for the use
of anti-myelin antibodies in the study of myelination and demyelination processes
in the PNS and remyelination processes in the central nervous system.

PMID: 2432751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Endocr Res. 1986;12(3):293-304.

Studies on high-affinity [3H]substance P binding sites in bovine pineal gland.

Govitrapong P, Ebadi M.

The presence of substance P in numerous mammalian pineal glands prompted us to
search for its binding sites in the bovine pineal gland. The binding assays to
pineal membrane were carried out in polypropylene microcentrifuge tubes in a
final volume of 500 microliters of 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.4) containing
aliquots of 200-500 micrograms protein, 0.02% BSA, 6 micrograms/ml chymostatin, 4
micrograms/ml leupeptin, 40 micrograms/ml bacitracin, 5 mM MnCl2, and 50
microliters of [3H]substance P (3H-SP, 45.7 Ci/mmol to yield a final
concentration of 0.02-20 nM) to start the reactions, which were incubated for 20 
min at 20 degrees C. The reactions were terminated by centrifugation in a Fisher 
Microcentrifuge Model 235A for 30 seconds at 13,000 X g, and the pellets were
washed twice with 1 ml of ice-cold 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer containing 0.02% BSA, 6 
micrograms/ml chymostatin, 4 micrograms/ml leupeptin, 40 micrograms/ml
bacitracin, 5 mM MnCl2, 120 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, and 1 mM CaCl2. The
bottoms of the tubes were cut, the membrane pellets were dissolved in 5 ml of
Triton X-100/toluene fluor (1:3) scintillation fluid, and the radioactivity was
counted. The specific [3H]-substance P binding at 1-2 nM was 40-50% of the total 
binding, and the non-specific binding was assessed by using 2 microM of
unlabelled substance P. These studies identified in bovine pineal gland a high
affinity receptor site for [3H]SP with a KD value of 0.43 nM and a Bmax value of 
71.14 fmol/mg protein. The relative affinity of various substance P analogues or 
fragments was: substance P greater than physalaemin greater than SP2-11 greater
than SP3-11 greater than SP4-11 greater than SP6-11 greater than substance K =
eledoisin greater than kassinin greater than SP7-11 greater than SP free acid.
Substance P did not alter the basal or the norepinephrine-induced stimulation of 
the activity of serotonin N-acetyltransferase in rat pineal gland in culture.

PMID: 2430788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Hybridoma. 1986 Summer;5(2):137-45.

Pancreatic amylase expression in human pancreatic development.

Davis MM, Hodes ME, Munsick RA, Ulbright TM, Goldstein DJ.

Enzymatic and immunologic methods were used to study amylase expression in
amniotic fluid and human pancreatic tissue from fetuses of various gestational
ages. A starch-coated slide assay was used to quantitate amylase activity in
amniotic fluids, and samples with activity were studied by electrophoresis to
determine the presence of salivary amylase (Amy1) and pancreatic amylase (Amy2)
isozymes. Immunohistochemical studies were performed with both a rabbit
anti-human Amy1 antibody and a murine anti-human Amy2 antibody (Amy2/SP2/1).
Amy2/SP2/1 was used to discriminate between Amy1 and Amy2. Both Amy1 and Amy2
activities were present in amniotic fluid from 14 weeks' gestation, and
immunologic activity was present in pancreatic tissue sections from 15.9 weeks'
gestation.

PMID: 2424823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Steroid Biochem. 1985 Dec;23(6A):955-65.

Hydrophobic interaction chromatography (HIC) for the separation of protein-bound 
and free steroids. Application to binding protein and receptor assays.

Steimer T, Theintz GE, Sizonenko PC, Herrmann WL.

Protein-bound steroids can be separated from free steroids using microcolumns of 
silica gel coated with an hydrophobic (octadecyl) solid phase. The bound fraction
is eluted in the assay buffer, whereas the free fraction is retained
quantitatively on the column in the first step and can be recovered in methanol. 
Both fractions can be quantitated directly (e.g. by liquid scintillation
spectrometry when using radioactive ligands) or kept for further analysis (e.g.
by TLC, HPLC etc.). Separation of the bound and free fractions is rapid, accurate
and reproducible; intra- and inter-assay coefficients of variation are lower than
5 and 10%, respectively. Recovery of radioactive steroids is high (usually over
85%) and can be estimated separately for each sample. Since assay blanks are very
low (typically less than 0.1% of input), this new method, which could be termed
"hydrophobic interaction chromatography" (HIC), should prove especially useful
for the development of sensitive binding assays, particularly in the field of
steroid receptors. The HIC method compared well with three methods currently used
for steroid binding assays, namely adsorption of unbound steroids on
dextran-coated charcoal, gel filtration on Sephadex LH-20 and adsorption of
steroid-protein complexes on DEAE-cellulose filters. Examples of application
described here include studies on human plasma sex hormone binding globulin
(SHBG) and SP2 placental protein (saturation analysis, binding specificity etc.),
the separation of antibody-bound steroids in a radioimmunoassay and the
estimation of androgen binding to rat epididymal androgen binding protein (rABP).
Receptor assays are illustrated by saturation analysis of the mouse uterine
oestrogen receptor and of the androgen receptor in the human genital skin.

PMID: 4094424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Behring Inst Mitt. 1985 Dec;(78):70-82.

New pregnancy and placental proteins and their possible diagnostic significance.

Bohn H.

In our laboratory a large number of, for the most part, new proteins have been
detected by immunochemical methods in extracts from human term placentae: namely 
3 pregnancy proteins (SP1, SP2 and SP3), around 40 soluble placental tissue
proteins (PPs) and at least 11 different solubilized, apparently
membrane-associated, tissue proteins. A great deal of the new proteins has been
already isolated to purity and characterized. The treatise gives an overview of
what is known of the physico-chemical properties and of the possible biological
role of these proteins as well as of their occurrence in tissues and body fluids.
It also summarizes the possible diagnostic significance of detection and
measurement of these proteins on the one hand in pregnant women, on the other
hand in patients with tumours and other diseases, as far as this has been already
investigated.

PMID: 3833243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Regul Pept. 1985 Dec;13(1):1-19.

Multiple tachykinins (neurokinin A, neuropeptide K and substance P) in
capsaicin-sensitive sensory neurons in the guinea-pig.

Hua XY, Theodorsson-Norheim E, Brodin E, Lundberg JM, Hökfelt T.

The occurrence of tachykinins in sensory neurons of the guinea-pig was studied by
means of radioimmunoassay combined with ion-exchange and high-performance liquid 
chromatography as well as by immunohistochemistry. Antisera raised against
kassinin (antiserum K12), neurokinin A (NKA) (antiserum NKA2) and substance P
(SP) (antisera SP25 and SP2) were used. Antiserum K12 detected NKA, neuropeptide 
K (NPK) and a component eluting in the position of eledoisin (ELE) in extracts of
the lung and ureter. Neurokinin B (NKB) was, however, not found. Neutral water
extraction favored recovery of NKA and of the ELE-like component, while NPK was
found only in acid extracts. The SP antisera detected two immunoreactive
components of which the major form coeluted with synthetic SP. Capsaicin
pretreatment depleted all these various forms of immunoreactivity in several
peripheral organs including the ureter and lung. The immunoreactivity detected by
antisera K12 or SP25 in radioimmunoassay had a similar regional distribution
pattern in peripheral tissues. Immunohistochemical examination revealed that
antiserum NKA2 stained the same spinal ganglion cells as the SP2 antiserum. The
distribution of capsaicin-sensitive nerve fibers stained by these two antisera
was also identical in peripheral organs such as the ureter, inferior mesenteric
ganglion, heart and lung. It is concluded that multiple tachykinins, including
SP, NKA, NPK and an ELE-like peptide, are present in capsaicin-sensitive sensory 
nerves in the guinea-pig. This finding can most likely be related to the origin
of SP, NKA and NPK from the same precursor molecule, subsequent posttranslational
tissue processing and axonal transport to terminal regions.

PMID: 2418471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Infect Immun. 1985 Dec;50(3):900-4.

Monoclonal antibodies that recognize the P fimbriae F71, F72, F9, and F11 from
uropathogenic Escherichia coli.

de Ree JM, Schwillens P, van den Bosch JF.

The Escherichia coli P fimbriae F71, F72, F9, and F11 from four cloned strains
were purified, and polyclonal antisera were raised in rabbits. Cross-reactions of
these antisera with eight different cloned and purified fimbriae were measured in
an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. These antisera showed a reaction with the
homologous fimbriae and also with most heterologous fimbriae. Monoclonal
antibodies (MAbs) directed against the same four native fimbriae were produced by
the fusion of spleen cells from immunized BALB/c mice with SP2/0 myeloma cells.
The resulting four series of MAbs were also screened in an enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay with eight different cloned and purified fimbriae. Four
different F71 hybridomas produced MAbs which recognized only epitopes on F71
fimbriae. Two F72 MAbs recognized epitopes on F72 and F9 fimbriae, whereas
another F72 MAb recognized an epitope on only F72 fimbriae. Three MAbs raised
against F9 reacted only with epitopes on F9 fimbriae. Six MAbs against F11
fimbriae could be divided into two groups: on the one hand two MAbs recognizing
F11, pyelonephritis-associated pilus, Pap, and F72 fimbriae and on the other hand
four MAbs recognizing F11 and "Clegg" fimbriae. None of the MAbs reacted with 1A 
or 1C fimbriae. In a hemagglutination inhibition assay it was shown that none of 
the MAbs produced inhibited the adhesive properties of homologous cloned strains.

PMCID: PMC261165
PMID: 2415458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. J Immunol Methods. 1985 Nov 28;84(1-2):105-16.

Production of monoclonal antibodies against prostatic acid phosphatase by in
vitro immunization of human spleen cells.

Yamaura N, Makino M, Walsh LJ, Bruce AW, Choe BK.

Monoclonal antibodies against human prostatic acid phosphatase (PAPase) were
produced by immunization of human primary spleen cell cultures. Dissociated
spleen cells were cultured for 5-8 days in the presence of 100 ng/ml of PAPase
and pokeweed mitogen (1:5000). Following immunization, B cells were isolated and 
infected with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Two weeks after EBV-transformation, cells
were fused with either mouse myeloma cells (SP2/OAg14) or human/mouse
heteromyeloma cells (SHM-D33). Hybrid clones were screened for anti-PAPase
production. In 7 independent immunizations, the average fusion frequency was 3.6 
per 10(6) lymphocytes. 18-32% of the hybridomas produced anti-PAPase;
approximately 75% of these secreted IgM and 25% secreted IgG. Antibody
specificity was determined by immunoassay and immunohistological studies. The
procedures described here may be suitable for the production of human monoclonal 
antibody of a useful specificity.

PMID: 2415632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Biol Chem. 1985 Nov 5;260(25):13763-70.

Structural characterization of cardiac protein phosphatase with a monoclonal
antibody. Evidence that the Mr = 38,000 phosphatase is the catalytic subunit of
the native enzyme(s).

Mumby MC, Green DD, Russell KL.

The native structures of protein phosphatases have not been clearly established. 
Several tissues contain high molecular weight enzymes which are converted to
active species of Mr approximately 35,000 by denaturing treatments or partial
proteolysis. We have used a monoclonal antibody directed against purified bovine 
cardiac Mr = 38,000 protein phosphatase to determine whether this species is the 
native catalytic subunit or a proteolytic product of a larger polypeptide.
Monoclonal antibody was obtained from a cloned hybrid cell line produced by the
fusion of Sp2 myeloma cells with spleen cells from a mouse immunized with
phosphatase coupled to hemocyanin. This antibody was specific for the Mr = 38,000
phosphatase as determined by immunoblot analysis of purified enzyme or cardiac
tissue extracts after native or sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis. A single immunoreactive protein of Mr = 38,000 was present in
cardiac tissue extracts including extracts prepared from freeze-clamped rat heart
rapidly denatured in hot sodium dodecyl sulfate buffer. Precipitation of cardiac 
extract with 80% ethanol did not alter the Mr of the phosphatase nor did it
liberate new immunoreactive material not observed in the extract. Ethanol
precipitation caused the dissociation of both phosphatase activity and
immunoreactivity from a high Mr form to a form of Mr between 30,000 and 40,000.
An immunoreactive protein of Mr = 38,000 was identified in several bovine and rat
tissues as well as tissues from rabbits, mice and chickens and human HT-29 cells.
From these data we conclude that the Mr = 38,000 cardiac phosphatase is a native 
catalytic subunit of higher molecular complexes which are dissociated by ethanol 
precipitation. A very similar, or identical, protein is present in several
tissues and species suggesting that this catalytic subunit is a ubiquitous enzyme
important in many dephosphorylation reactions.

PMID: 2997181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Mol Immunol. 1985 Nov;22(11):1237-41.

Production and characterization of monoclonal antibodies to anti-human chorionic 
somatomammotropin by immunization with two free synthetic peptides.

Antoni G, Mariani M, Presentini R, Lafata M, Neri P, Bracci L, Cianfriglia M.

The peptides corresponding to the fragments 135-140 and 166-174 of human
chorionic somatomammotropin (hCS) were synthesized, and used to raise monoclonal 
antibodies to the native hCS molecule. The synthetic peptides were injected into 
BALB/c mice in the free form, i.e. not conjugated to a carrier, and the spleens
were fused with Sp2/01Ag8 myeloma line to produce monoclonal antibodies. The
antibodies produced belonged to the IgM and IgG classes and, once purified by
affinity chromatography on hCS-Sepharose, they were covalently coupled to
macroporous polystyrene beads and characterized by competitive radioimmunoassay. 
Their affinity constants were determined by elaborating the radioimmunoassay data
by nonlinear regression analysis and they were found to range from 10(5) to 10(6)
M-1. The evaluation of the affinity constant of the antibodies produced is always
important as a measure of the immunogenicity of an antigen, particularly when
synthetic peptides are used as immunogens.

PMID: 4079943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Cytometry. 1985 Nov;6(6):501-5.

Characterization of monoclonal antibodies to bromodeoxyuridine.

Vanderlaan M, Thomas CB.

The characteristics of three mouse monoclonal antibodies to halogenated uridine
derivatives are presented. Two, IU-1 and IU-2, are produced by hybridomas derived
in our laboratory, and the third is the B-44 hybridoma described by Gratzner (7) 
and obtained commercially from Becton-Dickinson Monoclonal Center. Hybridomas
IU-1 and IU-2 were derived from the fusion of spleen cells from a Biozzi High
Responder mouse immunized with iododeoxyuridine (IdUrd) conjugated to bovine
serum albumin and SP2/0 mouse myeloma cells. This paper presents methods and
results for enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) against whole cells
labeled with bromodeoxyuridine (BrdUrd), ELISA against BrdUrd-labeled DNA, and a 
competition ELISA for free BrdUrd. All three antibodies show similar binding
affinities and specificities. The IU antibodies react with BrdUrd and IdUrd when 
the nucleosides are either free in solution or incorporated into single-stranded 
DNA (ss-DNA). The antibodies do not recognize either halogenated base in
double-stranded DNA (ds-DNA), nor do they react with uracil or bromocytidine.
Weak binding to thymidine, 5-fluorodeoxyuridine, and unsubstituted ss-DNA occurs.

PMID: 4064836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Mol Pharmacol. 1985 Nov;28(5):445-53.

Structure-activity relationship of bispyridyloxybenzene for induction of mouse
hepatic aminopyrine N-demethylase activity. Chemical, biological, and X-ray
crystallographic studies.

Kende AS, Ebetino FH, Drendel WB, Sundaralingam M, Glover E, Poland A.

1,4-bis-[2-(3,5-Dichloropyridyloxy)]-benzene (TCPOBOP) was previously shown to be
an extremely potent phenobarbital-like inducer of hepatic microsomal
monooxygenase activity in the mouse. To examine the structure-activity
relationship, 31 congeners of TCPOBOP were synthesized and tested for their
potency to induce hepatic aminopyrine N-demethylase activity in B6D2F1/J mice.
For biological activity, the minimum requirement is a) a central 1,4-dioxygenated
benzene ring, b) lateral pyridine rings linked to the central ring by ether
bonds, but with other lateral heteroaromatic rings, e.g., quinoline or
pyrimidine, also active, c) 5,5'-substituents of Cl, Br, or NO2 on the pyridine
rings. For a series of 5,5'-substituted and 3,3'-dichloro,5,5'-substituted
bispyridyloxybenzenes, no correlation was observed for Hansch pi and sigma p
values. To account for this lack of correlation and conformational variability
produced by the two ether bonds, we performed x-ray structure determinations on
three compounds: a) TCPOBOP, b) the 5,5'-dichloro analogue, and c) the
biologically inactive, 3,3'-dichloro analogue. In the two biologically active
congeners the positioning of the pyridine rings is anti to the plane of the
central benzene ring, and the dihedral angle between the central ring and the
pyridines is approximately 60 degrees. In the inactive analogue the pyridine
rings are syn and the dihedral angle is 84 degrees. The x-ray crystallographic
data are consistent with the ether oxygen having an sp2-bonding conjugating with 
the heterodipolar bond of the pyridine C(2)--N(1), which strongly restricts
rotation about the ether bonds. The potency of TCPOBOP and other
bispyridyloxybenzene analogues to induce a phenobarbital-like pleiotropic
response and the sharply defined structure-activity relationship among these
congeners support the hypothesis that they act by binding to a specific
recognition site.

PMID: 4058424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Eur J Immunol. 1985 Nov;15(11):1151-3.

A neomycin-resistant cell line for improved production of monoclonal antibodies
to cell surface antigens.

Van Snick J, De Plaen E, Boon T.

Overgrowth of hybridomas by proliferating spleen T cells often hinders the
production of monoclonal antibodies to certain antigens. To overcome this problem
we derived neomycin-resistant fusion partner SP2 neoR.1 by transfection of
SP2/0-Ag14 cells with plasmid pSVTK neo beta. Hybridomas obtained with SP2 neoR.1
grew optimally in the presence of the neomycin analog G418 at concentrations
which blocked the proliferative response of T cells to mitogenic stimuli. The
advantage of using SP2 neoR.1 and G418 under conditions where spleen cell
proliferation occurs after fusion was demonstrated with hybridomas derived from a
rat immunized with mouse helper T cell lines.

PMID: 3877638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. J Invest Dermatol. 1985 Nov;85(5):426-30.

Anti-T4-tyrosinase monoclonal antibodies--specific markers for pigmented
melanocytes.

Tomita Y, Montague PM, Hearing VJ.

Tyrosinase (EC 1.14.18.1) is the enzyme essential to pigment formation in
mammals; this enzyme is specifically localized in melanocytes, which occur
primarily in the skin, hair bulbs, and eyes. Three hybridomas, TMH-1, TMH-2, and 
TMH-3, which produce monoclonal antibodies directed against tyrosinase, were
obtained by fusion of SP2/0 myeloma cells and lymphocytes of rats hyperimmunized 
with purified melanosomal tyrosinase. These three monoclonal antibodies bound
specifically to the mature, T4 form of tyrosinase, and did not bind to either of 
the precursor forms (T1 or T2) of the enzyme, which demonstrates that further
posttranslational modifications of this enzyme occur which had not previously
been detected. Epitope mapping studies have shown that at least two different
immunologic determinants on tyrosinase are recognized by these antibodies. All
three antibodies showed positive immunofluorescence staining of pigmented murine 
melanocytes from various sources, including B16 melanoma growing in vivo and in
vitro, epidermal melanocytes, and retinal melanocytes. The antibodies did not
cross-react with unpigmented cells, including K1735 amelanotic melanoma cells,
albino murine skin or eye tissue, fibrosarcoma cells, rat fibroblasts, or
epidermal keratinocytes. These monoclonal antibodies are sensitive, highly
specific probes for pigmented mammalian melanocytes.

PMID: 2414367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Infect Immun. 1985 Oct;50(1):231-5.

Monoclonal antibodies against surface antigens of Bacteroides gingivalis.

Naito Y, Okuda K, Kato T, Takazoe I.

Monoclonal antibodies against the various surface antigens of Bacteroides
gingivalis were obtained by the fusion of murine myeloma cells (SP2/0-Ag14) with 
spleen cells of BALB/c mice immunized with the whole cells. Two monoclonal
antibodies reacted with lipopolysaccharide, and the other two reacted strongly
with capsule antigen. One showed reactivity with the hemagglutinin of the cells. 
The five monoclonal antibodies reacted with sonicated antigen from all B.
gingivalis strains tested. No cross-reactivity of the monoclonal antibodies with 
antigens from nine species of other black-pigmented Bacteroids strains was
observed. An immunoblotting test involving the use of these monoclonal antibodies
indicated that the epitope of B. gingivalis lipopolysaccharide was polysaccharide
with a high molecular weight of 40,000 to 60,000. The immunoblotting test also
demonstrated that the epitopes of capsule antigen and of hemagglutinin were
27,000- and 40,000-molecular-weight proteins, respectively.

PMCID: PMC262161
PMID: 4044037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. J Biochem. 1985 Oct;98(4):991-8.

Monoclonal antibody for calcitriol (1 alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3).

Yamamoto I, Matsuura E.

Hybridoma cell lines secreting antibodies for vitamin D3 metabolites have been
generated by fusing splenocytes from BALB/c mice immunized with 3
beta-glutaryl-25-hydroxyvitamin D3 conjugated to bovine serum albumin (3
beta-glu-25-OH-D3-BSA) and Sp2/O-Ag14 myeloma cells. Purification of monoclonal
antibodies from culture media or ascites fluids was accomplished by procedures
including affinity chromatography on Protein A-Sepharose 4B. Each monoclonal
antibody was analyzed as to its affinity and specificity by equilibrium dialysis 
and an enzyme immunoassay (EIA) based on a double antibody system. It was
demonstrated that clone 1C2-60 produced an antibody highly specific to 1
alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (calcitriol), and the clone 2B3-66 antibody was
reactive to 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 and similar structural compounds. These two
monoclonal antibodies produced by 1C2-60 and 2B3-66 were determined to belong to 
the IgG2a class, and their affinity constants (Ka) with 3 beta-glu-25-OH-D3 were 
demonstrated to be 3.6 X 10(9) M-1 and 2.9 X 10(9) M-1, respectively, at 4
degrees C. The characteristics of these monoclonal antibodies were compared with 
those of conventional antibodies raised in mice and rabbits. Finally, by using
monoclonal antibody 1C2-60, a sensitive EIA has been developed that can detect 10
pg of calcitriol.

PMID: 3908452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Proc Natl Sci Counc Repub China B. 1985 Oct;9(4):281-6.

Monoclonal antibodies to pseudorabies virus produced by mouse hybridomas.

Chang AC, Chen WF, Shien YS, Lee SC.

Monoclonal antibodies to pseudorabies viral capsid protein were prepared by
fusing Sp2/0-Ag14 myeloma cells with pseudorabies virus (PrV)-primed Balb/c
splenocytes. These monoclonal antibodies were specific for PrV. No crossreaction 
with Herpes Simplex Virus (HSV, type I) or infectious bovine rhinotrachitis virus
(IBR) was found. The reaction between these monoclonal antibodies and PrV was
demonstrated by immunofluorescent staining technique and enzyme-linked
immunoblotting assay. These antibodies could be a useful diagnostic reagent for
PrV as well as a good tool for the study of the capsid protein of PrV.

PMID: 3006109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. J Immunol. 1985 Oct;135(4):2713-8.

Characterization of monoclonal antibodies to the beta-adrenergic antagonist
alprenolol as models of the receptor binding site.

Sawutz DG, Sylvestre D, Homcy CJ.

Antibodies to receptor ligands have been valuable in understanding the nature of 
receptor-ligand interactions. We have developed four monoclonal antibodies to the
beta-adrenergic receptor antagonist alprenolol by immunizing A/J mice with
(-)-alprenolol coupled to keyhole limpet hemocyanin. The antisera from these mice
displayed specific [3H]dihydroalprenolol ([3H]DHA) binding that was inhibited by 
alprenolol, propranolol, and isoproterenol. Somatic cell fusion of spleen cells
from the immunized mice to SP2/0 myeloma cells, followed by limited dilution
subcloning, resulted in the isolation of four hybridomas (1B7, 5B7, 5D9, and 2G9)
demonstrating three different classes of ligand binding characteristics. 1B7 had 
the highest binding affinity for antagonists based on Scatchard analysis (Kd
[125I]- CYP = 1.4 X 10(-10) M; Kd [3H]DHA = 6.5 X 10(-9) M), and was the only
antibody to demonstrate agonist-inhibition of [3H]DHA binding. Ki values computed
from competitive inhibition curves of [3H]DHA binding to 1B7 resulted in a rank
order of potency similar to that of beta-2-adrenergic receptors: (-)-propranolol 
greater than acebutolol amine greater than isoproterenol greater than
(+)-propranolol greater than epinephrine greater than norepinephrine. 5B7 and 5D9
exemplified a second class of antibody. This pair had lower antagonist binding
affinities (Kd [3H]DHA = 2 X 10(-8) M and 2.5 X 10(-7) M, respectively) and was
stereoselective in binding receptor antagonists: (-)-propranolol greater than
(+)-propranolol greater than acebutolol amine. Agonist inhibition of [3H]DHA
binding to these antibodies could only be observed at very high concentrations
(greater than 10(-4) M agonist), and was not dose-dependent. Finally, the class
of anti-alprenolol monoclonal antibodies represented by 2G9 had the lowest
antagonist binding affinity of all (IC50 alprenolol = 1 X 10(-5) M), did not
demonstrate ligand stereoselectivity, and did not recognize agonists. We propose 
that antibodies raised against beta-adrenergic receptor ligands demonstrating
stereoselective agonist binding will also demonstrate high affinity antagonist
binding, and that they will closely parallel the binding characteristics of the
receptor. According to this "agonist best-fit hypothesis," anti-idiotypic
antibodies raised against the binding site of these idiotypes might contain true 
mirror images of the beta-adrenergic receptor binding site.

PMID: 2993414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Plant Physiol. 1985 Sep;79(1):34-40.

Starch Branching Enzymes from Maize : Immunological Characterization using
Polyclonal and Monoclonal Antibodies.

Singh BK(1), Preiss J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California, Davis,
California 95616.

Spleen cells from mice immunized with starch branching enzymes were fused with
cells from the mouse myeloma Sp2/0-AG14 cell line to form hybridomas. Those
hybridomas producing antibodies against the branching enzyme were screened by the
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay using purified branching enzyme as the antigen.
Three monoclonal cell lines (1A1D7, 1A1C3 and 4D2A9D8) were found to produce
antibodies which showed positive enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay reactions with
maize branching enzyme I in addition to branching enzymes IIa and IIb. Three
other monoclonal cell lines (4D2D10, 4D2F9, and 2A6C12) were also selected which 
were found to produce antibodies showing positive enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay reactions with branching enzymes IIa and IIb only.Amino acid composition
and peptide maps obtained after trypsin or chymotrypsin digestion show that there
is no difference between branching enzyme IIa and IIb but they are significantly 
different from branching enzyme I which, along with immunological data, suggests 
that only two forms of starch branching enzyme may be present in maize
kernels.Immunological cross-reaction was also found between the starch branching 
enzyme from maize kernels and the glycogen branching enzyme from Escherichia coli
using polyclonal antibodies against starch branching enzyme I or IIa and IIb or
E. coli glycogen branching enzyme, suggesting some immunological similarities
between maize starch branching enzymes and E. coli glycogen branching enzyme.

PMCID: PMC1074825
PMID: 16664399  [PubMed]


351. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 1985 Sep;17(9):863-72.

Subcellular localization of bovine heart calcium-dependent protease inhibitor.

Lane RD, Mellgren RL, Mericle MT.

Four monoclonal antibodies for a calcium-dependent protease inhibitor protein
were produced by fusing Sp2/0 myeloma cells with spleen cells from a Balb/C mouse
immunized with purified bovine heart inhibitor. Each of the monoclonal antibodies
was highly specific for the inhibitory protein as revealed by electro-blot
analysis. The antibodies recognized different antigenic sites on CNBr peptides
prepared from the purified inhibitor protein. Immunofluorescent microscopy of
sections from bovine heart ventricles treated with each of the antibodies
demonstrated the same fluorescent pattern. Fluorescence was observed at or near
the sarcolemma of the myocytes, and along the Z-discs of relaxed myofibrils
within the myocytes. Contracted myofibrils did not appear to bind antibody.
Immunostaining of glycerinated relaxed cardiac myofibrils revealed staining at
the Z-discs. One of the antibodies could also stain the Z-disc region of bovine
skeletal muscle myofibrils.

PMID: 3900427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Mol Immunol. 1985 Sep;22(9):1061-72.

Monoclonal antibodies to nerve growth factor from bovine seminal plasma.

Steele JG, Dalton BA, Hoffman H, Underwood PA, Rathjen D.

Mouse monoclonal antibodies directed against nerve growth factor (beta NGF) from 
bovine seminal plasma have been isolated and characterized. They are produced by 
hybridomas derived from Sp2/0.Ag14 myeloma cells and spleen cells from BALB/c
mice immunized with beta NGF which was purified by the method of Harper et al.
[J. biol. Chem. 257, 8541-8548 (1982)]. Five of these hybridomas can be grown in 
ascites tumor form and secrete antibodies of the IgG1 or IgG2a subclass. When
used to probe the components of seminal plasma extracts or purified beta NGF as
separated electrophoretically on SDS gels, the antibodies react with the beta NGF
band at Mr = 15,000. The antibodies bind to native bovine beta NGF, but bind very
poorly to mouse beta NGF. Antibody exclusion and additive-binding experiments
indicate that these antibodies bind to the 1 antigenic domain. The cell receptor 
binding site is probably not close to this domain, as the antibodies fail to
block the biological activity of bovine beta NGF on cultures of dissociated
neurons from sensory ganglia. These monoclonal antibodies define a region in
which bovine beta NGF is structurally different from the closely related molecule
mouse beta NGF.

PMID: 2415811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Eur J Immunol. 1985 Sep;15(9):906-13.

Antigens apparently nonimmunogenic for xid/Y mice cause the development of
specific splenic plasmablasts and of fusion partners for SP2 cells giving
hybridomas that secrete antibodies.

Ohriner WD, Cebra JJ.

Although xid/Y mice fail to make a detectable primary antibody response to a
variety of antigens such as Type III pneumococcal capsular polysaccharide (SIII),
2,4, 6-trinitrophenyl (TNP)-Ficoll, pneumococcal C carbohydrate, group A
streptococcal vaccine and several kinds of related antigenic determinants such as
phosphorylcholine (PC) and N-acetyl-glucosaminyl (GlcNAc), even when the latter
are coupled to hemocyanin (Hy), they do show: (a) an antigen-dependent
development of splenic B cells which can act as successful, productive fusion
partners for SP2 cells giving hybridomas making monoclonal anti-SIII, anti-PC,
anti-GlcNAc, anti-TNP, etc., and (b) an antigen-dependent appearance of
antigen-binding plasmablasts in their spleens. The frequencies of specific B
cells arising in xid/Y males with either of these properties are of the same
order of magnitude as those found in immunocompetent xid/X female littermates.
Further, both PC-Hy and GlcNAc-Hy prime xid/Y and xid/X mice for quantitatively
and qualitatively similar secondary responses. All three of these expressions of 
a specific, primary response occur in xid/Y mice in the absence of any rise in
circulating antibodies. The properties of successful, productive normal fusion
partners leading to secretory hybridoma lines are unknown. Thus we cannot decide 
whether the antigen-binding plasmablasts that arise in xid/Y mice can also play
the role of productive fusion partners. Neither do we know whether the
development of specific IgM and IgG3 plasmablasts in xid/Y mice after antigen
stimulation is an abnormality reflecting the xid mutation. It cannot be excluded 
that the development of productive fusion partners, of nonsecretory plasmablasts 
and of memory cells are all interrelated and reflect a process that also normally
occurs in xid/X, X/X and X/Y mice following similar immunization regimens. It is 
tempting to speculate that such cells initially responding may lag in the
development of normal secretory mechanisms and that the "transformed" fusion
partner may complement this deficiency.

PMID: 2412836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Eur J Biochem. 1985 Aug 15;151(1):49-57.

Carbon-13 and nitrogen-15 nuclear-magnetic-resonance investigation on
Desulfovibrio vulgaris flavodoxin.

Vervoort J, Müller F, LeGall J, Bacher A, Sedlmaier H.

Desulfovibrio vulgaris apoflavodoxin has been reconstituted with 15N and
13C-enriched riboflavin 5'-phosphate. For the first time all carbon atoms of the 
isoalloxazine ring of the protein-bound prosthetic group have been investigated. 
The reconstituted protein was studied in the oxidized and in the
two-electron-reduced state. The results are interpreted in terms of specific
interactions between the apoprotein and the prosthetic group, and the chemical
structure of protein-bound FMN. In the oxidized state weak hydrogen bonds exist
between the apoprotein and the N(5), N(3) and O(4 alpha) atoms of FMN. The N(1)
and O(2 alpha) atoms of FMN form strong hydrogen bonds. The isoalloxazine ring of
FMN is strongly polarized and the N(10) atom shows an increased sp2 hybridisation
compared to that of free FMN in aqueous solution. The N(3)-H group is not
accessible to bulk solvent, as deduced from the coupling constant of the N(3)-H
group. In the reduced state the hydrogen bond pattern is similar to that in the
oxidized state and in addition a strong hydrogen bond is observed between the
N(5)-H group of FMN and the apoprotein. The reduced prosthetic group possesses a 
coplanar structure and is ionized. The N(3)-H and N(5)-H groups are not
accessible to solvent water. Two-electron reduction of the protein leads to a
large electron density increase in the benzene subnucleus of bound FMN compared
to that in free FMN. The results are discussed in relation to the published
crystallographic data on the protein.

PMID: 4029133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. J Immunol Methods. 1985 Aug 2;81(2):223-8.

A short-duration polyethylene glycol fusion technique for increasing production
of monoclonal antibody-secreting hybridomas.

Lane RD.

In this study the exposure period of the lymphocyte-myeloma cell mixture to the
fusogen was evaluated for its influence upon the yield of total hybridoma
colonies and those which secreted monoclonal antibodies. Sp2/0 and FOX-NY myeloma
cells were fused for varying periods with murine splenic lymphocytes immunized
with sheep red blood cells. The optimal fusion period consisted of adding the
fusogen (5.0 ml Kodak 1450 PEG, 0.5 ml dimethylsulfoxide, and 4.5 ml of
phosphate-buffered saline, pH 7.0) to the cell mixture over a 45 s period at 37
degrees C. The fusion process was stopped by gradually diluting the mixture in 50
ml of RPMI-1640. After 10 min, the cells were centrifuged, resuspended in
selective medium with feeder macrophages and cultured. In comparison to common,
longer fusion techniques, this procedure produces approximately a 5-fold increase
in the number of hybrids produced when using the Sp2/0 cells and a 30-fold
increase in the number of hybrids produced when using the FOX-NY cells as the
fusion partner. In both cases, virtually all the wells contain monoclonal
antibody-secreting hybridoma colonies. This high efficiency fusion technique can 
be used most advantageously to produce monoclonal antibodies against weak
immunogens or to reduce the time needed for immunization with stronger
immunogens.

PMID: 4020150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Virol. 1985 Aug;55(2):298-306.

Monoclonal antibodies to the M protein of vesicular stomatitis virus (Indiana
serotype) and to a cDNA M gene expression product.

Pal R, Grinnell BW, Snyder RM, Wiener JR, Volk WA, Wagner RR.

Twenty-nine independent hybridomas producing monoclonal antibodies to the matrix 
(M) protein of vesicular stomatitis virus (Indiana serotype) were prepared by
fusion of SP2/0 myeloma cells with spleen lymphocytes obtained from BALB/c mice
which had been immunized with the purified M protein. The specific reactivity of 
each monoclonal antibody was determined by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
and a competitive binding assay. Most of the antibodies were of the
immunoglobulin G2a and G2b isotypes, although some were immunoglobulin M. By
measuring the competitive binding of 125I-antibody, we identified four antigenic 
determinants in the M protein of the virus; two of these determinants, however,
exhibited a large degree of overlap. Western blot analysis revealed little or no 
cross-reactivity of the antibodies with other viral proteins or with the M
protein of the New Jersey serotype. Prolonged trypsin proteolysis removed the
first 43 amino acids from the amino-terminal region of the M protein, but it
retained its reactivity with monoclonal antibodies to each epitope, except for
diminished reactivity with one. To aid in future mapping of these epitopes, we
inserted a cDNA clone of the mRNA encoding the M protein of vesicular stomatitis 
virus into an inducible lac expression vector; the M protein produced in the
JM103 strain of Escherichia coli under induced conditions was found to be
approximately the same size as native M protein and was recognized by the
monoclonal antibodies. These monoclonal antibodies and the cDNA clone should be
useful for studying the role of M protein in virus maturation and the regulation 
of viral transcription.

PMCID: PMC254933
PMID: 2410627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Br J Cancer. 1985 Jul;52(1):65-72.

Specificities and binding properties of 2 monoclonal antibodies against carcinoma
cells of the human urinary bladder.

Ben-Aissa H, Paulie S, Koho H, Biberfeld P, Hansson Y, Lundblad ML, Gustafson H, 
Jonsdottir I, Perlmann P.

Mice were immunized with cultured cells derived from transitional cell carcinoma 
of the human urinary bladder (TCC). Spleen cells were fused with mouse myeloma
cell line Sp2/0-Ag14 and the hybridomas obtained screened for antibody production
against a panel of human cells. Two hybridomas were selected for further studies.
The antibodies from one of these hybridomas (P7A5-4) could clearly discriminate
between malignant and normal cells from the bladder, both when tested with
cultured cells and fresh tissue. The P7A5-4 antibodies, however, also reacted
with some non-TCC cultured carcinoma and melanoma cells but to a lesser extent.
This difference in reactivity was even more pronounced in the fresh tumours
tested, thus indicating a quantitative difference in antigen expression between
TCC and other cells. From extracts of TCC cells, P7A5-4 bound three polypeptides 
of mol. wts 92Kd (ConA+), 23 and 17Kd (ConA-). The antibody derived from
hybridoma SK4H-12 bound a ConA reactive glycopeptide of 100Kd mol. wt, the
expression of which was almost entirely restricted to urothelial cell lines and
tissue of TCC origin, as shown by immunocytochemical studies. The finding in this
study of new antigens associated with urinary bladder carcinoma, extend the
results obtained previously in our laboratory (Koho et al., 1984; Paulie et al., 
1984) and further delineate the heterogeneity of tumour-associated antigens in
this human tumour system.

PMCID: PMC1977157
PMID: 4015953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 1985 Jul;34(4):694-701.

Monoclonal antibodies to metacyclic stage antigens of Trypanosoma cruzi.

Chao D, Dusanic DG.

Hybridoma cell lines secreting monoclonal antibodies against the Tulahuén strain 
of Trypanosoma cruzi were produced by the fusion of SP2/O-Ag 14 myeloma cells
with spleen cells from mice immunized with irradiated metacyclic trypomastigotes.
Twenty of the monoclonals synthesized by the hybridomas were identified as IgM, 2
as IgG1, 10 as IgG2a, 3 as IgG2b, 4 as IgG3, 1 as IgE, and 1 as IgA. Twenty-three
of these antibodies had kappa light chains and 18 showed delta chains. Twelve of 
the monoclonals agglutinated metacyclic trypomastigotes without additional
concentration and 4 of these precipitated antigens in extracts of T. cruzi
metacyclic or epimastigote stages. One monoclonal precipitated an epimastigote
antigen, while another reacted with a metacyclic antigen, and 2 antibodies formed
precipitin lines with antigens of both stages. Agglutinin assays performed to
characterize surface antigenic specificities of the 12 monoclonal antibodies
showed that 2 reacted only with the metacyclic stage of the Tulahuén strain. Two 
monoclonals agglutinated both metacyclic trypomastigotes and epimastigotes of the
Tulahuén strains. Three antibodies caused clumping of metacyclics and
epimastigotes of the Tulahuén, Raccoon V, and Corpus Christi strains of T. cruzi,
while a fourth also reacted with bloodstream trypomastigotes. One monoclonal
detected identical epitopes on metacyclics and epimastigotes of T. cruzi and
epimastigotes of Trypanosoma musculi, while 2 antibodies reacted with
metacyclics, epimastigotes, and bloodstream trypomastigotes of the Tulahuén and
Raccoon V strains and the bloodstream stage of T. musculi. One antibody
agglutinated all stages and strains of T. cruzi, T. musculi, and Trypanosoma
lewisi which were tested.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 3927760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1985 Jul;82(14):4842-6.

Molecular comparison of alpha 1- and alpha 2-adrenergic receptors suggests that
these proteins are structurally related "isoreceptors".

Shreeve SM, Fraser CM, Venter JC.

The structures of human platelet alpha 2-adrenergic receptors and rat liver alpha
1-adrenergic receptors were compared by utilizing isoelectric focusing,
NaDodSO4/PAGE, and monoclonal antibody crossreactivity. Digitonin-solubilized
alpha 1- and alpha 2-adrenergic receptors have an identical isoelectric point of 
4.6. Under reducing conditions in NaDodSO4/polyacrylamide gels, the alpha
1-adrenergic receptor has an apparent molecular mass of 85 kDa. Similarly, the
alpha 2-adrenergic receptor, which had been affinity-labeled with
[3H]phenoxybenzamine and partially purified by isoelectric focusing or
photoaffinity-labeled with p-[3,5-3H]azidoclonidine, was also found to have an
apparent molecular mass of 85 kDa. One hybridoma, developed from a fusion between
SP2/O myeloma cells and splenic lymphocytes from BALB/c mice immunized with human
platelet alpha 2-adrenergic receptors, secreted a monoclonal antibody (alpha
2-116p) against the ligand binding site of alpha 2-adrenergic but not alpha
1-adrenergic receptors. In contrast, three monoclonal antibodies raised against
the alpha 1-receptor polypeptide backbone but not the ligand binding site were
found to specifically immunoprecipitate human platelet alpha 2-adrenergic
receptors. These data suggest that the alpha 1- and alpha 2-adrenergic receptors 
are "isoreceptors," sharing immunogenic and, by implication, structural
determinants that most likely evolved as a result of gene duplication.

PMCID: PMC391001
PMID: 2862630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Int J Cancer. 1985 Jun 15;35(6):781-6.

A monoclonal antibody to human transitional-cell carcinoma of the bladder
cross-reacting with a differentiation antigen of neutrophilic lineage.

Baricordi OR, Sensi A, De Vinci C, Melchiorri L, Fabris G, Marchetti E, Corrado
F, Mattiuz PL, Pizza G.

A monoclonal antibody (MAb) to human transitional-cell carcinoma of the bladder
(TCCB) was obtained by immunization of a BALB/c mouse with formalin-fixed TCCB
cells and subsequent fusion of the spleen cells with SP2-OAg14 myeloma line. GF
26.7.3 MAb was selected by indirect immunofluorescence (IIF) as reacting agent
with target cells and negative with autologous lymphocytes and Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV)-transformed lymphoblastoid cell-line. GF 26.7.3 reacts with a high
percentage of bladder and colon carcinomas when examined by IIF and
immunoperoxidase techniques and cross-reacts with a determinant expressed on
neutrophilic cell lineage. The IIF analysis performed on bone marrow and
peripheral blood (PB) from healthy subjects and leukemic patients and on leukemic
cell lines showed that the expression of the structure detected by GF 26.7.3 is
restricted to the neutrophilic cell lineage and first expressed at the
promyelocytic level. Immunoprecipitation and SDS-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis (PAGE) of 125 I-labelled membrane proteins from target cells were
performed, but no bands were detected by autoradiography. In addition, pronase
insensitivity and periodate sensitivity suggest the possible involvement of a
carbohydrate determinant.

PMID: 3891639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. J Biol Response Mod. 1985 Jun;4(3):273-86.

Tissue distribution of breast cancer-associated antigens defined by monoclonal
antibodies.

Frankel AE, Ring DB, Tringale F, Hsieh-Ma ST.

Balb/c mice were immunized with membrane preparations of primary and metastatic
breast carcinomas or with live breast cancer cell lines. Sixty-two fusions were
performed between immune splenocytes and SP2/0 mouse myeloma cells, and 107
hybridomas were cloned that produced antibody reactive with breast cancer
membrane extract, cell lines, and frozen sections, but not with normal tissue
membrane extracts or a human fibroblast line. Ninety-four monoclonal antibodies
were purified and tested for binding to 16 normal tissue frozen sections and five
blood cell types. Thirty-five of the 94 antibodies were also tested on breast
cancer sections from 21 patients, 14 breast cancer cell lines, and 11 nonbreast
tumor sections. Two of 94 antibodies showed no reactivity to any of the 21 normal
tissues or 11 nonbreast neoplasms studied. These two antibodies, 451B7 and 452F2,
bound 60% of the breast cancer cell lines and 25% of the breast cancer tissue
sections. Eight additional antibodies bound three or fewer of 21 normal tissues. 
These antibodies bound 25-85% of breast cancer sections, 0-75% of breast cancer
cell lines, and many of the nonbreast cancers. A comparison of normal tissues and
nonbreast tumors bound by the breast cancer-reactive antibodies indicated that
most of the cross-reacting normal tissue structures were epithelial in origin,
and that the most cross-reactive nonbreast cancers were those of secondary sex
organs (uterus, prostate, ovary).

PMID: 4020386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Lancet. 1985 May 25;1(8439):1180-3.

Double-blind trial of CL115,347, a transdermally absorbed prostaglandin E2
analogue, in treatment of Raynaud's phenomenon.

Belch JJ, Madhok R, Shaw B, Leiberman P, Sturrock RD, Forbes CD.

CL115,347 (Cyanamid International) is a stable transdermally absorbed
prostaglandin E2 analogue said to have an antiplatelet vasodilatory effect. In a 
trial of this drug in Raynaud's phenomenon 15 patients were given 1 mg
CL115,347/day transdermally for 6 weeks and 14 were given a placebo. The treated 
group had fewer and shorter spasm attacks and better healing of ulcers as
assessed on a visual analogue scale. Blood supply as measured by cold challenge
plethysmography ('Medimatic SP2') was also improved by CL115,347, as were hand
temperatures. The treated group also had a significant rise in platelet count,
but initial decreases in platelet aggregation were not maintained up to the end
of the study.

PMID: 2860386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. J Biol Chem. 1985 Apr 25;260(8):5003-11.

Epidermal growth factor receptor of A431 cells. Characterization of a monoclonal 
anti-receptor antibody noncompetitive agonist of epidermal growth factor action.

Fernandez-Pol JA.

A monoclonal antibody to the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor of A431
cells, denoted 2D1-IgM, was generated after fusion of immunized BALB/c mouse
spleen cells with SP2/0-Ag14 myeloma cells. Specific binding of 2D1-IgM to the
A431 cell-surface receptor for EGF was demonstrated by indirect
immunofluorescence, immunoprecipitation, and immunoblot analysis. Scatchard
analysis of 125I-EGF binding to A431 cells demonstrated that 2D1-IgM treatment
did not change the number of EGF receptors, but caused an increase in the
affinity of EGF receptors from a population of low affinity to a uniform
population of high affinity. Like EGF, 2D1-IgM induced phosphorylation of EGF
receptors and EGF receptor clustering. As in the case of EGF, a biphasic growth
response with stimulation of DNA synthesis at low and inhibition at high
concentrations of 2D1-IgM was evident in A431 cells. The intrinsic "EGF-like"
bioactivity of 2D1-IgM was enhanced by the presence of EGF. These results suggest
that the binding of 2D1-IgM to the EGF receptor at a different site from that to 
which EGF binds can initiate an effective EGF-like biological response; and the
EGF-like biological effects of 2D1-IgM may be mediated by a population of high
affinity EGF receptors which may be involved in the control of cellular growth.

PMID: 2985573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Clin Chim Acta. 1985 Apr 15;147(2):117-25.

Development of a radial immunodiffusion technique employing monoclonal antibodies
for apolipoprotein B determination in human plasma.

Marcovina S, Di Cola G, Rapetto C, Fievet C, Clavey V, Fruchart JC.

Twenty monoclonal antibodies obtained from two different fusions of SP2/0-Ag 14
cell line (non-secretor hybridoma) with human plasma low density lipoproteins
have been selected. We found that a mixture formed by the 20 monoclonal
antibodies was able to form a single precipitin line with human plasma low
density lipoproteins by a double gel diffusion technique. Further studies
revealed that only two monoclonal antibodies were needed to precipitate low
density lipoproteins in gel. However, a minimum of four particular monoclonal
antibodies was required to obtain an optimal precipitin ring and a linear
standard curve within 24 h using a radial immunodiffusion technique. We have then
compared the radial immunodiffusion performed with a monoclonal antibody mixture 
to those employing conventional goat and rabbit antibodies in terms of plasma
apolipoprotein B determinations. The apolipoprotein B values determined by
monoclonal antibodies significantly correlate with the values obtained by the
technique using goat (r = 0.95; p less than 0.001) and rabbit (r = 0.95; p less
than 0.001) antibodies. Our data indicate that a mixture of monoclonal antibodies
can mimic conventional antibodies in terms of immunoprecipitation and
apolipoprotein B determination.

PMID: 3921291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Mol Immunol. 1985 Apr;22(4):477-88.

Binding and structural diversity among high-affinity monoclonal anti-digoxin
antibodies.

Mudgett-Hunter M, Anderson W, Haber E, Margolies MN.

High-affinity monoclonal antibodies specific for the cardiac glycoside digoxin
provide a useful system for the study of structure-function relationships between
antibody combining site and specific antigenic determinants. Fifteen
high-affinity monoclonal anti-digoxin antibodies were produced when spleen cells 
from A/J mice immunized with digoxin coupled to human serum albumin (Dig-HSA)
were fused with the non-secreting murine myeloma Sp2/0 cell line. Each subcloned 
hybridoma antibody was analyzed for affinity and specificity for structurally
related cardiac glycosides by a radioimmunoassay based on the adsorption of free 
[3H]digoxin to dextran-coated charcoal. All of the anti-digoxin hybridoma
proteins demonstrated high affinity constants ranging from 10(9) to 10(12) M-1.
Using seven different analogs of digoxin, binding specificities of the monoclonal
antibodies were assessed by inhibition radioimmunoassay. The 15 hybridomas
produced from fusions involving five mice could be divided into eight sets on the
basis of these binding specificities. Certain antibodies exhibit a preference for
the aglycone portion of digoxin, while others are more specific for the
tridigitoxose sugar moiety of digoxin. Monoclonal antibody H- and L-chains were
subjected to N-terminal amino acid sequence analysis. The antibodies may be
divided into several sequence homology sets for both H- and L-chains. In most
instances, homologous heavy chains are associated with a set of homologous light 
chains. Homologous partial sequences, however, do not correlate with similar
antigenic specificities and affinities for digoxin. Thus the fine specificity for
antigen is not dependent on VH- and VL-encoded sequences alone. These data
illustrate the broad diversity of the elicited response to a single hapten, even 
in inbred mice.

PMID: 4033667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 1985 Apr;8(4):311-28.

Monoclonal precipitating antibodies to porcine immunoglobulin M.

Paul PS, van Deusen RA, Mengeling WL.

Fusion of splenic immunocytes from a porcine IgM-immunized BALB/c mouse with
SP2/0 mouse myeloma cells resulted in 231 primary hybrids. Culture fluids of the 
primary hybrids were screened for antibody production by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) against porcine IgM and by radial immunodiffusion
versus porcine serum. Culture fluids of 10 of the primary hybrids were positive
in IgM-ELISA and radial immunodiffusion. Six of these primary hybrids (1A11,
1D10, 2D7, 2E2, 3B11, and 5C9) were cloned, and ascitic fluids were produced
using cloned primary hybrids. The monoclonal antibodies (Mabs) in ascitic fluids 
were characterized as to their reactivity with porcine immunoglobulin isotypes.
All six Mabs had mouse IgG1, K isotype and were mu-chain specific as they formed 
single precipitin lines against porcine serum and porcine IgM and no lines
against porcine IgG, IgA, and fetal porcine serum in immunodiffusion and
immunoelectrophoresis. In indirect ELISA, all Mabs reacted with porcine serum,
porcine IgM, and mu-chains but did not react with porcine IgG, IgA, or light
chains. All six Mabs were species-specific and recognized either of two antigenic
regions of mu-chain. These Mabs have been successfully used to detect
IgM-containing cells in tissue sections, to detect IgM in serum, and to
quantitate surface membrane IgM-bearing cells in peripheral blood.

PMID: 3923694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 1985 Apr;26(4):561-7.

S-antigen in the developing retina and pineal gland: a monoclonal antibody study.

Donoso LA, Merryman CF, Edelberg KE, Naids R, Kalsow C.

Spleen cells of BALB/c mice, previously immunized with bovine retinal S-antigen, 
were fused with Sp2/0-Ag14 mouse myeloma cells. Two monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) 
MAbA9-C6 (IgG2a isotype) and MAbA1-G5 (IgG1 isotype) were selected on the basis
of reactivity in an ELISA and immunofluorescent assay. In radioimmunoassay
MAbA9-C6 and MAbA1-G5 do not compete and appear to define unrelated epitopes of
S-antigen. Both MAbs reacted in the ELISA assay, whereas only MAbA9-C6 bound to
S-antigen in fixed tissue sections. Because MAbA9-C6 was useful for
immunocytochemistry, it was studied in more detail. MAbA9-C6 bound to all
vertebrate retinas tested including human, bovine, guinea pig, and mice. The
immunoreactivity of MAbA9-C6 also was studied in the developing rat retina and
pineal gland. In the morphologically undifferentiated retina, assessed by
conventional light microscopy, there was an incomplete separation of the outer
neuroblastic cells. However, in the same retina a distinct zone, corresponding to
S-antigen immunoreactivity, was present indicating antigenic differentiation with
regard to S-antigen at this stage of retinal development. In the pineal gland,
S-antigen immunoreactivity was first observed in the three day old rat and at all
stages examined thereafter. The usefulness of these two MAbs in the study of the 
embryologic development of the retina and of the antigenic epitopes of S-antigen 
is discussed.

PMID: 3884540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Mol Immunol. 1985 Apr;22(4):455-61.

Variable regions of antibodies to synthetic polypeptides--I. Characterization of 
an idiotope expressed on antibodies and T-cell factors.

Pincus SH, Ju ST, Dorf ME, Ewing LP, Araneo BA.

Spleen cells from a Lewis rat immunized with affinity-purified B10 anti-(T,G)-A-L
antibody were fused with the non-secreting murine hybridoma SP2/0. Cell lines
secreting monoclonal antibodies specific for mu- and kappa-chains, as well as an 
idiotope on anti-(T,G)-A-L antibodies, were isolated and characterized. The
anti-mu and -kappa antibodies, are true anti-isotypes, reacting with sera from
all strains of mice tested. The anti-idiotope antibodies recognize a determinant 
on antibodies binding a GT-containing epitope. The proportion of anti-GAT
antibody bearing the idiotope varies markedly in different murine strains. A
1000-fold higher level of antibody from Igha mice than from Ighb and Ighe mice is
required to give an equivalent inhibition of the idiotope-anti-idiotope reaction.
Analysis of monoclonal antibodies expressing the idiotope indicates that the
affinity of binding between idiotope and anti-idiotope can vary by as much as two
orders of magnitude. Immunoadsorbants prepared with anti-idiotope antibody bind
suppressor factor secreted by a GAT-specific T-cell hybridoma.

PMID: 3875786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. J Immunol. 1985 Apr;134(4):2357-65.

Xenogeneic monoclonal antibody to an Ly-6-linked murine cell surface antigen:
differential reactivity with T cell subpopulations and bone marrow cells.

Dumont FJ, Coker LZ, Habbersett RC, Treffinger JA.

The patterns of cellular and strain reactivity of a monoclonal antibody (6C3 MAb)
derived from the fusion of SP2/0 cells with splenocytes from rats immunized
against MRL/MpJ-lpr/lpr T cells were characterized by using flow cytofluorometry 
(FCF) analysis. This MAb was found to stain 70 to 90% of T cells of mice with the
lpr/lpr genotype and 20 to 60% of T cells of congenic +/+ strains. Dual-parameter
FCF analysis of Lyt-2 vs 6C3 expression revealed the existence of several Lyt-2- 
and Lyt-2+ T cell subsets, one of which (Lyt-2- bright 6C3+) was expanded in
lpr/lpr-bearing mice. The 6C3 MAb stained only 2 to 5% normal thymocytes but
reacted with 40 to 50% bone marrow (BM) cells. A strain survey demonstrated the
expression of the 6C3 antigen on peripheral T cells (and BM cells) of all strains
examined, with the exception of NOD, NZB/B1NJ, and ST/bJ. Interestingly, in the
positive strains, two types of 6C3 staining patterns of T cells were observed:
bimodal or trimodal. Study of BXH and CXB recombinant inbred (RI) strains
demonstrated that the bimodal and trimodal 6C3 patterns are associated with the
Ly-6.1 and Ly-6.2 phenotypes, respectively. Linkage of 6C3 expression with the
Ly-6 locus was confirmed by using the congenic C3H.B6-Ly-6b strain. Moreover, the
6C3 staining of T cells in Ly-6.2 strains was reduced by preincubation with the
H9/25 and SK-142-446 MAb, which are known to recognize Ly-6.2-associated
antigens. Therefore, the 6C3 MAb appears to detect a frame-work determinant on an
Ly-6-linked antigen that is absent from T cells of NOD, NZB, and ST/bJ mice.
Analysis of (NZB x C58) NX8 RI strains demonstrated a correlation between the
lack of 6C3 expression on T cells and unresponsiveness in autologous mixed
lymphocyte reaction (a property of NZB/B1NJ mice). The 6C3 MAb should prove
useful for further genetic and biochemical analysis of the Ly-6 locus and its
product(s), and for the delineation of functional subsets of T cells and BM cells
in normal and lpr/lpr-bearing mice.

PMID: 3156181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. J Biol Chem. 1985 Mar 25;260(6):3360-7.

A monoclonal antibody which inhibits epidermal growth factor binding has opposite
effects on the biological action of epidermal growth factor in different cells.

Chandler LP, Chandler CE, Hosang M, Shooter EM.

An epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor-interactive monoclonal antibody
(151-IgG) that inhibits EGF binding to PC12 rat pheochromocytoma cells and to
various other cell types has been produced. The hybridoma clone was obtained by
fusing Sp2/O-Ag14 myeloma cells with splenocytes from Balb/C mice which had been 
immunized with n-octyl glucoside-solubilized protein from isolated PC12 cell
plasma membranes. The antibody is an IgG which binds to protein A. 151-IgG did
not bind EGF. At 0.5 degrees C 151-IgG was directly competitive for EGF binding
to PC12 cells. It also inhibited EGF binding to bovine corneal endothelial cells,
rabbit corneal fibroblasts, human foreskin fibroblasts, and normal rat kidney
cells, and it slightly enchanced EGF binding to SW 3T3 cells. PC12 cells have the
same number of binding sites for 151-IgG as for EGF (approximately 27,000
sites/cell). 151-IgG inhibited the photoactivatable cross-linking of EGF to a
protein of Mr 170,000 in PC12 cells. 151-IgG inhibited the EGF-stimulated
incorporation of [3H]thymidine into quiescent bovine corneal endothelial cells,
rabbit corneal endothelial cells, epithelial normal rat kidney cells, and SW 3T3 
cells while it enhanced the EGF-stimulated [3H]thymidine incorporation into
quiescent human foreskin fibroblasts. 151-IgG by itself possessed intrinsic
EGF-like activity for human fibroblasts but not for the other cells tested. This 
suggests that there is a difference in EGF receptors and/or processing in these
normal cell types.

PMID: 2982858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Eur J Immunol. 1985 Mar;15(3):235-42.

Mott cells are plasma cells defective in immunoglobulin secretion.

Alanen A, Pira U, Lassila O, Roth J, Franklin RM.

Plasma cells containing intracellular inclusions of immunoglobulin (Russell
bodies) are known as Mott cells, and are found in large numbers in lymphoid
organs in autoimmune mice. Hybridoma technique was used to produce cell lines of 
this phenotype by fusing spleen cells from a NZB mouse with a nonproducing
hybridoma cell line (Sp2/0-Ag14), allowing us to carry out studies of this cell
type at the biochemical level. Ultrastructurally the inclusions were distended
cisternae of rough endoplasmic reticulum, suggesting a block in the secretory
pathway of the cells. Biosynthetic labeling studies confirmed that these cell
lines have either a complete or partial block of secretion of immunoglobulin,
possibly due to an abnormal light chain.

PMID: 3979421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Eur J Biochem. 1985 Mar 1;147(2):313-24.

Intramolecular interactions, mesomerism and dynamics in actinomycin D studied by 
15N NMR spectroscopy.

Juretschke HP, Lapidot A.

We present a detailed conformational study of 15N-labelled actinomycin D in
different organic solvents using 1H, 15N and two-dimensional (2D) NMR techniques 
at 30.4 MHz and 50.6 MHz. The assignment of the threonine and valine 15N
resonances to the individual residues on the alpha- or beta-lactone rings was
achieved via heteronuclear shift-correlated 2D NMR experiments. The solvent
perturbation studies allow an estimation of the solvent accessibility of the
nitrogens and carbonyl groups. Evidence is presented that the pentapeptide rings 
of actinomycin D have different conformations in polar and in apolar solvents.
The chromophoric N10 is efficiently solvent-protected, the solvent-dependence of 
its 15N resonance resulting from solvent interactions at other positions of the
molecule and from solvent-dependent changes in the twisting of the chromophoric
system. The chromophoric 2-amino nitrogen is shown to exhibit a strong sp2
character due to the formation of a conjugated system with the carbonyl group at 
C1. Such a conjugation requires a non-planar chromophoric ring system.
Additionally, a hydrogen bond connecting the 2-amino and the 1-carbonyl group was
detected. In some solvents, two resonances appear for the 2-amino nitrogen
implying the presence of the 2-amino group in two different conformations. The
possible implications of the non-planarity of the chromophore for the
intercalation process and for the biological activity of the drug are discussed.

PMID: 3971985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Am J Reprod Immunol Microbiol. 1985 Mar;7(3):104-8.

Characteristics and bioefficacy of monoclonal antigonadotropin releasing hormone 
antibody.

Gupta SK, Singh O, Talwar GP.

Mouse hybrid cell clones secreting antigonadotropin releasing hormone monoclonal 
antibody were developed by fusion of SP2/O-Ag 1.4 myeloma cells with splenocytes 
of mouse immunized with gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) tagged to tetanus
toxoid. The product of hybrid cell clones obtained as ascites fluid from mouse
peritoneal cavity had a titre of 10(6) (30-40% binding of 125I-GnRH) in
radioimmunoassay. The antibody was IgG2a and Kappa. The association constant (Ka)
of the product of hybrid cell clone P(8)16(62) for binding with GnRH was 1.2 X
10(9) L/mole. The monoclonal antibody (P(8)16(62)) was highly specific for the
native GnRH and devoid of reactivity with thyroid releasing hormone as tested in 
competitive radioimmunoassay. The recognition for GnRH agonists by monoclonal was
387-fold less with D-Ser (But)6 des Gly10 GnRH ethylamide and 608-fold less with 
Bz1-His6 GnRH. Monoclonal anti-GnRH antibody was competent to neutralize the in
vivo bioactivity of the hormone as evident by the block of estrus cycle and
termination of pregnancy in mice. Termination of pregnancy in animals receiving
anti-GnRH monoclonal could be prevented by administration of progesterone.

PMID: 3887952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. J Gen Virol. 1985 Mar;66 ( Pt 3):443-56.

Preparation and characterization of monoclonal antibodies directed against four
structural components of canine distemper virus.

Orvell C, Sheshberadaran H, Norrby E.

Mouse hybridomas producing antibodies against structural proteins of canine
distemper virus (CDV) were produced by fusion of Sp2/0 myeloma cells with spleen 
cells from BALB/c mice immunized with purified preparations of Vero cell-grown
CDV. Ascites fluids collected after intraperitoneal inoculation with 149 CDV
antibody-producing hybridoma cell lines were characterized by different
serological tests. By immune precipitation tests with [35S]methionine-labelled
extracellular virions and intracellular virus polypeptides, 57 clones were found 
to produce antibodies against the nucleocapsid protein (NP), 22 against the
polymerase (P) protein, 10 against the fusion (F) protein and nine against the
large uncleaved glycoprotein (named H in analogy with measles virus). By
competitive binding enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) tests with
monoclonal antibodies against each structural component, a minimum of 18, six,
three and seven separate antigenic determinants were identified on the NP, P, F
and H proteins, respectively. The reactions of clones directed against F and H
surface components of the virus were tested for their ability to inhibit the
infectivity of both CDV and measles virus in the absence and presence of
anti-gamma-globulin. In addition, the inhibitory activity of the clones on
measles haemagglutinating (HA) and haemolysis (HL) activity were examined.
Monoclonal antibodies against six of the seven antigenic determinants of the H
protein could neutralize the infectivity of the virus. After addition of
anti-gamma-globulin to the test, increases of titres varying from twofold to
several hundredfold were observed with the different clones. None of all the
clones against H could block measles virus infectivity, HA or HL activity. The 10
clones directed against the F protein could not neutralize the infectivity of CDV
even in the presence of anti-gamma-globulin. Further, the antibodies could not
inhibit measles HA and HL activity in the absence of anti-gamma-globulin.
However, after the addition of anti-gamma-globulin, antibodies against two of the
three sites were found to block measles virus HL activity. The reactions of all
clones were tested in immune fluorescence, ELISA and immune precipitation tests
with three strains of CDV. Each strain had a few unique antigenic sites.
Variation was found in four, one and three different antigenic sites of the NP, P
and H proteins, respectively.

PMID: 2579191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Life Sci. 1985 Feb 25;36(8):777-80.

Stereospecificity of SP1 and SP2 substance P receptors.

Piercey MF, Dobry-Schreur PJ, Masiques N, Schroeder LA.

Previous studies with N-terminal fragments of substance P (SP) have suggested the
existence of two separate SP receptor populations. SP1 receptors are found in
guinea pig ilea and rat colons. SP2 receptors are found in mouse spinal cords and
rat salivary glands. We have now found that substitution of Gly9 in substance P's
C-terminal hexapeptide leads to an analog (L-Pro9 SP6-11) which selectively and
potently stimulates SP2 receptors. In contrast, substitution of the same residue 
with D-Proline results in a potent and selective agonist for SP1 receptors. The
data dramatically confirm the distinction between SP1 and SP2 receptors and
demonstrate that the two receptors have distinct stereochemical architectures.

PMID: 2579310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. J Immunol. 1985 Feb;134(2):765-71.

High frequency of natural autoantibodies in normal newborn mice.

Dighiero G, Lymberi P, Holmberg D, Lundquist I, Coutinho A, Avrameas S.

Spleen cells from 6-day-old nonimmunized BALB/c and BALB.B10 mice were fused with
the nonsecreting hybridoma cell line Sp2/0. Three hundred and eighty-four
immunoglobulin-secreting hybrids were screened for antibody activity against
mouse actin, tubulin, and myosin, and against TNP, peroxidase, renin, DNA, and
neurofilaments. At least 24 hybridomas in the collection (6.25%) exhibited
antibody activity against this panel of antigens. Ten of these hybrids were
cloned, were propagated, and the corresponding monoclonal IgM protein was
isolated from ascitic fluids and was further characterized. At least four groups 
of antibody specificities were identified: 1) one clone reacting with TNP only;
2) one clone reacting with both actin and tubulin; 3) two clones which bound to
both TNP and actin; and 4) a fourth group, comprising the six other clones, which
all exhibited widespread reactivity and bound to actin, tubulin, myosin, and TNP.
These results indicate: 1) B cell clones directed against self antigens are
activated in the internal environment and are recovered consequently by somatic
cell hybridization; 2) the widespread antibody specificities found for these
newborn mouse antibodies are very similar to those previously characterized with 
human natural antibodies and human monoclonal Ig; and 3) the frequency of B cells
binding to cytoskeletal proteins and TNP is very high (at least 6.25%).

PMID: 4038410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Immunol Methods. 1985 Jan 21;76(1):157-69.

One-step purification of mouse monoclonal antibodies from ascites fluid by
hydroxylapatite chromatography.

Stanker LH, Vanderlaan M, Juarez-Salinas H.

A single-step method for purification of mouse monoclonal antibodies directly
from ascitic fluids using hydroxylapatite column chromatography is described. The
procedure yields highly purified IgG or IgM antibodies. The purified
immunoglobulin is essentially free of contaminating mouse albumin, transferrin,
and other ascites proteins, as determined by SDS-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis. Hydroxylapatite chromatography can also separate monoclonal IgG 
antibodies from contaminating IgG antibodies found in ascites fluid of animals
that have been immunosuppressed prior to ascites induction. Furthermore, the
evidence presented here suggests that some hybridomas of SP2/0 origin synthesize 
an extraneous light chain resulting in the secretion of hybrid antibody
molecules.

PMID: 3968440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Experientia. 1985 Jan 15;41(1):88-9.

Loss of antibody production accompanied by chromosome loss in a cloned hybrid
line secreting antibodies to sheep red blood cells.

Nowak JS.

Somatic cell hybrids between Sp2/O-Ag14 mouse myeloma cells and lymphocytes
derived from BALB/c mice hyperimmunized with sheep red blood cells (SRBC) were
produced. One hybrid producing IgG1 antibody to SRBC was selected, cloned twice
and subsequently transferred to BALB/c mice. After a number of transfers it was
found that the antibody titer in ascites fluid gradually decreased. Cytogenetic
analysis revealed gradual chromosome loss in the hybrid clone, which produced
progressively less antibody.

PMID: 3967746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Hybridoma. 1985 Spring;4(1):37-45.

Shared antigens of human prostate cancer cell lines as defined by monoclonal
antibodies.

Lindgren J, Pak KY, Ernst C, Rovera G, Steplewski Z, Koprowski H.

Eight monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) raised against human prostate cancer cell
lines are described. One MAb was derived from the fusion of mouse myeloma
P3x63Ag8-653 cells with spleen cells of mice immunized with DU145 prostate cancer
cells. The other seven were from the fusion of myeloma lines P3x63Ag8-653 or
SP2/0 with spleen cells of mice immunized with PC3, DU145 and 1013L prostate
cancer cells. All of the antibodies also reacted with cell lines of other human
cancer types, especially carcinomas. Immunoperoxidase staining on fixed tissue
revealed strong reactivity only with antibody PrN10. Seven other antibodies
seemed to bind to cell surface-associated (glyco)proteins. Antibodies PrL22 and
PrO11 showed similar reactivity in radioimmunoassay, and immunoprecipitated a 160
kD molecular weight polypeptide from [125I]lactoperoxidase-labeled cells.
Antibodies PrHk an PrQ12 bound to molecules with apparent MW of 115 kD and 100
kD, respectively; antibodies PrM24 and PrP14 revealed a more complex picture in
immunoprecipitation of surface-labeled cells.

PMID: 3881336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Infect Immun. 1985 Jan;47(1):242-6.

Production of neutralizing monoclonal antibodies to Escherichia coli heat-stable 
enterotoxin.

Brandwein H, Deutsch A, Thompson M, Giannella R.

In an effort to develop new approaches to the study and control of infectious
diarrhea, we prepared murine monoclonal antibodies to the Escherichia coli
heat-stable enterotoxin (STa). The toxin was purified from E. coli culture media 
and conjugated to bovine serum albumin. The STa-bovine serum albumin conjugate
was used to immunize BALB/c mice, and the immune spleen cells from these mice
were fused with SP2/0 myeloma cells. Resultant hybridomas were screened in an
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay protocol against 500 ng of STa-bovine serum
albumin bound to microtiter wells as the solid-phase antigen. Five stable clones 
were selected and grown further in ascites fluid, which demonstrated anti-STa
activity at dilutions of up to 1:500,000 in the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
for heat-stable enterotoxin. In a competitive enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
format, the antibodies recognized several human and porcine strains of STa to
various extents, but did not recognize E. coli heat-labile toxin, cholera toxin, 
or staphylococcal enterotoxin B. The antibodies were all able to bind
lactoperoxidase-labeled [125I]STa, and antibody 20B3 was also able to dissociate 
[125I]STa bound to toxin receptors on rat jejunal villous cells. Preincubation of
STa with antibodies 20B3 or 20F5 led to a concentration-dependent neutralization 
of toxin activity in a suckling mouse intestinal secretion assay. These
antibodies are likely to provide new tools for the continued study of STa
structure-function relationships and may lead to improved diagnosis and treatment
of E. coli-induced infectious diarrhea.

PMCID: PMC261502
PMID: 3880723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Immunogenetics. 1985;21(5):491-504.

Anti-MHC immunity detected prior to intentional alloimmunization. III. Natural
autoreactive H-2-specific antibodies.

Cerný-Provazník R, van Mourik P, Limpens J, Leupers T, Iványi P.

Cell fusion was performed between spleen cells from young BALB/cBy (H-2d) mice
which have never been immunized and SP2/0 mouse plasmacytoma cells. A monoclonal 
H-2 specific cytotoxic IgM antibody was obtained (By-1) which detected a new
public biregional H-2 specificity, H-2.m210. The mcAb By-1 reacted strongly with 
H-2Kd, Dd, and H-2s antigens, gave weak cross-reactions with H-2Kk, Dq, H-2r, and
H-2v antigens and was negative with H-2b, H-2f, H-2p, and H-2Ld antigens. A
polymorphic reaction pattern was also observed on a panel of lymphocytes from
B10.W strains. The intriguing finding on this reaction pattern was the reactivity
on H-2d cells, including the syngeneic BALB/cBy and truly autologous cells. As
shown by capping and immunoprecipitation experiments on H-2d cells and by studies
on H-2d-transfected mouse L cells, the target molecules for McAb By-1 were H-2Kd 
and H-2Dd molecules. The BALB/cBy mouse, from whose spleen cells the McAb By-1
was obtained, survived after the fusion experiment, and serum was examined for
the presence of cytotoxic H-2-specific antibodies during the rest of its life. At
the time of the fusion, no autoreactive serum antibodies were found, but about 4 
months later, we found in the serum of this mouse autoreactive H-2-specific
cytotoxic IgM antibodies. The serum antibodies followed the same reaction pattern
as that of the McAb By-1. As far as we know, this is the first report of
autoreactive H-2-specific antibodies in serum of a mouse which has never been
immunized and of the first natural autoreactive H-2-specific monoclonal antibody.

PMID: 3873412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Leuk Res. 1985;9(12):1529-37.

Further evidence for the existence of 'homing' receptors on murine leukemia cells
which mediate adherence to normal bone marrow stromal cells.

Kamenov B, Longenecker BM.

A significant proportion of 131IUDR-labelled cells from murine leukemia cell
lines L1210 and P388, but not the L5178Y lymphoma cell line, are retained in the 
bone marrow (B.M.) following i.v. injection into syngeneic mice. Following this, 
L1210 and P388 cells grow and rapidly replace the normal hematopoietic cells of
the B.M. L1210 and P388 cells, but not several lymphoma cell lines, also bind
avidly to monolayers of B.M. stromal cells (Dexter cultures) and soon overgrow
the cultures following rapid cell proliferation. P388 cells bound equally well to
confluent monolayers of B.M., whole mouse embryo and newborn mouse kidney while
L1210 cells bound well to B.M. and whole mouse embryo but showed little binding
to newborn kidney monolayers. The accumulation of the two leukemia cell lines in 
the B.M. was constant and indistinguishable over a 48-h period. In contrast, in
both spleen and liver the number of L1210 cells decreased during the same period 
while P388 cells were retained at a constant level. Generally there was a lack of
correlation of B.M. metastasis of a cell line and its metastasis to other organs 
although P388 cells, but not L1210 cells, demonstrated a tremendous capacity for 
metastatic growth in both spleen and liver. Normal B.M. cells were fused with the
syngeneic SP2/0 murine myeloma fusor line and 10 hybridomas plus the SP2/0 parent
were tested for in-vitro adherence to B.M. monolayers and in-vivo metastatic
behavior. The same 3 (out of 10) hybridomas showed a high level of adherence to
B.M. monolayers, high levels of retention of cells in the B.M. following i.v.
injection, and rapid growth and takeover of the normal B.M. In marked contrast,
neither the SP2/0 parent nor the remaining 7 hybridomas show significant
adherence, B.M. retention or growth in the B.M. A distinct lack of correlation of
B.M. vs liver or spleen metastasis was once again noted for the hybridomas
although all of the hybridomas showed much less metastatic growth in the liver
than the SP2/0 parent. Seven out of 10 hybridomas also showed less metastatic
growth in the spleen including all 3 of the hybridomas which showed preferential 
growth in the B.M. Our data are consistent with the existence of cell surface
'homing' receptors on leukemia cells for normal B.M. stromal cells which function
to retain the leukemia cells in the B.M. Such receptors might serve as functional
markers for cell differentiation and leukemia classification.

PMID: 3001437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. J Interferon Res. 1985 Summer;5(3):455-63.

Characterization of antibodies against recombinant HuIFN-gamma produced by
hybridoma cells.

Stefanos S, Wietzerbin J, Catinot L, Devos R, Falcoff R.

Balbc/c mice were immunized with purified recombinant E. coli-derived human
gamma-interferon (HuIFN-gamma). Their spleen cells were fused with a mouse
myeloma cell line (Sp2/0). Hybridomas producing antibodies reacting with
HuIFN-gamma were screened by a soluble-phase radioimmunoassay using pure
125I-labeled cloned IFN-gamma as antigen, and tested for their ability to
neutralize the antiviral activity of IFN. Three hybridomas S1-1, S1-2, and S1-3, 
were cloned and subcloned and remained stable. Although the antibodies produced
by clones S1-1 and S1-2 were both able to neutralize specifically the antiviral
activity of natural and recombinant HuIFN-gamma, they appeared to recognize
different epitopes on the HuIFN-gamma molecule. The antibodies produced by the
S1-3 clone failed to neutralize the antiviral activity of either interferon. The 
antibodies from all three clones were characterized as IgG1 subclass. Their
affinity constants were determined from competitive inhibition curves and ranged 
from 1 to 4.3 X 10(8) M-1.

PMID: 2414375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Hybridoma. 1985 Summer;4(2):91-102.

A monoclonal antibody 7G7/B6, binds to an epitope on the human interleukin-2
(IL-2) receptor that is distinct from that recognized by IL-2 or anti-Tac.

Rubin LA, Kurman CC, Biddison WE, Goldman ND, Nelson DL.

Murine splenocytes immune to influenza virus-activated human T-cells were fused
with SP2/0 cells, selected in chemically defined HAT media, and subcloned to
yield a monoclonal antibody (MAb) termed 7G7/B6. 7G7/B6 binds to lectin- and
antigen-activated T-cells, but not resting T-cells or B-lymphoblastoid lines from
the same donor. 7G7/B6 immunoprecipitates a 50-55 kD band from cell surface
iodinated PHA-activated T-cells or the T-cell leukemia line HUT 102B2, as shown
on SDS-PAGE. Cross-clearing studies demonstrate that 7G7/B6 binds the same cell
surface molecule(s) as anti-Tac, a MAb which has been shown previously to
recognize the human receptor for IL-2. 35S-methionine pulse chase experiments in 
HUT 102B2 cells reveal that 7G7/B6 binds to an early (less than 30 min) 35-37 kD 
and late (greater than 4 h) 50 kD protein. Sequential immunoprecipitations
demonstrate that these are identical to the molecules identified by anti-Tac
under similar conditions. However, only anti-Tac coprecipitates a higher
molecular band at 110 kD. 7G7/B6 and anti-Tac do not competitively inhibit the
binding of each other to PHA-activated T-cells. Functional studies reveal that in
contrast to anti-Tac, 7G7/B6 has almost no inhibitory effect in vitro on
IL-2-driven proliferation of IL-2-dependent T-cell lines, or alloimmune cytotoxic
T-cell generation (however, once generated, these cytotoxic T-cells were both
7G7/B6 and anti-Tac positive). Finally, IL-2 does not inhibit the binding of
7G7/B6 to activated T-cells under conditions which result in up to 75% inhibition
of anti-Tac binding. Therefore, 7G7/B6 is another MAb recognizing the human IL-2 
receptor, but binding to an epitope distinct from that recognized by either IL-2 
or anti-Tac.

PMID: 2408992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1984 Dec 20;802(3):399-406.

Monoclonal antibody to rat uterine peroxidase and its use in identification of
the peroxidase as being of eosinophil origin.

Keeping HS, Lyttle CR.

Peroxidase was purified from uteri of estrogen-treated rats by calcium chloride
extraction, affinity chromatography on concanavalin A-Sepharose and hydrophobic
interaction chromatography on phenyl-Sepharose. An overall purification of
greater than 1700-fold was achieved with a final recovery of 27%. Monoclonal
antibodies to peroxidase were subsequently prepared by immunization of male
C57BL/10J mice with the highly purified peroxidase from rat uterus. Spleen and
lymph node cells from the mice were fused with Sp2/0-Ag 14 mouse myeloma cells.
The resultant hybrid cells were screened for production of antibody using a
solid-phase, double antibody radioimmunoassay. The mature rat spleen, shown
previously to be abundant in eosinophils, contains high peroxidase activity.
Spleen peroxidase purified by the same procedure as the uterine enzyme
cross-reacted with a monoclonal antibody, designated IgG-107B, used in all
subsequent studies. Peroxidase extracted from isolated rat eosinophils also
cross-reacted with the antibody and yielded identical titers as the spleen and
uterine peroxidases. Spleen, uterine and horse eosinophil peroxidase had the same
apparent molecular weight, 57000, as determined by sodium dodecyl sulfate-urea
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Following electrophoretic transfer to
nitrocellulose, spleen, uterine and eosinophil peroxidase reacted with monoclonal
antibody, using an immunoblotting technique. These results provide biochemical
and immunological evidence that the majority of the calcium chloride-extractable 
peroxidase activity from the uteri of estrogen-treated rats is derived from
infiltrating eosinophils.

PMID: 6509085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Arch Pharm (Weinheim). 1984 Dec;317(12):1050-3.

Conformational equilibria in flunitrazepam due to sp2-sp2 carbon-carbon single
bond rotational isomerism.

Finner E, Zeugner H, Milkowski W.

PMID: 6525029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Clin Exp Immunol. 1984 Dec;58(3):511-21.

Production and characterization of monoclonal antibodies to Mycobacterium
tuberculosis, M. bovis (BCG) and M. leprae.

Kolk AH, Ho ML, Klatser PR, Eggelte TA, Kuijper S, de Jonge S, van Leeuwen J.

Thirty-two monoclonal antibodies (MoAb) to Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv, M.
bovis BCG and M. leprae were produced. The spleen cells of BALB/c mice immunized 
with sonicated or intact bacilli were fused with Sp2/0-Ag-14 myeloma cells. Many 
more antibody producing hybridomas were found when M. tuberculosis, rather than
M. leprae, was used as the immunogen. The MoAb were characterized by an enzyme
immunoassay and immunofluorescence on 16 mycobacterial species. The sodium
dodecylsulphate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis immunoperoxidase assay was
used to determine the molecular weight of the antigens detected by the MoAb.
Antigens of high, low and intermediate molecular weight were found. Some of the
antigens were proteinaceous, others of a glycolipid nature. The
immunofluorescence assay proved to be essential for the selection of MoAb since
some MoAb reacted only in this assay and not in the enzyme immunoassay. The most 
specific clones were found in the fusions with spleen cells of mice immunized
with intact rather than sonicated bacteria. One MoAb (F29-29) reacted only with
M. tuberculosis H37Rv; one (F41-3) only with M. leprae and another (F29-45)
reacted with M. tuberculosis and M. gastrii. Several MoAb only reacted with three
mycobacterial species: M. tuberculosis, M. kansasii and M. gastrii. Others showed
unique patterns of reactivity by enzyme immuno- and immunofluorescence assay. The
potential use of the MoAb for the identification of mycobacteria and
mycobacterial antigens is discussed.

PMCID: PMC1577099
PMID: 6439449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. J Cell Biol. 1984 Dec;99(6):2200-10.

Characterization of cytoplasmically oriented Golgi proteins with a monoclonal
antibody.

Chicheportiche Y, Vassalli P, Tartakoff AM.

BALB/c mice were repeatedly immunized with a galactosyl transferase-rich
microsomal fraction of rat myeloma cells. Spleen cells were subsequently fused
with Sp2/0 mouse myeloma cells, the resulting hybridomas were cloned, and their
secreted Ig was screened for reactivity with antigens belonging to the Golgi
complex. One such monoclonal antibody, 6F4C5, gave especially intense
immunofluorescent staining of the Golgi area of myeloma cells and fibroblasts. It
recognized two proteins bands on immunoblots of gel-fractionated cell lysates: a 
major one with an estimated Mr of 54,000 and a minor one at 86,000. Both proteins
were concentrated in microsomal fractions isolated at low ionic strength. They
were hydrophilic judging from partitioning of a Triton X-114 cell lysate. Both
were cytoplasmically oriented as demonstrated by protease and high KCl treatments
of postmitochondrial supernatants and microsomal fractions. Neither was retained 
by columns of insolubilized wheat germ agglutinin or concanavalin A, which
suggests that they are not glycoproteins. Their more detailed location in the
Golgi complex was studied by immunoelectron microscopy, using a saponin
permeabilization procedure and peroxidase-conjugated reagents. The observed
staining was restricted to two or three cisternae in the medial part of the
stack. Nevertheless, differential centrifugation experiments indicated that the
two antigens may be recovered in distinct subcellular fractions: this may be
related to the unexpected observation that rather low salt concentrations strip
the antigens from microsomal fraction.

PMCID: PMC2113572
PMID: 6438114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. J Med Chem. 1984 Dec;27(12):1648-57.

Functional group contributions to drug-receptor interactions.

Andrews PR, Craik DJ, Martin JL.

The binding constants and structural components of 200 drugs and enzyme
inhibitors have been used to calculate the average binding energies of 10 common 
functional groups. As expected, charged groups bind more strongly than polar
groups, which in turn bind more tightly than nonpolar groups. The derived
intrinsic binding energies (in kcal/mol) are (i) charged groups, CO-2, 8.2;
PO2-4, 10.0; N+, 11.5; (ii) polar groups, N, 1.2; OH, 2.5; CO, 3.4; O or S
ethers, 1.1; halogens, 1.3; (iii) nonpolar groups, C (sp2), 0.7; C (sp3), 0.8.
These values may be used to determine the goodness of fit of a drug to its
receptor. This is done by comparing the observed binding constant to the average 
binding energy calculated by summing the intrinsic binding energies of the
component groups and then subtracting two entropy related terms (14 kcal/mol for 
the loss of overall rotational and translational entropy and 0.7 kcal/mol for
each degree of conformational freedom). Drugs that match their receptors
exceptionally well have a measured binding energy that substantially exceeds this
calculated average value--examples include diazepam and biotin. Conversely, if
the observed binding energy is very much less than the calculated average value, 
then the drug apparently matches its receptor less well than average. Examples of
this type include methotrexate and buprenorphine.

PMID: 6094812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. J Virol. 1984 Dec;52(3):872-83.

Isolation and characterization of monoclonal antibodies to structural and
nonstructural herpesvirus saimiri proteins.

Randall RE, Newman C, Honess RW.

An improved screening procedure was applied to identify hybridomas secreting
antibodies to herpesvirus saimiri-specified polypeptides among the products of
fusions between SP2/0 myeloma cells and spleen cells from mice immunized with
purified virus particles or virus-specific DNA-binding proteins. Twenty-four
monoclonal antibodies were isolated with specificities for 13 different
virus-specified polypeptides (or complexes of polypeptides), including the major 
capsid protein of the virus (150K), the 160K and 130K structural proteins, a 108K
structural phosphoprotein, structural glycoproteins, the nonstructural early 76K 
protein, early nonstructural DNA-binding proteins of 48 to 51K and 110K and the
major immediate-early protein of 52K. Antibody to the virus 76K protein
precipitated a host protein of 62K, and a number of antibodies specific for host 
proteins were also isolated. Antibody to the 52K immediate-early polypeptide
precipitated the delayed-early 76K protein, whereas the antibody to the 76K
protein did not precipitate the 52K polypeptide. These observations suggest the
presence of epitopes common to virus and host proteins and an antigenic site
common to an immediate-early and a delayed-early virus protein. The antibodies
were used to examine the sites of intracellular accumulation of virus
polypeptides, the formation of complexes of structural proteins, and the
postsynthetic processing of virus proteins. The present collection of monoclonal 
antibodies provides a set of reagents with specificities for members of each of
the major kinetically or functionally distinct classes of virus gene products.

PMCID: PMC254608
PMID: 6092717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Equine Vet J. 1984 Nov;16(6):529-31.

Importance of uniform cuff application for equine blood pressure measurement.

Parry BW, Anderson GA.

Seventeen horses were used to determine the variances associated with blood
pressure cuff application (Sp2) and with other inherent errors (So2). Systolic
pressure values had Sp2 = 3.9 mmHg and So2 = 5.6 mmHg, while diastolic pressure
values had Sp2 = 1.1 mmHg and So2 = 4.4 mmHg. Thus, to be considered different,
two blood pressure means (in mmHg), each derived from three readings, had to
differ by at least 3.9 for systolic pressure and 3.4 for diastolic pressure when 
all readings were made without cuff displacement; 6.8 for systolic pressure and
4.6 for diastolic pressure when the cuff was reapplied between, but not during,
measurement of each mean; and 5.0 for systolic pressure and 3.8 for diastolic
pressure when the cuff was reapplied between all readings. It was concluded that 
uniform cuff application is readily achieved.

PMID: 6519043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Immunol. 1984 Nov;133(5):2301-7.

A monoclonal antibody (AE3.d3) with mitogenic properties for murine B cells.

Allouche M, Basch RS, Berman JW.

A monoclonal antibody, AE3.d3, derived from the fusion of rat splenocytes
immunized against mouse brain with the myeloma SP2, has been produced, which has 
the property of inducing the proliferation of mouse lymphocytes. The mitogenic
effect is highest in spleen and lymph node cells, where up to a 10-fold
stimulation of 3H-TdR incorporation is observed. B lymphocytes are the most
susceptible to this proliferative stimulus, and they are induced to differentiate
into plaque-forming cells. T lymphocytes and "null" cells (defined by the absence
of Thy-1 or Ig on their surface) do proliferate, although to a smaller extent.
The T cell subpopulation, isolated from either spleen or thymus, requires
additional "helper factors" in order to proliferate. The mitogenic response is
not genetically restricted by H-2 type, and strains such as C3H/HeJ and CBA/N, in
which B cell function is defective, as well as T cell-deficient strains such as
BALB/c nude mice, are capable of responding to the stimulus of AE3.d3. Using
immunofluorescence, we also examined the distribution of AE3.d3-positive cells in
various lymphoid organs. The highest percentage of stained cells is found in the 
spleen (approximately 28%) and lymph node (18%), whereas only 14% of the bone
marrow and 5% of the cells of the thymus are brightly stained with AE3.d3.

PMID: 6384364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Cancer Res. 1984 Nov;44(11):4987-92.

Characterization of two human small cell lung carcinoma-reactive monoclonal
antibodies generated by a novel immunization approach.

Tong AW, Lee J, Stone MJ.

Two human small cell lung carcinoma cell lines, NCI-H69 and NCI-H128, were used
as alternating sources of immunogen to generate monoclonal antibodies to small
cell lung carcinoma-associated antigens. BALB/c mice were sensitized with seven
injections of live tumor cells, four with NCI-H69 cells and three with NCI-H128
cells. Somatic cell hybridization was performed by fusion of the immune murine
splenocytes using syngeneic myeloma cells from the SP2/0 Ag14 cell line.
Hybridoma colonies were screened against small cell lung carcinoma cells and
normal lung fibroblasts with an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Compared to
animals immunized with only NCI-H69 or NCI-H128 cells, alternate immunization
resulted in the generation of a significantly higher number of hybridomas that
reacted selectively with both tumor cell lines. Monoclonal antibodies from two
reactive hybrid clones generated by alternate immunization, SCLC 2051 and SCLC
5023, were uniformly negative to normal human tissues including lung, kidney,
liver, spleen, breast, thyroid, brain, small intestine, and colon. While both
monoclonal antibodies were nonreactive to paraffin-embedded, formalin-fixed,
nonmalignant lung biopsies, the monoclonal antibody SCLC 5023 reacted with tumor 
cell infiltrates in biopsies from small cell lung carcinoma patients (14 of 14
cases positive), using the immunoperoxidase technique. This monoclonal reagent
also reacted with other lung tumor cell types, including atypical carcinoid (5 of
5 positive), epidermoid (4 of 6 positive), undifferentiated and bronchoalveolar
(3 of 4 cases each positive) carcinomas. By contrast, monoclonal antibody SCLC
2051 apparently identified an antigen expressed preferentially on small cell lung
carcinoma cells (12 of 14 positive) and only rarely reacted with other lung tumor
cell types (2 of 34 positive). Both monoclonal antibodies were negative to colon 
carcinoma, epidermoid carcinoma of the floor of the mouth, breast adenocarcinoma,
and B- and T-cell leukemia and lymphoma cells, as determined by the enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay, indirect immunofluorescence, and immunoperoxidase
techniques. These observations suggest that SCLC 2051 and SCLC 5023 may be of
value in identifying tumor-associated antigens expressed in small cell and other 
lung carcinomas. In addition, the generation of antibody-producing cells towards 
common tumor-associated antigens may be enhanced by immunization with multiple
tumor cell lines of the same histological type.

PMID: 6207911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Infect Immun. 1984 Nov;46(2):422-8.

Monoclonal antibody against pertussis toxin: effect on toxin activity and
pertussis infections.

Sato H, Ito A, Chiba J, Sato Y.

Antibody-producing hybridomas of myeloma SP2/O and spleen cells of BALB/c mouse
immunized with pertussis toxoid and pertussis toxin were selected by the binding 
ability of the monoclonal antibody to the subunit protein of the toxin. Two
monoclonal antibodies, 1B7 and 3F10, specific for a subunit which has no binding 
activity to haptoglobin and sheep erythrocytes, named S1, and one antibody, 1H2, 
for a subunit related to the binding activity of the pertussis toxin molecule to 
haptoglobin or sheep erythrocytes, named S4, were examined for mouse protective
activity against pertussis infection. Antibody 1B7 not only neutralized
leukocytosis-promoting and islet-activating activities of the toxin but also
protected mice against intracerebral and aerosol challenge with Bordetella
pertussis. The antibody, furthermore, showed therapeutic effects on mice showing 
severe clinical signs with pertussis infection. The other two antibodies, 3F10
and 1H2, showed neither neutralizing nor protecting activity, nor significant
synergistic effects on antibody 1B7.

PMCID: PMC261549
PMID: 6094351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Biochemistry. 1984 Oct 9;23(21):4859-67.

Reinvestigation of the structure of oxidized and reduced flavin: carbon-13 and
nitrogen-15 nuclear magnetic resonance study.

Moonen CT, Vervoort J, Müller F.

Several chemically substituted flavins are investigated in the oxidized and the
reduced state by 13C and 15N NMR techniques. The dependence on the polarity of
the solvent and on the concentration is studied. In combination with already
published results, a semiempirical theory is developed to interpret the chemical 
shifts in terms of the solution structure of flavins. Where possible, the results
are compared with crystallographic and light absorption data. In contrast to
common ideas, the solution structure of the oxidized state is not fully coplanar,
but the N(10) atom is situated out of plane to a certain degree. Polarizing the
flavin by hydrogen bonds in a high dielectric medium moves the N(10) atom into
the molecular plane, and the flavin molecule becomes coplanar. In the coplanar
molecule, pi electrons are delocalized from the N(10) atom mainly to O(2 alpha)
and O(4 alpha). The NMR results show that the solution structure of reduced
flavin is mainly governed by sterical hindrance and hydrogen bonds. The findings 
are in contrast to commonly accepted ideas that reduced flavin is strongly bent. 
In an apolar solvent, the reduced neutral isoalloxazine is only slightly bent.
The formation of hydrogen bonds in a protic solvent of a high dielectric constant
decreases the bend. The N(10) atom is now almost fully sp2 hybridized, and the
N(5) atom has an endocyclic angle of 115-117 degrees, indicating its predominant 
sp2 character. The results have several important implications for flavin
catalysis.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 6498164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Eur J Biochem. 1984 Sep 17;143(3):651-8.

Actinomycin D, 1H NMR studies on intramolecular interactions and on the planarity
of the chromophore.

Juretschke HP, Lapidot A.

The conformation of actinomycin D in acetone and chloroform solution at different
temperatures has been studied by 1H NMR spectroscopy. At lower temperature the
resonances due to the two chromophoric amino protons were observed. These signals
exhibit very different resonance positions indicating a severely hindered
rotation of the 2-amino group and the presence of a hydrogen-bond connecting the 
2-amino and the 1-carbonyl groups. In 1H NMR spectra of partially 15N-enriched
actinomycin D, the 1JN-H coupling constants at the 2-amino group were determined 
and a strong sp2 character for the 2-amino nitrogen was deduced. The strong amide
character of the 2-amino group is caused by mesomerism involving the 1-carbonyl
group. The amino proton signals are sensitive indicators for differences in the
spatial relationship of the diverse parts of the actinomycin molecule. At lower
temperatures a simultaneous and selective broadening of the alpha ring threonine 
and valine amide proton signals as well as of the 2-amino group resonance was
observed, indicating the presence of one dynamic process in the molecule which
slows down upon temperature reduction. A swinging motion of the N(10) nitrogen
through the chromophore plane would explain this observation. The interpretation 
of these results requires the presence of a non-planar chromophoric system in the
actinomycin molecule in acetone and chloroform solution. The possible
implications of this non-planarity for the intercalation process and for the
biological activity of the drug are discussed.

PMID: 6090137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. J Immunol Methods. 1984 Aug 3;72(1):97-107.

Expression of protozoan antigens by hybrids between Leishmania mexicana and
myeloma SP2/0.

Tomina H, Marcipar AJ, Broun GB.

Hybrid cells were obtained between Leishmania mexicana promastigotes and mouse
myeloma SP2/0 cells, and examined for expression of leishmanial antigens. A ratio
of 1:10 of myeloma to T. cruzi cells was unsuccessful because of outgrowth of
non-fused cells. With a ratio of 2:1 four waves of multiplication of 'chimeric'
cells were observed over 45 days. The death of the hybrids after this period is
explained by segregation of DNA and loss of chromosome material. Hybrid cells
gave a positive reaction with antibodies in the sera from patients infected with 
Leishmania, as demonstrated by indirect immunofluorescence. Conversely,
promastigote forms of Leishmania gave a negative reaction with the same
antibodies, which recognize surface antigens of the amastigote stage of
Leishmania. It is possible therefore that amastigote stage antigens are expressed
on the surface of the 'chimeric' hybrid as a result of transformation of
promastigotes following hybridization.

PMID: 6747308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Immunol Methods. 1984 Aug 3;72(1):71-6.

Comparison of polyethylene glycols as fusogens for producing lymphocyte-myeloma
hybrids.

Lane RD, Crissman RS, Lachman MF.

In order to improve the yield of hybridomas for monoclonal antibody production, 8
different sources and molecular weights of polyethylene glycol (PEG) were
compared as fusing agents. Sp2/0 myeloma cells were fused with murine splenic
lymphocytes immunized with sheep red blood cells. The Kodak 1450 PEG produced the
maximum number of hybridomas. The optimal technique consisted of slowly adding 1 
ml of freshly prepared fusogen (5 g Kodak 1450 PEG, 0.5 ml dimethylsulfoxide, and
5 ml of phosphate-buffered saline, pH 7.0) to the cells over a 1 min period,
incubating the mixture at 37 degrees C for 90 s, then gradually diluting the
mixture in 50 ml of Hanks' buffered salt solution. After 10 min, the cells are
centrifuged, resuspended in selective medium with feeder macrophages and
cultured. This procedure routinely produces between 600-3,000 hybridomas per
fusion.

PMID: 6747307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. J Immunol Methods. 1984 Jul 6;71(2):265-72.

Parameters affecting ascites tumour formation in mice and monoclonal antibody
production.

Brodeur BR, Tsang P, Larose Y.

Hybridoma cells injected intraperitoneally into mice induce formation of ascites 
tumours and production of ascites fluid containing high levels of monoclonal
antibody. Several parameters affecting the growth of the immunoglobulin-producing
tumours have been studied in order to define optimal conditions for ascitic fluid
formation and monoclonal antibody production. Using hybridomas produced by fusing
SP2/0 myeloma cells with immunized mouse spleen cells we have shown: (1) that the
optimal number of hybridoma cells required to induce an ascites tumour was
between 6 and 32 X 10(5) cells; (2) that each mouse should be treated with a
maximum of 0.5 ml of pristane; (3) that the priming period for pristane should be
14 days prior to the injection of cells; (4) that ascites formation and
monoclonal antibody production is significantly better in males; and finally (5) 
that the age of mice used should range between 43 and 78 days. Under these
conditions each mouse produces on average 7-10 ml of ascites fluid, containing a 
high level of antibody, over a maximum period of 6 days. The animals should start
producing between the 5th and 9th day and usually survive 11-16 days after being 
injected with the tumour cells.

PMID: 6736661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Biochem J. 1984 Jul 1;221(1):129-36.

Development of a radioligand immunoassay for 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol
receptors utilizing monoclonal antibody.

Dokoh S, Haussler MR, Pike JW.

A radioligand immunoassay for 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol [1,25(OH)2D3]
receptors was developed utilizing a specific, high-affinity (Kd = 1.8 X 10(-11 M)
monoclonal antibody (9A7 gamma) obtained from suspension cultures of rat spleen X
mouse myeloma hybrid SP2/0-9A7. A standard curve was established, based on the
competition between 1,25(OH)2[3H]D3-receptor (18 fmol/tube) and increasing
concentrations of radioinert 1,25(OH)2D3-receptor (0-240 fmol/tube) for the
binding site on 9A7 gamma. Samples, prepared in identical buffer, contained 0-100
fmol of receptor/tube. After an equilibrium incubation of
1,25(OH)2[3H]D3-receptor with either standard or sample (16 h at 4 degrees C),
antibody-bound receptor was immunoprecipitated with rabbit anti-(rat
immunoglobulin) prelinked to Staphylococcus aureus and quantified. The assay is
statistically sensitive to 2 fmol of receptor/tube, with intra- and inter-assay
variations of 7 and 12% respectively. Occupied, unoccupied and denatured receptor
were observed to compete equally in the assay. This quantitative technique has
been successfully applied to the characterization of receptors after
fractionation by sedimentation analysis and DNA-cellulose chromatography.
Finally, the measurement of total receptor by this assay, in conjunction with
1,25(OH)2D3 binding assays, has revealed that rachitic, normal and
1,25(OH)2D3-injected chicks have respectively 13, 20, and 56% of receptor in the 
occupied form. From these results we consider that this radioligand immunoassay
will be a useful tool in further research focusing on quantifying 1,25(OH)2D3
receptors in tissue and cell extracts.

PMCID: PMC1144011
PMID: 6087801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. J Biol Chem. 1984 Jun 10;259(11):6882-9.

A monoclonal antibody modulates the interaction of nerve growth factor with PC12 
cells.

Chandler CE, Parsons LM, Hosang M, Shooter EM.

A nerve growth factor (NGF) receptor interactive monoclonal antibody (192-IgG)
which enhances beta-NGF binding to PC12 cells has been produced. The hybridoma
clone was obtained by fusing Sp2/0- Ag14 myeloma cells with splenocytes from
Balb/C mice which had been immunized with n-octyl glucoside solubilized proteins 
from isolated PC12 cell plasma membranes. The antibody is an IgG, which does not 
bind beta-NGF. It binds to the same number of sites on PC12 cells at low
temperature as does beta-NGF. The 192-IgG increases the apparent affinity of
beta-NGF binding to fast receptors on PC12 cells at low temperature by a factor
of 2.5- to 4-fold and enhances the photoactivatable cross-linking of beta-NGF to 
the same receptor while decreasing the cross-linking of beta-NGF to the slow NGF 
receptor. At 37 degrees C 192-IgG partially inhibits the regeneration of neurites
from primed PC12 cells. The 192-IgG also reduces the rate of appearance of
binding to slow NGF receptors and increases the proportion of beta-NGF bound to
fast receptors at 37 degrees C. These results implicate the slow receptor as the 
mediator of the biological response. This antibody provides a tool for examining 
steps in the mechanism of action of beta-NGF after binding to the receptor.

PMID: 6327698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Lab Invest. 1984 Jun;50(6):653-8.

Correlation of lung macrophage age and surface antigen in the hamster.

Harbison ML, Godleski JJ, Mortara M, Brain JD.

A monoclonal antibody specific for a surface antigen found on hamster lung
macrophages has been produced. Macrophages obtained from LSH Syrian golden
hamsters by pulmonary lavage have varying amounts of this antigen on their
surface. We compared the age of alveolar macrophages (using 3H-thymidine) with
the amount of surface antigen. Lung macrophages were obtained by repeated saline 
lavage at 1, 3, 5, and 10 days after 3H-thymidine injection. Monoclonal antibody 
was then reacted with these cells followed by fluorescein
isothiocyanate-conjugated protein A. Cell size and fluorescence were analyzed by 
flow cytometry. A wide range of fluorescent intensity was observed; the cells
were sorted into four subpopulations (SPs). SP1 had the lowest fluorescence per
cell, and SP4 had the highest. The sorted cells were placed on glass slides, and 
autoradiographs were made. The percentage of labeled macrophages in each SP was
determined. At 1 day after thymidine injection, cells with a paucity of antigen
(SP1) were the most highly labeled; 12.5% of SP1 macrophages were labeled, but
only 1.4 and 1.1% of SP3 and SP4 were labeled, respectively. The labeling was
relatively even in all four SPs at 3 days, but at 5 days the labeling of cells in
SP2 and SP3 was highest. By day 10, labeled macrophages had large amounts of
surface antigen and were in SP3 and SP4. These findings suggest that pulmonary
macrophages that have recently synthesized DNA lack surface antigen. As time
passes, cells mature and more antigen is acquired. The amount of surface antigen 
reflects cell age and provides a useful tool to isolate and study macrophage SPs.

PMID: 6727298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Am J Vet Res. 1984 May;45(5):967-71.

Monoclonal antibodies to Brucella surface antigens associated with the smooth
lipopolysaccharide complex.

Schurig GG, Hammerberg C, Finkler BR.

Hybridomas producing antibodies to determinants associated with the
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) of Brucella abortus and B melitensis were obtained by
polyethylene glycol fusion of the SP2/0 myeloma cell line with B lymphocytes
harvested from a Sprague-Dawley-derived rat previously immunized with whole B
abortus strain 1119 organisms. Two clones, BRU38 and BRU28 , were selected for
their ability to react with whole B abortus organisms and purified smooth-LPS (
f5p ). The BRU38 monoclonal antibodies were absorbed with live, rough strain
45/20 and smooth strains of B abortus and B melitensis organisms, whereas only
smooth strains absorbed the antibody activity from BRU28 . Complete inhibition of
the monoclonal's activity could be achieved with crude smooth-LPS, a purified f5p
fraction, and a water-soluble acid degraded polysaccharide. Absorption of BRU38
and BRU28 with rough Brucella LPS, polysaccharide-B antigen, keto- deoxyoctanoic 
acid, or with several sugars and fatty acids known to be components of the
Brucella LPS complex had no effect on the monoclonals. The data indicate that
antigenic determinants are associated with the smooth LPS complex, probably with 
the O-side chain, and are expressed patchwise and in different quantities on
several strains of B abortus and B melitensis. The B abortus rough strain 45/20
contains surface determinants which lead to the agglutination of smooth strain
1119 organisms. The potential use of monoclonals in competitive enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assays for diagnostic purposes is discussed.

PMID: 6203443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Can J Genet Cytol. 1984 Apr;26(2):185-90.

Aberrant nuclear morphology in the mouse myeloma SP2/0 cell line.

Franklin AL, Irvin RT, Filion WG.

The mouse myeloma SP2/0 cell line when grown in supplemented Dulbecco's modified 
Eagle's media spontaneously produced aberrant nucleated cells which increased in 
frequency with cell culture age. These cells underwent cytological changes
associated with apoptosis, that is, the condensation of chromatin followed by
karyorrhexis and the production of small apoptotic bodies. Aberrant cells were
induced by media changes, centrifugation, and temperature shocking. The rapid
induction of aberrant cells by a media change suggests that the mechanism of
fragmentation was not associated with cell division.

PMID: 6722640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Mol Biol Med. 1984 Apr;2(2):121-34.

Cholesterol requirement of NS-1 mouse myeloma cells for growth in serum-free
medium.

Sato JD, Kawamoto T, McClure DB, Sato GH.

We have shown that NS-1 mouse myeloma cells, but not NS-1 hybridomas, required
human low density lipoprotein (LDL) for survival and growth in serum-free cell
culture (Kawamoto et al., 1983). Here we have further defined the lipid
requirement of NS-1 cells by demonstrating that LDL could be replaced by
cholesterol complexed with carrier bovine serum albumin (BSA). Cholesterol was
the active component of this complex since BSA alone did not promote NS-1
survival or growth. Cholesterol was an absolute requirement of these cells, and
it could not be replaced by mevalonolactone. In contrast to NS-1 cells a related 
mouse myeloma cell line, Sp2/0, did not require cholesterol or other lipids for
growth in vitro. Finally, we propose that cholesterol-deficient medium may be an 
effective alternative to HAT medium for selecting NS-1 hybridomas.

PMID: 6533417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Acta Pathol Microbiol Immunol Scand B. 1984 Apr;92(2):127-33.

Hydrophobicity of cultured mammalian cells and some effects of bacterial
phospholipases C.

Malmqvist T, Thelestam M, Möllby R.

Eucaryotic cell surface hydrophobicity was measured as a partition of palmitic
acid between the cell surface and the surrounding buffer. The method was found to
be independent of cell mass or amount of palmitic acid within a large interval.
An estimation of cell stability could also be obtained. The effects of Ca and Mg 
ions on cell hydrophobicity and stability of mouse myeloma (SP2/O) cells and of
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells were determined. This system permits
measurement of changes in cell hydrophobicity caused by various additives, e.g.
ions, purified bacterial products, antibiotics or cytostatics. Studies were made 
on these eucaryotic cells treated with purified bacterial phospholipases C from
S. aureus and C. perfringens. These enzymes were found to increase the eucaryotic
cell membrane hydrophobicity. This finding might indicate that bacterial
phospholipases C facilitate bacterial colonization at the start of an infection.

PMID: 6328866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. J Immunol Methods. 1984 Mar 30;68(1-2):217-26.

Radioimmunoassay of a glucose-containing tetrasaccharide using a monoclonal
antibody.

Lundblad A, Schroer K, Zopf D.

Monoclonal antibodies were produced in BALB/cJ mice against a urinary
glucose-containing tetrasaccharide (Glc)4 coupled to keyhole limpet hemocyanin
(KLH). The immune response was studied using 7 different strains of mice and 11
different immunization protocols. From 6 fusions using the Sp2/0 myeloma cell
line 2 hybrids were obtained producing antibodies (subtype IgG2b and IgG3,
respectively) that were capable of binding reduced tetrasaccharide. Specificity
studies showed that one of these antibodies (61.1) was useful for
radioimmunoassay of (Glc)4.

PMID: 6707478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. J Biol Chem. 1984 Mar 25;259(6):3475-81.

Monoclonal antibodies to rabbit skeletal muscle protein phosphatases C-I and
C-II.

Speth M, Alejandro R, Lee EY.

Rabbit skeletal muscle protein phosphatases C-I and C-II have been previously
isolated as two proteins of Mr = approximately 35,000. Both enzymes display broad
substrate specificities but have distinct enzymatic properties in regard to their
susceptibility to heat-stable protein inhibitor-2 and their response to divalent 
cations. Monoclonal antibodies against both protein phosphatase C-I and C-II were
produced by fusion of spleen cells of immunized BALB/c mice with SP2/0-Ag14 mouse
myeloma cells. The products of the hybrid cells were screened by solid phase
radioimmunoassay for the production of antibodies to protein phosphatase C-I and 
C-II. Positive cells were cloned and injected into mice to produce ascitic
fluids. Ten monoclonal antibodies against phosphatase C-I and eight monoclonal
antibodies against phosphatase C-II were obtained. These antibodies were
characterized with regard to their relative binding affinities to the two protein
phosphatases and their abilities to inhibit the phosphorylase phosphatase
activities of the two enzymes. All ten of the phosphatase C-I monoclonal
antibodies inhibited the phosphorylase phosphatase activity of phosphatase C-I,
and three of these also inhibited phosphatase C-II. Only one of the eight
antibodies to phosphatase C-II was inhibitory and inhibited the activities of
both phosphatase C-I and C-II. Examination of the binding of these monoclonal
antibodies by a solid phase radioimmunoassay showed that eight of the ten
phosphatase C-I antibodies cross-reacted with phosphatase C-II, while all eight
of the phosphatase C-II antibodies cross-reacted with phosphatase C-I. These
findings show that phosphatases C-I and C-II possess common antigenic
determinant(s) and may, therefore, be structurally related proteins.

PMID: 6323426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. J Leukoc Biol. 1984 Mar;35(3):265-79.

Monoclonal antibody to human granulocytes: cellular specificity and functional
studies.

Martin LS, Gordon DS, Wilson ME, Browning SW, Fritz RB.

Antigenic specificity and functional studies of G2, a monoclonal antibody to
human granulocytes, prepared by fusing spleen cells from immunized Balb/c mice to
the nonimmunoglobulin (Ig) secretor line SP2/0, are described. The antibody was
reactive with the HL60 and K562 cell lines and with human peripheral blood
granulocytes; and unreactive toward human lymphocytes, erythrocytes, a variety of
T and B cell lines, as well as toward leukemic cells obtained from patients with 
acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL), chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), and acute
myelocytic leukemia (AML). The G2 monoclonal antibody identified cell surface
antigens on cells from cases of acute myelomonocytic leukemia (AMMoL) and on
cells from 2 of 12 cases of acute undifferentiated leukemia (AUL). G2 was capable
of inhibiting oxygen consumption by human polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNL)
stimulated with aggregated human immunoglobulin (IgG), opsonized zymosan,
f-met-leu-phe (FMLP), and the calcium ionophore A23187. Inhibition of the PMNL
response to phorbol myristate acetate (PMA) and digitonin was dependent upon the 
dose of the stimulant. G2 should facilitate elucidation of the mechanisms of
granulocyte membrane perturbation and subsequent activation of various functions 
via a selective interaction with key cell surface antigens.

PMID: 6423749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Immunol. 1984 Mar;132(3):1544-9.

Amino acid sequence of a phosphocholine-binding antibody from an immune defective
CBA/N mouse employing the T15 VH region associated with unusual DH, JH, and V
kappa segments.

Clarke SH, Kenny JJ, Sieckmann DG, Rudikoff S.

Mice expressing the xid gene exhibit an altered immune response to phosphocholine
(PC)-conjugated keyhole limpet hemocyanin (KLH). Less than 25% of their
anti-PC-KLH response is PC specific, and most of these antibodies lack the
normally predominant T15 idiotype. These findings suggested that immune defective
mice might employ different variable region genes than normal mice in their
anti-PC response. To examine this possibility, we characterized by Southern blot 
analysis the gene family encoding PC-VH regions and determined the amino acid
sequence and fine specificity of binding of a T15-, IgG2, PC-specific hybridoma
(1B8E5) produced by fusion of the SP2/O cell line and PC-KLH immune CBA/N spleen 
cells. Southern blot analysis of DNA from CBA/N mice by using a PC-VH probe (S107
VH) revealed a hybridization pattern virtually identical to that of DNA from
normal CBA/J mice, indicating that CBA/N mice do not suffer from a gross deletion
of PC-VH genes. Analysis of the 1B8E5 antibody reveals that both the binding
specificity and relative affinity of this antibody are different from the anti-PC
antibodies of the T15, M167-M511, and M603 families. The complete amino acid
sequence of the heavy (H) chain variable region shows that 1B8E5 uses a VH
segment identical to the allelic form of T15 (C3) but has a unique D region of
three amino acids and use the JH1 joining segment. Both the DH and JH regions are
unusual when compared to PC-specific antibodies from normal mice, which have a D 
region composed of five to eight amino acids and use the JH1 joining segment. The
amino terminal sequence of the 1B8E5 light (L) chain demonstrates that this
anti-PC antibody carries a Vk3 subgroup L chain. Chains from this subgroup have
not previously been found in association with PC-binding antibodies. Thus, the
Vk, DH, and JH segments expressed in 1B8E5 make this hybridoma unique in terms of
the anti-PC antibodies studied to date, and suggests that additional PC-specific 
antibodies exist in inbred mice that employ "unusual" V gene segments.

PMID: 6420465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. J Biol Chem. 1984 Feb 25;259(4):2429-34.

On the mechanism of the acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of uridine to uracil. Evidence 
for 6-hydroxy-5,6-dihydrouridine intermediates.

Prior JJ, Santi DV.

In acidic media, the 5,6-double bond of uridine is rapidly hydrated to give a
small amount of 6-hydroxy-5,6-dihydrouridine (Urd-H2O), the mechanism of which is
known from studies of the acid-catalyzed dehydration of Urd-H2O (Prior, J. J.,
Maley, J., and Santi, D. V. (1984) J. Biol. Chem. 258, 2422-2428). In addition to
dehydration, Urd-H2O also undergoes direct hydrolysis of the N-glycosidic bond in
acidic solution. The kinetics of the above reaction demonstrates that Urd-H2O, or
an intermediate in the pathway leading from Urd to Urd-H2O, is kinetically
competent to account for the hydrolysis of the N-glycosidic bond of Urd. The
hydrolysis of (1'-2H)Urd proceeds with an alpha-secondary deuterium isotope
effect of kH/kD of 1.11 at 25 degrees C. This isotope effect is sufficiently
large to implicate carbonium ion character at the 1'-carbon during hydrolysis
but, since it is not the maximal value expected, suggests that N-glycoside
cleavage is rate-determining with a transition state intermediate between
reactant and products. Importantly, the hydrolysis of [6-3H]Urd proceeds with a
substantial inverse secondary isotope effect of kT/kH = 1.15 at 25 degrees C
which indicates some degree of sp2 to sp3 rehybridization of C-6 of the
pyrimidine moiety during hydrolysis. From the data available, it appears that an 
important pathway in the hydrolysis of the N-glycoside bond of Urd involves
either spontaneous cleavage of Urd which is protonated at the 5-carbon or a
protonated species of Urd-H2O. The studies described here, together with the
known susceptibility of the 6-position of pyrimidine heterocycles toward
nucleophiles, permits the proposal of chemically reasonable mechanisms for
enzyme-catalyzed cleavage of N-glycosidic bonds of pyrimidines.

PMID: 6546573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Immunology. 1984 Feb;51(2):377-85.

In vivo modulation of thymus-derived lymphocytes with monoclonal antibodies in
mice. III. Spontaneous and natural cytotoxic effector cells.

Herbert AG, Le Gros GS, Bidawid S, Watson JD.

Cytotoxic effector cell populations in murine spleen can be characterized by the 
phenotype of the cytotoxic cells or the nature of target cells. Lytic events can 
be antigen-specific, MHC-restricted and clonal, or target cell-specific but
apparently non-MHC-restricted. Two cytotoxic effectors of this latter category
are spontaneous and natural killers. Normal spleen cells from (BALB/c X DBA/2J)F1
mice (CDF1) cultured without added antigen develop a population of Thy-1+
spontaneous cytotoxic lymphocytes (SCTL) that lyse the DBA/2J mastocytoma P815,
as well as the BALB/c-derived plasmacytomas MOPC-11 and SP2/0. Cold target
competition experiments reveal the BALB/c-derived plasmacytomas MOPC-11, SP2/0,
J558 and the A strain-derived T cell lymphoma YAC-1, but not normal lymphoblasts,
block the lysis of P815 target cells. Thus, while these tumour cells appear to
express common antigens which are recognized by SCTL cells, plasmacytomas such as
J558 are not susceptible to lysis by SCTL. The relationship of SCTL to natural
killer (NK) cells was examined. In-vivo treatment of mice with monoclonal
anti-Thy-1 antibody leads to a rapid loss of SCTL and precursors from the spleen,
but there is a concomitant increase in NK cell activity.

PMCID: PMC1454437
PMID: 6607213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Hybridoma. 1984 Fall;3(3):201-14.

Production of monoclonal antibodies for affinity purification of bovine mullerian
inhibiting substance activity.

Shima H, Donahoe PK, Budzik GP, Kamagata S, Hudson P, Mudgett-Hunter M.

Two monoclonal antibodies (IG8 and IG10) specific for Mullerian inhibiting
substance (MIS) were obtained from the fusion between myeloma cell line SP2/0 and
spleen cells from an A/J mouse immunized with partially purified MIS. The
resulting hybridomas were screened by a solid-phase RIA and two lines were
selected and cloned. Both MAbs IG8 and IG10 subsequently demonstrated specificity
for MIS by their ability to inhibit biologically active MIS by precipitation with
a second antibody, directly block MIS activity in the organ culture assay, and
adsorb and elute active MIS when coupled to a solid support. SDS-polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis of affinity purified MIS demonstrated a major band at 140 kD 
in unreduced gels and two bands with approximate molecular weights of 70 and 74
KD following reduction. Protein bands were localized either directly by silver
staining or on immunoblots developed with radiolabeled anti-MIS MA.

PMID: 6548727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. J Steroid Biochem. 1984 Jan;20(1):43-50.

Monoclonal antibody to the hen oviduct progesterone receptor produced following
in vitro immunization.

Dicker PD, Tsai SY, Weigel NL, Tsai MJ, Schrader WT, O'Malley BW.

The progesterone receptor of the hen oviduct is composed of two non-identical
hormone-binding polypeptide subunits, A (Mr = 79,000) and B (Mr = 108,000). We
used a highly purified preparation of B to immunize mouse spleen cells in vitro. 
After 5 days in culture, the cells were fused with SP2/0-Ag 14 myeloma cells. The
resultant hybridomas were screened using an enzyme linked immunosorbent solid
phase assay, and those hybridomas producing antibodies binding to the immunogen
were cloned by limiting dilution. One such clone, 9B3-12, secreted an antibody of
immunoglobulin class IgM, which binds to B. This was indicated by the ability of 
the antibody to increase the rate of sedimentation coefficient of the B subunit. 
Further, when the proteins in the B preparation were separated by electrophoresis
and blotted onto nitrocellulose filters the antibody bound to a protein of
108,000 daltons. The antibody produced by 9B3-12 also reacted with subunit A and 
with the human progesterone receptor but failed to bind to the chick liver
glucocorticoid receptor or to progesterone in the absence of its receptor.

PMID: 6538613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Arch Immunol Ther Exp (Warsz). 1984;32(6):637-40.

Monoclonal anti-TL antibody recognizing a TL.2-like antigen.

Kusnierczyk P, Szkudlarek J, Steuden I.

We obtained a monoclonal anti-TL antibody-producing hybridoma by fusion of Sp2/0 
hybrid cells with spleen cells from (B6 X A-Tlab) F1 mice immunized with ASL1
leukemia cells. The antibody, TL-22-27-17, reacts in complement-dependent
cytotoxicity assay with ASL1 cells as well as with normal thymocytes of TL+ mouse
strains (B6-Tlaa, A, BALB/c, DBA/2 and 129) but not with thymocytes from TL- mice
(B6--Ly-1a). In addition, it did not react with lymph node cells or Concanavalin 
A-induced spleen blasts from B6-Tlaa mice; this result shows that TL-22-27-17
recognizes TL and not Qa-1 antigen. The positive reactions with BALB/c
(TL.1-2+3-5-6-7+) and 129 (TL.1-2+3-5-6-7-) thymocytes suggest that antibody
TL-22-27-17 reacts with TL.2 or TL.2-like antigenic determinant.

PMID: 6536234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. J Immunoassay. 1984;5(3-4):145-57.

A highly sensitive radioimmunoassay for human growth hormone using a monoclonal
antibody.

Gomez F, Pirens G, Schaus C, Closset J, Hennen G.

Biozzi-strain mice were immunized with a highly purified preparation of 20K
variant of hGH. Spleen-cells were fused with SP2/0Ag14 myeloma cells. Clone
productions were screened for specificity toward 20K and 22K hGH and for the
affinity constant of antibody-antigen reaction. For the selected monoclonal
antibody, Ka was 1.02.10(11) L/M using 22K hGH as both tracer and reference
preparation. No cross reactivity was found with PRL and other pituitary hormones;
hPL reactivity was 0.002 percent that of hGH. According to these antibody
characteristics, a highly sensitive RIA system was developed and used for
specific GH measurement in human serum. Using logit-log co-ordinates, the slope
of the standard curve was -1.099 and the minimum detected dose was 0.5 uIU/ml.
Excellent correlation (r = 0.9575) was found between assay data in this system
and those of a conventional RIA method using specific polyclonal rabbit
antiserum. The International Reference preparation (66/217) could adequately be
used to calibrate the monoclonal antibody system since the in house internal 22K 
GH standard and international one were equally well recognized by the monoclonal 
antibody.

PMID: 6530481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Hybridoma. 1984 Winter;3(4):373-6.

A monoclonal antibody specific for the carboxy-terminus of angiotensin II.

Nussberger J, Mudgett-Hunter M, Matsueda G, Haber E.

A monoclonal antibody specific for the carboxy-terminus of angiotensin II was
produced from the somatic cell fusion between SP2/0 myeloma cells and spleen
cells from CAF/J mice immunized with angiotensin II selectively coupled to
thyroglobulin. The subcloned line D5-7R2 was augmented in the ascites form and
shown to be specific for angiotensin II (octapeptide) and shorter angiotensin
peptides. This antibody, however, did not cross-react with angiotensin I
(decapeptide). This selectivity will be important in clinical assays that measure
angiotensin II in the presence of angiotensin I.

PMID: 6526402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Anim Blood Groups Biochem Genet. 1984;15(4):237-50.

Two-dimensional electrophoresis of horse serum proteins: genetic polymorphism of 
ceruloplasmin and two other serum proteins.

Juneja RK, Andersson L, Sandberg K, Gahne B, Adalsteinsson S, Gunnarsson E.

Two-dimensional agarose gel (pH 8.6)-horizontal polyacrylamide gel (pH 9.0)
electrophoresis of horse serum proteins revealed genetic polymorphism of
ceruloplasmin (Cp) and two unidentified serum proteins tentatively designated
serum protein 1 (SP1) and serum protein 2 (SP2). Family data were consistent with
the hypothesis that the observed Cp and SP1 phenotypes were each controlled by
two codominant, autosomal alleles. The three common SP2 phenotypes were shown to 
be controlled by two codominant, autosomal alleles. Population data and limited
family data indicated the occurrence of two additional SP2 alleles. Altogether
more than 600 horses representing 13 different breeds were typed for Cp, SP1 and 
SP2, and allele frequency estimates were calculated. SP2 was highly polymorphic
in all breeds studied whereas SP1 and Cp showed quite low degrees of
polymorphism. SP1 polymorphism was observed in seven breeds while Cp polymorphism
was observed only in the Icelandic toelter horse breed.

PMID: 6524707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Toxicon. 1984;22(6):967-73.

Production of a monoclonal antibody against hemorrhagic activity of Crotalus
atrox (western diamondback rattlesnake) venom.

Perez JC, Garcia VE, Huang SY.

Crotalid venoms have cytotoxic properties which could be useful in medical
research. Crotalus atrox venom-hyperimmunized mouse spleen cells were fused with 
SP2/0 myeloma cells. Forty-one wells containing the hybridoma cells were positive
for C. atrox venom, as determined by the enzyme linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA). Cell line 1-e12 was cloned and used to produce ascites tumors in BALB/c 
mice. The monoclonal antibody produced by cloned and subcultured 1-e12 cells
reacted with both C. atrox venom and six other venoms in the ELISA and
neutralized the hemorrhagic activity of crude C. atrox venom. A series of
monoclonal antibodies could be used in studying the nature of snake venoms.

PMID: 6523516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Immunol Lett. 1984;8(3):131-6.

Monoclonal antibodies (IgM) against a murine carcinoma, Lewis lung carcinoma
(3LL): production, purification and in vitro selectivity.

Midoux P, Roche AC, Monsigny M.

C57BL/6 mice were immunized against a syngeneic murine carcinoma, Lewis lung
carcinoma (3LL). Monoclonal antibodies were prepared by fusing spleen cells of
immunized mice with SP2-O-Ag mouse myeloma cells. Hybridoma clones producing
anti-3LL antibodies were selected on the basis of a solid-phase radioimmunoassay.
Two clones were selected and subcloned to give the 5B5 and the 6B6 hybrid lines
which were found to secrete IgM monoclonal antibodies. Large quantities of
monoclonal antibodies were purified from ascitic fluids by gel filtration
chromatography. Specificities of these antibodies were tested on 3LL tumor cells,
3LL metastases, lymphoid cells and leukemic L1210 cells. The 5B5 IgM monoclonal
antibody was found to be selectively directed against primary tumor cells and
metastatic cells.

PMID: 6500631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Infect Immun. 1984 Jan;43(1):421-8.

Monoclonal antibodies distinguish phase variants of Coxiella burnetii.

Williams JC, Johnston MR, Peacock MG, Thomas LA, Stewart S, Portis JL.

Monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) directed against phase I and II variants of Coxiella
burnetii were produced by fusing myeloma SP2/O-AG 14 cells with spleen cells from
mice immunized with the chloroform-methanol extraction residue of phase I whole
cells. Two hybridoma clones which distinguished the phase variants by
microimmunofluorescence assay were isolated and characterized. The MAbs showing
specificity for phase I cells (MAbI-1, immunoglobulin G, subclass 3 kappa)
reacted with the hot phenol-water extract of phase I C. burnetii in
immunodiffusion and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays. MAbI-1 reacted with
high-molecular-weight components from phase I phenol-water extract and whole cell
in an immunoblot assay. Specificity of MAbI-1 for a carbohydrate epitope in the
phenol-water extract was demonstrated by periodic acid inactivation of binding by
a competitive enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Phase I antigenic sites were
apparently well represented on the surface of cells as demonstrated by complete
fluorescence and microagglutination. The MAb showing specificity for phase II
cells (MAbII-1, immunoglobulin G, subclass 2b kappa) reacted with whole cells in 
the microimmunofluorescence assay, microagglutination test, complement fixation
test, and the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. MAbII-1 reacted specifically
with a 29,500-dalton surface protein as demonstrated by immunoprecipitation of
125I-surface-labeled cells. Although MAbII-1 reacted with detergent-solubilized
protein, it did not react with sodium-dodecyl sulfate-denatured protein by
immunoblot assay. This protein was not exposed on the surface of phase I cells,
but chloroform-methanol extraction of phase I cells exposed the phase II epitope.

PMCID: PMC263449
PMID: 6418662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Cell Biochem. 1984;26(1):47-64.

Replacement perfusion of cultured eucaryotic cells: a method for the accurate
measurement of the rates of growth, protein synthesis, and protein turnover.

Spanier AM, Clark WA Jr, Zak R.

The fractional rates of protein synthesis (ks) and degradation (kp) were studied 
in the myeloma cell line SP2/0-AG14 grown at different rates (kg). Cells in
spinner flask suspension cultures were maintained at constant cellular density
for prolonged periods by replacement perfusion of labeling medium at a rate
equivalent to the rate of growth. Total protein synthesis was calculated from the
specific radioactivity of labeled L-leucine in the precursor (medium) and
cellular protein. Fractional synthesis rates determined by approach to
equilibrium labeling were the same as those determined by equilibrium-pulse
labeling kinetics and pulse-chase kinetics. The rate of protein degradation was
determined from the established relationship Kg = ks - kp. Protein synthesis
rates remained constant over a threefold range in the rate of cell growth. At
relatively slow growth rates (kg = 0.017/hr) turnover represented a major
fraction of total synthesis (kp = 0.032/hr = 0.65ks). At rapid growth rates (kg =
0.058/hr) the value of kp was less than 0.005/hr. No major difference was
observed between the ks determined for individual cellular proteins (separated by
SDS-polyacrylamide (7.5%) gel electrophoresis) from rapid- and slow-growing
cultures. Thus, with an invariable ks, any change in growth rate is due to an
inverse change in the rate of turnover. Since turnover is the balance between
synthesis and degradation and since synthesis is unchanging, then changes in the 
growth rate of SP2/0-AG14 should be due to changes in the rate of protein
degradation. Experiments were therefore performed to determine the origin of the 
degradative machinery, ie, cytosolic or lysosomal; autolysis of prelabeled
cellular protein (in vitro) was observed only at acidic pH (4.2) and was totally 
inhibited by addition of leupeptin (10 microM) and pepstatin (2 microM), the
specific inhibitors of lysosomal cathepsins B (&L) and D, respectively. Since
growth rate appears to be regulated by the alterations in the rate of protein
degradation and degradation (in vitro) in SP2/0-AG14 appears to be lysosomal,
then one should be able to alter the rate of cellular growth by interfering with 
rate of lysosomal proteolysis. Indeed, when the lysosomotropic amine NH4Cl (10
mM) is added to cells growing with a kg of 0.018/hr +/- 0.001 (ks = 0.050/hr +/- 
0.002) the growth rate increased to 0.051/hr +/- 0.002 without change in the rate
of protein synthesis (ks = 0.049/hr +/- 0.003).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 6392311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Hybridoma. 1984 Summer;3(2):131-9.

Monoclonal anti-islet cell autoantibodies from C57BLKsJ db/db diabetic mice.

Sai P, Maurel C, Kremer M, Barriere P.

We have developed hybridomas producing anti-islet cell monoclonal autoantibodies 
(IC-MC auto Ab), by fusion of splenocytes from C57BLKsJ db/db diabetic mice with 
the SP2/O-Ag 14 myeloma. These IC-MC auto Ab were screened by an enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay, for their binding-ability to RINm5F insulinoma cells. Twenty
IC-MC auto Ab were produced, which have differing immunoglobulin isotypes. Four
of them induced a complement-dependent lysis of RINm5F cells in vitro, while the 
others did not. These two populations of auto Ab reflect the duality found in the
intact db/db mouse. Immunoperoxidase procedures demonstrated that IC-MC auto Ab
bound specifically to beta cell antigens of control pancreatic sections, in a
similar pattern as auto Ab spontaneously "trapped" in the islets of db/db mice.
Electron microscopic studies with an immunogold staining suggested that target
antigens for IC-MC auto Ab were predominantly located in the cytoplasmic matrix
of beta cells and, to a lesser extent, on their membranes. These antibodies
represent powerful reactives for the studies concerning with the pathogeny of
diabetes.

PMID: 6384027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 1984;78(2):193-202.

Zymodeme and species specificities of monoclonal antibodies raised against
Trypanosoma cruzi.

Flint JE, Schechter M, Chapman MD, Miles MA.

A series of hybrid cell lines was generated by the fusion of Sp2/0 myeloma cells 
with spleen cells from BALB/c mice that had been immunized or infected with
Trypanosoma cruzi zymodemes (Z1, Z2, Z3 ). Four immunoglobulin isotypes, IgM,
IgG1, IgG2a and IgG3 were represented amongst the monoclonal antibodies secreted 
by 22 hybridoma clones. On indirect immunofluorescence (IFAT) antibodies bound to
flagellum, cytoplasm, cell membrane or stained the whole organism. Two antibodies
were epimastigote-specific. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) and a dot 
immunobinding test were used to evaluate the zymodeme and species specificities
of 13 antibodies: four reacted with all T. cruzi zymodemes tested, two reacted
strongly with all except Z1, two predominantly with Z1, two predominantly with
Z2, and three predominantly with Z3 . Two IgM antibodies cross reacted with
Trypanosoma rangeli, T. brucei, Leishmania mexicana, L. braziliensis and L.
donovani. Five antibodies were used in a preliminary immunobinding test,
performed blindly, to compare monoclonal reactivities and zymodeme groups. The
results suggested a correlation between the two methods of characterization.
Anti-T. cruzi monoclonal antibodies are considered to have important applications
to epidemiological studies and the improved diagnosis and prognosis of Chagas'
disease.

PMID: 6380014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 1984;3(1):5-24.

Nonmetastatic tumor cells acquire metastatic properties following somatic
hybridization with normal cells.

De Baetselier P, Roos E, Brys L, Remels L, Gobert M, Dekegel D, Segal S, Feldman 
M.

Somatic cell hybridization between nonmetastatic tumor cells and normal cells of 
the lymphoreticular system results in hybrid cells manifesting metastatic
properties of defined target organ specificity. Thus, fusion of the nonmetastatic
BALB/c originated NSI plasmacytoma with C57BL B lymphocytes resulted in
hybridomas, each of which were metastatic. Of 10 hybridomas, 7 generated
metastases in the spleen and liver, whereas 3 generated liver metastases. The
generation of liver metastases by hybridomas which homed to both spleen and
liver, but not by those which homed to the liver only, was controlled by the
spleen. The acquisition of metastatic properties via somatic cell fusion seems to
represent a general principle, in which the normal partner determines the target 
organ specificity for the metastatic growth. Thus, fusion of SP2/O myeloma cells 
with syngeneic B lymphocytes also resulted in a hybrid cell metastasizing to the 
spleen and liver, yet a somatic hybrid between NSI and a macrophage or
dendritic-like cell metastasized to the lung. Cell surface molecules encoded by
the genome of the normal partner was demonstrated to control the target organ
specificity: antibodies against MHC-encoded antigens of the normal B cell partner
prevented the generation of metastases by hybridomas metastasizing to the spleen 
and liver, but not by those metastasizing to the liver only. This is in
accordance with the function of MHC molecules on lymphocytes in controlling their
homing to lymphoid organs. Hybridomas of T cell lymphomas also manifested
metastatic properties. Analysis of the cell surface Thy-1 antigens of a hybridoma
(DCH10), produced via somatic fusion between BW5145 lymphoma and a putative
macrophage cell indicated that cells of liver metastases (DCH10-Li) generated by 
the hybrid cells might have undergone further somatic cell fusion in vivo with
host (T?) cells. These cells have acquired new metastatic properties, generating 
metastases in spleen, liver and kidneys. In fact, even the inoculation of the
parental BW lymphoma cells resulted in a case of liver metastasis (BW-Li). Such
BW-Li cells, upon reinoculation, also generated metastases in the spleen, liver
and kidneys. Analysis of the Thyl phenotype indicated that BW-Li cells may also
have undergone somatic cell fusion in vivo with host (T?) cells, resulting in the
acquisition of metastatic properties. The pattern of cell-cell interactions
(adhesion, infiltration) with liver cell monolayers of BW-Li cells and of
DCH10-Li (T-cell lymphomas) was identical, and differed from cells of liver
metastases of the myeloma-B cell hybridomas which might be based on responses to 
liver growth signals.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 6370419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Hybridoma. 1984;3(1):25-31.

Monoclonal antibodies specific for the virion polypeptide, p27, of avian
retroviruses.

Parsons SJ, Wilson LD, Ely CM, Parsons JT, Benjamin DC.

The major component of the core structure of avian sarcoma leukosis viruses is a 
27 kD molecular weight polypeptide, p27. Spleen cells from mice immunized with
the Schmidt-Ruppin strain of Rous sarcoma virus (RSV) were fused with mouse
myeloma cells (SP2/0), and hybridoma cell lines producing monoclonal antibodies
to p27 were isolated. The monoclonal antibodies were all of the IgG1 subclass
with kappa light chains. These antibodies immunoprecipitated p27 and its
precursor proteins from extracts of RSV-transformed cells. Reciprocal competitive
binding experiments defined five nonoverlapping antigenic determinants within
p27. The monoclonal antibodies also immunoprecipitated the transforming protein, 
p110gag-myc, from avian myelocytomatosis virus transformed cells. Their
usefulness in studies of virion maturation and viral oncogenesis is discussed.

PMID: 6205983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Immunol Lett. 1984;8(2):61-8.

Generation of hybridoma antibodies to double-stranded DNA from non-autoimmune
BALB/c strain: studies on anti-idiotype.

Monier JC, Brochier J, Moreira A, Sault C, Roux B.

A hybridoma obtained between normal spleen cells from BALB/c mice (a
non-autoimmune strain) and SP2-O-Ag 14 myeloma cell line was designated as HB2.
These hybrid cells produced an IgM kappa-anti-ds-DNA antibody, but their
specificity was limited to some polydeoxyribonucleotides such as natural ds-DNA
from calf thymus, poly dG-poly dC, poly d(GC) and poly d(GC)-poly d(GC). In
contrast, poly dA-poly dT, poly d(AT) were not recognized. The configuration of
the nucleic acid helix plays a small role if any, in the building of the epitopes
recognized by the hybridoma HB2 antibodies, while the presence of G and C
appeared to be essential. These epitopes could not be found on ss- and
ds-polyribonucleotides. B cells able to produce anti-ds-DNA antibodies are
therefore present in non-autoimmune BALB/c mice, but not enough to produce the
corresponding antibodies at a detectable level in the serum. Following
immunization of BALB/c mice with hybridoma HB2 monoclonal antibodies,
anti-idiotype antibodies were obtained which also recognized idiotopes present in
the serum from both murine MRL/1 and human systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).

PMID: 6204937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Dev Biol Stand. 1984;57:409-14.

Monoclonal antibodies to DNA modified by the carcinogen N-acetoxy-N-2 acetyl
aminofluorene.

Le Guern A, Leng M, Kourilsky P.

BALB/c mice were immunized against acetyl aminofluorene-substituted guanosine
(AAF.Guo). Hybridomas were generated from the immune splenocytes fused with the
SP2/0.Ag8 cell line. Four monoclonal antibodies (mAb) were selected. Two of them 
recognize mainly AAF. substituted DNA but also native DNA, while the others
(derived from the hybridoma 16) are specific for the modified DNA. Using a solid 
phase radioimmunoassay, the fine specificity of mAb 16 was examined. The
interaction between purified mAb 16 an AAF.DNA is inhibited by either AAF.GMP,
AAF.Guo, or AAF.DNA. Moreover this interaction is slightly inhibited by
aminofluorene-substituted guanosine (AF.Guo). By control, free AAF, fluorenamine,
guanosine, desoxy GMP and native DNA do not compete in the assay. This mAb 16,
which specifically recognizes the AAF-nucleotide complex may be a very useful
tool to analyze the carcinogenic processes. Such an antibody can also be used for
chromosomal localization of genes by AAF-substituted probes.

PMID: 6084621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Biochemistry. 1983 Dec 6;22(25):5922-9.

gamma-butyrobetaine hydroxylase: primary and secondary tritium kinetic isotope
effects.

Blanchard JS, Englard S.

Primary and secondary tritium kinetic isotope effects have been determined for
the reactions catalyzed by purified preparations of gamma-butyrobetaine
hydroxylase obtained from Pseudomonas sp AK 1 and from calf liver. With
[methyl-14C,(3R)-3-3H]-gamma-butyrobetaine as substrate, the bacterial
hydroxylase was found to exhibit a primary T(V/K) of 1.3-1.5. This value was
determined from measurements of either the specific activity of the medium 3H2O
or of the ratio of 3H/14C in the residual gamma-butyrobetaine. Under identical
conditions of analysis, the calf liver enzyme exhibited a primary T(V/K) of
approximately 15. With [methyl-14C,(4R)-4-3H] gamma-butyrobetaine as substrate, a
beta-secondary T(V/K) of 1.10 has been determined for the calf liver hydroxylase;
this supports the existence in the reaction mechanism of an sp2-hybridized
transition state. A large normal value of 1.31 for the alpha-secondary T(V/K), as
derived from measurements with [methyl-14C,2,3-3H]-gamma-butyrobetaine, suggests 
that the motions of the primary and alpha-secondary hydrogens are coupled in the 
C-H cleavage step and resulting synchronous rehybridization. A chemical mechanism
involving homolytic cleavage of the C-H bond at the position undergoing
hydroxylation is proposed and discussed.

PMID: 6661416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Mol Immunol. 1983 Dec;20(12):1353-62.

Monoclonal antibodies specific for the M- and N-forms of human glycophorin A.

Bigbee WL, Vanderlaan M, Fong SS, Jensen RH.

Four mouse monoclonal antibodies directed against the red cell membrane protein
glycophorin A have been isolated and characterized. They are produced by
hybridomas derived from SP2/0 myeloma cells and spleen cells from Biozzi mice
immunized with a mixture of human erythrocytes from homozygous blood group M and 
N individuals. These antibodies recognize and bind to purified glycophorin A and 
to glycophorin on the red cell surface. All are of the IgGl, kappa light chain
subclass and bind to determinants presented on the 39 amino acid,
trypsin-sensitive, N-terminal peptide of glycophorin A. Three display
differential specificities for the two allelic forms of glycophorin A; two are
exquisitely specific for the M-form and one preferentially binds the N-form.
Treatment of red cells with neuraminidase, which removes N-acetylneuraminic acid 
from glycophorin A, abolishes the binding of these three antibodies. The binding 
of the N-specific antibody is also sensitive to modification of the
amino-terminal residue of the antigen. The fourth antibody binds equally well to 
both the M- and N-forms as well as to neuraminidase-treated red cells; thus it
recognizes a public, N-acetylneuraminic acid independent glycophorin A
determinant.

PMID: 6197636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1983 Nov;80(21):6456-9.

Monoclonal antibodies to rabbit progesterone receptor: crossreaction with other
mammalian progesterone receptors.

Logeat F, Vu Hai MT, Fournier A, Legrain P, Buttin G, Milgrom E.

A mouse was immunized with purified rabbit uterine cytosolic progesterone
receptor (specific activity: 3 nmol of steroid bound per mg of protein). After
fusion of its spleen cells with Sp2-OAg myeloma cells, supernatants of 11 hybrid 
cultures were found to react in both an immunoenzymatic test and a
double-immunoprecipitation test with the progesterone receptor. Clones were
obtained from the five hybrid cells that gave the strongest response in both
tests. Antibodies from cell culture supernatants and ascitic fluids were
characterized. Three are of the IgG1 and two of the IgG2a isotype. Their apparent
affinity for the progesterone receptor was measured by immunoprecipitation in
physiological salt conditions. The equilibrium dissociation constants were
between 0.1 and 4 nM. All five monoclonal antibodies crossreacted with the rabbit
nuclear receptor, the human cytosolic receptor, and other mammalian (rat, guinea 
pig) but not avian (chicken) cytosolic progesterone receptors. There was no
interaction with the glucocorticoid receptor and corticosteroid binding globulin.

PMCID: PMC390132
PMID: 6579531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. J Virol. 1983 Nov;48(2):440-50.

Monoclonal antibodies to newcastle disease virus: delineation of four epitopes on
the HN glycoprotein.

Iorio RM, Bratt MA.

Eighteen independent hybridomas producing monoclonal antibodies to Newcastle
disease virus have been prepared by fusion of SP2 cells with spleen lymphocytes
from a BALB/c mouse immunized with intact UV-inactivated Newcastle disease virus 
strain Australia-Victoria. They have been divided into three groups on the basis 
of radioimmunoprecipitation, infected cell surface and cytoplasmic fluorescence, 
and isotype. The anti-HN group is made up of nine antibodies which give surface
fluorescence on infected cells and immunoprecipitate the HN glycoprotein. These
antibodies bind to HN in nitrocellulose transfers of sodium dodecyl sulfate gels,
but only if it has been neither reduced nor boiled. To varying degrees, all of
these HN antibodies neutralize infectivity. These results suggest that they
recognize exposed determinants of a conformational nature on the native HN
molecule. They have been used in competition antibody-binding radioimmunoassays
and additive neutralization assays, and on the basis of these studies the
epitopes they recognize have been subdivided into four domains, two of which are 
overlapping, on the HN glycoprotein. The relatively weaker neutralizing activity 
observed with some of these antibodies cannot be explained by lower avidities for
their epitopes because there is not an inverse correlation between estimated
binding constant and neutralizing activity. The four antibodies in the second
group all give a predominantly cytoplasmic fluorescence pattern,
immunoprecipitate the nucleocapsid protein, and bind to nucleocapsid protein in
nitrocellulose transfers of reduced and nonreduced sodium dodecyl
sulfate-polyacrylamide gels. All five of the antibodies in the third group are of
the immunoglobulin M class, unlike the others which are all immunoglobulin G
antibodies. Members of this group show variable fluorescence patterns, but none
is able to immunoprecipitate or bind to a specific viral antigen transferred to
nitrocellulose paper from sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gels.

PMCID: PMC255369
PMID: 6194312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1983 Oct;80(19):5822-6.

Isolation and characterization of monoclonal antibodies directed against the DNA 
repair enzyme uracil DNA glycosylase from human placenta.

Arenaz P, Sirover MA.

A series of monoclonal antibodies has been prepared against the base excision
repair enzyme uracil DNA glycosylase isolated from human placenta. Spleen cells
from BALB/c mice immunized with purified human placental uracil DNA glycosylase
were fused with either P3X63 Ag8.653 or SP2/0 myeloma cells. Hybridomas producing
antibodies directed against the placental glycosylase were identified in an
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Each positive hybridoma was cloned twice by
limit dilution and tested for anti-glycosylase activity in an enzyme
immunoprecipitation assay. Each of the four clones examined in detail
precipitated enzyme activity in an immunoprecipitation reaction only in the
presence of rabbit anti-mouse IgG as a second antibody. No anti-uracil DNA
glycosylase activity was observed in a spontaneous hybridoma used as a control.
Each monoclonal antibody immunoprecipitated uracil DNA glycosylases isolated from
several human tissues. Partial crossreactivity was observed with rat liver
glycosylase and with a hamster enzyme. In contrast, no crossreactivity was
observed with yeast or Escherichia coli glycosylase. Glycerol gradient
sedimentation analysis demonstrated that one of the antibodies bound to the
glycosylase at a site that did not diminish its catalytic activity. A second
monoclonal antibody bound at a determinant that affected catalytic activity.
Analysis of antibody-glycosylase interactions suggests that human cells contain
antigenically distinct glycosylase species that may be encoded by individual
uracil DNA glycosylase genes. The potential use of these monoclonal antibodies in
studies examining the regulation of glycosylase isoenzymes during cell
proliferation in normal human cells and in cells from cancer-prone individuals is
considered.

PMCID: PMC390167
PMID: 6577457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. J Immunol Methods. 1983 Sep 30;63(1):123-31.

Covalent coupling of antigens to chemically activated lipopolysaccharide: a tool 
for in vivo and in vitro specific B cell stimulation.

Lange M, Le Guern C, Cazenave PA.

A simple chemical method is described which creates cyanate groups on the
saccharide core of bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS). The activated LPS molecule
is stable at pH 3.5 and can be kept for months at -20 degrees C without loss of
properties. The strong reactivity of the cyanate groups permits efficient
covalent coupling of various molecules to LPS. This is done under non-denaturing 
conditions. This paper also describes the coupling of microquantities of antigen 
(5-10 micrograms) to LPS. The 'LPS-antigen' conjugates are easily purified upon
centrifugation at 15,000 X g. These compounds are mitogenic for B cells and
trigger in vivo or in vitro production of antibodies directed against the coupled
antigen. In vitro, a concentration of conjugate as low as 10(-2) micrograms/ml
triggers specific antibody synthesis. Injection of 5 micrograms of conjugate in
mice induces a humoral response detectable 7 days after immunization. B cells
cultured for 5 days with an adequate dose of the LPS-beta-galactosidase conjugate
were fused with the Sp2-0-Ag cell line to give anti-beta-galactosidase
hybridomas.

PMID: 6604755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Infect Immun. 1983 Sep;41(3):1296-301.

Monoclonal antibodies against colonization factor antigen I pili from
enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli.

Worobec EA, Shastry P, Smart W, Bradley R, Singh B, Paranchych W.

Hybridomas secreting monoclonal antibodies directed against intact colonization
factor antigen I pili have been produced by the fusion of spleen cells from
immunized BALB/c mice with NS1/SP2 myeloma cells. The four monoclones with the
highest antibody titer, as detected by enzyme-linked immunosorbant assay (ELISA),
were chosen for antibody amplification by production of mouse ascitic fluid.
These four were examined for antibody specificity by ELISA and immunoblot assays,
using six different pilus types. Three of the four monoclonal isolates were
specific for only colonization factor antigen I pili in both assays, whereas the 
remaining isolate showed a distinct cross-reactivity with K99 pili in the ELISA
assay but not in immunoblot analysis. These results indicate that this monoclone 
may be recognizing a common structural element between the two adhesive pilus
types.

PMCID: PMC264639
PMID: 6136463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Mol Immunol. 1983 Jul;20(7):737-44.

Intramolecular heterogeneity of ligand binding by two IgM antibodies derived from
murine hybridomas.

Giles RC, Klapper DG, Clem LW.

The ligand binding properties of two murine anti-DNP IgM hybridoma antibodies
were analyzed. These IgM antibodies, designated NP3-17 C1-20 and SP2/0 I-64
C1-12, each displayed an average of only five high affinity binding sites for the
DNP moiety. Reductive 7S subunits of both of these proteins each adsorbed to and 
were hapten eluted from DNP affinity columns. These subunits, when examined by
equilibrium dialysis, each contained an average of one high affinity binding
site. Structural analysis of these molecules indicated each to be homogeneous.
Results obtained from trypsin hydrolysis of each molecule indicated that
differences in conformation of the binding sites may account for the observed
binding heterogeneity.

PMID: 6888381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. J Submicrosc Cytol. 1983 Jul;15(3):607-18.

Stereological study of murine myeloma and hybridoma cells in vitro and in vivo.

Renau-Piqueras J, Perez-Serrano MD, Martinez-Ramon A.

Stereologic ultrastructural methods were applied to several cell types involved
in the production of monoclonal antibodies against the mitochondrial enzyme
glutamic dehydrogenase (GDH). These cell types included SP2/O murine cells, in
vitro cultured hybrid cells producing monoclonal antibodies, and the same hybrid 
cells maintained as solid and ascites tumors (TH and ATH cells, respectively).
The statistical analysis of quantitative data indicates that the fusion between
SP2/O cells and spleen lymphocytes does not induce significant changes in the
fine structure of the former cells. Moreover, the transfer of hybrid cells from
in vitro to in vivo conditions induces their transformation from an immature
state to mature plasma cells. The increase in mitochondria and rough endoplasmic 
reticulum suggests that the ascites tumor provides cells with an environment more
suitable for expressing their activity than does the solid tumor.

PMID: 6876217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 1983 Jul;4(5-6):603-14.

Derivation of monoclonal antibodies against Brucella abortus antigens.

Holman PJ, Adams LG, Hunter DM, Heck FC, Nielsen KH, Wagner GG.

In vivo immunization, fusion, antibody detection, and cryopreservation procedures
for monoclonal antibody production against antigens of Brucella abortus are
described. Splenocytes from BALB/c mice immunized with irradiated B. abortus
S2308 were fused with Sp2/O-Ag14 myeloma cells and 61 hybridomas secreting
anti-Brucella antibodies were cloned. Hybridoma antibody synthesis was detected
effectively and most efficiently by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays.
Antibodies from clones of hybridoma A23 reacted with S19 and S2308 whole
bacterial cells, while hybridoma B49 reacted primarily with alkali--treated
lipopolysaccharides of S19, S1119.3 and S2308. Cryopreservation of clones had no 
major effect on antibody synthesis. The application of monoclonal anti-Brucella
antibodies in the differential diagnosis of bovine brucellosis is discussed.

PMID: 6412427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1983 Jun 30;409:751-9.

Monoclonal antibodies recognizing the secreted and membrane domains of the IgA
dimer receptor.

Kühn LC, Kraehenbuhl JP.

The receptor that mediates the specific uptake and intracellular transport of
dimeric immunoglobulin A (IgA dimer) in mucosal and glandular epithelia is
identical with a transmembrane precursor of secreted secretory component. During 
transport, the IgA dimer receptor (membrane SC) is cleaved into two domains, a
membrane anchorage peptide and secreted secretory component. We have produced
monoclonal antibodies with distinct specificity against both domains of the
rabbit IgA dimer receptor. Two mouse hybridoma lines were obtained by fusion of
SP2/0 myeloma cells with spleen cells from mice immunized with purified receptor 
from rabbit liver and by screening of culture supernatants in an
immunoprecipitation assay with radiolabeled receptor. One antibody, designated
anti-SC 303, reacts both with membrane and secreted SC and is therefore directed 
to a determinant on the secreted domain of the IgA dimer receptor. The other
antibody, anti-SC 166, unable to interact with secreted SC, recognizes the
membrane domain of the receptor. We discussed the unique precursor relationship
between a cell-surface receptor and a secreted protein and its implications in
the IgA dimer transport system.

PMID: 6575720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Cancer Res. 1983 Jun;43(6):2843-8.

Therapy of a murine sarcoma using syngeneic monoclonal antibody.

Kennel SJ, Lankford T, Flynn KM.

Syngeneic monoclonal antibodies (MoAb) to Moloney sarcoma cells (MSC) were
produced by fusion of spleen cells from MSC regressor mice to myeloma SP2/0. MoAb
244-19A, an immunoglobulin G2b, bound to MSC cells and did not bind to two other 
sarcomas (K-BALB and Ha2), a carcinoma (Line 1), a fibroblast (A31) or a
fibroblast infected with C-type virus (A31-Moloney leukemia virus). In contrast, 
MoAb 271-1A bound to the MSC and Ha2 sarcoma and line 1 carcinoma as well as to
the normal and infected fibroblast cultures. Antibodies were tested for
therapeutic effect using three schedules of antibody injection. Injection i.p. of
ascites fluid containing 244-19A MoAb given on Days-1, 0, and +1 relative to
tumor cell injection increased life span significantly over that of control
animals given injections (P3, immunoglobulin G, or MoAb 271-1A) and produced some
seven of 19, one of five, and one of five long-term survivors in three separate
experiments. Antibody given to animals with established tumors (4 days after
implantation) also prolonged life span significantly and produced three of nine
long-term survivors. Antibody given to animals with very large tumor burdens (10 
days after implantation) did not prolong life span significantly. Optimal dose,
schedule, and mechanism studies concerning this therapy are in progress.

PMID: 6850596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Lab Invest. 1983 May;48(5):639-49.

Methods in laboratory investigation. Monoclonal antibodies to type IV collagen:
probes for the study of structure and function of basement membranes.

Foellmer HG, Madri JA, Furthmayr H.

Type IV collagen is one of the main constituents of basement membranes, yet it is
unknown whether the structural framework at different sites is assembled from one
unique type of molecule or whether different type IV collagen molecules exist. To
study the composition, chemical identity, and organization of this protein in
different organs we have prepared monoclonal antibodies to a type IV collagen
preparation from human placenta. Swiss Webster mice were hyperimmunized, and
splenic cells were fused with the three different myeloma cell lines SP2/0, NS1, 
and U1. Type IV collagen-specific hybrids were selected and cloned by limiting
dilution and on hard agar. Monoclonal antibodies secreted by two clones were
extensively characterized by ELISA-inhibition assay, immunoprecipitation, rotary 
shadowing, and immunofluorescence techniques. Unlike conventionally raised
antibodies in rabbits, both monoclonal antibody reagents show species-specific
binding exclusively to native type IV collagen from human placenta but not to a
similar preparation from calf lung or to other types of collagen. After heat
denaturation of the antigen binding was no longer observed. The M3F7
antibody-binding site is located within the triple helical domain of the type IV 
molecule, approximately 900 A removed from the amino terminal end as visualized
by a metal shadow casting technique. The monoclonal antibody M3F7 precipitates
material from pepsin-derived and radiolabeled type IV collagen, and analysis of
the polypeptide chains in the immunoprecipitate by sodium dodecyl sulfate
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis suggests that two major fragments are
contained in the precipitate, which yield polypeptides of about 100 and 50
kilodaltons. After rotary shadowing of antigen-antibody mixtures native collagen 
fragments of two different size classes that bind antibody are visualized. One
fragment is approximately 1500 A in length, and the other measures about 2700 to 
3000 A. The localization of the antigenic site on these fragments suggests that
both are generated by pepsin cleavage at a site about 900 A removed from the
amino terminal end. In immunofluorescence experiments the monoclonal antibodies
stained all basement membranes in kidney, lung, placenta, or skin, suggesting
that at least the type IV collagen molecule recognized by these monoclonal
antibodies is shared by a variety of vascular and epithelial basement membranes.

PMID: 6682465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1983 May;80(10):2926-30.

Monoclonal antibodies to mitotic cells.

Davis FM, Tsao TY, Fowler SK, Rao PN.

Certain proteins or activities are present in mitotic cells but not in interphase
cells. These proteins may be synthesized or activated, or both, just prior to
mitosis and are responsible for the breakdown of the nuclear envelope and the
condensation of chromosomes. To learn more about the nature of these proteins, we
raised monoclonal antibodies to mitotic cells. Spleen cells from mice immunized
with a 0.15 M NaCl extract of synchronized mitotic HeLa cells were fused with
SP2/0-Ag14 mouse myeloma cells, and hybrids were selected in medium containing
hypoxanthine, methotrexate, thymidine, and glycine. Two different hybridoma
clones secreting antibodies reactive with mitotic and meiotic cells from every
species tested were isolated. Chromosomes as well as cytoplasm in mitotic cells
reacted with the antibodies, as detected by indirect immunofluorescence. The
proteins from mitotic cells were separated by electrophoresis in
NaDodSO4/polyacrylamide slab gels, transferred to nitrocellulose sheets, and
stained immunochemically. The two antibodies, designated MPM-1 and MPM-2,
recognize a family of polypeptides with apparent molecular masses of 0.40 to
greater than 200 kilodaltons (kDa). Both antibodies reacted strongly with three
polypeptide bands of 182 kDa, 118 kDa, and 70 kDa. Only mitotic cells exhibited
the protein bands that were recognized by the antibodies. All these bands were
found to be phosphoproteins as shown by 32P labeling and autoradiography and
their removal by alkaline phosphatase treatment.

PMCID: PMC393946
PMID: 6574461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1983 May;80(10):2854-8.

Monoclonal antibody to chicken oviduct progesterone receptor.

Radanyi C, Joab I, Renoir JM, Richard-Foy H, Baulieu EE.

Antibodies to molybdate-stabilized chicken oviduct progesterone receptor were
raised in a Wistar rat and detected by interaction with homogeneous
radioiodinated progesterone receptor. Spleen cells of this rat were then fused
with mouse Sp2/0-Ag14 myeloma cells and the antibodies produced by the hybrid
cells were detected by double immunoprecipitation using the 125I-labeled
receptor. Cells of one of the positive cultures were then cloned by limiting
dilution and one hybridoma cell line was studied. The monoclonal antibody
produced was an IgG2b, and it reacted with the molybdate-stabilized "8-9S" form
of the chicken oviduct progesterone receptor, labeled with either
[3H]progesterone or [3H]ORG 2058 (a high-affinity synthetic progestin). Kd for
the 8-9S progesterone receptor was approximately equal to 1 nM. Progesterone
receptor-monoclonal antibody complexes were labeled with radioactive
progesterone, suggesting that antibody does not prevent hormone binding. By using
a [35S]methionine-labeled antibody, we were able to detect the progesterone
receptor independently of its characteristic function of binding radioactive
hormone. No crossreaction with human progesterone receptor was detected.

PMCID: PMC393930
PMID: 6574454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Am J Physiol. 1983 May;244(5):E494-8.

Monoclonal antibody recognition of estrogen receptor in rabbit corpus luteum.

Holt JA, Lorincz MA, King WJ.

We demonstrated previously by administering [3H]estradiol and using
autoradiography that, in vivo, the exogenous estradiol that will sustain
progesterone production is sequestered to nuclei of the luteal cells in corpora
lutea of pseudopregnant rabbits. Our objective in the present experiments was to 
use an immunological method to demonstrate that estrogen receptor of the rabbit
corpus luteum is associated with this uptake. For this purpose, we prepared
nuclear extracts from corpora lutea removed from anesthetized pseudopregnant
rabbits 10 min after arterial infusion of 125I-estradiol. These extracts were
then analyzed by sucrose density gradient centrifugation in the presence and
absence of monoclonal antibody against human breast cancer estrogen receptor. We 
found that the 125I-estradiol-binding component extracted with 0.5 M KCl from the
nuclear pellet sediments in the 3-4S region in high-salt gradients; in the
presence of monoclonal antibody (D-547 Sp2 gamma), the entire estradiol-binding
component is shifted to the 8-9S region, indicating the formation of
immunocomplex with the 125I-estradiol-receptor moiety. The principal
estradiol-binding component that can be observed in the 3-4S region of high-salt 
gradients of cytosol of rabbit corpora lutea reacts with this antibody regardless
of whether 125I- or [3H]estradiol is given in vivo or in vitro. In both cytosol
and nuclear extracts of luteal tissue, unlabeled diethylstibestrol totally
inhibits the binding of radiolabeled estrogen to this antibody-shifted 125I- or
[3H]estradiol-binding moiety; neither progesterone nor testosterone inhibit
binding of radiolabeled estrogen to the antibody-shifted moiety. From these
findings we conclude that sequestering of estradiol by the rabbit corpus luteum
in vivo is accomplished by the steroid-specific estrogen receptor that shares
characteristics of the estrogen receptor found in human breast cancers, including
a) antigenic features and b) the capacity to translocate estrogens from the
cytosol to the nuclear fraction.

PMID: 6189407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. J Immunol. 1983 May;130(5):2308-15.

Monoclonal antibodies for carcinoembryonic antigen and related antigens as a
model system: a systematic approach for the determination of epitope
specificities of monoclonal antibodies.

Wagener C, Yang YH, Crawford FG, Shively JE.

A systematic approach for the determination of epitope specificities of
monoclonal antibodies to a complex antigen system is described. After initial
screening to identify antigen-binding monoclonal antibodies, one or more of the
clones are isolated by limiting dilution cloning, grown in ascites, and the
resulting antibodies secreted into the ascitic fluid are affinity purified on
Sepharose-bound protein A, radiolabeled, and cross-compared with antibodies from 
other clones by a solid-phase competitive immunoassay. In this work, BALB/c mice 
were immunized with either purified carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) or the
CEA-producing cell line HC 84S. Spleen cells were fused with the mouse myeloma
cell line Sp2/0-Ag14. The supernatants from 25 hybrids showed a significant
binding of 125I-CEA (greater than or equal to 15%). Nine hybrids were cloned,
resulting in 33 different clones. The antibodies produced by the different cloned
hybrids and the remaining uncloned hybrids recognized a total of five different
epitopes on CEA. All of the epitopes reside on the protein moiety of the molecule
as determined by antibody binding to deglycosylated CEA. The monoclonal
antibodies with five different epitope specificities were reacted with tissue
sections of normal and cancerous tissues and with peripheral blood smears. Each
of the five monoclonal antibodies reacted with tissue sections from colonic,
gastric, lung, and mammary carcinomas, as well as from a benign colonic polyp and
a resection margin from a colonic carcinoma. Four monoclonals reacted with normal
liver tissue. Granulocytes in peripheral blood smears bound three antibodies
strongly and one antibody weakly, and one antibody was not bound. One monoclonal 
antibody that reacted with normal liver tissue was not bound by granulocytes. The
ability of these five monoclonal antibodies to differentially detect three
different CEA-related antigens in normal and malignant tissues may have clinical 
utility.

PMID: 6187849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. J Cell Biol. 1983 Apr;96(4):1149-54.

Production of monoclonal antibodies against calmodulin by in vitro immunization
of spleen cells.

Pardue RL, Brady RC, Perry GW, Dedman JR.

Monoclonal antibodies against the highly conserved ubiquitous calcium-binding
protein, calmodulin (CaM), were produced by immunization of mouse primary spleen 
cell cultures. Dissociated spleen cells were cultured for 5 d in the presence of 
mixed thymocyte culture conditioned media (TCM) and purified bovine testes CaM
(50 ng-1 mg). Following immunization, cells were fused with mouse myeloma cells
(SP2/0, Ag 8.653) and cultured for 2-3 wk before initial screening for antibody. 
In five independent immunizations there was a range of 25-44% of the initial
polyclonal cultures which produced antibodies reacting with purified CaM as
determined by immunoassay. 80% of the cloned hybridoma produced IgM
immunoglobulins while the remaining clones were IgG producers. This ratio was
changed to 50% IgM and 50% IgG by subsequent extension of the in vitro
immunization periods and reduced amounts of antigen and extended in vitro
culturing. In vitro immunization introduces a new dimension to monoclonal
antibody production where limited antigen or poorly antigenic proteins are of
interest. The monoclonal antibodies produced in this study have enabled us to to 
selectively localize CaM in association with distinct subcellular structures,
mitochondria, stress fibers, centrioles, and the mitotic spindle.

PMCID: PMC2112333
PMID: 6833395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. J Immunol. 1983 Mar;130(3):1467-72.

Studies of a high molecular weight human melanoma-associated antigen.

Hellström I, Garrigues HJ, Cabasco L, Mosely GH, Brown JP, Hellström KE.

Hybridomas were generated by fusing SP2/0 mouse myeloma cells with spleen cells
from mice that had been immunized with cultured human melanoma cells. One of the 
hybridomas secreted a monoclonal IgG1 antibody, 48.7, which binds to a cell
surface antigen of cells from human melanomas and compound nevi. The presence of 
the target antigen in vivo was demonstrated immunohistologically by staining
frozen sections of primary and metastatic melanoma by the peroxidase
anti-peroxidase technique. Weak staining of some blood vessel cells was also
seen, but other normal cells, including skin melanocytes, were unstained, as were
cells from other tumor types. Antibody 48.7 immunoprecipitated polypeptides with 
apparent m.w. on sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of
250,000 and greater than 400,000.

PMID: 6822741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Cell. 1983 Mar;32(3):669-80.

Isolation of transcription factors that discriminate between different promoters 
recognized by RNA polymerase II.

Dynan WS, Tjian R.

A new fractionation procedure separates a whole-cell HeLa extract into three
components required for accurate in vitro transcription. One component (Sp1) is a
promoter-specific factor required for transcription of the SV40 early and late
promoters, but not for transcription of other promoters we have tested. The
second component (Sp2) is a general factor required for transcription of the SV40
promoters and a series of others, including the adeno-virus 2 major late
promoter, the human beta-globin promoter and the avian sarcoma virus promoter.
The third component is a fraction containing the endogenous RNA polymerase II.
When SV40 and adenovirus templates were present simultaneously in an in vitro
transcription reaction, addition of the Sp1 factor stimulated SV40 early promoter
transcription 40-fold, and inhibited adenovirus major late promoter transcription
by 40%. This finding suggests that Sp1 is involved in promoter selection, and is 
not merely a general transcription stimulatory factor.

PMID: 6187469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. J Immunol. 1983 Feb;130(2):1007-11.

A monoclonal antibody reactive with Marek's disease tumor-associated surface
antigen.

Lee LF, Liu X, Sharma JM, Nazerian K, Bacon LD.

An antibody-secreting hybridoma, RPH-6, to Marek's disease tumor-associated
surface antigen (MATSA) was produced by somatic-cell hybridization between the
mouse myeloma SP2/O-Ag/14 and spleen cells from MSB1 immunized mice. The antibody
reacted with 95 to 100% of the cells from eight of 10 chicken MD cell lines and
one of two turkey MD cell lines. It did not react with chicken MD cell lines RP1 
and SK3, turkey MD cell line RP19, lymphoid leukosis (LL) cell lines, RP9 and
RP12, and reticuloendotheliosis virus (REV) cell line RP14. A weak reaction was
observed with REV cell line RP13 (10 to 20%), and a very slight reaction with
normal chicken spleen cells (1 to 5%). RPH-6 produces immunoglobulin of the IgM
class. Cell culture and mouse ascitic fluids have titers of 10(2) and 10(6),
respectively, by fluorescent antibody (FA) test against MD tumor cell lines. The 
antibody did not react with Marek's disease virus (MDV) internal antigen or
membrane antigen as detected by indirect FA test on chicken embryo fibroblast
cultures grown on coverslips. The 51Cr release assay showed RPH-6 is highly
cytotoxic (60% release) only against MD lymphoblastoid cell lines, with antibody 
prepared from mouse ascites having a cytotoxic titer approaching 10(6). Results
from using RPH-6 for differential diagnosis of chicken lymphoid tumors of unknown
origin were in complete agreement with those obtained with rabbit anti-MATSA
reference serum and pathologic diagnosis.

PMID: 6294177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 1983 Jan;32(1):69-77.

Characterization of monoclonal antibodies against Schistosoma mansoni.

Zodda DM, Abdel-Hafez SK, Phillips SM.

Monoclonal antibodies directed against Schistosoma mansoni antigens were produced
by the in vitro fusion of B lymphocytes, obtained from mice infected with S.
mansoni, and SP2/0 myeloma cells. Antibody reactivity was assessed by ELISA
binding, utilizing 4 M KCl extracts of cercariae and adult worms, soluble egg
antigen (SEA), and purified antigenic preparations, and by indirect
immunofluorescence using living schistosomula. The monoclonal antibodies
recognized a wide spectrum of antigenic determinants. The specificity of the
monoclonal reactivities ranged from high cross-reactivity to extreme restriction,
vis-a-vis the distribution of the recognized determinants within genus, species, 
stages, and purified antigenic preparations. The specificity of reactivity of
monoclonal antibodies for a given determinant was greater than that of immune
mouse serum. These studies establish the feasibility of the production of large
numbers of monoclonal antibodies and of their use of antigen identification. The 
monoclonal antibodies are available to interested investigators upon request.

PMID: 6681690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Folia Parasitol (Praha). 1983;30(4):351-5.

The effect of monoclonal antibodies on Schistosoma mansoni cercarial penetration 
of mouse skin.

Abdel-Hafez SK, Zodda DM, Phillips SM.

Monoclonal antibodies (MA) were prepared by the fusion of spleen cells from
C57BL/6J mice infected with Schistosoma mansoni with non-secreting SP2 myeloma
cells. Clones of fused cells secreting MA reactive with the egg and cercarial
antigens (as determined by the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay), as well as
with schistosomules (as determined by immunofluorescence), were injected into
pristane "primed" mice to produce ascitic fluid. Cercariae were treated with MA
by incubating them in individual MA or a pool of 3 or 4 MA (0.25 ml each) in form
of ascitic fluid diluted in 10 ml of snail water for 60-90 minutes prior to snail
exposure. Groups of 7-9 mice were exposed to MA-treated cercariae either via the 
tail or intraperitoneally (i.p.). Control mice were exposed to non-treated
cercariae or those which were treated with nonsense ascitic fluid. Maturing adult
worms were recovered by the perfusion technique and counted. The results of two
experiments indicate that cercariae treated with a pool of 3 or 4 MA fail to
penetrate the skin of mice and thus were not able to develop into adult worms.
Treatment of cercariae with 1 MA resulted in a very low worm recovery (4.3% of
the exposure dose). The rate of worm recovery from mice injected i.p. with
pool-treated cercariae was similar to that recovered from control mice. In
contrast to control groups, mice injected with MA-treated cercariae had a higher 
percentage of immature worms which may indicate a possible form of stunting
phenomenon associated with MA-treatment.

PMID: 6662411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. J Cell Biochem. 1983;21(4):277-87.

Cell-surface associated proteins of corneal fibroblasts: dissection with
monoclonal antibodies.

SundarRaj N, Martin J, Sundar-Raj CV.

It is now generally accepted that the cell surface is involved in the interaction
of the cells with the extracellular matrix. To identify and characterize
cell-surface-associated components of corneal fibroblasts, several monoclonal
antibodies were developed. Hybridomas were developed by fusing mouse myeloma
cells SP2/OAg14 with spleen cells from mice immunized with membrane fractions of 
corneal fibroblasts grown in culture. Twenty-five hybridomas secreting monoclonal
antibodies to cell-surface components were selected by an enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay using corneal fibroblasts grown in microtiter plates as the
substrate. Immunohistochemical staining demonstrated that the antigenic
determinants recognized by these antibodies were not present on corneal
epithelial cells, but were present on skin fibroblasts. The antigenic
determinants recognized by two of these antibodies, designated 10D2 and 716, were
matrix components of the corneal stroma. Immunochemical characterization of the
antigens was carried out by indirect precipitation of the radioactively labeled
cellular proteins with the monoclonal antibodies and sodium dodecyl
sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) analysis of the
precipitates. Four antibodies were able to precipitate antigens from cell extract
in detectable amounts. Antibodies designated 5E2, 9G2, and 10D2 recognized
antigens consisting of polypeptides of approximate molecular weights 105K and
110K, while antibody 716 recognized an antigen of 100K molecular weight. However,
based on the tissue distribution and cell-surface distribution, these antibodies 
reacted with different antigenic determinants. The antigen recognized by 716 was 
also secreted by cells in culture but consisted of 220K and 200K polypeptide
chains. It was tentatively identified as cellular fibronectin, based on the
reaction of this antigen with polyclonal antibodies to plasma fibronectin.

PMID: 6654992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Anim Blood Groups Biochem Genet. 1983;14(4):239-50.

A bovine 'Ia-like' antigen detected by a xenogeneic monoclonal antibody.

Letesson JJ, Coppe P, Lostrie-Trussart N, Depelchin A.

A monoclonal antibody termed B2 Val 7C7, was produced by the fusion of xenoimmune
mouse spleen cells with Sp2/0.Ag 14 myeloma cells. This antibody is specific for 
a polymorphic lymphocyte antigen; it was detected on cells from 138 out of 177
cattle by both 125I-labelled protein A (solid-phase radioimmunoassay, SPRIA) and 
gold-labelled protein A (immunogold). Its binding was tested on various cell
types (peripheral blood lymphocytes, monocytes, polymorphonuclear cells (PMN),
thymocytes) from a variety of normal bovine donors. On the one hand, B2 Val 7C7
detects a determinant present on all IgG-bearing lymphocytes, on 20% of the
non-IgG-bearing lymphocytes and on the majority of the monocytes. On the other
hand, no binding occurs on any PMN or thymocytes. The detected membrane antigen
was isolated by immunoprecipitation from an NP 40 extract of 3H-leucine-labelled 
cells. On SDS-PAGE, it appears to be composed of two sub-units: a 32 000-dalton
and a 27 000-dalton chain. These results show that B2 Val 7C7 recognizes an
alloantigenic specificity present on an Ia-like antigen.

PMID: 6586090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Hybridoma. 1983;2(2):169-75.

Induction of proliferation and differentiation of murine B cells bearing surface 
Ig lambda by rat monoclonal antibody to lambda chain.

Yagawa K, Vitetta ES.

Rats were immunized with the purified BCL1-IgM lambda 3(1) and their spleen cells
were fused with Sp2/0 cells. Hybridomas secreting antibodies reactive with lambda
1-, lambda 2-, and lambda 3-containing myeloma proteins were subcloned and
propagated in spinner culture. The antibodies were tested in a solid-phase
radioimmunoassay and by indirect immunofluorescence using either BCL1 cells or
normal mouse spleen cells. One of the monoclonal antibodies was purified to 95%
homogeneity on DEAE-Sephadex. The purified anti-lambda anti-body, coupled to
Sepharose, was mitogenic for lambda-bearing normal B cells and BCL1 cells, and in
the presence of a supernatant from Concanavalin-A (Con A) stimulated these cells 
to secrete IgM lambda.

PMID: 6432681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. EMBO J. 1983;2(6):867-72.

Analysis of antibody diversity: V-D-J mRNA nucleotide sequence of four anti-GAT
monoclonal antibodies. A paucigene system using alternate D-J recombinations to
generate functionally similar hypervariable regions.

Rocca-Serra J, Matthes HW, Kaartinen M, Milstein C, Thèze J, Fougereau M.

The nucleotide sequence of four anti-(Glu60-Ala30-Tyr10)n (GAT) monoclonal gamma 
1 heavy chain mRNAs was determined from codon 10 to 120. This sequence overlaps
with the NH2-terminal amino acid sequence, allowing elucidation of the complete
protein sequence encompassing regions VH, D and JH. These sequences, which are
highly conserved, indicate that anti-GAT antibodies expressing the same public
idiotypic specificities represent a paucigene system, which uses at least two D-J
combinations leading to functionally similar hypervariable regions involved in
the recognition of the dominant Glu-Tyr determinant. D regions are encoded by D
genes which are closely related either to the D-SP2 or the D.FL16 germ line gene 
cores.

PMCID: PMC555202
PMID: 6416834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Oncodev Biol Med. 1983;4(3):209-17.

Production of monoclonal antibodies against the non-specific cross-reacting
antigen (NCA).

Chavanel G, Frenoy N, Escribano MJ, Burtin P.

Hybridomas were prepared by fusion of mouse spleen cells immunized with purified 
NCA (non-specific cross-reacting antigen) with cells of myeloma SP2/0. After
cloning, several clones were obtained which produced antibodies specific for NCA,
i.e., not reacting with CEA. All antibodies were IgG1 Kappa. Their affinity
constants were higher at 4 degrees C than at 37 degrees C. They revealed the
existence of at least two epitopes on the specific moiety of NCA.

PMID: 6402767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. J Immunol. 1983 Jan;130(1):1-3.

A monoclonal antibody from infected mice to a Schistosoma mansoni egg proteinase.

Dresden MH, Sung CK, Deelder AM.

A number of monoclonal antibodies were obtained by fusion of SP2/0 myeloma cells 
and spleen lymphocytes from mice infected with Schistosoma mansoni. These
antibodies were tested for their ability to inhibit acidic, thiol-dependent
proteinases previously isolated from Schistosoma mansoni eggs and adult worms.
One of the monoclonal antibodies isolated inhibits egg proteinase activity
measured in vitro with the use of a low m.w. synthetic substrate. This antibody, 
which is an IgG1 isotype, does not appreciably inhibit an acidic, thiol-dependent
proteinase obtained from the adult stage of Schistosoma mansoni.
Immunocytochemical methods with the monoclonal antibody have been used to
localize the egg proteinase within a set of "penetration" glands in the unhatched
miracidium.

PMID: 6336621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Hybridoma. 1983;2(3):287-96.

Monoclonal antibodies against chicken lymphocyte surface antigens.

Pink JR, Rijnbeek AM.

Spleen and lymph node cells of BALB/c mice, previously immunized with chicken
thymic or bursa cells, were fused with Sp2/0-Ag14 mouse myeloma cells. Hybridomas
from two fusions were selected on the basis of reactivity of their secreted
antibodies towards thymic or bursal tissues in an indirect immunofluorescence
assay. Four monoclonal antibodies reacting with different cell surface proteins
of chicken lymphocytes were characterized, as follows. One antibody (IgM X.14)
reacted only with cortical thymocytes, and precipitated material of apparent
molecular weight (AMW) 65,000 (65 kD), 125 kD, and 180 kD from these cells. A
second antibody (IgGl L.17) reacted with both bursa- and thymus-derived
lymphocytes, but with different high molecular weight glycoproteins (AMWs 210 kD 
and 180 kD, respectively) on the two cell types. These proteins may be homologues
of the previously described mouse B-220 and T-200 antigens. A third antibody
(IgGl L.22) reacted with a protein of AMW 70 kD present on bursa-derived cells of
some, but not all, chicken strains. Genetic analysis suggested that the presence 
of this protein was controlled by a single gene not closely linked to the major
histocompatibility complex. A fourth antibody (IgG2b L.43) reacted with
bursa-derived cells, macrophages and fibroblasts, but not with thymus-derived
lymphocytes. L.43 precipitated material of AMW 23 kD from bursal cells.

PMID: 6332057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. C R Seances Acad Sci III. 1983;297(6):305-8.

[Production of monoclonal antibodies against human cytomegalovirus].

[Article in French]

Mazeron MC, Berbar T, Guillemin MC, Colimon R, Roseto A, Perol Y.

Cell fusion of Sp2/0, a murine myeloma derived non-secreting variant, with
splenic lymphocytes from Mice immunized against human cytomegalovirus, has
originated two stable hybridomas producing monoclonal antibodies (IgG) which
react specifically with antigens that appear early in infectious cycle and remain
localized in the cell nucleus.

PMID: 6318932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Neoplasma. 1983;30(6):625-35.

Production and characterization of monoclonal antibodies against avian
myeloblastosis virus.

Poláková K, Russ G.

Hybridomas were prepared by fusion of mouse myeloma cell line Sp2/0 with
lymphocytes from mice immunized with avian myeloblastosis virus (AMV). The
specificity of each monoclonal antibody was characterized by radioimmunoassay
(RIA) using purified viral core proteins, immunoprecipitation of radioactively
labeled virus (35S-methionine-labeled AMV, 125J-labeled AMV) and immunoblotting. 
One monoclonal antibody (IC11) which is of IgG1 subclass, and two other
monoclonal antibodies (IF9 and IB8), both of IgG3 subclass, were directed against
the p19 protein of AMV. The remaining eight monoclonal antibodies (most of them
of IgM class) did not precipitate viral proteins under the experimental
conditions used, except IIG12 hybridoma antibody which irregularly precipitated
glycoprotein gp85. Since most of them (seven, including IIG12) gave positive
reactions in RIA with antigenically unrelated influenza virus, these monoclonal
antibodies were directed against virus components specified by chick cells (host 
cell antigen).

PMID: 6318135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Hybridoma. 1983;2(1):39-47.

Identification of human hepatoma-defined cell surface molecules.

Moriarity DM, Fox N, Aden DP, Hoyer JR, Knowles BB.

BALB/c mouse splenocytes from mice immunized with cells of the human hepatoma
line Hep G2 were fused with SP2/0-Ag 14 mouse myeloma cells. Two monoclonal
antibodies recognizing antigenic determinants (Hag-1, Hag-2) of hepatoma cell
surface molecules were investigated. Analysis of immunoprecipitates by sodium
dodecyl sulfate (SDS) gel electrophoresis revealed that the Hag-1 antigenic
determinant is born ona 115, kD MW glycoprotein, and that the second antibody
immunoprecipitates a group of surface proteins with MW of 230 kD, 79 kD, 23 kD,
and 20 kD from human hepatoma cells. These antigenic determinants are present on 
cell lines derived from other human tumors, thus neither of the antibodies is
hepatoma-specific; cross-reactivity with human colorectal carcinoma and some
mammary carcinoma cell lines is notable. Using indirect immunofluorescence on
frozen sections Hag-1 was detected in one of three liver biopsies tested whereas 
Hag-2 was demonstrated in all three. Both antigens were detected in sections of
human kidney with Hag-2 localized to the proximal tubules.

PMID: 6205970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Ann Rech Vet. 1983;14(4):437-44.

Utilization of monoclonal antibodies for antigenic characterization of
coronaviruses.

Vautherot JF, Laporte J.

Hybrid cells secreting monoclonal antibodies against Bovine Enteric Coronavirus
(BECV strain G110) were obtained by fusion between SP2/O myeloma cells and
splenocytes of mice hyperimmunized with purified virus. Specificity of 8 from the
12 monoclonal antibodies was established to be anti-GP105 by immunochemical
staining of viral polypeptides and by immunoprecipitation of radioactive-labelled
viral proteins. The reactivity of three BECV isolates (strain G110, F15 and
NCDCV) with the different monoclonal antibodies was studied by indirect
immunofluorescence (IIF), ELISA, hemagglutination-inhibition and
seroneutralization. G110 and F15 interacted in a similar manner with the
monoclonal antibodies, but NCDCV failed to react with A9 monoclonal antibody. IIF
test allowed us to detect another difference between U.K. BECV isolate and other 
BECV, in that the U.K. isolate did not react with F7 monoclonal antibody. No
differences could be seen by IIF in the reactivity of Danish BECV isolate, Human 
Enteric Coronavirus (HECV), Bovine Respiratory Coronavirus (BRCV) and our BECV
strains, with the 12 monoclonal antibodies. Human Respiratory Coronavirus (OC43),
Porcine Hemagglutinating Encephalitis Virus (HEV) and BECV share common antigenic
determinants which are outlined by the 6 non-neutralizing monoclonal antibodies. 
On the basis of the reactivity of coronaviruses with anti-BECV monoclonal
antibodies, a distinction can be easily made between BECV and other
coronaviruses, and differences were also detected within the BECV isolates.
Interestingly HECV were found to be more closely related to BECV than to human
OC43. These results show that monoclonal antibodies are of valuable help for
biochemical and antigenic studies as well as for diagnostic procedures.

PMID: 6203462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Med Microbiol Immunol. 1983;172(3):171-80.

Identification of shared antigenic determinants of different polypeptides from
Davis and Towne cytomegalovirus strains with monoclonal antibodies.

Chardonnet Y, Léry X, Revillard JP.

Six colonies producing antibodies were obtained by fusing mouse myeloma SP2-O
cells with spleen cells from mice immunized with cytomegalovirus Davis strain.
Among 88 surviving clones, 29 produced antibodies detectable by
immunofluorescence on infected MRC5 cells and 2 others produced neutralizing
antibodies against a homologous virus. Supernatants from these 31 positive clones
and 4 others which were negative in immunofluorescence or neutralization were
tested for their capacity to bind polypeptides from labelled Davis-infected cell 
extracts. Only 8 were found to be positive: five clones (A8, E3, F2, F8 and F20) 
precipitated 76 K, 60 K and 54 K bands; three others (A4, B9 and C24)
precipitated 76 K and 54 K only. Surprisingly, these 8 monoclonal antibodies
recognized a unique polypeptide 67 K of Towne-infected MRC5 cells. No correlation
was found between (1) the pattern of fluorescence on MRC5 cells infected with
Davis strain, (2) the neutralizing activity, and (3) the polypeptides recognized 
by the monoclonal antibodies.

PMID: 6196610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Biochemistry. 1982 Dec 21;21(26):6916-21.

Monoclonal antibodies against estrogen receptor: interaction with different
molecular forms and functions of the receptor.

Moncharmont B, Su JL, Parikh I.

Hybridoma cells have been produced by fusing SP2/O-Ag14 mouse myeloma cells with 
spleen cells from a mouse immunized with a purified preparation of estrogen
receptor from calf uterus. The antibodies, all of the immunoglobulin G (IgG)
class, interact with different forms of calf receptor as well as with rat and
human receptors. The equilibrium dissociation constant of the antibody-receptor
complex was measured in solid phase and in solution. With immobilized antibodies 
the Kd is 0.06 nM whereas in solution it is 0.5 nM. Only one antigenic
determinant is present per molecule of receptor with the antibodies tested. The
antibodies JS34/32 are able to form only a 1:1 complex with the 8S form of the
receptor, whereas a 2:1 receptor-IgG complex is formed at low antibody
concentration with the high-salt or nuclear form of receptor. The antibodies
JS34/32 and JS28/32 prevent neither the nuclear uptake of the receptor nor the
extraction of the translocated receptor from the nuclei.

PMID: 7159574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1982 Dec 20;709(2):318-24.

Production and preliminary characterization of monoclonal antibodies to rat
plasma fibronectin.

Hasty DL, Mainardi CL.

We have produced several monoclonal antibodies which appear to be directed
against different antigenic determinants of rat plasma fibronectin. Fibronectin
was purified from rat plasma by affinity chromatography on gelatin-Sepharose and 
arginine-Sepharose columns. Mice were immunized and hybridomas were prepared by
fusing spleen cells with Sp2/0-Ag14 myeloma cells using poly(ethylene glycol).
Three hybridomas (RFN1, RFN2 and RFN3) were selected for characterization. All
are IgG molecules, one is IgG2a, one IgG2b and one IgG1. Titers of ascites fluids
produced using these hybridomas range from 102 400 to greater than 409 600. The
antibodies cross-reacted to different degrees with human fibronectin. Rat
fibronectin was radioactively labeled and cleaved using human polymorphonuclear
leukocyte elastase. Four major peptides, Mr approx. 160 000, 140 000, 60 000 and 
30 000 were produced. Each of the hybridoma antibodies immunoprecipitated
different elastase peptides. RFN1 precipitated the Mr 160 000 peptide, RFN2
precipitated the Mr 160 000 and the Mr 140 000 peptide and RFN3 precipitated the 
Mr 60 000 peptide as well as low molecular weight material migrating at the
buffer front. These antibodies will be useful in studies of structure/function
relationships of rat fibronectin.

PMID: 6185152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1982 Dec;79(23):7595-7.

Biochemical studies of taste sensation: monoclonal antibody against L-alanine
binding activity of catfish taste epithelium.

Goldstein NI, Cagan RH.

The L-alanine taste receptors of the channel catfish Ictalurus punctatus provide 
a useful biochemical model for studying taste receptor mechanisms. Mouse
hybridomas that synthesize monoclonal antibodies have been produced. The antigen 
used to activate mouse spleen cells was the plasma membrane fraction obtained
from the taste receptor-containing epithelium of the channel catfish. The spleen 
cells were fused with myeloma cells, Sp2/0-Ag14, to form hybridomas. To
demonstrate inhibition of ligand binding by the product of these hybridomas, a
catfish membrane fraction (fraction P2) was incubated with the
antibody-containing preparation prior to assaying for L-[3H]alanine binding
activity. We thereby demonstrated inhibition of binding of the taste ligand
L-alanine to fraction P2. This approach should prove useful in further studies of
receptor binding and transduction events in taste receptors.

PMCID: PMC347387
PMID: 6961436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1982 Dec;79(23):7366-70.

Surface antigenic change during differentiation of a parasitic protozoan,
Leishmania mexicana: Identification by monoclonal antibodies.

Fong D, Chang KP.

The fusion of SP2/0 myeloma cells with spleen cells from mice immunized with
Leishmania mexicana amazonensis promastigotes produced hybridoma clones. Indirect
immunofluorescent antibody assay with live leishmanias showed that the monoclonal
antibody 6H12 recognized only the antigens bound to the surface of L. mexicana
amazonensis promastigotes. It also showed that the antibody bound to neither
amastigotes of this species nor to other Leishmania species--i.e., L.
braziliensis braziliensis, L. tropica, and L. donovani. Monoclonal antibodies
from three other clones (4D11, 4H9, and 6A11) were found to compete with 6H12 for
binding to L. mexicana promastigotes. With lysates of [35S]methionine-labeled
promastigotes, all four monoclonal antibodies precipitated the same triplet set
of protein bands at the approximately equal to 68,000-dalton region, whereas
another monoclonal antibody (6G5) precipitated a different band at approximately 
equal to 90,000 daltons. During differentiation of L. mexicana amazonensis from
amastigotes to promastigotes, there was a 4- to 8-fold increase above the initial
level in the binding of 6H12 monoclonal antibody to leishmanias, as detected by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and quantitative fluorometric assay,
respectively. Thus, we have demonstrated the use of monoclonal antibodies as
probes for antigens that change during leishmanial differentiation.

PMCID: PMC347340
PMID: 6961414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1982 Dec;79(24):7847-51.

Anti-idiotypes against anti-H-2 monoclonal antibodies: structural analysis of the
molecules induced by in vivo anti-idiotype treatment.

Bluestone JA, Krutzsch HC, Auchincloss H Jr, Cazenave PA, Kindt TJ, Sachs DH.

Previous studies have shown that treatment of mice in vivo with xenogeneic
anti-idiotype produced against a monoclonal anti-H-2Kk antibody, 11-4.1, leads to
the induction of molecules (Id') that inhibit the binding of anti-idiotype to
idiotype. To investigate the nature of these Id' molecules, spleens from such
anti-idiotype-treated mice were fused with the SP2/0 myeloma to produce
monoclonal Id' antibodies. All four monoclonal Id' antibodies were found to react
with goat and rabbit anti-11-4.1 in addition to the pig anti-idiotype used for
their induction and one of the four, J1-8-1, reacted with syngeneic BALB/c
anti-11-4.1. Partial amino acid sequences were determined for the heavy and light
chains of these monoclonal antibodies. J1-8-1 heavy chain had an NH2-terminal
amino acid sequence identical to that of 11-4.1 for the 39 NH2-terminal residues 
assigned, whereas its light chain and the heavy and light chains of the other Id'
molecules differed markedly from those of the 11-4.1 antibody. Isolated heavy
chains and light chains of J1-8-1 and 11-4.1 were reassociated in homologous and 
heterologous pairs. When J1-8-1 heavy chains and 11-4.1 light chains were mixed
in equimolar concentrations, anti-H-2Kk reactivity was found at a level
approximately 10% of that observed for reassociated 11-4.1 homologous heavy and
light chains. The finding that in vivo anti-idiotype treatment can trigger Id'
molecules structurally similar to the original idiotype has implications
regarding the mechanism of induction of Id' molecules and the regulation of
repertoire expression by idiotypic networks.

PMCID: PMC347446
PMID: 6818552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1982 Dec;79(24):7719-23.

Development of hybridomas secreting monoclonal antibodies to the chicken
intestinal 1 alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 receptor.

Pike JW, Donaldson CA, Marion SL, Haussler MR.

Four hybridomas that secrete monoclonal antibodies to the chicken intestinal
cytoplasmic 1 alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 [1,25-(OH)2D3] receptor have been
obtained. Splenic lymphocytes, derived from two male Lewis rats expressing serum 
antireceptor activity after repeated immunization with a partially purified
preparation of this protein, were fused with two nonsecreting murine myeloma cell
lines, SP2/0-Ag14 and P3-X63-Ag8.653. Viable hybrids were screened for
anti-chicken intestinal 1,25-(OH)2D3 receptor activity by incubation of hybrid
media with receptor-hormone complex; this was followed by immunoprecipitation
with rabbit anti-rat IgG. Of 1,724 hybridomas assayed by this technique, 4 were
positive (2 derived from each animal) for the secretion of an antireceptor
immunoglobulin molecule. After cloning by limiting dilution, the cell lines
(designated SP2/0-4A5, P3-8C8, SP2/0-8D3, and SP2/0-9A7) were expanded into
suspension culture. Antibody-induced alterations in the sedimentation pattern of 
the native 1,25-(OH)2D3 receptor, coupled with Ouchterlony double-diffusion
techniques, indicate that SP2/0-4A5 secretes an IgG2a, SP2/0-9A7 produces an
IgG2b, and P3-8C8 secretes an IgG. In contrast, SP2/0-8D3 was found to synthesize
an IgM. The monoclonal antibodies react with both occupied and unoccupied chicken
intestinal receptor and nuclear receptors, and they crossreact with 1,25-(OH)2D3 
receptors from a wide variety of tissue and cultured cell types, including human 
1,25-(OH)2D3 receptors. These immunological reagents should prove valuable in the
elucidation of the molecular action of 1,25-(OH)2D3.

PMCID: PMC347419
PMID: 6296847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. J Gen Virol. 1982 Dec;63(2):513-6.

A viable simian virus 40 variant with a deletion in the overlapping genes for
virion proteins VP1, VP2 and VP3.

Norkin LC, Piatak M.

Nucleotide sequence analysis was used to determine the exact location of a
deletion in the late region of the SP2 mutant of simian virus 40 (SV40), a viable
small-plaque variant isolated from a persistent infection of rhesus monkey kidney
cells. The results indicate that six base pairs are deleted from that part of the
SV40 genome in which the coding regions for the three virion proteins, VP1, VP2
and VP3, overlap. This implies that all three virion proteins are affected by the
deletion. This finding is discussed with respect to the viability of SP2.

PMID: 6296292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Endocrinology. 1982 Nov;111(5):1731-3.

Monoclonal antibodies to the glucocorticoid receptor.

Grandics P, Gasser DL, Litwack G.

One thousand-fold purified unactivated rat liver glucocorticoid receptor was
obtained by affinity chromatography followed by gel filtration. Splenic
lymphocytes of immunized mice were fused with a nonproducer SP2 myeloma cell line
to obtain hybridomas secreting antibodies against receptor. Hybridoma lines,
injected into mice, developed ascites tumors which provide substantial amounts of
monoclonal antibodies. A monoclonal antibody was purified from ascites fluids by 
chromatography on an anti-mouse IgG column. The antibody was shown to react
physically with the glucocorticoid receptor.

PMID: 7128534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Science. 1982 Oct 29;218(4571):474-5.

Monoclonal antibody to 5-bromo- and 5-iododeoxyuridine: A new reagent for
detection of DNA replication.

Gratzner HG.

Monoclonal antibodies specific for 5-bromodeoxyuridine have been produced and
applied in detecting low levels of DNA replication on a cell-by-cell basis in
vitro. The immunoglobulin-producing hybridomas were derived from spleen cells of 
mice immunized with a conjugate of iodouridine and ovalbumin. The cells were
fused with the plasmacytoma line SP2/0Ag14. The antibodies produced are highly
specific for bromodeoxyuridine and iododeoxyuridine and do not cross-react with
thymidine. DNA synthesis in cultured cells exposed to bromodeoxyuridine for as
short a time as 6 minutes can be detected easily and rapidly by an
immunofluorescent staining method and quantitated by flow cytometry.

PMID: 7123245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1982 Oct;79(19):6052-5.

A single domain of human prostatic acid phosphatase shows antibody-mediated
restoration of catalytic activity.

Choe BK, Dong MK, Walz D, Gleason S, Rose NR.

By limited proteolysis with mouse submaxillaris protease, human prostatic acid
phosphatase (EC 3.1.3.2) was cleaved into three fragments, Sp1, Sp2, and Sp3,
which individually had no enzymatic activity. One of the fragments, Sp3, regained
enzymatic activity after interaction with rabbit antibody to prostatic acid
phosphatase. The Sp3 fragment was purified and characterized as to its molecular 
weight, amino acid composition, and carbohydrate content. The Sp3 fragment
behaved like the parent molecule in L(+)-tartrate affinity and in trapping of a
phosphoryl intermediate. The same Sp3 fragment also bears the most prominent
antigenic determinants. This evidence suggest that Sp3 is the enzymatically
active domain of prostatic acid phosphatase.

PMCID: PMC347050
PMID: 6193513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Transplantation. 1982 Sep;34(3):113-20.

Monoclonal antibodies to mouse major histocompatibility complex antigens.

Ozato K, Mayer NM, Sachs DH.

As part of our continuing effort to produce a library of hybridoma antibodies
specific for the products of the mouse major histocompatibility complex (MHC),
nine antibodies reacting with antigens of the H-2d haplotype have been produced
by cell fusion between immune spleen cells and the SP2/0.Ag.14 cell, of H-2d
origin. Serological characterization revealed that seven antibodies reacted with 
H-2 antigens and two with Ia antigens. Of the anti-H-2 antibodies, four detected 
private specificities of H-2Kd or H-2Dd antigens and three detected public
specificities of H-2d and other haplotypes. One of the anti-Ia antibodies
detected a private Ia specificity corresponding to Ia.23 and the other detected a
previously undescribed public specificity. Anti-H-2d hybridoma cells represent a 
potential "autoreactive" situation in that the antibodies produced by the cells
should react with their own H-2 antigens unless expression of the corresponding
H-2d antigens in these cells was altered. In order to examine whether H-2d
antigens continued to be expressed on these anti-H-2d hybridoma cells, binding of
125I-labeled monoclonal anti-H-2Kd and/or H-2Dd antibodies was studied. Among the
four hybridoma clones tested, three bound specifically three independent
125I-labeled anti-H-2d antibodies, including two cases in which binding of
autologous antibodies was detected. The last clone did not bind any of the
anti-H-2d antibodies, although it bound an anti-H-2k antibody, indicating
selective loss of H-2d antigens. These observations demonstrate that neither loss
nor retention of H-2d antigen expression on the cell surface is obligatory in
hybridoma cells producing anti-H-2d antibodies.

PMID: 7135466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. J Reprod Fertil. 1982 Sep;66(1):299-303.

Photoperiodic suppression of gonadotrophin secretion in castrated male hamsters.

Urbanski HF, Simpson SM.

Male golden hamsters were transferred from long to short days and castrated on
the day of transfer (Group SP0) or 1, 2 or 3 weeks afterwards (Groups SP1, SP2 & 
SP3). Animals in Group LP were castrated and maintained on long days. After 7
weeks of short days, plasma levels of LH and FSH were low in Groups SP1, SP2, and
SP3. In Group SP0 LH output was also low and FSH secretion, although greater than
in Groups SP1, SP2 and SP3, was lower than in the long-day controls (Group LP).
This photoperiodic control of gonadotrophin secretion in castrated hamsters
raises doubts about the significance of hypothetical alterations in
hypothalamo-pituitary sensitivity to sex steroids.

PMID: 6811737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. J Immunol. 1982 Aug;129(2):678-2.

Hybridomas specific for carbohydrates; synthetic human blood group antigens for
the production, selection, and characterization of monoclonal typing reagents.

Bundle DR, Gidney MA, Kassam N, Rahman AF.

A general method for the production of carbohydrate-specific hybridoma antibodies
is illustrated by generation of monoclonal antibody to the antigenic determinant 
of human blood group B. This trisaccharide determinant was chemically synthesized
and covalently coupled to bovine serum albumin and human blood group O red cells.
Soluble protein antigen and the 'artificial' B red cells were used to immunize
BALB/c mice before fusion of spleen cells with the Sp2/0 plasmacytoma cell line. 
ELISA screening of putative hybrids for B-specific binding activity was
facilitated by the availability of a second synthetic conjugate, B-horse
hemoglobin. IgM-producing clones were identified by class-specific ELISA reagents
and by hemagglutination assay. In this way, clones suitable for blood typing were
rapidly identified. The precise antigenic specificity and Ig class of such
monoclonal antibodies were defined by inhibition of precipitation and by gel
filtration. Hybridoma antibodies were obtained from two separate fusion
experiments. One of these, clone 3E-4, was of the IgM class and possessed a
binding site that was completely satisfied (100% inhibition) by the trisaccharide
determinant of the B blood group. This antibody is shown to be suitable for use
in blood typing.

PMID: 6177774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Biochemistry. 1982 Jun 8;21(12):2929-36.

Antibody-nucleic acid complexes. Identification of antigenic determinant of a
murine monoclonal antibody specific for single-stranded nucleic acids.

Munns TW, Liszewski MK, Tellam JT, Ebling FM, Hahn BH.

Cloned hybrid cells, selected for their ability to secret an IgG 2a
immunoglobulin specific for single-stranded (ss) nucleic acids, were obtained by 
fusion of spleen cells from an unimmunized autoimmune MRL/1 pr male mouse with
nonsecreting myeloma cells (MOPC-21, line Sp2/0-Ag 14). Designated MRss-1, this
monoclonal antibody was (i) propagated by intraperitoneal injection of hybrid
cells to pristane-treated. Balb/c mice, (ii) purified from the bulk of other
proteins in ascites extracts by chromatography with DEAE-Sephacel adsorbent, and 
(iii) radiochemically labeled via reductive methylation using NaB3H4 and
formaldehyde. The binding of 3H-labeled antibody to immobilized ssDNA- agarose,
calf thymus) or soluble (fd DNA) ssDNA was rapid and dependent upon ssDNA and
ionic strength, but not hydrogen ion concentration. Optimal binding occurred in
both low and intermediate salt concentration (0.1-0.25 M NaCl), yet was
completely abolished above 0.30 M NaCl. The presence of guanine (Gua)-containing 
mono-, oligo-, and polynucleotides also abolished and/or decreased 3H-labeled
antibody binding to ssDNA-agarose. In these competition assays, the amount of
Gua-containing mono-and oligonucleotides required to inhibit antibody binding by 
50% (0.2-1.0 mg/mL) exceeded those of poly(G), rRNA, and fd DNA (i.e., 0.03-0.1
microgram/mL) by 4 orders of magnitude. In contrast, (deoxy)ribose 5'-phosphate
as well as other nucleic acid derivatives devoid of Gua failed to inhibit
antibody binding. The above findings were substantiated by the observation that
3H-labeled antibody bound to guanosine (G)- and guanidylate (pG)-conjugated
Sepharose, yet not to other nucleoside (A, C, and U)- or nucleotide (pA, pC, and 
pU)-conjugated adsorbents. Last, the introduction of the methyl group at the N-2,
O-6, and N-7 positions in the Gua ring system completely abolished antibody
binding. Collectively, these results demonstrate that the MRss-1 antibody
recognized single-stranded nucleic acid substrates by virtue of their content of 
guanidylate residues and, more specificity, by the presence of the Gua base
moiety.

PMID: 6179538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Brain Res. 1982 Jun;256(2):209-21.

Immunological identification of cerebellar cell lines.

Giotta GJ, Heitzmann J, Cohn M.

Spleen cells from BALB/c mice, previously immunized with rat cerebellar tissue,
were fused to the mouse myeloma cell line SP2/0-Ag14 and the cerebellar cell type
specificity of the resultant hybridomas determined. In this report we describe
the specificity of one hybridoma, C4/12. Monoclonal antibodies secreted by this
hybridoma recognize granule cell neurons in adult cerebellar frozen sections, and
in primary cultures started from 3 to 5-day-old newborn rats. In addition, C4/12 
recognizes a subclass of astrocytes when screened on primary cultures but not
adult cerebellar tissue. Two temperature sensitive Rous sarcoma virus transformed
cerebellar cell lines, previously shown to be either neuronal or glial, were
screened for the presence of the antigen. Both cell lines are positive at the
temperature permissive for transformation, whereas the glial line but not the
neuronal line exhibits the antigen at the nonpermissive temperature. These
results are discussed in light of the cell lines being representative of
precursor cells.

PMID: 7049326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1982 May;54(5):881-4.

A monoclonal antibody suitable for the radioimmunoassay of prolactin in human
serum.

Stuart MC, Underwood PA, Boscato L.

Monoclonal antibodies directed toward human PRL (hPRL) have been produced by
fusion of mouse myeloma cells (Sp2/0-Ag 14) with spleen cells from mice immunized
with hPRL. Total immunizing doses of 20 microgram and 64 microgram hPRL resulted 
in the production of three highly specific hPRL antibodies. The high affinity
antibody, with a Ka value of 0.23 X 10(10) M-1, was used to establish a RIA
highly suitable for the measurement of hPRL levels in human serum. The
correlation of serum hPRL levels measured using the antibody and those in a
conventional rabbit anti-hPRL assay was 0.99 (y = 1.16 - 7.2). These results
demonstrate that using the mouse hybridoma technique, it is possible to produce
high affinity monospecific monoclonal antibody suitable for the measurement of
hPRL in human serum.

PMID: 7061699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Regul Pept. 1982 May;3(5-6):337-49.

Use of substance P fragments to differentiate substance P receptors of different 
tissues.

Piercey MF, Dobry PJ, Einspahr FJ, Schroeder LA, Masiques N.

The C- and N-terminal fragments of substance P were compared to the parent
molecule with respect to their ability to: (a) contract the isolated guinea pig
ileum, (b) induce salivation in the rat, (c) excite single cat dorsal horn
neurones, and (d) induce scratching by intracranial injections in mice.
C-terminal fragments as small as the heptapeptide were potent SP agonists on all 
assay systems. C-terminal fragments containing five amino acids or less were, at 
most, only weakly active. The C-terminal hexapeptide was a potent SP receptor
stimulant on the isolated guinea pig ileum and, when directly applied by
microiontophoresis, on cat dorsal horn neurons. However, the same compound was
only 2-5% as potent as substance P in eliciting salivation and scratching in
vivo, an indication that this fragment may be especially labile to enzymatic
degradation. N-terminal fragments were totally inactive on the isolated guinea
pig ileum. On the rat salivation and central nervous system assays, however,
N-terminal fragments were capable of weak SP-like activity. It is concluded that 
SP receptors exist in multiple forms which we have labelled SP1 and SP2 receptors
for those insensitive or sensitive to N-terminal fragments, respectively.

PMID: 6180459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. J Immunol. 1982 Apr;128(4):1584-9.

A monoclonal antibody detecting unusual Thy-1 determinants.

Auchincloss H Jr, Ozato K, Sachs DH.

20-10-5S is a monoclonal antibody produced by the fusion of C3H anti-C3H.SW
splenocytes with the SP2/0 cell line. The antibody appears to react with Thy-1
determinants by several criteria including cytotoxicity patterns, functional
assays, genetic analyses, and competitive binding experiments. However, the
antibody and the determinants it detects are unusual in that: 1) 20-10-5S is
autoreactive; 2) the antibody shows allospecificity for Thy-1.2 vs Thy-1.1
antigens only on peripheral lymphocytes and not on thymocytes; and 3) the
antibody reacts only with determinants on murine T cells and not with antigens on
brain tissue or on rat thymocytes. It therefore seems that 20-10-5S reacts with
murine T cell-specific Thy-1 determinants that are lost or modified during
maturation of the cells on which they are expressed.

PMID: 6174608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Endocrinology. 1982 Jan;110(1):131-7.

A monoclonal antibody against bovine anti-Müllerian hormone.

Vigier B, Picard JY, Josso N.

Anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) was partially purified from incubation medium of
calf fetal testes and injected into a BALB/c mouse, whose splenocytes were fused 
with Sp2/Ag8 myeloma cells. Hybridomas were screened for specific antibody
production by double antibody precipitation of labeled AMH, which was obtained by
incubating fetal calf testes in the presence of tritiated fucose and submitting
the medium to the standard procedure of purification. In spite of the extremely
low concentration of AMH in the preparation used for immunization, three
hybridomas gave positive results in the screening assay. One was cloned and grown
in mice. The monoclonal antibody purified from ascites fluid abolished
anti-Müllerian activity of partially purified AMH, whether or not the immune
complex was removed from solution by a second, antimouse immunoglobulin antibody.
The monoclonal antibody also blocked anti-Müllerian activity of calf but not rat 
fetal testes. Our results indicate that the monoclonal antibody is species
specific and is directed towards the antigenic determinant responsible for
biological activity.

PMID: 6895620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. EMBO J. 1982;1(1):41-5.

A monoclonal antibody specific for the 200 K polypeptide of the neurofilament
triplet.

Debus E, Flügge G, Weber K, Osborn M.

A mouse monoclonal antibody, designated NF1, was obtained from a cloned hybridoma
isolated from a fusion of mouse myeloma Sp2 cells with spleen cells from a BALB/c
mouse immunized with a crude neurofilament preparation from porcine spinal cord. 
NF1 is an IgG1 and recognizes, in immune blotting procedures, only the 200 K
neurofilament triplet component. Its neurofilament-specific nature is further
revealed by immunofluorescence microscopy studies on frozen tissue sections and
various cultured cells. Immunoelectron microscopy studies on cytoskeletons of
cultured neurones emphasize the discontinuous display along each neurofilament
previously observed with polyclonal antibodies specific for the 200 K component
after appropriate but rather cumbersome cross-absorption steps. Use of NF1 on
various neuronal cells strongly supports the previous proposal of the existence
of certain subpopulations of neurofilament-free neurones and the observation that
certain neuronal arrangements, (e.g., those in dendrites of pyramidal cells of
the hippocampus), although rich in neurofilaments, probably lack the normal 200 K
triplet component. Since NF1 shows a broad cross-species reactivity and is able
to react on formaldehyde-fixed tissue, it should be a useful reagent to study
differential neurofilament expression and organization in embryonic, adult and
pathological tissues.

PMCID: PMC552992
PMID: 6821322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Exp Med. 1982 Jan 1;155(1):201-18.

Organization, structure, and assembly of immunoglobulin heavy chain diversity DNA
segments.

Kurosawa Y, Tonegawa S.

We have identified, cloned, and sequenced eight different DNA segments encoding
the diversity (D) regions of mouse immunoglobulin heavy-chain genes. Like the two
D segments previously characterized (16, 17), all eight D segments are flanked by
characteristic heptamers and nonamers separated by 12-bp spacers. These 10 D
segments, and several more D segments identified but not yet sequenced, can be
classified into three families based on the extent of sequence homology. The SP2 
family consists of nine highly homologous D segments that are all 17-bp long and 
clustered in a chromosomal region of approximately 60 kb. The FL16 family
consists of up to four D segments, two of which were mapped in the 5' end region 
of the SP2-D cluster. The two FL16D segments are 23 and 17 bp long. The third,
the Q52 family, is a single-member family of the 10-bp-long DQ52, located 700 bp 
5' to the JH cluster. We argue that the D-region sequences of the majority of
heavy chain genes arise from these germline D segments by various somatic
mechanisms, including joining of multiple D segments. We present a specific model
of D-D joining that does not violate the 12/23-bp spacer rule.

PMCID: PMC2186579
PMID: 6798155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Oncodev Biol Med. 1982;3(4):315-23.

Monitoring therapy in trophoblastic diseases by radioimmunoassay of
pregnancy-specific beta 1-glycoprotein and the beta subunit of human chorionic
gonadotropin.

Than GN, Csaba IF, Bohn H, Szabó DG, Szalmásy M, Menczer G.

The beta-subunit of human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) and pregnancy-specific
beta 1-glycoprotein (SP1) were measured simultaneously by specific
radioimmunoassays in 473 serum samples from 43 patients with trophoblastic
tumors. Both SP1 and hCG values were high in 16 untreated patients. 27 patients
had been treated previously elsewhere, and their further treatment and monitoring
were started simultaneously in our institute. Raised SP2 and hCG levels were
found in 22 and 21 cases, respectively. Treatment was followed by a parallel
decrease of both SP1 and hCG, but the hCG decline was more marked. Seronegativity
was reached only after several months; SP1 was present in the serum for 60-150
days, and hCG could be found even after this time. Both parameters were sensitive
indicators of residual tumor activity, calling for further therapy months before 
any clinical manifestation of recurrence. In three cases only one of the tumor
makers could be found, which underlines the importance of the simultaneous
measurement of hCG and SP1.

PMID: 6291007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Hybridoma. 1982;1(3):243-55.

Protein A binding assay for the identification of HLA antigens on peripheral
blood lymphocytes by monoclonal antibodies: application to HLA B27.

Yang YH, Grumet FC, Fendly B, Engleman E, Shively JE.

Splenocytes from mice immunized with purified, papain-solubilized HLA B27 antigen
and/or human lymphocytes bearing the B27 specificity were fused with myeloma cell
lines NSI or Sp2. The screening strategy employed a protein A binding assay in
which various target cells were used. First, the hybrid cell supernatants were
screened against B lymphocyte cell lines of known HLA specificities and the Daudi
cell line, which does not express HLA-A, B, or C antigens. Second, a panel of
PBLs were used as target cells. It was necessary to refine the protein A binding 
assay by preabsorbing the radiolabeled protein A with PBLs and by precoating the 
test wells with ovalbumin. Clones selected by these criteria were further tested 
by indirect immunoprecipitation and by inhibition of binding or microcytotoxicty 
to target call lines with purified HLA antigens or beta 2m. Forty-four clones
were selected which showed varying degrees of specificity for allo- and
nonallo-specific determinants and one clone was selected which was specific for
beta 2m. Clone 27M1 which was previously shown to be specific or HLA-B27 as
judged by conventional microcytotoxicity testing (Grumet et al., Lancet No. 8239,
II:174, 1981) was compared with other clones using the above parameters for
evaluation. Antibody from clone 27M1 showed preferential binding to B27 positive 
cell lines and PBLs, lesser binding to B7 positive target cells, and no binding
to B40 positive target cells. Purified B27 antigen (papain) from two sources
including the B27 target cell line, was able to inhibit the binding of antibodies
from 27M1 to target cells. The extension of the protein A binding assay to PBLs
has made it possible to more accurately quantitate the binding or inhibition of
binding of antibodies to panels of PBLs.

PMID: 6208127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Oncodev Biol Med. 1982;3(2-3):191-200.

Monoclonal antibodies against CEA. Comparison of the immunoprecipitates by
fingerprint analysis.

Grunert F, Wank K, Luckenbach GA, Von Kleist S.

By fusion of C3H mouse spleen cells, immunized with a PCA extract from liver
metastases of a colon tumor, and Sp2/O-Ag14 myeloma cells, we produced several
clones secreting monoclonal antibodies (MAb) with reactivity against
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA). For the screening of the different MAb, an ELISA 
technique with PCA extract and highly purified CEA coupled with alkaline
phosphatase was employed. The specificities of the MAb prescreened with the ELISA
technique were analyzed further by immunoprecipitation and separation on
SDS-PAGE, followed by enzyme digestion and thin-layer chromatography for
fingerprint analysis. The MAb recognized (a) an antigenic determinant present
only on CEA, (b) common determinants present on CEA and at least six other
molecules separated by SDS-PAGE and (c) antigenic determinants not present on
CEA. The fingerprint analysis showed the relationship of the molecules on the
basis of protein chemistry.

PMID: 6181485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Mol Immunol. 1982 Jan;19(1):105-17.

The immune response to ferredoxin: characterization of a major idiotype in serum 
using monoclonal antibody derived by cell fusion.

Weaver MS, Sikora L, Levy JG.

Ferredoxin (Fd) is a low mol. wt protein (6000 d) isolated from Clostridium
pasteurianum. This antigen possess two non-cross-reactive antigenic determinants 
and engenders a restricted antibody response in selected strains of mice.
Immunochemical studies of Fd have shown that antibody responses are confined to
two sequences of between five and seven amino acids in extent located at the
NH2-and COOH-termini of the molecule. Serum antibodies from responder strains of 
mice bind these epitopes in proportions which are regulated by genes mapping in
the Ir-region of the H-2 complex. A hybrid cell line secreting monoclonal
Fd-binding antibody has been isolated from an immune mouse through fusion with
the SP2/0 myeloma cell line. The resulting antibody binds to a single determinant
located at the nH2-terminal of the molecule. An anti-idiotype antibody to this
monoclonal antibody was raised in rabbits. After appropriate absorptions, its
specificity for the paratopic regions of the hybridoma antibody was established
by demonstrating its displacement from reaction with the idiotype by Fd. Analysis
of the distribution of the hybridoma idiotype in serum antibodies from congenic
mouse strains indicates that it is a major idiotype expressed in different inbred
strains sharing identity at the Igh-1 locus.

PMID: 6176853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Immunogenetics. 1981 Dec;14(6):497-505.

Paired H-2-specific monoclonal antibodies react differently to red cells and
lymphocytes.

Tonkonogy SL, Amos DB.

Two hybrid clones from a fusion of C57BL/6 anti-DBA/2 spleen cells and the
myeloma line Sp2/0 secrete antibodies reactive with a product of the murine major
histocompatibility complex (MHC). The two antibodies are provisionally designated
S13.11 and S13.29. Both react in rabbit-complement-mediated cytotoxicity with
spleen cells of H-2d, H-2f, H-2r, and H-2p strains. In addition, both antibodies 
hemagglutinate red blood cells from these strains. S13.11 is also cytotoxic for
H-2a, H-2k, H-2u, and H-2v spleen cells but does not hemagglutinate red blood
cells from mice bearing these haplotypes. With the exception of H-2v, this strain
pattern mimics the public specificity H-28. Quantitative absorption of S13.11
shows that H-2d cells are twice as efficient as H-2k cells in their ability to
remove the S13.11 antibody. S13.29 reacts weakly in cytotoxicity with H-2k spleen
cells and does not react with cells from H-2u or H-2v. Blocking studies indicate 
that S13.11 and S13.29 react with the same or a closely related molecule on the
cell surface.

PMID: 7319569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. J Biol Chem. 1981 Nov 25;256(22):11923-31.

Monoclonal antibodies to the low density lipoprotein receptor as probes for study
of receptor-mediated endocytosis and the genetics of familial
hypercholesterolemia.

Beisiegel U, Schneider WJ, Goldstein JL, Anderson RG, Brown MS.

Monoclonal antibodies directed against the low density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor
have been prepared by immunization of mice with a partially purified receptor
from bovine adrenal cortex. Spleen cells from the mice were fused with the
Sp2/0-Ag14 line of mouse myeloma cells. The most extensively studied monoclonal
antibody, designated immunoglobulin-C7, reacts with the human and bovine LDL
receptor, but not with receptors from the mouse, rat, Chinese hamster, rabbit, or
dog. 125I-labeled monoclonal antibody binds to human fibroblasts in amounts that 
are equimolar to 125I-LDL. In fibroblasts from 6 of 8 patients with the
receptor-negative form of homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, which have
less than 5% of normal LdL binding, the amount of monoclonal antibody binding was
also less than 5% of normal. Fibroblasts from the other two receptor-negative
homozygotes bound an amount of monoclonal antibody that was much greater than
expected on the basis of LDL binding, suggesting that these two patients produce 
a structurally altered receptor that binds the antibody, but not LDL. In normal
fibroblasts, the receptor-bound monoclonal antibody was taken up and degraded at 
37 degrees C at rapid rate similar to that for LDL. Fibroblasts from a patient
with the internalization defective form of familial hypercholesterolemia bound
the monoclonal antibody, but did not internalize or degrade it. The current data 
demonstrate the usefulness of monoclonal antibodies as probes for the study of
the cellular and genetic factors involved in receptor-mediated endocytosis.

PMID: 6271765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. J Immunol. 1981 Nov;127(5):1839-43.

Two distinct murine differentiation antigens determined by genes linked to the
Ly-6 locus.

Auchincloss H Jr, Ozato K, Sachs DH.

Two separate monoclonal antibodies, 34-11-3S and 34-2-11S, produced by the fusion
of C3H anti-BDF1 sensitized spleen cells to the SP2/0 myeloma variant cell line, 
were found to detect alloantigens on subpopulations of murine lymphocytes.
Analysis of the strain specificities of these antibodies showed that both
detected antigens determined by genes closely linked to the Ly-6 locus. However, 
analysis of the tissue distributions of antigen-bearing cells indicated that the 
2 antibodies reacted with distinct antigens, only 1 of which was similar in
distribution to the classically described Ly-6.2 antigen. Functional studies
performed using cells treated with antibody plus C showed that these 2 antibodies
defined lymphocyte subpopulations that are different from each other and from
those defined by several other reported Ly-6-related antibodies. The data suggest
that the Ly-6 locus consists either of multiple tightly linked genes exhibiting
marked linkage disequilibrium or of a single gene, the protein product of which
is subject to post-translational modifications during cell differentiation
leading to the expression of new determinants.

PMID: 7299117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. J Exp Med. 1981 Nov 1;154(5):1369-81.

A common idiotype on SJL and C57BL/6 anti-(4-hydroxy-3-nitrophenyl) acetyl
antibodies and its relationship with lambda chain production.

Ju ST, Karjalainen K, Dorf ME.

Hybridoma cell lines secreting antibodies specific to (3-nitro-4-hydroxyphenyl)
acetyl (NP) were generated by fusion of NP-immunized SJL spleen cells with the
SP2/0 cell line. One hybridoma (N-hybridoma) anti-NP antibody (mu, lambda2) was
found to partially inhibit (35-40%) the binding of the predominant idiotype in
primary C57BL/6 anti-NP antibodies (NPb). Iodinated hybridoma antibody could be
completely bound with anti-idiotypic antiserum made against either specifically
purified C57BL/6 anti-NP antibodies, SJL anti-NP antibodies, or N-hybridoma
antibody. The idiotypic specificities defined with anti-idiotypic antiserum made 
against N-hybridoma antibody were termed NP-1 idiotype. Strain distribution and
genetic mapping studies indicate that the gene(s) controlling the production of
NP-1 idiotype is closely associated with Igh-1b and Igh-1e alleles and mapped
within the same chromosomal segment that controls the synthesis of NPb idiotype. 
However, unlike NPb idiotype, the expression of NP-1 idiotype is not influenced
by the gene(s) that control lambda1 chain synthesis. Thus, SJL mice that produce 
low or undetectable levels of NPb idiotype due to a defect in lambda1 chain
production express high levels of NP-1 idiotype. Specifically purified C57BL/6
and SJL anti-NP antibodies fully express NP-1 idiotype, the level of which
correlates with the level of lambda2 chain-bearing molecules. Nonetheless,
further experiments indicate that lambda1-bearing anti-NP antibodies can express 
extremely weak NP-1 idiotypic cross-reactivity.

PMCID: PMC2186519
PMID: 6795301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Pol J Pharmacol Pharm. 1981 Oct;33(3):359-63.

Quantitative structure-activity relationships in erythromycin group with MTD
technique.

Bojarska-Dahlig H, Simon Z, Glabski T.

Quantitative structure-activity correlation studies were performed for a group of
17 erythromycin derivatives modified in the C-8--C-12 portion of the molecule.
The minimal steric difference, MTD, was used as the structural parameter and
logarithm of the biological potency measured by a standard assay, as the
biological parameter. The influence of the sp2 hybridization at C-9 and of the
presence of 11, 12-carbonate grouping on the antibacterial activity was shown.
The reported results give a further support to our hypothesis on greater
complementarity of the cyclic 11, 12-carbonates in the reaction on the bacterial 
ribosomes in comparison with their parent antibiotics.

PMID: 7322948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. J Gen Virol. 1981 Jun;54(Pt 2):325-32.

Monoclonal antibodies against measles virus.

Giraudon P, Wild TF.

Monoclonal antibodies were produced in vitro by fusing mouse myeloma cells (SP2) 
with spleen cells derived from Balb/c mice immunized with purified measles virus.
Fifteen independent hybrid cell lines, isolated from two separate fusions, were
maintained in culture for up to 5 months without loss of their antibody-secreting
activity. Radioimmunoprecipitation and polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis showed 
that in five of the hybrid lines the antibodies were directed against
haemagglutinin, in two against the nucleoprotein, and in one against L protein.
The remaining seven hybridomas did not precipitate viral antigens under the
experimental conditions employed even though they gave positive
immunofluorescence against measles virus-infected cells. Monoclonal
haemagglutinin antibodies displayed anti-haemagglutinating activity and
neutralized measles virus infectivity but not canine distemper virus (CDV).

PMID: 7288410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Eur J Immunol. 1981 Jun;11(6):450-4.

Common neuroectodermal antigens on human melanoma, neuroblastoma, retinoblastoma,
glioblastoma and fetal brain revealed by hybridoma antibodies raised against
melanoma cells.

Liao SK, Clarke BJ, Kwong PC, Brickenden A, Gallic BL, Dent PB.

The hybridoma system has been utilized to produce antibodies to characterize the 
cell surface antigens on human melanoma cells. On initial screening, two
antibodies derived by the fusion of mouse myeloma cell (SP2/0-Ag14) and
splenocytes from a mouse immunized with a melanoma cell line (CaCL 78-1) showed
cross-reactivity with 10 melanoma cell lines and did not react with any of 4
epithelial cancer lines, or 4 normal adult fibroblast lines. However, because of 
reactivity with 2 neuroblastoma cell lines, additional testing with other
neuroectodermal derivatives was carried out and revealed a broad cross-reactivity
among melanomas, neuroblastomas, retinoblastomas and glioblastomas and against
antigens shared by fetal but not adult brain. Thus, these results indicate the
existence of common neuroectodermal antigens on melanoma cells. Before melanoma
specificity can be claimed for, an antibody reactivity with nonmelanoma cells
bearing these neuroectodermal antigen should be excluded.

PMID: 7262181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1981 Jun;78(6):3581-5.

Resonance Raman investigation of dioxygen bonding in oxycobaltmyoglobin and
oxycobalthemoglobin: structural implication of splittings of the bound O--O
stretching vibration.

Tsubaki M, Yu NT.

Splittings related to the stretching vibration of bound dioxygen in hemoproteins 
have been detected by resonance Raman spectroscopy. With excitation at 406.7 nm
we observe three isotope-sensitive lines in oxycobaltmyoglobin (oxyCoMb) [or in
oxycobalthemoglobin A (oxyCoHbA)] at 1103 (1107), 1137 (1137), and 1153 (1152)
cm-1, of which the most intense one appears at 1137 cm-1. The first two
frequencies arise from resonance interaction between a v(O--O) mode at
approximately 1122 cm-1 and an accidentally degenerate porphyrin ring mode at
1123 (1121) cm-1, whereas the third one represents an "unperturbed" v(O--O)
vibration from a different species. These two v(O--O) modes at approximately 1122
and approximately 1153 cm-1 shift to approximately 1066 and approximately 1096
cm-1, respectively, upon 16O2 leads to 18O2 substitution. The same resonance
interaction may also occur in oxyFeMb (probably also in oxyFeHb(a), because it
exhibits an intensity increase at 1125 cm-1 upon 16O2 leads to 18O2 substitution,
although the v(O--O) vibrations have not been observed directly. Concomitant
enhancement is observed in the v(Co--O) vibration at 539 (537( cm-1, which is
considerably lower than the v(Fe--O) frequency at approximately 570 cm-1 in
oxyFeMb and oxyFeHbA. The Co--O bond is longer and weaker than the Fe--O bond.
Enhancement of both v(O--O) and v(Co--O) indicates the existence of a
charge-transfer transition underlying the Soret band, which may be assigned as
pi*(pi g*O2/xz) leads to sigma*(dz2Co/pi g*). The presence of two v(O--O)
vibrations (at approximately 1122 and approximately 1152 cm-1) but only one
v(Co--O) mode at approximately 538 cm-1) means that the two species in oxyCoMB or
oxyCoHbA have the same Co--O bond lengths but different O--O bond lengths. The
bound dioxygen in a bent end-on configuration may have two allowed orientations, 
which differ in the extent of sp2(N epsilon) leads to pi*(O2) donation from
distal histidine.

PMCID: PMC319614
PMID: 6943559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. J Biol Chem. 1981 May 25;256(10):4723-5.

Production and characterization of a monoclonal antibody against the seed lectin 
of the Dolichos biflorus plant.

Borrebaeck CA, Etzler ME.

Spleen cells from mice immunized with the Dolichos biflorus seed lectin were
fused with cells from the mouse myeloma Sp2/O-Ag14 cell line to form hybridomas. 
Those hybridomas producing antibodies against the seed lectin were cloned at
least four times and the monoclonal antibodies from clone C11/64-56.28 were
characterized and found to be specific for Subunit I of the lectin; they do not
react with the structurally similar Subunit II. In previous studies, we have
shown that although these two subunits appear to differ only at their
COOH-terminal ends, only Subunit I has carbohydrate binding activity. Using a
solid phase enzyme immunoassay, the antigenic determinant fr the monoclonal
antibody was found to be located on the COOH-terminal cyanogen bromide fragment
of this subunit. The monoclonal antibody inhibits the ability of the lectin to
agglutinate erythrocytes and N-acetyl-D-galactosamine, the specific hapten for
the lectin, inhibits the ability of the antibody to combine with the lectin.
These results suggest that the monoclonal antibody recognizes a determinant that 
is located either at or near the active site of the lectin or that is
conformationally interdependent with the active site.

PMID: 6785273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. J Immunol. 1981 May;126(5):1978-84.

The biochemical and biological characterization of lymphocyte regulatory
molecules. VI. Generation of a B cell hybridoma whose antibody product inhibits
interleukin 2 activity.

Gillis S, Henney CS.

In attempts to generate monoclonal antibodies with reactivity directed against
the lymphokine Interleukin 2 (IL-2, T cell growth factor), spleen cells harvested
from BALB/c mice previously immunized with rat IL-2 were fused with the BALB/c
myeloma SP2. Several of the resultant hybrid cell lines secreted a product that
significantly neutralized (greater than 50%) IL-2--dependent T cell
proliferation. Several lines of evidence suggested that the inhibitory activity
was associated with a monoclonal IgG antibody directed against IL-2 determinants.
First, passage of cloned hybrid cell culture supernatants through a protein
A-coupled Sepharose column yielded purified immunoglobulin G fractions that
inhibited mouse, rat, and human IL-2 activity. Secondly, hybridoma-derived IgG,
in concert with lyophilized Staphylococcus aureus, was capable of precipitating
both "cold" and intrinsically labeled IL-2 activity. Finally, Sepharose
conjugated with purified IgG fractions provided on extremely reactive IL-2
absorption matrix. These results suggest that monoclonal antibodies directed
against IL-2 determinants may eventually provide new detection assays for IL-2
and allow affinity chromatography to be employed for the isolation of this
lymphokine.

PMID: 6971316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Infect Immun. 1981 May;32(2):641-8.

Monoclonal antibodies against Neisseria gonorrhoeae: production of antibodies
directed against a strain-specific cell surface antigen.

Nachamkin I, Cannon JG, Mittler RS.

Hybridomas secreting monoclonal antibodies against an apparent strain-specific
cell surface antigen of Neisseria gonorrhoeae were produced. Spleen cells from
BALB/c mice immunized with whole gonococci were fused with mouse myeloma cell
line Sp2/0, and hybrid cells were selected in culture. One hybridoma that
secreted antibodies reactive with the immunizing strain was cloned by limiting
dilution to obtain cell lines secreting monoclonal antibodies. These antibodies
reacted with purified outer membranes from the immunizing strain as well as with 
whole gonococci. Binding of antibodies to whole gonococci was highly strain
specific, with most gonococcal strains showing less than 1% of the binding with
the immunizing strain. Antibodies did not bind to the other Neisseria species
tested. Binding of monoclonal antibodies to whole gonococci of the immunizing
strain was not dependent on state of piliation. The extent of antibody binding
did vary in different colonial variants of the immunizing strain. Antibody bound 
to cells from colonies that were transparent or of intermediate opacity, but did 
not bind to cells from deeply opaque colony variants.

PMCID: PMC351495
PMID: 6166560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Curr Eye Res. 1981;1(3):139-44.

Production of hybridomas secreting antibodies to the cornea.

Zam ZS, Jones P, Das ND.

Major controversies exist in the literature on the presence of blood group
antigens on the endothelial and stromal layers of the cornea, and the importance 
of major histocompatibility typing for keratoplasty. Antibodies were raised in
BALB/C mice against water soluble proteins of corneal epithelium. Following
fusion of spleen cells with myeloma cells (Sp2/0-Ag14) hybrid colonies were
maintained in HAT selective medium. The supernates of each colony were measured
and screened for antibody production by radioimmunoassay. Gel electrophoresis of 
the antigen showed nine major bands. The antibodies were partially characterized 
by cross reaction against other soluble corneal fractions.

PMID: 7297101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Ann Immunol (Paris). 1981 Jan-Feb;132C(1):87-100.

Antistreptococcal group A antibodies: production after in vitro activation and
hybridization of mouse spleen cells.

Herbst H, Braun DG.

Streptococcal group A polysaccharide-specific antibodies were raised by the
method of somatic cell hybridization. Spleen cells of experimentally unprimed
BALB/c and C57BL/6 mice were activated in vitro by the streptococcal vaccine and 
fused with the Sp2/0-Ag14 line at times o, 35, 70, and 105 h thereafter.
Hybridomas were obtained at all times independent of the addition of
thymocyte-conditioned medium. Occurrence of specific hybridomas for the T
cell-dependent A-CHO, however, required activation for greater than 35 h. Low
responder C57BL/6 splenocytes fused at considerably higher fusion efficiency to
yield specific hybridomas than high responder spleen cells 105 h after activation
by antigen. The isotypes of A-CHO-specific antibodies comprised predominantly mu 
and kappa polypeptides; however, gamma 3, alpha, and gamma polypeptide chains
were also identified. All specific antibodies were agglutinating the group A
streptococcal cells; this agglutination was fully inhibited by the addition of 1%
N-acetyl-D-glucosamine, the immune determinant sugar of the A-CHO. Three
hybridomas obtained by fusion of BALB/c splenocytes 105 h after activation were
cloned and grown as tumours in the peritoneal cavity of BALB/c mice. The
monoclonal antibodies in the ascites did not precipitate the A-CHO but continued 
to agglutinate group A streptococcal cells in a hapten inhibitable fashion with
different specificity profiles. Antibody from clone 21S36.1 was coprecipitable
upon addition of A-CHO with a gamma G3 monoclonal hybridoma-derived antibody in a
ratio of 1/7 while the other two monoclonal gamma M antibodies and the S117
myeloma protein were not. The result suggests that antibody 21S36.1 recognizes
one chain terminal determinant of the A-CHO.

PMID: 7020569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Clin Invest. 1980 Dec;66(6):1311-8.

Isolation and quantitation of the platelet membrane glycoprotein deficient in
thrombasthenia using a monoclonal hybridoma antibody.

McEver RP, Baenziger NL, Majerus PW.

We used the hybridoma technique to characterize further the platelet glycoprotein
abnormality in Glanzmann's thrombasthenia. Spleen cells from Balb/c mice
immunized with human platelets were fused to mouse myeloma cell line Sp2/0-Ag14. 
Hybridoma lines producing a variety of antiplatelet antibodies were isolated by
hypoxanthine-aminopterin-thymidine selection and cloned, and purified monoclonal 
IgG from six lines was prepared. One of these lines, 8aB5-9, produced an
antibody, Tab, that binds to a protein on normal but not thrombasthenic
platelets. We isolated this protein from Triton X-100 solubilized normal platelet
membranes by affinity chromatography on Tab-Sepharose. As determined by SDS
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, the isolated protein is a complex of
glycoproteins IIb and IIIa, because the two subunits comigrate with glycoproteins
IIb and IIIa of whole platelets and show identical changes in mobility after
disulfide bond reduction. We prepared (125)I-Tab to determine the number of
glycoprotein IIb-IIIa complexes on normal and thrombasthenic platelets by a
direct binding assay. Platelets from 17 normal donors bound 39,000+/-4,600 (SD)
Tab molecules/platelet. Platelets from four patients with thrombasthenia lacked
Tab binding sites (<5%). Five obligate and four presumed heterozygotes for
thrombasthenia bound 24,500+/-5,800 Tab molecules/platelet. The platelet
alloantigen, Pl(Al), is not that recognized by Tab, because platelets from three 
Pl(Al)-negative subjects bound Tab normally. Studies with the Tab antibody have
(a) enabled quantitation of the number of glycoprotein IIb-IIIa complexes on
normal platelet membranes, (b) demonstrated that thrombasthenic homozygotes lack 
and heterozygotes have a partial deficiency of this complex, and (c) made
possible the isolation of this membrane protein which may be required for normal 
platelet aggregation and clot retraction.

PMCID: PMC371616
PMID: 6449521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1980 Dec;77(12):7034-8.

Monoclonal antibodies to beta-adrenergic receptors: use in purification and
molecular characterization of beta receptors.

Fraser CM, Venter JC.

We have developed four hybridomas that produce monoclonal antibodies to the
turkey erythrocyte beta 1-adrenergic receptor and one hybridoma that produces a
monoclonal antibody to the calf lung beta 2 receptor. Splenic lymphocytes from
BALB/c mice immunized with partially purified turkey erythrocyte beta 1 receptors
or calf lung beta 2 receptors were used with the mouse myeloma line SP2/O-Ag14 to
yield hybridoma cultures producing beta receptor monoclonal antibodies of the IgG
class. The anti-turkey erythrocyte beta receptor antibodies precipitated
partially purified beta receptors and inhibited adrenergic ligand binding. In
contrast to autoantibodies to beta 2-adrenergic receptors [Venter, J. C., Fraser,
C. M. & Harrison, L. C. (1980) Science 207, 1361-1363] which do not crossreact
with cardiac beta 1 receptors, monoclonal antibody FV-104 directed against the
adrenergic ligand binding site of turkey erythrocyte beta receptors crossreacted 
equally with calf liver and lung beta 2 receptors as well as calf heart beta 1
receptors. These data suggest that some molecular homology exists between
beta-adrenergic receptors of substantially diverse pharmacological classes. We
utilized the monoclonal antibodies in the final stage of turkey erythrocyte beta 
1 receptor purification. Turkey erythrocyte beta receptors eluted from FV-104
monoclonal antibody affinity columns with Na-DodSO4 appeared as three components 
of Mr 70,000, 31,000, and 22,000 on NaDodSO4/polyacrylamide gels. Iodination of
material eluted from immunoaffinity columns with propranolol demonstrated the
existence of only a single component (Mr, 70,000), indicating that the turkey
erythrocyte beta 1 receptor can be purified to homogeneity.

PMCID: PMC350435
PMID: 6261236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Cell. 1980 Nov;22(2 Pt 2):349-59.

CH gene rearrangements in IgM-bearing B cells and in the normal splenic DNA
component of hybridomas making different isotypes of antibody.

Hurwitz JL, Coleclough C, Cebra JJ.

To probe mechanisms operating at the CH gene locus during normal B lymphocyte
differentiation, we have used cloned probes for the constant region genes Cmu, C 
gamma 1 and C alpha to analyze the immunoglobulin heavy chain genes of three
kinds of cell populations in successive stages of B cell development. These are
IGM-bearing B lymphocytes from the normal spleen of unprimed mice, hybridomas
prepared by fusing spleen cells from antigen-primed mice with the SP2/O permanent
cell line and selected to secrete one of five different isotypes (IgM, IgG3,
IgG1, IgG2 and IgA) and a set of plasmacytoma lines. The IgM-bearing B cells
carry Cmu genes with rearrangements between VH and JH genes on both chromosomes
even though only one chromosome is expressed; clearly, allelic exclusion cannot
be explained by the lack of CH gene rearrangement on the nonexpressed chromosome.
The normal splenic DNA component of antibody-secreting hybridomas displays
rearrangements between JH and Cmu genes as well as among CH genes other than Cmu,
with concomitant deletion of CH genes 5' to those expressed. These CH
rearrangements and deletions are likely to accompany the isotype switching
process and may occur on both expressed and nonexpressed chromosomes. We used
hybridomas (spleen-derived), which secrete primarily IgM, and plasmacytomas
(gut-derived), which secrete primarily IgA, to represent plasma cells in early
and late stages of differentiation, respectively. A direct comparison of
hybridomas and plasmacytomas making the same products (IgG3 or IgG1) indicates
that hybridomas display a low frequency (2/12) of nonexpressed C alpha gene
rearrangements in contrast to the high frequency (7/10) displayed by
plasma-cytomas. We propose that CH gene switching rearrangements and deletions
may occur successively along the CH gene locus, involving any of the undeleted
genes at each step. These can occur on both expressed and nonexpressed
chromosomes during the normal clonal outgrowth of a B cell line in vivo, and
would result in the accumulation of both productive and nonproductive
rearrangements of the presumed last CH gene, C alpha.

PMID: 6778617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Nucleic Acids Res. 1980 Oct 24;8(20):4639-49.

Monoclonal antibodies to Escherichia coli 50S ribosomes.

Shen V, King TC, Kumar V, Daugherty B.

Hybridoma cell lines that produce monoclonal antibodies directed against 50S
Ribosomal proteins have been isolated. Spleen cells (from BALB/c mice immunized
with 50S ribosomal subunits extracted from Escherichia coli) were fused to mouse 
myeloma cell line SP2/O-Ag 14. The initial screening for antibody producing
hybridomas was carried out by a double antibody sandwich method; hybridomas were 
subsequently cloned in soft agar. Antibodies were characterized by their specific
binding to individual 50S ribsomal proteins separated on phosphocellulose columns
and in two-dimensional polyacrylamide gels. The assignments were confirmed with
purified single ribosomal proteins. Of four clones analyzed thus far, two are
identical with specificity for r-protein L5. The other clones produce two
different antibodies directed against r-protein L20. Each monoclonal antibody
formed ribosome dimers visualizable in the electron microscope. Dimers could be
reacted with a different second antibody to form chains containing 8 or more
ribosomes, which may be useful for structural studies.

PMCID: PMC324376
PMID: 6160475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1980 Sep;77(9):5115-9.

Monoclonal antibodies to human estrogen receptor.

Greene GL, Nolan C, Engler JP, Jensen EV.

Extranuclear estrogen receptor protein (estrophilin) of MCF-7 human breast cancer
cells was purified by passage of the cytosol fraction of a cell homogenate
through an affinity column of estradiol linked to Sepharose by a substituted
di-n-propyl sulfide bridge in the 17 alpha position. Elution with 50 micro M
[3H]estradiol in 10% (vol/vol) dimethyl formamide/0.5 M sodium thiocyanate gave
40% recovery of [3H]estradiol-estrophilin showing 14% of the specific
radioactivity expected for the pure complex. Serum from a Lewis rat immunized
with this partially purified estradiol-receptor complex contained antiestrophilin
antibodies that reacted not only with nuclear and extranuclear estradiol-receptor
complexes from MCF-7 cells but also with estrophilin from rat, calf, and monkey
uterus, hen oviduct, and human breast cancers. Splenic lymphocytes from the
immunized rat were fused with cells of two different mouse myeloma lines
(P3-X63-Ag8 and Sp2/0-Ag14) to yield hybridoma cultures, 2% of which produced
antibodies to estrophilin. After cloning by limiting dilution, three hybridoma
lines secreting antiestrophilin were expanded in suspension culture and as
ascites tumors in athymic mice to provide substantial quantities of monoclonal
antibodies that recognize mammalian but not avian estrophilin and that show
different degrees of reactivity with receptor from nonprimate sources. By growing
the clone from Sp2/0 in the presence of [35S]methionine, radiolabeled monoclonal 
IgG has been prepared. These monoclonal antibodies should prove useful in the
study of estrogen receptors of human reproductive tissues, in particular for the 
radioimmunochemical assay and immunocytochemical localization of receptors in
breast cancers.

PIP: MCF-7 human breast cancer cell estrophilin was purified by passing the
cytosol fraction of a cell homogenate through an affinity column of estradiol
linked to Sepharose by a substituted di-n-propyl sulfide bridge in the 17
alpha-position. When eluted with 50 mcM radiolabeled estradiol in 10% dimethyl
formamide-.5 M sodium thiocynate, a 40% recovery of the radiolabeled
estradiol-estrophilin occured along with 14% of the specific radio activity
expected from the pure complex. Lewis rats immunized with this partially purified
estradiol receptor complex had serum that contained antiestrophilin antibodies
that reacted with nuclear and extranuclear receptor complexs from MCF-7 cells and
with the estrophilin from rat, calf, and monkey uterus, hen oviduct, and other
human breast cancers. Hybridoma cultures of 2 different mouse myeloma lines
(P3-X63-Ag8 and Sp2/0-Ag14) yielded antibodies to estrophilin 2% of the time.
After cloning, 3 hybridoma lines that secreted antiestrophilin were expanded to
provide quantities of monoclonal antibodies that recognize mammalian but not
avian estrophilin and that show different degrees of reactivity with receptor
from nonprimate sources. by growing the clone from Sp2/0 in the presence of
radiolabeled methionine, radiolabeled monoclonal immunoglobulin G was prepared
and should be useful in the study of estrogen receptors in human reproductive
tissues.
PMCID: PMC350007
PMID: 7001472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Eur J Biochem. 1980 Aug;109(2):603-12.

Model studies on the coordination of copper in biological systems. The
deprotonated peptide nitrogen as a potential binding site for copper(II).

Kroneck PM, Vortisch V, Hemmerich P.

1. A large number of potentially bidentate and tridentate amides, X-Y-CONH-Z,
were used as model ligands to investigate the complex formation of Cu(II) with
the deprotonated peptide nitrogen in biological molecules. A combination of
potentiometric titration, spectrophotometry and electron paramagnetic resonance
was applied to analyse the structure of the Cu(II) chelates formed at neurtal and
basic pH. 2. By systematic variation of the primary binding function X, the ring 
size of the chelate, and the spatial properties of the C-terminal and N-terminal 
substituents, three classes of amide ligands could be established with reference 
to their capacity for Cu(II)-induced deprotonation of NHCO and metal binding. 3. 
Under physiological conditions of pH, peptide (class A) chelates are only formed 
by those bidentate amide ligands with X being an imidazole (sp2) nitrogen or a
terminal (sp3) amino nitrogen. Mercaptide sulfur must also be considered to
belong in this group of strong copper(II)-binding sites, but in our
low-molecular-weight model ligands the redox equilibrium 2 Cu(II) + 2 RSH in
equilibrium or formed from 2 CU(II) + RSSR + 2 H+ interferes, yielding insoluble 
Cu(I)-S polymers above pH 4. In addition to the unidentate binding strength of X,
entropy effects play an important role. Depending on whether X is an imidazole or
amino nitrogen, only five-membered or six-membered monocyclic chelate structures 
respectively cause coordination of the deprotonated peptide function. 4. Biuret
(class B) Cu(II) chelates are only formed under non-physiological conditions at
pH > 11.5 producing the well known violet chromophores CuIIN4(-). In general
these complexes, which also include the Cu(II) biguanides, show a clearly
resolved electron paramagnetic resonance spectrum with nitrogen superhyperfine
structure. 5. A third class of peptide model ligands (class C) consists of those 
amides where the CuII-X bond does not provide enough thermodynamic stability. The
binding site of these class C amides includes functional groups such as
carboxylate (COO-), methionine sulfur (RSR'), aliphatic or aromatic hydroxyl (OH)
and amide nitrogen (NHCO) itself. When X is a pyridine (sp2) nitrogen or an amino
(sp3) nitrogen, NHCO deprotonation is only promoted in five-membered but not
six-membered ring chelates. On the other hand, a combination of COO- and NH2, as 
in asparagine, will allow deprotonation of NHCO in the presence of Cu(II). And
third, despite a pronounced unidentate affinity of the imidazole nitrogen for
Cu(II), N-acetylhistamine acts as a class C amine, in contrast to
imidazolylacetamide, which forms a stable Cu(II) peptide chelate. This difference
in Cu binding is explained on the basis of space-filling models. These clearly
demonstrate that in the case of the 2:1 complex of Cu(II) with N-acetylhistamine,
the planarity of the ionised peptide function can not be retained in a square
planar arrangement of the two amide ligands around the copper center.

PMID: 6250848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Nucleic Acids Symp Ser. 1980;(8):s55-8.

Use of alpha-secondary isotope effects in nucleophile-promoted reactions of
pyrimidine derivatives; evidence for transient 5,6-dihydropyrimidine
intermediates.

Wataya Y, Kawada R, Itadani A, Hayatsu H, Bruice TW, Garrett C, Matsuda A, Santi 
DV.

alpha-Secondary isotope effect provides a useful tool for detection of transient 
5,6-dihydropyrimidine intermediates which have been indirectly implicated in a
number of chemical and enzymic conversions of pyrimidine heterocycles. The method
involves the use of kinetic secondary alpha-hydrogen isotope effects which are
expected to accompany sp2 to sp3 rehybridization of C-6 of the pyrimidine ring if
they occur prior to or at the rate determining step. Thus, using 6-tritiated
pyrimidines, and measurement of the isotopic ratio of reactant and products,
kT/kH values of 1.15 or greater would be indicative of rehybridization. Using
this method, we have studied the inhibition of thymidylate synthetase by
5-fluorodeoxyuridylate and 5-nitro-deoxyuridylate as well as the chemical and
enzymic dehalogenation of 5-bromodeoxyuridine and 5-bromodeoxyuridylate. Large
secondary isotope effects observed in all of these reactions provided strong
evidence for the formation of 5,6-dihydropyrimidine intermediates.

PMID: 7255197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1980 Jan;77(1):157-61.

Monoclonal antibodies to estrophilin: probes for the study of estrogen receptors.

Greene GL, Fitch FW, Jensen EV.

Splenic lymphocytes from a Lewis rat, immunized with purified estradiol-receptor 
complex of calf uterine nuclei, were fused with cells of three different mouse
myeloma lines (P3-X63-Ag8, P3-NSI/I-Ag4-1, and Sp2/0-Ag14) to yield hybridoma
cultures, 9% of which produced antibodies to the receptor protein (estrophilin). 
When cloned by limiting dilution, approximately 70% of the viable cultures
secreted antiestrophilin antibody. When expanded in suspension culture, three
clones derived from Sp2/0-Ag14 were found to secrete rat IgG (gamma 2a class),
whereas seven other clones (from all three myeloma lines) secreted IgM.
Monoclonal IgG shows comparable affinity for nuclear and extranuclear receptors, 
whereas IgM reacts preferentially with the nuclear form. Both classes of antibody
react with unoccupied as well as with occupied receptor and do not interfere with
its ability to bind to estradiol. By growing IgG-secreting clones in the presence
of [35S]methionine, radiolabeled monoclonal antiestrophilin has been prepared.
Unlike antiestrophilin antibody previously generated in the rabbit or the goat,
which crossreacts with estrogen receptors from every animal species tested,
antibodies produced by the Lewis rat and by hybridomas derived from its spleen
cells react specifically with estrophilin from calf tissues. These monoclonal
antibodies provide reagents for the application of immunochemical techniques to
study estrogen receptors in calf target tissues.

PMCID: PMC348227
PMID: 6928610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Eur J Immunol. 1976 Jul;6(7):511-9.

Derivation of specific antibody-producing tissue culture and tumor lines by cell 
fusion.

Köhler G, Milstein C.

Cell fusion techniques have been used to produce hybrids between myeloma cells
and antibody-producing cells. The hybrid lines derived are permanently adapted to
grow in tissue culture and are capable of inducing antibody-producing tumors in
mice. Spleens from mice immunized against sheep red blood cells (SRBC) were fused
to an 8-azaguanine-resistant clone (X63-Ag8) of MOPC 21 myeloma. Over 50% of the 
derived hybrid lines produce and secrete immunoglobulins different from the MOPC 
21 myeloma. About 10% of the hybrid lines exhibit anti-SRBC activity. The high
proportion of antibody-producing hybrids suggests that the fusion involves a
restricted fraction of the spleen cell population, probably cells committed to
antibody production. In order to avoid the presence of the MOPC 21 heavy chain in
the specific hybrids, another myeloma cell line (NSI/1-Ag4-1) has been used. This
is a nonsecreting variant of the MOPC 21 myeloma which does not express heavy
chains. Three anti-SRBC (probably of the mu, gamma2b and gamma1 classes,
respectively) and two anti-2,4,6-trinitrophenyl (of the mu class)
antibody-producing hybrids have been repeatedly cloned. By random selection and
by selection of specific clones according to their lytic activity (clone plaque
selection), a number of different lines have been constructed. Such lines express
different combinations of the four possible chains of each hybrid line: the
myeloma gamma and K chains and the specific antibody heavy and light chains. In
three cases (Sp1, Sp2 and Sp7) it is shown that only the specific H and L
combination has activity and that the myeloma chains are unable to substitute for
them. In most cases lines have been derived which no longer express the MOPC 21
chains but only the specific antibody chains.

PMID: 825377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1975 Nov 4;407(4):420-9.

Barrier to rotation and conformation of the -NR2 group in cytosine and its
derivatives. Part II. Experimental and theoretical dipole moments of methylated
cytosines.

Kulakowska I, Geller M, Lesyng B, Bolewska K, Wierzchowski KL.

The dipole moments of several cytosine, methylaminocytosine and
dime-thylaminocytosine derivatives with and without an ortho methyl group were
determined experimentally in dioxane and benzene. Calculations of total energies 
and dipole moments were performed by the CNDO/2 and INDO methods for sp2 and sp3 
hybridization of exocyclic nitrogen for different values of rotational angle
phiC-N. Comparison of the experimental dipole moments with those calculated for
the energy minima suggests that the conformation of the dimethylamino group is
not planar and differs from that found in cytosine. 1,5,7-Trimethylcytosine, with
the dipole moment of 7 Deby units, was considered to be the model compound which 
closely reproduces the dipole moment of cytosine.

PMID: 1182183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1975 Nov 4;407(4):407-19.

Barrier to rotation and conformation of the NB2 group in cytosine and its
derivatives. Part I. Theoretical study of cytosine.

Geller M, Lesyng B.

A theoretical investigation of the conformation of the amino group in cytosine
has been performed by the CNDO/2 and INDO methods. The results suggest that from 
the energetical point of view the conformation of the amino group is not stable
in the course of rotation. It changes its hybridization from sp2-like in the
planar case to sp3-like in the transition state. The physical basis of the
barrier to rotation of this group around the C4-N7 bond are discussed. Some
comments on the solvent dependence of the electronic absorption spectra of
cytosine are presented.

PMID: 1182182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1973 Oct 1;54(3):862-6.

Activation of diol dehydrase by formamidinium or guanidinium ion, polyatomic
monovalent cations having sp2 nitrogen.

Toraya T, Fukui S.

PMID: 4753194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Med Chem. 1966 Sep;9(5):682-5.

Nonclassical and other sp2-hybridized steroids. Methano-, spirocyclopropyl-, and 
methylenepregnane derivatives.

Wolff ME, Ho W, Honjoh M.

PMID: 5969038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Med Chem. 1964 Sep;7:577-84.

THE STEROID-RECEPTOR COMPLEX. SOME CONSIDERATIONS BASED ON SP2-HYBRIDIZED
SYSTEMS.

WOLFF ME, HO W, KWOK R.

PMID: 14233163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. C R Hebd Seances Acad Sci. 1964 Mar 9;258:2935-7.

[SPONTANEOUS REGRESSION OF TUMORS DEVELOPED IN THE RAT AFTER SUBCUTANEOUS
INJECTIONS OF ASCITES CELLS OF THE SP2 FIBROSARCOMA].

[Article in French]

RIVIERE MR, LASNE C, GUERIN M.

PMID: 14143639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


