
1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2016 Mar 29. pii: S0003-9861(16)30078-9. doi:
10.1016/j.abb.2016.03.026. [Epub ahead of print]

Low Temperature Plasma Processing for Cell Growth Inspired Carbon Thin Films
Fabrication.

Kumar M(1), Piao JX(2), Jin SB(2), Lee JH(3), Tajima S(4), Hori M(4), Han JG(5).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Plasma Surface Technology, NU-SKKU Joint Institute for
Plasma-Nano Materials, School of Advanced Materials Science and Engineering,
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, 440-746, South Korea. Electronic address:
manishk@skku.edu. (2)Center for Advanced Plasma Surface Technology, NU-SKKU Joint
Institute for Plasma-Nano Materials, School of Advanced Materials Science and
Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, 440-746, South Korea. (3)Biological 
& Nanoscale Materials Lab, Advanced Materials Science and Engineering,
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, 440-746, South Korea. (4)Plasma Nanotechnology
Research Center, Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, 4648603, Japan.
(5)Center for Advanced Plasma Surface Technology, NU-SKKU Joint Institute for
Plasma-Nano Materials, School of Advanced Materials Science and Engineering,
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, 440-746, South Korea. Electronic address:
hanjg@skku.edu.

The recent bio-applications (i.e. bio-sensing, tissue engineering and cell
proliferation etc.) are driving the fundamental research in carbon based
materials with functional perspectives. High stability in carbon based coatings
usually demands the high density deposition. However, the standard techniques,
used for the large area and high throughput deposition of crystalline carbon
films, often require very high temperature processing (typically >800 (o)C in
inert atmosphere). Here, we present a low temperature (<150 (o)C) pulsed-DC
plasma sputtering process, which enables sufficient ion flux to deposit dense
unhydrogenated carbon thin films without any need of substrate-bias or
post-deposition thermal treatments. It is found that the control over plasma
power density and pulsed frequency governs the density and kinetic energy of
carbon ions participating during the film growth. Subsequently, it controls the
contents of sp(3) and sp(2) hybridizations via conversion of sp(2) to sp(3)
hybridization by ion's energy relaxation. The role of plasma parameters on the
chemical and surface properties are presented and correlated to the bio-activity.
Bioactivity tests, carried out in mouse fibroblast L-929 and Sarcoma osteogenic
(Saos-2) bone cell lines, demonstrate promising cell-proliferation in these
films.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 27036854  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. J Nanobiotechnology. 2016 Mar 31;14(1):25.

Neuroactivity of detonation nanodiamonds: dose-dependent changes in
transporter-mediated uptake and ambient level of excitatory/inhibitory
neurotransmitters in brain nerve terminals.

Pozdnyakova N(1), Pastukhov A(1), Dudarenko M(1), Galkin M(1), Borysov A(1),
Borisova T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurochemistry, Palladin Institute of Biochemistry, National
Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, 9 Leontovicha Street, Kiev, 01601, Ukraine.
(2)Department of Neurochemistry, Palladin Institute of Biochemistry, National
Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, 9 Leontovicha Street, Kiev, 01601, Ukraine.
tborisov@biochem.kiev.ua.

BACKGROUND: Nanodiamonds are one of the most perspective nano-sized particles
with superb physical and chemical properties, which are mainly composed of carbon
sp(3) structures in the core with sp(2) and disorder/defect carbons on the
surface. The research team recently demonstrated neuromodulatory properties of
carbon nanodots with other than nanodiamonds hybridization types, i.e., sp(2)
hybridized graphene islands and diamond-like sp(3) hybridized elements.
RESULTS: In this study, neuroactive properties of uncoated nanodiamonds produced 
by detonation synthesis were assessed basing on their effects on
transporter-mediated uptake and the ambient level of excitatory and inhibitory
neurotransmitters, glutamate and <U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid (GABA), in isolated rat
brain nerve terminals. It was shown that nanodiamonds in a dose-dependent manner 
attenuated the initial velocity of Na(+)-dependent transporter-mediated uptake
and accumulation of L-[(14)C]glutamate and [(3)H]GABA by nerve terminals and
increased the ambient level of these neurotransmitters. Also, nanodiamonds caused
a weak reduction in acidification of synaptic vesicles and depolarization of the 
plasma membrane of nerve terminals.
CONCLUSIONS: Therefore, despite different types of hybridization in nanodiamonds 
and carbon dots, they exhibit very similar effects on glutamate and GABA
transport in nerve terminals and this common feature of both nanoparticles is
presumably associated with their nanoscale size. Observed neuroactive properties 
of pure nanodiamonds can be used in neurotheranostics for simultaneous
labeling/visualization of nerve terminals and modulation of key processes of
glutamate- and GABAergic neurotransmission. In comparison with carbon dots, wider
medical application involving hypo/hyperthermia, external magnetic fields, and
radiolabel techniques can be perspective for nanodiamonds.

PMID: 27036406  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Nat Commun. 2016 Apr 1;7:11129. doi: 10.1038/ncomms11129.

Practical carbon-carbon bond formation from olefins through nickel-catalyzed
reductive olefin hydrocarbonation.

Lu X(1,)(2), Xiao B(1), Zhang Z(1), Gong T(1), Su W(1), Yi J(1), Fu Y(1), Liu
L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale, iChEM, CAS 
Key Laboratory of Urban Pollutant Conversion, Anhui Province Key Laboratory of
Biomass Clean Energy, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei
230026, China. (2)Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084,
China.

New carbon-carbon bond formation reactions expand our horizon of retrosynthetic
analysis for the synthesis of complex organic molecules. Although many methods
are now available for the formation of C(sp(2))-C(sp(3)) and C(sp(3))-C(sp(3))
bonds via transition metal-catalyzed cross-coupling of alkyl organometallic
reagents, direct use of readily available olefins in a formal fashion of
hydrocarbonation to make C(sp(2))-C(sp(3)) and C(sp(3))-C(sp(3)) bonds remains to
be developed. Here we report the discovery of a general process for the
intermolecular reductive coupling of unactivated olefins with alkyl or aryl
electrophiles under the promotion of a simple nickel catalyst system. This new
reaction presents a conceptually unique and practical strategy for the
construction of C(sp(2))-C(sp(3)) and C(sp(3))-C(sp(3)) bonds without using any
organometallic reagent. The reductive olefin hydrocarbonation also exhibits
excellent compatibility with varieties of synthetically important functional
groups and therefore, provides a straightforward approach for modification of
complex organic molecules containing olefin groups.

PMID: 27033405  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Chem Sci. 2015 Aug 14;6(8):4973-4977. Epub 2015 Jun 22.

Synthesis of (diarylmethyl)amines using Ni-catalyzed arylation of C(sp(3))-H
bonds.

Fernández-Salas JA(1), Marelli E(1), Nolan SP(2).

Author information: 
(1)EaStCHEM School of Chemistry , University of St Andrews , St Andrews , KY16
9ST , UK . Email: stevenpnolan@gmail.com. (2)EaStCHEM School of Chemistry ,
University of St Andrews , St Andrews , KY16 9ST , UK . Email:
stevenpnolan@gmail.com; Chemistry Department , College of Science , King Saud
University , Riyadh 11451 , Saudi Arabia.

The first nickel catalyzed deprotonative cross coupling between C(sp(3))-H bonds 
and aryl chlorides is reported, allowing the challenging arylation of
benzylimines in the absence of directing group or stoichiometric metal
activation. This methodology represents a convenient access to the
(diarylmethyl)amine moiety, which is widespread in pharmaceutically relevant
compounds.

PMCID: PMC4786957
PMID: 27019690  [PubMed]


5. J Am Chem Soc. 2016 Mar 28. [Epub ahead of print]

The N-B Interaction through a Water Bridge: Understanding the Chemoselectivity of
a Fluorescent Protein Based Probe for Peroxynitrite.

Chen ZJ, Tian Z, Kallio K, Oleson AL, Ji A, Borchardt D, Jiang DE, Remington SJ, 
Ai HW.

Boronic acid and esters have been extensively utilized for molecular recognition 
and chemical sensing. We recently reported a genetically encoded peroxynitrite
(ONOO-)-specific fluorescent sensor, pnGFP, based on the incorporation of a
boronic acid moiety into a circularly permuted green fluorescent protein (cpGFP) 
followed by directed protein evolution. Different from typical arylboronic acids 
and esters, the chromophore of pnGFP is unreactive to millimolar con-centrations 
of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). The focus of this study is to explore the mechanism 
for the observed unusual chemoselectivity of pnGFP toward peroxynitrite over
hydrogen peroxide by using site-directed mutagenesis, X-ray crystal-lography, 11B
NMR, and computational analysis. Our data collectively support that a His residue
on the protein scaffold polarizes a water molecule to induce the formation of an 
sp3-hybridized boron in the chromophore, thereby tuning the reactivity of pnGFP
with various reactive oxygen and nitrogen species (ROS/RNS). Our study
demonstrates the first example of tunable boron chemistry in a folded nonnative
protein, which offers wide implications in designing selective chemical probes.

PMID: 27019313  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Org Lett. 2016 Mar 28. [Epub ahead of print]

Exploiting the Bis-Nucleophilicity of a-Aminoboronates: Copper-Catalyzed,
Intramolecular Aminoalkylations of Bromobenzoyl Chlorides.

Dumas AM(1), Sieradzki AJ(1), Donnelly LJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Process Chemistry, Merck Sharp and Dohme Ltd. , Hertford Road,
Hoddesdon EN11 9BU, United Kingdom.

a-Aminoboronate salts are interesting examples of heteroatomic species containing
adjacent nucleophilic centers. We have developed an acylation/arylation reaction 
using 2-bromobenzoyl chlorides as bis-electrophiles that harnesses the
nucleophilicity of both positions, leading to isoindolinones. The reactions
proceed under mild conditions via an intramolecular, Cu-catalyzed sp(3)-sp(2)
coupling, giving products in up to 95% yield. These conditions enable arylation
of a,a-disubstituted aminoboronates, which are difficult to accomplish using
methods based on less abundant and more expensive transition metals.

PMID: 27017848  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. J Phys Chem B. 2016 Mar 25. [Epub ahead of print]

HCN, Formamidic Acid and Formamide in Aqueous Solution: A Free Energy Map.

Kua J, Thrush KL.

What chemical species might be found if water or ammonia reacts with HCN in
aqueous solution under neutral conditions? Is it energetically favorable for
formamidic acid, the first hydration product of HCN, to tautomerize into
formamide under standard conditions? Do these molecules form stable oligomers in 
solution? To answer these questions, we constructed a Gibbs free energy map of
the molecules that might be present to evaluate their relative thermodynamic and 
kinetic stability. Our protocol utilizes density functional theory calculations, 
Poisson-Boltzmann implicit solvent and thermodynamic corrections. We find that
for C1 species, formamide is indeed the thermodynamic sink, although the initial 
barrier to hydration is ~30 kcal/mol. Molecules with one carbon and three
heteroatoms are less stable. We also find that for HCN trimerization, although
the planar sp(2) six-membered ring is more stable compared to its monomers, the
reverse is true for the non-planar sp(3) six-membered rings formed by
trimerization of formamidic acid or formamide.

PMID: 27016454  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Acc Chem Res. 2016 Mar 25. [Epub ahead of print]

Syntheses and Transformations of a-Amino Acids via Palladium-Catalyzed
Auxiliary-Directed sp(3) C-H Functionalization.

He G(1), Wang B(2), Nack WA(2), Chen G(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory and Institute of Elemento-Organic Chemistry,
Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin),
Nankai University , Tianjin 300071, China. (2)Department of Chemistry, The
Pennsylvania State University , University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, United
States.

a-Amino acids (aAA) are one of the most useful chiral building blocks for
synthesis. There are numerous general strategies that have commonly been used for
aAA synthesis, many of which employ de novo synthesis focused on enantioselective
bond construction around the Ca center and others that consider conversion of
existing aAA precursors carrying suitable functional groups on side chains (e.g.,
serine and aspartic acid). Despite significant advances in synthetic methodology,
the efficient synthesis of enantiopure aAAs carrying complex side chains, as seen
in numerous peptide natural products, remains challenging. Complementary to these
"conventional" strategies, a strategy based on the selective functionalization of
side chain C-H bonds, particularly sp(3) hybridized C-H bonds, of various readily
available aAA precursors may provide a more straightforward and broadly
applicable means for the synthesis and transformation of aAAs. However, many
hurdles related to the low reactivity of C(sp(3))-H bonds and the difficulty of
controlling selectivity must be overcome to realize the potential of C-H
functionalization chemistry in this synthetic application. Over the past few
years, we have carried out a systematic investigation of palladium-catalyzed
bidentate auxiliary-directed C-H functionalization reactions for aAA substrates. 
Our strategies utilize two different types of amide-linked auxiliary groups,
attached at the N or C terminus of aAA substrates, to exert complementary regio- 
and stereocontrol on C-H functionalization reactions through palladacycle
intermediates. A variety of aAA precursors can undergo multiple modes of
C(sp(3))-H functionalization, including arylation, alkenylation, alkynylation,
alkylation, alkoxylation, and intramolecular aminations, at the ß, <U+03B3>, and even d 
positions to form new aAA products with diverse structures. In addition to
transforming aAAs at previously unreachable positions, these palladium-catalyzed 
C-H functionalization strategies enable new retrosynthetic logic for the
synthesis of many basic aAAs from a common alanine precursor. This approach
reduces the synthetic difficulty for many aAAs by bypassing the requirement for
stereocontrol at Ca and relies on straightforward and convergent single-bond
coupling transformations at the ß-methyl position of alanine to access a wide
range of ß-monosubstituted aAAs. Moreover, these ß-monosubstituted aAAs can
undergo further C-H functionalization at the ß-methylene position to generate
various ß-branched aAAs in a stereoselective and programmable fashion. These new 
strategies offer readily applicable methods for synthesis of challenging aAAs and
may facilitate the efficient total synthesis of complex peptide natural products.

PMID: 27015079  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. Zhonghua Lao Dong Wei Sheng Zhi Ye Bing Za Zhi. 2016 Jan 20;34(1):8-12. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1001-9391.2016.01.002.

[Histone acetylation modification of topoisomerase enzyme <U+2161>a promoter regulation 
factors in patients with chronic benzene poisoning].

[Article in Chinese]

Shi YF(1), Qian SH, Li JQ, Yu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, the first affiliated hospital of Wenzhou Medical
University, Wenzhou 325000, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate histone acetylation modification of topoisomerase
enzyme <U+2161>a (TOPO<U+2161>a) promoter regulation factors in patients with chronic benzene
poisoning, to explore the possible regulatory mechanism of TOPO<U+2161>a involved in
toxicity of chronic benzene poisoning;
METHODS: The bone marrow samples were from 25 chronic benzene poisoning cases and
25 controls. The Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay was carried out to
study the possible mechanism of TOPO<U+2161>a promoter regulation factors expression
changes. TOPO<U+2161>a promoter regulation factors mRNA were detected by RT-PCR
technique.
RESULTS: (1) Compared with the control, the histone H4 acetylation, histone H3
acetylation level of TOPO<U+2161>a promoter regulation factors SP1, ATF-2, SP3, NF-YA,
P53, C-MYB, ICBP90, NF-M in chronic benzene poisoning patients decreased, with
the significant difference (P<0.05) , except for C-JUN (P>0.05) ; (2) The mRNA
expression of TOPO<U+2161>apromoter regulation factors SP1, NF-YA, C-MYB, C-JUN and NF-M
were significantly lower than in the control with the significant difference
(P<0.05) , while the expression of SP3<U+3001>P53 mRNA increased (P<0.05) , ATF-2<U+3001>ICBP90
mRNA wasn't changed (P>0.05) .
CONCLUSION: (1) Chronic benzene poisoning TOPO <U+2161>a promoter regulation factors
histone modification changes accompanied with mRNA level changed. (2) Histone
acetylation modification of topoisomerase enzyme <U+2161>a promoter regulation factors
takes important role in the benezen's Hematopoietic toxicity.

PMID: 27014808  [PubMed - in process]


10. J Lipid Res. 2016 Mar 24. pii: jlr.M067447. [Epub ahead of print]

ATRA transcriptionally induces nSMase2 through CBP/p300-mediated Histone
acetylation.

Clarke CJ(1), Shamseddine AA(1), Jacob JJ(1), Khalife G(1), Burns TA(2), Hannun
YA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Stony Brook University, United States; (2)Medical University of South
Carolina, United States; (3)Cancer Center at Stony Brook Medicine, United States 
yusuf.hannun@stonybrookmedicine.edu.

Neutral sphingomyelinase-2 (nSMase2) is a key ceramide-producing enzyme in
cellular stress responses. While many post-translational regulators of nSMase2
are known, emerging evidence suggests a more protracted regulation of nSMase2 at 
the transcriptional level. Previously, we reported that nSMase2 is induced by
all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) in MCF7 cells and implicated nSMase2 in
ATRA-induced growth arrest. Here, we further investigated how ATRA regulates
nSMase2. We find that ATRA regulates nSMase2 transcriptionally through the
RAR-alpha receptor but this is independent of previously identified
transcriptional regulators of nSMase2 (Sp1, Sp3, Runx2) and is not through
increased promoter activity. Epigenetically, the nSMase2 gene is not repressively
methylated in MCF7 cells. However, inhibition of histone deacetylases (HDAC) with
trichostatin A (TSA) induced nSMase2 comparably to ATRA; furthermore, combined
ATRA and TSA treatment was not additive suggesting ATRA regulates nSMase2 through
direct modulation of histone acetylation. Confirming this, the histone
acetyltransferases CBP and p300 were required for ATRA induction of nSMase2.
Finally, use of class specific HDAC inhibitors suggested that HDAC4 and/or HDAC5 
are negative regulators of nSMase2 expression. Collectively, these results
identify a novel pathway of nSMase2 regulation and suggest that physiological or 
pharmacologic modulation of histone acetylation can directly affect nSMase2
levels.

Copyright © 2016, The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

PMID: 27013100  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Chem Commun (Camb). 2016 Mar 24. [Epub ahead of print]

Palladium-catalyzed C(sp(3))-C(sp(2)) cross-coupling of homoleptic rare-earth
metal trialkyl complexes with aryl bromides: efficient synthesis of
functionalized benzyltrimethylsilanes.

Cai G(1), Huang Y(1), Du T(1), Zhang S(1), Yao B(1), Li X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Cluster Science of Ministry of Education, School of
Chemistry, Beijing Institute of Technology, 5 South Zhongguancun Street, Haidian 
District, Beijing 100081, China. yaobo@bit.edu.cn xfli@bit.edu.cn.

The first C(sp(3))-C(sp(2)) cross-coupling of rare-earth metal alkyl complexes
with aryl bromides has been developed. This reaction was conducted at low
catalyst loading (0.5 mol%) and exhibited a broad substrate scope, thus providing
a facile method for the synthesis of benzyltrimethylsilanes with diverse
functional groups.

PMID: 27009850  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. J Med Chem. 2016 Mar 23. [Epub ahead of print]

Gamma Secretase Modulators: New Alzheimer's Drugs on the Horizon?

Bursavich MG, Harrison BA, Blain JF.

The rapidly aging population desperately requires new therapies for Alzheimer
disease. Despite years of pharmaceutical research, limited clinical success has
been realized with several failed disease modification therapies in recent years.
Due to compelling genetic evidence, the pharmaceutical industry has put a large
emphasis on brain beta amyloid (Aß) either through its removal via antibodies or 
by targeting the proteases responsible for its production. In this perspective we
focus on the development of small molecules that improve the activity of one such
protease, gamma secretase, through an allosteric binding site to preferentially
increase the concentration of the shorter non-amyloidogenic Aß species. After a
few early failures due to poor drug-like properties, the industry is now on the
cusp of delivering gamma secretase modulators (GSMs) for clinical proof of
mechanism studies that combine potency and efficacy with improved drug-like
properties such as lower cLogP, high CNS multiparameter optimization (MPO) scores
and high sp3 character.

PMID: 27007185  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. J Am Chem Soc. 2016 Mar 22. [Epub ahead of print]

Bimetallic C-C Bond Forming Reductive Elimination from Nickel.

Xu H, Diccianni JB, Katigbak J, Hu C, Zhang Y, Diao T.

Ni-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions have found important applications in
organic synthesis. The fundamental characterization of the key steps in
cross-coupling reactions, including C-C bond forming reductive elimination,
represents a significant challenge. Bimolecular pathways were invoked in early
proposals, but the experimental evidence was quite limited. We present the
preparation of well-defined (pyridine-pyrrolyl)Ni mono-methyl and phenyl
complexes that allow the direct observation of bimolecular reductive elimination 
to generate ethane and biphenyl, respectively. The sp3-sp3 and sp2-sp2 couplings 
proceed via two distinct pathways. Oxidants promote the fast formation of Ni(III)
from (pyridine-pyrrolyl)Ni-methyl, which dimerizes to afford a bimetallic Ni(III)
intermediate. Our data is most consistent with the subsequent methyl coupling
from the bimetallic Ni(III) to generate ethane as the rate-determining step. In
contrast, the formation of biphenyl is facilitated by the coordination of a
bidentate donor ligand.

PMID: 27005998  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Chemistry. 2016 Mar 22. doi: 10.1002/chem.201505097. [Epub ahead of print]

Total Synthesis, Stereochemical Assignment, and Field-Testing of the Sex
Pheromone of the Strepsipteran Xenos peckii.

Zhai H(1), Hrabar M(2), Gries R(2), Gries G(3), Britton R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British Columbia,
V5A 1S6, Canada. (2)Department of Biological Sciences, Simon Fraser University,
Burnaby, British Columbia, V5A 1S6, Canada. (3)Department of Biological Sciences,
Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British Columbia, V5A 1S6, Canada.
gries@sfu.ca. (4)Department of Chemistry, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby,
British Columbia, V5A 1S6, Canada. rbritton@sfu.ca.

The sex pheromone of the endoparasitoid insect Xenos peckii (Strepsiptera:
Xenidae) was recently identified as
(7E,11E)-3,5,9,11-tetramethyl-7,11-tridecadienal. Herein we report the asymmetric
synthesis of three candidate stereostructures for this pheromone using a
synthetic strategy that relies on an sp(3) -sp(2) Suzuki-Miyaura coupling to
construct the correctly configured C7-alkene function. Comparison of (1) H NMR
spectra derived from the candidate stereostructures to that of the natural sex
pheromone indicated a relative configuration of (3R*,5S*,9R*). Chiral gas
chromatographic (GC) analyses of these compounds supported an assignment of
(3R,5S,9R) for the natural product. Furthermore, in a 16-replicate field
experiment, traps baited with the synthetic (3R,5S,9R)-enantiomer alone or in
combination with the (3S,5R,9S)-enantiomer captured 23 and 18 X. peckii males,
respectively (mean±SE: 1.4±0.33 and 1.1±0.39), whereas traps baited with the
synthetic (3S,5R,9S)-enantiomer or a solvent control yielded no captures of
males. These strong field trapping data, in combination with spectroscopic and
chiral GC data, unambiguously demonstrate that
(3R,5S,9R,7E,11E)-3,5,9,11-tetramethyl-7,11-tridecadienal is the X. peckii sex
pheromone.

© 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 27001535  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


15. Chemistry. 2016 Mar 21. doi: 10.1002/chem.201600865. [Epub ahead of print]

Catalyst-Free Three-Component Tandem CDC Cyclization: Convenient Access to
Isoindolinones from Aromatic Acid, Amides, and DMSO by a Pummerer-Type
Rearrangement.

Wang PM(1), Pu F(1), Liu KY(1), Li CJ(2), Liu ZW(1), Shi XY(3), Fan J(1), Yang
MY(1), Wei JF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Applied Surface and Colloid Chemistry (Ministry of
Education), Key Laboratory for Macromolecular Science of Shaanxi Province, School
of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi'an, 710062, 
P.R. China. (2)Department of Chemistry, McGill University, Montreal, QC, H3A 0B8,
Canada. (3)Key Laboratory of Applied Surface and Colloid Chemistry (Ministry of
Education), Key Laboratory for Macromolecular Science of Shaanxi Province, School
of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi'an, 710062, 
P.R. China. shixy@snnu.edu.cn.

A catalyst-free multicomponent CDC reaction is rarely reported, especially for
the intermolecular tandem CDC cyclization, which represents an important strategy
for constructing cyclic compounds. Herein, a three-component tandem CDC
cyclization by a Pummerer-type rearrangement to afford biologically relevant
isoindolinones from aromatic acids, amides, and DMSO, is described. This
intermolecular tandem reaction undergoes a C(sp(2) )-H/C(sp(3) )-H
cross-dehydrogenative coupling, C-N bond formation, and intramolecular amidation.
A notable feature of this novel protocol is avoiding a catalyst and additive
(apart from oxidant).

© 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26998754  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


16. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2016 Mar 21:1-23. [Epub ahead of print]

Derivation of original RESP atomic partial charges for MD simulations of the LDAO
surfactant with AMBER: applications to a model of micelle and a fragment of the
lipid kinase PI4KA.

Karakas E(1,)(2,)(3), Taveneau C(3), Bressanelli S(3), Marchi M(2,)(3), Robert
B(2,)(3), Abel S(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Maison de la Simulation, USR 3441 , CEA - CNRS - INRIA - Univ. Paris-Sud -
Univ. de Versailles , 91191 , Gif sur Yvette , France. (2)b Commissariat à
l'Energie Atomique et aux Energies Alternatives, DRF/IBITECS/SB2SM/LBMS & CNRS
UMR 9198 , Saclay , France. (3)c Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell
(I2BC), CEA , CNRS, Univ Paris Sud, Université Paris-Saclay , 91198 Gif sur
Yvette , France.

In this paper, we describe the derivation and the validation of original RESP
atomic partial charges for the N, N-dimethyl-dodecylamine oxide (LDAO)
surfactant. These charges, designed to be fully compatible with all the AMBER
force fields, are at first tested against molecular dynamics simulations of pure 
LDAO micelles and with a fragment of the lipid kinase PIK4A (DI) modeled with the
QUARK molecular modeling server. To model the micelle, we used two distinct AMBER
force fields (i.e. Amber99SB and Lipid14) and a variety of starting conditions.
We find that the micelle structural properties (such as the shape, size, the LDAO
headgroup hydration, and alkyl chain conformation) slightly depend on the force
field but not on the starting conditions and more importantly are in good
agreement with experiments and previous simulations. We also show that the
Lipid14 force field should be used instead of the Amber99SB one to better
reproduce the C(sp3)C(sp3)C(sp3)C(sp3) conformation in the surfactant alkyl
chain. Concerning the simulations with LDAO-DI protein, we carried out different 
runs at two NaCl concentrations (i.e. 0 and 300 mM) to mimic, in the latter case,
the experimental conditions. We notice a small dependence of the simulation
results with the LDAO parameters and the salt concentration. However, we find
that in the simulations, three out of four tryptophans of the DI protein are not 
accessible to water in agreement with our fluorescence spectroscopy experiments
reported in the paper.

PMID: 26998712  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


17. J Chem Educ. 2015 Dec 8;92(12):2170-2172. Epub 2015 Oct 8.

Resonance Energy of an Arene Hydrocarbon from Heat of Combustion Measurements.

Kolesnichenko VL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Xavier University, New Orleans, Louisiana 70125,
United States.

A simple experimental method for determination of the resonance energy by
measuring the energies of combustion for two isomeric compounds, aromatic
1-tert-butyl-3,5-dimethylbenzene and nonaromatic
trans,trans,cis-1,5,9-cyclododecatriene is proposed. Both compounds not only have
the same molecular formula, but also contain the same number of sp(2) and sp(3)
carbon atoms. After converting the obtained values into the gas phase heats of
combustion and subtracting one value from another, the resulting mean resonance
energy of 184 kJ/mol was obtained. The proposed method can be offered as an
experiment for an undergraduate physical chemistry lab curriculum.

PMCID: PMC4795981
PMID: 26997668  [PubMed]


18. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2016 Mar 21. doi: 10.1002/anie.201600807. [Epub ahead of 
print]

[1+1+1] Cyclotrimerization for the Synthesis of Cyclopropanes.

Manna S(1,)(2), Antonchick AP(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Chemische Biologie, Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Physiologie, 
Otto-Hahn-Strasse 11, 44227, Dortmund, Germany. (2)Fakultät Chemie und Chemische 
Biologie, Technische Universität Dortmund, Otto-Hahn-Strasse 4a, 44227, Dortmund,
Germany. (3)Abteilung Chemische Biologie, Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare
Physiologie, Otto-Hahn-Strasse 11, 44227, Dortmund, Germany.
andrey.antonchick@mpi-dortmund.mpg.de. (4)Fakultät Chemie und Chemische Biologie,
Technische Universität Dortmund, Otto-Hahn-Strasse 4a, 44227, Dortmund, Germany. 
andrey.antonchick@mpi-dortmund.mpg.de.

The synthesis of small rings by functionalization of C(sp(3) )-H bonds remains a 
great challenge. We report for the first time a copper-catalyzed [1+1+1]
cyclotrimerization of acetophenone derivatives under mild reaction conditions.
The reaction has a broad scope for the stereoselective synthesis of cyclopropanes
by trimerization of acetophenone. The developed transformation is based on an
extraordinary copper-catalyzed cascade process that allows saturated carbocycles 
to be obtained for the first time by cyclotrimerization through functionalization
of C(sp(3) )-H bonds. The cascade of sixfold C(sp(3) )-H bond functionalization
allows the synthesis of cyclopropanes in a highly stereoselective approach.

© 2016 The Authors. Published by Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.

PMID: 26997466  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


19. Chemistry. 2016 Mar 15. doi: 10.1002/chem.201600704. [Epub ahead of print]

Ligand-Promoted C(sp3)-H Olefination en Route to Multi-functionalized Pyrazoles.

Yu JQ(1), Yang W(2), Ye S(3), Schmidt Y(4), Stamos D(5).

Author information: 
(1)chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California, UNITED
STATES. yu200@scripps.edu. (2)yweibo@scripps.edu. (3)ysq0607@gmail.com.
(4)yvonne_schmidt@vrtx.com. (5)dean_stamos@vrtx.com.

A Pd-catalyzed/N-heterocycle-directed C(sp3)-H olefination has been developed.
The monoprotected amino acid ligand (MPAA) is found to significantly promote
Pd-catalyzed C(sp3)-H olefination for the first time. Cu(OAc)2 instead of Ag+
salts are used as the terminal oxidant. This reaction provides a new method for
the synthesis of alkylated pyrazoles.

© 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26991450  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


20. FASEB J. 2016 Mar 16. pii: fj.201600213R. [Epub ahead of print]

Regulation of expression of venom toxins: silencing of prothrombin activator
trocarin D by AG-rich motifs.

Han SX(1), Kwong S(1), Ge R(1), Kolatkar PR(2), Woods AE(3), Blanchet G(1), Kini 
RM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore,
Singapore; (2)Qatar Biomedical Research Institute, Hamad Bin Khalifa University, 
Qatar Foundation for Education, Science, and Community Development, Doha, Qatar; 
and. (3)School of Pharmacy and Medical Sciences, University of South Australia,
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. (4)Department of Biological Sciences,
National University of Singapore, Singapore; dbskinim@nus.edu.sg.

Trocarin D (TroD), a venom prothrombin activator from Tropidechis carinatus,
shares similar structure and function with blood coagulation factor Xa
[Tropidechis carinatus FX (TrFX) a]. Their distinct physiologic roles are due to 
their distinct expression patterns. The genes of TroD and TrFX are highly
similar, except for promoter and intron 1, indicating that TroD has probably
evolved by duplication of FX, the plasma counterpart. The promoter insertion in
TroD accounts for the elevated but not venom gland-specific expression. Here we
examined the roles of 3 insertions and 2 deletions in intron 1 of TroD in the
regulation of expression using luciferase as a reporter. By systematic deletions,
we showed that a 209 base pair region within the second insertion silences
expression in mammalian and unmilked venom gland cells. Through bioinformatics
analysis, we identified 5 AG-rich motifs in this region. All except the 5th motif
are important for silencing function. YY1, Sp3 and HMGB2 were identified to bind 
these AG-rich motifs and silence gene expression in mammalian cells. Similar
AG-rich motif clusters are also found in other toxin genes but not in their
physiologic counterparts. Thus, AG-rich motifs contribute to regulation of
expression of TroD, and probably other toxin genes.-Han, S. X., Kwong, S., Ge,
R., Kolatkar, P. R., Woods, A. E., Blanchet, G., Kini, R. M. Regulation of
expression of venom toxins: silencing of prothrombin activator trocarin D by
AG-rich motif.

© FASEB.

PMID: 26985007  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


21. J Org Chem. 2016 Mar 28. [Epub ahead of print]

Intramolecular Functionalization of Benzylic Methylene Adjacent to the Ring
Nitrogen Atom in N-Aryltetrahydroisoquinoline Derivatives.

Yang L(1), Zhang-Negrerie D(2), Zhao K(1), Du Y(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Tianjin Key Laboratory for Modern Drug Delivery & High-Efficiency, School of
Pharmaceutical Science and Technology, Tianjin University , Tianjin 300072,
China. (2)Concordia International School Shanghai , Shanghai 201206, China.
(3)Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin) 
, Tianjin 300072, China.

Functionalization at the benzylic methylene group that is adjacent to the ring
nitrogen atom in a series of N-aryltetrahydroisoquinoline compounds has been
realized through intramolecular cross-dehydrogenative coupling reactions. The
presented transformation provided straightforward access to the formation of
C(sp(3))-Y (Y = C, N or O) bond via I(III) reagent.

PMID: 26982026  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


22. Dalton Trans. 2016 Mar 16. [Epub ahead of print]

Hydrothermal synthesis and characterization under dynamic conditions of cobalt
oxide nanoparticles supported over magnesium oxide nano-plates.

Alayoglu S(1), Rosenberg DJ(1), Ahmed M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, USA.
salayoglu@lbl.gov.

A nano-catalyst comprised of oxidized Co NPs supported on MgO nano-plates was
synthesized via a hydrothermal co-precipitation strategy and calcination in O2
and subsequently in H2 at 250 °C. Spectro-microscopy characterization was
performed by scanning transmission electron microscopy, electron energy loss
spectroscopy and scanning X-ray transmission microscopy. Surface measurements
under H2 and H2 + CO atmospheres were obtained by ambient pressure X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy and in situ X-ray absorption spectroscopy in the
225-480 °C range. These measurements at the atomic and microscopic levels
demonstrated that the oxidized Co nanoparticles uniformly decorated the MgO
nano-plates. The surfaces are enriched with Co, and with a mixture of Co(OH)2 and
CoO under H2 and H2 + CO atmospheres. Under a H2 atmosphere, the outermost
surfaces were composed of (lattice) O(2-), CO3(2-) and OH(-). No inorganic
carbonates were observed in the bulk. Chemisorbed CO, likely on the oxidized Co
surfaces, was observed at the expense of O(2-) under 300 mTorr H2 + CO (2<U+2009>:<U+2009>1) at
225 °C. Gas phase CO2 was detected under 32 Torr H2 + CO (2<U+2009>:<U+2009>1) at 225 °C upon
prolonged reaction time, and was attributed to a surface chemical reaction
between O(2-) and chemisorbed CO. Furthermore, sp(3) like carbon species were
detected on the otherwise carbon free surface in H2 + CO, which remained on the
surface under the subsequent reaction conditions. The formation of sp(3) like
hydrocarbons was ascribed to a surface catalytic reaction between the chemisorbed
CO and OH(-) as the apparent hydrogen source.

PMID: 26979489  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


23. Beilstein J Org Chem. 2016 Feb 17;12:301-8. doi: 10.3762/bjoc.12.32. eCollection 
2016.

Cascade alkylarylation of substituted N-allylbenzamides for the construction of
dihydroisoquinolin-1(2H)-ones and isoquinoline-1,3(2H,4H)-diones.

Qian P(1), Du B(1), Jiao W(2), Mei H(1), Han J(1), Pan Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, State Key Laboratory of
Coordination Chemistry, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210093, China. (2)School of 
Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Coordination
Chemistry, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210093, China; Institute for Chemistry & 
BioMedical Sciences, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210093, China.

An oxidative reaction for the synthesis of 4-alkyl-substituted
dihydroisoquinolin-1(2H)-ones with N-allylbenzamide derivatives as starting
materials has been developed. The radical alkylarylation reaction proceeds
through a sequence of alkylation and intramolecular cyclization. The substituent 
on the C-C double bond was found to play a key role for the progress of the
reaction to give the expected products with good chemical yields. Additionally,
N-methacryloylbenzamides were also suitable substrates for the current reaction
and provided the alkyl-substituted isoquinoline-1,3(2H,4H)-diones in good yield.

PMCID: PMC4778529
PMID: 26977189  [PubMed]


24. Chemphyschem. 2016 Mar 11. doi: 10.1002/cphc.201600073. [Epub ahead of print]

s-Hole opposite to a lone pair: unconventional pnicogen bonding interactions
between ZF3 (Z = N, P, As and Sb) compounds and several donors.

Frontera A(1), Mooibroek TJ(2), Bauza A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry, Universitat Illes Balears, Palma de Mallorca, SPAIN.
toni.frontera@uib.es. (2)tiddomooibroek@gmail.com. (3)antonio.bauza@uib.es.

The ability of several pnicogen sp3 derivatives ZF3 (Z = N, P, As, Sb) to
interact with electron rich entities by means of the opposite face to the lone
pair (lp) is investigated at the RI-MP2/aug-cc-pVQZ level of theory. The strength
of the interaction ranges between -1 to -87 kJ·mol-1, proving its favorable
nature, especially in case the lp is coordinated to a metal center, where the
strength of the interaction is significantly enhanced. The NBO analysis showed
that orbital effects are modest contributors to the global stabilization of the
pnicogen s-hole bonded complexes studied. Finally, some CSD examples are shown in
order to analyze the impact of this counterintuitive binding mode in the solid
state.

© 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26972801  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


25. Chem Rec. 2016 Mar 10. doi: 10.1002/tcr.201500280. [Epub ahead of print]

Transition Metal-Catalyzed Carbonylative C<U+F8FF>H Bond Functionalization of Arenes and
C(sp(3) )<U+F8FF>H Bond of Alkanes.

Gadge ST(1), Gautam P(1), Bhanage BM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Institute of Chemical Technology N. P. Marg, Matunga,
Mumbai 400019, India.

In this article, we present the progress made in the area of carbonylative C<U+F8FF>H
functionalization, with special emphasis on arenes and alkanes. The importance of
directing group assistance and C<U+F8FF>H functionalization using CO surrogates is also 
included. The budding development in the area of transition metal-catalyzed
C(sp(3) )<U+F8FF>H activation makes us feel it necessary to file a summary on the past, 
as well as current, contributions and a prospective outlook on the transition
metal-catalyzed carbonylative transformation of C<U+F8FF>H bonds, which is the focus of 
this review.

© 2016 The Chemical Society of Japan & Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,
Weinheim.

PMID: 26969501  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


26. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 5. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7925. [Epub ahead of print]

Specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 are non-oncogene 
addiction genes in cancer cells.

Hedrick E(1), Cheng Y(1), Jin UH(1), Kim K(2), Safe S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX 77843, USA. (2)Environmental Health, University of
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA.

Specificity protein (Sp) transcription factor (TF) Sp1 is overexpressed in
multiple tumors and is a negative prognostic factor for patient survival. Sp1 and
also Sp3 and Sp4 are highly expressed in cancer cells and in this study, we have 
used results of RNA interference (RNAi) to show that the three TFs individually
play a role in the growth, survival and migration/invasion of breast, kidney,
pancreatic, lung and colon cancer cell lines. Moreover, tumor growth in athymic
nude mice bearing L3.6pL pancreatic cancer cells as xenografts were significantly
decreased in cells depleted for Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 (combined) or Sp1 alone.
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) of changes in gene expression in Panc1
pancreatic cancer cells after individual knockdown of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4
demonstrates that these TFs regulate genes and pathways that correlated with the 
functional responses observed after knockdown but also some genes and pathways
that inversely correlated with the functional responses. However, causal IPA
analysis which integrates all pathway-dependent changes in all genes strongly
predicted that Sp1-, Sp3- and Sp4-regulated genes were associated with the
pro-oncogenic activity. These functional and genomic results coupled with
overexpression of Sp transcription factors in tumor vs. non-tumor tissues and
decreased Sp1 expression with age indicate that Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 are non-oncogene
addiction (NOA) genes and are attractive drug targets for individual and combined
cancer chemotherapies.

PMID: 26967243  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


27. Chemistry. 2016 Mar 9. doi: 10.1002/chem.201600447. [Epub ahead of print]

Highly Stable Mesoporous Zirconium Porphyrinic Frameworks with Distinct
Flexibility.

Xu L(1), Luo YP(2), Sun L(1), Xu Y(3), Cai ZS(1), Fang M(4), Yuan RX(2,)(5), Du
HB(6).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Coordination Chemistry, Collaborative Innovation
Center of Chemistry for Life Sciences, School of Chemistry and Chemical
Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210023, P. R. China. (2)School of
Chemistry and Materials Science, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, 210023, P.
R. China. (3)College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, State Key Laboratory 
of Materials-Oriented Chemical Engineering, Nanjing Tech University, Nanjing,
210009, P. R. China. (4)School of Chemistry and Materials Science, Nanjing Normal
University, Nanjing, 210023, P. R. China. fangmin@njnu.edu.cn. (5)School of
Chemistry and Materials Engineering, Changshu Institute of Technology, Changshu, 
215500, P. R. China. (6)State Key Laboratory of Coordination Chemistry,
Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemistry for Life Sciences, School of
Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210023, P. R.
China. hbdu@nju.edu.cn.

The construction of highly stable metal-porphyrinic frameworks (MPFs) is
appealing as these materials offer great opportunities for applications in
artificial light-harvesting systems, gas storage, heterogeneous catalysis, etc.
Herein, we report the synthesis of a novel mesoporous metal-porphyrinic framework
(denoted as NUPF-1) and its catalytic properties. NUPF-1 is constructed from a
new porphyrin linker and a Zr6 O8 structural building unit, possessing an
unprecedented doubly interpenetrating scu net. The structure exhibits not only
remarkable chemical and thermal stabilities, but also a distinct structural
flexibility, which is seldom seen in metal-organic framework (MOF) materials. By 
the merit of high chemical stability, NUPF-1 could be easily post-metallized with
[Ru3 (CO)12 ], and the resulting {NUPF-1-RuCO} is catalytically active as a
heterogeneous catalyst for intermolecular C(sp(3) )-H amination. Excellent yields
and good recyclability for amination of small substrates with various organic
azides have been achieved.

© 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26960623  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


28. Adv Mater. 2016 Mar 9. doi: 10.1002/adma.201505469. [Epub ahead of print]

Nanoscale Mechanics of Graphene and Graphene Oxide in Composites: A Scientific
and Technological Perspective.

Palermo V(1), Kinloch IA(2), Ligi S(3), Pugno NM(4,)(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Organic Synthesis and Photoreactivity (ISOF), National Research
Council of Italy (CNR), Via P. Gobetti 101, I-40129, Bologna, Italy. (2)The
School of Materials, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PL, 
United Kingdom. (3)GNext sas, Via d'Azeglio, I-40123, Bologna, Italy.
(4)Laboratory of Bio-inspired & Graphene Nanomechanics, Department of Civil,
Environmental and Mechanical Engineering, University of Trento, Trento, Italy.
(5)Center for Materials and Microsystems, Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Via Sommarive
18, I-38123, Povo (Trento), Italy. (6)School of Engineering and Materials
Science, Queen Mary University of London, Mile End Road, E1 4NS, London, UK.

Graphene shows considerable promise in structural composite applications thanks
to its unique combination of high tensile strength, Young's modulus and
structural flexibility which arise due to its maximal chemical bond strength and 
minimal atomic thickness. However, the ultimate performance of graphene
composites will depend, in addition to the properties of the matrix and
interface, on the morphology of the graphene used, including the size and shape
of the sheets and the number of chemical defects present. For example, whilst
oxidized sp(3) carbon atoms and vacancies in a graphene sheet can degrade its
mechanical strength, they can also increase its interaction with other materials 
such as the polymer matrix of a composite, thus maximizing stress transfer and
leading to more efficient mechanical reinforcement. Herein, we present an
overview of some recently published work on graphene mechanical properties and
discuss a list of challenges that need to be overcome (notwithstanding the strong
hype existing on this material) for the development of graphene-based materials
into a successful technology.

© 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26960186  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


29. Chemistry. 2016 Mar 8. doi: 10.1002/chem.201504984. [Epub ahead of print]

New Insights into the Diels-Alder Reaction of Graphene Oxide.

Brisebois PP(1), Kuss C(2), Schougaard S(3), Izquierdo R(4), Siaj M(5).

Author information: 
(1)patb.office@gmail.com. (2)chr.kuss@gmail.com. (3)schougaard.steen@uqam.ca.
(4)izquierdo.ricardo@uqam.ca. (5)Chemistry Department, Universite du Quebec a
Montreal, Montréal, CANADA. siaj.mohamed@uqam.ca.

Graphene oxide is regarded as a major precursor for graphene-based materials. The
development of graphene oxide derivatives with new functionalities requires a
thorough understanding of its chemical reactivity, especially for canonical
synthetic methods such as the Diels-Alder cycloaddition. We successfully extended
the Diels-Alder reaction to graphene oxide as a source of diene using maleic
anhydride as a dienophile, thereby outlining the presence of cis diene present on
graphene oxide framework which is a fundamental element in the understanding of
its exact structure and chemical nature. On the basis of high resolution
13C-SS-NMR spectra, we show evidence for the formation of new sp3 carbon centers 
covalently bonded to graphene oxide following hydrolysis of the reaction product.
We use density functional theory calculations to show that the presence of cis
dihydroxyl and C vacancy on the surface of graphene oxide is promoting the
reaction to significant negative reaction enthalpies.

© 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26953926  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


30. Chemistry. 2016 Mar 4. doi: 10.1002/chem.201600680. [Epub ahead of print]

Cu-Catalyzed Intramolecular Amidation of Unactivated C(sp3)-H Bonds to Synthesize
N-Substituted Indolines.

Shi Z(1), Pan F(2), Wu B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Peking University, Beijing, CHINA. zshi@pku.edu.cn.
(2)feip0000@163.com. (3)1300011722@pku.edu.cn.

A copper-catalyzed intramolecular amidation of unactivated C(sp3)-H bonds to
construct indoline derivatives was developed. Such an amidation proceeded well at
primary C-H bonds while preferred to secondary C-H bonds. The transformation
owned a broad substrate scope. The corresponding indolines were obtained in good 
to excellent yields. N-Formal and other carbonyl groups were suitable, which were
easily deprotected and transformed into methyl or long-chained alkyl groups.
Preliminary mechanistic studies suggested a radical pathway.

© 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26945702  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


31. J Am Chem Soc. 2016 Mar 18. [Epub ahead of print]

Positional Selectivity in C-H Functionalizations of 2-Benzylfurans with
Bimetallic Catalysts.

Zhang J(1), Sha SC(1), Bellomo A(1), Trongsiriwat N(1), Gao F(1), Tomson NC(1),
Walsh PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Roy and Diana Vagelos Laboratories, Penn/Merck Laboratory for High-Throughput 
Experimentation, Department of Chemistry, University of Pennsylvania , 231 South 
34th Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6323, United States.

Metal-catalyzed carbon-carbon bond-forming reactions are a mainstay in the
synthesis of pharmaceutical agents. A long-standing problem plaguing the field of
transition metal catalyzed C-H functionalization chemistry is control of
selectivity among inequivalent C-H bonds in organic reactants. Herein we advance 
an approach to direct site selectivity in the arylation of 2-benzylfurans founded
on the idea that modulation of cooperativity in bimetallic catalysts can enable
navigation of selectivity. The bimetallic catalysts introduced herein exert a
high degree of control, leading to divergent site-selective arylation reactions
of both sp(2) and sp(3) C-H bonds of 2-benzylfurans. It is proposed that the
selectivity is governed by cation-p interactions, which can be modulated by
choice of base and accompanying additives [MN(SiMe3)2, M = K or Li·12-crown-4].

PMID: 26937718  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


32. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2016 Mar 2. [Epub ahead of print]

A Study on Electrolytic Corrosion of Boron-Doped Diamond Electrodes when
Decomposing Organic Compounds.

Kashiwada T(1), Watanabe T(1), Ootani Y(2), Tateyama Y(2), Einaga Y(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Keio University , 3-14-1 Hiyoshi, Yokohama 223-8522, 
Japan. (2)International Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (WPI-MANA),
National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS) , 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba, Ibaraki
305-0044, Japan. (3)JST-ACCEL, 3-14-1 Hiyoshi, Yokohama 223-8522, Japan.

Electrolytic corrosion of boron-doped diamond (BDD) electrodes after applying a
high positive potential to decompose organic compounds in aqueous solution was
studied. Scanning electron microscopy images, Raman spectra, and glow discharge
optical emission spectroscopy revealed that relatively highly boron-doped domains
were primarily corroded and relatively low boron-doped domains remained after
electrolysis. The corrosion due to electrolysis was observed especially in
aqueous solutions of acetic acid or propionic acid, while it was not observed in 
other organic compounds such as formic acid, glucose, and methanol. Electron spin
resonance measurements after electrolysis in the acetic acid solution revealed
the generation of methyl radicals on the BDD electrodes. Here, the possible
mechanisms for the corrosion are discussed. Dangling bonds may be formed due to
abstraction of OH groups from C-OH functional groups by methyl radicals generated
on the surface of the BDD electrodes. As a result, the sp(3) diamond structure
would be converted to the sp(2) carbon structure, which can be easily etched.
Furthermore, to prevent electrolytic corrosion during electrolysis, both the
current density and the pH condition in the aqueous solution were optimized. At
low current densities or high pH, the BDD electrodes were stable without
electrolytic corrosion even in the acetic acid aqueous solution.

PMID: 26934500  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


33. Chemistry. 2016 Mar 2. doi: 10.1002/chem.201504775. [Epub ahead of print]

Single-Point Remote Control of Flapping Motion in Clothespin-Shaped Bimetallic
Palladium Complexes Based on the N(sp(2) )-N(sp(3) ) Interconversion in Amide
Functionalities.

Inoue R(1), Kawamorita S(1), Naota T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Engineering Science, Osaka
University, Machikaneyama, Toyonaka, Osaka, 560-8531, Japan. (2)Department of
Chemistry, Graduate School of Engineering Science, Osaka University,
Machikaneyama, Toyonaka, Osaka, 560-8531, Japan. naota@chem.es.osaka-u.ac.jp.

The synthesis, structure, and flapping motion of clothespin-shaped binuclear
trans-bis(salicylaldiminato)palladium(II) complexes (anti-1) with
4-azaheptamethylene linkers bearing amide (a-g), urethane (h), or urea (i)
functionalities are described in this report. Various 2D (1) H NMR experiments
and XRD analyses indicate that the amide- and urethane-linked anti-1<U+2009>a,b,d-h
complexes exist as equilibrated mixtures of major and minor conformers<U+2009>I and II
in CDCl3 , whereas the complexes anti-1<U+2009>c and i were observed as a single
species. The mapping of NOESY cross-peaks between conformers<U+2009>I and II revealed
that the equilibration of the major and minor conformers of anti-1<U+2009>a,b,d-h
proceeds by two pathways, namely a nonrotatory flapping motion of the coordinated
blades and a nonflapping rotation of C-N bonds, whereas the equilibration of
anti-1<U+2009>c proceeds by simultaneous flapping and rotation motions. Kinetic studies 
carried out by means of (1) H-(1) H EXSY experiments revealed that 1) the <U+0394>G(<U+2260>)
298K values for the flapping motion are controlled remotely by the steric and
electronic effects of the RCON functionalities and 2) the activation parameters
for the nonrotatory flapping process are identical to those for the nonflapping
peptide rotation in the complexes anti-1<U+2009>a,b,d-h, which indicates that the
present multistep conformational transformation induced by the flapping motion is
controlled by the rate-determining pyramidalization/depyramidalization (i.e.,
sp(2) /sp(3) interconversion) of the nitrogen atoms of the functionalities. The
static and controllable molecular mobility of anti-1 bearing peptide linkers has 
been discussed by comparison with the dynamic behavior of its analogues anti-2-4 
with flexible polymethylene linkers.

© 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26934178  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


34. Springerplus. 2016 Feb 11;5:120. doi: 10.1186/s40064-015-1626-y. eCollection
2016.

Assessment of genetic diversity, population structure and relationships in Indian
and non-Indian genotypes of finger millet (Eleusine coracana (L.) Gaertn) using
genomic SSR markers.

Ramakrishnan M(1), Antony Ceasar S(2), Duraipandiyan V(3), Al-Dhabi NA(4),
Ignacimuthu S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Plant Biotechnology, Entomology Research Institute, Loyola
College, Chennai, 600 034 India. (2)Division of Plant Biotechnology, Entomology
Research Institute, Loyola College, Chennai, 600 034 India ; Faculty of
Biological Sciences, Centre for Plant Sciences and School of Molecular and
Cellular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT UK. (3)Division of Plant
Biotechnology, Entomology Research Institute, Loyola College, Chennai, 600 034
India ; Department of Botany and Microbiology, Addiriyah Chair for Environmental 
Studies, College of Science, King Saud University, P.O.Box. 2455, Riyadh, 11451
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. (4)Department of Botany and Microbiology, Addiriyah
Chair for Environmental Studies, College of Science, King Saud University,
P.O.Box. 2455, Riyadh, 11451 Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. (5)Division of Plant
Biotechnology, Entomology Research Institute, Loyola College, Chennai, 600 034
India ; Visiting Professor Program, Deanship of Scientific Research, College of
Science, King Saud University, P.O.Box. 2455, Riyadh, 11451 Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia.

We evaluated the genetic variation and population structure in Indian and
non-Indian genotypes of finger millet using 87 genomic SSR primers. The 128
finger millet genotypes were collected and genomic DNA was isolated. Eighty-seven
genomic SSR primers with 60-70 % GC contents were used for PCR analysis of 128
finger millet genotypes. The PCR products were separated and visualized on a 6 % 
polyacrylamide gel followed by silver staining. The data were used to estimate
major allele frequency using Power Marker v3.0. Dendrograms were constructed
based on the Jaccard's similarity coefficient. Statistical fitness and population
structure analyses were performed to find the genetic diversity. The mean major
allele frequency was 0.92; the means of polymorphic alleles were 2.13 per primer 
and 1.45 per genotype; the average polymorphism was 59.94 % per primer and
average PIC value was 0.44 per primer. Indian genotypes produced an additional
0.21 allele than non-Indian genotypes. Gene diversity was in the range from 0.02 
to 0.35. The average heterozygosity was 0.11, close to 100 % homozygosity. The
highest inbreeding coefficient was observed with SSR marker UGEP67. The Jaccard's
similarity coefficient value ranged from 0.011 to 0.836. The highest similarity
value was 0.836 between genotypes DPI009-04 and GPU-45. Indian genotypes were
placed in Eleusine coracana major cluster (EcMC) 1 along with 6 non-Indian
genotypes. AMOVA showed that molecular variance in genotypes from various
geographical regions was 4 %; among populations it was 3 % and within populations
it was 93 %. PCA scatter plot analysis showed that GPU-28, GPU-45 and DPI009-04
were closely dispersed in first component axis. In structural analysis, the
genotypes were divided into three subpopulations (SP1, SP2 and SP3). All the
three subpopulations had an admixture of alleles and no pure line was observed.
These analyses confirmed that all the genotypes were genetically diverse and had 
been grouped based on their geographic regions.

PMCID: PMC4749518
PMID: 26900542  [PubMed]


35. Org Biomol Chem. 2016 Feb 18. [Epub ahead of print]

Synthetic studies towards putative yuremamine using an iterative C(sp(3))-H
arylation strategy.

Calvert MB(1), Sperry J(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemical Sciences, University of Auckland, 23 Symonds Street,
Auckland, New Zealand. j.sperry@auckland.ac.nz.

An overview of an iterative, 8-aminoquinoline (AQ)-directed C(sp(3))-H arylation 
strategy towards the pyrroloindole structure initially assigned to the alkaloid
yuremamine is described. During initial efforts using a model indane system, it
was discovered that the iodoresorcinol unit was not a viable C(sp(3))-H arylation
partner when masked as its dimethyl ether but upon switching to a MOM group, the 
ether oxygen served to stabilise the high valent Pd intermediate during the
reaction, thus promoting reductive elimination and leading to acceptable yields
of the C(sp(3))-H arylation product. The second C(sp(3))-H arylation with an
iodopyrogallol gave a 1,3-diarylated model yuremamine system possessing the
desired 1,3-cis relationship. When the successful model studies were applied to a
pyrroloindole system in pursuit of yuremamine, it became apparent that C9
underwent competing C(sp(2))-H arylation if left vacant, but installing a
tryptamine side chain at this site prevented the desired C(sp(3))-H arylation
from occurring altogether. However, a C9-methyl pyrroloindole underwent iterative
C(sp(3))-H arylation at C1 with an iodoresorcinol followed by C3 with an
iodopyrogallol to give a diarylated product with the aryl groups in the undesired
1,3-trans-relationship, arising from epimerisation at C1 during the second
C(sp(3))-H arylation event. Although the synthesis of putative yuremamine was not
accomplished, several findings are disclosed that will serve as useful additions 
to the burgeoning field of directed C(sp(3))-H arylations and related C-H
functionalization reactions.

PMID: 26891188  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


36. European J Org Chem. 2016 Jan;2016(1):139-149. Epub 2015 Nov 27.

Palladium-Catalyzed Directed C(sp(3))-H Arylation of Saturated Heterocycles at
C-3 Using a Concise Optimization Approach.

Affron DP(1), Bull JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, South Kensington, London SW7
2AZ, United Kingdom, http://www3.imperial.ac.uk/people/j.bull.

Saturated heterocycles, such as THFs, pyrrolidines, piperidines and THPs, are
essential components of many biologically active compounds. Examples of C-H
functionalization on these important ring systems remain scarce, especially at
unactivated positions. Here we report the development of conditions for the
palladium-catalyzed stereoselective C(sp(3))-H arylation at unactivated
3-positions of 5- and 6-membered N- and O-heterocycles with aminoquinoline
directing groups. Subtle differences in substrate structures altered their
reactivity significantly; and different conditions were required to achieve high 
yields in each case. Successful conditions were developed using a short empirical
optimization approach to cover reaction space with a limited set of variables.
Excellent cis-selectivity was achieved in all cases, except for the THP substrate
where minor trans-products were formed through a different palladacyclic
intermediate. Here, differences in reactivity and selectivity with other
directing groups were examined.

PMCID: PMC4736452
PMID: 26877706  [PubMed]


37. ChemSusChem. 2016 Feb 12. doi: 10.1002/cssc.201501516. [Epub ahead of print]

Selective and Stable Ethylbenzene Dehydrogenation to Styrene over Nanodiamonds
under Oxygen-lean Conditions.

Diao J(1), Feng Z(1), Huang R(1), Liu H(2), Hamid SB(3), Su DS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Shenyang National Laboratory for Materials Science, Institute of Metal
Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenyang, 110016, China. (2)Shenyang
National Laboratory for Materials Science, Institute of Metal Research, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shenyang, 110016, China. liuhy@imr.ac.cn. (3)Nanotechnology 
& Catalysis Research Centre, NANOCAT, University of Malaya, IPS Building, 50603, 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. (4)Shenyang National Laboratory for Materials Science,
Institute of Metal Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenyang, 110016,
China. dssu@imr.ac.cn.

For the first time, significant improvement of the catalytic performance of
nanodiamonds was achieved for the dehydrogenation of ethylbenzene to styrene
under oxygen-lean conditions. We demonstrated that the combination of direct
dehydrogenation and oxidative dehydrogenation indeed occurred on the nanodiamond 
surface throughout the reaction system. It was found that the active sp(2) -sp(3)
hybridized nanostructure was well maintained after the long-term test and the
active ketonic carbonyl groups could be generated in situ. A high reactivity with
40<U+2009>% ethylbenzene conversion and 92<U+2009>% styrene selectivity was obtained over the
nanodiamond catalyst under oxygen-lean conditions even after a 240 h test,
demonstrating the potential of this procedure for application as a promising
industrial process for the ethylbenzene dehydrogenation to styrene without steam 
protection.

© 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26871428  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


38. Org Biomol Chem. 2016 Feb 12. [Epub ahead of print]

3-Component synthesis of a-substituted sulfonamides via Brønsted acid-catalyzed
C(sp(3))-H bond functionalization of 2-alkylazaarenes.

Beisel T(1), Kirchner J(1), Kaehler T(1), Knauer J(1), Soltani Y(1), Manolikakes 
G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organic Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Goethe-University
Frankfurt, Max-von-Laue-Strasse 7, 60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
g.manolikakes@chemie.uni-frankfurt.de.

A Brønsted acid-catalyzed addition of 2-alkylazaarenes to in situ generated
N-sulfonylimines through selective C(sp(3))-H bond functionalization has been
developed. This protocol provides an atom- and step-economic approach to
a-substituted sulfonamides.

PMID: 26868020  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


39. Chem Soc Rev. 2016 Feb 11. [Epub ahead of print]

Copper-catalyzed oxidative carbon-heteroatom bond formation: a recent update.

Zhu X(1), Chiba S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Chemistry and Biological Chemistry, School of Physical and
Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 637371,
Singapore. shunsuke@ntu.edu.sg.

This review updates recent advances in Cu-catalyzed (anaerobic) oxidative
carbon-heteroatom bond formation on sp(3)- and sp(2)-C-H bonds as well as
alkenes, classified according to the types of stoichiometric oxidants.

PMID: 26865058  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


40. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2016 Feb 8;108(5). pii: djv387. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djv387.
Print 2016 May.

Relevance of Sp Binding Site Polymorphism in WWOX for Treatment Outcome in
Pancreatic Cancer.

Schirmer MA(1), Lüske CM(1), Roppel S(1), Schaudinn A(1), Zimmer C(1), Pflüger
R(1), Haubrock M(1), Rapp J(1), Güngör C(1), Bockhorn M(1), Hackert T(1), Hank
T(1), Strobel O(1), Werner J(1), Izbicki JR(1), Johnsen SA(1), Gaedcke J(1),
Brockmöller J(1), Ghadimi BM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Pharmacology (MAS, CML, SR, AS, CZ, RP, JB), Institute
of Bioinformatics (MH), Clinic of General and Visceral Surgery (CML, SR, JR, SAJ,
JG, BMG), and Clinic of Radiotherapy and Radiation Oncology (MAS), University
Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany; Department of General, Visceral,
and Thoracic Surgery, University Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany
(CG, MB, JRI); Department of General, Visceral, and Transplantation Surgery,
University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany (THac, THan, OS, JW).

Comment in
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2016 May;108(5). pii: djv424. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djv424.

BACKGROUND: A genome-wide association study (GWAS) suggested inherited genetic
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) affecting overall survival (OS) in
advanced pancreatic cancer. To identify robust clinical biomarkers, we tested the
strongest reported candidate loci in an independent patient cohort, assessed
cellular drug sensitivity, and evaluated molecular effects.
METHODS: This study comprised 381 patients with histologically verified
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma treated with gemcitabine-based chemotherapy. The
primary outcome was the relationship between germline polymorphisms and OS.
Functional assays addressed pharmacological dose-response effects in
lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) and pancreatic cancer cell lines (including upon
RNAi), gene expression analyses, and allele-specific transcription factor
binding. All statistical tests were two-sided.
RESULTS: The A allele (26% in Caucasians) at SNP rs11644322 in the putative tumor
suppressor gene WWOX conferred worse prognosis. Median OS was 14 months (95%
confidence interval [CI] = 12 to 15 months), 13 months (95% CI = 11 to 15
months), and nine months (95% CI = 7 to 12 months) for the GG, GA, and AA
genotypes, respectively (P trend < .001 for trend in univariate log-rank assuming
a codominant mode of inheritance; advanced disease subgroup P trend < .001). Mean
OS was 25 months (95% CI = 21 to 29 months), 19 months (95% CI = 15 to 22
months), and 13 months (95% CI = 10 to 16 months), respectively. This effect held
true after adjustment for age, performance status according to Eastern
Cooperative Oncology Group classification, TNM, grading, and resection status and
was comparable with the strongest established prognostic factors in multivariable
analysis. Consistently, reduced responsiveness to gemcitabine, but not
5-fluorouracil, along with lower WWOX expression was demonstrated in LCLs
harboring the AA genotype. Likewise, RNAi-mediated WWOX knockdown in pancreatic
cancer cells confirmed differential cytostatic drug sensitivity. In
electrophoretic mobility shift assays, the A allele exhibited weaker binding of
Sp family members Sp1/Sp3.
CONCLUSIONS: WWOX rs11644322 represents a major predictive factor in
gemcitabine-treated pancreatic cancer. Decreased WWOX expression may interfere
with gemcitabine sensitivity, and allele-specific binding at rs11644332 might be 
a causative molecular mechanism behind the observed clinical associations.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMID: 26857392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Chem Soc Rev. 2016 Feb 3. [Epub ahead of print]

Allenes, versatile unsaturated motifs in transition-metal-catalysed [2+2+2]
cycloaddition reactions.

Lledó A(1), Pla-Quintana A(1), Roglans A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Química Computacional i Catàlisi (IQCC) and Departament de
Química, Universitat de Girona (UdG), Facultat de Ciències, Campus de Montilivi, 
s/n, 17071 Girona, Spain. anna.roglans@udg.edu.

The development of efficient reactions that enable the construction of multiple
bonds and/or stereogenic centres in a single synthetic operation is of great
interest for greener and step-economical syntheses of complex organic targets.
Transition-metal-catalysed [2+2+2] cycloadditions excell in this regard: no fewer
than three new sigma bonds and a new ring system are formed from simple
unsaturated components. Allenes constitute an important subclass among these.
They are more reactive than simple alkenes and generate sp(3) centres, with
important stereochemical implications. In addition, further manipulation of the
resulting cycloadduct through the remaining double bond is possible, increasing
molecular complexity. This tutorial review highlights the value that allenes have
as reagents in [2+2+2] cycloaddition and their great versatility for the
development of methods to generate complex architectures.

PMID: 26838763  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


42. Nat Mater. 2016 Feb 1. doi: 10.1038/nmat4541. [Epub ahead of print]

Realistic molecular model of kerogen's nanostructure.

Bousige C(1,)(2), Ghimbeu CM(3), Vix-Guterl C(3), Pomerantz AE(4), Suleimenova
A(4), Vaughan G(5), Garbarino G(5), Feygenson M(6), Wildgruber C(7), Ulm FJ(1),
Pellenq RJ(1,)(2,)(8), Coasne B(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.
(2)<MSE>2, UMI 3466 CNRS-MIT, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, Massachusetts
02139, USA. (3)Institut de Science des Matériaux de Mulhouse (IS2M), UMR 7360
CNRS - UHA, 15 rue Jean Starcky, BP 2488, 68057 Mulhouse cedex, France.
(4)Schlumberger-Doll Research, 1 Hampshire Street, Cambridge, Massachusetts
02139, USA. (5)European Synchrotron Radiation Facility, BP-220, F-38043, Grenoble
Cedex 9, France. (6)Chemical and Engineering Materials Division, Oak Ridge
National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee 37831, USA. (7)Instrument and Source
Division (NScD), Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee 37831, USA. 
(8)CINaM, CNRS/Aix Marseille Université, Campus de Luminy, 13288 Marseille cedex 
09, France.

Despite kerogen's importance as the organic backbone for hydrocarbon production
from source rocks such as gas shale, the interplay between kerogen's chemistry,
morphology and mechanics remains unexplored. As the environmental impact of shale
gas rises, identifying functional relations between its geochemical, transport,
elastic and fracture properties from realistic molecular models of kerogens
becomes all the more important. Here, by using a hybrid experimental-simulation
method, we propose a panel of realistic molecular models of mature and immature
kerogens that provide a detailed picture of kerogen's nanostructure without
considering the presence of clays and other minerals in shales. We probe the
models' strengths and limitations, and show that they predict essential features 
amenable to experimental validation, including pore distribution, vibrational
density of states and stiffness. We also show that kerogen's maturation, which
manifests itself as an increase in the sp(2)/sp(3) hybridization ratio, entails a
crossover from plastic-to-brittle rupture mechanisms.

PMID: 26828313  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


43. ACS Med Chem Lett. 2015 Nov 4;7(1):23-7. doi: 10.1021/acsmedchemlett.5b00253.
eCollection 2016.

SAR Exploration Guided by LE and Fsp(3): Discovery of a Selective and Orally
Efficacious ROR<U+03B3> Inhibitor.

Hirata K(1), Kotoku M(1), Seki N(1), Maeba T(1), Maeda K(1), Hirashima S(1),
Sakai T(1), Obika S(1), Hori A(1), Hase Y(1), Yamaguchi T(1), Katsuda Y(1), Hata 
T(1), Miyagawa N(1), Arita K(1), Nomura Y(1), Asahina K(1), Aratsu Y(1), Kamada
M(2), Adachi T(2), Noguchi M(2), Doi S(2), Crowe P(3), Bradley E(3), Steensma
R(3), Tao H(3), Fenn M(3), Babine R(3), Li X(3), Thacher S(3), Hashimoto H(1),
Shiozaki M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Research Laboratories, Biological Pharmacological Research
Laboratories, Drug Metabolism & Pharmacokinetics Research Laboratories, Central
Pharmaceutical Research Institute, Japan Tobacco Inc. , 1-1, Murasaki-cho,
Takatsuki, Osaka 569-1125, Japan. (2)Pharmaceutical Frontier Research
Laboratories, Central Pharmaceutical Research Institute, Japan Tobacco Inc. ,
1-13-2, Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 236-0004, Japan. (3)Orphagen
Pharmaceuticals , 11558 Sorrento Valley Road, Suite 4, San Diego, California
92121, United States.

A novel series of ROR<U+03B3> inhibitors was identified starting with the HTS hit 1.
After SAR investigation based on a prospective consideration of two drug-likeness
metrics, ligand efficiency (LE) and fraction of sp(3) carbon atoms (Fsp(3)),
significant improvement of metabolic stability as well as reduction of CYP
inhibition was observed, which finally led to discovery of a selective and orally
efficacious ROR<U+03B3> inhibitor 3z.

PMCID: PMC4716592 [Available on 2017-01-14]
PMID: 26819660  [PubMed]


44. Science. 2016 Jan 15;351(6270):252-6. doi: 10.1126/science.aad7893.

Organic chemistry. Functionalization of C(sp3)-H bonds using a transient
directing group.

Zhang FL(1), Hong K(1), Li TJ(1), Park H(1), Yu JQ(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA
92037, USA. (2)The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La 
Jolla, CA 92037, USA. yu200@scripps.edu.

Proximity-driven metalation has been extensively exploited to achieve reactivity 
and selectivity in carbon-hydrogen (C-H) bond activation. Despite the substantial
improvement in developing more efficient and practical directing groups, their
stoichiometric installation and removal limit efficiency and, often,
applicability as well. Here we report the development of an amino acid reagent
that reversibly reacts with aldehydes and ketones in situ via imine formation to 
serve as a transient directing group for activation of inert C-H bonds. Arylation
of a wide range of aldehydes and ketones at the ß or <U+03B3> positions proceeds in the 
presence of a palladium catalyst and a catalytic amount of amino acid. The
feasibility of achieving enantioselective C-H activation reactions using a chiral
amino acid as the transient directing group is also demonstrated.

Copyright © 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 26816374  [PubMed]


45. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 22. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6975. [Epub ahead of print]

Fatty acid activated PPAR<U+03B3> promotes tumorigenicity of prostate cancer cells by up
regulating VEGF via PPAR responsive elements of the promoter.

Forootan FS(1), Forootan SS(1), Gou X(2), Yang J(3), Liu B(4), Chen D(1), Fayi
MS(1), Al-Jameel W(1), Rudland PS(5), Hussain SA(1), Ke Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Laboratory, Department of Molecular and Clinical Cancer
Medicine, Liverpool University, Liverpool L69 3GA, United Kingdom. (2)Antibiotics
Research and Re-evaluation Key Laboratory, Sichuan Antibiotics Industrial
Institute, Chengdu University, Chengdu 610081, China. (3)Urology Department of
Affiliated Hospital, Chengdu University, Chengdu 610081, China. (4)Department of 
Pharmacology, School of Pharmacology and Bioengineering, Chengdu University,
Chengdu 610081, China. (5)Department of Biochemistry, Liverpool University,
Liverpool L69 3GA, United Kingdom.

In previous work, it is suggested that the excessive amount of fatty acids
transported by FABP5 may facilitate the malignant progression of prostate cancer 
cells through a FABP5-PPAR<U+03B3>-VEGF signal transduction axis to increase
angiogenesis. To further functionally characterise the FABP5-PPAR<U+03B3>-VEGF signal
transduction pathway, we have, in this work, investigated the molecular
mechanisms involved in its tumorigenicity promoting role in prostate cancer.
Suppression of PPAR<U+03B3> in highly malignant prostate cancer cells produced a
significant reduction (up to 53%) in their proliferation rate, invasiveness (up
to 89%) and anchorage-independent growth (up to 94%) in vitro. Knockdown of PPAR<U+03B3>
gene in PC3-M cells by siRNA significantly reduced the average size of tumours
formed in nude mice by 99% and tumour incidence by 90%, and significantly
prolonged the latent period by 3.5 fold. Results in this study combined with some
previous results suggested that FABP5 promoted VEGF expression and angiogenesis
through PPAR<U+03B3> which was activated by fatty acids transported by FABP5. Further
investigations showed that PPAR<U+03B3> up-regulated VEGF expression through acting with
the PPAR-responsive elements in the promoter region of VEGF gene in prostate
cancer cells. Although androgen can modulate VEGF expression through Sp1/Sp3
binding site on VEGF promoter in androgen-dependent prostate cancer cells, this
route, disappeared as the cells gradually lost their androgen dependency; was
replaced by the FABP5-PPAR<U+03B3>-VEGF signalling pathway. These results suggested that
the FABP5-PPAR<U+03B3>-VEGF signal transduction axis, rather than androgen modulated
route, may be a more important novel therapeutic target for
angiogenesis-suppression treatment of castration resistant prostate cancer.

PMID: 26814431  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


46. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 25;11(1):e0147886. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0147886.
eCollection 2016.

Sp1 and Sp3 Are the Transcription Activators of Human ek1 Promoter in TSA-Treated
Human Colon Carcinoma Cells.

Kuan CS(1), See Too WC(1), Few LL(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Sciences, Health Campus, Universiti Sains Malaysia, 16150
Kubang Kerian, Kelantan, Malaysia.

BACKGROUND: Ethanolamine kinase (EK) catalyzes the phosphorylation of
ethanolamine, the first step in the CDP-ethanolamine pathway for the biosynthesis
of phosphatidylethanolamine (PE). Human EK exists as EK1, EK2a and EK2ß isoforms,
encoded by two separate genes, named ek1 and ek2. EK activity is stimulated by
carcinogens and oncogenes, suggesting the involvement of EK in carcinogenesis.
Currently, little is known about EK transcriptional regulation by endogenous or
exogenous signals, and the ek gene promoter has never been studied.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this report, we mapped the important
regulatory regions in the human ek1 promoter. 5' deletion analysis and
site-directed mutagenesis identified a Sp site at position (-40/-31) that was
essential for the basal transcription of this gene. Treatment of HCT116 cells
with trichostatin A (TSA), a histone deacetylase inhibitor, significantly
upregulated the ek1 promoter activity through the Sp(-40/-31) site and increased 
the endogenous expression of ek1. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay revealed
that TSA increased the binding of Sp1, Sp3 and RNA polymerase II to the ek1
promoter in HCT116 cells. The effect of TSA on ek1 promoter activity was
cell-line specific as TSA treatment did not affect ek1 promoter activity in HepG2
cells.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: In conclusion, we showed that Sp1 and Sp3 are not only
essential for the basal transcription of the ek1 gene, their accessibility to the
target site on the ek1 promoter is regulated by histone protein modification in a
cell line dependent manner.

PMCID: PMC4725723
PMID: 26807725  [PubMed - in process]


47. Org Biomol Chem. 2016 Jan 19. [Epub ahead of print]

Palladium-catalyzed ß-C(sp(3))-H arylation of phthaloyl alanine with hindered
aryl iodides: synthesis of complex ß-aryl a-amino acids.

Zhang X(1), He G(1), Chen G(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory and Institute of Elemento-Organic Chemistry,
Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin),
Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China. hegang@nankai.edu.cn
gongchen@nankai.edu.cn. (2)State Key Laboratory and Institute of Elemento-Organic
Chemistry, Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering
(Tianjin), Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China. hegang@nankai.edu.cn
gongchen@nankai.edu.cn and Department of Chemistry, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

An efficient protocol for palladium-catalyzed ß-C(sp(3))-H arylation of aliphatic
carboxamides equipped with a 2-(2-pyridyl) ethylamine (PE) auxiliary was
developed. The PE auxiliary is uniquely effective at facilitating the arylation
of primary C(sp(3))-H bonds with sterically hindered aryl iodides. A variety of
aryl iodides bearing alkoxyl, carbonyl, nitro and halogen groups on the ortho
position can react with the PE-coupled phthaloyl alanine substrate in moderate to
excellent yield. These reactions offer a useful solution for preparing complex
ß-aryl a-amino acid products from readily accessible starting materials.

PMID: 26781005  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


48. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Oct 15;8(10):17321-32. eCollection 2015.

Analysis of differentially expressed genes based on microarray data of glioma.

Jiang CM(1), Wang XH(1), Shu J(1), Yang WX(2), Fu P(3), Zhuang LL(1), Zhou GP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University Nanjing, Jiangsu Province 210029, China. (2)Department of Pediatrics, 
Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University Nantong, Jiangsu Province 226001,
China. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Hangzhou First People's Hospital, Affiliated 
Hangzhou Hospital of Nanjing Medical University Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province
310003, China.

Glioma represents one of the main causes of cancer-related death worldwide.
Unfortunately, its exact molecular mechanisms remain poorly understood, which
limits the prognosis and therapy. This study aimed to identify the critical
genes, transcription factors and the possible biochemical pathways that may
affect glioma progression at transcription level. After downloading micro-array
data from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), the differentially expressed genes
(DEGs) between glioma and normal samples were screened. We predicted novel
glioma-related genes and carried on online software DAVID to conduct GO
enrichment and transcription factor analysis of these selected genes. String
software was applied to construct a PPI protein interaction network, as well as
to find the key genes and transcription factors in the regulation of glioma. A
total of 97 DEGs were identified associated with cancer, the GO enrichment
analysis indicated these DEGs were mainly relevant to immune responses as well as
regulation of cell growth. In addition, the transcription factor analysis showed 
these DEGs were regulated by the binding sites of transcription factors GLI2,
SP1, SMAD7, SMAD3, RELA, STAT5B, CTNNB1, STAT5A, TFAP2A and SP3. PPI protein
interaction network analysis demonstrated the hub nodes in the interaction
network were EGFR, TGFB1, FN1 and MYC. The hub DEGs may be the most critical in
glioma and could be considered as drug targets for glioma therapy after further
exploration. Besides, with the identification of regulating transcription
factors, the pathogenesis of glioma at transcription level might be brought to
light.

PMCID: PMC4694224
PMID: 26770324  [PubMed]


49. Korean J Food Sci Anim Resour. 2015;35(1):41-9. doi: 10.5851/kosfa.2015.35.1.41. 
Epub 2015 Feb 28.

Antioxidant Activity of Allium hookeri Root Extract and Its Effect on Lipid
Stability of Sulfur-fed Pork Patties.

Cho HS(1), Park W(1), Hong GE(1), Kim JH(1), Ju MG(1), Lee CH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Biotechnology of Animal Resources, Konkuk
University, Seoul 143-701, Korea.

This study was performed to assess the antioxidant activity of Allium hookeri
root extract (AHE) on lipid oxidation of raw sulfur-fed pork patties for 14 d of 
refrigerated storage. Different concentration of ethanol (0-100%) and time (1-12 
h) were applied to determine the extraction condition. Water (0% ethanol)
extraction for 1 h was selected as an optimal extraction condition of AHE for the
following study showing the highest total phenolic content and total flavonoid
content, as well as the strongest antioxidant activity. The 1% AHE (SP1), 3% AHE 
(SP2), and 0.05% ascorbic acid (SP3) were added into sulfur-fed pork patties
against controls; SP0 (sulfur-fed pork patties with no AHE) and P0 (normal pork
patties with no AHE). The pH values of P0 and SP0 significantly increased
(p<0.05) than others on 14 d and redness of P0 showed the largest decrement
during storage. P0 and SP0 showed higher production of conjugated dienes on d 7
than others (p<0.05). Thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS) values were
decreased in proportion to the increased level of AHE on 14 d (p<0.05) resulting 
in higher TBARS values on P0 and SP0 (p<0.05) and the negative correlation
between AHE level and TBARS were also demonstrated (r=-0.910, p=0.001).
Therefore, the results suggest that AHE effectively retarded the lipid oxidation 
rate of sulfur-fed pork patties indicating the potential usage of AHE as a
natural preservative.

PMCID: PMC4682492
PMID: 26761799  [PubMed]


50. Chemistry. 2016 Mar 1;22(10):3273-3277. doi: 10.1002/chem.201503967. Epub 2016
Feb 16.

A Preliminary Study of Diastereoselectivity in the Pd(II) -Catalyzed C(sp(3) )-H 
Alkoxylation of Cyclic Systems.

Yang X(1), Sun TY(2), Rao Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)MOE Key Laboratory of Protein Sciences, Department of Pharmacology and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing,
100084, China. (2)Lab of Computational Chemistry and Drug Design, Key Laboratory 
of Chemical Genomics, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen,
518055, China. (3)MOE Key Laboratory of Protein Sciences, Department of
Pharmacology and Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Medicine, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, 100084, China. yrao@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn.

Primary mechanism of a Pd(II) -catalyzed 8-aminoquinoline-directed C-H
alkoxylation was investigated. It was understood that the Pd(II) -catalyzed
C(sp(3) )-O bond formation proceeded through a concerted reductive elimination
from the Pd(IV) intermediate in the cyclic system. Deuteration experiments and
related computational studies elucidate that intrinsic conformation determined
the diastereoselectivity of the Pd(II) -catalyzed C-H alkoxylation of cyclic
carboxylic acids.

© 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26714795  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


51. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 19;7(3):3379-93. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6582.

Monoamine oxidase B levels are highly expressed in human gliomas and are
correlated with the expression of HiF-1a and with transcription factors Sp1 and
Sp3.

Sharpe MA(1), Baskin DS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Kenneth R. Peak Brain and Pituitary Tumor Center, 
Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Monoamine oxidases A and B (MAOA and MAOB) are highly expressed in many cancers. 
Here we investigated the level of MAOB in gliomas and confirmed its high
expression. We found that MAOB levels correlated with tumor grade and
hypoxia-inducible factor 1-alpha (HiF-1a) expression. HiF-1a was localized to the
nuclei in high-grade gliomas, but it was primarily cytosolic in low-grade gliomas
and normal human astrocytes. Expression of both glial fibrillary acidic protein
(GFAP) and MAOB are correlated to HiF-1a expression levels. Levels of MAOB are
correlated by the levels of transcription factor Sp3 in the majority of GBM
examined, but this control of MAOB expression by Sp3 in low grade astrocytic
gliomas is significantly different from control in the in the majority of
glioblastomas. The current findings support previous suggestions that MAOB can be
exploited for the killing of cancer cells. Selective cell toxicity can be
achieved by designing non-toxic prodrugs that require MAOB for their catalytic
conversion into mature cytotoxic chemotherapeutics.

PMID: 26689994  [PubMed - in process]


52. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2015 Dec 18. doi: 10.1071/RD15324. [Epub ahead of print]

Effect of inbreeding depression on bull sperm quality and field fertility.

Dorado J, Cid RM, Molina A, Hidalgo M, Ariza J, Moreno-Millán M, Demyda-Peyrás S.

The present study investigated the effect of inbreeding depression on sperm
quality using automated and objective methods and subsequent effects on beef bull
field fertility. Individual inbreeding coefficient (F) values and field fertility
data were determined using a dataset of AI bulls belonging to the Spanish Retinta
Breeders Association (Asociación Nacional de Criadores de Ganado Vacuno Selecto
de Raza Retinta (ANCRE)). Animals were clustered in two groups according to the F
values as follows: (1) a high inbreeding group (HI; F = 13.5%, mean 16.3); and
(2) a non-inbreeding group (NI; F = 0%). In total, 17 different assessments were 
performed in both experimental groups, including evaluation of sperm morphology, 
acrosomal and DNA status, sperm plasma membrane integrity and function
(hypo-osmotic swelling test), 10 kinetic parameters and the structure of sperm
subpopulations. Sperm morphology, acrosomal and DNA status and osmotic tolerance 
were similar in both groups. Three velocity parameters (curvilinear velocity,
straight line velocity and average path velocity) and the amplitude of lateral
head displacement were higher in HI (P < 0.05). Cluster analysis of kinematic
parameters revealed three different sperm subpopulations (sP1, sP2 and sP3), with
the proportion of the sP1 population (highly active but non-progressive
spermatozoa) being significantly (P < 0.05) higher in the HI group. Field
fertility was assessed using two calving record datasets. In a smaller database
including only bulls evaluated in the present study, there was a significant
increase in the calving interval of cows sired with HI bulls. Conversely, in an
extended genetic analysis of the ANCRE database, inbreeding only explained a
small part of the variation in calving interval, and the results of regression
analysis were not significant among bulls. The findings of the present study
suggest that high inbreeding levels have a moderate effect on bull semen quality,
with an increased percentage of highly active but non-progressive spermatozoa,
but only when F values reached a certain threshold. This motility pattern could
explain, in part, the higher calving interval produced by inbred bulls under
field conditions.

PMID: 26678044  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


53. BMC Cancer. 2015 Dec 16;15:974. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1956-8.

Sulindac sulfide inhibits colon cancer cell growth and downregulates specificity 
protein transcription factors.

Li X(1), Pathi SS(2), Safe S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology & Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX, 77843-4466, USA. (2)Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation,
825 NE 13th St., Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA. (3)Department of Veterinary
Physiology & Pharmacology, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, 77843-4466,
USA. ssafe@cvm.tamu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors play pivotal roles in 
maintaining the phenotypes of many cancers. We hypothesized that the
antineoplastic effects of sulindac and its metabolites were due, in part, to
targeting downregulation of Sp transcription factors.
METHODS: The functional effects of sulindac, sulindac sulfone and sulindac
sulfide on colon cancer cell proliferation were determined by cell counting.
Effects of these compounds on expression of Sp1, Sp3, Sp4 and pro-oncogenic
Sp-regulated genes were determined by western blot analysis of whole cell lysates
and in transient transfection assays using GC-rich constructs.
RESULTS: Sulindac and its metabolites inhibited RKO and SW480 colon cancer cell
growth and the order of growth inhibitory potency was sulindac sulfide>>sulindac 
sulfone>sulindac. Treatment of SW480 and RKO cells with sulindac sulfide
downregulated expression of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 proteins. Sulindac sulfide also
decreased expression of several Sp-regulated genes that are critical for cancer
cell survival, proliferation and angiogenesis and these include survivin, bcl-2, 
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), cyclin D1, p65 subunit of NF<U+03BA>B and
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Sulindac sulfide also induced reactive
oxygen species (ROS) and decreased the level of microRNA-27a in colon cancer
cells, which resulted in the upregulation of the Sp-repressor ZBTB10 and this
resulted in downregulation of Sp proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that the cancer chemotherapeutic effects of
sulindac in colon cancer cells are due, in part, to its metabolite sulindac
sulfide which downregulates Sp transcription factors and Sp-regulated
pro-oncogenic gene products.

PMCID: PMC4682223
PMID: 26673922  [PubMed - in process]


54. Beilstein J Org Chem. 2015 Nov 9;11:2132-44. doi: 10.3762/bjoc.11.230.
eCollection 2015.

C-H bond halogenation catalyzed or mediated by copper: an overview.

Hao W(1), Liu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of the Functional Small Organic Molecules, Ministry of
Education, and College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Jiangxi Normal
University, Nanchang 330022, P.R. China.

Carbon-halogen (C-X) bonds are amongst the most fundamental groups in organic
synthesis, they are frequently and widely employed in the synthesis of numerous
organic products. The generation of a C-X bond, therefore, constitutes an issue
of universal interest. Herein, the research advances on the copper-catalyzed and 
mediated C-X (X = F, Cl, Br, I) bond formation via direct C-H bond transformation
is reviewed.

PMCID: PMC4661017
PMID: 26664634  [PubMed]


55. Guang Pu Xue Yu Guang Pu Fen Xi. 2015 Jun;35(6):1534-8.

[Study on the Micro-FTIR Spectra of the Euhedral Faceted Polycrystalline Diamonds
(EFPCDs) from Western Yangtze Craton and Its Geological Significance].

[Article in Chinese]

Hu PY, Zeng LL, Yang ZJ, Fu HF, Liu SW, Shen WJ, Peng ZL.

The results of Micro-FTIR spectra analysis of the euhedral faceted
polycrystalline diamonds (EFPCDs) from the Western Yangtze Craton show that the
EFPCDs are mostly IaAB type, the concentration of nitrogen.varies greatly from
25. 70- 358.35 µg x g(-1). Different nitrogen content distributes in different
diamond grains or position in same sample. The C Center was not found in the
samples and the conversion from A center to B center is incomplete, in the
meanwhile, B% value concentrated in 40%. Thus, polycrystalline diamonds are not
formed in the stage of nucleation but gathered together after formation of the
individual diamond grains during the residence time in the mantle. And its
formation environment is. more complex than the euhedral faceted polycrystalline 
diamonds from Mengyin kimberlite, the Eastern of North China Craton. The diamonds
extremely possibly originated in the deep mantle from 160 to 180 km, reaching the
depth of the core of the Yangtze Craton, at the same time it is close to the
bottom of the lithosphere. The C-H bond of sp2 hybridization are conducive to the
formation of platelets in diamonds. Meanwhile, its concentrations are generally
higher than the C-H bond of sp3 hybridization in the samples.

PMID: 26601362  [PubMed]


56. Int J Pharm. 2015 Dec 30;496(2):741-50. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2015.11.007. Epub 
2015 Nov 12.

Molecular interaction between glimepiride and Soluplus(®)-PEG 4000 hybrid based
solid dispersions: Characterisation and anti-diabetic studies.

Reginald-Opara JN(1), Attama A(2), Ofokansi K(2), Umeyor C(3), Kenechukwu F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Drug Delivery and Nanomedicines Research Unit, Department of Pharmaceutics,
Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Nigeria, Nsukka 410001, Enugu
State, Nigeria. Electronic address: joy.achuam@unn.edu.ng. (2)Drug Delivery and
Nanomedicines Research Unit, Department of Pharmaceutics, Faculty of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Nigeria, Nsukka 410001, Enugu State,
Nigeria. (3)Department of Pharmaceutics and Pharmaceutical Technology, Nnamdi
Azikwe University, Awka, Anambra State, Nigeria.

The objective of this study was to evaluate a novel blend of polyvinyl
caprolactam-polyvinyl acetate-polyethylene glycol 6000 grafted copolymer
(Soluplus(®)) and polyethylene glycol (PEG) 4000 for solubility enhancement,
physicochemical stability and anti-diabetic efficacy of the produced solid
dispersions containing glimepiride, a biopharmaceutics classification system
(BCS) class II sulphonylurea. Different batches of glimepiride solid dispersions 
(SD) were prepared by the solvent evaporation method using the individual
polymers and blends of the polymers at different ratios. The Soluplus(®)-PEG 4000
(sol-PEG) hybrid polymer based glimepiride solid dispersions were characterized
by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), fourier transform infrared (FTIR)
spectroscopy, micromeritics and dissolution studies. In vivo anti-diabetic
activity was determined by measuring the changes in blood glucose concentrations 
in albino rats. The solid dispersions showed good flow properties and excellent
practical yield. Drug content and release from the different formulations
increased when Soluplus(®) was used as the main matrix polymer. The kinetics of
drug release from all the solid dispersions followed first order. Solid state
characterization confirmed the formation of amorphous glimepiride solid
dispersions in the Sol-PEG hybrid polymer and no strong drug-polymer interaction 
was observed. The blood glucose reduction in albino rats by the Sol-PEG-Glim SDs 
was significantly (p<0.05) higher and more sustained when compared with the plain
drug sample and commercially available product. Optimized SD batches (SP1 and
SP3) showed a reduction in blood glucose level from 100% to 9.81% and 8.97%,
respectively, at Tmax of 3h. The Sol-PEG-Glim SD was found to be stable over a
period of 6 months (at 40°C, 70% RH) with no significant changes in the drug
content. Thus, the Sol-PEG polymeric hybrids represent a promising tool for
enhanced delivery of glimepiride.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26581773  [PubMed - in process]


57. Stand Genomic Sci. 2015 Nov 11;10:99. doi: 10.1186/s40793-015-0092-z. eCollection
2015.

Working draft genome sequence of the mesophilic acetate oxidizing bacterium
Syntrophaceticus schinkii strain Sp3.

Manzoor S(1), Müller B(2), Niazi A(3), Schnürer A(2), Bongcam-Rudloff E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Breeding and Genetics Science, Swedish University of
Agricultural Science, SLU-Global Bioinformatics Centre, Uppsala, SE 750 07 Sweden
; University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan. (2)Department of Microbiology,
Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, BioCenter, Uppsala, SE 750 07
Sweden. (3)Department of Animal Breeding and Genetics Science, Swedish University
of Agricultural Science, SLU-Global Bioinformatics Centre, Uppsala, SE 750 07
Sweden.

Syntrophaceticus schinkii strain Sp3 is a mesophilic syntrophic acetate oxidizing
bacterium, belonging to the Clostridia class within the phylum Firmicutes,
originally isolated from a mesophilic methanogenic digester. It has been shown to
oxidize acetate in co-cultivation with hydrogenotrophic methanogens forming
methane. The draft genome shows a total size of 3,196,921 bp, encoding 3,688 open
reading frames, which includes 3,445 predicted protein-encoding genes and 55 RNA 
genes. Here, we are presenting assembly and annotation features as well as basic 
genomic properties of the type strain Sp3.

PMCID: PMC4642661
PMID: 26566424  [PubMed]


58. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2016 Jan 15;310(2):G64-9. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00367.2015. Epub 2015 Nov 12.

Intestinal NHE8 is highly expressed in goblet cells and its expression is subject
to TNF-a regulation.

Xu H(1), Li Q(1), Zhao Y(1), Li J(1), Ghishan FK(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Arizona Health Sciences Center, Tucson, Arizona. (2)University
of Arizona Health Sciences Center, Tucson, Arizona fghishan@peds.arizona.edu.

While the intestine plays an important role in digestion and absorption, the
mucus lining the epithelium represents a pivotal function in mucosal protection. 
Goblet cells are scattered in both the crypts and among enterocytes, and they
secrete an important component of mucus, mucin. We have reported that
sodium/hydrogen exchanger (NHE) 8 is a novel player in mucosal protection, since 
loss of NHE8 function resulted in reduced mucin production and increased
bacterial adhesion. While NHE8 has been shown to be expressed in enterocytes and 
its expression is reduced during intestinal inflammation, nothing is known about 
the role of NHE8 in goblet cells. This current study is designed to define the
expression of NHE8 and the role of TNF-a in the regulation of NHE8 in goblet
cells. Using HT29-MTX cells as an in vitro model, we detected abundant NHE8 mRNA 
in goblet cells. Immunohistochemical staining localized NHE8 protein on the
plasma membrane and in the intracellular compartments in goblet cells.
Furthermore, NHE8 expression in goblet cells is regulated by the proinflammatory 
cytokine TNF-a. The expression of NHE8 in HT29-MTX cells was significantly
reduced at both mRNA and protein levels in the presence of TNF-a. This inhibition
of NHE8 mRNA expression could be blocked by the transcriptional inhibitor
actinomycin D. Promoter reporter assay showed that NHE8 promoter activity was
indeed reduced by TNF-a. Mechanistically, TNF-a reduced Sp3 protein binding to
the human NHE8 basal promoter region. Therefore, NHE8 is expressed in goblet
cells, and the inflammatory cytokine TNF-a downregulates NHE8 expression by a
transcriptional mechanism.

Copyright © 2016 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4719064 [Available on 2017-01-15]
PMID: 26564720  [PubMed - in process]


59. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Nov 24;112(47):E6562-70. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1518894112. Epub 2015 Nov 9.

Sigma-1 receptor mediates cocaine-induced transcriptional regulation by
recruiting chromatin-remodeling factors at the nuclear envelope.

Tsai SY(1), Chuang JY(2), Tsai MS(1), Wang XF(3), Xi ZX(3), Hung JJ(4), Chang
WC(5), Bonci A(6), Su TP(7).

Author information: 
(1)Cellular Pathobiology Section, Integrative Neuroscience Research Branch,
National Institute on Drug Abuse, National Institutes of Health, Department of
Health and Human Services, Baltimore, MD 21224; (2)Cellular Pathobiology Section,
Integrative Neuroscience Research Branch, National Institute on Drug Abuse,
National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services,
Baltimore, MD 21224; The Ph.D. Program for Neural Regenerative Medicine, Taipei
Medical University, Taipei 11031, Taiwan; (3)Molecular Targets and Medication
Discovery Branch, National Institute on Drug Abuse, National Institutes of
Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Baltimore, MD 21224;
(4)Institute of Bioinformatics and Biosignal Transduction, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan 70101, Taiwan; (5)Graduate Institute of Medical Science,
Taipei Medical University, Taipei 11031, Taiwan; (6)Cellular Neurobiology Branch,
Intramural Research Program, National Institute on Drug Abuse, National
Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Baltimore, MD
21224; Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, CA
94608; Solomon H. Snyder Neuroscience Institute, Johns Hopkins University School 
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205. (7)Cellular Pathobiology Section, Integrative
Neuroscience Research Branch, National Institute on Drug Abuse, National
Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Baltimore, MD
21224; TSU@intra.nida.nih.gov.

The sigma-1 receptor (Sig-1R) chaperone at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) plays
important roles in cellular regulation. Here we found a new function of Sig-1R,
in that it translocates from the ER to the nuclear envelope (NE) to recruit
chromatin-remodeling molecules and regulate the gene transcription thereof.
Sig-1Rs mainly reside at the ER-mitochondrion interface. However, on stimulation 
by agonists such as cocaine, Sig-1Rs translocate from ER to the NE, where Sig-1Rs
bind NE protein emerin and recruit chromatin-remodeling molecules, including
lamin A/C, barrier-to-autointegration factor (BAF), and histone deacetylase
(HDAC), to form a complex with the gene repressor specific protein 3 (Sp3).
Knockdown of Sig-1Rs attenuates the complex formation. Cocaine was found to
suppress the gene expression of monoamine oxidase B (MAOB) in the brain of
wild-type but not Sig-1R knockout mouse. A single dose of cocaine (20 mg/kg) in
rats suppresses the level of MAOB at nuclear accumbens without affecting the
level of dopamine transporter. Daily injections of cocaine in rats caused
behavioral sensitization. Withdrawal from cocaine in cocaine-sensitized rats
induced an apparent time-dependent rebound of the MAOB protein level to about
200% over control on day 14 after withdrawal. Treatment of cocaine-withdrawn rats
with the MAOB inhibitor deprenyl completely alleviated the behavioral
sensitization to cocaine. Our results demonstrate a role of Sig-1R in
transcriptional regulation and suggest cocaine may work through this newly
discovered genomic action to achieve its addictive action. Results also suggest
the MAOB inhibitor deprenyl as a therapeutic agent to block certain actions of
cocaine during withdrawal.

PMCID: PMC4664336
PMID: 26554014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Top Curr Chem. 2015 Nov 7. [Epub ahead of print]

Aminations with Hypervalent Iodine.

Muñiz K(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemical Research of Catalonia (ICIQ), 16 Avgda. Països Catalans,
43007, Tarragona, Spain. kmuniz@iciq.es. (2)Catalan Institution for Research and 
Advanced Studies (ICREA), Pg. Lluís Companys 23, 08010, Barcelona, Spain.
kmuniz@iciq.es.

Recent progress in the area of hypervalent iodine-mediated and catalyzed
amination reaction of hydrocarbons is reviewed. These reactions comprise
processes under both intra and intermolecular control and include the
functionalization of aromatic C-H bonds as well as conversion of sp-, sp(2)-, and
sp(3)-hybridized carbon atoms. These developments demonstrate that hypervalent
iodine(III) methodology has reached a high level in amination chemistry. The
individual reactions are discussed with a focus on mechanistic details and
emphasis is made to the underlying hypervalent iodine reagents, for which
structural information is available.

PMID: 26546327  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


61. Springerplus. 2015 Oct 16;4:620. doi: 10.1186/s40064-015-1412-x. eCollection
2015.

Susceptibility variation to different entomopathogenic nematodes in Strategus
aloeus L (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae).

Gómez A(1), Sáenz-Aponte A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Biological Control, Plant Biology and Productive System Group, 
Department of Biology, School of Sciences, Pontificia Universidad Javeriana,
Bogotá, Colombia.

Strategus aloeus L (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae), known as "Little bull" or oil palm
"chiza" is a limiting pest in palm plantation in Cesar Colombia. Its management
is based on pesticide use or old palm removal in renewal lots. Therefore, other
alternatives are being sought out. Entomopathogenic nematodes isolated from the
Colombian Andean region were evaluated. Under laboratory conditions S. aloeus
third instar larvae exposure to 160 infective juveniles (IJs) per/cm(2)
Steinernema sp3 JCL027, S. feltiae SCT125, S. websteri JCL006, S. colombiense
SNI0198, Heterorhabditis bacteriophora HNI0100, H. bacteriophora HASA702, H.
indica SL0708 (n = 20) was evaluated under a completely randomized design. The
experiment was repeated three times on different dates. Significant differences
were observed (F = 11.127, df = 7. 24, p = 0.0054), registering mortality between
3 and 14 days. Steinernema sp3 JCL027 was the strain producing the highest
mortality rate (19.3 ± 8 %), followed by H. bacteriophora HNI0100 (5.2 ± 9 %).
Thus, we evaluated Steinernema sp3 JCL0270 using a randomized design at 0, 160,
290, 420, 550, 680, 810 IJs/cm(2) (n = 12). The experiment was repeated three
times on different dates. Significant differences were found among treatments
(44 ± 5 %, F = 14.676; df = 6. 21, p = 0.001), with 680 IJs/cm(2) producing the
highest mortality followed by 810 IJs/cm(2) (22 ± 5 %). In conclusion, this
alternative must be further explored in search of pesticide use and cost
reduction, in addition to young palm loss in a plantation.

PMCID: PMC4628039
PMID: 26543755  [PubMed]


62. EXCLI J. 2015 Mar 20;14:452-64. doi: 10.17179/excli2015-140. eCollection 2015.

Prediction of aromatase inhibitory activity using the efficient linear method
(ELM).

Shoombuatong W(1), Prachayasittikul V(2), Prachayasittikul V(3), Nantasenamat
C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Data Mining and Biomedical Informatics, Faculty of Medical
Technology, Mahidol University, Bangkok 10700, Thailand. (2)Center of Data Mining
and Biomedical Informatics, Faculty of Medical Technology, Mahidol University,
Bangkok 10700, Thailand ; Department of Clinical Microbiology and Applied
Technology, Faculty of Medical Technology, Mahidol University, Bangkok 10700,
Thailand. (3)Department of Clinical Microbiology and Applied Technology, Faculty 
of Medical Technology, Mahidol University, Bangkok 10700, Thailand.

Aromatase inhibition is an effective treatment strategy for breast cancer.
Currently, several in silico methods have been developed for the prediction of
aromatase inhibitors (AIs) using artificial neural network (ANN) or support
vector machine (SVM). In spite of this, there are ample opportunities for further
improvements by developing a simple and interpretable quantitative
structure-activity relationship (QSAR) method. Herein, an efficient linear method
(ELM) is proposed for constructing a highly predictive QSAR model containing a
spontaneous feature importance estimator. Briefly, ELM is a linear-based model
with optimal parameters derived from genetic algorithm. Results showed that the
simple ELM method displayed robust performance with 10-fold cross-validation MCC 
values of 0.64 and 0.56 for steroidal and non-steroidal AIs, respectively.
Comparative analyses with other machine learning methods (i.e. ANN, SVM and
decision tree) were also performed. A thorough analysis of informative molecular 
descriptors for both steroidal and non-steroidal AIs provided insights into the
mechanism of action of compounds. Our findings suggest that the shape and
polarizability of compounds may govern the inhibitory activity of both steroidal 
and non-steroidal types whereas the terminal primary C(sp3) functional group and 
electronegativity may be required for non-steroidal AIs. The R code of the ELM
method is available at http://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.1274030.

PMCID: PMC4614109
PMID: 26535037  [PubMed]


63. Synlett. 2015 Oct;26(16):2293-2295. Epub 2015 Aug 21.

A Scalable Protocol for the Regioselective Alkylation of
2-Methylcyclohexane-1,3-dione with Unactivated sp(3) Electrophiles.

Sharpe RJ(1), Portillo M(1), Vélez RA(1), Johnson JS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, NC 27599-3290, USA.

A method for the C-selective alkylation of 2-methylcyclohexane-1,3-dione with
unactivated sp(3) electrophiles is accomplished via alkylation and subsequent
deprotection of the derived ketodimethyl hydrazones. The present method provides 
a high-yielding entry to dialkyl cycloalkanones that cannot be accessed via
direct alkylation of 2-methylcyclohexane-1,3-dione. The title reaction may be
useful in the scalable preparation of terpene and steroidal building blocks in
the arena of natural product synthesis.

PMCID: PMC4625839 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26525231  [PubMed]


64. Cell Death Dis. 2015 Oct 29;6:e1947. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2015.268.

P53-dependent upregulation of neutral sphingomyelinase-2: role in
doxorubicin-induced growth arrest.

Shamseddine AA(1), Clarke CJ(1), Carroll B(1), Airola MV(1), Mohammed S(1), Rella
A(2), Obeid LM(1,)(3), Hannun YA(1,)(2,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Stony Brook University, Health Science Center, Stony
Brook, NY 11794-8430, USA. (2)Stony Brook University Cancer Center, Stony Brook, 
NY 11794-8430, USA. (3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology at Stony Brook
University, Stony Brook, NY 11794-8430, USA. (4)The Northport Veterans Affairs
Hospital, Northport, NY 11768, USA.

Neutral sphingomyelinase-2 (nSMase2) is a ceramide-generating enzyme that has
been implicated in growth arrest, apoptosis and exosome secretion. Although
previous studies have reported transcriptional upregulation of nSMase2 in
response to daunorubicin, through Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors, the role of 
the DNA damage pathway in regulating nSMase2 remains unclear. In this study, we
show that doxorubicin induces a dose-dependent induction of nSMase2 mRNA and
protein with concomitant increases in nSMase activity and ceramide levels.
Upregulation of nSMase2 was dependent on ATR, Chk1 and p53, thus placing it
downstream of the DNA damage pathway. Moreover, overexpression of p53 was
sufficient to transcriptionally induce nSMase2, without the need for DNA damage. 
DNA-binding mutants as well as acetylation mutants of p53 were unable to induce
nSMase2, suggesting a role of nSMase2 in growth arrest. Moreover, knockdown of
nSMase2 prevented doxorubicin-induced growth arrest. Finally, p53-induced nSMase2
upregulation appears to occur via a novel transcription start site upstream of
exon 3. These results identify nSMase2 as a novel p53 target gene, regulated by
the DNA damage pathway to induce cell growth arrest.

PMCID: PMC4632297
PMID: 26512957  [PubMed - in process]


65. J Phys Chem Lett. 2015 Nov 5;6(21):4431-6. doi: 10.1021/acs.jpclett.5b02175. Epub
2015 Oct 27.

Quantification of Conventional and Nonconventional Charge-Assisted Hydrogen Bonds
in the Condensed and Gas Phases.

Katsyuba SA(1), Vener MV(2), Zvereva EE(1,)(3), Fei Z(4), Scopelliti R(4),
Brandenburg JG(5), Siankevich S(4), Dyson PJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)A. E. Arbuzov Institute of Organic and Physical Chemistry, Kazan Scientific
Centre of the Russian Academy of Sciences , Arbuzov Street 8, 420088 Kazan,
Russia. (2)Department of Quantum Chemistry, Mendeleev University of Chemical
Technology , Miusskaya Square 9, 125047 Moscow, Russia. (3)Institut de
Nanosciences et Cryogénie, SP2M/L_sim, CEA , 17 Rue des Martyrs, 38054 Grenoble, 
France. (4)Institut des Sciences et Ingénierie Chimiques, Ecole Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) EPFL - BCH , CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.
(5)Mulliken Center for Theoretical Chemistry, Institut für Physikalische und
Theoretische Chemie der Universität Bonn , Beringstrasse 4, 53115 Bonn, Germany.

Charge-assisted hydrogen bonds (CAHBs) play critical roles in many systems from
biology through to materials. In none of these areas has the role and function of
CAHBs been explored satisfactorily because of the lack of data on the energy of
CAHBs in the condensed phases. We have, for the first time, quantified three
types of CAHBs in both the condensed and gas phases for
1-(2'-hydroxylethyl)-3-methylimidazolium acetate ([C2OHmim][OAc]). The energy of 
conventional OH···[OAc](-) CAHBs is ~10 kcal·mol(-1), whereas nonconventional
C(sp2)H···[OAc](-) and C(sp3)H···[OAc](-) CAHBs are weaker by ~5-7 kcal·mol(-1). 
In the gas phase, the strength of the nonconventional CAHBs is doubled, whereas
the conventional CAHBs are strengthened by <20%. The influence of cooperativity
effects on the ability of the [OAc](-) anion to deprotonate the imidazolium
cation is evaluated. The ability to quantify CAHBs in the condensed phase on the 
basis of easier accessible gas-phase estimates is highlighted.

PMID: 26496074  [PubMed - in process]


66. J Biol Chem. 2015 Dec 11;290(50):30193-203. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.662221. Epub
2015 Oct 20.

Human Telomerase Reverse Transcriptase (hTERT) Transcription Requires Sp1/Sp3
Binding to the Promoter and a Permissive Chromatin Environment.

Cheng D(1), Zhao Y(2), Wang S(1), Jia W(3), Kang J(3), Zhu J(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Washington State University
College of Pharmacy, Spokane, Washington 99210. (2)the Department of Cellular and
Molecular Physiology, Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, Hershey,
Pennsylvania 17033, and. (3)the School of Life Sciences and Technology, Tongji
University, Shanghai 200092, China. (4)From the Department of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Washington State University College of Pharmacy, Spokane, Washington
99210, the Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Pennsylvania State
University College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania 17033, and
jiyue.zhu@wsu.edu.

The transcription of human telomerase gene hTERT is regulated by transcription
factors (TFs), including Sp1 family proteins, and its chromatin environment. To
understand its regulation in a relevant chromatin context, we employed bacterial 
artificial chromosome reporters containing 160 kb of human genomic sequence
containing the hTERT gene. Upon chromosomal integration, the bacterial artificial
chromosomes recapitulated endogenous hTERT expression, contrary to transient
reporters. Sp1/Sp3 expression did not correlate with hTERT promoter activity, and
these TFs bound to the hTERT promoters in both telomerase-positive and
telomerase-negative cells. Mutation of the proximal GC-box resulted in a dramatic
decrease of hTERT promoter activity, and mutations of all five GC-boxes
eliminated its transcriptional activity. Neither mutations of GC-boxes nor
knockdown of endogenous Sp1 impacted promoter binding by other TFs, including
E-box-binding proteins, and histone acetylation and trimethylation of histone
H3K9 at the hTERT promoter in telomerase-positive and -negative cells. The result
indicated that promoter binding by Sp1/Sp3 was essential, but not a limiting
step, for hTERT transcription. hTERT transcription required a permissive
chromatin environment. Importantly, our data also revealed different functions of
GC-boxes and E-boxes in hTERT regulation; although GC-boxes were essential for
promoter activity, factors bound to the E-boxes functioned to de-repress hTERT
promoter.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4706010 [Available on 2016-12-11]
PMID: 26487723  [PubMed - in process]


67. Plant Biol (Stuttg). 2015 Oct 14. doi: 10.1111/plb.12407. [Epub ahead of print]

Increased temperatures negatively affect Juniperus communis seeds: evidence from 
transplant experiments along a latitudinal gradient.

Gruwez R(1), De Frenne P(1), Vander Mijnsbrugge K(2,)(3), Vangansbeke P(1,)(4),
Verheyen K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Forest & Nature Lab, Ghent University, Melle-Gontrode, Belgium. (2)Research
Institute for Nature and Forest, Geraardsbergen, Belgium. (3)Agency for Nature
and Forest, Brussels, Belgium. (4)Flemish Institute for Technological Research
(VITO), Mol, Belgium.

With a distribution range that covers most of the Northern hemisphere, common
juniper (Juniperus communis) has one of the largest ranges of all vascular plant 
species. In several regions in Europe, however, populations are decreasing in
size and number due to failing recruitment. One of the main causes for this
failure is low seed viability. Observational evidence suggests that this is
partly induced by climate warming, but our mechanistic understanding of this
effect remains incomplete. Here, we experimentally assess the influence of
temperature on two key developmental phases during sexual reproduction, i.e.
gametogenesis and fertilisation (seed phase two, SP2) and embryo development
(seed phase three, SP3). Along a latitudinal gradient from southern France to
central Sweden, we installed a transplant experiment with shrubs originating from
Belgium, a region with unusually low juniper seed viability. Seeds of both seed
phases were sampled during three consecutive years, and seed viability assessed. 
Warming temperatures negatively affected the seed viability of both SP2 and SP3
seeds along the latitudinal gradient. Interestingly, the effect on embryo
development (SP3) only occurred in the third year, i.e. when the gametogenesis
and fertilisation also took place in warmer conditions. We found strong
indications that this negative influence mostly acts via disrupting growth of the
pollen tube, the development of the female gametophyte and fertilisation (SP2).
This, in turn, can lead to failing embryo development, for example, due to
nutritional problems. Our results confirm that climate warming can negatively
affect seed viability of juniper.

© 2015 German Botanical Society and The Royal Botanical Society of the
Netherlands.

PMID: 26465806  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


68. Curr Pharmacol Rep. 2015 Apr;1(2):73-78. Epub 2015 Jan 11.

MicroRNA-Specificity Protein (Sp) Transcription Factor Interactions and
Significance in Carcinogenesis.

Safe S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
4466 TAMU, College Station, TX 77843-4466 USA, Tel: 979-845-5989, ,
ssafe@cvm.tamu.edu.

Specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors (TFs) such as Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 are
overexpressed in tumors and Sp1 is a negative prognostic factor for multiple
tumor types. Sp TFs regulate expression of pro-oncogenic factors important for
cell proliferation, survival, angiogenesis, migration/invasion and inflammation
and the high expression of Sp TFs in tumors is primarily due to miRNAs. For
example, expression of tumor-suppressor-like miRNAs such as miR-200b/c, miR-335, 
miR-22, miR-149 and others that inactivate Sp1 expression is low in many tumor
types. Research in our laboratory has also demonstrated that high expression of
Sp TFs is also due to miRNA-dependent inhibition of the transcriptional
repressors ZBTB10 and ZBTB4 by miR-27a and miR-20a/miR-17p, respectively. Thus,
miRNAs play a critical role in maintaining high levels of Sp1, Sp3, Sp4 and
pro-oncogenic Sp-regulated genes in tumors and cancer cells, and there is ample
evidence that anticancer agents targeting the miRNASp TF axis can be highly
effective for cancer chemotherapy.

PMCID: PMC4596546
PMID: 26457240  [PubMed]


69. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Nov 13;467(2):341-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.09.155. Epub 2015 Oct 6.

O-GlcNAc modification of Sp3 and Sp4 transcription factors negatively regulates
their transcriptional activities.

Ha C(1), Lim K(2).

Author information: 
(1)ASAN Institute for Life Science, ASAN Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of
Korea. (2)Center for Vaccine Biology and Immunology, University of Rochester
Medical Center, NY 14642, USA. Electronic address: Kihong_Lim@urmc.rochester.edu.

The addition of O-linked N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) on serine or threonine
modifies a myriad of proteins and regulates their function, stability and
localization. O-GlcNAc modification is common among chromosome-associated
proteins, such as transcription factors, suggesting its extensive involvement in 
gene expression regulation. In this study, we demonstrate the O-GlcNAc status of 
the Sp family members of transcription factors and the functional impact on their
transcriptional activities. We highlight the presence of O-GlcNAc residues in Sp3
and Sp4, but not Sp2, as demonstrated by their enrichment in GlcNAc positive
protein fractions and by detection of O-GlcNAc residues on Sp3 and Sp4
co-expressed in Escherichia coli together with O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT) using
an O-GlcNAc-specific antibody. Deletion mutants of Sp3 and Sp4 indicate that the 
majority of O-GlcNAc sites reside in their N-terminal transactivation domain.
Overall, using reporter gene assays and co-immunoprecipitations, we demonstrate a
functional inhibitory role of O-GlcNAc modifications in Sp3 and Sp4 transcription
factors. Thereby, our study strengthens the current notion that O-GlcNAc
modification is an important regulator of protein interactome.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26431879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2015 Oct;56(11):6217-32. doi: 10.1167/iovs.15-16587.

Functional Impact of Collagens on the Activity Directed by the Promoter of the a5
Integrin Subunit Gene in Corneal Epithelial Cells.

Lake J(1), Zaniolo K(1), Gingras MÈ(2), Couture C(1), Salesse C(1), Guérin SL(1).

Author information: 
(1)CUO-Recherche Centre de Recherche FRQS du CHU de Québec, Québec, Québec,
Canada 2Médecine Régénératrice, Centre de Recherche FRQS du CHU de Québec,
Québec, Québec, Canada 3Centre de Recherche en Organogénèse Expérimentale de
l'Université Laval/LOEX, Québe. (2)CUO-Recherche Centre de Recherche FRQS du CHU 
de Québec, Québec, Québec, Canada.

PURPOSE: The early step of corneal wound healing is characterized by the massive 
production of fibronectin (FN), whose secretion is progressively replaced by
collagens from the basal membrane as wound healing proceeds. Here, we examined
whether expression of the gene encoding the a5 subunit from the FN-binding
integrin a5ß1 changes as corneal epithelial cells (CECs) are cultured in the
presence of collagen type I (CI) or type IV (CIV).
METHODS: Responsiveness of the a5 gene toward collagen was determined by
transfection of a5 promoter/chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) plasmids into
rabbit and human CECs cultured on BSA or collagens. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assays and Western blots were used to monitor the transcription factors
required for basal a5 gene transcription in the presence of collagens. Gene
profiling on microarrays was used to determine the impact of collagens on the
patterns of genes expressed by CECs.
RESULTS: All collagen types repressed the full-length a5/CAT promoter activity in
confluent CECs. A moderate increase was observed in subconfluent rabbit CECs
grown on CIV but not on CI. These collagen-dependent regulatory influences also
correlated with alterations in the transcription factors Sp1/Sp3, NFI, and AP-1
that ensure a5 gene basal transcription. Microarray analyses revealed that CI
more profoundly altered the pattern of genes expressed by human CECs than CIV.
CONCLUSIONS: Collagens considerably suppressed a5 gene expression in CECs,
suggesting that during wound healing, they may interfere with the influence FN
exerts on CECs by altering their adhesive and migratory properties through a
mechanism involving a reduction in a5 gene expression.

PMID: 26431475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Guang Pu Xue Yu Guang Pu Fen Xi. 2015 May;35(5):1258-61.

[Investigation of the Interaction between 1,3-Dimethylurea and Solvent by Raman
Methods].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhu YY, Zhou M.

Urea family plays significant role in the bio-science area. Because of the unique
frame, they can form Hydrogen bond with water as well as other substance.
Hydrogen bonds are normal weak interactions in the system of bio-molecules. A
Raman spectrum is the most powerful method to obscure the Hydrogen bond
interaction between molecules. Initially, we measure the Raman spectra of DMU
crystal, and then use density function theory with a B3LYP/6-311G* * basis set to
optimize the geometry structure and calculate the vibrational frequency of gas
phase DMU, which assigns the Raman pecks. Then, measure the solvent. When
dissolving DMU in water, the interaction between DMU-DMU will replaced by the
interaction between water-DMU. The orbital hybridization of nitrogen atoms
changes from the solid-state the sp' orbital hybridization to sp3. So, the frame 
of this molecule goes from in-planet to out of plant during this process.

PMID: 26415439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Int Adv Otol. 2015 Aug;11(2):114-7. doi: 10.5152/iao.2015.426.

Binaural Interaction Component in Speech Evoked Auditory Brainstem Responses.

Uppunda AK(1), Bhat J, D'costa PE, Raj M, Kumar K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Audiology, All India Institute of Speech and Hearing, Mysore,
Karnataka, India. kaushlendra.kumar@manipal.edu.

OBJECTIVE: This article aims to describe the characteristics of the binaural
interaction component (BIC) of speech-evoked auditory brainstem response (ABR).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: All 15 subjects had normal peripheral hearing sensitivity.
ABRs were elicited by speech stimulus /da/.
RESULTS: The first BIC (BIC-SP1) in the speech-evoked ABR occurred at around 6 ms
in the region of peak V. The second BIC (BIC-SP2) was present around 8 ms in the 
latency region of peak A. The third and fourth BICs of speech-evoked ABR (BIC-SP3
& BIC-SP4) were observed at around 36 ms and 46 ms, respectively, in the latency 
regions of peaks E and F, respectively. BIC-SP1 and BIC-SP2 were present in all
subjects tested (100%), whereas BIC-SP3 and BIC-SP4 were present in 11 (73%).
CONCLUSION: Because ABRs are not affected by sleep and mature early, this tool
can be evaluated in identifying binaural interaction in younger and
difficult-to-test populations.

PMID: 26380999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Chemistry. 2015 Oct 26;21(44):15491-5. doi: 10.1002/chem.201502375. Epub 2015 Sep
11.

Pd(II) -Catalyzed Intermolecular Amination of Unactivated C(sp(3) )-H Bonds.

Gou Q(1), Liu G(1), Liu ZN(1), Qin J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemistry for Natural Resource, Ministry of
Education, School of Chemical Science and Technology, Yunnan University, Kunming,
Yunnan, 650091 (P.R. China). (2)Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemistry for Natural
Resource, Ministry of Education, School of Chemical Science and Technology,
Yunnan University, Kunming, Yunnan, 650091 (P.R. China). qinjun@ynu.edu.cn.

Pd(II) -catalyzed intermolecular amination of unactivated C(sp(3) )-H bonds has
been successfully developed for the first time. This method provides a new way to
achieve the challenging intermolecular amination of unactivated C(sp(3) )-H
bonds, producing a variety of unnatural ß(2) -amino carboxylic acid analogues.
This C(sp(3) )-H amination protocol is demonstrated with a broad substrate scope,
good functional-group tolerance, and chemoselectivity. It is operated without use
of phosphine ligand or external oxidant.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26359788  [PubMed]


74. J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2015 Feb;15(2):1037-44.

Preparation and Characterization of Ion-Irradiated Nanodiamonds as Photoacoustic 
Contrast Agents.

Fang CY, Chang CC, Mou CY, Chang HC.

Highly radiation-damaged or irradiated nanodiamonds (INDs) are a new type of
nanomaterial developed recently as a potential photoacoustic (PA) contrast agent 
for deep-tissue imaging. This work characterized in detail the photophysical
properties of these materials prepared by ion irradiation of natural diamond
powders using various spectroscopic methods. For 40-nm NDs irradiated with 40-keV
He+ at a dose of 3 x 10(15) ions/cm2, an average molar extinction coefficient of 
4.2 M-1 cm-1 per carbon atom was measured at 1064 nm. Compared with gold nanorods
of similar dimensions (10 nm x 67 nm), the INDs have a substantially smaller (by 
> 4 orders of magnitude) molar extinction coefficient per particle. However, the 
deficit is readily compensated by the much higher thermal stability, stronger
hydrophilic interaction with water, and a lower nanobubble formation threshold
(~30 mJ/cm2) of the sp3-carbon-based nanomaterial. No sign of photodamage was
detected after high-energy (>100 mJ/cm2) illumination of the INDs for hours. Cell
viability assays at the IND concentration of up to 100 µg/mL showed that the
nanomaterial is non-cytotoxic and potentially useful for long-term PA bioimaging 
applications.

PMID: 26353610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Oncol Rep. 2015 Nov;34(5):2403-12. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4259. Epub 2015 Sep 8.

Sp1 cooperates with Sp3 to upregulate MALAT1 expression in human hepatocellular
carcinoma.

Huang Z(1), Huang L(1), Shen S(1), Li J(1), Lu H(1), Mo W(1), Dang Y(1), Luo
D(1), Chen G(1), Feng Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical
University, Nanning, Guangxi 530021, P.R. China.

Long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) metastasis-associated lung adenocarcinoma transcript
1 (MALAT1), also known as nuclear-enriched transcript 2 (NEAT2), is highly
conserved among mammals and highly expressed in the nucleus. It was first
identified in lung cancer as a prognostic marker for metastasis but is also
associated with several other solid tumors. In hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC),
MALAT1 is a novel biomarker for predicting tumor recurrence after liver
transplantation. The mechanism of overexpression in tumor progression remains
unclear. In the present study, we investigated the role of specificity protein
1/3 (Sp1/3) in regulation of MALAT1 transcription in HCC cells. The results
showed a high expression of Sp1, Sp3 and MALAT1 in HCC vs. paired non-tumor liver
tissues, which was associated with the AFP level (Sp1, r=7.44, P=0.0064; MALAT1, 
r=12.37, P=0.0004). Co-silencing of Sp1 and Sp3 synergistically repressed MALAT1 
expression. Sp1 binding inhibitor, mithramycin A (MIT), also inhibited MALAT1
expression in HCC cells. In conclusion, the upstream of MALAT1 contains five
Sp1/3 binding sites, which may be responsible for MALAT1 transcription.
Inhibitors, such as MIT, provide a potential therapeutic strategy for HCC
patients with MALAT1 overexpression.

PMID: 26352013  [PubMed - in process]


76. Sci Rep. 2015 Sep 9;5:13655. doi: 10.1038/srep13655.

Ice Regelation: Hydrogen-bond extraordinary recoverability and water
quasisolid-phase-boundary dispersivity.

Zhang X(1,)(2), Huang Y(3), Sun P(1), Liu X(1), Ma Z(3), Zhou Y(3), Zhou J(4),
Zheng W(5), Sun CQ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Coordination Bond Metrology and Engineering, College of Materials
Science and Engineering, China Jiliang University, Hangzhou 310018, China.
(2)Institute of Nanosurface Science and Engineering, Shenzhen University,
Shenzhen 518060, China. (3)Key Laboratory of Low-dimensional Materials and
Application Technology (MOE) and School of Materials Science and Engineering,
Xiangtan University, Xiangtan, 411105, China. (4)State Key Laboratory of New
Ceramics and Fine Processing, Department of Materials Science and Engineering,
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. (5)School of Materials Science, Jilin
University, Changchun 130012, China. (6)NOVITAS, School of Electrical and
Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798.

Regelation, i.e., ice melts under compression and freezes again when the pressure
is relieved, remains puzzling since its discovery in 1850's by Faraday. Here we
show that hydrogen bond (O:H-O) cooperativity and its extraordinary
recoverability resolve this anomaly. The H-O bond and the O:H nonbond possesses
each a specific heat <U+03B7>x(T/TDx) whose Debye temperature TDx is proportional to its
characteristic phonon frequency <U+03C9>x according to Einstein's relationship. A
superposition of the <U+03B7>x(T/TDx) curves for the H-O bond (x=H, <U+03C9>H~3200<U+2009>cm(-1)) and 
the O:H nonbond (x=L, <U+03C9>L~200<U+2009>cm(-1), TDL=198<U+2009>K) yields two intersecting
temperatures that define the liquid/quasisolid/solid phase boundaries.
Compression shortens the O:H nonbond and stiffens its phonon but does the
opposite to the H-O bond through O-O Coulomb repulsion, which closes up the
intersection temperatures and hence depress the melting temperature of quasisolid
ice. Reproduction of the Tm(P) profile clarifies that the H-O bond energy EH
determines the Tm with derivative of EH=3.97<U+2009>eV for bulk water and ice. Oxygen
atom always finds bonding partners to retain its sp3-orbital hybridization once
the O:H breaks, which ensures O:H-O bond recoverability to its original state
once the pressure is relieved.

PMCID: PMC4563362
PMID: 26351109  [PubMed]


77. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2015 Oct 26;54(44):13045-8. doi: 10.1002/anie.201506273. 
Epub 2015 Sep 9.

Aerobic Asymmetric Dehydrogenative Cross-Coupling between Two C(sp3)-H Groups
Catalyzed by a Chiral-at-Metal Rhodium Complex.

Tan Y(1), Yuan W(1), Gong L(2), Meggers E(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Chemical Biology of Fujian Province and Department of
Chemical Biology, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen
University, Xiamen 361005 (P.R. China). (2)Key Laboratory for Chemical Biology of
Fujian Province and Department of Chemical Biology, College of Chemistry and
Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005 (P.R. China).
gongl@xmu.edu.cn. (3)Key Laboratory for Chemical Biology of Fujian Province and
Department of Chemical Biology, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering,
Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005 (P.R. China). meggers@xmu.edu.cn,
meggers@chemie.uni-marburg.de. (4)Fachbereich Chemie, Philipps-Universität
Marburg, Hans-Meerwein-Straße 4, 35043 Marburg (Germany). meggers@xmu.edu.cn,
meggers@chemie.uni-marburg.de.

A sustainable C-C bond formation is merged with the catalytic asymmetric
generation of one or two stereocenters. The introduced catalytic asymmetric
cross-coupling of two C(sp3)-H groups with molecular oxygen as the oxidant
profits from the oxidative robustness of a chiral-at-metal rhodium(III) catalyst 
and exploits an autoxidation mechanism or visible-light photosensitized
oxidation. In the latter case, the catalyst serves a dual function, namely as a
chiral Lewis acid for catalyzing enantioselective enolate chemistry and at the
same time as a visible-light-driven photoredox catalyst.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26351096  [PubMed - in process]


78. Theriogenology. 2015 Dec;84(9):1536-41. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2015.07.038. Epub 2015 Aug 4.

Sperm head phenotype and male fertility in ram semen.

Maroto-Morales A(1), Ramón M(2), García-Álvarez O(1), Montoro V(1), Soler AJ(1), 
Fernández-Santos MR(1), Roldan ER(3), Pérez-Guzmán MD(2), Garde JJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)SaBio IREC (UCLM-CSIC-JCCM), Campus Universitario, Albacete, Spain.
(2)Regional Center of Animal Selection and Reproduction (CERSYRA) JCCM,
Valdepeñas, Spain. (3)Reproductive Ecology and Biology Group, Museo Nacional de
Ciencias Naturales (CSIC), Madrid, Spain. (4)SaBio IREC (UCLM-CSIC-JCCM), Campus 
Universitario, Albacete, Spain. Electronic address: Julian.garde@uclm.es.

Although there is ample evidence for the effects of sperm head shape on sperm
function, its impact on fertility has not been explored in detail at the
intraspecific level in mammals. Here, we assess the relationship between sperm
head shape and male fertility in a large-scale study in Manchega sheep (Ovis
aries), which have not undergone any selection for fertility. Semen was collected
from 83 mature rams, and before insemination, head shapes were measured for five 
parameters: area, perimeter, length, width, and p2a (perimeter(2)/2×p×area) using
a computer-assisted sperm morphometric analysis. In addition, a cluster analysis 
using sperm head length and p2a factor was performed to determine sperm
subpopulations (SPs) structure. Our results show the existence of four sperm SPs,
which present different sperm head phenotype: SP1 (large and round), SP2 (short
and elongated), SP3 (shortest and round), and SP4 (large and the most elongated).
No relationships were found between males' fertility rates and average values of 
sperm head dimensions. However, differences in fertility rates between rams were 
strongly associated to the proportion of spermatozoa in an ejaculate SP with
short and elongated heads (P < 0.001). These findings show how the heterogeneity 
in sperm head shape of the ejaculate has an effect on reproductive success, and
highlight the important role of modulation of the ejaculate at the intraspecific 
level.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26318229  [PubMed - in process]


79. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 22;6(28):26359-72. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4560.

Specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors and metformin regulate expression 
of the long non-coding RNA HULC.

Gandhy SU(1), Imanirad P(2), Jin UH(1), Nair V(2), Hedrick E(2), Cheng Y(2),
Corton JC(3), Kim K(4), Safe S(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health Sciences Center,
Houston, TX, USA. (2)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas 
A&M University, College Station, TX, USA. (3)Integrated Systems Toxicology
Division, US-EPA, MD B143-06, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA. (4)Department of
Environmental Health, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA.

Specificity protein 1 (Sp1) transcription factor (TF) regulates expression of
long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells. RNA
interference (RNAi) studies showed that among several lncRNAs expressed in HepG2,
SNU-449 and SK-Hep-1 cells, highly upregulated in liver cancer (HULC) was
regulated not only by Sp1 but also Sp3 and Sp4 in the three cell lines. Knockdown
of Sp transcription factors and HULC by RNAi showed that they play important
roles in HCC cell proliferation, survival and migration. The relative
contribution of Sp1, Sp3, Sp4 and HULC on these responses in HepG2, SNU-449 and
SK-Hep-1 cells were cell context- and response-dependent. In the poorly
differentiated SK-Hep-1 cells, knockdown of Sp1 or HULC resulted in genomic and
morphological changes, indicating that Sp1 and Sp1-regulated HULC are important
for maintaining the mesenchymal phenotype in this cell line. Genomic analysis
showed an inverse correlation between expression of genes after knockdown of HULC
and expression of those genes in liver tumors from patients. The antidiabetic
drug metformin down-regulates Sp proteins in pancreatic cancer, and similar
results including decreased HULC expression were observed in HepG2, SNU-449 and
SK-Hep-1 cells treated with metformin, indicating that metformin and other
antineoplastic agents that target Sp proteins may have clinical applications for 
HCC chemotherapy.

PMCID: PMC4694907
PMID: 26317792  [PubMed - in process]


80. Chemistry. 2015 Oct 12;21(42):14937-42. doi: 10.1002/chem.201502140. Epub 2015
Aug 27.

Development of a Rhodium(II)-Catalyzed Chemoselective C(sp(3) )-H Oxygenation.

Lin Y(1), Zhu L(2), Lan Y(3), Rao Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)MOE Key Laboratory of Protein Sciences, Department of Pharmacology and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Medicine and School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, 100084 (P. R. China). (2)School of Chemistry and Chemical
Engineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing, 400030 (P. R. China). (3)School of 
Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing, 400030 (P.
R. China). lanyu@cqu.edu.cn. (4)MOE Key Laboratory of Protein Sciences,
Department of Pharmacology and Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Medicine and
School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084 (P. R. China).
yrao@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn.

We report the first example of Rh(II) -catalyzed chemoselective double C(sp(3)
)-H oxygenation, which can directly transform various toluene derivatives into
highly valuable aromatic aldehydes with great chemoselectivity and practicality. 
The critical combination of catalyst Rh(OAc)2 , oxidant Selectfluor, and solvents
of TFA/TFAA promises the successful delivery of the oxidation with satisfactory
yields. A possible mechanism involving a unique carbene-Rh complex is proposed,
and has been supported by both experiments and theoretical calculations.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26311544  [PubMed]


81. J Biomed Nanotechnol. 2015 Jan;11(1):137-42.

Graphitized-Carbon-Nanofiber Paper-Enzyme Electrode Fabrication Through
Non-Covalent Modification for Enzyme Biofuel Cell Application.

Fapyane D, Lee SJ, Kang SH, Ahn JH, Chang IS.

Carbon nanofibers are an emerging smart material that are promising for use as a 
biosensor and a biofuel cell transducer material due to their morphological and
electrochemical characteristics. In particular, graphitized carbon nanofibers
possess unique structures of graphite-like edges within their high surface area
that provide a large active site for enzyme attachment. For a specific
application such as a biofuel cell, which requires highly stable electrical
communication and electricity generation, non-covalent enzyme immobilization
using bifunctional molecule is suggested as an appropriate approach because it
does not change the carbon hybridization from sp2 to sp3 as covalent
immobilization by acid treatment does. Graphitized carbon-nanofiber paper (GCNFp)
electrode were fabricated through dispersion-filtration method in which glucose
oxidase as model enzyme were immobilized by a bifunctional molecule that forms
p-p stacking of the pyrene moiety with the nanofiber wall coupled by a reactive
end-amine reaction. This system provides a practical enzyme-electrode hybrid that
facilitates comparatively faster enzyme-electrode electrical communication than
other system using similar material, as calculated from the heterogeneous
electron-transfer rate constant (K(s)) which was 5.45 s(-1).

PMID: 26301307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2015 Aug 24. doi: 10.1071/RD15231. [Epub ahead of print]

Effect of seminal plasma proteins on the motile sperm subpopulations in ram
ejaculates.

Luna C, Yeste M, Rivera Del Alamo MM, Domingo J, Casao A, Rodriguez-Gil JE,
Pérez-Pé R, Cebrián-Pérez JA, Muiño-Blanco T.

It has been proposed that seminal plasma proteins (SPP) support survival of ram
spermatozoa, exerting a dual effect, both capacitating and decapacitating. In
this study, changes in motility patterns of ram spermatozoa capacitated in the
presence of epidermal growth factor (EGF) were evaluated. Clustering procedures
were used to determine the presence of sperm subpopulations with specific motion 
characteristics. Four sperm subpopulations (SP) were defined after the
application of a principal component analysis procedure. Progressive spermatozoa 
with high straightness (STR) were found in SP1, reflected in the high linearity
(LIN) and STR values and low amplitude of lateral head movement (ALH; rapid,
non-hyperactivated spermatozoa). SP2 spermatozoa seemed to be starting to acquire
hyperactivated motility, while the SP3 group consisted of rapid, hyperactivated
spermatozoa. SP4 showed less-vigorous spermatozoa, with non-linear motility. The 
addition of SPP before in vitro capacitation with EGF induced a decrease in SP1
and an increase in SP3. However, a reduction in the chlortetracycline-capacitated
sperm rate and protein tyrosine phosphorylation was found, which corroborates
with the hypothesis that the SPP protective effect on spermatozoa is related to
their decapacitating role. These findings allow us to deduce that ram spermatozoa
are able to undergo capacitation with no hyperactivation and that SPP are able to
induce hyperactivation in spermatozoa but maintain them in a decapacitated state.

PMID: 26300553  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


83. European J Org Chem. 2015 Apr 1;2015(10):2205-2213.

Conformationally Constrained Penta(hetero)cyclic Molecular Architectures via
Photoassisted Diversity-Oriented Synthesis.

Umstead WJ(1), Mukhina OA(1), Kutateladze DA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Denver, Denver, 80208,
USA.

Intramolecular cycloadditions of photogenerated azaxylylenes provide access to
unprecedented polyheterocyclic scaffolds, suitable for subsequent
postphotochemical modifications to further grow molecular complexity. Here we
explore approaches to rapid "assembly" of novel photoprecursors with
nitrogen/oxygen-rich tethers capable of producing potential pharmacophores and
also compatible with subsequent 1,3-dipolar cycloadditions to furnish pentacyclic
heterocycles with new structural cores, minimal number of rotatable bonds, and a 
high content of sp(3) hybridized carbons. The modular "assembly" of the
photoprecursors and potential variety of postphotochemical modifications of
primary photoproducts provide framework for combinatorial implementation of this 
synthetic strategy.

PMCID: PMC4527657
PMID: 26257575  [PubMed]


84. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 7;10(8):e0135141. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135141.
eCollection 2015.

Analysis of Response Elements Involved in the Regulation of the Human Neonatal Fc
Receptor Gene (FCGRT).

Mikulska JE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunochemistry, Ludwik Hirszfeld Institute of Immunology and
Experimental Therapy, Polish Academy of Sciences, Wroclaw, Poland.

Republished in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(9):e0139744.

Human epithelial, endothelial and PMA-differentiated THP-1 cell lines were used
as model systems to study the transcriptional regulation of the human FCGRT gene 
encoding the alpha chain of hFcRn. The data obtained from site-directed
mutagenesis in transient transfection experiments indicate that the Sp1 sites at 
positions -641, -635, and -313, CF1/YY1 elements at positions -586 and -357, and 
the AP-1 motif at -276 within the-660/-233 fragment of the human FCGRT promoter
(hFCGRT) participate in the regulation of human FCGRT in all selected cell lines.
However, their individual contribution to promoter activity is not equivalent.
The Sp1 binding site at -313 and the AP-1 site at -276 are critical for the
activity of the hFCGRT promoter in epithelial and endothelial cells. Moreover,
the CF1/YY1 site at -586 in differentiated THP-1 cells, plays an essential role
in the transcriptional activity of the promoter. In addition, the C/EBPbeta
binding site at -497 of the hFCGRT promoter in epithelial and endothelial cells, 
and the C/EBPbeta motif located at -497 and -233 within the hFCGRT promoter in
differentiated THP-1 cells may function as positive regulatory sequences in
response to LPS or PMA stimulation. EMSA and supershift analyses showed that the 
functionally identified binding motifs in the hFCGRT promoter were able to
specifically interact with their corresponding (Sp1, Sp2, Sp3, c-Fos, c-Jun, YY1,
and C/EBPbeta or C/EBPdelta) transcription factors (TFs), suggesting their
possible involvement in the regulation of the human FCGRT gene expression.

PMCID: PMC4529178
PMID: 26252948  [PubMed - in process]


85. J Neurochem. 2015 Oct;135(2):402-15. doi: 10.1111/jnc.13261. Epub 2015 Aug 28.

Molecular cloning, epigenetic regulation, and functional characterization of
Prkd1 gene promoter in dopaminergic cell culture models of Parkinson's disease.

Ay M(1), Jin H(1), Harischandra DS(1), Asaithambi A(1), Kanthasamy A(1),
Anantharam V(1), Kanthasamy AG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Parkinson's Disorder Research Laboratory, Department of Biomedical Sciences,
Iowa Center for Advanced Neurotoxicology, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, USA.

We recently identified a compensatory survival role for protein kinase D1 (PKD1) 
in protecting dopaminergic neurons from oxidative insult. To investigate the
molecular mechanism of Prkd1 gene expression, we cloned the 5'-flanking region
(1620-bp) of the mouse Prkd1 gene. Deletion analyses revealed that the -250/+113 
promoter region contains full promoter activity in MN9D dopaminergic neuronal
cells. In silico analysis of the Prkd1 promoter uncovered binding sites for key
redox transcription factors including Sp1 and NF-<U+03BA>B. Over-expression of Sp1, Sp3,
and NF-<U+03BA>B-p65 proteins stimulated Prkd1 promoter activity. Binding of Sp3 and
NF-<U+03BA>B-p65 to the Prkd1 promoter was confirmed using chromatin
immunoprecipitation. Treatment with the Sp inhibitor mithramycin A significantly 
attenuated Prkd1 promoter activity and PKD1 mRNA and protein expression. Further 
mechanistic studies revealed that inhibition of histone deacetylation and DNA
methylation up-regulated PKD1 mRNA expression. Importantly, negative modulation
of PKD1 signaling by pharmacological inhibition or shRNA knockdown increased
dopaminergic neuronal sensitivity to oxidative damage in a human mesencephalic
neuronal cell model. Collectively, our findings demonstrate that Sp1, Sp3, and
NF-<U+03BA>B-p65 can transactivate the mouse Prkd1 promoter and that epigenetic
mechanisms, such as DNA methylation and histone modification, are key regulatory 
events controlling the expression of pro-survival kinase PKD1 in dopaminergic
neuronal cells. Previously, we demonstrated that protein kinase D1 (PKD1) plays a
survival role during the early stage of oxidative stress in dopaminergic neuronal
cells.

© 2015 International Society for Neurochemistry.

PMID: 26230914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Ann Oncol. 2015 Oct;26(10):2097-101. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdv316. Epub 2015 Jul
27.

Comparison of two different S-1 plus cisplatin dosing schedules as first-line
chemotherapy for metastatic and/or recurrent gastric cancer: a multicenter,
randomized phase III trial (SOS).

Ryu MH(1), Baba E(2), Lee KH(3), Park YI(4), Boku N(5), Hyodo I(6), Nam BH(7),
Esaki T(8), Yoo C(1), Ryoo BY(1), Song EK(9), Cho SH(10), Kang WK(11), Yang
SH(12), Zang DY(13), Shin DB(14), Park SR(1), Shinozaki K(15), Takano T(16), Kang
YK(17); SOS study investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Comprehensive Clinical Oncology, Faculty
of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. (3)Department of
Hemato-oncology, Yeungnam University Hospital, Daegu. (4)Center for Gastric
Cancer, Research Institute and Hospital, National Cancer Center, Goyang,
Gyeonggi, Korea. (5)Department of Clinical Oncology, St Marianna University
School of Medicine, Kawasaki. (6)Division of Gastroenterology, University of
Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan. (7)Biometric Research Branch, National Cancer Center,
Goyang, Gyeonggi, Korea. (8)Department of Gastrointestinal and Medical Oncology, 
National Kyushu Cancer Center, Fukuoka, Japan. (9)Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Chonbuk National University
Medical School, Jeonju. (10)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Chonnam National
University Hwasun Hospital, Gwangju. (11)Division of Hematology-Oncology,
Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School
Medicine, Seoul. (12)Department of Internal Medicine, Korea Cancer Center
Hospital, Seoul. (13)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Hallym University Medical Center, Hallym University College of
Medicine, Anyang. (14)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Gachon University Gil Hospital, Incheon, Korea. (15)Division of
Clinical Oncology, Hiroshima Prefectural Hospital, Hiroshima. (16)Department of
Medical Oncology, Toranomon Hospital, Minato-ku, Japan. (17)Department of
Oncology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea ykkang@amc.seoul.kr.

BACKGROUND: Five-weekly S-1 plus cisplatin (SP5) is one of the standard
first-line regimens for advanced gastric cancer (GC), proven in a Japanese phase 
III study. To enhance the dose intensity of cisplatin, 3-weekly S-1 plus
cisplatin (SP3) was developed.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This multicenter, randomized, open-label, phase III study
evaluated whether SP3 (S-1 80 mg/m(2)/day on days 1-14 and cisplatin 60 mg/m(2)
on day 1) was noninferior/superior to SP5 (S-1 80-120 mg/day on days 1-21 and
cisplatin 60 mg/m(2) on day 1 or 8) in terms of progression-free survival (PFS). 
Chemotherapy-naive patients with metastatic, recurrent gastric or
gastroesophageal junction adenocarcinoma were randomized 1 : 1 to receive either 
SP3 or SP5. The trial is registered at ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT00915382).
RESULTS: Between February 2009 and January 2012, 625 patients were randomized at 
42 sites in Korea and Japan. With a median follow-up duration of 32.4 months
(range, 13.3-48.6 months) in surviving patients, SP3 was not only noninferior but
also superior to SP5 in terms of PFS [median 5.5 versus 4.9 months; hazard ratio 
(HR) = 0.82; 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.68-0.99; P = 0.0418 for superiority).
There was no difference in overall survival (OS) between the groups (median 14.1 
versus 13.9 months; HR = 0.99; 95% CI 0.81-1.21; P = 0.9068). In patients with
measurable disease, the response rates were 60% in the SP3 arm and 50% in the SP5
arm (P = 0.065). Both regimens were generally well tolerated, but grade 3 or
higher anemia (19% versus 9%) and neutropenia (39% versus 9%) were more frequent 
in SP3.
CONCLUSIONS: SP3 is superior to SP5 in terms of PFS. However, since the
improvement in PFS was only slight and there was no difference in OS, both SP3
and SP5 can be recommended as first-line treatments for patients with advanced
GC.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26216386  [PubMed - in process]


87. Nano Lett. 2015 Aug 12;15(8):5124-30. doi: 10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b01343. Epub
2015 Aug 3.

Systematic Enumeration of sp(3) Nanothreads.

Xu ES(1), Lammert PE(1), Crespi VH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Department of Materials Science and Engineering,
§Department of Chemistry, and <U+2225>Materials Research Institute, Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, United States.

Slow decompression of crystalline benzene in large-volume high-pressure cells has
recently achieved synthesis of a novel one-dimensional allotrope of sp(3) carbon 
in which stacked columns of benzene molecules rehybridize into an ordered crystal
of nanothreads. The progenitor benzene molecules function as six-valent
one-dimensional superatoms with multiple binding sites. Here we enumerate their
hexavalent bonding geometries, recognizing that the repeat unit of interatomic
connectivity ("topological unit cell") need not coincide with the
crystallographic unit cell, and identify the most energetically favorable cases. 
A topological unit cell of one or two benzene rings with at least two bonds
interconnecting each adjacent pair of rings, accommodates 50 topologically
distinct nanothreads, 15 of which are within 80 meV/carbon atom of the most
stable member. Optimization of aperiodic helicity reveals the most stable
structures to be chiral. We generalize Euler's rules for ring counting to cover
this new form of very thin one-dimensional carbon, calculated their physical
properties, and propose a naming convention that can be generalized to handle
nanothreads formed from other progenitor molecules.

PMID: 26207926  [PubMed]


88. Virology. 2015 Nov;485:47-57. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2015.06.031. Epub 2015 Jul 23.

Differential effects of Sp cellular transcription factors on viral promoter
activation by varicella-zoster virus (VZV) IE62 protein.

Khalil MI(1), Ruyechan WT(2), Hay J(2), Arvin A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Microbiology & Immunology, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States; Department of Molecular Biology,
National Research Center EL-Buhouth St., Dokki, Cairo, Egypt. Electronic address:
mkhalil2@stanford.edu. (2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and the
Witebsky Center for Microbial Pathogenesis and Immunology, University at Buffalo,
Buffalo, NY, United States. (3)Departments of Pediatrics and Microbiology &
Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States.

The immediate early (IE) 62 protein is the major varicella-zoster virus (VZV)
regulatory factor. Analysis of the VZV genome revealed 40 predicted GC-rich boxes
within 36 promoters. We examined effects of ectopic expression of Sp1-Sp4 on
IE62- mediated transactivation of three viral promoters. Ectopic expression of
Sp3 and Sp4 enhanced IE62 activation of ORF3 and gI promoters while Sp3 reduced
IE62 activation of ORF28/29 promoter and VZV DNA replication. Sp2 reduced IE62
transactivation of gI while Sp1 had no significant influence on IE62 activation
with any of these viral promoters. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA)
confirmed binding of Sp1 and Sp3 but not Sp2 and Sp4 to the gI promoter. Sp1-4
bound to IE62 and amino acids 238-258 of IE62 were important for the interaction 
with Sp3 and Sp4 as well as Sp1. This work shows that Sp family members have
differential effects on IE62-mediated transactivation in a promoter-dependent
manner.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4619144 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26207799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Chem Rec. 2015 Oct;15(5):854-71. doi: 10.1002/tcr.201500017. Epub 2015 Jul 17.

Exploration of Dimethylzinc-Mediated Radical Reactions.

Yamada K(1), Tomioka K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
yamak@pharm.kyoto-u.ac.jp. (2)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Faculty of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Doshisha Women's College of Liberal Arts, Kyoto, Japan. 
ktomioka@dwc.doshisha.ac.jp.

In this account, our studies on radical reactions that are promoted by
dimethylzinc and air are described. Advantages of this reagent and differences
from conventional radical initiators, such as triethylborane, are discussed.

Copyright © 2015 The Chemical Society of Japan and Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.
KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26201084  [PubMed - in process]


90. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2015 Aug 3;54(32):9404-8. doi: 10.1002/anie.201504507.
Epub 2015 Jul 15.

Rhodium(III)-Catalyzed Activation of C(sp3)-H Bonds and Subsequent Intermolecular
Amidation at Room Temperature.

Huang X(1), Wang Y(1), Lan J(1), You J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Green Chemistry and Technology of Ministry of Education,
College of Chemistry, and State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China Medical 
School, Sichuan University, 29 Wangjiang Road, Chengdu 610064 (PR China). (2)Key 
Laboratory of Green Chemistry and Technology of Ministry of Education, College of
Chemistry, and State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China Medical School,
Sichuan University, 29 Wangjiang Road, Chengdu 610064 (PR China).
jsyou@scu.edu.cn.

Disclosed herein is a Rh(III)-catalyzed chelation-assisted activation of
unreactive C(sp3)-H bonds, thus enabling an intermolecular amidation to provide a
practical and step-economic route to 2-(pyridin-2-yl)ethanamine derivatives.
Substrates with other N-donor groups are also compatible with the amidation. This
protocol proceeds at room temperature, has a relatively broad functional-group
tolerance and high selectivity, and demonstrates the potential of rhodium(III) in
the promotive functionalization of unreactive C(sp3)-H bonds. A rhodacycle having
a SbF6(-) counterion was identified as a plausible intermediate.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26178691  [PubMed - in process]


91. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2015 Aug 10;54(33):9523-7. doi: 10.1002/anie.201503056.
Epub 2015 Jul 14.

Application of a C-C Bond-Forming Conjugate Addition Reaction in Asymmetric
Dearomatization of ß-Naphthols.

Yang D(1), Wang L(1), Kai M(1), Li D(1), Yao X(1), Wang R(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Preclinical Study for New Drugs of Gansu Province, Lanzhou
University, Lanzhou, 730000 (China). (2)Key Laboratory of Preclinical Study for
New Drugs of Gansu Province, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, 730000 (China).
wangrui@lzu.edu.cn. (3)State Key Laboratory for Oxo Synthesis and Selective
Oxidation, Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Lanzhou, 730000 (China). wangrui@lzu.edu.cn.

A C-C bond-forming conjugate reaction was successfully applied to the
enantioselective dearomatization of ß-naphthols. A C(sp2)-C(sp3) bond is formed
by using propargylic ketones as reactive partners. Good to excellent Z/E ratios
and ee values were obtained by employing an in situ generated magnesium catalyst.
Further transformations of the Z-configured C-C double bond in the products were 
achieved under mild reaction conditions. Moreover, the stereocontrolling element 
of this magnesium-catalyzed dearomatization reaction was explored by
computational chemistry.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26173841  [PubMed - in process]


92. Org Lett. 2015 Aug 7;17(15):3798-801. doi: 10.1021/acs.orglett.5b01774. Epub 2015
Jul 14.

Efficient Palladium-Catalyzed C-H Fluorination of C(sp3)-H Bonds: Synthesis of
ß-Fluorinated Carboxylic Acids.

Zhu Q(1), Ji D(1), Liang T(1), Wang X(1), Xu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Natural Medicines and Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Drug
Design and Optimization, Department of Medicinal Chemistry, China Pharmaceutical 
University, Nanjing 210009, China.

A novel and facile process for direct fluorination of unactivated C(sp3)-H bonds 
at the ß position of carboxylic acids was accomplished by a
palladium(II)-catalyzed C-H activation. The addition of Ag2O and pivalic acid was
found to be crucial for the success of this transformation. This reaction
provides a versatile strategy for the synthesis of ß-fluorinated carboxylic
acids.

PMID: 26172446  [PubMed]


93. Eur J Pharm Sci. 2015 Oct 12;78:90-102. doi: 10.1016/j.ejps.2015.07.008. Epub
2015 Jul 9.

Aprepitant loaded solid preconcentrated microemulsion for enhanced
bioavailability: A comparison with micronized Aprepitant.

Kamboj S(1), Sharma R(1), Singh K(1), Rana V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutics Division, Dept. of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Drug Research,
Punjabi University, Patiala 147002, India. (2)Pharmaceutics Division, Dept. of
Pharmaceutical Sciences and Drug Research, Punjabi University, Patiala 147002,
India. Electronic address: vikas_pbi@rediffmail.com.

Aprepitant (APT) is a lipophilic, poorly water soluble drug with moderate
permeability characteristic. Therefore, we aimed to improve solubility as well as
permeability that could possibly improve oral bioavailability of APT. For this
purpose, Quality by design (QbD) approach employing simplex lattice mixture
design was used to prepare solid preconcentrated microemulsion (S-PCM). Further, 
the software generated numerically optimized S-PCM formulations were developed by
utilizing desirability function. The spectral attributes (powder X-ray
diffraction, ATR-FTIR, and differential scanning calorimetry) of S-PCM
formulations suggested that APT was present in amorphous form. The results of
droplet size (150-180 nm), zeta potential (-13 to -15 mV), poly dispersity index 
(PDI) (0.211-0.238) and emulsification time (<1 min), of these S-PCM formulations
(SP1, SP2 and SP3) suggested spherical shape morphology (Transmission electron
microscopy) with thermodynamic stability. The comparison of in vitro/ex vivo
behavior of S-PCM (SP1) with micronized and non-micronized formulations of APT
suggested 2-fold and 5-fold enhancement in solubility and permeability,
respectively. This was further evident from pharmacokinetic studies in rabbits
that showed 1.5-fold enhancement in bioavailability of S-PCM with respect to
micronized APT. Thus, it could be envisaged that development of S-PCM formulation
of APT is the best alternative to micronization technology based APT formulations
reported earlier.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26165621  [PubMed - in process]


94. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Sep;1849(9):1188-97. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2015.07.003. Epub 2015 Jul 8.

Functional interplay of SP family members and nuclear factor Y is essential for
transcriptional activation of the human Calreticulin gene.

Schardt JA(1), Keller M(2), Seipel K(2), Pabst T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, University Hospital and University of Bern,
3010 Bern, Switzerland. Electronic address: julian.schardt@insel.ch.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, University Hospital and University of Bern,
3010 Bern, Switzerland.

Calreticulin (CALR) is a highly conserved, multifunctional protein involved in a 
variety of cellular processes including the maintenance of intracellular calcium 
homeostasis, proper protein folding, differentiation and immunogenic cell death. 
More recently, a crucial role for CALR in the pathogenesis of certain hematologic
malignancies was discovered: in clinical subgroups of acute myeloid leukemia,
CALR overexpression mediates a block in differentiation, while somatic mutations 
have been found in the majority of patients with myeloproliferative neoplasms
with nonmutated Janus kinase 2 gene (JAK2) or thrombopoietin receptor gene (MPL).
However, the mechanisms underlying CALR promoter activation have insufficiently
been investigated so far. By dissecting the core promoter region, we could
identify a functional TATA-box relevant for transcriptional activation. In
addition, we characterized two evolutionary highly conserved cis-regulatory
modules (CRMs) within the proximal promoter each composed of one binding site for
the transcription factors SP1 and SP3 as well as for the nuclear transcription
factor Y (NFY) and we verified binding of these factors to their cognate sites in
vitro and in vivo.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26162987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2015 Sep 15;309(6):G500-5. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00194.2015. Epub 2015 Jul 9.

Sodium butyrate stimulates NHE8 expression via its role on activating NHE8 basal 
promoter activity.

Xu H(1), McCoy A(1), Li J(1), Zhao Y(1), Ghishan FK(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona. (2)University of Arizona, Tucson,
Arizona fghishan@peds.arizona.edu.

Butyrate is a major metabolite in colonic lumen. It is produced from bacterial
fermentation of dietary fiber. Butyrate has been shown to stimulate
electroneutral sodium absorption through its regulation on sodium/hydrogen
exchanger 3 (NHE3). Although NHE8, the newest addition of intestinal NHE family, 
is involved in sodium absorption in the intestinal tract, whether butyrate
modulates NHE8 expression in the intestinal epithelial cells is not known. In the
current study, we showed that butyrate treatment strongly induced NHE8 protein
and NHE8 mRNA expression in human intestinal epithelial cells. Transfection with 
the human NHE8 promoter reporter constructs showed that butyrate treatment
stimulated reporter gene expression at an amount comparable with its stimulation 
of NHE8 mRNA expression. Interestingly, a similar result was also observed in
human NHE8 promoter transfected cells after trichostatin (TSA) treatment. Gel
mobility shift assay identified an enhanced Sp3 protein binding on the human NHE8
basal promoter region upon butyrate stimulation. Furthermore, Sp3 acetylation
modification is involved in butyrate-mediated NHE8 activation in Caco-2 cells.
Our findings suggest that the mechanism of butyrate action on NHE8 expression
involves enhanced Sp3 interaction at the basal promoter region of the human NHE8 
gene promoter to activate NHE8 gene transcription. Thus butyrate is involved in
intestinal regulation of NHE8 resulting enhanced sodium absorption.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4572406 [Available on 2016-09-15]
PMID: 26159698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Periodontal Res. 2016 Apr;51(2):237-49. doi: 10.1111/jre.12303. Epub 2015 Jun
30.

Identification of quantitative trait loci influencing inflammation-mediated
alveolar bone loss: insights into polygenic inheritance of host-biofilm
disequilibria in periodontitis.

Sima C(1,)(2,)(3), Cheng Q(3), Rautava J(4,)(5), Levesque C(6), Sherman P(5),
Glogauer M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Oral Sciences, The Forsyth Institute, Cambridge, MA,
USA. (2)Department of Oral Medicine, Infection, and Immunity, Harvard School of
Dental Medicine, Boston, MA, USA. (3)Matrix Dynamics Group, Faculty of Dentistry,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. (4)Department of Oral Pathology and
Oral Radiology, Institute of Dentistry, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
(5)Cell Biology Program, Research Institute, Hospital for Sick Children,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. (6)Department of Oral Microbiology,
Faculty of Dentistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: The relative contribution of genetic and environmental 
factors to the onset and progression of periodontitis is inconclusive. Despite
the high prevalence, phenotypic heterogeneity and significant local and systemic 
implications of this disease, early detection and individualized therapy are
problematic. Using a murine model of periodontitis in a panel of 17 recombinant
inbred mice, the current study addressed the heritability of, and oral dysbiosis 
associated with, inflammation-mediated alveolar bone loss (iABL), the hallmark of
periodontitis.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Quantitative trait locus (QTL) genomics and quantitative
PCR for over 99% of known murine oral microbiota were used.
RESULTS: It was found that iABL is a polygenic trait with 32.7% heritability. One
suggestive QTL, nicknamed inflammation-mediated alveolar bone loss locus (iABLL),
was identified on chromosome 2. Eleven genes involved in innate immune responses 
and bone metabolism, particularly related to macrophage and osteoblast function, 
namely Etl4, Pdss1, Cobll1, 9330158F14Rik, Xirp2, Stk39, Mettl5, Metapl1, Itga6, 
Pdk1 and Sp3, were found in the iABLL using cis expression QTL and nonsynonymous 
single nucleotide polymorphism analyses. Specific oral microbiome shifts in
saliva and tongue mucosa are associated with disease in this model.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that complex host-biofilm interactions generate 
pathogenic states that extend beyond subgingival biofilms and periodontal
tissues. Although no temporal relationship between the onset of iABL and
microbiome changes were established, our findings suggest that host factors may
be responsible for pathogenic shifts in subgingival biofilms when persistent and 
undisturbed.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26126603  [PubMed - in process]


97. Chemistry. 2015 Aug 3;21(32):11320-4. doi: 10.1002/chem.201501962. Epub 2015 Jun 
29.

Nickel-Catalyzed Insertion of Alkynes and Electron-Deficient Olefins into
Unactivated sp(3) C-H Bonds.

Maity S(1), Agasti S(1), Earsad AM(1), Hazra A(1), Maiti D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Powai,
Mumbai-400076 (India). (2)Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology
Bombay, Powai, Mumbai-400076 (India). dmaiti@chem.iitb.ac.in.

Insertion of unsaturated systems such as alkynes and olefins into unactivated
sp(3) C-H bonds remains an unexplored problem. We herein address this issue by
successfully incorporating a wide variety of functionalized alkynes and
electron-deficient olefins into the unactivated sp(3) C-H bond of pivalic acid
derivatives with excellent syn- and linear- selectivity. A strongly chelating
8-aminoquinoline directing group proved beneficial for these insertion reactions,
while an air-stable and inexpensive Ni(II) salt has been employed as the active
catalyst.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26121618  [PubMed]


98. J Enzyme Inhib Med Chem. 2015 Jun 26:1-10. [Epub ahead of print]

Synthesis of 3,4-dihydro-2H-1,2-benzothiazine-3-carboxylic acid 1,1-dioxides and 
their evaluation as ligands for NMDA receptor glycine binding site.

Bluke Z(1), Paass E, Sladek M, Abel U, Kauss V.

Author information: 
(1)Riga Technical University , Riga , Latvia .

A series of 2-substituted 3,4-dihydro-2H-1,2-benzothiazine-3-carboxylic acid
1,1-dioxides were synthesized and evaluated for their affinity to the glycine
binding site of the N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor. The binding affinity
was determined by the displacement of radioligand [(3)H]MDL-105,519 from rat
cortical membrane preparations. The most attractive structures in the search for 
prospective NMDA receptor ligands were identified to be 2-arylcarbonylmethyl
substituted 3,4-dihydro-2H-1,2-benzothiazine-3-carboxylic acid 1,1-dioxides. It
has been demonstrated for the first time that the replacement of NH group in the 
ligand by sp(3) CH2 is tolerated. This finding may pave the way for previously
unexplored approaches for designing new ligands of the NMDA receptor.

PMID: 26114309  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


99. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2015 Aug 24;54(35):10280-3. doi: 10.1002/anie.201503888. 
Epub 2015 Jun 19.

Cp*Rh(III) -Catalyzed Arylation of C(sp(3) )-H Bonds.

Wang X(1), Yu DG(1,)(2), Glorius F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Organisch-Chemisches Institut,
Corrensstrasse 40, 48149 Münster (Germany)
http://www.uni-muenster.de/Chemie.oc/glorius/index.html. (2)Current Address:
College of Chemistry, Sichuan University, Chengdu (China). (3)Westfälische
Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Organisch-Chemisches Institut, Corrensstrasse 40,
48149 Münster (Germany) http://www.uni-muenster.de/Chemie.oc/glorius/index.html. 
glorius@uni-muenster.de.

The first Cp*Rh(III) -catalyzed arylation of unactivated C(sp(3) )-H bonds is
presented. The unactivated primary C(sp(3) )-H bond of 2-alkylpyridines can be
activated by Rh(III) and further reacts with triarylboroxines to efficiently
build new C(sp(3) )-aryl bonds. The methodology also provides a facile and
efficient synthesis of unsymmetrical triarylmethanes by Rh(III) -catalyzed
C(sp(3) )-H arylation of diarylmethanes.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26095347  [PubMed]


100. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2015 Jul 15;7(27):14833-42. doi:
10.1021/acsami.5b03122. Epub 2015 Jul 1.

Impressive Transmission Mode Electromagnetic Interference Shielding Parameters of
Graphene-like Nanocarbon/Polyurethane Nanocomposites for Short Range Tracking
Countermeasures.

Kumar A(1), Alegaonkar PS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Physics, Defence Institute of Advanced Technology (DU), 
Pune 411025, India.

Shielding the microwave signature (8.2-12.4 GHz, X-band) of a locked in target is
a tactically important electronic countermeasure. Herein, we report on mitigation
in X-band transmission mode shielding parameters for polyurethane (PU), after
incorporating graphene-like nanocarbon sheets (GNCs). Initially, PU and variable 
weight percent (1-25) GNCs/PU paste samples were subjected to Fourier transform
infrared, Raman spectroscopy, and scanning electron microscopy. These samples
were molded into toroidal shaped specimens by adiabatic hot-pressing technique,
for microwave scattering measurements. Parameters, such as complex permittivity
(<U+03F5>'-j<U+03F5><U+2033>), alternating current (ac) conductivity, skin thickness, transmission
(S21), effective transmission loss (SET), and shielding effectiveness were
determined, in addition to direct current (dc) conductivity. The real and
imaginary components are increased, respectively, by ~5 and ~30 times, whereas
loss tangent, by ~7, at 25 wt % loading of GNCs. The ac conductivity is enhanced 
from 0.248 (PU) to 7.288 S/m (25 wt %) by maximizing transmission loss to -26.45 
dB (99.9%) and minimizing thickness to 1-2 mm. The dc percolation threshold is
found to be low at ~5 wt %, indicating superior dispersibility of GNCs,
thereafter. In analysis, the atomic polarization (at ~10 GHz) associated with the
aromatic urethane amide rings acts as a backbone to engage incident
electromagnetic field wiggles. The coupling occurs via charge transfer
polarization currents at doubly bonded nitrogen, oxygen, and hydrosorpted sp3
carbon sites in GNCs. The field-matter interaction is dominant at the microvoid
skin interface between GNCs and PU. Possible polarization mechanism is explained.
The GNCs/PU nanocomposites are realized as an effective electromagnetic
interference shielding block in the tracking band. The details are presented.

PMID: 26083074  [PubMed]


101. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jul 31;290(31):19018-33. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.654244. Epub
2015 Jun 10.

Promoters of Human Cosmc and T-synthase Genes Are Similar in Structure, Yet
Different in Epigenetic Regulation.

Zeng J(1), Mi R(1), Wang Y(1), Li Y(2), Lin L(2), Yao B(2), Song L(1), van Die
I(3), Chapman AB(4), Cummings RD(1), Jin P(2), Ju T(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Biochemistry. (2)Human Genetics, and. (3)the
Department of Molecular Cell Biology and Immunology, VU University Medical
Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (4)Medicine, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia 30322 and. (5)From the Departments of Biochemistry,
tju@emory.edu.

The T-synthase (core 1 ß3-galactosyltransferase) and its molecular chaperone
Cosmc regulate the biosynthesis of mucin type O-glycans on glycoproteins, and
evidence suggests that both T-synthase and Cosmc are transcriptionally suppressed
in several human diseases, although the transcriptional regulation of these two
genes is not understood. Here, we characterized the promoters essential for human
Cosmc and T-synthase transcription. The upstream regions of the genes lack a
conventional TATA box but contain CpG islands, cCpG-I and cCpG-II for Cosmc and
tCpG for T-synthase. Using luciferase reporter assays, site-directed mutagenesis,
ChIP assays, and mithramycin A treatment, we identified the core promoters within
cCpG-II and tCpG, which contain two binding sites for Krüppel-like transcription 
factors, including SP1/SP3, respectively. Methylome analysis of Tn4 B cells,
which harbor a silenced Cosmc, confirmed the hypermethylation of the Cosmc core
promoter but not for T-synthase. These results demonstrate that Cosmc and
T-synthase are transcriptionally regulated at a basal level by the specificity
protein/Krüppel-like transcription factor family of members, which explains their
ubiquitous and coordinated expression, and also indicate that they are
differentially epigenetically regulated beyond X chromosome imprinting. These
results are important in understanding the regulation of these genes that have
roles in human diseases, such as IgA nephropathy and cancer.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4521027 [Available on 2016-07-31]
PMID: 26063800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Tetrahedron Lett. 2015 Jun 3;56(23):3604-3607.

Synthesis of triarylmethanols via tandem arylation/oxidation of diarylmethanes.

Mao J(1), Eberle K(2), Zhang J(2), Rodriguez C(3), Xi Z(4), Pericàs MA(5), Walsh 
PJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Chemistry, China Agricultural University, 2 West
Yuanmingyuan Road, Beijing 100193, P. R. China ; Roy and Diana Vagelos
Laboratories, Department of Chemistry, University of Pennsylvania, 231 South 34th
Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6323, United States. (2)Roy and Diana
Vagelos Laboratories, Department of Chemistry, University of Pennsylvania, 231
South 34th Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6323, United States.
(3)Institute of Chemical Research of Catalonia (ICIQ), Av. Països Catalans 16,
43007 Tarragona, Spain. (4)Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences,
and Key Laboratory of Bioorganic Chemistry and Molecular Engineering of Ministry 
of Education, College of Chemistry, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.
(5)Institute of Chemical Research of Catalonia (ICIQ), Av. Països Catalans 16,
43007 Tarragona, Spain ; Departament de Química Orgànica, Universitat de
Barcelona (UB), 08028 Barcelona, Spain.

A tandem arylation/oxidation of diarylmethanes for the convenient synthesis of
unsymmetrical triarylmethanols bearing different aryl and heteroaryl groups is
described. A Pd(OAc)2-NiXantphos catalyst system efficiently catalyzed arylation 
of weakly acidic sp(3)-hybridized C-H bonds of diarylmethanes with aryl bromides,
and the arylation products were then oxidized in situ to carbinols by simply
opening the reaction flasks to air. The triarylmethanol products were obtained in
35-98% yield.

PMCID: PMC4448728 [Available on 2016-06-03]
PMID: 26034337  [PubMed]


103. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2015 Jul 6;54(28):8231-5. doi: 10.1002/anie.201502308.
Epub 2015 Jun 1.

Pd-Catalyzed Regioselective Activation of gem-Difluorinated Cyclopropanes: A
Highly Efficient Approach to 2-Fluorinated Allylic Scaffolds.

Xu J(1,)(2), Ahmed EA(1), Xiao B(1), Lu QQ(1), Wang YL(2), Yu CG(1), Fu Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)iChEM, CAS Key Laboratory of Urban Pollutant Conversion, Department of
Chemistry, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026 (China).
(2)School of Medical Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei 230009
(China). (3)iChEM, CAS Key Laboratory of Urban Pollutant Conversion, Department
of Chemistry, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026
(China). fuyao@ustc.edu.cn.

An unprecedented Pd-catalyzed regioselective activation of gem-difluorinated
cyclopropanes induced by C-C bond cleavage is reported. It provides a general and
efficient access to a variety of 2-fluoroallylic amines, ethers, esters, and
alkylation products in high Z-selectivity, which are important skeletons in many 
biologically active molecules. In addition, the transformation represents the
first general application of gem-difluorinated cyclopropanes as reaction partners
in transition-metal-catalyzed cross-coupling reaction.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26032302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Prostate. 2015 Oct;75(14):1556-67. doi: 10.1002/pros.23029. Epub 2015 May 27.

Transcriptional regulation of BNIP3 by Sp3 in prostate cancer.

Huang Y(1,)(2), Shen P(3), Chen X(1), Chen Z(3), Zhao T(3), Chen N(1), Gong J(1),
Nie L(1), Xu M(1), Li X(1), Zeng H(3), Zhou Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory of Pathology, West China Hospital,
Sichuan University, Chengdu, China. (2)Department of Pathology, Fujian Provincial
Hospital, Fuzhou, China. (3)Department of Urology, West China Hospital, Sichuan
University, Chengdu, China.

BACKGROUND: The transcription factors Sp3/Sp1 are expressed in a various types of
cancers and BNIP3 is overexpressed in prostate cancer. Although it has been
demonstrated that BNIP3 is transcriptionally regulated by HIF-1a and is
post-transcriptionally regulated by miR145, our previous data indicated that
there might be some other transcription factors regulating BNIP3 in prostate
cancer. This study is conducted to investigate whether BNIP3 expression is
directly regulated by Sp3/Sp1 or not.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Bioinformatics analysis shows that BNIP3 promoter contains
several potential Sp3/Sp1 binding sites. And then it is demonstrated that SP3
could regulate the BNIP3 transcriptionally by binding to the predicted sites by
dual reporter gene assays, ChIP, and EMSA. The biological effects of SP3
regulating BNIP3 on prostate cancer cells proliferation are measured by MTT,
TUNEL, and flow cytometry.
RESULTS: Our data show that Sp3 but not Sp1, is positively related to BNIP3
overexpression in prostate cancer. Sp3 can directly regulate BNIP3 transcription 
by mainly binding to the Sp3 binding sites (-624~-615 and -350~-343) of BNIP3
promoter. Knockdown of Sp3 by RNA interference could reduce cells growth and lead
to cells apoptosis in PC-3 and DU145. Sp3-dependent BNIP3 overexpression might be
an important mechanism to promote prostate cancer cells proliferation.
CONCLUSION: This is the first study to provide direct evidence of Sp3-dependent
BNIP3 expression. Sp3 might be the major transcriptional regulator of BNIP3 in
prostate cancer and it is worthy to further study. The regulation of BNIP3 by Sp3
may be a new cancer-specific therapeutic target in prostate cancer.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26012884  [PubMed - in process]


105. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Sep 5;412:226-38. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2015.05.008. Epub 
2015 May 21.

X-linked lymphocyte regulated gene 5c-like (Xlr5c-like) is a novel target of
progesterone action in granulosa cells of periovulatory rat ovaries.

Mishra B(1), Park JY(1), Wilson K(1), Jo M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Chandler Medical Center, University
of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536-0298, USA. (2)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Chandler Medical Center, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY
40536-0298, USA. Electronic address: mjo2@uky.edu.

Progesterone (P4), acting through its nuclear receptor (PGR), plays an essential 
role in ovulation by mediating the expression of genes involved in ovulation
and/or luteal formation. To identify ovulatory specific PGR-regulated genes, a
preliminary microarray analysis was performed using rat granulosa cells treated
with hCG<U+2009>±<U+2009>RU486 (PGR antagonist). The transcript most highly down-regulated by
RU486 was an EST (expressed sequence tag) sequence (gb: BI289578.1) that matches 
with predicted sequence for Xlr5c-like mRNA. Since nothing is known about
Xlr5c-like, we first characterized the expression pattern of Xlr5c-like mRNA in
the rat ovary. The level of mRNA for Xlr5c-like is transiently up-regulated in
granulosa cells of periovulatory follicles after hCG stimulation in PMSG-primed
rat ovaries. The transient induction of Xlr5c-like mRNA was mimicked by hCG
treatment in cultured granulosa cells from preovulatory ovaries. We further
demonstrated that the LH-activated PKA, MEK, PI3K, and p38 signaling is involved 
in the increase in Xlr5c-like mRNA. The increase in Xlr5c-like mRNA was abolished
by RU486. The inhibitory effect of RU486 was reversed by MPA (synthetic
progestin), but not by dexamethasone (synthetic glucocorticoid). Furthermore,
mutation of SP1/SP3 and PGR response element sites in the promoter region of
Xlr5c-like decreased Xlr5c-like reporter activity. RU486 also inhibited
Xlr5c-like reporter activity. ChIP assay verified the binding of PGR and SP3 to
the Xlr5c-like promoter in periovulatory granulosa cells. Functionally,
siRNA-mediated Xlr5c-like knockdown in granulosa cell cultures resulted in
reduced levels of mRNA for Snap25, Cxcr4, and Adamts1. Recombinant Xlr5c-like
protein expressed using an adenoviral approach was localized predominantly to the
nucleus and to a lesser extent to the cytoplasm of rat granulosa cells. In
conclusion, this is the first report showing the spatiotemporally regulated
expression of Xlr5c-like mRNA by hCG in rat periovulatory ovaries. P4/PGR
mediates the LH-induced increase in Xlr5c-like mRNA. In turn, Xlr5c-like is
involved in regulating the expression of specific ovulatory genes such as Snap25,
Cxcr4, and Adamts1, possibly acting in the nucleus of periovulatory granulosa
cells.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4516606 [Available on 2016-09-05]
PMID: 26004213  [PubMed - in process]


106. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2015 May 19;107(8). pii: djv136. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djv136.
Print 2015 Aug.

Measurement of Domain-Specific HER2 (ERBB2) Expression May Classify Benefit From 
Trastuzumab in Breast Cancer.

Carvajal-Hausdorf DE(1), Schalper KA(1), Pusztai L(1), Psyrri A(1), Kalogeras
KT(1), Kotoula V(1), Fountzilas G(1), Rimm DL(2).

Author information: 
(1): Department of Pathology (DECH, KAS, DLR) and Medical Oncology (LP), Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT; Attikon University Hospital,
Athens, Greece (AP); Translational Research Section, Hellenic Cooperative
Oncology Group, Data Office, Athens, Greece (KTK); Department of Medical
Oncology, "Papageorgiou" Hospital (KTK, GF), Department of Pathology (VK), and
Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Hellenic Foundation for Cancer Research (VK,
GF), Aristotle University of Thessaloniki School of Medicine, Thessaloniki,
Greece. (2): Department of Pathology (DECH, KAS, DLR) and Medical Oncology (LP), 
Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT; Attikon University Hospital,
Athens, Greece (AP); Translational Research Section, Hellenic Cooperative
Oncology Group, Data Office, Athens, Greece (KTK); Department of Medical
Oncology, "Papageorgiou" Hospital (KTK, GF), Department of Pathology (VK), and
Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Hellenic Foundation for Cancer Research (VK,
GF), Aristotle University of Thessaloniki School of Medicine, Thessaloniki,
Greece. david.rimm@yale.edu.

BACKGROUND: Studies have shown that antibodies targeting the intracellular (ICD) 
or extracellular domains (ECD) of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)
are equivalent when traditional methods are used. We describe a new method to
quantify ICD and ECD expression separately and assess the prognostic value of
domain-specific HER2 results in patients who received adjuvant trastuzumab
therapy.
METHODS: We measured HER2 protein expression with quantitative immunofluorescence
(QIF) in tissue microarrays (TMA) using two different antibodies targeting the
ICD (CB11 and A0485) and ECD (SP3 and D8F12). We assessed the prognostic value of
ICD and ECD expression in 180 patients from a clinical trial of adjuvant
chemotherapy followed by trastuzumab (HeCOG 10/05). We performed an exploratory
univariate domain-specific, disease-free survival (DFS) analysis and compared DFS
functions with Kaplan-Meier estimates. All statistical tests were two-sided.
RESULTS: HER2 ICD expression by QIF showed slightly higher sensitivity to predict
ERBB2 (HER2) gene amplification than ECD expression, which was more specific and 
had higher positive predictive value. In the HeCOG 10/05 trial specimens, 15% of 
cases showed discordant results for ICD and ECD expression. High ECD was
statistically associated with longer DFS (log-rank P = .049, HR = 0.31, 95% CI = 
0.144 to 0.997), while ICD status was not. Among patients with low ECD, there was
no difference in DFS by ICD status. However, when ICD was high, high ECD was
statistically associated with longer DFS (log-rank P = .027, HR = 0.23, 95% CI = 
0.037 to 0.82) compared with low ECD.
CONCLUSION: Quantitative measurements of HER2 ICD and ECD expression in breast
cancer suggest a subclassification of HER2-positive tumors. Trastuzumab-treated
patients with high ECD showed better DFS than patients with low ECD. This
suggests differential benefit from trastuzumab therapy based on HER2 ECD
expression.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4554192 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25991002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Neurosci. 2015 May 13;35(19):7332-48. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2174-14.2015.

Sp3/REST/HDAC1/HDAC2 Complex Represses and Sp1/HIF-1/p300 Complex Activates ncx1 
Gene Transcription, in Brain Ischemia and in Ischemic Brain Preconditioning, by
Epigenetic Mechanism.

Formisano L(1), Guida N(2), Valsecchi V(3), Cantile M(3), Cuomo O(3), Vinciguerra
A(3), Laudati G(3), Pignataro G(3), Sirabella R(2), Di Renzo G(3), Annunziato
L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology, Department of Neuroscience, Reproductive and
Dentistry Sciences, School of Medicine, "Federico II" University of Naples,
Naples 80131, Italy, Division of Pharmacology, Department of Science and
Technology, University of Sannio, 82100 Benevento, Italy, and. (2)IRCSS SDN,
Naples 80131, Italy. (3)Division of Pharmacology, Department of Neuroscience,
Reproductive and Dentistry Sciences, School of Medicine, "Federico II" University
of Naples, Naples 80131, Italy. (4)Division of Pharmacology, Department of
Neuroscience, Reproductive and Dentistry Sciences, School of Medicine, "Federico 
II" University of Naples, Naples 80131, Italy, IRCSS SDN, Naples 80131, Italy
lannunzi@unina.it.

The Na(+)-Ca(2+) exchanger 1 (NCX1) is reduced in stroke by the RE1-silencing
transcription factor (REST), whereas it is increased in ischemic brain
preconditioning (PC) by hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1). Because ncx1 brain
promoter (ncx1-Br) has five putative consensus sequences, named Sp1A-E, for the
specificity protein (Sp) family of transcription factors (Sp1-4), we investigated
the role of this family in regulating ncx1 transcription in rat cortical neurons.
Here we found that Sp1 is a transcriptional activator, whereas Sp3 is a
transcriptional repressor of ncx1, and that both bind ncx1-Br in a
sequence-specific manner, modulating ncx1 transcription through the Sp1 sites
C-E. Furthermore, by transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (tMCAO) in rats, 
the transcriptional repressors Sp3 and REST colocalized with the two
histone-deacetylases (HDACs) HDAC1 and HDAC2 on the ncx1-Br, with a consequent
hypoacetylation. Contrarily, in PC+tMCAO the transcriptional activators Sp1 and
HIF-1 colocalized with histone acetyltransferase p300 on ncx1-Br with a
consequent hyperacetylation. In addition, in neurons silenced with siRNA of NCX1 
and subjected to oxygen and glucose deprivation (OGD) (3 h) plus reoxygenation
(RX) (24 h), the neuroprotection of Class I HDAC inhibitor MS-275 was
counteracted, whereas in neurons overexpressing NCX1 and subjected to ischemic
preconditioning (PC+OGD/RX), the neurotoxic effect of p300 inhibitor C646 was
prevented. Collectively, these results demonstrate that NCX1 expression is
regulated by the Sp3/REST/HDAC1/HDAC2 complex in tMCAO and by the Sp1/HIF-1/p300 
complex in PC+tMCAO and that epigenetic intervention, by modulating the
acetylation of ncx1-Br, may be a strategy for the development of innovative
therapeutic intervention in stroke.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/357332-17$15.00/0.

PMID: 25972164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2014 Dec;14(12):9124-30.

Microstructure and properties of silicon-incorporated DLC film fabricated using
HMDS gas and RF-PECVD process.

Song BJ, Song WJ, Han JH, Kim KR, Yoon SJ, Kim TG, Kim JK, Cho H, Kim GH, Hwang
DY, Kim HS.

The microstructure and characteristics of silicon-incorporated diamond-like
carbon film, fabricated using a radio-frequency plasma-enhanced chemical vapor
deposition process with hexamethyldisilane [(CH3)3,Si x Si(CH3)3:HMDS] gas as a
silicon source, were investigated. Diamond-like carbon films with silicon
compositions from 0 to 5 atomic percent were deposited onto ultra-fine grained
AZ31 magnesium alloy substrate as buffer layers or multilayers. Si doping led not
only to an increase in the bonding ratio (sp3/sp2), but improvements in hardness,
critical adhesion, and corrosion resistance. Out of the investigated samples, the
multi-deposited silicon diamond-like carbon thin film on magnesium substrate
showed the best combination of adhesive, wear resistance, and corrosion
resistance properties.

PMID: 25971022  [PubMed]


109. Chemosphere. 2015 Sep;135:257-64. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2015.04.064. Epub
2015 May 15.

Multibiomarker in fish to evaluate a river used to water public supply.

Bueno-Krawczyk AC(1), Guiloski IC(2), Piancini LD(3), Azevedo JC(4), Ramsdorf
WA(4), Ide AH(4), Guimarães AT(5), Cestari MM(3), Silva de Assis HC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Ecology and Conservation Post-graduate Program, Federal University of Paraná, 
P.O. Box 19031, Curitiba-Paraná 81531-990, Brazil. Electronic address:
bueno_acd@yahoo.com.br. (2)Department of Pharmacology, Federal University of
Paraná, P.O. Box 19031, Curitiba-Paraná 81531-990, Brazil. (3)Department of
Genetics, Federal University of Paraná, P.O. Box 19031, Curitiba-Paraná
81531-990, Brazil. (4)Environmental Science and Technology Post-graduate Program,
Paraná Federal Technological University, Curitiba, PR, Brazil. (5)Department of
Biological Sciences and Health, West Paraná State University, Cascavel, PR,
Brazil.

We aimed to evaluate the ecological integrity of a large river, which receives
agricultural and urban effluents and is used to water public supply. The fish
species Astyanax bifasciatus was used as bioindicator during winter and spring
2012, and summer 2013 at the Middle Iguaçu River basin in Paraná state, Brazil.
Water chemical and physical measures and ecotoxicological tests were carried out 
as well biochemical and genetic biomarkers in sampled fish in each period. The
studied area was divided in three sample points: SP1, located where the water is 
collected to public supply; SP2, located in an urbanized area, and SP3, located
at an urbanized area with the discharge of the sewage treatment. Although water
chemical and physical analyzes were range of the Brazilian law to hydric bodies, 
anticholinesterasic effects were found in winter, oxidative stress in summer and 
spring. The higher genotoxic effect was in winter to all sample points. The
temporal variation in biomarkers and the detection of caffeine in the water call 
attention to the water quality in this river mainly to be used to public supply.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25965005  [PubMed - in process]


110. Pharmacol Ther. 2015 Aug;152:111-24. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2015.05.008. Epub 
2015 May 8.

Sp1 transcription factor: A long-standing target in cancer chemotherapy.

Vizcaíno C(1), Mansilla S(1), Portugal J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología Molecular de Barcelona, CSIC, Parc Científic de
Barcelona, E-08028 Barcelona, Spain. (2)Instituto de Biología Molecular de
Barcelona, CSIC, Parc Científic de Barcelona, E-08028 Barcelona, Spain.
Electronic address: jpmbmc@ibmb.csic.es.

Sp1 (specificity protein 1) is a well-known member of a family of transcription
factors that also includes Sp2, Sp3 and Sp4, which are implicated in an ample
variety of essential biological processes and have been proven important in cell 
growth, differentiation, apoptosis and carcinogenesis. Sp1 activates the
transcription of many cellular genes that contain putative CG-rich Sp-binding
sites in their promoters. Sp1 and Sp3 proteins bind to similar, if not the same, 
DNA tracts and compete for binding, thus they can enhance or repress gene
expression. Evidences exist that the Sp-family of proteins regulates the
expression of genes that play pivotal roles in cell proliferation and metastasis 
of various tumors. In patients with a variety of cancers, high levels of Sp1
protein are considered a negative prognostic factor. A plethora of compounds can 
interfere with the trans-activating activities of Sp1 and other Sp proteins on
gene expression. Several pathways are involved in the down-regulation of Sp
proteins by compounds with different mechanisms of action, which include not only
the direct interference with the binding of Sp proteins to their putative DNA
binding sites, but also promoting the degradation of Sp protein factors.
Down-regulation of Sp transcription factors and Sp1-regulated genes is
drug-dependent and it is determined by the cell context. The acknowledgment that 
several of those compounds are safe enough might accelerate their introduction
into clinical usage in patients with tumors that over-express Sp1.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25960131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Immunol Res. 2015 Jul;62(3):273-9. doi: 10.1007/s12026-015-8658-9.

All-trans retinoic acid up-regulates the human CD2AP gene expression through
Sp1/Sp3 binding sites.

Xu HG(1), Jin R, Gao S, Ren W, Zou L, Liu L, Zhou GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University, 300 Guang Zhou Road, Nanjing, 210029, Jiangsu Province, China.

All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA), an active metabolite of vitamin A, plays an
important role in regulating cell differentiation, proliferation, and apoptosis. 
It was reported that ATRA could cause an up-regulation of protein expression of
CD2AP in nephrotic animals. However, the mechanism of ATRA-mediated up-regulation
is not well understood. In the present study, deletion analysis and luciferase
assays demonstrated that ATRA caused a marked increase in the activity of the
CD2AP promoter, and the region between nt -599 and -328 from the transcription
start site, where there are two clusters of Sp1/3 binding sites, was
indispensable for ATRA-mediated up-regulation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays revealed that ATRA activated the CD2AP transcription through enhancing the
DNA-binding activity of Sp1 and Sp3 with the CD2AP promoter. Taken together, this
study provided evidence for the first time showing the stimulating effect of ATRA
on CD2AP and new therapeutic strategies for the treatment of nephritic syndrome
and other associated diseases of CD2AP deficiency.

PMID: 25957888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Aug;12(2):2707-14. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3709. Epub 2015 Apr
30.

A comprehensive analysis of differentially expressed genes and pathways in
abdominal aortic aneurysm.

Yuan K(1), Liang W(1), Zhang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Surgery, Renji Hospital of Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200127, P.R. China.

The current study aimed to investigate the molecular mechanism underlying
abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) via various bioinformatics techniques. Gene
expression profiling analysis of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between
AAA samples and normal controls was conducted. The Database for Annotation,
Visualization and Integrated Discovery tool was utilized to perform Gene ontology
(GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes analyses for DEGs and clusters
from the protein-protein interaction (PPI) network, which was constructed using
the Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes. In addition, important
transcription factors (TFs) that regulated DEGs were investigated. A total of 346
DEGs were identified between AAA samples and healthy controls. Additionally, four
clusters were identified from the PPI network. Cluster 1 was associated with
sensory perception of smell and the olfactory transduction subpathway. The most
significant GO function terms for cluster 2 and 3 were response to virus and
defense response, respectively. Cluster 4 was associated with
mitochondria-associated functions and the oxidative phosphorylation subpathway.
Early growth response-1 (EGR-1), Myc, activating transcription factor 5 (ATF5)
and specificity protein (SP) 1:SP3 were identified to be critical TFs in this
disease. The present study suggested that the olfactory transduction subpathway, 
mitochondria and oxidative phosphorylation pathways were involved in AAA, and
TFs, such as EGR-1, Myc, ATF5 and SP1:SP3, may be potential candidate molecular
targets for this disease.

PMID: 25936411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Phys Condens Matter. 2014 Jun 11;26(23):235402.

A metallic carbon consisting of helical carbon triangle chains.

Hu M, Dong X, Pan Y, Xu B, Yu D, He J.

Carbon is the basis of life on Earth and many technological applications. We
computationally report an sp3-hybridization-assembled carbon allotrope
constructed by helical triangle chains through the evolutionary structure
prediction method. Different from the previous metallic carbon K4, this carbon,
called Tri-carbon, is mechanically and dynamically stable at ambient pressure.
High ring strain in the carbon triangle blocks forces the CC bond in Tri-carbon 
to be a 'bent bond', rather than the common single bond in diamond or the p bond 
in graphite. Unlike the unstrained sp3-hybridization in semiconductive diamond,
valence electrons in the 'bent bond' are recombined to form extremely anisotropic
sp3-hybridized bonds, thus conferring metallicity to Tri-carbon. Under
nonhydrostatic conditions, Tri-carbon shows significantly anisotropic ideal
tensile and compressive strength. Tri-carbon is expected to be achieved through
chemical methods, such as the synthesis of cyclopropane derivatives (e.g.
triangulane and tetrahedrane). These methods eliminate the restriction of
ultra-high pressure to obtain metallic carbons.

PMID: 25932471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 22;10(4):e0120942. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0120942.
eCollection 2015.

Capturing nature's diversity.

Pascolutti M(1), Campitelli M(1), Nguyen B(1), Pham N(1), Gorse AD(2), Quinn
RJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Eskitis Institute for Drug Discovery, Griffith University, Brisbane,
Queensland, Australia. (2)Eskitis Institute for Drug Discovery, Griffith
University, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia; QFAB Bioinformatics, The University 
of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.

Natural products are universally recognized to contribute valuable chemical
diversity to the design of molecular screening libraries. The analysis undertaken
in this work, provides a foundation for the generation of fragment screening
libraries that capture the diverse range of molecular recognition building blocks
embedded within natural products. Physicochemical properties were used to select 
fragment-sized natural products from a database of known natural products
(Dictionary of Natural Products). PCA analysis was used to illustrate the
positioning of the fragment subset within the property space of the non-fragment 
sized natural products in the dataset. Structural diversity was analysed by three
distinct methods: atom function analysis, using pharmacophore fingerprints, atom 
type analysis, using radial fingerprints, and scaffold analysis. Small
pharmacophore triplets, representing the range of chemical features present in
natural products that are capable of engaging in molecular interactions with
small, contiguous areas of protein binding surfaces, were analysed. We
demonstrate that fragment-sized natural products capture more than half of the
small pharmacophore triplet diversity observed in non fragment-sized natural
product datasets. Atom type analysis using radial fingerprints was represented by
a self-organizing map. We examined the structural diversity of non-flat
fragment-sized natural product scaffolds, rich in sp3 configured centres. From
these results we demonstrate that 2-ring fragment-sized natural products
effectively balance the opposing characteristics of minimal complexity and broad 
structural diversity when compared to the larger, more complex fragment-like
natural products. These naturally-derived fragments could be used as the starting
point for the generation of a highly diverse library with the scope for further
medicinal chemistry elaboration due to their minimal structural complexity. This 
study highlights the possibility to capture a high proportion of the individual
molecular interaction motifs embedded within natural products using a fragment
screening library spanning 422 structural clusters and comprised of approximately
2800 natural products.

PMCID: PMC4406718
PMID: 25902039  [PubMed - in process]


115. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Jun 12;461(4):582-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.04.049. Epub 2015 Apr 16.

Parathyroid hormone inhibition of Na(+)/H(+) exchanger 3 transcription:
Intracellular signaling pathways and transcription factor expression.

Neri EA(1), Bezerra CN(2), Queiroz-Leite GD(1), Polidoro JZ(1), Rebouças NA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Institute of Biomedical Sciences,
University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil. (2)Department of Physiology and
Biophysics, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo,
Brazil. Electronic address: camilab@icb.usp.br.

The main transport mechanism of reabsorption of sodium bicarbonate and fluid in
the renal proximal tubules involves Na(+)/H(+) exchanger 3 (NHE3), which is
acutely and chronically downregulated by parathyroid hormone (PTH). Although PTH 
is known to exert an inhibitory effect on NHE3 expression and transcription, the 
molecular mechanisms involved remain unclear. Here, we demonstrated that, in
opossum kidney proximal tubule (OKP) cells, PTH-induced inhibition of Nhe3 gene
promoter occurs even in the core promoter that controls expression of the
reporter gene. We found that inhibition of the protein kinase A (PKA) and Janus
kinase/signal transducer and activator of transcription (JAK/STAT) pathways
transformed PTH from an inhibitor of promoter activity into an activator of that 
same activity, as did point mutations in the EGR1, Sp1, and Sp3 binding consensus
elements in the promoter. In nuclear extracts of PTH-treated OKP cells, we also
observed increased expression of EGR1 mRNA and of some Sp3 isoforms.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay showed a supershift of the -61 to -42-bp
probe with an anti-EGR1 antibody in PTH-treated cells, suggesting that EGR1
binding is relevant for the inhibitory activity of PTH. We conclude that
PTH-induced inhibition of NHE3 transcription is related to higher EGR1
expression; to EGR1 binding to the proximal and core promoters; and to PKA and
JAK/STAT pathway activation. This mechanism might be responsible, at least in
part, for lower NHE3 expression and sodium reabsorption in renal proximal tubules
in the presence of high PTH levels.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25888790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Am Chem Soc. 2015 May 6;137(17):5695-705. doi: 10.1021/ja5116088. Epub 2015 Apr
24.

Toward Efficient Enzymes for the Generation of Universal Blood through
Structure-Guided Directed Evolution.

Kwan DH, Constantinescu I, Chapanian R, Higgins MA(1), Kötzler MP, Samain E(2),
Boraston AB(1), Kizhakkedathu JN, Withers SG.

Author information: 
(1)<U+22A5>Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria,
Victoria, British Columbia, Canada V8W 3P6. (2)#Centre de Recherches sur les
Macromolécules Végétales, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Grenoble 
Cedex 9, France BP 53, 38041.

Blood transfusions are critically important in many medical procedures, but the
presence of antigens on red blood cells (RBCs, erythrocytes) means that careful
blood-typing must be carried out prior to transfusion to avoid adverse and
sometimes fatal reactions following transfusion. Enzymatic removal of the
terminal N-acetylgalactosamine or galactose of A- or B-antigens, respectively,
yields universal O-type blood, but is inefficient. Starting with the family 98
glycoside hydrolase from Streptococcus pneumoniae SP3-BS71 (Sp3GH98), which
cleaves the entire terminal trisaccharide antigenic determinants of both A- and
B-antigens from some of the linkages on RBC surface glycans, through several
rounds of evolution, we developed variants with vastly improved activity toward
some of the linkages that are resistant to cleavage by the wild-type enzyme. The 
resulting enzyme effects more complete removal of blood group antigens from cell 
surfaces, demonstrating the potential for engineering enzymes to generate
antigen-null blood from donors of various types.

PMID: 25870881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Org Chem. 2015 May 1;80(9):4661-71. doi: 10.1021/acs.joc.5b00564. Epub 2015 Apr
16.

Modular Approach to Reductive C(sp2)-H and C(sp3)-H Silylation of Carboxylic Acid
Derivatives through Single-Pot, Sequential Transition Metal Catalysis.

Hua Y(1), Jung S(1), Roh J(1), Jeon J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Texas at Arlington,
Arlington, Texas 76019, United States.

We report a modular approach to catalytic reductive Csp2-H and Csp3-H silylation 
of carboxylic acid derivatives encompassing esters, ketones, and aldehydes.
Choice of either an Ir(I)/Rh(I) or Rh(I)/Rh(I) sequence leads to either
exhaustive reductive ester or reductive ketone/aldehyde silylation, respectively.
Notably, a catalyst-controlled direct formation of doubly reduced silyl ethers is
presented, specifically via Ir-catalyzed exhaustive hydrosilylation. The
resulting silyl ethers undergo Csp2-H and benzylic Csp3-H silylation in a single 
vessel.

PMID: 25853682  [PubMed]


118. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2015 May 26;54(22):6604-7. doi: 10.1002/anie.201501287.
Epub 2015 Apr 8.

Copper-Catalyzed Radical/Radical C(sp<U+2009>3)-H/P-H Cross-Coupling: a-Phosphorylation 
of Aryl Ketone O-Acetyloximes.

Ke J(1), Tang Y(1), Yi H(1), Li Y(2), Cheng Y(1), Liu C(1), Lei A(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences, The Institute for Advanced
Studies (IAS), Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei 430072 (P.R. China)
http://aiwenlei.whu.edu.cn/Main_Website/ (2)Key Laboratory for Organic
Electronics and Information Display and Institute of Advanced Materials, Nanjing 
University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, 210023 (P.R. China).
(3)College of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences, The Institute for Advanced
Studies (IAS), Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei 430072 (P.R. China)
http://aiwenlei.whu.edu.cn/Main_Website/. aiwenlei@whu.edu.cn. (4)State Key
Laboratory for Oxo Synthesis and Selective Oxidation, Lanzhou Institute of
Chemical Physics, 730000 Lanzhou (P.R. China). aiwenlei@whu.edu.cn.

The selective radical/radical cross-coupling of two different organic radicals is
a great challenge due to the inherent activity of radicals. In this paper, a
copper-catalyzed radical/radical C(sp<U+2009>3)-H/P-H cross-coupling has been developed.
It provides a radical/radical cross-coupling in a selective manner. This work
offers a simple way toward ß-ketophosphonates by oxidative coupling of aryl
ketone o-acetyloximes with phosphine oxides using CuCl as catalyst and PCy3 as
ligand in dioxane under N2 atmosphere at 130<U+2009>°C for 5 h, and yields ranging from 
47% to 86%. The preliminary mechanistic studies by electron paramagnetic
resonance (EPR) showed that, 1) the reduction of ketone o-acetyloximes generates 
iminium radicals, which could isomerize to a-sp(3) -carbon radical species;
2) phosphorus radicals were generated from the oxidation of phosphine oxides.
Various aryl ketone o-acetyloximes and phosphine oxides were suitable for this
transformation.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25853638  [PubMed]


119. Med Biol Eng Comput. 2015 Sep;53(9):805-14. doi: 10.1007/s11517-015-1293-8. Epub 
2015 Apr 8.

Performance investigation of SP3 and diffusion approximation for
three-dimensional whole-body optical imaging of small animals.

Yang D(1), Chen X(2), Cao X(1), Wang J(3), Liang J(1), Tian J(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Engineering Research Center of Molecular and Neuro Imaging of Ministry of
Education, School of Life Science and Technology, Xidian University, Xi'an,
710071, Shaanxi, China. (2)Engineering Research Center of Molecular and Neuro
Imaging of Ministry of Education, School of Life Science and Technology, Xidian
University, Xi'an, 710071, Shaanxi, China. xuelichenmig@gmail.com. (3)Department 
of Nuclear Medicine, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, 
710032, Shaanxi, China. (4)Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Beijing, 100190, China.

The third-order simplified harmonic spherical approximation (SP3) and diffusion
approximation (DA) equations have been widely used in the three-dimensional (3D) 
whole-body optical imaging of small animals. With different types of tissues,
which were classified by the ratio of µ s'/µ <U+0251>, the two equations have their own 
application scopes. However, the classification criterion was blurring and
unreasonable, and the scope has not been systematically investigated until now.
In this study, a new criterion for classifying tissues was established based on
the absolute value of absorption and reduced scattering coefficients. Using the
newly defined classification criterion, the performance and applicability of the 
SP3 and DA equations were evaluated with a series of investigation experiments.
Extensive investigation results showed that the SP3 equation exhibited a better
performance and wider applicability than the DA one in most of the observed
cases, especially in tissues of low-scattering-low-absorption and
low-scattering-high-absorption range. For the case of tissues with the
high-scattering-low-absorption properties, a similar performance was observed for
both the SP3 and the DA equations, in which case the DA was the preferred option 
for 3D whole-body optical imaging. Results of this study would provide
significant reference for the study of hybrid light transport models.

PMID: 25850985  [PubMed - in process]


120. ACS Catal. 2015 Feb 6;5(2):587-595. Epub 2014 Dec 8.

Mechanistic and Kinetic Studies of the Direct Alkylation of Benzylic Amines: A
Formal C(sp(3))-H Activation Proceeds Actually via a C(sp(2))-H Activation
Pathway.

Pollice R(1), Dastbaravardeh N(1), Marquise N(1), Mihovilovic MD(1), Schnürch
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Applied Synthetic Chemistry, Vienna University of Technology ,
Getreidemarkt 9/163-OC, Vienna 1060, Austria.

Mechanistic investigations of a Rh(I)-catalyzed direct C-H alkylation of benzylic
amines with alkenes, formally an C(sp(3))-H activation, reveal this reaction to
proceed via imine intermediates and, hence, via C(sp(2))-H activation. The
reaction shows a primary kinetic isotope effect of 4.3 at the benzylic C-H
position together with a reversible H-D exchange at the same position, which
indicates that there are at least two distinct steps in which the corresponding
C-H bonds are broken. The imine intermediates are shown to be converted to the
final product under the reaction conditions, and a time course analysis of the
alkylated imine intermediate shows that it is formed before the final amine
product in the course of the reaction.

PMCID: PMC4372103
PMID: 25838971  [PubMed]


121. Oncotarget. 2015 May 10;6(13):11600-13.

Activation of AKR1C1/ERß induces apoptosis by downregulation of c-FLIP in
prostate cancer cells: A prospective therapeutic opportunity.

Yun H(1,)(2), Xie J(1,)(3), Olumi AF(4), Ghosh R(1,)(2,)(5,)(6), Kumar
AP(1,)(2,)(5,)(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The University of Texas Health Science Center, San
Antonio, TX, USA. (2)Department of Pharmacology, The University of Texas Health
Science Center, San Antonio, TX, USA. (3)Department of Urology, Shanxi Dayi
Hospital, Shanxi Academy of Medical Science, Taiyuan, P.R.China. (4)Department of
Urology, Massachusetts General Hospital Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 
(5)Department of Molecular Medicine, The University of Texas Health Science
Center, San Antonio, TX, USA. (6)Cancer Therapy and Research Center, The
University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, TX, USA. (7)South Texas
Veterans Health Care System, San Antonio, TX, USA.

We provide first-time evidence for ERß-mediated transcriptional upregulation of
c-FLIP as an underlying mechanism in the development of castrate-resistant
cancer. While androgens inhibit apoptosis partly through transcriptional
upregulation of the anti-apoptotic protein, c-FLIP in androgen-responsive cells, 
they downregulate c-FLIP in androgen-independent cells. We found that although
Sp1 and p65 trans-activate c-FLIP, the combination of Sp1 and p65 has
differential effects in a cellular context-dependent manner. We show that
activation of the androgen metabolism enzyme, aldo-keto reductase, AKR1C1,
relieves androgen independence through activation of 3ß-Adiol-mediated
upregulation of ERß. ERß competes with Sp1 and Sp3 to transcriptionally
downregulate c-FLIP in the absence of consensus estrogen-response element in
androgen-independent cells. Forced expression of AR in androgen-independent cells
show that ERß-mediated growth inhibition occurs under conditions of androgen
independence. Reactivation of ERß with the estrogenic metabolite,
2-methoxyestradiol, decreased enrichment ratio of Sp1/Sp3 at the c-FLIP promoter 
with concomitant effects on cell growth and death. Expression of Sp1 and c-FLIP
are elevated while AKR1C1, ERß and Sp3 are significantly low in human prostate
tumor samples. ERß is epigenetically silenced in prostate cancer patients,
therefore our results suggest that combination of ERß agonists with ADT would
benefit men stratified on the basis of high estrogen levels.

PMCID: PMC4484479
PMID: 25816367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Chemistry. 2015 May 4;21(19):7030-4. doi: 10.1002/chem.201406290. Epub 2015 Mar
23.

Selenium-Catalyzed C(sp3)-H Acyloxylation: Application in the Expedient Synthesis
of Isobenzofuranones.

Krätzschmar F(1), Kaßel M, Delony D, Breder A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Organische und Biomolekulare Chemie, Georg-August-Universitaet
Göttingen, Tammannstrasse 2, 37077 Göttingen (Germany).

Oxidative Se-catalyzed C(sp3)-H bond acyloxylation has been used to construct a
diverse array of isobenzofuranones from simple ortho-allyl benzoic acid
derivatives. The synthetic procedure employs mild reaction conditions and gives
high chemoselectivity enabled by an inexpensive organodiselane catalyst. The
presented approach offers a new synthetic pathway toward the core structures of
phthalide natural products.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25808950  [PubMed]


123. Chemistry. 2015 May 4;21(19):7043-7. doi: 10.1002/chem.201406591. Epub 2015 Mar
20.

Modular Stereoselective Synthesis of (1<U+2192>2)-C-Glycosides based on the sp(2) -sp(3)
Suzuki-Miyaura Reaction.

Oroszova B(1), Choutka J, Pohl R, Parkan K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry of Natural Compounds, University of Chemistry and
Technology, Prague, Technická 5, 166 28 Prague 6 (Czech Republic).

This work reports a modular and rapid approach to the stereoselective synthesis
of a variety of a- and ß-(1<U+2192>2)-linked C-disaccharides. The key step is a
Ni-catalyzed cross-coupling reaction of D-glucal pinacol boronate with alkyl
halide glycoside easily prepared from commercially available D-glucal. The
products of this sp(2) -sp(3) cross-coupling reaction can be converted to
glucopyranosyl, mannopyranosyl, or 2-deoxy-glucopyranosyl C-mannopyranosides by
one- or two-step stereoselective oxidative-reductive transformations. To the best
of our knowledge, we demonstrated the first synthetic application of a
challenging sp(2) -sp(3) Suzuki-Miyaura cross-coupling reaction in carbohydrate
chemistry.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25801323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Biotech Histochem. 2015 Jul;90(5):353-60. doi: 10.3109/10520295.2015.1007481.
Epub 2015 Mar 24.

Identification of genes associated with disc degeneration using bioinformatics.

Ji SC(1), Han N, Liu Y, Li G, Sun Z, Li Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Trauma Surgery, East Hospital, Tongji University
School of Medicine , Shanghai , China.

Intervertebral disc degeneration is a common orthopedic disease that has been
recognized as the major cause of low back pain. About 80% of the population is
affected by this disease. We explored molecular mechanisms of disc degeneration
and identified the genes associated with the disease. The transcription profile
of GSE34095 was downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus database with three
degenerative disc samples and three healthy disc samples. Gene ontology and
pathway enrichment analysis were performed. We constructed a protein-protein
interaction (PPI) network and a transcription factor (TF) target network.
Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in normal and disc degeneration samples
were identified including 243 up-regulated genes and 351 down-regulated genes.
Meanwhile, seven Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways were
obtained by mapping the 594 DEGs to the KEGG and we found that the calcium
signaling pathway was the most significant for developing disc degeneration. The 
pathways interaction network analysis showed that the adherens junction pathway
interacted with other six pathways. In addition, the top five genes, FYN, PRKCD, 
YWHAB, YWHAZ and AR, with a high degree of interaction of 7, 4, 4, 4 and 4,
respectively, were related to the disc degeneration in the PPI network.
Furthermore, transcription factors including TFAP2A, E2F4, SP3 and AR had the
potential to regulate disc degeneration through the mitogen-activated protein
kinase, vascular endothelial growth factor and p53 pathways. The genes and
pathways that we identified may be involved in disc degeneration.

PMID: 25801299  [PubMed - in process]


125. Hum Immunol. 2015 May;76(5):307-17. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2015.03.010. Epub 2015 
Mar 19.

NFAT-1, Sp-1, Sp-3, and miR-21: New regulators of chemokine C receptor 7
expression in mature human dendritic cells.

Al Akoum C(1), Akl I(2), Rouas R(2), Fayyad-Kazan M(1), Falha L(1), Renno T(3),
Burny A(2), Lewalle P(2), Fayyad-Kazan H(2), Badran B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Laboratory of Immunology, EDST-PRASE, Lebanese
University, Faculty of Sciences, Hadath-Beirut, Lebanon. (2)Laboratory of
Experimental Hematology, Institut Jules Bordet, Université Libre de Bruxelles,
121, Boulevard de Waterloo, 1000 Bruxelles, Belgium. (3)Innate Immune Signalling 
and Oncogenesis Group Lyon Cancer Research Center, Centre Léon Bérard, 28 rue
Laennec, 69373 Lyon, France. (4)Department of Biochemistry, Laboratory of
Immunology, EDST-PRASE, Lebanese University, Faculty of Sciences, Hadath-Beirut, 
Lebanon. Electronic address: bassam.badran@ul.edu.lb.

The chemokine C receptor 7 (CCR7) is a G-protein-coupled heptahelical receptor
(GPCR) that is expressed on a wide variety of cells including memory T cells, B
cells, mature dendritic cells, and cancer cells. Activated by its ligands CCL19
or CCL21, CCR7 plays a major role in metastasis of cancer cells. Recent studies
demonstrated the role of NF-<U+03BA>B and AP-1 transcription factors in addition to
let-7 microRNA in CCR7 expression. Our ChIP assays further show the binding of
Sp-1, Sp-3 and NFAT-1 transcription factors to their potential binding sites in
the 1Kb promoter region with the later found to inhibit whilst Sp-1, and Sp-3
were found to stimulate CCR7 expression as demonstrated by transfection assays.
On the other hand, in addition to the known let-7 regulation of CCR7, we found
miR-21 to have a highly conserved target region in CCR7 3'UTR and to be
significantly down-regulated during the course of dendritic cell maturation,
allowing for high expression of CCR7.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 25797200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. PLoS Genet. 2015 Mar 20;11(3):e1005102. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005102.
eCollection 2015.

Zinc finger independent genome-wide binding of Sp2 potentiates recruitment of
histone-fold protein Nf-y distinguishing it from Sp1 and Sp3.

Völkel S(1), Stielow B(1), Finkernagel F(1), Stiewe T(2), Nist A(2), Suske G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT), Philipps-University
of Marburg, Marburg, Germany. (2)Genomics Core Facility, Zentrum für Tumor- und
Immunbiologie (ZTI), Philipps-University of Marburg, Marburg, Germany.

Transcription factors are grouped into families based on sequence similarity
within functional domains, particularly DNA-binding domains. The Specificity
proteins Sp1, Sp2 and Sp3 are paradigmatic of closely related transcription
factors. They share amino-terminal glutamine-rich regions and a conserved
carboxy-terminal zinc finger domain that can bind to GC rich motifs in vitro. All
three Sp proteins are ubiquitously expressed; yet they carry out unique functions
in vivo raising the question of how specificity is achieved. Crucially, it is
unknown whether they bind to distinct genomic sites and, if so, how binding site 
selection is accomplished. In this study, we have examined the genomic binding
patterns of Sp1, Sp2 and Sp3 in mouse embryonic fibroblasts by ChIP-seq. Sp1 and 
Sp3 essentially occupy the same promoters and localize to GC boxes. The genomic
binding pattern of Sp2 is different; Sp2 primarily localizes at CCAAT motifs.
Consistently, re-expression of Sp2 and Sp3 mutants in corresponding knockout MEFs
revealed strikingly different modes of genomic binding site selection. Most
significantly, while the zinc fingers dictate genomic binding of Sp3, they are
completely dispensable for binding of Sp2. Instead, the glutamine-rich
amino-terminal region is sufficient for recruitment of Sp2 to its target
promoters in vivo. We have identified the trimeric histone-fold CCAAT box binding
transcription factor Nf-y as the major partner for Sp2-chromatin interaction.
Nf-y is critical for recruitment of Sp2 to co-occupied regulatory elements.
Equally, Sp2 potentiates binding of Nf-y to shared sites indicating the existence
of an extensive Sp2-Nf-y interaction network. Our results unveil strikingly
different recruitment mechanisms of Sp1/Sp2/Sp3 transcription factor members
uncovering an unexpected layer of complexity in their binding to chromatin in
vivo.

PMCID: PMC4368557
PMID: 25793500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Science. 2015 Mar 13;347(6227):1221-6. doi: 10.1126/science.aaa5414.

Synthesis of many different types of organic small molecules using one automated 
process.

Li J(1), Ballmer SG(1), Gillis EP(1), Fujii S(1), Schmidt MJ(1), Palazzolo AM(1),
Lehmann JW(1), Morehouse GF(1), Burke MD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI), Department of Chemistry, University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA. (2)Howard Hughes Medical
Institute (HHMI), Department of Chemistry, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA. mdburke@illinois.edu.

Comment in
    Science. 2015 Mar 13;347(6227):1190-3.

Small-molecule synthesis usually relies on procedures that are highly customized 
for each target. A broadly applicable automated process could greatly increase
the accessibility of this class of compounds to enable investigations of their
practical potential. Here we report the synthesis of 14 distinct classes of small
molecules using the same fully automated process. This was achieved by
strategically expanding the scope of a building block-based synthesis platform to
include even C(sp3)-rich polycyclic natural product frameworks and discovering a 
catch-and-release chromatographic purification protocol applicable to all of the 
corresponding intermediates. With thousands of compatible building blocks already
commercially available, many small molecules are now accessible with this
platform. More broadly, these findings illuminate an actionable roadmap to a more
general and automated approach for small-molecule synthesis.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMCID: PMC4687482
PMID: 25766227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Exp Eye Res. 2015 Jun;135:146-63. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2015.03.001. Epub 2015 Mar 
4.

Characterization of the human a9 integrin subunit gene: Promoter analysis and
transcriptional regulation in ocular cells.

Duval C(1), Zaniolo K(1), Leclerc S(1), Salesse C(2), Guérin SL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre Universitaire d'Ophtalmologie-Recherche, Axe Médecine Régénératrice,
Hôpital du Saint-Sacrement, Centre de Recherche FRQS du CHU de Québec, Québec,
Canada. (2)Centre Universitaire d'Ophtalmologie-Recherche, Axe Médecine
Régénératrice, Hôpital du Saint-Sacrement, Centre de Recherche FRQS du CHU de
Québec, Québec, Canada; Département d'Ophtalmologie, Faculté de Médecine,
Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada. (3)Centre Universitaire
d'Ophtalmologie-Recherche, Axe Médecine Régénératrice, Hôpital du
Saint-Sacrement, Centre de Recherche FRQS du CHU de Québec, Québec, Canada;
Département d'Ophtalmologie, Faculté de Médecine, Université Laval, Québec, QC,
Canada. Electronic address: Sylvain.Guerin@fmed.ulaval.ca.

a9ß1 is the most recent addition to the integrin family of membrane receptors and
consequently remains the one that is the least characterized. To better
understand how transcription of the human gene encoding the a9 subunit is
regulated, we cloned the a9 promoter and characterized the regulatory elements
that are required to ensure its transcription. Transfection of a9 promoter/CAT
plasmids in primary cultured human corneal epithelial cells (HCECs) and uveal
melanoma cell lines demonstrated the presence of both negative and positive
regulatory elements along the a9 promoter and positioned the basal a9 promoter to
within 118 bp from the a9 mRNA start site. In vitro DNaseI footprinting and in
vivo ChIP analyses demonstrated the binding of the transcription factors Sp1,
c-Myb and NFI to the most upstream a9 negative regulatory element. The
transcription factors Sp1 and NFI were found to bind the basal a9 promoter
individually but Sp1 binding clearly predominates when both transcription factors
are present in the same extract. Suppression of Sp1 expression through RNAi also 
caused a dramatic reduction in the expression of the a9 gene. Most of all,
addition of tenascin-C (TNC), the ligand of a9ß1, to the tissue culture plates
prior to seeding HCECs increased a9 transcription whereas it simultaneously
decreased expression of the a5 integrin subunit gene. This dual regulatory action
of TNC on the transcription of the a9 and a5 genes suggests that both these
integrins must work together to appropriately regulate cell adhesion, migration
and differentiation that are hallmarks of tissue wound healing.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25746835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Hypertension. 2015 May;65(5):1064-72. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.115.05255.
Epub 2015 Mar 2.

Transcriptional regulation of renal dopamine D1 receptor function during
oxidative stress.

Banday AA(1), Lokhandwala MF(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Heart and Kidney Institute, Department of Pharmacological and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of Houston, TX.
abanday@uh.edu. (2)From the Heart and Kidney Institute, Department of
Pharmacological and Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of
Houston, TX.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Nephrol. 2015 May;11(5):255.

There exists a strong link between oxidative stress, renal dopaminergic system,
and hypertension. It is reported that reactive oxygen species attenuate renal
proximal tubular dopamine receptor (D1R) function, which disrupts sodium
regulation and leads to hypertension. However, the mechanisms for renal D1R
dysfunction are not clear. We investigated the role of redox-sensitive
transcription factors AP1 and SP3 in transcriptional suppression of D1R gene and 
subsequent D1R signaling. Human kidney proximal tubular cells were treated with a
pro-oxidant l-buthionine sulfoximine (BSO) with and without an antioxidant
tempol. In human kidney cells, BSO caused oxidative stress and reduced D1R mRNA
and membrane receptor expression. Incubation of human kidney cells with SKF38393,
a D1R agonist, caused a concentration-dependent inhibition of Na/K-ATPase.
However, SKF38393 failed to inhibit Na/K-ATPase in BSO-treated cells. BSO
increased AP1 and SP3 nuclear expression. Transfection with AP1- or SP3-specific 
siRNA abolished BSO-induced D1R downregulation. Treatment of rats with BSO for 4 
weeks increased oxidative stress and SP3-AP1 expression and reduced D1R numbers
in renal proximal tubules. These rats exhibited high blood pressure, and SKF38393
failed to inhibit proximal tubular Na/K-ATPase activity. Control rats were kept
on tap water. Tempol per se had no effect on D1R expression or other signaling
molecules but prevented BSO-induced oxidative stress, SP3-AP1 upregulation, and
D1R dysfunction in both human kidney cells and rats. These data show that
oxidative stress via AP1-SP3 activation suppresses D1R transcription and
function. Tempol mitigates oxidative stress, blocks AP1-SP3 activation, and
prevents D1R dysfunction and hypertension.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4393374 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25733244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Cell Biochem. 2015 Sep;116(9):1880-7. doi: 10.1002/jcb.25143.

SMAD3 and SP1/SP3 Transcription Factors Collaborate to Regulate Connective Tissue
Growth Factor Gene Expression in Myoblasts in Response to Transforming Growth
Factor ß.

Córdova G(1,)(2,)(3), Rochard A(2,)(3), Riquelme-Guzmán C(1), Cofré C(1),
Scherman D(2,)(3), Bigey P(2,)(3), Brandan E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Diferenciación Celular y Patología, Centro de Regulación
Celular y Patología (CRCP), Departamento de Biología Celular y Molecular,
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile. (2)Unité de
Technologie Chimique et Biologique pour la Santé, CNRS, UMR8258, Paris, F-75006, 
France. (3)INSERM U1022, Université Paris Descartes, ENSCP Chimie-ParisTech,
Paris, France.

Fibrotic disorders are characterized by an increase in extracellular matrix
protein expression and deposition, Duchene Muscular Dystrophy being one of them. 
Among the factors that induce fibrosis are Transforming Growth Factor type ß
(TGF-ß) and the matricellular protein Connective Tissue Growth Factor
(CTGF/CCN2), the latter being a target of the TGF-ß/SMAD signaling pathway and is
the responsible for the profibrotic effects of TGF-ß. Both CTGF and TGF are
increased in tissues affected by fibrosis but little is known about the
regulation of the expression of CTGF mediated by TGF-ß in muscle cells. By using 
luciferase reporter assays, site directed mutagenesis and specific inhibitors in 
C2C12 cells; we described a novel SMAD Binding Element (SBE) located in the 5'
UTR region of the CTGF gene important for the TGF-ß-mediated expression of CTGF
in myoblasts. In addition, our results suggest that additional transcription
factor binding sites (TFBS) present in the 5' UTR of the CTGF gene are important 
for this expression and that SP1/SP3 factors are involved in TGF-ß-mediated CTGF 
expression.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25727481  [PubMed - in process]


131. Lancet Glob Health. 2015 Mar;3(3):e143-53. doi: 10.1016/S2214-109X(14)70385-7.

Cost-effectiveness of two versus three or more doses of intermittent preventive
treatment for malaria during pregnancy in sub-Saharan Africa: a modelling study
of meta-analysis and cost data.

Fernandes S(1), Sicuri E(2), Kayentao K(3), van Eijk AM(4), Hill J(4), Webster
J(5), Were V(6), Akazili J(7), Madanitsa M(8), ter Kuile FO(9), Hanson K(5).

Author information: 
(1)London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, Keppel Street, London, UK.
Electronic address: silke.fernandes@lshtm.ac.uk. (2)ISGlobal, Barcelona Ctr. Int.
Health Res. (CRESIB), Hospital Clínic-Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, UK; Malaria Research and
Training Centre, Department of Epidemiology of Parasitic Diseases, Faculty of
Medicine, Pharmacy and Dentistry, University of Sciences, Techniques and
Technologies of Bamako, Bamako, Mali. (4)Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine,
Liverpool, UK. (5)London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, Keppel Street,
London, UK. (6)KEMRI/CDC Research and Public Health Collaboration, Kisumu, Kenya.
(7)Navrongo Health Research Centre, Navrongo, Ghana. (8)College of Medicine,
University of Malawi, Blantyre, Malawi. (9)Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine,
Liverpool, UK; KEMRI/CDC Research and Public Health Collaboration, Kisumu, Kenya.

Comment in
    Lancet Glob Health. 2015 Mar;3(3):e116-7.

BACKGROUND: In 2012, WHO changed its recommendation for intermittent preventive
treatment of malaria during pregnancy (IPTp) from two doses to monthly doses of
sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine during the second and third trimesters, but noted the
importance of a cost-effectiveness analysis to lend support to the decision of
policy makers. We therefore estimated the incremental cost-effectiveness of IPTp 
with three or more (IPTp-SP3+) versus two doses of sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine
(IPTp-SP2).
METHODS: For this analysis, we used data from a 2013 meta-analysis of seven
studies in sub-Saharan Africa. We developed a decision tree model with a lifetime
horizon. We analysed the base case from a societal perspective. We did
deterministic and probabilistic sensitivity analyses with appropriate parameter
ranges and distributions for settings with low, moderate, and high background
risk of low birthweight, and did a separate analysis for HIV-negative women.
Parameters in the model were obtained for all countries included in the original 
meta-analysis. We did simulations in hypothetical cohorts of 1000 pregnant women 
receiving either IPTp-SP3+ or IPTp-SP2. We calculated disability-adjusted
life-years (DALYs) for low birthweight, severe to moderate anaemia, and clinical 
malaria. We calculated cost estimates from data obtained in observational
studies, exit surveys, and from public procurement databases. We give financial
and economic costs in constant 2012 US$. The main outcome measure was the
incremental cost per DALY averted.
FINDINGS: The delivery of IPTp-SP3+ to 1000 pregnant women averted 113·4 DALYs at
an incremental cost of $825·67 producing an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio 
(ICER) of $7·28 per DALY averted. The results remained robust in the
deterministic sensitivity analysis. In the probabilistic sensitivity analyses,
the ICER was $7·7 per DALY averted for moderate risk of low birthweight, $19·4
per DALY averted for low risk, and $4·0 per DALY averted for high risk. The ICER 
for HIV-negative women was $6·2 per DALY averted.
INTERPRETATION: Our findings lend strong support to the WHO guidelines that
recommend a monthly dose of IPTp-SP from the second trimester onwards.
FUNDING: Malaria in Pregnancy Consortium and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.

Copyright © 2015 Fernandes et al. Open Access article distributed under the terms
of CC BY-NC-SA. Published by .. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25701992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Feline Med Surg. 2015 Mar;17(3):235-50. doi: 10.1177/1098612X15571880.

ISFM consensus guidelines on the practical management of diabetes mellitus in
cats.

Sparkes AH(1), Cannon M(2), Church D(3), Fleeman L(4), Harvey A(5), Hoenig M(6), 
Peterson ME(7), Reusch CE(8), Taylor S(9), Rosenberg D(10); ISFM.

Author information: 
(1)International Cat Care/ISFM, Tisbury, Wiltshire SP3 6LD, UK andy@icatcare.org.
(2)Oxford Cat Clinic, Oxford OX2 9JU, UK. (3)Professor, Small Animal Medicine and
Surgery Group, The Royal Veterinary College, North Mymms, Hatfield, Hertfordshire
AL9 7TA, UK. (4)Animal Diabetes Australia, Rowville Veterinary Clinic, Rowville, 
VIC 3178, Australia. (5)Small Animal Specialist Hospital, North Ryde, NSW 2113,
Australia. (6)Professor, Department of Veterinary Clinical Medicine, University
of Illinois College of Veterinary Medicine, Urbana-Champaign, Illinois, USA.
(7)Animal Endocrine Clinic, 21 West 100th Street, New York, NY 10025, USA.
(8)Professor & Director, Clinic for Small Animal Internal Medicine, Vetsuisse
Faculty, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 260, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland.
(9)International Cat Care/ISFM, Tisbury, Wiltshire SP3 6LD, UK. (10)Micen Vet
Centre, 58 Rue Auguste Perret, Parc Technologique, Europarc, 9400 Créteil,
France.

PRACTICAL RELEVANCE: Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a common endocrinopathy in cats
that appears to be increasing in prevalence. The prognosis for affected cats can 
be good when the disease is well managed, but clinical management presents
challenges, both for the veterinary team and for the owner. These ISFM Guidelines
have been developed by an independent, international expert panel of clinicians
and academics to provide practical advice on the management of routine
(uncomplicated) diabetic cats.
CLINICAL CHALLENGES: Although the diagnosis of diabetes is usually
straightforward, optimal management can be challenging. Clinical goals should be 
to limit or eliminate clinical signs of the disease using a treatment regimen
suitable for the owner, and to avoid insulin-induced hypoglycaemia or other
complications. Optimising bodyweight, feeding an appropriate diet and using a
longer acting insulin preparation (eg, protamine zinc insulin, insulin glargine
or insulin detemir) are all factors that are likely to result in improved
glycaemic control in the majority of cats. There is also some evidence that
improved glycaemic control and reversal of glucose toxicity may promote the
chances of diabetic remission. Owner considerations and owner involvement are an 
important aspect of management. Provided adequate support is given, and owners
are able to take an active role in monitoring blood glucose concentrations in the
home environment, glycaemic control may be improved. Monitoring of other
parameters is also vitally important in assessing the response to insulin.
Insulin adjustments should always be made cautiously and not too
frequently--unless hypoglycaemia is encountered.
EVIDENCE BASE: The Panel has produced these Guidelines after careful review of
the existing literature and of the quality of the published studies. They
represent a consensus view on practical management of cats with DM based on
available clinical data and experience. However, in many areas, substantial data 
are lacking and there is a need for better studies in the future to help inform
and refine recommendations for the clinical management of this common disease.

© ISFM and AAFP 2015.

PMID: 25701862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Chem Commun (Camb). 2015 Mar 18;51(22):4583-6. doi: 10.1039/c4cc09508a.

Rhenium-catalysed dehydrogenative borylation of primary and secondary C(sp3)-H
bonds adjacent to a nitrogen atom.

Murai M(1), Omura T, Kuninobu Y, Takai K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Chemistry and Biotechnology, Graduate School of Natural Science
and Technology, Okayama University, 3-1-1 Tsushimanaka, Kita-ku, Okayama
700-8530, Japan. masahito.murai@cc.okayama-u.ac jpktakai@cc.okayama-u.ac.jp.

Rhenium-catalysed C(sp(3))-H bond borylation in the absence of any oxidant,
hydrogen acceptor, or external ligand, with the generation of H2 as the sole
byproduct is described. The transformation, which represents a rare example of
rhenium-catalysed C(sp(3))-H bond functionalisation, features high atom
efficiency and simple reaction conditions.

PMID: 25688385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Adv Synth Catal. 2014 Aug 11;356(11-12):2517-2524.

Palladium-Catalyzed Direct a-Aryation of Benzyl Thioethers with Aryl Bromides.

Frensch G(1), Hussain N(2), Marques FA(3), Walsh PJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)P. Roy and Diana T. Vagelos Laboratories, Department of Chemistry, University 
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, United States ; Departamento de Química,
Universidade Federal do Paraná, CP 19081, 81531-990, Curitiba - PR, Brazil. (2)P.
Roy and Diana T. Vagelos Laboratories, Department of Chemistry, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, United States. (3)Departamento de Química, 
Universidade Federal do Paraná, CP 19081, 81531-990, Curitiba - PR, Brazil.

The arylation of sp(3)-hybridized C-H's bonds is a powerful strategy to build
molecular complexity and diversity. A novel and efficient palladium-catalyzed
direct sp(3) C-H arylation of aryl and alkyl benzyl thioether derivatives with
aryl bromides is reported. The reaction involves reversible deprotonation of the 
benzylic C-H's of the thioether with either LiN(SiMe3)2 or NaN(SiMe3)2 and
subsequent cross-coupling to provide the functionalized products in up to 97%
yield. A screen of 24 of the most successful ligands in cross-coupling chemistry 
led to the identification of NiXantPhos as the only viable ligand for this
challenging coupling.

PMCID: PMC4323356
PMID: 25685127  [PubMed]


135. J Am Chem Soc. 2015 Feb 25;137(7):2785. doi: 10.1021/jacs.5b00104. Epub 2015 Feb 
16.

Correction to "Nickel-catalyzed site-selective alkylation of unactivated C(sp3)-H
bonds".

Wu X, Zhao Y, Ge H.

Erratum for
    J Am Chem Soc. 2014 Feb 5;136(5):1789-92.

PMID: 25683744  [PubMed]


136. Phys Rev Lett. 2015 Jan 30;114(4):047403. Epub 2015 Jan 28.

Electronic structures and optical properties of partially and fully fluorinated
graphene.

Yuan S(1), Rösner M(2), Schulz A(2), Wehling TO(2), Katsnelson MI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecules and Materials, Radboud University Nijmegen,
Heyendaalseweg 135, 6525AJ Nijmegen, Netherlands. (2)Institut für Theoretische
Physik, Universität Bremen, Otto-Hahn-Allee 1, 28359 Bremen, Germany and Bremen
Center for Computational Materials Science, Universität Bremen, Am Fallturm 1a,
28359 Bremen, Germany.

In this Letter, we study the electronic structures and optical properties of
partially and fully fluorinated graphene by a combination of ab initio G0W0
calculations and large-scale multiorbital tight-binding simulations. We find
that, for partially fluorinated graphene, the appearance of paired fluorine atoms
is more favorable than unpaired atoms. We also show that different types of
structural disorder, such as carbon vacancies, fluorine vacancies, fluorine
vacancy clusters and fluorine armchair and zigzag clusters, will introduce
different types of midgap states and extra excitations within the optical gap.
Furthermore, we argue that the local formation of sp3 bonds upon fluorination can
be distinguished from other disorder inducing mechanisms which do not destroy the
sp2 hybrid orbitals by measuring the polarization rotation of passing polarized
light.

PMID: 25679908  [PubMed]


137. Vet Rec. 2015 Apr 4;176(14):359. doi: 10.1136/vr.102806. Epub 2015 Feb 4.

Should single layer centrifugation of dog semen be done before or after the semen
is cooled?

Gálvez MJ(1), Ortiz I(1), Hidalgo M(1), Morrell JM(2), Dorado J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Reproduction Group, Department of Animal Medicine and Surgery, Faculty 
of Veterinary Medicine, University of Cordoba, Córdoba 14071, Spain. (2)Division 
of Reproduction, Department of Clinical Sciences, Swedish University of
Agricultural Sciences, Box 7054, Uppsala SE-75007, Sweden.

The aim of this study was to assess the effectiveness of sperm selection by
single layer centrifugation (SLC) on canine sperm quality when SLC was performed 
before or after the cooling process, or when double SLC (before and after
cooling) was performed. Twenty ejaculates from four dogs were divided into four
aliquots as follows: unselected: no SLC was performed; SLC prior to cooling
(SLC-PC): sperm selection was carried out before cooling; SLC after cooling
(SLC-AC): sperm selection was performed after cooling; and double SLC: sperm
selection was carried out before and after cooling. Sperm motility (by
computer-assisted semen analysis), morphology (Diff-Quick staining), sperm
membrane integrity (Vital-Test kit) and acrosome integrity (double fluorescent
stain) were assessed in re-warmed semen samples. Four sperm subpopulations (sP)
were detected using a pattern analysis technique (sP1: highly active,
non-progressive; sP2: low velocity, highly progressive; sP3: less vigorous,
poorly progressive; sP4: highly progressive motility). A higher proportion of
sperm were classified as sP4 in SLC-AC samples. Most of the sperm parameters
assessed showed higher values in the SLC-AC group. We conclude that SLC-AC is the
best protocol to improve sperm quality in chilled canine semen in comparison to
the other procedures tested.

British Veterinary Association.

PMID: 25653394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Molecules. 2015 Feb 2;20(2):2529-35. doi: 10.3390/molecules20022529.

Propane dehydrogenation catalyzed by ZSM-5 zeolites. A mechanistic study based on
the selective energy transfer (SET) theory.

Larsson R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Engineering II, University of Lund, P.O. Box 124, SE-22100 Lund,
Sweden. Ragnar.Larsson@chemeng.lth.se.

Experimentally determined activation energies of propane dehydrogenation
catalyzed by ZSM-5 zeolites have been used to test the SET theory. The basis of
this theory is that the catalyst system transfers vibrational energy via a
resonance process to a specific vibration mode of the reacting molecule. Being
excited up to a certain number of vibrational quanta the molecule is brought to
reaction. By analyzing the above-mentioned activation energies we found the wave 
number of this "specific mode" to be 1065 cm-1. This is very close to the rocking
vibration of propane (1053 cm-1). We suggest that the propane molecule reacts
when excited so that the CH3 group has been forced towards a flat structure with 
a carbon atom hybridization that is more sp2 than sp3. Consequently there is no
way for three H-atoms to bind to the carbon and one of them must leave. This is
the starting point of the reaction. The isokinetic temperature of the system was 
found as Tiso = 727 ± 4 K. From the SET formula for Tiso when both
energy-donating (<U+03C9>) and energy-accepting (<U+03BD>) vibrations have the same frequency, 
viz., Tiso = Nhc<U+03BD>/2R, we obtain <U+03BD> = <U+03C9> = 1011 ± 6 cm-1. This agrees rather well
with the CH3 rocking mode (1053 cm-1) and also with asymmetric "TO4" stretching
vibrations of the zeolite structure (<U+03C9>).

PMID: 25648595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. BMC Genet. 2015 Jan 30;16:1. doi: 10.1186/s12863-014-0153-0.

Genome-wide association mapping of iron homeostasis in the maize association
population.

Benke A(1), Urbany C(2), Stich B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research, Carl-von-Linné Weg 10, 50829
Köln, Germany. benke@mpipz.mpg.de. (2)Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding
Research, Carl-von-Linné Weg 10, 50829 Köln, Germany. urbany@mpipz.mpg.de. (3)Max
Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research, Carl-von-Linné Weg 10, 50829 Köln, 
Germany. stich@mpipz.mpg.de.

BACKGROUND: Iron (Fe) deficiency in plants is the result of low Fe soil
availability affecting 30% of cultivated soils worldwide. To improve our
understanding on Fe-efficiency this study aimed to (i) evaluate the influence of 
two different Fe regimes on morphological and physiological trait formation, (ii)
identify polymorphisms statistically associated with morphological and
physiological traits, and (iii) dissect the correlation between morphological and
physiological traits using an association mapping population.
RESULTS: The fine-mapping analyses on quantitative trait loci (QTL) confidence
intervals of the intermated B73 × Mo17 (IBM) population provided a total of 13
and 2 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) under limited and adequate Fe
regimes, respectively, which were significantly (FDR = 0.05) associated with
cytochrome P450 94A1, invertase beta-fructofuranosidase insoluble isoenzyme 6,
and a low-temperature-induced 65 kDa protein. The genome-wide association (GWA)
analyses under limited and adequate Fe regimes provided in total 18 and 17
significant SNPs, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Significantly associated SNPs on a genome-wide level under both Fe
regimes for the traits leaf necrosis (NEC), root weight (RW), shoot dry weight
(SDW), water (H2O), and SPAD value of leaf 3 (SP3) were located in genes or
recognition sites of transcriptional regulators, which indicates a direct impact 
on the phenotype. SNPs which were significantly associated on a genome-wide level
under both Fe regimes with the traits NEC, RW, SDW, H2O, and SP3 might be
attractive targets for marker assisted selection as well as interesting objects
for future functional analyses.

PMCID: PMC4342226
PMID: 25634232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2015 Feb 11;7(5):3133-41. doi: 10.1021/am507429j. Epub
2015 Jan 28.

Alternative carrier injection/extraction inspired by electrode interlayers based 
on peripheral modification of the electron-rich skeleton.

Chen D(1), Zhang C, Zhou H, Li X, Wang Z, Su SJ, Cao Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices and Institute of
Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, South China University of
Technology , Guangzhou 510640, China.

Peripheral modifications of the electron-rich trifluorene-substituted
triphenylamine core have been comparatively studied through the linkage of the
different polar pendants with fluorene via saturated sp3 hybrid alkyl chains. The
work function of electrode could be effectively tuned by the interlayers with or 
without peripheral pendants of phosphoric acid and phosphonate groups to give
selective hole and electron injection/extraction property. Their applications in 
various vacuum- and solution-processed organic light-emitting diodes and
photovoltaic devices were thoroughly investigated. The current comparative study 
provides valuable exploration on developing high-performance environmentally
friendly solvent-processed electrode interlayer materials.

PMID: 25608007  [PubMed]


141. Chem Commun (Camb). 2015 Feb 21;51(15):3219-22. doi: 10.1039/c4cc09576f.

Pd-catalyzed a-selective C(sp3)-H acetoxylation of amides through an unusual
cyclopalladation mechanism.

Wang M(1), Yang Y, Fan Z, Cheng Z, Zhu W, Zhang A.

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Receptor Research, and Synthetic Organic & Medicinal
Chemistry Laboratory (SOMCL), Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica (SIMM),
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201203, China. aozhang@simm.ac.cn.

We report the first example of Pd-catalyzed site-selective a-C(sp(3))-H
oxidation/acetoxylation of amides through an unusual [4,6]-bicyclic metallacycle 
intermediate with 1-aminoanthraquinone as a new bidentate directing group. In
addition to the distinct mechanism and high efficiency, the reaction is highly
appealing due to the ample commercial source, low-cost, as well as easy removal
and recycling of the auxiliary group.

PMID: 25603885  [PubMed - in process]


142. J Am Chem Soc. 2015 Feb 11;137(5):2006-14. doi: 10.1021/ja512374g. Epub 2015 Jan 
23.

The mechanism of a ligand-promoted C(sp3)-H activation and arylation reaction via
palladium catalysis: theoretical demonstration of a Pd(II)/Pd(IV) redox manifold.

Dang Y(1), Qu S, Nelson JW, Pham HD, Wang ZX, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, University of the Chinese
Academy of Sciences , Beijing 100049, China.

Erratum in
    J Am Chem Soc. 2015 Jul 22;137(28):9196.

Density functional theory (DFT) computations (BP86 and M06-L) have been utilized 
to elucidate the detailed mechanism of a palladium-catalyzed reaction involving
pyridine-type nitrogen-donor ligands that significantly expands the scope of
C(sp(3))-H activation and arylation. The reaction begins with precatalyst
initiation, followed by substrate binding to the Pd(II) center through an amidate
auxiliary, which directs the ensuing bicarbonate-assisted C(sp(3))-H bond
activation producing five-membered-ring cyclopalladate(II) intermediates. These
Pd(II) complexes further undergo oxidative addition with iodobenzene to form
Pd(IV) complexes, which proceed by reductive C-C elimination/coupling to give
final products of arylation. The base-assisted C(sp(3))-H bond cleavage is found 
to be the rate-determining step, which involves hydrogen bond interactions. The
mechanism unravels the intimate involvement of the added 2-picoline ligand in
every phase of the reaction, explains the isolation of the cyclopalladate
intermediates, agrees with the observed kinetic hydrogen isotope effect, and
demonstrates the Pd(II)/Pd(IV) redox manifold.

PMID: 25588921  [PubMed]


143. J Org Chem. 2015 Feb 6;80(3):1929-36. doi: 10.1021/jo502477r. Epub 2015 Jan 28.

Cross-dehydrogenative coupling of azoles with a-C(sp3)-H of ethers and thioethers
under metal-free conditions: functionalization of H-N azoles via C-H activation.

Aruri H(1), Singh U, Sharma S, Gudup S, Bhogal M, Kumar S, Singh D, Gupta VK,
Kant R, Vishwakarma RA, Singh PP.

Author information: 
(1)Medicinal Chemistry Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Integrative Medicine , 
Canal Road, Jammu-18001, India.

A metal-free cross-dehydrogenative coupling method for the synthesis of
N-substituted azoles has been developed. The TBAI/TBHP system catalyzed the
coupling of azoles with ethers and thioethers via a-C(sp(3))-H activation. Under 
the optimized conditions, a diverse range of un/substituted azoles such as
1H-benzimidazole, 9H-purine, 1H-benzotriazole, 1H-1,2,3-triazole,
1H-1,2,4-triazole, and 1H-pyrazole were successfully employed for coupling with
various ethers and thioethers such as tetrahydrofuran, tetrahydropyran,
1,4-dioxane, diethyl ether, tetrahydrothiophene, and 1,3-dithiolane.

PMID: 25588073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Curr Colorectal Cancer Rep. 2013 Dec;9(4):350-357.

REACTIVE OXYGEN SPECIES AND COLORECTAL CANCER.

Sreevalsan S(1), Safe S(2).

Author information: 
(1)VMR 1197, Room 413, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, 77843
979-845-9182 ssreevalsan@cvm.tamu.edu. (2)VMR 1197, Room 410, Texas A&M
University, College Station, TX, 77843 979-845-5988.

Several agents used for treatment of colon and other cancers induce reactive
oxygen species (ROS) and this plays an important role in their anticancer
activities. In addition to the well-known proapoptotic effects of ROS inducers,
these compounds also decrease expression of specificity protein (Sp)
transcription factors Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 and several pro-oncogenic Spregulated
genes important for cancer cell proliferation, survival and metastasis. The
mechanism of these responses involve ROS-dependent downregulation of microRNA-27a
(miR-27a) or miR-20a (and paralogs) and induction of two Sp-repressors, ZBTB10
and ZBTB4 respectively. This pathway significantly contributes to the anticancer 
activity of ROS inducers and should be considered in development of drug
combinations for cancer chemotherapy.

PMCID: PMC4288935
PMID: 25584043  [PubMed]


145. J Org Chem. 2015 Feb 6;80(3):1506-16. doi: 10.1021/jo502446k. Epub 2015 Jan 23.

Copper-catalyzed C(sp3)-OH cleavage with concomitant C-C coupling: synthesis of
3-substituted isoindolinones.

Rao HS(1), Rao AV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Pondicherry University , Pondicherry 605 014, India.

Copper(II) trifluoromethanesulfonate (Cu(OTf)2) efficiently catalyzes the C-C
coupling of 3-hydoxyisoindolinones with a variety of aryl-, heteroaryl-, and
alkenylboronic acids to furnish C(3) aryl-, heteroaryl-, and alkenyl-substituted 
isoindolinones. The coupling reactions work smoothly in 1,2-dicholoroethane (DCE)
reflux, to effect both inter- and intramolecular versions. This is the first
report on C(sp(3))-OH cleavage with concomitant C-C coupling. The photolabile
2-nitrobenzyl protecting group is most appropriate for promotion of the coupling 
reaction and for deprotection. The tetracyclic ring motif of the alkaloid
neuvamine was prepared by applying the newly developed copper-catalyzed C-C
coupling.

PMID: 25569689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Chem Inf Model. 2015 Jan 26;55(1):1-18. doi: 10.1021/ci500542e. Epub 2015 Jan
13.

Novel Scaffold FingerPrint (SFP): applications in scaffold hopping and
scaffold-based selection of diverse compounds.

Rabal O(1), Amr FI, Oyarzabal J.

Author information: 
(1)Small Molecule Discovery Platform, Molecular Therapeutics Program, Center for 
Applied Medical Research (CIMA), University of Navarra , Avda. Pio XII 55,
E-31008 Pamplona, Spain.

A novel 2D Scaffold FingerPrint (SFP) for mining ring fragments is presented. The
rings are described not only by their topology, shape, and pharmacophoric
features (hydrogen-bond acceptors and donors, their relative locations, sp3
carbons, and chirality) but also by the position and nature of their growing
vectors because they play a critical role from the drug discovery perspective.
SFP can be used (i) to identify alternative chemotypes to a reference ring either
in a visual mode or by running quantitative similarity searches and (ii) in
chemotype-based diversity selections. Two retrospective case studies focused on
melanin concentrating hormone 1-receptor antagonists (MCH-R1) and
phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors (PDE5) demonstrate the capability of this method
for identifying novel structurally different and synthetically accessible
chemotypes. Good enrichment factor (155 and 219) and recall values (46% and 73%) 
are found within the first 100 ranked hits (0.3% of screened database). Our 2D
SFP descriptor outperforms well-validated current gold-standard 2D fingerprints
(ECFP_6) and 3D approaches based on shape and electrostatic similarity.
Scaffold-based selection of diverse compounds has a critical impact on corporate 
library design and compound acquisitions; thus, a novel strategy is introduced
that uses diverse scaffold selections using this SFP descriptor combined with
R-group selection at the different substitution sites. Both approaches are
available as part of an interactive web-based application that requires minimal
input and no computational knowledge by medicinal chemists.

PMID: 25558803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Am Chem Soc. 2015 Jan 28;137(3):1341-7. doi: 10.1021/ja512212x. Epub 2015 Jan
15.

Pd-catalyzed intramolecular C-N bond cleavage, 1,4-migration, sp3 C-H activation,
and Heck reaction: four controllable diverse pathways depending on the judicious 
choice of the base and ligand.

Wang M(1), Zhang X, Zhuang YX, Xu YH, Loh TP.

Author information: 
(1)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale and
Department of Chemistry, University of Science and Technology of China , Hefei
230026, China.

Erratum in
    J Am Chem Soc. 2015 Apr 29;137(16):5636.

Diverse and controllable pathways induced by palladium-catalyzed intramolecular
Heck reaction of N-vinylacetamides for the synthesis of nitrogen-containing
products in reasonable to high yields via tuning the phosphine ligands and bases 
are reported. Domino reactions including unique ß-N-Pd elimination, 1,4-Pd
migration, or direct acyl C-H bond functionalization were found to be involved
forming different products, respectively. Given the ability of using the same
starting material to generate diverse products via completely different
chemoselective processes, these current methodologies offer straightforward
access to valuable nitrogen-containing products under mild reaction conditions as
well as inspire the discovery of novel reactions.

PMID: 25545361  [PubMed]


148. J Am Chem Soc. 2015 Jan 28;137(3):1130-5. doi: 10.1021/ja5102739. Epub 2015 Jan
14.

Palladium(II)-catalyzed intramolecular tandem aminoalkylation via divergent
C(sp3)-H functionalization.

Du W(1), Gu Q, Li Z, Yang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The University of Hong Kong , Pokfulam Road, Hong
Kong, P. R. China.

We have developed a Pd(II)-catalyzed oxidative tandem aminoalkylation via
divergent C(sp(3))-H functionalization, affording three- and five-membered-ring
fused indolines in good yields under two optimized conditions, respectively. The 
mechanism studies have indicated that the benzylic C-H cleavage involved in the
former transformation is the rate-determining step, while the cleavage of amide
a-C-H in the latter is not. This is the first example of a Pd-catalyzed tandem
reaction involving C(sp(3))-H activation without the employment of
prefunctionalized reagents (e.g., halogenated and boron reagents) and directing
groups, representing a green and economic protocol for the construction of
N-containing heterocycles.

PMID: 25541675  [PubMed]


149. Blood. 2015 Mar 19;125(12):1957-67. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-08-593343. Epub 2014 
Dec 23.

Sp1/Sp3 transcription factors regulate hallmarks of megakaryocyte maturation and 
platelet formation and function.

Meinders M(1), Kulu DI(2), van de Werken HJ(2), Hoogenboezem M(3), Janssen H(4), 
Brouwer RW(5), van Ijcken WF(5), Rijkers EJ(6), Demmers JA(6), Krüger I(7), van
den Berg TK(1), Suske G(7), Gutiérrez L(1), Philipsen S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Blood Cell Research, Sanquin Research and Landsteiner
Laboratory, Academic Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands; (2)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands; (3)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Sanquin Research and
Landsteiner Laboratory, Academic Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands; (4)Division of Cell Biology, The Netherlands Cancer
Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; (5)Center for Biomics, and. (6)Proteomics 
Center, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands; and. (7)Institute of Molecular
Biology and Tumor Research, Philipps-University Marburg, Marburg, Germany.

Sp1 and Sp3 belong to the specificity proteins (Sp)/Krüppel-like transcription
factor family. They are closely related, ubiquitously expressed, and recognize
G-rich DNA motifs. They are thought to regulate generic processes such as
cell-cycle and growth control, metabolic pathways, and apoptosis. Ablation of Sp1
or Sp3 in mice is lethal, and combined haploinsufficiency results in
hematopoietic defects during the fetal stages. Here, we show that in adult mice, 
conditional pan-hematopoietic (Mx1-Cre) ablation of either Sp1 or Sp3 has minimal
impact on hematopoiesis, whereas the simultaneous loss of Sp1 and Sp3 results in 
severe macrothrombocytopenia. This occurs in a cell-autonomous manner as shown by
megakaryocyte-specific (Pf4-Cre) double-knockout mice. We employed flow
cytometry, cell culture, and electron microscopy and show that although
megakaryocyte numbers are normal in bone marrow and spleen, they display a less
compact demarcation membrane system and a striking inability to form
proplatelets. Through megakaryocyte transcriptomics and platelet proteomics, we
identified several cytoskeleton-related proteins and downstream effector kinases,
including Mylk, that were downregulated upon Sp1/Sp3 depletion, providing an
explanation for the observed defects in megakaryopoiesis. Supporting this notion,
selective Mylk inhibition by ML7 affected proplatelet formation and stabilization
and resulted in defective ITAM receptor-mediated platelet aggregation.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 25538045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Chem Commun (Camb). 2015 Feb 4;51(10):1937-40. doi: 10.1039/c4cc08187k.

Nickel catalyzed dealkoxylative C(sp2)-C(sp3) cross coupling
reactions--stereospecific synthesis of allylsilanes from enol ethers.

Guo L(1), Leiendecker M, Hsiao CC, Baumann C, Rueping M.

Author information: 
(1)RWTH Aachen University, Institute of Organic Chemistry, Landoltweg 1, D-52074 
Aachen, Germany. magnus.rueping@rwth-aachen.de.

The application of cyclic and acyclic enol ethers as electrophiles in cross
coupling reactions offers new possibilities for the preparation of functional
compounds. A novel nickel catalyzed dealkoxylative cross coupling reaction allows
access to structurally diverse allylsilanes and alcohol derivatives with high
stereospecificity and in good yields under mild reaction conditions directly from
the corresponding enol ethers.

PMID: 25532100  [PubMed]


151. Org Lett. 2015 Jan 2;17(1):90-3. doi: 10.1021/ol503291s. Epub 2014 Dec 19.

Application of two direct C(sp3)-H functionalizations for total synthesis of
(+)-lactacystin.

Yoshioka S(1), Nagatomo M, Inoue M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Science, The University of Tokyo , Hongo,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Herein, we report a new synthetic route from (S)-pyroglutaminol to
(+)-lactacystin, a potent inhibitor of the 20S proteasome. The photoinduced
intermolecular C(sp(3))-H alkynylation and intramolecular C(sp(3))-H acylation
chemo- and stereoselectively constructed the tetra- and trisubstituted carbon
centers, respectively. The obtained bicycle was transformed into the target
compound in a concise manner. The present total synthesis demonstrates the power 
of the direct C(sp(3))-H functionalizations for the assembly of multiple
functionalized structures of natural products.

PMID: 25526222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. ACS Med Chem Lett. 2014 Nov 11;5(12):1308-12. doi: 10.1021/ml500388q. eCollection
2014.

Single Diastereomer of a Macrolactam Core Binds Specifically to Myeloid Cell
Leukemia 1 (MCL1).

Fang C(1), D'Souza B(1), Thompson CF(1), Clifton MC(2), Fairman JW(2), Fulroth
B(1), Leed A(1), McCarren P(1), Wang L(1), Wang Y(1), Feau C(1), Kaushik VK(1),
Palmer M(1), Wei G(1), Golub TR(3), Hubbard BK(1), Serrano-Wu MH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Broad Institute , 415 Main Street, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, United
States. (2)Beryllium , 3 Preston Court, Bedford, Massachusetts 01730, United
States. (3)Broad Institute , 415 Main Street, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142,
United States ; Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Howard Hughes Medical Institute 
, 450 Brookline Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, United States.

A direct binding screen of 100<U+2009>000 sp(3)-rich molecules identified a single
diastereomer of a macrolactam core that binds specifically to myeloid cell
leukemia 1 (MCL1). A comprehensive toolbox of biophysical methods was applied to 
validate the original hit and subsequent analogues and also established a binding
mode competitive with NOXA BH3 peptide. X-ray crystallography of ligand bound to 
MCL1 reveals a remarkable ligand/protein shape complementarity that diverges from
previously disclosed MCL1 inhibitor costructures.

PMCID: PMC4265822
PMID: 25516789  [PubMed]


153. Adv Synth Catal. 2014 Aug 10;356(11-12):2719-2724.

Metal-Free Preparation of Cycloalkyl Aryl Sulfides via Di-tert-butyl
Peroxide-Promoted Oxidative C(sp3)[BOND]H Bond Thiolation of Cycloalkanes.

Zhao J(1), Fang H(1), Han J(2), Pan Y(1), Li G(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, State of Key laboratory of
Coordination, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210093, China. (2)School of Chemistry 
and Chemical Engineering, State of Key laboratory of Coordination, Nanjing
University, Nanjing, 210093, China ; Institute for Chemistry & BioMedical
Sciences, Nanjing University. (3)Institute for Chemistry & BioMedical Sciences,
Nanjing University ; Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Texas Tech
University, Lubbock, Texas, 79409-1061, USA.

A concise thiolation of C(sp(3))-H bond of cycloalkanes with diaryl disulfides in
the presence of oxidant of di-tert-butylperoxide (DTBP) has been developed. This 
reaction without using any of metal catalyst, tolerates varieties of disulfides
and cycloalkanes substrates, giving good to excellent chemical yields, which
provides a useful approach to cycloalkyl aryl sulfides from unactivated
cycloalkanes.

PMCID: PMC4260410
PMID: 25505857  [PubMed]


154. European J Org Chem. 2014 Jul;2014(20):4335-4341. Epub 2014 May 27.

Total Synthesis of (±)-Paroxetine by Diastereoconvergent Cobalt-Catalysed
Arylation.

Despiau CF(1), Dominey AP(2), Harrowven DC(1), Linclau B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry, University of Southampton, Highfield, Southampton SO17 1BJ, UK
http://www.southampton.ac.uk/chemistry/about/staff/linclau.page.
(2)GlaxoSmithKline, Medicines Research Centre Gunnels Wood Road, Stevenage SG1
2NY, UK.

A total synthesis of paroxetine is reported, with a diastereoselective and
diastereoconvergent cobalt-catalysed sp(3)-sp(2) coupling reaction involving a
3-substituted 4-bromo-N-Boc-piperidine (Boc = tert-butoxycarbonyl) substrate as a
key step. A 9:1 diastereoselectivity was obtained, while a control experiment
involving a conformationally locked 3-substituted 4-bromo-tert-butyl cyclohexane 
ring proceeded with essentially complete stereoselectivity.

PMCID: PMC4255755
PMID: 25505371  [PubMed]


155. Neoplasia. 2014 Dec;16(12):1059-69. doi: 10.1016/j.neo.2014.09.011.

The transcriptional repressor ZBTB4 regulates EZH2 through a
MicroRNA-ZBTB4-specificity protein signaling axis.

Yang WS(1), Chadalapaka G(2), Cho SG(3), Lee SO(4), Jin UH(4), Jutooru I(2), Choi
K(5), Leung YK(1), Ho SM(1), Safe S(6), Kim K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, University of Cincinnati, College of
Medicine, 3223 Eden Ave., Cincinnati, OH 45267. (2)Department of Veterinary
Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University, 4466 Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX 77843. (3)Department of Preventive Medicine, College of
Korean Medicine, Kyung Hee University, 1 Hoegi, Dongdaemun-gu, Seoul 130-701,
Republic of Korea. (4)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health
Science Center, 2121 W. Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX 77030. (5)Division of
Experimental Biology and Cancer Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital medical
Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229. (6)Department of Veterinary Physiology and
Pharmacology, Texas A&M University, 4466 Texas A&M University, College Station,
TX 77843; Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health Science
Center, 2121 W. Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX 77030.

ZBTB4 is a transcriptional repressor and examination of publically-available
microarray data sets demonstrated an inverse relationship in the prognostic value
and expression of ZBTB4 and the histone methyltransferase EZH2 in tumors from
breast cancer patients. The possibility of functional interactions between EZH2
and ZBTB4 was investigated in breast cancer cells and the results showed that
EZH2 is directly suppressed by ZBTB4 which in turn is regulated (suppressed) by
miR-106b and other paralogues from the miR-17-92, miR-106b-25 and miR-106a-363
clusters that are highly expressed in breast and other tumors. ZBTB4 also acts a 
suppressor of specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4,
and RNA interference studies show that Sp proteins are required for EZH2
expression. The prediction analysis results from breast cancer patient array data
sets confirm an association of Sp1-dependent EZH2 gene signature with decreased
survival of breast cancer patients. Disruption of oncogenic miR-ZBTB4 signaling
axis by anticancer agent such as betulinic acid that induce down-regulation of Sp
proteins in breast cancer cells resulted in inhibition of tumor growth and
colonization of breast cancer cells in a mouse model. Thus, EZH2 is reciprocally 
regulated by a novel signaling network consisting of Sp proteins, oncogenic miRs 
and ZBTB4, and modulation of this gene network is a novel therapeutic approach
for treatment of breast cancer and possibly other cancers.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4309261
PMID: 25499219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Nat Commun. 2014 Dec 10;5:5714. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6714.

Laser-induced porous graphene films from commercial polymers.

Lin J(1), Peng Z(2), Liu Y(3), Ruiz-Zepeda F(4), Ye R(2), Samuel EL(2), Yacaman
MJ(4), Yakobson BI(5), Tour JM(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Materials Science and NanoEngineering, Rice University, 6100 
Main Street, Houston, Texas 77005, USA [2] Smalley Institute for Nanoscale
Science and Technology, Rice University, 6100 Main Street, Houston, Texas 77005, 
USA. (2)Department of Chemistry, Rice University, 6100 Main Street, Houston,
Texas 77005, USA. (3)Department of Materials Science and NanoEngineering, Rice
University, 6100 Main Street, Houston, Texas 77005, USA. (4)Department of Physics
and Astronomy, University of Texas at San Antonio, One UTSA Circle, San Antonio, 
Texas 78249, USA. (5)1] Department of Materials Science and NanoEngineering, Rice
University, 6100 Main Street, Houston, Texas 77005, USA [2] Smalley Institute for
Nanoscale Science and Technology, Rice University, 6100 Main Street, Houston,
Texas 77005, USA [3] Department of Chemistry, Rice University, 6100 Main Street, 
Houston, Texas 77005, USA.

The cost effective synthesis and patterning of carbon nanomaterials is a
challenge in electronic and energy storage devices. Here we report a one-step,
scalable approach for producing and patterning porous graphene films with
three-dimensional networks from commercial polymer films using a CO2 infrared
laser. The sp(3)-carbon atoms are photothermally converted to sp(2)-carbon atoms 
by pulsed laser irradiation. The resulting laser-induced graphene (LIG) exhibits 
high electrical conductivity. The LIG can be readily patterned to interdigitated 
electrodes for in-plane microsupercapacitors with specific capacitances of
>4<U+2009>mF<U+2009>cm(-2) and power densities of ~9<U+2009>mW<U+2009>cm(-2). Theoretical calculations
partially suggest that enhanced capacitance may result from LIG's unusual
ultra-polycrystalline lattice of pentagon-heptagon structures. Combined with the 
advantage of one-step processing of LIG in air from commercial polymer sheets,
which would allow the employment of a roll-to-roll manufacturing process, this
technique provides a rapid route to polymer-written electronic and energy storage
devices.

PMCID: PMC4264682
PMID: 25493446  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


157. Org Lett. 2014 Dec 19;16(24):6488-91. doi: 10.1021/ol503347d. Epub 2014 Dec 9.

Total synthesis of hibispeptin A via Pd-catalyzed C(sp3)-H arylation with
sterically hindered aryl iodides.

He G(1), Zhang SY, Nack WA, Pearson R, Rabb-Lynch J, Chen G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Pennsylvania State University , University Park, 
Pennsylvania 16802, United States.

To access the key Ile-Hpa pseudodipeptide motif in hibispeptins, a series of
bidentate carboxamide-based auxiliary groups have been explored to facilitate the
palladium-catalyzed arylation of unactivated <U+03B3>-C(sp(3))-H bonds of Ile precursor 
with aryl iodides. A new pyridylmethylamine-based auxiliary group PR is
introduced, which permits the use of more sterically hindered ortho-substituted
aryl iodide substrates and can be removed under mild conditions. Pd-catalyzed
PR-directed <U+03B3>-C(sp(3))-H arylation enabled the first total synthesis of
hibispeptin A.

PMID: 25487778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Chem Commun (Camb). 2015 Jan 25;51(7):1371-4. doi: 10.1039/c4cc08717h.

Transition metal free intramolecular selective oxidative C(sp3)-N coupling:
synthesis of N-aryl-isoindolinones from 2-alkylbenzamides.

Verma A(1), Patel S, Meenakshi, Kumar A, Yadav A, Kumar S, Jana S, Sharma S,
Prasad ChD, Kumar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research
(IISER) Bhopal, Indore By-pass Road, Bhauri, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, India-462
066. sangitkumar@iiserb.ac.in.

A synthetic method has been developed for the preparation of biologically
important isoindolinones including indoprofen and DWP205190 drugs from
2-alkylbenzamide substrates by transition metal-free intramolecular selective
oxidative coupling of C(sp(3))-H and N-H bonds utilizing iodine, potassium
carbonate and di-tert-butyl peroxide in acetonitrile at 110-140 °C.

PMID: 25487732  [PubMed]


159. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2015 Jan 14;7(1):158-65. doi: 10.1021/am5054724. Epub 
2014 Dec 17.

Probing the role of carbon microstructure on the thermal stability and
performance of ultrathin (<2 nm) overcoats on L10 FePt media for heat-assisted
magnetic recording.

Kundu S(1), Dwivedi N, Satyanarayana N, Yeo RJ, Ahner J, Jones PM, Bhatia CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of
Singapore , 21 Lower Kent Ridge Road, Singapore 117583, Republic of Singapore.

An understanding of the factors influencing the thermal stability of ultrathin
carbon overcoats (COCs) is crucial for their application in heat-assisted
magnetic recording (HAMR) at densities = 1 Tb/in(2). Two types of
non-hydrogenated ultrathin (~1.5 nm) COCs were investigated after being subjected
to laser-induced localized heating (at temperatures > 700 K) as envisaged in
HAMR. Filtered cathodic vacuum arc (FCVA)-processed carbon with tuned C(+) ion
energies of 350 eV followed by 90 eV provides significantly higher sp(3) C-C
hybridization than magnetron sputter deposition even at very low thicknesses of
~1.5 nm. As a result, the FCVA-deposited ultrathin carbon overcoats displayed
excellent thermal stability along with improved wear and corrosion resistance. On
the other hand, the sputtered carbon exhibited carbon loss and topographical and 
structural changes after laser irradiation owing to lower sp(3) hybridization.
Therefore, this study highlights the pivotal role of carbon microstructure,
primarily sp(3) hybridization, in non-hydrogenated carbon overcoats to maintain
excellent thermal stability during the recurring high-temperature cycles in a
HAMR process.

PMID: 25485473  [PubMed]


160. ACS Nano. 2014 Dec 23;8(12):12292-9. doi: 10.1021/nn506257c. Epub 2014 Dec 11.

A fluoride-driven ionic gate based on a 4-aminophenylboronic acid-functionalized 
asymmetric single nanochannel.

Liu Q(1), Xiao K, Wen L, Dong Y, Xie G, Zhang Z, Bo Z, Jiang L.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Key Laboratory of Energy Conversion and Storage Materials, College of 
Chemistry, Key Laboratory of Theoretical and Computational Photochemistry,
Ministry of Education, Beijing Normal University , Beijing 100875, P. R. China.

Fluorine is one of the human body's required trace elements. Imbalanced fluoride 
levels severely affect the normal functioning of living organisms. In this
article, an anion-regulated synthetic nanochannel is described. A fluoride-driven
ionic gate was developed by immobilizing a fluoride-responsive functional
molecule, 4-aminophenylboronic acid, onto a single conical polyimide nanochannel.
When the ionic gate was in the presence of fluoride, the boron bound F-, and the 
hybridization of the boron center changed from sp2 to sp3. Thus, negatively
charged monofluoride adduct (RB(OH)2F-), difluoride adduct (RB(OH)F2-), and
trifluoride adduct (RBF3-) modified surfaces with different wettability would be 
formed successively by increasing the concentration of F-. On the basis of the
variation of surface charge and wettability, the nanochannel can actualize
reversible switching between the "off" state and the "on" state in the absence
and presence of F-, respectively. As an anion-regulated synthetic nanochannel,
this fluoride-driven ionic gate was characterized by measuring ionic current,
which possesses high sensitivity, fine selectivity, and strong stability. Thus,
this gate may show great promise for use in biosensors, water quality monitoring,
and drug delivery.

PMID: 25482729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Chem Commun (Camb). 2015 Jan 25;51(7):1320-2. doi: 10.1039/c4cc08629e.

Metal-free cascade construction of C-C bonds by activation of inert C(sp3)-H
bonds.

Zhang H(1), Pan C, Jin N, Gu Z, Hu H, Zhu C.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Coordination Chemistry, School of Chemistry and
Chemical Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, P. R. China.
cjzhu@nju.edu.cn.

A new synthetic strategy for C-C bond formation has been developed via a free
radical cascade process under metal-free conditions. Activation of inert
C(sp(3))-H/elimination of SO2/C-C bond formation were achieved in sequence in
this system.

PMID: 25482658  [PubMed]


162. Org Lett. 2014 Dec 19;16(24):6504-7. doi: 10.1021/ol503410e. Epub 2014 Dec 5.

Chemoselective hydroxylation of aliphatic sp3 C-H bonds using a ketone catalyst
and aqueous H2O2.

Pierce CJ(1), Hilinski MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Virginia , Charlottesville, Virginia
22904-4319, United States.

The first ketone-catalyzed method for the oxidation of aliphatic C-H bonds is
reported. The reaction conditions employ aryl trifluoromethyl ketones in
catalytic amounts and hydrogen peroxide as the terminal oxidant. Hydroxylation is
stereospecific and chemoselective for tertiary over secondary C-H bonds. A
catalytic cycle invoking a dioxirane as the active oxidant is proposed.

PMID: 25479376  [PubMed]


163. Am J Pathol. 2015 Feb;185(2):485-95. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2014.09.021. Epub 2014
Dec 2.

Xylosyltransferase-1 expression is refractory to inhibition by the inflammatory
cytokines tumor necrosis factor a and IL-1ß in nucleus pulposus cells: novel
regulation by AP-1, Sp1, and Sp3.

Ye W(1), Zhou J(2), Markova DZ(3), Tian Y(4), Li J(4), Anderson DG(3), Shapiro
IM(3), Risbud MV(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania; Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital of
Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China. (2)Department of Cancer Biology, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Department of Surgery,
Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania. (4)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Thomas Jefferson University, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Changzheng
Hospital of the Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China.
(5)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania. Electronic address: makarand.risbud@jefferson.edu.

We investigated whether expression of xylosyltransferase-1 (XT-1), a key enzyme
in glycosaminoglycan biosynthesis, is responsive to disk degeneration and to
inhibition by the inflammatory cytokines tumor necrosis factor a and IL-1ß in
nucleus pulposus (NP) cells. Analysis of human NP tissues showed that XT-1
expression is unaffected by degeneration severity; XT-1 and Jun, Fos, and Sp1
mRNA were positively correlated. Cytokines failed to inhibit XT-1 promoter
activity and expression. However, cytokines decreased activity of XT-1 promoters 
containing deletion and mutation of the -730/-723 bp AP-1 motif, prompting us to 
investigate the role of AP-1 and Sp1/Sp3 in the regulation of XT-1 in healthy NP 
cells. Overexpression and suppression of AP-1 modulated XT-1 promoter activity.
Likewise, treatment with the Sp1 inhibitors WP631 and mithramycin A or
cotransfection with the plasmid DN-Sp1 decreased XT-1 promoter activity.
Inhibitors of AP-1 and Sp1 and stable knockdown of Sp1 and Sp3 resulted in
decreased XT-1 expression in NP cells. Genomic chromatin immunoprecipitation
analysis showed AP-1 binding to motifs located at -730/-723 bp and -684/-677 bp
and Sp1 binding to -227/-217 bp and -124/-114 bp in XT-1 promoter. These results 
suggest that XT-1 expression is refractory to the disease process and to
inhibition by inflammatory cytokines and that signaling through AP-1, Sp1, and
Sp3 is important in the maintenance of XT-1 levels in NP cells.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4305180
PMID: 25476526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Arthritis Res Ther. 2014 Dec 3;16(6):484. doi: 10.1186/s13075-014-0484-2.

UDP-glucose dehydrogenase modulates proteoglycan synthesis in articular
chondrocytes: its possible involvement and regulation in osteoarthritis.

Wen Y, Li J, Wang L, Tie K, Magdalou J, Chen L, Wang H.

INTRODUCTION: The objective of this study was to investigate the possible role of
UDP-glucose dehydrogenase (UGDH) in osteoarthritis (OA) and uncover whether,
furthermore how interleukin-1beta (IL-1ß) affects UGDH gene expression.
METHODS: UGDH specific siRNAs were applied to determine the role of UGDH in
proteoglycan (PG) synthesis in human articular chondrocytes. Protein levels of
UGDH and Sp1 in human and rat OA cartilage were detected. Then, human primary
chondrocytes were treated with IL-1ß to find out whether and how IL-1ß could
regulate the gene expression of UGDH and its trans-regulators, that is Sp1, Sp3
and c-Krox. Finally, p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) inhibitor
SB203580 and stress-activated protein kinase/c-Jun N-terminal kinase (SAP/JNK)
inhibitor SP600125 were used to pick out the pathway that mediated the
IL-1ß-modulated PGs synthesis and gene expression of UGDH, Sp1, Sp3 and c-Krox.
RESULTS: UGDH specific siRNAs markedly inhibited UGDH mRNA and protein
expression, and thus led to an obvious suppression of PGs synthesis in human
articular chondrocytes. UGDH protein level in human and rat OA cartilage were
much lower than the corresponding controls and negatively correlated to the
degree of OA. Decrease in Sp1 protein level was also observed in human and rat OA
cartilage respectively. Meanwhile, IL-1ß suppressed UGDH gene expression in human
articular chondrocytes in the late phase, which also modulated gene expression of
Sp1, Sp3 and c-Krox and increased both Sp3/Sp1 and c-Krox/Sp1 ratio. Moreover,
the inhibition of SAP/JNK and p38 MAPK pathways both resulted in an obvious
attenuation of the IL-1ß-induced suppression on the UGDH gene expression.
CONCLUSIONS: UGDH is essential in the PGs synthesis of articular chondrocytes,
while the suppressed expression of UGDH might probably be involved in advanced
OA, partly due to the modulation of p38 MAPK and SAP/JNK pathways and its
trans-regulators by IL-1ß.

PMCID: PMC4298080
PMID: 25465897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. IEEE Trans Med Imaging. 2015 Jun;34(6):1197-211. doi: 10.1109/TMI.2014.2375193.
Epub 2014 Nov 26.

Experimental Comparison of Continuous-Wave and Frequency-Domain Fluorescence
Tomography in a Commercial Multi-Modal Scanner.

Lu Y, Darne CD, Tan IC, Zhu B, Rightmer R, Rasmussen JC, Sevick-Muraca EM.

The performance evaluation of a variety of small animal tomography measurement
approaches and algorithms for recovery of fluorescent absorption cross section
has not been conducted. Herein, we employed an intensified CCD system installed
in a commercial small animal CT (Computed Tomography) scanner to compare image
reconstructions from time-independent, continuous wave (CW) measurements and from
time-dependent, frequency domain (FD) measurements in a series of physical
phantoms specifically designed for evaluation. Comparisons were performed as a
function of (1) number of projections, (2) the level of preprocessing filters
used to improve the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), (3) endogenous heterogeneity of 
optical properties, as well as in the cases of (4) two fluorescent targets and
(5) a mouse-shaped phantom. Assessment of quantitative recovery of fluorescence
absorption cross section was performed using a fully parallel,
regularization-free, linear reconstruction algorithm with diffusion approximation
(DA) and high order simplified spherical harmonics ( SPN) approximation to the
radiative transport equation (RTE). The results show that while FD measurements
may result in superior image reconstructions over CW measurements, data
acquisition times are significantly longer, necessitating further development of 
multiple detector/source configurations, improved data read-out rates, and
detector technology. FD measurements with SP3 reconstructions enabled better
quantitative recovery of fluorescent target strength, but required increased
computational expense. Despite the developed parallel reconstruction framework
being able to achieve more than 60 times speed increase over sequential
implementation, further development in faster parallel acceleration strategies
for near-real time and real-time image recovery and more precise forward solution
is necessary.

PMID: 25438307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. ACS Nano. 2014 Dec 23;8(12):12763-8. doi: 10.1021/nn5059248. Epub 2014 Nov 26.

Tiling phosphorene.

Guan J(1), Zhu Z, Tománek D.

Author information: 
(1)Physics and Astronomy Department, Michigan State University , East Lansing,
Michigan 48824, United States.

We present a scheme to categorize the structure of different layered phosphorene 
allotropes by mapping their nonplanar atomic structure onto a two-color 2D
triangular tiling pattern. In the buckled structure of a phosphorene monolayer,
we assign atoms in "top" positions to dark tiles and atoms in "bottom" positions 
to light tiles. Optimum sp3 bonding is maintained throughout the structure when
each triangular tile is surrounded by the same number N of like-colored tiles,
with 0=N=2. Our ab initio density functional calculations indicate that both the 
relative stability and electronic properties depend primarily on the structural
index N. The proposed mapping approach may also be applied to phosphorene
structures with nonhexagonal rings and 2D quasicrystals with no translational
symmetry, which we predict to be nearly as stable as the hexagonal network.

PMID: 25418761  [PubMed]


167. Org Lett. 2014 Dec 5;16(23):6232-5. doi: 10.1021/ol503165b. Epub 2014 Nov 21.

Cu(I)-catalyzed transannulation of N-heteroaryl aldehydes or ketones with
alkylamines via C(sp3)-H amination.

Li M(1), Xie Y(1), Ye Y(1), Zou Y(2), Jiang H(1), Zeng W(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, South China University of
Technolgy, Guangzhou 510641, China. (2)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China.

A copper(I)-catalyzed direct transannulation of N-heteroaryl aldehydes or ketones
with alkylamines via Csp(3)-H amination has been achieved using molecular oxygen 
as a sole oxidant. N-Heteroarenes are employed as the amine source. This
transformation provides a rapid and concise access to multifunctional
imidazo[1,5-a]pyridines.

PMID: 25415390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Org Biomol Chem. 2015 Jan 28;13(4):1048-52. doi: 10.1039/c4ob02017k. Epub 2014
Nov 20.

Allylic and benzylic sp3 C-H oxidation in water.

Ang WJ(1), Lam Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, National University of Singapore, 3 Science Drive 3, 
Singapore 117543, Singapore. chmlamyl@nus.edu.sg.

A copper-catalyzed method for the oxidation of allylic and benzylic sp(3) C-H by 
aqueous tert-butyl hydroperoxide (T-Hydro) in water using a recyclable fluorous
ligand has been developed. The reaction procedure is tolerant to additional
functional groups and the fluorous ligand could be reused with little loss of
catalytic activity.

PMID: 25412371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Org Lett. 2014 Dec 5;16(23):6260-3. doi: 10.1021/ol503248f. Epub 2014 Nov 20.

Palladium-catalyzed stereoretentive olefination of unactivated C(sp3)-H bonds
with vinyl iodides at room temperature: synthesis of ß-vinyl a-amino acids.

Wang B(1), Lu C(1), Zhang SY(1), He G(1), Nack WA(1), Chen G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania 16802, United States.

A method is reported for palladium-catalyzed N-quinolyl carboxamide-directed
olefination of the unactivated C(sp(3))-H bonds of phthaloyl alanine with a broad
range of vinyl iodides at room temperature. This reaction represents the first
example of the stereoretentive installation of multisubstituted terminal and
internal olefins onto unactivated C(sp(3))-H bonds. These methods enable access
to a wide range of challenging ß-vinyl a-amino acid products in a streamlined and
controllable fashion, beginning from simple precursors.

PMID: 25412205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Am Chem Soc. 2014 Dec 3;136(48):16780-3. doi: 10.1021/ja510674u. Epub 2014 Nov 
20.

Boron-catalyzed silylative reduction of quinolines: selective sp3 C-Si bond
formation.

Gandhamsetty N(1), Joung S, Park SW, Park S, Chang S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Catalytic Hydrocarbon Functionalizations, Institute for Basic
Science (IBS) , Daejeon 305-701, South Korea.

A silylative reduction of quinolines to synthetically versatile
tetrahydroquinoline molecules involving the formation of a C(sp(3))-Si bond
exclusively ß to nitrogen is described. Triarylborane is a highly efficient
catalyst (up to 1000 turnovers), and silanes serve as both a silyl source and a
reducing reagent. The present procedure is convenient to perform even on a large 
scale with excellent stereoselectivity. Mechanistic studies revealed that the
formation of a 1,4-addition adduct is rate-limiting while the subsequent
C(sp(3))-Si bond-forming step from the 1,4-adduct is facile.

PMID: 25412033  [PubMed]


171. J Org Chem. 2015 Jan 2;80(1):70-9. doi: 10.1021/jo501967m. Epub 2014 Nov 26.

Synthesis of fused bicyclic piperidines: potential bioactive templates for
medicinal chemistry.

Zhou J(1), Campbell-Conroy EL(1), Silina A(1), Uy J(1), Pierre F(1), Hurley
DJ(1), Hilgraf N(1), Frieman BA(1), DeNinno MP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Vertex Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 11010 Torreyana Road,
San Diego, California 92121, United States.

An array of six pyridyl-substituted fused bicyclic piperidines was prepared as
novel cores for medicinal chemistry. For maximum diversity, the size of the fused
ring varied from three to six atoms and contained up to two oxygen atoms. The
pyridine ring was incorporated to improve physicochemical properties and to
challenge the robustness of the chemistry. The presence of the pyridine did
interfere with our initial approaches to these molecules, and in several
instances, a blocking strategy had to be employed. These new scaffolds possess
high sp3 character and may prove useful in multiple medicinal chemistry
applications.

PMID: 25405702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Chemistry. 2015 Jan 12;21(3):1337-42. doi: 10.1002/chem.201404308. Epub 2014 Nov 
13.

A regioselective synthesis of benzopinacolones through aerobic dehydrogenative
a-arylation of the tertiary sp3 C-H bond of 1,1-diphenylketones with aromatic and
heteroaromatic compounds.

More NY(1), Jeganmohan M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Indian Institution of Science Education and Research,
Pune 411021, Maharashtra (India), Fax: (+91)<U+2009>20-25865315.

A regioselective synthesis of symmetrical and unsymmetrical benzopinacolones
through aerobic dehydrogenative a-arylation at the tertiary sp(3) C-H bond of
substituted 1,1-diphenylketones with aromatic and heteroaromatic compounds, in
the presence of K2S2O8 in CF3COOH at room temperature, is described. The reaction
is proposed to go via a carbocation intermediate, which could be generated
directly from cleavage of the sp(3) C-H bond of 1,1-diphenylketone. Subsequent
a-arylation was achieved at the methene sp(3) carbon atom of the substituted
ketone. A variety of substituted aromatic and heteroaromatic compounds were
compatible with this reaction. In addition, benzopinacolones were converted into 
sterically hindered, tetrasubstituted alkenes and polycyclic aromatic compounds.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25394565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2015 Jan 15;308(2):C189-96. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00342.2014. Epub 2014 Nov 12.

Identification and characterization of the minimal 5'-regulatory region of the
human riboflavin transporter-3 (SLC52A3) in intestinal epithelial cells.

Ghosal A(1), Sabui S(1), Said HM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine and Physiology/Biophysics, University of California,
Irvine, California; and Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Long
Beach, California. (2)Departments of Medicine and Physiology/Biophysics,
University of California, Irvine, California; and Department of Veterans Affairs 
Medical Center, Long Beach, California hmsaid@uci.edu.

The human riboflavin (RF) transporter-3 (product of the SLC52A3 gene) plays an
important role in intestinal RF absorption. Our aims in this study were to
identify the minimal 5'-regulatory region of the SLC52A3 gene and the regulatory 
element(s) involved in its activity in intestinal epithelial cells, as well as to
confirm promoter activity and establish physiological relevance in vivo in
transgenic mice. With the use of transiently transfected human intestinal
epithelial HuTu 80 cells and 5'-deletion analysis, the minimal SLC52A3 promoter
was found to be encoded between -199 and +8 bp (using the start of the
transcription start site as position 1). Although several putative cis-regulatory
elements were predicted in this region, only the stimulating protein-1 (Sp1)
binding site (at position -74/-71 bp) was found to play a role in promoter
activity, as indicated by mutational analysis. Binding of Sp1 to the minimal
SLC52A3 promoter was demonstrated by means of EMSA and supershift assays and by
chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis. Studies with Drosophila SL2 cells (which 
lack Sp activity) confirmed the importance of Sp1 in driving the activity of the 
SLC52A3 minimal promoter; they further showed that Sp3 can also do the
activation. Finally, with the use of luciferase gene fusions, the activity of the
cloned SLC52A3 promoter was confirmed in vivo in transgenic mice. These studies
report, for the first time, on the identification and characterization of the
SLC52A3 promoter and also demonstrate the importance of Sp1 in regulating its
activity in intestinal epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC4297772
PMID: 25394472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Dalton Trans. 2015 Jan 14;44(2):686-93. doi: 10.1039/c4dt02879a. Epub 2014 Nov
11.

Catalytic oxygenation of sp3 "C-H" bonds with Ir(III) complexes of chelating
triazoles and mesoionic carbenes.

Hohloch S(1), Kaiser S, Duecker FL, Bolje A, Maity R, Komrlj J, Sarkar B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Chemie und Biochemie, Anorganische Chemie, Freie Universität
Berlin, Fabeckstraße 34-36, D-14195, Berlin, Germany.
biprajit.sarkar@fu-berlin.de.

Cp*-Ir(III) complexes with additional chelating ligands are known active
pre-catalysts for the oxygenation of C-H bonds. We present here eight examples of
such complexes where the denticity of the chelating ligands has been varied from 
the well-known 2,2'-bpy through pyridyl-triazole, bi-triazole to ligands
containing pyridyl-triazolylidene, triazolyl-triazolylidene and
bi-triazolylidenes. Additionally, we also compare the catalytic results to
complexes containing chelating cyclometallated ligands with additional triazole
or triazolylidene donors. Single crystal X-ray structural data are presented for 
all the new complexes that contain one or more triazolylidene donors of the
mesoionic carbene type. We present the first example of a metal complex
containing a chelating triazole-triazolylidene ligand. The results of the
catalytic screening show that complexes containing unsymmetrical donors of the
pyridyl-triazole or pyridyl-triazolylidene types are the most potent
pre-catalysts for the C-H oxygenation of cyclooctane in the presence of either
m-CPBA or NaIO4 as a sacrificial oxidant. These pre-catalysts can also be used to
oxygenate C-H bonds in other substrates such as fluorene and ethyl benzene. The
most potent pre-catalysts presented here work with a lower catalyst loading and
under milder conditions while delivering better product yields in comparison with
related literature known Ir(III) pre-catalysts. These results thus point to the
potential of ligands with unsymmetrical donors obtained through the click
reaction in oxidation catalysis.

PMID: 25387154  [PubMed]


175. Viral Immunol. 2014 Dec;27(10):543-50. doi: 10.1089/vim.2014.0080.

The amino acids 736-761 of the MERS-CoV spike protein induce neutralizing
antibodies: implications for the development of vaccines and antiviral agents.

Yang Y(1), Deng Y, Wen B, Wang H, Meng X, Lan J, Gao GF, Tan W.

Author information: 
(1)1 Key Laboratory of Medical Virology, Ministry of Health, National Institute
for Viral Disease Control and Prevention , Chinese Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, Beijing, China .

Based on a bioinformatics analysis of the Middle East respiratory syndrome
coronavvirus (MERS-CoV) S protein, we synthesized a panel of peptides coupled to 
keyhole limpet haemocyanin and used them to raise antibodies in rabbits. In
addition, the recombinant receptor-binding domain (RBD) was used to raise
polyclonal antibodies in mice. All of the antibodies raised by S-peptide
immunisation were specific and sensitive for S protein expressed in transfected
cells in the indirect immunofluorescence assay or Western blotting. The RBD
efficiently elicited neutralizing antibodies against MERS-CoV by blocking viral
entry at the binding step. Furthermore, we found that the SP3 peptide,
corresponding to amino-acid residues 736-761 of the S protein, elicited robust
neutralizing activities by blocking viral entry at the postbinding and membrane
fusion steps. We conclude that amino-acid residues 736-761 of the S protein carry
neutralizing epitopes that may be used in the development of vaccines and
antiviral agents against MERS-CoV.

PMCID: PMC4259179
PMID: 25387086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Org Lett. 2014 Nov 21;16(22):5988-91. doi: 10.1021/ol503004a. Epub 2014 Nov 11.

Structurally diverse a-substituted benzopyran synthesis through a practical
metal-free C(sp3)-H functionalization.

Chen W(1), Xie Z, Zheng H, Lou H, Liu L.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Chemical Biology of Ministry of Education, School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Shandong University , Jinan 250012, PR China.

A trityl ion-mediated practical C-H functionalization of a variety of benzopyrans
with a wide range of nucleophiles (organoboranes and C-H molecules) at ambient
temperature has been disclosed. The metal-free reaction has an excellent
functional group tolerance and high chemoselectivity and displays a broad scope
with respect to both benzopyran and nucleophile partners, efficiently affording a
collection of benzopyrans bearing diverse skeletons and a-functionalities in one 
step.

PMID: 25386987  [PubMed]


177. J Am Chem Soc. 2014 Dec 3;136(48):16940-6. doi: 10.1021/ja510233h. Epub 2014 Nov 
20.

Site-selective C(sp3)-H functionalization of di-, tri-, and tetrapeptides at the 
N-terminus.

Gong W(1), Zhang G, Liu T, Giri R, Yu JQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute , 10550 North Torrey
Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, United States.

Although the syntheses of novel and diverse peptides rely mainly on traditional
coupling using unnatural amino acids, postsynthetic modification of peptides
could provide a complementary method for the preparation of nonproteinogenic
peptides. Site selectivity of postsynthetic modification of peptides is usually
achieved by targeting reactive moieties, such as the thiol group of cysteine or
the C-2 position of tryptophan. Herein, we report the development of
site-selective functionalizations of inert C(sp(3))-H bonds of N-terminal amino
acids in di-, tri-, and tetrapeptides without installing a directing group. The
native amino acid moiety within the peptide is used as a ligand to accelerate the
C-H activation reaction. In the long run, this newly uncovered reactivity could
provide guidance for developing site-selective C(sp(3))-H activation toward
postsynthetic modification of a broader range of peptides.

PMCID: PMC4277765
PMID: 25384178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Exp Ther Med. 2014 Dec;8(6):1813-1818. Epub 2014 Sep 30.

Glypican 4 may be involved in the adipose tissue redistribution in high-fat
feeding C57BL/6J mice with peroxisome proliferators-activated receptor <U+03B3> agonist 
rosiglitazone treatment.

Liu L(1), Gu H(2), Zhao Y(1), An L(1), Yang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Hygiene, School of Public Health, China
Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110001, P.R. China. (2)Department of
Orthopedics, Shengjing Hospital, China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning
110004, P.R. China.

Fat distribution affects the risk of developing obesity-related chronic diseases.
Glypican 4 (Gpc4) may be involved in the regulation of obesity and body fat
distribution. The aim of the study was to explore whether Gpc4 affects fat
accumulation and the possible mechanism. C57BL/6J mice were fed with a high-fat
diet for eight weeks and treated with a peroxisome proliferators-activated
receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>) agonist, rosiglitazone, for another four weeks. The weight of 
inguinal and epididymal fat pads was determined. The Gpc4 mRNA and protein
expression and two probable regulators of the Gpc4 gene, specificity protein 1
(Sp1) and Sp3 mRNA, were also measured. Mice treated with rosiglitazone showed a 
significant increase in subcutaneous fat weight compared with the untreated mice.
The expression of Gpc4 mRNA and protein was significantly higher in visceral than
in subcutaneous fat in all the groups. Compared with untreated mice the
expression of Gpc4 and Sp3 mRNA in subcutaneous fat and the expression of Sp1 and
Sp3 mRNA in visceral fat in mice treated with rosiglitazone increased
significantly. The Sp3/Sp1 ratio was consistent with the expression of Gpc4 mRNA 
and protein in subcutaneous and visceral fat. The present study indicated that
Gpc4 may play an important role in fat distribution, and this effect is perhaps
regulated by the ratio of Sp3/Sp1 in the subcutaneous and visceral fat tissues.

PMCID: PMC4217774
PMID: 25371737  [PubMed]


179. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 3;9(11):e111576. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111576.
eCollection 2014.

The potential utility of predicted one bond carbon-proton coupling constants in
the structure elucidation of small organic molecules by NMR spectroscopy.

Venkata C(1), Forster MJ(2), Howe PW(3), Steinbeck C(1).

Author information: 
(1)European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton,
Cambridge, United Kingdom. (2)Chemical Research, Syngenta, Jealott's Hill
Research Centre, Bracknell, United Kingdom. (3)Product Safety, Syngenta,
Jealott's Hill Research Centre, Bracknell, United Kingdom.

NMR spectroscopy is the most popular technique used for structure elucidation of 
small organic molecules in solution, but incorrect structures are regularly
reported. One-bond proton-carbon J-couplings provide additional information about
chemical structure because they are determined by different features of molecular
structure than are proton and carbon chemical shifts. However, these couplings
are not routinely used to validate proposed structures because few software tools
exist to predict them. This study assesses the accuracy of Density Functional
Theory for predicting them using 396 published experimental observations from a
diverse range of small organic molecules. With the B3LYP functional and the TZVP 
basis set, Density Functional Theory calculations using the open-source software 
package NWChem can predict one-bond CH J-couplings with good accuracy for most
classes of small organic molecule. The root-mean-square deviation after
correction is 1.5 Hz for most sp3 CH pairs and 1.9 Hz for sp2 pairs; larger
errors are observed for sp3 pairs with multiple electronegative substituents and 
for sp pairs. These results suggest that prediction of one-bond CH J-couplings by
Density Functional Theory is sufficiently accurate for structure validation. This
will be of particular use in strained ring systems and heterocycles which have
characteristic couplings and which pose challenges for structure elucidation.

PMCID: PMC4218771
PMID: 25365289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Mol Syst Biol. 2014 Oct 30;10:757. doi: 10.15252/msb.20145625.

Ultrasensitive proteome analysis using paramagnetic bead technology.

Hughes CS(1), Foehr S(1), Garfield DA(1), Furlong EE(1), Steinmetz LM(1),
Krijgsveld J(2).

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Genome Biology Unit, Heidelberg,
Germany. (2)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Genome Biology Unit,
Heidelberg, Germany jeroen.krijgsveld@embl.de.

Comment in
    Mol Syst Biol. 2014;10:758.

In order to obtain a systems-level understanding of a complex biological system, 
detailed proteome information is essential. Despite great progress in proteomics 
technologies, thorough interrogation of the proteome from quantity-limited
biological samples is hampered by inefficiencies during processing. To address
these challenges, here we introduce a novel protocol using paramagnetic beads,
termed Single-Pot Solid-Phase-enhanced Sample Preparation (SP3). SP3 provides a
rapid and unbiased means of proteomic sample preparation in a single tube that
facilitates ultrasensitive analysis by outperforming existing protocols in terms 
of efficiency, scalability, speed, throughput, and flexibility. To illustrate
these benefits, characterization of 1,000 HeLa cells and single Drosophila
embryos is used to establish that SP3 provides an enhanced platform for profiling
proteomes derived from sub-microgram amounts of material. These data present a
first view of developmental stage-specific proteome dynamics in Drosophila at a
single-embryo resolution, permitting characterization of inter-individual
expression variation. Together, the findings of this work position SP3 as a
superior protocol that facilitates exciting new directions in multiple areas of
proteomics ranging from developmental biology to clinical applications.

© 2014 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

PMCID: PMC4299378
PMID: 25358341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Biol Chem. 2014 Dec 12;289(50):34743-67. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.576702. Epub
2014 Oct 23.

Histone hyperacetylation up-regulates protein kinase Cd in dopaminergic neurons
to induce cell death: relevance to epigenetic mechanisms of neurodegeneration in 
Parkinson disease.

Jin H(1), Kanthasamy A(1), Harischandra DS(1), Kondru N(1), Ghosh A(1), Panicker 
N(1), Anantharam V(1), Rana A(2), Kanthasamy AG(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biomedical Sciences, Iowa Center for Advanced
Neurotoxicology, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa 50011. (2)the Department of
Molecular Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Stritch School of Medicine, Loyola
University Chicago, Maywood, Illinois 60153, and the Hines Veterans Affairs
Medical Center, Hines, Illinois 60141. (3)From the Department of Biomedical
Sciences, Iowa Center for Advanced Neurotoxicology, Iowa State University, Ames, 
Iowa 50011, akanthas@iastate.edu.

The oxidative stress-sensitive protein kinase Cd (PKCd) has been implicated in
dopaminergic neuronal cell death. However, little is known about the epigenetic
mechanisms regulating PKCd expression in neurons. Here, we report a novel
mechanism by which the PKCd gene can be regulated by histone acetylation.
Treatment with histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor sodium butyrate (NaBu)
induced PKCd expression in cultured neurons, brain slices, and animal models.
Several other HDAC inhibitors also mimicked NaBu. The chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that hyperacetylation of histone H4 by NaBu
is associated with the PKCd promoter. Deletion analysis of the PKCd promoter
mapped the NaBu-responsive element to an 81-bp minimal promoter region. Detailed 
mutagenesis studies within this region revealed that four GC boxes conferred
hyperacetylation-induced PKCd promoter activation. Cotransfection experiments and
Sp inhibitor studies demonstrated that Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 regulated NaBu-induced
PKCd up-regulation. However, NaBu did not alter the DNA binding activities of Sp 
proteins or their expression. Interestingly, a one-hybrid analysis revealed that 
NaBu enhanced transcriptional activity of Sp1/Sp3. Overexpression of the
p300/cAMP-response element-binding protein-binding protein (CBP) potentiated the 
NaBu-mediated transactivation potential of Sp1/Sp3, but expressing several HDACs 
attenuated this effect, suggesting that p300/CBP and HDACs act as coactivators or
corepressors in histone acetylation-induced PKCd up-regulation. Finally, using
genetic and pharmacological approaches, we showed that NaBu up-regulation of PKCd
sensitizes neurons to cell death in a human dopaminergic cell model and brain
slice cultures. Together, these results indicate that histone acetylation
regulates PKCd expression to augment nigrostriatal dopaminergic cell death, which
could contribute to the progressive neuropathogenesis of Parkinson disease.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4263877
PMID: 25342743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Oct 16;5:e1476. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.422.

HDAC8 and STAT3 repress BMF gene activity in colon cancer cells.

Kang Y(1), Nian H(2), Rajendran P(3), Kim E(3), Dashwood WM(3), Pinto JT(4),
Boardman LA(5), Thibodeau SN(5), Limburg PJ(5), Löhr CV(6), Bisson WH(7),
Williams DE(8), Ho E(1), Dashwood RH(9).

Author information: 
(1)Linus Pauling Institute, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN, USA. (3)Center for Epigenetics & Disease Prevention, Institute of 
Biosciences & Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, New York Medical College,
Valhalla, NY, USA. (5)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. (6)College of Veterinary
Medicine, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA. (7)Department of
Environmental and Molecular Toxicology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR,
USA. (8)1] Linus Pauling Institute, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA
[2] Department of Environmental and Molecular Toxicology, Oregon State
University, Corvallis, OR, USA. (9)1] Center for Epigenetics & Disease
Prevention, Institute of Biosciences & Technology, Texas A&M Health Science
Center, Houston, TX, USA [2] Department of Nutrition & Food Science, Texas A&M
University, College Station, TX, USA [3] Department of Clinical Cancer
Prevention, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA [4] Department of
Molecular & Cellular Medicine, Texas A&M University College of Medicine, College 
Station, TX, USA.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are undergoing clinical trials as
anticancer agents, but some exhibit resistance mechanisms linked to
anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 functions, such as BH3-only protein silencing. HDAC
inhibitors that reactivate BH3-only family members might offer an improved
therapeutic approach. We show here that a novel seleno-a-keto acid triggers
global histone acetylation in human colon cancer cells and activates apoptosis in
a p21-independent manner. Profiling of multiple survival factors identified a
critical role for the BH3-only member Bcl-2-modifying factor (Bmf). On the
corresponding BMF gene promoter, loss of HDAC8 was associated with signal
transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3)/specificity protein 3 (Sp3)
transcription factor exchange and recruitment of p300. Treatment with a p300
inhibitor or transient overexpression of exogenous HDAC8 interfered with BMF
induction, whereas RNAi-mediated silencing of STAT3 activated the target gene.
This is the first report to identify a direct target gene of HDAC8 repression,
namely, BMF. Interestingly, the repressive role of HDAC8 could be uncoupled from 
HDAC1 to trigger Bmf-mediated apoptosis. These findings have implications for the
development of HDAC8-selective inhibitors as therapeutic agents, beyond the
reported involvement of HDAC8 in childhood malignancy.

PMCID: PMC4237248
PMID: 25321483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. BMC Genomics. 2014 Oct 11;15:888. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-888.

De novo assembly and characterization of the transcriptome of the toxic
dinoflagellate Karenia brevis.

Ryan DE, Pepper AE, Campbell L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oceanography, Texas A & M University, College Station, TX 77843,
USA. lisacampbell@tamu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Karenia brevis is a harmful algal species that blooms in the Gulf of 
Mexico and produces brevetoxins that cause neurotoxic shellfish poisoning.
Elevated brevetoxin levels in K. brevis cells have been measured during
laboratory hypo-osmotic stress treatments. To investigate mechanisms underlying
K. brevis osmoacclimation and osmoregulation and establish a valuable resource
for gene discovery, we assembled reference transcriptomes for three clones:
Wilson-CCFWC268, SP3, and SP1 (a low-toxin producing variant). K. brevis
transcriptomes were annotated with gene ontology terms and searched for putative 
transmembrane proteins that may elucidate cellular responses to hypo-osmotic
stress. An analysis of single nucleotide polymorphisms among clones was used to
characterize genetic divergence.
RESULTS: K. brevis reference transcriptomes were assembled with 58.5 (Wilson),
78.0 (SP1), and 51.4 million (SP3) paired reads. Transcriptomes contained 86,580 
(Wilson), 93,668 (SP1), and 84,309 (SP3) predicted transcripts. Approximately 40%
of the transcripts were homologous to proteins in the BLAST nr database with an E
value = 1.00E-6. Greater than 80% of the highly conserved CEGMA core eukaryotic
genes were identified in each transcriptome, which supports assembly
completeness. Seven putative voltage-gated Na+ or Ca2+ channels, two
aquaporin-like proteins, and twelve putative VATPase subunits were discovered in 
all clones using multiple bioinformatics approaches. Furthermore, 45% (Wilson)
and 43% (SP1 and SP3) of the K. brevis putative peptides > 100 amino acids long
produced significant hits to a sequence in the NCBI nr protein database. Of
these, 77% (Wilson and SP1) and 73% (SP3) were successfully assigned gene
ontology functional terms. The predicted single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
frequencies between clones were 0.0028 (Wilson to SP1), 0.0030 (Wilson to SP3),
and 0.0028 (SP1 to SP3).
CONCLUSIONS: The K. brevis transcriptomes assembled here provide a foundational
resource for gene discovery and future RNA-seq experiments. The identification of
ion channels, VATPases, and aquaporins in all three transcriptomes indicates that
K. brevis regulates cellular ion and water concentrations via transmembrane
proteins. Additionally, > 40,000 unannotated loci may include potentially novel
K. brevis genes. Ultimately, the SNPs identified among the three ecologically
diverse clones with different toxin profiles may help to elucidate variations in 
K. brevis brevetoxin production.

PMCID: PMC4203930
PMID: 25306556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Chemistry. 2014 Nov 24;20(48):15775-84. doi: 10.1002/chem.201404776. Epub 2014
Oct 10.

Iridium complexes containing mesoionic C donors: selective C(sp3)-H versus
C(sp2)-H bond activation, reactivity towards acids and bases, and catalytic
oxidation of silanes and water.

Petronilho A(1), Woods JA, Mueller-Bunz H, Bernhard S, Albrecht M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, University College Dublin, Belfield,
Dublin 4 (Ireland).

Metalation of a C2-methylated pyridylimidazolium salt with [IrCp*Cl2]2 affords
either an ylidic complex, resulting from C(sp(3))-H bond activation of the
C2-bound CH3 group if the metalation is performed in the presence of a base, such
as AgO2 or Na2CO3, or a mesoionic complex via cyclometalation and thermally
induced heterocyclic C(sp(2))-H bond activation, if the reaction is performed in 
the absence of a base. Similar cyclometalation and complex formation via
C(sp(2))-H bond activation is observed when the heterocyclic ligand precursor
consists of the analogous pyridyltriazolium salt, that is, when the metal bonding
at the C2 position is blocked by a nitrogen rather than a methyl substituent.
Despite the strongly mesoionic character of both the imidazolylidene and the
triazolylidene, the former reacts rapidly with D(+) and undergoes isotope
exchange at the heterocyclic C5 position, whereas the triazolylidene ligand is
stable and only undergoes H/D exchange under basic conditions, where the
imidazolylidene is essentially unreactive. The high stability of the Ir-C bond in
aqueous solution over a broad pH range was exploited in catalytic water oxidation
and silane oxidation. The catalytic hydrosilylation of ketones proceeds with
turnover frequencies as high as 6,000 h(-1) with both the imidazolylidene and the
triazolylidene system, whereas water oxidation is enhanced by the stronger donor 
properties of the imidazol-4-ylidene ligands and is more than three times faster 
than with the triazolylidene analogue.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25302630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Protein Expr Purif. 2015 Jan;105:23-32. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2014.09.017. Epub 2014
Oct 5.

Highly efficient production of VHH antibody fragments in Brevibacillus
choshinensis expression system.

Mizukami M(1), Tokunaga H(2), Onishi H(1), Ueno Y(1), Hanagata H(1), Miyazaki
N(3), Kiyose N(3), Ito Y(4), Ishibashi M(2), Hagihara Y(5), Arakawa T(6),
Miyauchi A(1), Tokunaga M(7).

Author information: 
(1)R & D Department, Higeta Shoyu Co., Ltd., 2-8 Chuo-cho, Choshi, Chiba
288-8680, Japan. (2)Applied and Molecular Microbiology, Faculty of Agriculture,
Kagoshima University, 1-21-24 Korimoto, Kagoshima 890-0065, Japan. (3)Graduate
School of Science and Engineering, Kagoshima University, 1-21-35 Korimoto,
Kagoshima 890-0065, Japan. (4)Graduate School of Science and Engineering,
Kagoshima University, 1-21-35 Korimoto, Kagoshima 890-0065, Japan. Electronic
address: k2174603@kadai.jp. (5)National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science 
and Technology (AIST), 1-8-31 Midorigaoka, Ikeda, Osaka 563-8577, Japan.
(6)Alliance Protein Laboratories, 6042 Cornerstone Court West, Suite A, San
Diego, CA 92121, USA. (7)Applied and Molecular Microbiology, Faculty of
Agriculture, Kagoshima University, 1-21-24 Korimoto, Kagoshima 890-0065, Japan.
Electronic address: tokunaga@chem.agri.kagoshima-u.ac.jp.

Anti-IZUMO1PFF VHH (variable domain of camelid heavy chain antibody) clones, N6
and N15, from immunized alpaca (Lama pacos) phage library were efficiently
expressed and their VHH products were secreted into the culture medium of
Brevibacillus choshinensis HPD31-SP3, e.g., at a level of 26-95mg in 100ml
conventional flask culture. With a 3-L scale fed-batch culture for 65h, the N15
VHH protein with C-terminal His-tag was produced at ~3g/l culture medium. The N6 
and N15 proteins were easily purified to apparent homogeneity by cation exchange 
and Ni-affinity chromatographies. Both proteins showed specific antigen-binding
activity by ELISA and high antigen binding affinity, KD=6.0-8.6nM, by surface
plasmon resonance analysis. Size exclusion chromatography-multi-angle laser light
scattering analysis revealed that N6 and N15 proteins purified were exclusively
monomeric form in phosphate buffered saline. CD spectrum showed beta-sheet rich
structure, consistent with a typical antibody structure and also suggested
aromatic-aromatic interactions, as indicated by a positive peak at 232nm. Thermal
melting analysis of the N15 protein with C-terminal His-tag demonstrated a clear 
thermal transition with a Tm at 67°C. The heat-denatured sample recovered antigen
binding activity upon cooling, indicating a reversible denaturation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25286401  [PubMed - in process]


186. J Org Chem. 2014 Nov 7;79(21):10581-7. doi: 10.1021/jo5016823. Epub 2014 Oct 15.

Hypervalent iodine-mediated oxygenation of N,N-diaryl tertiary amines:
intramolecular functionalization of sp3 C-H bonds adjacent to nitrogen.

Zhang N(1), Cheng R, Zhang-Negrerie D, Du Y, Zhao K.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Science and Technology, Tianjin University , Tianjin 
300072, China.

An intramolecular C(sp(3))-O bond formation has been achieved via
PhI(OAc)2/NaN3-mediated oxygenation of N,N-diaryl tertiary amines. The appealing 
features of this method include mild reaction conditions, absence of heavy-metal 
catalysts, and the direct intramolecular functionalization of sp(3) C-H bonds
adjacent to nitrogen.

PMID: 25279661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Org Lett. 2014 Oct 17;16(20):5258-61. doi: 10.1021/ol502337b. Epub 2014 Sep 30.

Sulfoximine assisted Pd(II)-catalyzed bromination and chlorination of primary
ß-C(sp3)-H bond.

Rit RK(1), Yadav MR, Ghosh K, Shankar M, Sahoo AK.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry, University of Hyderabad , Hyderabad-500046, India.

S-methyl-S-2-pyridyl-sulfoximine (MPyS) directed bromination and chlorination of 
the 1°-ß-C(sp(3))-H bond of MPyS-N-amides is realized under the influence of
N-Br/Cl-phthalimides and a Pd(II)-catalyst. The sequential halogenation and
acetoxylation of a-dimethyl MPyS-N-amides constructs highly functionalized
a-trisubstituted aliphatic acid derivatives. The MPyS directing group is cleaved 
from the halogenated products and recovered.

PMID: 25268810  [PubMed]


188. Parasitology. 2015 Apr;142(4):527-33. doi: 10.1017/S003118201400153X. Epub 2014
Sep 30.

Analysis of genetic variability of Fasciola hepatica populations from different
geographical locations by ISSR-PCR.

Robles-Pérez D(1), García-García P(2), Martínez-Pérez JM(1), Rojo-Vázquez FA(1), 
Martínez-Valladares M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,University of León,Campus de Vegazana, 24071
León,Spain. (2)Faculty of Biological and Environmental Sciences,University of
León,Campus de Vegazana, 24071 León,Spain. (3)Instituto de Ganadería de Montaña
(CSIC-ULE),Finca Marzanas, 24346 Grulleros, León,Spain.

Inter-simple sequence repeats markers were used to determinate the genetic
variability of Fasciola hepatica populations recovered from sheep and cattle from
Spain (Sp1, Sp2, Sp3 and Sp4), UK (Eng), Ireland (Ir) and Mexico (Mex). Twenty
five primers were tested but only five produced 39 reproducible bands, being
71.79% polymorphic bands. This percentage ranged from 10.26% in Sp4 to 48.72% in 
Sp1, and per host between 28.21 and 48.72% in sheep and between 10.26 and 38.46% 
in cattle. This relatively low range of genetic diversity within populations,
with a mean of 34.40%, implies that a large proportion of variation resided among
populations. The population differentiation (Gst = 0.547) indicated that 54.7% of
variation is due to differences between populations and 45.3% due to differences 
within population. The Nei's distance ranged between 0.091 and 0.230 in sheep and
between 0.150 and 0.337 in cattle. The genetic relationships between populations 
and individuals were shown by a UPGMA dendrogram and a principal coordinate
analysis; both grouped all populations separately from Sp4, a population of from 
the Midwest of Spain with the lowest level of diversity. Small genetic distances 
were observed between Eng and Ir, on the one hand, and Sp1, Sp2, Sp3, from the
Northwest of Spain, together with Mex, on the other.

PMID: 25266441  [PubMed - in process]


189. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2015 May-Jun;23(5):355-63. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0000000000000090.

Evaluation of HER2 Protein Expression Using 2 New Monoclonal Antibodies.

Aleixo PB(1), Meurer RT, Vasconcellos FA, Conceição FR, Aleixo JA, Hartmann AA.

Author information: 
(1)*Postgraduation Program in Pathology, Pathology Research Laboratory,
Universidade Federal de Ciências da Saúde de Porto Alegre (UFCSPA), Porto Alegre 
Postgraduation Program in Biotechnology, Technology Development Center,
Universidade Federal de Pelotas (UFPEL), Pelotas, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.

This study describes the performance of 2 new mouse anti-HER2 monoclonal
antibodies (Abs), clones 33F and 410G, in evaluating HER2 overexpression in a
series of 123 invasive breast carcinoma cases. In-house immunohistochemistry
(IHC) was performed and the results were compared with those for the SP3 and
A0485 anti-HER2 Abs. Chromogenic in situ hybridization was used to detect ERBB2
amplification and its concordance with IHC was analyzed. Comparison of IHC
results for 33F with SP3 and A0485 yielded concordance rates (K) of 0.81 and
0.75, respectively; the same concordance rates were found when comparing results 
for 410G with SP3 and A0485. Compared with SP3 and A0485, 33F and 410G
specificities were 98.6% and 98.6%, and 100% and 100%, respectively, whereas the 
sensitivities were 80% and 74.1%, and 78% and 72.2%, respectively. The K values
between 33F and 410G HER2+ expression and chromogenic in situ
hybridization-positive amplification were 1 and 0.96, respectively. These
concordance rates were reproduced in another production batch (K=0.96 and
K=0.96). Together, these results show that the tested monoclonal Abs would be
well suited for detecting HER2 protein overexpression by IHC.

PMID: 25265434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Org Lett. 2014 Oct 17;16(20):5278-81. doi: 10.1021/ol502377x. Epub 2014 Sep 29.

Developing Pd(II) catalyzed double sp3 C-H alkoxylation for synthesis of
symmetric and unsymmetric acetals.

Zong Y(1), Rao Y.

Author information: 
(1)MOE Key Laboratory of Protein Sciences, Department of Pharmacology and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Medicine and School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua
University , Beijing 100084, China.

An effective Pd(II) catalyzed double unactivated C(sp(3))-H alkoxylation has been
developed to prepare both symmetric and unsymmetric acetals. This new reaction
demonstrates good functional group tolerance, excellent reactivity, and high
yields. A variety of novel acetals can be readily accessed via this new method.

PMID: 25264564  [PubMed]


191. Chemistry. 2014 Nov 10;20(46):15021-30. doi: 10.1002/chem.201403985. Epub 2014
Sep 26.

Palladium-N-heterocyclic carbene (NHC)-catalyzed asymmetric synthesis of
indolines through regiodivergent C(sp3)-H activation: scope and DFT study.

Katayev D(1), Larionov E, Nakanishi M, Besnard C, Kündig EP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organic Chemistry, University of Geneva, 30 Quai Ernest
Ansermet, 1211Geneva 4 (Switzerland), Fax: (+)<U+2009>41<U+2009>22-237-3215.

Two bulky, chiral, monodentate N-heterocyclic carbene ligands were applied to
palladium-catalyzed asymmetric C-H arylation to incorporate C(sp(3))-H bond
activation. Racemic mixtures of the carbamate starting materials underwent
regiodivergent reactions to afford different trans-2,3-substituted indolines.
Although this CAr-Calkyl coupling requires high temperatures (140-160<U+2009>°C), chiral
induction is high. This regiodivergent reaction, when carried out with
enantiopure starting materials, can lead to single structurally different
enantiopure products, depending on the catalyst chirality. The C-H activation at 
a tertiary center was realized only in the case of a cyclopropyl group. No C-H
activation takes place alpha to a tertiary center. A detailed DFT study is
included and analyses of methyl versus methylene versus methine C-H activation is
used to rationalize experimentally observed regio- and enantioselectivities.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25262613  [PubMed]


192. Org Lett. 2014 Oct 17;16(20):5342-5. doi: 10.1021/ol502524d. Epub 2014 Sep 25.

Metal-free oxidative C(sp3)-H bond functionalization of alkanes and conjugate
addition to chromones.

Zhao J(1), Fang H, Qian P, Han J, Pan Y.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Nanjing University , Nanjing,
210093, China.

A metal-free oxidative C(sp(3))-H bond functionalization and subsequent conjugate
addition reaction using di-tert-butyl peroxide (DTBP) as the oxidant was
established, which tolerates a wide range of simple alkane substrates to react
with different substituted chromones for direct preparation of
2-alkylchromanones.

PMID: 25255426  [PubMed]


193. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2014 Nov 17;53(47):12912-5. doi: 10.1002/anie.201402922. 
Epub 2014 Sep 22.

Metal-catalyzed dealkoxylative C(aryl)-C(sp3) cross-coupling-replacement of
aromatic methoxy groups of aryl ethers by employing a functionalized nucleophile.

Leiendecker M(1), Hsiao CC, Guo L, Alandini N, Rueping M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Organische Chemie, RWTH Aachen University, Landoltweg 1, 52074
Aachen (Germany).

The direct replacement of aromatic methoxy groups with activated carbon
nucleophiles would give rise to novel synthetic pathways for targeted and
diversity-oriented syntheses. We demonstrate here that this transformation can be
achieved in a one-step reaction involving a bifunctional organolithium
nucleophile in combination with a CAr <U+F8FF>OMe bond-cleaving nickel catalyst. The
resulting products are stable, a-CH active, and suitable for various further
modifications.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25250516  [PubMed]


194. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Oct 7;111(40):14518-23. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1215767111. Epub 2014 Sep 22.

MicroRNA-223 coordinates cholesterol homeostasis.

Vickers KC(1), Landstreet SR(2), Levin MG(3), Shoucri BM(3), Toth CL(2), Taylor
RC(2), Palmisano BT(3), Tabet F(4), Cui HL(5), Rye KA(4), Sethupathy P(6),
Remaley AT(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892; Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232; kasey.c.vickers@Vanderbilt.edu. (2)Department of
Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232;
(3)National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892; (4)Lipid Research Group, The Heart Research Institute,
Newtown, NSW 2042, Australia; (5)Lipoproteins and Atherosclerosis, Baker IDI
Heart and Diabetes Institute, Melbourne, VIC 3004, Australia; and. (6)Department 
of Genetics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2015 Mar 27;116(7):1112-4.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) regulate a wide variety of biological processes and contribute
to metabolic homeostasis. Here, we demonstrate that microRNA-223 (miR-223), an
miRNA previously associated with inflammation, also controls multiple mechanisms 
associated with cholesterol metabolism. miR-223 promoter activity and mature
levels were found to be linked to cellular cholesterol states in hepatoma cells. 
Moreover, hypercholesterolemia was associated with increased hepatic miR-223
levels in athero-prone mice. miR-223 was found to regulate high-density
lipoprotein-cholesterol (HDL-C) uptake, through direct targeting and repression
of scavenger receptor BI, and to inhibit cholesterol biosynthesis through the
direct repression of sterol enzymes 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthase 1 and
methylsterol monooxygenase 1 in humans. Additionally, miR-223 was found to
indirectly promote ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 expression (mRNA and
protein) through Sp3, thereby enhancing cellular cholesterol efflux. Finally,
genetic ablation of miR-223 in mice resulted in increased HDL-C levels and
particle size, as well as increased hepatic and plasma total cholesterol levels. 
In summary, we identified a critical role for miR-223 in systemic cholesterol
regulation by coordinated posttranscriptional control of multiple genes in
lipoprotein and cholesterol metabolism.

PMCID: PMC4210029
PMID: 25246565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Chem Commun (Camb). 2014 Nov 4;50(85):12880-3. doi: 10.1039/c4cc06003b.

Efficient imidation of C(sp3)-H bonds adjacent to oxygen atoms of aryl ethers
under metal-free conditions.

Sun K(1), Wang X, Li G, Zhu Z, Jiang Y, Xiao B.

Author information: 
(1)College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Anyang Normal University,
Anyang 455000, P. R. China. sunk468@nenu.edu.cn.

An intermolecular oxidative C-N formation reaction of aryl ethers with
pharmacological saccharins was realized under metal-free conditions for the first
time. The understanding of the intrinsic characteristics between C(sp(3))-H and
C(sp(2))-O bonds of aryl ethers and their potential for application might promote
more research interest in this area.

PMID: 25213755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2014 Oct 27;53(44):11950-4. doi: 10.1002/anie.201407848. 
Epub 2014 Sep 11.

Sulfonamide-promoted palladium(II)-catalyzed alkylation of unactivated methylene 
C(sp3)-H bonds with alkyl iodides.

Chen K(1), Shi BF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027 (China).

The alkylation of unactivated ß-methylene C(sp(3))-H bonds of a-amino acid
substrates with a broad range of alkyl iodides using Pd(OAc)2 as the catalyst is 
described. The addition of NaOCN and 4-Cl-C6H4SO2NH2 was found to be crucial for 
the success of this transformation. The reaction is compatible with a diverse
array of functional groups and proceeds with high diastereoselectivity.
Furthermore, various ß,ß-hetero-dialkyl- and ß-alkyl-ß-aryl-a-amino acids were
prepared by sequential C(sp(3))-H functionalization of an alanine-derived
substrate, thus providing a versatile strategy for the stereoselective synthesis 
of unnatural ß-disubstituted a-amino acids.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25213367  [PubMed]


197. Chem Commun (Camb). 2014 Nov 4;50(85):12867-9. doi: 10.1039/c4cc05051g.

Oxidative coupling of alkenes with amides using peroxides: selective amide
C(sp3)-H versus C(sp2)-H functionalization.

Yang XH(1), Wei WT, Li HB, Song RJ, Li JH.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensing and Chemometrics, College of
Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China.
jhli@hnu.edu.cn.

A new oxidative coupling of unactivated terminal alkenes with amides using
peroxides is described, in which mono- and difunctionalization of alkenes are
selectively achieved. In this reaction with amides, the chemoselectivity toward
the functionalization of the C(sp(3))-H bonds adjacent to the nitrogen atom or
the functionalization of the carbonyl C(sp(2))-H bonds across alkenes relies on
the reaction conditions.

PMID: 25212419  [PubMed]


198. J Am Chem Soc. 2014 Sep 24;136(38):13194-7. doi: 10.1021/ja508165a. Epub 2014 Sep
15.

Ligand-promoted alkylation of C(sp3)-H and C(sp2)-H bonds.

Zhu RY(1), He J, Wang XC, Yu JQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute , 10550 North Torrey
Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, United States.

9-Methylacridine was identified as a generally effective ligand to promote a
Pd(II)-catalyzed C(sp(3))-H and C(sp(2))-H alkylation of simple amides with
various alkyl iodides. This alkylation reaction was applied to the preparation of
unnatural amino acids and geometrically controlled tri- and tetrasubstituted
acrylic acids.

PMCID: PMC4183600
PMID: 25208210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Chimia (Aarau). 2014;68(6):414-8. doi: 10.2533/chimia.2014.414.

Selective incorporation of difluoromethylene moieties into arenes assisted by
transition metals.

Gao B(1), Ni C(1), Hu J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Organofluorine Chemistry Shanghai Institute of Organic
Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences 345 Ling-Ling Road, Shanghai 200032,
China. (2)Key Laboratory of Organofluorine Chemistry Shanghai Institute of
Organic Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences 345 Ling-Ling Road, Shanghai
200032, China. jinbohu@sioc.ac.cn.

Fluorinated compounds are of significant importance in various fields due to
their unique chemical, physical, and biological properties. Accordingly, the
incorporation of fluorine atom(s) or fluorine-containing functionalities into
organic molecules has received considerable attention. For decades, extensive
reports and reviews mainly focused on the fluorination and perfluoroalkylation
(especially trifluoromethylation) whereas the preparation of partially
fluorinated compounds was less developed. Difluoromethylated arenes and their
derivatives (ArCF2R, R <U+2260> F, R(f), H) have been found to be as important in
pharmaceuticals as trifluoromethylated arenes. However, it is only recently that 
these compounds have experienced a revival of interest from synthetic chemists.
The direct construction of carbon(sp2)-carbon(sp3) bonds via transition
metal-mediated cross-coupling reactions represents one of the most
straightforward strategies for the introduction of difluoromethylene moieties
(CF2R, R <U+2260> F, R(f)) to aromatic compounds. This mini-review focuses on recent
advances of this research topic from both synthetic and mechanistic perspectives.

PMID: 25198751  [PubMed]


200. Org Lett. 2014 Sep 19;16(18):4956-9. doi: 10.1021/ol502511g. Epub 2014 Sep 5.

Regio- and stereospecific synthesis of C-3 functionalized proline derivatives by 
palladium catalyzed directed C(sp3)-H arylation.

Affron DP(1), Davis OA, Bull JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London , South Kensington, London
SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom.

Functionalization of C(sp(3))-H bonds at the unactivated 3-position of proline
derivatives has been achieved using aryl iodides and palladium catalysis. This
directly affords cis-2,3-disubstituted pyrrolidines as single stereoisomers.
3-Arylation occurs in high yield under solvent-free conditions with
aminoquinoline and methoxyaminoquinoline directing groups. The latter was readily
removed to give primary amide derivatives with physicochemical properties
appropriate for use as fragments in drug discovery.

PMID: 25191995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Org Chem. 2014 Dec 19;79(24):11903-10. doi: 10.1021/jo501610x. Epub 2014 Sep
11.

Mechanistic study of the selectivity of olefin versus cyclobutene formation by
palladium(0)-catalyzed intramolecular C(sp3)-H activation.

Kefalidis CE(1), Davi M, Holstein PM, Clot E, Baudoin O.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Charles Gerhardt, CNRS UMR 5253, Université Montpellier 2 , case
courrier 1501, Place Eugène Bataillon, 34095 Montpellier, France.

This study describes the mechanism and selectivity pattern of the Pd(0)-catalyzed
C(sp(3))-H activation of a prototypical substrate bearing two linear alkyl
groups. Experimentally, the use of the Pd/P(t-Bu)3 catalytic system leads to a
ca. 7:3 mixture of olefin and benzocyclobutene (BCB) products. The C-H activation
step was computed to be favored for the secondary position a to the benzylic
carbon over the primary position ß to the benzylic carbon by more than 4 kcal
mol(-1), in line with previous selectivity trends on analogous substrates. The
five-membered palladacycle obtained through this activation step may then follow 
two different pathways, which were computationally characterized: (1)
decoordination of the protonated base and reductive elimination to give the BCB
product and (2) proton transfer to the aryl ligand and base-mediated ß-H
elimination to give the olefin product. Experiments conducted with deuterated
substrates were in accordance with this mechanism. The difference between the
highest activation barriers in the two pathways was computed to be 1.2 kcal
mol(-1) in favor of BCB formation. However, the use of a kinetic model revealed
the critical influence of the kinetics of dissociation of HCO3(-) formed after
the C-H activation step in actually directing the reaction toward either of the
two pathways.

PMID: 25188526  [PubMed]


202. Org Lett. 2014 Sep 19;16(18):4790-3. doi: 10.1021/ol5022542. Epub 2014 Sep 2.

Copper-mediated direct C(sp3)-H and C(sp2)-H acetoxylation.

Wang Z(1), Kuninobu Y, Kanai M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of Tokyo , 7-3-1
Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

A copper-mediated terminal position-selective C(sp(3))-H acetoxylation using a
bidentate directing group and AgOAc as an oxidant was achieved. This reaction has
high functional group tolerance and is not affected by steric hindrance. The
reaction proceeds in excellent yield, even in gram scale, and the directing group
can be removed after the reaction. Aromatic C(sp(2))-H acetoxylation also
proceeded under similar reaction conditions.

PMID: 25180452  [PubMed]


203. Molecules. 2014 Aug 29;19(9):13358-73. doi: 10.3390/molecules190913358.

Theoretical investigation on nearsightedness of finite model and molecular
systems based on linear response function analysis.

Mitsuta Y(1), Yamanaka S(2), Yamaguchi K(3), Okumura M(4), Nakamura H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Science, Osaka University, Machikaneyama 1-1, Toyoanaka,
Osaka 560-0043, Japan. mitsutay13@chem.sci.osaka-u.ac.jp. (2)Graduate School of
Science, Osaka University, Machikaneyama 1-1, Toyoanaka, Osaka 560-0043, Japan.
syama@chem.sci.osaka-u.ac.jp. (3)Institute for Nanoscience Design Center, Osaka
University, Machikaneyama 1-3, Toyoanaka, Osaka 560-8531, Japan.
yama@chem.sci.osaka-u.ac.jp. (4)Graduate School of Science, Osaka University,
Machikaneyama 1-1, Toyoanaka, Osaka 560-0043, Japan. ok@chem.sci.osaka-u.ac.jp.
(5)Institute for Protein Research, Osaka University, 3-2, Yamadaoka Suita, Osaka 
565-0871, Japan. harukin@protein.osaka-u.ac.jp.

We examined nearsightedness of electronic matter (NEM) of finite systems on the
basis of linear response function (LRF). From the computational results of a
square-well model system, the behavior of responses obviously depends on the
number of electrons (N): as N increases, LRF, d<U+03C1>(r)/dv(r'), decays rapidly for
the distance, |r-r'|. This exemplifies that the principle suggested by Kohn and
Prodan holds even for finite systems: the cause of NEM is destructive
interference among electron density amplitudes. In addition, we examined
double-well model systems, which have low-lying degenerate levels. In this case, 
there are two types of LRF: the cases of the half-filled and of full-filled in
low-lying degenerate levels. The response for the former is delocalized, while
that of the later is localized. These behaviors of model systems are discussed in
relation to the molecular systems' counterparts, H2, He22+, and He2 systems. We
also see that NEM holds for the dissociated limit of H2, of which the mechanism
is similar to that of the insulating state of solids as suggested by Kohn. We
also examined LRF of alanine tripeptide system as well as butane and butadiene
molecules, showing that NEM of the polypeptide system is caused by sp3 junctions 
at Ca atoms that prevent propagation of amplitudes of LRF, which is critically
different from that of NEM for finite and infinite homogeneous systems.

PMID: 25178060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Chemistry. 2014 Oct 6;20(41):13203-9. doi: 10.1002/chem.201403860. Epub 2014 Aug 
27.

C(sp3)-H activation without a directing group: regioselective synthesis of
N-ylide or N-heterocyclic carbene complexes controlled by the choice of metal and
ligand.

Cross WB(1), Razak S, Singh K, Warner AJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Science and Technology, Nottingham Trent University, Nottingham,
NG11 8NS (UK). warren.cross@ntu.ac.uk.

N-Ylide complexes of Ir have been generated by C(sp(3))-H activation of
a-pyridinium or a-imidazolium esters in reactions with [Cp*IrCl2]2 and NaOAc.
These reactions are rare examples of C(sp(3))-H activation without a covalent
directing group, which-even more unusually-occur a to a carbonyl group. For the
reaction of the a-imidazolium ester [3H]Cl, the site selectivity of C-H
activation could be controlled by the choice of metal and ligand: with
[Cp*IrCl2]2 and NaOAc, C(sp(3))-H activation gave the N-ylide complex 4; in
contrast, with Ag2O followed by [Cp*IrCl2]2, C(sp(2))-H activation gave the
N-heterocyclic carbene complex 5. DFT calculations revealed that the N-ylide
complex 4 was the kinetic product of an ambiphilic C-H activation. Examination of
the computed transition state for the reaction to give 4 indicated that unlike in
related reactions, the acetate ligand appears to play the dominant role in C-H
bond cleavage.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25164979  [PubMed]


205. J Org Chem. 2014 Dec 19;79(24):11933-9. doi: 10.1021/jo501691f. Epub 2014 Sep 4.

Direct arylation of C(sp3)-H bonds in aliphatic amides with diaryliodonium salts 
in the presence of a nickel catalyst.

Iyanaga M(1), Aihara Y, Chatani N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Chemistry, Faculty of Engineering, Osaka University ,
Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

The Ni(II)-catalyzed direct arylation of C(sp(3))-H (methyl and methylene) bonds 
in aliphatic amides containing an 8-aminoquinoline moiety as the directing group 
with diaryliodonium salts as coupling electrophiles is described. A wide variety 
of functional groups are tolerated in the reaction. The reaction represents the
first example of the Ni-catalyzed direct arylation of C(sp(3))-H bonds with
diaryliodonium salts.

PMID: 25162768  [PubMed]


206. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:257040. doi: 10.1155/2014/257040. Epub 2014 Jul 24.

Peptide-ligand binding modeling of siRNA with cell-penetrating peptides.

García-Sosa AT(1), Tulp I(1), Langel K(2), Langel Ü(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemistry, University of Tartu, Ravila 14a, 50411 Tartu, Estonia.
(2)Institute of Technology, University of Tartu, Nooruse 1, 50411 Tartu, Estonia.
(3)Institute of Technology, University of Tartu, Nooruse 1, 50411 Tartu, Estonia 
; Department of Neurochemistry, Stockholm University, 106 91 Stockholm, Sweden.

The binding affinity of a series of cell-penetrating peptides (CPP) was modeled
through docking and making use of the number of intermolecular hydrogen bonds,
lipophilic contacts, and the number of sp3 molecular orbital hybridization
carbons. The new ranking of the peptides is consistent with the experimentally
determined efficiency in the downregulation of luciferase activity, which
includes the peptides' ability to bind and deliver the siRNA into the cell. The
predicted structures of the complexes of peptides to siRNA were stable throughout
10 ns long, explicit water molecular dynamics simulations. The stability and
binding affinity of peptide-siRNA complexes was related to the sidechains and
modifications of the CPPs, with the stearyl and quinoline groups improving
affinity and stability. The reranking of the peptides docked to siRNA, together
with explicit water molecular dynamics simulations, appears to be well suited to 
describe and predict the interaction of CPPs with siRNA.

PMCID: PMC4131515
PMID: 25147791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Chemistry. 2014 Sep 22;20(39):12544-52. doi: 10.1002/chem.201402933. Epub 2014
Aug 21.

Small molecule activation by POC(sp3)OP-nickel complexes.

Hao J(1), Vabre B, Mougang-Soumé B, Zargarian D.

Author information: 
(1)Département de chimie, Université de Montréal, 2900 Boul. Edouard-Montpetit,
Montréal, Québec, H3C 3 J7 (Canada).

This contribution describes the reactivities of CO2 , CO, O2 , and ArNC with the 
pincer-type complexes [(<U+03BA>(P) ,<U+03BA>(C) ,<U+03BA>(P') -POC<U+2009>sp<U+2009>3OP)NiX] (POC<U+2009>sp<U+2009>3OP=(R2 POCH2 
)2 CH; R=iPr; X=OSiMe3 , NArH; Ar=2,6-iPr2 C6 H3 ). Reaction of the amido
derivative with CO2 and CO leads to a simple insertion into the Ni<U+F8FF>N bond to give
stable carbamate and carbamoyl derivatives, respectively, the pincer ligand
backbone remaining intact in both cases. In contrast, the analogous reactions
with the siloxide derivative produced kinetically labile insertion products that 
either revert to the starting material (in the case of CO2 ) or react further to 
give the mixed-valent, dinickel species [(POC<U+2009>sp<U+2009>3OP)Ni(II) {µ,<U+03BA>(O) ,<U+03BA>(P) ,<U+03BA>(P') 
-OCOCH(CH2 CH2 OPR2 )2 }Ni(0) (CO)2 ]. The zero-valent center in the latter
compound is ligated by a new ligand arising from transformation of the POC<U+2009>sp<U+2009>3OP
ligand backbone. The carbonylation and carboxylation of the siloxido derivative
also produced minor quantities of a side-product identified as the trinickel
species, [{(<U+03B7>(3) -allyl)Ni(µ(O) ,<U+03BA>(P) -R2 PO)2 }2 Ni], arising from total
dismantling of the POC<U+2009>sp<U+2009>3OP ligand. Similar reactivities were observed with
isonitrile, ArNC: reaction with the siloxido derivative resulted in a complex
sequence of steps involving initial insertion, a 1,3-hydrogen shift, and an
Arbuzov rearrangement to give [Ni(CNAr)4 ] and a methacrylamide based on
fragments of the POC<U+2009>sp<U+2009>3OP ligand. Oxygenation of the amido and siloxido
derivatives led to the phosphinate derivative, [(POC<U+2009>sp<U+2009>3OP)Ni(OP(O)R2 )],
arising from oxidative transformation of the original ligand frame; the reaction 
with the Ni-NHAr derivative also gave ArHNP(O)R2 through a complex N<U+F8FF>P
bond-forming reaction.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25145857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Biol Chem. 2014 Oct 3;289(40):27692-701. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.592576. Epub
2014 Aug 20.

Mechanism of metformin-dependent inhibition of mammalian target of rapamycin
(mTOR) and Ras activity in pancreatic cancer: role of specificity protein (Sp)
transcription factors.

Nair V(1), Sreevalsan S(1), Basha R(2), Abdelrahim M(2), Abudayyeh A(3),
Rodrigues Hoffman A(4), Safe S(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology and. (2)the
Cancer Research Institute, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center-Orlando, Orlando, Florida 
32806, the Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030. (3)the Department of
Emergency Medicine, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, and.
(4)Veterinary Pathobiology, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843.
(5)From the Departments of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology and the
Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health Sciences Center,
Houston, Texas 77030 ssafe@cvm.tamu.edu.

The antidiabetic drug metformin exhibits both chemopreventive and
chemotherapeutic activity for multiple cancers including pancreatic cancer;
however, the underlying mechanism of action of metformin is unclear. A recent
study showed that metformin down-regulated specificity protein (Sp) transcription
factors (TFs) Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 in pancreatic cancer cells and tumors, and this
was accompanied by down-regulation of several pro-oncogenic Sp-regulated genes.
Treatment with metformin or down-regulation of Sp TFs by RNAi also inhibits two
major pro-oncogenic pathways in pancreatic cancer cells, namely mammalian target 
of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling and epidermal growth factor (EGFR)-dependent
activation of Ras. Metformin and Sp knockdown by RNAi decreased expression of the
insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF-1R), resulting in inhibition of mTOR
signaling. Ras activity was also decreased by metformin and Sp knockdown of EGFR,
another Sp-regulated gene. Thus, the antineoplastic activities of metformin in
pancreatic cancer are due, in part, to down-regulation of Sp TFs and Sp-regulated
IGF-1R and EGFR, which in turn results in inhibition of mTOR and Ras signaling,
respectively.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4183806
PMID: 25143389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Jun 15;7(7):4454-60. eCollection 2014.

Immunohistochemical results of HER2/neu protein expression assessed by rabbit
monoclonal antibodies SP3 and 4B5 in colorectal carcinomas.

Song Z(1), Deng Y(2), Zhuang K(2), Li A(2), Liu S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Gastroenterology, Department of
Gastroenterology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University Guangzhou, China 
; Department of Pathophysiology, Wenzhou Medical University Wenzhou, Zhejiang
Province, China. (2)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Gastroenterology,
Department of Gastroenterology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University
Guangzhou, China.

HER2/neu is an efficient target for cancer therapy. However, reports about its
overexpression rate in colorectal carcinomas showed wide variability. This study 
aims to investigate HER2/neu expression in colorectal carcinomas using these two 
rabbit monoclonal HER2/neu antibodies, and to clarify the relationship between
protein overexpression and gene amplification of HER2/neu and their
clinicopathologic importance. Tissue microarray was performed from sections of
106 cases colorectal carcinomas. Their clinical data, including gender, age,
stage, recurrence, lymph node metastasis, and follow-ups were collected.
Immunohistochemistry for rabbit monoclonal antibody SP3 and 4B5 were performed,
Fluorescent in situ hybridization was applied to detect the amplification of
HER2/neu gene. The HER2/neu overexpression of (2+ and 3+) in our results were
seen in 7.5% (8/106) for 4B5 and 3.8% (4/106) for SP3 respectively, the HER2/neu 
amplification was in 2.8% (3/106). All cases of overexpression for SP3 were
included by those for 4B5. Both antibodies stained 3 cases of HER2/neu 3+, and
FISH confirmed HER2/neu amplification did occurred in these cases. In our study, 
4B5 was more sensitive to detect HER2/neu of colorectal carcinoma than SP3. 2.8% 
patients with colorectal patients might benefit from anti-HER2/neu therapy.

PMCID: PMC4129068
PMID: 25120833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Neurosci Res. 2015 Jan;93(1):167-77. doi: 10.1002/jnr.23464. Epub 2014 Aug 5.

Extracellular signal-related kinase 2/specificity protein 1/specificity protein
3/repressor element-1 silencing transcription factor pathway is involved in
Aroclor 1254-induced toxicity in SH-SY5Y neuronal cells.

Formisano L(1), Guida N, Laudati G, Boscia F, Esposito A, Secondo A, Di Renzo G, 
Canzoniero LM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology, Department of Neuroscience, Reproductive and
Dentistry Sciences, School of Medicine, University of Naples Federico II, Naples,
Italy; Division of Pharmacology, Department of Science and Technology, University
of Sannio, Benevento, Italy.

Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) cause a wide spectrum of toxic effects in the
brain through undefined mechanisms. Exposure to the PCB mixture Aroclor-1254
(A1254) increases the repressor element-1 silencing transcription factor (REST)
expression, leading to neuronal death. This study sought to understand the
sequence of some molecular mechanisms to determine whether A1254 could increase
REST expression and the cytoprotective effect of the phorbol ester
tetradecanoylphorbol acetate (TPA) on A1254-induced toxicity in SH-SY5Y cells. As
shown by Western blot analysis, A1254 (10 µg/ml) downregulates extracellular
signal-related kinase 2 (ERK2) phosphorylation in a time-dependent manner,
thereby triggering the binding of specificity protein 1 (Sp1) and Sp3 to the REST
gene promoter as revealed by chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis. This chain
of events results in an increase in REST mRNA and cell death, as assessed by
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and
dimethylthiazolyl-2-5-diphenyltetrazolium-bromide assay, respectively.
Accordingly, TPA prevented both the A1254-induced decrease in ERK2
phosphorylation and the A1254-induced increase in Sp1, Sp3, and REST protein
expression. After 48 hr, TPA prevented A1254-induced cell death. ERK2
overexpression counteracted the A1254-induced increase in Sp1 and Sp3 protein
expression and prevented A1254-induced Sp1 and Sp3 binding to the REST gene
promoter, thus counteracting the increase in REST mRNA expression induced by the 
toxicant. In neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells, ERK2/Sp1/SP3/REST is a new pathway
underlying the neurotoxic effect of PCB. The ERK2/Sp1/Sp3/REST pathway, which
underlies A1254-induced neuronal death, might represent a new drug signaling
cascade in PCB-induced neuronal toxicity.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25093670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Pathol Res Pract. 2014 Nov;210(11):713-8. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2014.06.031. Epub
2014 Jul 16.

High agreement between whole slide imaging and optical microscopy for assessment 
of HER2 expression in breast cancer: whole slide imaging for the assessment of
HER2 expression.

Nunes C(1), Rocha R(2), Buzelin M(3), Balabram D(3), Foureaux F(3), Porto S(3),
Gobbi H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo
Horizonte, MG, Brazil. Electronic address: cristianabnunes@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Anatomic Pathology, AC Camargo Cancer Center, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo
Horizonte, MG, Brazil.

Whole slide imaging (WSI) technology has been used for training, teaching,
researching, and remote consultation. Few studies compared HER2 expression using 
optical microscopy (OM) and WSI evaluations in breast carcinomas. However, no
consensus has been achieved comparing both assessments.MATERIAL AND METHODS:
Sections from tissue microarray containing 200 preselected invasive breast
carcinomas were submitted to immunohistochemistry applying three anti-HER2
antibodies (HercepTest, CB11, SP3) and in situ hybridization (DDISH). Slides
were evaluated using OM and WSI (Pannoramic MIDI and Viewer, 3DHISTECH).
Sensitivity and specificity were calculated comparing the anti-HER2 antibodies
and DDISH.
RESULTS: WSI and OM HER2 evaluations agreement was considered good (SP3, k=0.80) 
to very good (CB11 and HercepTest, k=0.81). WSI evaluation led to higher
sensitivity (ranging from 100 of SP3 and HercepTest to 97 of CB11) and lower
specificity (ranging from 86.4 of SP3 to 89.4 of HercepTest) compared to OM
evaluation (sensitivity ranged from 92.1 of CB11 to 98 of SP3 and specificity
ranged from 95.2 of SP3 and HercepTest to 97.1 of CB11 and SP3).
CONCLUSION: High agreement was achieved between WSI and OM evaluations. All three
antibodies were highly sensitive and specific using both evaluations. WSI can be 
considered a useful tool for HER2 immunohistochemical assessment.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25091257  [PubMed - in process]


212. Org Lett. 2014 Aug 15;16(16):4288-91. doi: 10.1021/ol502011k. Epub 2014 Aug 4.

Palladium-catalyzed remote C(sp3)-H arylation of 3-pinanamine.

Cui W(1), Chen S, Wu JQ, Zhao X, Hu W, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University , Guangzhou 510006, 
China.

3-Pinanamine is a prevalent motif in medicinal chemistry and asymmetric
synthesis. In line with the pursuit of novel 3-pinanamine based anti-influenza
virus A agent, the direct functionalization of 3-pinanamine was achieved by using
Pd-catalyzed C(sp(3))-H activation logic. Good substrate scope and functional
group tolerance were observed. The reaction represents a rare example of a direct
functionalization of an aliphatic amine at the remote d position.

PMID: 25089912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Org Lett. 2014 Aug 15;16(16):4162-5. doi: 10.1021/ol501855m. Epub 2014 Aug 4.

Facile regio- and stereoselective metal-free synthesis of all-carbon
tetrasubstituted alkenes bearing a C(sp3)-F unit via dehydroxyfluorination of
Morita-Baylis-Hillman (MBH) adducts.

Takizawa S(1), Arteaga FA, Kishi K, Hirata S, Sasai H.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Scientific and Industrial Research (ISIR), Osaka University ,
Mihogaoka, Ibaraki-shi, Osaka 567-0047, Japan.

Highly E-selective all-carbon tetrasubstituted alkenes with a C(sp(3))-F unit
have been synthesized through a dehydroxyfluorination of Morita-Baylis-Hillman
(MBH) adducts which can be readily prepared from a,ß-unsaturated carbonyl
compounds and a-keto esters. A variety of subsequent transformations afforded
monofluoromethyl substituted heterocycles in high yields.

PMID: 25089369  [PubMed]


214. Cell. 2014 Jul 31;158(3):579-92. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.05.051.

p53-dependent Nestin regulation links tumor suppression to cellular plasticity in
liver cancer.

Tschaharganeh DF(1), Xue W(2), Calvisi DF(3), Evert M(3), Michurina TV(2), Dow
LE(1), Banito A(1), Katz SF(4), Kastenhuber ER(1), Weissmueller S(5), Huang
CH(1), Lechel A(4), Andersen JB(6), Capper D(7), Zender L(2), Longerich T(8),
Enikolopov G(2), Lowe SW(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (2)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring
Harbor, NY 11724, USA. (3)Institute of Pathology, University of Medicine,
Greifswald 17487, Germany. (4)Department of Internal Medicine I, University of
Ulm, Ulm 89070, Germany. (5)Department of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Memorial
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA; Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, USA. (6)Laboratory of Experimental
Carcinogenesis, NCI/CCR, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA; Biotech Research and
Innovation Centre (BRIC), University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen 2200, Denmark.
(7)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Heidelberg and Clinical
Cooperation Unit Neuropathology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg
69120, Germany. (8)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Heidelberg,
Heidelberg 69120, Germany. (9)Department of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Memorial
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA; Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
New York, NY 10065, USA. Electronic address: lowes@mskcc.org.

The p53 tumor suppressor coordinates a series of antiproliferative responses that
restrict the expansion of malignant cells, and as a consequence, p53 is lost or
mutated in the majority of human cancers. Here, we show that p53 restricts
expression of the stem and progenitor-cell-associated protein nestin in an Sp1/3 
transcription-factor-dependent manner and that Nestin is required for tumor
initiation in vivo. Moreover, loss of p53 facilitates dedifferentiation of mature
hepatocytes into nestin-positive progenitor-like cells, which are poised to
differentiate into hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs) or cholangiocarcinomas (CCs) 
in response to lineage-specific mutations that target Wnt and Notch signaling,
respectively. Many human HCCs and CCs show elevated nestin expression, which
correlates with p53 loss of function and is associated with decreased patient
survival. Therefore, transcriptional repression of Nestin by p53 restricts
cellular plasticity and tumorigenesis in liver cancer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4221237
PMID: 25083869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Mol Med (Berl). 2014 Aug 2. [Epub ahead of print]

Up-regulation of type II collagen gene by 17ß-estradiol in articular chondrocytes
involves Sp1/3, Sox-9, and estrogen receptor a

Maneix L(1), Servent A, Porée B, Ollitrault D, Branly T, Bigot N, Boujrad N,
Flouriot G, Demoor M, Boumediene K, Moslemi S, Galéra P.

Author information: 
(1)Normandy University, Caen, France; UNICAEN, Laboratoire Microenvironnement
Cellulaire et Pathologies (MILPAT), EA4652, 14032, Caen, France.

The existence of a link between estrogen deprivation and osteoarthritis (OA) in
postmenopausal women suggests that 17ß-estradiol (17ß-E2) may be a modulator of
cartilage homeostasis. Here, we demonstrate that 17ß-E2 stimulates, via its
receptor human estrogen receptor a 66 (hERa66), type II collagen expression in
differentiated and dedifferentiated (reflecting the OA phenotype) articular
chondrocytes. Transactivation of type II collagen gene (COL2A1) by
ligand-independent transactivation domain (AF-1) of hERa66 was mediated by "GC"
binding sites of the -266/-63-bp promoter, through physical interactions between 
ERa, Sp1/Sp3, Sox9, and p300, as demonstrated in chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) and Re-Chromatin Immuno-Precipitation (Re-ChIP) assays in primary and
dedifferentiated cells. 17ß-E2 and hERa66 increased the DNA-binding activities of
Sp1/Sp3 and Sox-9 to both COL2A1 promoter and enhancer regions. Besides, Sp1,
Sp3, and Sox-9 small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) prevented hERa66-induced
transactivation of COL2A1, suggesting that these factors and their respective
cis-regions are required for hERa66-mediated COL2A1 up-regulation. Our results
highlight the genomic pathway by which 17ß-E2 and hERa66 modulate Sp1/Sp3
heteromer binding activity and simultaneously participate in the recruitment of
the essential factors Sox-9 and p300 involved respectively in the
chondrocyte-differentiated status and COL2A1 transcriptional activation. These
novel findings could therefore be attractive for tissue engineering of cartilage 
in OA, by the fact that 17ß-E2 could promote chondrocyte redifferentiation.KEY
MESSAGES:  17ß-E2 up-regulates type II collagen gene expression in articular
chondrocytes.  An ERa66/Sp1/Sp3/Sox-9/p300 protein complex mediates this
stimulatory effect.  This heteromeric complex interacts and binds to Col2a1
promoter and enhancer in vivo.  Our findings highlight a new regulatory
mechanism for 17ß-E2 action in chondrocytes.  17ß-E2 might be an attractive
candidate for cartilage engineering applications.

PMID: 25081415  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


216. Chemistry. 2014 Aug 25;20(35):11084-90. doi: 10.1002/chem.201402907. Epub 2014
Jul 28.

Synthesis of 1-indanols and 1-indanamines by intramolecular
palladium(0)-catalyzed C(sp3)-H arylation: impact of conformational effects.

Janody S(1), Jazzar R, Comte A, Holstein PM, Vors JP, Ford MJ, Baudoin O.

Author information: 
(1)Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS UMR 5246, Institut de Chimie et
Biochimie Moléculaires et Supramoléculaires, CPE Lyon, 43 Boulevard du 11
Novembre 1918, 69622 Villeurbanne (France).

A range of valuable 1-indanols and 1-indanamines containing a tertiary C1 atom
were synthesized by intramolecular palladium(0)-catalyzed C(sp(3))-H arylation,
despite unfavorable steric interactions. The efficiency of the reaction was found
to correlate with the degree of substitution at C2, as expected from the
Thorpe-Ingold effect. Additionally, the nature of the heteroatomic substituent at
C1 had a marked influence on the diastereoselectivity at C1 and C2; indeed,
1-indanols and 1-indanamines were obtained with the opposite relative
configuration. Analysis of the X-ray and DFT-optimized structures of the
corresponding reactive intermediates provided useful insights into the subtle
conformational effects induced by these substituents.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25069403  [PubMed]


217. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2014 Oct 1;280(1):190-8. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2014.07.014.
Epub 2014 Jul 25.

Histone deacetylase 4 promotes ubiquitin-dependent proteasomal degradation of Sp3
in SH-SY5Y cells treated with di(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate (DEHP), determining
neuronal death.

Guida N(1), Laudati G(1), Galgani M(2), Santopaolo M(2), Montuori P(3), Triassi
M(3), Di Renzo G(1), Canzoniero LM(4), Formisano L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology, Department of Neuroscience, Reproductive and
Odontostomatologic Sciences, School of Medicine, "Federico II" University of
Naples, Via Pansini 5, 80131 Naples, Italy. (2)Laboratorio di Immunologia,
Istituto di Endocrinologia e Oncologia Sperimentale, Consiglio Nazionale delle
Ricerche (IEOS-CNR), Napoli, Italy. (3)Department of Preventive Medical Sciences,
University Federico II, Via Pansini 5, 80131 Naples, Italy. (4)Division of
Pharmacology, Department of Neuroscience, Reproductive and Odontostomatologic
Sciences, School of Medicine, "Federico II" University of Naples, Via Pansini 5, 
80131 Naples, Italy; Division of Pharmacology, Department of Science and
Technology, University of Sannio, Via Port'Arsa 11, 82100 Benevento, Italy.
Electronic address: canzon@unisannio.it. (5)Division of Pharmacology, Department 
of Neuroscience, Reproductive and Odontostomatologic Sciences, School of
Medicine, "Federico II" University of Naples, Via Pansini 5, 80131 Naples, Italy;
Division of Pharmacology, Department of Science and Technology, University of
Sannio, Via Port'Arsa 11, 82100 Benevento, Italy. Electronic address:
cformisa@unisannio.it.

Phthalates, phthalic acid esters, are widely used as plasticizers to produce
polymeric materials in industrial production of plastics and daily consumable
products. Animal studies have shown that di(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate (DEHP) may
cause toxic effects in the rat brain. In the present study, chronic exposure to
DEHP (0.1-100µM) caused dose-dependent cell death via the activation of caspase-3
in neuroblastoma cells. Intriguingly, this harmful effect was prevented by the
pan-histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor trichostatin A, by the class II HDAC
inhibitor MC-1568, but not by the class I HDAC inhibitor MS-275. Furthermore,
DEHP reduced specificity protein 3 (Sp3) gene expression, but not Sp3 mRNA, after
24 and 48h exposures. However, Sp3 protein reduction was prevented by
pre-treatment with MC-1568, suggesting the involvement of class II HDACs in
causing this effect. Then, we investigated the possible relationship between
DEHP-induced neuronal death and the post-translational mechanisms responsible for
the down-regulation of Sp3. Interestingly, DEHP-induced Sp3 reduction was
associated to its deacetylation and polyubiquitination. Co-immunoprecipitation
studies showed that Sp3 physically interacted with HDAC4 after DEHP exposure,
while HDAC4 inhibition by antisense oligodeoxynucleotide reverted the
DEHP-induced degradation of Sp3. Notably, Sp3 overexpression was able to
counteract the detrimental effect induced by DEHP. Taken together, these results 
suggest that DEHP exerts its toxic effect by inducing deacetylation of Sp3 via
HDAC4, and afterwards, Sp3-polyubiquitination.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25068794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Fertil Steril. 2014 Oct;102(4):1175-1182.e8. doi:
10.1016/j.fertnstert.2014.06.016. Epub 2014 Jul 22.

Methylation status of human chorionic gonadotropin beta subunit promoter and
TFAP2A expression as factors regulating CGB gene expression in placenta.

Glodek A(1), Kubiczak MJ(1), Walkowiak GP(1), Nowak-Markwitz E(2), Jankowska
A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan,
Poland. (2)Gynecologic Oncology Department, Poznan University of Medical
Sciences, Poznan, Poland. (3)Department of Cell Biology, Poznan University of
Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. Electronic address: ajanko@ump.edu.pl.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate mechanisms regulating the expression of CGB genes in
placental tissues from uncomplicated pregnancies and chorionic samples from
spontaneous miscarriages.
DESIGN: Molecular analyses in human samples.
SETTING: Laboratory of molecular biology.
PATIENT(S): Nine placental samples from term deliveries and 21 chorionic samples 
from miscarriages at 7-13 weeks of gestation.
INTERVENTION(S): None.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): The expression level of CGBs and genes encoding SP1,
SP3, and AP2 transcription factors was analyzed using quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (qPCR). The methylation status of the CGBs' promoter regions was
determined using methylation-specific PCR.
RESULT(S): The experiments showed significant differences in CGBs' expression and
their regulation between placental and chorionic tissues. In placental tissues
and chorionic tissues from 7 to 9 weeks of gestation, the expression level of
CGBs was shown to be associated with the amount of TFAP2A transcripts. It was
also demonstrated that variation in the expression level of CGB genes relies on
changes in methylation of CGB3-9 and CGB1-2 promoter sequences.
CONCLUSION(S): During pregnancy, regulation of hCG beta subunit genes expression 
correlates with both methylation of their promoters and TFAP2A expression level. 
The results suggest that these factors may be very influential in the early
stages of pregnancy and may be associated with pregnancy outcome.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25063728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Chem Asian J. 2014 Oct;9(10):2736-9. doi: 10.1002/asia.201402510. Epub 2014 Jul
24.

Copper-promoted site-selective acyloxylation of unactivated C(sp³)-H bonds.

Wu X(1), Zhao Y, Ge H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Indiana University Purdue
University Indianapolis, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202 (USA), Fax: 317-2744701.

Erratum in
    Chem Asian J. 2015 Mar;10(3):499.

The site-selective acyloxylation of aliphatic amides was achieved via a
copper-promoted C(sp(3))-H bond functionalization process directed by a bidentate
ligand. The reaction showed a great preference for activating C-H bonds of
ß-methyl groups over those of <U+03B3>-methyl and unactivated methylene groups.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25059113  [PubMed]


220. Org Lett. 2014 Aug 15;16(16):4201-3. doi: 10.1021/ol501935d. Epub 2014 Jul 24.

Unique regioselectivity in the C(sp3)-H a-alkylation of amines: the benzoxazole
moiety as a removable directing group.

Lahm G(1), Opatz T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Organic Chemistry, Johannes Gutenberg-University , Duesbergweg
10-14, 55128 Mainz, Germany.

The benzoxazol-2-yl- substituent was found to act as a removable activating and
directing group in the Ir-catalyzed alkylation of C(sp(3))-H bonds adjacent to
nitrogen in secondary amines. It can be easily introduced by oxidative coupling
or by an SNAr reaction, and it can be removed by hydroxide or by hydride
reduction. For 1,2,3,4-tetrahydroisoquinolines, activation exclusively takes
place in the 3-position. A variety of activated as well as unactivated terminal
olefins are suitable reaction partners.

PMID: 25057785  [PubMed]


221. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2014 Sep 8;53(37):9817-21. doi: 10.1002/anie.201404946.
Epub 2014 Jul 23.

Chemoselective carbophilic addition of a-diazoesters through ligand-controlled
gold catalysis.

Xi Y(1), Su Y, Yu Z, Dong B, McClain EJ, Lan Y, Shi X.

Author information: 
(1)C. Eugene Bennett Department of Chemistry, West Virginia University,
Morgantown, WV 26506 (USA) http://community.wvu.edu/~xs007/

The chemoselective addition of arenes and 1,3-diketones to a-aryldiazoesters was 
achieved through ligand-controlled gold catalysis. Unlike a dirhodium catalyst
(which promotes C(sp3)-H insertion and cyclopropanation) and a copper catalyst
(which catalyzes O-H and N-H insertions), the gold catalyst with an
electron-deficient phosphite as the ancillary ligand exclusively gave the
carbophilic addition product, thus representing a new and efficient approach to
form "carbophilic carbocations", which selectively react with carbon
nucleophiles.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25056282  [PubMed]


222. Schizophr Res. 2014 Sep;158(1-3):247-54. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2014.06.039. Epub 
2014 Jul 16.

An investigation of the factors that regulate muscarinic receptor expression in
schizophrenia.

Seo MS(1), Scarr E(2), Dean B(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Molecular Psychiatry Laboratory, The Florey Institute of Neuroscience and 
Mental Health, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia; Department of Psychiatry, The
University of Melbourne Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia. Electronic address: 
myoung.seo@florey.edu.au. (2)The Molecular Psychiatry Laboratory, The Florey
Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia;
Department of Psychiatry, The University of Melbourne Parkville, Victoria 3010,
Australia.

We previously identified a group of subjects with schizophrenia who, on average, 
have a 75% decrease in cholinergic receptor, muscarinic 1 (CHRM1) in Brodmann's
area (BA) 9. To extend this finding, we determined i) if the decrease in CHRM1
was present in another functionally related CNS region (BA6), ii) whether the
marked decrease in CHRM1 was accompanied by changes in levels of other CHRMs and 
iii) potential factors responsible for the decreased CHRM1 expression. We
measured CHRM1 and CHRM3 using in situ radioligand binding with [(3)H]pirenzepine
and [(3)H]4-DAMP respectively in BA6 from 20 subjects with schizophrenia who had 
low levels of CHRM1 in BA9 (SzLow[(3)H]PZP), 18 subjects with schizophrenia whose
levels of CHRM1 were similar to controls (SzNormal[(3)H]PZP) and 20 control
subjects. Levels of CHRM1, 3 and 4 mRNA were measured using qPCR and levels of
the transcription factors, SP1 and SP3, were determined using Western blots. In
BA6, the density of [(3)H]pirenzepine binding was decreased in subjects with
SzLow[(3)H]PZP (p<0.001) compared to controls. The density of [(3)H]4-DAMP
binding, levels of CHRM1, 3 and 4 mRNA and levels of SP1 and SP3 was not
significantly different between the three groups. This study shows that the
previously identified decrease in CHRM1 expression is not confined to the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex but is present in other cortical areas. The effect
shows some specificity to CHRM1, with no change in levels of binding to CHRM3.
Furthermore, this decrease in CHRM1 does not appear to be associated with low
levels of CHRM1 mRNA or to simply be regulated by the transcription factors, SP1 
and SP3, suggesting that other mechanisms are responsible for the decreased CHRM1
in these subjects.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 25037527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Org Chem. 2014 Aug 1;79(15):7103-11. doi: 10.1021/jo501274f. Epub 2014 Jul 23.

Functionalization of amides via copper-catalyzed oxyalkylation of vinylarenes and
decarboxylative alkenylation of sp3 C-H.

Yan H(1), Lu L, Rong G, Liu D, Zheng Y, Chen J, Mao J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Organic Synthesis of Jiangsu Province College of Chemistry, 
Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Soochow University , Suzhou 215123,
People's Republic of China.

An efficient protocol was developed to prepare a series of derivatives from
amides by copper-catalyzed oxyalkylation of vinylarenes and decarboxylative
alkenylation of sp(3) C-H. This method is simple, practical, and inexpensive.

PMID: 25029187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Eur J Med Chem. 2014 Sep 12;84:160-72. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2014.07.023. Epub
2014 Jul 8.

Potent, orally available, selective COX-2 inhibitors based on 2-imidazoline core.

Sarnpitak P(1), Mujumdar P(1), Morisseau C(2), Hwang SH(2), Hammock B(2),
Iurchenko V(3), Zozulya S(3), Gavalas A(4), Geronikaki A(4), Ivanenkov Y(5),
Krasavin M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Eskitis Institute for Drug Discovery, Griffith University, Nathan, Queensland 
4111, Australia. (2)Department of Entomology, University of California, One
Shields Avenue, Davis, CA 95616-8584, United States. (3)Enamine Ltd, 78
Chervonotkatska Street, Kyiv 02094, Ukraine. (4)School of Pharmacy, Aristotle
University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki 54124, Greece. (5)Moscow Institute of
Physics & Technology (State University) Dolgoprudny, Moscow Region 141700,
Russia. (6)Eskitis Institute for Drug Discovery, Griffith University, Nathan,
Queensland 4111, Australia; Department of Chemistry, St. Petersburg State
University, 26 Universitetskyi Prospekt, Peterhof 198504, Russia. Electronic
address: m.krasavin@hotmail.com.

A novel series of compounds containing a polar, non-flat 2-imidazoline core was
designed based on the SAR information available for aromatic azole
cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors. While the majority of the compounds prepared using
an earlier developed imidazoline N-arylation methodology turned out to be
inferior to the known COX-2 inhibitors, one lead compound displayed potency (300 
nM) comparable to clinically used Celecoxib and was shown to be more selective.
The series represents the first example of selective COX-2 inhibitors built
around a distinctly polar core, contradicting an earlier accepted view that a
lipophilic scaffold is required for high inhibitor potency. The lead compound
demonstrated very good oral bioavailability in mice, slow metabolic degradation, 
modest distribution into the brain and a remarkable anti-inflammatory efficacy in
carrageenan-induced mouse paw edema model. A foundation has therefore been laid
for a chemically novel series of COX-2 inhibitors that has a potential for
diverse therapeutic applications in inflammatory disease area.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25016374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Org Lett. 2014 Jul 18;16(14):3776-9. doi: 10.1021/ol501655g. Epub 2014 Jul 10.

Cu-catalyzed arylcarbocyclization of alkynes with diaryliodonium salts through
C-C bond formation on inert C(sp3)-H bond.

Peng J(1), Chen C, Chen J, Su X, Xi C, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Bioorganic Phosphorus Chemistry & Chemical Biology (Ministry
of Education), Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University , Beijing 100084,
China.

Copper-catalyzed arylcarbocyclization reaction of alkynes was realized with
diaryliodonium salts through C-C bond formation on an inert C(sp3)-H bond. This
method provides an efficient cyclization of alkyl alkynes to generate carbocycles
with good step-economy. Theoretical study revealed an interesting Cu-catalyzed
concerted pathway of the C-C bond formation.

PMID: 25008539  [PubMed]


226. Chem Commun (Camb). 2014 Aug 21;50(65):9207-10. doi: 10.1039/c4cc04151h.

Allylic sp3 C-H borylation of alkenes via allyl-Pd intermediates: an efficient
route to allylboronates.

Deng HP(1), Eriksson L, Szabó KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organic Chemistry, Stockholm University, Sweden.

Palladium catalyzed allylic C-H functionalization was performed using exocyclic
alkene substrates. Multi-component synthesis of stereodefined homoallylic
alcohols could be performed using a reaction sequence involving allylic C-H
borylation and allylation of aldehydes.

PMID: 24995538  [PubMed]


227. Org Biomol Chem. 2014 Aug 21;12(31):5839-42. doi: 10.1039/c4ob01256a.

A cascade alkylarylation reaction of 2-isocyanobiphenyls with simple alkanes for 
6-alkyl phenanthridines via dual C(sp3)-H/C(sp2)-H functionalizations.

Zhu ZQ(1), Wang TT, Bai P, Huang ZZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Zhejiang University, Xixi Campus, Hangzhou 310028, P.
R. China. huangzhizhen@zju.edu.cn.

A cascade alkylarylation reaction of 2-isocyanobiphenyls with simple alkanes for 
6-alkyl phenanthridines has been developed through dual C(sp(3))-H/C(sp(2))-H
functionalizations. The synthetic method has the advantages of high yields, good 
compatibility of functional groups and mild reaction conditions, although very
unreactive alkanes were involved in the reaction. A plausible mechanism through
both copper-catalyzed and DTBP mediated pathways has also been proposed.

PMID: 24995431  [PubMed]


228. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2014 Aug 18;53(34):9064-7. doi: 10.1002/anie.201405508.
Epub 2014 Jul 1.

Access to ß-lactams by enantioselective palladium(0)-catalyzed C(sp3)-H
alkylation.

Pedroni J(1), Boghi M, Saget T, Cramer N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Asymmetric Catalysis and Synthesis, EPFL SB ISIC LCSA, BCH 4305,
1015 Lausanne (Switzerland) http://isic.epfl.ch/lcsa.

ß-Lactams are very important structural motifs because of their broad biological 
activities as well as their propensity to engage in ring-opening reactions.
Transition-metal-catalyzed C-H functionalizations have emerged as strategy
enabling yet uncommon highly efficient disconnections. In contrast to the
significant progress of Pd(0)-catalyzed C-H functionalization for aryl-aryl
couplings, related reactions involving the formation of saturated
C(sp(3))-C(sp(3)) bonds are elusive. Reported here is an asymmetric C-H
functionalization approach to ß-lactams using readily accessible chloroacetamide 
substrates. Important aspects of this transformation are challenging
C(sp(3))-C(sp(3)) and strain-building reductive eliminations to for the
four-membered ring. In general, the ß-lactams are formed in excellent yields and 
enantioselectivities using a bulky taddol phosphoramidite ligand in combination
with adamantyl carboxylic acid as cocatalyst.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24986088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Org Lett. 2014 Jul 18;16(14):3672-5. doi: 10.1021/ol501454j. Epub 2014 Jun 30.

Copper-catalyzed aerobic oxidative amination of sp3 C-H bonds: efficient
synthesis of 2-hetarylquinazolin-4(3H)-ones.

Li Q(1), Huang Y, Chen T, Zhou Y, Xu Q, Yin SF, Han LB.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensing and Chemo metrics, College of
Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University , Changsha 410082, China.

An efficient synthesis of 2-hetarylquinazolin-4(3H)-ones via copper-catalyzed
direct aerobic oxidative amination of sp(3)C-H bonds has been developed. This
tandem oxidation-amination-cyclization transformation represents a
straightforward protocol to prepare 2-hetaryl-substituted quinazolinones from
easily available 2-aminobenzamides and (2-azaaryl)methanes.

PMID: 24977337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Org Chem Front. 2014 Jul 1;1(5):468-472.

Vanadium-Catalyzed C(sp(3))-H Fluorination Reactions.

Xia JB, Ma Y, Chen C.

Vanadium(III) oxide catalyzes the direct fluorination of C(sp(3))-H groups with
Selectfluor. This reaction is operationally simple. The catalyst and the reaction
byproduct can be removed easily by filtration. Using this method, a fluorine atom
can be introduced to the tertiary position of 1,4-cineole and L-menthone
selectively.

PMCID: PMC4067045
PMID: 24976971  [PubMed]


231. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 26;9(6):e99131. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099131. eCollection
2014.

In situ quantitative measurement of HER2mRNA predicts benefit from
trastuzumab-containing chemotherapy in a cohort of metastatic breast cancer
patients.

Vassilakopoulou M(1), Togun T(2), Dafni U(3), Cheng H(1), Bordeaux J(1),
Neumeister VM(1), Bobos M(4), Pentheroudakis G(5), Skarlos DV(6), Pectasides
D(7), Kotoula V(8), Fountzilas G(9), Rimm DL(1), Psyrri A(10).

Author information: 
(1)Yale University, School of Medicine, Department of Pathology, New Haven,
Connecticut, United States of America. (2)Yale University, School of Public
Health, Department of Biostatistics, New Haven, Connecticut, United States of
America. (3)Laboratory of Biostatistics, University of Athens School of Nursing, 
Athens, Greece. (4)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Hellenic Foundation for
Cancer Research, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki School of Medicine,
Thessaloniki, Greece. (5)Department of Medical Oncology, Ioannina University
Hospital, Ioannina, Greece. (6)Second Department of Medical Oncology,
"Metropolitan" Hospital, Piraeus, Greece. (7)Oncology Section, Second Department 
of Internal Medicine, "Hippokration" Hospital, Athens, Greece. (8)Laboratory of
Molecular Oncology, Hellenic Foundation for Cancer Research, Aristotle University
of Thessaloniki School of Medicine, Thessaloniki, Greece; Department of
Pathology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki School of Medicine, Thessaloniki,
Greece. (9)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Hellenic Foundation for Cancer
Research, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki School of Medicine, Thessaloniki, 
Greece; Department of Medical Oncology, "Papageorgiou" Hospital, Aristotle
University of Thessaloniki School of Medicine, Thessaloniki, Greece. (10)Division
of Oncology, Second Department of Internal Medicine, University of Athens School 
of Medicine, Attikon University Hospital, Athens, Greece.

BACKGROUND: We sought to determine the predictive value of in situ mRNA
measurement compared to traditional methods on a cohort of trastuzumab-treated
metastatic breast cancer patients.
METHODS: A tissue microarray composed of 149, classified as HER2-positive,
metastatic breast cancers treated with various trastuzumab-containing
chemotherapy regimens was constructed. HER2 intracellular domain(ICD), HER2
extracellular domain(ECD) and HER2 mRNA were assessed using AQUA. For HER2
protein evaluation, CB11 was used to measure ICD and SP3 to measure ECD of the
HER2 receptor. In addition, HER2 mRNA status was assessed using RNAscope assay
ERRB2 probe. Kaplan - Meier estimates were used for depicting time-to-event
endpoints. Multivariate Cox regression models with backward elimination were used
to assess the performance of markers as predictors of TTP and OS, after adjusting
for important covariates.
RESULTS: HER2 mRNA was correlated with ICD HER2, as measured by CB11 HER2, with
ECD HER2 as measured by SP3 (Pearson's Correlation Coefficient, r<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.66 and 0.51
respectively) and with FISH HER2 (Spearman's Correlation Coefficient, r<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.75). 
All markers, HER2 mRNA, ICD HER2 and ECD HER2, along with FISH HER2, were found
prognostic for OS (Log-rank p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.007, 0.005, 0.009 and 0.043 respectively), and 
except for FISH HER2, they were also prognostic for TTP Log-rank p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.036, 0.068
and 0.066 respectively) in this trastuzumab- treated cohort. Multivariate
analysis showed that in the presence of pre-specified set of prognostic factors, 
among all biomarkers only ECD HER2, as measured by SP3, is strong prognostic
factor for both TTP (HR<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.54, 95% CI: 0.31-0.93, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.027) and OS (HR<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.39, 
95%CI: 0.22-0.70, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.002).
CONCLUSIONS: The expression of HER2 ICD and ECD as well as HER2 mRNA levels was
significantly associated with TTP and OS in this trastuzumab-treated metastatic
cohort. In situ assessment of HER2 mRNA has the potential to identify breast
cancer patients who derive benefit from Trastuzumab treatment.

PMCID: PMC4072595
PMID: 24968015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 20;9(6):e99931. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099931. eCollection
2014.

Shell extracts from the marine bivalve Pecten maximus regulate the synthesis of
extracellular matrix in primary cultured human skin fibroblasts.

Latire T(1), Legendre F(2), Bigot N(2), Carduner L(3), Kellouche S(3), Bouyoucef 
M(2), Carreiras F(3), Marin F(4), Lebel JM(5), Galéra P(2), Serpentini A(5).

Author information: 
(1)UMR BOREA « Biologie des ORganismes et Ecosystèmes Aquatiques », MNHN, UPMC,
UCBN, CNRS-7208, IRD-207, Université de Caen Basse-Normandie, IBFA, Campus 1,
Science C, Caen cedex 5, France; Laboratoire Microenvironnement cellulaire et
pathologies (MILPAT), EA 4652, SFR 146 ICORE, Université de Caen Basse-Normandie,
Faculté de Médecine, CHU niveau 3, Caen cedex 5, France. (2)Laboratoire
Microenvironnement cellulaire et pathologies (MILPAT), EA 4652, SFR 146 ICORE,
Université de Caen Basse-Normandie, Faculté de Médecine, CHU niveau 3, Caen cedex
5, France. (3)Equipe de Recherche sur les Relations Matrice Extracellulaire
Cellules (ERRMECe), EA 1391, Institut des Matériaux, Université de
Cergy-Pontoise, Cergy-Pontoise cedex, France. (4)UMR 6282 CNRS "Biogéosciences", 
Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France. (5)UMR BOREA « Biologie des ORganismes et
Ecosystèmes Aquatiques », MNHN, UPMC, UCBN, CNRS-7208, IRD-207, Université de
Caen Basse-Normandie, IBFA, Campus 1, Science C, Caen cedex 5, France.

Mollusc shells are composed of more than 95% calcium carbonate and less than 5%
of an organic matrix consisting mostly of proteins, glycoproteins and
polysaccharides. Previous studies have elucidated the biological activities of
the shell matrices from bivalve molluscs on skin, especially on the expression of
the extracellular matrix components of fibroblasts. In this work, we have
investigated the potential biological activities of shell matrix components
extracted from the shell of the scallop Pecten maximus on human fibroblasts in
primary culture. Firstly, we demonstrated that shell matrix components had
different effects on general cellular activities. Secondly, we have shown that
the shell matrix components stimulate the synthesis of type I and III collagens, 
as well as that of sulphated GAGs. The increased expression of type I collagen is
likely mediated by the recruitment of transactivating factors (Sp1, Sp3 and human
c-Krox) in the -112/-61 bp COL1A1 promoter region. Finally, contrarily to what
was obtained in previous works, we demonstrated that the scallop shell extracts
have only a small effect on cell migration during in vitro wound tests and have
no effect on cell proliferation. Thus, our research emphasizes the potential use 
of shell matrix of Pecten maximus for dermo-cosmetic applications.

PMCID: PMC4064982
PMID: 24949635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. FASEB J. 2014 Oct;28(10):4265-79. doi: 10.1096/fj.14-250654. Epub 2014 Jun 19.

Overexpression of histone deacetylases in cancer cells is controlled by interplay
of transcription factors and epigenetic modulators.

Yang H(1), Salz T(2), Zajac-Kaye M(1), Liao D(1), Huang S(3), Qiu Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology and. (2)Department of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville,
Florida, USA. (3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of
Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA qiuy@ufl.edu
sumingh@ufl.edu. (4)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology and qiuy@ufl.edu
sumingh@ufl.edu.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) that deacetylate histone and nonhistone proteins
play crucial roles in a variety of cellular processes. The overexpression of
HDACs is reported in many cancer types and is directly linked to accelerated cell
proliferation and survival. However, little is known about how HDAC expression is
regulated in cancer cells. In this study, we found that HDAC1 and HDAC2 promoters
are regulated through collaborative binding of transcription factors Sp1/Sp3 and 
epigenetic modulators, including histone H3K4 methyltransferase SET1 and histone 
acetyltransferase p300, whose levels are also elevated in colon cancer cell lines
and patient samples. Interestingly, Sp1 and Sp3 differentially regulate HDAC1 and
HDAC2 promoter activity. In addition, Sp1/Sp3 recruits SET1 and p300 to the
promoters. SET1 knockdown (KD) results in a loss of the H3K4 trimethylation mark 
at the promoters, as well as destabilizes p300 at the promoters. Conversely, p300
also influences SET1 recruitment and H3K4me3 level, indicating a crosstalk
between p300 and SET1. Further, SET1 KD reduces Sp1 binding to the HDAC1 promoter
through the increase of Sp1 acetylation. These results indicate that interactions
among transcription factors and epigenetic modulators orchestrate the activation 
of HDAC1 and HDAC2 promoter activity in colon cancer cells.

© FASEB.

PMCID: PMC4202103
PMID: 24948597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Chem Commun (Camb). 2014 Aug 7;50(61):8353-5. doi: 10.1039/c4cc03615h.

Pd(II)-Catalyzed arylation of unactivated methylene C(sp3)-H bonds with aryl
halides using a removable auxiliary.

Zhang Q(1), Yin XS, Zhao S, Fang SL, Shi BF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China.
bfshi@zju.edu.cn.

A Pd(II)-catalyzed arylation of methylene C(sp(3))-H bonds in aliphatic amides
directed by our newly developed PIP directing group with aryl iodides/bromides
has been achieved. Arylation occurs efficiently with a broad range of aryl
halides and amides.

PMID: 24943091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Org Lett. 2014 Jun 20;16(12):3404-7. doi: 10.1021/ol501485f. Epub 2014 Jun 12.

Transition-metal-assisted radical/radical cross-coupling: a new strategy to the
oxidative C(sp3)-H/N-H cross-coupling.

Zhou L(1), Tang S, Qi X, Lin C, Liu K, Liu C, Lan Y, Lei A.

Author information: 
(1)College of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences, Wuhan University , Wuhan, Hubei
430072, P. R. China.

A transition-metal-assisted oxidative C(sp(3))-H/N-H cross-coupling reaction of
N-alkoxyamides with aliphatic hydrocarbons is described. During the reaction,
nitrogen radicals were generated from the oxidation of N-alkoxyamides.
Experiments and DFT calculations revealed that transition-metal catalyst could
lower the reactivity of the generated nitrogen radical by the coordination of the
transition metal, which allowed the selective radical/radical cross-coupling with
the transient sp(3) carbon radical to construct C(sp(3))--N bonds. Various
C(sp(3))-H bonds could be transformed into C(sp(3))-N bonds through this radical 
amidation strategy.

PMID: 24921665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Org Chem. 2014 Jun 20;79(12):5664-72. doi: 10.1021/jo5008256. Epub 2014 Jun 11.

Phlorins bearing different substituents at the sp3-hybridized meso-position.

Bruce AM(1), Weyburne ES, Engle JT, Ziegler CJ, Geier GR 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Colgate University , Department of Chemistry, 13 Oak Drive, Hamilton, New York
13346, United States.

Phlorins bearing different substituents at the sp(3)-hybridized meso-position
were investigated. The extent to which different substituents at this unique
position can influence phlorin spectroscopic properties, structure, and stability
is of interest given that such substituents are not in direct conjugation with
the phlorin macrocycle. While the effect of various substituents at the
sp(2)-hybridized positions has been the subject of prior investigations, the
impact of different substituents at the saturated carbon atom has not been
systematically examined. In this study, phlorins with different combinations of
geminal methyl and phenyl substituents were prepared in yields of 24-49% via
dipyrromethane + dipyrromethanedicarbinol routes, and their NMR spectra, UV-vis
spectra, X-ray crystal structures, and stability toward light and air were
compared. The nature of the substituents at the sp(3)-hybridized position was
found to impact spectroscopic properties, structure, and stability to varying
degrees. Thus, the choice of substituents at the sp(3)-hybridized meso-position
provides a further option for altering phlorin properties.

PMID: 24916888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2014 Jul 21;53(30):7870-4. doi: 10.1002/anie.201402475.
Epub 2014 Jun 6.

Gold-catalyzed C(sp3)-H/C(sp)H coupling/cyclization/oxidative alkynylation
sequence: a powerful strategy for the synthesis of 3-alkynyl polysubstituted
furans.

Ma Y(1), Zhang S, Yang S, Song F, You J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Green Chemistry and Technology of Ministry of Education,
College of Chemistry, and State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China Medical 
School, Sichuan University, 29 Wangjiang Road, Chengdu 610064 (PR China).

In sharp contrast to the gold-catalyzed reactions of alkynes/allenes with
nucleophiles, gold-catalyzed oxidative cross-couplings and especially C-H/C-H
cross-coupling have been under represented. By taking advantage of the unique
redox property and carbophilic p acidity of gold, this work realizes the first
gold-catalyzed direct C(sp(3))-H alkynylation of 1,3-dicarbonyl compounds with
terminal alkynes under mild reaction conditions, with subsequent cyclization and 
in situ oxidative alkynylation. A variety of terminal alkynes including aryl,
heteroaryl, alkenyl, alkynyl, alkyl, and cyclopropyl alkynes all successfully
participate in the domino reaction. The protocol offers a simple and
region-defined approach to 3-alkynyl polysubstituted furans.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24910115  [PubMed]


238. Chem Biol Interact. 2014 Aug 5;219:123-32. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2014.05.019. Epub
2014 Jun 4.

The activity of a novel mithramycin analog is related to its binding to DNA,
cellular accumulation, and inhibition of Sp1-driven gene transcription.

Fernández-Guizán A(1), Mansilla S(2), Barceló F(3), Vizcaíno C(2), Núñez LE(4),
Morís F(4), González S(1), Portugal J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Funcional, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de
Oviedo, E-33006 Oviedo, Spain. (2)Instituto de Biología Molecular de Barcelona,
CSIC, Parc Cientíific de Barcelona, E-08028 Barcelona, Spain. (3)Departament de
Biologia Fundamental i Ciencies de la Salut, Universitat de les Illes Balears,
E-07122 Palma de Mallorca, Spain. (4)EntreChem SL, Edificio Científico
Tecnológico, Campus El Cristo, E-33006 Oviedo, Spain. (5)Instituto de Biología
Molecular de Barcelona, CSIC, Parc Cientíific de Barcelona, E-08028 Barcelona,
Spain. Electronic address: jpmbmc@ibmb.csic.es.

DIG-MSK (demycarosyl-3D-ß-D-digitoxosyl-mithramycin SK) is a recently isolated
compound of the mithramycin family of antitumor antibiotics, which includes
mithramycin A (MTA) and mithramycin SK (MSK). Here, we present evidence that the 
binding of DIG-MSK to DNA shares the general features of other mithramycins such 
as the preference for C/G-rich tracts, but there are some differences in the
strength of binding and the DNA sequence preferentially recognized by DIG-MSK. We
aimed at gaining further insights into the DIG-MSK mechanism of action by direct 
comparison with the effects of the parental MTA. Similar to MTA, MSK and DIG-MSK 
accumulated rapidly in A2780, IGROV1 and OVCAR3 human ovarian cancer cell lines, 
and DIG-MSK was a potent inhibitor of both basal and induced expression of an
Sp1-driven luciferase vector. This inhibitory activity was confirmed for the
endogenous Sp1 gene and a set of Sp-responsive genes, and compared to that of MTA
and MSK. Furthermore, DIG-MSK was stronger than MTA as inhibitor of Sp3-driven
transcription and endogenous Sp3 gene expression. Differences in the effects of
MTA, MSK and DIG-MSK on gene expression may have a large influence on their
biological activities.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24907531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Science. 2014 Jul 25;345(6195):433-6. doi: 10.1126/science.1253647. Epub 2014 Jun
5.

Dual catalysis. Single-electron transmetalation in organoboron cross-coupling by 
photoredox/nickel dual catalysis.

Tellis JC(1), Primer DN(1), Molander GA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Roy and Diana Vagelos Laboratories, Department of Chemistry, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (2)Roy and Diana Vagelos Laboratories,
Department of Chemistry, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
gmolandr@sas.upenn.edu.

Comment in
    Science. 2014 Jul 25;345(6195):381-2.

The routine application of C(sp3)-hybridized nucleophiles in cross-coupling
reactions remains an unsolved challenge in organic chemistry. The sluggish
transmetalation rates observed for the preferred organoboron reagents in such
transformations are a consequence of the two-electron mechanism underlying the
standard catalytic approach. We describe a mechanistically distinct
single-electron transfer-based strategy for the activation of organoboron
reagents toward transmetalation that exhibits complementary reactivity patterns. 
Application of an iridium photoredox catalyst in tandem with a nickel catalyst
effects the cross-coupling of potassium alkoxyalkyl- and benzyltrifluoroborates
with an array of aryl bromides under exceptionally mild conditions (visible
light, ambient temperature, no strong base). The transformation has been extended
to the asymmetric and stereoconvergent cross-coupling of a secondary
benzyltrifluoroborate.

Copyright © 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMCID: PMC4406487
PMID: 24903560  [PubMed]


240. Org Lett. 2014 Jun 20;16(12):3372-5. doi: 10.1021/ol501400u. Epub 2014 Jun 3.

Copper-catalyzed direct trifluoromethylthiolation of benzylic C-H bonds via
nondirected oxidative C(sp3)-H activation.

Chen C(1), Xu XH, Yang B, Qing FL.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Organofluorine Chemistry, Shanghai Institute of Organic
Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences , 345 Lingling Lu, Shanghai 200032, China.

A copper-catalyzed trifluoromethylthiolation of benzylic sp(3) C-H bonds was
developed via nondirected oxidative C-H activation using readily prepared and
stable AgSCF3. This reaction provides a novel and straightforward method for the 
preparation of various benzyl trifluoromethyl sulfides.

PMID: 24892973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Chem Commun (Camb). 2014 Jul 18;50(56):7521-3. doi: 10.1039/c4cc02768j.

Visible-light-induced direct C(sp3)-H difluromethylation of
tetrahydroisoquinolines with the in situ generated difluoroenolates.

Li W(1), Zhu X, Mao H, Tang Z, Cheng Y, Zhu C.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Coordination Chemistry, School of Chemistry and
Chemical Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, P. R. China.
cjzhu@nju.edu.cn.

An effective approach to C1-difluoromethylated tetrahydroisoquinoline derivatives
has been developed through C-H functionalization of tertiary amines by
visible-light photoredox catalysis. This method uses stable, easily obtained
a,a-difluorinated gem-diol as the CF2 source. The corresponding products were
obtained in moderate to high yields at ambient temperature.

PMID: 24888757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Hum Genet. 2014 Aug;133(8):1059-73. doi: 10.1007/s00439-014-1447-z. Epub 2014 May
27.

CpG methylation regulates allelic expression of GDF5 by modulating binding of SP1
and SP3 repressor proteins to the osteoarthritis susceptibility SNP rs143383.

Reynard LN(1), Bui C, Syddall CM, Loughlin J.

Author information: 
(1)Musculoskeletal Research Group, Institute of Cellular Medicine, 4th Floor
Catherine Cookson Building, The Medical School, Framlington Place, Newcastle
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK, louise.reynard@newcastle.ac.uk.

GDF5 encodes an extracellular signalling molecule that is essential for normal
skeletal development. The rs144383 C to T SNP located in the 5'UTR of this gene
is functional and has a pleiotropic effect on the musculoskeletal system, being a
risk factor for knee-osteoarthritis (OA), congenital hip dysplasia, lumbar disc
degeneration and Achilles tendon pathology. rs143383 exerts a joint-wide effect
on GDF5 expression, with expression of the OA-associated T allele being
significantly reduced relative to the C allele, termed allelic expression
imbalance. We have previously reported that the GDF5 locus is subject to DNA
methylation and that allelic imbalance of rs143383 is mediated by SP1, SP3 and
DEAF1 transcriptional repressors. In this study, we have assayed GDF5 methylation
in normal and osteoarthritic cartilage, and investigated the effect of
methylation on the allelic imbalance of rs143383. We observed demethylation of
the GDF5 5'UTR in OA knee cartilage relative to both OA (p = 0.009) and non-OA (p
= 0.001) hip cartilage, with the most significant demethylation observed at the
highly conserved +37 CpG site located 4 bp upstream of rs143383. Methylation
modulates the level and direction of allelic imbalance of rs143383, with
methylation of the +37 CpG dinucleotide within the SP1/SP3 binding site having an
allele-specific effect on SP1 and SP3 binding. Furthermore, methylation
attenuated the repressive effects of SP1, SP3 and DEAF1 on GDF5 promoter
activity. This data suggest that the differential methylation of the +37 CpG site
between osteoarthritic hip and knee cartilage may be responsible for the
knee-specific effect of rs143383 on OA susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC4099533
PMID: 24861163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Chem Soc Rev. 2014 Aug 7;43(15):5245-56. doi: 10.1039/c4cs00004h.

Gold-catalyzed C(sp3)-H bond functionalization.

Xie J(1), Pan C, Abdukader A, Zhu C.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Coordination Chemistry, School of Chemistry and
Chemical Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China.
cjzhu@nju.edu.cn.

C-H bonds are ubiquitous in organic molecules. Homogenous gold-catalyzed direct
functionalization of unsaturated C-H bonds has emerged as a powerful method in
our synthetic toolbox. However, Csp(3)-H bonds have larger dissociation energy
and lower proton acidity, and thus the efficient and exquisitely selective
cleavage of this kind of chemical bonds for the formation of new carbon-carbon
and carbon-heteroatom bonds is still a great challenge. In this tutorial review, 
we will highlight the recent achievements of gold-catalyzed oxidative and
redox-neutral Csp(3)-H bond functionalization, which opens new avenues for
economical and sustainable construction of fine chemicals.

PMID: 24853478  [PubMed]


244. Org Lett. 2014 Jun 6;16(11):3086-9. doi: 10.1021/ol5011906. Epub 2014 May 22.

Copper-catalyzed esterification of alkylbenzenes with cyclic ethers and
cycloalkanes via C(sp3)-H activation following cross-dehydrogenative coupling.

Rout SK(1), Guin S, Ali W, Gogoi A, Patel BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati , North
Guwahati 781039, India.

A copper-catalyzed cross-dehydrogenative coupling strategy has been developed for
the synthesis of two classes of esters from simple solvents. The reaction of
methylarenes with cyclic ethers resulted in a-acyloxy ethers involving four sp(3)
C-H cleavages, while treatment of methylarenes with cycloalkanes led to the
formation of allyl esters at the expense of six consecutive sp(3) C-H bonds.

PMID: 24852383  [PubMed]


245. Sci Rep. 2014 May 21;4:5021. doi: 10.1038/srep05021.

Probing the role of an atomically thin SiNx interlayer on the structure of
ultrathin carbon films.

Dwivedi N(1), Rismani-Yazdi E(1), Yeo RJ(1), Goohpattader PS(1), Satyanarayana
N(1), Srinivasan N(2), Druz B(2), Tripathy S(3), Bhatia CS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of
Singapore, Singapore 117583. (2)Veeco Instruments Inc, Terminal Drive Plainview, 
New York 11803, United States. (3)Institute of Materials Research and Engineering
(IMRE), A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology, and Research), 3 Research Link,
Singapore 117602.

Filtered cathodic vacuum arc (FCVA) processed carbon films are being considered
as a promising protective media overcoat material for future hard disk drives
(HDDs). However, at ultrathin film levels, FCVA-deposited carbon films show a
dramatic change in their structure in terms of loss of sp3 bonding, density, wear
resistance etc., compared to their bulk counterpart. We report for the first time
how an atomically thin (0.4 nm) silicon nitride (SiNx) interlayer helps in
maintaining/improving the sp3 carbon bonding, enhancing interfacial
strength/bonding, improving oxidation/corrosion resistance, and strengthening the
tribological properties of FCVA-deposited carbon films, even at ultrathin levels 
(1.2 nm). We propose the role of the SiNx interlayer in preventing the catalytic 
activity of Co and Pt in media, leading to enhanced sp3C bonding (relative
enhancement~40%). These findings are extremely important in view of the atomic
level understanding of structural modification and the development of high
density HDDs.

PMCID: PMC4028925
PMID: 24846506  [PubMed]


246. Chemistry. 2014 Jun 16;20(25):7706-17. doi: 10.1002/chem.201402358. Epub 2014 May
19.

C(sp3)-H bond activation with triel metals: indium and gallium zwitterions
through internal hydride abstraction in rigid salan ligands.

Maudoux N(1), Fang J, Roisnel T, Dorcet V, Maron L, Carpentier JF, Sarazin Y.

Author information: 
(1)Organometallics: Materials and Catalysis Department, Institut des Sciences
Chimiques de Rennes, UMR 6226 CNRS-Université de Rennes 1, Campus de Beaulieu,
35042 Rennes (France).

The hydropyrimidine salan
(salan=N,N'-dimethyl-N,N'-bis[(2-hydroxyphenyl)methylene]-1,2-diaminoethane)
proteo-ligands with a rigid backbone {ON^(CH2)^NO}H2 react with M(CH2SiMe3)3
(M=Ga, In) to yield the zwitterions {ON^(CH(+))^NO}M(-)(CH2SiMe3)2 (M=Ga, 2; In, 
3) by abstraction of a hydride from the ligand backbone followed by elimination
of dihydrogen. By contrast, with Al2Me6, the neutral-at-metal bimetallic complex 
[{ON^(CH2)^NO}AlMe]2 ([1]2) is obtained quantitatively. The formation of indium
zwitterions is also observed with sterically more encumbered ligands containing
o-Me substituents on the phenolic rings, or an N<U+2009>(CHPh)<U+2009>N moiety in the
heterocyclic core. Overall, the ease of C(sp3)-H bond activation follows the
order Al«Ga<In. Experimental data based on model complexes, XRD studies, and
(2)H NMR spectroscopy show that the formation of the Ga/In zwitterion involves
rapid release of SiMe4 followed by evolution of H2, and suggest the formation of 
a transient metal-hydride species. DFT calculations indicate that the systems
{ON^(CH2)^NO}H2+M(CH2SiMe3)3 (M=Al, Ga, In) all initially lead to the formation
of the neutral monophenolate dihydrocarbyl species through a single protonolysis.
From here, the thermodynamic product, the model neutral-at-metal complex 1, is
formed in the case of aluminum after a second protonolysis. On the other hand,
lower activation energy pathways lead to the generation of zwitterionic complexes
2 and 3 in the cases of gallium and indium, and the formation of these
zwitterions obeys a strict kinetic control; the computations suggest that, as
inferred from the experimental data, the reaction proceeds through an instable
metal-hydride species, which could not be isolated synthetically.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24842493  [PubMed]


247. Chem Sci. 2014 Jun 1;5(6):2184-2190.

Total syntheses of indolactam alkaloids (-)-indolactam V, (-)-pendolmycin,
(-)-lyngbyatoxin A, and (-)-teleocidin A-2.

Nathel NF(1), Shah TK(1), Bronner SM(1), Garg NK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, 607
Charles Young Drive East, Box 951569, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

We report the total syntheses of (-)-indolactam V and the C7-substituted
indolactam alkaloids (-)-pendolmycin, (-)-lyngbyatoxin A, and (-)-teleocidin A-2.
The strategy for preparing indolactam V relies on a distortion-controlled
indolyne functionalization reaction to establish the C4-N linkage, in addition to
an intramolecular conjugate addition to build the conformationally-flexible
nine-membered ring. The total synthesis of indolactam V then sets the stage for
the divergent synthesis of the other targeted alkaloids. Specifically, late-stage
sp(2)-sp(3) cross-couplings on an indolactam V derivative are used to introduce
the key C7 substituents and the necessary quaternary carbons. These challenging
couplings, in addition to other delicate manipulations, all proceed in the
presence of a basic tertiary amine, an unprotected secondary amide, and an
unprotected indole. Thus, our approach not only enables the enantiospecific total
syntheses of four indolactam alkaloids, but also serves as a platform for probing
complexity-generating and chemoselective transformations in the context of
alkaloid total synthesis.

PMCID: PMC4019407
PMID: 24839542  [PubMed]


248. Org Lett. 2014 Jun 6;16(11):3032-5. doi: 10.1021/ol5011449. Epub 2014 May 16.

Syntheses of sulfides and selenides through direct oxidative functionalization of
C(sp3)-H bond.

Du B(1), Jin B, Sun P.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Biofunctional Materials, College of Chemistry and
Materials Science, Nanjing Normal University , Nanjing 210097, China.

A new protocol for C-S and C-Se bond formation by the direct functionalization of
the C(sp(3))-H bond of alkanes under metal-free conditions was developed. Using
(t)BuOO(t)Bu as the oxidant, the reaction of disulfides or diselenides with
alkanes gave sulfides or selenides in moderate to good yields. The method was
very simple and atom-economical.

PMID: 24835082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Chem Commun (Camb). 2014 Jun 21;50(49):6471-4. doi: 10.1039/c4cc02648a. Epub 2014
May 9.

Metal-free oxidative synthesis of quinazolinones via dual amination of sp3 C-H
bonds.

Zhao D(1), Wang T, Li JX.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Lab of Analytical Chemistry for Life Science, School of Chemistry
and Chemical Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210093, P. R. China.
lijxnju@nju.edu.cn.

A novel metal-free synthesis of quinazolinones via dual amination of sp(3) C-H
bonds was developed. The sp(3) carbon in methylarenes or adjacent to a heteroatom
in DMSO, DMF or DMA was used as the one carbon synthon.

PMID: 24816567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2014 Jul;18(7):759-69. doi:
10.1517/14728222.2014.914173. Epub 2014 May 3.

Transcription factor Sp1, also known as specificity protein 1 as a therapeutic
target.

Safe S(1), Imanirad P, Sreevalsan S, Nair V, Jutooru I.

Author information: 
(1)Texas A&M University, Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology , 4466 TAMU,
College Station, TX 77843-4466 , USA ssafe@cvm.tamu.edu.

INTRODUCTION: Specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors (TFs) are members of
the Sp/Kruppel-like factor family, and Sp proteins play an important role in
embryonic and early postnatal development. Sp1 has been the most extensively
investigated member of this family, and expression of this protein decreases with
age, whereas Sp1 and other family members (Sp3 and Sp4) are highly expressed in
tumors and cancer cell lines.
AREA COVERED: The prognostic significance of Sp1 in cancer patients and the
functional pro-oncogenic activities of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 in cancer cell lines are 
summarized. Several different approaches have been used to target downregulation 
of Sp TFs and Sp-regulated genes, and this includes identification of different
structural classes of antineoplastic agents including NSAIDs, natural products
and their synthetic analogs and several well-characterized drugs including
arsenic trioxide, aspirin and metformin. The multiple pathways involved in
drug-induced Sp downregulation are also discussed.
EXPERT OPINION: The recognition by the scientific and clinical community that
experimental and clinically used antineoplastic agents downregulate Sp1, Sp3 and 
Sp4, and pro-oncogenic Sp-regulated genes will facilitate future clinical
applications for individual drug and drug combination therapies that take
advantage of their unusual effects.

PMID: 24793594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Org Chem. 2014 Jun 20;79(12):5684-96. doi: 10.1021/jo500839c. Epub 2014 May 27.

Mechanisms of the PtCl2-catalyzed intramolecular cyclization of
o-isopropyl-substituted aryl alkynes for the synthesis of indenes and comparison 
of three sp3 C-H bond activation modes.

Wang Y(1), Liao W, Huang G, Xia Y, Yu ZX.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences (BNLMS), Key Laboratory of 
Bioorganic Chemistry and Molecular Engineering of Ministry of Education, College 
of Chemistry, Peking University , Beijing 100871, China.

Chatani and He respectively reported an efficient way to synthesize indenes
through PtCl2 catalyzed sp(3) C-H bond activation. Interestingly, the R group (R 
= H or Br) in the alkyne moiety of the substrates in Chatani's experiments
migrates to the C3 position in indenes, whereas the R group (R = Ar) stays in the
original C2 position of final indenes in He's experiments. DFT calculations
indicated that there are two competing pathways a and c for the cyclization
reaction. Pathway a involves [1,2]-R migration, [1,5]-H shift, and
4p-electrocyclization, giving the indenes with the R group at the C3 position.
Pathway c takes place through irreversible [1,5]-H shift/cyclization and [1,2]-H 
shift, generating indenes with the R group at the C2 position. DFT calculations
found that, when R = H or Br, pathway a is favored. When R = alkyl group, the
[1,2]-R migration is difficult and pathway c is preferred. When R = Ar, DFT
calculations predicted and experiments verified that both pathways a and c occur 
to give two indene products. Comparison of different models of sp(3) C-H
activations has been presented to guide further understanding and prediction of
new C-H bond activations.

PMID: 24787037  [PubMed]


252. Org Biomol Chem. 2014 Jun 28;12(24):4051-60. doi: 10.1039/c4ob00469h.

sp3 C-H oxidation by remote H-radical shift with oxygen- and nitrogen-radicals: a
recent update.

Chiba S(1), Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Chemistry and Biological Chemistry, School of Physical and
Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 637371,
Singapore. shunsuke@ntu.edu.sg.

This review updates on recent advances in aliphatic sp(3) C-H bond oxidation by
remote H-radical abstraction with oxygen- and nitrogen-radicals classifying by
the type of the radical precursors.

PMID: 24781782  [PubMed - in process]


253. Molecules. 2014 Apr 23;19(4):5231-42. doi: 10.3390/molecules19045231.

The intramolecular Diels-Alder reaction of diarylheptanoids--quantum chemical
calculation of structural features favoring the formation of phenylphenalenones.

Monakhova Y(1), Schneider B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Saratov State University, Astrakhanskaya Street 83,
Saratov 410012, Russia. yul-monakhova@mail.ru. (2)Max Planck Institute for
Chemical Ecology, Hans Knöll-Str. 8, Jena 07745, Germany. schneider@ice.mpg.de.

Diarylheptanoids have been reported as biosynthetic precursors of
phenylphenalenones in plants. Quantum chemical calculations of molecular geometry
and orbitals were used to elaborate which structural features are required to
determine if diarylheptanoids can undergo an intramolecular Diel-Alder reaction
to form phenylphenalenones. The computational data showed that an ortho-quinone- 
or a hydoxyketone-bearing ring A, containing the dienophile moiety, and a
heptadiene chain with conjugated cisoid double bonds at C-4/C-6 and a saturated
segment consisting of two sp3-carbon atoms, are required. Only four
diarylheptanoids out of eighteen studied compounds proved to be suitable
candidates. Among them are two 3,5-dideoxy compounds and two other compounds
oxygenated only at C-3, suggesting that lachnanthocarpone, a representative of
the 6-oxygenated phenylphenalenones, and anigorufone, a representative of the
6-deoxy phenylphenalenones, are not connected via a precursor-product
relationship ("late reduction at C-6") but formed through partially separate
pathways.

PMID: 24762963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Org Lett. 2014 May 16;16(10):2602-5. doi: 10.1021/ol500670h. Epub 2014 Apr 24.

Predictably selective (sp3)C-O bond formation through copper catalyzed
dehydrogenative coupling: facile synthesis of dihydro-oxazinone derivatives.

Modak A(1), Dutta U, Kancherla R, Maity S, Bhadra M, Mobin SM, Maiti D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay , Powai, Mumbai
400076, India.

An intramolecular dehydrogenative (sp(3))C-O bond formation in salicylamides can 
be initiated by an active Cu/O2 species to generate pharamaceutically relevant
dihydro-oxazinones. Experimental findings suggest that stereoelectronic
parameters in both coupling partners are controlling factors for site selectivity
in bond formation. Mechanistic investigations including isotope labeling, kinetic
studies helped to propose a catalytic cycle. The method provides a convenient
synthesis of an investigational new medicine CX-614, which has potential in
finding treatment for Parkinson's and Alzheimer's diseases.

PMID: 24761793  [PubMed]


255. J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2014 Mar;14(3):2334-42.

P2O5 assisted green synthesis of multicolor fluorescent water soluble carbon
dots.

Babar DG, Sonkar SK, Tripathi KM, Sarkar S.

A low cost synthesis of multicolor fluorescent carbon dots (C-dots) from edible
sugars is described here. Common sugars like dextrose, lactose or maltose in
aqueous medium gets dehydrated using phosphorus pentoxide (P2O5). The reaction is
facile and completed within few minutes to form insoluble carbon (C-dots) mostly 
having the graphitic (G-band, Raman) sp2 hybridized carbon atoms (C-atoms). This 
insoluble carbon on oxidative treatment with nitric acid produced disordered sp3 
(D-band retaining G-band, Raman) hybridized C-atoms, originated from the
graphitic pool with sp2 hybridized C-atoms. This high density assimilation of
self passivated "surfacial defects" become emissive during electronic
transitions. Surfacial defects due to high degree of electrophilic carboxylation 
create the water soluble version of multicolor fluorescent C-dots as "water
soluble fluorescent carbon dots" (wsFCDs). wsFCDs being itself self-passivated
imposes the tunable multicolor emission throughout the visible spectrum without
having any external coating and surface passivation and could be used as
multicolor fluorescent probe especially in the emerging field of optical
bio-imaging.

PMID: 24745229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Chemistry. 2014 May 19;20(21):6324-31. doi: 10.1002/chem.201400018. Epub 2014 Apr
16.

Hybrid nanocarbon as a catalyst for direct dehydrogenation of propane: formation 
of an active and selective core-shell sp2/sp3 nanocomposite structure.

Wang R(1), Sun X, Zhang B, Sun X, Su D.

Author information: 
(1)Shenyang National Laboratory for Materials Science, Institute of Metal
Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 72 Wenhua Road, Shenyang, 110016 (P.R.
China); National Institute of Clean-and-Low-Carbon Energy, Changping District,
Beijing, 102209 (P.R. China).

Hybrid nanocarbon, comprised of a diamond core and a graphitic shell with a
variable sp(2)-/sp(3)-carbon ratio, is controllably obtained through sequential
annealing treatment (550-1300<U+2009>°C) of nanodiamond. The formation of sp(2) carbon
increases with annealing temperature and the nanodiamond surface is reconstructed
from amorphous into a well-ordered, onion-like carbon structure via an
intermediate composite structure--a diamond core covered by a defective, curved
graphene outer shell. Direct dehydrogenation of propane shows that the
sp(2)-/sp(3)-nanocomposite exhibits superior catalytic performance to that of
individual nanodiamond and graphitic nanocarbon. The optimum catalytic activity
of the diamond/graphene composite depends on the maximum structural defectiveness
and high chemical reactivity of the ketone groups. Ketone-type functional groups 
anchored on the defects/vacancies are active for propene formation; nevertheless,
once the oxygen functional groups are desorbed, the defects/vacancies alone might
be active sites responsible for the C-H bond activation of propane.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24740731  [PubMed]


257. J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2014 Jun;14(6):4178-84.

Electrical transport model of Silicene as a channel of field effect transistor.

Sadeghi H.

The analytical electrical transport model of the Silicene, a single layer of sp3 
bonded silicon atoms in the honeycomb lattice structure as a channel in the field
effect transistor configuration is presented in this paper. Although the carrier 
concentration of the Silicene shows similar behavior to Graphene, there are some 
differences in the conductance behavior. Presented model shows increment in the
total carrier and the conductance with the gate voltage as expected for
conventional semiconductors which affected by the temperature only in the
neutrality point. The minimum conductance is increased by the temperature whereas
it remains stable in the degenerate regime. Presented analytical model is in good
agreement with the numerical conductance calculation based on the implementation 
of the non-equilibrium Green's function method coupled to the density functional 
theory.

PMID: 24738367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Jul;34(13):2382-95. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01602-13. Epub 2014 Apr 
14.

Mechanism of action of phenethylisothiocyanate and other reactive oxygen
species-inducing anticancer agents.

Jutooru I(1), Guthrie AS(2), Chadalapaka G(1), Pathi S(1), Kim K(3), Burghardt
R(4), Jin UH(5), Safe S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas, USA. (2)Department of Biochemistry & Biophysics, Texas
A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA. (3)Department of Environmental
Health, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA. (4)Department of
Veterinary Integrative Biosciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas,
USA. (5)Institute of Biosciences & Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center,
Houston, Texas, USA. (6)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology,
Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA Institute of Biosciences &
Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center, Houston, Texas, USA
ssafe@cvm.tamu.edu.

Reactive oxygen species (ROS)-inducing anticancer agents such as
phenethylisothiocyanate (PEITC) activate stress pathways for killing cancer
cells. Here we demonstrate that PEITC-induced ROS decreased expression of
microRNA 27a (miR-27a)/miR-20a:miR-17-5p and induced miR-regulated ZBTB10/ZBTB4
and ZBTB34 transcriptional repressors, which, in turn, downregulate specificity
protein (Sp) transcription factors (TFs) Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 in pancreatic cancer
cells. Decreased expression of miR-27a/miR-20a:miR-17-5p by PEITC-induced ROS is 
a key step in triggering the miR-ZBTB Sp cascade leading to downregulation of Sp 
TFs, and this is due to ROS-dependent epigenetic effects associated with
genome-wide shifts in repressor complexes, resulting in decreased expression of
Myc and the Myc-regulated miRs. Knockdown of Sp1 alone by RNA interference also
induced apoptosis and decreased pancreatic cancer cell growth and invasion,
indicating that downregulation of Sp transcription factors is an important common
mechanism of action for PEITC and other ROS-inducing anticancer agents.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4054319
PMID: 24732804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. J Org Chem. 2014 May 2;79(9):3847-55. doi: 10.1021/jo500192h. Epub 2014 Apr 11.

Iron-catalyzed cross-dehydrogenative coupling esterification of unactive C(sp3)-H
bonds with carboxylic acids for the synthesis of a-acyloxy ethers.

Zhao J(1), Fang H, Zhou W, Han J, Pan Y.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Nanjing University , Nanjing
210093, People's Republic of China.

An iron-catalyzed oxidative esterification reaction between unactivated
C(sp(3))-H bonds from symmetric and asymmetric ethers and carboxylic acids using 
di-tert-butyl peroxide (DTBP) as the oxidant via a cross dehydrogenative coupling
(CDC) reaction was established, which tolerates a wide range of cyclic ether
substrates to react with aromatic acids and phenylacetic acid, providing an
efficient method for the preparation of a-acyloxy ethers with good to excellent
yields. Intermolecular competing kinetic isotope effect (KIE) experiments were
also carried out, which indicate that C(sp(3))-H bond cleavage may be the
rate-determining step of this CDC reaction.

PMID: 24725271  [PubMed]


260. Cell Oncol (Dordr). 2014 Apr;37(2):131-45. doi: 10.1007/s13402-014-0169-5. Epub
2014 Apr 8.

Transcription of the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-3 (VEGFR3) gene 
is regulated by the zinc finger proteins Sp1 and Sp3 and is under epigenetic
control: transcription of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 3.

Hertel J(1), Hirche C, Wissmann C, Ebert MP, Höcker M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Angiogenesis and Tumor Metastasis, Campus Mitte, Charité
University Hospital Berlin, Charitéplatz 1, 10117, Berlin, Germany.

BACKGROUND: In the past, the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-3
(VEGFR-3) has been linked to the regulation of lymphangiogenesis and the
lymphatic spread of solid malignancies. The molecular mechanisms controlling
VEGFR3 gene expression have, however, remained poorly understood. Here, we aimed 
at assessing these mechanisms through VEGFR3 gene promoter analysis and the
identification of transcription factors binding to it. In addition, we focussed
on epigenetic modifications underlying VEGFR3 transcription regulation.
METHODS: 5' Deletion analyses for the identification of functional promoter
elements, electrophoretic mobility shift assays, chromatin immunoprecipitations, 
methylation-specific PCRs, and Trichostatin A (TSA) and 5-Aza desoxycytidine
(5-Aza dC) treatments were performed in this study.
RESULTS: Following the isolation of a 2 kb stretch of 5'-flanking DNA of VEGFR3, 
we identified a novel GC-rich element (GRE) spanning -101/-66 sufficient for
VEGFR3 transcription and activated by Sp1 and Sp3, respectively. Histone
de-acetylase inhibition by TSA led to the accumulation of acetylated histones
H3/H4 at the VEGFR3 gene promoter, up-regulation of its mRNA levels, and
transactivation of promoter reporter constructs in endothelial cell lines.
Similarly, methylation inhibition by 5-Aza dC triggered up-regulation of VEGFR3
mRNA levels and increased promoter activity. TSA and 5-Aza-dC did not influence
Sp1/Sp3 binding, but increased the transactivating capacity of both transcription
factors, suggesting epigenetic modification as an underlying mechanism.
CONCLUSIONS: Here we describe the identification of regulatory elements
controlling human VEGFR3 gene expression and show that histone acetylation and
CpG methylation are important determinants of VEGFR3 transcription regulation.
These findings may facilitate the development of intervention strategies aimed at
targeting VEGFR3-based tumor lymphangiogenesis and/or lymphatic tumor spread.

PMID: 24710631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Apr 15;111(15):5574-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1315034111. Epub 2014 Mar 27.

Sumoylation differentially regulates Sp1 to control cell differentiation.

Gong L(1), Ji WK, Hu XH, Hu WF, Tang XC, Huang ZX, Li L, Liu M, Xiang SH, Wu E,
Woodward Z, Liu YZ, Nguyen QD, Li DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Truhlsen Eye Institute,
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-5540.

The mammalian small ubiquitin-like modifiers (SUMOs) are actively involved in
regulating differentiation of different cell types. However, the functional
differences between SUMO isoforms and their mechanisms of action remain largely
unknown. Using the ocular lens as a model system, we demonstrate that different
SUMOs display distinct functions in regulating differentiation of epithelial
cells into fiber cells. During lens differentiation, SUMO1 and SUMO2/3 displayed 
different expression, localization, and targets, suggesting differential
functions. Indeed, overexpression of SUMO2/3, but not SUMO1, inhibited basic (b) 
FGF-induced cell differentiation. In contrast, knockdown of SUMO1, but not
SUMO2/3, also inhibited bFGF action. Mechanistically, specificity protein 1
(Sp1), a major transcription factor that controls expression of lens-specific
genes such as ß-crystallins, was positively regulated by SUMO1 but negatively
regulated by SUMO2. SUMO2 was found to inhibit Sp1 functions through several
mechanisms: sumoylating it at K683 to attenuate DNA binding, and at K16 to
increase its turnover. SUMO2 also interfered with the interaction between Sp1 and
the coactivator, p300, and recruited a repressor, Sp3 to ß-crystallin gene
promoters, to negatively regulate their expression. Thus, stable SUMO1, but
diminishing SUMO2/3, during lens development is necessary for normal lens
differentiation. In support of this conclusion, SUMO1 and Sp1 formed complexes
during early and later stages of lens development. In contrast, an interaction
between SUMO2/3 and Sp1 was detected only during the initial lens vesicle stage. 
Together, our results establish distinct roles of different SUMO isoforms and
demonstrate for the first time, to our knowledge, that Sp1 acts as a major
transcription factor target for SUMO control of cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3992630
PMID: 24706897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Chem Commun (Camb). 2014 Jun 21;50(49):6439-42. doi: 10.1039/c4cc00743c. Epub
2014 Apr 4.

tert-Butyl peroxybenzoate (TBPB)-mediated 2-isocyanobiaryl insertion with
1,4-dioxane: efficient synthesis of 6-alkyl phenanthridines via C(sp3)-H/C(sp2)-H
bond functionalization.

Cao JJ(1), Zhu TH, Wang SY, Gu ZY, Wang X, Ji SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Organic Synthesis of Jiangsu Province, College of Chemistry,
Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123,
China. shunyi@suda.edu.cn shunjun@suda.edu.cn.

An efficient method for the construction of 6-alkyl phenanthridines by tert-butyl
peroxybenzoate (TBPB)-mediated 2-isocyanobiaryl insertion with 1,4-dioxane was
established. Two new C-C bonds were formed in this reaction via a sequential
C(sp(3))-H/C(sp(2))-H bond functionalization under metal-free conditions.

PMID: 24699898  [PubMed]


263. Artif Cells Nanomed Biotechnol. 2016 Feb;44(1):48-55. doi:
10.3109/21691401.2014.901335. Epub 2014 Apr 3.

Effects of sodium pyruvate on ameliorating metabolic acidosis.

Yang J(1), Zhao JX(1), Wang Y(1), Chen G(1), Cheng WN(2), Luo X(1), Pei XT(1),
Zhao L(1), Su Q(3), Zhou H(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Institute of Transfusion Medicine, Academy of Military Medical Sciences ,
Beijing , P.R. China. (2)b Department of Biological Engineering , College of
Environment and Chemical Engineering, Yanshan University , Qinhuangdao , P. R.
China. (3)c The First Affiliated Hospital of General Hospital of PLA , Beijing , 
P. R. China.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the effects of sodium pyruvate (SP) on metabolic acidosis.
METHODS: For the in vivo experiments, we evaluated effects of SP on an ammonium
chloride (NH4Cl)-induced hyperchloremic acidosis rat model. SP was infused at
overall doses of 2, 4, and 6 mmol·kg(- 1) for the SP1, SP2, and SP3 groups,
respectively. Treatment with sodium bicarbonate (SB) was used as a positive
control (2 mmol·kg(- 1)), and treatment with normal saline (NS) was used as a
volume control (2 mL·kg(- 1)). Blood was sampled from the ophthalmic venous
plexus for pH, blood gases, electrolytes, glucose, creatinine (Cr), and urea
analysis after injection. For the in vitro experiment, propionate was applied to 
induce intracellular acidosis in human endothelial cells. Intracellular pH (pHi) 
was fluorimetrically measured after the addition of SP.
RESULTS: In the in vivo study, the pH of SP1 group showed no significant
difference compared with that of the NS group. The SP2 and SP3 groups had a
higher pH than the NS group (P < 0.01). The SP3 group had a higher pH than the SB
group (P < 0.05) and SP1 group (P < 0.05). Moreover, SP treatment ameliorated the
abnormality of calcium and decreased the blood potassium levels. The SP3 group
had higher glucose levels than SP1 group (P < 0.05). No significant differences
were observed between all the groups in the plasma Cr and urea levels. In the in 
vitro study, the pHi increased immediately after the addition of SP.
CONCLUSION: The data suggest that intravascular treatment with SP represents a
novel therapeutic strategy to ameliorate metabolic acidosis.

PMID: 24697727  [PubMed - in process]


264. Nat Prod Commun. 2014 Mar;9(3):303-8.

A general synthetic approach to hydroquinone meroterpenoids: stereoselective
synthesis of (+)-(S)-metachromin V and alliodorol.

Serra S, Cominetti AA, Lissoni V.

A new general synthetic approach to hydroquinone meroterpenoids is here
described. The framework of the aforementioned natural compounds was built up
through the Li2CuCl4 catalysed cross coupling reaction of the
4-substituted-(E)-prenyl acetates 9 with 2,5-bis(benzyloxy)phenyl magnesium
bromide 8 as a key step. The latter sp3-sp2 coupling affords the products in good
chemical yields and in very high stereoisomeric purity. A further key step of the
present synthetic method consists of the removal of the benzylic protecting
groups by a very mild procedure based on the use of lithium naphthalenide. The
latter reagent, in combination with aliphatic dialkylamines, is able to cleave
all the benzylic protecting groups leaving unaffected the polyenic moieties. By
these means, we devised a new synthesis of the natural hydroquinone
geranylhydroquinone, farnesylhydroquinone, metachromin V and alliodorol. In
addition, the marine meroterpenoid, (+)-(S)-metachromin V, was synthesized for
the first time; its chemical structure was confirmed and its absolute
configuration was unambiguously assigned.

PMID: 24689200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Org Lett. 2014 Apr 18;16(8):2248-51. doi: 10.1021/ol500745t. Epub 2014 Mar 31.

Pd(II)-catalyzed intermolecular arylation of unactivated C(sp3)-H bonds with aryl
bromides enabled by 8-aminoquinoline auxiliary.

Wei Y(1), Tang H, Cong X, Rao B, Wu C, Zeng X.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Organic Chemistry and Materials Physics Center, Frontier Institute 
of Science and Technology, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Xi'an
Jiaotong University , Xi'an, Shaanxi, 710054, P. R. China.

An example of using readily available, less reactive aryl bromides as arylating
reagents in the Pd(II)-catalyzed intermolecular arylation of unactivated
C(sp(3))-H bonds is described. This reaction was promoted by a crucial
8-aminoquinolinyl directing group and a K2CO3 base, enabling regiospecific
installation of an aryl scaffold at the ß-position of carboxamides. A mechanistic
study by DFT calculations reveals a C(sp(3))-H activation-led pathway featuring
the oxidative addition as the highest energy transition state.

PMID: 24684454  [PubMed]


266. Chemistry. 2014 Apr 25;20(18):5501-10. doi: 10.1002/chem.201304257. Epub 2014 Mar
28.

Rollover-assisted C(sp2)-C(sp3) bond formation.

Zucca A(1), Maidich L, Canu L, Petretto GL, Stoccoro S, Cinellu MA, Clarkson GJ, 
Rourke JP.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica e Farmacia, Università degli Studi di Sassari, Via
Vienna 2, 07100 Sassari (Italy). zucca@uniss.it.

Rollover cyclometalation involves bidentate heterocyclic donors, unusually acting
as cyclometalated ligands. The resulting products, possessing a free donor atom, 
react differently from the classical cyclometalated complexes. Taking advantage
of a "rollover"/"retro-rollover" reaction sequence, a succession of oxidative
addition and reductive elimination in a series of platinum(II) complexes
[Pt(N,C)(Me)(PR3)] resulted in a rare C(sp(2))-C(sp(3)) bond formation to give
the bidentate nitrogen ligands 3-methyl-2,2'-bipyridine,
3,6-dimethyl-2,2'-bipyridine, and 3-methyl-2-(2'-pyridyl)-quinoline, which were
isolated and characterized. The nature of the phosphane PR3 is essential to the
outcome of the reaction. This route constitutes a new method for the activation
and functionalization of C-H bond in the C(3) position of bidentate heterocyclic 
compounds, a position usually difficult to functionalize.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24682987  [PubMed]


267. Gene. 2014 Jun 1;542(2):134-40. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.03.043. Epub 2014 Mar
25.

Sp1 transcriptionally regulates BRK1 expression in non-small cell lung cancer
cells.

Li M(1), Ling B(1), Xiao T(1), Tan J(1), An N(1), Han N(1), Guo S(1), Cheng S(1),
Zhang K(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Cancer Institute (Hospital),
Peking Union Medical College & Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing
100021, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Cancer Institute
(Hospital), Peking Union Medical College & Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences,
Beijing 100021, China. Electronic address: zhangkt@cicams.ac.cn.

Following a previous study reporting that BRK1 is upregulated in non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC), the present study sought to clarify the role of specificity 
protein 1 (Sp1) in the transcriptional regulation of the BRK1 gene. Therefore, a 
construct, named F8, consisting of the -1341 to -1 nt sequence upstream of the
start codon of the BRK1 gene inserted into pGL4.26 was made. A series of
truncated fragments was then constructed based on F8. Segment S831, which
contained the -84 to -1 nt region, displayed the highest transcriptional activity
in the A549, H1299 and H520 NSCLC cell lines. Bioinformatic analysis showed a
potential Sp1-binding element at -73 to -64 nt, and a mutation in this region
suppressed the transcriptional activity of S831. Then the RNAi assays of Sp1 and 
its coworkers Sp3 and Sp4 were performed, and suppression of Sp1 by siRNA
inhibited the mRNA expression of BRK1. Both an electrophoretic mobility shift
assay (EMSA) and a chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay demonstrated that
Sp1 bound to the promoter area of the BRK1 gene. Our data identified a functional
and positive Sp1 regulatory element from -73 to -64 nt in the BRK1 promoter,
which may likely explain the overexpression of BRK1 in NSCLC.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24680773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Org Lett. 2014 Apr 4;16(7):2042-5. doi: 10.1021/ol5006399. Epub 2014 Mar 27.

Organocatalytic approach for C(sp3)-H bond arylation, alkylation, and amidation
of isochromans under facile conditions.

Muramatsu W(1), Nakano K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki University , 1-14
Bunkyo-machi, Nagasaki, Nagasaki 852-8521, Japan.

A new catalytic approach for the synthesis of isochroman derivatives via direct
C(sp(3))-H bond arylation is described. The oxidation reaction with
[bis(trifluoroacetoxy)iodo]benzene facilitates the regeneration of
2,3-dichloro-5,6-dicyano-1,4-benzoquinone in the C(sp(3))-H bond arylation of
isochroman. The reaction conditions can also be used for alkyl Grignard reagents 
and amides to afford the corresponding isochroman derivatives.

PMID: 24673439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. RSC Adv. 2014 Jan 1;4(3):1062-1066.

Transformations of X (C, O, N)-CN Bonds: Cases of Selective X (C, O, N)-C
Activation.

Wang R(1), Falck JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of chemistry, Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, TX 75390-9038 (USA).

Activation of C-C, C-N, and C-O bonds has in recent decades been recognized as a 
valuable strategic objective. While considerable progress has been achieved, many
of the more challenging issues, e.g., regioselective activation of specific C-X
(C, O, N) bonds, chemoselective cleavage of C(sp3)-X bonds, enantioselective
activation and even the successful application of solid catalysts in such
transformations remain elusive. The research disclosed herein summarize recent
advances in C-X bond cleavages, including regioselective processes, although the 
carbon is activated in the form of a cyano group.

PMCID: PMC3960016
PMID: 24660056  [PubMed]


270. Org Lett. 2014 Apr 4;16(7):1876-9. doi: 10.1021/ol500300w. Epub 2014 Mar 18.

Ruthenium(II)-catalyzed C(sp3)-H a-alkylation of pyrrolidines.

Schinkel M(1), Wang L, Bielefeld K, Ackermann L.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Organische und Biomolekulare Chemie, Georg-August-Universität ,
Tammannstrasse 2, 37077 Göttingen, Germany.

A catalytic system comprising [RuCl2(PPh3)3], AgOTf, and BINAP enabled atom- and 
step-economical additions of C(sp(3))-H bonds onto unactivated alkenes 2 under
comparably mild reaction conditions. The pyridyl directing group was easily
removed to furnish the corresponding (NH)-free amines with ample scope.

PMID: 24635222  [PubMed]


271. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2014 Apr 14;53(16):4191-5. doi: 10.1002/anie.201310711.
Epub 2014 Mar 12.

Rhodium(III)-catalyzed alkenylation reactions of 8-methylquinolines with alkynes 
by C(sp3)-H activation.

Liu B(1), Zhou T, Li B, Xu S, Song H, Wang B.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Elemento-Organic Chemistry, Collaborative Innovation
Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin), College of Chemistry,
Nankai University, Tianjin 300071 (China).

The alkenylation reactions of 8-methylquinolines with alkynes, catalyzed by
[{Cp*RhCl2}2], proceeds efficiently to give 8-allylquinolines in good yields by
C(sp(3))-H bond activation. These reactions are highly regio- and
stereoselective. A catalytically competent five-membered rhodacycle has been
structurally characterized, thus revealing a key intermediate in the catalytic
cycle.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24623676  [PubMed]


272. Chem Commun (Camb). 2014 Apr 18;50(30):3944-6. doi: 10.1039/c4cc00716f. Epub 2014
Mar 5.

Nickel-catalyzed chelation-assisted direct arylation of unactivated C(sp3)-H
bonds with aryl halides.

Li M(1), Dong J, Huang X, Li K, Wu Q, Song F, You J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Green Chemistry and Technology of Ministry of Education,
College of Chemistry, and State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China Medical 
School, Sichuan University, 29 Wangjiang Road, Chengdu 610064, PR China.
jsyou@scu.edu.cn.

In this work, we have disclosed the nickel-catalyzed unactivated ß-C(sp(3))-H
bond arylation of aliphatic acid derivatives with aryl iodides/bromides via
bidentate chelation-assistance of an 8-aminoquinoline moiety. These preliminary
results indicate the intrinsic catalytic potential of nickel metal for
unactivated C(sp(3))-H bond arylation.

PMID: 24599346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Org Chem. 2014 Apr 4;79(7):2944-54. doi: 10.1021/jo402776u. Epub 2014 Mar 17.

KO(t)Bu-mediated synthesis of dimethylisoindolin-1-ones and
dimethyl-5-phenylisoindolin-1-ones: selective C-C coupling of an unreactive
tertiary sp3 C-H bond.

Bhakuni BS(1), Yadav A, Kumar S, Patel S, Sharma S, Kumar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research
(IISER) Bhopal , Indore By-pass Road, Bhauri, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, India 462
066.

A new reaction for the synthesis of dimethylisoindolinones has been presented
from 2-halo-N-isopropyl-N-alkylbenzamide substrates and KO(t)Bu by the selective 
C-C coupling of an unreactive tertiary sp(3) C-H bond. The reaction manifested an
excellent selectivity toward a tertiary sp(3) C-H bond over primary or sec C-H
bond. Moreover, biaryl C-C coupling along with alkyl-aryl C-C coupling can be
achieved in one pot using dihalobenzamides for the synthesis of biaryl
5-phenylisoindolin-1-ones. It seems that the reaction proceeds via a radical
pathway in which the aryl radical translocates via 1,5-hydrogen atom transfer
(HAT), forming a tertiary alkyl carbon-centered radical. The generated tertiary
alkyl radical could attack the benzamide ring in a 5-exo/endo-trig manner
followed by the release of an electron and a proton, leading to a five-membered
isoindolinone ring. HAT seems to be responsible for the selective
functionalization of the tertiary alkyl group over primary and secondary C-H
bonds.

PMID: 24597670  [PubMed]


274. Org Biomol Chem. 2014 Apr 14;12(14):2189-92. doi: 10.1039/c3ob42354a.

Direct sp3 C-H bond arylation, alkylation, and amidation of
tetrahydroisoquinolines mediated by hypervalent iodine(III) under mild
conditions.

Muramatsu W(1), Nakano K, Li CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki University, 1-14
Bunkyo-machi, Nagasaki, Nagasaki 852-8521, Japan. muramatu@nagasaki-u.ac.jp.

We have developed a method for the sp(3) C-H bond functionalization of
tetrahydroisoquinolines (THIQs) mediated by [bis(trifluoroacetoxy)iodo]benzene
(PIFA). The treatment of the THIQs with various nucleophiles in the presence of
PIFA in a green solvent alternative gave the coupled products, with a C-C, C-N,
or quaternary carbon center in high yields.

PMID: 24595886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. J Urol. 2014 Sep;192(3):981-9. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2014.02.095. Epub 2014 Mar 1.

An intricate network of conserved DNA upstream motifs and associated
transcription factors regulate the expression of uromodulin gene.

Srivastava R(1), Micanovic R(2), El-Achkar TM(3), Janga SC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biohealth Informatics, School of Informatics and Computing,
Indiana University Purdue University Indianapolis, Indianapolis, Indiana.
(2)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, Indiana
University and Roudebush Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Indianapolis, Indiana; 
Center for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, School of Medicine, Indiana 
University and Roudebush Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Indianapolis, Indiana. 
(3)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, Indiana
University and Roudebush Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Indianapolis, Indiana; 
Center for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, School of Medicine, Indiana 
University and Roudebush Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Indianapolis, Indiana. 
Electronic address: telachka@iu.edu. (4)Department of Biohealth Informatics,
School of Informatics and Computing, Indiana University Purdue University
Indianapolis, Indianapolis, Indiana; Department of Medical and Molecular
Genetics, School of Medicine, Indiana University and Roudebush Veterans Affairs
Medical Center, Indianapolis, Indiana; Center for Computational Biology and
Bioinformatics, School of Medicine, Indiana University and Roudebush Veterans
Affairs Medical Center, Indianapolis, Indiana. Electronic address:
scjanga@iupui.edu.

PURPOSE: Uromodulin is a kidney specific glycoprotein whose expression can
modulate kidney homeostasis. However, the set of sequence specific transcription 
factors that regulate the uromodulin gene UMOD and their upstream binding
locations are not well characterized. We built a high resolution map of its
transcriptional regulation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We applied in silico phylogenetic footprinting on the
upstream regulatory regions of a diverse set of human UMOD orthologs to identify 
conserved binding motifs and corresponding position specific weight matrices. We 
further analyzed the predicted binding motifs by motif comparison, which
identified transcription factors likely to bind these discovered motifs.
Predicted transcription factors were then integrated with experimentally known
protein-protein interactions available from public databases and tissue specific 
expression resources to delineate important regulators controlling UMOD
expression.
RESULTS: Analysis allowed the identification of a reliable set of binding motifs 
in the upstream regulatory regions of UMOD to build a high confidence compendium 
of transcription factors that could bind these motifs, such as GATA3, HNF1B, SP1,
SMAD3, RUNX2 and KLF4. ENCODE deoxyribonuclease I hypersensitivity sites in the
UMOD upstream region of the mouse kidney confirmed that some of these binding
motifs were open to binding by predicted transcription factors. The transcription
factor-transcription factor network revealed several highly connected
transcription factors, such as SP1, SP3, TP53, POU2F1, RARB, RARA and RXRA, as
well as the likely protein complexes formed between them. Expression levels of
these transcription factors in the kidney suggest their central role in
controlling UMOD expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings will form a map for understanding the regulation
of uromodulin expression in health and disease.

Copyright © 2014 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24594405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Eur Respir Rev. 2014 Mar 1;23(131):111-7. doi: 10.1183/09059180.00008513.

Pirfenidone: an update on clinical trial data and insights from everyday
practice.

Kreuter M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Pneumology and Respiratory Critical Care Medicine, Center for
Interstitial and Rare Lung Diseases, Thoraxklinik, University of Heidelberg,
Heidelberg, Germany. 2 Translational Lung Research Heidelberg (TLRC), Heidelberg,
Germany, Member of the German Center for Lung Research.

Comment in
    Eur Respir Rev. 2014 Mar 1;23(131):3-4.

Pirfenidone is an orally active, small molecule that inhibits synthesis of
profibrotic and inflammatory mediators. It was approved for the treatment of
adults with mild-to-moderate idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis in the European Union 
based on the results of two pivotal phase III, double-blind, randomised,
placebo-controlled clinical trials (CAPACITY) demonstrating efficacy and safety, 
and supported by two Japanese clinical trials (SP2 and SP3). Currently, there is 
increasing interest in experience with pirfenidone in patients relating to the
real-world setting. Following the publication of the CAPACITY clinical studies,
additional analyses have been conducted to provide further support for
pirfenidone in clinical practice, including a modified per-protocol analysis of
the CAPACITY study population. New data from the RECAP extension study also
provided longer term data for pirfenidone and promising continuation rates with
treatment. Pirfenidone is also being evaluated in specialist centre cohorts
providing important information on real-world efficacy and safety. Increasing
experience with pirfenidone in everyday clinical practice is helping to establish
\expert guidance on the management of known adverse events, together with
practical recommendations, to ensure adherence to treatment so that the possible 
longer term benefits of pirfenidone treatment in reducing lung function decline
can be maximised.

PMID: 24591668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 28;9(2):e88965. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088965. eCollection
2014.

CMTM3 inhibits human testicular cancer cell growth through inducing cell-cycle
arrest and apoptosis.

Li Z(1), Xie J(2), Wu J(3), Li W(4), Nie L(5), Sun X(1), Tang A(1), Li X(5), Liu 
R(1), Mei H(1), Wang F(1), Wang Z(6), Gui Y(3), Cai Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Genitourinary Tumor, Shenzhen Second People's
Hospital, First Affiliated Hospital of Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China.
(2)Guandong Key Laboratory of Male Reproductive Medicine and Genetics, Peking
University Shenzhen Hospital, Shenzhen PKU-HKUST Medical Center, Shenzhen, China 
; Department of Clinical Laboratory, Peking University Shenzhen Hospital,
Shenzhen, China. (3)Guandong Key Laboratory of Male Reproductive Medicine and
Genetics, Peking University Shenzhen Hospital, Shenzhen PKU-HKUST Medical Center,
Shenzhen, China. (4)Department of Urology, Suzhou municipal Hospital, Suzhou,
Anhui, China. (5)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Peking University Shenzhen
Hospital, Shenzhen, China. (6)Department of Urology, The Second Hospital of
Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China.

Comment in
    J Urol. 2015 Sep;194(3):706-7.

Human CMTM3 has been proposed as a putative tumor suppressor gene. The loss of
CMTM3 has been found in several carcinomas. However, the regulation of CMTM3
expression and its function in tumor progression remain largely unknown. Here, we
investigated the regulation of CMTM3 expression, function and molecular mechanism
in human testicular cancer cells. CMTM3 was frequently downregulated or silenced 
in testicular cancer cell lines and tumor tissues but highly expressed in normal 
testis tissues. The re-expression of CMTM3 significantly suppressed the colony
formation, proliferation, and migration capacity of testicular cancer cells by
inducing a G2 cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Moreover, the re-expression of
CMTM3 activated the transcription of p53, induced p53 accumulation, up-regulated 
the expression of p21, and increased the cleavage of caspase 9, 8, 3, and PARP.
The downregulation of CMTM3 in clinical tumor tissues was associated with the
methylation of a single CpG site located within the Sp1/Sp3-responsive region of 
the core promoter. These results indicate that CMTM3 can function as tumor
suppressor through the induction of a G2 cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. CMTM3
is thus involved in testicular cancer pathogenesis, and it is frequently at least
partially silenced by the methylation of a single, specific CpG site in tumor
tissues.

PMCID: PMC3938458
PMID: 24586462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Chem Commun (Camb). 2014 Apr 11;50(28):3729-31. doi: 10.1039/c4cc00894d.

Expeditious synthesis of 1-aminoindane derivatives achieved by [1,4]-hydride
shift mediated C(sp3)-H bond functionalization.

Mori K(1), Kurihara K, Akiyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Gakushuin University, 1-5-1
Mejiro, Toshima-ku, Tokyo 171-8588, Japan. takahiko.akiyama@gakushuin.ac.jp.

Described herein is a [1,4]-hydride shift mediated expeditious synthesis of
1-aminoindane derivatives. A wide variety of substrates could be employed in this
reaction to afford various indane derivatives in good to excellent chemical
yields. Examination of the amine moiety revealed that the sterically hindered
amine is the key to achieving both low catalyst loading and excellent chemical
yields.

PMID: 24577676  [PubMed]


279. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Jun;1843(6):1196-206. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2014.02.008. Epub 2014 Feb 24.

Specificity protein 4 (Sp4) regulates the transcription of AMPA receptor subunit 
GluA2 (Gria2).

Priya A(1), Johar K(1), Nair B(1), Wong-Riley MT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Road, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA. (2)Department of 
Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of Wisconsin, 8701
Watertown Plank Road, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA. Electronic address: mwr@mcw.edu.

The alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptors are
important glutamatergic receptors mediating fast excitatory synaptic transmission
in the brain. The regulation of the four subunits of AMPA receptors, GluA1-4, is 
poorly understood. Excitatory synaptic transmission is highly energy-demanding,
and this energy is derived mainly from the oxidative pathway. Recently, we found 
that specificity factor regulates all subunits of cytochrome c oxidase (COX), a
critical energy-generating enzyme. COX is also regulated by nuclear respiratory
factor 1 (NRF-1), which transcriptionally controls the Gria2 (GluA2) gene of AMPA
receptors. The goal of the present study was to test our hypothesis that
Sp-factors (Sp1, Sp3, and/or Sp4) also regulate AMPA subunit genes. If so, we
wish to determine if Sp-factors and NRF-1 function via a complementary,
concurrent and parallel, or a combination of complementary and
concurrent/parallel mechanism. By means of multiple approaches, including
electrophoretic mobility shift and supershift assays, chromatin
immunoprecipitation, promoter mutations, real-time quantitative PCR, and western 
blot analysis, we found that Sp4, but not Sp1 or Sp3, regulates the Gria2, but
not Gria1, 3, or 4, subunit gene of the AMPA receptor in a concurrent and
parallel manner with NRF-1. Thus, Sp4 and NRF-1 both mediate the tight coupling
between neuronal activity and energy metabolism at the transcriptional level.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4024218
PMID: 24576410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Chem Commun (Camb). 2014 Apr 11;50(28):3692-4. doi: 10.1039/c3cc49231a.

Palladium(0)-catalyzed cyclopropanation of benzyl bromides via C(sp3)-H bond
activation.

Mao J(1), Zhang SQ, Shi BF, Bao W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Zhejiang University, 148 Tianmushan road, Hangzhou,
310028, Zhejiang, China. wlbao@zju.edu.cn.

A novel and highly efficient Pd(0)-catalyzed domino reaction to prepare
cyclopropane derivatives has been established. The process involves a Heck-type
coupling reaction and a C(sp(3))-H bond activation. Preliminary DFT calculations 
suggest that a four-membered palladacycle intermediate is involved.

PMID: 24575427  [PubMed]


281. Nat Prod Rep. 2014 Apr;31(4):441-8. doi: 10.1039/c3np70108e. Epub 2014 Feb 27.

sp3-sp3 Coupling reactions in the synthesis of natural products and biologically 
active molecules.

Geist E(1), Kirschning A, Schmidt T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Organische Chemie und Zentrum für Biomolekulare Wirkstoffchemie
(BMWZ), Leibniz Universität Hannover, Schneiderberg 1B, D-30167 Hannover,
Germany. andreas.kirschning@oci.uni-hannover.de.

This Highlight covers the current status of relatively unexplored sp(3)-sp(3)
cross-coupling reactions with particular focus on natural product and related
syntheses.

PMID: 24573302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. J Am Chem Soc. 2014 Mar 12;136(10):3744-7. doi: 10.1021/ja412706d. Epub 2014 Mar 
3.

Double C(sp3)-H bond functionalization mediated by sequential hydride
shift/cyclization process: diastereoselective construction of polyheterocycles.

Mori K(1), Kurihara K, Yabe S, Yamanaka M, Akiyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Gakushuin University , Mejiro,
Toshima-ku, Tokyo 171-8588, Japan.

Described herein are two novel types of double C(sp(3))-H bond functionalizations
triggered by a sequential hydride shift/cyclization process: (1) construction of 
a bicyclo[3.2.2]nonane skeleton by a [1,6]- and [1,5]-hydride shift sequence and 
(2) sequential [1,4]- and [1,5]-hydride shift mediated construction of a linear
tricyclic skeleton.

PMID: 24564435  [PubMed]


283. PLoS Comput Biol. 2014 Feb 13;10(2):e1003448. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003448. 
eCollection 2014.

Mathematical model of a telomerase transcriptional regulatory network developed
by cell-based screening: analysis of inhibitor effects and telomerase expression 
mechanisms.

Bilsland AE(1), Stevenson K(1), Liu Y(1), Hoare S(1), Cairney CJ(1), Roffey J(2),
Keith WN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cancer Sciences, University of Glasgow, Cancer Research UK
Beatson Laboratories, Bearsden, Glasgow, United Kingdom. (2)Cancer Research
Technology Ltd., Wolfson Institute for Biomedical Research, London, United
Kingdom.

Cancer cells depend on transcription of telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT). 
Many transcription factors affect TERT, though regulation occurs in context of a 
broader network. Network effects on telomerase regulation have not been
investigated, though deeper understanding of TERT transcription requires a
systems view. However, control over individual interactions in complex networks
is not easily achievable. Mathematical modelling provides an attractive approach 
for analysis of complex systems and some models may prove useful in systems
pharmacology approaches to drug discovery. In this report, we used transfection
screening to test interactions among 14 TERT regulatory transcription factors and
their respective promoters in ovarian cancer cells. The results were used to
generate a network model of TERT transcription and to implement a dynamic Boolean
model whose steady states were analysed. Modelled effects of signal transduction 
inhibitors successfully predicted TERT repression by Src-family inhibitor SU6656 
and lack of repression by ERK inhibitor FR180204, results confirmed by RT-QPCR
analysis of endogenous TERT expression in treated cells. Modelled effects of GSK3
inhibitor 6-bromoindirubin-3'-oxime (BIO) predicted unstable TERT repression
dependent on noise and expression of JUN, corresponding with observations from a 
previous study. MYC expression is critical in TERT activation in the model,
consistent with its well known function in endogenous TERT regulation. Loss of
MYC caused complete TERT suppression in our model, substantially rescued only by 
co-suppression of AR. Interestingly expression was easily rescued under modelled 
Ets-factor gain of function, as occurs in TERT promoter mutation. RNAi targeting 
AR, JUN, MXD1, SP3, or TP53, showed that AR suppression does rescue endogenous
TERT expression following MYC knockdown in these cells and SP3 or TP53 siRNA also
cause partial recovery. The model therefore successfully predicted several
aspects of TERT regulation including previously unknown mechanisms. An
extrapolation suggests that a dominant stimulatory system may programme TERT for 
transcriptional stability.

PMCID: PMC3923661
PMID: 24550717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Mol Model. 2014 Mar;20(3):2143. doi: 10.1007/s00894-014-2143-6. Epub 2014 Feb
19.

A new AMBER-compatible force field parameter set for alkanes.

Nikitin AM(1), Milchevskiy YV, Lyubartsev AP.

Author information: 
(1)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow,
119991, Russia, agilemolecule@gmail.com.

We present a new force field parameter set for simulating alkanes. Its functional
form and parameters are chosen to make it directly compatible with the
AMBER94/99/12 family of force fields implemented in the available software. The
proposed parameterization enables universal description of both the
conformational and thermodynamic properties of linear, branched, and cyclic
alkanes. Such unification is achieved by using two essential principles: (1)
reduction of the Lennard-Jones radius for all sp3 carbons to 1.75Å; (2) separate 
optimization of Lennard-Jones well depths for carbons with different degree of
substitution. The new parameter set may prove to be optimal for description of
alkyl residues in a broad range of biomolecules, from amino acids to lipids with 
their extended linear tails.

PMID: 24549797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014;1839(4):265-74. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.02.004.
Epub 2014 Feb 13.

Phosphorylated Sp1 is the regulator of DNA-PKcs and DNA ligase IV transcription
of daunorubicin-resistant leukemia cell lines.

Nishida Y(1), Mizutani N(1), Inoue M(1), Omori Y(1), Tamiya-Koizumi K(1), Takagi 
A(1), Kojima T(1), Suzuki M(2), Nozawa Y(3), Minami Y(4), Ohnishi K(5), Naoe
T(6), Murate T(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiological Laboratory Science, Nagoya University
Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan. (2)Division of Molecular
Carcinogenesis, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan.
(3)Tokai Gakuin University, Kakamigahara, Japan. (4)Division of Blood
Transfusion/Division of Oncology and Hematology, Kobe University Hospital, Kobe, 
Japan. (5)Oncology Center, Hamamatsu University Graduate School of Medicine,
Hamamatsu, Japan. (6)National Hospital Organization, Nagoya Medical Center,
Nagoya, Japan. (7)Department of Pathophysiological Laboratory Science, Nagoya
University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan. Electronic address:
murate@met.nagoya-u.ac.jp.

Multidrug resistance (MDR) is a serious problem faced in the treatment of
malignant tumors. In this study, we characterized the expression of
non-homologous DNA end joining (NHEJ) components, a major DNA double strand break
(DSB) repair mechanism in mammals, in K562 cell and its daunorubicin
(DNR)-resistant subclone (K562/DNR). K562/DNR overexpressed major enzymes of
NHEJ, DNA-PKcs and DNA ligase IV, and K562/DNR repaired DSB more rapidly than
K562 after DNA damage by neocarzinostatin (MDR1-independent radiation-mimetic).
Overexpressed DNA-PKcs and DNA ligase IV were also observed in DNR-resistant HL60
(HL60/DNR) cells as compared with parental HL60 cells. Expression level of
DNA-PKcs mRNA paralleled its protein level, and the promoter activity of DNA-PKcs
of K562/DNR was higher than that of K562, and the 5'-region between -49bp and the
first exon was important for its activity. Because this region is GC-rich, we
tried to suppress Sp1 family transcription factor using mithramycin A (MMA), a
specific Sp1 family inhibitor, and siRNAs for Sp1 and Sp3. Both MMA and siRNAs
suppressed DNA-PKcs expression. Higher serine-phosphorylated Sp1 but not total
Sp1 of both K562/DNR and HL60/DNR was observed compared with their parental K562 
and HL60 cells. DNA ligase IV expression of K562/DNR was also suppressed
significantly with Sp1 family protein inhibition. EMSA and ChIP assay confirmed
higher binding of Sp1 and Sp3 with DNA-PKcs 5'-promoter region of DNA-PKcs of
K562/DNR than that of K562. Thus, the Sp1 family transcription factor affects
important NHEJ component expressions in anti-cancer drug-resistant malignant
cells, leading to the more aggressive MDR phenotype.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24530422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Atherosclerosis. 2014 Mar;233(1):178-85. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2013.12.014. Epub 2014 Jan 8.

Molecular and functional characterization of LRP1 promoter polymorphism c.1-25
C>G (rs138854007).

Aledo R(1), Costales P(1), Ciudad C(2), Noé V(2), Llorente-Cortes V(3), Badimon
L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center, CSIC-ICCC, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant
Pau, IIB-Sant Pau, Autonomous University of Barcelona, Sant Antoni Mª Claret,
167, 08025 Barcelona, Spain. (2)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Department,
School of Pharmacy, IBUB, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Cardiovascular Research Center, CSIC-ICCC, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant
Pau, IIB-Sant Pau, Autonomous University of Barcelona, Sant Antoni Mª Claret,
167, 08025 Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address: cllorente@csic-iccc.org.

The transcription of the Low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP1) 
is upregulated by aggregated LDL (agLDL) and angiotensin II (AngII) in human
vascular smooth muscle cells (hVSMC). The polymorphism c.1-25C>G creates a new
GC-box in the LRP1 promoter recognized by Sp1/Sp3 transcription factors. The aims
of this study were 1) to evaluate the impact of c.1-25C>G polymorphism on LRP1
transcriptional activity and expression, and 2) to examine the response of
c.1-25C>G LRP1 promoter to LDL and AngII. EMSA and Luciferase assays in HeLa
cells showed that -25G promoter has enhanced basal transcriptional activity and
specific Sp1/Sp3 binding. hVSMC with GG genotype (GG-hVSMC) had higher LRP1 mRNA 
and protein levels, respectively than CC genotype (CC-hVSMC). EMSA assays showed 
that the polymorphism determines scarce amount of SRE-B/SREBP-2 complex formation
and the failure of agLDL to further reduce these SRE-B/SREBP-2 complexes. Taken
together, these results suggest that c.1-25C>G, by difficulting SREBP-2 binding, 
prevents SREBP-2 displacement required for LRP1 promoter response to LDL. In
contrast, c.1-25C>G strongly favours Sp1/Sp3 binding and AngII-induced activity
in Sp1/Sp3 dependent manner in GG-hVSMC. This increase is functionally translated
into a higher capacity of GG-hVSMC to become foam cells from agLDL in presence of
AngII. These results suggest that c.1-25C>G determines a lack of response to
agLDL and an exacerbated response to AngII. It is thus conceivable that the
presence of the polymorphism would be easily translated to vascular alterations
in the presence of the pro-hypertensive autacoid, AngII.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24529141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Opt Express. 2013 Nov 18;21(23):27537-49. doi: 10.1364/OE.21.027537.

High reflectance ta-C coatings in the extreme ultraviolet.

Larruquert JI, Rodríguez-de Marcos LV, Méndez JA, Martin PJ, Bendavid A.

The extreme ultraviolet (EUV) reflectance of amorphous tetrahedrally coordinated 
carbon films (ta-C) prepared by filtered cathodic vacuum arc was measured in the 
30-188-nm range at near normal incidence. The measured reflectance of films grown
with average ion energies in the ~70-140-eV range was significantly larger than
the reflectance of a C film grown with average ion energy of ~20 eV and of C
films deposited by sputtering or evaporation. The difference is attributed to a
large proportion of sp3 atom bonding in the ta-C film. This high reflectance is
obtained for films deposited onto room-temperature substrates. The reflectance of
ta-C films is higher than the standard single-layer coating materials in the EUV 
spectral range below 130 nm. A self-consistent set of optical constants of ta-C
films was obtained with the Kramers-Krönig analysis using ellipsometry
measurements in the 190-950 nm range and the EUV reflectance measurements. These 
optical constants allowed calculating the EUV reflectance of ta-C films at
grazing incidence for applications such as free electron laser mirrors.

PMID: 24514272  [PubMed]


288. J Chem Phys. 2014 Feb 7;140(5):054514. doi: 10.1063/1.4864109.

K6 carbon: a metallic carbon allotrope in sp3 bonding networks.

Niu CY(1), Wang XQ(1), Wang JT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics, Institute of
Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China.

We identify by first-principles calculations a new cubic carbon phase in I4132
(O(8)) symmetry, named K6 carbon, which has a six atom primitive cell comprising 
sp(3) hybridized C3 triangle rings. The structural stability is verified by
phonon mode analysis. The calculated elastic constants show that the K6 carbon is
a high ductile material with a density even lower than graphite. Electronic band 
and density of states calculations reveal that it is a metallic carbon allotrope 
with a high electronic density of states of ~0.10 states/eV per atom at the Fermi
level. These results broaden our understanding of the structural and electronic
properties of carbon allotropes.

PMID: 24511959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Org Lett. 2014 Feb 7;16(3):656-9. doi: 10.1021/ol500045p. Epub 2014 Jan 30.

A unique combined source of "CN" from 1,2-dichloroethane and TMSN3 in the
copper-catalyzed cyanation of a C(sp3)-H bond adjacent to a nitrogen atom.

Zhang G(1), Ma Y, Cheng G, Liu D, Wang R.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemical Engineering, Nanjing University of Science, Technology ,
Nanjing 210000, China.

A novel combined metal-free "CN" source from trimethylsilyl azide and
1,2-dichloroethane has been developed and successfully applied to
copper-catalyzed oxidative cyanation of a-C-H tertiary amines for the synthesis
of C1-cyanation tetrahydroisoquinoline derivatives with good to excellent yields 
for the first time.

PMID: 24479944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Nanoscale Res Lett. 2014 Jan 29;9(1):52. doi: 10.1186/1556-276X-9-52.

Hydrogen induced redox mechanism in amorphous carbon resistive random access
memory.

Chen YJ, Chen HL, Young TF(1), Chang TC, Tsai TM, Chang KC, Zhang R, Chen KH, Lou
JC, Chu TJ, Chen JH, Bao DH, Sze SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical and Electro-Mechanical Engineering, National Sun
Yat-Sen University, Kaohsiung 804, Taiwan. youngtf@mail.nsysu.edu.tw.

We investigated the bipolar resistive switching characteristics of the resistive 
random access memory (RRAM) device with amorphous carbon layer. Applying a
forming voltage, the amorphous carbon layer was carbonized to form a conjugation 
double bond conductive filament. We proposed a hydrogen redox model to clarify
the resistive switch mechanism of high/low resistance states (HRS/LRS) in carbon 
RRAM. The electrical conduction mechanism of LRS is attributed to conductive sp2 
carbon filament with conjugation double bonds by dehydrogenation, while the
electrical conduction of HRS resulted from the formation of insulating sp3-type
carbon filament through hydrogenation process.

PMCID: PMC3922695
PMID: 24475979  [PubMed]


291. Nat Chem. 2014 Feb;6(2):146-50. doi: 10.1038/nchem.1836. Epub 2014 Jan 5.

Ligand-enabled cross-coupling of C(sp3)-H bonds with arylboron reagents via
Pd(II)/Pd(0) catalysis.

Chan KS(1), Wasa M(1), Chu L(1), Laforteza BN(1), Miura M(1), Yu JQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 N. Torrey Pines
Road, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

There have been numerous developments in C-H activation reactions in the past
decade. Attracted by the ability to functionalize molecules directly at
ostensibly unreactive C-H bonds, chemists have discovered reaction conditions
that enable reactions of C(sp(2))-H and C(sp(3))-H bonds with a variety of
coupling partners. Despite these advances, the development of suitable ligands
that enable catalytic C(sp(3))-H bond functionalization remains a significant
challenge. Herein we report the discovery of a mono-N-protected amino acid ligand
that enables Pd(II)-catalysed coupling of <U+03B3>-C(sp(3))-H bonds in triflyl-protected
amines with arylboron reagents. Remarkably, no background reaction was observed
in the absence of ligand. A variety of amine substrates and arylboron reagents
were cross-coupled using this method. Arylation of optically active substrates
derived from amino acids also provides a potential route for preparing
non-proteinogenic amino acids.

PMCID: PMC4077182
PMID: 24451591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Mol Biol Cell. 2014 Mar;25(6):925-35. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E13-07-0423. Epub 2014 Jan
22.

Transcriptional repression of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) by the protein
arginine methyltransferase PRMT1.

Lafleur VN(1), Richard S, Richard DE.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche du CHU de Québec, L'Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, and Department
of Molecular Biology, Medical Biochemistry and Pathology, Université Laval,
Québec, QC G1R 2J6, Canada Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, Sir
Mortimer B. Davis Jewish General Hospital, and Departments of Oncology and
Medicine, McGill University, Montréal, QC H3G 1Y6, Canada.

Hypoxia-inducible factors (HIF-1 and HIF-2) are essential mediators for the
adaptive transcriptional response of cells and tissues to low-oxygen conditions. 
Under hypoxia or when cells are treated with various nonhypoxic stimuli, the
active HIF-a subunits are mainly regulated through increased protein
stabilization. For HIF-1a, it is clear that further transcriptional,
translational, and posttranslational regulations are important for complete HIF-1
activity. Novel evidence links hypoxia and HIF-1 to arginine methylation, an
important protein modification. These studies suggest that arginine
methyltransferases may be important for hypoxic responses. Protein arginine
methyltransferase 1 (PRMT1), the predominant arginine methyltransferase, can act 
as a transcriptional activator or repressor by modifying a diverse set of
substrates. In this work, we show that PRMT1 is a repressor of both HIF-1 and
HIF-2. The cellular depletion of PRMT1 by small interference RNA targeting leads 
to increased HIF transcriptional activity. This activation is the result of
enhanced HIF-a subunit transcription, which allows increased HIF-a subunit
availability. We provide evidence that PRMT1-dependent HIF-1a regulation is
mediated through the activities of both specificity protein 1 (Sp1) and Sp3, two 
transcription factors known to control HIF-1a expression. This study therefore
identifies PRMT1 as a novel regulator of HIF-1- and HIF-2-mediated responses.

PMCID: PMC3952860
PMID: 24451260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. J Am Chem Soc. 2014 Feb 5;136(5):1789-92. doi: 10.1021/ja413131m. Epub 2014 Jan
21.

Nickel-catalyzed site-selective alkylation of unactivated C(sp3)-H bonds.

Wu X(1), Zhao Y, Ge H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Indiana University Purdue
University Indianapolis , Indianapolis, Indiana 46202 United States.

Erratum in
    J Am Chem Soc. 2015 Feb 25;137(7):2785.

The direct alkylation of unactivated sp(3) C-H bonds of aliphatic amides was
achieved via nickel catalysis with the assist of a bidentate directing group. The
reaction favors the C-H bonds of methyl groups over the methylene C-H bonds and
tolerates various functional groups. Moreover, this reaction shows a predominant 
preference for sp(3) C-H bonds of methyl groups via a five-membered ring
intermediate over the sp(2) C-H bonds of arenes in the cyclometalation step.

PMID: 24446698  [PubMed]


294. J Nutr Biochem. 2014 Feb;25(2):259-66. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2013.10.015. Epub
2013 Nov 22.

Prenatal caloric restriction enhances DNA methylation and MeCP2 recruitment with 
reduced murine placental glucose transporter isoform 3 expression.

Ganguly A(1), Chen Y(2), Shin BC(1), Devaskar SU(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology and Developmental Biology,
Neonatal Research Center of UCLA Children's Discovery and Innovation Institute,
David Geffen School of Medicine UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1752, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology and Developmental Biology,
Neonatal Research Center of UCLA Children's Discovery and Innovation Institute,
David Geffen School of Medicine UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1752, USA; Department
of General Surgery, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College of Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. (3)Department of Pediatrics, 
Division of Neonatology and Developmental Biology, Neonatal Research Center of
UCLA Children's Discovery and Innovation Institute, David Geffen School of
Medicine UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1752, USA. Electronic address:
sdevaskar@mednet.ucla.edu.

Diminished transplacental glucose transport plays an important role in prenatal
calorie restriction (CR) induced reduction in fetal growth. Fetal growth
restriction (FGR) has an impact in shaping the adult phenotype with
transgenerational implications. To understand the mechanisms underlying prenatal 
CR-induced transplacental glucose transport, we examined the epigenetic
regulation of placental glucose transporter (Glut1 and Glut3) expression. We
restricted calories by 50% in C57BL6 pregnant mice from gestational days 10 to 19
(CR; n=8) vs. controls (CON; n=8) and observed a 50% diminution in placental
Glut3 expression (P<.05) with no effect on Glut1 expression by reverse
transcription and quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). CR
enhanced DNA methylation of a CpG island situated ~1000 bp upstream from the
transcriptional start site of the glut3 gene, with no such effect on the glut1
gene as assessed by methylation-sensitive PCR and bisulfite sequencing. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays demonstrated enhanced MeCP2 binding to the CpG 
island of the glut3 gene in response to CR vs. CON (P<.05). Sequential ChIP
demonstrated that enhanced MeCP2 binding of the glut3-(m)CpG island enhanced
histone deacetylase 2 recruitment (P<.05) but interfered with Sp1 binding
(P<.001), although it did not affect Sp3 or Creb/pCreb interaction. We conclude
that late-gestation CR enhanced DNA methylation of the placental glut3 gene. This
epigenetic change augmented specific nuclear protein-DNA complex formation that
was associated with prenatal CR-induced reduction of placental glut3 expression
and thereby transplacental glucose transport. This molecular complex provides
novel targets for developing therapeutic interventions aimed at reversing FGR.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4208916
PMID: 24445052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Org Lett. 2014 Feb 7;16(3):796-9. doi: 10.1021/ol403541g. Epub 2014 Jan 17.

Tandem sp3 C-H functionlization/decarboxylation of 2-alkylazaarenes with
coumarin-3-carboxylic acids.

Xu L(1), Shao Z, Wang L, Xiao J.

Author information: 
(1)College of Chemistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Qingdao Agricultural
University , Qingdao 266109, China.

The catalyst-free sp(3) C-H functionalization of 2-alkylazaarenes has been
achieved in the reaction with (thio)coumarin-3-carboxylic acids. Followed by a
tandem decarboxylation, this method provides facile synthesis of biologically
important azaarene-substituted 3,4-dihydro(thio)coumarins in a single step in
high yields.

PMID: 24437668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Org Lett. 2014 Feb 7;16(3):844-7. doi: 10.1021/ol4036159. Epub 2014 Jan 16.

Highly efficient preparation of selectively isotope cluster-labeled long chain
fatty acids via two consecutive C(sp3)-C(sp3) cross-coupling reactions.

Lethu S(1), Matsuoka S, Murata M.

Author information: 
(1)JST ERATO, Lipid Active Structure Project and §Project Research Center for
Fundamental Sciences, Osaka University , 1-1 Machikaneyama, Toyonaka, Osaka
560-0043, Japan.

An efficient synthesis involving two copper-catalyzed alkyl-alkyl coupling
reactions has been designed to easily access doubly isotope-labeled fatty acids. 
Such NMR- and IR-active compounds were obtained in excellent overall yields and
will be further used for determining the conformation of an alkyl chain of
lipidic biomolecules upon interaction with proteins.

PMID: 24432759  [PubMed]


297. Guang Pu Xue Yu Guang Pu Fen Xi. 2013 Oct;33(10):2700-4.

[Laser Raman spectral investigations of the carbon structure of LiFePO4/C cathode
material].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang C(1), Li YM(2), Zhao QF(2), Gan XK(2), Yao YC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Kunming University of Science and Technology, Faculty of Metalurgcal and
Engergy Engineering, National Engineering Laboratory for Vacuum Metallurgy,
Kunming 650093, China. yangchao1988@foxmail.com (2)Kunming University of Science 
and Technology, Faculty of Metalurgcal and Engergy Engineering, National
Engineering Laboratory for Vacuum Metallurgy, Kunming 650093, China.

In the present paper, Laser Raman spectral was used to study the carbon structure
of LiFePO4/C positive material. The samples were also been characterized by X-ray
diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscope(SEM), selected area electron
diffraction (SEAD) and resistivity test. The result indicated that compared with 
the sp2/sp3 peak area ratios the I(D)/I(G) ratios are not only more evenly but
also exhibited some similar rules. However, the studies indicated that there
exist differences of I(D)/ I(G) ratios and sp2/sp3 peak area ratios among
different points in the same sample. And compared with the samples using citric
acid or sucrose as carbon source, the sample which was synthetized with mixed
carbon source (mixed by citric acid and sucrose) exhibited higher I(D)/I(G)
ratios and sp2/sp3 peak area ratios. Also, by contrast, the differences of
I(D)/I(G) ratios and sp2/sp3 peak area ratios among different points in the same 
sample are less than the single carbon source samples' datas. In the scanning
electron microscopy (sem) and transmission electron microscopy (sem) images, we
can observed the uneven distributions of carbon coating of the primary particles 
and the secondary particles, this may be the main reason for not being uniform of
difference data in the same sample. The obvious discreteness will affect the
normal use of Raman spectroscopy in these tests.

PMID: 24409720  [PubMed]


298. Chem Commun (Camb). 2014 Feb 18;50(14):1757-60. doi: 10.1039/c3cc48545e. Epub
2014 Jan 7.

Palladium[II] catalysed C(sp3)-H oxidation of dimethyl carbamoyl
tetrahydrocarbazoles.

Nakano Y(1), Lupton DW.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry, Monash University, Clayton, Melbourne, VIC 3800,
Australia. david.lupton@monash.edu.

Dimethyl carbamoyl tetrahydrocarbazoles undergo directed oxidation using standard
conditions to exclusively provide products from C(sp(3))-H oxidation. This result
is in contrast to recent studies on the directed C-H olefination of
hydrocarbazoles, which result in selective aromatic functionalisation.

PMID: 24400324  [PubMed]


299. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 31;8(12):e83426. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083426.
eCollection 2013.

A novel SP1/SP3 dependent intronic enhancer governing transcription of the UCP3
gene in brown adipocytes.

Hoffmann C(1), Zimmermann A(1), Hinney A(2), Volckmar AL(2), Jarrett HW(3),
Fromme T(1), Klingenspor M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Nutritional Medicine, Else Kröner-Fresenius Center & Research Center
for Nutrition and Food Sciences, Technische Universität München,
Freising-Weihenstephan, Germany. (2)Department of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and Psychotherapy, Universitätsklinikum Essen,
University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. (3)Department of Chemistry,
University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, United States of America.

Uncoupling protein (UCP) 3 is a mitochondrial inner membrane protein implicated
in lipid handling and metabolism of reactive oxygen species. Its transcription is
mainly regulated by peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPAR), a family 
of nuclear hormone receptors. Employing bandshift assays, RNA interference and
reporter gene assays we examine an intronic region in the UCP3 gene harboring a
cis-element essential for expression in brown adipocytes. We demonstrate binding 
of SP1 and SP3 to this element which is adjacent to a direct repeat 1 element
mediating activation of UCP3 expression by PPAR<U+03B3> agonists. Transactivation
mediated by these elements is interdependent and indispensable for UCP3
expression. Systematic deletion uncovered a third binding element, a putative NF1
site, in close proximity to the SP1/3 and PPAR<U+03B3> binding elements. Data mining
demonstrated binding of MyoD and Myogenin to this third element in C2C12 cells,
and, furthermore, revealed recruitment of p300. Taken together, this intronic
region is the main enhancer driving UCP3 expression with SP1/3 and PPAR<U+03B3> as the
core factors required for expression.

PMCID: PMC3877035
PMID: 24391766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Am Chem Soc. 2014 Jan 22;136(3):1062-9. doi: 10.1021/ja410883p. Epub 2014 Jan
9.

Ni-catalyzed carboxylation of C(sp2)- and C(sp3)-O bonds with CO2.

Correa A(1), León T, Martin R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemical Research of Catalonia (ICIQ), Av. Països Catalans 16,
43007 Tarragona, Spain.

In recent years a significant progress has been made for the carboxylation of
aryl and benzyl halides with CO2, becoming convenient alternatives to the use of 
stoichiometric amounts of well-defined metal species. Still, however, most of
these processes require the use of pyrophoric and air-sensitive reagents and the 
current methods are mostly restricted to organic halides. Therefore, the
discovery of a mild, operationally simple alternate carboxylation that occurs
with a wide substrate scope employing readily available coupling partners will be
highly desirable. Herein, we report a new protocol that deals with the
development of a synergistic activation of CO2 and a rather challenging
activation of inert C(sp(2))-O and C(sp(3))-O bonds derived from simple and cheap
alcohols, a previously unrecognized opportunity in this field. This unprecedented
carboxylation event is characterized by its simplicity, mild reaction conditions,
remarkable selectivity pattern and an excellent chemoselectivity profile using
air-, moisture-insensitive and easy-to-handle nickel precatalysts. Our results
render our method a powerful alternative, practicality and novelty aside, to
commonly used organic halides as counterparts in carboxylation protocols.
Furthermore, this study shows, for the first time, that traceless directing
groups allow for the reductive coupling of substrates without extended p-systems,
a typical requisite in many C-O bond-cleavage reactions. Taking into
consideration the limited knowledge in catalytic carboxylative reductive events, 
and the prospective impact of providing a new tool for accessing valuable
carboxylic acids, we believe this work opens up new vistas and allows new tactics
in reductive coupling events.

PMID: 24377699  [PubMed]


301. J Am Chem Soc. 2014 Jan 22;136(3):898-901. doi: 10.1021/ja411715v. Epub 2014 Jan 
9.

Nickel-catalyzed direct arylation of C(sp3)-H bonds in aliphatic amides via
bidentate-chelation assistance.

Aihara Y(1), Chatani N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Chemistry, Faculty of Engineering, Osaka University ,
Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

The Ni-catalyzed, direct arylation of C(sp(3))-H (methyl and methylene) bonds in 
aliphatic amides containing an 8-aminoquinoline moiety as a bidentate directing
group with aryl halides is described. Deuterium-labeling experiments indicate
that the C-H bond cleavage step is fast and reversible. Various nickel complexes 
including both Ni(II) and Ni(0) show a high catalytic activity. The results of a 
series of mechanistic experiments indicate that the catalytic reaction does not
proceed through a Ni(0)/Ni(II) catalytic cycle, but probably through a
Ni(II)/Ni(IV) catalytic cycle.

PMID: 24377655  [PubMed]


302. J Comput Aided Mol Des. 2014 Jan;28(1):13-23. doi: 10.1007/s10822-013-9700-4.
Epub 2013 Dec 29.

Scaffold mining of kinase hinge binders in crystal structure database.

Xing L(1), Rai B, Lunney EA.

Author information: 
(1)Pfizer Worldwide Research and Development, 200 CambridgePark Drive, Cambridge,
MA, 02140, USA, li.xing@pfizer.com.

Protein kinases are the second most prominent group of drug targets, after
G-protein-coupled receptors. Despite their distinct inhibition mechanisms, the
majority of kinase inhibitors engage the conserved hydrogen bond interactions
with the backbone of hinge residues. We mined Pfizer internal crystal structure
database (CSDb) comprising of several thousand of public as well as internal
X-ray binary complexes to compile an inclusive list of hinge binding scaffolds.
The minimum ring scaffolds with directly attached hetero-atoms and functional
groups were extracted from the full compounds by applying a rule-based filtering 
procedure employing a comprehensive annotation of ATP-binding site of the human
kinase complements. The results indicated large number of kinase inhibitors of
diverse chemical structures are derived from a relatively small number of common 
scaffolds, which serve as the critical recognition elements for protein kinase
interaction. Out of the nearly 4,000 kinase-inhibitor complexes in the CSDb we
identified approximately 600 unique scaffolds. Hinge scaffolds are overwhelmingly
flat with very little sp3 characteristics, and are less lipophilic than their
corresponding parent compounds. Examples of the most common as well as the
uncommon hinge scaffolds are presented. Although the most common scaffolds are
found in complex with multiple kinase targets, a large number of them are
uniquely bound to a specific kinase, suggesting certain scaffolds could be more
promiscuous than the others. The compiled collection of hinge scaffolds along
with their three-dimensional binding coordinates could serve as basis set for
hinge hopping, a practice frequently employed to generate novel invention as well
as to optimize existing leads in medicinal chemistry.

PMID: 24375079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Org Lett. 2014 Jan 17;16(2):508-11. doi: 10.1021/ol403393w. Epub 2013 Dec 27.

Palladium-catalyzed ß-acyloxylation of simple amide via sp3 C-H activation.

Zhou L(1), Lu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Shanghai Jiao Tong University , 800 Dongchuan Road,
Shanghai 200240, People's Republic of China.

ß-Acyloxy amides are prepared in moderate to high yields by palladium-catalyzed
acyloxylation of primary sp(3) C-H bonds from simple amides without any special
directing group. A catalytic system of Pd(OAc)2/CF3CO2H/K2S2O8 is available to
various amides with N-substituted by linear alkanes, cyclic alkanes, and
electron-deficient benzyl compounds in this reaction. Acyloxylated products could
be transformed easily to the corresponding ß-hydroxy amides.

PMID: 24372283  [PubMed]


304. Cell Biosci. 2014 Aug 19;4:46. doi: 10.1186/2045-3701-4-46. eCollection 2014.

Dysregulated transcriptional and post-translational control of DNA
methyltransferases in cancer.

Lin RK(1), Wang YC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Pharmacognosy, Taipei Medical University, 250 Wu-Hsing
Street, Taipei 110, Taiwan ; Program for the Clinical Drug Discovery from
Botanical Herbs, Taipei Medical University, 250 Wu-Hsing Street, Taipei 110,
Taiwan ; Program for Clinical Pharmacogenomics and Pharmacoproteomics, Taipei
Medical University, 250 Wu-Hsing Street, Taipei 110, Taiwan. (2)Department of
Pharmacology and Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, National Cheng Kung
University, No.1, University Road, Tainan 70101, Taiwan.

Cancer is a leading cause of death worldwide. Aberrant promoter hypermethylation 
of CpG islands associated with tumor suppressor genes can lead to transcriptional
silencing and result in tumorigenesis. DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) are the
enzymes responsible for DNA methylation and have been reported to be
over-expressed in various cancers. This review highlights the current status of
transcriptional and post-translational regulation of the DNMT expression and
activity with a focus on dysregulation involved in tumorigenesis. The
transcriptional up-regulation of DNMT gene expression can be induced by Ras-c-Jun
signaling pathway, Sp1 and Sp3 zinc finger proteins and virus oncoproteins.
Transcriptional repression on DNMT genes has also been reported for p53, RB and
FOXO3a transcriptional regulators and corepressors. In addition, the low
expressions of microRNAs 29 family, 143, 148a and 152 are associated with DNMTs
overexpression in various cancers. Several important post-translational
modifications including acetylation and phosphorylation have been reported to
mediate protein stability and activity of the DNMTs especially DNMT1. In this
review, we also discuss drugs targeting DNMT protein expression and activation
for therapeutic strategy against cancer.

PMCID: PMC4422219
PMID: 25949795  [PubMed]


305. Acta Chim Slov. 2013;60(4):781-9.

Quantitative relationships between structure and lipophilicity of naturally
occurring polyphenols.

Rastija V, Nikolic S, Masand VH.

The lipophilicity of polyphenols inherent in food, beverages, and medicinal
plants was modelled by using 3D descriptors derived from optimized 3D molecular
structures in combination with 2D descriptors. The training sets were generated
by manual selection or by cluster formation, and statistically robust predictive 
models were obtained in both cases. The most relevant structural features for the
lipophilicity of polyphenols are depicted by the statistically most significant
variables: the number of donor atoms for the H bonds is unfavorable for
lipophilicity, and the enhanced number of ring secondary C atom (sp3) also
decreases lipophilicity, while the increased atomic polarizability implies higher
lipophilicity of polyphenols. The study also revealed the importance of a
three-dimensional distribution of atomic electronegativity for the lipophilicity 
of molecules.

PMID: 24362981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Org Lett. 2014 Jan 17;16(2):580-3. doi: 10.1021/ol4034513. Epub 2013 Dec 20.

Samarium(III)-catalyzed C(sp3)-H bond activation: synthesis of indolizines via
C-C and C-N coupling between 2-alkylazaarenes and propargylic alcohols.

Wang X(1), Li SY, Pan YM, Wang HS, Liang H, Chen ZF, Qin XH.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for the Chemistry and Molecular Engineering of Medicinal
Resources (Ministry of Education of China), School of Chemistry & Chemical
Engineering of Guangxi Normal University , Guilin 541004, People's Republic of
China.

A new rare earth metal and samarium-catalyzed C(sp(3))-H bond activation is
reported in which 2-alkylazaarenes and propargylic alcohols were converted to
indolizines. This process operates under mild conditions and solvent-free
conditions. A broad scope of coupling partners has been established, and a likely
mechanism has also been suggested.

PMID: 24359214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Org Lett. 2014 Jan 17;16(2):382-5. doi: 10.1021/ol4032478. Epub 2013 Dec 19.

Free-radical cascade alkylarylation of alkenes with simple alkanes: highly
efficient access to oxindoles via selective (sp3)C-H and (sp2)C-H bond
functionalization.

Li Z(1), Zhang Y, Zhang L, Liu ZQ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Applied Organic Chemistry, Lanzhou University ,
Lanzhou Gansu 730000, P. R. China.

A copper-catalyzed alkylarylation of alkenes with simple alkanes was achieved,
which not only provided an efficient method to prepare various alkyl-substituted 
oxindoles, but also represented a novel strategy for selective sp(3) C-H
functionalization/C-C bond formation via a free-radical cascade process.
Additionally, selective activation of unactivated (sp(3))C-H and (sp(2))C-H bonds
by one single step is achieved in this system, which would also provide a novel
strategy for raising efficiency in C-H bond functionalization.

PMID: 24354601  [PubMed]


308. Org Lett. 2014 Jan 17;16(2):448-51. doi: 10.1021/ol403338s. Epub 2013 Dec 18.

Formal carbon insertion of N-tosylhydrazone into B-B and B-Si bonds:
gem-diborylation and gem-silylborylation of sp3 carbon.

Li H(1), Shangguan X, Zhang Z, Huang S, Zhang Y, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing National Laboratory of Molecular Sciences (BNLMS) and Key Laboratory
of Bioorganic Chemistry and Molecular Engineering of Ministry of Education,
College of Chemistry, Peking University , Beijing 100871, China.

A convenient method is developed to synthesize 1,1-diboronates from the
corresponding N-tosylhydrazones. This method is also applicable to synthesize
1-silyl-1-boron compounds. Meanwhile, derivatization and consecutive Pd-catalyzed
cross-coupling reactions with 1,1-boronates were explored, demonstrating the
synthetic potential of 1,1-diboronates.

PMID: 24350698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Am Chem Soc. 2014 Jan 8;136(1):169-78. doi: 10.1021/ja407422q. Epub 2013 Dec
16.

sp3-sp2 vs sp3-sp3 C-C site selectivity in Rh-catalyzed ring opening of
benzocyclobutenol: a DFT study.

Ding L(1), Ishida N, Murakami M, Morokuma K.

Author information: 
(1)Fukui Institute for Fundamental Chemistry, Kyoto University , Kyoto 606-8103, 
Japan.

The C(sp(3))-C(sp(2)) vs C(sp(3))-C(sp(3)) site selectivity in the C-C bond
activation in Rh-catalyzed ring opening of benzocyclobutenol was systematically
investigated using density functional theory (DFT). The catalytic cycle includes 
three elementary steps: the proton transfer from the substrate to a rhodium
hydroxide, the C-C cleavage, and the proton transfer from water onto a carbon
forming the final product with regeneration of the rhodium hydroxide. The site
selectivity is determined by the C-C cleavage step; the C(sp(3))-C(sp(2))
cleavage is favored over the C(sp(3))-C(sp(3)) cleavage because the former
transition state is stabilized by an interaction between the benzene ring of the 
substrate and Rh. DMSO, a more polar solvent, reduces the site selectivity as the
more polar C(sp(3))-C(sp(3)) transition state (TS) is stabilized more than the
C(sp(3))-C(sp(2)) TS and decreases the advantage of the latter TS. DPPF ligand is
bulky, and the steric repulsion on the tighter C(sp(3))-C(sp(2)) TS causes the
loss of the site selectivity. For the even more crowded Rh(P(t-Bu)3)2 catalyst,
one phosphine has to dissociate before the C-C cleavage reaction takes place, and
the advantage of the C(sp(3))-C(sp(2)) TS is regained for the less crowded
RhP(t-Bu)3 active catalyst.

PMID: 24341735  [PubMed]


310. Org Lett. 2014 Jan 17;16(2):480-3. doi: 10.1021/ol403364k. Epub 2013 Dec 17.

Palladium-catalyzed unactivated C(sp3)-H bond activation and intramolecular
amination of carboxamides: a new approach to ß-lactams.

Sun WW(1), Cao P, Mei RQ, Li Y, Ma YL, Wu B.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Phytochemistry and Plant Resources in West China,
Kunming Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences , Kunming 650201, China.

An efficient method to synthesize the ß-lactams with high regioselectivity via
Pd-catalyzed C(sp(3))-H bond activation and intramolecular amination of simple
and readily available aminoquinoline carboxamides was demonstrated. C6F5I plays a
significant role in the formation of the C-N bond of the four-membered ring
ß-lactams. High yield along with wide substrate scope and functional group
tolerance makes this reaction applicable to build natural-product-derived
ß-lactams. This method has been applied to the efficient synthesis of the
ß-lactamase inhibitor MK-8712.

PMID: 24341538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 10;8(12):e82130. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082130.
eCollection 2013.

Differential responses of neuronal and spermatogenic cells to the doppel
cytotoxicity.

Qin K(1), Ding T, Xiao Y, Ma W, Wang Z, Gao J, Zhao L.

Author information: 
(1)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory for Technology and Application of Model
Organisms, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, China ; Department of
Microbiology, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China ; Department of
Neurology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.

Although structurally and biochemically similar to the cellular prion (PrP(C)),
doppel (Dpl) is unique in its biological functions. There are no reports about
any neurodegenerative diseases induced by Dpl. However the artificial expression 
of Dpl in the PrP-deficient mouse brain causes ataxia with Purkinje cell death.
Abundant Dpl proteins have been found in testis and depletion of the Dpl gene
(Prnd) causes male infertility. Therefore, we hypothesize different regulations
of Prnd in the nerve and male productive systems. In this study, by
electrophoretic mobility shift assays we have determined that two different sets 
of transcription factors are involved in regulation of the Prnd promoter in mouse
neuronal N2a and GC-1 spermatogenic (spg) cells, i.e., upstream stimulatory
factors (USF) in both cells, Brn-3 and Sp1 in GC-1 spg cells, and Sp3 in N2a
cells, leading to the expression of Dpl in GC-1 spg but not in N2a cells. We have
further defined that, in N2a cells, Dpl induces oxidative stress and apoptosis,
which stimulate ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM)-modulating bindings of
transcription factors, p53 and p21, to Prnp promoter, resulting the PrP(C)
elevation for counteraction of the Dpl cytotoxicity; in contrast, in GC-1 spg
cells, phosphorylation of p21 and N-terminal truncated PrP may play roles in the 
control of Dpl-induced apoptosis, which may benefit the physiological function of
Dpl in the male reproduction system.

PMCID: PMC3858285
PMID: 24339999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 4;8(12):e80638. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080638. eCollection
2013.

Transcriptional activation of Mina by Sp1/3 factors.

Lian S(1), Potula HH, Pillai MR, Van Stry M, Koyanagi M, Chung L, Watanabe M, Bix
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee, United States of America.

Mina is an epigenetic gene regulatory protein known to function in multiple
physiological and pathological contexts, including pulmonary inflammation, cell
proliferation, cancer and immunity. We showed previously that the level of Mina
gene expression is subject to natural genetic variation linked to 21 SNPs
occurring in the Mina 5' region. In order to explore the mechanisms regulating
Mina gene expression, we set out to molecularly characterize the Mina promoter in
the region encompassing these SNPs. We used three kinds of assays--reporter, gel 
shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation--to analyze a 2 kb genomic fragment
spanning the upstream and intron 1 regions flanking exon 1. Here we discovered a 
pair of Mina promoters (P1 and P2) and a P1-specific enhancer element (E1).
Pharmacologic inhibition and siRNA knockdown experiments suggested that Sp1/3
transcription factors trigger Mina expression through additive activity targeted 
to a cluster of four Sp1/3 binding sites forming the P1 promoter. These results
set the stage for comprehensive analysis of Mina gene regulation from the context
of tissue specificity, the impact of inherited genetic variation and the nature
of upstream signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC3851307
PMID: 24324617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Cell Physiol. 2014 Jul;229(7):916-26. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24523.

Krüppel-like factor 4 regulates blood-tumor barrier permeability via ZO-1,
occludin and claudin-5.

Ma J(1), Wang P, Liu Y, Zhao L, Li Z, Xue Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, College of Basic Medicine, China Medical
University, Shenyang, People's Republic of China; Institute of Pathology and
Pathophysiology, China Medical University, Shenyang, People's Republic of China.

Blood-tumor barrier (BTB) constitutes an efficient organization of tight
junctions which significantly reduce permeability for chemotherapy drugs.
Krüppel-like factor 4 (KLF4), a member of the Krüppel-like family, has been
documented in endothelial cells and may serve as an essential regulator of
endothelial barrier function. However, our knowledge about the expression and
function of KLF4 in the endothelial cells of BTB still remains unclear. In this
study, we sought to investigate the role of KLF4 in regulation of BTB function as
well as the potential molecular mechanisms. Quantitative RT-PCR, Western blot,
and immunofluorescence assays demonstrated that KLF4 was down-regulated in the
glioma endothelial cells (GECs) which were obtained through endothelial cells
co-cultured with glioma cells. Short hairpin RNA targeting KLF4 impaired the
integrity of BTB detected by trans-endothelial electric resistance assay, and
meanwhile reduced the expression of ZO-1, occludin and claudin-5, demonstrated by
quantitative RT-PCR, Western blot, and immunofluorescence assays. Depletion of
KLF4 increased BTB permeability to small molecules detected by permeability
assays. Furthermore, luciferase assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
showed that KLF4 up-regulated the promoter activities and interacted with "CACCC"
DNA sequence presented in the promoters of ZO-1, occludin, and claudin-5. GATA-1,
GATA-6, Sp1, and Sp3 factors participated in KLF4 regulation of promoter
activities through binding to the promoters of tight junctions related proteins. 
Collectively, our results indicated that KLF4 is a key transcriptional regulator 
of BTB function by regulating expressions of tight junction related proteins,
which would draw growing attention to KLF4 as a potential target for glioma
therapy.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24318462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Stem Cell Res. 2014 Jan;12(1):296-308. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2013.11.007. Epub 2013 
Nov 16.

Pluripotency factors and Polycomb Group proteins repress aryl hydrocarbon
receptor expression in murine embryonic stem cells.

Ko CI(1), Wang Q(1), Fan Y(1), Xia Y(1), Puga A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health and Center for Environmental Genetics,
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 3223 Eden Avenue, Cincinnati, OH
45267, USA. (2)Department of Environmental Health and Center for Environmental
Genetics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 3223 Eden Avenue,
Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA. Electronic address: Alvaro.Puga@uc.edu.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a transcription factor and environmental
sensor that regulates expression of genes involved in drug-metabolism and cell
cycle regulation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses, Ahr ablation in mice
and studies with orthologous genes in invertebrates suggest that AHR may also
play a significant role in embryonic development. To address this hypothesis, we 
studied the regulation of Ahr expression in mouse embryonic stem cells and their 
differentiated progeny. In ES cells, interactions between OCT3/4, NANOG, SOX2 and
Polycomb Group proteins at the Ahr promoter repress AHR expression, which can
also be repressed by ectopic expression of reprogramming factors in hepatoma
cells. In ES cells, unproductive RNA polymerase II binds at the Ahr transcription
start site and drives the synthesis of short abortive transcripts. Activation of 
Ahr expression during differentiation follows from reversal of repressive marks
in Ahr promoter chromatin, release of pluripotency factors and PcG proteins,
binding of Sp factors, establishment of histone marks of open chromatin, and
engagement of active RNAPII to drive full-length RNA transcript elongation. Our
results suggest that reversible Ahr repression in ES cells holds the gene poised 
for expression and allows for a quick switch to activation during embryonic
development.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3896086
PMID: 24316986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Antiviral Res. 2014 Feb;102:11-22. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2013.11.012. Epub
2013 Dec 5.

Inhibition of human cytomegalovirus replication by overexpression of CREB1.

Chia YL(1), Ng CH(1), Lashmit P(2), Chu KL(1), Lew QJ(1), Ho JP(1), Lim HL(3),
Nissom PM(3), Stinski MF(2), Chao SH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Expression Engineering, Bioprocessing Technology Institute, Agency for
Science, Technology and Research (A(*)STAR), 20 Biopolis Way, #06-01 Centros,
Singapore 138668, Singapore. (2)Department of Microbiology, University of Iowa,
51 Newton Rd., 3-772 Bowen Science Building, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.
(3)Microarray Groups, Bioprocessing Technology Institute, Agency for Science,
Technology and Research (A(*)STAR), 20 Biopolis Way, #06-01 Centros, Singapore
138668, Singapore. (4)Expression Engineering, Bioprocessing Technology Institute,
Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A(*)STAR), 20 Biopolis Way, #06-01
Centros, Singapore 138668, Singapore; Department of Microbiology, National
University of Singapore, Block MD4, 5 Science Drive 2, Singapore 117597,
Singapore. Electronic address: jimmy_chao@bti.a-star.edu.sg.

Expression of the human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) major immediate-early (MIE) genes 
is regulated by a strong enhancer-containing promoter with multiple binding sites
for various transcription factors, including cyclic AMP response element binding 
protein 1 (CREB1). Here we show that overexpression of CREB1 potently blocked MIE
transcription and HCMV replication. Surprisingly, CREB1 still exhibited strong
inhibition of the MIE promoter when all five CREB binding sites within the
enhancer were mutated, suggesting that CREB1 regulated the MIE gene expression
indirectly. Promoter deletion analysis and site-directed mutagenesis identified
the region between -130 and -50 upstream of the transcription start site of the
MIE gene as the "CREB1 responsive region". Mutations of SP1/3 and NF-<U+03BA>B binding
sites within this region interrupted the inhibitory effect induced by CREB1
overexpression. Our findings suggest that overexpression of CREB1 can cause
repression of HCMV replication and may contribute to the development of new
anti-HCMV strategies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24316029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Gene. 2014 Feb 15;536(1):135-44. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.11.053. Epub 2013 Dec
4.

Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors regulate the basal expression of human
microsomal epoxide hydrolase (EPHX1) through interaction with the E1b far
upstream promoter.

Su S(1), Omiecinski CJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Toxicology and Carcinogenesis, The Pennsylvania State
University, 101 Life Sciences Bldg, University Park, PA 16802, USA. (2)Center for
Molecular Toxicology and Carcinogenesis, The Pennsylvania State University, 101
Life Sciences Bldg, University Park, PA 16802, USA. Electronic address:
cjo10@psu.edu.

Microsomal epoxide hydrolase (mEH, EPHX1) is a critical biotransformation enzyme,
catalyzing the metabolism of many xenobiotics. Human mEH is transcribed using
alternative promoters. The upstream E1 promoter is active in liver while the far 
upstream E1b promoter drives the expression of mEH in all tissues, including
liver. Although several liver-specific transcription factors have been identified
in the regulation of E1 transcription, little is known regarding the mechanisms
of E1b transcriptional regulation. Genome-wide mapping of DNase I hypersensitive 
sites revealed an open chromatin region between nucleotide -300 upstream and +400
downstream of E1b. This area coincides with a previously described promoter
region responsible for maintaining high basal promoter activity. In silico
analysis of this location revealed several Sp1/Sp3 binding sites. Site-directed
mutagenesis of these motifs suppressed the transactivation activity of the E1b
proximal promoter, indicating their importance as contributors to E1b promoter
regulation. Further, E1b promoter activities were increased significantly
following Sp1 and Sp3 overexpression, while Mithramycin A, a selective Sp1
inhibitor, reduced the promoter activities. EMSA studies demonstrated that Sp1
bound to two putative Sp1/Sp3 binding sites. ChIP analysis confirmed that both
endogenous Sp1 and Sp3 were bound to the proximal promoter region of E1b.
Knockdown of Sp1 expression using siRNA did not alter the endogenous E1b
transcriptional level, while knockdown of Sp3 greatly decreased E1b expression in
different human cell lines. Taken together, these results support the concept
that Sp1 and Sp3 are functionally involved as transcriptional integrators
regulating the basal expression of the derived mEH E1b variant transcript.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3926136
PMID: 24315822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2013 Dec;69(Pt 12):2353-64. doi:
10.1107/S0907444913021823. Epub 2013 Nov 19.

Crystallographic identification of an unexpected protein complex in silkworm
haemolymph.

Pietrzyk AJ(1), Bujacz A, Mueller-Dieckmann J, Lochynska M, Jaskolski M, Bujacz
G.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biocrystallographic Research, Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry,
Polish Academy of Sciences, Noskowskiego 12/14, 61-704 Poznan, Poland.

The first crystal structure of a complex formed by two storage proteins, SP2 and 
SP3, isolated from their natural source, mulberry silkworm (Bombyx mori L.)
haemolymph, has been determined. The structure was solved by molecular
replacement using arylphorin, a protein rich in aromatic amino-acid residues,
from oak silkworm as the initial model. The quality of the electron-density maps 
obtained from the X-ray diffraction experiment allowed the authors to detect that
the investigated crystal structure was composed of two different arylphorins: SP2
and SP3. This discovery was confirmed by N-terminal sequencing. SP2 has been
extensively studied previously, whereas only a few reports on SP3 are available. 
However, to date no structural studies have been reported for these proteins.
These studies revealed that SP2 and SP3 exist in the silkworm body as a
heterohexamer formed by one SP2 trimer and one SP3 trimer. The overall fold,
consisting of three haemocyanin-like subdomains, of SP2 and SP3 is similar. Both 
proteins contain a conserved N-glycosylation motif in their structures.

PMID: 24311577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Molecules. 2013 Nov 28;18(12):14739-46. doi: 10.3390/molecules181214739.

Examination of the potential for adaptive chirality of the nitrogen chiral center
in aza-aspartame.

Bouayad-Gervais SH(1), Lubell WD.

Author information: 
(1)Département de chimie, Université de Montréal, 2900 Boul. Edouard-Monpetit,
Montréal, QC H3T 1J4, Canada. william.lubell@umontreal.ca.

The potential for dynamic chirality of an azapeptide nitrogen was examined by
substitution of nitrogen for the a-carbon of the aspartate residue in the
sweetener S,S-aspartame. Considering that S,S- and R,S-aspartame possess sweet
and bitter tastes, respectively, a bitter-sweet taste of aza-aspartame 9 could be
indicative of a low isomerization barrier for nitrogen chirality
inter-conversion. Aza-aspartame 9 was synthesized by a combination of hydrazine
and peptide chemistry. Crystallization of 9 indicated a R,S-configuration in the 
solid state; however, the aza-residue chiral center was considerably flattened
relative to its natural amino acid counterpart. On tasting, the authors
considered aza-aspartame 9 to be slightly bitter or tasteless. The lack of bitter
sweet taste of aza-aspartame 9 may be due to flattening from sp2 hybridization in
the urea as well as a high barrier for sp3 nitrogen inter-conversion, both of
which may interfere with recognition by taste receptors.

PMID: 24288001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Chem Commun (Camb). 2014 May 25;50(40):5376-8. doi: 10.1039/c3cc47445c. Epub 2013
Nov 28.

Oxidative C(sp3)-H bond cleavage, C-C and C=C coupling at a boron center with O2 
as the oxidant mediated by platinum(II).

Pal S(1), Zavalij PY, Vedernikov AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Maryland, College
Park, MD 20742, USA. avederni@umd.edu.

Dimethyl- and diphenylplatinum(II) fragments Pt(II)R2 (R = Me, Ph) enable facile 
and efficient oxidative C(sp(3))-H bond cleavage and stepwise C-C and C=C
coupling at the boron atom of a coordinated
1,5-cyclooctanediyldi(2-pyridyl)borato ligand with O2 as the sole oxidant.

PMID: 24287586  [PubMed]


320. Ann Bot. 2014 Feb;113(3):489-500. doi: 10.1093/aob/mct272. Epub 2013 Nov 26.

Negative effects of temperature and atmospheric depositions on the seed viability
of common juniper (Juniperus communis).

Gruwez R(1), De Frenne P, De Schrijver A, Leroux O, Vangansbeke P, Verheyen K.

Author information: 
(1)Forest and Nature Lab, Ghent University, Geraardsbergsesteenweg 267, BE-9090
Melle-Gontrode, Belgium.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Environmental change is increasingly impacting ecosystems
worldwide. However, our knowledge about the interacting effects of various
drivers of global change on sexual reproduction of plants, one of their key
mechanisms to cope with change, is limited. This study examines populations of
poorly regenerating and threatened common juniper (Juniperus communis) to
determine the influence of four drivers of global change (rising temperatures,
nitrogen deposition, potentially acidifying deposition and altering precipitation
patterns) on two key developmental phases during sexual reproduction,
gametogenesis and fertilization (seed phase two, SP2) and embryo development
(seed phase three, SP3), and on the ripening time of seeds.
METHODS: In 42 populations throughout the distribution range of common juniper in
Europe, 11,943 seeds of two developmental phases were sampled. Seed viability was
determined using seed dissection and related to accumulated temperature
(expressed as growing degree-days), nitrogen and potentially acidifying
deposition (nitrogen plus sulfur), and precipitation data.
KEY RESULTS: Precipitation had no influence on the viability of the seeds or on
the ripening time. Increasing temperatures had a negative impact on the viability
of SP2 and SP3 seeds and decreased the ripening time. Potentially acidifying
depositions negatively influenced SP3 seed viability, while enhanced nitrogen
deposition led to lower ripening times.
CONCLUSIONS: Higher temperatures and atmospheric deposition affected SP3 seeds
more than SP2 seeds. However, this is possibly a delayed effect as juniper seeds 
develop practically independently, due to the absence of vascular communication
with the parent plant from shortly after fertilization. It is proposed that the
failure of natural regeneration in many European juniper populations might be
attributed to climate warming as well as enhanced atmospheric deposition of
nitrogen and sulfur.

PMCID: PMC3906965
PMID: 24284814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Complement Ther Med. 2013 Dec;21(6):641-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ctim.2013.08.003. Epub 
2013 Aug 17.

A validation study on the insertion depth ranges of the five phase points by
using musculoskeletal ultrasound: a pilot study.

Park M(1), Kim S.

Author information: 
(1)Wonkwang University Oriental Medical Hospital, Department of Acupuncture &
Moxibustion, Gwangju, South Korea.

OBJECTIVES: We conducted preliminary research to validate the insertion depth
ranges of the five phase points by using ultrasonography.
DESIGN AND SETTING: The insertion depth ranges of the five phase points were
investigated by reviewing acupuncture and moxibustion literature. The following
lengths were measured in centimetres in order to substitute B-cun values with
centimetre values: the distance from the cubital crease to the palmar crease,
from the inferior border of the medial tibia condyle to the medial malleolus, and
from the popliteal crease to the prominence of the lateral malleolus. The five
phase points were represented by pen marks on the skin, per the World Health
Organization acupuncture point specifications. The anatomical structures of the
five phase points within the insertion depth ranges were observed using colour
Doppler ultrasound.
RESULTS: The five phase points for which the insertion depth ranges needed to be 
modified were LU11, HT9, PC9, LI1, LI2, SI1, SI2, TE1, ST45, BL66, GB44, SP1,
SP2, LR1, and BL67. The five phase points that required careful insertion of
acupuncture needles were LU8, LU9, LU10, LI5, ST36, ST41, SP3, HT4, HT7, HT8,
SI3, SI8, BL40, KI2, KI3, KI10, KI27, GB34, GB38, LR3, and LR4.
CONCLUSION: This preliminary study provided evidence on the insertion depths in
acupuncture treatment. To generate more concrete evidence regarding insertion
depths, further research should be conducted in a participant group with more
diverse body mass index (BMI) values by using acupoint-specific ultrasonography
transducers that can measure the acupoints properly.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24280473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Org Lett. 2013 Dec 20;15(24):6202-5. doi: 10.1021/ol4030452. Epub 2013 Nov 26.

Palladium-catalyzed arylation of cyclopropanes via directing group-mediated
C(sp3)-H bond activation to construct quaternary carbon centers: synthesis of
cis- and trans-1,1,2-trisubstituted chiral cyclopropanes.

Hoshiya N(1), Kobayashi T, Arisawa M, Shuto S.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Center for Research and Education on
Drug Development, Hokkaido University , Kita-12, Nishi-6, Kita-ku, Sapporo
060-0812, Japan.

Pd(II)-catalyzed tertiary C(sp(3))-H arylation of cyclopropanes via directing
group-mediated C-H activation for the construction of a chiral quaternary carbon 
center on cyclopropanes using aryl iodides as a coupling partner is reported. The
arylation had a wide substrate scope and good functional group tolerance,
including heteroaryl iodides, to provide various chiral arylcyclopropanes with
the cis- and trans-1,1,2-trisubstituted structures.

PMID: 24279330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Org Lett. 2013 Dec 6;15(23):5986-9. doi: 10.1021/ol402869h. Epub 2013 Nov 20.

Nickel or phenanthroline mediated intramolecular arylation of sp3 C-H bonds using
aryl halides.

Wertjes WC(1), Wolfe LC, Waller PJ, Kalyani D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, St. Olaf College , 1520 St. Olaf Avenue, Northfield, 
Minnesota 55057, United States.

The development of the intramolecular arylation of sp(3) C-H bonds adjacent to
nitrogen using aryl halides is described. Arylation was accomplished using either
Ni(COD)2 or 1,10-phenanthroline in substoichiometric amounts, and the reaction
conditions were applied to a variety of electronically differentiated benzamide
substrates. Preliminary studies suggest a mechanism involving aryl and alkyl
radical intermediates.

PMCID: PMC3946489
PMID: 24256509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Chem Commun (Camb). 2014 Jan 11;50(3):341-3. doi: 10.1039/c3cc47015f. Epub 2013
Nov 15.

Amide bond formation via C(sp3)-H bond functionalization and CO insertion.

Liu H(1), Laurenczy G, Yan N, Dyson PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institut des Sciences et Ingénierie Chimiques, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de
Lausanne (EPFL), CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. Paul.Dyson@epfl.ch.

An efficient method for the synthesis of amides via Pd-catalyzed oxidative
carbonylation of C(sp(3))-H bonds with CO and amines is described. The route
efficiently provides substituted phenyl amides from alkanes.

PMID: 24244940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Eur J Neurosci. 2014 Feb;39(4):566-78. doi: 10.1111/ejn.12415. Epub 2013 Nov 12.

Regulation of Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase by neuron-specific transcription factor Sp4:
implication in the tight coupling of energy production, neuronal activity and
energy consumption in neurons.

Johar K(1), Priya A, Wong-Riley MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology, and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Road, Milwaukee, WI, 53226, USA.

A major source of energy demand in neurons is the Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase pump that
restores the ionic gradient across the plasma membrane subsequent to depolarizing
neuronal activity. The energy comes primarily from mitochondrial oxidative
metabolism, of which cytochrome c oxidase (COX) is a key enzyme. Recently, we
found that all 13 subunits of COX are regulated by specificity (Sp) factors, and 
that the neuron-specific Sp4, but not Sp1 or Sp3, regulates the expression of key
glutamatergic receptor subunits as well. The present study sought to test our
hypothesis that Sp4 also regulates Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase subunit genes in neurons. By
means of multiple approaches, including in silico analysis, electrophoretic
mobility shift and supershift assays, chromatin immunoprecipitation, promoter
mutational analysis, over-expression, and RNA interference studies, we found that
Sp4, with minor contributions from Sp1 and Sp3, functionally regulate the Atp1a1,
Atp1a3, and Atp1b1 subunit genes of Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase in neurons. Transcripts of 
all three genes were up-regulated by depolarizing KCl stimulation and
down-regulated by the impulse blocker tetrodotoxin (TTX), indicating that their
expression was activity-dependent. Silencing of Sp4 blocked the up-regulation of 
these genes induced by KCl, whereas over-expression of Sp4 rescued them from
TTX-induced suppression. The effect of silencing or over-expressing Sp4 on
primary neurons was much greater than those of Sp1 or Sp3. The binding sites of
Sp factors on these genes are conserved among mice, rats and humans. Thus, Sp4
plays an important role in the transcriptional coupling of energy generation and 
energy consumption in neurons.

© 2013 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4017901
PMID: 24219545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2014 Jan 3;53(1):74-100. doi: 10.1002/anie.201304268.
Epub 2013 Nov 8.

The cross-dehydrogenative coupling of C(sp3)-H bonds: a versatile strategy for
C-C bond formations.

Girard SA(1), Knauber T, Li CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and FQRNT Center for Green Chemistry and Catalysis,
McGill University, 801 Sherbrooke St. W., Montréal, Quebec H3A 0B8 (Canada)
http://cjli.mcgill.ca.

Over the last decade, substantial research has led to the introduction of an
impressive number of efficient procedures which allow the selective construction 
of C<U+F8FF>C bonds by directly connecting two different C<U+F8FF>H bonds under oxidative
conditions. Common to these methodologies is the generation of the reactive
intermediates in situ by activation of both C<U+F8FF>H bonds. This strategy was
introduced by the group of Li as cross-dehydrogenative coupling (CDC) and
discloses waste-minimized synthetic alternatives to classic coupling procedures
which rely on the use of prefunctionalized starting materials. This Review
highlights the recent progress in the field of cross-dehydrogenative C<U+2009>sp<U+2009>3<U+F8FF>C
formations and provides a comprehensive overview on existing procedures and
employed methodologies.

Copyright © 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24214829  [PubMed]


327. Genome Res. 2014 Feb;24(2):300-9. doi: 10.1101/gr.156224.113. Epub 2013 Nov 8.

Discovery of recurrent structural variants in nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Valouev A(1), Weng Z, Sweeney RT, Varma S, Le QT, Kong C, Sidow A, West RB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bioinformatics, Department of Preventive Medicine, University of
Southern California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90087, USA;

We present the discovery of genes recurrently involved in structural variation in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) and the identification of a novel type of somatic 
structural variant. We identified the variants with high complexity mate-pair
libraries and a novel computational algorithm specifically designed for
tumor-normal comparisons, SMASH. SMASH combines signals from split reads and
mate-pair discordance to detect somatic structural variants. We demonstrate a
>90% validation rate and a breakpoint reconstruction accuracy of 3 bp by Sanger
sequencing. Our approach identified three in-frame gene fusions (YAP1-MAML2,
PTPLB-RSRC1, and SP3-PTK2) that had strong levels of expression in corresponding 
NPC tissues. We found two cases of a novel type of structural variant, which we
call "coupled inversion," one of which produced the YAP1-MAML2 fusion. To
investigate whether the identified fusion genes are recurrent, we performed
fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) to screen 196 independent NPC cases. We 
observed recurrent rearrangements of MAML2 (three cases), PTK2 (six cases), and
SP3 (two cases), corresponding to a combined rate of structural variation
recurrence of 6% among tested NPC tissues.

PMCID: PMC3912420
PMID: 24214394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Anim Reprod Sci. 2013 Dec;143(1-4):64-71. doi: 10.1016/j.anireprosci.2013.10.003.
Epub 2013 Oct 21.

Relationship between conventional semen characteristics, sperm motility patterns 
and fertility of Andalusian donkeys (Equus asinus).

Dorado J(1), Acha D, Ortiz I, Gálvez MJ, Carrasco JJ, Díaz B, Gómez-Arrones V,
Calero-Carretero R, Hidalgo M.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Reproduction Group, Department of Medicine and Animal Surgery, Faculty 
of Veterinary Medicine, University of Cordoba, 14071 Córdoba, Spain. Electronic
address: jdorado@uco.es.

Sperm quality has an important role in determining fertility. The aims of this
study were to compare the conventional sperm parameters, plus the characteristics
of the motility patterns of the different sperm subpopulations, of donkey donors 
with different fertility level, and to determine their relationships to
fertility. Thirty ejaculates from 6 Andalusian donkeys were assessed for gel-free
volume, pH, sperm concentration, motility and morphology. The fertility of
donkeys was classified on the basis of pregnancy rates per cycle, where donkeys
with a per cycle pregnancy rate =60% were considered to be "fertile" (n=3) and
those with a per cycle pregnancy rate <40% were categorized to be "sub-fertile"
(n=3). Significant differences (P<0.001) between the "fertile" and the
"sub-fertile" group were found for total and progressive motility, and for
straight line velocity. Sperm variables associated (P<0.05) with an increase in
percent pregnant per cycle included total motility (r=0.37), progressive motility
(r=0.53), curvilinear velocity (r=0.44), straightness (r=0.39), beat cross
frequency (r=0.44), and gel-free volume (r=0.53). Four sperm subpopulations (sP) 
were identified in fresh semen: sP1 (slow and non-progressive spermatozoa, 20%), 
sP2 (moderately slow but progressive spermatozoa, 71.2%), sP3 (highly active but 
non-progressive spermatozoa, 2.9%), and sP4 (highly active and progressive
spermatozoa, 5.9%). The lowest percentage (3.1%; P<0.001) of sP4 spermatozoa was 
observed in the "sub-fertile" group. Three of the sperm subpopulations were
related (P<0.05) to fertility (sP2, r=0.54; sP3, r=0.45; sP4, r=0.56). In
conclusion, we were able to relate the fertility of donkeys with in vitro
measures of sperm motility using computer-assisted sperm analysis techniques.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24210876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Chemistry. 2013 Dec 9;19(50):16906-9. doi: 10.1002/chem.201303311. Epub 2013 Nov 
7.

Ligand-metal cooperating PC(sp3)P pincer complexes as catalysts in olefin
hydroformylation.

Musa S(1), Filippov OA, Belkova NV, Shubina ES, Silantyev GA, Ackermann L, Gelman
D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemistry, The Hebrew University, Edmond Safra Campus, 91904
Jerusalem (Israel), Fax: (+972)<U+2009>2-6585279.

PMID: 24203915  [PubMed]


330. J Am Chem Soc. 2013 Nov 20;135(46):17282-5. doi: 10.1021/ja409404k. Epub 2013 Nov
7.

C(sp3)-H bond hydroxylation catalyzed by myoglobin reconstituted with manganese
porphycene.

Oohora K(1), Kihira Y, Mizohata E, Inoue T, Hayashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Chemistry, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka
University , Suita, 565-0871, Japan.

Myoglobin reconstituted with manganese porphycene was prepared in an effort to
generate a new biocatalyst and was characterized by spectroscopic techniques. The
X-ray crystal structure of the reconstituted protein reveals that the artificial 
cofactor is located in the intrinsic heme-binding site with weak ligation by
His93. Interestingly, the reconstituted protein catalyzes the H2O2-dependent
hydroxylation of ethylbenzene to yield 1-phenylethanol as a single product with a
turnover number of 13 at 25 °C and pH 8.5. Native myoglobin and other modified
myoglobins do not catalyze C-H hydroxylation of alkanes. Isotope effect
experiments yield KIE values of 2.4 and 6.1 for ethylbenzene and toluene,
respectively. Kinetic data, log kobs versus BDE(C(sp(3))-H) for ethylbenzene,
toluene, and cyclohexane, indicate a linear relationship with a negative slope.
These findings clearly indicate that the reaction occurs via a rate-determining
step that involves hydrogen-atom abstraction by a Mn(O) species and a subsequent 
rebound hydroxylation process which is similar to the reaction mechanism of
cytochrome P450.

PMID: 24191678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Oncol Rep. 2014 Jan;31(1):117-24. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2811. Epub 2013 Oct 24.

Combination of quercetin and hyperoside has anticancer effects on renal cancer
cells through inhibition of oncogenic microRNA-27a.

Li W(1), Liu M, Xu YF, Feng Y, Che JP, Wang GC, Zheng JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji University,
Shanghai 200072, P.R. China.

Quercetin and hyperoside (QH) in combination (1:1 ratio) have previously been
shown to inhibit the growth of human leukemia cells. Here, we investigated the
anticancer activity of the same mixture in 786-O renal cancer cells. QH decreased
the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) by up to 2.25-fold and increased 
the antioxidant capacity by up to 3-fold in 786-O cells (3.8-60 µg/ml), whereas
IC50 values for viability were 18.2, 18.7 and 11.8 µg/ml, respectively. QH also
induced caspase-3 cleavage (2-fold) and increased PARP cleavage. Specificity
protein (Sp) transcription factors are overexpressed in cancer cells and regulate
genes required for cell proliferation, survival and angiogenesis. QH treatment
decreased the expression of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 mRNA and this was accompanied by
decreased protein expression. Moreover, expression of the Sp-dependent
anti-apoptotic survival gene survivin was also significantly reduced, both at the
mRNA and protein levels. QH decreased microRNA-27a (miR-27a) and induced the zinc
finger protein ZBTB10, an Sp-repressor, suggesting that interactions between QH
and the miR-27a-ZBTB10 axis play a role in Sp downregulation. This was confirmed 
by transfection of cells with a specific mimic for miR-27a, which partially
reversed the effects of QH. These findings are consistent with previous studies
on botanical anticancer agents in colon cancer cells.

PMID: 24173369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. World J Gastroenterol. 2013 Oct 14;19(38):6438-46. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v19.i38.6438.

HER2 in gastric cancer: comparative analysis of three different antibodies using 
whole-tissue sections and tissue microarrays.

Abrahão-Machado LF(1), Jácome AA, Wohnrath DR, dos Santos JS, Carneseca EC,
Fregnani JH, Scapulatempo-Neto C.

Author information: 
(1)Lucas Faria Abrahão-Machado, Cristovam Scapulatempo-Neto, Department of
Pathology, Barretos Cancer Hospital, Barretos, Sao Paulo 14784-400, Brazil.

AIM: To compare the performance of three commercially available anti-human
epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) antibodies in whole-tissue sections and
tissue microarrays (TMAs) of a series of gastric tumors.
METHODS: We present a comparative analysis of three anti-HER2 antibodies
(HercepTest, 4B5 and SP3) using TMA and whole-tissue sections prepared from the
same paraffin blocks of 199 gastric adenocarcinomas operated upon between January
2004 and December 2008 at a Brazilian cancer hospital. The data on the patients' 
age, sex, the anatomical location of the tumor and the Lauren's histological
classification were collected from clinical and pathological records. The
immunohistochemical (IHC) results were examined by two pathologists and the cases
were classified as positive (3+), equivocal (2+) and negative (0 or 1+),
according to the criteria of the IHC scoring system of gastric cancer. TMAs and
whole-tissue sections were evaluated separately and independently. All cases
yielding discordant IHC results and/or scored as 2+ were subjected to dual-color 
in situ hybridization in order to determine the final HER2 status. Besides
determining the sensitivity and predictive value for HER2-positive status, we
measured the accuracy of each antibody by calculating the area under the receiver
operating characteristic (ROC) curve. The agreement between the results obtained 
using the TMAs and those obtained using the whole-tissue sections was assessed by
means of Kappa coefficient.
RESULTS: Intratumoral heterogeneity of HER2 expression was observed with all
antibodies. HER2-positive expression (3+) in the whole-tissue sections was
observed in 23 cases (11.6%) using the 4B5 antibody, in 18 cases (9.1%) using the
SP3 antibody and in 10 cases (5.1%) using the HercepTest antibody. In the TMAs,
11 positive cases (5.6%) were identified using SP3 antibody, 9 (4.6%) using the
4B5 antibody and 6 (3%) using the HercepTest antibody. The sensitivity using
whole-tissue sections and TMA, respectively, was 95.2% and 42.9% with 4B5, 90.5% 
and 66.7% with SP3 and 47.6% and 42.9% with HercepTest. The accuracy, calculated 
from the area under the ROC curve, using whole-tissue sections and TMA,
respectively, was 0.91 and 0.79 by 4B5, 0.86 and 0.80 by SP3 and 0.73 and 0.71 by
HercepTest. The concordance of the results obtained using whole-tissue sections
and TMA was 97.4% (Kappa 0.75) using HercepTest, 85.6% (Kappa 0.56) using SP3 and
84.1% (Kappa 0.38) using 4B5.
CONCLUSION: The use of the 4B5 antibody on whole-tissue sections was the most
accurate IHC method for evaluating HER2 expression in gastric adenocarcinoma.

PMCID: PMC3801314
PMID: 24151362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. J Hazard Mater. 2013 Nov 15;262:796-804. doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2013.09.017. Epub
2013 Sep 17.

Growth, physiological response and phytoremoval capability of two willow clones
exposed to ibuprofen under hydroponic culture.

Iori V(1), Zacchini M, Pietrini F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Agro-environmental and Forest Biology, CNR-National Research
Council of Italy, Via Salaria Km. 29,300, 00015, Monterotondo Scalo, Roma, Italy.

Ibuprofen (IBU) is one of the most widespread pharmaceuticals in the aquatic
ecosystem, despite the high removal rate that occurs in wastewater treatment
plants. Phytoremediation represents a technology to improve the performance of
existing wastewater treatment. This study was conducted under hydroponics to
evaluate the ability of Salicaceae plants to tolerate and reduce IBU
concentration in contaminated water. To this end, we combined growth,
physiological and biochemical data to study the effects of different IBU
concentrations on two clones of Salix alba L. Data demonstrated that clone SS5
was more tolerant and showed a higher ability to reduce IBU concentration in the 
solution than clone SP3. The high tolerance to IBU shown by SS5 was likely due to
several mechanisms including the capacity to maintain an elevated photosynthetic 
activity and an efficient antioxidative defence. These results illustrate the
remarkable potential of willow to phytoremediate IBU-contaminated waters in
natural and constructed wetlands.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24140530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Inorg Chem. 2013 Nov 4;52(21):12691-701. doi: 10.1021/ic401915b. Epub 2013 Oct
16.

Heteroscorpionate magnesium alkyls bearing unprecedented apical s-C(sp3)-mg
bonds: heteroselective ring-opening polymerization of rac-lactide.

Garcés A(1), Sánchez-Barba LF, Fernández-Baeza J, Otero A, Honrado M,
Lara-Sánchez A, Rodríguez AM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Inorgánica y Analítica, Universidad Rey Juan Carlos , 
Móstoles-28933-Madrid, Spain.

The previously described reaction of the low sterically hindered
heteroscorpionate lithium acetamidinates [Li(<U+03BA>(3)-pbpamd)(THF)] and
[Li(<U+03BA>(3)-tbpamd)(THF)] with a series of commercially available Grignard reagents 
RMgCl in an equimolecular ratio yielded the magnesium monoalkyls
[Mg(R)(<U+03BA>(3)-NNN)] (NNN = pbpamd, R = CH2SiMe3, Et (1), Bn (2); NNN = tbpamd, R = 
CH2SiMe3, Et (3), Bn (4)). However, subsequent reaction of these monoalkyls
[Mg(R)(<U+03BA>(3)-NNN)] with two additional equivalents of the same RMgCl in
tetrahydrofuran gave rise to dinuclear dialkyls of the type
[RMg(<U+03BA>(3)-N,N,N;<U+03BA>(2)-C,N)MgR(thf)] (<U+03BA>(3)-N,N,N;<U+03BA>(2)-C,N = pbpamd(-), R = CH2SiMe3
(5), Et (6); <U+03BA>(3)-N,N,N;<U+03BA>(2)-C,N = tbpamd(-), R = CH2SiMe3 (7), Et (8)).
Furthermore, when the reaction was carried out in a mixture of
tetrahydrofuran/dioxane with the same stoichiometry, a new family of tetranuclear
tetraalkyl magnesium complexes [{RMg(<U+03BA>(3)-N,N,N;<U+03BA>(2)-C,N)MgR}2{µ-O,O-(C4H8)}]
(<U+03BA>(3)-N,N,N;<U+03BA>(2)-C,N = pbpamd(-), R = CH2SiMe3 (9), Et (10), Bn (11);
<U+03BA>(3)-N,N,N;<U+03BA>(2)-C,N = tbpamd(-), R = CH2SiMe3 (12), Et (13), Bn (14)) was
obtained. In both families, an apical methine C-H activation process on the
heteroscorpionate takes place. The single-crystal X-ray structures of 4, 8, 9,
and 12 confirm the nuclearity of each family, with 4-coordinative arrangements
for all magnesium atoms. More importantly, the presence in the di- and
tetranuclear complexes of unprecedented apical carbanions with a direct
s-C(sp(3))-Mg covalent bond, and as a result, the existence of stereogenic
magnesium centers, have been unambiguously confirmed. Interestingly, the
dinuclear dialkyls 5 and 7, as well as the tetranuclear tetraalkyls 9, 10, and
12, can act as highly efficient single-component living initiators for the
ring-opening polymerization of e-caprolactone and lactides. Lactide (LA)
polymerizations afforded polylactide (PLA) materials with medium molecular
weights in only a few minutes even at 20 °C for L-LA and in a few hours at 50 °C 
for rac-LA propagations. More importantly, microstructural analysis of the
poly(rac-lactide) materials revealed that the tetranuclear tetra-alkyl 12 exerts 
enhanced levels of heteroselectivity on the PLAs under mild conditions, with Ps
values up to 0.78.

PMID: 24131220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Chem Commun (Camb). 2013 Nov 28;49(92):10817-9. doi: 10.1039/c3cc45861j.

Oxidative 1,2-difunctionalization of activated alkenes with benzylic C(sp3)-H
bonds and aryl C(sp2)-H bonds.

Zhou MB(1), Wang CY, Song RJ, Liu Y, Wei WT, Li JH.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensing and Chemometrics, College of
Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China.
jhli@hnu.edu.cn.

DTBP (di-tert-butyl peroxide) is utilized to mediate oxidative
1,2-difunctionalization of activated alkenes with an aryl C(sp(2))-H bond and a
benzylic C(sp(3))-H bond for the synthesis of functionalized oxindoles. This
reaction is a new organomediated strategy for alkene difunctionalization
facilitated by Lewis acids.

PMID: 24113153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2013 Nov 4;52(45):11726-43. doi: 10.1002/anie.201301451. 
Epub 2013 Sep 17.

Catalytic functionalization of C(sp2)-H and C(sp3)-H bonds by using bidentate
directing groups.

Rouquet G(1), Chatani N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Chemistry, Faculty of Engineering, Osaka University,
Suita, Osaka 565-0871 (Japan).

C-H bonds are ubiquitous in organic compounds. It would, therefore, appear that
direct functionalization of substrates by activation of C-H bonds would eliminate
the multiple steps and limitations associated with the preparation of
functionalized starting materials. Regioselectivity is an important issue because
organic molecules can contain a wide variety of C-H bonds. The use of a directing
group can largely overcome the issue of regiocontrol by allowing the catalyst to 
come into proximity with the targeted C-H bonds. A wide variety of functional
groups have been evaluated for use as directing groups in the transformation of
C-H bonds. In 2005, Daugulis reported the arylation of unactivated C(sp(3))-H
bonds by using 8-aminoquinoline and picolinamide as bidentate directing groups,
with Pd(OAc)2 as the catalyst. Encouraged by these promising results, a number of
transformations of C-H bonds have since been developed by using systems based on 
bidentate directing groups. In this Review, recent advances in this area are
discussed.

Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24105797  [PubMed]


337. Org Lett. 2013 Oct 18;15(20):5210-3. doi: 10.1021/ol402736v. Epub 2013 Oct 8.

Palladium-catalyzed C(sp2 and sp3)-H activation/C-O bond formation: synthesis of 
benzoxaphosphole 1- and 2-oxides.

Eom D(1), Jeong Y, Kim YR, Lee E, Choi W, Lee PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Kangwon National University , Chuncheon 200-701,
Republic of Korea.

An efficient synthetic method of benzoxaphosphole 1- and 2-oxides is reported
from phosphonic and phosphinic acids without prefunctionalization through a
Pd-catalyzed C(sp(2) and sp(3))-H activation/C-O bond formation under aerobic
conditions.

PMID: 24102336  [PubMed]


338. Immunol Cell Biol. 2013 Nov-Dec;91(10):634-41. doi: 10.1038/icb.2013.57. Epub
2013 Oct 8.

Redox balance of mouse medullary CD4 single-positive thymocytes.

Jin R(1), Teng F, Xu X, Yao Y, Zhang S, Sun X, Zhang Y, Ge Q.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Medical Immunology, Department of Immunology, Ministry of
Health, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing, China.

After positive selection, the newly differentiated single-positive (SP)
thymocytes undergo negative selection to eliminate autoreactive T cells,
functional maturation to acquire immunocompetence and egress capability. To
investigate whether the intracellular reduction/oxidation (redox) balance has an 
important role on SP maturation, the levels of intracellular reactive oxygen
species (ROS) and the expression of proteins that regulate ROS were compared
among the four subsets of mouse TCRaß(+)CD4(+)CD8(-) thymocytes (SP1-SP4) that
represent sequential stages of SP differentiation program. A gradual increase of 
ROS and a gradual decrease of thioredoxin were revealed along the SP maturation
process. The high ROS level at the mature SP stage did not result from a specific
enrichment at this stage of natural regulatory T cells and SP thymocytes
undergoing negative selection (Helios positive). An increase of ROS in the most
mature SP4 cells resulted in enhanced cytokine production upon stimulation,
whereas an early increase of ROS in the immature SP1 thymocytes resulted in
enhanced apoptosis. Aire(-/-) mice that have defects in negative selection and a 
developmental blockage at the SP3-SP4 transition showed significantly less ROS in
SP3 thymocytes. Thymic epithelial cells that have been shown to promote SP
maturation in vitro also increased the ROS level of SP thymocytes. These results 
suggest that ROS may be involved in promoting the functional maturation of CD4(+)
SPs and thymic medullary microenvironment contributes to the pro-oxidant shift of
SP thymocytes.

PMID: 24100390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. J Org Chem. 2013 Oct 4;78(19):9689-714. doi: 10.1021/jo4013628. Epub 2013 Sep 19.

Scope and limitations of auxiliary-assisted, palladium-catalyzed arylation and
alkylation of sp2 and sp3 C-H bonds.

Nadres ET(1), Santos GI, Shabashov D, Daugulis O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Houston , Houston, Texas 77204, United 
States.

The scope of palladium-catalyzed, auxiliary-assisted direct arylation and
alkylation of sp(2) and sp(3) C-H bonds of amine and carboxylic acid derivatives 
has been investigated. The method employs a palladium acetate catalyst,
substrate, aryl, alkyl, benzyl, or allyl halide, and inorganic base in tert-amyl 
alcohol or water solvent at 100-140 °C. Aryl and alkyl iodides as well as benzyl 
and allyl bromides are competent reagents in this transformation. The picolinic
acid auxiliary is used for amine <U+03B3>-functionalization, and the 8-aminoquinoline
auxiliary is used for carboxylic acid ß-functionalization. Some optimization of
base, additives, and solvent is required for achieving best results.

PMCID: PMC3829615
PMID: 24090404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Org Lett. 2013 Oct 18;15(20):5270-3. doi: 10.1021/ol402494e. Epub 2013 Oct 3.

Palladium-catalyzed sp2 and sp3 C-H bond activation and addition to isatin toward
3-hydroxy-2-oxindoles.

Wang GW(1), Zhou AX, Wang JJ, Hu RB, Yang SD.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Applied Organic Chemistry, Lanzhou University ,
Lanzhou 730000, P. R. China, and State Key Laboratory for Oxo Synthesis and
Selective Oxidation, Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics , Lanzhou 730000, P.
R. China.

The first Pd(II)-catalyzed C-H addition to isatins by direct sp(2)/sp(3) C-H bond
activation for the construction of 3-substituted-3-hydroxy-2-oxindoles is
reported. The bidentate nitrogen ligands were found to promote this reaction.
Specifically, the preliminary bioassay indicated that
3-(5-chlorobenzoxazole)-3-hydroxy-N-benzyl-2-oxindole (2w) is a new inhibitor of 
human kidney cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma cells. Moreover, this reaction
system exhibits great functional group tolerance and requires no directing group,
extra base, or additives.

PMID: 24090099  [PubMed]


341. Beilstein J Org Chem. 2013 Aug 21;9:1718-23. doi: 10.3762/bjoc.9.197. eCollection
2013.

Iron-catalyzed decarboxylative alkenylation of cycloalkanes with arylvinyl
carboxylic acids via a radical process.

Zhao J(1), Fang H, Han J, Pan Y.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, State of Key Laboratory of
Coordination, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210093, China.

A Fe(acac)3-catalyzed decarboxylative coupling of 2-(aryl)vinyl carboxylic acids 
with cycloalkanes was developed by using DTBP as an oxidant through a radical
process. This reaction tolerates a wide range of substrates, and products are
obtained in good to excellent yields (71-95%). The reaction also shows excellent 
stereoselectivity, and only trans-isomers are obtained.

PMCID: PMC3778410
PMID: 24062833  [PubMed]


342. Allergol Int. 2013 Dec;62(4):447-62. doi: 10.2332/allergolint.12-OA-0522. Epub
2013 Sep 25.

Characterization and gene cloning of an acidic thaumatin-like protein (TLP 1), an
allergen from sapodilla fruit (Manilkara zapota).

Ashok Kumar HG(1), Hegde VL, Shetty SM, Venkatesh YP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Nutrition, Central Food Technological Research 
Institute (CFTRI), Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, Mysore,
Karnataka, India.

Comment in
    Allergol Int. 2013 Dec;62(4):401-2.

BACKGROUND: Allergy to sapodilla (Manilkara zapota) fruit ingestion is rare. An
independent study from our group has identified a basic thaumatin-like protein
(TLP 2) as the major allergen. The present study was aimed at identifying and
characterizing additional allergens from sapodilla.
METHODS: Allergic subjects were identified by case history, skin prick test (SPT)
and allergen-specific IgE. Sapodilla extract was fractionated using SP-Sepharose 
into 3 components (SP1, SP2 and SP3) which were analyzed by native/SDS-PAGE,
IgE-immunoblot, isoelectric focusing (IEF) and N-terminal sequencing. The
conserved regions of plant TLPs and the N-terminal sequence were used to design
primers for PCR.
RESULTS: SPT and ELISA confirmed a subject with oral allergy syndrome (OAS) to
sapodilla and custard apple. Two proteins (26.9 and 24.5kDa; reducing conditions)
were detected as allergens, of which the latter in SP2 has already been
identified as basic TLP (TLP 2). The 26.9kDa protein present in SP1 was
identified as an acidic TLP based on native PAGE, IEF and N-terminal sequencing. 
Presence of a basic ß-1,3-glucanase in SP3 was inferred by zymography. Sequence
analysis of the genomic clone of the acidic TLP gene revealed that it is
intronless and non-glycosylated. Evolutionary relatedness to olive, grape and
kiwi fruit allergenic TLPs were inferred by phylogenetic analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: An acidic TLP (TLP 1) was identified as a new allergen in sapodilla.
TLP 1 is a single polypeptide (207 residues) belonging to the thaumatin family of
the GH64-TLP-SF superfamily. Clinically, sapodilla should be considered in the
list of fruits causing OAS.

PMID: 24060761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Nat Chem. 2013 Oct;5(10):840-5. doi: 10.1038/nchem.1711. Epub 2013 Jul 21.

Brightening of carbon nanotube photoluminescence through the incorporation of sp3
defects.

Piao Y(1), Meany B, Powell LR, Valley N, Kwon H, Schatz GC, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Maryland, College
Park, Maryland 20742, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Chem. 2013 Oct;5(10):812-3.

Semiconducting carbon nanotubes promise a broad range of potential applications
in optoelectronics and imaging, but their photon-conversion efficiency is
relatively low. Quantum theory suggests that nanotube photoluminescence is
intrinsically inefficient because of low-lying 'dark' exciton states. Here we
demonstrate the significant brightening of nanotube photoluminescence (up to
28-fold) through the creation of an optically allowed defect state that resides
below the predicted energy level of the dark excitons. Emission from this new
state generates a photoluminescence peak that is red-shifted by as much as 254
meV from the nanotube's original excitonic transition. We also found that the
attachment of electron-withdrawing substituents to carbon nanotubes
systematically drives this defect state further down the energy ladder. Our
experiments show that the material's photoluminescence quantum yield increases
exponentially as a function of the shifted emission energy. This work lays the
foundation for chemical control of defect quantum states in low-dimensional
carbon materials.

PMID: 24056340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Mol Carcinog. 2015 Jan;54(1):24-34. doi: 10.1002/mc.22071. Epub 2013 Sep 4.

The DNA hypomethylating agent, 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, enhances tumor cell
invasion through a transcription-dependent modulation of MMP-1 expression in
human fibrosarcoma cells.

Poplineau M(1), Schnekenburger M, Dufer J, Kosciarz A, Brassart-Pasco S,
Antonicelli F, Diederich M, Trussardi-Régnier A.

Author information: 
(1)Unité MEDyC, URCA-CNRS FRE 3481, SFR Cap Santé, Faculté de Pharmacie,
Université de Reims Champagne-Ardenne, 1 avenue du Maréchal Juin, 51096, Reims,
France.

In diseases such as cancer, cells need to degrade the extracellular matrix (ECM) 
and therefore require high protease levels. Thus, aberrant tissue degradation is 
associated to matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) overexpression resulting from
different mechanisms including epigenetic events. One of the most characterized
epigenetic mechanisms is DNA methylation causing changes in chromatin
conformation, thereby decreasing the accessibility to the transcriptional
machinery and resulting in a robust gene silencing. Modulation of DNA methylation
by DNA hypomethylating agents such as 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-azadC) is widely 
used in epigenetic anticancer treatments. Here, we focus on the effects of this
drug on the expression level of MMP-1, -2, and -9 in human HT1080 fibrosarcoma
cells. We demonstrate that 5-azadC increases MMP expression at both mRNA and
protein levels, and promotes invasion potential of HT1080 cells. Using
broad-spectrum and specific MMP inhibitors, we establish that MMP-1, but not
MMP-2 and -9, plays a key role in 5-azadC-enhanced cell invasion. We show that
5-azadC induces MMP-1 expression through a transcriptional mechanism without
affecting MMP-1 promoter methylation status. Finally, we demonstrate that 5-azadC
treatment increases the nuclear levels of Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors, and 
modulates their recruitment to the MMP-1 promoter, resulting in chromatin
remodeling associated to 5-azadC-induced MMP-1 expression. All together, our data
indicate that the hypomethylating agent 5-azadC modulates, mainly via Sp1
recruitment, MMP-1 expression resulting in an increased invasive potential of
HT1080 cells.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24038389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2013 Oct 28;15(40):17619-25. doi: 10.1039/c3cp50946j.

sp3-Bonded silicon allotropes based on the Kelvin problem.

Zhao HY(1), Wang J, Ma QM, Liu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics and Hebei Advanced Thin Film Laboratory, Hebei Normal
University, Shijiazhuang 050024, Hebei, China. yliu@hebtu.edu.cn.

The Kelvin problem, how to partition three-dimensional space into cells of equal 
volume with minimal area, is a fascinating one. Aggregations of bubbles are
naturally physical illustrations of the Kelvin problem. And the superconductor
Na8Si46 as an inspiration leads to an amazing discovery of the Weaire-Phelan (WP)
structure of foam - the optimal solution to the Kelvin problem to date. Here
based on the structural similarity between sp(3)-bonded silicon allotropes and
the solutions to the Kelvin problem, a series of new sp(3)-hybridization silicon 
allotropes, named "Kelvin Silicons", are presented. Furthermore, the structural
stability and electronic properties of these new silicon allotropes are
investigated using density-functional theory (DFT) calculations. The results show
that Kelvin Silicons are structurally stable semiconductors with indirect
bandgaps in the range of 0.17-1.40 eV, and their bulk moduli are about 75.9-88.5%
that of the diamond phase. The simulated X-ray diffraction spectra of the new
silicon crystalline structures would provide more information for possible
experimental observations and synthesis.

PMID: 24036687  [PubMed]


346. Mol Cancer Ther. 2013 Nov;12(11):2483-93. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0486.
Epub 2013 Sep 12.

The cannabinoid WIN 55,212-2 decreases specificity protein transcription factors 
and the oncogenic cap protein eIF4E in colon cancer cells.

Sreevalsan S(1), Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Corresponding Author: Stephen Safe, Department of Veterinary Physiology and
Pharmacology, Texas A&M University, 4466 TAMU, College Station, TX 77843-4466.
ssafe@cvm.tamu.edu.

2,3-Dihydro-5-methyl-3-([morpholinyl]methyl)pyrollo(1,2,3-de)-1,4-benzoxazinyl]-[
1-naphthaleny]methanone [WIN 55,212-2, (WIN)] is a synthetic cannabinoid that
inhibits RKO, HT-29, and SW480 cell growth, induced apoptosis, and downregulated 
expression of survivin, cyclin D1, EGF receptor (EGFR), VEGF, and its receptor
(VEGFR1). WIN also decreased expression of specificity protein (Sp) transcription
factors Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4, and this is consistent with the observed
downregulation of the aforementioned Sp-regulated genes. In addition, we also
observed by RNA interference (RNAi) that the oncogenic cap protein eIF4E was an
Sp-regulated gene also downregulated by WIN in colon cancer cells. WIN-mediated
repression of Sp proteins was not affected by cannabinoid receptor antagonists or
by knockdown of the receptor but was attenuated by the phosphatase inhibitor
sodium orthovanadate or by knockdown of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A).
WIN-mediated repression of Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 was due to PP2A-dependent
downregulation of microRNA-27a (miR-27a) and induction of miR-27a-regulated
ZBTB10, which has previously been characterized as an "Sp repressor." The results
show that the anticancer activity of WIN is due, in part, to PP2A-dependent
disruption of miR-27a:ZBTB10 and ZBTB10-mediated repression of Sp transcription
factors and Sp-regulated genes, including eIF4E.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC4288937
PMID: 24030632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013 Oct;24(10):1537-43. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2012111122. Epub 2013
Sep 12.

Chromosome 2q31.1 associates with ESRD in women with type 1 diabetes.

Sandholm N(1), McKnight AJ, Salem RM, Brennan EP, Forsblom C, Harjutsalo V,
Mäkinen VP, McKay GJ, Sadlier DM, Williams WW, Martin F, Panduru NM, Tarnow L,
Tuomilehto J, Tryggvason K, Zerbini G, Comeau ME, Langefeld CD; FIND Consortium, 
Godson C, Hirschhorn JN, Maxwell AP, Florez JC, Groop PH; FinnDiane Study Group
and the GENIE Consortium.

Collaborators: Koivula S, Uggeldahl T, Forslund T, Halonen A, Koistinen A,
Koskiaho P, Laukkanen M, Saltevo J, Tiihonen M, Forsen M, Granlund H, Jonsson AC,
Nyroos B, Kinnunen P, Orvola A, Salonen T, Vähänen A, Laukkanen H, Nyländen P,
Sademies A, Anderson S, Asplund B, Byskata U, Liedes P, Kuusela M, Virkkala T,
Nikkola A, Ritola E, Niska M, Saarinen H, Oukko-Ruponen E, Virtanen T, Lyytinen
A, Kari H, Simonen T, Kaprio A, Kärkkäinen J, Rantaeskola B, Kääriäinen P, Haaga 
J, Pietiläinen AL, Klemetti S, Nyandoto T, Rontu E, Satuli-Autere S, Toivonen R, 
Virtanen H, Ahonen R, Ivaska-Suomela M, Jauhiainen A, Laine M, Pellonpää T,
Puranen R, Airas A, Laakso J, Rautavaara K, Erola M, Jatkola E, Lönnblad R, Malm 
A, Mäkelä J, Rautamo E, Hentunen P, Lagerstam J, Ahola A, Feodoroff M, Gordin D, 
Heikkilä O, Hietala K, Kytö J, Lindh S, Parkkonen M, Pettersson-Fernholm K,
Rosengård-Bärlund M, Sandelin A, Salonen AR, Salovaara L, Saraheimo M, Soppela T,
Soro-Paavonen A, Thorn L, Tolonen N, Tuomikangas J, Vesisenaho T, Wadén J, Sipilä
V, Kalliomäki T, Koskelainen J, Nikkanen R, Savolainen N, Sulonen H, Valtonen E, 
Toivanen E, Parta A, Pirttiniemi I, Aranko S, Ervasti S, Kauppinen-Mäkelin R,
Kuusisto A, Leppälä T, Nikkilä K, Pekkonen L, Nuorva K, Tiihonen M, Jokelainen S,
Kemppainen P, Mankinen AM, Sankari M, Stuckey H, Suominen P, Lappalainen A,
Liimatainen M, Santaholma J, Aimolahti A, Huovinen E, Ilkka V, Lehtimäki M,
Pälikkö-Kontinen E, Vanhanen A, Koskinen E, Siitonen T, Huttunen E, Ikäheimo R,
Karhapää P, Kekäläinen P, Laakso M, Lakka T, Lampainen E, Moilanen L, Niskanen L,
Tuovinen U, Vauhkonen I, Voutilainen E, Kääriäinen T, Isopoussu E, Kilkki E,
Koskinen I, Riihelä L, Meriläinen T, Poukka P, Savolainen R, Uhlenius N, Mäkelä
A, Tanner M, Hyvärinen L, Severinkangas S, Tulokas T, Linkola P, Pulli I,
Granlund T, Saari M, Salonen T, Mäkelä A, Eloranta P, Jousmaa IM, Rinne J, Lanki 
H, Moilanen S, Tilly-Kiesi M, Gynther A, Manninen R, Nironen P, Salminen M,
Vänttinen T, Pirttiniemi I, Hänninen AM, Henttula UM, Kekäläinen P, Pietarinen M,
Rissanen A, Voutilainen M, Burgos A, Urtamo K, Jokelainen E, Jylkkä PL, Kaarlela 
E, Vuolaspuro J, Hiltunen L, Häkkinen R, Keinänen-Kiukaanniemi S, Ikäheimo R,
Haapamäki H, Helanterä A, Hämäläinen S, Ilvesmäki V, Miettinen H, Sopanen P,
Welling L, Javtsenko V, Tamminen M, Holmbäck ML, Isomaa B, Sarelin L, Ahonen P,
Merensalo P, Sävelä K, Kallio M, Rask B, Rämö S, Holma A, Honkala M, Tuomivaara
A, Vainionpää R, Laine K, Saarinen K, Salminen T, Aalto P, Juurinen E, Alanko A, 
Lapinleimu J, Rautio P, Virtanen M, Asola M, Juhola M, Kunelius P, Lahdenmäki ML,
Pääkkönen P, Rautavirta M, Korpi-Hyövälti E, Latvala T, Leijala E, Ensala T,
Hussi E, Härkönen R, Nyholm U, Toivanen J, Vaden A, Alarotu P, Kujansuu E,
Kirkkopelto-Jokinen H, Helin M, Gummerus S, Calonius L, Niskanen T, Kaitala T,
Vatanen T, Ala-Houhala I, Kuningas T, Lampinen P, Määttä M, Oksala H, Oksanen T, 
Salonen K, Tauriainen H, Tulokas S, Kivelä T, Petlin L, Savolainen L, Hämäläinen 
I, Virtamo H, Vähätalo M, Breitholz K, Eskola R, Metsärinne K, Pietilä U,
Saarinen P, Tuominen R, Äyräpää S, Mäkinen K, Sopanen P, Ojanen S, Valtonen E,
Ylönen H, Rautiainen M, Immonen T, Isomäki I, Kroneld R, Tapiolinna-Mäkelä M,
Bergkulla S, Hautamäki U, Myllyniemi VA, Rusk I.

Comment in
    J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013 Oct;24(10):1505-7.

Sex and genetic variation influence the risk of developing diabetic nephropathy
and ESRD in patients with type 1 diabetes. We performed a genome-wide association
study in a cohort of 3652 patients from the Finnish Diabetic Nephropathy
(FinnDiane) Study with type 1 diabetes to determine whether sex-specific genetic 
risk factors for ESRD exist. A common variant, rs4972593 on chromosome 2q31.1,
was associated with ESRD in women (P<5×10(-8)) but not in men (P=0.77). This
association was replicated in the meta-analysis of three independent type 1
diabetes cohorts (P=0.02) and remained significant for women (P<5×10(-8); odds
ratio, 1.81 [95% confidence interval, 1.47 to 2.24]) upon combined meta-analysis 
of the discovery and replication cohorts. rs4972593 is located between the genes 
that code for the Sp3 transcription factor, which interacts directly with
estrogen receptor a and regulates the expression of genes linked to glomerular
function and the pathogenesis of nephropathy, and the CDCA7 transcription factor,
which regulates cell proliferation. Further examination revealed potential
transcription factor-binding sites within rs4972593 and predicted eight
estrogen-responsive elements within 5 kb of this locus. Moreover, we found
sex-specific differences in the glomerular expression levels of SP3 (P=0.004).
Overall, these results suggest that rs4972593 is a sex-specific genetic variant
associated with ESRD in patients with type 1 diabetes and may underlie the
sex-specific protection against ESRD.

PMCID: PMC3785274
PMID: 24029427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Phys Rev Lett. 2013 Aug 23;111(8):085503. Epub 2013 Aug 20.

Interlayer carbon bond formation induced by hydrogen adsorption in few-layer
supported graphene.

Rajasekaran S(1), Abild-Pedersen F, Ogasawara H, Nilsson A, Kaya S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Stanford University,
Stanford, California 94305, USA and SIMES, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, 
2575 Sand Hill Road, Menlo Park, California 94025, USA.

We report on the hydrogen adsorption induced phase transition of a few layer
graphene (1 to 4 layers) to a diamondlike structure on Pt(111) based on core
level x-ray spectroscopy, temperature programed desorption, infrared
spectroscopy, and density functional theory total energy calculations. The
surface adsorption of hydrogen induces a hybridization change of carbon from the 
sp2 to the sp3 bond symmetry, which propagates through the graphene layers,
resulting in interlayer carbon bond formation. The structure is stabilized
through the termination of interfacial sp3 carbon atoms by the substrate. The
structural transformation occurs as a consequence of high adsorption energy.

PMID: 24010453  [PubMed]


349. J Org Chem. 2013 Oct 4;78(19):9803-14. doi: 10.1021/jo401521y. Epub 2013 Sep 25.

Removal of the pyridine directing group from a-substituted
N-(pyridin-2-yl)piperidines obtained via directed Ru-catalyzed sp3 C-H
functionalization.

Smout V(1), Peschiulli A, Verbeeck S, Mitchell EA, Herrebout W, Bultinck P, Vande
Velde CM, Berthelot D, Meerpoel L, Maes BU.

Author information: 
(1)Organic Synthesis, Department of Chemistry, University of Antwerp ,
Groenenborgerlaan 171, 2020 Antwerp, Belgium.

Two strategies, "hydrogenation-hydride reduction" and "quaternization-hydride
reduction", are reported that make use of mild reaction conditions (room
temperature) to efficiently remove the N-pyridin-2-yl directing group from a
diverse set of C-2-substituted piperidines that were synthesized through directed
Ru-catalyzed sp(3) C-H functionalization. The deprotected products are obtained
in moderate to good overall yields irrespective of the strategy followed,
indicating that both methods are generally equally effective. Only in the case of
2,6-disubstituted piperidines, could the "quaternization-hydride reduction"
strategy not be used. The "hydrogenation-hydride reduction" protocol was
successfully applied to trans- and
cis-2-methyl-N-(pyridin-2-yl)-6-undecylpiperidine in a short synthetic route
toward (±)-solenopsin A (trans diastereoisomer) and (±)-isosolenopsin A (cis
diastereoisomer). The absolute configuration of the enantiomers of these fire ant
alkaloids could be determined via VCD spectroscopy.

PMID: 24007399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Chem Asian J. 2013 Dec;8(12):2970-3. doi: 10.1002/asia.201300930. Epub 2013 Sep
4.

Iridium- and rhodium-catalyzed dehydrogenative silylations of C(sp3)-H bonds
adjacent to a nitrogen atom using hydrosilanes.

Mita T(1), Michigami K, Sato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido University, Nishi 6, Kita 12,
Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-0812 (Japan), Fax: (+81)<U+2009>11-706-4982.
tmita@pharm.hokudai.ac.jp.

PMID: 24006175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Org Lett. 2013 Sep 20;15(18):4758-61. doi: 10.1021/ol402116a. Epub 2013 Sep 4.

Direct arylation of primary and secondary sp3 C-H bonds with diarylhyperiodonium 
salts via Pd catalysis.

Pan F(1), Shen PX, Zhang LS, Wang X, Shi ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing National Laboratory of Molecular Sciences (BNLMS) and Key Laboratory
of Bioorganic Chemistry and Molecular Engineering of Education, College of
Chemistry and Green Chemistry Center, Peking University , Beijing 100871, China, 
and State Key Laboratory of Organometallic Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences
, Shanghai 200032, China.

Palladium-catalyzed primary and secondary sp(3) C-H bond arylation is reported.
The method using diarylhyperiodonium salts as arylation reagents shows good
functional group tolerance and proceeds under mild reaction conditions. The KIE
experiments show that the C-H bond activation is the rate-determining step.

PMID: 24004106  [PubMed]


352. J Feline Med Surg. 2013 Sep;15 Suppl 1:45-52. doi: 10.1177/1098612X13495248.

Feline CKD: New horizons - where do we go from here?

Taylor S(1), Sparkes AH.

Author information: 
(1)International Society of Feline Medicine, High Street, Tisbury, Wiltshire SP3 
6LD, UK.

PRACTICAL RELEVANCE: Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is common in humans as well as 
in cats, and is a significant human health problem. In feline medicine, despite
recent research and improvements in our understanding of the condition,
management remains limited by late diagnosis and an inadequate ability to prevent
progression of disease. Investigation of future treatments that both delay the
progression of CKD and manage clinical signs, and that are also easy and cost
effective to administer, is desirable. To this end, we may learn from our
colleagues in the medical profession.
AUDIENCE: CKD is commonly encountered in general practice and so all
practitioners dealing with cats will benefit from understanding future treatment 
possibilities and interventions in the management of CKD.
EVIDENCE BASE: Large-scale medical studies have been performed to provide an
evidence base for treatment decisions in human CKD. Several studies in cats have 
looked at various aspects of treatment and prognosis, but large-scale studies are
needed to assess the benefits of treatments such as angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers.
CLINICAL CHALLENGES: Providing treatment that is effective, easy to administer
and not cost-prohibitive is the challenge currently faced by clinicians in the
management of feline CKD.

PMID: 23999185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Mol Cells. 2013 Oct;36(4):368-75. doi: 10.1007/s10059-013-0191-x. Epub 2013 Aug
29.

Transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 regulate expression of human ABCG2 gene and
chemoresistance phenotype.

Yang WJ(1), Song MJ, Park EY, Lee JJ, Park JH, Park K, Park JH, Kim HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medical Biology, Institute of Tropical Medicine,
and Brain Korea 21 Project for Medical Science, Yonsei University College of
Medicine, Seoul, 120-752, Korea.

ABCG2 is a member of the ATP binding cassette (ABC) transmembrane proteins that
plays an important role in stem cell biology and drug resistance of cancer cells.
In this study, we investigated how expression of human ABCG2 gene is regulated in
lung cancer A549 cells. Binding of Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors to the ABCG2
promoter in vitro and in vivo was elucidated by electrophoretic mobility shift
assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. The ABCG2 promoter activity was
impaired when Sp1 sites were mutated but was enhanced by overexpression of Sp1 or
Sp3 proteins. Knockdown of Sp1 or Sp3 expression by short interfering RNA
significantly decreased the expression of ABCG2 mRNA and protein, resulting in
attenuated formation of the side population in A549 cells. In addition, Sp1
inhibition in vivo by mithramycin A suppressed the percentage of the side
population fraction and sphere forming activities of A549 cells. Moreover,
inhibiting Sp1- or Sp3-dependent ABCG2 expression caused chemosensitization to
the anticancer drug cisplatin. Collectively, our results demonstrate that Sp1 and
Sp3 transcription factors are the primary determinants for activating basal
transcription of the ABCG2 gene and play an important role in maintaining the
side population phenotype of lung cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3887993
PMID: 23996530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. J Nanopart Res. 2013;15:1811. Epub 2013 Jul 2.

Controllable functionalization and wettability transition of graphene-based films
by an atomic oxygen strategy.

Yi M(1), Zhang W, Shen Z, Zhang X, Zhao X, Zheng Y, Ma S.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Key Laboratory for Powder Technology Research and Development, Beijing
University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Beijing, 100191 China ; Plasma
Laboratory, Ministry-of-Education Key Laboratory of Fluid Mechanics, Beijing
University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Beijing, 100191 China.

Though chemical modification of graphene based on Hummers method has been most
widely used to tailor its properties and interfacial characteristics, a method
which could achieve definitive and controllable groups and properties is still
highly required. Here, we demonstrate a high-vacuum oxidation strategy by atomic 
oxygen (AO) and investigate the AO induced functionalization and wettability
transition in films made from basal-defect- and oxide-free graphene dispersions. 
These graphene-based films are neither graphene nor graphite, but graphene blocks
constituted by numerous randomly stacked graphene flakes. It is found that AO
induced functionalization of these films through the formation of epoxy groups,
sp(3) configuration, ether, and double and triple C-O groups. The films turn to
be hydrophilic after exposed to AO. The contact angle increases with AO exposure 
time. This phenomenon is attributed to the lower surface roughness induced by
collision and/or edge erosion of energetic ions to the film surface and is
further explained by the Wenzel model. The demonstrated strategy can overcome
limitations of Hummers method, provide possibility to gain functionalization and 
wettability transition in liquid-phase exfoliated basal-defect- and oxide-free
graphene in the dry environment, and may extend the study and application of this
material in spacecraft in low earth orbit.

PMCID: PMC3751286
PMID: 23990752  [PubMed]


355. Theriogenology. 2013 Nov;80(8):955-62. doi: 10.1016/j.theriogenology.2013.07.027.
Epub 2013 Aug 27.

Use of single-layer centrifugation with Androcoll-C to enhance sperm quality in
frozen-thawed dog semen.

Dorado J(1), Gálvez MJ, Morrell JM, Alcaráz L, Hidalgo M.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Reproduction Group, Department of Medicine and Animal Surgery, Faculty 
of Veterinary Medicine, University of Cordoba, Córdoba, Spain. Electronic
address: jdorado@uco.es.

The aim of this study was to investigate whether single-layer centrifugation
(SLC) with Androcoll-C could select good quality spermatozoa, including those
with specific motility patterns, from doses of frozen dog semen. Semen from five 
dogs was collected and cryopreserved following a standard protocol. After
thawing, the semen samples were divided in two aliquots, one of which was used as
a control and the other one processed by SLC. Assessment of sperm motility
(assessed by computer-assisted semen analysis), morphology (Diff-Quick staining),
viability (dual staining with propidium iodine/acridine orange), and acrosome
integrity (dual staining with propidium iodine/isothiocyanate-labeled peanut
[Arachis hypogaea] agglutinin) were performed on aliquots of fresh semen,
frozen-thawed control samples, and frozen-thawed SLC-treated preparations. A
multivariate clustering procedure separated 57,577 motile spermatozoa into three 
subpopulations (sP): sP1 consisted of poorly active and nonprogressive
spermatozoa (48.8%), sP2 consisted of moderately slow but progressive spermatozoa
(13.3%), and sP3 consisted of highly active and/or progressive spermatozoa
(37.8%). SLC with Androcoll-C yielded sperm suspensions with improved motility,
viability, and acrosome integrity (P < 0.01). The frozen-thawed SLC-treated
samples were enriched in sP3, representing 38.5% of the sperm population.
Likewise, sP2 was more frequently observed after SLC, but not significantly so.
From these results, we concluded that for dog semen samples selected by SLC with 
Androcoll-C after thawing, the sperm quality parameters, including motility
patterns, are better than in frozen-thawed control samples.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23987984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Org Lett. 2013 Sep 20;15(18):4654-7. doi: 10.1021/ol402281f. Epub 2013 Aug 30.

Metal-free oxidative C(sp3)-H bond thiolation of ethers with disulfides.

Guo SR(1), Yuan YQ, Xiang JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Lishui University , Lishui, 323000, China, and
College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University , Changsha,
410082, P.R. of China.

A novel method for the preparation of alkyl aryl sulfides through direct
oxidation thiolation of commercial ethers with diaryl disulfides using
di-tert-butyl peroxide (DTBP) as the oxidant without a metal catalyst was
established. The C(sp(3))-H bond in various ethers was successfully converted
into a C-S bond, and the corresponding sulfides were achieved with moderate to
high yields.

PMID: 23987104  [PubMed]


357. Chem Asian J. 2013 Sep;8(9):2242-53. doi: 10.1002/asia.201300544. Epub 2013 Jun
18.

Modulation of multifunctional N,O,P ligands for enantioselective copper-catalyzed
conjugate addition of diethylzinc and trapping of the zinc enolate.

Ye F(1), Zheng ZJ, Deng WH, Zheng LS, Deng Y, Xia CG, Xu LW.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Organosilicon Chemistry and Material Technology of Ministry 
of Education, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou 310012, PR China.

In this work, we have successfully synthesized a new family of chiral Schiff
basephosphine ligands derived from chiral binaphthol (BINOL) and chiral primary 
amine. The controllable synthesis of a novel hexadentate and tetradentate N,O,P
ligand that contains both axial and sp3-central chirality from axial BINOL and
sp3-central primary amine led to the establishment of an efficient
multifunctional N,O,P ligand for copper-catalyzed conjugate addition of an
organozinc reagent. In the asymmetric conjugate reaction of organozinc reagents
to enones, the polymer-like bimetallic multinuclear Cu-Zn complex constructed in 
situ was found to be substrate-selective and a highly excellent catalyst for
diethylzinc reagents in terms of enantioselectivity (up to >99<U+2009>% ee). More
importantly, the chirality matching between different chiral sources, C2-axial
binaphthol and sp3-central chiral phosphine, was crucial to the enantioselective 
induction in this reaction. The experimental results indicated that our chiral
ligand (R,S,S)-L1- and (R,S)-L4-based bimetallic complex catalyst system
exhibited the highest catalytic performance to date in terms of
enantioselectivity and conversion even in the presence of 0.005 mol<U+2009>% of catalyst
(S/C = 20<U+2009>000, turnover number (TON) = 17,600). We also studied the tandem
silylation or acylation of enantiomerically enriched zinc enolates that formed in
situ from copper-L4-complex-catalyzed conjugate addition, which resulted in the
high-yield synthesis of chiral silyl enol ethers and enoacetates, respectively.
Furthermore, the specialized structure of the present multifunctional N,O,P
ligand L1 or L4, and the corresponding mechanistic study of the copper catalyst
system were investigated by 31P NMR spectroscopy, circular dichroism (CD), and
UV/Vis absorption.

Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23983068  [PubMed]


358. Cell Signal. 2014 Feb;26(2):398-408. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.08.002. Epub
2013 Aug 24.

TMPRSS4 upregulates uPA gene expression through JNK signaling activation to
induce cancer cell invasion.

Min HJ(1), Lee Y(2), Zhao XF(3), Park YK(3), Lee MK(4), Lee JW(5), Kim S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Immunotherapy Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Daejeon 305-806, Republic of Korea. (2)Immunotherapy Research
Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Daejeon
305-806, Republic of Korea; Department of Chemistry, Korea Advanced Institute of 
Science and Technology, Daejeon 305-701, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of
Surgery, Chonnam National University Medical School, Hwasun 519-809, Republic of 
Korea. (4)Bionanotechnology Research Center, Korea Research Institute of
Bioscience and Biotechnology, Daejeon 305-806, Republic of Korea. (5)Department
of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742,
Republic of Korea. (6)Immunotherapy Research Center, Korea Research Institute of 
Bioscience and Biotechnology, Daejeon 305-806, Republic of Korea; Department of
Chemistry, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon 305-701,
Republic of Korea. Electronic address: semikim@kribb.re.kr.

TMPRSS4 is a novel type II transmembrane serine protease that is highly expressed
in pancreatic, thyroid, colon, and other cancer tissues. Previously, we
demonstrated that TMPRSS4 mediates tumor cell invasion, migration, and
metastasis. However, the mechanisms by which TMPRSS4 contributes to invasion are 
not fully understood. Here, we demonstrated that TMPRSS4 induced the
transcription of the urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) gene through
activating the transcription factors Sp1, Sp3, and AP-1 in mainly a JNK-dependent
manner and that the induction of uPA was required for TMPRSS4-mediated cancer
cell invasion and signaling events. In addition, the uPA receptor was involved in
TMPRSS4-induced signaling activation and subsequent uPA expression probably
through its association with TMPRSS4 on the cell surface. Immunohistochemical
analysis showed that uPA expression was significantly correlated with TMPRSS4
expression in human lung and prostate cancers. These observations suggest that
TMPRSS4 is an important regulator of uPA gene expression; the upregulation of uPA
by TMPRSS4 contributes to invasion and may represent a novel mechanism for the
control of invasion.

© 2013.

PMID: 23978400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Biomol Screen. 2013 Aug 23;19(5):727-737. [Epub ahead of print]

On the Relationship between Molecular Hit Rates in High-Throughput Screening and 
Molecular Descriptors.

Hansson M(1), Pemberton J(2), Engkvist O(3), Feierberg I(3), Brive L(4), Jarvis
P(2), Zander-Balderud L(3), Chen H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden Chemistry Innovation
Center, Discovery Sciences, AstraZeneca R&D Mölndal, Mölndal, Sweden
mari.hansson89@gmail.com hongming.chen@astrazeneca.com. (2)Statistics, Discovery 
Sciences, AstraZeneca R&D Alderley Park, Alderley Park, UK. (3)Chemistry
Innovation Center, Discovery Sciences, AstraZeneca R&D Mölndal, Mölndal, Sweden. 
(4)Chemistry Innovation Center, Discovery Sciences, AstraZeneca R&D Mölndal,
Mölndal, Sweden Cygnal Bioscience, Pixbo, Sweden. (5)Chemistry Innovation Center,
Discovery Sciences, AstraZeneca R&D Mölndal, Mölndal, Sweden
mari.hansson89@gmail.com hongming.chen@astrazeneca.com.

High-throughput screening (HTS) is widely used in the pharmaceutical industry to 
identify novel chemical starting points for drug discovery projects. The current 
study focuses on the relationship between molecular hit rate in recent in-house
HTS and four common molecular descriptors: lipophilicity (ClogP), size (heavy
atom count, HEV), fraction of sp(3)-hybridized carbons (Fsp3), and fraction of
molecular framework (f MF). The molecular hit rate is defined as the fraction of 
times the molecule has been assigned as active in the HTS campaigns where it has 
been screened. Beta-binomial statistical models were built to model the molecular
hit rate as a function of these descriptors. The advantage of the beta-binomial
statistical models is that the correlation between the descriptors is taken into 
account. Higher degree polynomial terms of the descriptors were also added into
the beta-binomial statistic model to improve the model quality. The relative
influence of different molecular descriptors on molecular hit rate has been
estimated, taking into account that the descriptors are correlated to each other 
through applying beta-binomial statistical modeling. The results show that ClogP 
has the largest influence on the molecular hit rate, followed by Fsp3 and HEV. f 
MF has only a minor influence besides its correlation with the other molecular
descriptors.

© 2013 Society for Laboratory Automation and Screening.

PMID: 23975880  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


360. J Assoc Res Otolaryngol. 2013 Dec;14(6):791-800. doi: 10.1007/s10162-013-0411-2. 
Epub 2013 Aug 23.

A genome-wide association study of chronic otitis media with effusion and
recurrent otitis media identifies a novel susceptibility locus on chromosome 2.

Allen EK(1), Chen WM, Weeks DE, Chen F, Hou X, Mattos JL, Mychaleckyj JC, Segade 
F, Casselbrant ML, Mandel EM, Ferrell RE, Rich SS, Daly KA, Sale MM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Public Health Genomics, University of Virginia, P.O. Box 800717,
Charlottesville, VA, USA.

Chronic otitis media with effusion (COME) and recurrent otitis media (ROM) have
been shown to be heritable, but candidate gene and linkage studies to date have
been equivocal. Our aim was to identify genetic susceptibility factors using a
genome-wide association study (GWAS). We genotyped 602 subjects from 143 families
with 373 COME/ROM subjects using the Illumina Human CNV370-Duo DNA Bead Chip
(324,748 SNPs). We carried out the GWAS scan and imputed SNPs at the regions with
the most significant associations. Replication genotyping in an independent
family-based sample was conducted for 53 SNPs: the 41 most significant SNPs with 
P<U+2009><<U+2009>10(-4) and 12 imputed SNPs with P<U+2009><<U+2009>10(-4) on chromosome 15 (near the
strongest signal). We replicated the association of rs10497394 (GWAS discovery
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.30<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-5)) on chromosome 2 in the independent otitis media population
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>4.7<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-5); meta-analysis P<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.52<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-8)). Three additional SNPs had
replication P<U+2009>values<U+2009><<U+2009>0.10. Two were on chromosome 15q26.1 including rs1110060, 
the strongest association with COME/ROM in the primary GWAS (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>3.4<U+2009>×10(-7)) in 
KIF7 intron 7 (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.072), and rs10775247, a non-synonymous SNP in TICRR exon 2
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.075). The third SNP rs386057 was on chromosome 5 in TPPP intron 1
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.045). We have performed the first GWAS of COME/ROM and have identified a
SNP rs10497394 on chromosome 2 is significantly associated with COME/ROM
susceptibility. This SNP is within a 537 kb intergenic region, bordered by CDCA7 
and SP3. The genomic and functional significance of this newly identified locus
in COME/ROM pathogenesis requires additional investigation.

PMCID: PMC3825021
PMID: 23974705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Neurotoxicology. 2013 Dec;39:95-101. doi: 10.1016/j.neuro.2013.07.010. Epub 2013 
Aug 21.

Enhanced taupathy and AD-like pathology in aged primate brains decades after
infantile exposure to lead (Pb).

Bihaqi SW(1), Zawia NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Rhode
Island, Kingston, RI, USA.

Late Onset Alzheimer Disease (LOAD) constitutes the majority of AD cases (~90%). 
Amyloidosis and tau pathology, which are present in AD brains, appear to be
sporadic in nature. We have previously shown that infantile lead (Pb) exposure is
associated with a change in the expression and regulation of the amyloid
precursor protein (APP) and its beta amyloid (Aß) products in old age. Here we
report that infantile Pb exposure elevated the mRNA and protein levels of tau as 
well as its transcriptional regulators namely specificity protein 1 and 3 (Sp1
and Sp3) in aged primates. These changes were also accompanied by an enhancement 
in site-specific tau phosphorylation as well as an increase in the mRNA and
protein levels of cyclin dependent kinase 5 (cdk5). There was also a change in
the protein ratio of p35/p25 with more Serine/Threonine phosphatase activity
present in aged primates exposed to Pb as infants. These molecular alterations
favored abundant tau phosphorylation and immunoreactivity in the frontal cortex
of aged primates with prior Pb exposure. These findings provide more evidence
that neurodegenerative diseases may be products of environmental influences that 
occur during the development.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC3844042
PMID: 23973560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Feline Med Surg. 2013 Sep;15(9):811-7. doi: 10.1177/1098612X13500431.

ISFM guidelines on population management and welfare of unowned domestic cats
(Felis catus).

Sparkes AH(1), Bessant C, Cope K, Ellis SL, Finka L, Halls V, Hiestand K,
Horsford K, Laurence C, MacFarlaine I, Neville PF, Stavisky J, Yeates J; ISFM.

Author information: 
(1)International Cat Care/ISFM, Tisbury, Wiltshire SP3 6LD, UK.

GUIDELINES RATIONALE: Cats are among the most commonly kept domestic pets, and
coexist with humans in a variety of different circumstances. Cats are sentient
beings and, as such, humans have a responsibility for cat welfare where humans
and cats coexist. Because cats reproduce efficiently, measures to control
populations are frequently needed, but these should be based on ethical and
humane approaches.FRAMEWORK: These consensus guidelines from the International
Society of Feline Medicine's Welfare Advisory Panel provide a framework for the
approach to welfare and population control measures, primarily among unowned cats
and those going through a homing programme.

PMID: 23966006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Org Biomol Chem. 2013 Oct 7;11(37):6246-9. doi: 10.1039/c3ob41488d.

Pd(0)-catalyzed benzylic arylation-oxidation of 4-methylquinazolines via sp3 C-H 
activation under air conditions.

Zhao D(1), Zhu MX, Wang Y, Shen Q, Li JX.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Lab of Analytical Chemistry for Life Science, School of Chemistry
and Chemical Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210093, P. R. China.

An efficient and selective Pd(0)-catalyzed sp(3) C-H bond arylation-oxidation of 
4-methylquinazolines is reported. The method enables the introduction of
arylketone at the benzylic position of 4-methylquinazolines without the use of an
additional directing group, and atmospheric oxygen is used as the sole oxidant.

PMID: 23959586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Chemistry. 2013 Sep 27;19(40):13547-53. doi: 10.1002/chem.201301280. Epub 2013
Aug 16.

Cooperative catalysis of metal and O-H···O/sp3-C-H···O two-point hydrogen bonds
in alcoholic solvents: Cu-catalyzed enantioselective direct alkynylation of
aldehydes with terminal alkynes.

Ishii T(1), Watanabe R, Moriya T, Ohmiya H, Mori S, Sawamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Hokkaido University, Sapporo
060-0810 (Japan), Fax: (+81)<U+2009>11-706-3749.

Catalyst-substrate hydrogen bonds in artificial catalysts usually occur in
aprotic solvents, but not in protic solvents, in contrast to enzymatic catalysis.
We report a case in which ligand-substrate hydrogen-bonding interactions
cooperate with a transition-metal center in alcoholic solvents for
enantioselective catalysis. Copper(I) complexes with prolinol-based hydroxy amino
phosphane chiral ligands catalytically promoted the direct alkynylation of
aldehydes with terminal alkynes in alcoholic solvents to afford nonracemic
secondary propargylic alcohols with high enantioselectivities. Quantum-mechanical
calculations of enantiodiscriminating transition states show the occurrence of a 
nonclassical sp(3)-C-H···O hydrogen bond as a secondary interaction between the
ligand and substrate, which results in highly directional catalyst-substrate
two-point hydrogen bonding.

Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23955688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Org Chem. 2013 Sep 20;78(18):9450-6. doi: 10.1021/jo401018v. Epub 2013 Aug 28.

Catalytic sp3 C-H oxidation of peptides and their analogues by radical cation
salts: from glycine amides to quinolines.

Jia X(1), Wang Y, Peng F, Huo C, Yu L, Liu J, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Eco-Environment-Related Polymer Materials, Ministry of
Education, China and Gansu Key Laboratory of Polymer Materials, College of
Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Northwest Normal University , Lanzhou, Gansu 
730070, China.

A catalytic a-sp(3) C-H oxidation of peptides and glycine amides was achieved
under radical cation salt catalysis in the presence of O2, producing a series of 
substituted quinolines. The scope of this reaction shows good functional group
tolerance and high efficiency of the oxidative functionalization.

PMID: 23952331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Psychiatr Res. 2013 Nov;47(11):1608-14. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2013.07.019. 
Epub 2013 Aug 12.

Reduced expression of SP1 and SP4 transcription factors in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells in first-episode psychosis.

Fusté M(1), Pinacho R, Meléndez-Pérez I, Villalmanzo N, Villalta-Gil V, Haro JM, 
Ramos B.

Author information: 
(1)Unitat de recerca, Parc Sanitari Sant Joan de Déu, Fundació Sant Joan de Déu, 
Universitat de Barcelona, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Salud
Mental, CIBERSAM, Dr. Antoni Pujadas, 42, 08830 Sant Boi de Llobregat, Barcelona,
Spain.

Alterations of transcription factor specificity protein 4 (SP4) and 1 (SP1) have 
been linked to different neuropsychiatric diseases. Reduced SP4 and SP1 protein
levels in the prefrontal cortex have been associated with bipolar disorder and
schizophrenia, respectively, suggesting that both factors could be involved in
the pathogenesis of disorders with psychotic features. The aim of this study was 
to investigate whether the reduction of SP1, SP4 and SP3 protein and mRNA
expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells in the early stages of psychosis
may act as a potential biomarker of these disorders. A cross-sectional study of
first-episode psychosis patients (n = 14) compared to gender- and age-matched
healthy controls (n = 14) was designed. Patients were recruited through the adult
mental health services of Parc Sanitari Sant Joan de Déu. Protein and gene
expression levels of SP1, SP4 and SP3 were assessed in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells of patients with first-episode psychosis and healthy control
subjects. We report that protein levels of SP1 and SP4, but not SP3, are
significantly reduced in patients compared to controls. In contrast, we did not
observe any differences in expression levels for SP1, SP4 or SP3 genes between
patient and control groups. In patients, SP4 protein levels were significantly
associated with SP1 protein levels. No association was found, however, between
protein and gene expression levels for each factor. Our study shows reduced SP1
and SP4 protein levels in first-episode psychosis in lymphocytes, suggesting that
these transcription factors are potential peripheral biomarkers of psychotic
spectrum disorders in the early stages.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23941741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2013 Sep 16;52(38):9896-8. doi: 10.1002/anie.201303556.
Epub 2013 Aug 12.

8-Aminoquinoline: a powerful directing group in metal-catalyzed direct
functionalization of C-H bonds.

Corbet M(1), De Campo F.

Author information: 
(1)Eco-Efficient Products & Processes Laboratory (E2P2L) Solvay/CNRS UMI 3464,
Solvay Research & Innovation Center Shanghai, 3966 Jindu Road, Xinzhuang
Industrial Zone, Shanghai 201108 (P. R. China) http://www.solvay.com.
matthieu.corbet@solvay.com.

Chelate me if you can: Over the last decade, strategies for the functionalization
of both C(sp2)-H and C(sp3)-H bonds have witnessed an increasing use of a simple,
yet powerful directing group, 8-aminoquinoline (in blue). This auxiliary is very 
efficient in a wide range of metal-mediated reactions, and can be readily removed
to afford the desired carboxylic acids or corresponding derivatives.

Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23939922  [PubMed]


368. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Aug 20;110(34):13729-33. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1304346110. Epub 2013 Aug 6.

A combination of directing groups and chiral anion phase-transfer catalysis for
enantioselective fluorination of alkenes.

Wu J(1), Wang YM, Drljevic A, Rauniyar V, Phipps RJ, Toste FD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

We report a catalytic enantioselective electrophilic fluorination of alkenes to
form tertiary and quaternary C(sp3)-F bonds and generate ß-amino- and
ß-aryl-allylic fluorides. The reaction takes advantage of the ability of chiral
phosphate anions to serve as solid-liquid phase transfer catalysts and hydrogen
bond with directing groups on the substrate. A variety of heterocyclic,
carbocyclic, and acyclic alkenes react with good to excellent yields and high
enantioselectivities. Further, we demonstrate a one-pot, tandem
dihalogenation-cyclization reaction, using the same catalytic system twice in
series, with an analogous electrophilic brominating reagent in the second step.

PMCID: PMC3752255
PMID: 23922394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. J Am Chem Soc. 2013 Aug 14;135(32):12135-41. doi: 10.1021/ja406484v. Epub 2013
Aug 6.

Stereoselective synthesis of ß-alkylated a-amino acids via palladium-catalyzed
alkylation of unactivated methylene C(sp3)-H bonds with primary alkyl halides.

Zhang SY(1), Li Q, He G, Nack WA, Chen G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

We report a new set of reactions based on the Pd-catalyzed alkylation of
methylene C(sp(3))-H bonds of aliphatic quinolyl carboxamides with a-haloacetate 
and methyl iodide and applications in the stereoselective synthesis of various
ß-alkylated a-amino acids. These reactions represent the first generally
applicable method for the catalytic alkylation of unconstrained and unactivated
methylene C-H bonds with high synthetic relevance. When applied with simple
isotope-enriched reagents, they also provide a convenient and powerful means to
site-selectively incorporate isotopes into the carbon scaffolds of amino acid
compounds.

PMID: 23919290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2013 Sep 11;5(17):8572-80. doi: 10.1021/am402030m.
Epub 2013 Aug 20.

Fabrication and characterization of nanotemplated carbon monolithic material.

He X(1), Nesterenko EP, Nesterenko PN, Brabazon D, Zhou L, Glennon JD, Luong JH, 
Paull B.

Author information: 
(1)Irish Separation Science Cluster, Dublin City University , Glasnevin, Dublin
9, Ireland.

A novel hierarchical nanotemplated carbon monolithic rod (NTCM) was prepared
using a novel facile nanotemplating approach. The NTCM was obtained using
C60-fullerene modified silica gels as hard templates, which were embedded in a
phenolic resin containing a metal catalyst for localized graphitization, followed
by bulk carbonization, and template and catalyst removal. TEM, SEM, and BET
measurements revealed that NTCM possessed an integrated open hierarchical porous 
structure, with a trimodal pore distribution. This porous material also possessed
a high mesopore volume and narrow mesopore size distribution. During the course
of carbonization, the C60 conjugated to aminated silica was partly decomposed,
leading to the formation of micropores. The Raman signature of NTCM was very
similar to that of multiwalled carbon nanotubes as exemplified by three major
peaks as commonly observed for other carbon materials, i.e., the sp3 and sp2
carbon phases coexisted in the sample. Surface area measurements were obtained
using both nitrogen adsorption/desorption isotherms (BET) and with a methylene
blue binding assay, with BET results showing the NTCM material possessed an
average specific surface area of 435 m2 g(-1), compared to an area of 372 m2
g(-1) obtained using the methylene blue assay. Electrochemical studies using NTCM
modified glassy carbon or boron doped diamond (BDD) electrodes displayed
quasi-reversible oxidation/reduction with ferricyanide. In addition, the BDD
electrode modified with NTCM was able to detect hydrogen peroxide with a
detection limit of below 300 nM, whereas the pristine BDD electrode was not
responsive to this target compound.

PMID: 23915389  [PubMed]


371. Anim Reprod Sci. 2013 Aug;140(3-4):232-40. doi:
10.1016/j.anireprosci.2013.06.012. Epub 2013 Jul 4.

Single-layer centrifugation through PureSperm® 80 selects improved quality
spermatozoa from frozen-thawed dog semen.

Dorado J(1), Alcaraz L, Gálvez MJ, Acha D, Ortiz I, Urbano M, Hidalgo M.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Reproduction Group, Department of Medicine and Animal Surgery, Faculty 
of Veterinary Medicine, University of Cordoba, Córdoba, Spain. jdorado@uco.es

Erratum in
    Anim Reprod Sci. 2013 Nov 30;142(3-4):198.

The aim of this study was to investigate whether single-layer centrifugation
(SLC) with PureSperm® 80 could select good quality spermatozoa, including those
with specific motility patterns, from doses of frozen dog semen. Semen from 5
dogs was collected and cryopreserved following a standard protocol. After
thawing, semen samples were divided into two aliquots: one of them was used as
control and the other one processed by SLC. Assessment of sperm motility
(assessed by computer-assisted semen analysis), morphology (Diff-Quick staining) 
and viability (triple fluorescent stain of propidium
iodine/isothiocyanate-labeled peanut (Arachis hypogaea) agglutinin/Rhodamine
123), were performed on aliquots of fresh semen, frozen-thawed control and
frozen-thawed SLC treated samples. A multivariate clustering procedure separated 
26,051 motile spermatozoa into three subpopulations (sP): sP1 consisting of
highly active but non-progressive spermatozoa (40.3%), sP2 consisting of
spermatozoa with high velocity and progressive motility (30.0%), and sP3
consisting of poorly active and non-progressive spermatozoa (29.7%). SLC with
PureSperm® 80 yielded sperm suspensions with improved motility, morphology,
viability and acrosome integrity (P<0.001). The frozen-thawed SLC treated samples
were enriched in sP2, reaching a proportion of 44.1% of the present spermatozoa. 
From these results, we concluded that SLC with PureSperm® 80 may be an
alternative and successful method for improving the quality of frozen-thawed dog 
spermatozoa. Moreover, sP2 (high-speed and progressive spermatozoa) was more
frequently observed after SLC. Finally, this study also demonstrated that the
general motile sperm structure present in dogs remained constant despite the
effect caused by either cryopreservation or separation by SLC through PureSperm® 
80.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23896392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Chem Commun (Camb). 2013 Sep 14;49(71):7794-6. doi: 10.1039/c3cc43616k. Epub 2013
Jul 25.

Fe-promoted cross coupling of homobenzylic methyl ethers with Grignard reagents
via sp3 C-O bond cleavage.

Luo S(1), Yu DG, Zhu RY, Wang X, Wang L, Shi ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing National Laboratory of Molecular Sciences (BNLMS), College of
Chemistry and Green Chemistry Center, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

The first iron-catalyzed formal cross coupling of homobenzylic methyl ethers with
alkyl Grignard reagents is realized. The reaction is proposed to proceed through 
a sequence of dehydroalkoxylation to form the vinyl-intermediate, followed by
Fe-catalyzed selective carbometalation to form a benzylic Grignard reagent.

PMID: 23884449  [PubMed]


373. BMC Med Genet. 2013 Jul 23;14:76. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-14-76.

DNA methylation of the glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor (GLP1R) in human
pancreatic islets.

Hall E(1), Dayeh T, Kirkpatrick CL, Wollheim CB, Dekker Nitert M, Ling C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University Diabetes Centre, CRC, Lund
University, Scania University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Insulin secretion is enhanced upon the binding of Glucagon-like
peptide-1 (GLP-1) to its receptor (GLP1R) in pancreatic ß cells. Although a
reduced expression of GLP1R in pancreatic islets from type 2 diabetic patients
and hyperglycaemic rats has been established, it is still unknown if this is
caused by differential DNA methylation of GLP1R in pancreatic islets of type 2
diabetic patients.
METHODS: In this study, DNA methylation levels of 12 CpG sites close to the
transcription start site of GLP1R were analysed in pancreatic islets from 55
non-diabetic and 10 type 2 diabetic human donors as well as in ß and a cells
isolated from human pancreatic islets. DNA methylation of GLP1R was related to
GLP1R expression, HbA1c levels and BMI. Moreover, mRNA expression of MECP2,
DNMT1, DNMT3A and DNMT3B was analysed in pancreatic islets of the non-diabetic
and type 2 diabetic donors.
RESULTS: One CpG unit, at position +199 and +205 bp from the transcription start 
site, showed a small increase in DNA methylation in islets from donors with type 
2 diabetes compared to non-diabetic donors (0.53%, p=0.02). Furthermore, DNA
methylation levels of one CpG site located 376 bp upstream of the transcription
start site of GLP1R correlated negatively with GLP1R expression (rho=-0.34,
p=0.008) but positively with BMI and HbA1c (rho=0.30, p=0.02 and rho=0.30,
p=0.03, respectively). This specific CpG site is located in an area with known
SP1 and SP3 transcription factor binding sites. Moreover, when we compared the
DNA methylation of the GLP1R promoter in isolated human ß and a cells, we found
that it was higher in a- compared with ß-cells (p=0.009). Finally, there was a
trend towards decreased DNMT3A expression (p=0.056) in type 2 diabetic compared
with non-diabetic islets.
CONCLUSIONS: Together, our study shows that while BMI and HbA1c are positively
associated with DNA methylation levels of GLP1R, its expression is negatively
associated with DNA methylation of GLP1R in human pancreatic islets.

PMCID: PMC3727960
PMID: 23879380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Chem Commun (Camb). 2013 Sep 4;49(68):7540-2. doi: 10.1039/c3cc44055a.

Metal-free oxidative hydroxyalkylarylation of activated alkenes by direct sp3 C-H
functionalization of alcohols.

Meng Y(1), Guo LN, Wang H, Duan XH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, School of Science and MOE Key Laboratory for
Nonequilibrium Synthesis and Modulation of Condensed Matter, Xi'an Jiaotong
University, Xi'an 710049, China.

A metal-free tandem radical addition/cyclization reaction of activated alkenes
and alcohols has been developed. The process provides an efficient and atom
economical access to various valuable hydroxyl-containing oxindoles through the
direct sp(3) C-H functionalization of alcohols.

PMID: 23873284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2013 Sep 7;15(33):14120-5. doi: 10.1039/c3cp51746b. Epub
2013 Jul 22.

Orthorhombic C32: a novel superhard sp3 carbon allotrope.

Zhang M(1), Liu H, Du Y, Zhang X, Wang Y, Li Q.

Author information: 
(1)College of Physics, Beihua University, Jilin 132013, China.

Using a recently developed 'Crystal structure AnaLYsis by Particle Swarm
Optimization' (CALYPSO) algorithm on a structural search, we predicted a novel
sp(3) carbon allotrope possessing an orthorhombic lattice with the space group
Cmmm (oC32). The calculated elastic constants and the simulated hardness revealed
that oC32 simultaneously possesses ultra-incompressible and superhard properties 
with a high bulk modulus of 457 GPa and a high Vickers hardness of 96.2 GPa. This
oC32 phase is dynamically stable and energetically more preferable than the
experientially observed cold-compressed carbon, thus oC32 is expected to be
experimentally synthesizable under extreme conditions. These results further
expand the list of meta-stable carbon allotropes and superhard materials under
atmospheric and extreme conditions.

PMID: 23872724  [PubMed]


376. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Dec;1833(12):2745-56. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.07.002. Epub 2013 Jul 18.

Specificity protein 4 functionally regulates the transcription of NMDA receptor
subunits GluN1, GluN2A, and GluN2B.

Priya A(1), Johar K, Wong-Riley MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Road, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.

N-Methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptors are major glutamatergic receptors involved 
in most excitatory neurotransmission in the brain. The transcriptional regulation
of NMDA receptors is not fully understood. Previously, we found that the GluN1
and GluN2B subunits of the NMDA receptor are regulated by nuclear respiratory
factors 1 and 2 (NRF-1 and NRF-2). NRF-1 and NRF-2 also regulate all 13 subunits 
of cytochrome c oxidase (COX), a critical energy-generating enzyme, thereby
coupling neuronal activity and energy metabolism at the transcriptional level.
Specificity protein (Sp) is a family of transcription factors that bind to
GC-rich regions, with Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 all binding to the same cis- motifs. Sp1 
and Sp3 are ubiquitously expressed, whereas Sp4 expression is restricted to
neurons and testicular cells. Recently, we found that the Sp1 factor regulates
all subunits of COX. The goal of the present study was to test our hypothesis
that the Sp factors also regulate specific subunits of NMDA receptors, and that
they function with NRF-1 and NRF-2 via one of three mechanisms: complementary,
concurrent and parallel, or a combination of complementary and
concurrent/parallel. By means of multiple approaches we found that Sp4
functionally regulated GluN1, GluN2A, and GluN2B, but not GluN2C. On the other
hand, Sp1 and Sp3 did not regulate these subunits as previously thought. Our data
suggest that Sp4 operates in a complementary and concurrent/parallel manner with 
NRF-1 and NRF-2 to mediate the tight coupling between energy metabolism and
neuronal activity at the molecular level.

© 2013.

PMCID: PMC3834217
PMID: 23871830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Clin Pathol. 2013 Nov;66(11):946-50. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2013-201647. Epub
2013 Jul 18.

False positivity in HER2 testing of breast cancer: novel paths for approaching an
old dilemma.

Nunes CB(1), Rocha RM, Buzelin MA, Balabram D, de Souza Foureaux F, Porto SS,
Gobbi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Federal University of Minas Gerais, , Belo
Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.

AIMS: Variability in determining HER2 status has been reported, especially,
differences in sensitivity and specificity among commercially available
antibodies, with false positive and false negative results. We compared the
sensitivity and specificity of five anti-HER2 antibodies by immunohistochemistry 
(IHC), using the new dual colour brightfield in situ hybridisation (DDISH) as the
gold standard, on invasive breast carcinomas (IBC) arrays.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Serial sections from tissue microarrays (TMA) containing
200 preselected primary IBC were submitted to DDISH (VENTANA INFORM HER2 Dual ISH
assay), and immunohistochemistry, using Dako A0485 and HercepTest (polyclonal),
Novocastra CB11 (mouse monoclonal), NeoMarkers SP3 and Ventana 4B5 (rabbit
monoclonal).
RESULTS: From the initial 200 cases, 184 were assessed by DDISH and IHC. The
concordance among the antibodies was considered very good (kappa statistics
varied from 0.82 to 0.9). The overall concordance between IHC and DDISH ranged
from 94.1% for CB11 to 96.6% for A0485. The antibodies A0485, HercepTest, SP3 and
4B5 were over 95% sensitive and specific. CB11 was the most specific antibody
(97.1%). 60% (CB11) to 83.3% (SP3) of the 2+ cases showed no gene amplification
by DDISH. False negative cases varied from 0.5% (A0485) to 3.8% (CB11) of the
cases, and false positive from 1.6% (CB11) to 2.7% (HercepTest, SP3 and 4B5) of
the 184 cases.
CONCLUSIONS: There was very good agreement among the five anti-HER2 antibodies.
CB11 was the most specific antibody, but showed more false negative cases. A0485,
SP3, 4B5 and HercepTest were highly sensitive and specific, but showed more false
positive cases.

PMID: 23867547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 2013 Jul;40(7):951-4.

[Successful treatment of a patient using mFOLFOX6 after laparoscopic surgery for 
rectal cancer with peritoneal dissemination].

[Article in Japanese]

Hamano G(1), Ikebe T, Mayumi K, Takemura M, Hori T, Nishioka T.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Surgery, Goshi Hospital.

A 58-year-old man underwent laparoscopic surgery for rectal cancer(rectal
sigmoid)complicated by intestinal obstruction. He had no liver metastasis.
Although many nodules suspected to have arisen from peritoneal dissemination were
observed in the pelvic cavity, we performed anterior resection assuming that the 
primary lesion was resectable. The surgical findings were sSE, sN2, sP3, sStage
IV, and histopathological findings were signet-ring cell carcinoma, pSE, pN2,
pP+, pStage IV. After 8 courses of adjuvant chemotherapy with modified
5-fluorouracil/Leucovorin/oxaliplatin(mFOLFOX6), carcinoembryonic antigen(
CEA)decreased to a normal level, and positron emission tomography-computed
tomography(PET-CT)showed no abnormal accumulation that suggested metastasis. To
evaluate the effectiveness of this procedure, laparoscopic peritoneal biopsy was 
performed 5 months after surgery, revealing histopathological disappearance of
the peritoneal dissemination lesion. The patient has been followed up and has
been receiving S-1 for 1 year after the first surgery. No evidence of recurrence 
has been observed.

PMID: 23863744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Chemistry. 2013 Aug 26;19(35):11577-89. doi: 10.1002/chem.201301403. Epub 2013
Jul 12.

On the "tertiary structure" of poly-carbenes; self-assembly of sp3-carbon-based
polymers into liquid-crystalline aggregates.

Franssen NM(1), Ensing B, Hegde M, Dingemans TJ, Norder B, Picken SJ, Alberda van
Ekenstein GO, van Eck ER, Elemans JA, Vis M, Reek JN, de Bruin B.

Author information: 
(1)Van 't Hoff Institute for Molecular Sciences (HIMS), Universiteit van
Amsterdam, P.<U+2009>O. Box 94720, 1090 GS Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The self-assembly of poly(ethylidene acetate) (st-PEA) into van der
Waals-stabilized liquid-crystalline (LC) aggregates is reported. The LC behavior 
of these materials is unexpected, and unusual for flexible sp(3)-carbon backbone 
polymers. Although the dense packing of polar ester functionalities along the
carbon backbone of st-PEA could perhaps be expected to lead directly to rigid-rod
behavior, molecular modeling reveals that individual st-PEA chains are actually
highly flexible and should not reveal rigid-rod induced LC behavior. Nonetheless,
st-PEA clearly reveals LC behavior, both in solution and in the melt over a broad
elevated temperature range. A combined set of experimental measurements,
supported by MM/MD studies, suggests that the observed LC behavior is due to
self-aggregation of st-PEA into higher-order aggregates. According to MM/MD
modeling st-PEA single helices adopt a flexible helical structure with a
preferred trans-gauche syn-syn-anti-anti orientation. Unexpectedly, similar
modeling experiments suggest that three of these helices can self-assemble into
triple-helical aggregates. Higher-order assemblies were not observed in the MM/MD
simulations, suggesting that the triple helix is the most stable aggregate
configuration. DLS data confirmed the aggregation of st-PEA into higher-order
structures, and suggest the formation of rod-like particles. The dimensions
derived from these light-scattering experiments correspond with st-PEA
triple-helix formation. Langmuir-Blodgett surface pressure-area isotherms also
point to the formation of rod-like st-PEA aggregates with similar dimensions as
st-PEA triple helixes. Upon increasing the st-PEA concentration, the viscosity of
the polymer solution increases strongly, and at concentrations above 20 wt<U+2009>%
st-PEA forms an organogel. STM on this gel reveals the formation of helical
aggregates on the graphite surface-solution interface with shapes and dimensions 
matching st-PEA triple helices, in good agreement with the structures proposed by
molecular modeling. X-ray diffraction, WAXS, SAXS and solid state NMR
spectroscopy studies suggest that st-PEA triple helices are also present in the
solid state, up to temperatures well above the melting point of st-PEA. Formation
of higher-order aggregates explains the observed LC behavior of st-PEA,
emphasizing the importance of the "tertiary structure" of synthetic polymers on
their material properties.

Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23852805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. European J Org Chem. 2013 May;2013(14):2878-2890. Epub 2013 Mar 22.

Aryl Bromides and Aryl Chlorides for the Direct Arylation of Benzylic Amines
Mediated by Ruthenium(II).

Dastbaravardeh N(1), Schnürch M, Mihovilovic MD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Applied Synthetic Chemistry, Vienna University of Technology
Getreidemarkt 9/163-OC, 1060 Vienna, Austria.

The ruthenium(II)-catalyzed sp(3) C-H bond arylation of benzylic amines with aryl
halides is reported. In the present method, aryl iodides and, more importantly,
also the cheaper aryl bromides and aryl chlorides can be applied as aryl sources.
Additionally, the method does not require elaborate manipulations in a glove box 
and can be carried out in simple screw cap vials. Potassium pivalate proved to be
beneficial for the transformation with aryl bromides or iodides as aryl source,
but was not required for aryl chlorides. In the latter case, the addition of PPh3
led to high conversion. 3-Methyl and 3-phenyl pyridine were established as
directing groups, and the substituent in the 3-position represents a key
structural feature for high conversion. The directing group can be cleaved after 
the transformation, which allows access to diarylmethylamines. Mechanistic
studies were carried out and critically compared to mechanistic reports of
related transformations.

PMCID: PMC3698694
PMID: 23847437  [PubMed]


381. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2013 Jul 15;52(29):7586-9. doi: 10.1002/anie.201302402.
Epub 2013 Jun 12.

In situ generation of nucleophilic allenes by the gold-catalyzed rearrangement of
propargylic esters for the highly diastereoselective formation of intermolecular 
C(sp3)-C(sp2) bonds.

Yu Y(1), Yang W, Rominger F, Hashmi AS.

Author information: 
(1)Organisch-Chemisches Institut, Ruprecht-Karls-Universität Heidelberg, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 270, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

New perspectives, in particular for the synthesis of isochromane derivatives (see
scheme), are provided by the title reaction. Excellent diastereoselectivites are 
achieved in this reaction which proceeds through a gold-catalyzed 1,3-acyloxy
migration. In some cases exclusively the Z isomer is detected.

Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23843175  [PubMed]


382. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Sep;41(17):8107-25. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt589. Epub 2013
Jul 5.

Deciphering the modulation of gene expression by type I and II interferons
combining 4sU-tagging, translational arrest and in silico promoter analysis.

Trilling M(1), Bellora N, Rutkowski AJ, de Graaf M, Dickinson P, Robertson K,
Prazeres da Costa O, Ghazal P, Friedel CC, Albà MM, Dölken L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virology, University Hospital in Essen, University of
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, D-45147, Germany, Computational Genomics Group, IMIM-UPF
Research Programme on Biomedical Informatics, Barcelona Biomedical Research Park 
(PRBB), Barcelona 08003, Spain, Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, 
Box 157, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK, Division of Pathway
Medicine, University of Edinburgh Medical School, Edinburgh, EH16 4SB, Scotland, 
UK, SynthSys, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH9 3JU Scotland, UK, Institute
of Medical Microbiology, Technical University Munich, Munich 81675, Germany,
Institute for Informatics, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich 80333,
Germany and Catalan Institution for Research and Advanced Studies (ICREA),
Barcelona 08010, Spain.

Interferons (IFN) play a pivotal role in innate immunity, orchestrating a
cell-intrinsic anti-pathogenic state and stimulating adaptive immune responses.
The complex interplay between the primary response to IFNs and its modulation by 
positive and negative feedback loops is incompletely understood. Here, we
implement the combination of high-resolution gene-expression profiling of nascent
RNA with translational inhibition of secondary feedback by cycloheximide.
Unexpectedly, this approach revealed a prominent role of negative feedback
mechanisms during the immediate (=60 min) IFNa response. In contrast, a more
complex picture involving both negative and positive feedback loops was observed 
on IFN<U+03B3> treatment. IFN<U+03B3>-induced repression of genes associated with regulation of
gene expression, cellular development, apoptosis and cell growth resulted from
cycloheximide-resistant primary IFN<U+03B3> signalling. In silico promoter analysis
revealed significant overrepresentation of SP1/SP3-binding sites and/or GC-rich
stretches. Although signal transducer and activator of transcription 1
(STAT1)-binding sites were not overrepresented, repression was lost in absence of
STAT1. Interestingly, basal expression of the majority of these IFN<U+03B3>-repressed
genes was dependent on STAT1 in IFN-naïve fibroblasts. Finally, IFN<U+03B3>-mediated
repression was also found to be evident in primary murine macrophages.
IFN-repressed genes include negative regulators of innate and stress response,
and their decrease may thus aid the establishment of a signalling perceptive
milieu.

PMCID: PMC3783172
PMID: 23832230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Chem Commun (Camb). 2013 Aug 18;49(64):7171-3. doi: 10.1039/c3cc43418d.

Synthesis of (spiro)cyclopentapyridinones via C(sp3)-H functionalization: a
post-Ugi gold-catalyzed regioselective tandem cyclization.

Vachhani DD(1), Galli M, Jacobs J, Van Meervelt L, Van der Eycken EV.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Organic & Microwave-Assisted Chemistry (LOMAC), Department of
Chemistry, University of Leuven (KU Leuven), Celestijnenlaan 200F, B-3001,
Leuven, Belgium.

A gold-catalyzed regioselective tandem cyclization of N-propynylbutynamide via
Csp(3)-H functionalization has been described, providing a distinctive
methodology for the architecture of cyclopentapyridinones as well as
spirocyclopentapyridinones.

PMID: 23831954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Org Lett. 2013 Jul 19;15(14):3698-701. doi: 10.1021/ol401508u. Epub 2013 Jul 5.

Chemoselective sp2-sp3 cross-couplings: iron-catalyzed alkyl transfer to
dihaloaromatics.

Malhotra S(1), Seng PS, Koenig SG, Deese AJ, Ford KA.

Author information: 
(1)Genentech Inc., Small Molecule Process Chemistry, 1 DNA Way, South San
Francisco, California 94080, USA. malhotra.sushant@gene.com

The chemoselective functionalization of a range of dihaloaromatics with methyl,
cyclopropyl, and higher alkyl Grignard reagents via iron-catalyzed cross-coupling
is described. The site selectivity of C-X (X = halogen) activation is determined 
by factors such as the position of the halogen on the ring, the solvent, and the 
nucleophile. A one-pot protocol for the chemoselective synthesis of mixed dialkyl
heterocycles is achieved solely employing iron catalysis.

PMID: 23829418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. PLoS Genet. 2013 Jun;9(6):e1003557. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003557. Epub 2013 
Jun 27.

The identification of trans-acting factors that regulate the expression of GDF5
via the osteoarthritis susceptibility SNP rs143383.

Syddall CM(1), Reynard LN, Young DA, Loughlin J.

Author information: 
(1)Musculoskeletal Research Group, Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.

rs143383 is a C to T transition SNP located in the 5'untranslated region (5'UTR) 
of the growth differentiation factor 5 gene GDF5. The T allele of the SNP is
associated with increased risk of osteoarthritis (OA) in Europeans and in Asians.
This susceptibility is mediated by the T allele producing less GDF5 transcript
relative to the C allele, a phenomenon known as differential allelic expression
(DAE). The aim of this study was to identify trans-acting factors that bind to
rs143383 and which regulate this GDF5 DAE. Protein binding to the gene was
investigated by two experimental approaches: 1) competition and supershift
electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs) and 2) an oligonucleotide pull down
assay followed by quantitative mass spectrometry. Binding was then confirmed in
vivo by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP), and the functional effects of
candidate proteins investigated by RNA interference (RNAi) and over expression.
Using these approaches the trans-acting factors Sp1, Sp3, P15, and DEAF-1 were
identified as interacting with the GDF5 5'UTR. Knockdown and over expression of
the factors demonstrated that Sp1, Sp3, and DEAF-1 are repressors of GDF5
expression. Depletion of DEAF-1 modulated the DAE of GDF5 and this differential
allelic effect was confirmed following over expression, with the rs143383 T
allele being repressed to a significantly greater extent than the rs143383 C
allele. In combination, Sp1 and DEAF-1 had the greatest repressive activity. In
conclusion, we have identified four trans-acting factors that are binding to
GDF5, three of which are modulating GDF5 expression via the OA susceptibility
locus rs143383.

PMCID: PMC3694828
PMID: 23825960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2013 Aug 12;52(33):8657-60. doi: 10.1002/anie.201304359. 
Epub 2013 Jul 3.

Site-selective oxidation of unactivated C(sp3)-H bonds with hypervalent
iodine(III) reagents.

Moteki SA(1), Usui A, Zhang T, Solorio Alvarado CR, Maruoka K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Synthetic Organic Chemistry, Department of Chemistry, Graduate
School of Science, Kyoto University, Sakyo, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan.

PMID: 23825014  [PubMed]


387. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Sep;41(17):8045-60. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt581. Epub 2013
Jul 1.

Mineralocorticoid receptor interaction with SP1 generates a new response element 
for pathophysiologically relevant gene expression.

Meinel S(1), Ruhs S, Schumann K, Strätz N, Trenkmann K, Schreier B, Grosse I,
Keilwagen J, Gekle M, Grossmann C.

Author information: 
(1)Julius-Bernstein-Institut für Physiologie, Universität Halle-Wittenberg, 06112
Halle/Saale, Germany, Institut für Informatik, Universität Halle-Wittenberg,
06120 Halle/Saale, Germany and Abteilung Molekulare Genetik, Leibniz-Institut für
Pflanzengenetik und Kulturpflanzenforschung (IPK), 06466 Gatersleben, Germany.

The mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) is a ligand-induced transcription factor
belonging to the steroid receptor family and involved in water-electrolyte
homeostasis, blood pressure regulation, inflammation and fibrosis in the
renocardiovascular system. The MR shares a common hormone-response-element with
the glucocorticoid receptor but nevertheless elicits MR-specific effects
including enhanced epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) expression via unknown
mechanisms. The EGFR is a receptor tyrosine kinase that leads to activation of
MAP kinases, but that can also function as a signal transducer for other
signaling pathways. In the present study, we mechanistically investigate the
interaction between a newly discovered MR- but not glucocorticoid receptor-
responsive-element (=MRE1) of the EGFR promoter, specificity protein 1 (SP1) and 
MR to gain general insights into MR-specificity. Biological relevance of the
interaction for EGFR expression and consequently for different signaling pathways
in general is demonstrated in human, rat and murine vascular smooth muscle cells 
and cells of EGFR knockout mice. A genome-wide promoter search for identical
binding regions followed by quantitative PCR validation suggests that the
identified MR-SP1-MRE1 interaction might be applicable to other genes. Overall, a
novel principle of MR-specific gene expression is explored that applies to the
pathophysiologically relevant expression of the EGFR and potentially also to
other genes.

PMCID: PMC3783164
PMID: 23821666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Chemistry. 2013 Aug 5;19(32):10643-54. doi: 10.1002/chem.201301633. Epub 2013 Jul
2.

Mechanistic study on the cleavage and reorganization of C(sp3)-H and C=N bonds in
carbodiimides: synthesis of 1,2-dihydrothiopyrimidines and
2,3-dihydropyrimidinthiones through four-component coupling.

Wang Y(1), Zhao F, Zhou Y, Chi Y, Wang Z, Zhang WX, Xi Z.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Key Laboratory of
Bioorganic Chemistry and Molecular Engineering of Ministry of Education, College 
of Chemistry, Peking University, Beijing 100871, P.R. China.

This study sheds light on the cleavage and reorganization of C(sp(3))-H and C=N
bonds of carbodiimides in a three-component reaction of terminal alkynes, sulfur,
and carbodiimides by a combination of methods including 1) isolation and X-ray
analysis of six-membered-ring lithium species 2-S, 2) trapping of the
oxygen-analogues (B-O and D-O) of both four-membered-ring intermediate B-S and
ring-opening intermediate D-S, 3) deuterium labeling studies, and 4) theoretical 
studies. These results show that 1) the reaction rate-determining step is [2+2]
cycloaddition, 2) the C=N bond cleavage takes place before C(sp(3))-H bond
cleavage, 3) the hydrogen attached to C6 in 2-S originates from the carbodiimide,
and 4) three types of new aza-heterocycles, such as 1,2-dihydrothiopyrimidines,
N-acyl 2,3-dihydropyrimidinthiones, and 1,2-dihydropyrimidinamino acids are
constructed efficiently based on 2-S. All results strongly support the idea that 
the reaction proceeds through [2+2] cycloaddition/4p electrocyclic
ring-opening/1,5-H shift/6p electrocyclic ring-closing as key steps. The research
strategy on the synthesis, isolation, and reactivity investigation of important
intermediates in metal-mediated reactions not only helps achieve an in-depth
understanding of reaction mechanisms but also leads to the discovery of new
synthetically useful reactions based on the important intermediates.

Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23821475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Org Lett. 2013 Jul 19;15(14):3650-3. doi: 10.1021/ol401534g. Epub 2013 Jul 1.

Simple and direct sp3 C-H bond arylation of tetrahydroisoquinolines and
isochromans via 2,3-dichloro-5,6-dicyano-1,4-benzoquinone oxidation under mild
conditions.

Muramatsu W(1), Nakano K, Li CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki University, 1-14
Bunkyo-machi, Nagasaki, Nagasaki 852-8521, Japan. muramatu@nagasaki-u.ac.jp

Erratum in
    Org Lett. 2014 Jan 17;16(2):644.

The 2,3-dichloro-5,6-dicyano-1,4-benzoquinone (DDQ)-mediated sp(3) C-H bond
arylation of tetrahydroisoquinolines and isochromans is described. The
corresponding products were facilely synthesized via a simple nucleophilic
addition reaction between readily available aryl Grignard reagents and iminium
(or oxonium) cations generated in situ by DDQ oxidation of
tetrahydroisoquinolines (or isochromans) under mild conditions.

PMID: 23815788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Neoplasia. 2013 Jul;15(7):795-804.

Prostaglandin E2 Promotes UV radiation-induced immune suppression through DNA
hypermethylation.

Prasad R(1), Katiyar SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL
35294, USA.

Exposure of mice to UV radiation results in suppression of the contact
hypersensitivity (CHS) response. Here, we report that the UV-induced suppression 
of CHS is associated with increases in the levels of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2),
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), and PGE2 receptors in the exposed skin. UV
radiation-induced suppression of CHS was inhibited by topical treatment of the
skin with celecoxib or indomethacin (inhibitors of COX-2) or AH6809 (an EP2
antagonist). Moreover, mice deficient in COX-2 were found to be resistant to
UV-induced suppression of CHS. The exposure of wild-typemice to UVB radiation
resulted in DNA hypermethylation, increased DNA methyltransferase (Dnmt)
activity, and elevated levels of Dnmt1, Dnmt3a, and Dnmt3b proteins in the skin, 
and these responses were downregulated on topical treatment of the site of
exposure after irradiation with indomethacin or EP2 antagonist. Topical treatment
of UVB-exposed COX-2-deficient mice with PGE2 enhanced the UVB-induced
suppression of CHS as well as global DNA methylation and elevated the levels of
Dnmt activity and Dnmt proteins in the skin. Intraperitoneal injection of
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-dc), a DNA demethylating agent, restored the CHS
response to 2,4-dinitrofluorobenzene in UVB-exposed skin and this was associated 
with the reduction in global DNA methylation and Dnmt activity and reduced levels
of Dnmt proteins. Furthermore, treatment with 5-Aza-dc reversed the effect of
PGE2 on UV-induced suppression of CHS in COX-2-deficient mice. These findings
reveal a previously unrecognized role for PGE2 in the promotion of UVB-induced
immunosuppression and indicate that it is mediated through PGE2 regulation of DNA
methylation.

PMCID: PMC3689242
PMID: 23814491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Carcinogenesis. 2013 Dec;34(12):2870-9. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt231. Epub 2013 Jun
26.

Metformin inhibits pancreatic cancer cell and tumor growth and downregulates Sp
transcription factors.

Nair V(1), Pathi S, Jutooru I, Sreevalsan S, Basha R, Abdelrahim M, Samudio I,
Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX 77843, USA.

Metformin is a widely used antidiabetic drug, and epidemiology studies for
pancreatic and other cancers indicate that metformin exhibits both
chemopreventive and chemotherapeutic activities. Several metformin-induced
responses and genes are similar to those observed after knockdown of specificity 
protein (Sp) transcription factors Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 by RNA interference, and we
hypothesized that the mechanism of action of metformin in pancreatic cancer cells
was due, in part, to downregulation of Sp transcription factors. Treatment of
Panc1, L3.6pL and Panc28 pancreatic cancer cells with metformin downregulated
Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 proteins and several pro-oncogenic Sp-regulated genes including 
bcl-2, survivin, cyclin D1, vascular endothelial growth factor and its receptor, 
and fatty acid synthase. Metformin induced proteasome-dependent degradation of
Sps in L3.6pL and Panc28 cells, whereas in Panc1 cells metformin decreased
microRNA-27a and induced the Sp repressor, ZBTB10, and disruption of
miR-27a:ZBTB10 by metformin was phosphatase dependent. Metformin also inhibited
pancreatic tumor growth and downregulated Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 in tumors in an
orthotopic model where L3.6pL cells were injected directly into the pancreas. The
results demonstrate for the first time that the anticancer activities of
metformin are also due, in part, to downregulation of Sp transcription factors
and Sp-regulated genes.

PMCID: PMC3845888
PMID: 23803693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Biochem J. 2013 Sep 1;454(2):283-93. doi: 10.1042/BJ20130481.

Flavanoids induce expression of the suppressor of cytokine signalling 3 (SOCS3)
gene and suppress IL-6-activated signal transducer and activator of transcription
3 (STAT3) activation in vascular endothelial cells.

Wiejak J(1), Dunlop J, Mackay SP, Yarwood SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular, Cell and Systems Biology, College of Medical,
Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Scotland, UK.

The atherogenic cytokine IL-6 (interleukin-6) induces pro-inflammatory gene
expression in VECs (vascular endothelial cells) by activating the JAK (Janus
kinase)/STAT3 (signal transducer and activator of transcription 3) signalling
pathway, which is normally down-regulated by the STAT3-dependent induction of the
E3 ubiquitin ligase component SOCS3 (suppressor of cytokine signalling 3). Novel 
treatments based on the regulation of SOCS3 protein levels could therefore have
value in the treatment of diseases with an inflammatory component, such as
atherosclerosis. To this end we carried out a screen of 1031 existing medicinal
compounds to identify inducers of SOCS3 gene expression and identified the
flavanoids naringenin and flavone as effective inducers of SOCS3 protein, mRNA
and promoter activity. This was in contrast with the action of traditional
JAK/STAT3 inhibitors and the polyphenol resveratrol, which effectively suppress
SOCS3 gene expression. Both naringenin and flavone also effectively suppressed
IL-6-stimulated phosphorylation of STAT3 (Tyr7°5) which led to suppression of
IL-6-induction of the atherogenic STAT3 target gene MCP1 (monocyte chemotactic
protein-1), suggesting that their ability to induce SOCS3 gene expression is
STAT3-independent. Supporting this idea was the observation that the general
kinase inhibitor compound C inhibits flavone- and cAMP-dependent, but not
JAK-dependent, SOCS3 induction in VECs. Indeed, the ability of flavanoids to
induce SOCS3 expression requires activation of the ERK
(extracellular-signal-regulated kinase)-dependent transcription factor SP3, and
not STAT3. In the present paper we therefore describe novel molecular actions of 
flavanoids, which control SOCS3 gene induction and suppression of STAT3
signalling in VECs. These mechanisms could potentially be exploited to develop
novel anti-atherogenic therapies.

PMCID: PMC3749869
PMID: 23782265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2013 Jul 22;52(30):7837-40. doi: 10.1002/anie.201303099. 
Epub 2013 Jun 18.

Palladium(II)-catalyzed dehydrogenative cross-coupling between two C(sp3)-H
bonds: unexpected C=C bond formation.

Li G(1), Qian S, Wang C, You J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Green Chemistry and Technology of Ministry of Education,
College of Chemistry, West China Medical School, Sichuan University, 29 Wangjiang
Road, Chengdu 610064, PR China.

C=C bond construction: A palladium-catalyzed oxidative C(sp3)-H/C(sp3)-H
cross-coupling is shown to forge C=C bonds rather than C(sp3)-C(sp3) bonds
through reactions of indolin-2-ones or benzofuran-2-ones with O-benzoyl
hydroxylamines in the absence of an added oxidant.

Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23780778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Org Lett. 2013 Jul 5;15(13):3238-41. doi: 10.1021/ol4012212. Epub 2013 Jun 17.

Auxiliary-enabled Pd-catalyzed direct arylation of methylene C(sp3)-H bond of
cyclopropanes: highly diastereoselective assembling of di- and trisubstituted
cyclopropanecarboxamides.

Parella R(1), Gopalakrishnan B, Babu SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Sciences, Indian Institute of Science Education and
Research Mohali, Knowledge City, Mohali, Punjab, India.

Erratum in
    Org Lett. 2014 Feb 21;16(4):1274.

An auxiliary-enabled and Pd(OAc)2-catalyzed direct arylation of C(sp(3))-H bonds 
of cyclopropanes and production of di- and trisubstituted
cyclopropanecarboxamides having contiguous stereocenters are reported. The
installation of aryl groups on cyclopropanecarboxamides led to the assembling of 
novel mono- and di- aryl-N-(quinolin-8-yl)cyclopropanecarboxamide scaffolds and
mono- and di- aryl-N-(2-(methylthio)phenyl)cyclopropanecarboxamides. The
stereochemistry of products was unequivocally assigned from the X-ray structures 
of key compounds.

PMID: 23772812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Aug;33(16):3099-112. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00524-13. Epub 2013 Jun
10.

A network of transcription factors operates during early tooth morphogenesis.

Zhao M(1), Gupta V, Raj L, Roussel M, Bei M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Regenerative Developmental Biology, The Forsyth Institute,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.

Improving the knowledge of disease-causing genes is a unique challenge in human
health. Although it is known that genes causing similar diseases tend to lie
close to one another in a network of protein-protein or functional interactions, 
the identification of these protein-protein networks is difficult to unravel.
Here, we show that Msx1, Snail, Lhx6, Lhx8, Sp3, and Lef1 interact in vitro and
in vivo, revealing the existence of a novel context-specific protein network.
These proteins are all expressed in the neural crest-derived dental mesenchyme
and cause tooth agenesis disorder when mutated in mouse and/or human. We also
identified an in vivo direct target for Msx1 function, the cyclin D-dependent
kinase (CDK) inhibitor p19(ink4d), whose transcription is differentially
modulated by the protein network. Considering the important role of p19(ink4d) as
a cell cycle regulator, these results provide evidence for the first time of the 
unique plasticity of the Msx1-dependent network of proteins in conferring
differential transcriptional output and in controlling the cell cycle through the
regulation of a cyclin D-dependent kinase inhibitor. Collectively, these data
reveal a novel protein network operating in the neural crest-derived dental
mesenchyme that is relevant for many other areas of developmental and
evolutionary biology.

PMCID: PMC3753897
PMID: 23754753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Org Lett. 2013 Jun 21;15(12):3090-3. doi: 10.1021/ol401276b. Epub 2013 Jun 5.

A C(sp3)-C(sp3) bond forming reductive condensation of a-keto esters and
enolizable carbon pronucleophiles.

Zhao W(1), Fink DM, Labutta CA, Radosevich AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Pennsylvania State University , University Park, 
Pennsylvania 16802, United States.

The preparation of densely functionalized unsymmetrical 1,4-dicarbonyl structural
motifs by a phosphorus(III)-mediated reductive condensation of a-keto esters and 
enolizable carbon pronucleophiles is described. The reaction, which is initiated 
by Kukhtin-Ramirez addition of commercially available
tris(dimethylamino)phosphine to the a-keto ester substrate, proceeds rapidly
under mild conditions.

PMID: 23738614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Org Biomol Chem. 2013 Jul 14;11(26):4308-11. doi: 10.1039/c3ob40748a. Epub 2013
May 29.

Bu4NI-catalyzed decarboxylative acyloxylation of an sp3 C-H bond adjacent to a
heteroatom with a-oxocarboxylic acids.

Zhang S(1), Guo LN, Wang H, Duan XH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, School of Science and MOE Key Laboratory for
Nonequilibrium Synthesis and Modulation of Condensed Matter, Xi'an Jiaotong
University, Xi'an 710049, China.

A novel metal-free decarboxylative acyloxylation of an sp(3) C-H bond in
formamides and ethers has been explored. A variety of N-acyloxymethylamides and
a-acyloxy ethers could be easily synthesized by this method. Preliminary
mechanistic studies have shown that the reaction proceeded via a radical process.

PMID: 23715588  [PubMed]


398. Guang Pu Xue Yu Guang Pu Fen Xi. 2013 Mar;33(3):647-52.

[The curing behavior of two thermoset resins containing silicon alkynyl group].

[Article in Chinese]

Shi S(1), Kong L, Qi HM, Zhang DH.

Author information: 
(1)Tianjin Polytechnic University, China. shis1971@163.com

In the present report, the curing behavior of two thermoset resins containing
silicon alkynyl group- PAR and PMR, and the correlation between the curing
structure of resin and their thermal stability were investigated by FTIR, 13C
NMR, DSC and TGA techniques. The IR and NMR results showed that the curing
mechanism of PAR and PMR resin is different. Based on aromatic cyclization among 
alkynyl groups and Diels-Alder reaction, aromatic frame network structure
constituted by benzene cycles and condensed aromatic cycles are formed in the PAR
cured resin. Using additional reaction among Si-H group, alkynyl group and
alkenyl group, saturated Si-C(sp3) network structure is formed in the PMR cured
resin. The aromatic frame network structure and Si-C(sp3) network structure
provide good thermal stability for PAR and PMR resin respectively. The thermal
decomposition temperatures Td5 of both resins are above 600 degrees C, and the
residues percentages at 900 degrees C are above 85%.

PMID: 23705425  [PubMed]


399. J Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Jun 18;51(1):99-108. doi: 10.1530/JME-12-0251. Print 2013.

Regulation of the osterix (Osx, Sp7) promoter by osterix and its inhibition by
parathyroid hormone.

Barbuto R(1), Mitchell J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Osterix (Osx, Sp7) is a zinc-finger transcription factor belonging to the
specificity protein (Sp) family expressed in cells of the osteoblast lineage in
the developing skeleton where it regulates expression of a number of osteoblastic
genes. We previously reported inhibition of osterix mRNA and protein by
parathyroid hormone (PTH) stimulation of cAMP in osteoblasts. We here show that
Osx expression in osteoblasts is regulated by Sp proteins as demonstrated by
mithramycin A inhibition of Osx mRNA and OSX protein levels. Mutation of putative
transcription factor binding sites within the Osx promoter demonstrated a tandem 
repeat sequence that selectively binds OSX but not other Sp factors expressed in 
osteoblasts (Sp1, Sp3, or Tieg (Klf10)). Mutation of either or both the repeat
sequences inhibited 90% of the promoter activity and also abrogated some of the
PTH-mediated inhibition of the promoter. Previous studies have shown growth
factor regulation of Osx expression by MAPK proteins, particularly p38
phosphorylation of OSX that increases its transcriptional activity. PTH
stimulation of osteoblasts inhibits MAPK components (ERK, JNK, and p38) but
inhibition of Osx mRNA and protein expression by PTH was selectively mimicked by 
p38 inhibition and expression of constitutively active MKK6, which stimulates
p38, blocked PTH inhibition of OSX. Together, our studies suggest that OSX
autoregulation is a major mechanism in osteoblasts and that PTH stimulation
inhibits osterix by inhibition of p38 MAPK regulation of OSX.

PMCID: PMC3685218
PMID: 23682129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Chem Commun (Camb). 2013 Jun 21;49(49):5601-3. doi: 10.1039/c3cc42675k.

Iridium-catalyzed triple C(sp3)-H borylations: construction of triborylated
sp3-carbon centers.

Mita T(1), Ikeda Y, Michigami K, Sato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-0812,
Japan. biyo@pharm.hokudai.ac.jp

An unprecedented catalytic C(sp(3))-H triborylation at a single carbon was
developed with the assistance of a nitrogen directing group.

PMID: 23677063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Cell Cycle. 2013 Jun 15;12(12):1828-34. doi: 10.4161/cc.24992. Epub 2013 May 15.

Enforcing the pause: transcription factor Sp3 limits productive elongation by RNA
polymerase II.

Valin A(1), Gill G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cellular Biology, Tufts University School of
Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.

The transition of paused RNA polymerase II into productive elongation is a highly
dynamic process that serves to fine-tune gene expression in response to changing 
cellular environments. We have recently reported that the transcription factor
Sp3 inhibits the transition of paused RNA Pol II to productive elongation at the 
promoter of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21(CIP1) and other
Sp3-repressed genes. Our studies support the view that Sp3 has three modes of
action: activation, SUMO-Sp3-mediated heterochromatin silencing and
SUMO-independent inhibition of elongation. At the p21(CIP1) promoter, binding of 
the positive elongation factor P-TEFb kinase was not affected by Sp3. In
contrast, Sp3 promoted binding of the protein phosphatase PP1 to the p21(CIP1)
promoter, suggesting that Sp3-dependent regulation of the local balance between
kinase and phosphatase activities may contribute to gene expression. Our findings
show that the transition of paused RNA Pol II to productive elongation is an
important step regulated by both promoter-specific activators and repressors to
finely modulate mRNA expression levels.

PMCID: PMC3735696
PMID: 23676218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Chem Commun (Camb). 2013 Jun 21;49(49):5598-600. doi: 10.1039/c3cc42226g.

A straightforward access to guaiazulene derivatives using palladium-catalysed sp2
or sp3 C-H bond functionalisation.

Zhao L(1), Bruneau C, Doucet H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut des Sciences Chimiques de Rennes, UMR 6226 CNRS-Université de Rennes 
1 Organométalliques: Matériaux et Catalyse, 35042 Rennes Cedex, France.

A novel palladium-catalysed direct arylation of guaiazulenes with a variety of
aryl bromides is reported. Both sp(2) and sp(3) C-H bonds have been
functionalised, as the nature of the cation of the base was found to allow the
control of the regioselectivity of the arylation giving rise to C2 or C3 arylated
guaiazulenes and also to 4-benzylguaiazulenes.

PMID: 23673684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Mol Carcinog. 2014 Feb;53 Suppl 1:E53-61. doi: 10.1002/mc.22010. Epub 2013 May
14.

Tolfenamic acid inhibits colon cancer cell and tumor growth and induces
degradation of specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors.

Pathi S(1), Li X, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas.

Tolfenamic acid (TA) is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) that
inhibits lung, esophageal, breast and pancreatic cancer cell and tumor growth,
and this study investigated the anticancer activity of TA in colon cancer. TA
inhibited growth and induced apoptosis in RKO, SW480, HT-29, and HCT-116 colon
cancer cells, and TA (50 mg/kg/d) also inhibited tumor growth in athymic nude
mice bearing RKO cells as xenografts. TA downregulated expression of Sp proteins 
(Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4) in colon cancer cells and this was accompanied by decreased
expression of several Sp-regulated growth promoting (cyclin D1, hepatocyte growth
factor receptor), angiogenic (vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and its
receptor 1), survival (survivin and bcl-2), and inflammatory (NF<U+03BA>Bp65/p50) gene
products. The mechanism of TA-mediated effects on Sp proteins was due to
activation of caspases. These results now extend the number of NSAIDs that may
have clinical potential for colon cancer chemotherapy and show that the
anticancer activity of TA is due, in part, to targeting Sp transcription factors.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23670891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2013 Feb;13(2):1063-7.

Molecular dynamics simulations of friction process between diamond-like carbon
and Si-DLC films.

Lan H(1), Kato T.

Author information: 
(1)School of Mechanical, Electronic and Control Engineering, Beijing Jiaotong
University, No. 3 of Shangyuan Residence, Haidian District, Beijing 100044,
China.

Diamond-like carbon (DLC) films have been extensively studied over the past
decades due to their unique combination of properties; in particular,
silicon-doped DLC (Si-DLC) films are of significant interest for tribological
effects, they had a very low friction coefficient and possessed the potential to 
improve wear performance in humid atmospheres and at higher temperatures. But
many experimental results of the Si-DLC films showed that their tribological
properties changed greatly on different silicon content. In the paper, molecular 
dynamics (MD) simulations were used to study microstructure of amorphous Si-DLC
films and a sliding friction process between DLC and Si-DLC films on
un-lubricated and oil-lubricated conditions respectively. The results show that
silicon atoms are almost surrounded by carbon atoms in all Si-DLC films. The
sp3/sp2 ratio in Si-DLC films increases with the increasing silicon content.
After sliding, a transfer film between the DLC and Si-DLC films is formed on the 
un-lubricated condition. In contrast, a boundary lubrication layer is found on
the oil-lubricated condition. Moreover, the friction forces on the un-lubricated 
condition are larger than those on the oil-lubricated condition.

PMID: 23646572  [PubMed]


405. J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2013 Feb;13(2):933-6.

Synthesis of functional carbon nanospheres by a composite-molten-salt method and 
amperometric sensing of hydrogen peroxide.

Wang X(1), Hu C, Xiong Y, Zhang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Physics, Chongqing University, Chongqing 400044, PR
China.

Functional carbon nanospheres have been synthesized from analytically pure
glucose by a composite-molten-salt (CMS) method. Field emission scanning electron
microscopy, transmission electron microscopy, Raman and Fourier transformation
infra-red spectroscopy indicate the carbon nanospheres are solid, bond
hybridisation (sp2/sp3) and with many functional groups on their surfaces.
Amperometric sensor based on the synthesized carbon nanospheres have been
fabricated without pretreatment or modification. The detection of hydrogen
peroxide exhibits high sensitivity and good selectivity. The electrochemical
measurement of these nanospheres demonstrates much superior performance to those 
of the carbon nanospheres synthesized by hydrothermal method.

PMID: 23646545  [PubMed]


406. J Am Chem Soc. 2013 May 15;135(19):7194-204. doi: 10.1021/ja3122526. Epub 2013
May 2.

Nonheme iron-mediated amination of C(sp3)-H bonds. Quinquepyridine-supported
iron-imide/nitrene intermediates by experimental studies and DFT calculations.

Liu Y(1), Guan X, Wong EL, Liu P, Huang JS, Che CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and State Key Laboratory of Synthetic Chemistry, The
University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong.

The 7-coordinate complex [Fe(qpy)(MeCN)2](ClO4)2 (1, qpy =
2,2':6',2<U+2033>:6<U+2033>,2''':6''',2''''-quinquepyridine) is a highly active nonheme iron
catalyst for intra- and intermolecular amination of C(sp(3))-H bonds. This
complex effectively catalyzes the amination of limiting amounts of not only
benzylic and allylic C(sp(3))-H bonds of hydrocarbons but also the C(sp(3))-H
bonds of cyclic alkanes and cycloalkane/linear alkane moieties in sulfamate
esters, such as those derived from menthane and steroids cholane and androstane, 
using PhI-NR or "PhI(OAc)2 + H2NR" [R = Ts (p-toluenesulfonyl), Ns
(p-nitrobenzenesulfonyl)] as nitrogen source, with the amination products
isolated in up to 93% yield. Iron imide/nitrene intermediates
[Fe(qpy)(NR)(X)](n+) (CX, X = NR, solvent, or anion) are proposed in these
amination reactions on the basis of experimental studies including ESI-MS
analysis, crossover experiments, Hammett plots, and correlation with C-H bond
dissociation energies and with support by DFT calculations. Species consistent
with the formulations of [Fe(qpy)(NTs)2](2+) (CNTs) and [Fe(qpy)(NTs)](2+) (C)
were detected by high-resolution ESI-MS analysis of the reaction mixture of 1
with PhI-NTs (4 equiv). DFT calculations revealed that the reaction barriers for 
H-atom abstraction of cyclohexane by the ground state of 7-coordinate CNTs and
ground state of C are 15.3 and 14.2 kcal/mol, respectively, in line with the
observed high activity of 1 in catalyzing the C-H amination of alkanes under mild
conditions.

PMID: 23634746  [PubMed]


407. Org Lett. 2013 May 3;15(9):2160-3. doi: 10.1021/ol4006757. Epub 2013 Apr 19.

Metal-free fluorination of C(sp3)-H bonds using a catalytic N-oxyl radical.

Amaoka Y(1), Nagatomo M, Inoue M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Hongo,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

A direct conversion of C(sp(3))-H bonds to C(sp(3))-F bonds has been developed.
In this process, a catalytic N-oxyl radical generated from
N,N-dihydroxypyromellitimide abstracts hydrogen from the C(sp(3))-H bond and
Selectfluor acts to trap the resulting carbon radical to form the C(sp(3))-F
bond. This simple metal-free protocol enables the chemoselective introduction of 
a fluorine atom into various aromatic and aliphatic compounds and serves as a
powerful tool for the efficient synthesis of fluorinated molecules.

PMID: 23600550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Org Lett. 2013 May 3;15(9):2274-7. doi: 10.1021/ol4008487. Epub 2013 Apr 16.

Mild metal-free sequential dual oxidative amination of C(sp3)-H bonds: efficient 
synthesis of imidazo[1,5-a]pyridines.

Yan Y(1), Zhang Y, Zha Z, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Soft Matter Chemistry and Department of Chemistry,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, PR China.

A metal-free sequential dual oxidative amination of C(sp(3))-H bonds under
ambient conditions was the first developed, affording imidazo[1,5-a]pyridines in 
good to excellent yields. The reaction was involved in two oxidative C-N
couplings and one oxidative dehydrogenation process with six hydrogen atoms
removed.

PMID: 23590555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Chem Commun (Camb). 2013 May 21;49(41):4619-21. doi: 10.1039/c3cc41110a. Epub
2013 Apr 15.

[Ru(IV)(F20-TPP)Cl2] efficiently catalysed inter- and intra-molecular nitrene
insertion into sp3 C-H bonds of hydrocarbons using phosphoryl azides as nitrene
sources.

Xiao W(1), Wei J, Zhou CY, Che CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and State Key Laboratory of Synthetic Chemistry, The
University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong, China.

[Ru(IV)(F20-TPP)Cl2][H2(F20-TPP) = meso-tetrakis(pentafluorophenyl)porphyrin] is 
an active catalyst for both inter- and intra-molecular nitrene insertion into
sp(3) C-H bonds of hydrocarbons in good to high product yields using phosphoryl
azides as nitrene sources.

PMID: 23589822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Am Chem Soc. 2013 Apr 24;135(16):6030-2. doi: 10.1021/ja402806f. Epub 2013 Apr 
16.

ß-Arylation of carboxamides via iron-catalyzed C(sp3)-H bond activation.

Shang R(1), Ilies L, Matsumoto A, Nakamura E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, School of Science, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1
Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

A 2,2-disubstituted propionamide bearing an 8-aminoquinolinyl group as the amide 
moiety can be arylated at the ß-methyl position with an organozinc reagent in the
presence of an organic oxidant, a catalytic amount of an iron salt, and a
biphosphine ligand at 50 °C. Various features of selectivity and reactivity
suggest the formation of an organometallic intermediate via rate-determining C-H 
bond cleavage rather than a free-radical-type reaction pathway.

PMID: 23581730  [PubMed]


411. J Org Chem. 2013 Apr 19;78(8):4145-52. doi: 10.1021/jo400658d. Epub 2013 Apr 10.

C(sp3)-H bond arylations catalyzed by well-defined [Ru(O2CMes)2(p-cymene)].

Kumar NY(1), Jeyachandran R, Ackermann L.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Organische und Biomolekulare Chemie, Georg-August-Universität,
Tammannstrasse 2, 37077 Göttingen, Germany.

The well-characterized ruthenium(II) biscarboxylate complex
[Ru(O2CMes)2(p-cymene)] enabled versatile direct (hetero)arylations of C(sp(3))-H
bonds with low (co)catalyst loading and ample substrate scope. Detailed
mechanistic studies provided strong support for a facile and reversible
C(sp(3))-H bond metalation.

PMID: 23574572  [PubMed]


412. J Biol Chem. 2013 May 24;288(21):15318-25. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.447318. Epub
2013 Apr 4.

Interactions between NF-<U+03BA>B and SP3 connect inflammatory signaling with reduced
FGF-10 expression.

Carver BJ(1), Plosa EJ, Stinnett AM, Blackwell TS, Prince LS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University School of 
Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

Inflammation inhibits normal lung morphogenesis in preterm infants. Soluble
inflammatory mediators present in the lungs of patients developing
bronchopulmonary dysplasia disrupt expression of multiple genes critical for
development. However, the mechanisms linking innate immune signaling and
developmental programs are not clear. NF-<U+03BA>B activation inhibits expression of the
critical morphogen FGF-10. Here, we show that interactions between the RELA
subunit of NF-<U+03BA>B and SP3 suppress SP1-mediated FGF-10 expression. SP3
co-expression reduced SP1-mediated Fgf-10 promoter activity, suggesting
antagonistic interactions between SP1 and SP3. Chromatin immunoprecipitation of
LPS-treated primary mouse fetal lung mesenchymal cells detected increased
interactions between SP3, RELA, and the Fgf-10 promoter. Expression of a
constitutively active I<U+03BA>B kinase ß mutant not only decreased Fgf-10 promoter
activity but also increased RELA-SP3 nuclear interactions. Expression of a
dominant-negative I<U+03BA>B, which blocks NF-<U+03BA>B nuclear translocation, prevented
inhibition of FGF-10 by SP3. The inhibitory functions of SP3 required sequences
located in the N-terminal region of the protein. These data suggested that
inhibition of FGF-10 by inflammatory signaling involves the NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent
interactions between RELA, SP3, and the Fgf-10 promoter. NF-<U+03BA>B activation may
therefore lead to reduced gene expression by recruiting inhibitory factors to
specific gene promoters following exposure to inflammatory stimuli.

PMCID: PMC3663551
PMID: 23558680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. J Org Chem. 2013 Apr 19;78(8):4115-22. doi: 10.1021/jo4004629. Epub 2013 Apr 10.

Cobryketone derived from vitamin B12 via palladium-catalyzed cleavage of the
sp3-sp3 carbon-carbon bond.

Kurcon S(1), Proinsias Kó, Gryko D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Organic Chemistry PAS, Kasprzaka 44/52, 01-224 Warsaw, Poland.

Heptamethyl cobyrinate was transformed into hexamethyl 8-nor-cobyrinate. The
crucial step involved the synthesis of new, vitamin B12 derived cobryketone via
palladium-catalyzed cleavage of the sp(3)-sp(3) carbon-carbon bond with the
liberation of the ketone. The replacement of sp(3) carbon atom with sp(2) (C-O)
at the 8-position produces a bathochromic shift of all absorption bands and makes
a and ß bands equal as a consequence of the expansion of the existing conjugated 
system of double bonds.

PMID: 23544362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Org Lett. 2013 Apr 19;15(8):1802-5. doi: 10.1021/ol400692b. Epub 2013 Mar 29.

A copper-catalyzed synthesis of 3-aroylindoles via a sp3 C-H bond activation
followed by C-C and C-O bond formation.

Gogoi A(1), Guin S, Rout SK, Patel BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati, Guwahati
781039, India.

An efficient Cu(I)-catalyzed synthesis of 3-aroylindoles has been achieved from
o-alkynylated N,N-dimethylamines via a sp(3) C-H bond activation a to the
nitrogen atom followed by an intramolecular nucleophilic attack with the alkyne
using an aqueous solution of tert-butyl hydroperoxide (TBHP) as the oxidant. In
this tandem catalytic synthesis of 3-aroylindoles both C-C and C-O bonds are
installed at the expense of two sp(3) C-H bond cleavages.

PMID: 23541283  [PubMed]


415. J Psychiatr Res. 2013 Jul;47(7):926-34. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2013.03.004.
Epub 2013 Mar 27.

Analysis of Sp transcription factors in the postmortem brain of chronic
schizophrenia: a pilot study of relationship to negative symptoms.

Pinacho R(1), Villalmanzo N, Roca M, Iniesta R, Monje A, Haro JM, Meana JJ,
Ferrer I, Gill G, Ramos B.

Author information: 
(1)Unitat de Recerca, Parc Sanitari Sant Joan de Déu, Fundació Sant Joan de Déu, 
Universitat de Barcelona, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Salud
Mental, CIBERSAM, Dr. Antoni Pujadas, 42, 08830 Sant Boi de Llobregat, Barcelona,
Spain.

Negative symptoms are the most resilient manifestations in schizophrenia. An
imbalance in dopamine and glutamate pathways has been proposed for the emergence 
of these symptoms. SP1, SP3 and SP4 transcription factors regulate genes in these
pathways, suggesting a possible involvement in negative symptoms. In this study, 
we characterized Sp factors in the brains of subjects with schizophrenia and
explored a possible association with negative symptoms. We also included analysis
of NR1, NR2A and DRD2 as Sp target genes. Postmortem cerebellum and prefrontal
cortex from an antemortem clinically well-characterized and controlled collection
of elderly subjects with chronic schizophrenia (n = 16) and control individuals
(n = 14) were examined. We used the Positive and Negative Syndrome and the
Clinical Global Impression Schizophrenia scales, quantitative PCR and immunoblot.
SP1 protein and mRNA were reduced in the prefrontal cortex in schizophrenia
whereas none of Sp factors were altered in the cerebellum. However, we found that
SP1, SP3 and SP4 protein levels inversely correlated with negative symptoms in
the cerebellum. Furthermore, NR2A and DRD2 mRNA levels correlated with negative
symptoms in the cerebellum. In the prefrontal cortex, SP1 mRNA and NR1 and DRD2
inversely correlated with these symptoms while Sp protein levels did not. This
pilot study not only reinforces the involvement of SP1 in schizophrenia, but also
suggests that reduced levels or function of SP1, SP4 and SP3 may participate in
negative symptoms, in part through the regulation of NMDA receptor subunits
and/or Dopamine D2 receptor, providing novel information about the complex
negative symptoms in this disorder.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23540600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Org Lett. 2013 Apr 5;15(7):1784-7. doi: 10.1021/ol400690t. Epub 2013 Mar 27.

Palladium-catalyzed diarylmethyl C(sp3)-C(sp2) bond formation: a new coupling
approach toward triarylmethanes.

Xia Y(1), Hu F, Liu Z, Qu P, Ge R, Ma C, Zhang Y, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing National Laboratory of Molecular Sciences (BNLMS), College of
Chemistry, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

Palladium-catalyzed reductive coupling reactions between N-tosylhydrazones and
aryl halides lead to the formation of C(sp(3))-C(sp(2)) bonds. This approach
provides a general route for the synthesis of triarylmethanes.

PMID: 23534368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Nutr Cancer. 2013;65(3):494-504. doi: 10.1080/01635581.2012.725194.

Resveratrol and quercetin in combination have anticancer activity in colon cancer
cells and repress oncogenic microRNA-27a.

Del Follo-Martinez A(1), Banerjee N, Li X, Safe S, Mertens-Talcott S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Science, Texas A&M University, College
Station, Texas 77843, USA.

Resveratrol and quercetin (RQ) in combination (1:1 ratio) previously inhibited
growth in human leukemia cells. This study investigated the anticancer activity
of the same mixture in HT-29 colon cancer cells. RQ decreased the generation of
reactive oxygen species (ROS) by up to 2.25-fold and increased the antioxidant
capacity by up to 3-fold in HT-29 cells (3.8-60 µg/mL), whereas IC50 values for
viability were 18.13, 18.73, and 11.85 µg/mL, respectively. RQ also induced
caspase-3-cleavage (2-fold) and increased PARP cleavage. Specificity protein (Sp)
transcription factors are overexpressed in colon and other cancers and regulate
genes required for cell proliferation survival and angiogenesis. RQ treatment
decreased the expression of Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 mRNA and this was accompanied by
decreased protein expression. Moreover, the Sp-dependent antiapoptotic survival
gene survivin was also significantly reduced, both at mRNA and protein levels. RQ
decreased microRNA-27a (miR-27a) and induced zinc finger protein ZBTB10, an
Sp-repressor, suggesting that interactions of RQ with the miR-27a-ZBTB10-axis
play a role in Sp downregulation. This was confirmed by transfection of cells
with the specific mimic for miR-27a, which partially reversed the effects of RQ. 
These findings are consistent with previous studies on botanical anticancer
agents in colon cancer cells.

PMID: 23530649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. J Biol Chem. 2013 May 10;288(19):13278-94. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.457010. Epub
2013 Mar 24.

Regulation of the bone-restricted IFITM-like (Bril) gene transcription by Sp and 
Gli family members and CpG methylation.

Kasaai B(1), Gaumond MH, Moffatt P.

Author information: 
(1)Shriners Hospital for Children, Montreal, Quebec H3G 1A6, Canada.

BACKGROUND: BRIL is a bone-specific membrane protein that is involved in
osteogenesis imperfecta type V.
RESULTS: Bril transcription is activated by Sp1, Sp3, OSX, and GLI2 and by CpG
demethylation.
CONCLUSION: Regulation of Bril involves trans-acting factors integrating at
conserved promoter elements and epigenetic modifications.
SIGNIFICANCE: Identification of the mechanisms governing Bril transcription is
important to understand its role in skeletal biology. Bril encodes a small
membrane protein present in osteoblasts. In humans, a single recurrent mutation
in the 5'-UTR of BRIL causes osteogenesis imperfecta type V. The exact function
of BRIL and the mechanism by which it contributes to disease are still unknown.
The goal of the current study was to characterize the mechanisms governing Bril
transcription in humans, rats, and mice. In the three species, as detected by
luciferase reporter assays in UMR106 cells, we found that most of the base-line
regulatory activity was localized within ~250 bp upstream of the coding ATG.
Co-transfection experiments indicated that Sp1 and Sp3 were potent inducers of
the promoter activity, through the binding of several GC-rich boxes. Osterix was 
a weak activator but acted cooperatively with Sp1 and GLI2 to synergistically
induce the BRIL promoter. GLI2, a mediator of hedgehog signaling pathway, was
also a potent activator of BRIL through a single GLI binding site.
Correspondingly, agonists of the hedgehog pathway (purmorphamine and Indian
hedgehog) in MC3T3 osteoblasts led to increased BRIL levels. The BRIL promoter
activity was also found to be negatively modulated through two different
mechanisms. First, the ZFP354C zinc finger protein repressed basal and
Sp1-induced activity. Second, CpG methylation of the promoter region correlated
with an inactive state and prevented Sp1 activation. The data provide the very
first analyses of the cis- and trans-acting factors regulating Bril
transcription. They revealed key roles for the Sp members and GLI2 that possibly 
cooperate to activate Bril when the promoter becomes demethylated.

PMCID: PMC3650367
PMID: 23530031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Biochem Cell Biol. 2013 Apr;91(2):102-8. doi: 10.1139/bcb-2012-0072. Epub 2012
Nov 12.

17ß-Estradiol suppresses MHC class I chain-related B gene expression via an
intact GC box.

Sroijak N(1), Ponglikitmongkol M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok
10400, Thailand.

Major histocompatibility complex class I chain-related B (MICB) is a
membrane-bound glycoprotein involved in both innate and adaptive immunity through
its interaction with NKG2D receptors present on <U+03B3>d T, aß CD8(+) T, and natural
killer cells. Factors known to upregulate MICB expression include heat shock,
viral or bacterial infection, and tumorigenesis, and here, we explored the effect
of 17ß-estradiol (E2) on MICB regulation. Physiological concentrations of E2 were
found to suppress MICB mRNA and surface protein levels and this effect was
antagonized by the antiestrogen ICI 182780. The inhibitory effect of E2 was also 
observed for other NKG2D ligands, MICA and ULBPs. Evaluation of promoter
fragments from the common MICB*00502 allele revealed that inhibition of
transcription by E2 required the GC box at -87. The electrophoretic mobility
shift assay and supershift analysis established the presence of SP1, SP3, or
estrogen receptor a recognition sites within the MICB promoter sequence and
interaction of these factors in situ was confirmed by chromatin
immunoprecipitation. We conclude that E2 upon forming a complex with its cognate 
receptor suppresses MICB expression through binding with SP1/SP3 sites within the
MICB promoter GC box. These results suggest that the partial benefit of
17ß-estradiol on autoimmune diseases may be mediated by reducing the immune NKG2D
ligands like MICB.

PMID: 23527639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Virology. 2013 Jun 5;440(2):171-81. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2013.02.019. Epub 2013
Mar 21.

Regulation of the varicella-zoster virus ORF3 promoter by cellular and viral
factors.

Khalil MI(1), Sommer M, Arvin A, Hay J, Ruyechan WT.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Microbiology & Immunology, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, United States. mkhalil2@stanford.edu

The varicella zoster virus (VZV) immediate early 62 protein (IE62) activates most
if not all identified promoters of VZV genes and also some minimum model
promoters that contain only a TATA box element. Analysis of the DNA elements that
function in IE62 activation of the VZV ORF3 promoter revealed that the 100
nucleotides before the translation start site of the ORF3 gene contains the
promoter elements. This promoter lacks any functional TATA box element. Cellular 
transcription factors Sp1, Sp3 and YY1 bind to the promoter, and mutation of
their binding sites inhibited ORF3 gene expression. VZV regulatory proteins, IE63
and ORF29, ORF61 and ORF10 proteins inhibited IE62-mediated activation of this
promoter. Mutation of the Sp1/Sp3 binding site in the VZV genome did not alter
VZV replication kinetics. This work suggests that Sp family proteins contribute
to the activation of VZV promoters by IE62 in the absence of functional TATA box.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3640663
PMID: 23523134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2013 Sep;18(5):631-41. doi: 10.1007/s12192-013-0416-0.
Epub 2013 Mar 20.

Inhibition of cystathionine ß-synthase is associated with glucocorticoids
over-secretion in psychological stress-induced hyperhomocystinemia rat liver.

Zhao Y(1), Wu S, Gao X, Zhang Z, Gong J, Zhan R, Wang X, Wang W, Qian L.

Author information: 
(1)Key laboratory of stress medicine, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences,
Beijing, China.

Hyperhomocysteinemia (HHcy), a pathological condition characterized by an
increase in plasma concentration of total homocysteine (Hcy), is recognized as a 
risk factor for several diseases. The transsulfuration pathway is the main
metabolic fate of Hcy utilization, which requires the activity of cystathionine
ß-synthase (CBS). Our results showed the development of HHcy induced by
psychological stress was mainly derived from a reduction of CBS activity in the
liver, which was accompanied by a significant decrease in its mRNA level. It
suggested that the hepatic CBS enzyme regulated by stress at the level of
transcription would have a profound effect on circulating Hcy levels. The
expression of Sp3, a negative factor for cbs transcription, obviously increased
in hepatocytes nuclei of stressed rats, but Sp1 was not altered. It indicated
that Sp3 was the key point of variations in cbs transcription caused by stress.
Meanwhile, we detected that augmented plasma Hcy concentrations correlated with
glucocordicoids (GCs) over-secretion in response to stress, and CBS mRNA levels
were markedly lowered in GCs-treated rat hepatocytes. Further results found that 
glucocorticoids receptor (GR) expression in hepatocyte nuclei of stress rats and 
GR nuclear translocation ratio was increased, and the same results were proved by
experiments in vitro, i.e., GR nuclear translocation and Sp3 expression was
remarkably increased in GCs-treated hepatocytes. Moreover, results from ChIP
suggested GCs enhanced the binding of GR to the regulatory region of the Sp3
promoter. These results indicated that GCs inhibit CBS transcription by
up-regulating Sp3 in psychological stress-induced HHcy.

PMCID: PMC3745252
PMID: 23512717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2013 Apr 15;52(16):4453-6. doi: 10.1002/anie.201300459.
Epub 2013 Mar 19.

Direct functionalization of tetrahydrofuran and 1,4-dioxane: nickel-catalyzed
oxidative C(sp3)-H arylation.

Liu D(1), Liu C, Li H, Lei A.

Author information: 
(1)College of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072,
P. R. China.

PMID: 23512429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Langmuir. 2013 Apr 16;29(15):4839-46. doi: 10.1021/la4000846. Epub 2013 Apr 2.

Carbon-binding designer proteins that discriminate between sp2- and
sp3-hybridized carbon surfaces.

Coyle BL(1), Rolandi M, Baneyx F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington 98195-1750, United States.

Robust and simple strategies to directly functionalize graphene- and
diamond-based nanostructures with proteins are of considerable interest for
biologically-driven manufacturing, biosensing, and bioimaging. Here, we identify 
a new set of carbon-binding peptides that vary in overall hydrophobicity and
charge and engineer two of these sequences (Car9 and Car15) within the framework 
of E. coli thioredoxin 1 (TrxA). We develop purification schemes to recover the
resulting TrxA derivatives in a soluble form and conduct a detailed analysis of
the mechanisms that underpin the interaction of the fusion proteins with
carbonaceous surfaces. Although equilibrium quartz crystal microbalance
measurements show that TrxA::Car9 and TrxA::Car15 have similar affinities for
sp(2)-hybridized graphitic carbon (Kd = 50 and 90 nM, respectively), only the
latter protein is capable of dispersing carbon nanotubes. Further investigation
by surface plasmon resonance and atomic force microscopy reveals that TrxA::Car15
interacts with sp(2)-bonded carbon through a combination of hydrophobic and p-p
interactions but that TrxA::Car9 exhibits a cooperative mode of binding that
relies on a combination of electrostatics and weaker p stacking. Consequently, we
find that TrxA::Car9 binds equally well to sp(2)- and sp(3)-bonded (diamondlike) 
carbon particles whereas TrxA::Car15 is capable of discriminating between the two
carbon allotropes. Our results emphasize the importance of understanding both
bulk and molecular recognition events when exploiting the adhesive properties of 
solid-binding peptides and proteins in technological applications.

PMCID: PMC3658162
PMID: 23510486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. J Org Chem. 2013 Apr 5;78(7):3104-12. doi: 10.1021/jo4000674. Epub 2013 Mar 26.

Manganese dioxide-methanesulfonic acid promoted direct dehydrogenative alkylation
of sp3 C-H bonds adjacent to a heteroatom.

Liu X(1), Sun B, Xie Z, Qin X, Liu L, Lou H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Natural Products Chemistry, Key Lab of Chemical Biology (MOE),
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Shandong University, Jinan 250012, PR China.

A manganese dioxide (MnO2)-methanesulfonic acid (CH3SO3H) oxidation system has
been developed to efficiently promote direct coupling of benzylic ethers and
carbamates with simple ketones via oxidative C-H bond activation. The alkylation 
proceeds smoothly under air atmosphere to afford the corresponding products in
good to excellent yields (53-87%). The employment of the combination of MnO2 and 
CH3SO3H is attractive on the basis of economical and environmental issues.

PMID: 23506099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2013 Sep;57(9):1638-48. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201200609. Epub 2013
Mar 8.

The drug resistance suppression induced by curcuminoids in colon cancer SW-480
cells is mediated by reactive oxygen species-induced disruption of the
microRNA-27a-ZBTB10-Sp axis.

Noratto GD(1), Jutooru I, Safe S, Angel-Morales G, Mertens-Talcott SU.

Author information: 
(1)School of Food Science, Washington State University, WA, USA.
giuliana.noratto@wsu.edu

SCOPE: Mechanisms involving the curcuminoids effects in decreasing the
prooncogenic specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors, and Sp-regulated
genes in SW-480 colon cancer cells and how the multidrug resistance protein
(MDR1) inhibition is mediated by Sp suppression.
METHODS AND RESULTS: HT-29 and SW-480 colon cancer and normal CCD-18Co colon
fibroblast cells were treated with curcuminoids previously analyzed by HPLC. Gene
and protein expression regulation were assessed by RT-PCR, transfections with
expression constructs, and Western blots. Curcuminoids (2.5-10 µg/mL) suppressed 
preferentially the growth of SW-480 and HT-29 compared to CCD-18Co cells and
enhanced the anticancer activity of the chemotherapeutic drug 5-fluorouracil due 
to the suppression of MDR1. Additionally, Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 and Sp-regulated
genes were downregulated by curcuminoids in SW-480 and this was accompanied by
suppression of microRNA-27a (miR-27a) and induction of ZBTB10, an mRNA target of 
miR-27a and a transcriptional repressor of Sp expression. This mechanism was
mediated by the induction of ROS. RNA-interference and transfection with
ZBTB10-expression plasmid demonstrated that MDR1 was regulated by Sp1 and Sp3 and
the disruption of the miR-27a-ZBTB10-Sp axis.
CONCLUSION: Colon cancer treatment with curcuminoids will enhance the therapeutic
effects of drugs in patients who have developed drug resistance.

© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23471840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Endocrinology. 2013 Apr;154(4):1648-60. doi: 10.1210/en.2012-2008. Epub 2013 Mar 
7.

A novel isoform of liver receptor homolog-1 is regulated by steroidogenic
factor-1 and the specificity protein family in ovarian granulosa cells.

Kawabe S(1), Yazawa T, Kanno M, Usami Y, Mizutani T, Imamichi Y, Ju Y, Matsumura 
T, Orisaka M, Miyamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Fukui, Fukui 910-1193, Japan.

Liver receptor homolog-1 (LRH-1) is a member of the nuclear receptor 5A (NR5A)
subfamily. It is expressed in granulosa cells of the ovary and is involved in
steroidogenesis and ovulation. To reveal the transcriptional regulatory mechanism
of LRH-1, we determined its transcription start site in the ovary using KGN
cells, a human granulosa cell tumor cell line. 5'-rapid amplification of cDNA
ends PCR revealed that human ovarian LRH-1 was transcribed from a novel
transcription start site, termed exon 2o, located 41 bp upstream of the reported 
exon 2. The novel LRH-1 isoform was expressed in the human ovary but not the
liver. Promoter analysis and an EMSA indicated that a steroidogenic factor-1
(SF-1) binding site and a GC box upstream of exon 2o were required for promoter
activity, and that SF-1 and specificity protein (Sp)-1/3 bind to the respective
regions in ovarian granulosa cells. In KGN cells, transfection of SF-1 increased 
ovarian LRH-1 promoter activity and SF-1-dependent reporter activity was further 
enhanced when peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> coactivator-1a
(PGC-1a) was cotransfected. In Drosophila SL2 cells, Sp1 was more effective than 
Sp3 in enhancing promoter activity, and co-transfection of the NR5A-family
synergistically increased activity. Infection with adenoviruses expressing SF-1
or PGC-1a induced LRH-1 expression in KGN cells. These results indicate that the 
expression of human LRH-1 is regulated in a tissue-specific manner, and that the 
novel promoter region is controlled by the Sp-family, NR5A-family and PGC-1a in
ovarian granulosa cells in a coordinated fashion.

PMID: 23471216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. J Am Chem Soc. 2013 Apr 3;135(13):5127-43. doi: 10.1021/ja312464b. Epub 2013 Mar 
21.

Cleavage of ether, ester, and tosylate C(sp3)-O bonds by an iridium complex,
initiated by oxidative addition of C-H bonds. Experimental and computational
studies.

Kundu S(1), Choi J, Wang DY, Choliy Y, Emge TJ, Krogh-Jespersen K, Goldman AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Rutgers, The State University of
New Jersey , New Brunswick, New Jersey 08903, United States.

A pincer-ligated iridium complex, (PCP)Ir (PCP = <U+03BA>(3)-C6H3-2,6-[CH2P(t-Bu)2]2),
is found to undergo oxidative addition of C(sp(3))-O bonds of methyl esters
(CH3-O2CR'), methyl tosylate (CH3-OTs), and certain electron-poor methyl aryl
ethers (CH3-OAr). DFT calculations and mechanistic studies indicate that the
reactions proceed via oxidative addition of C-H bonds followed by oxygenate
migration, rather than by direct C-O addition. Thus, methyl aryl ethers react via
addition of the methoxy C-H bond, followed by a-aryloxide migration to give
cis-(PCP)Ir(H)(CH2)(OAr), followed by iridium-to-methylidene hydride migration to
give (PCP)Ir(CH3)(OAr). Methyl acetate undergoes C-H bond addition at the
carbomethoxy group to give (PCP)Ir(H)[<U+03BA>(2)-CH2OC(O)Me] which then affords
(PCP-CH2)Ir(H)(<U+03BA>(2)-O2CMe) (6-Me) in which the methoxy C-O bond has been cleaved,
and the methylene derived from the methoxy group has migrated into the PCP
Cipso-Ir bond. Thermolysis of 6-Me ultimately gives (PCP)Ir(CH3)(<U+03BA>(2)-O2CR), the 
net product of methoxy group C-O oxidative addition. Reaction of (PCP)Ir with
species of the type ROAr, RO2CMe or ROTs, where R possesses ß-C-H bonds (e.g., R 
= ethyl or isopropyl), results in formation of (PCP)Ir(H)(OAr),
(PCP)Ir(H)(O2CMe), or (PCP)Ir(H)(OTs), respectively, along with the corresponding
olefin or (PCP)Ir(olefin) complex. Like the C-O bond oxidative additions, these
reactions also proceed via initial activation of a C-H bond; in this case, C-H
addition at the ß-position is followed by ß-migration of the aryloxide,
carboxylate, or tosylate group. Calculations indicate that the ß-migration of the
carboxylate group proceeds via an unusual six-membered cyclic transition state in
which the alkoxy C-O bond is cleaved with no direct participation by the iridium 
center.

PMID: 23469859  [PubMed]


428. Biochem J. 2013 Jun 15;452(3):519-29. doi: 10.1042/BJ20121666.

Sp sites contribute to basal and inducible expression of the human TNIP1
(TNFa-inducible protein 3-interacting protein 1) promoter.

Encarnacao PC(1), Ramirez VP, Zhang C, Aneskievich BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Pharmacology and Toxicology, Department of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269-3092, USA.

TNIP1 [TNFa (tumour necrosis factor a)-induced protein 3-interacting protein 1]
is a co-repressor of RAR (retinoic acid receptor) and PPAR
(peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor). Additionally, it can reduce
signalling stemming from cell membrane receptors such as those for TNFa and EGF
(epidermal growth factor). Consequently, it influences a variety of
receptor-mediated events as diverse as transcription, programmed cell death and
cell cycling. Thus changes in TNIP1 expression levels are likely to affect
multiple important biological end points. TNIP1 expression level changes have
been linked to psoriasis and systemic sclerosis. As such, it is crucial to
determine what controls its expression levels, starting with constitutive control
of its promoter. Our analysis of the TNIP1 promoter revealed multiple
transcription start sites in its GC-rich proximal regions along with two
transcriptionally active Sp (specificity protein) sites, responsive to both Sp1
and Sp3. EMSA (electrophoretic mobility-shift assay) and ChIP (chromatin
immunoprecipitation) demonstrated physical binding between Sp1 and Sp3 at these
sites. A decrease in Sp1 protein levels via siRNA (short interfering RNA) or
diminished Sp1 DNA binding by mithramycin decreased TNIP1 mRNA levels. This
Sp-binding GC-rich region of the TNIP1 promoter also participates in
transcriptional activation by ligand-bound RAR. Together, these results
demonstrate newly identified regulators of TNIP1 expression and suggest possible 
transcription factor targets which in turn control TNIP1-related biological end
points ranging from apoptosis to inflammatory diseases.

PMID: 23464785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. J Cell Biochem. 2013 Aug;114(8):1863-70. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24528.

Control of Fiat (factor inhibiting ATF4-mediated transcription) expression by Sp 
family transcription factors in osteoblasts.

Hekmatnejad B(1), Gauthier C, St-Arnaud R.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Unit, Shriners Hospitals for Children-Canada, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada H3G 1A6.

FIAT (factor inhibiting ATF4-mediated transcription) represses Osteocalcin gene
transcription and inhibits osteoblast activity by heterodimerizing with ATF4 to
prevent it from binding DNA. It thus appears important to identify and
characterize the molecular mechanisms that control Fiat gene expression in
osteoblasts. In silico sequence analysis identified a canonical GC-box within a
1,400 bp region of the proximal Fiat gene promoter. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assays (EMSA) with MC3T3-E1 osteoblastic cells nuclear extracts indicated
that the transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3, but not Sp7/OSTERIX, bound this
proximal GC-box. Chromatin immunoprecipitation confirmed interaction of the two
transcription factors with the Fiat promoter GC-element in living osteoblasts.
Transient transfection studies showed that Sp1 dose-dependently activated the
expression of a Fiat-luciferase reporter construct while both the long or short
isoforms of Sp3 dose-dependently inhibited transcription from the Fiat reporter
construct. Transfection of an Sp7/OSTERIX expression vector did not affect
expression of the Fiat-luciferase reporter. Co-transfection of increasing amounts
of the Sp3 expression vector in the context of maximal Sp1-dependent
Fiat-luciferase activation led to dose-dependent repression of the expression of 
the reporter. Using RNA knockdown, we measured a reduction in steady-state Fiat
expression when Sp1 was inhibited, and a reciprocal increase upon Sp3 knockdown. 
In parallel, treatment of osteoblasts with WP631, which prevents Sp1/DNA
interactions, strongly inhibited the expression of Fiat and reduced the occupancy
of the Fiat promoter proximal GC-box by Sp1. Taken together, our results suggest 
an interplay between Sp1 and Sp3 as a mechanism involved in the control of Fiat
gene expression in osteoblasts.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23463631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. J Org Chem. 2013 Apr 19;78(8):3918-24. doi: 10.1021/jo400305x. Epub 2013 Mar 15.

DFT prediction of multitopic N-heterocyclic carbenes using Clar's aromatic sextet
theory.

Suresh CH(1), Ajitha MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Sciences and Technology Division, CSIR-National Institute for
Interdisciplinary Science and Technology, Trivandrum 695019, India.
sureshch@gmail.com

Existence of several multitopic N-heterocyclic carbene (NHC) ligands with up to
four carbene centers have been predicted on the basis of Clar's aromatic sextet
theory. Assessment on stability and reactivity of NHCs was made by quantifying
aromaticity, aromatic stabilization energy (E(aroma)), strength of carbene lone
pair, proton affinity, and CuCl binding energy. On NICS(0) and HOMA scales of
aromaticity, several NHCs showed high aromaticity, while E(aroma) (17.2-19.4
kcal/mol) indicated substantial stability for the N-heterocycle. Homodesmotic
reactions suggested that heat of formation of most of the newly designed carbenes
is very close to that of the existing bis-NHCs. Designing a multitopic ligand
through branching via C(sp3) linkage was very effective as it improved the
stability of the carbene. Electrostatic potential minimum (V(min)) at the carbene
lone pair suggested that annelation of heterocycle to a benzenoid ring or
branching through C(sp3) linkage can only marginally influence the electron
donating power of the ligand. Hence, all multitopic NHCs showed proton affinity
(252.3-267.4 kcal/mol) and CuCl binding energy (62.9-66.6 kcal/mol) very close to
those of 1,3-dimethylimidazolidine-2-ylidene (1). It has also been demonstrated
that branched multitopic 3-dimensional NHCs are attractive for designing
metal-organic framework with narrow (1-1.5 nm) cage/pore size.

PMID: 23461408  [PubMed]


431. Org Lett. 2013 Mar 15;15(6):1402-5. doi: 10.1021/ol4003948. Epub 2013 Mar 5.

Pd-catalyzed tandem sp2-sp3 coupling reactions of chiral stannolanes: an
efficient preparation of optically active tetrahydrobenz[f]isoindoles.

Kamimura A(1), So M, Ishikawa S, Uno H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Molecular Bioscience, Yamaguchi University, Ube,
755-8611, Japan. ak10@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp

A novel double Migita-Kosugi-Stille coupling reaction with dihydrostannolanes,
which are readily available from a radical cascade reaction, was achieved with
dihalobenzenes in the presence of a palladium catalyst. Use of unsymmetrical
1-bromo-2-iodobenzene derivatives accomplished the double coupling reaction which
gave tetrahydrobenz[f]isoindoles in a regioselective manner.

PMID: 23461269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2013 Mar 25;52(13):3570-2. doi: 10.1002/anie.201209583.
Epub 2013 Feb 25.

C(sp3)-F bond formation: a free-radical approach.

Sibi MP(1), Landais Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, North Dakota State University,
Fargo, North Dakota 58108, USA. Mukund.sibi@ndsu.edu

PMID: 23441011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013 May;145(5):1335-44. doi:
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2013.01.016. Epub 2013 Feb 20.

Differential responses of the right ventricle to abnormal loading conditions in
vivo: possible pathophysiologic mechanisms.

Azakie A(1), Fineman J, He Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of California at San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA. tony.azakie@ucsfmedctr.org

OBJECTIVE: The right ventricle (RV) demonstrates differential adaptations in
response to pressure versus volume loading, a phenomenon that may be important in
the management of children and adults with congenital heart disease (CHD). The
purpose of this study is to elucidate possible transcriptional mechanisms of the 
RV response to pressure versus volume loading in vivo.
METHODS: Fetal lambs had aortopulmonary shunting or pulmonary artery (PA)
banding. Four weeks after spontaneous delivery, ovine hearts were evaluated for
hemodynamic changes and changes in expression of sarcomeric gene proteins and
transcriptional factors. Western blot densitometry and chromatin
immunoprecipitation were applied using standard techniques. Transactivation
assays were performed using transient transfections in Schneider's Drosophila
line 2 cells in culture.
RESULTS: After PA banding, the RV pressure increased from 36 ± 4 mm Hg (n = 4) to
96 ± 8 mm Hg (n = 4, P < .05). The RVs of shunted and banded animals showed
significant increases in the expression levels and promoter binding of activators
myocyte enhancer factor 2, GATA-4, Nkx2.5, transcriptional enhancer factor 1, and
specificity protein (Sp) 1. The transcriptional repressor Sp3 was downregulated
in shunted animals, but its expression was increased paradoxically in the RV of
the PA band group. Immunoprecipitation of Sp3 showed posttranslational
modification to the acetylated isoform. In transient transfections of Schneider's
Drosophila line 2 cells, acetylation of Sp3 converted it from a transcriptional
repressor to an activator.
CONCLUSIONS: Posttranslational modifications of the transcriptional repressor
Sp3, by acetylation, may be an important mechanism in the differential response
of the RV to abnormal loading conditions. Sp3 may serve as a biomarker for RV
failure for various heart defects in children and adults with CHD. These findings
may have therapeutic implications in the management of right heart failure.

Copyright © 2013 The American Association for Thoracic Surgery. Published by
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23434296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Histopathology. 2013 Mar;62(4):563-77. doi: 10.1111/his.12024.

Immunohistochemical analysis of the monoclonal antibody 4B5 in breast tissue
expressing human epidermal growth factor receptor 4 (HER4).

Jay JI(1), Brunhoeber PS, Smith MH, Williams RR, Sugarman MC, Free HL, Tast DE.

Author information: 
(1)Ventana Medical Systems Inc., Tucson, AZ 85755, USA.

AIMS: A recent study examining the specificity of human epidermal growth factor
receptor (HER) 2 pharmacodiagnostic antibodies demonstrated that CB11 and 4B5
stain both HER2-transfected and HER4-transfected cell lines. However, there has
been no evidence showing that 4B5 has affinity for HER4 in clinically obtained
tissues, and, if so, whether this has any impact on the assessment of HER2. We
therefore sought to determine the expression of membrane-bound HER4 in clinical
breast carcinomas, and evaluate its impact on the clinical utility of 4B5 in
determining HER2 status.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Breast carcinomas were assessed by immunohistochemistry
(IHC) for membrane-bound HER4 using anti-HER4 clone E200. HER2 expression in
these cases was then assessed using anti-HER2 clone 4B5, and a reference clone,
SP3. In all 117 membrane HER4-positive cases (out of 241), 4B5 scored equal to or
less than the reference anti-HER2 clone SP3. Eighteen cases were positive for
membrane-bound HER4 by E200 and negative by 4B5, including a membrane HER4 level 
3+ case.
CONCLUSIONS: No cross-reactivity of 4B5 with membrane-bound HER4 was identified
in the clinical IHC analysis of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded breast carcinoma
cases as evidenced by the HER4 antibody clone E200.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 23432624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2013 Mar 25;52(13):3638-41. doi: 10.1002/anie.201210029. 
Epub 2013 Feb 18.

Synthesis of oxindoles by iron-catalyzed oxidative 1,2-alkylarylation of
activated alkenes with an aryl C(sp2)-H bond and a C(sp3)-H bond adjacent to a
heteroatom.

Wei WT(1), Zhou MB, Fan JH, Liu W, Song RJ, Liu Y, Hu M, Xie P, Li JH.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensing and Chemometrics, College of
Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China.

PMID: 23417843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. J Am Chem Soc. 2013 Mar 6;135(9):3387-90. doi: 10.1021/ja400648w. Epub 2013 Feb
25.

Palladium(0)-catalyzed alkynylation of C(sp3)-H bonds.

He J(1), Wasa M, Chan KS, Yu JQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey
Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, United States.

The alkynylation of ß-C(sp(3))-H bonds in aliphatic amides with alkynyl halides
has been enabled using Pd(0)/N-heterocyclic carbene (NHC) and Pd(0)/phosphine
(PR3) catalysts. This is the first example of utilizing [AlkynylPd(II)L(n)]
complexes to activate C(sp(3))-H bonds.

PMID: 23406445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Apr;33(8):1582-93. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00323-12. Epub 2013 Feb
11.

Transcription factor Sp3 represses expression of p21CIP¹ via inhibition of
productive elongation by RNA polymerase II.

Valin A(1), Ouyang J, Gill G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cellular Biology, Tufts University School of
Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Like that of many protein-coding genes, expression of the p21(CIP1) cell cycle
inhibitor is regulated at the level of transcription elongation. While many
transcriptional activators have been shown to stimulate elongation, the
mechanisms by which promoter-specific repressors regulate pausing and elongation 
by RNA polymerase II (RNA PolII) are not well described. Here we report that the 
transcription factor Sp3 inhibits basal p21(CIP1) gene expression by
promoter-bound RNA PolII. Knockdown of Sp3 led to increased p21(CIP1) mRNA levels
and reduced occupancy of the negative elongation factor (NELF) at the p21(CIP1)
promoter, although the level of binding of the positive transcription elongation 
factor b (P-TEFb) kinase was not increased. Sp3 depletion correlated with
increased H3K36me3 and H2Bub1, two histone modifications associated with
transcription elongation. Further, Sp3 was shown to promote the binding of
protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) to the p21(CIP1) promoter, leading to reduced H3S10
phosphorylation, a finding consistent with Sp3-dependent regulation of the local 
balance between kinase and phosphatase activities. Analysis of other targets of
Sp3-mediated repression suggests that, in addition to previously described SUMO
modification-dependent chromatin-silencing mechanisms, inhibition of the
transition of paused RNA PolII to productive elongation, described here for
p21(CIP1), is a general mechanism by which transcription factor Sp3 fine-tunes
gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3624253
PMID: 23401853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. J Am Chem Soc. 2013 Feb 27;135(8):2947-50. doi: 10.1021/ja3126239. Epub 2013 Feb 
15.

Synthesis of primary and secondary alkylboronates through site-selective C(sp3)-H
activation with silica-supported monophosphine-Ir catalysts.

Kawamorita S(1), Murakami R, Iwai T, Sawamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Hokkaido University, Sapporo
060-0810, Japan.

The site-selective activation and borylation of unactivated C(sp(3))-H bonds in
2-alkylpyridines to form primary and secondary alkylboronates was achieved using 
silica-supported monophosphine-Ir catalysts. This borylation occurs selectively
at C-H bonds located <U+03B3> to the pyridine nitrogen atom. The site-selectivity of
this reaction suggests that the C-H bond cleavage occurs with the assistance of a
proximity effect due to N-to-Ir coordination.

PMID: 23398347  [PubMed]


439. Chem Commun (Camb). 2013 Mar 18;49(22):2198-200. doi: 10.1039/c3cc00130j.

Multifunctionalization of alkenes via aerobic oxynitration and sp3 C-H oxidation.

Taniguchi T(1), Sugiura Y, Hatta T, Yajima A, Ishibashi H.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Institute of Medical, Pharmaceutical and
Health Sciences, Kanazawa University, Kakuma-machi, Kanazawa 920-1192, Japan.
tsuyoshi@p.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

A method for direct functionalization of three positions including an unactivated
C-H bond of aliphatic alkenes using tert-butyl nitrite and molecular oxygen to
give <U+03B3>-lactols has been developed. The present reaction proceeds through a
sequence of radical processes involving oxynitration followed by aerobic
oxidation of an sp(3) C-H bond. This multifunctionalization reaction requires
neither metallic reagents nor photolysis and proceeds under mild conditions.

PMID: 23396373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. J Clin Pathol. 2013 May;66(5):409-14. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2012-201270. Epub
2013 Feb 5.

SP3, a reliable alternative to HercepTest in determining HER-2/neu status in
breast cancer patients.

D'Alfonso TM(1), Liu YF, Chen Z, Chen YB, Cimino-Mathews A, Shin SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, New York-Presbyterian
Hospital, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York 10065, USA.
tid9007@med.cornell.edu

Accurate assessment of HER-2/neu gene status in breast cancer patients has
important prognostic and therapeutic implications. Overexpression/gene
amplification of HER-2 is associated with a more aggressive clinical course and
eligibility for targeted therapy with trastuzumab. A variety of
immunohistochemical (IHC) antibodies and in situ hybridisation (ISH) methods have
been employed to assess HER-2 status. SP3 is a rabbit monoclonal antibody that
has been shown to have a high level of agreement with other anti-HER-2 antibodies
and ISH methods. We assessed HER-2 status by SP3 and HercepTest IHC stains and by
fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) on invasive breast carcinomas from
paired needle core biopsy and excisional biopsy specimens from 100 patients. We
compared the two antibodies with respect to concordance rates with FISH,
concordance rates between samples of the same tumour, and sensitivity and
specificity using FISH as the reference test. Concordance between SP3 and FISH in
needle core biopsy and excisional biopsy specimens was 96% (95% CI 91.9% to
99.7%) (<U+03BA>=0.89 (95% CI 0.73 to 1.00)) and 97% (95% CI 90.3% to 99.3%) (<U+03BA>=0.84
(95% CI 0.66 to 1.00)), respectively. Sensitivity and specificity of SP3 for
detecting HER-2 overexpression/gene amplification were 78.3% and 100%,
respectively, in needle core biopsy and excisional biopsy specimens. Concordance 
between SP3 results assessed on the needle core biopsy and excisional biopsy was 
89% (95% CI 81.2% to 94.4%) (<U+03BA>=0.62 (95% CI 0.42 to 0.82)). Concordance between
SP3 and HercepTest antibodies, after excluding 2+ cases, was 97.6% (95% CI 94.0% 
to 99.3%) (<U+03BA>=0.88 (95% CI 0.77 to 1.00)). SP3 is a reliable alternative to
HercepTest in evaluating HER-2 status in breast cancer patients. Like other
anti-HER-2 antibodies, SP3 may serve as a diagnostic tool in breast pathology and
has potential utility as an IHC biomarker in non-mammary malignancies.

PMID: 23386665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Microb Cell Fact. 2013 Feb 1;12:12. doi: 10.1186/1475-2859-12-12.

High-level intracellular expression of heterologous proteins in Brevibacillus
choshinensis SP3 under the control of a xylose inducible promoter.

D'Urzo N(1), Martinelli M, Nenci C, Brettoni C, Telford JL, Maione D.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Vaccines and Diagnostics, Via Fiorentina 1, 53100, Siena, Italy.

BACKGROUND: In past years research has focused on the development of alternative 
Gram positive bacterial expression systems to produce industrially relevant
proteins. Brevibacillus choshinensis is an easy to handle non-sporulating
bacterium, lacking extracellular proteases, that has been already shown to
provide a high level of recombinant protein expression. One major drawback,
limiting the applicability of the Brevibacillus expression system, is the absence
of expression vectors based on inducible promoters. Here we used the PxylA
inducible promoter, commonly employed in other Bacillae expression systems, in
Brevibacillus.
RESULTS: Using GFP, a-amylase and TcdA-GT as model proteins, high level of
intracellular protein expression (up to 250 mg/L for the GFP) was achieved in
Brevibacillus, using the pHis1522 vector carrying the B. megaterium
xylose-inducible promoter (PxylA). The GFP expression yields were more than 25
fold higher than those reported for B. megaterium carrying the same vector. All
the tested proteins show significant increment in their expression levels (2-10
folds) than those obtained using the available plasmids based on the P2
constitutive promoter.
CONCLUSION: Combining the components of two different commercially available Gram
positive expression systems, such as Brevibacillus (from Takara Bio) and B.
megaterium (from Mobitec), we demonstrate that vectors based on the B. megaterium
PxylA xylose inducible promoter can be successfully used to induce high level of 
intracellular expression of heterologous proteins in Brevibacillus.

PMCID: PMC3582527
PMID: 23374160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. J Am Chem Soc. 2013 Feb 13;135(6):2124-7. doi: 10.1021/ja312277g. Epub 2013 Jan
29.

Palladium-catalyzed picolinamide-directed alkylation of unactivated C(sp3)-H
bonds with alkyl iodides.

Zhang SY(1), He G, Nack WA, Zhao Y, Li Q, Chen G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

We report an efficient method for the alkylation of <U+03B3>-C(sp(3))-H bonds of
picolinamide-protected aliphatic amine substrates with primary alkyl iodides via 
palladium catalysis. Ag(2)CO(3) and dibenzyl phosphate, (BnO)(2)PO(2)H, are
critical promoters of this reaction. These reactions provide a convenient and
straightforward method for the preparation of high-value N-containing products
from readily available amine and alkyl iodide precursors.

PMID: 23350845  [PubMed]


443. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2012;2012:179657. doi: 10.1155/2012/179657.
Epub 2012 Dec 17.

Research on nonlinear feature of electrical resistance of acupuncture points.

Wei J(1), Mao H, Zhou Y, Wang L, Liu S, Shen X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Acupuncture and Moxibustion, Shanghai University of Traditional 
Chinese Medicine, 1200 Cailun Road, Shanghai 201203, China.

A highly sensitive volt-ampere characteristics detecting system was applied to
measure the volt-ampere curves of nine acupuncture points, LU9, HT7, LI4, PC6,
ST36, SP6, KI3, LR3, and SP3, and corresponding nonacupuncture points bilaterally
from 42 healthy volunteers. Electric currents intensity was increased from 0<U+2009>µA
to 20<U+2009>µA and then returned to 0<U+2009>µA again. The results showed that the volt-ampere
curves of acupuncture points had nonlinear property and magnetic hysteresis-like 
feature. On all acupuncture point spots, the volt-ampere areas of the increasing 
phase were significantly larger than that of the decreasing phase (P < 0.01). The
volt-ampere areas of ten acupuncture point spots were significantly smaller than 
those of the corresponding nonacupuncture point spots when intensity was increase
(P < 0.05 ~ P < 0.001). And when intensity was decrease, eleven acupuncture point
spots showed the same property as above (P < 0.05 ~ P < 0.001), while two
acupuncture point spots showed opposite phenomenon in which the areas of two
acupuncture point spots were larger than those of the corresponding
nonacupuncture point spots (P < 0.05 ~ P < 0.01). These results show that the
phenomenon of low skin resistance does not exist to all acupuncture points.

PMCID: PMC3533649
PMID: 23346191  [PubMed]


444. Chem Asian J. 2013 Mar;8(3):534-7. doi: 10.1002/asia.201201039. Epub 2013 Jan 23.

Iron-catalyzed synthesis of 2-vinylquinolines via sp3 C-H functionalization and
subsequent C-N cleavage.

Li Y(1), Guo F, Zha Z, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale, Department of
Chemistry, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, 230026,
P. R. China.

PMID: 23345285  [PubMed]


445. Arch Dermatol Res. 2013 Jul;305(5):371-8. doi: 10.1007/s00403-013-1317-x. Epub
2013 Jan 23.

The POU domain transcription factors Oct-6 and Oct-11 negatively regulate
loricrin gene expression in keratinocytes: association with AP-1 and Sp1/Sp3.

Kawachi Y(1), Ishitsuka Y, Maruyama H, Fujisawa Y, Furuta J, Nakamura Y, Ishii Y,
Ichikawa E, Otsuka F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1
Tennodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan. kyasuhir@md.tsukuba.ac.jp

Loricrin is a major component of the epidermal cornified cell envelope, and is
expressed only in terminally differentiated keratinocytes. This cell
differentiation-specific expression pattern suggests specific regulatory
mechanisms for activation and suppression of loricrin gene transcription in
differentiated keratinocytes. Here, we identified a regulatory element in the
proximal promoter region of the loricrin gene involved in suppression of its
expression in keratinocytes. A database search indicated that this sequence
contained a POU transcription factor binding motif. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assay revealed that Oct-1, Oct-6, and Oct-11 actually bind to the motif.
Constructs with point mutations in the POU-binding motif showed increased
reporter activity, indicating that the POU factors negatively regulate loricrin
gene transcription. Cotransfection experiments suggested that Oct-6 and Oct-11
suppress loricrin gene transcription in a cooperative manner with AP-1 and Sp1.
Furthermore, in vitro experiments indicated that the Oct-6 and Oct-11 can
physically associate with both AP-1 factors and Sp1/Sp3. These findings indicate 
that Oct-6 and Oct-11 contribute to the regulation of loricrin gene transcription
via interaction with AP-1 factors and Sp1/Sp3.

PMID: 23341029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Org Lett. 2013 Feb 1;15(3):714-7. doi: 10.1021/ol400056z. Epub 2013 Jan 22.

Iron-catalyzed allylic arylation of olefins via C(sp3)-H activation under mild
conditions.

Sekine M(1), Ilies L, Nakamura E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, School of Science, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1
Hongo, Tokyo 113-0033.

An aryl Grignard reagent in the presence of mesityl iodide converts an allylic
C-H bond of a cycloalkene or an allylbenzene derivative into a C-C bond in the
presence of a catalytic amount of Fe(acac)(3) and a diphosphine ligand at 0 °C.
The stereo- and regioselectivity of the reaction, together with deuterium
labeling experiments, suggest that C-H bond activation is the slow step in the
catalytic cycle preceding the formation of an allyliron intermediate.

PMID: 23339442  [PubMed]


447. Org Lett. 2013 Feb 1;15(3):574-7. doi: 10.1021/ol303389t. Epub 2013 Jan 18.

Molecular iodine catalyzed cross-dehydrogenative coupling reaction between two
sp3 C-H bonds using hydrogen peroxide.

Nobuta T(1), Tada N, Fujiya A, Kariya A, Miura T, Itoh A.

Author information: 
(1)Gifu Pharmaceutical University, 1-25-4 Daigaku-nishi, Gifu, 501-1196, Japan.

A useful method for molecular iodine catalyzed oxidative C-C bond formation
between tertiary amines and a carbon nucleophile using hydrogen peroxide as the
terminal oxidant is reported. This is the first report of a molecular iodine
catalyzed cross-dehydrogenative coupling (CDC) reaction between two sp(3) C-H
bonds.

PMID: 23331076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e49709. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049709. Epub 2013 Jan 9.

The transcription factor Sp3 regulates the expression of a metastasis-related
marker of sarcoma, actin filament-associated protein 1-like 1 (AFAP1L1).

Kajita Y(1), Kato T Jr, Tamaki S, Furu M, Takahashi R, Nagayama S, Aoyama T,
Nishiyama H, Nakamura E, Katagiri T, Nakamura Y, Ogawa O, Toguchida J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tissue Regeneration, Institute for Frontier Medical Sciences,
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.

We previously identified actin filament-associated protein 1-like 1 (AFAP1L1) as 
a metastasis-predicting marker from the gene-expression profiles of 65 spindle
cell sarcomas, and demonstrated the up-regulation of AFAP1L1 expression to be an 
independent risk factor for distant metastasis in multivariate analyses. Little
is known, however, about how the expression of AFAP1L1 is regulated. Luciferase
reporter assays showed tandem binding motives of a specificity protein (Sp)
located at -85 to -75 relative to the transcriptional start site to be essential 
to the promoter activity. Overexpression of Sp1 and Sp3 proteins transactivated
the proximal AFAP1L1 promoter construct, and electrophoretic mobility shift
assays showed that both Sp1 and Sp3 were able to bind to this region in vitro.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments, however, revealed that Sp3 is the
major factor binding to the proximal promoter region of the AFAP1L1 gene in
AFAP1L1- positive cells. Treatment with mithramycin A, an inhibitor of proteins
binding to GC-rich regions, prevented Sp3 from binding to the proximal promoter
region of AFAP1L1 and decreased its expression in a dose-dependent manner.
Finally, knocking down Sp3 using small inhibitory RNA duplex (siRNA) reduced
AFAP1L1 expression significantly, which was partially restored by expressing
siRNA-resistant Sp3. These findings indicate a novel role for Sp3 in sarcomas as 
a driver for expression of the metastasis-related gene AFAP1L1.

PMCID: PMC3541374
PMID: 23326307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2013 Feb 18;52(8):2194-7. doi: 10.1002/anie.201209591.
Epub 2013 Jan 16.

Intramolecular C(sp3)-N coupling by oxidation of benzylic C,N-dianions.

Jeffrey JL(1), Bartlett ES, Sarpong R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA
94720, USA.

PMCID: PMC3888652
PMID: 23325610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. J Am Chem Soc. 2013 Jan 30;135(4):1248-51. doi: 10.1021/ja311398j. Epub 2013 Jan 
15.

C(sp3)-F bond activation of CF3-substituted anilines with catalytically generated
silicon cations: spectroscopic evidence for a hydride-bridged Ru-S dimer in the
catalytic cycle.

Stahl T(1), Klare HF, Oestreich M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Chemie, Technische Universität Berlin, Strasse des 17. Juni 115, 
10623 Berlin, Germany.

Heterolytic splitting of the Si-H bond mediated by a Ru-S bond forms a
sulfur-stabilized silicon cation that is sufficiently electrophilic to abstract
fluoride from CF(3) groups attached to selected anilines. The ability of the Ru-H
complex, generated in the cooperative activation step, to intramolecularly
transfer its hydride to the intermediate carbenium ion (stabilized in the form of
a cationic thioether complex) is markedly dependent on the electronic nature of
its phosphine ligand. An electron-deficient phosphine thwarts the reduction step 
but, based on the Ru-S catalyst, half of an equivalent of an added alkoxide not
only facilitates but also accelerates the catalysis. The intriguing effect is
rationalized by the formation of a hydride-bridged Ru-S dimer that was detected
by (1)H NMR spectroscopy. A refined catalytic cycle is proposed.

PMID: 23311960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Infect Genet Evol. 2013 Mar;14:275-81. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2012.12.025. Epub
2013 Jan 8.

LMP1 promoter sequence analysis in Epstein Barr virus pediatric infection reveals
preferential circulation of B95.8 related variants in Argentina.

Gantuz M(1), Lorenzetti MA, Altcheh J, De Matteo E, Moscatelli G, Moroni S,
Chabay PA, Preciado MV.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Laboratory, Pathology Division, Ricardo Gutiérrez Children
Hospital, Gallo 1330, Buenos Aires, Argentina. magg169@yahoo.com.ar

The Epstein Barr virus (EBV) is associated with several lymphoid and epithelial
malignancies such as Hodgkin and Burkitt lymphoma or nasopharyngeal carcinoma and
it is also the etiological agent of infectious mononucleosis (IM).
Transcriptional regulation of the viral oncoprotein LMP1, remains yet not fully
understood. LMP1 expression can be initiated in an EBNA2 dependent or independent
manner from ED-L1 or LT-R1 promoters. It has been proposed that sequence
variation at ED-L1 region could be an important factor concerning LMP1
expression. In order to characterize the natural sequence variation of the ED-L1 
promoter, and its relationship with neoplasia, 44 pediatric patients, 17 IM and
27 EBV-associated lymphoma cases from Argentina, were studied. Phylogenetic
analysis showed 4 main clusters, namely B95.8, Raji, Cao and P3HR1. Most
isolates, 80.3%, conformed the B95.8 group. Co-infection with more than one viral
variant was detected in 5/17 IM cases, but no co-infections were detected among
lymphoma cases. Moreover, co-infected IM cases exhibited differences between the 
ED-L1 sequences obtained from different anatomical compartments. Mutations
confined to transcription factor binding sites such as SP1/SP3, CRE, AP2, C/EBP
were found in similar proportions in 23 isolates from both benign and malignant
samples, rendering the distribution of these mutations not significant among
malignant samples.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23305886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Org Lett. 2013 Jan 18;15(2):426-8. doi: 10.1021/ol303353m. Epub 2013 Jan 10.

Rhodium-catalyzed intramolecular silylation of unactivated C(sp3)-H bonds.

Kuninobu Y(1), Nakahara T, Takeshima H, Takai K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Chemistry and Biotechnology, Graduate School of Natural Science
and Technology, Okayama University, 3-1-1 Tsushimanaka, Okayama 700-8530, Japan. 
kuninobu@mol.f.u-tokyo.ac.jp

The treatment of a variety of hydrosilanes, each incorporating a benzylic
C(sp(3))-H bond, with a rhodium catalyst resulted in intramolecular
dehydrogenative silylation. This silylation reaction was found to occur at
typically unreactive C(sp(3))-H bonds located at terminal positions on alkyl
chains. Interestingly, the rhodium catalyst also promoted regioselective
silylation at a site internal to an alkyl chain.

PMID: 23305172  [PubMed]


453. Anim Reprod Sci. 2013 Feb;137(1-2):93-102. doi:
10.1016/j.anireprosci.2012.12.007. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

Identification of sperm head subpopulations with defined pleiomorphic
characteristics in ejaculates of captive Goeldi's monkeys (Callimico goeldii).

Valle RR(1), Arakaki PR, Carvalho FM, Muniz JA, Leal CL, García-Herreros M.

Author information: 
(1)ICS, Universidade Paulista, São Paulo, Brazil; FMVZ, Universidade de São
Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the incidence of pleiomorphisms and its
influence on the distribution of sperm morphometric subpopulations in ejaculates 
from the vulnerable Goeldi's monkey (Callimico goeldii) by using a combination of
computerized analysis system and Principal Component Analysis (PCA) methods. Each
sperm head was measured for four primary spermatozoal head dimensional parameters
(area [A (µm(2))], perimeter [P (µm)], length [L (µm)] and width [W (µm)]) and
three head shape derived parameters (ellipticity [(L/W)], elongation
[(L-W)/(L+W)] and rugosity [(4pA/P(2))]). Six separate subpopulations (SPs) were 
identified: SP1, constituted by very large, narrow and very elliptical
spermatozoa (A=16.85±1.56µm(2), W=2.75±0.42µm and ellipticity=2.16±0.24); SP2,
characterized by average sized, short, wide and round spermatozoa
(A=15.00±1.92µm(2), L=5.06±0.49µm, W=3.51±0.31µm and ellipticity=1.44±0.15); SP3,
represented by small, wide and slightly round spermatozoa (A=14.95±1.75µm(2),
W=3.47±0.29µm and ellipticity=1.48±0.14); SP4 included very small, short and very
round spermatozoa (A=14.15±2.38µm(2), L=4.90±0.57µm and elongation=0.18±0.05);
SP5 consisted of average sized and slightly elliptical spermatozoa
(A=15.14±1.72µm(2) and ellipticity=1.49±0.14); and SP6 included large and round
spermatozoa (A=16.30±1.62µm(2) and elongation=0.19±0.04). There were differences 
in the sperm subpopulation distribution (P<0.001) among the five donors analyzed.
In conclusion, the results of the current study confirmed that the use of
computer sperm analysis methods combined with PCA cluster analyses are useful
methods to identify, classify, and characterize different sperm head morphometric
subpopulations in neotropical primates. Broadening our knowledge of C. goeldii
sperm morphometric abnormalities as well as developing reliable techniques for
sperm evaluation may be essential for ex situ conservation of this threatened
species.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23294901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. J Cell Physiol. 2013 Jul;228(7):1525-35. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24311.

Dynamic distribution of HDAC1 and HDAC2 during mitosis: association with F-actin.

He S(1), Khan DH, Winter S, Seiser C, Davie JR.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Child Health, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, Canada.

During mitosis, histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) becomes highly phosphorylated
through the action of CK2, and HDAC1 and 2 are displaced from mitotic
chromosomes. HDAC1 and 2 are components of corepressor complexes, which function 
with lysine acetyltransferases to catalyze dynamic protein acetylation and
regulate gene expression. In this study, we show that HDAC1 and 2 associate with 
F-actin in mitotic cells. Inhibition of Aurora B or protein kinase CK2 did not
prevent the displacement of HDAC1 and 2 from mitotic chromosomes in HeLa cells.
Further, proteins of the HDAC1 and 2 corepressor complexes and transcription
factors recruiting these corepressors to chromatin were dissociated from mitotic 
chromosomes independent of Aurora B activity. HDAC1 and 2 returned to the nuclei 
of daughter cells during lamin A/C reassembly and before Sp1, Sp3, and RNA
polymerase II. Our results show that HDAC1 and 2 corepressor complexes are
removed from the mitotic chromosomes and are available early in the events
leading to the re-establishment of the gene expression program in daughter cells.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23280436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2012 Dec;16(15):2051-6.

Regulation network analysis in the esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

Xiang J(1), Zang W, Che J, Chen K, Hang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of
Medicine, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: The incidence of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) has high
regional selectivity. The molecular mechanisms of ESCC are complex and involve
multiple oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes, receptor tyrosine kinases,
cytoplasmic enzymes, and tumor interstitial elements.
AIM: Here we used bioinformatics to obtain some important genes and pathways
involved in ESCC.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this article, we did Affymetrix microarray data
collection from three big databases, and then selected all the differentially
expressed genes (DEGs) according to some principles. On this basis, we carried
out regulation network analysis and pathway enrichment analysis, obtaining ESCC
related regulation network analysis, after which we selected significant pathways
on regulation network and established TF-pathway regulation network.
RESULTS: In the transcription factors (TFs) regulation network we found SP1,
E2F1, USF2 and SP3 form a local network which suggested that these TFs might play
a more important role in ESCC. Some key pathways were also identified, such as
P53 signaling pathway, melanoma and prostate cancer pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: The identification of crucial molecular pathways involved in ESCC
would ultimately improve therapeutic effects and facilitate the development of
new treatment strategies.

PMID: 23280018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e51575. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051575. Epub 2012 Dec 14.

Synergistic effect of caffeine and glucocorticoids on expression of surfactant
protein B (SP-B) mRNA.

Fehrholz M(1), Bersani I, Kramer BW, Speer CP, Kunzmann S.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany.
markus.fehrholz@uni-wuerzburg.de

Administration of glucocorticoids and caffeine is a common therapeutic
intervention in the neonatal period, but possible interactions between these
substances are still unclear. The present study investigated the effect of
caffeine and different glucocorticoids on expression of surfactant protein
(SP)-B, crucial for the physiological function of pulmonary surfactant. We
measured expression levels of SP-B, various SP-B transcription factors including 
erythroblastic leukemia viral oncogene homolog 4 (ErbB4) and thyroid
transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), as well as the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) after
administering different doses of glucocorticoids, caffeine, cAMP, or the
phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitor rolipram in the human airway epithelial cell line
NCI-H441. Administration of dexamethasone (1 µM) or caffeine (5 mM) stimulated
SP-B mRNA expression with a maximal of 38.8±11.1-fold and 5.2±1.4-fold increase, 
respectively. Synergistic induction was achieved after co-administration of
dexamethasone (1 mM) in combination with caffeine (10 mM) (206±59.7-fold
increase, p<0.0001) or cAMP (1 mM) (213±111-fold increase, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0108). SP-B mRNA
was synergistically induced also by administration of caffeine with
hydrocortisone (87.9±39.0), prednisolone (154±66.8), and betamethasone (123±6.4).
Rolipram also induced SP-B mRNA (64.9±21.0-fold increase). We detected a higher
expression of ErbB4 and GR mRNA (7.0- and 1.7-fold increase, respectively),
whereas TTF-1, Jun B, c-Jun, SP1, SP3, and HNF-3a mRNA expression was
predominantly unchanged. In accordance with mRNA data, mature SP-B was induced
significantly by dexamethasone with caffeine (13.8±9.0-fold increase,
p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0134). We found a synergistic upregulation of SP-B mRNA expression induced 
by co-administration of various glucocorticoids and caffeine, achieved by
accumulation of intracellular cAMP. This effect was mediated by a
caffeine-dependent phosphodiesterase inhibition and by upregulation of both ErbB4
and the GR. These results suggested that caffeine is able to induce the
expression of SP-transcription factors and affects the signaling pathways of
glucocorticoids, amplifying their effects. Co-administration of caffeine and
corticosteroids may therefore be of benefit in surfactant homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC3522739
PMID: 23272120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. J Chem Inf Model. 2013 Feb 25;53(2):327-42. doi: 10.1021/ci300445e. Epub 2013 Jan
18.

3D molecular descriptors important for clinical success.

Kombo DC(1), Tallapragada K, Jain R, Chewning J, Mazurov AA, Speake JD, Hauser
TA, Toler S.

Author information: 
(1)Targacept, Inc., 200 East First Street, Suite 300, Winston-Salem, North
Carolina 27101-4165, USA. dckombo777@mail.com

The pharmacokinetic and safety profiles of clinical drug candidates are greatly
influenced by their requisite physicochemical properties. In particular, it has
been shown that 2D molecular descriptors such as fraction of Sp3 carbon atoms
(Fsp3) and number of stereo centers correlate with clinical success. Using the
proteomic off-target hit rate of nicotinic ligands, we found that shape-based 3D 
descriptors such as the radius of gyration and shadow indices discriminate
off-target promiscuity better than do Fsp3 and the number of stereo centers. We
have deduced the relevant descriptor values required for a ligand to be
nonpromiscuous. Investigating the MDL Drug Data Report (MDDR) database as
compounds move from the preclinical stage toward the market, we have found that
these shape-based 3D descriptors predict clinical success of compounds at
preclinical and phase1 stages vs compounds withdrawn from the market better than 
do Fsp3 and LogD. Further, these computed 3D molecular descriptors correlate well
with experimentally observed solubility, which is among well-known
physicochemical properties that drive clinical success. We also found that about 
84% of launched drugs satisfy either Shadow index or Fsp3 criteria, whereas
withdrawn and discontinued compounds fail to meet the same criteria. Our studies 
suggest that spherical compounds (rather than their elongated counterparts) with 
a minimal number of aromatic rings may exhibit a high propensity to advance from 
clinical trials to market.

PMID: 23244494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Huan Jing Ke Xue. 2012 Sep;33(9):3014-23.

[Sediment and pore water nutrient characteristics in growing zones of
Alternanthera philoxeroides in the Shiwuli River, Chaohu Lake].

[Article in Chinese]

Li RZ(1), Li F, Zhou AJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Resources and Environmental Engineering, Hefei University of
Technology, Hefei 230009, China. Lrz1970@163.com

In order to investigate the nitrogen and phosphorus characteristics of sediments 
and pore water in growing zones of aquatic macrophytes (Alternanthera
philoxeroides), three classic representative sampling points in the planted
Alternanthera philoxeroides fields (i. e. SP1, SP2 and SP3) and one reference
site in the seldom vegetation (i. e. SP4) were chosen along the Shiwuli River,
pouring into Chaohu Lake. Fifteen sediment cores were collected and sliced
in-situ with a thickness of 2 cm, and a total of 80 samples were obtained. In the
laboratory, both the contents of TN, TP, NH4(+) -N, NO3(-) -N, Fe/Al-P, Ca-P,
organic matter in sediments and the concentrations of TN, TP, NH4(+) -N, NO3(-)
-N and PO4(3-) -P in pore water were measured. And then, the vertical
distribution profiles were illustrated and explored, and the correlations were
also analyzed for the growing zones of Alternanthera philoxeroides. Through the
comparison of profiles, it found that both nitrogen and phosphorus concentrations
in pore water showed a rough similarity for three vegetation fields. At the
surface sediment-overlying water interface, in general, there was a good
agreement on the source-sink relationship for nitrogen and phosphorus
corresponding to the SP1, SP2 and SP3. Study results showed that the vertical
distribution of NH4(+) -N and NO3(-) -N in pore water within the depth of 0-18 cm
could be characterized by using exponential functions such as Exp2PMod2 or Exp3P2
provided by OriginLab software, but PO4(3-) -P hardly ever did, implying that
PO4(3-)-P might have a weaker regularity in solute diffusion than that of NH4(+) 
-N and NO3(-) -N.

PMID: 23243853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Oncol Rep. 2013 Mar;29(3):1238-44. doi: 10.3892/or.2012.2188. Epub 2012 Dec 14.

Inhibition of lymphangiogenic factor VEGF-C expression and production by the
histone deacetylase inhibitor suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid in breast cancer
cells.

Cheng HT(1), Hung WC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, National Sun Yat-Sen University, Kaohsiung
804, Taiwan, ROC.

Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA), a potent histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitor, has been shown to exert anticancer effects in various types of human
cancer and is now used in the clinic for cancer treatment. In addition to
cytostatic and cytotoxic activities, SAHA also represses angiogenesis to inhibit 
tumor growth. However, the effect of SAHA on tumor lymphangiogenesis, a step in
which cancer cells produce pro-lymphangiogenic factors such as vascular
endothelial growth factor-C (VEGF-C) to stimulate proliferation and migration of 
lymphatic endothelial cells, remains largely unclear. In this study, we
investigated the expression of VEGF-C in breast cancer cell lines and found that 
VEGF-C was highly expressed in MDA-MB-231, MCF-7, MDA-MB-453 and BT-474 cells.
SAHA inhibited VEGF-C expression in a dose-dependent manner in these cell lines. 
The secretion of VEGF-C into conditioned medium was also suppressed. We cloned
human VEGF-C gene promoter and demonstrated that SAHA directly repressed promoter
activity in MDA-MB-231 cells. Promoter deletion assay suggested that SAHA
repressed VEGF-C via the -185/+38 region which contained several transcription
factor binding sites. Notably, we found that SAHA reduced Sp1, but not Sp3 and
NF-<U+03BA>B protein levels. Treatment with Sp1 inhibitor mithramycin A also inhibited
VEGF-C expression in breast cancer cells. In addition, enforced expression of Sp1
partially rescued the inhibition of VEGF-C by SAHA. Collectively, our results
suggest that SAHA inhibits VEGF-C expression in breast cancer cells via
transcriptional repression and this drug may exert anti-lymphangiogenic activity 
in cancer treatment.

PMID: 23242251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. J Org Chem. 2013 Jan 18;78(2):733-7. doi: 10.1021/jo302144w. Epub 2012 Dec 27.

Synthesis of tetramic acid derivatives via intramolecular sp3 C-H amination
mediated by hypervalent iodine(III) reagents/Brønsted acids.

Mao L(1), Li Y, Xiong T, Sun K, Zhang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Northeast Normal University, Changchun, 130024, PR
China.

An efficient synthesis of tetramic acid derivatives was developed via
intramolecular sp(3) C-H aminations of 1-acetyl N-aryl
cyclopropane/cyclopentanecarboxamides in the presence of PhI(OPiv)(2) and
CH(3)CH(2)COOH.

PMID: 23237025  [PubMed]


461. J Org Chem. 2013 Jan 18;78(2):658-72. doi: 10.1021/jo302547q. Epub 2013 Jan 3.

Mechanistic investigations and substrate scope evaluation of ruthenium-catalyzed 
direct sp3 arylation of benzylic positions directed by 3-substituted pyridines.

Dastbaravardeh N(1), Kirchner K, Schnürch M, Mihovilovic MD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Applied Synthetic Chemistry, Vienna University of Technology,
Getreidemarkt 9/163-OC, 1060 Vienna, Austria.

A highly efficient direct arylation process of benzylic amines with arylboronates
was developed that employs Ru catalysis. The arylation takes place with greatest 
efficiency at the benzylic sp(3) carbon. If the distance to the activating aryl
ring is increased, arylation is still possible but the yield drops significantly.
Efficiency of the CH activation was found to be significantly increased by use of
3-substituted pyridines as directing groups, which can be removed after the
transformation in high yield. Calculation of the energy profile of different
rotamers of the substrate revealed that presence of a substituent in the
3-position favors a conformation with the CH(2) group adopting a position in
closer proximity to the directing group and facilitating C-H insertion. This
operationally simple reaction can be carried out in argon atmosphere as well as
in air and under neutral reaction conditions, displaying a remarkable functional 
group tolerance. Mechanistic studies were carried out and critically compared to 
mechanistic reports of related transformations.

PMCID: PMC3557922
PMID: 23236951  [PubMed]


462. J Chem Phys. 2012 Dec 7;137(21):214702. doi: 10.1063/1.4767389.

Structural stability and electronic properties of sp3 type silicon nanotubes.

Hever A(1), Bernstein J, Hod O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Physics, School of Chemistry, The Sackler Faculty of
Exact Sciences, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv 69978, Israel.

A density functional theory study of the structural and electronic properties and
relative stability of narrow hydrogen passivated sp(3) silicon nanotubes of
different growth orientations is presented. All nanotubes studied and their
corresponding wire structures are found to be meta-stable with the wires being
more energetically stable. Silicon nanotubes show a dramatic bandgap increase of 
up to 68% with respect to the corresponding wires. Furthermore, a direct relation
between the bandgap of the system and the molar fraction of the passivating
hydrogen contents is found. These results suggest that by careful control over
their crystallographic growth orientation, dimensions, and chemical composition
it should be possible to design and fabricate silicon nanotubes with desired
electronic properties.

PMID: 23231251  [PubMed]


463. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jan 18;288(3):1774-84. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.419887. Epub 2012 
Dec 5.

Regulation of xylosyltransferase I gene expression by interleukin 1ß in human
primary chondrocyte cells: mechanism and impact on proteoglycan synthesis.

Khair M(1), Bourhim M, Barré L, Li D, Netter P, Magdalou J, Fournel-Gigleux S,
Ouzzine M.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 7561 CNRS, Faculty of Medicine, University of Lorraine, 54505
Vanduvre-lès-Nancy, France.

Xylosyltransferase I (XT-I) is an essential enzyme of proteoglycan (PG)
biosynthesis pathway catalyzing the initial and rate-limiting step in
glycosaminoglycan chain assembly. It plays a critical role in the regulation of
PG synthesis in cartilage; however, little is known about underlying mechanism.
Here, we provide evidence that, in human primary chondrocytes, IL-1ß regulates
XT-I gene expression into an early phase of induction and a late phase of
down-regulation. Based on promoter deletions, the region up to -850 bp was
defined as a major element of XT-I gene displaying both constitutive and
IL-1ß-regulated promoter activity. Point mutation and signaling analyses revealed
that IL-1ß-induced promoter activity is achieved through AP-1 response elements
and mediated by SAP/JNK and p38 signaling pathways. Transactivation and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays indicated that AP-1 is a potent transactivator of XT-I
promoter and that IL-1ß-induced activity is mediated through increased
recruitment of AP-1 to the promoter. Finally, we show that Sp3 is a repressor of 
XT-I promoter and bring evidence that the repressive effect of IL-1ß during the
late phase is mediated through Sp3 recruitment to the promoter. This suggests
that modulation of Sp3 in cartilage could prevent IL-1ß inhibition of PG
synthesis and limit tissue degradation.

PMCID: PMC3548487
PMID: 23223231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. J Biol Chem. 2013 Feb 1;288(5):3153-62. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.404327. Epub 2012
Dec 3.

NEU3 sialidase is activated under hypoxia and protects skeletal muscle cells from
apoptosis through the activation of the epidermal growth factor receptor
signaling pathway and the hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1a.

Scaringi R(1), Piccoli M, Papini N, Cirillo F, Conforti E, Bergante S, Tringali
C, Garatti A, Gelfi C, Venerando B, Menicanti L, Tettamanti G, Anastasia L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences for Health, University of Milan, 20090
Segrate (Milan), Italy.

NEU3 sialidase, a key enzyme in ganglioside metabolism, is activated under
hypoxic conditions in cultured skeletal muscle cells (C2C12). NEU3 up-regulation 
stimulates the EGF receptor signaling pathway, which in turn activates the
hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF-1a), resulting in a final increase of cell survival
and proliferation. In the same cells, stable overexpression of sialidase NEU3
significantly enhances cell resistance to hypoxia, whereas stable silencing of
the enzyme renders cells more susceptible to apoptosis. These data support the
working hypothesis of a physiological role played by NEU3 sialidase in protecting
cells from hypoxic stress and may suggest new directions in the development of
therapeutic strategies against ischemic diseases, particularly of the
cerebro-cardiovascular system.

PMCID: PMC3561537
PMID: 23209287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. BMC Cancer. 2012 Nov 30;12:564. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-564.

Curcumin and synthetic analogs induce reactive oxygen species and decreases
specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors by targeting microRNAs.

Gandhy SU(1), Kim K, Larsen L, Rosengren RJ, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)College of Medicine, Texas A&M Health Science Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

BACKGROUND: Curcumin inhibits growth of several cancer cell lines, and studies in
this laboratory in bladder and pancreatic cancer cells show that curcumin
downregulates specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 and
pro-oncogenic Sp-regulated genes. In this study, we investigated the anticancer
activity of curcumin and several synthetic cyclohexanone and piperidine analogs
in colon cancer cells.
METHODS: The effects of curcumin and synthetic analogs on colon cancer cell
proliferation and apoptosis were determined using standardized assays. The
changes in Sp proteins and Sp-regulated gene products were analysed by western
blots, and real time PCR was used to determine microRNA-27a (miR-27a), miR-20a,
miR-17-5p and ZBTB10 and ZBTB4 mRNA expression.
RESULTS: The IC50 (half-maximal) values for growth inhibition (24 hr) of colon
cancer cells by curcumin and synthetic cyclohexanone and piperidine analogs of
curcumin varied from 10 µM for curcumin to 0.7 µM for the most active synthetic
piperidine analog RL197, which was used along with curcumin as model agents in
this study. Curcumin and RL197 inhibited RKO and SW480 colon cancer cell growth
and induced apoptosis, and this was accompanied by downregulation of specificity 
protein (Sp) transcription factors Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 and Sp-regulated genes
including the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), hepatocyte growth factor
receptor (c-MET), survivin, bcl-2, cyclin D1 and NF<U+03BA>B (p65 and p50). Curcumin and
RL197 also induced reactive oxygen species (ROS), and cotreatment with the
antioxidant glutathione significantly attenuated curcumin- and RL197-induced
growth inhibition and downregulation of Sp1, Sp3, Sp4 and Sp-regulated genes. The
mechanism of curcumin-/RL197-induced repression of Sp transcription factors was
ROS-dependent and due to induction of the Sp repressors ZBTB10 and ZBTB4 and
downregulation of microRNAs (miR)-27a, miR-20a and miR-17-5p that regulate these 
repressors.
CONCLUSIONS: These results identify a new and highly potent curcumin derivative
and demonstrate that in cells where curcumin and RL197 induce ROS, an important
underlying mechanism of action involves perturbation of miR-ZBTB10/ZBTB4,
resulting in the induction of these repressors which downregulate Sp
transcription factors and Sp-regulated genes.

PMCID: PMC3522018
PMID: 23194063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Dalton Trans. 2013 Jul 14;42(26):9462-7. doi: 10.1039/c2dt32143b.

sp-sp3 coupling reactions of alkynylsilver cations, RC=CAg2+ (R = Me and Ph) with
allyliodide.

Khairallah GN(1), Williams CM, Chow S, O'Hair RA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Bio21 Institute of Molecular Science and
Biotechnology, The University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia.
gkhai@unimelb.edu.au

Alkynylsilver cations, RC=CAg2(+) (where R = Me and Ph) have been prepared in the
gas phase using multistage mass spectrometry experiments in a quadrupole ion trap
mass spectrometer. Two methods were used: (i) electrospray ionisation (ESI) of a 
mixture of AgNO3 (in MeOH/H2O/acetic acid) and the alkyne carboxylic acid to
yield the appropriate silver acetylide cations RC=CAg2(+), via a facile
decarboxylation of the RC=CCO2Ag2(+) precursor; (ii) ESI of silver acetylides,
RC=CAg, which yields a cluster of the type, [(RC=CAg)12Ag2Cl](+). Regardless of
the method of preparation, these alkynylsilver cations, RC=CAg2(+), undergo
ion-molecule reactions with allyliodide to yield the ionic products Ag2I(+) and
[(RC=CCH2CH=CH2)Ag](+). The CID spectrum of [(PhC=CCH2CH=CH2)Ag](+) was compared 
to that of an authentic sample of the silver adduct of 5-phenyl-1-penten-4-yne.
Both ions fragment to yield Ag(+) and the radical cation, PhC=CCH2CH=CH2(+)<U+02D9>,
confirming that C-C bond coupling has taken place in the gas phase. DFT
calculations were carried out on these C-C bond coupling reactions for the system
R = Me. The reaction is highly exothermic and involves the initial coordination
of the allyliodide to both silver atoms, with the iodine coordinating to one atom
and the alkene moiety coordinating to the other. The overall mechanism of C-C
bond coupling involves oxidative addition of the allyliodide followed by
reductive elimination of RC=CCH2CH=CH2, to ultimately yield two sets of reaction 
products: (i) Ag2I(+) and RC=CCH2CH=CH2; and (ii) [(RC=CCH2CH=CH2)Ag](+) and AgI.

PMID: 23187760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. J Org Chem. 2012 Dec 21;77(24):11167-76. doi: 10.1021/jo302248c. Epub 2012 Dec 5.

Substitution-assisted stereochemical control of bispidone-based ligands.

Legdali T(1), Roux A, Platas-Iglesias C, Camerel F, Nonat AM, Charbonnière LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Ingénierie Moléculaire Appliquée à l'Analyse, IPHC, UMR 7178
CNRS/UdS, ECPM, Bât R1N0, 25 rue Becquerel, 67087 Strasbourg Cedex 02, France.

Three new bispidone derivatives substituted by methylenecarboxylic ethyl ester
groups have been synthesized in high yields as potential ligands for (64)Cu
complexation and PET imaging. Their solution and solid-state structures have been
determined by (1)H NMR spectroscopy and X-ray crystallography. These studies
reveal a strong rigidity of the bicycle, which adopts either a chair-chair or a
boat-chair conformation depending on the substituents in the N3 and N7 positions.
A methyl substituent at N3 stabilizes the chair-chair conformation, whereas
ethylacetate or 2-pyridylmethyl groups induce a considerable stabilization of the
boat-chair conformation. However, when introduced in the position N7, a
2-pyridylmethyl substituent stabilizes the chair-chair isomer. The relative
energies of the isomers and the isomerization process have been modeled by
density functional theory calculations on a series of six N-substituted
bispidones, including those newly synthesized. The subtle influence of the
substituents has been related not only to the effect of steric hindrance on the
thermodynamic stability but also to the presence of weak H-bonding interactions
involving hydrogen-bonding acceptors, such as pyridylmethyl or ethylacetate
substituents, and donors, such as C(sp2)-H of the pyridyl rings or C(sp3)-H at
various positions of the bispidone skeleton.

PMID: 23176106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Feb;1829(2):231-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2012.11.002. 
Epub 2012 Nov 17.

Neuron-restrictive silencer factor functions to suppress Sp1-mediated
transactivation of human secretin receptor gene.

Yuan Y(1), Chow BK, Lee VH, Lee LT.

Author information: 
(1)The School of Biological Sciences, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong,
China.

In the present study, a functional neuron restrictive silencer element (NRSE) was
initially identified in the 5' flanking region (-83 to -67, relative to ATG) of
human secretin receptor (hSCTR) gene by promoter assays coupled with scanning
mutation analyses. The interaction of neuron restrictive silencer factor (NRSF)
with this motif was later indicated via gel mobility shift and ChIP assays. The
silencing activity of NRSF was confirmed by over-expression and also by shRNA
knock-down of endogenous NRSF. These studies showed an inverse relationship
between the expression levels of NRSF and hSCTR in the cells. As hSCTR gene was
previously shown to be controlled by two GC-boxes which are regulated by the
ratio of Sp1 to Sp3, in the present study, the functional interactions of NRSF
and Sp proteins to regulate hSCTR gene was investigated. By
co-immunoprecipitation assays, we found that NRSF could be co-precipitated with
Sp1 as well as Sp3 in PANC-1 cells. Interestingly, co-expressions of these
factors showed that NRSF could suppress Sp1-mediated, but not Sp3-mediated,
transactivation of hSCTR. Taken together, we propose here that the
down-regulatory effects of NRSF on hSCTR gene expression are mediated via its
suppression on Sp1-mediated transactivation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23168245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Dentomaxillofac Radiol. 2012 Dec;41(8):621-9. doi: 10.1259/dmfr/98504520.

Thermographic and clinical correlation of myofascial trigger points in the
masticatory muscles.

Haddad DS(1), Brioschi ML, Arita ES.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Dentistry, University of São Paulo-FOUSP, Av. Açocê, n° 386/Bairro:
Moema/CEP:04075-022/, São Paulo, Brazil. deniseshaddad@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVES: The aim of the study was to identify and correlate myofascial trigger
points (MTPs) in the masticatory muscles, using thermography and algometry.
METHODS: 26 female volunteers were recruited. The surface facial area over the
masseter and anterior temporalis muscles was divided into 15 subareas on each
side (n=780). This investigation consisted of three steps. The first step
involved thermographic facial examination, using lateral views. The second step
involved the pressure pain threshold (PPT), marking the MTP pattern areas for
referred pain (n=131) and local pain (n=282) with a coloured pencil, and a
photograph of the lateral face with the head in the same position as the infrared
imaging. The last step was the fusion of these two images, using dedicated
software (Reporter® 8.5-SP3 Professional Edition and QuickReport® 1.2, FLIR
Systems, Wilsonville, OR); and the calculation of the temperature of each point.
RESULTS: PPT levels measured at the points of referred pain in MTPs (1.28±0.45
kgf) were significantly lower than the points of local pain in MTPs (1.73±0.59
kgf; p<0.05). Infrared imaging indicated differences between referred and local
pain in MTPs of 0.5 °C (p<0.05). Analysis of the correlation between the PPT and 
infrared imaging was done using the Spearman non-parametric method, in which the 
correlations were positive and moderate (0.4=r<0.7). The sensitivity and
specificity in MTPs were 62.5% and 71.3%, respectively, for referred pain, and
43.6% and 60.6%, respectively, for local pain.
CONCLUSION: Infrared imaging measurements can provide a useful, non-invasive and 
non-ionizing examination for diagnosis of MTPs in masticatory muscles.

PMCID: PMC3528192
PMID: 23166359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. J Chem Phys. 2012 Nov 14;137(18):184506. doi: 10.1063/1.4765324.

Polymorphic phases of sp3-hybridized superhard CN.

Wang X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Condensed Matter Physics, Linyi University, Linyi 276005,
People's Republic of China. wxl@lyu.edu.cn

It is well established that carbon nitride (CN) is a potential superhard material
as its bond in network structures is slightly shorter than the C-C bond in
diamond. However, the structure of superhard CN materials is yet to be determined
experimentally. We have performed an extensive structural search for the high
pressure crystalline phases of CN using the particle swarm optimization
technique; seven low-energy polymorphic structures of sp(3)-hybridized CN have
been found in an unbiased search. Density-functional theory calculations indicate
that, among the seven low-energy crystalline structures, Pnnm structure (8
atoms/cell) is energetically more favorable than the previously reported most
stable crystalline structure with 1:1 stoichiometry. Furthermore, Pnnm possesses 
the highest hardness (62.3 GPa). Formation enthalpies demonstrate that this
material can be synthesized at pressure 10.9 GPa, lower than needed by ß-C(3)N(4)
(14.1 GPa).

PMID: 23163382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Chemistry. 2012 Dec 14;18(51):16473-7. doi: 10.1002/chem.201203066. Epub 2012 Nov
13.

Direct sp3 C-H amination of nitrogen-containing benzoheterocycles mediated by
visible-light-photoredox catalysts.

Miyake Y(1), Nakajima K, Nishibayashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Engineering Innovation, School of Engineering, The University of 
Tokyo, Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8656, Japan.

Visible-light-mediated direct sp(3) C-H amination of benzocyclic amines via
a-aminoalkyl radicals by using photoredox catalysts is described here. The
obtained N,N-acetals were also successfully applied for carbon-carbon bond
forming reactions with carbon nucleophiles. The procedure is suitable for a
late-stage modification of C-H bonds to C-C bonds.

Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23150225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. J Am Chem Soc. 2012 Dec 5;134(48):19580-3. doi: 10.1021/ja309830p. Epub 2012 Nov 
16.

C(sp3)-C(sp3) and C(sp3)-H bond activation of 1,1-disubstituted cyclopentane.

Mukai C(1), Ohta Y, Oura Y, Kawaguchi Y, Inagaki F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kanazawa University, Kakuma-machi, Kanazawa 920-1192, Japan.
mukai@p.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

The unprecedented C(sp(3))-C(sp(3)) bond cleavage of unactivated cyclopentane has
been achieved. Rh(I)-catalyzed cycloaddition of allenylcyclopentane-alkynes
produced in situ the 9-cyclopentyl-8-rhodabicyclo[4.3.0]nona-1,6-diene
intermediates, which subsequently underwent [7+2] cycloaddition via ß-C
elimination, affording bicyclo[7.4.0]tridecatriene derivatives in good yields.
Changing the Rh(I) catalyst effected the C<U+03B3>-H bond activation of the common
9-cyclopentyl-8-rhodabicyclo[4.3.0]nona-1,6-diene intermediate to produce the
novel spiro[2.4]heptane skeleton in a site-selective manner.

PMID: 23146104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Org Lett. 2012 Dec 7;14(23):5864-7. doi: 10.1021/ol302767w. Epub 2012 Nov 7.

Intramolecular dehydrogenative coupling of sp2 C-H and sp3 C-H bonds: an
expeditious route to 2-oxindoles.

Ghosh S(1), De S, Kakde BN, Bhunia S, Adhikary A, Bisai A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research
Bhopal, MP-462 023, India.

An intramolecular-dehydrogenative-coupling (IDC) using "transition-metal-free"
oxidation conditions has been achieved to synthesize a variety of 2-oxindoles
bearing an all-carbon quaternary stereogenic center at the benzylic position. The
methodology involves a one-pot C-alkylation of ß-N-arylamido esters (3, 6) with
alkyl halides using potassium tert-butoxide concomitant with a dehydrogenative
coupling. A radical-mediated pathway has been tentatively proposed for the
oxidative process.

PMID: 23134301  [PubMed]


474. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e48189. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048189. Epub 2012 Oct 25.

Transcriptional control of the multi-drug transporter ABCB1 by transcription
factor Sp3 in different human tissues.

Gromnicova R(1), Romero I, Male D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life, Health and Chemical Sciences, The Open University, Milton 
Keynes, Bucks, United Kingdom.

The ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter ABCB1, encoded by the multidrug
resistance gene MDR1, is expressed on brain microvascular endothelium and several
types of epithelium, but not on endothelia outside the CNS. It is an essential
component of the blood-brain barrier. The aim of this study was to identify
cell-specific controls on the transcription of MDR1 in human brain endothelium.
Reporter assays identified a region of 500 bp around the transcription start site
that was optimally active in brain endothelium. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
identified Sp3 and TFIID associated with this region and EMSA (electrophoretic
mobility shift assays) confirmed that Sp3 binds preferentially to an Sp-target
site (GC-box) on the MDR1 promoter in brain endothelium. This result contrasts
with findings in other cell types and with the colon carcinoma line Caco-2, in
which Sp1 preferentially associates with the MDR1 promoter. Differences in MDR1
transcriptional control between brain endothelium and Caco-2 could not be
explained by the relative abundance of Sp1:Sp3 nor by the ratio of Sp3 variants, 
because activating variants of Sp3 were present in both cell types. However
differential binding of other transcription factors was also detected in two
additional upstream regions of the MDR1 promoter. Identification of cell-specific
controls on the transcription of MDR1 indicates that it may be possible to
modulate multi-drug resistance on tumours, while leaving the blood brain barrier 
intact.

PMCID: PMC3485001
PMID: 23133566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Chem Commun (Camb). 2012 Dec 21;48(98):11993-5. doi: 10.1039/c2cc36708d.

Highly efficient vinylaromatics generation via iron-catalyzed sp3 C-H bond
functionalization CDC reaction: a novel approach to preparing substituted
benzo[a]phenazines.

Lou SJ(1), Xu DQ, Shen DF, Wang YF, Liu YK, Xu ZY.

Author information: 
(1)Catalytic Hydrogenation Research Center, State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of
Green Chemistry-Synthesis Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou
310014, P. R. China.

An iron-catalyzed benzylic vinylation was developed to transfer the carbon atom
in the N,N-dimethyl moiety of N,N-dimethylacetamide (or N,N-dimethylformamide) to
2-methyl azaarenes to generate 2-vinyl azaarenes.

PMID: 23128502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Acta Crystallogr Sect E Struct Rep Online. 2012 Oct 1;68(Pt 10):o3041-2. doi:
10.1107/S1600536812040159. Epub 2012 Sep 29.

(2S,7S)-10-Ethyl-1,8,10,12-tetra-aza-tetra-cyclo-[8.3.1.1(8,12).0(2,7)]penta-deca
n-10-ium iodide.

Rivera A(1), Osorio HJ, Sadat-Bernal J, Eigner V, Duek M.

Author information: 
(1)Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Sede Bogotá, Facultad de Ciencias,
Departamento de Química, Cra 30 No.45-03, Bogotá, Código Postal 111321, Colombia.

The title chiral quaternary ammonium salt, C(13)H(25)N(4) (+)·I(-), was
synthesized through the Menschutkin reaction between the cage aminal
(2S,7S)-1,8,10,12-tetra-aza-tetra-cyclo-[8.3.1.1(8,12).0(2,7)]penta-decane and
ethyl iodide. The quaternization occurred regioselectively on the nitrogen with
major sp3 character. The crystal structure consists of anions and cations
separated by normal distances. Ions are not linked through C-H<U+22EF>I hydrogen bonds.

PMCID: PMC3470393
PMID: 23125806  [PubMed]


477. Matrix Biol. 2012 Sep-Oct;31(7-8):373-9. doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2012.10.002. Epub 
2012 Nov 1.

Identification and analysis of the human hyaluronan synthase 1 gene promoter
reveals Smad3- and Sp3-mediated transcriptional induction.

Chen L(1), Neville RD, Michael DR, Martin J, Luo DD, Thomas DW, Phillips AO,
Bowen T.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Nephrology, Matrix Biology Research Group, Institute of Molecular
and Experimental Medicine, Cardiff University School of Medicine, Heath Park,
Cardiff CF14 4XN, UK.

The ubiquitous mammalian extracellular matrix glycosaminoglycan hyaluronan (HA)
plays a pivotal role in the regulation of cell phenotype in fibrosis and
scarring. Transforming growth factor-beta 1 (TGF-ß1) and interleukin-1 beta
(IL-1ß) up-regulate hyaluronan synthase (HAS) 1 and HAS2 in dermal fibroblasts
and renal proximal tubular epithelial cells, and subsequent HA synthesis
regulates cell phenotype. In the present study, we investigated the mechanism of 
HAS1 transcriptional up-regulation in response to these cytokines. We used
5'-rapid amplification of cDNA ends analysis to identify the 5' end of HAS1
transcripts, resulting in an increase of 26 nucleotides to the HAS1 exon 1
sequence of reference sequence NM_001523. Constitutive luciferase activity of
upstream DNA sequences was shown in luciferase reporter assays, but our reporter 
vector signals were refractory to the addition of TGF-ß1 and IL-1ß. Using siRNAs 
to knockdown transcription factor mRNAs, we showed that TGF-ß1 up-regulation of
HAS1 transcription was mediated via Smad3 but not Smad2, while HAS1 induction by 
IL-1<U+F020>ß was Sp3, not Sp1, dependent.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23123404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. J Am Chem Soc. 2012 Nov 14;134(45):18695-704. doi: 10.1021/ja3073462. Epub 2012
Nov 2.

Controlled oxidation of remote sp3 C-H bonds in artemisinin via P450 catalysts
with fine-tuned regio- and stereoselectivity.

Zhang K(1), Shafer BM, Demars MD 2nd, Stern HA, Fasan R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Rochester, New York 14627, United
States.

The selective oxyfunctionalization of isolated sp(3) C-H bonds in complex
molecules represents a formidable challenge in organic chemistry. Here, we
describe a rational, systematic strategy to expedite the development of P450
oxidation catalysts with refined regio- and stereoselectivity for the
hydroxylation of remote, unactivated C-H sites in a complex scaffold. Using
artemisinin as model substrate, we demonstrate how a three-tier strategy
involving first-sphere active site mutagenesis, high-throughput P450
fingerprinting, and fingerprint-driven P450 reactivity predictions enabled the
rapid evolution of three efficient biocatalysts for the selective hydroxylation
of a primary and a secondary C-H site (with both S and R stereoselectivity) in a 
relevant yet previously inaccessible region of this complex natural product. The 
evolved P450 variants could be applied to provide direct access to the desired
hydroxylated derivatives at preparative scales (0.4 g) and in high isolated
yields (>90%), thereby enabling further elaboration of this molecule. As an
example, enantiopure C7-fluorinated derivatives of the clinical antimalarial
drugs artesunate and artemether, in which a major metabolically sensitive site is
protected by means of a C-H to C-F substitution, were afforded via P450-mediated 
chemoenzymatic synthesis.

PMCID: PMC3498520
PMID: 23121379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Org Biomol Chem. 2013 Jan 7;11(1):164-9. doi: 10.1039/c2ob26785c.

Photochemically induced radical alkynylation of C(sp3)-H bonds.

Hoshikawa T(1), Kamijo S, Inoue M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Hongo,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

A general strategy for photochemical alkynylation of unreactive C(sp(3))-H bonds 
has been developed. After C-H abstraction by the photo-excited benzophenone, a
two-carbon unit was efficiently transferred to the generated radical from
1-tosyl-2-(trimethylsilyl)acetylene to afford the alkynylated product. The
present reaction enables construction of various tri- and tetra-substituted
carbons from heteroatom-substituted methylenes, methines and alkanes in a highly 
chemoselective fashion, and would serve as a new synthetic strategy for rapid
construction of complex structures.

PMID: 23117280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. J Am Chem Soc. 2012 Nov 14;134(45):18570-2. doi: 10.1021/ja309325e. Epub 2012 Nov
5.

Ligand-enabled methylene C(sp3)-H bond activation with a Pd(II) catalyst.

Wasa M(1), Chan KS, Zhang XG, He J, Miura M, Yu JQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California 
92037, United States.

Pd(II) insertion into ß-methylene C(sp(3))-H bonds was enabled by a mutually
repulsive and electron-rich quinoline ligand. Ligand tuning led to the
development of a method that allows for installation of an aryl group on a range 
of acyclic and cyclic amides containing ß-methylene C(sp(3))-H bonds.

PMCID: PMC3500088
PMID: 23116159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. J Org Chem. 2012 Nov 16;77(22):9959-69. doi: 10.1021/jo301840e. Epub 2012 Nov 5.

Radical amination of C(sp3)-H bonds using N-hydroxyphthalimide and dialkyl
azodicarboxylate.

Amaoka Y(1), Kamijo S, Hoshikawa T, Inoue M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of Tokyo , Hongo,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

A direct conversion of C(sp(3))-H bonds to C(sp(3))-N bonds has been achieved by 
utilizing catalytic N-hydroxyphthalimide (NHPI) and stoichiometric dialkyl
azodicarboxylate. NHPI functions as a precursor of the electron-deficient
phthalimide N-oxyl radical (PINO) to abstract hydrogens, and dialkyl
azodicarboxylate acts as a trapping agent of the resultant carbon radical to
generate the hydrazine derivatives. This C-H amination proceeds in a highly
chemoselective manner with a wide applicability to functionalize benzylic,
propargylic, and aliphatic C-H bonds. Furthermore, the obtained hydrazine
compounds were readily converted to the corresponding carbamates or amines.
Hence, the present protocol for direct introduction of the nitrogen functionality
serves as a powerful tool for efficient construction of nitrogen-substituted
natural products and pharmaceuticals.

PMID: 23113810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e48208. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048208. Epub 2012 Oct 26.

Aspirin inhibits colon cancer cell and tumor growth and downregulates specificity
protein (Sp) transcription factors.

Pathi S(1), Jutooru I, Chadalapaka G, Nair V, Lee SO, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology & Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX, USA.

Acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin) is highly effective for treating colon cancer
patients postdiagnosis; however, the mechanisms of action of aspirin in colon
cancer are not well defined. Aspirin and its major metabolite sodium salicylate
induced apoptosis and decreased colon cancer cell growth and the sodium salt of
aspirin also inhibited tumor growth in an athymic nude mouse xenograft model.
Colon cancer cell growth inhibition was accompanied by downregulation of Sp1, Sp3
and Sp4 proteins and decreased expression of Sp-regulated gene products including
bcl-2, survivin, VEGF, VEGFR1, cyclin D1, c-MET and p65 (NF<U+03BA>B). Moreover, we also
showed by RNA interference that ß-catenin, an important target of aspirin in some
studies, is an Sp-regulated gene. Aspirin induced nuclear caspase-dependent
cleavage of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 proteins and this response was related to
sequestration of zinc ions since addition of zinc sulfate blocked
aspirin-mediated apoptosis and repression of Sp proteins. The results demonstrate
an important underlying mechanism of action of aspirin as an anticancer agent
and, based on the rapid metabolism of aspirin to salicylate in humans and the
high salicylate/aspirin ratios in serum, it is likely that the anticancer
activity of aspirin is also due to the salicylate metabolite.

PMCID: PMC3482208
PMID: 23110215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2012 Dec 3;51(49):12307-10. doi: 10.1002/anie.201205062. 
Epub 2012 Oct 26.

Metal-free oxidation/C(sp3)-H functionalization of unactivated alkynes using
pyridine-N-oxide as the external oxidant.

Chen DF(1), Han ZY, He YP, Yu J, Gong LZ.

Author information: 
(1)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale and
Department of Chemistry, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei,
230026, China.

PMID: 23109289  [PubMed]


484. Endocrinology. 2012 Dec;153(12):5845-56. doi: 10.1210/en.2012-1626. Epub 2012 Oct
23.

Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors mediate leptin-induced collagen a1(I) gene
expression in primary culture of male rat hepatic stellate cells.

García-Ruiz I(1), Gómez-Izquierdo E, Díaz-Sanjuán T, Grau M, Solís-Muñoz P,
Muñoz-Yagüe T, Solís-Herruzo JA.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute, University Hospital 12 de Octubre, School of Medicine,
Universidad Complutense, 28041 Madrid, Spain.

Mechanisms by which leptin stimulates collagen a(1)(I) [Col1a(I)] gene expression
are unclear. The purposes of this study were to identify the trans-acting factors
and cis-acting elements in Col1a(I) promoter involved in this effect as well as
the pathways that are implicated. In primary cultures of rat hepatic stellate
cells (HSCs), we measured the effects of leptin on Col1a(I) gene and protein
expression and on the binding of nuclear proteins to the Col1a(I) promoter. We
found that leptin increased Col1a(I) gene and protein expression in activated
HSCs. Transient transfections showed that leptin exerted its effects through
elements located between -220 and -112 bp of the Col1a(I) promoter. Gel
retardation assays demonstrated that leptin induced the binding of transcription 
factors specific protein (Sp)-1 and Sp3 to two elements located between -161 and 
-110 bp of the Col1a(I) promoter. Leptin-induced Sp1/Sp3 phosphorylation, but
this effect was suppressed by inhibiting or silencing Janus kinase-2,
phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase, nonphagocytic adenine dinucleotide phosphate
(NADPH) oxidase, or ERK1/2, by the use of antioxidants or catalase, or by
preventing protein-aldehyde adduct formation. Leptin provoked oxidative stress,
aldehyde-protein adduct formation, and increased gene expression of some
components of the NADPH oxidase complex. In conclusion, in HSCs, leptin
up-regulates Col1a(I) gene expression after activating NADPH oxidase, inducing
oxidative stress, aldehyde-protein adduct formation, and ERK1/2 phosphorylation, 
which in turn activates Sp1/Sp3 and provokes the binding of these two factors to 
regulatory elements located between -161 and -110 bp of the Col1a(I) promoter.
These findings may contribute to a better understanding of mechanisms involved in
the leptin-induced liver fibrosis.

PMID: 23093703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Immunol Lett. 2012 Dec 17;148(2):163-71. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2012.10.006. Epub
2012 Oct 17.

Qa-2 associated lipid rafts are indispensable in the final maturation of CD4<U+207A>CD8<U+207B>
thymocytes.

Li J(1), Li HD, Zhang Y, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular
Immunology, Key Laboratory of Educational Ministry, Tianjin Medical University,
22 Qixiangtai Road, Tianjin 300070, China.

Lipid rafts have been shown to play significant roles in thymocyte development.
However, the exact role of lipid rafts in single positive (SP) thymocyte
differentiation is poorly characterized. We previously defined a developmental
program (SP1<U+2192>SP4) for CD4SP thymocytes. In this study, we found that lipid raft
components were up-regulated during CD4SP maturation. Qa-2, a unique marker for
the most mature SP4 subset, was localized to lipid rafts and heterogeneously
expressed in SP4 cells. Functional assays showed that the proliferation capacity 
of SP4 cells correlated with the expression of Qa-2. Raft-disruption on both
CD4SP and epithelial cells by cholesterol extraction or cholesterol oxidation in 
a medullary thymic epithelial cell (mTEC)-supported co-culture system impaired
the transition from SP3 to SP4. This result was further confirmed in fetal thymic
organ culture system. Collectively, these studies suggest that raft-associated
signaling between mTECs and thymocytes drives the differentiation of CD4SP
thymocytes and lipid rafts are involved in the final maturation of SP4
thymocytes.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23085604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. J Dermatol. 2013 Jan;40(1):48-53. doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.12000. Epub 2012 Oct 18.

Transcriptional regulatory network for psoriasis.

Lu X(1), Du J, Liang J, Zhu X, Yang Y, Xu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China.

Psoriasis is a common, chronic, intractable skin disease that affects
approximately 2% of the world's population. Transcriptional regulation is one of 
the most fundamental processes in psoriasis. However, high-throughput functional 
analysis of multiple transcription factors and their target genes in psoriasis is
still rare. Thus, the objective of our study was to interpret the mechanisms of
psoriasis through the regulation network construction using the GSE14905
microarray data. The results showed E2F transcription factor 1 (E2F1), jun
proto-oncogene (JUN), nuclear factor of kappa light polypeptide gene enhancer in 
B-cells 1 (NF-<U+03BA>B1), signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1),
STAT3 and SP3 were hinge points in our transcriptome network. Importantly, JUN
may regulate activating transcription factor 3 expression to involve cell
proliferation process; STAT1 and STAT3 can inhibit tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinases-3 expression to modulate the cell adhesion molecule pathway;
NF-<U+03BA>B and E2F1 can downregulate cyclin D1, but upregulate proliferating cell
nuclear antigen expression to promote the cell cycle pathway. In addition, the
regulation network between transcription factors and pathways revealed that
NF-<U+03BA>B1 could promote the Toll-like receptor signaling pathway and that SP3 may
inhibit the steroid hormone biosynthesis pathway in psoriasis. This
transcriptional regulation analysis may provide a better understanding of
molecular mechanism and some potential therapeutic targets in the treatment of
human psoriasis.

© 2012 Japanese Dermatological Association.

PMID: 23078099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Org Lett. 2012 Nov 2;14(21):5546-9. doi: 10.1021/ol302640e. Epub 2012 Oct 16.

CuI controlled C-C and C-N bond formation of heteroaromatics through C(sp3)-H
activation.

Xia R(1), Niu HY, Qu GR, Guo HM.

Author information: 
(1)College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Key Laboratory of Green
Chemical Media and Reactions of Ministry of Education, Henan Normal University,
No. 46 Jianshe Road, Xinxiang, 453007, China.

A new method for C-C and C-N bond formation of heteroaromatics and C(sp(3))-H
alkanes was developed with high regioselectivity. The reaction occurred on C8 to 
give 8-cylcoakylpurines by C-C bond formation only promoted by tBuOOtBu, while it
occurred on the amino group to give N6-alkylated purines by C-N bond formation
when 2 equiv of CuI were added. A reaction mechanism was also proposed based on
our preliminary experimental data.

PMID: 23072561  [PubMed]


488. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Nov 9;428(1):142-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.10.028. Epub 2012 Oct 12.

Human cytosolic sialidase NEU2-low general tissue expression but involvement in
PC-3 prostate cancer cell survival.

Koseki K(1), Wada T, Hosono M, Hata K, Yamaguchi K, Nitta K, Miyagi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry, Miyagi Cancer Center Research Institute, Natori
981-1293, Japan.

Human cytosolic sialidase (NEU2) has been identified and characterized using a
NEU2 cDNA constructed from a genomic library of human skeletal muscle. However,
the tissue distribution of NEU2 mRNA and the physiological functions of the
enzyme remain unclear. In the present study, unlike other human sialidases, NEU2 
expression as assessed by quantitative real-time PCR was found to be extremely
low or undetectable in many human tissues and cells, with notable exceptions like
the placenta and testis. The gene forms obtained by PCR with cDNAs synthesized
from poly (A)(+) RNA of human brain and colon were verified to encode cytosolic
sialidase with appropriate activity, regardless of the brain gene feature of
SNPs. Among a series of human cancer cell lines examined, only prostate cancer
PC-3 cells exhibited relatively high expression and NEU2-silencing with an siRNA 
resulted in decreased cell survival and motility. To gain insights into the
significance of the high levels, transcription factors in the promoter region of 
the NEU2 gene were surveyed for involvement. PC-3 cells were characterized by
high expression of Runx2 and Sp3, and their silencing reduced NEU2, suggesting
regulatory roles.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23068092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Cancer Res. 2012 Dec 1;72(23):6236-46. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-1236. Epub
2012 Oct 12.

A novel evolutionarily conserved element is a general transcriptional repressor
of p21WAF¹/CIP¹.

Xu W(1), Zhu Q, Wu Z, Guo H, Wu F, Mashausi DS, Zheng C, Li D.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.

The effective induction of p21(WAF1/CIP1/Cdkn1a) (p21) expression in p53-negative
cancer cells is an important avenue in cancer management. We investigated the
ability of various common chemotherapeutic drugs to induce p21 expression in
p53-negative cancer cells and showed that the induction of p21 expression by
oxaliplatin is caused by the derepression of a previously unrecognized negative
regulatory element with a Sp1/Sp3 palindrome sequence core at -216 to -236 of the
p21 proximal promoter. Electrophoretic mobility shift and antibody super-shift
assays confirmed the specific binding of Sp1/Sp3, and showed that the
oxaliplatin-mediated derepression of p21 transcription was associated with an
increased Sp1/Sp3 phosphorylation and binding affinity to the
oxaliplatin-responsive element. A search of the ENCODE database for
vertebrate-conserved genomic elements identified the Sp1/Sp3 palindrome element
as the only vertebrate-conserved element within the 500-bp proximal p21 promoter 
region, indicating its fundamental importance. In in vivo competition assays,
transfected synthetic Sp1/Sp3 palindrome elements derepressed the cotransfected
or endogenous p21 promoter in a dosage-dependent manner. This derepression was
not seen in oxaliplatin-treated cells, suggesting that the exogenous Sp1/Sp3
palindrome and oxaliplatin had the same downstream signaling target. Taken
together, our results revealed, for the first time, this evolutionarily conserved
Sp1/Sp3 palindrome element in the proximal p21 promoter that serves as a
regulatory repressor to maintain p21 basal level expression.

PMID: 23066038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Mol Immunol. 2013 Apr;53(4):345-54. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2012.08.024. Epub 2012 
Oct 11.

CADM1 is expressed as multiple alternatively spliced functional and dysfunctional
isoforms in human mast cells.

Moiseeva EP(1), Leyland ML, Bradding P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Lung Health, Dept. of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation,
University of Leicester, Leicester, UK. em309@le.ac.uk

Cell adhesion molecule 1 (CADM1) is implicated in the pathogenesis of several
diseases and is responsible for adhesion and survival of mast cells (MCs).
Differential expression of CADM1 isoforms was found in different species. We
previously cloned SP4, SP1, SP6 and a dysfunctional isoform from human lung MCs
(HLMCs) and the MC line HMC-1. The aim of this study was to identify all isoforms
expressed in human MCs. The functional isoforms SP4, SP1, SP6 and SP3, with
alternative splicing between exons 7/11, were detected in human MCs by RT-PCR.
Two dysfunctional isoforms with alternative splicing of cryptic exons A and B
between exons 1/2, leading to premature termination of translation, were found in
~40% of MC specimens. Sequencing of genomic DNA showed that splicing of cryptic
exon B did not result from specific SNPs within this exon or its putative splice 
branch point. Highly glycosylated CADM1 (~105 kDa) was detected by western
blotting, but an extracellular domain (~95 kDa) was found only in the culture
medium from HLMCs, but not HMC-1 cells, indicating differential protein
expression. Transfection of SP1 and SP6, but not SP4, reduced adhesion of HMC-1
cells to human lung fibroblasts but not airway smooth muscle cells. Hence,
dysfunctional and functional CADM1 isoforms are found in human MCs. The longer
SP1 and SP6 were most evident in differentiated HLMCs and displayed differential 
adhesion compared to SP4. These multiple isoforms are likely to contribute to MC 
function in both health and disease.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3550521
PMID: 23063768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Org Lett. 2012 Oct 19;14(20):5378-81. doi: 10.1021/ol302613q. Epub 2012 Oct 11.

I2-CF3SO3H synergistic promoted sp3 C-H bond diarylation of aromatic ketones.

Zhu YP(1), Jia FC, Liu MC, Wu LM, Cai Q, Gao Y, Wu AX.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Pesticide & Chemical Biology, Ministry of Education, College
of Chemistry, Central China Normal University, Hubei, Wuhan 430079, PR China.

An I(2)-CF(3)SO(3)H synergistic promoted sp(3) C-H bond diarylation protocol was 
developed for the synthesis of 2,2-bis(4-(dimethylamino)phenyl)-1-aryl ethanones.
The reaction performed well in the absence of any metal and ligand. It integrated
three reactions with different mechanisms (iodination, Kornblum oxidation, and
hydroarylation) in a single reactor.

PMID: 23057842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2012 Nov;16(11):1287-92. doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2011.0325. 
Epub 2012 Oct 11.

Functional network analysis with the subcellular location and gene ontology
information in human allergic asthma.

Diao B(1), Liu Y, Zhang Y, Liu Q, Lu WJ, Xu G.

Author information: 
(1)Wuhan General Hospital Guangzhou Military Region, Wuhan, China.

Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disease characterized by airway
hyperresponsiveness, tissue remodeling, and airflow obstruction. The pathogenesis
of asthma is only partly understood, and there is an urgent need for improved
therapeutic strategies for this disease. The protein-protein interaction (PPI)
network has considerable promise as a tool for discovery of novel asthma
therapeutic targets and their relationship. Among the genes that have been
identified by PPI studies, APP, CDKN1B, and SP3 displayed up-regulated
expression. Further study depicted that CDKN1B localized in the nucleus or
cytoplasm could interact with GRB2 and CASP8, but SP3 localized in the nucleus
could interact with histone deacetylase 1, SP1, and E2F1. We anticipate that
these types of analyses will provide considerable insight into asthma
pathogenesis and will provide a wealth of new molecules for downstream analyses.

PMID: 23057572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2012 Nov 12;51(46):11561-5. doi: 10.1002/anie.201206267. 
Epub 2012 Oct 10.

Activation of a C(sp3)-H bond by a transient s-alkylpalladium(II) complex:
synthesis of spirooxindoles through a palladium-catalyzed domino
carbopalladation/C(sp3)-C(sp3) bond-forming process.

Piou T(1), Neuville L, Zhu J.

Author information: 
(1)Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, EPFL-SB-ISIC-LSPN, BCH 5304, 1015
Lausanne, Switzerland.

PMID: 23055447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. BMC Biotechnol. 2012 Oct 10;12:72. doi: 10.1186/1472-6750-12-72.

Identification of a novel enhancer that binds Sp1 and contributes to induction of
cold-inducible RNA-binding protein (cirp) expression in mammalian cells.

Sumitomo Y(1), Higashitsuji H, Higashitsuji H, Liu Y, Fujita T, Sakurai T,
Candeias MM, Itoh K, Chiba T, Fujita J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan.

BACKGROUND: There are a growing number of reports on the sub-physiological
temperature culturing of mammalian cells for increased recombinant protein
yields. However, the effect varies and the reasons for the enhancement are not
fully elucidated. Expression of cold-inducible RNA-binding protein (cirp, also
called cirbp or hnRNP A18) is known to be induced in response to mild, but not
severe, hypothermia in mammalian cells. To clarify the molecular mechanism
underlying the induction and to exploit this to improve the productivity of
recombinant proteins, we tried to identify the regulatory sequence(s) in the 5'
flanking region of the mouse cirp gene.
RESULTS: By transiently transfecting HEK293 cells with plasmids expressing
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase as a reporter, we found that the cirp 5'
flanking region octanucleotide 5'-TCCCCGCC-3' is a mild-cold responsive element
(MCRE). When 3 copies of MCRE were placed upstream of the CMV promoter and used
in transient transfection, reporter gene expression was increased 3- to 7-fold at
32°C relative to 37°C in various cell lines including HEK293, U-2 OS, NIH/3T3,
BALB/3T3 and CHO-K1 cells. In stable transfectants, MCRE also enhanced the
reporter gene expression at 32°C, although more copy numbers of MCRE were
necessary. Sp1 transcription factor bound to MCRE in vitro. Immunohistochemistry 
and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that more Sp1, but not Sp3,
was localized in the nucleus to bind to the cirp regulatory region containing
MCRE at 32°C than 37°C. Overexpression of Sp1 protein increased the expression of
endogenous Cirp as well as a reporter gene driven by the 5' flanking region of
the cirp gene, and down-regulation of Sp1 had the opposite effect. Mutations
within the MCRE sequence in the 5' flanking region abolished the effects of Sp1
on the reporter gene expression both at 37°C and 32°C.
CONCLUSIONS: Cold-induced, as well as constitutive, expression of cirp is
dependent, at least partly, on MCRE and Sp1. The present novel enhancer permits
conditional high-level gene expression at moderately low culture temperatures and
could be utilized to increase the yield of recombinant proteins in mammalian
cells.

PMCID: PMC3534229
PMID: 23046908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. J Am Chem Soc. 2012 Oct 24;134(42):17416-9. doi: 10.1021/ja307956w. Epub 2012 Oct
12.

Catalytic functionalization of methyl group on silicon: iridium-catalyzed
C(sp3)-H borylation of methylchlorosilanes.

Ohmura T(1), Torigoe T, Suginome M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Synthetic Chemistry and Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of
Engineering, Kyoto University, Katsura, Nishikyo-ku, Kyoto 615-8510, Japan.
ohmura@sbchem.kyoto-u.ac.jp

A methyl group of methylchlorosilanes undergoes C-H borylation in an
iridium-catalyzed reaction with bis(pinacolato)diboron in cyclohexane at 80 °C,
giving (borylmethyl)chlorosilanes selectively.

PMID: 23043232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2012 Nov 12;51(46):11540-4. doi: 10.1002/anie.201205913. 
Epub 2012 Oct 8.

Highly efficient stereoselective catalytic C(sp3)-H insertions with donor rhodium
carbenoids generated from cyclopropenes.

Archambeau A(1), Miege F, Meyer C, Cossy J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Chimie Organique, ESPCI ParisTech, CNRS (UMR 7084), 10 rue
Vauquelin, 75231 Paris Cedex 05, France.

PMID: 23042749  [PubMed]


497. J Am Chem Soc. 2012 Oct 17;134(41):16991-4. doi: 10.1021/ja3082186. Epub 2012 Oct
5.

Catalytic functionalization of unactivated sp3 C-H bonds via exo-directing
groups: synthesis of chemically differentiated 1,2-diols.

Ren Z(1), Mo F, Dong G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, Texas 78712, USA.

We describe a Pd-catalyzed site-selective functionalization of unactivated
aliphatic C-H bonds, providing chemically differentiated 1,2-diols from
monoalcohol derivatives. The oxime was employed as both a directing group (DG)
and an alcohol surrogate for this transformation. As demonstrated in a range of
substrates, the C-H bonds ß to the oxime group are selectively oxidized. Besides 
activation of the methyl groups, methylene groups (CH(2)) in cyclic substrates
and methine groups (CH) at bridge-head positions can also be functionalized. In
addition, an intriguing oxidative skeleton rearrangement was observed using the
menthol-derived substrate. The use of exo-directing groups in C-H activation, as 
illustrated in this work, would potentially open doors for the discovery of new
transformations and new cleavable DGs.

PMID: 23030547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Phys Rev Lett. 2012 Jul 13;109(2):025502. Epub 2012 Jul 9.

"Compressed graphite" formed during C60 to diamond transformation as revealed by 
scattering computed tomography.

Álvarez-Murga M(1), Bleuet P, Garbarino G, Salamat A, Mezouar M, Hodeau JL.

Author information: 
(1)European Synchrotron Radiation Facility, Grenoble F-38043 France and Institut 
Néel, CNRS, BP 166, F-38042 Grenoble Cedex 9, France.

The collapsing of C60 into polycrystalline diamond has been studied after
nonhydrostatic pressurization at ambient temperature using x-ray scattering
computed tomography. Using this selective structural probe we provide evidence of
concentric coexistence of "compressed graphite" (d(00l)~3.09-3.11<U+2009><U+2009>Å),
sp2-graphitelike phase (d(00l)~3.35-3.42<U+2009><U+2009>Å), and sp3-like amorphous carbon
surrounding polycrystalline diamond (a~3.56-3.59<U+2009><U+2009>Å). The so-called "compressed
graphite" exhibits a collapsed c axis and is textured with disordered layers.
This latter phase is better described as a short interlayered carbon phase with
buckled sp2-sp3 layers with possible interlayer bonding. Additionally, our 3D
maps of phase distribution and of the residual stress retained in the
polycrystalline diamond phase support the importance of stressed synthesis
conditions for diamond formation.

PMID: 23030177  [PubMed]


499. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e44917. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044917. Epub 2012 Sep 13.

Predictive value of Sp1/Sp3/FLIP signature for prostate cancer recurrence.

Bedolla RG(1), Gong J, Prihoda TJ, Yeh IT, Thompson IM, Ghosh R, Kumar AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The University of Texas Health Science Center, San
Antonio, Texas, United States of America.

Prediction of prostate cancer prognosis is challenging and predictive biomarkers 
of recurrence remain elusive. Although prostate specific antigen (PSA) has high
sensitivity (90%) at a PSA level of 4.0 ng/mL, its low specificity leads to many 
false positive results and considerable overtreatment of patients and its
performance at lower ranges is poor. Given the histopathological and molecular
heterogeneity of prostate cancer, we propose that a panel of markers will be a
better tool than a single marker. We tested a panel of markers composed of the
anti-apoptotic protein FLIP and its transcriptional regulators Sp1 and Sp3 using 
prostate tissues from 64 patients with recurrent and non-recurrent cancer who
underwent radical prostatectomy as primary treatment for prostate cancer and were
followed with PSA measurements for at least 5 years. Immunohistochemical staining
for Sp1, Sp3, and FLIP was performed on these tissues and scored based on the
proportion and intensity of staining. The predictive value of the FLIP/Sp1/Sp3
signature for clinical outcome (recurrence vs. non-recurrence) was explored with 
logistic regression, and combinations of FLIP/Sp1/Sp3 and Gleason score were
analyzed with a stepwise (backward and forward) logistic model. The
discrimination of the markers was identified by sensitivity-specificity analysis 
and the diagnostic value of FLIP/Sp1/Sp3 was determined using area under the
curve (AUC) for receiver operator characteristic curves. The AUCs for FLIP, Sp1, 
Sp3, and Gleason score for predicting PSA failure and non-failure were 0.71,
0.66, 0.68, and 0.76, respectively. However, this increased to 0.93 when
combined. Thus, the "biomarker signature" of FLIP/Sp1/Sp3 combined with Gleason
score predicted disease recurrence and stratified patients who are likely to
benefit from more aggressive treatment.

PMCID: PMC3441693
PMID: 23028678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Small. 2013 Jan 28;9(2):306-11. doi: 10.1002/smll.201201100. Epub 2012 Oct 2.

Spin-polarized semiconductors: tuning the electronic structure of graphene by
introducing a regular pattern of sp3 carbons on the graphene plane.

Jing L(1), Huang P, Zhu H, Gao X.

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory for Biomedical Effects of Nanomaterials and Nanosafety,
Institute of High Energy Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, PR
China.

First-principles calculations (generalized gradient approximation, density
functional therory (DFT) with dispersion corrections, and DFT plus local atomic
potential) are carried out on the stability and electronic structures of
superlattice configurations of nitrophenyl diazonium functionalized graphene with
different coverage. In the calculations, the stabilities of these structures are 
strengthened significantly since van der Waals interactions between nitrophenyl
groups are taken into account. Furthermore, spin-polarized and wider-bandgap
electronic structures are obtained when the nitrophenyl groups break the
sublattice symmetry of the graphene. The unpaired quasi-localized p electrons are
responsible for this itinerant magnetism. The results provide a novel approach to
tune graphene's electronic structures as well as to form ferromagnetic
semiconductive graphene.

Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23027424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. J Org Chem. 2012 Oct 19;77(20):9366-73. doi: 10.1021/jo301568e. Epub 2012 Oct 9.

Iron-catalyzed N-alkylation of azoles via cleavage of an sp3 C-H bond adjacent to
a nitrogen atom.

Xia Q(1), Chen W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Zhejiang University, Xixi Campus, Hangzhou 310028,
People's Republic of China.

Iron-catalyzed direct C-N bond formation between azoles and amides is described. 
The oxidative coupling reactions of sp(3) C-H bonds adjacent to a nitrogen atom
in amides and sulfonamides with the N-H bond in azoles proceeded smoothly in the 
presence of FeCl(2) and di-tert-butyl peroxide (DTBP).

PMID: 23025235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Genome Biol Evol. 2012;4(11):1102-17. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evs085.

SP transcription factor paralogs and DNA-binding sites coevolve and adaptively
converge in mammals and birds.

Yokoyama KD(1), Pollock DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado,
Denver School of Medicine, USA.

Functional modification of regulatory proteins can affect hundreds of genes
throughout the genome, and is therefore thought to be almost universally
deleterious. This belief, however, has recently been challenged. A potential
example comes from transcription factor SP1, for which statistical evidence
indicates that motif preferences were altered in eutherian mammals. Here, we set 
out to discover possible structural and theoretical explanations, evaluate the
role of selection in SP1 evolution, and discover effects on coregulatory
proteins. We show that SP1 motif preferences were convergently altered in birds
as well as mammals, inducing coevolutionary changes in over 800 regulatory
regions. Structural and phylogenic evidence implicates a single causative amino
acid replacement at the same SP1 position along both lineages. Furthermore,
paralogs SP3 and SP4, which coregulate SP1 target genes through competitive
binding to the same sites, have accumulated convergent replacements at the
homologous position multiple times during eutherian and bird evolution,
presumably to preserve competitive binding. To determine plausibility, we
developed and implemented a simple model of transcription factor and binding site
coevolution. This model predicts that, in contrast to prevailing beliefs, even
small selective benefits per locus can drive concurrent fixation of transcription
factor and binding site mutants under a broad range of conditions. Novel binding 
sites tend to arise de novo, rather than by mutation from ancestral sites, a
prediction substantiated by SP1-binding site alignments. Thus, multiple lines of 
evidence indicate that selection has driven convergent evolution of transcription
factors along with their binding sites and coregulatory proteins.

PMCID: PMC3514965
PMID: 23019068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys. 2012 Aug;86(2 Pt 1):021904. Epub 2012
Aug 6.

Correlation between protein secondary structure, backbone bond angles, and
side-chain orientations.

Lundgren M(1), Niemi AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics and Astronomy, Uppsala University, PO Box 803, S-75108
Uppsala, Sweden. martin.lundgren@physics.uu.se

We investigate the fine structure of the sp3 hybridized covalent bond geometry
that governs the tetrahedral architecture around the central C(a) carbon of a
protein backbone, and for this we develop new visualization techniques to analyze
high-resolution x-ray structures in the Protein Data Bank. We observe that there 
is a correlation between the deformations of the ideal tetrahedral symmetry and
the local secondary structure of the protein. We propose a universal
coarse-grained energy function to describe the ensuing side-chain geometry in
terms of the C(ß) carbon orientations. The energy function can model the
side-chain geometry with a subatomic precision. As an example we construct the
C(a)-C(ß) structure of HP35 chicken villin headpiece. We obtain a configuration
that deviates less than 0.4 Å in root-mean-square distance from the experimental 
x-ray structure.

PMID: 23005782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Oct 19;427(2):410-4. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.09.078. Epub 2012 Sep 21.

The regulation of trefoil factor 2 expression by the transcription factor Sp3.

Liu J(1), Wang X, Cai Y, Zhou J, Guleng B, Shi H, Ren J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Zhongshan Hospital affiliated to Xiamen
University, Xiamen 361004, Fujian Province, PR China.

Trefoil factor family 2 (TFF2) participates in mucus stabilization and repair,
apoptosis, and inflammatory responses. Previously published reports have
indicated that several growth factors and basal transcription factors are
associated with the expression of TFF2. However, the detailed mechanisms that
regulate TFF2 expression are not fully understood. The present study was designed
to assess the essential role of the transcription factor SP3 with respect to TFF2
expression. We first demonstrated that there was a negative correlation between
the expression levels of SP3 and TFF2. Thus, in the examined cells, the
overexpression of SP3 decreased the expression level of TFF2, whereas the
inhibition of SP3 increased the expression level of TFF2. Moreover, we discovered
two GC boxes in the TFF2 promoter and confirmed the specific binding of SP3 to
this promoter. On the whole, this study indicated that Sp3 was a major regulator 
of TFF2 expression. This knowledge should contribute to our understanding of the 
role that is played by SP3 in the regulation of TFF2 expression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23000412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Org Lett. 2012 Oct 5;14(19):5158-61. doi: 10.1021/ol302511f. Epub 2012 Sep 21.

Stereoselective radical amination of electron-deficient C(sp3)-H bonds by
Co(II)-based metalloradical catalysis: direct synthesis of a-amino acid
derivatives via a-C-H amination.

Lu H(1), Hu Y, Jiang H, Wojtas L, Zhang XP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida
33620-5250, USA.

The cobalt(II) complex of 3,5-Di(t)Bu-IbuPhyrin, [Co(P1)], is an effective
catalyst for intramolecular amination of electron-deficient C-H bonds, including 
those adjacent to electron-withdrawing CO(2)R, C(O)NR(2), C(O)R, and CN groups,
in excellent yields with high regio- and stereoselectivity. The
[Co(P1)]-catalyzed amination system provides a direct method for the synthesis of
a-amino acid derivatives from the corresponding carboxylate precursors.

PMCID: PMC3466332
PMID: 22998175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Nanoscale. 2012 Oct 21;4(20):6658-63.

A physics/circuit-based switching model for carbon-based resistive memory with
sp2/sp3 cluster conversion.

Qin S(1), Zhang J, Fu D, Xie D, Wang Y, Qian H, Liu L, Yu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microelectronics, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.

The switching mechanism in carbon-based resistive-switching random access memory 
is modelled using a percolation approach built on the low-temperature transition 
between phases sp(3) (diamond-like and high-resistive state) and sp(2)
(graphite-like and low-resistive state) for a matrix of carbon clusters in a
diamond-like carbon film. The switching process is described using a random
circuit breaker network with each breaker controlled by the resistance of
clusters sp(2)/sp(3). The key feature of the proposed model is the thermal
stress-induced transition from sp(2) to sp(3) phase and the electric
field-induced transition from sp(3) to sp(2) phase. Compared with experiments on 
the switching biasing scheme, a good agreement between simulation and measured
data validated the accuracy of the proposed model.

PMID: 22990172  [PubMed]


7. J Am Chem Soc. 2012 Oct 3;134(39):16163-6. doi: 10.1021/ja3075242. Epub 2012 Sep 
25.

Rhodium-catalyzed cascade oxidative annulation leading to substituted
naphtho[1,8-bc]pyrans by sequential cleavage of C(sp2)-H/C(sp3)-H and
C(sp2)-H/O-H bonds.

Tan X(1), Liu B, Li X, Li B, Xu S, Song H, Wang B.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Elemento-Organic Chemistry, College of Chemistry,
Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China.

The cascade oxidative annulation reactions of benzoylacetonitrile with internal
alkynes proceed efficiently in the presence of a rhodium catalyst and a copper
oxidant to give substituted naphtho[1,8-bc]pyrans by sequential cleavage of
C(sp(2))-H/C(sp(3))-H and C(sp(2))-H/O-H bonds. These cascade reactions are
highly regioselective with unsymmetrical alkynes. Experiments reveal that the
first-step reaction proceeds by sequential cleavage of C(sp(2))-H/C(sp(3))-H
bonds and annulation with alkynes, leading to 1-naphthols as the intermediate
products. Subsequently, 1-naphthols react with alkynes by cleavage of
C(sp(2))-H/O-H bonds, affording the 1:2 coupling products. Moreover, some of the 
naphtho[1,8-bc]pyran products exhibit intense fluorescence in the solid state.

PMID: 22989331  [PubMed]


8. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2012 Oct 15;51(42):10633-7. doi: 10.1002/anie.201204015. 
Epub 2012 Sep 17.

Gold vinylidene complexes: intermolecular C(sp3)-H insertions and
cyclopropanations pathways.

Hashmi AS(1), Wieteck M, Braun I, Rudolph M, Rominger F.

Author information: 
(1)Organisch-Chemisches Institut, Ruprecht-Karls-Universität Heidelberg, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 270, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. hashmi@hashmi.de

Highly reactive gold vinylidene species are used for intermolecular C(sp(3))-H
insertions into unactivated alkanes (see scheme). In addition, they can be
regarded as synthons for alkylidene carbenes. Initiated by cyclopropanation of
the vinylidene species/alkylidene carbenoide, cyclobutene derivatives are formed 
in a diastereoselective fashion by a ring-enlargement cascade in only one step.

Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22987629  [PubMed]


9. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2012 Oct 8;51(41):10377-81. doi: 10.1002/anie.201205051. 
Epub 2012 Sep 13.

Gold-catalyzed functionalization of unactivated C(sp3)-H bonds by hydride
transfer facilitated by alkynylspirocyclopropanes.

Barluenga J(1), Sigüeiro R, Vicente R, Ballesteros A, Tomás M, Rodríguez MA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Orgánica e Inorgánica e Instituto Universitario de
Química Organometálica Enrique Moles, Universidad de Oviedo, c/Julián Clavería 8,
33006 Oviedo, Spain. barluenga@uniovi.es

PMID: 22976902  [PubMed]


10. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2012 Oct 8;51(41):10399-402. doi: 10.1002/anie.201205403.
Epub 2012 Sep 10.

Synthesis of hexahydroindoles by intramolecular C(sp3)-H alkenylation:
application to the synthesis of the core of aeruginosins.

Sofack-Kreutzer J(1), Martin N, Renaudat A, Jazzar R, Baudoin O.

Author information: 
(1)Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS UMR 5246-Institut de Chimie et
Biochimie Moléculaires et Supramoléculaires, CPE Lyon, 43 Boulevard du 11
Novembre 1918, 69622 Villeurbanne, France.

PMID: 22965492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Org Biomol Chem. 2012 Oct 21;10(39):7869-71.

KI-catalyzed imidation of sp3 C-H bond adjacent to amide nitrogen atom.

Lao ZQ(1), Zhong WH, Lou QH, Li ZJ, Meng XB.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, Department of Chemical
Biology, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Peking University Health Science
Center, Beijing 100191, PR China.

We have developed a new KI-catalyzed method for the imidation of an sp(3) C-H
bond adjacent to an amide nitrogen atom by using TBHP (tert-butyl hydroperoxide, 
70% aqueous solution) as the oxidant. This novel procedure tolerated air and
moisture and provided a series of novel products in moderate to excellent yields 
under mild conditions.

PMID: 22948963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Nov;136(1):21-34. doi: 10.1007/s10549-012-2224-0.
Epub 2012 Sep 2.

Cytotoxicity of pomegranate polyphenolics in breast cancer cells in vitro and
vivo: potential role of miRNA-27a and miRNA-155 in cell survival and
inflammation.

Banerjee N(1), Talcott S, Safe S, Mertens-Talcott SU.

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Program of Toxicology, Texas A&M University, College
Station, TX 77843, USA.

Several studies have demonstrated that polyphenolics from pomegranate (Punica
granatum L.) are potent inhibitors of cancer cell proliferation and induce
apoptosis, cell cycle arrest, and also decrease inflammation in vitro and vivo.
There is growing evidence that botanicals exert their cytotoxic and
anti-inflammatory activities, at least in part, by decreasing specificity protein
(Sp) transcription factors. These are overexpressed in breast tumors and regulate
genes important for cancer cell survival and inflammation such as the p65 unit of
NF-<U+03BA>B. Moreover, previous studies have shown that Pg extracts decrease
inflammation in lung cancer cell lines by inhibiting
phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate (PI3K)-dependent phosphorylation of AKT 
in vitro and inhibiting the activation of NF-kB in vivo. The objective of this
study was to investigate the roles of miR-27a-ZBTB10-Sp and miR-155-SHIP-1-PI3K
on the anti-inflammatory and cytotoxic activity of pomegranate extract. Pg
extract (2.5-50 µg/ml) inhibited growth of BT-474 and MDA-MB-231 cells but not
the non-cancer MCF-10F and MCF-12F cells. Pg extract significantly decreased Sp1,
Sp3, and Sp4 as well as miR-27a in BT474 and MDA-MB-231 cells and increased
expression of the transcriptional repressor ZBTB10. A significant decrease in Sp 
proteins and Sp-regulated genes was also observed. Pg extract also induced SHIP-1
expression and this was accompanied by downregulation of miRNA-155 and inhibition
of PI3K-dependent phosphorylation of AKT. Similar results were observed in tumors
from nude mice bearing BT474 cells as xenografts and treated with Pg extract. The
effects of antagomirs and knockdown of SHIP-1 by RNA interference confirmed that 
the anti-inflammatory and cytotoxic effects of Pg extract were partly due to the 
disruption of both miR-27a-ZBTB10 and miR-155-SHIP-1. In summary, the anticancer 
activities of Pg extract in breast cancer cells were due in part to targeting
microRNAs155 and 27a. Both pathways play an important role in the
proliferative/inflammatory phenotype exhibited by these cell lines.

PMCID: PMC3488590
PMID: 22941571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Virol. 2012 Dec;86(23):13070-80. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01538-12. Epub 2012 Aug 29.

An Sp1/Sp3 site in the downstream region of varicella-zoster virus (VZV) oriS
influences origin-dependent DNA replication and flanking gene transcription and
is important for VZV replication in vitro and in human skin.

Khalil MI(1), Robinson M, Sommer M, Arvin A, Hay J, Ruyechan WT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, and the Witebsky Center for
Microbial Pathogenesis and Immunology, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, 
USA. mkhalil2@stanford.edu

The distribution and orientation of origin-binding protein (OBP) sites are the
main architectural contrasts between varicella-zoster virus (VZV) and herpes
simplex virus (HSV) origins of DNA replication (oriS). One important difference
is the absence of a downstream OBP site in VZV, raising the possibility that an
alternative cis element may replace its function. Our previous work established
that Sp1, Sp3, and YY1 bind to specific sites within the downstream region of VZV
oriS; we hypothesize that one or both of these sites may be the alternative cis
element(s). Here, we show that the mutation of the Sp1/Sp3 site decreases DNA
replication and transcription from the adjacent ORF62 and ORF63 promoters
following superinfection with VZV. In contrast, in the absence of DNA replication
or in transfection experiments with ORF62, only ORF63 transcription is affected. 
YY1 site mutations had no significant effect on either process. Recombinant
viruses containing these mutations were then constructed. The Sp1/Sp3 site mutant
exhibited a significant decrease in virus growth in MeWo cells and in human skin 
xenografts, while the YY1 site mutant virus grew as well as the wild type in MeWo
cells, even showing a late increase in VZV replication in skin xenografts
following infection. These results suggest that the Sp1/Sp3 site plays an
important role in both VZV origin-dependent DNA replication and ORF62 and ORF63
transcription and that, in contrast to HSV, these events are linked during virus 
replication.

PMCID: PMC3497629
PMID: 22933283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Am Chem Soc. 2012 Sep 12;134(36):14638-41. doi: 10.1021/ja307045r. Epub 2012
Aug 28.

Direct arylation/alkylation/magnesiation of benzyl alcohols in the presence of
Grignard reagents via Ni-, Fe-, or Co-catalyzed sp3 C-O bond activation.

Yu DG(1), Wang X, Zhu RY, Luo S, Zhang XB, Wang BQ, Wang L, Shi ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing National Laboratory of Molecular Sciences, College of Chemistry,
Peking University, Beijing 10087, China.

Direct application of benzyl alcohols (or their magnesium salts) as electrophiles
in various reactions with Grignard reagents has been developed via transition
metal-catalyzed sp(3) C-O bond activation. Ni complex was found to be an
efficient catalyst for the first direct cross coupling of benzyl alcohols with
aryl/alkyl Grignard reagents, while Fe, Co, or Ni catalysts could promote the
unprecedented conversion of benzyl alcohols to benzyl Grignard reagents in the
presence of (n)hexylMgCl. These methods offer straightforward pathways to
transform benzyl alcohols into a variety of functionalities.

PMID: 22920831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Chem Commun (Camb). 2012 Oct 9;48(78):9771-3. doi: 10.1039/c2cc35701a.

Organocatalytic deprotonative functionalization of C(sp2)-H and C(sp3)-H bonds
using in situ generated onium amide bases.

Inamoto K(1), Okawa H, Taneda H, Sato M, Hirono Y, Yonemoto M, Kikkawa S, Kondo
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University, 6-3, Aoba,
Aramaki, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8578, Japan. inamoto@m.tohoku.ac.jp

Onium amides, generated in situ from the combination of aminosilanes and onium
fluorides (R(4)PF, R(4)NF), are employed for the first time as bases for
catalytic deprotonative functionalization of C(sp(2))-H and activated C(sp(3))-H 
bonds under mild conditions.

PMID: 22918470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Chem Commun (Camb). 2012 Oct 9;48(78):9723-5. doi: 10.1039/c2cc35309a.

Metal catalyzed C(sp3)-H bond amination of 2-alkyl azaarenes with diethyl
azodicarboxylate.

Liu JY(1), Niu HY, Wu S, Qu GR, Guo HM.

Author information: 
(1)College of Chemistry and Environmental Science, Key Laboratory of Green
Chemical Media and Reactions of Ministry of Education, Henan Normal University,
Xinxiang 453007, Henan, China.

Metal-catalyzed direct C(sp(3))-H bond amination of 2-alkyl azaarenes with N=N
double bonds has been developed, which expands the scope of C(sp(3))-H bond
activation reactions and provides a new access to medicinally important azaarene 
derivatives.

PMID: 22914742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Oral Implantol. 2012 Aug;38(4):377-90. doi: 10.1563/AAID-JOI-D-11-00212.

Implant-guided volumetric analysis of edentulous maxillary bone with cone-beam
computerized tomography scan. Maxillary sinus pneumatization classification.

Tolstunov L, Thai D, Arellano L.

The primary goal of this anatomic study was to measure the average bone volume of
the edentulous maxilla with a cone-beam computerized tomography (CBCT) scan and
to determine its suitability for implant treatment without additional bone
grafting. The secondary goal of the study was to estimate the degree of sinus
pneumatization (SP) in reviewed CBCT scans, assess the sinus-to-maxillary bone
interrelationship in edentulism, and attempt to classify maxillary sinuses based 
on the degree of their pneumatization. This retrospective radiographic
quantitative study consisted of the analysis of CBCT scans of 30 randomly
selected maxillary edentulous patients who presented in 2008-2010 to the
University of the Pacific, Arthur A. Dugoni School of Dentistry, for evaluation
and treatment of their edentulism. A volume of edentulous maxillary bone mesial
to the maxillary sinuses (intersinal region) that can be used for a full-arch
implant treatment was evaluated based on specifically selected and clinically
relevant measurement criteria. There were 30 CBCT scans of maxillary edentulous
patients reviewed (9 men, 21 women) with a mean age of 67.3 years (range, 41 to
92 years). The total mean maxillary bone volume (MMBV) suitable for implantation 
was 4<U+2009>408.1 mm(3) and ranged from 1489.7 to 7263.1 mm(3). The MMBV in the study
was higher than an assumed or hypothetical bone volume minimally suitable for
4-implant treatment as proposed by the authors for comparative purposes (3500
mm(3)). The degree of SP as seen on a CBCT scan (60 sinuses analyzed on panoramic
images of 30 CBCT scans) had the following results in the study: SP0 (clear: not 
interfering with implant treatment in cases of high/small sinus), 2 sinuses or
3.3%; SP1 (mild sinus enlargement), 29 sinuses or 48.3%; SP2 (moderate SP), 16
sinuses or 26.7%; SP3 (severe SP), 9 sinuses or 15.0%; and SP4 (extreme), 4
sinuses or 6.7%. Most analyzed maxillary sinuses (47 of 60, or 78.3%) were in the
clear, mild, or moderate categories of SP (SP0, SP1, and SP2), which have a
sufficient amount of maxillary bone beneath the maxillary sinuses to allow a
full-arch implant treatment. An inverse correlation between SP and MMBV was
observed. Although many other clinical criteria are important (bone quality,
alveolar crest anatomy, etc), the results of this CBCT radiographic study
indicate that in many maxillary edentulous cases, the existing bone quantity
(volume) can be sufficient for a full-arch maxillary implant treatment with at
least 4 implants without the additional trauma or expense of bone grafts and
sinus lifts. A variety of implant treatment options can be proposed based on
maxillary bone availability and bone-to-sinus interrelationship. It appears that 
with age and edentulism, the amount of available maxillary bone is steadily
decreasing.

PMID: 22913308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Nanoscale Res Lett. 2012 Aug 19;7(1):466. doi: 10.1186/1556-276X-7-466.

Unusual surface and edge morphologies, sp2 to sp3 hybridized transformation and
electronic damage after Ar+ ion irradiation of few-layer graphene surfaces.

Al-Harthi SH(1), Elzain M, Al-Barwani M, Kora'a A, Hysen T, Myint MT,
Anantharaman MR.

Author information: 
(1)Physics Department, College of Science, Sultan Qaboos University, P,O, Box 36,
Al Khoud, Sultan Qaboos, Muscat, 123, Oman. salim1@squ.edu.om.

Roughness and defects induced on few-layer graphene (FLG) irradiated by Ar+ ions 
at different energies were investigated using X-ray photoemission spectroscopy
(XPS) and atomic force microscopy techniques. The results provide direct
experimental evidence of ripple formation, sp2 to sp3 hybridized carbon
transformation, electronic damage, Ar+ implantation, unusual defects and edge
reconstructions in FLG, which depend on the irradiation energy. In addition,
shadowing effects similar to those found in oblique-angle growth of thin films
were seen. Reliable quantification of the transition from the sp2-bonding to
sp3-hybridized state as a result of Ar+ ion irradiation is achieved from the
deconvolution of the XPS C (1s) peak. Although the ion irradiation effect is
demonstrated through the shape of the derivative of the Auger transition C KVV
spectra, we show that the D parameter values obtained from these spectra which
are normally used in the literature fail to account for the sp2 to sp3
hybridization transition. In contrast to what is known, it is revealed that using
ion irradiation at large FLG sample tilt angles can lead to edge reconstructions.
Furthermore, FLG irradiation by low energy of 0.25 keV can be a plausible way of 
peeling graphene layers without the need of Joule heating reported previously.

PMCID: PMC3496642
PMID: 22901368  [PubMed]


19. Org Med Chem Lett. 2012 Aug 16;2(1):30. doi: 10.1186/2191-2858-2-30.

Chemical characterization, antioxidant and inhibitory effects of some marine
sponges against carbohydrate metabolizing enzymes.

Shaaban M(1), Abd-Alla HI, Hassan AZ, Aly HF, Ghani MA.

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry of Natural Compounds Department, Division of Pharmaceutical
Industries, National Research Centre, Dokki, Giza, 12622, Egypt.
mshaaba_99@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: More than 15,000 marine products have been described up to now;
Sponges are champion producers, concerning the diversity of products that have
been found. Most bioactive compounds from sponges were classified into
anti-inflammatory, antitumor, immuno- or neurosurpressive, antiviral,
antimalarial, antibiotic, or antifouling. Evaluation of in vitro inhibitory
effects of different extracts from four marine sponges versus some antioxidants
indices and carbohydrate hydrolyzing enzymes concerned with diabetes mellitus was
studied. The chemical characterizations for the extracts of the predominating
sponges; SP1 and SP3 were discussed.
METHODS: All chemicals served in the biological study were of analytical grade
and purchased from Sigma, Merck and Aldrich. All kits were the products of
Biosystems (Spain), Sigma Chemical Company (USA), Biodiagnostic (Egypt).
Carbohydrate metabolizing enzymes; Î±-amylase, Î±-glucosidase, and
Î²-galactosidase (EC3.2.1.1, EC3.2.1.20, and EC3.2.1.23, respectively) were
obtained from Sigma Chemical Company (USA).
RESULTS: Four marine sponges; Smenospongia (SP1), Callyspongia (SP2), Niphates
(SP3), and Stylissa (SP4), were collected from the Red Sea at Egyptian coasts,
and taxonomically characterized. The sponges' extracts exhibited diverse
inhibitory effects on oxidative stress indices and carbohydrate hydrolyzing
enzymes in linear relationships to some extent with concentration of inhibitors
(dose dependant). The extracts of sponges (3, 1, and 2) showed, respectively,
potent-reducing power. Purification and Chemical characterization of sponge 1
using NMR and mass spectroscopy, recognized the existence of di-isobutyl
phthalate (1), di-n-butyl phthalate (2), linoleic acid (3), ß-sitosterol (4), and
cholesterol (5). Sponge 3 produced bis-[2-ethyl]-hexyl-phthylester (6) and
triglyceride fatty acid ester (7).
CONCLUSION: Marine sponges are promising sources for delivering of bioactive
compounds. Four marine sponges, collected from Red Sea at Egyptian coasts, were
identified as Smenospongia (SP1), Callyspongia (SP2), Niphates (SP3), and
Stylissa (SP4). The results demonstrated that different sponges extracts
exhibited inhibitory effects on oxidative stress indices and carbohydrate
hydrolyzing enzymes in linear relationships to some extent with concentration of 
inhibitors (dose dependant). The extracts of sponges (3, 1, and 2) showed,
respectively, potent-reducing power. Chemical characterizations of sponges SP1
and SP3 were discussed. Based on this study, marine sponges are considered as
talented sources for production of diverse and multiple biologically active
compounds.

PMCID: PMC3524779
PMID: 22898269  [PubMed]


20. Nanoscale Res Lett. 2012 Aug 16;7(1):460. doi: 10.1186/1556-276X-7-460.

Spontaneous formation of graphene-like stripes on high-index diamond C(331)
surface.

Xu M(1), Zhang Y, Zhang J, Lu J, Qian B, Lu D, Zhang Y, Wang L, Chen X, Shigekawa
H.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Thin Film and Microfabrication of the Ministry of
Education, Research Institute of Micro/Nano Science and Technology, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai, 200240, People's Republic of China.
yfzhang@sjtu.edu.cn.

We employ first-principles density functional theory calculations to study the
surface reconstruction, energetic stability, and electronic structure of diamond 
C(331) surface. Spontaneous formation of graphene-like stripes on the
reconstructed surface is found to occur as the surface terrace C atoms transform 
from sp3 to sp2 hybridization upon structural relaxation. The comparison of the
calculated absolute surface energies of C(331), C(111), and C(110) surfaces
demonstrates the energetic stability of the graphitic-like C(331) surface. Local 
density of electronic states analysis reveals the occurrence of localized
electronic states near the Fermi level, which may have a significant impact on
the surface conductivity.

PMCID: PMC3552805
PMID: 22898095  [PubMed]


21. Front Pharmacol. 2012 Aug 6;3:151. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2012.00151. eCollection
2012.

Basal and Regulatory Promoter Studies of the AKR1C3 Gene in Relation to Prostate 
Cancer.

Schulze JJ(1), Karypidis H, Ekström L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska Institutet Stockholm, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Human 17ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 5 (17ß-HSD5) formally
known as aldo-keto reductase 1C3 (AKR1C3) play a major role in the formation and 
metabolism of androgens. The enzyme is highly expressed in the prostate gland and
previous studies indicate that genetic variation in the AKR1C3 gene may influence
the prostate volume and risk of prostate cancer.
AIM: Here we aimed to further study the genetic regulation of AKR1C3 and its
putative role in prostate cancer.
EXPERIMENTS: A previously identified promoter polymorphism (A>G, rs3763676)
localized at -138 from the translational start site were studied in relation to
prostate cancer in a Swedish population based case-control study including 176
patients diagnosed with prostate cancer and 161 controls. Moreover, we have
studied the basal and androgen induced promoter activity of the AKR1C3 gene.
Expression studies with AKR1C3 promoter reporter constructs were performed in
HepG2 and DSL2 cells.
RESULTS: We found that carriers of the promoter A-allele had a borderline
significant decreased risk of prostate cancer (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.59; 95% CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.32-1.08). We
also show that dihydrotestosterone (DHT) induced the promoter activity of the
A-allele 2.2-fold (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.048). Sp3 seem to play an important role in regulating
the transcription activity of AKR1C3 and site-directed mutagenesis of a GC-box 78
base-pair upstream the ATG-site significantly inhibited the basal AKR1C3 promoter
activity by 70%.
CONCLUSION: These results further supports previous findings that the A>G
promoter polymorphism may be functional and that AKR1C3 plays a critical role in 
prostate carcinogenesis. Our findings also show that the members of Sp family of 
transcription factors are important for the constitutive expression of AKR1C3
gene.

PMCID: PMC3412290
PMID: 22888320  [PubMed]


22. Reprod Sci. 2012 Dec;19(12):1323-31. doi: 10.1177/1933719112450339. Epub 2012 Aug
8.

Expression of the GTP-binding protein Gas in human myometrial cells is regulated 
by ubiquitination and protein degradation: involvement of proteasomal inhibition 
by trichostatin A.

Karolczak-Bayatti M(1), Abu-Amara TM, Europe-Finner GN.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Faculty of Medical
Sciences, Newcastle upon Tyne, England, UK. magda.karolczak@nil.ac.uk

In this study, we show that myometrial transcriptional complexes consisting of
Sp1, Sp3, histone deacetylase (HDAC)1/2, RbAp48, and mSin3A are recruited to 4
out of the 6 Sp1-4 sites within the Gas promoter. Moreover disruption in the
binding of these complexes via mithramycin administration results in a
substantial decrease in expression of Gas proteins in myometrial cell cultures.
In many instances, these transcriptional regulatory complexes repress expression 
of genes having a high CG content within their promoter region. This repression
can be attenuated by inhibition of HDAC activity by the class I/II HDAC inhibitor
trichostatin A (TSA) resulting in increased gene transcription. However, although
a substantial increase in Gas protein levels was observed upon administration of 
TSA to primary cultures of human myometrial cells, this was not preceded by an
increase in messenger RNA (mRNA) and thus an elevation in gene transcription.
Importantly the increase in Gas protein levels occurred via ubiquitination and
inhibition of proteasomal activity, indicating that this pathway is also involved
in regulating Gas protein expression during pregnancy and parturition.

PMID: 22875848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2012 Sep 25;361(1-2):31-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2012.03.008.
Epub 2012 Mar 28.

Phorbol esters enhance 1a,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3-regulated 25-hydroxyvitamin
D-24-hydroxylase (CYP24A1) gene expression through ERK-mediated phosphorylation
of specific protein 3 (Sp3) in Caco-2 cells.

Jiang Y(1), Fleet JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN
47907-2059, United States. yjiang@life.illinois.edu

Phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) increased 1,25(OH)(2)D(3)-induced human 25 
hydroxyvitamin d-24 hydroxylase (hCYP24A1) gene expression and vitamin D receptor
(VDR) binding to the hCYP24A1 promoter. It did not alter transient receptor
potential cation channel, subfamily V, member 6 (TRPV6) expression, VDR binding
to the TRPV6 promoter, or VDR binding to a crude chromatin preparation. PMA
activated Extracellular signal-Regulated Kinases (ERK) 1/2 and p38 mitogen
activated protein kinases (MAPK) and inhibiting these kinases reduced
1,25(OH)(2)D(3)-induced and PMA-enhanced hCYP24A1 promoter activity. Mithramycin 
A inhibits Specific Protein (Sp) family member binding to DNA and reduced
1,25(OH)(2)D(3)-induced and PMA-enhanced hCYP24A1 promoter activity. Sp1 or Sp3
siRNA knockdown reduced 1,25(OH)(2)D(3)-regulated hCYP24A1 promoter activity but 
only Sp3 siRNA reduced PMA-enhanced hCYP24A1 promoter activity. PMA increased
MAPK-dependent Sp3 phosphorylation, Sp3-VDR interactions, and Sp3 binding to the 
hCYP24A1 promoter. These data suggest that MAPK signaling contributes to
1,25(OH)(2)D(3)-induced and PMA-enhanced CYP24A1 gene transcription by modulating
Sp3 function.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3414851
PMID: 22871965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2012 Aug 6;51(32):8077-81. doi: 10.1002/anie.201203880.
Epub 2012 Jul 2.

Selective iodine-catalyzed intermolecular oxidative amination of C(sp3)-H bonds
with ortho-carbonyl-substituted anilines to give quinazolines.

Yan Y(1), Zhang Y, Feng C, Zha Z, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale, and Department 
of Chemistry, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, 230026 P. R. 
China.

PMID: 22865568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2012 Aug 27;51(35):8811-5. doi: 10.1002/anie.201204274.
Epub 2012 Jul 31.

Organocatalytic asymmetric direct C(sp3)-H functionalization of ethers: a highly 
efficient approach to chiral spiroethers.

Jiao ZW(1), Zhang SY, He C, Tu YQ, Wang SH, Zhang FM, Zhang YQ, Li H.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Applied Organic Chemistry and College of Chemistry and
Chemical Engineering, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730000, P.R. China.

PMID: 22855246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Chem Commun (Camb). 2012 Sep 18;48(72):9086-8. doi: 10.1039/c2cc34561g. Epub 2012
Aug 2.

I2 promoted domino oxidative cyclization for one-pot synthesis of
2-acylbenzothiazoles via metal-free sp3 C-H functionalization.

Zhu YP(1), Lian M, Jia FC, Liu MC, Yuan JJ, Gao QH, Wu AX.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Pesticide and Chemical Biology, Ministry of Education,
College of Chemistry, Central China Normal University, 152 Luoyu Road, Wuhan,
430079, P. R. China.

An I(2) promoted domino protocol was developed to construct 2-acylbenzothiazoles 
from simple and readily available aromatic ketones/unsaturated methyl ketones and
o-aminobenzenethiols. The reaction proceeded smoothly under metal-free and
peroxide-free conditions.

PMID: 22854885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Org Lett. 2012 Aug 17;14(16):4270-3. doi: 10.1021/ol302035j. Epub 2012 Jul 31.

Palladium-catalyzed cascade process consisting of isocyanide insertion and
benzylic C(sp3)-H activation: concise synthesis of indole derivatives.

Nanjo T(1), Tsukano C, Takemoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyoto University, Yoshida,
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

Synthesis of the indole skeleton was achieved using a Pd-catalyzed cascade
process consisting of isocyanide insertion and benzylic C(sp(3))-H activation. It
was found that slow addition of isocyanide is effective for reducing the amount
of catalyst needed and Ad(2)P(n)Bu is a good ligand for C(sp(3))-H activation.
The construction of the tetracyclic carbazole skeleton was also achieved by a
Pd-catalyzed domino reaction incorporating alkyne insertion.

PMID: 22849720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Am Chem Soc. 2012 Aug 29;134(34):14118-26. doi: 10.1021/ja304643e. Epub 2012
Aug 14.

Understanding reactivity and stereoselectivity in palladium-catalyzed
diastereoselective sp3 C-H bond activation: intermediate characterization and
computational studies.

Giri R(1), Lan Y, Liu P, Houk KN, Yu JQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey
Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

The origin of the high levels of reactivity and diastereoselectivity (>99:1 dr)
observed in the oxazoline-directed, Pd(II)-catalyzed sp(3) C-H bond iodination
and acetoxylation reactions as reported in previous publications has been studied
and explained on the basis of experimental and computational investigations. The 
characterization of a trinuclear chiral C-H insertion intermediate by X-ray paved
the way for further investigations into C-H insertion step through the lens of
stereochemistry. Computational investigations on reactivities and
diastereoselectivities of C-H activation of t-Bu- and i-Pr-substituted oxazolines
provided good agreement with the experimental results. Theoretical predictions
with DFT calculations revealed that C-H activation occurs at the monomeric Pd
center and that the most preferred transition state for C-H activation contains
two sterically bulky t-Bu substituents in anti-positions due to steric repulsion 
and that this transition state leads to the major diastereomer, which is
consistent with the structure of the newly characterized C-H insertion
intermediate. The structural information about the transition state also suggests
that a minimum dihedral angle between C-H bonds and Pd-OAc bonds is crucial for
C-H bond cleavage. We have also utilized density functional theory (DFT) to
calculate the energies of various potential intermediates and transition states
with t-Bu- and i-Pr-substituted oxazolines and suggested a possible explanation
for the substantial difference in reactivity between the t-Bu- and
i-Pr-substituted oxazolines.

PMID: 22830301  [PubMed]


29. Chem Commun (Camb). 2012 Sep 7;48(69):8709-11. doi: 10.1039/c2cc33641c. Epub 2012
Jul 24.

Triflimide-catalyzed allyl-allyl cross-coupling: a metal-free allylic alkylation.

Ding F(1), William R, Wang F, Liu XW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Chemistry and Biological Chemistry, School of Physical and
Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 637371, Singapore.

A highly efficient metal-free intermolecular C(sp3)-C(sp3) allyl-allyl
cross-coupling protocol between allyl acetates and allyltrimethylsilanes, which
proceeded smoothly in the presence of catalytic triflimide to form 1,5-dienes
with good to excellent regioselectivity, has been developed.

PMID: 22828708  [PubMed]


30. Curr Mol Med. 2012 Sep;12(8):982-94.

The PP2A-Aß gene is regulated by multiple transcriptional factors including
Ets-1, SP1/SP3, and RXRa/ß.

Liu J(1), Ji W, Sun S, Zhang L, Chen HG, Mao Y, Liu L, Zhang X, Gong L, Deng M,
Chen L, Han WJ, Chen PC, Hu WF, Hu X, Woodward Z, Liu WB, Xiao YM, Liang SP, Liu 
Y, Liu SJ, Li DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-5870, USA.

Protein phosphatase-2A (PP-2A) is a major serine/threonine phosphatase abundantly
expressed in eukaryotes. PP-2A is a heterotrimer that contains a 65 kD scaffold A
subunit, a 36 kD catalytic C subunit, and a regulatory B subunit of variable
isoforms ranging from 54-130 kDs. The scaffold subunits, PP2A-Aa/ß, act as
platforms for both the C and B subunits to bind, and thus are key structural
components for PP-2A activity. Mutations in both genes encoding PP2A-Aa and
PP2A-Aß lead to carcinogenesis and likely other human diseases. Our previous work
showed that the gene coding for PP2A-Aa is positively regulated by multiple
transcription factors including Ets-1, CREB, and AP-2a but negatively regulated
by SP-1/SP-3. In the present study, we have functionally dissected the promoter
of the mouse PP2A-Aß gene. Our results demonstrate that three major cis-elements,
including the binding sites for Ets-1, SP1/SP3, and RXRa/ß, are present in the
proximal promoter of the mouse PP2A-Aß gene. Gel mobility shifting assays reveal 
that Ets-1, SP1/SP3, and RXRa/ß all bind to PP2A-Aß gene promoter. In vitro
mutagenesis and reporter gene activity assays demonstrate that while Ets-1
displays negative regulation, SP1/SP3 and RXRa/ß positively regulate the promoter
of the PP2A-Aß gene. Co-expression of the cDNAs encoding Ets-1, SP1/SP3, or
RXRa/ß and the luciferase reporter gene driven by PP2A-Aß promoter further
confirm their control over the PP2A-Aß promoter. Finally, ChIP assays demonstrate
that Ets-1, SP1/SP3, and RXRa/ß can all bind to the PP2A-Aß gene promoter.
Together, our results reveal that multiple transcription factors regulate the
PP2A-Aß gene. Moreover, our results provide important information explaining why 
PP2A-Aa and PP2A-Aß display distinct expression levels.

PMID: 22827437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Am Chem Soc. 2012 Aug 22;134(33):13765-72. doi: 10.1021/ja3047816. Epub 2012
Aug 7.

Palladium-catalyzed C(sp3)-H arylation of diarylmethanes at room temperature:
synthesis of triarylmethanes via deprotonative-cross-coupling processes.

Zhang J(1), Bellomo A, Creamer AD, Dreher SD, Walsh PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Roy and Diana Vagelos Laboratories, Department of Chemistry, University of
Pennsylvania, 231 South 34th Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6323, USA.

Although metal-catalyzed direct arylation reactions of non- or weakly acidic C-H 
bonds have recently received much attention, chemists have relied heavily on
substrates with appropriately placed directing groups to steer reactivity. To
date, examples of intermolecular arylation of unactivated C(sp(3))-H bonds in the
absence of a directing group remain scarce. We report herein the first general,
high-yielding, and scalable method for palladium-catalyzed C(sp(3))-H arylation
of simple diarylmethane derivatives with aryl bromides at room temperature. This 
method facilitates access to a variety of sterically and electronically diverse
hetero- and nonheteroaryl-containing triarylmethanes, a class of compounds with
various applications and interesting biological activity. Key to the success of
this approach is an in situ metalation of the substrate via C-H deprotonation
under catalytic cross-coupling conditions, which is referred to as a
deprotonative-cross-coupling process (DCCP). Base and catalyst identification
were performed by high-throughput experimentation (HTE) and led to a unique
base/catalyst combination [KN(SiMe(3))(2)/Pd-NiXantphos] that proved to
efficiently promote the room-temperature DCCP of diarylmethanes. Additionally,
the DCCP exhibits remarkable chemoselectivity in the presence of substrates that 
are known to undergo O-, N-, enolate-, and C(sp(2))-H arylation.

PMID: 22816972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Am Chem Soc. 2012 Aug 8;134(31):12924-7. doi: 10.1021/ja305694r. Epub 2012 Jul 
26.

Rh-catalyzed borylation of N-adjacent C(sp3)-H bonds with a silica-supported
triarylphosphine ligand.

Kawamorita S(1), Miyazaki T, Iwai T, Ohmiya H, Sawamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Hokkaido University , Sapporo
060-0810, Japan.

Direct C(sp(3))-H borylation of amides, ureas, and 2-aminopyridine derivatives at
the position a to the N atom, which gives the corresponding
a-aminoalkylboronates, has been achieved with a heterogeneous catalyst system
consisting of [Rh(OMe)(cod)]2 and a silica-supported triarylphosphine ligand
(Silica-TRIP) that features an immobilized triptycene-type cage structure with a 
bridgehead P atom. The reaction occurs not only at terminal C-H bonds but also at
internal secondary C-H bonds under mild reaction conditions (25-100 °C, 0.1-0.5
mol % Rh).

PMID: 22816772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Int J Cancer. 2013 Feb 15;132(4):795-806. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27730. Epub 2012 Aug
3.

Inhibition of rhabdomyosarcoma cell and tumor growth by targeting specificity
protein (Sp) transcription factors.

Chadalapaka G(1), Jutooru I, Sreevalsan S, Pathi S, Kim K, Chen C, Crose L,
Linardic C, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX 77843-4466, USA.

Erratum in
    Int J Cancer. 2015 Sep 15;137(6):E9.

Specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 are highly
expressed in rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) cells. In tissue arrays of RMS tumor cores
from 71 patients, 80% of RMS patients expressed high levels of Sp1 protein,
whereas low expression of Sp1 was detected in normal muscle tissue. The
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) tolfenamic acid (TA) inhibited
growth and migration of RD and RH30 RMS cell lines and also inhibited tumor
growth in vivo using a mouse xenograft (RH30 cells) model. The effects of TA were
accompanied by downregulation of Sp1, Sp3, Sp4 and Sp-regulated genes in RMS
cells and tumors, and the role of Sp protein downregulation in mediating
inhibition of RD and RH30 cell growth and migration was confirmed by individual
and combined knockdown of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 proteins by RNA interference. TA
treatment and Sp knockdown in RD and RH30 cells also showed that four genes that 
are emerging as individual drug targets for treating RMS, namely c-MET,
insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGFR), PDGFRa and CXCR4, are also
Sp-regulated genes. These results suggest that NSAIDs such as TA may have
potential clinical efficacy in drug combinations for treating RMS patients.

Copyright © 2012 UICC.

PMCID: PMC3527649
PMID: 22815231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Org Lett. 2012 Aug 3;14(15):4030-3. doi: 10.1021/ol301909g. Epub 2012 Jul 19.

Catalytic radical cation salt induced C(sp3)-H functionalization of glycine
derivatives: synthesis of substituted quinolines.

Jia X(1), Peng F, Qing C, Huo C, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Eco-Environment-Related Polymer Materials, Ministry of
Education of China, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Northwest
Normal University, Lanzhou, Gansu 730070, China. jiaxd1975@163.com

A domino C(sp(3))-H functionalization of glycine derivatives was achieved under
catalytic radical cation salt induced conditions, producing a series of
quinolines. The proposed mechanism shows that a peroxyl radical cation, which is 
generated by the coupling between O(2) and TBPA(+), might be involved to
initiate the catalytic oxidation.

PMID: 22812489  [PubMed]


35. J Chem Phys. 2012 Jul 14;137(2):024502. doi: 10.1063/1.4732538.

Phase conversion from graphite toward a simple monoclinic sp3-carbon allotrope.

Wang JT(1), Chen C, Kawazoe Y.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics, Institute of
Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. wjt@aphy.iphy.ac.cn

We identify by ab initio calculations a simple monoclinic carbon in P2/m
(C(2h)(1)) symmetry with an alternating zigzag and armchair buckling of the
carbon sheets in AA stacking, which is formed via a distinct one-layer by
one-layer conversion mechanism along the [210] direction assisted by a large
lattice distortion. It is dynamically stable and energetically favorable as well 
as recently identified orthorhombic W- and monoclinic M-carbon. Moreover, this
new phase has a wider band gap than diamond's, and is compatible with the
experimental x-ray diffraction data. These results broaden our understanding of
the direct graphite-to-diamond phase transition.

PMID: 22803542  [PubMed]


36. J Am Chem Soc. 2012 Aug 1;134(30):12334-7. doi: 10.1021/ja303333k. Epub 2012 Jul 
23.

Enantioselective metal/organo-catalyzed aerobic oxidative sp3 C-H olefination of 
tertiary amines using molecular oxygen as the sole oxidant.

Zhang G(1), Ma Y, Wang S, Zhang Y, Wang R.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Preclinical Study for New Drugs of Gansu Province, Institute
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, and State Key Laboratory of Applied
Organic Chemistry, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China.

An organocatalysis/copper-catalyzed asymmetric oxidative sp(3) C-H olefination
reaction of tertiary amines with olefins using molecular oxygen as the sole
oxidant under mild conditions was realized for the first time. This novel
strategy provides an efficient and environmentally friendly way to access
diversify optically active C(1)-alkene tetrahydroisoquinoline derivatives.

PMID: 22800571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Org Lett. 2012 Jul 20;14(14):3792-5. doi: 10.1021/ol301680v. Epub 2012 Jul 12.

Ruthenium(II)-catalyzed sp3 C-H bond arylation of benzylic amines using aryl
halides.

Dastbaravardeh N(1), Schnürch M, Mihovilovic MD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Applied Synthetic Chemistry, Vienna University of Technology ,
Getreidemarkt 9/163-OC, 1060 Vienna, Austria.

A ruthenium(II)-catalyzed protocol for the direct arylation of benzylic amines
was developed. Employing 3-substituted pyridines as directing groups, arylation
was achieved using aryl bromides or aryl iodides as the aryl source. Potassium
pivalate proved to be an important additive in this transformation. The arylation
took place selectively in the benzylic sp(3) position, and no significant
competitive sp(2) arylation was observed. Arylated imines were observed as
byproducts in minor amounts. Additionally, reaction conditions for cleaving the
pyridine group were established, enabling access to bis-arylated methylamines.

PMID: 22789033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Chemistry. 2012 Aug 13;18(33):10393-8. doi: 10.1002/chem.201201072. Epub 2012 Jul
11.

The role of the alcohol and carboxylic acid in directed ruthenium-catalyzed
C(sp3)-H a-alkylation of cyclic amines.

Bergman SD(1), Storr TE, Prokopcová H, Aelvoet K, Diels G, Meerpoel L, Maes BU.

Author information: 
(1)Organic Synthesis, Department of Chemistry, University of Antwerp,
Groenenborgerlaan 171, 2020 Antwerp, Belgium.

A general directed Ru-catalyzed C(sp(3))-H a-alkylation protocol for piperidines 
(less-reactive substrates than the corresponding five-membered cyclic amines) has
been developed. The use of a hindered alcohol (2,4-dimethyl-3-pentanol) as the
solvent and catalyst activator, and a catalytic amount of
trans-1,2-cyclohexanedicarboxylic acid is necessary to achieve a high conversion 
to product. This protocol was used to effectively synthesize a number of 2-hexyl-
and 2,6-dihexyl piperidines, as well as the alkaloid (±)-solenopsin A. Kinetic
studies have revealed that the carboxylic acid additive has a significant effect 
on catalyst initiation, catalyst longevity, and reverses the reaction selectivity
compared with the acid-free reaction (promotes alkylation versus competing alkene
reduction).

Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22786664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Chem Soc Rev. 2012 Sep 7;41(17):5588-98. doi: 10.1039/c2cs35096c. Epub 2012 Jul
10.

From C(sp2)-H to C(sp3)-H: systematic studies on transition metal-catalyzed
oxidative C-C formation.

Li BJ(1), Shi ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing National Laboratory of Molecular Sciences, College of Chemistry and
Green Chemistry Center, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China.

In this tutorial review, we will summarize our recent efforts in transition
metal-catalyzed oxidative coupling via C-H functionalization of aromatic,
benzylic and allylic C-H bonds. Related works from other laboratories will be
cited where suitable, aiming to give the readers a flavor of this field. Special 
emphasis is placed on the reaction design and development.

PMID: 22782263  [PubMed]


40. Org Lett. 2012 Jul 20;14(14):3724-7. doi: 10.1021/ol301579q. Epub 2012 Jul 5.

Pd(II)-catalyzed primary-C(sp3)-H acyloxylation at room temperature.

Rit RK(1), Yadav MR, Sahoo AK.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry, University of Hyderabad , Hyderabad, India.

With the aid of a novel S-methyl-S-2-pyridyl-sulfoximine (MPyS) directing group
(DG), the unactivated primary ß-C(sp(3))-H bond of MPyS-N-amides oxidizes at room
temperature. The catalytic conditions are applicable to the diacetoxylation of
primary ß,ß'-C(sp(3))-H bonds, and the carboxylic acid solvent is pivotal in the 
formation of the C-O bond. The MPyS-DG cleaves from the oxidation products and is
recovered. This method provides convenient access to
a,a'-disubstituted-ß-hydroxycarboxylic acids.

PMID: 22765229  [PubMed]


41. Chem Commun (Camb). 2012 Aug 14;48(63):7847-9. doi: 10.1039/c2cc33203e. Epub 2012
Jul 4.

Copper-catalyzed decarboxylative C(sp2)-C(sp3) coupling reactions via radical
mechanism.

Yang H(1), Sun P, Zhu Y, Yan H, Lu L, Qu X, Li T, Mao J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Organic Synthesis of Jiangsu Province, College of Chemistry,
Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Soochow University, Suzhou, 215123,
P. R. China.

We have successfully developed an example of copper-catalyzed decarboxylative
C(sp(2))-C(sp(3)) coupling reactions via C-H functionalization for the first
time. It is noteworthy that our catalytic system is very stable, low-cost,
palladium-free, ligand-free, and easily accessible.

PMID: 22760299  [PubMed]


42. Mol Cancer Ther. 2012 Sep;11(9):1852-62. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-0181. Epub
2012 Jun 29.

Induction of the transcriptional repressor ZBTB4 in prostate cancer cells by
drug-induced targeting of microRNA-17-92/106b-25 clusters.

Kim K(1), Chadalapaka G, Pathi SS, Jin UH, Lee JS, Park YY, Cho SG,
Chintharlapalli S, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center, MD
Anderson Cancer Center, The University of Texas, Houston, USA.

Androgen-insensitive DU145 and PC3 human prostate cancer cells express high
levels of specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4, and
treatment of cells with methyl 2-cyano-3,11-dioxo-18ß-olean-1,12-dien-30-oate
(CDODA-Me) inhibited cell growth and downregulated Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 expression. 
CDODA-Me (15 mg/kg/d) was a potent inhibitor of tumor growth in a mouse xenograft
model (PC3 cells) and also decreased expression of Sp transcription factors in
tumors. CDODA-Me-mediated downregulation of Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 was due to
induction of the transcriptional repressor ZBTB4, which competitively binds and
displaces Sp transcription factors from GC-rich sites in Sp1-, Sp3-, Sp4-, and
Sp-regulated gene promoters. ZBTB4 levels are relatively low in DU145 and PC3
cells due to suppression by miR paralogs that are members of the miR-17-92
(miR-20a/17-5p) and miR-106b-25 (miR-106b/93) clusters. Examination of publically
available prostate cancer patient array data showed an inverse relationship
between ZBTB4 and miRs-20a/17-5p/106b/93 expression, and increased ZBTB4 in
patients with prostate cancer was a prognostic factor for increased survival.
CDODA-Me induces ZBTB4 in prostate cancer cells through disruption of miR-ZBTB4
interactions, and this results in downregulation of pro-oncogenic Sp
transcription factors and Sp-regulated genes.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3632183
PMID: 22752225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Org Chem. 2012 Jul 20;77(14):6076-86. doi: 10.1021/jo300849t. Epub 2012 Jul 11.

Platinum(II)-catalyzed cyclization sequence of aryl alkynes via C(sp3)-H
activation: a DFT study.

Li ZF(1), Fan Y, DeYonker NJ, Zhang X, Su CY, Xu H, Xu X, Zhao C.

Author information: 
(1)MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinorganic and Synthetic Chemistry/KLGHEI of
Environment and Energy Chemistry, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering,
Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510275, People's Republic of China.

The mechanism and intermediates of hydroalkylation of aryl alkynes via C(sp(3))-H
activation through a platinum(II)-centered catalyst are investigated with density
functional theory at the B3LYP/[6-31G(d) for H, O, C; 6-31+G(d,p) for F, Cl; SDD 
for Pt] level of theory. Solvent effects on reactions were explored using
calculations that included a polarizable continuum model for the solvent (THF).
Free energy diagrams for three suggested mechanisms were computed: (a) one that
leads to formation of a Pt(II) vinyl carbenoid (Mechanism A), (b) another where
the transition state implies a directed 1,4-hydrogen shift (Mechanism B), and (c)
one with a Pt-aided 1,4-hydrogen migration (Mechanism C). Results suggest that
the insertion reaction pathway of Mechanism A is reasonable. Through 4,5-hydrogen
transfer, the Pt(II) vinyl carbenoid is formed. Thus, the stepwise insertion
mechanism is favored while the electrocyclization mechanism is implausible.
Electron-withdrawing/electron-donating groups substituted at the phenyl and
benzyl sp(3) C atoms slightly change the thermodynamic properties of the first
half of Mechanism A, but electronic effects cause a substantial shift in relative
energies for the second half of Mechanism A. The rate-limiting step can be varied
between the 4,5-hydrogen shift process and the 1,5-hydrogen shift step by
altering electron-withdrawing/electron-donating groups on the benzyl C atom.
Additionally, NBO and AIM analyses are applied to further investigate electronic 
structure changes during the mechanism.

PMID: 22746201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Org Lett. 2012 Jul 6;14(13):3392-5. doi: 10.1021/ol301366p. Epub 2012 Jun 26.

Metal-free sp3 C-H bond dual-(het)arylation: I2-promoted domino process to
construct 2,2-bisindolyl-1-arylethanones.

Zhu YP(1), Liu MC, Jia FC, Yuan JJ, Gao QH, Lian M, Wu AX.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Pesticide & Chemical Biology, Ministry of Education, College
of Chemistry, Central China Normal University, Hubei, Wuhan 430079, P. R. China.

A molecular I(2)-promoted sp(3) C-H bond dual-(het)arylation protocol was
developed for the synthesis of 2,2-bisindolyl-1-arylethanones. Through a logical 
design, three mechanism-different reactions (iodination, Kornblum oxidation, and 
Friedel-Crafts reaction) were assembled in a single reactor. A variety of
2,2-bisindolyl-1-aryl ethanones were synthesized from simple and readily
available aryl methyl ketones and indoles. In the reaction, metal, base, and
ligand were all avoidable.

PMID: 22734467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Biochem Mol Toxicol. 2012 Sep;26(9):337-43. doi: 10.1002/jbt.21425. Epub 2012
Jun 21.

Effect of neonatal exposure on male rats to bisphenol A on the expression of DNA 
methylation machinery in the postimplantation embryo.

Doshi T(1), D'Souza C, Dighe V, Vanage G.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Preclinical Reproductive and Genetic Toxicology, National 
Institute for Research in Reproductive Health (ICMR), Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.

Bisphenol A (BPA) is used in the production of polycarbonate plastics and epoxy
resins. Our previous studies have demonstrated that neonatal exposure of male
rats to BPA causes decrease in sperm count and motility, increase in
postimplantation loss (POL), ultimately leading to subfertility during adulthood.
Epigenetic mechanisms such as DNA methylation play an important role in embryo
development. DNA methyltransferases (Dnmts) are the key players involved in
regulating DNA methylation marks. The objective of the present study was to
determine the mechanism involved in resorption of embryo as a result of BPA
exposure. The results of the present study demonstrate that neonatal exposure of 
male rats to BPA down regulates the gene expression of Dnmts and related
transcription factors in resorbed embryos as compared with the viable embryo.
Thereby, suggesting that BPA may have altered the sperm epigenome, which might
have affected the embryo development and leading to an increase in the POL.

2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc

PMID: 22730197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Curr Med Chem. 2012;19(22):3779-86.

Expression of specificity protein transcription factors in pancreatic cancer and 
their association in prognosis and therapy.

Sankpal UT(1), Maliakal P, Bose D, Kayaleh O, Buchholz D, Basha R.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research institute, MD Anderson Cancer Center Orlando, 6900 Lake Nona
Blvd, Orlando, FL 32827, USA.

Pancreatic cancer is an aggressive malignancy with poor prognosis. Pancreatic
adenocarcinoma is one of the leading causes of cancer-related deaths in the
United States. Due to the aggressive nature of this malignancy, there is a
serious concern for identifying effective targets, and adopting novel strategies 
for therapy. Members of the Specificity Protein (Sp) family of transcription
factors, Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 regulate the expression of a number of genes
associated with cancer cell proliferation, differentiation, and metastasis. Sp1
levels are upregulated in pancreatic cancer cell lines, and surgically resected
human pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Sp1 overexpression in tumor tissues is
associated with aggressive disease, poor prognosis and inversely correlated with 
survival. Sp1 is also known to affect angiogenesis by regulating the expression
of vascular endothelial growth factor and its receptors. Results from clinical
studies suggest Sp1 as new biomarker to identify aggressive pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma. The pharmacological inhibition of Sp1 using agents such as
celecoxib, mithramycin, curcumin, and tolfenamic acid has showed promising
results in pre-clinical studies and demonstrated Sp transcription factors as
potential targets for pancreatic cancer therapy. This review summarizes studies
showing the association of Sp proteins with this malignancy, with a special
emphasis on pre-clinical studies that tested strategies to target Sp
transcription factors for inhibiting human pancreatic cancer cell proliferation
and tumor growth in laboratory animals. The results showed remarkable efficacy
and suggest that such approaches have the potential for high success in
developing clinically relevant strategies for treating pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 22725697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2012 Jul 23;51(30):7507-10. doi: 10.1002/anie.201203897. 
Epub 2012 Jun 19.

Sequential C(sp3)-H arylation and olefination: total synthesis of the proposed
structure of pipercyclobutanamide A.

Gutekunst WR(1), Gianatassio R, Baran PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, 10650 North Torrey
Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

PMCID: PMC3495593
PMID: 22715157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Org Lett. 2012 Jul 6;14(13):3462-5. doi: 10.1021/ol301431d. Epub 2012 Jun 19.

Sequential protocol for C(sp3)-H carboxylation with CO2:
transition-metal-catalyzed benzylic C-H silylation and fluoride-mediated
carboxylation.

Mita T(1), Michigami K, Sato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-0812,
Japan. tmita@pharm.hokudai.ac.jp

One of the most challenging transformations in current organic chemistry is the
catalytic carboxylation of a C(sp(3))-H bond using CO(2) gas, an inexpensive and 
ubiquitous C1 source. A sequential protocol for C(sp(3))-H carboxylation by
employing a nitrogen-directed, metal-assisted, C-H activation/catalytic
silylation reaction in conjunction with fluoride-mediated carboxylation with
CO(2) was established. The carboxylation proceeded only at the benzylic
C(sp(3))-Si bond, not at the aromatic C(sp(2))-Si, which is advantageous for
further manipulations of the products.

PMID: 22712564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Phys Chem Lett. 2012 Jun 21;3(12):1680-3. doi: 10.1021/jz300578x. Epub 2012 Jun
7.

Reaction of the Basal Plane of Graphite with the Methyl Radical.

Mandeltort L(1), Choudhury P(2), Johnson JK(2,)(3), Yates JT Jr(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia
22904, United States. (2)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15261, United States. (3)§National Energy
Technology Laboratory, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15236, United States.

The reaction of methyl radicals with the basal plane of graphite has been
observed to occur with an activation energy of less than 0.3 eV. This reaction is
initiated by Li-induced CH3Cl dissociation to produce CH3 radicals on the
graphite surface. It is found that ~3/4 of the methyl radicals remain on the
graphite surface up to 700 K at puckered sp(3) carbon sites, while 1/4 of the CH3
radicals participate in CH4 formation and small amounts of C2 and C3 hydrocarbon 
formation. CH3 radicals become mobile over an activation energy barrier of ~0.7
eV.

PMID: 26285728  [PubMed]


50. Org Lett. 2012 Jul 6;14(13):3474-7. doi: 10.1021/ol301442z. Epub 2012 Jun 14.

Carbon-based leaving group in substitution reactions: functionalization of
sp3-hybridized quaternary and tertiary benzylic carbon centers.

Mahoney SJ(1), Lou T, Bondarenko G, Fillion E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, N2L 3G1,
Canada.

Lewis acid promoted substitution reactions employing Meldrum's acid and 5-methyl 
Meldrum's acid as carbon-based leaving groups are described which transform
unstrained quaternary and tertiary benzylic C(sp(3))-C(sp(3)) bonds into
C(sp(3))-X bonds (X = C, H, N). Importantly, this reaction has a broad scope in
terms of both suitable substrates and nucleophiles with good to excellent yields 
obtained (typically >90%).

PMID: 22697467  [PubMed]


51. Breast Cancer Res. 2012 Jun 13;14(3):R93.

Determining sensitivity and specificity of HER2 testing in breast cancer using a 
tissue micro-array approach.

Dekker TJ(1), Borg ST, Hooijer GK, Meijer SL, Wesseling J, Boers JE, Schuuring E,
Bart J, van Gorp J, Mesker WE, Kroep JR, Smit VT, van de Vijver MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Academic Medical Center, Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam,
1100 DD, The Netherlands.

INTRODUCTION: Overexpression of the human epidermal growth factor receptor 2
(HER2) as a result of HER2 gene amplification is associated with a relatively
poor prognosis in breast cancer and is predictive of HER2-targeting therapy
response. False-positive rates of up to 20% for HER2 testing have been described.
HER2-testing laboratories are therefore encouraged to participate in external
quality control schemes in order to improve HER2-testing standardization.
METHODS: This study investigated the feasibility of retesting large numbers of
invasive breast cancers for HER2 status on tissue micro-array (TMA) as part of a 
quality control scheme. For this assessment different HER2 testing methods were
used including HER2 detecting antibodies SP3, 4B5, Herceptest and mono color
silver in situ hybridization (SISH) and dual color SISH. Final HER2 status for
each tumor on the TMA was compared to the local testing result for the same
tumor. Discordances between these two results were investigated further by
staining whole tumor sections.
RESULTS: For this study, 1,210 invasive breast carcinomas of patients treated in 
six hospitals between 2006 and 2008 were evaluated. Results from the three
immunohistochemistry (IHC) and two in situ hybridization (ISH) assays performed
on the TMAs were compared. The final HER2 status on TMA was determined with SP3, 
4B5 and mono color SISH. Concordance between local HER2 test results and TMA
retesting was 98.0%. Discordant results between local and TMA retesting were
found in 20 tumors (2.0%). False positive HER2 IHC results were identified in 13 
(1.3%) tumors; false negative IHC results in seven (0.7%) tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: Retesting large volumes of HER2 classified breast carcinomas was
found to be feasible and can be reliably performed by staining TMAs with SP3, 4B5
and mono color SISH in combination with full-sized slides for discordant cases.
The frequency of false-positive results was lower than previously reported in the
literature. This method is now offered to other HER2-testing laboratories.

PMCID: PMC3446356
PMID: 22694844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Lipid Res. 2012 Sep;53(9):1910-9. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M027680. Epub 2012 Jun 12.

Okadaic acid inhibits the trichostatin A-mediated increase of human CYP46A1
neuronal expression in a ERK1/2-Sp3-dependent pathway.

Nunes MJ(1), Moutinho M, Milagre I, Gama MJ, Rodrigues E.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Medicines and Pharmaceutical Sciences (iMed.UL),
University of Lisbon, 1649-019 Lisbon, Portugal.

The CYP46A1 gene codes for the cholesterol 24-hydroxylase, a cytochrome P450
specifically expressed in neurons and responsible for the majority of cholesterol
turnover in the central nervous system. Previously, we have demonstrated the
critical participation of Sp transcription factors in the CYP46A1 response to
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors, and in this study we investigated the
involvement of intracellular signaling pathways in the trichostatin A (TSA)
effect. Our results show that pretreatment of neuroblastoma cells with chemical
inhibitors of mitogen-activated kinase kinase (MEK)1 significantly potentiates
the TSA-dependent induction of cholesterol 24-hydroxylase, whereas inhibition of 
protein phosphatases by okadaic acid (OA) or overexpression of MEK1 partially
impairs the TSA effect without affecting histone hyperacetylation at the
promoter. Immunoblotting revealed that TSA treatment decreases ERK1/2
phosphorylation concomitantly with a decrease in Sp3 binding activity, which are 
both reversed by pretreatment with OA. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis
demonstrated that TSA induces the release of p-ERK1/2 from the CYP46A1 proximal
promoter, whereas pretreatment with OA restores the co-occupancy of Sp3-ERK1/2 in
the same promoter fragments. We demonstrate for the first time the participation 
of MEK-ERK1/2 signaling pathway in HDAC inhibitor-dependent induction of
cytochrome P450 gene expression, underlying the importance of this regulatory
signaling mechanism in the control of brain cholesterol elimination.

PMCID: PMC3413230
PMID: 22693257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. FEBS J. 2012 Aug;279(15):2714-26. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2012.08654.x. Epub
2012 Jun 25.

Sp1 and Sp3 are involved in the full transcriptional activity of centromere
protein H in human nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells.

Zhao WF(1), Wang HB, Xie B, Hu LJ, Xu LH, Kuang BH, Li MZ, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, SunYat-sen University Cancer 
Center, Guangzhou, China.

The overexpression of centromere protein H (CENPH), one of the fundamental
components of the human active kinetochore, has been shown to be closely
associated with human cancers. However, the mechanism of its transcriptional
regulation has not been reported. The aim of the present study was to investigate
the regulatory elements for the transcriptional regulation of CENPH in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells. To characterize the CENPH promoter and identify
regulatory elements, we cloned 1015 bp (-975/+40 bp) of the 5'-flanking region of
the CENPH gene from immortalized normal nasopharyngeal epithelial cells
(Bmi-1/NPEC). Functional analysis established a minimal region (-140/-87 bp)
involved in the regulation of human CENPH promoter activity. Through
site-directed mutagenesis, a transactivation assay, chromatin
immunoprecipitation, and electrophoretic mobility shift assay, we found that the 
Sp1/Sp3 transcription factors could bind to the CENPH promoter in vitro and
in vivo, and that they regulated CENPH promoter activation in human
nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells. Furthermore, Sp1 and Sp3 were highly expressed in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells. Knockdown of Sp1 and Sp3 by small interfering RNA
or inhibition of Sp1 and Sp3 activity by mithramycin A decreased CENPH mRNA
expression, whereas the exogenous expression of Sp1 and Sp3 upregulated CENPH
mRNA expression. Taken together, our results indicate that Sp1 and Sp3 bind to
the CENPH minimal promoter and function as a regulator of the transcription of
CENPH in human nasopharyngeal carcinomas.

© 2012 The Authors Journal compilation © 2012 FEBS.

PMID: 22682030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Invest Dermatol. 2012 Oct;132(10):2360-7. doi: 10.1038/jid.2012.164. Epub 2012 
Jun 7.

NF-<U+03BA>B accumulation associated with COL1A1 transactivators defects during
chronological aging represses type I collagen expression through a -112/-61-bp
region of the COL1A1 promoter in human skin fibroblasts.

Bigot N(1), Beauchef G, Hervieu M, Oddos T, Demoor M, Boumediene K, Galéra P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Matrice Extracellulaire et Pathologie, IFR ICORE 146, Université
de Caen/Basse-Normandie, UFR de Médecine, Caen, France.

The aging process, especially of the skin, is governed by changes in the
epidermal, dermo-epidermal, and dermal compartments. Type I collagen, which is
the major component of dermis extracellular matrix (ECM), constitutes a prime
target for intrinsic and extrinsic aging-related alterations. In addition, under 
the aging process, pro-inflammatory signals are involved and collagens are
fragmented owing to enhanced matrix metalloproteinase activities, and fibroblasts
are no longer able to properly synthesize collagen fibrils. Here, we demonstrated
that low levels of type I collagen detected in aged skin fibroblasts are
attributable to an inhibition of COL1A1 transcription. Indeed, on one hand, we
observed decreased binding activities of specific proteins 1 and 3, CCAAT-binding
factor, and human collagen-Krüppel box, which are well-known COL1A1
transactivators acting through the -112/-61-bp promoter sequence. On the other
hand, the aging process was accompanied by elevated amounts and binding
activities of NF-<U+03BA>B (p65 and p50 subunits), together with an increased number of 
senescent cells. The forced expression of NF-<U+03BA>B performed in young fibroblasts
was able to establish an old-like phenotype by repressing COL1A1 expression
through the short -112/-61-bp COL1A1 promoter and by elevating the senescent cell
distribution. The concomitant decrease of transactivator functions and increase
of transinhibitor activity is responsible for ECM dysfunction, leading to
aging/senescence in dermal fibroblasts.

PMID: 22673730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Org Lett. 2012 Jun 15;14(12):3218-21. doi: 10.1021/ol301220s. Epub 2012 Jun 5.

Unexpected copper-catalyzed aerobic oxidative cleavage of C(sp3)-C(sp3) bond of
glycol ethers.

Liu ZQ(1), Zhao L, Shang X, Cui Z.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Applied Organic Chemistry, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou
Gansu 730000, PR China. liuzhq@lzu.edu.cn

An unexpected Cu-catalyzed oxidative cleavage of the C(sp(3))-C(sp(3)) bond in
glycol ethers by using air or molecular oxygen as the terminal stoichiometric
oxidant is demonstrated. As a result, the corresponding a-acyloxy ethers and
formates of 1,2-ethanediol are formed by direct coupling of carboxylic acids and 
aldehydes with glycol ethers under the reaction conditions. This method
represents the first example of Cu-catalyzed aerobic cleavage of saturated C-C
bond in ethers.

PMID: 22668348  [PubMed]


56. Oncol Rep. 2012 Aug;28(2):677-81. doi: 10.3892/or.2012.1845. Epub 2012 Jun 1.

4-hexylresorcinol stimulates the differentiation of SCC-9 cells through the
suppression of E2F2, E2F3 and Sp3 expression and the promotion of Sp1 expression.

Kim SG(1), Kim AS, Jeong JH, Choi JY, Kweon H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, College of Dentistry,
Gangneung-Wonju National University, Gangneung 210-702, Republic of Korea.
epker@chollian.net

The dormancy-inducing factors of bacteria inhibit tumor cell growth. In the
present study, we evaluated the antitumor effects of the dormancy-inducing factor
4-hexylresorcinol (4-HR) using real-time cell electronic sensing (RT-CES) in
SCC-9 cells (tongue squamous cell carcinoma cells). Treatment with 4-HR
suppressed the growth of SCC-9 cells in a dose-dependent manner. We used a DNA
microarray to identify genes that showed a significant change in expression upon 
4-HR administration in SCC-9 cells. Among the differentially expressed genes, the
protein expression of several cell proliferation related factors, including E2F1,
E2F2, E2F3, E2F4, E2F5, E2F6, Sp1 and Sp3, were determined by western blot
analyses. Treatment with 4-HR strongly suppressed E2F2 and slightly suppressed
E2F3 but did not change the expression of E2F1, E2F4, E2F5 and E2F6 relative to
no treatment. Furthermore, 4-HR increased Sp1 expression in a dose-dependent
manner and decreased Sp3 expression. Therefore, the ratio of Sp1 to Sp3, an
important driving force of epithelial cell differentiation, was drastically
increased. Consistent with this observation, 4-HR increased the expression of the
epithelial cell differentiation markers involucrin and keratin 10. Together, our 
results indicate that 4-HR induces the differentiation of SCC-9 via the
modulation of the E2F-mediated signaling pathway.

PMID: 22664654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Org Lett. 2012 Jun 15;14(12):2992-5. doi: 10.1021/ol3009842. Epub 2012 Jun 4.

Selective catalytic sp3 C-O bond cleavage with C-N bond formation in
3-alkoxy-1-propanols.

Chen C(1), Hong SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Chemistry and Biological Chemistry, School of Physical and
Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 637371,
Singapore.

The ruthenium catalyzed selective sp(3) C-O cleavage with amide formation was
reported in reactions of 3-alkoxy-1-propanol derivatives and amines. The cleavage
only occurs at the C3-O position even with 3-benzyloxy-1-propanol. Based on the
experimental results, O-bound and C-bound Ru enolate complexes were proposed as
key intermediates for the unique selective sp(3) C-O bond cleavage in
3-alkoxy-1-propanols.

PMID: 22663065  [PubMed]


58. J Am Chem Soc. 2012 Jun 20;134(24):9902-5. doi: 10.1021/ja3036459. Epub 2012 Jun 
6.

Palladium-catalyzed oxidative carbonylation of benzylic C-H bonds via nondirected
C(sp3)-H activation.

Xie P(1), Xie Y, Qian B, Zhou H, Xia C, Huang H.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Oxo Synthesis and Selective Oxidation, Lanzhou
Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Lanzhou 730000, P.R. 
China.

A new strategy for generating benzylpalladium reactive species from toluenes via 
nondirected C(sp(3))-H activation has been developed. This led to construction of
an efficient Pd-catalyzed reaction protocol for the oxidative carboxylation of
benzylic C-H bonds to form substituted 2-phenylacetic acid esters and derivatives
from inexpensive, commercially available starting materials.

PMID: 22662917  [PubMed]


59. Pharmacol Rep. 2012;64(2):282-92.

Antinociceptive and anti-inflammatory activities of a sulfated polysaccharide
isolated from the green seaweed Caulerpa cupressoides.

Rodrigues JA(1), Vanderlei ES, Silva LM, Araújo IW, Queiroz IN, Paula GA, Abreu
TM, Ribeiro NA, Bezerra MM, Chaves HV, Lima V, Jorge RJ, Monteiro HS, Leite EL,
Benevides NM.

Author information: 
(1)Northeast Biotechnology Network, Federal University of Ceará, Campus do Pici, 
Fortaleza, Ceará, Av Mister Hull, CEP 60455-760, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Red and brown algae sulfated polysaccharides (SPs) have been widely
investigated as antinociceptive and/or anti-inflammatory agents; however, no
description of these biological properties concerning green algae SPs have been
reported. Caulerpa curpressoides (Chlorophyta) presents three SPs fractions
(Cc-SP1, Cc-SP2, and Cc-SP3). Anticoagulant (in vitro) and anti- and
pro-thrombotic (in vivo) effects of Cc-SP2 had been recently reported. We
evaluated the effects of Cc-SP2 using models of nociception and acute
inflammation in vivo.
METHODS: Male Swiss mice received Cc-SP2 (iv) 30 min prior to receiving 0.6%
acetic acid (10 ml/kg, ip), 1% formalin (20 µl, sc) or were subjected to thermal 
stimuli (51 ± 1 °C). Cc-SP2 was injected sc to male Wistar rats in a peritonitis 
model or a paw edema model using carrageenan (ip or ipl, 500 µg). To analyze the 
systemic effects, Cc-SP2 (27 mg/kg, sc) was administrated to both genders mice
before waiting for 14 days.
RESULTS: Cc-SP2 (3, 9 or 27 mg/kg) reduced (p < 0.05) the number of writhes
induced by acetic acid by 57, 89.9 and 90.6%, respectively, the licking time in
the first (9 or 27 mg/kg with 42.47 and 52.1%, respectively) and the second (3, 9
or 27 mg/kg with 68.95, 82.34 and 84.61%, respectively) phases. In the hot-plate 
test, the antinociceptive effect of Cc-SP2 (9 mg/kg) was primarily observed at 60
min (26.7 ± 1.2 s), with its effect reversed by naloxone (8.6 ± 1.3 s),
suggesting the involvement of the opioid system. Cc-SP2 (3, 9 or 27 mg/kg, sc, p 
< 0.05) showed anti-inflammatory effects by decreasing neutrophils migration by
64, 69 and 73%, respectively, and potently reduced the paw edema, especially at
the second (0.16 ± 0.02, 0.16 ± 0.03 and 0.12 ± 0.05 ml) and third (0.16 ± 0.03, 
0.18 ± 0.02 and 0.14 ± 0.04 ml) hours, respectively. Cc-SP2 did not cause hepatic
or renal alterations or affect body mass or the macroscopy of the organs examined
(p > 0.05). Histopathological analyses of the liver and kidney showed that both
organs were affected by Cc-SP2 treatment, but these effects were considered
reversible.
CONCLUSION: The results indicate that the analgesic and anti-inflammatory effects
of Cc-SP2 could be of biomedical applicability as a new, natural tool in pain and
acute inflammatory conditions.

PMID: 22661177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Org Chem. 2012 Jun 15;77(12):5418-22. doi: 10.1021/jo300662x. Epub 2012 Jun 5.

Access to C(sp3)-C(sp2) and C(sp2)-C(sp2) bond formation via sequential
intermolecular carbopalladation of multiple carbon-carbon bonds.

Wen Y(1), Huang L, Jiang H.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, South China University of
Technology, Guangzhou 510640, China.

A synthetic strategy of 4-benzyl-substituted 1,3-butadiene derivatives through
Pd-catalyzed three-component coupling reaction of benzyl chlorides, alkynes, and 
monosubstituted alkenes is described. This tandem coupling reaction forms a
C(sp(3))-C(sp(2)) bond and a C(sp(2))-C(sp(2)) bond sequentially in a single-step
operation.

PMID: 22647071  [PubMed]


61. FASEB J. 2012 Sep;26(9):3703-14. doi: 10.1096/fj.11-203323. Epub 2012 May 29.

Prostaglandin E2 increases fibroblast gene-specific and global DNA methylation
via increased DNA methyltransferase expression.

Huang SK(1), Scruggs AM, Donaghy J, McEachin RC, Fisher AS, Richardson BC,
Peters-Golden M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA. stehuang@umich.edu.

Although alterations in DNA methylation patterns have been associated with
specific diseases and environmental exposures, the mediators and signaling
pathways that direct these changes remain understudied. The bioactive lipid
mediator prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)) has been shown to exert a myriad of effects 
on cell survival, proliferation, and differentiation. Here, we report that PGE(2)
also signals to increase global DNA methylation and DNA methylation machinery in 
fibroblasts. HumanMethylation27 BeadChip array analysis of primary fetal (IMR-90)
and adult lung fibroblasts identified multiple genes that were hypermethylated in
response to PGE(2). PGE(2), compared with nontreated controls, increased
expression and activity (EC(50)~10(7) M) of one specific isoform of DNA
methyltransferase, DNMT3a. Silencing of DNMT3a negated the ability of PGE(2) to
increase DNMT activity. The increase in DNMT3a expression was mediated by PGE(2) 
signaling via its E prostanoid 2 receptor and the second messenger cAMP. PGE(2), 
compared with the untreated control, increased the expression and activity of Sp1
and Sp3 (EC(50)~3×10(7) M), transcription factors known to increase DNMT3a
expression, and inhibition of these transcription factors abrogated the PGE(2)
increase of DNMT3a expression. These findings were specific to fibroblasts, as
PGE(2) decreased DNMT1 and DNMT3a expression in RAW macrophages. Taken together, 
these findings establish that DNA methylation is regulated by a ubiquitous
bioactive endogenous mediator. Given that PGE(2) biosynthesis is modulated by
environmental toxins, various disease states, and commonly used pharmacological
agents, these findings uncover a novel mechanism by which alterations in DNA
methylation patterns may arise in association with disease and certain
environmental exposures.

PMCID: PMC3425823
PMID: 22645246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2012 Jul 22;19(4):497-508. doi: 10.1530/ERC-12-0129. Print
2012 Aug.

Expression of guanylyl cyclase-B (GC-B/NPR2) receptors in normal human fetal
pituitaries and human pituitary adenomas implicates a role for C-type natriuretic
peptide.

Thompson IR(1), Chand AN, King PJ, Ansorge O, Karavitaki N, Jones CA, Rahmutula
D, Gardner DG, Zivkovic V, Wheeler-Jones CP, McGonnell IM, Korbonits M, Anderson 
RA, Wass JA, McNeilly AS, Fowkes RC.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Signalling Group, Veterinary Basic Sciences, University of London,
Royal College Street, London NW1 0TU, UK.

C-type natriuretic peptide (CNP/Nppc) is expressed at high levels in the anterior
pituitary of rats and mice and activates guanylyl cyclase B receptors (GC-B/Npr2)
to regulate hormone secretion. Mutations in NPR2/Npr2 can cause achondroplasia,
GH deficiency, and female infertility, yet the normal expression profile within
the anterior pituitary remains to be established in humans. The current study
examined the expression profile and transcriptional regulation of NPR2 and GC-B
protein in normal human fetal pituitaries, normal adult pituitaries, and human
pituitary adenomas using RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry. Transcriptional
regulation of human NPR2 promoter constructs was characterized in anterior
pituitary cell lines of gonadotroph, somatolactotroph, and corticotroph origin.
NPR2 was detected in all human fetal and adult pituitary samples regardless of
age or sex, as well as in all adenoma samples examined regardless of tumor
origin. GC-B immunoreactivity was variable in normal pituitary,
gonadotrophinomas, and somatotrophinomas. Maximal transcriptional regulation of
the NPR2 promoter mapped to a region within -214<U+200A>bp upstream of the start site in
all anterior pituitary cell lines examined. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays
revealed that this region contains Sp1/Sp3 response elements. These data are the 
first to show NPR2 expression in normal human fetal and adult pituitaries and
adenomatous pituitary tissue and suggest a role for these receptors in both
pituitary development and oncogenesis, introducing a new target to manipulate
these processes in pituitary adenomas.

PMID: 22645228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Anticancer Res. 2012 Jun;32(6):2347-52.

Regulatory mechanisms of the HB-EGF autocrine loop in inflammation, homeostasis, 
development and cancer.

Miyata K(1), Yotsumoto F, Nam SO, Kuroki M, Miyamoto S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, Fukuoka
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Heparin binding epidermal growth factor-like growth factor (HB-EGF) is involved
in development and homeostasis as well as in pathological processing of chronic
diseases, especially cancer. Enhancement of HB-EGF expression is directly or
indirectly regulated by transcriptional factors, including activator protein-1
(AP-1), specificity protein (SP)1, SP3, nuclear factor kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B), hypoxia
inducible factor 1, alpha subunit (HIF-1a, myogenic differentiation 1 (MyoD),
Wilms tumor 1 (WT-1) and snail homolog 1 (Snail), and also by microRNAs. These
transcription or post-transcription factors may communicate to form an autocrine 
HB-EGF amplification loop. Emerging evidence has indicated that HB-EGF is a
rational target for the therapy of cancer and atherosclerosis. In this review, we
discuss the relationship between the HB-EGF autocrine loop and HB-EGF
transcriptional factors, and we highlight HB-EGF as a therapeutic target in
diverse diseases.

PMID: 22641673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Phys Condens Matter. 2012 Jun 6;24(22):223001. doi:
10.1088/0953-8984/24/22/223001.

1D graphene-like silicon systems: silicene nano-ribbons.

De Padova P(1), Perfetti P, Olivieri B, Quaresima C, Ottaviani C, Le Lay G.

Author information: 
(1)Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche-ISM, Roma, Italy. paola.depadova@ism.cnr.it

Through this review we can follow the various phases that have led to the
discovery of the new allotrope form of silicon: silicene. This is a one-atom
thick silicon sheet arranged in a honeycomb lattice, similar to graphene. For
silicon, which usually is sp3 hybridized, it represents an unusual and rare
structure. First, silicene was theoretically hypothesized and subsequently its
structure calculated as a possible candidate for nano-ribbons of Si grown on the 
anisotropic Ag(110) surface. It was only later, when the physical and chemical
properties of this peculiar form of silicon, demonstrating the presence of p and 
p* bands giving the so-called Dirac cones at the K corners of the Brillouin zone,
the sp2-like nature of the valence orbitals of the Si-Si bonds and its strong
resistance towards oxygen were reported, that the real existence of silicene
became recognized in the scientific community. This review is essentially focused
on the experimental work performed on 1D isolated silicene nano-ribbons and their
1D dense array grown on Ag(110) surfaces.

PMID: 22592268  [PubMed]


65. Anticancer Agents Med Chem. 2012 Sep;12(7):807-17.

Calculation of molecular features with apparent impact on both activity of
mutagens and activity of anticancer agents.

Toropov AA(1), Toropova AP, Benfenati E, Gini G, Leszczynska D, Leszczynski J.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri, 20156 Via La Masa 19, Milano,
Italy. andrey.toropov@marionegri.it

The analysis of the influence of molecular features which can be extracted from
the simplified molecular input line entry system (SMILES) and involved in the
process of the building up of a series of QSAR models (with different splits into
training and test sets) by means of the CORAL software for mutagenicity and
anticancer activity has been performed. The presence of nitrogen (sp3) is
favorable for decrease of the both endpoints; the presence of only one ring is
also promotor for decrease of the both endpoints; however the presence of two or 
three rings is favorable for increase of mutagenicity and decrease of anticancer 
activity. These findings provide useful criteria for further experimental and
computational studies in the search for new anticancer agents.

PMID: 22583412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Anticancer Agents Med Chem. 2012 Dec;12(10):1211-20.

Unifying mechanisms of action of the anticancer activities of triterpenoids and
synthetic analogs.

Safe SH(1), Prather PL, Brents LK, Chadalapaka G, Jutooru I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
4466 TAMU, College Station, TX 77843-4466, USA. ssafe@cvm.tamu.edu

Triterpenoids such as betulinic acid (BA) and synthetic analogs of oleanolic acid
[2-cyano-3,12-dioxooleana-1,9-dien-28-oic acid (CDDO)] and glycyrrhetinic acid
[2-cyano-3,11-dioxo-18ß-oleana-1,12-dien-30-oc acid (CDODA)] are potent
anticancer agents that exhibit antiproliferative, antiangiogenic,
anti-inflammatory and pro-apoptotic activities. Although their effects on
multiple pathways have been reported, unifying mechanisms of action have not been
reported. Studies in this laboratory have now demonstrated that several
triterpenoids including BA and some derivatives, celastrol, methyl ursolate,
ß-boswellic acid derivatives, and the synthetic analogs CDDO, CDODA and their
esters decreased expression of specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors and
several pro-oncogenic Sp-regulated genes in multiple cancer cell lines. The
mechanisms of this response are both compound- and cell context-dependent and
include activation of both proteasome-dependent and -independent pathways.
Triterpenoid-mediated induction of reactive oxygen species (ROS) has now been
characterized as an important proteasome-independent pathway for downregulation
of Sp transcription factors. ROS decreases expression of microRNA-27a (miR-27a)
and miR-20a/miR-17-5p and this results in the induction of the transcriptional
"Sp-repressors" ZBTB10 and ZBTB4, respectively, which in turn downregulate Sp and
Sp-regulated genes. Triterpenoids also activate or deactive nuclear receptors and
G-protein coupled receptors, and these pathways contribute to their
antitumorigenic activity and may also play a role in targeting Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4
which are highly overexpressed in multiple cancers and appear to be important for
maintaining the cancer phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3532564
PMID: 22583404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Anal Chem. 2012 Jun 5;84(11):5007-16. doi: 10.1021/ac3006236. Epub 2012 May 14.

Importance of fundamental sp, sp2, and sp3 hydrocarbon radicals in the growth of 
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.

Shukla B(1), Koshi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Aerospace and Mechanical Engineering, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, California 90089-1453, United States. bikaushu@usc.edu

The most basic chemistry of products formation in hydrocarbons pyrolysis has been
explored via a comparative experimental study on the roles of fundamental sp,
sp(2), and sp(3) hydrocarbon radicals/intermediates such as ethyne/ethynyl
(C(2)H(2)/C(2)H), ethene/ethenyl (C(2)H(4)/C(2)H(3)), and methane/methyl
(CH(4)/CH(3)) in products formations. By using an in situ time-of-flight mass
spectrometry technique, gas-phase products of pyrolysis of acetylene (ethyne,
C(2)H(2)), ethylene (ethene, C(2)H(4)), and acetone (propanone, CH(3)COCH(3))
were detected and found to include small aliphatic products to large polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) of mass 324 amu. Observed products mass spectra
showed a remarkable sequence of mass peaks at regular mass number intervals of
24, 26, or 14 indicating the role of the particular corresponding radicals,
ethynyl (C(2)H), ethenyl (C(2)H(3)), or methyl (CH(3)), in products formation.
The analysis of results revealed the following: (a) product formation in
hydrocarbon pyrolysis is dominated by hydrogen abstraction and a vinyl (ethenyl, 
C(2)H(3)) radical addition (HAVA) mechanism, (b) contrary to the existing concept
of termination of products mass growth at cyclopenta fused species like
acenaphthylene, novel pathways forming large PAHs were found succeeding beyond
such cyclopenta fused species by the further addition of C(2)H(x) or CH(3)
radicals, (c) production of cyclopenta ring-fused PAHs (CP-PAHs) such as
fluoranthene/corannulene appeared as a preferred route over benzenoid species
like pyrene/coronene, (d) because of the high reactivity of the CH(3) radical, it
readily converts unbranched products into products with aliphatic chains
(branched product), and (e) some interesting novel products such as dicarbon
monoxide (C(2)O), tricarbon monoxide (C(3)O), and cyclic ketones were detected
especially in acetone pyrolysis. These results finally suggest that existing
kinetic models of product formation should be modified to include the reported
novel species and their formation pathways. It is expected that outcomes of this 
study will be useful to understand the products formation from reactors to
interstellar atmospheres as well as the growth mechanism of carbon nanomaterials.

PMID: 22582767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Chem Commun (Camb). 2012 Jun 14;48(47):5928-30. doi: 10.1039/c2cc32009f. Epub
2012 May 9.

Cu(II)-catalyzed C-H (SP3) oxidation and C-N cleavage: base-switched
methylenation and formylation using tetramethylethylenediamine as a carbon
source.

Zhang L(1), Peng C, Zhao D, Wang Y, Fu HJ, Shen Q, Li JX.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Lab of Analytical Chemistry for Life Science, School of Chemistry
and Chemical Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210093, P. R. China.

Base-switched methylenation and formylation using tetramethylethylenediamine
(TMEDA) as a carbon source have been achieved under mild conditions, catalyzed by
CuCl(2), with atmospheric oxygen as oxidant. Bisindolylmethanes, diphenylmethanes
and 3-formylindoles were synthesized with excellent regioselectivity and good
yield.

PMID: 22573031  [PubMed]


69. Gene. 2012 Jul 25;503(2):200-7. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.04.088. Epub 2012 May 4.

Transactivation of the human NME5 gene by Sp1 in pancreatic cancer cells.

Li F(1), Jiang Z, Wang K, Guo J, Hu G, Sun L, Wang T, Tang X, He L, Yao J, Wen D,
Qin X, Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Center of Drug Screening, China Pharmaceutical University, No. 24
Tongjia Xiang, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, China.

Non-metastatic cells 5 (NME5), a recently found gene belonging to the NDPK-like
molecules gene family, is highly expressed in testis and some types of human
cancer. Current studies have revealed diverse potential functions of NME5 and we 
have reported that NME5 is associated with innate resistance to gemcitabine in
human pancreatic cancer cells in previous study. However, the mechanism
underlying the transcriptional regulation of NME5 has not been elucidated yet. In
this study, we analyzed the 5'-flanking region of the human NME5 gene and
revealed its transcription start site (TSS) at -35 bp relative to its translation
start codon ATG. Using 5' unidirectional deletion analysis, we demonstrated that 
the proximal promoter of NME5 is located within -1051 bp to +35 bp. Two
functional GC-boxes (-300 bp and -323 bp) were identified within the promoter
region. Mutation of either GC-box led to significant reduction in NME5 promoter
activity, whereas overexpression of Sp1 activated NME5 promoter activity in MIA
PaCa-2 and 293T cells. In silico analysis predicted that transcription factor Sp1
binds to both GC-boxes, which were confirmed by EMSA and ChIP. In addition, we
found that compared with MIA PaCa-2, Sp1 was highly expressed in PAXC002, a well 
characterized human pancreatic cancer cell line with innate gemcitabine
resistance where NME5 was reported to be highly expressed, indicating that Sp1
induces NEM5 expression in PAXC002 cells. In conclusion, our study characterized 
for the first time the human NME5 promoter which is controlled by Sp1
transcription factor in pancreatic cancer.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22564704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Mol Cancer Ther. 2012 Jul;11(7):1421-31. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-0026. Epub
2012 May 2.

Betulinic acid targets YY1 and ErbB2 through cannabinoid receptor-dependent
disruption of microRNA-27a:ZBTB10 in breast cancer.

Liu X(1), Jutooru I, Lei P, Kim K, Lee SO, Brents LK, Prather PL, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College
Station, Texas 77843, USA.

Treatment of ErbB2-overexpressing BT474 and MDA-MB-453 breast cancer cells with 1
to 10 µmol/L betulinic acid inhibited cell growth, induced apoptosis,
downregulated specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4,
and decreased expression of ErbB2. Individual or combined knockdown of Sp1, Sp3, 
Sp4 by RNA interference also decreased expression of ErbB2 and this response was 
because of repression of YY1, an Sp-regulated gene. Betulinic acid-dependent
repression of Sp1, Sp3, Sp4, and Sp-regulated genes was due, in part, to
induction of the Sp repressor ZBTB10 and downregulation of microRNA-27a
(miR-27a), which constitutively inhibits ZBTB10 expression, and we show for the
first time that the effects of betulinic acid on the miR-27a:ZBTB10-Sp
transcription factor axis were cannabinoid 1 (CB1) and CB2 receptor-dependent,
thus identifying a new cellular target for this anticancer agent.

©2012 AACR.

PMID: 22553354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35130. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035130. Epub 2012 Apr 19.

Modulation of the activity of Sp transcription factors by mithramycin analogues
as a new strategy for treatment of metastatic prostate cancer.

Malek A(1), Núñez LE, Magistri M, Brambilla L, Jovic S, Carbone GM, Morís F,
Catapano CV.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Oncology Research (IOR), Bellinzona, Switzerland.

Deregulated activity of transcription factors (TFs) of the Sp/KLF family, like
Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4, and consequent over-expression of Sp-regulated genes occur
frequently in human cancers. This provides the rationale for development of
inhibitors of Sp TFs as cancer therapeutics. Mithramycin A (MTM-A) is a natural
polyketide that binds GC-rich DNA sequences, inhibits activity of Sp TFs and
exhibits potent antitumor activity in experimental systems. However, clinical use
of MTM-A is limited by the severe toxicity of the compound. Here, we studied two 
MTM-A analogues, which had been generated by genetically engineering of the MTM-A
biosynthetic pathway, and evaluated their activity in human prostate cancer in
cell cultures and mouse models. The compounds, named MTM-SDK and MTM-SK, were
highly effective in vitro inhibiting proliferation of prostate cancer cells and
transcription of Sp-regulated genes by blocking binding of Sp proteins to the
gene promoters. When administered to mice, both compounds were well tolerated
with maximum tolerated doses of MTM-SDK and MTM-SK, respectively, 4- and 32- fold
higher than MTM-A. After systemic administration, both compounds were cleared
rapidly from the bloodstream but maintained plasma levels well above the active
concentrations required in vitro for inhibition of Sp TF activity and cell
proliferation. Consistently, MTM-SDK and MTM-SK inhibited transcription of
Sp-regulated genes in prostate tumor xenografts and exhibited potent antitumor
activity in subcutaneous and metastatic tumor xenograft models with no or minimal
toxicity. Taken together, these data indicate that MTM-SDK and MTM-SK possess
significantly improved pharmacological and toxicological properties compared to
MTM-A and represent promising drugs for treatment of advanced prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC3334962
PMID: 22545098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Org Chem. 2012 May 18;77(10):4826-31. doi: 10.1021/jo3004293. Epub 2012 May 7.

Cross coupling between sp3-carbon and sp3-carbon using a diborylmethane
derivative at room temperature.

Endo K(1), Ohkubo T, Ishioka T, Shibata T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Material Sciences, Graduate School of Natural Science and
Technology, Kanazawa University, Kakuma, Kanazawa 920-1192, Japan.
kendo@se.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

A novel example of the Suzuki-Miyaura cross-coupling reaction between
sp(3)-carbon and sp(3)-carbon is described. The reaction of a diborylmethane
derivative with allyl halides or benzyl halides proceeded efficiently in the
presence of appropriate Pd-catalysts at room temperature. The present approaches 
provide functionalized homoallylboronates and alkylboronates with excellent
regio- and chemoselectivities.

PMID: 22540212  [PubMed]


73. Magn Reson Chem. 2012 Jun;50(6):449-57. doi: 10.1002/mrc.3821. Epub 2012 Apr 26.

Structure and NMR spectra of cyclophanes with unsaturated bridges (cyclophenes).

Dodziuk H(1), Demissie TB, Ruud K, Szymanski S, Jazwinski J, Hopf H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physical Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences, Kasprzaka 44/52, 
01-224 Warsaw, Poland. dodziuk@ichf.edu.pl

The calculated structures of several known and hypothetical cyclophanes with
ethylene bridges (cyclophenes) are reported together with experimental and
calculated values of their NMR parameters. Of the exchange-correlation
functionals and basis sets used in this work, only the <U+03C9>B97X-D/6-311++G(2d,2p)
and <U+03C9>B97X-D/cc-pVQZ yielded values of the C(sp3)-C(sp3) bond length close to the 
experimental data, although significant differences still remain. As far as the
NMR parameters are concerned, except for close-lying signals, chemical shifts and
coupling constants calculated at the <U+03C9>B97X-D/cc-pVQZ level reproduce in most
cases the experimental trends. Contrary to the calculations of geometries, an
agreement between the values of the NMR parameters obtained at <U+03C9>B97X-D/cc-pVQZ
level and the experimental ones is the poorest compared with that of the
<U+03C9>B97X-D/6-311++G(2d,2p) one. Taking into account that the results of the
different calculations show the same qualitative trends in most cases, we believe
that they correctly describe the structure and properties of the hypothetical
molecules studied here.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 22539441  [PubMed]


74. J Phys Condens Matter. 2012 May 23;24(20):205402. doi:
10.1088/0953-8984/24/20/205402. Epub 2012 Apr 27.

Two-pulse excitation for efficient formation of an sp3 nanodomain with frozen
shear in a graphite crystal.

Nishioka K(1), Nasu K, Yonemitsu K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Science, Okazaki, Aichi, Japan.
knisi@phys.chuo-u.ac.jp

We propose a two-pulse excitation to efficiently form a novel sp(3)-bonded
nanosize domain with frozen shear in a graphite crystal. This sp(3) structure is 
well stabilized by shear displacement between two neighboring graphite layers.
The shearing motion is induced transiently by the first laser pulse, and is
frozen by the second pulse before disappearing, resulting in the efficient
formation of the sp(3)-bonded domain with frozen shear. We show this dynamical
process qualitatively by molecular dynamics calculations.

PMID: 22538264  [PubMed]


75. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2012 Jul 1;303(1):C58-68. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00118.2012. Epub 2012 Apr 25.

Reciprocal regulation controlling the expression of CPI-17, a specific inhibitor 
protein for the myosin light chain phosphatase in vascular smooth muscle cells.

Kim JI(1), Urban M, Young GD, Eto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Cellular activity of the myosin light chain phosphatase (MLCP) determines
agonist-induced force development of smooth muscle (SM). CPI-17 is an endogenous 
inhibitor protein for MLCP, responsible for mediating G-protein signaling into SM
contraction. Fluctuations in CPI-17 expression occur in response to pathological 
stresses, altering excitation-contraction coupling in SM. Here, we determined the
signaling pathways regulating CPI-17 expression in rat aorta tissues and the cell
culture using a pharmacological approach. CPI-17 transcription was suppressed in 
response to the proliferative stimulus with platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)
through the ERK1/2 pathway, whereas it was elevated in response to inflammatory, 
stress-induced and excitatory stimuli with transforming growth factor-ß, IL-1ß,
TNFa, sorbitol, and serotonin. CPI-17 transcription was repressed by inhibition
of JNK, p38, PKC, and Rho-kinase (ROCK). The mouse and human CPI-17 gene
promoters were governed by the proximal GC-boxes at the 5'-flanking region, where
Sp1/Sp3 transcription factors bound. Sp1 binding to the region was more prominent
in intact aorta tissues, compared with the SM cell culture, where the CPI-17 gene
is repressed. The 173-bp proximal promoter activity was negatively and positively
regulated through PDGF-induced ERK1/2 and sorbitol-induced p38/JNK pathways,
respectively. By contrast, PKC and ROCK inhibitors failed to repress the 173-bp
promoter activity, suggesting distal enhancer elements. CPI-17 transcription was 
insensitive to knockdown of myocardin/Kruppel-like factor 4 small interfering RNA
or histone deacetylase inhibition. The reciprocal regulation of Sp1/Sp3-driven
CPI-17 expression through multiple kinases may be responsible for the adaptation 
of MLCP signal and SM tone to environmental changes.

PMCID: PMC3404528
PMID: 22538237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Am Chem Soc. 2012 May 9;134(18):7880-91. doi: 10.1021/ja301484b. Epub 2012 Apr 
25.

Design and evaluation of a crystalline hybrid of molecular conductors and
molecular rotors.

Lemouchi C(1), Mézière C, Zorina L, Simonov S, Rodríguez-Fortea A, Canadell E,
Wzietek P, Auban-Senzier P, Pasquier C, Giamarchi T, Garcia-Garibay MA, Batail P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire MOLTECH-Anjou, CNRS and Université d'Angers, UMR 6200, 49045
Angers, France.

Combining recent concepts from the fields of molecular conductivity and molecular
machinery we set out to design a crystalline molecular conductor that also
possesses a molecular rotor. We report on the structures, electronic and physical
properties, and dynamics of two solids with a common
1,4-bis(carboxyethynyl)bicyclo[2.2.2]octane (BABCO) functional rotor. One,
[nBu(4)N(+)](2)[BABCO][BABCO(-)](2), is a colorless insulator where the
dicarboxylic acid cocrystallizes with two of its monoanionic conjugated bases.
The other is self-assembled by electrocrystallization in the form of black, shiny
needles, with highly conducting molecular slabs of (EDT-TTF-CONH(2))(2)(+)
(EDT-TTF = ethylenedithiotetrathiafulvalene) and anionic [BABCO(-)] rotors. Using
variable-temperature (5-300 K) proton spin-lattice relaxation, (1)H T(1)(-1), we 
were able to assign two types of Brownian rotators in
[nBu(4)N(+)](2)[BABCO][BABCO(-)](2). We showed that neutral BABCO groups have a
rotational frequency of 120 GHz at 300 K with a rotational barrier of 2.03 kcal
mol(-1). Rotors on the BABCO(-) sites experience stochastic 32 GHz jumps at the
same temperature over a rotational barrier of 2.72 kcal mol(-1). In contrast, the
BABCO(-) rotors within the highly conducting crystals of
(EDT-TTF-CONH(2))(2)(+)[BABCO(-)] are essentially "braked" at room temperature.
Notably, these crystals possess a conductivity of 5 S cm(-1) at 1 bar, which
increases rapidly with pressure up to 50 S cm(-1) at 11.5 kbar. Two regimes with 
different activation energies E(a) for the resistivity (180 K above 50 and 400 K 
below) are observed at ambient pressure; a metallic state is stabilized at ca. 8 
kbar, and an insulating ground state remains below 50 K at all pressures. We
discuss two likely channels by which the motion of the rotors might become slowed
down in the highly conducting solid. One is defined as a low-velocity viscous
regime inherent to a noncovalent, physical coupling induced by the cooperativity 
between five C(sp3)-H···O hydrogen bonds engaging any rotor and five BABCO units 
in its environment. The rotational barrier calculated with the effect of this set
of hydrogen bonds amounts to 7.3 kcal mol(-1). Another is quantum dissipation, a 
phenomenon addressing the difference of dynamics of the rotors in the two solids 
with different electrical properties, by which the large number of degrees of
freedom of the low dimensional electron gas may serve as a bath for the
dissipation of the energy of the rotor motion, the two systems being coupled by
the Coulomb interaction between the charges of the rotors (local moments and
induced dipoles) and the charges of the carriers.

PMID: 22500581  [PubMed]


77. Org Lett. 2012 Apr 20;14(8):2106-9. doi: 10.1021/ol300639a. Epub 2012 Apr 12.

Copper-catalyzed oxidative trifluoromethylation of terminal alkenes using
nucleophilic CF3SiMe3: efficient C(sp3)-CF3 bond formation.

Chu L(1), Qing FL.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Organofluorine Chemistry, Shanghai Institute of Organic
Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 345 Lingling Lu, Shanghai 200032, China.

An efficient C(sp(3))-CF(3) bond-forming reaction via Cu-catalyzed oxidative
trifluoromethylation of terminal alkenes has been developed, which proceeds under
mild conditions using readily available, less expensive CF(3)SiMe(3) as the
source of the CF(3) group. This method allows access to a variety of
trifluoromethylated allylic compounds.

© 2012 American Chemical Society

PMID: 22497319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Am Chem Soc. 2012 May 2;134(17):7530-8. doi: 10.1021/ja301582d. Epub 2012 Apr
10.

Polymorphic phases of sp3-hybridized carbon under cold compression.

Zhou R(1), Zeng XC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Nebraska Center for Materials and Nanoscience,
University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska 68588, USA.

It is well established that graphite can be transformed into superhard carbons
under cold compression (Mao et al. Science 2003, 302, 425). However, structure of
the superhard carbon is yet to be determined experimentally. We have performed an
extensive structural search for the high-pressure crystalline phases of carbon
using the evolutionary algorithm. Nine low-energy polymorphic structures of
sp(3)-hybridized carbon result from the unbiased search. These new polymorphic
carbon structures together with previously reported low-energy sp(3)-hybridized
carbon structures (e.g., M-carbon, W-carbon, and Cco-C(8) or Z-carbon) can be
classified into three groups on the basis of different ways of stacking two (or
more) out of five (A-E) types of buckled graphene layers. Such a classification
scheme points out a simple way to construct a variety of sp(3)-hybridized carbon 
allotropes via stacking buckled graphene layers in different combinations of the 
A-E types by design. Density-functional theory calculations indicate that, among 
the nine low-energy crystalline structures, seven are energetically more
favorable than the previously reported most stable crystalline structure (i.e.,
Cco-C(8) or Z-carbon) in the pressure range 0-25 GPa. Moreover, several newly
predicted polymorphic sp(3)-hybridized carbon structures possess elastic moduli
and hardness close to those of the cubic diamond. In particular, Z-carbon-4
possesses the highest hardness (93.4) among all the low-energy sp(3)-hybridized
carbon structures predicted today. The calculated electronic structures suggest
that most polymorphic carbon structures are optically transparent. The simulated 
X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra of a few polymorphic structures are in good
agreement with the experimental spectrum, suggesting that samples from the
cold-compressed graphite experiments may consist of multiple polymorphic phases
of sp(3)-hybridized carbon.

© 2012 American Chemical Society

PMID: 22490007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Am Chem Soc. 2012 May 2;134(17):7313-6. doi: 10.1021/ja3023972. Epub 2012 Apr
19.

Efficient alkyl ether synthesis via palladium-catalyzed, picolinamide-directed
alkoxylation of unactivated C(sp3)-H and C(sp2)-H bonds at remote positions.

Zhang SY(1), He G, Zhao Y, Wright K, Nack WA, Chen G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

We report the efficient synthesis of alkyl ethers by the functionalization of
unactivated sp(3)- and sp(2)-hybridized C-H bonds. In the Pd(OAc)(2)-catalyzed,
PhI(OAc)(2)-mediated reaction system, picolinamide-protected amine substrates
undergo facile alkoxylation at the <U+03B3> or d positions with a range of alcohols,
including t-BuOH, to give alkoxylated products. This method features a relatively
broad substrate scope for amines and alcohols, inexpensive reagents, and
convenient operating conditions. This method highlights the emerging value of
unactivated C-H bonds, particularly the C(sp(3))-H bond of methyl groups, as
functional groups in organic synthesis.

© 2012 American Chemical Society

PMID: 22486219  [PubMed]


80. Molecules. 2012 Mar 30;17(4):3957-68. doi: 10.3390/molecules17043957.

4-N,N-Dimethylaminopyridine promoted selective oxidation of methyl aromatics with
molecular oxygen.

Zhang Z(1), Gao J, Wang F, Xu J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Catalysis, Dalian National Laboratory for Clean
Energy, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian
116023, China. zhangzhan@dicp.ac.cn

4-N,N-Dimethylaminopyridine (DMAP) as catalyst in combination with benzyl bromide
was developed for the selective oxidation of methyl aromatics. DMAP exhibited
higher catalytic activity than other pyridine analogues, such as
4-carboxypyridine, 4-cyanopyridine and pyridine. The sp3 hybrid carbon-hydrogen
(C-H) bonds of different methyl aromatics were successfully oxygenated with
molecular oxygen. The real catalyst is due to the formation of a pyridine onium
salt from the bromide and DMAP. The onium salt was well characterized by NMR and 
the reaction mechanism was discussed.

PMID: 22466855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Biochimie. 2012 Jun;94(6):1390-7. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2012.03.011. Epub 2012
Mar 17.

Transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 regulate basal transcription of the human IRF-3
gene.

Xu HG(1), Jin R, Ren W, Zou L, Wang Y, Zhou GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province 210029, China.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) plays a crucial role in initiation and
development of the IFN antiviral response. The expression level of human IRF-3 is
thought to be closely related to antiviral state of cells. However, the
mechanisms of the transcription regulation of IRF-3 have remained largely
unknown. We previously reported that transcription factor E2F1 negatively
regulates the basal transcriptional activity of IRF-3. Here we demonstrate that
transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 up-regulate the basal transcriptional activity 
of IRF-3 and increase IRF-3 expression at mRNA level. By transient transfection
analysis we revealed that mutation of Sp1/NRF-1 binding site resulted in a
profound reduction of IRF-3 promoter activity. Overexpression of Sp1 and Sp3, but
not NRF-1, transactivated the IRF-3 promoter activity in reporter gene assays
while knocking-down of endogenous Sp1 and Sp3 by a shRNA strategy markedly
inhibited IRF-3 promoter activity. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays
showed that Sp1 and Sp3 interact with the IRF-3 promoter in vivo. These results
suggest that basal expression level of IRF-3 is regulated by transcription
factors Sp1 and Sp3.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22464952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Chemphyschem. 2012 Jun 4;13(8):2046-50. doi: 10.1002/cphc.201200076. Epub 2012
Mar 29.

A special conjugated model around sp3 carbon atoms: density functional theory
study on the homoaromatic electron delocalization and applications of benzo-fused
tetra(triptycene)porphyrins.

Qi D(1), Zhang L, Zhao L, Cai X, Jiang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing
100083, China.

The three-unit homoaromatic electron-delocalizing nature of the benzo-fused
tetra(triptycene)porphyrins (TTPs) with a three-dimensional conjugated model is
clarified using density functional theory studies. Due to the electron
delocalization, the unidirectional photon-induced current of this kind of TTP
molecular skeleton with a highest efficiency of about 90% in the range between
350 and 500 nm gives them great potential as efficient solar antenna collectors. 
In addition, their active triptycene cups fused at the central porphyrin core
render possible potential application in host-guest chemistry.

Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22461262  [PubMed]


83. Chem Commun (Camb). 2012 Apr 28;48(34):4100-2. doi: 10.1039/c2cc30511a.

Synthesis and properties of ß,ß-sp3-hybridized subphthalocyanine analogues.

Shimizu S(1), Otaki T, Yamazaki Y, Kobayashi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University, Sendai
980-8578, Japan.

A ß,ß-sp(3)-hybridized subphthalocyanine analogue, dibenzosubtriazachlorin, was
synthesized, and its significantly split Q band absorptions in longer and shorter
wavelength regions relative to those of subphthalocyanines were revealed. The
effect of benzo-annulation to a subtriazachlorin structure on the position of the
split Q bands as well as the electronic structures was also investigated.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012

PMID: 22453253  [PubMed]


84. Org Lett. 2012 Apr 6;14(7):1930-3. doi: 10.1021/ol300627p. Epub 2012 Mar 26.

Ruthenium(0)-catalyzed sp3 C-H bond arylation of benzylic amines using
arylboronates.

Dastbaravardeh N(1), Schnürch M, Mihovilovic MD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Applied Synthetic Chemistry, Vienna University of Technology,
Getreidemarkt 9/163-OC, 1060 Vienna, Austria.

A Ru-catalyzed direct arylation of benzylic sp(3) carbons of acyclic amines with 
arylboronates is reported. This highly regioselective and efficient
transformation can be performed with various combinations of N-(2-pyridyl)
substituted benzylamines and arylboronates. Substitution of the pyridine
directing group in the 3-position proved to be crucial in order to achieve high
arylation yields. Furthermore, the pyridine directing group can be removed in
high yields via a two-step protocol.

PMID: 22449256  [PubMed]


85. J Biol Chem. 2012 May 11;287(20):16168-78. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.305292. Epub
2012 Mar 15.

Sulforaphane induction of p21(Cip1) cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor expression 
requires p53 and Sp1 transcription factors and is p53-dependent.

Chew YC(1), Adhikary G, Wilson GM, Xu W, Eckert RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA.

Sulforaphane (SFN) is an important cancer preventive agent derived from
cruciferous vegetables. We show that SFN treatment suppresses normal human
keratinocyte proliferation via a mechanism that involves increased expression of 
p21(Cip1). SFN treatment produces a concentration-dependent increase in p21(Cip1)
promoter activity via a mechanism that involves stabilization of the p53 protein 
leading to increased p53 binding to the p21(Cip1) promoter p53 response elements.
The proximal p21(Cip1) promoter GC-rich Sp1 factor binding elements are also
required, as the SFN-dependent increase is lost when these sites are mutated. SFN
treatment increases Sp1 binding to these elements, and the response is enhanced
in the presence of exogenous Sp1 and reduced in the presence of <U+0394>N-Sp3. CpG
island methylation alters p21(Cip1) promoter activity some systems; however,
expression in SFN-treated keratinocytes does not involve changes in proximal
promoter methylation. The promoter is minimally methylated, and the methylation
level is not altered by SFN treatment. This study indicates that SFN increases
p21(Cip1) promoter transcription via a mechanism that involves SFN-dependent
stabilization of p53 and increased p53 and Sp1 binding to their respective
response elements in the p21(Cip1) promoter. These results are in marked contrast
to the mechanisms observed in skin cancer cell lines and suggest that SFN may
protect normal keratinocytes from damage while causing cancer cells to undergo
apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC3351300
PMID: 22427654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Am Chem Soc. 2012 Apr 4;134(13):5742-5. doi: 10.1021/ja3004792. Epub 2012 Mar
21.

C(sp)-C(sp3) bond formation through Cu-catalyzed cross-coupling of
N-tosylhydrazones and trialkylsilylethynes.

Ye F(1), Ma X, Xiao Q, Li H, Zhang Y, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing National Laboratory of Molecular Sciences, College of Chemistry,
Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

Copper-catalyzed cross-coupling of N-tosylhydrazones with trialkylsilylethynes
leads to the formation of C(sp)-C(sp(3)) bonds. Cu carbene migratory insertion is
proposed to play the key role in this transformation.

PMID: 22424212  [PubMed]


87. Beilstein J Org Chem. 2012;8:192-200. doi: 10.3762/bjoc.8.21. Epub 2012 Feb 6.

A concise synthesis of 3-(1-alkenyl)isoindolin-1-ones and
5-(1-alkenyl)pyrrol-2-ones by the intermolecular coupling reactions of
N-acyliminium ions with unactivated olefins.

Lu N(1), Wang L, Li Z, Zhang W.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Applied Organic Chemistry, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou
730000, China;

A concise synthesis of 3-(1-alkenyl)isoindolin-1-ones and
5-(1-alkenyl)pyrrol-2-ones has been achieved by the coupling reactions of
N-acyliminium ions produced from 3-hydroxyisoindol-1-ones or
5-hydroxy-1-pyrrol-2-ones with unactivated olefins in the presence of
BF(3)·OEt(2) at room temperature. For most of the olefins, the reactions afforded
the C(sp3)-C(sp2) cross-coupling products, but for the a-methylstyrene and
1-hexene, the C(sp3)-C(sp3) cross-coupling products were obtained.

PMCID: PMC3302081
PMID: 22423287  [PubMed]


88. Mol Carcinog. 2013 Aug;52(8):591-602. doi: 10.1002/mc.21893. Epub 2012 Mar 7.

Betulinic acid decreases ER-negative breast cancer cell growth in vitro and in
vivo: role of Sp transcription factors and microRNA-27a:ZBTB10.

Mertens-Talcott SU(1), Noratto GD, Li X, Angel-Morales G, Bertoldi MC, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Science, Texas A&M University, College
Station, Texas 77843, USA.

Betulinic acid (BA), a pentacyclic triterpenoid isolated from tree bark is
cytotoxic to cancer cells. There is evidence that specificity proteins (Sps),
such as Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4, are overexpressed in tumors and contribute to the
proliferative and angiogenic phenotype associated with cancer cells. The
objective of this study was to determine the efficacy of BA in decreasing the Sps
expression and underlying mechanisms. Results show that BA decreased
proliferation and induced apoptosis of estrogen-receptor-negative breast cancer
MDA-MB-231 cells. The BA-induced Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 downregulation was accompanied
by increased zinc finger ZBTB10 expression, a putative Sp-repressor and decreased
microRNA-27a levels, a microRNA involved in the regulation of ZBTB10. Similar
results were observed in MDA-MB-231 cells transfected with ZBTB10 expression
plasmid. BA induced cell cycle arrest in the G2/M phase and increased Myt-1 mRNA 
(a microRNA-27a target gene), which causes inhibition in G2/M by phosphorylation 
of cdc2. The effects of BA were reversed by transient transfection with a mimic
of microRNA-27a. In nude mice with xenografted MDA-MB-231 cells, tumor size and
weight were significantly decreased by BA treatment. In tumor tissue, ZBTB10 mRNA
was increased while mRNA and protein of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4, as well as mRNA of
vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR), survivin and microRNA-27a
were decreased by BA. In lungs of xenografted mice, human ß2-microglobulin mRNA
was decreased in BA-treated animals. These results show that the anticancer
effects of BA are at least in part based on interactions with the
microRNA-27a-ZBTB10-Sp-axis causing increased cell death.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3418350
PMID: 22407812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Chemistry. 2012 Apr 10;18(15):4480-4. doi: 10.1002/chem.201200018. Epub 2012 Mar 
12.

Diastereo- and enantioselective intramolecular C(sp3)-H arylation for the
synthesis of fused cyclopentanes.

Martin N(1), Pierre C, Davi M, Jazzar R, Baudoin O.

Author information: 
(1)Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS UMR 5246, Institut de Chimie et
Biochimie Moléculaires et Supramoléculaires, CPE Lyon, 43 Boulevard du 11
Novembre 1918, 69622 Villeurbanne, France.

All C-H bonds are not equal: The intramolecular arylation of unactivated
C(sp(3))-H bonds in the presence of a chiral Pd/binepine catalyst allows the
synthesis of fused cyclopentanes efficiently and in an diastereo- and
enantioselective manner (see scheme).

Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22407525  [PubMed]


90. Org Lett. 2012 Mar 16;14(6):1436-9. doi: 10.1021/ol300180w. Epub 2012 Mar 5.

Concise route to 3-arylisoquinoline skeleton by Lewis acid catalyzed C(sp3)-H
bond functionalization and its application to formal synthesis of
(±)-tetrahydropalmatine.

Mori K(1), Kawasaki T, Akiyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Gakushuin University, 1-5-1
Mejiro, Toshima-ku, Tokyo 171-8588, Japan.

An expeditious route to furnish an isoquinoline skeleton via hydride shift
mediated C-H bond functionalization was developed. In this process, an unusual
[1,5]-H shift without the assistance of the adjacent heteroatom took place to
produce tetrahydroisoquinoline derivatives in good to excellent chemical yields. 
The formal synthesis of (±)-tetrahydropalmatine was achieved by exploiting this
new transformation.

PMID: 22390141  [PubMed]


91. Acupunct Med. 2012 Mar;30(1):12-6. doi: 10.1136/acupmed-2011-010089.

Traditional Chinese medicine patterns and recommended acupuncture points in
infertile and fertile women.

Birkeflet O(1), Laake P, Vøllestad N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Health and Society, University of Oslo, Oslo N-0318, Norway.
oddveig.birkeflet@medisin.uio.no

BACKGROUND: Acupuncture is rooted in traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) and
emphasises individualised treatment according to TCM patterns. Eight TCM patterns
are regarded as typical for female infertility. There are no empirical data
comparing these patterns in fertile and infertile women.
OBJECTIVE: To identify and compare the TCM patterns and recommended acupuncture
points in infertile and fertile women. The hypothesis that infertile and fertile 
women should differ in occurrence of TCM patterns described as typical for
infertility was examined.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study examined the distribution of TCM patterns and
acupuncture points among 24 infertile and 24 fertile women. TCM patterns and
points proposed by two acupuncturists were analysed. The odds ratio was used as
the effect measure.
RESULTS: Three patterns were found in more than 92% of the women. Five patterns
occurred more frequently among infertile (p=0.03), and four among fertile
(p=0.02) women. Only three of the eight patterns assumed typical for infertile
women were more common among infertile women. Two of the eight patterns were more
common among fertile women. Acupuncture points KI3, LI3 and SP6 were chosen for
almost all women, whereas CV4, CV3 and ST29 were chosen more often for infertile 
women (p<0.03), and SP3 more often for fertile women (p<0.001).
CONCLUSION: The data indicate that the presence of some, and the absence of
other, TCM patterns are associated with infertility. These results are not
consistent with the assumed associations between eight specific patterns and
infertility, as maintained by TCM textbooks.

PMID: 22378581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Theriogenology. 2012 May;77(8):1529-39. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2011.11.020. Epub 2012 Feb 25.

Morphometrically-distinct sperm subpopulations defined by a multistep statistical
procedure in ram ejaculates: intra- and interindividual variation.

Maroto-Morales A(1), Ramón M, García-Álvarez O, Soler AJ, Fernández-Santos MR,
Roldan ER, Gomendio M, Pérez-Guzmán MD, Garde JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biology of Reproduction Group, National Wildlife Research Institute (IREC)
UCLM-CSIC-JCCM, 02071 Albacete, Spain.

The existence of sperm subpopulations within the mammalian ejaculate has now been
widely recognized. However, to the best of our knowledge, no data exist regarding
the existence of sperm morphometric subpopulations within the ovine ejaculate.
Computer assisted sperm morphometry analysis (ASMA) data and clustering methods
were used in this study to identify sperm-head subpopulations in ram semen. Two
experiments were carried out. In Experiment 1, ejaculates from 226 mature rams of
the Manchega breed belonging to 36 different herds were used. A minimum of 100
sperm heads were analyzed from each male and eight morphometric characteristics
for each individual sperm were recorded. Subpopulation analysis was performed in 
sequential steps: variable group analysis and correlation analysis to select
which morphometric characteristics to use in cluster analyses; nonhierarchical
clustering analysis using sperm head length and p2a (also known as roundness)
shape factor as initial classificatory variables; and hierarchical clustering
analysis to obtain the final number of clusters. The clustering analyses, based
on 26,306 individual cells, revealed the existence of four sperm subpopulations
(SP1, SP2, SP3 and SP4) with different morphometric characteristics. Significant 
differences in the proportion of spermatozoa in the SP1 and SP3 were found
between rams belonging to different herds. In Experiment 2, the intra- and
intermale variability on the distribution of sperm subpopulations was assessed.
Three ejaculates from each of 21 rams were collected and the same multistep
clustering analysis was performed. For all subpopulations defined, the intermale 
variability resulted in high values, being the intramale variability much lower. 
This fact would allow the use of sperm head morphometry to characterize a male
and might provide valuable information to asses its fertility. In conclusion, our
results show that using computer assisted sperm morphometry analysis and
multivariate cluster analyses, four sperm subpopulations with different head
phenotype were identified in ram ejaculates.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22365694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Iran J Microbiol. 2011 Mar;3(1):47-53.

Isolation of a strain of Pseudomonas putida capable of metabolizing anionic
detergent sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS).

Chaturvedi V(1), Kumar A.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi-221 005, India.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate (SDS) is one of the most widely
used anionic detergents. The present study deals with isolation and
identification of SDS-degrading bacteria from a detergent contaminated pond
situated in Varanasi city, India.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Employing enrichment technique in minimal medium (PBM),
SDS-degrading bacteria were isolated from pond water sample. Rate of degradation 
of SDS was studied in liquid PBM and also degradation of different concentrations
of SDS was also studied to find out maximum concentration of SDS degraded by the 
potent isolates. Alkyl sulfatase activity (key enzyme in SDS degradation) was
estimated in crude cell extracts and multiplicity of alkyl sulfatase was studied 
by Native PAGE Zymography. The potent isolate was identified by 16S rRNA sequence
analysis.
RESULTS: Using enrichment technique in minimal medium containing SDS as a sole
carbon source, initially three SDS degrading isolates were recovered. However,
only one isolate, SP3, was found to be an efficient degrader of SDS. It was
observed that this strain could completely metabolize 0.1% SDS in 16 h, 0.2% SDS 
in 20 h and 0.3% SDS in 24 h of incubation. Specific activity of alkyl sulfatase 
was 0.087±0.004 µmol SDS/mg protein/min and Native PAGE Zymography showed
presence of alkyl sulfatase of Rf value of 0.21. This isolate was identified as
Pseudomonas putida strain SP3.
CONCLUSION: This is the report of isolation of SDS-degrading strain of P. putida,
which shows high rate of SDS degradation and can degrade up to 0.3% SDS. It
appears that this isolate can be exploited for bioremediation of this detergent
from water systems.

PMCID: PMC3279795
PMID: 22347583  [PubMed]


94. Chem Commun (Camb). 2012 Mar 25;48(25):3064-6. doi: 10.1039/c2cc17871k. Epub 2012
Feb 15.

Aza-oxindole synthesis by oxidative coupling of C(sp2)-H and C(sp3)-H centers.

Dey C(1), Kündig EP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organic Chemistry, University of Geneva, 30 Quai Ernest
Ansermet, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

A Cu(II) mediated oxidative C(sp(2))-H and C(sp(3))-H coupling protocol gives
access to aza-oxindoles in good to excellent yield in the presence of NaOtBu as
base and toluene as solvent.

PMID: 22337506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Carcinogenesis. 2012 Apr;33(4):886-94. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs102. Epub 2012 Feb 
14.

Celastrol decreases specificity proteins (Sp) and fibroblast growth factor
receptor-3 (FGFR3) in bladder cancer cells.

Chadalapaka G(1), Jutooru I, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
4466 TAMU, Vet Res Bldg 410, College Station, TX 77843, USA.

Celastrol (CSL) is a naturally occurring triterpenoid acid that exhibits
anticancer activity, and in KU7 and 253JB-V bladder cells, CSL induced apoptosis,
inhibited growth, colony formation and migration and CSL decreased bladder tumor 
growth in vivo. CSL also decreased expression of specificity protein (Sp)
transcription factors Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 and several Sp-regulated genes/proteins
including vascular endothelial growth factor, survivin and cyclin D1 and
fibroblast growth factor receptor-3, a potential drug target for bladder cancer
therapy, has now been characterized as an Sp-regulated gene downregulated by CSL.
The mechanism of Sp downregulation by CSL was cell context-dependent due to
activation of proteosome-dependent (KU7) and -independent (253JB-V) pathways. In 
253JB-V cells, CSL induced reactive oxygen species (ROS) and inhibitors of ROS
blocked CSL-induced growth inhibition and repression of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4. This
response was due to induction of the Sp repressors ZBTB10 and ZBTB4 and
downregulation of miR-27a and miR-20a/17-5p, respectively, which regulate
expression of these transcriptional repressors. Thus, the anticancer activity of 
CSL in 253JB-V cells is due to induction of ROS and ROS-mediated induction of Sp 
repressors (ZBTB4/ZBTB10) through downregulation of miR-27a and miR-20a/17-5p.

PMCID: PMC3324448
PMID: 22334592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Nano Lett. 2012 Mar 14;12(3):1603-8. doi: 10.1021/nl204545q. Epub 2012 Feb 15.

Graphene-on-diamond devices with increased current-carrying capacity: carbon
sp2-on-sp3 technology.

Yu J(1), Liu G, Sumant AV, Goyal V, Balandin AA.

Author information: 
(1)Nano-Device Laboratory, Department of Electrical Engineering and Materials
Science and Engineering Program, University of California, Riverside, California 
92521, USA.

Graphene demonstrated potential for practical applications owing to its excellent
electronic and thermal properties. Typical graphene field-effect transistors and 
interconnects built on conventional SiO(2)/Si substrates reveal the breakdown
current density on the order of 1 µA/nm(2) (i.e., 10(8) A/cm(2)), which is ~100× 
larger than the fundamental limit for the metals but still smaller than the
maximum achieved in carbon nanotubes. We show that by replacing SiO(2) with
synthetic diamond, one can substantially increase the current-carrying capacity
of graphene to as high as ~18 µA/nm(2) even at ambient conditions. Our results
indicate that graphene's current-induced breakdown is thermally activated. We
also found that the current carrying capacity of graphene can be improved not
only on the single-crystal diamond substrates but also on an inexpensive
ultrananocrystalline diamond, which can be produced in a process compatible with 
a conventional Si technology. The latter was attributed to the decreased thermal 
resistance of the ultrananocrystalline diamond layer at elevated temperatures.
The obtained results are important for graphene's applications in high-frequency 
transistors, interconnects, and transparent electrodes and can lead to the new
planar sp(2)-on-sp(3) carbon-on-carbon technology.

© 2012 American Chemical Society

PMID: 22329428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Mol Pharmacol. 2012 May;81(5):657-68. doi: 10.1124/mol.111.076976. Epub 2012 Feb 
6.

Extracellular signal-regulated kinase mitogen-activated protein kinase-dependent 
SOCS-3 gene induction requires c-Jun, signal transducer and activator of
transcription 3, and specificity protein 3 transcription factors.

Wiejak J(1), Dunlop J, Gao S, Borland G, Yarwood SJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Molecular, Cell and Systems Biology, College of Medical,
Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom.

SOCS-3 gene induction by cAMP-elevating agents or the protein kinase C (PKC)
activator, phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA), in primary HUVECs was found to 
require PKC<U+03B7>- and PKCe-dependent extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)
activation. The minimal, ERK-responsive element of the SOCS-3 promoter was
localized to a region spanning nucleotides -107 to the transcription start site
and contains conserved binding sites for AP-1 and SP1/SP3 transcription factors, 
as well as proximal and distal signal transducer and activator of transcription
(pSTAT and dSTAT) binding elements. All three classes of transcription factor
were activated in response to ERK activation. Moreover, representative protein
components of each of these transcription factor binding sites, namely c-Jun,
STAT3, and SP3, were found to undergo ERK-dependent phosphorylation within their 
respective transactivation domains. Mutational analysis demonstrated an absolute 
requirement for the SP1/SP3 binding element in controlling basal transcriptional 
activity of the minimal SOCS-3 promoter. In addition AP-1, pSTAT, and SP1/SP3
binding sites were required for ERK-dependent, PMA-stimulated SOCS-3 gene
activation. The dSTAT site seems to be important for supporting activity of the
AP-1 site, because combined deletion of both sites completely blocks
transcriptional activation of SOCS-3 by PMA. Together these results describe
novel, ERK-dependent regulation of transcriptional activity that requires
codependent activation of multiple transcription factors within the same region
of the SOCS-3 gene promoter.

PMID: 22311708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2012 Feb 27;51(9):2238-42. doi: 10.1002/anie.201108511.
Epub 2012 Feb 3.

Chiral monodentate phosphines and bulky carboxylic acids: cooperative effects in 
palladium-catalyzed enantioselective C(sp3)-H functionalization.

Saget T(1), Lemouzy SJ, Cramer N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Asymmetric Catalysis and Synthesis, EPFL SB ISIC LCSA, BCH 4305,
Lausanne, Switzerland.

PMID: 22308174  [PubMed]


99. Chem Commun (Camb). 2012 Mar 11;48(21):2674-6. doi: 10.1039/c2cc17330a. Epub 2012
Feb 3.

Iron-catalysed tandem cross-dehydrogenative coupling (CDC) of terminal allylic
C(sp3) to C(sp2) of styrene and benzoannulation in the synthesis of
polysubstituted naphthalenes.

Liu H(1), Cao L, Sun J, Fossey JS, Deng WP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy and Shanghai Key Laboratory of Functional Materials
Chemistry, East China University of Science and Technology, 130 Meilong Road,
Shanghai 200237, China.

A novel iron-catalysed tandem cross-dehydrogenative coupling and benzoannulation 
process was developed for the synthesis of biologically and synthetically
important polysubstituted naphthalene derivatives from simple 1,2-aryl-propenes
and styrenes in moderate to good yields.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012

PMID: 22307234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2012 Mar 12;51(11):2763-6. doi: 10.1002/anie.201108889.
Epub 2012 Feb 2.

Palladium-catalyzed amidation by chemoselective C(sp3)-H activation: concise
route to oxindoles using a carbamoyl chloride precursor.

Tsukano C(1), Okuno M, Takemoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyoto University, Yoshida,
Sakyo-ku, Japan.

Quite select: a new strategy was developed for the synthesis of various oxindoles
from carbamoyl chlorides. Under the optimum reaction conditions, with Ad(2)PBu as
a ligand, tBuCONHOH as an additive, and a CO atmosphere, selective C(sp(3))-H
activation proceeded in the presence of a C(sp(2))-H bond. Ad=adamantyl.

Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22302600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Am Chem Soc. 2012 Feb 15;134(6):2926-9. doi: 10.1021/ja211486f. Epub 2012 Feb
7.

Regioselective ring expansion of 2,4-diiminoazetidines via cleavage of C-N and
C(sp3)-H bonds: efficient construction of 2,3-dihydropyrimidinesulfonamides.

Wang Y(1), Chi Y, Zhang WX, Xi Z.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, and Key Laboratory of
Bioorganic Chemistry and Molecular Engineering of Ministry of Education, College 
of Chemisstry, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

A highly regioselective base-mediated ring expansion of 2,4-diiminoazetidines via
cleavage of C-N and C(sp(3))-H bonds is achieved for the first time to afford
efficiently 2,3-dihydropyrimidinesulfonamides. The mechanism of the ring
expansion via tandem 4p electrocyclic ring-opening/1,5-H shift/6p electrocyclic
ring-closing is well confirmed by the trapping experiments of two key
intermediates and deuterium labeling studies.

PMID: 22299677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2012 Feb 27;51(9):2225-8. doi: 10.1002/anie.201108351.
Epub 2012 Feb 1.

Palladium-catalyzed intermolecular C(sp3)-H amidation.

Iglesias A(1), Alvarez R, de Lera AR, Muñiz K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemical Research of Catalonia (ICIQ), Tarragona, Spain.

PMID: 22298436  [PubMed]


103. J Am Chem Soc. 2012 Feb 8;134(5):2547-50. doi: 10.1021/ja212020b. Epub 2012 Jan
27.

Intermolecular Ritter-type C-H amination of unactivated sp3 carbons.

Michaudel Q(1), Thevenet D, Baran PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey
Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Intermolecular Ritter-type C-H amination of unactivated sp(3) carbons has been
developed. This new reaction proceeds under mild conditions using readily
available reagents and an inexpensive source of nitrogen (acetonitrile). A broad 
scope of substrates can be aminated with this method since many functional groups
are tolerated. This reaction also allows for the direct, innate C-H amination of 
a variety of hydrocarbons such as cyclohexane without the need of
prefunctionalization or installation of a directing group.

PMCID: PMC3277284
PMID: 22276612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Org Lett. 2012 Feb 3;14(3):676-9. doi: 10.1021/ol2030982. Epub 2012 Jan 24.

Facile synthesis of azaarene-substituted 3-hydroxy-2-oxindoles via Brønsted acid 
catalyzed sp3 C-H functionalization.

Niu R(1), Xiao J, Liang T, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian
116023, PR China.

Brønsted acid catalyzed functionalization of sp(3) C-H bonds in 2-methyl
azaarenes has been achieved in the reaction with isatins. This method provides
facile synthesis of biologically important azaarene-substituted
3-hydroxy-2-oxindoles in one step in moderate to good yields.

© 2012 American Chemical Society

PMID: 22273253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2012 Jun;9(5):555-62.

Alzheimer's disease biomarkers and epigenetic intermediates following exposure to
Pb in vitro.

Bihaqi SW(1), Zawia NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical & Pharmaceutical Sciences, Interdisciplinary
Neuroscience Program, University of Rhode Island, Kingston, RI 02881, USA.

Late onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD) is typical of the majority of Alzheimer's
disease (AD) cases (~90%), and has no clear genetic association. Previous studies
from our lab suggest that an epigenetic component could be involved.
Developmental exposure of primates and rodents to lead (Pb) predetermined the
expression of AD-related genes, such as the amyloid-ß precursor protein (AßPP),
later in life. In addition to AßPP, the preponderance of genes that were
reprogrammed was rich in CpG dinucleotides implicating DNA methylation and
chromatin restructuring in their regulation. To examine the involvement of
epigenetic intermediates in Pb-induced alterations in gene expression,
differentiated SH-SY5Y cells were exposed to a series of Pb concentrations (5-100
µM) for 48 h and were analyzed for the protein expression of AßPP, ß-site amyloid
precursor protein cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1), specificity protein 1 and 3 (Sp1,
Sp3) and epigenetic intermediates like DNA methyltransferase 1, 3a (Dnmt1,
Dnmt3a) and methyl CpG binding protein 2 (MeCP2) involved in DNA methylation six 
days after the exposure had ceased. Western blot analysis indicated a significant
latent elevation in AD biomarkers as well as the transcription factors Sp1 and
Sp3, accompanied by a significant reduction in the protein levels of DNA
methylating enzymes. RT-PCR analysis of Dnmt1, Dnmt3a and MeCP2 indicated a
significant down-regulation of the mRNA levels. These data suggest that Pb
interferes with DNA methylating capacity in these cells, thus altering the
expression of AD-related genes.

PMID: 22272629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Nanoscale Res Lett. 2012 Jan 19;7(1):82. doi: 10.1186/1556-276X-7-82.

Synthesis of highly transparent ultrananocrystalline diamond films from a
low-pressure, low-temperature focused microwave plasma jet.

Liao WH(1), Wei DH, Lin CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering and Institute of Manufacturing
Technology, National Taipei University of Technology, Taipei, 106, Taiwan.
dhwei@ntut.edu.tw.

This paper describes a new low-temperature process underlying the synthesis of
highly transparent ultrananocrystalline diamond [UNCD] films by low-pressure and 
unheated microwave plasma jet-enhanced chemical vapor deposition with
Ar-1%CH4-10%H2 gas chemistry. The unique low-pressure/low-temperature [LPLT]
plasma jet-enhanced growth even with added H2 and unheated substrates yields UNCD
films similar to those prepared by plasma-enhanced growth without addition of H2 
and heating procedure. This is due to the focused plasma jet which effectively
compensated for the sluggish kinetics associated with LPLT growth. The effects of
pressure on UNCD film synthesis from the microwave plasma jet were systematically
investigated. The results indicated that the substrate temperature, grain size,
surface roughness, and sp3 carbon content in the films decreased with decreasing 
pressure. The reason is due to the great reduction of Ha emission to lower the
etching of sp2 carbon phase, resulting from the increase of mean free path with
decreasing pressure. We have demonstrated that the transition from
nanocrystalline (80 nm) to ultrananocrystalline (3 to 5 nm) diamond films grown
via microwave Ar-1%CH4-10%H2 plasma jets could be controlled by changing the
pressure from 100 to 30 Torr. The 250-nm-thick UNCD film was synthesized on glass
substrates (glass transition temperature [Tg] 557°C) using the unique LPLT (30
Torr/460°C) microwave plasma jet, which produced UNCD films with a high sp3
carbon content (95.65%) and offered high optical transmittance (approximately 86%
at 700 nm).

PMCID: PMC3271979
PMID: 22260391  [PubMed]


107. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2011;2011:6158-61. doi:
10.1109/IEMBS.2011.6091521.

L1-regularized Cerenkov luminescence tomography with a SP3 method and CT fusion.

Zhong J(1), Tian J, Yang X, Qin C.

Author information: 
(1)Intelligent Medical Research Center, Institute of Automation, ChineseAcademy
of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China.

Imaging modality of radionuclides has been enriched by an optical approach,
Cerenkov luminescence tomography (CLT). Referred to the traditional radionuclide 
imaging, such as positron emission tomography (PET) or single photon emission
computed tomography (SPECT), any incremental improvement of CLT imaging is
consistent with the application to information needs. In this contribution, the
paper presents an l(1)-regularized imaging method for CLT problem. After
utilizing the Vavilov-Cerenkov effect via third-order simplified spherical
harmonics (SP(3)) approximation, we establish the large-scale linear equations in
the CLT framework. The derived linear problem is seriously ill-posed, and
transformed into an l(1)-regularized least squares program. The inverse solution 
to these equations is the three-dimensional radioisotope recovery data by an
interior-point method. In the physical phantom and the in vivo mouse experiment, 
results demonstrate that the proposed technique produces better imaging quality
and improves the reconstruction efficacy, compared with those from diffusion
approximation with the Tikhonov regularization.

PMID: 22255745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2012 Feb 20;51(8):1934-7. doi: 10.1002/anie.201108154.
Epub 2012 Jan 17.

Palladium-catalyzed intermolecular coupling of 2-silylaryl bromides with alkynes:
synthesis of benzosiloles and heteroarene-fused siloles by catalytic cleavage of 
the C(sp3)-Si bond.

Liang Y(1), Geng W, Wei J, Xi Z.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, College of Chemistry,
Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

PMID: 22252916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Chem Commun (Camb). 2012 Feb 18;48(15):2152-4. doi: 10.1039/c2cc16943f. Epub 2012
Jan 13.

Unusual group migration and C(sp3)-H activation leading to stable metallacycles
in the reactions of Cp*IrS2C2B10H10 and aryl azides.

Zhong W(1), Xie M, Jiang Q, Li Y, Yan H.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Coordination Chemistry, School of Chemistry and
Chemical Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210093, PR China.

The thermal or photochemical reactions of Cp*IrS(2)C(2)B(10)H(10) (1) and aryl
azides lead to C-C coupling via C(sp(3))-H activation in 2 as well as the
formation of C-S bonds and new-type SSN pincer ligands in 3-8 through
ortho-substituted electron-withdrawing group migration over an aryl ring.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012

PMID: 22246206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Anal Sci. 2012;28(1):13-20.

An sp2 and sp3 hybrid nanocrystalline carbon film electrode for anodic stripping 
voltammetry and its application for electrochemical immunoassay.

Kurita R(1), Nakamoto K, Sato Y, Kamata T, Ueda A, Kato D, Hirono S, Niwa O.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Tsukuba
Central, Higashi, Ibaraki, Japan. r.kurita@aist.go.jp

A hybridized nanocrystalline carbon film electrode consisting of sp(2) and sp(3) 
bonds was investigated to reveal the reduction properties of Cd(2+) and for
application as a highly sensitive and reliable electrochemical immunoassay.
Conductive nanocrystalline carbon film consisting of about 60% sp(2) and 40%
sp(3) bonds was fabricated using electron cyclotron resonance (ECR) sputtering
equipment, and then the Cd(2+) concentrations were measured with an ECR sputtered
carbon (ECR nano-carbon) electrode by employing an anodic stripping voltammetry
(ASV) technique. The preconcentrated Cd was analyzed with Kelvin probe force
microscopy and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy while observing the
morphology change with an atomic force microscope and a scanning electron
microscope. The preconcentrated Cd on the ECR nano-carbon electrode was revealed 
to be a thin sheet structure, which was significantly different from the Cd on a 
conventional carbon material that grows with a coralloid structure. The
background current during an ASV measurement maintains a low level equivalent to 
that found with boron-doped diamond because the surface of the ECR nano-carbon is
robust and angstrom-level flat. The carbon-electrode performance for ASV was
improved by controlling its structure at a nanometer scale without any metal
doping or coating. Finally, the ECR nano-carbon was used for biomolecular
determination by electrochemical immunoassay with a CdSe nanoparticle label.
Electrochemical immunoassay results were successfully obtained with the ECR
nano-carbon, and they correlated well with fluorescence results obtained for CdSe
nanoparticles.

PMID: 22232218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Org Biomol Chem. 2012 Feb 28;10(8):1537-42. doi: 10.1039/c2ob06941e. Epub 2012
Jan 5.

Palladium-catalyzed silyl C(sp3)-H bond activation.

Liang Y(1), Geng W, Wei J, Ouyang K, Xi Z.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, College of Chemistry,
Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China.

The first transition-metal-catalyzed activation of silyl C(sp(3))-H bond was
realized and synthetically applied. A variety of organic skeletons substituted
with SiMe(3) groups could undergo the Pd-catalyzed intramolecular coupling
reaction, resulting in an unprecedented synthetic method for yielding
six-membered silacycles. It was found that the adjacent Si atom played an
essential role for the activation of the C(sp(3))-H bond of the SiMe(3) group; no
activation reaction of the C(sp(3))-H bond of the CMe(3) group took place under
the same reaction conditions.

PMID: 22222845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Mol Med (Berl). 2012 Jun;90(6):649-66. doi: 10.1007/s00109-011-0842-3. Epub
2012 Jan 4.

Sox9/Sox6 and Sp1 are involved in the insulin-like growth factor-I-mediated
upregulation of human type II collagen gene expression in articular chondrocytes.

Renard E(1), Porée B, Chadjichristos C, Kypriotou M, Maneix L, Bigot N, Legendre 
F, Ollitrault D, De Crombrugghe B, Malléin-Gérin F, Moslemi S, Demoor M,
Boumediene K, Galéra P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Matrice Extracellulaire et Pathologie, IFR ICORE 146, Université
de Caen/Basse-Normandie, UFR de Médecine, CHU niveau 3, Avenue de la Côte de
Nacre, 14032, Caen Cedex, France.

Type II collagen is a marker of articular cartilage encoded by the COL2A1 gene.
The nature of the trans factors involved in the upregulation of this gene by
insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) remains unclear. We found that IGF-I
increased type II collagen synthesis by a transcriptional control mechanism
involving a 715-bp region within the COL2A1 first-intron specific enhancer. The
overproduction of L-Sox5/Sox6/Sox9 and Sp1 and decoy experiments targeting these 
factors demonstrated their action in concert in IGF-I trans-activation. These
results were supported by the data obtained in knockdown experiments in which
siRNA against Sox9/Sox6 and Sp1 prevented the IGF-I-induced increase in collagen 
II production. Indeed, each of these trans-activators increased the expression of
others. IGF-I increased the binding of Sox9 and Sp1/Sp3 to their cis elements in 
the enhancer, and we provide the first evidence of Sox9 interaction with the
promoter by chromatin immunoprecipitation. Interactions with COL2A1 were also
observed for Sp1, p300/CBP, and Tip60. Finally, a physical interaction between
Sox9, p300, Sp3, and Sp1 was detected. These data demonstrate the role of Sox9,
Sp1/Sp3, and euchromatin-associated factors (p300, Tip60) in the IGF-I-induced
upregulation of COL2A1, indicating possible use of this growth factor in
articular cartilage engineering applications to promote repair in patients with
degenerative diseases, such as osteoarthritis.

PMID: 22215151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Am Chem Soc. 2012 Jan 11;134(1):3-6. doi: 10.1021/ja210660g. Epub 2011 Dec 29.

Highly efficient syntheses of azetidines, pyrrolidines, and indolines via
palladium catalyzed intramolecular amination of C(sp3)-H and C(sp2)-H bonds at <U+03B3> 
and d positions.

He G(1), Zhao Y, Zhang S, Lu C, Chen G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

Efficient methods have been developed to synthesize azetidine, pyrrolidine, and
indoline compounds via palladium-catalyzed intramolecular amination of C-H bonds 
at the <U+03B3> and d positions of picolinamide (PA) protected amine substrates. These
methods feature relatively a low catalyst loading, use of inexpensive reagents,
and convenient operating conditions. Their selectivities are predictable. These
methods highlight the use of unactivated C-H bond, especially the C(sp(3))-H bond
of methyl groups, as functional groups in organic synthesis.

© 2011 American Chemical Society

PMID: 22191666  [PubMed]


114. Org Lett. 2012 Jan 6;14(1):398-401. doi: 10.1021/ol2031763. Epub 2011 Dec 16.

Synthesis of tricyclic nitrogen heterocycles by a sequence of palladium-catalyzed
N-H and C(sp3)-H arylations.

Guyonnet M(1), Baudoin O.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 5246 - Institut de Chimie et Biochimie Moléculaires et
Supramoléculaires, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1 , CPE Lyon, 43 Boulevard du
11 Novembre 1918, 69622 Villeurbanne, France.

A range of tricyclic nitrogen heterocycles were synthesized in a straightforward 
and efficient manner via a sequence involving palladium-catalyzed N-arylation and
C(sp(3))-H arylation as the key steps. Whereas the C(sp(3))-H arylation furnished
fused 6,5,6-membered ring systems efficiently, the formation of the more strained
6,5,5-membered systems proved to be more challenging and required a subtle
adjustment of the reaction conditions.

© 2011 American Chemical Society

PMID: 22176522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Mol Pharmacol. 2012 Mar;81(3):455-64. doi: 10.1124/mol.111.076422. Epub 2011 Dec 
15.

Specificity protein 1 (sp1) oscillation is involved in copper homeostasis
maintenance by regulating human high-affinity copper transporter 1 expression.

Liang ZD(1), Tsai WB, Lee MY, Savaraj N, Kuo MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, TX 77054, USA.

Copper is an essential micronutrient for cell growth but is toxic in excess.
Copper transporter (Ctr1) plays an important role in regulating adequate copper
levels in mammalian cells. We have shown previously that expression of the human 
high-affinity copper transporter (hCtr1) was transcriptionally up-regulated under
copper-depleted conditions and down-regulated under replete conditions; moreover,
elevated hCtr1 levels suppress hCtr1 expression. Specificity protein 1 (Sp1)
regulates expression of hCtr1 under copper-stressed conditions. In this study, we
made the following important observations: 1) Sp1 expression is down-regulated
under copper-replete conditions but up-regulated under copper-depleted
conditions. These up- and down-regulations of Sp1 in turn regulate hCtr1
expression to control copper homeostasis. 2) Copper-regulated Sp1 expression
involved Sp1 binding to its own promoter as demonstrated by the chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay; therefore, Sp1 is also transcriptionally
self-regulated via hCtr1/copper intermediation. 3) Both zinc finger and
glutamine-rich transactivation domains of Sp1 are involved in the Sp1-mediated
hCtr1 and Sp1 regulation by copper stresses. 4) Although Sp3 expression is also
regulated by copper availability, Sp3 does not regulate hCtr1 homeostasis.
Collectively, our results demonstrated that mammalian cells use Sp1 oscillation
in response to copper availability to regulate copper homeostasis through hCtr1
expression in a tripartite inter-regulatory relationship. These findings have
important implications in mammalian copper physiology regulation.

PMCID: PMC3286298
PMID: 22172574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Chem Commun (Camb). 2012 Jan 25;48(7):979-81. doi: 10.1039/c2cc15813b. Epub 2011 
Dec 6.

Metal-free, organocatalytic cascade formation of C-N and C-O bonds through dual
sp3 C-H activation: oxidative synthesis of oxazole derivatives.

Xie J(1), Jiang H, Cheng Y, Zhu C.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Coordination Chemistry, School of Chemistry and
Chemical Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, PR China.

An organocatalytic cascade reaction that involves the formation of C-N, C-O and
C=N bonds in one process via dual sp(3) C-H activation has been developed. This
protocol affords a facile metal-free methodology for the synthesis of oxazole
derivatives in air under mild conditions.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012

PMID: 22146854  [PubMed]


117. Chem Commun (Camb). 2012 Jan 21;48(6):898-900. doi: 10.1039/c1cc16630a. Epub 2011
Dec 5.

Catalytic asymmetric cleavage of sp3 C-N bonds for access to highly
enantioenriched N-benzylic sulfonamides.

Wu XS(1), Tian SK.

Author information: 
(1)Joint Laboratory of Green Synthetic Chemistry, Department of Chemistry,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230026, China.

In the presence of 10 mol% of a chiral phosphoric acid, a variety of racemic
N-benzylic sulfonamides having N-(3-indolyl)methyl groups smoothly undergo
kinetic resolution with benzyl thiol at 0 °C or at room temperature and the
remaining sulfonamides are recovered in moderate to excellent yields and with
excellent ee.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012

PMID: 22143402  [PubMed]


118. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Mar 15;21(6):1325-35. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr569. Epub 2011 Dec 
2.

Identification of a chronic obstructive pulmonary disease genetic determinant
that regulates HHIP.

Zhou X(1), Baron RM, Hardin M, Cho MH, Zielinski J, Hawrylkiewicz I, Sliwinski P,
Hersh CP, Mancini JD, Lu K, Thibault D, Donahue AL, Klanderman BJ, Rosner B, Raby
BA, Lu Q, Geldart AM, Layne MD, Perrella MA, Weiss ST, Choi AM, Silverman EK.

Author information: 
(1)Channing Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Womens Hospital and 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. xzhou@rics.bwh.harvard.edu

Multiple intergenic single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) near hedgehog
interacting protein (HHIP) on chromosome 4q31 have been strongly associated with 
pulmonary function levels and moderate-to-severe chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). However, whether the effects of variants in this region are
related to HHIP or another gene has not been proven. We confirmed genetic
association of SNPs in the 4q31 COPD genome-wide association study (GWAS) region 
in a Polish cohort containing severe COPD cases and healthy smoking controls (P =
0.001 to 0.002). We found that HHIP expression at both mRNA and protein levels is
reduced in COPD lung tissues. We identified a genomic region located ~85 kb
upstream of HHIP which contains a subset of associated SNPs, interacts with the
HHIP promoter through a chromatin loop and functions as an HHIP enhancer. The
COPD risk haplotype of two SNPs within this enhancer region (rs6537296A and
rs1542725C) was associated with statistically significant reductions in HHIP
promoter activity. Moreover, rs1542725 demonstrates differential binding to the
transcription factor Sp3; the COPD-associated allele exhibits increased Sp3
binding, which is consistent with Sp3's usual function as a transcriptional
repressor. Thus, increased Sp3 binding at a functional SNP within the chromosome 
4q31 COPD GWAS locus leads to reduced HHIP expression and increased
susceptibility to COPD through distal transcriptional regulation. Together, our
findings reveal one mechanism through which SNPs upstream of the HHIP gene
modulate the expression of HHIP and functionally implicate reduced HHIP gene
expression in the pathogenesis of COPD.

PMCID: PMC3284120
PMID: 22140090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jan 27;287(5):3462-78. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.286443. Epub 2011 
Dec 2.

The p65 subunit of NF-<U+03BA>B inhibits COL1A1 gene transcription in human dermal and
scleroderma fibroblasts through its recruitment on promoter by protein
interaction with transcriptional activators (c-Krox, Sp1, and Sp3).

Beauchef G(1), Bigot N, Kypriotou M, Renard E, Porée B, Widom R,
Dompmartin-Blanchere A, Oddos T, Maquart FX, Demoor M, Boumediene K, Galera P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Matrice Extracellulaire et Pathologie, IFR ICORE 146, Université
de Caen/Basse-Normandie, UFR de Médecine, CHU niveau 3, Avenue de la Côte de
Nacre, 14032 Caen Cedex, France.

Transcriptional mechanisms regulating type I collagen genes expression in
physiopathological situations are not completely known. In this study, we have
investigated the role of nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) transcription factor on type I
collagen expression in adult normal human (ANF) and scleroderma (SF) fibroblasts.
We demonstrated that NF-<U+03BA>B, a master transcription factor playing a major role in
immune response/apoptosis, down-regulates COL1A1 expression by a transcriptional 
control involving the -112/-61 bp sequence. This 51-bp region mediates the action
of two zinc fingers, Sp1 (specific protein-1) and Sp3, acting as trans-activators
of type I collagen expression in ANF and SF. Knockdown of each one of these trans
factors by siRNA confirmed the trans-activating effect of Sp1/Sp3 and the p65
subunit of NF-<U+03BA>B trans-inhibiting effect on COL1A1 expression. Despite no
existing <U+03BA>B consensus sequence in the COL1A1 promoter, we found that
Sp1/Sp3/c-Krox and NF-<U+03BA>B bind and/or are recruited on the proximal promoter in
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays. Attempts to elucidate whether
interactions between Sp1/Sp3/c-Krox and p65 are necessary to mediate the NF-<U+03BA>B
inhibitory effect on COL1A1 in ANF and SF were carried out; in this regard,
immunoprecipitation assays revealed that they interact, and this was validated by
re-ChIP. Finally, the knockdown of Sp1/Sp3/c-Krox prevents the p65 inhibitory
effect on COL1A1 transcription in ANF, whereas only the siRNAs targeting Sp3 and 
c-Krox provoked the same effect in SF, suggesting that particular interactions
are characteristic of the scleroderma phenotype. In conclusion, our findings
highlight a new mechanism for COL1A1 transcriptional regulation by NF-<U+03BA>B, and
these data could allow the development of new antifibrotic strategies.

PMCID: PMC3271000
PMID: 22139845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. DNA Cell Biol. 2012 May;31(5):651-9. doi: 10.1089/dna.2011.1447. Epub 2011 Dec 2.

Genomic organization and promoter cloning of the human X11a gene APBA1.

Chai KH(1), McLoughlin DM, Chan TF, Chan HY, Lau KF.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Program, School Life Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong , Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong SAR.

X11a is a brain specific multi-modular protein that interacts with the
Alzheimer's disease amyloid precursor protein (APP). Aggregation of amyloid-ß
peptide (Aß), an APP cleavage product, is believed to be central to the
pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease. Recently, overexpression of X11a has been
shown to reduce Aß generation and to ameliorate memory deficit in a transgenic
mouse model of Alzheimer's disease. Therefore, manipulating the expression level 
of X11a may provide a novel route for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease. Human
X11a is encoded by the gene APBA1. As evidence suggests that X11a expression can 
be regulated at transcription level, we have determined the gene structure and
cloned the promoter of APBA1. APBA1 spans over 244 kb on chromosome 9 and is
composed of 13 exons and has multiple transcription start sites. A putative APBA1
promoter has been identified upstream of exon 1 and functional analysis revealed 
that this is highly active in neurons. By deletion analysis, the minimal promoter
was found to be located between -224 and +14, a GC-rich region that contains a
functional Sp3 binding site. In neurons, overexpression of Sp3 stimulates the
APBA1 promoter while an Sp3 inhibitor suppresses the promoter activity. Moreover,
inhibition of Sp3 reduces endogenous X11a expression and promotes the generation 
of Aß. Our findings reveal that Sp3 play an essential role in APBA1
transcription.

PMID: 22136355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Arch Oral Biol. 2012 May;57(5):531-8. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2011.10.017.
Epub 2011 Nov 30.

Analysis of syndecan-1 gene promoter during mouse tooth development.

Iguchi-Ishiguro H(1), Ouchi Y, Watanabe S, Numabe Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nippon Dental University School of Life
Dentistry at Tokyo, 1-9-20 Fujimi, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 102-8159, Japan.
hitomi-i@tky.ndu.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: Syndecan-1 plays an important role in cell proliferation in dental
papilla during tooth development. This study aimed to clarify the transcription
mechanisms that regulate syndecan-1 gene expression in dental papilla.
DESIGN: We analysed genomic conservation and putative transcriptional factor
binding sites of syndecan-1 gene loci using the bioinformatics tool VISTA. To
identify the region responsible for syndecan-1 gene expression in mouse dental
papilla cells (MDPCs) in vitro, the 1.5-kb upstream region of the mouse
syndecan-1 coding region was inserted upstream of the enhanced green fluorescent 
protein (EGFP) or luciferase gene, and promoter activity was examined by
transient reporter gene expression assay in cultured MDPCs. To examine the
binding of the upstream binding factor, we performed chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay.
RESULTS: VISTA analysis showed that the 1.5-kb upstream region was highly
conserved amongst species, and three GC-rich motifs, as well as a TATA-box-like
motif, were identified in this region. Reporter gene assay showed that the 1.5-kb
upstream region of mouse syndecan-1 induced reporter gene expression in MDPCs.
Deletion of the promoter from the 5'-end to 339 bp upstream reduced luciferase
activity by nearly half vs. the 1.5-kb sequence. Further deletion up to 68 bp
resulted in further loss of luciferase activity. On ChIP assay, we found direct
recruitment of Sp3 transcription factor to the GC-rich motif region.
CONCLUSION: The 1.5-kb upstream region of the syndecan-1 gene was sufficient to
induce its expression in dental papilla, and binding of Sp3 transcription factor 
may play a pivotal role in this syndecan-1 induction.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22134060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Biosci Rep. 2012 Jun;32(3):281-97. doi: 10.1042/BSR20110045.

Promoter cloning and characterization of the human programmed cell death protein 
4 (pdcd4) gene: evidence for ZBP-89 and Sp-binding motifs as essential Pdcd4
regulators.

Leupold JH(1), Asangani IA, Mudduluru G, Allgayer H.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
MI, USA.

Pdcd4 (programmed cell death protein 4) is an important novel tumour suppressor
inhibiting transformation, translation, invasion and intravasation, and its
expression is down-regulated in several cancers. However, little is known about
the transcriptional regulation and the promoter of this important tumour
suppressor. So far the following is the first comprehensive study to describe the
regulation of Pdcd4 transcription by ZBP-89 (zinc-finger-binding protein 89),
besides characterizing the gene promoter. We identified the transcriptional start
sites of the human pdcd4 promoter, a functional CCAAT-box, and the basal promoter
region. Within this basal region, computer-based analysis revealed several
potential binding sites for ZBPs, especially for Sp (specificity protein) family 
members and ZBP-89. We identified four Sp1/Sp3/Sp4-binding elements to be
indispensable for basal promoter activity. However, overexpression of Sp1 and Sp3
was not sufficient to enhance Pdcd4 protein expression. Analysis in different
solid cancer cell lines showed a significant correlation between pdcd4 and zbp-89
mRNA amounts. In contrast with Sp transcription factors, overexpression of ZBP-89
led to an enhanced expression of Pdcd4 mRNA and protein. Additionally, specific
knockdown of ZBP-89 resulted in a decreased pdcd4 gene expression. Reporter gene 
analysis showed a significant up-regulation of basal promoter activity by
co-transfection with ZBP-89, which could be abolished by mithramycin treatment.
Predicted binding of ZBP-89 to the basal promoter was confirmed by EMSA
(electrophoretic mobility-shift assay) data and supershift analysis for ZBP-89.
Taken together, data for the first time implicate ZBP-89 as a regulator of Pdcd4 
by binding to the basal promoter either alone or by interacting with Sp family
members.

PMID: 22111549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Org Lett. 2011 Dec 16;13(24):6366-9. doi: 10.1021/ol202654j. Epub 2011 Nov 22.

Synthesis of new class of alkyl azarene pyridinium zwitterions via iodine
mediated sp3 C-H bond activation.

Kumar A(1), Gupta G, Srivastava S.

Author information: 
(1)Medicinal and Process Chemistry Division, Central Drug Research Institute,
CSIR, Lucknow, India. dratulsax@gmail.com

An efficient and conceptually different approach toward C-H bond activation by
using iodine mediated sp(3) C-H functionalization for the synthesis of alkyl
azaarene pyridinium zwitterions is described. This work has the interesting
distinction of being the first synthesis of a new class of alkyl azaarene
pyridinium zwitterion via transition-metal-free sp(3) C-H bond activation of an
alkyl azaarene.

PMID: 22106823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Proteins. 2012 Feb;80(2):352-61. doi: 10.1002/prot.23183. Epub 2011 Nov 22.

Template-based protein structure modeling using TASSER(VMT.).

Zhou H(1), Skolnick J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for the Study of Systems Biology, School of Biology, Georgia Institute 
of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia 30318.

Template-based protein structure modeling is commonly used for protein structure 
prediction. Based on the observation that multiple template-based methods often
perform better than single template-based methods, we further explore the use of 
a variable number of multiple templates for a given target in the latest variant 
of TASSER, TASSER(VMT) . We first develop an algorithm that improves the
target-template alignment for a given template. The improved alignment, called
the SP(3) alternative alignment, is generated by a parametric alignment method
coupled with short TASSER refinement on models selected using knowledge-based
scores. The refined top model is then structurally aligned to the template to
produce the SP(3) alternative alignment. Templates identified using SP(3)
threading are combined with the SP(3) alternative and HHEARCH alignments to
provide target alignments to each template. These template models are then
grouped into sets containing a variable number of template/alignment
combinations. For each set, we run short TASSER simulations to build full-length 
models. Then, the models from all sets of templates are pooled, and the top 20-50
models selected using FTCOM ranking method. These models are then subjected to a 
single longer TASSER refinement run for final prediction. We benchmarked our
method by comparison with our previously developed approach, pro-sp(3) -TASSER,
on a set with 874 easy and 318 hard targets. The average GDT-TS score
improvements for the first model are 3.5 and 4.3% for easy and hard targets,
respectively. When tested on the 112 CASP9 targets, our method improves the
average GDT-TS scores as compared to pro-sp3-TASSER by 8.2 and 9.3% for the 80
easy and 32 hard targets, respectively. It also shows slightly better results
than the top ranked CASP9 Zhang-Server, QUARK and HHpredA methods. The program is
available for download at http://cssb.biology.gatech.edu/.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3291807
PMID: 22105797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Nanoscale Res Lett. 2011 Nov 11;6:589. doi: 10.1186/1556-276X-6-589.

Atomistic aspects of ductile responses of cubic silicon carbide during nanometric
cutting.

Goel S(1), Luo X, Reuben RL, Rashid WB.

Author information: 
(1)School of Engineering and Physical Sciences, Heriot Watt University,
Edinburgh, EH144AS, Scotland, UK. x.luo@hw.ac.uk.

Cubic silicon carbide (SiC) is an extremely hard and brittle material having
unique blend of material properties which makes it suitable candidate for
microelectromechanical systems and nanoelectromechanical systems applications.
Although, SiC can be machined in ductile regime at nanoscale through single-point
diamond turning process, the root cause of the ductile response of SiC has not
been understood yet which impedes significant exploitation of this ceramic
material. In this paper, molecular dynamics simulation has been carried out to
investigate the atomistic aspects of ductile response of SiC during nanometric
cutting process. Simulation results show that cubic SiC undergoes sp3-sp2
order-disorder transition resulting in the formation of SiC-graphene-like
substance with a growth rate dependent on the cutting conditions. The disorder
transition of SiC causes the ductile response during its nanometric cutting
operations. It was further found out that the continuous abrasive action between 
the diamond tool and SiC causes simultaneous sp3-sp2 order-disorder transition of
diamond tool which results in graphitization of diamond and consequent tool wear.

PMCID: PMC3224798
PMID: 22078069  [PubMed]


126. Chem Commun (Camb). 2012 Jan 18;48(5):635-53. doi: 10.1039/c1cc14592d. Epub 2011 
Nov 9.

Interaction of niobium and tantalum pentahalides with O-donors: coordination
chemistry and activation reactions.

Marchetti F(1), Pampaloni G.

Author information: 
(1)Università di Pisa, Dipartimento di Chimica e Chimica Industriale, Via
Risorgimento 35, I-56126 Pisa, Italy.

The chemistry of niobium and tantalum pentahalides, MX(5), with oxygen compounds 
is reviewed herein. The polynuclear structure of MX(5) is readily broken by
addition of oxygen-containing organic molecules, L, to give either mononuclear or
ionic dinuclear coordination adducts. Then activation of the organic ligand may
take place favoured by several factors, i.e. low M-X bond energy, high
temperature, presence of more than one oxygen function within L, L/M molar ratio 
= 2. The activation reactions are often uncommon in the context of metal halides;
they include the cleavage of C(sp3)-O, C(sp2)-O, C-H and C-C bonds, and eventual 
successive rearrangements proceeding with C-O or C-C couplings. The recently
elucidated reactivity of MX(5) with limited amounts of oxygen compounds will be
presented, and possible connections with the relevant MX(5)-directed syntheses
reported in the literature will be outlined.

PMID: 22073391  [PubMed]


127. J Neurochem. 2012 Jan;120(2):220-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2011.07577.x. Epub
2011 Nov 28.

Neuronal differentiation alters the ratio of Sp transcription factors recruited
to the CYP46A1 promoter.

Milagre I(1), Nunes MJ, Castro-Caldas M, Moutinho M, Gama MJ, Rodrigues E.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Medicines and Pharmaceutical Sciences (iMed.UL),
University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal.

CYP46A1 is a neuron-specific cytochrome P450 that plays a pivotal role in
maintaining cholesterol homeostasis in the CNS. However, the molecular mechanisms
underlying human CYP46A1 expression are still poorly understood, partly because
of the lack of a cellular model that expresses high levels of CYP46A1. Our
previous studies demonstrated that specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors
control CYP46A1 expression, and are probably responsible for cell-type
specificity. Herein, we have differentiated Ntera2/cloneD1 cells into
post-mitotic neurons and identified for the first time a human cell model that
expresses high levels of CYP46A1 mRNA. Our results show a decrease in Sp1 protein
levels, concomitant with the increase in CYP46A1 mRNA levels. This decrease was
correlated with changes in the ratio of Sp proteins associated to the CYP46A1
proximal promoter. To examine if the increase in (Sp3+Sp4)/Sp1 ratio was observed
in other Sp-regulated promoters, we have selected four genes--reelin, glutamate
receptor subunit zeta-1, glutamate receptor subunit epsilon-1 and µ-opioid
receptor--known to be expressed in the human brain and analyzed the Sp proteins
binding pattern to the promoter of these genes, in undifferentiated and
differentiated Ntera2/cloneD1. Our data indicate that the dissociation of Sp1
from promoter regions is a common feature amongst Sp-regulated genes that are
up-regulated after neuronal differentiation.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal of Neurochemistry © 2011 International Society for
Neurochemistry.

PMID: 22060190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2012 Feb 1;302(3):G317-25. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00363.2011. Epub 2011 Nov 3.

PKCd-dependent activation of ERK1/2 leads to upregulation of the human NHE2
transcriptional activity in intestinal epithelial cell line C2BBe1.

Muthusamy S(1), Shukla S, Amin MR, Cheng M, Orenuga T, Dudeja PK, Malakooti J.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Digestive Diseases and Nutrition, Department of Medicine,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

The apical Na+/H+ exchanger (NHE) isoform NHE2 is involved in transepithelial Na+
absorption in the intestine. Our earlier studies have shown that mitogenic agent 
phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) induces the expression of NHE2 through
activation of transcription factor early growth response-1 (Egr-1) and its
interactions with the NHE2 promoter. However, the signaling pathways involved in 
transcriptional stimulation of NHE2 in response to PMA in the intestinal
epithelial cells are not known. Chemical inhibitors and genetic approaches were
used to investigate the signaling pathways responsible for the stimulation of
NHE2 expression by PMA via Egr-1 induction. We show that, in response to PMA,
PKCd, a member of novel PKC isozymes, and MEK-ERK1/2 pathway of mitogen-activated
protein kinases stimulate the NHE2 expression in C2BBe1 intestinal epithelial
cells. PMA rapidly and transiently induced activation of PKCd. Small inhibitory
RNA-mediated knockdown of PKCd blocked the stimulatory effect of PMA on the NHE2 
promoter activity. In addition, blockade of PKCd by rottlerin, a PKCd-specific
inhibitor, and ERK1/2 by U0126, a MEK-ERK inhibitor, abrogated PMA-induced Egr-1 
expression. Immunofluorescence studies revealed that inhibition of ERK1/2
activation prevents translocation of PMA-induced Egr-1 into the nucleus.
Consistent with these data, PMA-induced Egr-1 interaction with the NHE2 promoter 
region was prevented in nuclear extracts from U0126-pretreated cells. In
conclusion, our data provide the first evidence that the stimulatory effect of
PMA on NHE2 expression is mediated through the initial activation of PKCd,
subsequent PKCd-dependent activation of MEK-ERK1/2 signaling pathway, and
stimulation of Egr-1 expression. Furthermore, we show that transcription factor
Egr-1 acts as an intermediate effector molecule that links the upstream signaling
cues to the long-term stimulation of NHE2 expression by PMA in C2BBe1 cells.

PMCID: PMC3287399
PMID: 22052014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2011 Dec 16;50(51):12236-9. doi: 10.1002/anie.201105894. 
Epub 2011 Oct 31.

Synergistic palladium-catalyzed C(sp3)-H activation/C(sp3)-O bond formation: a
direct, step-economical route to benzolactones.

Novák P(1), Correa A, Gallardo-Donaire J, Martin R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemical Research of Catalonia (ICIQ), Av. Països Catalans, 16,
43007, Tarragona, Spain.

PMID: 22038700  [PubMed]


130. Immunol Lett. 2012 Jan 30;141(2):227-34. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2011.10.009. Epub
2011 Oct 20.

Potential role for alternatively activated macrophages in the secondary bacterial
infection during recovery from influenza.

Chen WH(1), Toapanta FR, Shirey KA, Zhang L, Giannelou A, Page C, Frieman MB,
Vogel SN, Cross AS.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Vaccine Development, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. wchen@medicine.umaryland.edu

PURPOSE: Secondary bacterial infections are a common complication of influenza.
Innate immune host defenses appear to be impaired following influenza, leading to
susceptibility to subsequent bacterial infections. Alternatively activated
macrophages (AAM) in the lungs may play a critical role in eliciting the
hypersusceptibility to secondary bacterial pneumonia.
METHODS: C57BL6 mice were challenged with sublethal doses of the mouse-adapted
A/PR/8/34 (PR8) influenza virus or saline and allowed to recover. At complete
recovery (day 14), mice were re-challenged with sublethal doses of Streptococcus 
pneumoniae serotype 3 (Sp3).
RESULTS: PR8-recovered mice developed a rapidly fatal pulmonary infection to a
100-fold sublethal pneumococcal challenge, whereas PR8-naive mice demonstrated no
mortality or illness. The cytokines which induce AAM (IL-4 and IL-13) and the
expression of genes associated with AAM (Arginase-1, FIZZ1, and YM1) were
elevated after PR8 infection. Flow cytometry suggests that alveolar macrophages
demonstrate the AAM-phenotype, as indicated by MGL-1 and MHCII expression, in
response to PR8 infection. Recovery from PR8 was associated with blunted cytokine
responses to TLR ligands.
CONCLUSIONS: The mechanisms of immune regulation during recovery from influenza
are being elucidated. We provide evidence that pulmonary AAM are induced during
influenza infection and may contribute to the elicitation of hypersusceptibility 
to a secondary bacterial infection.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3243824
PMID: 22037624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Chem Commun (Camb). 2011 Dec 28;47(48):12867-9. doi: 10.1039/c1cc15397h. Epub
2011 Oct 31.

TBHP-mediated oxidative thiolation of an sp3 C-H bond adjacent to a nitrogen atom
in an amide.

Tang RY(1), Xie YX, Xie YL, Xiang JN, Li JH.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensing and Chemometrics, College of
Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China.

The first example of molecular sieve-promoted TBHP-mediated direct oxidative
thiolation of an sp(3) C-H bond adjacent to a nitrogen atom with disulfides under
metal-free conditions, which allows for preparation of numerous S,N-containing
compounds, is presented. Moreover, diverse benzothiazoles and a fipronil analog
can be synthesized through this strategy.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011

PMID: 22037478  [PubMed]


132. Med Chem. 2011 Sep;7(5):518-25.

Targeting Sp1 transcription factors in prostate cancer therapy.

Sankpal UT(1), Goodison S, Abdelrahim M, Basha R.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, MD Anderson Cancer Center Orlando, Orlando, FL
32827, USA.

Transcription factors are proteins that regulate gene expression by binding to
specific DNA sequences within gene promoter regions. Specificity protein (Sp)
family transcription factors play a critical role in various cellular processes
and have been shown to be associated with tumorigenesis. The Sp family consists
of several members that contain a highly conserved DNA-binding domain composed of
three zinc fingers at the C-terminus and serine/threonine- and glutamine-rich
transactivation domains at the N-terminal. Sp1 is elevated in several cancers
including prostate and is associated with the prognosis of patients. Sp1, Sp3,
and Sp4 regulate a variety of cancer associated genes that are involved in cell
cycle, proliferation, cell differentiation, and apoptosis. Studies have shown
that in prostate cancer, Sp1 regulates important genes like androgen receptor,
TGF-ß, c-Met, fatty acid synthase, matrix metalloprotein (MT1-MMP), PSA, and
a-integrin. These results highlight the importance of Sp1 in prostate cancer and 
emphasize the potential therapeutic value of targeting Sp1. Several strategies,
including the use of natural and synthetic compounds, have been used to inhibit
Sp1 in prostate cancer. These include polyphenol quercetin, betulinic acid,
acetyl-11-keto-beta-boswellic acid, tea phenols, isothiocyanates,
thiazolidinediones, arsenic trioxide, and selenium. This review will describe the
association of Sp proteins in prostate cancer with a special emphasis on some of 
the agents tested to target Sp proteins for the treatment of this malignancy.

PMID: 22022994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e25567. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025567. Epub 2011 Oct 13.

The molecular signature underlying the thymic migration and maturation of TCRaß+ 
CD4+ CD8 thymocytes.

Teng F(1), Zhou Y, Jin R, Chen Y, Pei X, Liu Y, Dong J, Wang W, Pang X, Qian X,
Chen WF, Zhang Y, Ge Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing,
China.

BACKGROUND: After positive selection, the newly generated single positive (SP)
thymocytes migrate to the thymic medulla, where they undergo negative selection
to eliminate autoreactive T cells and functional maturation to acquire immune
competence and egress capability.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To elucidate the genetic program underlying this 
process, we analyzed changes in gene expression in four subsets of mouse
TCRaß(+)CD4(+)CD8(-) thymocytes (SP1 to SP4) representative of sequential stages 
in a previously defined differentiation program. A genetic signature of the
migration of thymocytes was thus revealed. CCR7 and PlexinD1 are believed to be
important for the medullary positioning of SP thymocytes. Intriguingly, their
expression remains at low levels in the newly generated thymocytes, suggesting
that the cortex-medulla migration may not occur until the SP2 stage. SP2 and SP3 
cells gradually up-regulate transcripts involved in T cell functions and the
Foxo1-KLF2-S1P(1) axis, but a number of immune function-associated genes are not 
highly expressed until cells reach the SP4 stage. Consistent with their critical 
role in thymic emigration, the expression of S1P(1) and CD62L are much enhanced
in SP4 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These results support at the molecular level that single positive
thymocytes undergo a differentiation program and further demonstrate that SP4 is 
the stage at which thymocytes acquire the immunocompetence and the capability of 
emigration from the thymus.

PMCID: PMC3192722
PMID: 22022412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Opt Lett. 2011 Oct 15;36(20):4041-3. doi: 10.1364/OL.36.004041.

Comparison between radiative transfer theory and the simplified spherical
harmonics approximation for a semi-infinite geometry.

Liemert A(1), Kienle A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Lasertechnologien in der Medizin und Messtechnik, Ulm, Germany.

In this study, the third-order simplified spherical harmonics equations (SP3), an
approximation of the radiative transfer equation, are solved for a semi-infinite 
geometry considering the exact simplified spherical harmonics boundary
conditions. The obtained Green's function is compared to radiative transfer
calculations and the diffusion theory. In general, it is shown that the SP3
equations provide better results than the diffusion approximation in media with
high absorption coefficient values but no improvement is found for small
distances to the source.

PMID: 22002379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Org Lett. 2011 Nov 4;13(21):5928-31. doi: 10.1021/ol202659e. Epub 2011 Oct 12.

Photochemically induced radical transformation of C(sp3)-H bonds to C(sp3)-CN
bonds.

Kamijo S(1), Hoshikawa T, Inoue M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Hongo,
Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

A general protocol for direct transformation of unreactive C(sp(3))-H bonds to
C(sp(3))-CN bonds has been developed. The C-H activation was effected by
photoexcited benzophenone, and the generated carbon radical was subsequently
trapped with tosyl cyanide to afford the corresponding nitrile in a highly
efficient manner. The present methodology is widely applicable to versatile
starting materials and, thus, serves as a powerful tool for selective one-carbon 
elongation for construction of architecturally complex molecules.

© 2011 American Chemical Society

PMID: 21992181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2011 Dec 2;50(49):11761-4. doi: 10.1002/anie.201105288.
Epub 2011 Oct 7.

On the nature of C-H···F-C interactions in hindered CF3-C(sp3) bond rotations.

Prakash GK(1), Wang F, Rahm M, Shen J, Ni C, Haiges R, Olah GA.

Author information: 
(1)Loker Hydrocarbon Research Institute and Department of Chemistry, University
of Southern California, University Park, Los Angeles, CA-90089-1661, USA.
gprakash@usc.edu

PMCID: PMC3439535
PMID: 21984045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Jan;1819(1):38-56. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2011.09.001. 
Epub 2011 Sep 18.

Functional characterization of the human translocator protein (18kDa) gene
promoter in human breast cancer cell lines.

Batarseh A(1), Barlow KD, Martinez-Arguelles DB, Papadopoulos V.

Author information: 
(1)The Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre and the
Department of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3G 1A4.
amani.batarseh@childrens.harvard.edu

The translocator protein (18kDa; TSPO) is a mitochondrial drug- and
cholesterol-binding protein that has been implicated in several processes,
including steroidogenesis, cell proliferation, and apoptosis. Expression of the
human TSPO gene is elevated in several cancers. To understand the molecular
mechanisms that regulate TSPO expression in human breast cancer cells, the TSPO
promoter was identified, cloned, and functionally characterized in poor-in-TSPO
hormone-dependent, non-aggressive MCF-7 cells and rich-in-TSPO
hormone-independent, aggressive, and metastatic MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells.
RNA ligase-mediated 5'-rapid amplification of cDNA ends analysis indicated
transcription initiated at multiple sites downstream of a GC-rich promoter that
lacks functional TATA and CCAAT boxes. Deletion analysis indicated that the
region from -121 to +66, which contains five putative regulatory sites known as
GC boxes, was sufficient to induce reporter activity up to 24-fold in MCF-7 and
nearly 120-fold in MDA-MB-231 cells. Electrophoretic mobility shift and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays indicated that Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 bind to these GC boxes
in vitro and to the endogenous TSPO promoter. Silencing of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 gene 
expression reduced TSPO levels. In addition, TSPO expression was epigenetically
regulated at one or more of the identified GC boxes. Disruption of the sequence
downstream of the main start site of TSPO differentially regulated TSPO promoter 
activity in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells, indicating that essential elements
contribute to its differential expression in these cells. Taken together, these
experiments constitute the first in-depth functional analysis of the human TSPO
gene promoter and its transcriptional regulation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3249510
PMID: 21958735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Guang Pu Xue Yu Guang Pu Fen Xi. 2011 Jul;31(7):1800-3.

[XPS and Raman studies of diamond-like carbon films prepared by various
deposition techniques].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang FZ(1), Wang SQ, Shen LR, Chen QC.

Author information: 
(1)Southwestern Institute of Physics, Chengdu 610041, China.
development11111@163.com

Diamond-like carbon (DLC) films were deposited on a silicon chip substrate by a
metal pulsed magnetic filtered cathodic vacuum arc deposition technique, a direct
current magnetron sputtering technique and a pulsed glow discharge plasma
enhanced chemical vapor deposition technique. And the characteristics of DLC
films were investigated using laser Raman spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy. The spectra of diamond like carbon were collected using Raman
spectrometers with 325 nm flters. It was found that DLC films prepared by various
deposition technique have different G-peak, D-peak, T-peak, the full width at
half maximum(FWHM)of G-peak, D-peak and T-peak, the intensity ratio I(D)/I(G) and
I(T)/I(G) and the sp3 content. Among them, the films grown by metal pulsed
magnetic filtered cathodic vacuum arc deposition technique have the largest
G-peak wave number and the intensity ratio I(T)/I(G), the minimum of the
intensity ratio I(D)/I(G), G-FWHM and the maximum sp3 content; those grown by the
direct current magnetron sputtering technique have the 2nd largest G-peak wave
number, the intensity ratio I(D)/I(G) and I(T)/I(G) and sp3 content, however,
they have the largest G-FWHM, while those grown by the pulsed glow discharge
plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition technique have the minimum G-peak wave 
number and the intensity ratio I(T)/I(G) and sp3 content, and the maximum
intensity ratio I(D)/I(G).

PMID: 21942027  [PubMed]


139. J Am Chem Soc. 2011 Oct 19;133(41):16410-3. doi: 10.1021/ja207775a. Epub 2011 Sep
25.

Copper-catalyzed C(sp3)-C(sp3) bond formation using a hypervalent iodine reagent:
an efficient allylic trifluoromethylation.

Wang X(1), Ye Y, Zhang S, Feng J, Xu Y, Zhang Y, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing National Laboratory of Molecular Sciences (BNLMS), College of
Chemistry, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

An efficient copper-catalyzed allylic trifluoromethylation reaction has been
developed. This reaction provides a general and straightforward way to synthesize
allylic trifluoromethylated compounds under mild conditions.

PMID: 21936560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Am Chem Soc. 2011 Oct 19;133(41):16382-5. doi: 10.1021/ja207296y. Epub 2011 Sep
26.

Intermolecular oxidative C-N bond formation under metal-free conditions: control 
of chemoselectivity between aryl sp2 and benzylic sp3 C-H bond imidation.

Kim HJ(1), Kim J, Cho SH, Chang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Molecular-Level Interface Research Center, Korea
Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, 305-701, Republic 
of Korea.

A new synthetic approach toward intermolecular oxidative C-N bond formation of
arenes has been developed under transition-metal-free conditions. Complete
control of chemoselectivity between aryl sp(2) and benzylic sp(3) C-H bond
imidation was achieved by the choice of nitrogen sources, representatively being 
phthalimide and dibenzenesulfonimide, respectively.

PMID: 21928852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Chem Commun (Camb). 2011 Nov 7;47(41):11483-5. doi: 10.1039/c1cc14292e. Epub 2011
Sep 19.

Enantioselective synthesis of 2-methyl indolines by palladium catalysed
asymmetric C(sp3)-H activation/cyclisation.

Anas S(1), Cordi A, Kagan HB.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Chimie Moléculaire et des Matériaux d'Orsay (UMR 8182, CNRS),
Laboratoire de Catalyse Moléculaire, Université Paris-Sud, 91405 Orsay, France.

The first example of the enantioselective methyl C-H activation by an
intramolecular ArPdX species and subsequent cyclisation was developed. Palladium 
catalysts using commercially available chiral diphosphines yield good ee's (up to
93% ee) in the synthesis of 2-methyl indolines from 2-halo N-isopropyl anilides. 
This approach was also employed for the synthesis of enantioenriched cyclohexyl
fused indolines with moderate enantioselectivities.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011

PMID: 21927738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Nutr Cancer. 2011;63(7):1133-42. doi: 10.1080/01635581.2011.605984. Epub 2011 Sep
15.

Pharmacologic doses of ascorbic acid repress specificity protein (Sp)
transcription factors and Sp-regulated genes in colon cancer cells.

Pathi SS(1), Lei P, Sreevalsan S, Chadalapaka G, Jutooru I, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas 77843-4466, USA.

Ascorbic acid (vitamin C) inhibits cancer cell growth, and there is a controversy
regarding the cancer chemoprotective effects of pharmacologic doses of this
compound that exhibits prooxidant activity. We hypothesized that the anticancer
activity of pharmacologic doses of ascorbic acid (<5 mM) is due, in part, to
reactive oxygen species-dependent downregulation of specificity protein (Sp)
transcription factors Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 and Sp-regulated genes. In this study,
ascorbic acid (1-3 mM) decreased RKO and SW480 colon cancer cell proliferation
and induced apoptosis and necrosis, and this was accompanied by downregulation of
Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 proteins. In addition, ascorbic acid decreased expression of
several Sp-regulated genes that are involved in cancer cell proliferation
[hepatocyte growth factor receptor (c-Met), epidermal growth factor receptor and 
cyclin D1], survival (survivin and bcl-2), and angiogenesis [vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) and its receptors (VEGFR1 and VEGFR2)]. Other prooxidants
such as hydrogen peroxide exhibited similar activities in colon cancer cells, and
cotreatment with glutathione inhibited these responses. This study demonstrates
for the first time that the anticancer activities of ascorbic acid are due, in
part, to ROS-dependent repression of Sp transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC3359146
PMID: 21919647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Am Chem Soc. 2011 Oct 12;133(40):15926-9. doi: 10.1021/ja207468n. Epub 2011 Sep
21.

Visible light promoted hydroxylation of a Si-C(sp3) bond catalyzed by rhodium
porphyrins in water.

Yu M(1), Fu X.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, College of Chemistry and
Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

Catalytic activation of an unstrained, unactivated Si-C(sp(3)) bond in water to
form methane and silanol by electrophilic rhodium(III) porphyrin [(por)Rh(III)]
in acidic aqueous solutions under visible light (<U+03BB> = 420 nm) has been developed. 
Activation of the Si-C(sp(3)) bond occurs through direct Si-C bond cleavage, with
methyl group transfer to rhodium to give a porphyrin rhodium methyl complex.
Photolysis of (por)Rh-CH(3) in water yields methyl radical and (por)Rh(II).
Subsequently, (por)Rh(II) reacts with water rapidly to produce (por)Rh-H and
(por)Rh-OH. (por)Rh-OH is then protonated to regenerate (por)Rh(III)-OH(2), and
(por)Rh-H undergoes hydrogen atom abstraction by methyl radical to form the
observed methane.

PMID: 21919487  [PubMed]


144. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2011;720:191-207. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-0254-1_16.

Malignant transformation of human skin fibroblasts by two alternative pathways.

McCormick JJ(1), Maher VM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI 48824-1302, USA. mccormi1@msu.edu

We developed a telomerase-positive, infinite life span human fibroblast cell
strain (MSU-1.0) by transfection of a v-MYC oncogene and spontaneous
over-expression of transcription factors SP1/SP3. Loss of expression of p14(ALT) 
and enhanced expression of SPRY2 gave rise to the MSU-1.1 cell strain. Unlike
MSU-1.0 cells, the MSU-1.1 cells can be malignantly transformed by expression of 
N-RAS(LYS61) or H-Ras(v12) oncoproteins (driven by their original promoters) and 
expression of a SRC-family protein, v-FES. MSU-1.1 cells can also be malignantly 
transformed by high expression of these RAS oncogenes or the v-K-RAS oncogene.
PDGF-B transformed MSU-1.1 cells give rise to benign tumors (fibromas) in athymic
mice. A second route to malignant transformation of the MSU-1.1 cells involves
loss of functional TP53 protein by carcinogen treatment and loss of expression of
wild type p16(INK). These studies indicate 6-8 "hits" are required to activate
the oncogenes and inactivate the suppressor genes we identified.

PMID: 21901629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Chem Rec. 2011 Sep;11(5):236-41. doi: 10.1002/tcr.201100024. Epub 2011 Sep 6.

Catalytic migratory oxidative coupling of nitrones through an outer-sphere
C(sp3)-H activation process.

Hashizume S(1), Oisaki K, Kanai M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1,
Hongo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Outer-sphere redox catalysis is key to efficient C-H activation, which has
attracted increased interest in organic chemistry. In this account, we describe a
Cu(I) -catalyzed oxidative coupling between nitrones and various ethers or amines
as an example. Predictable site-selective C-C bond formation was achieved through
activation of the C-H bonds in each coupling partner and the migration of a C-N
double bond. Mechanistic studies strongly suggested that the reaction proceeded
via an oxonium/iminium cation species as the key intermediate. The mechanistic
information allows for future extension of outer-sphere redox catalysis.

Copyright © 2011 The Japan Chemical Journal Forum and Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21898780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Mech Dev. 2011 Sep-Dec;128(7-10):428-41. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2011.08.003. Epub
2011 Aug 23.

Developmental functions for the Caenorhabditis elegans Sp protein SPTF-3.

Ulm EA(1), Sleiman SF, Chamberlin HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Ohio State University, 484 W.12th Ave.,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA. chamberlin.27@osu.edu

Sp factors are important for animal development and the transcriptional
regulation of a wide variety of genes. How they influence the developmental
decisions of individual cells within the organism, however, is poorly understood.
To better understand the developmental functions for Sp transcription factors, we
have characterized the functions of Caenorhabditis elegans SPTF-3 using RNAi
knockdown and a non-null, hypomorphic mutant allele. We find that disruption of
sptf-3 confers a variety of developmental defects, including defects in
development of the egg-laying system, oocyte production, and embryonic
morphogenesis. sptf-3 mutants exhibit defects in vulval lineage polarity, a
phenotype previously only observed in mutants defective in Wnt signaling. We show
that the embryonic function of sptf-3 is dependent on germline activity, arguing 
that the gene has an important maternal contribution to embryonic development. An
evaluation of reporter gene expression suggests that SPTF-3 exhibits specificity,
in that it can influence the expression of a given gene in some cells but not
others, and that SPTF-3 participates in the maintenance of gene expression states
in differentiated cells. We propose SPTF-3 provides a good model to study the in 
vivo functions for Sp transcription factors during animal development.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21884786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Cell Mol Med. 2012 Jul;16(7):1461-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2011.01420.x.

Trichostatin A induces 5-lipoxygenase promoter activity and mRNA expression via
inhibition of histone deacetylase 2 and 3.

Pufahl L(1), Katryniok C, Schnur N, Sorg BL, Metzner J, Grez M, Steinhilber D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Chemistry/ZAFES, Goethe University Frankfurt,
Frankfurt, Germany.

The 5-lipoxygenase (5-LO) is the key enzyme in the formation of leukotrienes. We 
have previously shown that the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor trichostatin 
A (TSA) activates 5-LO transcription via recruitment of Sp1, Sp3 and RNA
polymerase II to the proximal promoter. To identify the HDACs involved in the
regulation of 5-LO promoter activity isoform-specific HDAC inhibitors were
applied. 5-LO promoter activity and mRNA expression were up-regulated by the
class I HDAC inhibitors apicidin and MS-275 but not by class II inhibitors.
Knockdown of HDAC 1, 2 and 3 revealed that HDAC2 and HDAC3 but not HDAC1 is
involved in the up-regulation of 5-LO mRNA expression. To analyse the chromatin
modifications at the 5-LO promoter associated with HDAC inhibition, the time
course of 5-LO mRNA induction by trichostatin A was investigated and the
concomitant changes in histone modifications at the 5-LO promoter in HL-60, U937 
and Mono Mac6 cells were determined. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis
revealed that trichostatin A increases acetylation of histones H3 and H4 at the
5-LO core promoter in HL-60 and U937 cells whereas no significant changes were
observed in Mono Mac6 cells. The appearance of H3 and H4 acetylation preceded the
5-LO mRNA induction whereas in all three cell lines, induction of 5-LO mRNA
expression correlated with histone H3 lysine 4 trimethylation (H3K4me3), a marker
for transcriptional activity of gene promoters.

© 2011 The Authors Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine © 2011 Foundation
for Cellular and Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3823215
PMID: 21883892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. DNA Cell Biol. 2012 Feb;31(2):180-6. doi: 10.1089/dna.2011.1278. Epub 2011 Aug
31.

In vivo binding of Orc2 to a region of the chicken lysozyme GAS41 origin
containing multiple Sp1-binding sites.

Hübner K(1), Phi-van L.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Institute of Animal Welfare and Animal Husbandry,
Dornbergstrasse 25-27, Celle, Germany .

Most known DNA replication origins in vertebrate genomes have been found to occur
close to transcriptional promoters. The origin of bidirectional DNA replication
of the chicken lysozyme GAS41 locus was identified in a CpG island covering the
GAS41 gene promoter. In this study, we generated an a-Orc2 antibody from rabbits 
immunized with the C-terminal half of Orc2 for studying in vivo Orc2 binding to
the lysozyme-GAS41 origin. Using the chromatin immunoprecipitation technique and 
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction, we were able to map the
Orc2-binding site to a region of the lysozyme GAS41 origin that contains multiple
Sp1/Sp3-binding sites co-mapping with two DNase I hypersensitive sites. Further, 
knockdown of endogenous Sp1 by RNA interference reduced specific Orc2 binding to 
the lysozyme GAS41 origin. These results suggest that Sp1 participates in
recruiting Orc2 to the origin.

PMID: 21879882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Cancer Genet. 2011 Jul;204(7):351-65. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2011.07.008.

Promiscuous partnerships in Ewing's sarcoma.

Sankar S(1), Lessnick SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, UT, USA.

Ewing's sarcoma is a highly aggressive bone and soft tissue tumor of children and
young adults. At the molecular genetic level Ewing's sarcoma is characterized by 
a balanced reciprocal translocation, t(11;22)(q24;q12), which encodes an
oncogenic fusion protein and transcription factor EWS/FLI. This tumor-specific
chimeric fusion retains the amino terminus of EWS, a member of the TET
(TLS/EWS/TAF15) family of RNA-binding proteins, and the carboxy terminus of FLI, 
a member of the ETS family of transcription factors. In addition to EWS/FLI,
variant translocation fusions belonging to the TET/ETS family have been
identified in Ewing's sarcoma. These studies solidified the importance of TET/ETS
fusions in the pathogenesis of Ewing's sarcoma and have since been used as
diagnostic markers for the disease. EWS fusions with non-ETS transcription factor
family members have been described in sarcomas that are clearly distinct
from Ewing's sarcoma. However, in recent years there have been reports of rare
fusions in "Ewing's-like tumors" that harbor the amino-terminus of EWS fused to
the carboxy-terminal DNA or chromatin-interacting domains contributed by non-ETS 
proteins. This review aims to summarize the growing list of fusion oncogenes that
characterize Ewing's sarcoma and Ewing's-like tumors and highlights important
questions that need to be answered to further support the existing concept that
Ewing's sarcoma is strictly a "TET/ETS" fusion-driven malignancy. Understanding
the molecular mechanisms of action of the various different fusion oncogenes will
provide better insights into the biology underlying this rare but important solid
tumor.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3164520
PMID: 21872822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Organometallics. 2011 Aug 8;30(15):3926-3929.

Steric Crowding Makes Challenging C(sp3)-F Reductive Eliminations Feasible.

Zhao SB(1), Becker JJ, Gagné MR.

Author information: 
(1)Caudill Laboratories, Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3290, USA.

A high-yielding fluorination of (triphos)Pt-R(+) has been achieved using an array
of F(+) sources, with XeF(2) yielding R-F in minutes. The C-F coupling proved to 
be a stereoretentive process that proceeds via a concerted reductive elimination 
from a putative dicationic Pt(IV) center. The larger the steric congestion of the
(triphos)Pt-C(sp3) (+) complexes, the more efficient the fluorination, seemingly 
a result of sterically accelerated C-F reductive elimination along with
simultaneous deceleration of its competing processes (ß-H elimination).

PMCID: PMC3159157
PMID: 21869853  [PubMed]


151. BMC Cancer. 2011 Aug 24;11:371. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-11-371.

Betulinic acid inhibits colon cancer cell and tumor growth and induces
proteasome-dependent and -independent downregulation of specificity proteins (Sp)
transcription factors.

Chintharlapalli S(1), Papineni S, Lei P, Pathi S, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology & Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX 77843, USA.

BACKGROUND: Betulinic acid (BA) inhibits growth of several cancer cell lines and 
tumors and the effects of BA have been attributed to its mitochondriotoxicity and
inhibition of multiple pro-oncogenic factors. Previous studies show that BA
induces proteasome-dependent degradation of specificity protein (Sp)
transcription factors Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 in prostate cancer cells and this study
focused on the mechanism of action of BA in colon cancer cells.
METHODS: The effects of BA on colon cancer cell proliferation and apoptosis and
tumor growth in vivo were determined using standardized assays. The effects of BA
on Sp proteins and Sp-regulated gene products were analyzed by western blots, and
real time PCR was used to determine microRNA-27a (miR-27a) and ZBTB10 mRNA
expression.
RESULTS: BA inhibited growth and induced apoptosis in RKO and SW480 colon cancer 
cells and inhibited tumor growth in athymic nude mice bearing RKO cells as
xenograft. BA also decreased expression of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 transcription factors
which are overexpressed in colon cancer cells and decreased levels of several
Sp-regulated genes including survivin, vascular endothelial growth factor, p65
sub-unit of NF<U+03BA>B, epidermal growth factor receptor, cyclin D1, and pituitary
tumor transforming gene-1. The mechanism of action of BA was dependent on cell
context, since BA induced proteasome-dependent and proteasome-independent
downregulation of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 in SW480 and RKO cells, respectively. In RKO
cells, the mechanism of BA-induced repression of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 was due to
induction of reactive oxygen species (ROS), ROS-mediated repression of
microRNA-27a, and induction of the Sp repressor gene ZBTB10.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the anticancer activity of BA in colon
cancer cells is due, in part, to downregulation of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 transcription
factors; however, the mechanism of this response is cell context-dependent.

PMCID: PMC3170653
PMID: 21864401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Chem Soc Rev. 2012 Jan 21;41(2):931-42. doi: 10.1039/c1cs15104e. Epub 2011 Aug
15.

Recent advances in transition metal-catalyzed sp3 C-H amination adjacent to
double bonds and carbonyl groups.

Ramirez TA(1), Zhao B, Shi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523,
USA.

Transition metal-catalyzed C-H amination at positions adjacent to double bonds
and carbonyl groups is discussed in this critical review. While the focus will
center on the recent developments of a-oxidative amination, some historical
developments and mutually beneficial reports in the broader field of C-H
amination will be discussed. C-H amination has become a viable method for the
efficient installation of nitrogen atoms en route to target molecules (89
references).

PMID: 21842094  [PubMed]


153. Chem Asian J. 2011 Nov 4;6(11):3077-83. doi: 10.1002/asia.201100310. Epub 2011
Aug 10.

Combination of sp2- and sp3-type phosphorus atoms for gold chemistry:
preparation, structure, and catalytic activity of gold complexes that bear
ligated 2-silyl-1,3-diphosphapropenes.

Ito S(1), Zhai L, Mikami K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Tokyo
Institute of Technology, Tokyo 152-8552, Japan. ito.s.ao@m.titech.ac.jp

Kinetically protected 2-silyl-1,3-diphosphapropenes that bear both sp(2)- and
sp(3)-type phosphorus atoms were employed in the preparation of gold complexes.
The structural properties of the 1,3-diphosphapropene digold(I) complexes were
characterized by spectroscopic and crystallographic analyses, which revealed
unique aurophilic interactions and conformational properties of the ligand. The
2-silyl-1,3-diphosphapropene-bis(chlorogold) complexes catalyzed
cycloisomerization reactions of 1,6-enyne derivatives even in the absence of
silver co-catalyst, and were able to be recovered after the reaction. The
catalytic activity of the digold complexes primarily depended on the sp(2)-type
phosphorus atom and the silyl group, and could be tuned by the sp(3)-phosphino
group. Additionally, results on the catalytic activity of the digold complex in
the presence and absence of silver salts showed considerable differences.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21834098  [PubMed]


154. Dalton Trans. 2011 Sep 28;40(36):9094-7. doi: 10.1039/c1dt10577a. Epub 2011 Aug
10.

Iridium complexes bearing a PNP ligand, favoring facile C(sp3)-H bond cleavage.

Lokare KS(1), Nielsen RJ, Yousufuddin M, Goddard WA 3rd, Periana RA.

Author information: 
(1)The Scripps Research Institute, Scripps Florida, Jupiter, Florida 33458, USA. 
klokare@scripps.edu

Hydrogen iodide is lost upon reaction of PNP with IrI(3), where PNP =
2,6-bis-(di-t-butylphosphinomethyl)pyridine to give crystallographically
characterized Ir(PNP)*(I)(2), which reacts with H(2) to give Ir(PNP)(H)(I)(2).
Ir(PNP)(Cl)(3) is relatively inert towards the intramolecular C-H activation of
the tert-butyl's of the PNP ligand.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011

PMID: 21833386  [PubMed]


155. J Am Chem Soc. 2011 Sep 7;133(35):13774-7. doi: 10.1021/ja205912y. Epub 2011 Aug 
10.

Pinene-derived iminodiacetic acid (PIDA): a powerful ligand for stereoselective
synthesis and iterative cross-coupling of C(sp3) boronate building blocks.

Li J(1), Burke MD.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Roger Adams Laboratory, Department of
Chemistry, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 61801, USA.

Efficient access to chiral C(sp(3)) boronates in stereochemically pure form is
critical for realizing the substantial potential of such building blocks in
complex-molecule synthesis. We herein report that a pinene-derived iminodiacetic 
acid (PIDA) ligand enables the highly diastereoselective synthesis of a wide
range of oxiranyl C(sp(3)) boronates from the corresponding olefins. These
oxiranyl PIDA boronates, in turn, can be readily transformed into unprecedented
stable a-boryl aldehydes via a novel 1,2-migration of the boronate group that
proceeds with complete maintenance of stereochemical purity. B-Protected
haloboronic acids containing dual sp(3)-hybridized C centers are readily
accessible via this platform, and the herein demonstrated capacity for
stereocontrolled iterative C(sp(3)) cross-coupling with this novel type of
bifunctional reagent to access a medicinally important chiral small-molecule
target in highly enantioenriched form represents a substantial advance for the
building-block-based approach to synthesis.

PMCID: PMC3164213
PMID: 21823591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Bone. 2011 Oct;49(4):683-92. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2011.07.027. Epub 2011 Jul 28.

The transcriptional activity of osterix requires the recruitment of Sp1 to the
osteocalcin proximal promoter.

Niger C(1), Lima F, Yoo DJ, Gupta RR, Buo AM, Hebert C, Stains JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, University of Maryland, School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA. cniger@umoa.umm.edu

The transcription factor osterix (Osx/Sp7) is required for osteogenic
differentiation and bone formation in vivo. While Osx can act at canonical Sp1
DNA-binding sites and/or interact with NFATc1 to cooperatively regulate
transcription in some osteoblast promoters, little is known about the molecular
details by which Osx regulates osteocalcin (OCN) transcription. We previously
identified in the OCN proximal promoter a minimal C/T-rich motif, termed OCN-CxRE
(connexin-response element) that binds Sp1 and Sp3 in a gap junction-dependent
manner. In the present study, we hypothesized that Osx could act via this
non-canonical Sp1/Sp3-binding element to regulate OCN transcription. OCN promoter
luciferase reporter assays show that Osx alone is an insufficient activator that 
requires Sp1, but not Sp3, to synergistically stimulate OCN promoter activity.
Moreover, promoter deletion analyses demonstrate that both the Sp1/Sp3-binding
OCN-CxRE (-70 to -57) and the -92 to -87 region of the OCN proximal promoter are 
critical for Osx/Sp1 synergistic activities. Our data show that Sp1 influences
Osx activity by enhancing Osx occupancy on the OCN promoter, perhaps via physical
interactions between the two transcription factors. Finally, alteration of the
expression of the gap junction protein connexin43 modulates the recruitment of
both Sp1 and Osx to the OCN promoter. In total, our data are strongly in support 
of Sp1 as an essential transcription factor required for Osx recruitment and
transactivation of the OCN promoter. Further, these data lend insight into a
mechanism by which alteration of connexin43 impacts osteogenesis in vitro and in 
vivo.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3170016
PMID: 21820092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Nucleus. 2011 May-Jun;2(3):229-45. doi: 10.4161/nucl.2.3.15893.

The dynamics of the alternatively spliced NOL7 gene products and role in
nucleolar architecture.

Kinor N(1), Shav-Tal Y.

Author information: 
(1)The Mina & Everard Goodman Institute of Nanotechnology, Bar-Ilan University;
Ramat Gan, Israel.

Three alternatively spliced forms of the human NOL7 gene coding for relatively
small proteins were identified. The two shorter forms were generated by intron
retention events, and each isoform was differently localized within the cell. The
NOL7-SP1 long form (29 kD) localized to the nucleolus, SP2 was nucleoplasmic,
while SP3 was distributed throughout the whole cell. NOL7-SP1 was confined to the
nucleolar granular component, and during cell division disassociated from the
nucleolus. Knockdown of NOL7-SP1 levels abrogated nucleolar architecture, in
particular the internal regions, and reduced cell proliferation. Analysis of the 
nucleolar dynamics of the SP1 protein during interphase showed nucleolar high
binding affinity. Dissection of protein domains showed that nucleolar targeting
was mediated by a unique C-terminal nucleolar localization sequence (NoLS).
However, this sequence was not sufficient for conferring high binding affinity,
which required additional regions of the protein. Our analysis shows that NOL7 is
important for maintaining internal nucleolar structure and cell growth rates, and
that while specific protein localization can be obtained by specific short
localization motifs, nucleolar residency through binding must be mediated by a
synergistic combination of protein modules.

PMCID: PMC3149883
PMID: 21818416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Org Lett. 2011 Sep 2;13(17):4692-5. doi: 10.1021/ol201907w. Epub 2011 Aug 3.

Ir(I)-catalyzed enantioselective secondary sp3 C-H bond activation of
2-(alkylamino)pyridines with alkenes.

Pan S(1), Endo K, Shibata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, School of Advanced Science and
Engineering, Waseda University, Shinjuku, Tokyo, 169-8555, Japan.

A cationic Ir(I)-tolBINAP complex catalyzed an enantioselective C-C bond
formation initiated by secondary sp(3) C-H bond cleavage adjacent to a nitrogen
atom. The reaction of 2-(alkylamino)pyridines with various alkenes gave chiral
amines in good yields with high enantiomeric excesses.

PMID: 21812393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Synthesis (Stuttg). 2011 Aug;2011(16):2579-2589.

Palladium-Catalyzed Ligand-Directed Oxidative Functionalization of Cyclopropanes.

Kubota A(1), Sanford MS(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Michigan, Department of Chemistry, 930 N. University Ave, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

This report describes the Pd-catalyzed functionalization of cyclopropanes
containing oxazoline, oxime ether, and pyridine directing groups. Three different
oxidants were examined in these studies: IOAc, PhI(OAc)2, and benzoquinone. The
reactions yielded products derived from 2° sp(3) C-H functionalization and/or C-C
activation of the cyclopropane ring. The outcome and the product distributions
were highly dependent on the structure of the substrate and the nature of the
oxidant.

PMCID: PMC4386895
PMID: 25861123  [PubMed]


160. J Am Chem Soc. 2011 Aug 24;133(33):12984-6. doi: 10.1021/ja206002m. Epub 2011 Aug
3.

Palladium-catalyzed direct ethynylation of C(sp3)-H bonds in aliphatic carboxylic
acid derivatives.

Ano Y(1), Tobisu M, Chatani N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Chemistry, Faculty of Engineering, Osaka University,
Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

The first catalytic alkynylation of unactivated C(sp(3))-H bonds has been
accomplished. The method allows for the straightforward introduction of an
ethynyl group into aliphatic acid derivatives under palladium catalysis. This new
reaction can be applied to the rapid elaboration of complex aliphatic acids, for 
example, via azide/alkyne cycloaddition.

PMID: 21790123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2011 Oct;301(4):L427-40. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00090.2011. Epub 2011 Jul 22.

Thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) gene: identification of ZBP-89, Sp1, and
TTF-1 sites in the promoter and regulation by TNF-a in lung epithelial cells.

Das A(1), Acharya S, Gottipati KR, McKnight JB, Chandru H, Alcorn JL, Boggaram V.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biomedical Research, The University of Texas Health Center at
Tyler, 75708-3154, USA.

Erratum in
    Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2011 Dec;301(6):L1003.

Thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1/Nkx2.1/TITF1) is a homeodomain-containing
transcription factor essential for the morphogenesis and differentiation of the
lung. In the lung, TTF-1 controls the expression of surfactant proteins that are 
essential for lung stability and lung host defense. In this study, we identified 
functionally important transcription factor binding sites in the TTF-1 proximal
promoter and studied tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) regulation of TTF-1
expression. TNF-a, a proinflammatory cytokine, has been implicated in the
pathogenesis of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and inhibits
surfactant protein levels. Deletion analysis of TTF-1 5'-flanking DNA indicated
that the TTF-1 proximal promoter retained high-level activity. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assay, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and mutational analysis
experiments identified functional ZBP-89, Sp1, Sp3, and TTF-1 sites in the TTF-1 
proximal promoter. TNF-a inhibited TTF-1 protein levels in H441 and primary
alveolar type II cells. TNF-a inhibited TTF-1 gene transcription and promoter
activity, indicating that transcriptional mechanisms play important roles in the 
inhibition of TTF-1 levels. TNF-a inhibited TTF-1 but not Sp1 or hepatocyte
nuclear factor-3 DNA binding to TTF-1 promoter. Transactivation experiments in
A549 cells indicated that TNF-a inhibited TTF-1 promoter activation by exogenous 
Sp1 and TTF-1 without altering their levels, suggesting inhibition of
transcriptional activities of these proteins. TNF-a inhibition of TTF-1
expression was associated with increased threonine, but not serine,
phosphorylation of Sp1. Because TTF-1 serves as a positive regulator for
surfactant protein gene expression, TNF-a inhibition of TTF-1 expression could
have important implications for the reduction of surfactant protein levels in
diseases such as ARDS.

PMCID: PMC3191750
PMID: 21784970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2011 Sep 5;50(37):8614-7. doi: 10.1002/anie.201103450.
Epub 2011 Jul 19.

Stereospecific palladium-catalyzed decarboxylative C(sp3)-C(sp2) coupling of
2,5-cyclohexadiene-1-carboxylic acid derivatives with aryl iodides.

Chou CM(1), Chatterjee I, Studer A.

Author information: 
(1)Organisch-Chemisches Institut, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität,
Corrensstrasse 40, 48149 Münster, Germany.

PMID: 21774047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Mol Biol. 2011 Sep 2;411(5):1017-36. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.06.035. Epub 2011 
Jul 13.

The overall architecture and receptor binding of pneumococcal
carbohydrate-antigen-hydrolyzing enzymes.

Higgins MA(1), Ficko-Blean E, Meloncelli PJ, Lowary TL, Boraston AB.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, PO Box 3055 STN CSC,
Victoria, BC, Canada V8W 3P6.

The TIGR4 and SP3-BS71 strains of Streptococcus pneumoniae each produce family 98
glycoside hydrolases, called Sp4GH98 and Sp3GH98, respectively, which have
different modular architectures and substrate specificities. Sp4GH98 degrades the
Lewis(Y) antigen and possesses three C-terminal family 47 carbohydrate-binding
modules (CBMs) that bind to this substrate. Sp3GH98 degrades the blood group A/B 
antigens and has two N-terminal family 51 CBMs that are of unknown function.
Here, we examine the complex carbohydrate-binding specificity of the family 51
CBMs from Sp3GH98 (referred to as CBM51-1 and CBM51-2), the structural basis of
this interaction, and the overall solution conformations of both Sp3GH98 and
Sp4GH98, which are shown to be fully secreted proteins. Through glycan microarray
binding analysis and isothermal titration calorimetry, CBM51-1 is found to bind
specifically to the blood group A/B antigens. However, due to a series of
relatively small structural rearrangements that were revealed in structures
determined by X-ray crystallography, CBM51-2 appears to be incapable of binding
carbohydrates. Analysis of small-angle X-ray scattering data in combination with 
the available high-resolution X-ray crystal structures of the Sp3GH98 and Sp4GH98
catalytic modules and their CBMs yielded models of the biological solution
structures of the full-length enzymes. These studies reveal the complex
architectures of the two enzymes and suggest that carbohydrate recognition by the
CBMs and the activity of the catalytic modules are not directly coupled.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21767550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Oncogene. 2012 Feb 23;31(8):1034-44. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.296. Epub 2011 Jul 18.

Identification of oncogenic microRNA-17-92/ZBTB4/specificity protein axis in
breast cancer.

Kim K(1), Chadalapaka G, Lee SO, Yamada D, Sastre-Garau X, Defossez PA, Park YY, 
Lee JS, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center,
Houston, TX 77843, USA.

The human POK family members are transcription factors with a POZ domain and
zinc-fingers that act primarily as transcriptional repressors. Several members of
this family are involved in oncogenesis and this prompted us to assess whether
expression levels of individual POK family members are associated with clinical
outcomes in cancer. We have observed that ZBTB4 (zinc-finger and BTB domain
containing 4) is downregulated in breast cancer patients, and that its expression
is significantly correlated with relapse-free survival. Further integrative
analysis of mRNA and microRNA (miR) expression data from the NCI-60 cell lines
revealed an inverse correlation between ZBTB4 and oncogenic miRs derived from the
miR-17-92 cluster and its paralogs. The experimental results using MDA-MB-231 and
MCF-7 human breast cancer cells confirm that miRNAs derived from these clusters, 
containing miR-17-5p, miR-20a, miR-106a, miR-106b and miR-93, negatively regulate
ZBTB4 expression. Overexpression of ZBTB4 or restoration of ZBTB4 by using an
antagomir inhibit growth and invasion of breast cancer cells, and this effect is 
due, in part, to ZBTB4-dependent repression of the specificity protein 1 (Sp1),
Sp3 and Sp4 genes, and subsequent downregulation of several Sp-dependent
oncogenes, in part, through competition between ZBTB4 and Sp transcription
factors for GC-rich promoter sequences. These results confirm that ZBTB4
functions as a novel tumor-suppressor gene with prognostic significance for
breast cancer survival, and the oncogenic miR-17-92/ZBTB4/Sp axis may be a
potential therapeutic target.

PMCID: PMC3288192
PMID: 21765466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2011 Aug 28;13(32):14565-70. doi: 10.1039/c1cp20435a. Epub
2011 Jul 13.

Body-centered tetragonal B2N2: a novel sp3 bonding boron nitride polymorph.

Wen B(1), Zhao J, Melnik R, Tian Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Metastable Materials, Science and Technology, Yanshan 
University, Qinhuangdao 066004, China. wenbin@ysu.edu.cn

A novel polymorph of boron nitride (BN) with a body-centered tetragonal structure
(bct-BN) has been predicted using first-principles calculations. The structural, 
vibrational, and mechanical calculations indicated that bct-BN is mechanically
stable at zero pressure. When pressure is above 6 GPa, bct-BN becomes
energetically more stable than h-BN. The bct-BN appears to be an intermediate
phase between h-BN and w-BN due to a low energy barrier from h-BN to w-BN via
bct-BN. Our results also indicated that the structure of unknown E-BN phase might
be bct-BN.

PMID: 21750815  [PubMed]


166. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Oct;1809(10):541-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2011.06.011.
Epub 2011 Jul 1.

Functional characterization of the proximal promoter of the murine pyruvate
carboxylase gene in hepatocytes: role of multiple gc boxes.

Rojvirat P(1), Chavalit T, Muangsawat S, Thonpho A, Jitrapakdee S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Metabolism Research Group, Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of
Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok 10400, Thailand.

Pyruvate carboxylase (PC) catalyzes the first committed step in gluconeogenesis
in the liver. The murine PC gene possesses two promoters, the proximal (P1) and
the distal (P2) which mediate production of distinct tissue-specific mRNA
isoforms. By comparing the luciferase activities of 5'-nested deletions of the
P1-promoter in the AML12 mouse hepatocyte cell line, the critical cis-acting
elements required for maintaining basal transcription were located within the 166
nucleotides proximal to the transcription start site. Three GC boxes were
identified within this region and shown by gel shift and ChIP assays to bind
Sp1/Sp3. Over-expression of Sp1/Sp3 in AML12 and NIH3T3 cells increased
P1-promoter activity, with Sp1 being a stronger activator than Sp3. Mutation of
any one of the three GC boxes dramatically reduced basal promoter activity by
60-80% suggesting that all three boxes are equally strong regulatory elements. In
AML12 cells, over-expression of Sp1/Sp3 restored the transcriptional activity of 
GC1 and GC2 but not GC3 mutants to levels similar to that of the WT construct,
suggesting that GC3 is particularly critical for Sp1/Sp3-mediated induction. In
NIH3T3 cells, however, the three boxes were equally important, indicating that
the GC boxes differentially contribute to transcriptional regulation of the
P1-promoter in the two cell lines. Mutants harboring two disrupted GC boxes
showed a further decrease in promoter activity similar to the triple GC box
mutant. Neither Sp1 nor Sp3 was able to fully restore the promoter activities of 
these mutants to that the WT level.

2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21745612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2011 Aug 8;50(33):7666-9. doi: 10.1002/anie.201101806.
Epub 2011 Jun 29.

Double C-H bond activation of C(sp3)H2 groups for the preparation of complexes
with back-to-back bisimidazolinylidenes.

Prades A(1), Poyatos M, Mata JA, Peris E.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Inorgánica y Orgánica, Universitat Jaume I, Avenida
Sos Baynat, 12071 Castellón, Spain.

PMID: 21717539  [PubMed]


168. Science. 2011 Jun 24;332(6037):1545-8. doi: 10.1126/science.1200514.

Net oxidative addition of C(sp3)-F bonds to iridium via initial C-H bond
activation.

Choi J(1), Wang DY, Kundu S, Choliy Y, Emge TJ, Krogh-Jespersen K, Goldman AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Rutgers, State University of New
Jersey, New Brunswick, NJ 08903, USA.

Carbon-fluorine bonds are the strongest known single bonds to carbon and as a
consequence can prove very hard to cleave. Alhough vinyl and aryl C-F bonds can
undergo oxidative addition to transition metal complexes, this reaction has
appeared inoperable with aliphatic substrates. We report the addition of
C(sp(3))-F bonds (including alkyl-F) to an iridium center via the initial,
reversible cleavage of a C-H bond. These results suggest a distinct strategy for 
the development of catalysts and promoters to make and break C-F bonds, which are
of strong interest in the context of both pharmaceutical and environmental
chemistry.

PMID: 21700870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Org Chem. 2011 Aug 5;76(15):6057-66. doi: 10.1021/jo200637g. Epub 2011 Jul 6.

Vicinal 1H-1H NMR coupling constants from density functional theory as reliable
tools for stereochemical analysis of highly flexible multichiral center
molecules.

López-Vallejo F(1), Fragoso-Serrano M, Suárez-Ortiz GA, Hernández-Rojas AC,
Cerda-García-Rojas CM, Pereda-Miranda R.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química y Programa de Posgrado en Farmacologi´a, Centro de
Investigación y de Estudios Avanzados del Instituto Politécnico Nacional, A.P.
14-470, México, D. F. 07000 Mexico.

A protocol for stereochemical analysis, based on the systematic comparison
between theoretical and experimental vicinal (1)H-(1)H NMR coupling constants,
was developed and applied to a series of flexible compounds (1-8) derived from
the 6-heptenyl-5,6-dihydro-2H-pyran-2-one framework. The method included a broad 
conformational search, followed by geometry optimization at the DFT B3LYP/DGDZVP 
level, calculation of the vibrational frequencies, thermochemical parameters,
magnetic shielding tensors, and the total NMR spin-spin coupling constants. Three
scaling factors, depending on the carbon atom hybridizations, were found for the 
(1)H-C-C-(1)H vicinal coupling constants: f((sp3)-(sp3)) = 0.910, f((sp3)-(sp2)) 
= 0.929, and f((sp2)-(sp2))= 0.977. A remarkable correlation between the
theoretical (J(pre)) and experimental (1)H-(1)H NMR (J(exp)) coupling constants
for spicigerolide (1), a cytotoxic natural product, and some of its synthetic
stereoisomers (2-4) demonstrated the predictive value of this approach for the
stereochemical assignment of highly flexible compounds containing multiple chiral
centers. The stereochemistry of two natural
6-heptenyl-5,6-dihydro-2H-pyran-2-ones (14 and 15) containing diverse functional 
groups in the heptenyl side chain was also analyzed by application of this
combined theoretical and experimental approach, confirming its reliability.
Additionally, a geometrical analysis for the conformations of 1-8 revealed that
weak hydrogen bonds substantially guide the conformational behavior of the
tetraacyloxy-6-heptenyl-2H-pyran-2-ones.

PMID: 21692472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2011 Jul 25;50(31):7119-23. doi: 10.1002/anie.201101088. 
Epub 2011 Jun 17.

C(sp3)-O bond-forming reductive elimination of ethers from bisphosphine-ligated
benzylpalladium(II) aryloxide complexes.

Marquard SL(1), Hartwig JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL
61801, USA.

PMID: 21688359  [PubMed]


171. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2011 Sep;17(5):303-7. doi: 10.1097/MCP.0b013e3283486d52.

Sarcoidosis and interstitial pulmonary fibrosis; two distinct disorders or two
ends of the same spectrum.

Shigemitsu H(1), Azuma A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary & Critical Care Medicine, University of Southern
California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 91024, USA.
hshigemi@usc.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Pulmonary fibrosis is a reparative response characterized by
accumulation of extracellular matrix in the lung parenchyma that may be observed 
in end-stage sarcoidosis. This article will discuss the recent advancements in
the understanding of the pathogenesis of pulmonary fibrosis in sarcoidosis in
comparison with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF)/usual interstitial pneumonia 
(UIP).
RECENT FINDINGS: A recent study examined clinical, radiographic, and
histopathologic findings of end-stage sarcoidosis patients with lung fibrosis who
underwent lung transplantation. The authors found many of the patients to have
moderate-to-severe interstitial pneumonitis in some cases with UIP considered to 
be atypical of end-stage sarcoidosis. Furthermore, these patients had diagnosis
of sarcoidosis for a shorter time prior to transplant compared with individuals
without interstitial pneumonitis (mean 4.8 years vs. 23.3 years). Another study
found a promoter polymorphism in prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (PTGS2),
-765G>C, to be associated with susceptibility and increased risk for pulmonary
fibrosis in sarcoidosis in the white population compared with healthy controls.
An altered Sp1/Sp3 binding to the -765 region has been proposed as a possible
mechanism for reduced PTGS2 expression.
SUMMARY: A subset of patients with sarcoidosis that progresses to pulmonary
fibrosis may share some similar mechanistic and morphologic aberrations with
IPF/UIP. Future studies are needed to examine the significance of chronic
interstitial pneumonitits and UIP pattern in fibrotic sarcoidosis as a potential 
marker for progressive disease, and the roles of PTGS2 polymorphism in various
ethnic groups and Sp1/Sp3 binding in other fibrotic lung diseases.

PMID: 21681100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Am Chem Soc. 2011 Jul 13;133(27):10340-3. doi: 10.1021/ja203875d. Epub 2011 Jun
17.

sp3 C-H bond activation with ruthenium(II) catalysts and C(3)-alkylation of
cyclic amines.

Sundararaju B(1), Achard M, Sharma GV, Bruneau C.

Author information: 
(1)UMR6226 CNRS-Université de Rennes, Sciences chimiques de Rennes, Catalyse et
Organométalliques, Campus de Beaulieu, 35042 Rennes Cedex, France.

A selective C(3)-alkylation via activation/functionalization of sp(3) C-H bond of
saturated cyclic amines was promoted by (arene)ruthenium(II) complexes featuring 
a bidentate phosphino-sulfonate ligand upon reaction with aldehydes. This highly 
regioselective sustainable transformation takes place via initial dehydrogenation
of cyclic amines and hydrogen autotransfer processes.

PMID: 21671630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Mol Pain. 2011 Jun 6;7:44. doi: 10.1186/1744-8069-7-44.

Transcription factors Sp1 and Sp4 regulate TRPV1 gene expression in rat sensory
neurons.

Chu C(1), Zavala K, Fahimi A, Lee J, Xue Q, Eilers H, Schumacher MA.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, San Francisco Department of Anesthesia and
Perioperative Care 513 Parnassus Ave, Rm, S436, University of California, San
Francisco 94143-0427, USA.

BACKGROUND: The capsaicin receptor, transient receptor potential vanilloid type
-1 (TRPV1) directs complex roles in signal transduction including the detection
of noxious stimuli arising from cellular injury and inflammation. Under
pathophysiologic conditions, TRPV1 mRNA and receptor protein expression are
elevated in dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons for weeks to months and is
associated with hyperalgesia. Building on our previous isolation of a promoter
system for the rat TRPV1 gene, we investigated the proximal TRPV1 P2-promoter by 
first identifying candidate Sp1-like transcription factors bound in vivo to the
P2-promoter using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay. We then performed
deletion analysis of GC-box binding sites, and quantified promoter activity under
conditions of Sp1 / Sp4 over-expression versus inhibition/knockdown. mRNA
encoding Sp1, Sp4 and TRPV1 were quantified by qRT-PCR under conditions of
Sp1/Sp4 over-expression or siRNA mediated knockdown in cultured DRG neurons.
RESULTS: Using ChIP analysis of DRG tissue, we demonstrated that Sp1 and Sp4 are 
bound to the candidate GC-box site region within the endogenous TRPV1
P2-promoter. Deletion of GC-box "a" or "a + b" within the P2- promoter resulted
in a complete loss of transcriptional activity indicating that GC-box "a" was the
critical site for promoter activation. Co-transfection of Sp1 increased
P2-promoter activity in cultured DRG neurons whereas mithramycin-a, an inhibitor 
of Sp1-like function, dose dependently blocked NGF and Sp1-dependent promoter
activity in PC12 cells. Co-transfection of siRNA directed against Sp1 or Sp4
decreased promoter activity in DRG neurons and NGF treated PC12 cells. Finally,
electroporation of Sp1 or Sp4 cDNA into cultures of DRG neurons directed an
increase in Sp1/Sp4 mRNA and importantly an increase in TRPV1 mRNA. Conversely,
combined si-RNA directed knockdown of Sp1/Sp4 resulted in a decrease in TRPV1
mRNA.
CONCLUSION: Based on these studies, we now propose a model of TRPV1 expression
that is dependent on Sp1-like transcription factors with Sp4 playing a
predominant role in activating TRPV1 RNA transcription in DRG neurons. Given that
increases of TRPV1 expression have been implicated in a wide range of
pathophysiologic states including persistent painful conditions, blockade of
Sp1-like transcription factors represents a novel direction in therapeutic
strategies.

PMCID: PMC3121596
PMID: 21645329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Phys Chem Lett. 2011 Jun 2;2(11):1310-4. doi: 10.1021/jz200398d. Epub 2011 May 
13.

Stability and Properties of Two-Dimensional Graphene Hydroxide.

Zhu Q(1), Lu YH(1), Jiang JZ(1).

Author information: 
(1)International Center for New-Structured Materials (ICNSM) and Laboratory of
New-Structured Materials (LNSM), Department of Materials Science and Engineering,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, P. R. China.

Systematic study of interaction between graphene and hydroxyls is carried out by 
first-principles calculations. Although single hydroxyl adsorbed on graphene
presents magnetic properties, hydroxyls prefer to adsorb on graphene in pairs
without magnetic properties. The formation energy of hydroxyl pairs with graphene
is coverage-dependent, and the most stable structure is half-covered by hydroxyl 
pairs along zigzag chains with alternative sp2 and sp3 hybridization between
carbon atoms. The bandgap of this structure is 0.97 eV in GW approximation, close
to the bandgap of Si, and this structure is stable at room temperature. It is
possible to build graphene-based electronic circuits from graphene hydroxide
without the need for cutting or etching.

PMID: 26295426  [PubMed]


175. Chem Commun (Camb). 2011 Jul 7;47(25):7224-6. doi: 10.1039/c1cc11193k. Epub 2011 
May 27.

Arylation of a-pivaloxyl ketones with arylboronic reagents via Ni-catalyzed sp3
C-O activation.

Huang K(1), Li G, Huang WP, Yu DG, Shi ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing National Laboratory of Molecular Sciences (BNLMS), College of
Chemistry and Green Chemistry Center, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

A Suzuki-Miyaura coupling of a-pivaloxyl ketones via Ni-catalyzed sp(3) C-O
activation to produce a-aryl ketones is developed. This study offers a convenient
method to construct a-arylation products from readily available a-hydroxyl
carbonyl compounds.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011

PMID: 21623433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Feb;39(2):1479-86. doi: 10.1007/s11033-011-0885-0. Epub 2011
May 22.

Transcriptional control of human CD2AP expression: the role of Sp1 and Sp3.

Xu HG(1), Ren W, Zou L, Wang Y, Jin R, Zhou GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University, 300 Guang Zhou Road, Nanjing 210029, Jiangsu Province, China.

The CD2 associated protein (CD2AP) is characterized as a T-lymphocyte CD2 adapter
protein and is found to be related to glomerulosclerosis, and CD2AP knockout mice
develop a rapid onset nephrotic syndrome and die of renal failure. Here we report
that the transcription factor Sp1 and Sp3 up-regulate the basal transcriptional
activity of CD2AP and increase CD2AP expression at mRNA level. We show by
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay that Sp1 and Sp3 interact with the
CD2AP promoter region in vivo. By transient transfection analysis we also
demonstrate the mutations of Sp1/3 binding sites result in a profound reduction
of CD2AP promoter activity. Overexpression of Sp1 and Sp3 transactivates the
CD2AP promoter, whereas small interfering RNA-mediated (siRNA) blockage of Sp1
and Sp3 genes expressions inhibits markedly its activity. These results suggest
that Sp1 and Sp3 play an important role in regulating CD2AP transcription through
binding to the Sp1/3 binding sites.

PMID: 21604172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Org Lett. 2011 Jun 17;13(12):3254-7. doi: 10.1021/ol2012007. Epub 2011 May 20.

Ruthenium-catalyzed conversion of sp3 C-O bonds in ethers to C-C bonds using
triarylboroxines.

Ogiwara Y(1), Kochi T, Kakiuchi F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science and Technology, Keio University,
3-14-1 Hiyoshi, Yokohama, Kanagawa 223-8522, Japan.

Catalytic conversion of unreactive sp(3) C-O bonds in alkyl ethers to C-C bonds
is described. Alkyl ethers bearing 2- or 4-pyridyl groups were coupled with
triarylboroxines in the presence of a ruthenium catalyst. Triarylboroxines
bearing a variety of functional groups including electron-withdrawing and
-donating groups can be used for the reaction. No additional base was required
for the coupling with the organoboron reagents, and base-sensitive groups can be 
tolerated. The reaction is considered to proceed via dehydroalkoxylation followed
by addition of triarylboroxines to form C-C bonds.

© 2011 American Chemical Society

PMID: 21598994  [PubMed]


178. Zhonghua Kou Qiang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Mar;46(3):165-7.

[Relationship between Sp3 and the transcriptional regulation of enamelin gene].

[Article in Chinese]

Lü P(1), Tian H, Gao XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cariology and Endodontology, Peking University School, Beijing
100081, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of Sp3 in the transcriptional regulation of
enamelin gene.
METHODS: By bioinformatic analysis, a putative responsive element for Sp3 was
identified. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay was used to examine the
interaction between Sp3 and enamelin. 5'-flanking regulatory region of enamelin
was cloned and ligated into pGL3-basic luciferase vector. Sp3 and the Enam-luc
were cotransfected into mouse ameloblast-like cell line, and the activity of
luciferase was examined.
RESULTS: The results showed that Sp3 could not directly bind to the enamelin
regulation region and activate enamelin transcription.
CONCLUSIONS: Sp3 might not be involved in transcriptional regulation of enamelin 
gene via an indirect interaction.

PMID: 21575439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Am J Clin Pathol. 2011 Jun;135(6):845-51. doi: 10.1309/AJCPIP5LOO3NGDJG.

A comparison of equivocal immunohistochemical results with anti-HER2/neu
antibodies A0485 and SP3 with corresponding FISH results in routine clinical
practice.

Manion E(1), Hornick JL, Lester SC, Brock JE.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 75 Francis St., Boston, MA
02115, USA.

HER2/neu status in breast cancer is determined by immunohistochemical analysis
and/or fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Previous studies have found
widely varying sensitivities and specificities for anti-HER2/neu antibodies,
including recently developed rabbit monoclonal antibodies. The current
prospective study compared rabbit monoclonal antibody SP3 and rabbit polyclonal
antibody A0485 immunostaining on routinely processed consecutive cases of breast 
carcinoma. Of 1,610 cases tested, 261 (16.2%) equivocal (2+) cases were evaluated
by FISH. Of 253 cases equivocal with A0485 results, 125 (49.4%) were negative
with SP3. In 22 (8.7%) of 253 cases equivocal with A0485, there was amplification
by FISH, and 3 of these cases were SP3- (0/1+). Of the 20 (14.8%) of 135
SP3-equivocal cases amplified by FISH, 1 case was A0485-. The reported
false-negative rate with A0485 is 2.8%, and the American Society of Clinical
Oncology/College of American Pathologists guidelines recommend a rate of less
than 5%. Compared with A0485, the false-negative rate with SP3 is only 0.3%
(3/1,156) higher, but it shows about a 50% reduction in equivocal scores,
reducing the need for reflex FISH testing.

PMID: 21571957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jun 3;409(2):222-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.04.127. Epub 2011 Apr 30.

Accessible chromatin structure permits factors Sp1 and Sp3 to regulate human
TGFBI gene expression.

Lee JJ(1), Park K, Shin MH, Yang WJ, Song MJ, Park JH, Yong TS, Kim EK, Kim HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medical Biology, Institute of Tropical Medicine,
Brain Korea 21 Project for Medical Science, Yonsei University College of
Medicine, 250 Seongsanno, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 120-752, Republic of Korea.

Transforming growth factor beta 1-induced (TGFBI) protein is an extracellular
matrix (ECM) protein that is associated with other ECM proteins and functions as 
a ligand for various types of integrins. In this study, we investigated how human
TGFBI expression is regulated in lung and breast cancer cells. We observed that
the TGFBI promoter in A549 and MBA-MD-231 cells, which constitutively express
TGFBI, existed in an open chromatin conformation associated with
transcriptionally permissive histone modifications. Moreover, we found that TGFBI
expression required Sp1 transcription elements that can bind transcription
factors Sp1 and Sp3 in vitro. Occupancy of the TGFBI promoter by Sp1 and Sp3 in
vivo was only observed in TGFBI-expressing cells, indicating that open chromatin 
conformation might facilitate the binding of Sp1 and Sp3 to the TGFBI promoter
region. TGFBI promoter activity was impaired when Sp1 elements were mutated, but 
was increased when Sp1 or Sp3 factors was overexpressed. Furthermore, Sp1
inhibition in vivo by mithramycin A, as well as knockdown of Sp1 and/or Sp3
expression by short interfering RNA, significantly reduced TGFBI mRNA and protein
levels. Thus, our data demonstrated that the expression of TGFBI is well
correlated with chromatin conformation at the TGFBI promoter, and that factors
Sp1 and Sp3 are the primary determinants for the control of constitutive
expression of TGFBI gene.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21554857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Exp Hematol. 2011 Jul;39(7):730-40.e1-2. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2011.04.004. Epub 
2011 Apr 23.

Differential regulation of sense and antisense promoter activity at the Csf1R
locus in B cells by the transcription factor PAX5.

Ingram RM(1), Valeaux S, Wilson N, Bouhlel MA, Clarke D, Krüger I, Kulu D, Suske 
G, Philipsen S, Tagoh H, Bonifer C.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Experimental Haematology, Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.

OBJECTIVE: The transcription factor PAX5 is essential for the activation of
B-cell-specific genes and for the silencing of myeloid-specific genes. We
previously determined the molecular mechanism by which PAX5 silences the
myeloid-specific colony-stimulating-factor-receptor (Csf1R) gene and showed that 
PAX5 directly binds to the Csf1r promoter as well as to an intronic enhancer that
generates an antisense transcript in B cells. Here we examine the role of PAX5 in
the regulation of sense and antisense transcription in B cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We performed PAX5-specific chromatin immunoprecipitation
analyses across the Csfr1 locus. We investigated the role of PAX5 in regulating
Csf1r sense and antisense promoter activity by transient transfections and by
employing a Pax5(-/-) pro-B-cell line expressing an inducible PAX5 protein. PAX5 
interacting factors were identified by pull-down experiments. The role of the
transcription factor Sp3 in driving antisense promoter expression was examined in
B cells from Sp3 knockout mice.
RESULTS: PAX5 differentially regulates the Csf1r promoter and the promoter of the
antisense transcript. PAX5 interferes with PU.1 transactivation at the sense
promoter by binding to a PAX5 consensus sequence. At the antisense promoter, PAX5
does not specifically recognize DNA, but interacts with Sp3 to upregulate
antisense promoter activity. Antisense promoter activation by PAX5 is dependent
on the presence of its partial homeo-domain.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate that PAX5 regulates Csf1r in B cells by reducing the 
frequency of binding of the basal transcription machinery to the promoter and by 
activating antisense RNA expression.

Copyright © 2011 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21549805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. J Am Chem Soc. 2011 Jun 1;133(21):8070-3. doi: 10.1021/ja2001709. Epub 2011 May
10.

Highly regioselective carbonylation of unactivated C(sp3)-H bonds by ruthenium
carbonyl.

Hasegawa N(1), Charra V, Inoue S, Fukumoto Y, Chatani N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Chemistry, Faculty of Engineering, Osaka University,
Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

The regioselective carbonylation of unactivated C(sp(3))-H bonds of aliphatic
amides was achieved using Ru(3)(CO)(12) as a catalyst. The presence of a
2-pyridinylmethylamine moiety in the amide is crucial for a successful reaction. 
The reaction shows a preference for C-H bonds of methyl groups as opposed to
methylene C-H bonds and tolerates a variety of functional groups. The
stoichiometric reaction of an amide with Ru(3)(CO)(12) gave a dinuclear ruthenium
complex in which the 2-pyridinylmethylamino moiety was coordinated to the
ruthenium center in an N,N manner.

© 2011 American Chemical Society

PMID: 21542614  [PubMed]


183. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2011 May 23;50(22):5192-6. doi: 10.1002/anie.201100984.
Epub 2011 Apr 27.

A practical strategy for the structural diversification of aliphatic scaffolds
through the palladium-catalyzed picolinamide-directed remote functionalization of
unactivated C(sp3)-H bonds.

He G(1), Chen G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
PA 16802, USA.

PMID: 21538752  [PubMed]


184. J Am Chem Soc. 2011 Jun 22;133(24):9204-7. doi: 10.1021/ja2024959. Epub 2011 May 
4.

Palladium-catalyzed synthesis of benzosilolo[2,3-b]indoles via cleavage of a
C(sp3)-Si bond and consequent intramolecular C(sp2)-Si coupling.

Liang Y(1), Zhang S, Xi Z.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences and Key Laboratory of
Bioorganic Chemistry and Molecular Engineering of the Ministry of Education,
College of Chemistry, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

An efficient process involving Pd-catalyzed selective cleavage of a C(sp(3))-Si
bond and consequent intramolecular C(sp(2))-Si coupling has been developed,
affording benzosilolo[2,3-b]indoles as a new type of silicon-bridged
polyheteroarene in excellent yields. Aldehyde was found for the first time to be 
able to promote the efficiency of the catalytic process remarkably.

PMID: 21517096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Cell Sci. 2011 May 15;124(Pt 10):1681-90. doi: 10.1242/jcs.077552. Epub 2011
Apr 21.

TALE homeodomain proteins regulate site-specific terminal differentiation, LCE
genes and epidermal barrier.

Jackson B(1), Brown SJ, Avilion AA, O'Shaughnessy RF, Sully K, Akinduro O, Murphy
M, Cleary ML, Byrne C.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cutaneous Research, Blizard Institute, Barts and The London School 
of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London E1 2AT, UK.

The epidermal barrier varies over the body surface to accommodate regional
environmental stresses. Regional skin barrier variation is produced by
site-dependent epidermal differentiation from common keratinocyte precursors and 
often manifests as site-specific skin disease or irritation. There is strong
evidence for body-site-dependent dermal programming of epidermal differentiation 
in which the epidermis responds by altering expression of key barrier proteins,
but the underlying mechanisms have not been defined. The LCE multigene cluster
encodes barrier proteins that are differentially expressed over the body surface,
and perturbation of LCE cluster expression is linked to the common regional skin 
disease psoriasis. LCE subclusters comprise genes expressed variably in either
external barrier-forming epithelia (e.g. skin) or in internal epithelia with less
stringent barriers (e.g. tongue). We demonstrate here that a complex of TALE
homeobox transcription factors PBX1, PBX2 and Pknox (homologues of Drosophila
Extradenticle and Homothorax) preferentially regulate external rather than
internal LCE gene expression, competitively binding with SP1 and SP3.
Perturbation of TALE protein expression in stratified squamous epithelia in mice 
produces external but not internal barrier abnormalities. We conclude that
epidermal barrier genes, such as the LCE multigene cluster, are regulated by TALE
homeodomain transcription factors to produce regional epidermal barriers.

PMCID: PMC3183491
PMID: 21511732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Chem Soc Rev. 2011 Oct;40(10):4902-11. doi: 10.1039/c1cs15058h. Epub 2011 Apr 20.

Transition metal-catalyzed arylation of unactivated C(sp3)-H bonds.

Baudoin O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS UMR 5246-Institut de Chimie et
Biochimie Moléculaires et Supramoléculaires, CPE Lyon, 43 Boulevard du 11
Novembre 1918, 69622 Villeurbanne, France. olivier.baudoin@univ-lyon1.fr

Transition-metal-catalyzed C-H bond arylation has recently emerged as a powerful 
tool for the functionalization of organic molecules that may complement or even
replace traditional catalytic cross-couplings. While many efforts have focused on
the arylation of arenes and heteroarenes in the past two decades, less studies
have been devoted to the arylation of nonacidic C-H bonds of alkyl groups. This
tutorial review highlights recent work in this active area.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011

PMID: 21505712  [PubMed]


187. Comp Biochem Physiol Part D Genomics Proteomics. 2011 Jun;6(2):206-12. doi:
10.1016/j.cbd.2011.03.003. Epub 2011 Apr 4.

Genome duplications within the Xenopodinae do not increase the multiplicity of
antimicrobial peptides in Silurana paratropicalis and Xenopus andrei skin
secretions.

Mechkarska M(1), Eman A, Coquet L, Jérôme L, Jouenne T, Vaudry H, King JD, Takada
K, Conlon JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, United
Arab Emirates University, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates.

A putative genome duplication event within the Silurana lineage has given rise to
the tetraploid frog S. paratropicalis and a second polyploidization within the
Xenopus lineage has produced the octoploid frog X. andrei. Peptidomic analysis of
norepinephrine-stimulated skin secretions of S. paratropicalis and X. andrei led 
to identification of multiple peptides with growth-inhibitory activity against
Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus. Structural characterization
demonstrated that the S. paratropicalis components comprised three peptides
belonging to the caerulein-precursor fragment family (CPF-SP1, -SP2 and -SP3),
two peptides from the xenopsin-precursor fragment family (XPF-SP1 and -SP2), and 
one peptide orthologous to peptide glycine-leucine-amide (PGLa-SP1). The CPF
peptides showed potent, broad-spectrum antimicrobial activity. The X. andrei
components comprised two peptides from the magainin family, (magainin-AN1 and
-AN2), two from the XPF family (XPF-AN1 and -AN2), two from the PGLa
family(PGLa-AN1 and -AN2), and one caerulein-precursor fragment (CPF-AN1).The
primary structures of these peptides indicate a close phylogenetic relationship
between X. andrei and the octoploid frog X. amieti. Under the same experimental
conditions, seven orthologous antimicrobial peptides were previously isolated
from the diploid frog S. tropicalis, nine from the tetraploid frog X. borealis,
and five from the tetraploid frog X. clivii. The data indicate, therefore, that
nonfunctionalization (gene deletion) has been the most common fate of duplicated 
antimicrobial peptide genes following polyploidization events in the Silurana and
Xenopus lineages.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21498136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Gynecol Oncol. 2011 Jul;122(1):163-70. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2011.03.014. Epub
2011 Apr 15.

Tolfenamic acid inhibits ovarian cancer cell growth and decreases the expression 
of c-Met and survivin through suppressing specificity protein transcription
factors.

Basha R(1), Ingersoll SB, Sankpal UT, Ahmad S, Baker CH, Edwards JR, Holloway RW,
Kaja S, Abdelrahim M.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, MD Anderson Cancer Center Orlando, Orlando, FL
32827, USA. riyaz.basha@orlandohealth.com

OBJECTIVE: The aberrant expression of hepatocyte growth factor and its receptor
c-Met are associated with aggressive disease and poor prognosis in a variety of
human malignancies including ovarian cancer (OC). Specificity protein (Sp)
transcription factors have high relevance in the signaling cascade associated
with c-Met activation. Tolfenamic acid (TA), a NSAID, is known to induce the
degradation of Sp proteins, which have been negatively associated with survival
in some cancer patients. Our aim was to examine the anti-OC activity of TA using 
in vitro and in vivo models and asses the inhibitory effects of this novel
compound.
METHODS: We developed OC sub-cell lines (AF1-3) derived from the original SKOV3
that are more resistant to IFNa-2b and more tumorigenic in nude mice than the
original cells. We tested the anti-cancer activity of TA using ovarian cancer
cells, SKOV3-AF2 and ES-2. The cells were treated with DMSO (vehicle) or TA
(25/50/100 µM) and cell viability was measured at 24, 48, and 72 h. Cell lysates 
were prepared following 48 h treatment (50µM) and evaluated the expression of Sp 
proteins (Sp1/Sp3/Sp4), c-Met, survivin, Bcl2, and cleaved polyADP-ribose
polymerase (c-PARP) through Western blot analysis. Caspase-3 activity was
assessed with Caspase-Glo kit. Cell cycle distribution and apoptosis were
analyzed using BD FACSCalibur flow cytometer. For in vivo studies mice were
subcutaneously injected with ES-2 cells and treated with vehicle or TA (50
mg/kg/thrice weekly).
RESULTS: TA significantly inhibited the growth of SKOV3 (AF1-3) and ES-2 cells.
The expression of Sp proteins and c-Met was significantly decreased suggesting
that TA could be targeting c-Met through degradation of Sp proteins. TA greatly
increased the apoptotic fraction (Annexin V positive), c-PARP expression and
caspase-3 activity. TA significantly decreased Bcl2 expression and induced G0/G1 
cell cycle arrest. In vivo studies revealed that TA significantly inhibited tumor
weight and volume in mice. These results show that TA has a profound inhibitory
effect on tumor growth in mice, reduces OC cells proliferation, induces
apoptosis, cell cycle arrest and Sp proteins degradation. TA also inhabited the
expression of survivin that is associated with radiation resistance and suggests 
that apart from its tumor suppressant effects, TA can also enhance the tumor
response to radiotherapy.
CONCLUSIONS: These data clearly show that TA effectively inhibits OC cell growth 
in vitro and in vivo. This study represents potential role(s) of TA that
suppresses OC cell growth, and may enhance tumor response to radiotherapy, and
have implications in OC treatment.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21496890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Org Chem. 2011 May 20;76(10):3997-4007. doi: 10.1021/jo2003488. Epub 2011 Apr
28.

Structure and reactivity of a preactivated sp2-sp3 diboron reagent: catalytic
regioselective boration of a,ß-unsaturated conjugated compounds.

Gao M(1), Thorpe SB, Kleeberg C, Slebodnick C, Marder TB, Santos WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia 24061, United
States.

A novel sp(2)-sp(3) diboron reagent has been developed for the copper-catalyzed
ß-boration of a,ß-unsaturated conjugated compounds. The reaction proceeds under
mild conditions with various substrates, i.e., a,ß-unsaturated esters, ketones,
nitriles, ynones, amides, and aldehydes, in the absence of additives such as
phosphine and sodium tert-butoxide to provide ß-borylhomoenolates in good to
excellent yields. The presence of an sp(3)-hybridized boron center, unambigously 
confirmed by X-ray crystallography, sufficiently activates the unsymmetrical
pinacolato diisopropanolaminato diboron (PDIPA diboron, 2) to transfer the
sp(2)-hybridized boron moiety chemoselectively. These observations suggest that
the activation of one of the boron atoms is an essential step in the Cu-catalyzed
ß-boration catalytic cycle.

PMID: 21491953  [PubMed]


190. Chem Commun (Camb). 2011 May 28;47(20):5717-9. doi: 10.1039/c1cc11087j. Epub 2011
Apr 12.

"On water" sp3-sp2 cross-couplings between benzylic and alkenyl halides.

Krasovskaya V(1), Krasovskiy A, Bhattacharjya A, Lipshutz BH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, University of California, Santa
Barbara, California 93106, USA.

Organic-solvent-free cross-couplings between benzylic and alkenyl halides have
been developed. Various alkenyl halides can be efficiently benzylated by
combining the precursor halides in the presence of Zn dust and a Pd catalyst at
room temperature, in water as the only medium.

© The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011

PMCID: PMC3352766
PMID: 21487612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Am Chem Soc. 2011 May 4;133(17):6541-4. doi: 10.1021/ja2015586. Epub 2011 Apr
8.

Aerobic Pd-catalyzed sp3 C-H olefination: a route to both N-heterocyclic
scaffolds and alkenes.

Stowers KJ(1), Fortner KC, Sanford MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Michigan, 930 North University Avenue, 
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

This communication describes a new method for the Pd/polyoxometalate-catalyzed
aerobic olefination of unactivated sp(3) C-H bonds. Nitrogen heterocycles serve
as directing groups, and air is used as the terminal oxidant. The products
undergo reversible intramolecular Michael addition, which protects the
monoalkenylated product from overfunctionalization. Hydrogenation of the Michael 
adducts provides access to bicyclic nitrogen-containing scaffolds that are
prevalent in alkaloid natural products. Additionally, the cationic Michael
adducts undergo facile elimination to release a,ß-unsaturated olefins, which can 
be further elaborated via C-C and C-heteroatom bond-forming reactions.

© 2011 American Chemical Society

PMCID: PMC3083468
PMID: 21476513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Dalton Trans. 2011 Sep 21;40(35):8912-21. doi: 10.1039/c1dt10118h. Epub 2011 Apr 
8.

Original palladium pincer complexes deriving from 1,3-bis(thiophosphinoyl)indene 
proligands: C(sp3)-H versus C(sp2)-H bond activation.

Nebra N(1), Lisena J, Saffon N, Maron L, Martin-Vaca B, Bourissou D.

Author information: 
(1)University of Toulouse, UPS, LHFA, 118 route de Narbonne, F-31062 Toulouse,
France.

A series of original 2-indenylidene palladium pincer complexes
{PdL[Ind(Ph(2)P==S)(2)]} (L = HNCy(2), PPh(3), Cl(-)) have been prepared by
double C-H activation of a 1,3-bis(thiophosphinoyl)indene proligand.
Crystallographic analyses and DFT calculations indicate that the bonding
situation of the {Pd[Ind(Ph(2)P==S)(2)]} fragment is essentially governed by the 
conjugated and rigid nature of the dianionic pincer ligand, the nature of the
coligand having little influence. The formation of the 2-indenylidene complexes
involves either a 2-indenyl pincer or a four-membered cyclometalated complex as
an intermediate, suggesting that C(sp(2))-H or C(sp(3))-H bond activation takes
place. However, deuterium labelling experiences show that in all cases,
C(sp(3))-H bond activation occurs followed eventually by a Pd/H exchange.
Nevertheless, evidence for direct C(sp(2))-H bond activation under mild
conditions is obtained when a methyl group is introduced at the indene proligand 
to prevent C(sp(3))-H bond activation. The ensuing dissymmetrical 2-indenyl
palladium pincer complex has been fully characterized.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011

PMID: 21475756  [PubMed]


193. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jun 3;286(22):19840-59. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.203687. Epub 2011
Apr 5.

Transcriptional regulation of pro-apoptotic protein kinase Cdelta: implications
for oxidative stress-induced neuronal cell death.

Jin H(1), Kanthasamy A, Anantharam V, Rana A, Kanthasamy AG.

Author information: 
(1)Parkinson's Disorder Research Laboratory, Iowa Center for Advanced
Neurotoxicology, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Iowa State University, Ames, 
Iowa 50011, USA.

We previously demonstrated that protein kinase Cd (PKCd; PKC delta) is an
oxidative stress-sensitive kinase that plays a causal role in apoptotic cell
death in neuronal cells. Although PKCd activation has been extensively studied,
relatively little is known about the molecular mechanisms controlling PKCd
expression. To characterize the regulation of PKCd expression, we cloned an
~2-kbp 5'-promoter segment of the mouse Prkcd gene. Deletion analysis indicated
that the noncoding exon 1 region contained multiple Sp sites, including four GC
boxes and one CACCC box, which directed the highest levels of transcription in
neuronal cells. In addition, an upstream regulatory region containing adjacent
repressive and anti-repressive elements with opposing regulatory activities was
identified within the region -712 to -560. Detailed mutagenesis studies revealed 
that each Sp site made a positive contribution to PKCd promoter expression.
Overexpression of Sp family proteins markedly stimulated PKCd promoter activity
without any synergistic transactivating effect. Furthermore, experiments in
Sp-deficient SL2 cells indicated long isoform Sp3 as the essential activator of
PKCd transcription. Importantly, both PKCd promoter activity and endogenous PKCd 
expression in NIE115 cells and primary striatal cultures were inhibited by
mithramycin A. The results from chromatin immunoprecipitation and gel shift
assays further confirmed the functional binding of Sp proteins to the PKCd
promoter. Additionally, we demonstrated that overexpression of p300 or
CREB-binding protein increases the PKCd promoter activity. This stimulatory
effect requires intact Sp-binding sites and is independent of p300 histone
acetyltransferase activity. Finally, modulation of Sp transcriptional activity or
protein level profoundly altered the cell death induced by oxidative insult,
demonstrating the functional significance of Sp-dependent PKCd gene expression.
Collectively, our findings may have implications for development of new
translational strategies against oxidative damage.

PMCID: PMC3103361
PMID: 21467032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2011 Jun 1;253(2):130-6. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2011.03.019.
Epub 2011 Apr 3.

The effect of interferon-a on the expression of cytochrome P450 3A4 in human
hepatoma cells.

Flaman AS(1), Gravel C, Hashem AM, Tocchi M, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Vaccine Evaluation, Biologics and Genetic Therapies Directorate,
Health Products and Food Branch, Health Canada, Ottawa, ON, Canada.

Interferon a (IFNa) is used to treat malignancies and chronic viral infections.
It has been found to decrease the rate of drug metabolism by acting on cytochrome
P450 enzymes, but no studies have investigated the consequences of IFNa treatment
on the CYP3A4 isoform, responsible for the metabolism of a majority of drugs. In 
this study, we have examined the effect of IFNa on CYP3A4 catalytic activity and 
expression in human hepatoma cells. We found that IFNa inhibits CYP3A4 activity
and rapidly down-regulates the expression of CYP3A4, independent of de novo
protein synthesis. Pharmacologic inhibitors and a dominant-negative mutant
expression plasmid were used to dissect the molecular pathway required for CYP3A4
suppression, revealing roles for Jak1 and Stat1 and eliminating the involvement
of the p38 mitogen-activated and extracellular regulated kinases. Treatment of
hepatoma cells with IFNa did not affect the nuclear localization or relative
abundance of Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors, suggesting that the suppression
of CYP3A4 by IFNa does not result from inhibitory Sp3 out-competing Sp1. To our
knowledge, this is the first report that IFNa down-regulates CYP3A4 expression
largely through the JAK-STAT pathway. Since IFNa suppresses CYP3A4 expression,
caution is warranted when IFNa is administered in combination with CYP3A4
substrates to avoid the occurrence of adverse drug interactions.

Crown Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21466820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Am Chem Soc. 2011 Apr 27;133(16):6166-9. doi: 10.1021/ja2014955. Epub 2011 Apr 
5.

Selective activation of enantiotopic C(sp3)-hydrogen by means of chiral
phosphoric acid: asymmetric synthesis of tetrahydroquinoline derivatives.

Mori K(1), Ehara K, Kurihara K, Akiyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Gakushuin University, Mejiro,
Toshima-ku, Tokyo 171-8588, Japan.

Chiral phosphoric acid-catalyzed asymmetric C-H functionalization has been
achieved. In this process, enantiotopic C(sp(3))-hydrogen is selectively
activated by chiral phosphoric acid to afford tetrahydroquinoline derivatives
with excellent enantioselectivities (up to 97% ee).

PMID: 21466211  [PubMed]


196. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 25;6(3):e18076. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018076.

Placenta growth factor-1 exerts time-dependent stabilization of adherens
junctions following VEGF-induced vascular permeability.

Cai J(1), Wu L, Qi X, Shaw L, Li Calzi S, Caballero S, Jiang WG, Vinores SA,
Antonetti D, Ahmed A, Grant MB, Boulton ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Florida, Gainesville,
Florida, United States of America.

Increased vascular permeability is an early event characteristic of tissue
ischemia and angiogenesis. Although VEGF family members are potent promoters of
endothelial permeability the role of placental growth factor (PlGF) is hotly
debated. Here we investigated PlGF isoforms 1 and 2 and present in vitro and in
vivo evidence that PlGF-1, but not PlGF-2, can inhibit VEGF-induced permeability 
but only during a critical window post-VEGF exposure. PlGF-1 promotes VE-cadherin
expression via the trans-activating Sp1 and Sp3 interaction with the VE-cadherin 
promoter and subsequently stabilizes transendothelial junctions, but only after
activation of endothelial cells by VEGF. PlGF-1 regulates vascular permeability
associated with the rapid localization of VE-cadherin to the plasma membrane and 
dephosphorylation of tyrosine residues that precedes changes observed in claudin 
5 tyrosine phosphorylation and membrane localization. The critical window during 
which PlGF-1 exerts its effect on VEGF-induced permeability highlights the
importance of the translational significance of this work in that PLGF-1 likely
serves as an endogenous anti-permeability factor whose effectiveness is limited
to a precise time point following vascular injury. Clinical approaches that would
pattern nature's approach would thus limit treatments to precise intervals
following injury and bring attention to use of agents only during therapeutic
windows.

PMCID: PMC3064593
PMID: 21464949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2011 Feb;11(2):1480-3.

R.F. magnetron sputtering of multilayered c-BN films on cemented carbide tool.

Park S(1), Jeong S, Lee K.

Author information: 
(1)DigitalAir Solution Business Team, SAMSUNG Electronics Co., Ltd., Suwon
443-742, Korea.

A c-BN thin film was deposited using a B4C target in a r.f. magnetron sputtering 
system. The c-BN layer was coated with a TiAIN adhesion layer (approximately 2
microm), boron carbide (approximately 1 microm) and BCN (10 approximately 15 nm) 
nano-gradient layer system. The c-BN layers with thicknesses of more than 0.5
microm were successfully deposited onto cemented carbide substrates. The high
resolution XPS spectra analysis of B1s and N1s revealed that the c-BN film was
mainly composed of sp3 BN bonds.

PMID: 21456217  [PubMed]


198. Thromb Haemost. 2011 Jun;105(6):945-53. doi: 10.1160/TH10-10-0682. Epub 2011 Mar 
24.

Allelic imbalance of tissue-type plasminogen activator (t-PA) gene expression in 
human brain tissue.

Tjarnlund-Wolf A(1), Hultman K, Curtis MA, Faull RL, Medcalf RL, Jern C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, Sahlgrenska Academy at University of
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.

We have identified a single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the t-PA enhancer
(-7351C>T), which is associated with endothelial t-PA release in vivo. In vitro
studies demonstrated that this SNP is functional at the level of transcription.
In the brain, t-PA has been implicated in both physiologic and pathophysiologic
processes. The aim of the present study was to examine the effect of the t-PA
-7351C>T SNP on t-PA gene expression in human brain tissue. Allelic mRNA
expression was measured in heterozygous post-mortem brain tissues using
quantitative TaqMan genotyping assay. Protein-DNA interactions were assessed
using electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) and chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP). Significantly higher levels of t-PA mRNA were
generated from chromosomes that harboured the wild-type -7351C allele, as
compared to those generated from the mutant T allele (for the hippocampus, C to T
allelic ratio of ~1.3, p=0.010, n=12; and for the cortex, C to T allelic ratio of
~1.2, p=0.017, n=12). EMSA showed reduced neuronal and astrocytic nuclear protein
binding affinity to the T allele, and identified Sp1 and Sp3 as the major
transcription factors that bound to the -7351 site. ChIP analyses confirmed that 
Sp1 recognises this site in intact cells. In conclusion, the t-PA -7351C>T SNP
affects t-PA gene expression in human brain tissue. This finding might have
clinical implications for neurological conditions associated with enhanced t-PA
levels, such as in the acute phase of cerebral ischaemia, and also for stroke
recovery.

PMID: 21437359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Anal Quant Cytol Histol. 2010 Aug;32(4):192-200.

Image cytometric validation of breast carcinoma markers (ER, HER2 and MIB-1)
using tissue microarrays: rabbit monoclonal vs. FDA-approved antibodies.

Nassar A(1), Norton CM, Lawson D, Cohen C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55902, USA.
nassar.aziza@mayo.edu

OBJECTIVE: To use the ACIS III (Dako, Carpinteria, California, U.S.A.) with
tissue microarrays (TMAs) to compare rabbit monoclonal antibodies (RMab) for ER, 
HER2, and MIB-1 with FDA-approved monoclonal (FMab) and polyclonal (FPab)
antibodies.
STUDY DESIGN: TMAs of 43 breast cancers were used. Immunohistochemistry was
performed using RMab (LabVision, Fremont, California, U.S.A.): ER (SP1; 1/100),
HER2 (SP3; 1/100), and MIB-1 (SP6; 1/200). FMPab (Dako) used: ER (1D5; 1/50),
HercepTest kit and MIB-1 (MIB-1; 1/160). The stained TMAs were quantitated
visually and by image cytometry (ACIS III).
RESULTS: The overall agreement between RMab and FMab for ER using visual (98.45%)
and image analysis (97.56%) was excellent, with a kappa level of 0.89 and 0.94,
respectively. For HER2, the overall agreement between RMab and FPab was fair for 
visual (67.44%) and substantial (87.50%) for image analysis, with a kappa level
of 0.32 and 0.72, respectively. For MIB-1, there was fair (64.29%) to poor
(43.33%) agreement between MIB-1 RMab and FMab using visual and image analysis,
with a kappa level of 0.47 and 0.16, respectively.
CONCLUSION: RMabs for ER (SP1) and HER2 (SP3) are almost comparable to their
counterpart, FDA antibodies; however, MIB-1 RMab (SP6) shows poor concordance
with FMab in TMA. Image analysis shows a better concordance than visual
quantitation assessment specifically for ER and HER2.

PMID: 21434519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2011 Mar 28;50(14):3303-7. doi: 10.1002/anie.201007187.
Epub 2011 Feb 14.

Highly diastereoselective iron-mediated C(sp2)-C(sp3) cross-coupling reactions
between aryl Grignard reagents and cyclic iodohydrine derivatives.

Steib AK(1), Thaler T, Komeyama K, Mayer P, Knochel P.

Author information: 
(1)Department Chemie, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Butenandtstrasse
5-13, Haus F, 81377 München, Germany.

PMID: 21432956  [PubMed]


201. Dalton Trans. 2011 Sep 21;40(35):8760-3. doi: 10.1039/c1dt10167f. Epub 2011 Mar
23.

New possible mode of ligand-metal cooperation in PC(sp3)P pincer complexes.

Musa S(1), Romm R, Azerraf C, Kozuch S, Gelman D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemistry, The Hebrew University, Edmond Safra Campus, 91904,
Jerusalem, Israel.

Ligand-metal cooperation in iridium and platinum complexes bearing tricyclic
dibenzobarrelene-based PC(sp(3))P pincer ligands is discussed. We demonstrated
that the carbon-metal bond in these complexes may be efficiently cleaved and
regenerated via 1,2-addition/elimination reactions.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011

PMID: 21431178  [PubMed]


202. Phys Rev Lett. 2011 Feb 18;106(7):075501. Epub 2011 Feb 16.

Low-temperature phase transformation from graphite to sp3 orthorhombic carbon.

Wang JT(1), Chen C, Kawazoe Y.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics, Institute of
Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China.

We identify by ab initio calculations an orthorhombic carbon polymorph in Pnma
symmetry that has the lowest enthalpy among proposed cold-compressed graphite
phases. This new phase contains alternating zigzag and armchair buckled carbon
sheets transformed via a one-layer by three-layer slip mechanism. It has a wide
indirect band gap and a large bulk modulus that are comparable to those of
diamond. Its simulated x-ray diffraction pattern best matches the experimental
data. Pressure plays a key role in lowering the kinetic barrier during the phase 
conversion process. These results provide a comprehensive understanding and an
excellent account for experimental findings.

PMID: 21405524  [PubMed]


203. Org Lett. 2011 Apr 15;13(8):1968-71. doi: 10.1021/ol200345a. Epub 2011 Mar 15.

Pd(0)-catalyzed diarylation of sp3 C-H bond in (2-azaaryl)methanes.

Song G(1), Su Y, Gong X, Han K, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Zhongshan
Road, Dalian 116023, China.

A highly efficient and selective palladium-catalyzed diarylation of
(2-azaaryl)methanes at the methyl group is described. Aryl chlorides proved
reactive enough. A palladium <U+03B7>(3)-azaallyl intermediate has been identified on
the basis of DFT studies.

© 2011 American Chemical Society

PMID: 21405051  [PubMed]


204. Toxicol Lett. 2011 Jun 10;203(2):111-7. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2011.02.020. Epub
2011 Mar 5.

Decreased topoisomerase IIa expression and altered histone and regulatory factors
of topoisomerase IIa promoter in patients with chronic benzene poisoning.

Yu K(1), Shi YF, Yang KY, Zhuang Y, Zhu RH, Xu X, Cai G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, First Affiliated Hospital, Wenzhou Medical College, 
Wenzhou, Zhejiang 325000, China. yukang62@126.com

Topoisomerase IIa (Topo IIa) has been implicated in the benzene-induced
hemotoxicity in vitro. This study was to examine the effect of in vivo chronic
benzene exposure on Topo IIa in human bone marrow mononuclear cells, and to
further explore the mechanism underlying decreased Topo IIa expression in
patients with chronic benzene exposure. Topo IIa activity, expression, and mRNA
level assessed by DNA cleavage/relaxation assay, Western blot, and reverse
transcriptase-PCR, decreased in patients with benzene exposure. These changes
were accompanied by reduced histone H4 and H3 acetylation and H3K4 methylation,
and increased H3K9 methylation in the Topo IIa promoter, which were evaluated by 
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay. In addition, there were alterations
in mRNA levels of Topo IIa promoter regulatory factors such as SP1, ATF-2, SP3,
NF-YA, NF-M, P53, C-MYB, C-JUN, and ICBP90. Our results demonstrate that Topo IIa
expression was reduced in patients with chronic benzene exposure, which was
accompanied by alterations in histone acetylation and methylation and regulatory 
factor mRNA levels of Topo IIa promoter.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21382456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Org Lett. 2011 Apr 1;13(7):1816-9. doi: 10.1021/ol200329e. Epub 2011 Mar 7.

Synthesis of polycyclic molecules by double C(sp2)-H/C(sp3)-H arylations with a
single palladium catalyst.

Pierre C(1), Baudoin O.

Author information: 
(1)Universite´ Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS UMR 5246-Institut de Chimie et
Biochimie Mole´culaires et Supramole´culaires, CPE Lyon, 43 Boulevard du 11
Novembre 1918, 69622 Villeurbanne, France.

Polycyclic molecules were obtained in good yields by double C(sp(2))-H/C(sp(3))-H
arylations mediated by a single palladium/phosphine catalyst. Both double
intermolecular/intramolecular and intramolecular/intramolecular C-C couplings
were performed successfully, which indicates that this concept has a broad
applicability for the rapid construction of molecular complexity.

PMID: 21381642  [PubMed]


206. Org Lett. 2011 Apr 1;13(7):1674-7. doi: 10.1021/ol200169g. Epub 2011 Mar 4.

Iron(II)-catalyzed oxidation of sp3 C-H bonds adjacent to a nitrogen atom of
unprotected arylureas with tert-butyl hydroperoxide in water.

Wei Y(1), Ding H, Lin S, Liang F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Northeast Normal University, Changchun 130024, China.

With a FeSO(4)/TBHP system in water, direct oxidation of sp(3) C-H bonds adjacent
to nitrogen of arylureas to give both unprecedented tert-butoxylated and
hydroxylated products 2 was revealed. Under elevated temperatures, either
2-oxo-N-arylpyrrolidine-1-carboxamides 3 or 1,3-diarylureas 4 were attained,
depending on the aliphatic ring size of the arylurea substrates.

PMID: 21375293  [PubMed]


207. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2011 Mar 28;50(14):3318-22. doi: 10.1002/anie.201006717. 
Epub 2011 Mar 1.

Carbon-catalyzed oxidative dehydrogenation of n-butane: selective site formation 
during sp3-to-sp2 lattice rearrangement.

Liu X(1), Frank B, Zhang W, Cotter TP, Schlögl R, Su DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Inorganic Chemistry, Fritz Haber Institute of the Max Planck
Society, Faradayweg 4-6, 14195 Berlin, Germany.

PMID: 21365724  [PubMed]


208. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Apr-Jun;1809(4-6):236-44. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2011.02.003. Epub 2011 Mar 9.

Functional and sequence analysis of human neuroglobin gene promoter region.

Zhang W(1), Tian Z, Sha S, Cheng LY, Philipsen S, Tan-Un KC.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR.

Neuroglobin (Ngb), a recently found oxygen-binding protein belonging to the
vertebrate globin family, is mainly expressed in neurons of brains and eyes.
Current studies have revealed diverse potential functions of Ngb and it was found
to be able to reduce the severity of stroke and Alzheimer's disease, implying its
importance in brains. However, the mechanism of Ngb regulation of transcription
has not been elucidated yet. In this study, we analyzed the 5'-flanking region of
human neuroglobin gene (NGB) and identified a transcription start site (TSS)
located at -306bp relative to the translation start site ATG. We characterized
the proximal promoter of NGB and found two GC-boxes located at -16 and +30bp
relative to the TSS which are bound by transcription factor Sp1 and Sp3. Mutation
of either GC-box led to a significant reduction in NGB promoter activity, while
overexpression of Sp1 and Sp3 resulted in activation of the promoter. However,
two putative NRSE sites (-359 and -127bp relative to the TSS) apparently showed
no influence on NGB tissue-specific expression. Treatment of two non-neuronal
cell lines HeLa and BEAS-2B with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine remarkably induced NGB
expression, suggesting a potential role of DNA methylation in regulating NGB
tissue-specific expression.

2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21362510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jun 3;286(22):19523-32. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.233916. Epub 2011
Feb 25.

The human hyaluronan synthase 2 (HAS2) gene and its natural antisense RNA exhibit
coordinated expression in the renal proximal tubular epithelial cell.

Michael DR(1), Phillips AO, Krupa A, Martin J, Redman JE, Altaher A, Neville RD, 
Webber J, Kim MY, Bowen T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Nephrology, Cardiff University School of Medicine, Heath Park,
Cardiff, UK.

Aberrant expression of the human hyaluronan synthase 2 (HAS2) gene has been
implicated in the pathology of malignancy, pulmonary arterial hypertension,
osteoarthritis, asthma, thyroid dysfunction, and large organ fibrosis. Renal
fibrosis is associated with increased cortical synthesis of hyaluronan (HA), an
extracellular matrix glycosaminoglycan, and we have shown that HA is a correlate 
of interstitial fibrosis in vivo. Our previous in vitro data have suggested that 
both HAS2 transcriptional induction and subsequent HAS2-driven HA synthesis may
contribute to kidney fibrosis via phenotypic modulation of the renal proximal
tubular epithelial cell (PTC). Post-transcriptional regulation of HAS2 mRNA
synthesis by the natural antisense RNA HAS2-AS1 has recently been described in
osteosarcoma cells, but the antisense transcript was not detected in kidney. In
this study, PTC stimulation with IL-1ß or TGF-ß1 induced coordinated temporal
profiles of HAS2-AS1 and HAS2 transcription. Constitutive activity of the
putative HAS2-AS1 promoter was demonstrated, and transcription factor-binding
sequence motifs were identified. Knockdown of Sp1/Sp3 expression by siRNA blunted
IL-1ß induction of both HAS2-AS1 and HAS2, and Smad2/Smad3 knockdown similarly
attenuated TGF-ß1 stimulation. Inhibition of IL-1ß-stimulated HAS2-AS1 RNA
induction using HAS2-AS1-specific siRNAs also suppressed up-regulation of HAS2
mRNA transcription. The thermodynamic feasibility of HAS2-AS1/HAS2 heterodimer
formation was demonstrated in silico, and locus-specific cytoplasmic
double-stranded RNA was detected in vitro. In summary, our data show that
transcriptional induction of HAS2-AS1 and HAS2 occurs simultaneously in PTCs and 
suggest that transcription of the antisense RNA stabilizes or augments HAS2 mRNA 
expression in these cells via RNA/mRNA heteroduplex formation.

PMCID: PMC3103331
PMID: 21357421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2011 Feb 25;50(9):2174-7. doi: 10.1002/anie.201006879.
Epub 2011 Feb 1.

Highly diastereoselective C(sp3)-C(sp) cross-coupling reactions between 1,3- and 
1,4-substituted cyclohexylzinc reagents and bromoalkynes through remote
stereocontrol.

Thaler T(1), Guo LN, Mayer P, Knochel P.

Author information: 
(1)Department Chemie, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Butenandtstrasse
5-13, Haus F, 81377 München, Germany.

PMID: 21344579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Infect Dis. 2011 May 1;203(9):1264-73. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jir010. Epub 2011
Feb 21.

Designed reduction of Streptococcus pneumoniae pathogenicity via synthetic
changes in virulence factor codon-pair bias.

Coleman JR(1), Papamichail D, Yano M, García-Suárez Mdel M, Pirofski LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Albert Einstein
College of Medicine and Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, New York, USA.

In this study, we used a previously described method of controlling gene
expression with computer-based gene design and de novo DNA synthesis to attenuate
the virulence of Streptococcus pneumoniae. We produced 2 S. pneumoniae serotype 3
(SP3) strains in which the pneumolysin gene (ply) was recoded with
underrepresented codon pairs while retaining its amino acid sequence and
determined their ply expression and pneumolysin production in vitro and their
virulence in a mouse pulmonary infection model. Expression of ply and production 
of pneumolysin of the recoded SP3 strains were decreased, and the recoded SP3
strains were less virulent in mice than the wild-type SP3 strain or a <U+0394>ply SP3
strain. Further studies showed that the least virulent recoded strain induced a
markedly reduced inflammatory response in the lungs compared with the wild-type
or <U+0394>ply strain. These findings suggest that reducing pneumococcal virulence gene 
expression by altering codon-pair bias could hold promise for rational design of 
live-attenuated pneumococcal vaccines.

PMCID: PMC3069727
PMID: 21343143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Free Radic Biol Med. 2011 May 1;50(9):1196-209. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2011.02.006. Epub 2011 Feb 16.

Regulation of the human ascorbate transporter SVCT2 exon 1b gene by zinc-finger
transcription factors.

Qiao H(1), May JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville,
TN 372326303, USA. huan.qiao@vanderbilt.edu

The sodium-dependent vitamin C transporter (SVCT) 2 is crucial for ascorbate
uptake in metabolically active and specialized tissues. This study focused on the
gene regulation of SVCT2 exon 1b, which is ubiquitously expressed in human and
mouse tissues. Although the human SVCT2 exon 1b promoter does not contain a
classical TATA box, we found that it does contain a functional initiator that
binds Yin Yang-1 (YY1) and interacts with upstream Sp1/Sp3 elements in the
proximal promoter region. These elements in turn play a critical role in
regulating YY1-mediated transcription of exon 1b. Formation of YY1/Sp complexes
on the promoter is required for its optional function. YY1 with Sp1 or Sp3
synergistically enhanced exon 1b promoter activity as well as the endogenous
SVCT2 protein expression. Further, in addition to Sp1/Sp3, both EGR-1 and EGR-2
were detected in the protein complexes that bound the three GC boxes bearing
overlapping binding sites for EGR/WT1 and Sp1/3. The EGR family factors WT1 and
MAZ were found to differentially regulate exon 1b promoter activity. These
results show that differential occupancy of transcription factors on the GC-rich 
consensus sequences in the SVCT2 exon 1b promoter contributes to the regulation
of cell and tissue expression of SVCT2.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3070803
PMID: 21335086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Chemistry. 2011 Mar 7;17(11):3101-4. doi: 10.1002/chem.201100019. Epub 2011 Feb
15.

Enantioselective gold-catalyzed functionalization of unreactive sp3 C-H bonds
through a redox-neutral domino reaction.

Zhou G(1), Liu F, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Green Chemistry and Chemical Processes, Department 
of Chemistry, East China Normal University, 3663 N. Zhongshan Road, Shanghai
200062, PR China.

Selectivity is golden: The first asymmetric redox-neutral domino reaction
catalyzed by gold that results in the direct functionalization of unreactive
sp(3) C-H bonds has been reported. This method consists of a
heterocyclization/1,5-hydride transfer/cyclization reaction and provides
synthetically valuable azepines with high enantioselectivities and in high yields
(Tf = triflate; see scheme).

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21328507  [PubMed]


214. Histopathology. 2011 Feb;58(3):383-94. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2011.03760.x.
Epub 2011 Feb 16.

HER2 status in gastro-oesophageal adenocarcinomas assessed by two rabbit
monoclonal antibodies (SP3 and 4B5) and two in situ hybridization methods (FISH
and SISH).

Boers JE(1), Meeuwissen H, Methorst N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Isala klinieken, Zwolle, the Netherlands.
j.e.boers@isala.nl/j.e.boers@me.com

AIMS: HER2 gene amplification has been detected in 10-20% of gastric
adenocarcinomas. In view of the recently demonstrated clinical benefit of the
anti-human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) drug trastuzumab in the
treatment of advanced gastric cancer, reliable HER2 testing is of key importance.
The aim of this study was to examine HER2 status in gastro-oesophageal
adenocarcinomas comparing SP3 and 4B5 immunohistochemistry (IHC) with dual probe 
HER2 [fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and silver in situ hybridization 
(SISH)].
METHODS AND RESULTS: IHC and SISH were carried out on biopsy specimens of 146
patients with adenocarcinomas of the oesophagus and stomach. All SP3-IHC-positive
cases and 91% of 4B5-IHC-positive cases were amplified. Sensitivity of
SP3-IHC-positivity and 4B5-IHC-positivity for amplification was 77% and 96%,
respectively. Results of FISH performed in 42 cases were identical to SISH.
Amplification was heterogeneous in 73% of the adenocarcinomas; 24% of the
oesophago-gastric carcinomas and 7% of distal stomach tumours were amplified.
CONCLUSIONS: HER2-positivity is present in a significant proportion of
oesophago-gastric adenocarcinomas (24%), but at a lower rate in the distal
stomach (7%). Sensitivity for amplification is higher with 4B5 IHC than with SP3.
FISH and SISH yield identical results, but assessment is much easier with SISH.
Our findings provide important guidance for HER2-testing in gastro-oesophageal
adenocarcinomas for patients in whom anti-HER2 treatment is considered.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Limited.

PMCID: PMC3085073
PMID: 21323962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Guang Pu Xue Yu Guang Pu Fen Xi. 2010 Dec;30(12):3338-42.

[Comparative study of reflectance spectroscopy of women's acupoints around
menstruation].

[Article in Chinese]

Jiang XH(1), Liu HP, Guo ZY, Meng YY, Zeng CC, Liu SH.

Author information: 
(1)College of Biophotonics, South China Normal University, Laboratory of
Photonics Chinese Medicine of State Administration of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Guangzhou 510631, China. jiang198518314@163.com

Acupoint was reaction of viscera and its optical parameter was an important
characteristic of tissue. In the present work, in order to discuss specificity of
acupuncture on the response of qi and blood in human body, we compared the
diffuse reflectance of Taichong (LV3), Taibai (SP3), and Chongyang (ST42) before,
during and after menstruation. All the acupoints had the same shape of the
spectrum and troughs were all at 423.16, 544.06 and 577.47 nm. The values of
reflectance during menstruation were greater than before and after menstruation, 
especially for SP3 and ST42 (P < 0.05). SP3 and ST42 were more sensitive to the
changes of qi and blood than LV3, and it was asymmetric and we found no evidence 
for the imbalance of the left side and right. These results indicated that
acupoint diffuse reflectance changed with qi and blood, and that SP3 and ST42 had
close relationship with menstruation. Diffuse reflectance may be possibly used in
the quantitative analysis of qi and blood.

PMID: 21322235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Am Chem Soc. 2011 Mar 2;133(8):2571-82. doi: 10.1021/ja108426f. Epub 2011 Feb
9.

Three-coordinate NiII: tracing the origin of an unusual, facile Si-C(sp3) bond
cleavage in [(tBu2PCH2SiMe2)2N]Ni+.

Fullmer BC(1), Fan H, Pink M, Huffman JC, Tsvetkov NP, Caulton KG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana 47405, USA.

All attempts to synthesize (PNP)Ni(OTf) form instead
((t)Bu(2)PCH(2)SiMe(2)NSiMe(2)OTf)Ni(CH(2)P(t)Bu(2)). Abstraction of F(-) from
(PNP)NiF by even a catalytic amount of BF(3) causes rearrangement of the
(transient) (PNP)Ni(+) to analogous ring-opened
[((t)Bu(2)PCH(2)SiMe(2)NSiMe(2)F)]Ni(CH(2)P(t)Bu(2)). Abstraction of Cl(-) from
(PNP)NiCl with NaB(C(6)H(3)(CF(3))(2))(4) in CH(2)Cl(2) or C(6)H(5)F gives
(PNP)NiB(C(6)H(3)(CF(3))(2))(4), the key intermediate in these reactions is
(PNP)Ni(+), [(PNP)Ni](+), in which one Si-C bond (together with N and two P)
donates to Ni. This makes this Si-C bond subject to nucleophilic attack by F(-), 
triflate, and alkoxide/ether (from THF). This s(Si-C) complex binds CO in the
time of mixing and also binds chloride, both at nickel. Evidence is offered of a 
"self-healing" process, where the broken Si-C bond can be reformed in an
equilibrium process. (PNP)Ni(+) reacts rapidly with H(2) to give (PN(H)P)NiH(+), 
which can be deprotonated to form (PNP)NiH. A variety of nucleophilic attacks
(and THF polymerization) on the coordinated Si-C bond are envisioned to occur
perpendicular to the Si-C bond, based on the character of the LUMO of (PNP)Ni(+).

PMID: 21306156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Am Chem Soc. 2011 Mar 2;133(8):2424-6. doi: 10.1021/ja110520p. Epub 2011 Feb 9.

Expeditious construction of a carbobicyclic skeleton via sp3-C-H
functionalization: hydride shift from an aliphatic tertiary position in an
internal redox process.

Mori K(1), Sueoka S, Akiyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Gakushuin University, Toshima-ku,
Tokyo, Japan.

Described herein is the first example of an aliphatic, nonbenzylic hydride
shift/cyclization sequence that contains two types of novel sp(3)-C-H
functionalization: (1) construction of a tetraline skeleton via [1,5]-hydride
shift/cyclization and (2) [1,6]-hydride shift/cyclization to form a five-membered
ring (indane derivatives).

PMID: 21306120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Org Lett. 2011 Mar 4;13(5):960-3. doi: 10.1021/ol103001k. Epub 2011 Feb 3.

Highly selective insertion of arynes into a C(sp)-O(sp3) s bond.

Laczkowski KZ(1), García D, Peña D, Cobas A, Pérez D, Guitián E.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Qui´mica Orga´nica, Universidade de Santiago de Compostela,
Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

Arynes react with ethoxyacetylene to afford 2-ethoxyethynylaryl derivatives
through a highly chemo- and regioselective formal insertion of the aryne into the
C(sp)-O(sp(3)) bond of the alkyne. Computational studies suggest that the
reaction does not proceed through a mechanism initiated by the nucleophilic
addition of the oxygen atom to the aryne as previously proposed but by the
addition of the triple bond of the alkyne to the aryne.

PMID: 21291202  [PubMed]


219. J Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Mar 23;46(2):125-38. doi: 10.1530/JME-10-0145. Print 2011 
Apr.

Transcription of platelet-derived growth factor receptor a in Leydig cells
involves specificity protein 1 and 3.

Bergeron F(1), Bagu ET, Tremblay JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Reproduction, Perinatal and Child Health, CHUQ Research Centre, CHUL Room
T1-49, 2705 Laurier Boulevard, Québec, Québec G1V4G2, Canada.

Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) A is secreted by Sertoli cells and acts on 
Leydig precursor cells, which express the receptor PDGFRA, triggering their
differentiation into steroidogenically active Leydig cells. There is, however, no
information regarding the molecular mechanisms that govern Pdgfra expression in
Leydig cells. In this study, we isolated and characterized a 2.2<U+200A>kb fragment of
the rat Pdgfra 5'-flanking sequence in the TM3 Leydig cell line, which
endogenously expresses Pdgfra. A series of 5' progressive deletions of the Pdgfra
promoter was generated and transfected in TM3 cells. Using this approach, two
regions (-183/-154 and -154/-105), each conferring 46% of Pdgfra promoter
activity, were identified. To better define the regulatory elements,
trinucleotide mutations spanning the -154/-105 region were introduced by
site-directed mutagenesis in the context of the -2.2<U+200A> kb Pdgfra promoter.
Mutations that altered the TCCGAGGGAAAC sequence at -138 <U+200A>bp significantly
decreased Pdgfra promoter activity in TM3 cells. Several proteins from TM3
nuclear extracts were found to bind to this G(C/A) motif in electromobility shift
assay. Two of the proteins were identified as the transcription factors SP1 and
SP3. Using transient transfections of TM3 Leydig cells, SP1 and SP3 were found to
activate the Pdgfra promoter by threefold. The SP1/SP3-dependent activation of
the Pdgfra promoter was severely blunted when the G(C/A) motif was mutated. Our
study provides new insights into the regulatory mechanisms of Pdgfra
transcription in Leydig cells, which includes a role for the transcription
factors SP1 and SP3.

PMID: 21289081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Hepatology. 2011 Feb;53(2):628-39. doi: 10.1002/hep.24041. Epub 2011 Jan 3.

Activation of alpha(1) -adrenergic receptors stimulate the growth of small mouse 
cholangiocytes via calcium-dependent activation of nuclear factor of activated T 
cells 2 and specificity protein 1.

Alpini G(1), Franchitto A, Demorrow S, Onori P, Gaudio E, Wise C, Francis H,
Venter J, Kopriva S, Mancinelli R, Carpino G, Stagnitti F, Ueno Y, Han Y, Meng F,
Glaser S.

Author information: 
(1)Central Texas Veterans Health Care System, TX, USA. galpini@tamu.edu

Small cholangiocytes proliferate via activation of calcium (Ca(2+) )-dependent
signaling in response to pathological conditions that trigger the damage of large
cyclic adenosine monophosphate-dependent cholangiocytes. Although our previous
studies suggest that small cholangiocyte proliferation is regulated by the
activation of Ca(2+) -dependent signaling, the intracellular mechanisms
regulating small cholangiocyte proliferation are undefined. Therefore, we sought 
to address the role and mechanisms of action by which phenylephrine, an a(1)
-adrenergic agonist stimulating intracellular D-myo-inositol-1,4,5-triphosphate
(IP(3) )/Ca(2+) levels, regulates small cholangiocyte proliferation. Small and
large bile ducts and cholangiocytes expressed all AR receptor subtypes. Small
(but not large) cholangiocytes respond to phenylephrine with increased
proliferation via the activation of IP(3) /Ca(2+) -dependent signaling.
Phenylephrine stimulated the production of intracellular IP(3) . The Ca(2+)
-dependent transcription factors, nuclear factor of activated T cells 2 (NFAT2)
and NFAT4, were predominantly expressed by small bile ducts and small
cholangiocytes. Phenylephrine stimulated the Ca(2+) -dependent DNA-binding
activities of NFAT2, NFAT4, and Sp1 (but not Sp3) and the nuclear translocation
of NFAT2 and NFAT4 in small cholangiocytes. To determine the relative roles of
NFAT2, NFAT4, or Sp1, we knocked down the expression of these transcription
factors with small hairpin RNA. We observed an inhibition of
phenylephrine-induced proliferation in small cholangiocytes lacking the
expression of NFAT2 or Sp1. Phenylephrine stimulated small cholangiocyte
proliferation is regulated by Ca(2+) -dependent activation of NFAT2 and
Sp1.CONCLUSION: Selective stimulation of Ca(2+) -dependent small cholangiocyte
proliferation may be key to promote the repopulation of the biliary epithelium
when large bile ducts are damaged during cholestasis or by toxins.

Copyright © 2010 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC3522188
PMID: 21274883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Mol Carcinog. 2011 Sep;50(9):655-67. doi: 10.1002/mc.20738. Epub 2011 Jan 25.

Inhibition of pituitary tumor-transforming gene-1 in thyroid cancer cells by
drugs that decrease specificity proteins.

Chintharlapalli S(1), Papineni S, Lee SO, Lei P, Jin UH, Sherman SI, Santarpia L,
Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center,
Houston, USA.

Methyl 2-cyano-3,11-dioxo-18ß-olean-1,12-dien-30-oate (CDODA-Me) and the
corresponding 2-trifluoromethyl analog (CF(3)DODA-Me) are derived synthetically
from the triterpenoid glycyrrhetinic acid, a major component of licorice.
CDODA-Me and CF(3)DODA-Me inhibited growth of highly invasive ARO, DRO, K-18, and
HTh-74 thyroid cancer cells and this was due, in part, to decreased expression of
specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 that are
overexpressed in these cells. CDODA-Me and CF(3)DODA-Me also decreased expression
of Sp-dependent genes, such as survivin and vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF), and induced apoptosis. In addition, pituitary tumor-transforming gene-1
(PTTG-1) protein and mRNA levels were also decreased in thyroid cancer cells
treated with CDODA-Me or CF(3)DODA-Me and this was accompanied by decreased
expression of PTTG-1-dependent c-Myc and fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2)
genes. RNA interference studies against Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 proteins showed that in
thyroid cancer cells, PTTG-1 was an Sp-dependent gene. This study demonstrates
for the first time that drugs, such as CDODA-Me and CF(3)DODA-Me, that decrease
Sp protein expression also downregulate PTTG-1 in thyroid cancer cells and
therefore have potential for clinical treatment of thyroid cancer and other
endocrine neoplasias where PTTG-1 is a major pro-oncogenic factor.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3128656
PMID: 21268135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Genomics. 2011 Jun;97(6):358-63. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2011.01.005. Epub 2011 Jan 
23.

Differential expression of immune-associated cancer regulatory genes in low-
versus high-dose-rate irradiated AKR/J mice.

Shin SC(1), Lee KM, Kang YM, Kim K, Lim SA, Yang KH, Kim JY, Nam SY, Kim HS.

Author information: 
(1)Radiation Health Research Institute, Korea Hydro and Nuclear Power Co., Ltd., 
SSangmun-dong, Dobong-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

AKR/J mice carrying leukemia viral inserts develop thymic lymphoma. Recently, we 
demonstrated that the incidence of thymic lymphoma was decreased when these mice 
were raised in a low-dose-rate <U+03B3>-irradiation facility. In contrast, mice
irradiated at a high-dose rate developed severe thymic lymphoma and died much
earlier. To understand the genetic changes occurred by low- versus high-dose-rate
<U+03B3>-irradiation whole genome microarray was performed. Both groups of mice
demonstrated up-regulation of Ifng, Igbp1, and IL7 in their thymuses, however,
mice exposed to high-dose-rate <U+03B3>-irradiation exhibited marked down-regulation of 
Sp3, Il15, Traf6, IL2ra, Pik3r1, and Hells. In contrast, low-dose-rate irradiated
mice demonstrated up-regulation of Il15 and Jag2. These gene expression profiles 
imply the impaired immune signaling pathways by high-dose-rate <U+03B3>-irradiation
while the facilitation of anti-tumor immune responses by low-dose-rate
<U+03B3>-irradiation. Therefore, our data delineate common and distinct
immune-associated pathways downstream of low- versus high-dose-rate irradiation
in the process of cancer progression in AKR/J mice.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21266193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Chemistry. 2011 Feb 25;17(9):2698-703. doi: 10.1002/chem.201003111. Epub 2011 Jan
24.

Neighboring lithium-assisted [1,2]-Wittig rearrangement: practical access to
diarylmethanol-based 1,4-diols and optically active BINOL derivatives with axial 
and sp3-central chirality.

Gao G(1), Gu FL, Jiang JX, Jiang K, Sheng CQ, Lai GQ, Xu LW.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Organosilicon Chemistry and Material Technology of Ministry 
of Education, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou, P R China.

A facile and practical methodology for the synthesis of synthetically useful
diarylmethanol-based 1,4-diols and enantiomerically pure BINOL-derived diols with
axial and sp(3)-central chirality has been developed through neighboring
lithium-promoted [1,2]-Wittig rearrangement. The chirality transfer process shows
a broad substrate scope in terms of the aromatic ether substituent, which allows 
access to a broad of range of chiral 1,1'-binaphthalene-2-a-arylmethanol-2'-ols
with excellent enantioselectivities (>99<U+2009>% enantiomeric excess) and yields
(84-96<U+2009>%). This should be considered as an available and attractive chiral source
to design and prepare privileged ligands or catalysts.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21264970  [PubMed]


224. Chem Commun (Camb). 2011 Mar 14;47(10):2931-3. doi: 10.1039/c0cc04688d. Epub 2011
Jan 24.

Experimental charge density distribution of non-coordinating sp3 carbanions in
[Mg{(pz*)3C}2].

Kratzert D(1), Leusser D, Stern D, Meyer J, Breher F, Stalke D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Anorganische Chemie der Universität Göttingen, Tammannstraße 4,
37077 Göttingen, Germany.

In this communication we present the experimental charge density distribution in 
[Mg{(pz*)(3)C}(2)] (1), (pz* = 3,5-dimethylpyrazolyl), containing two
non-coordinating sp(3) carbanionic lone-pairs.

PMID: 21264370  [PubMed]


225. Org Lett. 2011 Feb 18;13(4):772-5. doi: 10.1021/ol103039x. Epub 2011 Jan 20.

Palladium-catalyzed tandem fluorination and cyclization of enynes.

Peng H(1), Liu G.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Organometallic Chemistry, Shanghai Institute of
Organic Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 354 Fenglin Road, Shanghai,
China, 200032.

A novel palladium-catalyzed tandem fluorination and cyclization of enynes has
been developed. A favorable cis-fluoropalladation is proposed as a key step to
construct a vinyl-F bond, and the final C(sp3)-Pd bond is reduced by alcohol.
This transformation represents an efficient road to synthesize fluorinated
lactams.

PMID: 21250750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Virol. 2011 Apr;85(7):3436-48. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02539-10. Epub 2011 Jan 19.

Expression of the human endogenous retrovirus (HERV) group HML-2/HERV-K does not 
depend on canonical promoter elements but is regulated by transcription factors
Sp1 and Sp3.

Fuchs NV(1), Kraft M, Tondera C, Hanschmann KM, Löwer J, Löwer R.

Author information: 
(1)Paul Ehrlich Institut, Federal Institute for Vaccines and Biomedicines,
Paul-Ehrlich-Strasse 51-59, D-63225 Langen, Germany.

After fixation in the human genome, human endogenous retroviruses (HERVs) are
bona fide cellular genes despite their exogenous origin. To be able to spread
within the germ line and the early embryo, the ancient retroviral promoters must 
have adapted to the requirements for expression in these cell types. We describe 
that in contrast to the case for current exogenous retroviruses, which replicate 
in specific somatic cells, the long terminal repeat (LTR) of the human endogenous
retrovirus HERV-K acts as a TATA- and initiator element-independent promoter with
a variable transcription start site. We present evidence that the HERV-K LTR is
regulated by the transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3. Mutating specific GC boxes,
which are binding sites for Sp proteins, and knocking down Sp1 and Sp3 by use of 
small interfering RNA (siRNA) significantly reduced the promoter activity.
Binding of Sp1 and Sp3 to the promoter region was confirmed using electrophoretic
mobility shift assays (EMSAs) and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP). Our data 
explain why certain HERV-K proviruses have lost promoter competence. Since
vertebrate promoters lacking canonical core promoter elements are common but
poorly studied, understanding the HERV-K promoter not only will provide insight
into the regulation of endogenous retroviruses but also can serve as a paradigm
for understanding the regulation of this class of cellular genes.

PMCID: PMC3067833
PMID: 21248046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Oncogene. 2011 May 12;30(19):2282-8. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.588. Epub 2011 Jan 17.

Cdc25B is negatively regulated by p53 through Sp1 and NF-Y transcription factors.

Dalvai M(1), Mondesert O, Bourdon JC, Ducommun B, Dozier C.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Toulouse, LBCMCP, Toulouse, France.

Cdc25B phosphatases function as key players in G2/M cell cycle progression by
activating the CDK1-cyclinB1 complexes. They also have an essential role in
recovery from the G2/M checkpoint activated in response to DNA damage.
Overexpression of Cdc25B results in bypass of the G2/M checkpoint and
illegitimate entry into mitosis, and also causes replicative stress, leading to
genomic instability. Thus, fine-tuning of Cdc25B expression level is critical for
correct cell cycle progression and G2 checkpoint recovery. However, the
transcriptional regulation of Cdc25B remains largely unknown. Earlier studies
have shown that the tumor suppressor p53 overexpression transcriptionally
represses Cdc25B; however, the molecular mechanism of this repression has not yet
been elucidated, although it was suggested to occur through the induction of p21.
Here we show that Cdc25B is downregulated by the basal level of p53 in multiple
cell types. This downregulation also occurs in p21-/- cell lines, indicating that
p21 is not required for p53-mediated regulation of Cdc25B. Deletion and mutation 
analyses of the Cdc25B promoter revealed that downregulation by p53 is dependent 
on the presence of functional Sp1/Sp3 and NF-Y binding sites. Furthermore,
chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses show that p53 binds to the Cdc25B promoter
and mediates transcriptional attenuation through the Sp1 and NF-Y transcription
factors. Our results suggest that the inability to downregulate Cdc25B after loss
of p53 might contribute to tumorigenesis.

PMID: 21242964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Gene. 2011 Apr 1;475(1):49-56. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2011.01.001. Epub 2011 Jan 13.

Identification and characterization of human PCDH10 gene promoter.

Li Z(1), Xie J, Li W, Tang A, Li X, Jiang Z, Han Y, Ye J, Jing J, Gui Y, Cai Z.

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Key Laboratory of Male Reproductive Medicine and Genetics, Peking
University Shenzhen Hospital, Shenzhen PKU-HKUST Medical Center, 1120 Lianhua
Road, Shenzhen, Guangdong, PR China.

Recent studies have suggested roles for PCDH10 as a novel tumor suppressor gene. 
In our previous work, we located the core promoter of PCDH10 to a 462-bp segment 
of 5'-flanking region characterized by a high GC content. Here we further
identified and characterized the promoter for PCDH10. Transient transfection of
PC3 and LNCaP cells with a series of deleted promoter constructs indicated that
the minimal promoter region was between nucleotides -144 and -99. This segment
contained a CAAT box, a GT box, and a putative transcription factor binding site 
for AP-4. Mutational analysis identified that the CAAT box and GT box are
necessary for promoter activity. Ectopic expression of NF-Ys increased reporter
gene activity, whereas expression of a dominant-negative NF-YA decreased reporter
gene activity. Co-transfection of Sp1/Sp3 expression plasmids enhanced reporter
gene activity in a dose-dependent manner. Mithramycin A, an inhibitor of Sp-DNA
interaction, reduced PCDH10 promoter activity. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrated binding of transcription
factors Sp1/Sp3 to the promoter region in vitro and in vivo. Our data show that
Sp1/Sp3 and CBF/NF-Y transcription factors play a crucial role in the basal
expression of the human PCDH10 gene.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21237250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. FEBS J. 2011 Apr;278(6):964-72. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2011.08018.x. Epub 2011 
Feb 5.

Sp3 transcription factor is crucial for transcriptional activation of the human
NOX4 gene.

Katsuyama M(1), Hirai H, Iwata K, Ibi M, Matsuno K, Matsumoto M, Yabe-Nishimura
C.

Author information: 
(1)Radioisotope Center, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Japan.
mkatsuya@koto.kpu-m.ac.jp

NOX is the catalytic subunit of NADPH oxidase, the superoxide-generating enzyme. 
Among several isoforms of NOX, NOX4 is abundantly expressed in various tissues.
To clarify the mechanisms of constitutive and ubiquitous expression of NOX4, the 
promoter activities of the human NOX4 gene were analyzed by reporter assays. The 
5'-flanking and non-coding regions of the human NOX4 gene are known to contain
multiple GC bases. Among them, three GC-boxes containing putative Sp/Klf-binding 
sites, which were not found in rodent genes, were suggested to be essential for
the basal expression of the NOX4 gene in SH-SY5Y and HEK293 cells.
Electrophoresis mobility shift assays demonstrated that Sp1 and Sp3 could bind to
GC-boxes at positions -239/-227 and +69/+81 in these cells. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays showed that Sp1 and Sp3 could also bind to GC-boxes at
positions -239/-227 and +69/+81 in vivo. The promoter activity of the NOX4 gene
was reduced in SH-SY5Y and HEK293 cells by transfection of an anti-Sp3 short
hairpin RNA-expression plasmid. Taken together, these results suggest that Sp3
plays a key role in the expression of NOX4 in various cell lineages in humans.

© 2011 The Authors Journal compilation © 2011 FEBS.

PMID: 21235713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Invest New Drugs. 2012 Jun;30(3):853-61. doi: 10.1007/s10637-010-9622-0. Epub
2011 Jan 4.

Chemopreventive effects of tolfenamic acid against esophageal tumorigenesis in
rats.

Maliakal P(1), Abdelrahim M, Sankpal UT, Maliakal C, Baker CH, Safe S, Herrera
LJ, Abudayyeh A, Kaja S, Basha R.

Author information: 
(1)M. D. Anderson Cancer Center Orlando, Cancer Research Institute, Orlando, FL
32827, USA.

The primary objective of this study is to identify small molecules that target
critical transcription factors for potential application in the chemoprevention
of esophageal cancer. Specificity proteins (Sp) play a critical role in the
growth and metastasis of several malignancies including esophageal cancer.
Researchers at the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center Orlando Cancer Research Institute
have reported previously that tolfenamic acid (TA) inhibits cancer cell
proliferation and tumor growth through the degradation of Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4. We
evaluated the chemopreventive properties of TA against esophageal tumorigenesis
in N-nitrosomethylbenzylamine (NMBA)-induced murine tumor model. Fischer-344 rats
were treated with NMBA (0.5 mg/kg s.c. 3 times a week) for 5 weeks to initiate
the tumor formation, and then treated with 50 mg/kg TA from week 6 through
week 25. Tumor incidence, tumor multiplicity (number of papilloma per rat), and
tumor volume were evaluated after 25 weeks. All rats in the control group that
received only NMBA developed lesions (100% incidence), while the TA-treated group
showed significantly lower (33%) tumor incidence and tumor multiplicity.
Furthermore, the tumor volume was significantly diminished in the TA-treated
group when compared with the control group. Using small molecules such as TA to
target key transcription factors associated with tumorigenesis for the prevention
of esophageal malignancies is a new and promising strategy. Results of the
current study provide evidence that TA, when given orally after tumor initiation,
can significantly suppress tumorigenesis induced by carcinogenic nitrosamines in 
rats. These appealing results demonstrate that TA may potentially serve as an
effective chemopreventive agent in patient populations vulnerable to esophageal
cancer.

PMID: 21197621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Biol Chem. 2011 Mar 4;286(9):7681-91. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.188532. Epub 2010
Dec 30.

Coactivator function of positive cofactor 4 (PC4) in Sp1-directed luteinizing
hormone receptor (LHR) gene transcription.

Liao M(1), Zhang Y, Kang JH, Dufau ML.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Endocrinology Section, Program of Developmental Endocrinology and
Genetics, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4510, USA.

The LHR has an essential role in sexual development and reproductive function,
and its transcription is subjected to several modes of regulation. In this study,
we investigated PC4 coactivator function in the control of LHR transcription.
Knockdown of PC4 by siRNA inhibited the LHR basal promoter activity and
trichostatin A (TSA)-induced gene transcriptional activation and expression in
MCF-7 cells. While overexpression of PC4 alone had no effect on the LHR gene, it 
significantly enhanced Sp1- but not Sp3-mediated LHR transcriptional activity.
PC4 directly interacts with Sp1 at the LHR promoter, and this interaction is
negatively regulated by PC4 phosphorylation. The coactivator domain (22-91 aa) of
PC4 and DNA binding domain of Sp1 are essential for PC4/Sp1 interaction. ChIP
assay revealed significant occupancy of PC4 at the LHR promoter that increased
upon TSA treatment. Disruption of PC4 expression significantly reduced
TSA-induced recruitment of TFIIB and RNAP II, at the promoter. PC4 functions are 
beyond TSA-induced phosphatase release, PI3K-mediated Sp1 phosphorylation, and
HDAC1/2/mSin3A co-repressor release indicating its role as linker coactivator of 
Sp1 and the transcriptional machinery. These findings demonstrated a critical
aspect of LHR modulation whereby PC4 acts as a coactivator of Sp1 to contribute
to the human of LHR transcription.

PMCID: PMC3045022
PMID: 21193408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 14;5(12):e14311. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014311.

Transcriptional activation of REST by Sp1 in Huntington's disease models.

Ravache M(1), Weber C, Mérienne K, Trottier Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics and Molecular and Cellular Biology (IGBMC), U964/Centre 
National de Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) UMR 1704/Université de Strasbourg,
Illkirch, France.

In Huntington's disease (HD), mutant huntingtin (mHtt) disrupts the normal
transcriptional program of disease neurons by altering the function of several
gene expression regulators such as Sp1. REST (Repressor Element-1 Silencing
Transcription Factor), a key regulator of neuronal differentiation, is also
aberrantly activated in HD by a mechanism that remains unclear. Here, we show
that the level of REST mRNA is increased in HD mice and in NG108 cells
differentiated into neuronal-like cells and expressing a toxic mHtt fragment.
Using luciferase reporter gene assay, we delimited the REST promoter regions
essential for mHtt-mediated REST upregulation and found that they contain Sp
factor binding sites. We provide evidence that Sp1 and Sp3 bind REST promoter and
interplay to fine-tune REST transcription. In undifferentiated NG108 cells, Sp1
and Sp3 have antagonistic effect, Sp1 acting as an activator and Sp3 as a
repressor. Upon neuronal differentiation, we show that the amount and ratio of
Sp1/Sp3 proteins decline, as does REST expression, and that the transcriptional
role of Sp3 shifts toward a weak activator. Therefore, our results provide new
molecular information to the transcriptional regulation of REST during neuronal
differentiation. Importantly, specific knockdown of Sp1 abolishes REST
upregulation in NG108 neuronal-like cells expressing mHtt. Our data together with
earlier reports suggest that mHtt triggers a pathogenic cascade involving Sp1
activation, which leads to REST upregulation and repression of neuronal genes.

PMCID: PMC3001865
PMID: 21179468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Mol Cancer Res. 2011 Feb;9(2):195-202. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-10-0363. Epub
2010 Dec 14.

GT-094, a NO-NSAID, inhibits colon cancer cell growth by activation of a reactive
oxygen species-microRNA-27a: ZBTB10-specificity protein pathway.

Pathi SS(1), Jutooru I, Chadalapaka G, Sreevalsan S, Anand S, Thatcher GR, Safe
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
4466 TAMU, Vet. Res. Bldg. 410, College Station, TX 77843, USA.

Ethyl 2-((2,3-bis(nitrooxy)propyl)disulfanyl)benzoate (GT-094) is a novel nitric 
oxide (NO) chimera containing an nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) and 
NO moieties and also a disulfide pharmacophore that in itself exhibits cancer
chemopreventive activity. In this study, the effects and mechanism of action of
GT-094 were investigated in RKO and SW480 colon cancer cells. GT-094 inhibited
cell proliferation and induced apoptosis in both cell lines and this was
accompanied by decreased mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) and induction of 
reactive oxygen species (ROS), and these responses were reversed after
cotreatment with the antioxidant glutathione. GT-094 also downregulated genes
associated with cell growth [cyclin D1, hepatocyte growth factor receptor
(c-Met), epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)], survival (bcl-2, survivin),
and angiogenesis [VEGF and its receptors (VEGFR1 and VEGFR2)]. Results of
previous RNA interference studies in this laboratory has shown that these genes
are regulated, in part, by specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors Sp1,
Sp3, and Sp4 that are overexpressed in colon and other cancer cell lines and not 
surprisingly, GT-094 also decreased Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 in colon cancer cells.
GT-094-mediated repression of Sp and Sp-regulated gene products was due to
downregulation of microRNA-27a (miR-27a) and induction of ZBTB10, an Sp repressor
that is regulated by miR-27a in colon cancer cells. Moreover, the effects of
GT-094 on Sp1, Sp3, Sp4, miR-27a, and ZBTB10 were also inhibited by glutathione
suggesting that the anticancer activity of GT-094 in colon cancer cells is due,
in part, to activation of an ROS-miR-27a:ZBTB10-Sp transcription factor pathway.

PMCID: PMC3069691
PMID: 21156786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Biochem. 2011 Mar;149(3):301-9. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvq145. Epub 2010 Dec 10.

Constitutive expression of the brg1 gene requires GC-boxes near to the
transcriptional start site.

Itoh T(1), Miyake K, Yamaguchi T, Tsuge M, Kaneoka H, Iijima S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Graduate School of Engineering, Nagoya
University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Japan.

We previously reported that BRG1, an ATPase subunit of SWI/SNF chromatin
remodelling complexes, is constitutively expressed and that the alternative
ATPase subunit (BRM) is inducibly expressed through differentiation in mammalian 
cells. In the present study, the regulatory elements that confer constitutive
expression on brg1 were explored. First, we analysed the promoter proximal region
surrounding its transcriptional start site. Using computer-aided analysis, a
TATA-less, GC-rich promoter containing four putative binding sites for Sp1/3 was 
predicted. One of the putative Sp1/3-binding sites (from -21 to -15 bp)
overlapped with a putative YY1-binding site. A gel-shift assay showed that YY1
but not Sp1/3 bound to this sequence and that Sp3 but not Sp1 bound to the other 
three predicted binding sites. Furthermore, chromatin immunoprecipitation
analysis showed that Sp3 and YY1 bound to the promoter region together with
TATA-binding protein in vivo. In vivo and in vitro binding assays showed that Sp3
and YY1 interacted with each other. Together, these results suggest that Sp3 and 
YY1 recruit general transcription factors and facilitate the assembly of a
preinitiation complex.

PMID: 21149256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2010 Nov;10(11):7070-4.

Molecular dynamics study of the effect of chemical functionalization on the
elastic properties of graphene sheets.

Zheng Q(1), Li Z, Geng Y, Wang S, Kim JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and 
Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China.

In this study, the effects of chemical functionalization on the elastic
properties of graphene sheets are investigated by using molecular dynamics (MD)
and molecular mechanics (MM) simulations. The influences of the degree of
functionalization, which is defined as the ratio of the number of the total
sp3-hybridized atoms to the number of the total carbon atoms of the graphene
sheet, the chirality of graphene sheets, the molecular structure and molecular
weight of functional groups on Young's modulus are studied. The dependence of
shear modulus and wrinkling properties on the functional groups are also
investigated. The simulation results indicate that Young's modulus depends
strongly on the degree of functionalization and the molecular structure of the
functional groups, while the effects of chirality of the graphene sheets and the 
molecular weight of the functional groups are negligible. The chemical
functionalization also reduces the shear modulus and critical strain, beyond
which the wrinkling instability occurs.

PMID: 21137867  [PubMed]


236. J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2010 Nov;10(11):7036-9.

Magnetic properties of Al-SiC co-sputtered films grown by radio frequency
sputtering.

Liu X(1), Zhen C, Liu Y, Liu S, Zhou H, Li X, Hou D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physics, Hebei Advanced Thin Films Laboratory, Hebei Normal
University, Shijiazhuang 050016, China.

Room-temperature ferromagnetism was observed in the Al-SiC co-sputtered films
fabricated by radio frequency (RF) sputtering. When the annealing temperature
(Ta) was increased from 800 to 1100 degrees C, the ferromagnetic ordering was
present with the formation of Al-C bonds. Both annealing and Al-doped the films
can improve the crystallization of SiC and induce long-range magnetic order in
the Al-SiC co-sputtered films. Experiments show that the Al solubility was less
than 0.8 at% in SiC matrix. As a possible explanation for the existence of local 
magnetic moment in Al-doped SiC, unpaired spins arise in a conversion from sp3 to
the sp3/sp2 hybridization. The partial Si-C bonds in SiC were converted to Al-C
bonds when the trivalent aluminum entered into Si sites. Al atoms introduce some 
net spins in Al doped film with the calculated integrated spin density 0.467
microB. The structural defects produced by Al-doping have provided an exciting
possibility of nonmagnetic atoms-doped to control the spin moments and induce
ferromagnetism in wide-gap semiconductor.

PMID: 21137860  [PubMed]


237. Chem Commun (Camb). 2011 Feb 14;47(6):1902-4. doi: 10.1039/c0cc04581k. Epub 2010 
Dec 3.

Solvent-controlled switch of selectivity between sp2 and sp3 C-H bond activation 
by platinum(II).

Garner AW(1), Harris CF, Vezzu DA, Pike RD, Huo S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, East Carolina University, Greenville, NC 27858, USA.

By merely changing the solvent, two different cyclometalated platinum complexes
resulted from either sp(2) or sp(3) C-H bond activation can be prepared
selectively. For example, the reaction of L1 with K(2)PtCl(4) in MeCN gave
exclusively kinetic product 1a, while the reaction in AcOH was thermodynamically 
controlled and produced predominantly 1b.

PMID: 21127816  [PubMed]


238. Cryobiology. 2011 Feb;62(1):22-31. doi: 10.1016/j.cryobiol.2010.11.005. Epub 2010
Nov 26.

Effect of cryopreservation on fish sperm subpopulations.

Beirão J(1), Cabrita E, Pérez-Cerezales S, Martínez-Páramo S, Herráez MP.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biology, University of León, 24071
León, Spain. jbeis@unileon.es

The evaluation of the motility data obtained with a CASA system, applying a
Two-Step Cluster analysis, identified in seabream sperm 3 different sperm
subpopulations that correlated differently with embryo hatching rates. Hence, we 
designed an experiment to understand the effect of the application of different
cryopreservation protocols in these sperm motility-based subpopulations. We
analyzed Sparus aurata frozen/thawed semen motility 15, 30, 45 and 60s after
activation, using CASA software. Different protocols were applied for
cryopreservation: three different cryoprotectants (Dimethyl Sulfoxide (Me(2)SO), 
Ethylene Glycol (EG) and Propylene Glycol (PG)) each at two different
concentrations and two packaging volumes (0.5ml straws, and 1.8ml cryovials) were
tested. Different freezing rates were evaluated corresponding to 1, 2, 3, 4 and
8cm above the liquid nitrogen surface for the straws and 1, 2 and 4cm for the
cryovials. Motility parameters rendered by CASA were treated with a Two-Step
Cluster analysis. Three different subpopulations were obtained: SP1 - slow
non-linear spermatozoa, SP2 - slow linear spermatozoa and SP3 - fast linear
spermatozoa. We considered SP3 as the subpopulation of interest and focused
further analyses on it. Generally, SP3 was the best represented subpopulation 15s
after activation and was also the one showing a greater decrease in time, being
the least represented after 60s. According to the applied univariate general
linear model, samples frozen in straws with 5% Me(2)SO and in cryovials with 10% 
Me(2)SO at 2 and 1cm from the LN(2,) respectively, produced the best results
(closer to the control). Clustering analysis allowed the detection of fish sperm 
subpopulations according to their motility pattern and showed that sperm
composition in terms of subpopulations was differentially affected by the
cryopreservation protocol depending on the cryoprotectant used, freezing rates
and packaging systems.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21112321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Clin Exp Immunol. 2011 Feb;163(2):178-88. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2010.04289.x. 
Epub 2010 Nov 19.

Identification of a novel cell type-specific intronic enhancer of macrophage
migration inhibitory factor (MIF) and its regulation by mithramycin.

Beaulieu E(1), Green L, Elsby L, Alourfi Z, Morand EF, Ray DW, Donn R.

Author information: 
(1)University of Manchester, UK.

The aim of this study was to determine the genetic regulation of macrophage
migration inhibitory factor (MIF). DNase I hypersensitivity was used to identify 
potential hypersensitive sites (HS) across the MIF gene locus. Reporter gene
assays were performed in different human cell lines with constructs containing
the native or mutated HS element. Following phylogenetic and transcription factor
binding profiling, electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) and RNA
interference were performed and the effects of incubation with mithramycin, an
antibiotic that binds GC boxes, were also studied. An HS centred on the first
intron of MIF was identified. The HS acted as an enhancer in human T lymphoblasts
(CEMC7A), human embryonic kidney cells (HEK293T) and human monocytic cells
(THP-1), but not in a fibroblast-like synoviocyte (FLS) cell line (SW982) or
cultured FLS derived from rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients. Two cis-elements
within the first intron were found to be responsible for the enhancer activity.
Mutation of the consensus Sp1 GC box on each cis-element abrogated enhancer
activity and EMSA indicated Sp1 binding to one of the cis-elements contained in
the intron. SiRNA knock-down of Sp1 alone or Sp1 and Sp3 together was incomplete 
and did not alter the enhancer activity. Mithramycin inhibited expression of MIF 
in CEMC7A cells. This effect was specific to the intronic enhancer and was not
seen on the MIF promoter. These results identify a novel, cell type-specific
enhancer of MIF. The enhancer appears to be driven by Sp1 or related Sp family
members and is highly sensitive to inhibition via mithramycin.

© 2010 The Authors. Clinical and Experimental Immunology © 2010 British Society
for Immunology.

PMCID: PMC3043308
PMID: 21087445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. PLoS Genet. 2010 Nov 11;6(11):e1001203. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001203.

Epigenetic silencing of spermatocyte-specific and neuronal genes by SUMO
modification of the transcription factor Sp3.

Stielow B(1), Krüger I, Diezko R, Finkernagel F, Gillemans N, Kong-a-San J,
Philipsen S, Suske G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research, Philipps-University of
Marburg, Marburg, Germany.

SUMO modification of transcription factors is linked to repression of
transcription. The physiological significance of SUMO attachment to a particular 
transcriptional regulator, however, is largely unknown. We have employed the
ubiquitously expressed murine transcription factor Sp3 to analyze the role of
SUMOylation in vivo. We generated mice and mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs)
carrying a subtle point mutation in the SUMO attachment sequence of Sp3
(IKEE(553)D mutation). The E(553)D mutation impedes SUMOylation of Sp3 at
K(551)in vivo, without affecting Sp3 protein levels. Expression profiling
revealed that spermatocyte-specific genes, such as Dmc1 and Dnahc8, and neuronal 
genes, including Paqr6, Rims3, and Robo3, are de-repressed in non-testicular and 
extra-neuronal mouse tissues and in mouse embryonic fibroblasts expressing the
SUMOylation-deficient Sp3E(553)D mutant protein. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
experiments show that transcriptional de-repression of these genes is accompanied
by the loss of repressive heterochromatic marks such as H3K9 and H4K20
tri-methylation and impaired recruitment of repressive chromatin-modifying
enzymes. Finally, analysis of the DNA methylation state of the Dmc1, Paqr6, and
Rims3 promoters by bisulfite sequencing revealed that these genes are highly
methylated in Sp3wt MEFs but are unmethylated in Sp3E(553)D MEFs linking
SUMOylation of Sp3 to tissue-specific CpG methylation. Our results establish SUMO
conjugation to Sp3 as a molecular beacon for the assembly of repression
machineries to maintain tissue-specific transcriptional gene silencing.

PMCID: PMC2978682
PMID: 21085687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Helicobacter. 2010 Oct;15(5):438-48. doi: 10.1111/j.1523-5378.2010.00787.x.

Helicobacter pylori induction of the gastrin promoter through GC-rich DNA
elements.

Tucker TP(1), Gray BM, Eaton KA, Merchant JL.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Internal Medicine, Microbiology and Immunology and Molecular
and Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection has been linked to the
development of chronic gastritis, duodenal ulcer disease, and gastric cancer.
Helicobacter pylori- infected patients and animal models develop
hypergastrinemia, chronic gastritis, and gastric atrophy. Since gastrin is an
important regulator of gastric acid secretion and cell growth, H. pylori
regulation of this hormone has been implicated in its pathogenesis.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate the effect of H. pylori on gastrin gene expression in 
mice and of human bacterial isolates on gastrin mRNA expressed in a human cell
line.
METHODS: Gastrin mRNA was measured by qRT-PCR in H. pylori-infected mice. H.
pylori were co-cultured with AGS cells to study regulation of human gastrin gene 
expression. Various MAP kinases were implicated in signal transduction from the
bacteria using specific inhibitors. Gastrin reporter constructs and gel shift
assays were used to map DNA responsive elements.
RESULTS: In addition to an increase in gastrin mRNA in H. pylori-infected mice,
H. pylori induced the endogenous human gastrin gene through MAP kinase-dependent 
signaling but not NF<U+03BA>B-dependent signaling. Activation of gastrin through MAPK
signaling did not require CagA or VacA virulence factors. Transfection studies
demonstrated that a GC-rich motif mediated H. pylori-induction of the gastrin
promoter and that the motif inducibly binds Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors.
CONCLUSIONS: Direct contact of live H. pylori bacteria with human cells is
sufficient to induce gastrin gene expression.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3306726
PMID: 21083750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Am Chem Soc. 2010 Dec 15;132(49):17378-80. doi: 10.1021/ja108754f. Epub 2010
Nov 17.

Pd(II)-catalyzed carbonylation of C(sp3)-H bonds: a new entry to 1,4-dicarbonyl
compounds.

Yoo EJ(1), Wasa M, Yu JQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey
Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Pd(II)-catalyzed ß-C(sp(3))-H carbonylation of N-arylamides under CO (1 atm) has 
been achieved. Following amide-directed C(sp(3))-H cleavage and insertion of CO
into the resulting [Pd(II)-C(sp(3))] bond, intramolecular C-N reductive
elimination gave the corresponding succinimides, which could be readily converted
to 1,4-dicarbonyl compounds. This method was found to be effective with
substrates containing a-hydrogen atoms and could be applied to effect methylene
C(sp(3))-H carbonylation of cyclopropanes.

PMCID: PMC3135760
PMID: 21082838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Nanoscale. 2011 Feb;3(2):731-40. doi: 10.1039/c0nr00718h. Epub 2010 Nov 16.

Made-to-order nanocarbons through deterministic plasma nanotechnology.

Ren Y(1), Xu S, Rider AE, Ostrikov KK.

Author information: 
(1)Plasma Sources and Applications Centre, NIE and Institute of Advanced Studies,
Nanyang Technological University, 1 Nanyang Walk, 637616, Singapore.

Through a combinatorial approach involving experimental measurement and plasma
modelling, it is shown that a high degree of control over diamond-like nanocarbon
film sp3/sp2 ratio (and hence film properties) may be exercised, starting at the 
level of electrons (through modification of the plasma electron energy
distribution function). Hydrogenated amorphous carbon nanoparticle films with
high percentages of diamond-like bonds are grown using a middle-frequency (2 MHz)
inductively coupled Ar+CH4 plasma. The sp3 fractions measured by X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and Raman spectroscopy in the thin films are
explained qualitatively using sp3/sp2 ratios 1) derived from calculated sp3 and
sp2 hybridized precursor species densities in a global plasma discharge model and
2) measured experimentally. It is shown that at high discharge power and lower
CH4 concentrations, the sp3/sp2 fraction is higher. Our results suggest that a
combination of predictive modeling and experimental studies is instrumental to
achieve deterministically grown made-to-order diamond-like nanocarbons suitable
for a variety of applications spanning from nano-magnetic resonance imaging to
spin-flip quantum information devices. This deterministic approach can be
extended to graphene, carbon nanotips, nanodiamond and other nanocarbon materials
for a variety of applications.

PMID: 21079877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Acta Ophthalmol. 2010 Dec;88(8):e328-33. doi: 10.1111/j.1755-3768.2010.02027.x.
Epub 2010 Nov 10.

Acupuncture for treating dry eye: a randomized placebo-controlled trial.

Shin MS(1), Kim JI, Lee MS, Kim KH, Choi JY, Kang KW, Jung SY, Kim AR, Kim TH.

Author information: 
(1)Korea Institute of Oriental Medicine, Daejeon, Korea.

Comment in
    Acta Ophthalmol. 2011 Jun;89(4):e371-2; author reply e372.
    Acta Ophthalmol. 2012 Feb;90(1):e73.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the efficacy and safety of acupuncture for ocular symptoms, 
tear film stability and tear secretion in dry eye patients.
METHODS: This is a randomized, patient-assessor blinded, sham acupuncture
controlled trial. Forty-two participants with defined moderate to severe dry eye 
underwent acupuncture treatment three times a week for 3 weeks. Seventeen
standard points (GV23; bilateral BL2, GB14, TE23, Ex1, ST1 and GB20; and
unilateral SP3, LU9, LU10 and HT8 on the left for men and right for women) with
'de qi' manipulation for the verum acupuncture group and seventeen sham points of
shallow penetration without other manipulation for the sham group were applied
during the acupuncture treatment. Differences were measured using the ocular
surface disease index (OSDI), the visual analogue scale (VAS) of ocular
discomfort, the tear film break-up time (BUT) and the Schimer I test with
anaesthesia. In addition, adverse events were recorded.
RESULTS: There were no statistically significant differences between results on
the OSDI, VAS, BUT or Schimer I tests from baseline between the verum and sham
acupuncture groups. However, results from the within-group analysis showed that
the OSDI and VAS in both groups and the BUT in the verum acupuncture group were
significantly improved after 3 weeks of treatment. No adverse events were
reported during this trial.
CONCLUSION: Both types of acupuncture improved signs and symptoms in dry-eye
patients after a 4-week treatment. However, verum acupuncture did not result in
better outcomes than sham acupuncture.

© 2010 The Authors. Acta Ophthalmologica © 2010 Acta Ophthalmologica Scandinavica
Foundation.

PMID: 21070615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 14;286(2):1061-73. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.158709. Epub 2010 
Nov 10.

N-Myc and SP regulate phosphatidylserine synthase-1 expression in brain and glial
cells.

Tasseva G(1), Cole L, Vance JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2S2,
Canada.

Phosphatidylserine (PS) is an essential constituent of biological membranes and
plays critical roles in apoptosis and cell signaling. Because no information was 
available on transcriptional mechanisms that regulate PS biosynthesis in
mammalian cells, we investigated the regulation of expression of the mouse PS
synthase-1 (Pss1) gene. The Pss1 core promoter was characterized in vitro and in 
vivo through gel shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. Transcription
factor-binding sites, such as a GC-box cluster that binds Sp1/Sp3/Sp4 and N-Myc, 
and a degenerate E-box motif that interacts with Tal1 and E47, were identified.
Pss1 transactivation was higher in brain of neonatal mice than in other tissues, 
consistent with brain being a major site of expression of Pss1 mRNA and PSS1
activity. Enzymatic assays revealed that PSS1 activity is enriched in primary
cortical astrocytes compared with primary cortical neurons. Site-directed
mutagenesis of binding sites within the Pss1 promoter demonstrated that Sp and
N-Myc synergistically activate Pss1 expression in astrocytes. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation indicated that Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 interact with a common DNA
binding site on the promoter. Reduction in levels of Sp1, Sp3, or N-Myc proteins 
by RNA interference decreased promoter activity. In addition, disruption of
Sp/DNA binding with mithramycin significantly reduced Pss1 expression and PSS1
enzymatic activity, underscoring the essential contribution of Sp factors in
regulating PSS1 activity. These studies provide the first analysis of mechanisms 
that regulate expression of a mammalian Pss gene in brain.

PMCID: PMC3020713
PMID: 21068393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. J Agric Food Chem. 2010 Dec 8;58(23):12137-42. doi: 10.1021/jf101728d. Epub 2010 
Nov 3.

Chemiluminescence evaluation of antioxidant activity and prevention of DNA damage
effect of peptides isolated from soluble eggshell membrane protein hydrolysate.

Huang X(1), Zhou Y, Ma M, Cai Z, Li T.

Author information: 
(1)National R&D Center for Egg Processing, Huazhong Agricultural University, 1
Shizishan Street, Wuhan, Hubei 430070, China.

A new kind of soluble eggshell membrane protein (SEP) was prepared from eggshell 
membrane (ESM). The extraction rate of SEP could rise to 90% by two times,
basically accomplishing the complete utilization of the whole ESM. Five proteases
were employed as hydrolytic enzyme for the preparation of antioxidative peptides 
from SEP, and the antioxidative activities of the hydrolysates were investigated 
using a chemiluminescence method. Among the hydrolysates, alcalase hydrolysates
with the highest free radical scavenging activity were further separated into
three fractions using Sephadex G-25 gel filtration chromatography of the 4 h
hydrolysate (SP1, SP2, and SP3). Among these three fractions, SP2 with an average
molecular weight of 618.86 Da possessed the strongest fraction of scavenging
activity. The IC50 values of the superoxide radicals, hydroxyl scavenging
activities, and protective effect on DNA damage caused by hydroxyl radicals
generated were 0.10, 0.18, and 0.95 mg/mL, respectively. These results
demonstrate that inexpensive ESM waste could be a new alternative in the
production of antioxidative peptides.

PMID: 21047127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Org Lett. 2010 Dec 3;12(23):5370-3. doi: 10.1021/ol101995v. Epub 2010 Nov 3.

Rhodium-catalyzed activation of C(sp3)-X (X = Cl, Br) bond: an intermolecular
halogen exchange case.

Wang J(1), Tong X, Xie X, Zhang Z.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai 200240, China.

A RhCl(PPh(3))(3)-catalyzed halogen-exchange reaction between allyl and alkyl
halides with ß-H atoms was observed. The possible mechanism of the reaction
involves oxidative addition and reductive elimination of the C(sp(3))-X bonds,
which is not common in organometallic chemistry.

PMID: 21047102  [PubMed]


248. Dalton Trans. 2010 Dec 21;39(47):11317-21. doi: 10.1039/c0dt01234c. Epub 2010 Nov
1.

Pd-catalyzed decarboxylative arylation of silyl enol ester sp3 ß-C-H bond under
aerobic conditions.

Fu Z(1), Huang S, Kan J, Su W, Hong M.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Structural Chemistry, Fujian Institute of Research on 
the Structure of Matter, The Chinese Academy of Sciences, Fuzhou, Fujian 350002, 
China.

Pd-catalyzed aerobic oxidative coupling of various benzoic acids with silyl enol 
esters proceeds via a combination of decarboxylation with sp(3) ß-C-H bond
activation to give Heck-type products. Mechanistic studies reveal this coupling
involves in situ generation of olefin from aerobic oxidation of silyl enolate,
followed by decarboxylative Heck coupling.

PMID: 21038060  [PubMed]


249. Chemistry. 2010 Nov 22;16(44):13063-7. doi: 10.1002/chem.201001887.

C-2 arylation of piperidines through directed transition-metal-catalyzed sp3 C-H 
activation.

Prokopcová H(1), Bergman SD, Aelvoet K, Smout V, Herrebout W, Van der Veken B,
Meerpoel L, Maes BU.

Author information: 
(1)Organic Synthesis, University of Antwerp, Groenenborgerlaan 171, 2020 Antwerp,
Belgium.

PMID: 20981669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Biol Cell. 2010 Jan;103(1):21-33. doi: 10.1042/BC20100094.

PMA up-regulates the transcription of Axl by AP-1 transcription factor binding to
TRE sequences via the MAPK cascade in leukaemia cells.

Mudduluru G(1), Leupold JH, Stroebel P, Allgayer H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Surgery Mannheim/Molecular Oncology of Solid
Tumors, DKFZ and University of Heidelberg, Mannheim 68167, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Axl is a receptor tyrosine kinase promoting anti-apoptosis, invasion 
and mitogenesis, and is highly expressed in different solid cancers. Axl basal
transcriptional activity is driven by Sp1/Sp3, and overexpression of MZF-1
(myeloid zinc-finger 1) induces Axl transcription and gene expression.
Furthermore, Axl expression is epigenetically controlled by CpG hypermethylation;
however, little is known about inducible Axl gene expression and Axl regulation
in haematopoetic malignancies.
RESULTS: In the present study, we studied Axl transcriptional regulation under
PMA-stimulated conditions in leukaemia cells. Luciferase analysis with sequential
5'-deletion constructs revealed that the -660/-580 region of the Axl promoter is 
indispensable for induced promoter activity under PMA stimulation. This region
includes AP-1 (activator protein 1)/CREB [CRE (cAMP-response-element)-binding
protein] motifs, five times partially overlapping TGCGTG repeats and multiple GT 
repeats. Mutational, supershift and ChIP (chromatin immunoprecipitation) analysis
determined that AP-1 family members bind to AP-1 motifs and to the 5 × TGCGTG
overlapping repeats, thus transactivating Axl promoter activity. Furthermore,
specific inhibitors of PKC (protein kinase C), ERK1/2
(extracellular-signal-regulated kinase 1/2) and p38 reduced Axl expression.
Additionally, mithramycin treatment abolished constitutive and PMA-induced Axl
expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together the results of the present study suggest that
PMA-induced Axl gene expression in leukaemia cells is mediated by AP-1 motifs and
5 × TGCGTG repeats within the promoter region -660/-580, and through the
PKC/ERK1/2/AP-1 or PKC/p-38/AP-1 signalling axis.

PMID: 20977427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 14;286(2):1301-11. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.127837. Epub 2010 
Oct 25.

Human glycolipid transfer protein gene (GLTP) expression is regulated by Sp1 and 
Sp3: involvement of the bioactive sphingolipid ceramide.

Zou X(1), Gao Y, Ruvolo VR, Gardner TL, Ruvolo PP, Brown RE.

Author information: 
(1)The Hormel Institute, University of Minnesota, Austin, Minnesota 55912, USA.

Glycolipid transfer protein (GLTP) accelerates glycolipid intermembrane transfer 
via a unique lipid transfer/binding fold (GLTP fold) that defines the GLTP
superfamily and is the prototype for functional GLTP-like domains in larger
proteins, i.e. FAPP2. Human GLTP is encoded by the single-copy GLTP gene on
chromosome 12 (12q24.11 locus), but regulation of GLTP gene expression remains
completely unexplored. Herein, the ability of glycosphingolipids (and their
sphingolipid metabolites) to regulate the transcriptional expression of GLTP via 
its promoter has been evaluated. Using luciferase and GFP reporters in concert
with deletion mutants, the constitutive and basal (225 bp; ~78% G+C) human GLTP
promoters have been defined along with adjacent regulatory elements. Despite high
G+C content, translational regulation was not evident by the mammalian target of 
rapamycin pathway. Four GC-boxes were shown to be functional Sp1/Sp3
transcription factor binding sites. Mutation of one GC-box was particularly
detrimental to GLTP transcriptional activity. Sp1/Sp3 RNA silencing and
mithramycin A treatment significantly inhibited GLTP promoter activity. Among
tested sphingolipid analogs of glucosylceramide, sulfatide, ganglioside GM1,
ceramide 1-phosphate, sphingosine 1-phosphate, dihydroceramide, sphingosine, only
ceramide, a nonglycosylated precursor metabolite unable to bind to GLTP protein, 
induced GLTP promoter activity and raised transcript levels in vivo. Ceramide
treatment partially blocked promoter activity decreases induced by Sp1/Sp3
knockdown. Ceramide treatment also altered the in vivo binding affinity of Sp1
and Sp3 for the GLTP promoter and decreased Sp3 acetylation. This study
represents the first characterization of any Gltp gene promoter and links human
GLTP expression to sphingolipid homeostasis through ceramide.

PMCID: PMC3020738
PMID: 20974858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Water Sci Technol. 2010;62(7):1526-35. doi: 10.2166/wst.2010.936.

Electro-coagulation treatment efficiency of graphite, iron and aluminum
electrodes using alum and wood ash electrolytes on a Kraft pulp and paper mill
effluent.

Orori OB(1), Etiégni L, Senelwa K, Mwamburi MM, Balozi KB, Barisa GK, Omutange
ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forestry and Wood Science, Moi University, Eldoret 30100, Kenya.
benorori@yahoo.com

Specific power consumption and reduction of BOD, COD, TS, pH, and chemical
elements were used to determine the treatment efficiency of Fe, graphite and Al
electrodes with alum and wood ash as supporting electrolytes on the effluent from
a Kraft pulp and paper mill in Kenya. Five sampling points were selected along
mill's effluent treatment system: primary settling tank (SP1), first aerated
lagoon (SP2), second aerated lagoon (SP3), stabilization pond (SP4), and at
discharge point (SP5). Operating costs were also compared between treatments.
Graphite electrodes combined with alum showed the lowest power consumption (0.5
to 3.9 mWh/m³), followed by Al and Fe. All the electrodes reduced color from a
maximum of 3,200°H to the minimum local standard of 15°H. However Al electrode
with alum was the most effective method for BOD and COD reduction by over 60% and
58.8% respectively and generated less sludge at all sampling points. The cost of 
treatment was lowest with graphite electrode (US$0.006 to 0.0008 per m³ of
effluent), but highest with Al electrodes combined with wood ash (US$31.74 to
8.34 per m³). Further study is required for the effectiveness of increasing the
concentration of wood ash leachate at higher concentration and current density.

PMID: 20935369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Alzheimers Dis. 2010;22(4):1209-21. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2010-100651.

Chromatin-modifying agents increase transcription of CYP46A1, a key player in
brain cholesterol elimination.

Milagre I(1), Nunes MJ, Moutinho M, Rivera I, Fuso A, Scarpa S, Gama MJ,
Rodrigues E.

Author information: 
(1)iMed.UL-Research Institute for Medicines and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty 
of Pharmacy, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal.

The major mechanism of brain cholesterol elimination is the conversion of
cholesterol into 24S-hydroxycholesterol by CYP46A1, a neuron-specific cytochrome 
P450. Since increasing evidence suggests that upregulation of CYP46A1 may be
relevant for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease, we aim to identify the
molecular mechanisms involved in CYP46A1 transcription. Our previous studies
demonstrated the role of Sp transcription factors in basal expression and histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor-dependent derepression of CYP46A1. Here, we show
that the demethylating agent 5'-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine (DAC) is a CYP46A1 inducer
and that pre-treatment with DAC causes a marked synergistic activation of CYP46A1
transcription by trichostatin A. Surprisingly, bisulfite sequencing analysis
revealed that the CYP46A1 core promoter is completely unmethylated in both human 
brain and non-neuronal human tissues where CYP46A1 is not expressed. Therefore,
we have investigated Sp expression levels by western blot and real-time PCR, and 
their binding patterns to the CYP46A1 promoter, by electrophoretic mobility shift
assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, after DAC treatment. Our results 
showed that DAC decreases not only Sp1 and Sp3 protein levels, but also the
binding activity of Sp3 to the +1 region of the CYP46A1 locus. Concomitantly,
HDAC1 and HDAC2 were also significantly dissociated from the promoter. In
conclusion, DAC induces CYP46A1 gene expression, in a DNA methylation-independent
mechanism, decreasing Sp3/HDAC binding to the proximal promoter. Furthermore, by 
affecting the expression of the Sp3 transcription factor in neuronal cells, DAC
might affect not only brain cholesterol metabolism, but also the expression of
many other neuronal genes.

PMID: 20930312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Dalton Trans. 2010 Nov 21;39(43):10528-35. doi: 10.1039/c0dt00578a. Epub 2010 Oct
7.

DFT study of the mechanism of benzocyclobutene formation by palladium-catalysed
C(sp3)-H activation: role of the nature of the base and the phosphine.

Kefalidis CE(1), Baudoin O, Clot E.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Charles Gerhardt, Université Montpellier 2, CNRS 5253, cc 1501, Place
Eugène Bataillon, 34095, Montpellier Cedex, France.

DFT(B3PW91) calculations of the mechanism of the intramolecular C(sp(3))-H
arylation of 2-bromo-tert-butylbenzene to form benzocyclobutene catalysed by
Pd(PR(3)) (R = Me, (t)Bu) and a base (acetate, bicarbonate, carbonate) show that 
the preferred mechanism is highly dependent on the nature of the phosphine and
the base used in the calculations. With the experimental reagents (P(t)Bu(3) and 
carbonate) the rate-determining step is C-H activation with the base coordinated 
trans to the C-H bond. An agostic interaction of a geminal C-H bond with respect 
to the bond to be cleaved induces a lowering of the activation barrier.

PMID: 20927457  [PubMed]


255. J Oral Pathol Med. 2011 Mar;40(3):227-34. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0714.2010.00950.x. 
Epub 2010 Oct 4.

Establishment of human dental epithelial cell lines expressing ameloblastin and
enamelin by transfection of hTERT and cdk4 cDNAs.

Hatakeyama S(1), Mizusawa N, Tsutsumi R, Yoshimoto K, Mizuki H, Yasumoto S, Sato 
S, Takeda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogenesis and Control of Oral Diseases, School of Dentistry, 
Iwate Medical University, Morioka, Japan. hsetsuko11@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: An in vitro cell culture system of dental epithelium is useful for
the investigations of cellular differentiation and function of ameloblast in
amelogenesis and of regenerative therapy in human tooth. However, there have been
no immortalized human dental epithelial ameloblastic-lineage cell lines, which
proliferate indefinitely and additionally produce enamel matrix proteins.
METHODS: We transfected two retroviral constructs of human telomerase reverse
transcriptase (hTERT) cDNA and mouse cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (cdk4) cDNA into
the primary ameloblastoma cells and isolated immortalized human dental epithelial
cell lines of HAM1, HAM2 and HAM3. The three cell lines were examined by electron
microscopy, assay of senescence-associated ß-galactosidase activity, mRNA
expression and immuno-reactivity of dental epithelial marker cell molecules and
enamel matrix proteins.
RESULTS: They showed undifferentiated phenotypes in monolayer culture and did not
have any ß-galactosidase activity. The transcripts of dental epithelial cell
markers of Msx2, Jagged1, Notch1, Sp3, Sp6, keratin 14 and keratin 18 were
confirmed. In addition, mRNA and protein expression of ameloblastin and enamelin 
were also detected in three cell lines. All cells in the three cell lines were
keratin 14- and 18-positive and some elongated cells were Jagged1-positive.
Msx2-positive nuclei were noted in only HAM2 cells.
CONCLUSION: We established three cell lines by transfection of hTERT and cdk4
cDNAs, which were characterized as dental epithelial progenitor cells containing 
ameloblast-lineage cell phenotype.

© 2010 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 20923449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2010 Dec;299(6):G1344-53. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00334.2010. Epub 2010 Sep 30.

Glutamine protects against apoptosis via downregulation of Sp3 in intestinal
epithelial cells.

Ban K(1), Kozar RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Texas Medical School, Houston, 77030,
USA. Kechen.Ban@uth.tmc.edu

Glutamine plays a key role in intestinal growth and maintenance of gut function, 
and as we have shown protects the postischemic gut (Kozar RA, Scultz SG, Bick RJ,
Poindexter BJ, Desoigne R, Weisbrodt NW, Haber MM, Moore FA. Shock 21: 433-437,
2004). However, the precise mechanisms of the gut protective effects of glutamine
have not been well elucidated. In the present study, RNA microarray was performed
to obtain differentially expressed genes in intestinal epithelial IEC-6 cells
following either 2 mM or 10 mM glutamine. The result demonstrated that
specificity protein 3 (Sp3) mRNA expression was downregulated 3.1-fold. PCR and
Western blot confirmed that Sp3 expression was decreased by glutamine in a time- 
and dose-dependent fashion. To investigate the role of Sp3, Sp3 gene siRNA
silencing was performed and apoptosis was assessed. Silencing of Sp3 demonstrated
a significant increase in Bcl-2 and decrease in Bax protein expression, as well
as a decrease in caspase-3, -8, and -9 protein expression and activity. The
protein expression of apoptosis-related proteins after hypoxia/reoxygenation was 
similar to that of normoxia and correlated with a decrease in DNA fragmentation. 
Importantly, the addition of glutamine to Sp3-silenced cells did not further
lessen apoptosis, suggesting that Sp3 plays a major role in the inhibitory effect
of glutamine on apoptosis. This novel finding may explain in part the
gut-protective effects of glutamine.

PMCID: PMC3006244
PMID: 20884886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Cell Mol Med. 2011 Sep;15(9):1865-77. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2010.01182.x.

GATA4 regulates ANF expression synergistically with Sp1 in a cardiac hypertrophy 
model.

Hu X(1), Li T, Zhang C, Liu Y, Xu M, Wang W, Jia Z, Ma K, Zhang Y, Zhou C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Peking University, Haidian District, Beijing, China.

Cardiac hypertrophy in response to multiple stimuli has important physiological
and pathological significances. GATA4 serves as a nuclear integrator of several
signalling pathways during cardiac hypertrophy. Sp1 and Sp3 are also reported to 
be involved in this process. However, the mechanism by which GATA4 acts as a
mediator, integrating these ubiquitously expressed transcriptional factors, is
poorly understood. We found that the expression of GATA4 and Sp1 was up-regulated
in the myocardium of a pressure overload hypertrophy rat model, as well in
phenylephrine-induced (PE-induced) hypertrophic growth of neonatal
cardiomyocytes. GST pull-down assays demonstrated that GATA4 could interact with 
Sp1 in vitro. Therefore, we proposed that GATA4 cooperates with Sp1 in regulating
ANF expression, as its reactivation is closely linked with hypertrophy. Further
studies demonstrated that GATA4 could activate the ANF promoter synergistically
with Sp1 through direct interaction. In contrast, Sp3 exhibited antagonistic
function, and overexpression of Sp3 repressed the transcriptional synergy between
Sp1 and GATA4. We also found that Sp1 alone could activate the ANF promoter in
cardiomyocytes, whereas Sp3 exerted negative effects on ANF expression.
Bioinformatics analysis revealed novel Sp-binding sites on the ANF promoter. The 
recruitment of GATA4 and Sp1 on the ANF promoter was enhanced during
phenylephrine-mediated hypertrophy, whereas the recruitment of Sp3 was reduced.
The phosphorylation of GATA4 by ERK1/2 kinase could enhance the affinity between 
GATA4 and Sp1. Thus, our findings revealed the critical interaction of GATA4 and 
Sp1 in modulating ANF expression, indicating their involvement in cardiac
hypertrophy.

© 2011 The Authors Journal compilation © 2011 Foundation for Cellular and
Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3918043
PMID: 20874724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Org Lett. 2010 Oct 15;12(20):4446-9. doi: 10.1021/ol1018147.

Stereocontrolled synthesis of contiguous C(sp3)-C(aryl) bonds by
lanthanide(III)-catalyzed domino aryl-Claisen [3,3]-sigmatropic rearrangements.

Ramadhar TR(1), Kawakami J, Lough AJ, Batey RA.

Author information: 
(1)Davenport Research Laboratories, Department of Chemistry, University of
Toronto, 80 St. George Street, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, M5S 3H6.

A domino [3,3]-sigmatropic aryl-Claisen rearrangement of cyclic and acyclic
bisaryloxy-substituted alkenes can be performed in high yield by using Ln(fod)(3)
catalysis to obtain bisphenolic products incorporating two contiguous
aryl-C(sp(3)) bonds. Stereospecific rearrangement was observed for cyclic
substrates. The precursor diaryl ethers were typically synthesized from the
corresponding diols by double arylation procedures using either copper catalyzed 
coupling of aryltrifluoroborate salts or by S(N)Ar reaction.

PMID: 20857953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Am J Clin Pathol. 2010 Oct;134(4):621-32. doi: 10.1309/AJCPOG3O3KTPZQNK.

The reliability of rabbit monoclonal antibodies in the immunohistochemical
assessment of estrogen receptors, progesterone receptors, and HER2 in human
breast carcinomas.

Rhodes A(1), Sarson J, Assam EE, Dean SJ, Cribb EC, Parker A.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health & Life Sciences, University of the West of England,
Coldharbour Lane, Bristol, BS16 1QY, England.

The reliability of the rabbit monoclonal antibodies SP1, SP2, SP3, and 4B5 was
immunohistochemically assessed on a range of 96 invasive breast carcinomas and
the results compared with those achieved with established antibody markers for
estrogen receptors (6F11), progesterone receptors (PgR636), and HER2 (polyclonal 
A0485 and clone CB11), with HER2 status validated by fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) and silver in situ hybridization. Optimal results depended
on the duration of microwave antigen-retrieval time and the use of a high pH
buffer for rabbit and mouse estrogen receptor antibodies (SP1 and 6F11), although
only on antigen-retrieval duration for the progesterone receptors SP2 and PgR636.
The highest rate of concordance between HER2 overexpression and HER2 gene
amplification was with the rabbit monoclonal antibodies (SP3 and 4B5) and FISH.
Rabbit monoclonal antibodies are reliable alternatives to established antibody
markers for the immunohistochemical testing of estrogen receptors, progesterone
receptors, and HER2 in breast cancer.

PMID: 20855644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Org Lett. 2010 Oct 1;12(19):4240-3. doi: 10.1021/ol101576q.

Copper-catalyzed synthesis of a-amino imides from tertiary amines: Ugi-type
three-component assemblies involving direct functionalization of sp3 C-Hs
adjacent to nitrogen atoms.

Ye X(1), Xie C, Pan Y, Han L, Xie T.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center of Biomedicine and Health, and College of Materials, Chemistry
and Chemical Engineering, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou 310012, PR China.

a-Amino imides can be accessed straightforwardly from tertiary amines through
copper-catalyzed three-component reactions involving the direct functionalization
of sp(3) C-Hs adjacent to nitrogen atoms. This reaction has demonstrated a
tolerance to a wide range of functionalizations and can be performed under very
mild conditions. A plausible mechanism has been proposed in which an Ugi-type
cascade assembly has been included.

PMID: 20828188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Ann Anat. 2010 Sep 20;192(5):275-83. doi: 10.1016/j.aanat.2010.07.010. Epub 2010 
Aug 6.

The role of Sp1 and Sp3 in normal and cancer cell biology.

Li L(1), Davie JR.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba
R3E 0V9, Canada.

Sp1 and Sp3 are transcription factors expressed in all mammalian cells. These
factors are involved in regulating the transcriptional activity of genes
implicated in most cellular processes. Dysregulation of Sp1 and Sp3 is observed
in many cancers and diseases. Due to the amino acid sequence similarity of the
DNA binding domains, Sp1 and Sp3 recognize and associate with the same DNA
element with similar affinity. However, others and our laboratory demonstrated
that these two factors possess different properties and exert different
functional roles. Both Sp1 and Sp3 can interact with and recruit a large number
of proteins including the transcription initiation complex, histone modifying
enzymes and chromatin remodeling complexes, which strongly suggest that Sp1 and
Sp3 are important transcription factors in the remodeling chromatin and the
regulation of gene expression. In this review, the role of Sp1 and Sp3 in normal 
and cancer cell biology and the multiple mechanisms deciding the functional roles
of Sp1 and Sp3 will be presented.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20810260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Chem Commun (Camb). 2010 Oct 14;46(38):7259-61. doi: 10.1039/c0cc00841a. Epub
2010 Aug 25.

Palladium-catalyzed acetoxylation of sp3 C-H bonds using molecular oxygen.

Jiang H(1), Chen H, Wang A, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)College of Chemistry, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou City,
Guangdong Province 510640, China. jianghf@scut.edu.cn

Molecular oxygen as oxidant to promote palladium-catalyzed acetoxylation of sp(3)
C-H bonds to afford a-oxygenated products is reported.

PMID: 20737106  [PubMed]


263. Br J Cancer. 2010 Sep 7;103(6):802-11. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605818. Epub 2010 Aug
24.

Enzastaurin inhibits invasion and metastasis in lung cancer by diverse molecules.

Körner A(1), Mudduluru G, Manegold C, Allgayer H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Surgery Mannheim/Molecular Oncology of Solid Tumors
(German Cancer Research Center-DKFZ-Heidelberg), Mannheim Medical Faculty,
Ruprecht-Karls-University Heidelberg, Mannheim 68167, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Enzastaurin (Enz) is a serine/threonine kinase inhibitor blocking
protein kinase C (PKC)beta/AKT pathway. However, an ability of this compound to
inhibit cancer invasion and metastasis is not yet clearly elucidated.
METHODS: The ability of Enz to inhibit invasion and metastasis, and to target
molecules was investigated in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) by RT-PCR
validated microarray, Matrigel, and in vivo chorionallantoic membrane (CAM)
assays.
RESULTS: Enzastaurin significantly reduced migration, invasion, and in vivo
metastasis to lungs and liver (CAM assay) of diverse NSCLC cell lines. Genes
promoting cancer progression (u-PAR, VEGFC, and HIF1alpha) and tumour suppression
(VHL, RASSF1, and FHIT) of NSCLC were significantly (P<0.05) down- or upregulated
after Enz treatment in H460, A549, and H1299 cells, respectively.
Luciferase/chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis showed that Enz
transcriptionally controls urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor (u-PAR) 
expression by promoter inhibition through Sp1, Sp3, and c-Jun(AP-1). Moreover,
siRNA knockdown of u-PAR re-sensitised Enz-resistant cells and induced apoptosis,
suggesting u-PAR as a marker of Enz resistance.
CONCLUSION: This study shows that Enz inhibits migration, invasion, and in vivo
metastasis by targeting u-PAR, besides further targeting progression-related and 
tumour-suppressor genes in NSCLC. Together with u-PAR being a novel putative
marker of Enz response, these data encourage molecularly tailored clinical
studies on Enz in NSCLC therapy.

PMCID: PMC2966618
PMID: 20736951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Braz J Biol. 2010 Aug;70(3):529-36.

Prey selection in the trap-nesting wasp Trypoxylon (Trypargilum) opacum Brèthes
(Hymenprtera; Crabronidae).

Buschini ML(1), Borba NA, Brescovit AD.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biologia, Universidade Estadual do Centro-Oeste, Guarapuava,
PR, Brazil. isatunes@yahoo.com.br

The purpose of our research was to document and discuss the temporal patterns of 
prey use shown by the trap-nesting wasp Trypoxylon opacum in two different
habitats in Southern Brazil. It was carried out from December 2001 to December
2004. Twenty nine species belonging to five families of spiders were captured by 
T. opacum. Araneidae was the most captured family and has been strongly
represented by the genus Eustala. Through Bray-Curtis s coefficient and the
unweighted pair group method average (UPGMA), the spiders can be divided into
three groups: the smaller group includes the most abundant species (Alpaida sp2, 
Bertrana rufostriata, Eustala sp1, Eustala sp2, Eustala sp3 and Eustala sp4), the
second group includes species with intermediate abundance (Alpaida, Alpaida
gracia and Mangora sp2), and the third and largest group includes the less
abundant species, (Acacesia villalobosi, Alpaida argenata, Alpaida sp1, Araneus
blumenau, Araneus sicki, Crysometa boraceia, Crysometa sp3, Eustala sp8, Eustala 
sp11, Larinia t-notata, Mangora sp1, Ocrepeira aff gnomo, Sanogasta sp.,
Sanogasta sp2, Sanogasta sp3, Salticidae sp2, Theridion sp1, Theridion sp2,
Wagneriana eupalaestris, Wagneriana iguape). Of 1,053 identified spiders, 362
were captured in the grassland areas and 691 in the swamp, since T. opacum built 
nests only in these two habitats. The diversity, richness and evenness of spiders
in T. opacum nests were higher in grassland than in the swamp.

PMID: 20730339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2010 Aug 15;237(4):369-75. doi: 10.2460/javma.237.4.369.

Comparison of long-term financial implications for five veterinary career tracks.

Gordon ME(1), Lloyd JW, Harris-Kober DL.

Author information: 
(1)Office of the Dean, College of Veterinary Medicine, Michigan State University,
East Lansing, MI 48824, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To compare present values of expected income streams for 5 distinct
veterinary medical career tracks.
DESIGN: Present value model.
SAMPLE POPULATION: AVMA survey data.
PROCEDURES: Present values of expected income streams (net of debt repayment)
were created and ranked. Sensitivity to each independent variable was assessed.
RESULTS: Career present value at 34 years after graduation (CPV(34)) was highest 
for board-certified specialist (SP; $2,272,877), followed by practice owner (PO; 
$2,119,596), practice owner buying into practice after 10 years (PO-10;
$1,736,333), SP working three-fourths time (SP3/4; $1,702,744), and general
practitioner (GP; $1,221,131). Compared with CPV(34) for SP, other career tracks 
yielded values of 93.3% (PO), 76.4% (PO-10), 74.9% (SP3/4), and 53.7% (GP). The
model was robust to debt, interest rate, loan term, and discount rate but was
sensitive to mean starting incomes and mean incomes.
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Greatest return on time and money invested by
a veterinary student is through practicing full-time as an SP or through being a 
PO. Being an SP or SP3/4 was substantially more lucrative than being a GP and was
comparable to being a PO. Practice ownership and working as an SP3/4 may be
options for balancing financial gain with free time. Specialty training and
practice ownership may be career tracks with the best potential repayment options
for veterinarians with a large educational debt. Regardless of the amount of
debt, the type of practice, mean incomes in a particular field, personal
lifestyle, and professional interests are important factors when deciding among
career tracks.

PMID: 20707746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Oct;299(4):E640-6. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00063.2010. Epub 2010 Aug 3.

SK3 channel expression during pregnancy is regulated through estrogen and Sp
factor-mediated transcriptional control of the KCNN3 gene.

Pierce SL(1), England SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Carver College of Medicine,
University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Overexpression of the small-conductance calcium-activated K(+) channel 3 (SK3) in
transgenic mice compromises parturition, suggesting that the SK3 channel plays a 
role in pregnancy. In wild-type mouse myometrium, expression of SK3 transcript
and protein is significantly reduced during pregnancy, but the mechanism(s)
responsible for this attenuation of channel expression is unknown. The promoter
region of the SK3-encoding mouse KCNN3 gene contains two binding sites for
specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors, two of which are expressed in the
uterus: Sp1, which enhances gene transcription in response to estrogen; and Sp3, 
which competes for the same binding motif as Sp1 and can repress gene expression.
We investigated the hypothesis that Sp1 and Sp3 regulate SK3 channel expression
during pregnancy. In mouse myometrium, Sp1 expression was reduced during late
gestation, whereas Sp3 expression levels were constant throughout pregnancy.
Using a reporter system, we found that Sp1 overexpression resulted in a
significant increase in SK3 promoter activation and that Sp3 cotransfection
reduced promoter activation to basal levels. These findings indicate that Sp3
outcompetes Sp1 to decrease SK3 transcription. To determine whether high levels
of estrogen in vivo can affect the regulation of SK3 protein levels by Sp
factors, ovariectomized mice were implanted with a 17ß-estradiol or placebo
pellet for 3 wk; estrogen-treated mice had reduced uterine SK3 protein expression
compared with placebo-treated counterparts. In human myometrial cells
overexpressing Sp1, estrogen treatment stimulated expression of the SK3
transcript. Overall, our findings indicate that Sp1 and Sp3 compete to regulate
SK3 channel expression during pregnancy in response to stimulation by estrogen.

PMCID: PMC2957868
PMID: 20682843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Am Chem Soc. 2010 Aug 11;132(31):10692-705. doi: 10.1021/ja103081n.

Investigation of the mechanism of C(sp3)-H bond cleavage in Pd(0)-catalyzed
intramolecular alkane arylation adjacent to amides and sulfonamides.

Rousseaux S(1), Gorelsky SI, Chung BK, Fagnou K.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Catalysis Research and Innovation, Department of Chemistry,
University of Ottawa, 10 Marie Curie, Ottawa, Ontario, K1N 6N5, Canada.
srous100@uottawa.ca

The reactivity of C(sp(3))-H bonds adjacent to a nitrogen atom can be tuned to
allow intramolecular alkane arylation under Pd(0) catalysis. Diminishing the
Lewis basicity of the nitrogen lone pair is crucial for this catalytic activity. 
A range of N-methylamides and sulfonamides react exclusively at primary
C(sp(3))-H bonds to afford the products of alkane arylation in good yields. The
isolation of a Pd(II) reaction intermediate has enabled an evaluation of the
reaction mechanism with a focus on the role of the bases in the C(sp(3))-H bond
cleaving step. The results of these stoichiometric studies, together with kinetic
isotope effect experiments, provide rare experimental support for a concerted
metalation-deprotonation (CMD) transition state, which has previously been
proposed in alkane C(sp(3))-H arylation. Moreover, DFT calculations have
uncovered the additional role of the pivalate additive as a promoter of phosphine
dissociation from the Pd(II) intermediate, enabling the CMD transition state.
Finally, kinetic studies were performed, revealing the reaction rate expression
and its relationship with the concentration of pivalate.

PMID: 20681702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Biol Chem. 2010 Sep 24;285(39):29842-50. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.116319. Epub
2010 Jul 27.

Histone modifiers, YY1 and p300, regulate the expression of cartilage-specific
gene, chondromodulin-I, in mesenchymal stem cells.

Aoyama T(1), Okamoto T, Fukiage K, Otsuka S, Furu M, Ito K, Jin Y, Ueda M,
Nagayama S, Nakayama T, Nakamura T, Toguchida J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Frontier Medical Sciences, Kyoto University,Kyoto 606-8507,
Japan.

Elucidating the regulatory mechanism for tissue-specific gene expression is key
to understanding the differentiation process. The chondromodulin-I gene (ChM-I)
is a cartilage-specific gene, the expression of which is regulated by the
transcription factor, Sp3. The binding of Sp3 to the core-promoter region is
regulated by the methylation status of the Sp3-binding motif as we reported
previously. In this study, we have investigated the molecular mechanisms of the
down-regulation of ChM-I expression in mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) and normal
mesenchymal tissues other than cartilage. The core-promoter region of cells in
bone and peripheral nerve tissues was hypermethylated, whereas the methylation
status in cells of other tissues including MSCs did not differ from that in cells
of cartilage, suggesting the presence of inhibitory mechanisms other than DNA
methylation. We found that a transcriptional repressor, YY1, negatively regulated
the expression of ChM-I by recruiting histone deacetylase and thus inducing the
deacetylation of associated histones. As for a positive regulator, we found that 
a transcriptional co-activator, p300, bound to the core-promoter region with Sp3,
inducing the acetylation of histone. Inhibition of YY1 in combination with forced
expression of p300 and Sp3 restored the expression of ChM-I in cells with a
hypomethylated promoter region, but not in cells with hypermethylation. These
results suggested that the expression of tissue-specific genes is regulated in
two steps; reversible down-regulation by transcriptional repressor complex and
tight down-regulation via DNA methylation.

PMCID: PMC2943260
PMID: 20663886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Aug;26(8):754-7.

[Effect of Cobaltous chloride on the transcription activity of modified human
eNOS promoter].

[Article in Chinese]

Long YT(1), Xing FY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Tissue Transplantation and Immunology, Jinan University,
Guangzhou 510632, China.

AIM: To construct modified promoter of human endothelial nitric-oxide
synthase(eNOS) and investigate transcriptional activity of the eNOS promoter via 
a hypoxia model of human umbilical vein endothelial cells-12(HUVEC-12) stimulated
by Cobaltous chloride in vitro.
METHODS: The pGL2-eNOS-repSP3 vector was constructed by the SP1-replaced SP3
element with using DNA site-directed mutation of PCR. The cells were transfected 
with pGL2-eNOS-repSP3 vector and normal pGL2-eNOS-p vector, repsectively.
Compared with another modified eNOS promoter(pGL2-eNOS-insSP1) the
transcriptional activity of pGL2-eNOS-repSP3 vector was determined using a double
luciferase reporter gene system by the stimulation of different concentrations of
Cobaltous Chloride.
RESULTS: The pGL2-eNOS-repSP3 vector was constructed successfully. After the
stimulation of Cobaltous Chloride, the transcriptional activities of both
pGL2-eNOS-repSP3 and pGL2-eNOS-insSP1 increased as the concentration of Cobaltous
Chloride increased. But there was not significantly statistical difference
between them.
CONCLUSION: There is no significant difference on transcriptional activities
between the two modified vectors, pGL2-eNOS-repSP3 and pGL2-eNOS-insSP1.

PMID: 20619101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Org Lett. 2010 Aug 6;12(15):3414-7. doi: 10.1021/ol101220x.

Facile benzo-ring construction via palladium-catalyzed functionalization of
unactivated sp3 C-H bonds under mild reaction conditions.

Feng Y(1), Wang Y, Landgraf B, Liu S, Chen G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pensylvania 16802, USA.

A practical synthetic method for the annulation of benzo-rings by the
intramolecular coupling of an aryl iodide and a methylene C-H bond is described. 
The palladium-catalyzed C-H functionalization is directed by an aminoquinoline
carboxamide group, which can be easily installed and removed. High yields and
broad substrate scope were achieved. An additive of ortho-phenyl benzoic acid,
identified from a systematic screening, functions as a critical ligand for the
catalytic process under mild condition, even at near room temperature.

PMID: 20583778  [PubMed]


271. J Am Chem Soc. 2010 Jul 21;132(28):9585-7. doi: 10.1021/ja104305s.

Pyrrole synthesis via allylic sp3 C-H activation of enamines followed by
intermolecular coupling with unactivated alkynes.

Rakshit S(1), Patureau FW, Glorius F.

Author information: 
(1)NRW Graduate School of Chemistry, Organisch-Chemisches Institut, Westfälische 
Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Corrensstrasse 40, 48149 Münster, Germany.

A conceptually novel pyrrole synthesis is reported, efficiently merging enamines 
and (unactivated) alkynes under oxidative conditions. In an intermolecular Rh
catalyzed process, the challenging allylic sp(3) C-H activation of the enamine
substrates is followed by the cyclization with the alkyne (R(3) = CO(2)R).
Alternatively, in some cases (R(3) = CN), the enamine can be utilized for a
vinylic sp(2) C-H activation. A total of 17 examples with yields above 60% is
presented, together with the results of an initial mechanistic investigation.

PMID: 20578748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Int J Cancer. 2011 Apr 15;128(8):1836-42. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25524.

Role for transcription factor TFII-I in the suppression of SSeCKS/Gravin/Akap12
transcription by Src.

Bu Y(1), Gao L, Gelman IH.

Author information: 
(1)Kinex Pharmaceuticals, LLC, Buffalo, NY, USA.

The SSeCKS/Gravin/AKAP12 gene, encoding a kinase scaffolding protein with
metastasis-suppressing activity, is transcriptionally downregulated in
Src-transformed cells through the recruitment of HDAC1 to a Src-responsive
proximal promoter site charged with Sp1, Sp3 and USF1. However, the ectopic
expression of these proteins formed a suppressive complex in Src-transformed but 
not in parental NIH3T3 cells, suggesting the involvement of additional repressor 
factors. Transcription factor II-I (TFII-I) [general transcription factor 2i
(Gtf2i)] was identified by mass spectrometry as being associated with the SSeCKS 
promoter complex in NIH3T3/Src cells, and moreover, the Src-induced tyrosine
phosphorylation of TFII-I significantly increased its binding to the SSeCKS
proximal promoter. siRNA-mediated knockdown of TFII-I or the expression of
TFII-I(Y248/249F) caused the derepression of SSeCKS in NIH3T3/Src cells. Taken
with previous data showing that the tyrosine phosphorylation of TFII-I
facilitates its nuclear translocation, these data suggest that Src-family
kinase-mediated phosphorylation converts a portion of TFII-I into a
transcriptional repressor.

Copyright © 2010 UICC.

PMCID: PMC2997892
PMID: 20568114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Chemistry. 2010 Jul 26;16(28):8516-21. doi: 10.1002/chem.201000227.

Base-catalyzed stereoselective vinylation of ketones with arylacetylenes: a new
C(sp3)-C(sp2) bond-forming reaction.

Trofimov BA(1), Schmidt EY, Ushakov IA, Zorina NV, Skital'tseva EV, Protsuk NI,
Mikhaleva AI.

Author information: 
(1)A. E. Favorsky Irkutsk Institute of Chemistry, Siberian Branch, Russian
Academy of Sciences, 1 Favorsky Str., 664033 Irkutsk, Russia.
boris_trofimov@irioch.irk.ru

Alkylaryl- and alkylheteroarylketones, including those with condensed aromatic
moieties, are readily vinylated with arylacetylenes (KOH/DMSO, 100 degrees C, 1
h) to give regio- and stereoselectively the (E)-beta-gamma-ethylenic ketones
((E)-3-buten-1-ones) in 61-84% yields and with approximately 100%
stereoselectivity. This vinylation represents a new C(sp(3))-C(sp(2))
bond-forming reaction of high synthetic potential.

PMID: 20564291  [PubMed]


274. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2010 Aug 1;309(1):100-4. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-6968.2010.02023.x. Epub 2010 May 25.

Syntrophaceticus schinkii gen. nov., sp. nov., an anaerobic, syntrophic
acetate-oxidizing bacterium isolated from a mesophilic anaerobic filter.

Westerholm M(1), Roos S, Schnürer A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Uppsala BioCenter, Swedish University of
Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden.

A mesophilic, syntrophic acetate-oxidizing bacterium, designated strain Sp3(T),
was isolated from sludge from a mesophilic methanogenic digestor operating at a
high ammonium concentration (6.4 g L(-1) NH(4)(+)-N). The strain showed
acetate-oxidizing ability in cocultivation with a hydrogen-consuming methanogen. 
Comparative 16S rRNA gene sequence analysis confirmed that strain Sp3(T) belonged
to the Firmicutes-Clostridia class. The most closely related species was
Thermacetogenium phaeum (16S rRNA gene sequence identity 92%). Strain Sp3(T) used
ethanol, betaine and lactate as carbon and electron sources and showed growth
between 25 and 40 degrees C and pH 6.0 and 8.0. Based on the phylogenetic
position and the physiological characteristics of strain Sp3(T), this new
syntrophic, acetate-oxidizing bacterium is proposed as the new genus and species 
Syntrophaceticus schinkii, with Sp3(T) (=JCM 16669(T)) as the type strain. An
isolate (strain Esp=JCM 16670) with high 16S rRNA gene sequence identity (99%) to
syntrophic acetate-oxidizing Clostridium ultunense was also retrieved from the
methanogenic digestor.

PMID: 20546311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Gene. 2010 Sep 15;464(1-2):50-62. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2010.06.002. Epub 2010 Jun 
9.

Structural and functional characterization of the mouse tescalcin promoter.

Perera EM(1), Bao Y, Kos L, Berkovitz G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Endocrinology Division, University of Miami, Leonard
Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA. eperera@med.miami.edu

Tescalcin, an EF-hand calcium binding protein that regulates the Na(+)/H(+)
exchanger 1 (NHE1), is highly expressed in various mouse tissues such as heart
and brain. Despite its potentially important role in cell physiology, the
mechanisms that regulate tescalcin gene (Tesc) expression are unknown. In this
study, we report two new Tesc mRNA variants (V2 and V3) and characterize the
mouse Tesc promoter. The V2 and V3 transcripts result from alternative splicing
of intron 5. Our results show that Tesc mRNA variants are expressed in various
mouse tissues. Primer extension analysis located the transcription start site at 
94 nucleotides upstream of the translation start codon. The DNA nucleotide
sequence of the 5'-flanking region contained a CpG island spanning the promoter
region from nucleotides -372 to +814, a canonical TATA box (-38/-32), and
putative transcription factor binding sites for Sp1, EGR1, ZBP-89, KLF3, MZF1,
AP2, ZF5, and CDF-1. Transient transfection of the Y1 and msc-1 cell lines with a
series of 5'-deleted promoter constructs indicated that the minimal promoter
region was between nucleotides -130 and -40. Electrophoresis mobility shift
assays, supershift assays, and mutation studies demonstrated that Sp1 and Sp3
bind to the GC-rich motifs, a CACCC box and three GC boxes, located within the
Tesc proximal promoter. Nonetheless, mutations that abolished interaction of Sp1 
and Sp3 with the GC-rich motifs located within the minimal promoter region did
not abrogate promoter activity in Y1 cells. Mithramycin A, an inhibitor of
Sp1-DNA interaction, reduced Tesc promoter activity in msc-1 cells in a
dose-dependent manner. Sp3 was a weaker transactivator compared to Sp1 in
Drosophila D.mel-2 cells. However, when Sp1 and Sp3 were coexpressed, they
transactivated the Tesc promoter in a synergistic manner. In Y1 cells, mutation
analysis of a putative ZF5 motif located within the Tesc minimal promoter
indicated that this motif was critical for activity of Tesc promoter. Taken
together, the data demonstrated that Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors cooperate 
positively in the regulation of Tesc promoter, and that the putative ZF5 motif is
critical for its activation.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20540995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. J Biol Chem. 2010 Aug 13;285(33):25332-44. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.095240. Epub
2010 Jun 9.

Inhibition of NFkappaB and pancreatic cancer cell and tumor growth by curcumin is
dependent on specificity protein down-regulation.

Jutooru I(1), Chadalapaka G, Lei P, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas 77843, USA.

Curcumin activates diverse anticancer activities that lead to inhibition of
cancer cell and tumor growth, induction of apoptosis, and antiangiogenic
responses. In this study, we observed that curcumin inhibits Panc28 and L3.6pL
pancreatic cancer cell and tumor growth in nude mice bearing L3.6pL cells as
xenografts. In addition, curcumin decreased expression of p50 and p65 proteins
and NFkappaB-dependent transactivation and also decreased Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4
transcription factors that are overexpressed in pancreatic cancer cells. Because 
both Sp transcription factors and NFkappaB regulate several common genes such as 
cyclin D1, survivin, and vascular endothelial growth factor that contribute to
the cancer phenotype, we also investigated interactions between Sp and NFkappaB
transcription factors. Results of Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 knockdown by RNA interference
demonstrate that both p50 and p65 are Sp-regulated genes and that inhibition of
constitutive or tumor necrosis factor-induced NFkappaB by curcumin is dependent
on down-regulation of Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 proteins by this compound. Curcumin also 
decreased mitochondrial membrane potential and induced reactive oxygen species in
pancreatic cancer cells, and this pathway is required for down-regulation of Sp
proteins in these cells, demonstrating that the mitochondriotoxic effects of
curcumin are important for its anticancer activities.

PMCID: PMC2919096
PMID: 20538607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Biol Inorg Chem. 2010 Sep;15(7):1157-69. doi: 10.1007/s00775-010-0676-4. Epub
2010 Jun 6.

Antiproliferative Pt(IV) complexes: synthesis, biological activity, and
quantitative structure-activity relationship modeling.

Gramatica P(1), Papa E, Luini M, Monti E, Gariboldi MB, Ravera M, Gabano E,
Gaviglio L, Osella D.

Author information: 
(1)QSAR Research Unit in Environmental Chemistry and Ecotoxicology, Department of
Structural and Functional Biology, Università dell'Insubria, Via Dunant 3, 21100,
Varese, Italy.

Several Pt(IV) complexes of the general formula [Pt(L)2(L')2(L'')2] [axial
ligands L are Cl-, RCOO-, or OH-; equatorial ligands L' are two am(m)ine or one
diamine; and equatorial ligands L'' are Cl- or glycolato] were rationally
designed and synthesized in the attempt to develop a predictive quantitative
structure-activity relationship (QSAR) model. Numerous theoretical molecular
descriptors were used alongside physicochemical data (i.e., reduction peak
potential, Ep, and partition coefficient, log Po/w) to obtain a validated QSAR
between in vitro cytotoxicity (half maximal inhibitory concentrations, IC50, on
A2780 ovarian and HCT116 colon carcinoma cell lines) and some features of Pt(IV) 
complexes. In the resulting best models, a lipophilic descriptor (log Po/w or the
number of secondary sp3 carbon atoms) plus an electronic descriptor (Ep, the
number of oxygen atoms, or the topological polar surface area expressed as the
N,O polar contribution) is necessary for modeling, supporting the general finding
that the biological behavior of Pt(IV) complexes can be rationalized on the basis
of their cellular uptake, the Pt(IV)-->Pt(II) reduction, and the structure of the
corresponding Pt(II) metabolites. Novel compounds were synthesized on the basis
of their predicted cytotoxicity in the preliminary QSAR model, and were
experimentally tested. A final QSAR model, based solely on theoretical molecular 
descriptors to ensure its general applicability, is proposed.

PMID: 20526854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Biol Chem. 2010 Aug 6;285(32):24695-706. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.113977. Epub
2010 Jun 2.

Transcription of the transforming growth factor beta activating integrin beta8
subunit is regulated by SP3, AP-1, and the p38 pathway.

Markovics JA(1), Araya J, Cambier S, Jablons D, Hill A, Wolters PJ, Nishimura SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Pulmonary Division, School of Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco, California 94110, USA.

Integrin alphavbeta8 is a critical regulator of transforming growth factor beta
activation in vasculogenesis during development, immune regulation, and
endothelial/epithelial-mesenchymal homeostasis. Recent studies have suggested
roles for integrin beta8 in the pathogenesis of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease, brain arteriovenous malformations, and select cancers (Araya, J.,
Cambier, S., Markovics, J. A., Wolters, P., Jablons, D., Hill, A., Finkbeiner,
W., Jones, K., Broaddus, V. C., Sheppard, D., Barzcak, A., Xiao, Y., Erle, D. J.,
and Nishimura, S. L. (2007) J. Clin. Invest. 117, 3551-3562; Su, H., Kim, H.,
Pawlikowska, L., Kitamura, H., Shen, F., Cambier, S., Markovics, J., Lawton, M.
T., Sidney, S., Bollen, A. W., Kwok, P. Y., Reichardt, L., Young, W. L., Yang, G.
Y., and Nishimura, S. L. (2010) Am. J. Pathol. 176, 1018-1027; Culhane, A. C.,
and Quackenbush, J. (2009) Cancer Res. 69, 7480-7485; Cambier, S., Mu, D. Z.,
O'Connell, D., Boylen, K., Travis, W., Liu, W. H., Broaddus, V. C., and
Nishimura, S. L. (2000) Cancer Res. 60, 7084-7093). Here we report the first
identification and characterization of the promoter for ITGB8. We show that a SP 
binding site and a cyclic AMP response element (CRE) in the ITGB8 core promoter
are required for its expression and that Sp1, Sp3, and several AP-1 transcription
factors form a complex that binds to these sites in a p38-dependent manner.
Furthermore, we demonstrate the requirement for Sp3, ATF-2, and p38 for the
transcription and protein expression of integrin beta8. Additionally, reduction
of SP3 or inhibition of p38 blocks alphavbeta8-mediated transforming growth
factor beta activation. These results place integrin beta8 expression and
activity under the control of ubiquitous transcription factors in a
stress-activated and pro-inflammatory pathway.

PMCID: PMC2915706
PMID: 20519498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Biochem J. 2010 Aug 15;430(1):107-17. doi: 10.1042/BJ20100350.

Regulation of plasma-membrane-associated sialidase NEU3 gene by Sp1/Sp3
transcription factors.

Yamaguchi K(1), Koseki K, Shiozaki M, Shimada Y, Wada T, Miyagi T.

Author information: 
(1)Miyagi Cancer Center Research Institute, Natori, Japan.

Gene expression of the human plasma membrane-associated sialidase (NEU3), a key
enzyme for ganglioside degradation, is relatively high in brain and is modulated 
in response to many cellular processes, including neuronal cell differentiation
and tumorigenesis. We demonstrated previously that NEU3 is markedly up-regulated 
in various human cancers and showed that NEU3 transgenic mice developed a
diabetic phenotype and were susceptible to azoxymethane-induced aberrant crypt
foci in their colon tissues. These results suggest that appropriate control of
NEU3 gene expression is required for homoeostasis of cellular functions. To gain 
insights into regulation mechanisms, we determined the gene structure and
assessed transcription factor involvement. Oligo-capping analysis indicated the
existence of alternative promoters for the NEU3 gene. Transcription started from 
two clusters of multiple TSSs (transcription start sites); one cluster is
preferentially utilized in brain and another in other tissues and cells.
Luciferase reporter assays showed further that the region neighbouring the two
clusters has promoter activity in the human cell lines analysed. The promoter
lacks TATA, but contains CCAAT and CAAC, elements, whose deletions led to a
decrease in promoter activity. Electrophoretic mobility-shift assays and
chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrated binding of transcription factors Sp
(specificity protein) 1 and Sp3 to the promoter region. Down-regulation of the
factors by siRNAs (short interfering RNAs) increased transcription from
brain-type TSSs and decreased transcription from other TSSs, suggesting a role
for Sp1 and Sp3 in selection of the TSSs. These results indicate that NEU3
expression is diversely regulated by Sp1/Sp3 transcription factors binding to
alternative promoters, which might account for multiple modulation of gene
expression.

PMID: 20518744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2010;342:43-65. doi: 10.1007/82_2010_42.

Roles of cellular transcription factors in VZV replication.

Ruyechan WT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Witebsky Center for Microbial
Pathogenesis and Immunology, University at Buffalo SUNY, Buffalo, NY 14214, USA. 
ruyechan@buffalo.edu

Varicella zoster virus (VZV) is the causative agent of chickenpox and shingles.
During productive infection the complete VZV proteome consisting of some 68
unique gene products is expressed through interaction of a small number of viral 
transcriptional activators with the general transcription apparatus of the host
cell. Recent work has shown that the major viral transactivator, commonly
designated the IE62 protein, interacts with the human Mediator of transcription. 
This interaction requires direct contact between the MED25 subunit of Mediator
and the acidic N-terminal transactivation domain of IE62. A second cellular
factor, host cell factor-1, has been shown to be the common element in two
mechanisms of activation of the promoter driving expression of the gene encoding 
IE62. Finally, the ubiquitous cellular transcription factors Sp1, Sp3, and YY1
have been shown to interact with sequences near the VZV origin of DNA replication
and in the case of Sp1/Sp3 to influence replication efficiency.

PMID: 20490778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Mol Pharmacol. 2010 Aug;78(2):226-36. doi: 10.1124/mol.110.064451. Epub 2010 May 
20.

Methyl 2-cyano-3,12-dioxooleana-1,9-dien-28-oate decreases specificity protein
transcription factors and inhibits pancreatic tumor growth: role of microRNA-27a.

Jutooru I(1), Chadalapaka G, Abdelrahim M, Basha MR, Samudio I, Konopleva M,
Andreeff M, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
4466 TAMU, Vet. Res. Bldg. 410, College Station, TX 77843-4466, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Pharmacol. 2011 Feb;79(2):336.

The anticancer agent 2-cyano-3,12-dioxooleana-1,9-dien-28-oic acid (CDDO) and its
methyl ester (CDDO-Me) typically induce a broad spectrum of growth-inhibitory,
proapoptotic, and antiangiogenic responses. Treatment of Panc1, Panc28, and
L3.6pL pancreatic cancer cells with low micromolar concentrations of CDDO or
CDDO-Me resulted in growth inhibition, induction of apoptosis, and
down-regulation of cyclin D1, survivin, vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF), and its receptor (VEGFR2). RNA interference studies indicate that these
repressed genes are regulated by specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors
Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4, and Western blot analysis of lysates from pancreatic cancer
cells treated with CDDO and CDDO-Me shows for the first time that both compounds 
decreased the expression of Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4. Moreover, CDDO-Me (7.5 mg/kg/day) 
also inhibited pancreatic human L3.6pL tumor growth and down-regulated Sp1, Sp3, 
and Sp4 in tumors using an orthotopic pancreatic cancer model. CDDO-Me also
induced reactive oxygen species (ROS) and decreased mitochondrial membrane
potential (MMP) in Panc1 and L3.6pL cells, and cotreatment with antioxidants
(glutathione and dithiothreitol) blocked the formation of ROS, reversed the loss 
of MMP, and inhibited down-regulation of Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4. Repression of Sp and 
Sp-dependent genes by CDDO-Me was due to the down-regulation of microRNA-27a and 
induction of zinc finger and BTB domain containing 10 (ZBTB10), an Sp repressor, 
and these responses were also reversed by antioxidants. Thus, the anticancer
activity of CDDO-Me is due, in part, to activation of ROS, which in turn targets 
the microRNA-27a:ZBTB10-Sp transcription factor axis. This results in decreased
expression of Sp-regulated genes, growth inhibition, induction of apoptosis, and 
antiangiogenic responses.

PMCID: PMC2917860
PMID: 20488920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys. 2010 Apr;81(4 Pt 1):041602. Epub 2010
Apr 5.

Molecular dynamics simulation of the formation of sp3 hybridized bonds in
hydrogenated diamondlike carbon deposition processes.

Murakami Y(1), Horiguchi S, Hamaguchi S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Atomic and Molecular Technologies, Osaka University, 2-1 Yamadaoka,
Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

The formation process of sp3 hybridized carbon networks (i.e., diamondlike
structures) in hydrogenated diamondlike carbon (DLC) films has been studied with 
the use of molecular-dynamics simulations. The processes simulated in this study 
are injections of hydrocarbon (CH3 and CH) beams into amorphous carbon (a-C)
substrates. It has been shown that diamondlike sp3 structures are formed
predominantly at a subsurface level when the beam energy is relatively high, as
in the "subplantation" process for hydrogen-free DLC deposition. However, for
hydrogenated DLC deposition, the presence of abundant hydrogen at subsurface
levels, together with thermal spikes caused by energetic ion injections,
substantially enhances the formation of carbon-to-carbon sp3 bonds. Therefore,
the sp3 bond formation process for hydrogenated DLC films essentially differs
from that for hydrogen-free DLC films.

PMID: 20481730  [PubMed]


283. Mol Imaging Biol. 2011 Feb;13(1):53-8. doi: 10.1007/s11307-010-0332-y.

In vivo mouse bioluminescence tomography with radionuclide-based imaging
validation.

Lu Y(1), Machado HB, Bao Q, Stout D, Herschman H, Chatziioannou AF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, Crump Institute for
Molecular Imaging, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA
90095, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Bioluminescence imaging, especially planar bioluminescence imaging,
has been extensively applied in in vivo preclinical biological research.
Bioluminescence tomography (BLT) has the potential to provide more accurate
imaging information due to its 3D reconstruction compared with its planar
counterpart.
METHODS: In this work, we introduce a positron emission tomography (PET)
radionuclide imaging-based strategy to validate the BLT results. X-ray computed
tomography, PET, spectrally resolved bioluminescence imaging, and surgical
excision were performed on a tumor xenograft mouse model expressing a
bioluminescent reporter gene.
RESULTS: With different spectrally resolved measured data, the BLT
reconstructions were acquired based on the third-order simplified spherical
harmonics (SP3) approximation and the diffusion approximation (DA). The
corresponding tomographic images were obtained for validation of bioluminescence 
source reconstruction.
CONCLUSION: Our results show the strength of PET imaging compared with other
validation methods for BLT and improved source localization accuracy based on the
SP(3) approximation compared with the diffusion approximation.

PMCID: PMC3023015
PMID: 20464517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Mol Immunol. 2010 Jul;47(11-12):2094-102. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2010.04.002. Epub
2010 May 11.

Proximal human FOXP3 promoter transactivated by NF-kappaB and negatively
controlled by feedback loop and SP3.

Eckerstorfer P(1), Novy M, Burgstaller-Muehlbacher S, Paster W, Schiller HB,
Mayer H, Stockinger H.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology Unit, Institute for Hygiene and Applied Immunology,
Center for Pathophysiology, Infectiology and Immunology, Medical University of
Vienna, Lazarettgasse 19, A-1090 Vienna, Austria.

Forkhead box protein 3 (Foxp3) is indispensable for the development of
CD4(+)CD25(+) regulatory T cells (Tregs). Here we analyzed three prominent
evolutionary conserved regions (ECRs) upstream of the transcription start site of
the human FOXP3 gene. We show that ECR2 and ECR3 fragments derived from positions
-1.3 to -2.0 kb and -5.0 to -6.0 kb, respectively, display basal transcriptional 
activity. Reporter constructs derived from ECR1, located between -0.6 and +0.23
kb and thus the most proximal ECR in respect of transcription initiation,
remained almost inactive. However, ECR1 was transactivated by the NF-kappaB
subunit p65 in HEK 293 cells. In Jurkat and primary T cells, in addition to p65, 
a second stimulus delivered by either T-cell receptor stimulation or addition of 
PMA was needed. Co-expression of I kappaB alpha inhibited p65-mediated FOXP3
proximal promoter transactivation, and the NF-kappaB inhibitor curcumin reduced
Foxp3 neoexpression in IL-2/CD3/CD28/TGF-beta stimulated PBMCs. Moreover,
proximal FOXP3 promoter transactivation was inhibited by Foxp3 and the SP
transcription factor family member SP3. Thus, the human proximal FOXP3 promoter
is controlled by activation through the TCR involving PKC and the NF-kappaB
subunit p65 and by inhibition through a negative feedback loop and SP3.

(c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20462637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Gynecol Oncol. 2010 Aug 1;118(2):182-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2010.03.020. Epub
2010 May 8.

Inhibition of Sp1-dependent transcription and antitumor activity of the new
aureolic acid analogues mithramycin SDK and SK in human ovarian cancer
xenografts.

Previdi S(1), Malek A, Albertini V, Riva C, Capella C, Broggini M, Carbone GM,
Rohr J, Catapano CV.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, Mario Negri Institute for
Pharmacological Research, Milan, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: Increased activity of Sp family of transcription factors is a frequent
and critical event in cancer development and progression. Genes governing tumor
growth, invasion and angiogenesis are regulated by Sp factors, like Sp1, Sp3 or
Sp4, and are frequently over-expressed in tumors. Targeting Sp factors has been
explored as a therapeutic approach. Mithramycin (MTM) is a natural antibiotic
that binds DNA and inhibit Sp1-dependent transcription. New analogues, named
MTM-SDK and MTM-SK, were recently obtained by genetic engineering of the MTM
biosynthetic pathway and have demonstrated improved transcriptional and
antiproliferative activity in ovarian cancer cell lines in vitro. In the present 
study we evaluated the activity of the new compounds in human ovarian cancer
xenografts.
METHODS: Expression of Sp1 and target proteins in ovarian cancer specimens and
tumor xenografts was assessed by immunohistochemistry. Drug-induced silencing of 
Sp1-regulated genes in cells and tumor xenograft samples was assessed by
quantitative RT-PCR. Toxicity and antitumor activity of the compounds were
investigated in healthy and tumor-bearing immunocompromised mice, respectively.
RESULTS: Expression of Sp1 was frequently increased in human epithelial ovarian
cancers. MTM-SDK and MTM-SK acted as potent inhibitors of Sp1-dependent
transcription both in vitro and in tumor xenografts. Both compounds were well
tolerated even after prolonged administration and delayed growth of ovarian tumor
xenografts. MTM-SDK was particularly effective against orthotopic tumors leading 
to a significant increase of survival and delay of tumor progression.
CONCLUSIONS: MTM-SDK and MTM-SK show relevant activity in vivo and represent
interesting candidates for treatment of ovarian cancers.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2900446
PMID: 20452660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Org Chem. 2010 Jun 4;75(11):3916-9. doi: 10.1021/jo1005813.

FeCl3-catalyzed oxidative allylation of sp2 and sp3 C-H bond adjacent to a
nitrogen atom: easy access to homoallyl tertiary amines.

Kumaraswamy G(1), Murthy AN, Pitchaiah A.

Author information: 
(1)Organic Division-III, Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad 500
007, India. gkswamy_iict@yahoo.co.in

Oxidative allylation to sp(2)- and sp(3)-carbon attached to the nitrogen atom was
accomplished. The alpha-allylation of tertiary amines was catalyzed by easily
available hydrated iron(III) chloride in combination with air or aqueous
(t)BuOOH. Remarkably, N-allyl- and N-propagyl-tethered tertiary amines were also 
allylated through this protocol.

PMID: 20446705  [PubMed]


287. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2011 Apr;126(2):333-43. doi: 10.1007/s10549-010-0900-5. 
Epub 2010 May 5.

Functional implication of TRAIL -716 C/T promoter polymorphism on its in vitro
and in vivo expression and the susceptibility to sporadic breast tumor.

Pal R(1), Gochhait S, Chattopadhyay S, Gupta P, Prakash N, Agarwal G, Chaturvedi 
A, Husain N, Husain SA, Bamezai RN.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre of Applied Human Genetics, School of Life Sciences, Jawaharlal
Nehru University, Aruna Asafali Road, New Delhi, 110067, India.

Recently, TRAIL function has been elucidated beyond its known classical role of
mediating cellular homeostasis and immune surveillance against transformed cells.
Here, we show how CC genotype of -716 TRAIL promoter SNP rendered risk for
sporadic breast cancer as compared to the CT and TT genotypes (P (recessive
model) = 0.018, OR = 1.4, 95% CI = 1.1-1.9; P (allele model) = 0.010, OR = 1.3,
95% CI = 1.1-1.7). The in silico prediction of the introduction of core
Sp1/Sp3-binding motif suggested the functional significance of the SNP variation.
This functional implication was validated by luciferase assay in HeLa (P =
0.026), MCF-7 (P = 0.022), HepG2 (P = 0.024), and HT1080 (P = 0.030) cells and
also by real-time expression studies on tumor tissues (P = 0.01), revealing the
transcriptionally repressed status of -716 T when compared to -716 C allele. The 
SNP-SNP interactions reflected an enhanced protective effect of CT and TT
genotypes with the protective genetic backgrounds of TP53-BRCA2 (P = 0.002, OR = 
0.2, 95% CI = 0.1-0.6), IFNG (P = 0.0000002, OR = 0.3, 95% CI = 0.2-0.4), and
common variant Casp8 (P = 0.0003, OR = 0.5, 95% CI = 0.3-0.7). Interestingly, a
comparison with clinical parameters showed overrepresented CT and TT genotypes in
progressing (P = 0.041) and ER/PR negative tumors (P = 0.024/0.006). This was
explained by increased apoptotic index, calculated as a ratio of selected
pro-apoptotic and anti-apoptotic gene expression profiles, in CC genotyped
tumors, favoring either intrinsic (P = 0.008,0.018) or extrinsic (P =
0.025,0.217) pathway depending upon the ER/PR status. Our study reveals for the
first time that a promoter SNP of TRAIL functionally modulates the gene and
consequently its role in breast cancer pathogenesis, cautioning to consider the
-716 TRAIL SNP status in patients undergoing TRAIL therapy.

PMID: 20443055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. PLoS One. 2010 Apr 28;5(4):e10369. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010369.

Differential control of Notch1 gene transcription by Klf4 and Sp3 transcription
factors in normal versus cancer-derived keratinocytes.

Lambertini C(1), Pantano S, Dotto GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Lausanne, Epalinges, Switzerland.

In specific cell types like keratinocytes, Notch signaling plays an important
pro-differentiation and tumor suppressing function, with down-modulation of the
Notch1 gene being associated with cancer development. Besides being controlled by
p53, little else is known on regulation of Notch1 gene expression in this
context. We report here that transcription of this gene is driven by a TATA-less 
"sharp peak" promoter and that the minimal functional region of this promoter,
which extends from the -342 bp position to the initiation codon, is
differentially active in normal versus cancer cells. This GC rich region lacks
p53 binding sites, but binds Klf4 and Sp3. This finding is likely to be of
biological significance, as Klf4 and, to a lesser extent, Sp3 are up-regulated in
a number of cancer cells where Notch1 expression is down-modulated, and Klf4
over-expression in normal cells is sufficient to down-modulate Notch1 gene
transcription. The combined knock-down of Klf4 and Sp3 was necessary for the
reverse effect of increasing Notch1 transcription, consistent with the two
factors exerting an overlapping repressor function through their binding to the
Notch1 promoter.

PMCID: PMC2860992
PMID: 20442780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Org Lett. 2010 Jun 4;12(11):2460-3. doi: 10.1021/ol100472t.

Copper-catalyzed remote sp3 C-H chlorination of alkyl hydroperoxides.

Kundu R(1), Ball ZT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Rice University, Houston, Texas 77005, USA.

A copper-catalyzed methodology to functionalize remote sp(3) C-H bonds in alkyl
hydroperoxides is presented. The atom-transfer chlorination utilizes simple
ammonium chloride salts as the chlorine source, and the internal redox process
requires no external redox reagents.

PMID: 20438056  [PubMed]


290. Exp Cell Res. 2010 Aug 1;316(13):2174-88. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2010.04.027. Epub 
2010 May 8.

Arsenic trioxide downregulates specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors and
inhibits bladder cancer cell and tumor growth.

Jutooru I(1), Chadalapaka G, Sreevalsan S, Lei P, Barhoumi R, Burghardt R, Safe
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX 77843-4466, USA. ijutooru@cvm.tamu.edu

Arsenic trioxide exhibits antiproliferative, antiangiogenic and proapoptotic
activity in cancer cells, and many genes associated with these responses are
regulated by specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors. Treatment of cancer 
cells derived from urologic (bladder and prostate) and gastrointestinal (pancreas
and colon) tumors with arsenic trioxide demonstrated that these cells exhibited
differential responsiveness to the antiproliferative effects of this agent and
this paralleled their differential repression of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 proteins in the
same cell lines. Using arsenic trioxide-responsive KU7 and non-responsive 253JB-V
bladder cancer cells as models, we show that in KU7 cells, < or =5 microM arsenic
trioxide decreased Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 and several Sp-dependent genes and responses 
including cyclin D1, epidermal growth factor receptor, bcl-2, survivin and
vascular endothelial growth factor, whereas at concentrations up to 15 microM,
minimal effects were observed in 253JB-V cells. Arsenic trioxide also inhibited
tumor growth in athymic mice bearing KU7 cells as xenografts, and expression of
Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 was significantly decreased. Inhibitors of oxidative stress such
as glutathione or dithiothreitol protected KU7 cells from arsenic
trioxide-induced antiproliferative activity and Sp repression, whereas
glutathione depletion sensitized 253JB-V cells to arsenic trioxide. Mechanistic
studies suggested that arsenic trioxide-dependent downregulation of Sp and
Sp-dependent genes was due to decreased mitochondrial membrane potential and
induction of reactive oxygen species, and the role of peroxides in mediating
these responses was confirmed using hydrogen peroxide.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2900380
PMID: 20435036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Chem Commun (Camb). 2010 Jun 21;46(23):4115-7. doi: 10.1039/c0cc00071j. Epub 2010
Apr 29.

Platinum-catalyzed cycloisomerization of 1,4-enynes via activation of a
sp3-hybridized C-H bond.

Vasu D(1), Das A, Liu RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, 30013, Taiwan
(ROC).

We report the cycloisomerization of 1-alkenyl-1-alkynylcyclopropanes to
cyclooctatriene products catalyzed by PtCl(2)/CO in hot xylene. In contrast to
the reported enyne cycloisomerization, this 1,4-enyne cycloisomerization proceeds
via an atypical addition of the allyl carbon to the alkyne in a 6-endo-dig
cyclization.

PMID: 20428593  [PubMed]


292. Acta Med Okayama. 2010 Apr;64(2):95-108.

The Sp1 and CBF/NF-Y transcription factors cooperatively regulate the mouse
pro-alpha3(V) collagen gene (Col5a3) in osteoblastic cells.

Wu YF(1), Matsuo N, Sumiyoshi H, Yoshioka H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Matrix Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Oita University, Yufu,
Oita 879-5593, Japan.

The purpose of this study was to clarify the mechanism responsible for the
transcriptional regulation of the mouse Col5a3 gene in osteoblastic cells.
Transient transfection into rat osteosarcoma ROS17/2.8 cells demonstrated that a 
region from nucleotides 337 to 1 was involved in the transcriptional activity of 
the Col5a3 gene. An electrophoretic mobility shift assay showed that Sp1/Sp3 and 
CBF/NF-Y bound to a GC-rich domain (194/186) and a CCAAT box (134/130) in the
Col5a3 gene, respectively. Introduction of mutations or deletion into a GC-rich
domain, the CCAAT box, or both elements decreased the transcription activity.
Overexpression of Sp1 increases the transcription activity and interferes with Sp
family binding to the GC-rich domain to decrease promoter activity. Therefore,
the transcription of the mouse Col5a3 gene is cooperatively regulated by Sp1 and 
CBF/NF-Y in osteoblastic cells.

PMID: 20424664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Mol Cancer Res. 2010 May;8(5):739-50. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-09-0493. Epub
2010 Apr 20.

Drugs that target specificity proteins downregulate epidermal growth factor
receptor in bladder cancer cells.

Chadalapaka G(1), Jutooru I, Burghardt R, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
4466 TAMU, Veterinary Research Building 410, College Station, TX 77843-4466, USA.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is an important chemotherapeutic
target for tyrosine kinase inhibitors and antibodies that block the extracellular
domain of EGFR. Betulinic acid (BA) and curcumin inhibited bladder cancer cell
growth and downregulated specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors, and this
was accompanied by decreased expression of EGFR mRNA and protein levels. EGFR, a 
putative Sp-regulated gene, was also decreased in cells transfected with a
cocktail (iSp) containing small inhibitory RNAs for Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4, and RNA
interference with individual Sp knockdown indicated that EGFR expression was
primarily regulated by Sp1 and Sp3. BA, curcumin, and iSp also decreased
phosphorylation of Akt in these cells, and downregulation of EGFR by BA,
curcumin, and iSp was accompanied by induction of LC3 and autophagy, which is
consistent with recent studies showing that EGFR suppresses autophagic cell
death. The results show that EGFR is an Sp-regulated gene in bladder cancer, and 
drugs such as BA and curcumin that repress Sp proteins also ablate EGFR
expression. Thus, compounds such as curcumin and BA that downregulate Sp
transcription factors represent a novel class of anticancer drugs that target
EGFR in bladder cancer cells and tumors by inhibiting receptor expression.

(c)2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC2872686
PMID: 20407012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2010 Aug;37(8):1559-65. doi:
10.1007/s00259-010-1446-9. Epub 2010 Apr 20.

Tumour-targeting properties of antibodies specific to MMP-1A, MMP-2 and MMP-3.

Pfaffen S(1), Frey K, Stutz I, Roesli C, Neri D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Applied Biosciences, ETH Zürich, Institute of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Wolfgang-Pauli-Strasse 10, 8093 Zürich, Switzerland.

PURPOSE: Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), a group of more than 20
zinc-containing endopeptidases, are upregulated in many diseases, but several
attempts to use radiolabelled MMP inhibitors for imaging tumours have proved
unsuccessful in mouse models, possibly due to the limited specificity of these
agents or their unfavourable pharmacokinetic profiles. In principle,
radiolabelled monoclonal antibodies could be considered for the selective
targeting and imaging of individual MMPs.
METHODS: We cloned, produced and characterized high-affinity monoclonal
antibodies specific to murine MMP-1A, MMP-2 and MMP-3 in SIP (small
immunoprotein) miniantibody format using biochemical and immunochemical methods. 
We also performed comparative biodistribution analysis of their tumour-targeting 
properties at three time points (3 h, 24 h, 48 h) in mice bearing subcutaneous F9
tumours using radioiodinated protein preparations. The clinical stage L19
antibody, specific to the alternatively spliced EDB domain of fibronectin, was
used as reference tumour-targeting agent for in vivo studies.
RESULTS: All anti-MMP antibodies and SIP(L19) strongly stained sections of F9
tumours when assessed by immunofluorescence methods. In biodistribution
experiments, SIP(SP3), specific to MMP-3, selectively accumulated at the tumour
site 24 and 48 h after intravenous injection, but was rapidly cleared from other 
organs. By contrast, SIP(SP1) and SIP(SP2), specific to MMP-1A and MMP-2, showed 
no preferential accumulation at the tumour site.
CONCLUSION: Antibodies specific to MMP-3 may serve as vehicles for the efficient 
and selective delivery of imaging agents or therapeutic molecules to sites of
disease.

PMID: 20405286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Chemistry. 2010 May 17;16(19):5723-35. doi: 10.1002/chem.200902387.

Ruthenium-catalyzed alkylation of indoles with tertiary amines by oxidation of a 
sp3 C-H bond and Lewis acid catalysis.

Wang MZ(1), Zhou CY, Wong MK, Che CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Open Laboratory of Chemical Biology of the
Institute of Molecular Technology for Drug Discovery and Synthesis, The
University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong, China.

Ruthenium porphyrins (particularly [Ru(2,6-Cl(2)tpp)CO];
tpp=tetraphenylporphinato) and RuCl(3) can act as oxidation and/or Lewis acid
catalysts for direct C-3 alkylation of indoles, giving the desired products in
high yields (up to 82% based on 60-95% substrate conversions). These ruthenium
compounds catalyze oxidative coupling reactions of a wide variety of anilines and
indoles bearing electron-withdrawing or electron-donating substituents with high 
regioselectivity when using tBuOOH as an oxidant, resulting in the alkylation of 
N-arylindoles to 3-{[(N-aryl-N-alkyl)amino]methyl}indoles (yield: up to 82%,
conversion: up to 95%) and the alkylation of N-alkyl or N-H indoles to
3-[p-(dialkylamino)benzyl]indoles (yield: up to 73%, conversion: up to 92%). A
tentative reaction mechanism involving two pathways is proposed: an iminium ion
intermediate may be generated by oxidation of an sp(3) C-H bond of the alkylated 
aniline by an oxoruthenium species; this iminium ion could then either be trapped
by an N-arylindole (pathway A) or converted to formaldehyde, allowing a
subsequent three-component coupling reaction of the in situ generated
formaldehyde with an N-alkylindole and an aniline in the presence of a Lewis acid
catalyst (pathway B). The results of deuterium-labeling experiments are
consistent with the alkylation of N-alkylindoles via pathway B. The relative
reaction rates of [Ru(2,6-Cl(2)tpp)CO]-catalyzed oxidative coupling reactions of 
4-X-substituted N,N-dimethylanilines with N-phenylindole (using tBuOOH as
oxidant), determined through competition experiments, correlate linearly with the
substituent constants sigma (R(2)=0.989), giving a rho value of -1.09. This rho
value and the magnitudes of the intra- and intermolecular deuterium isotope
effects (k(H)/k(D)) suggest that electron transfer most likely occurs during the 
initial stage of the oxidation of 4-X-substituted N,N-dimethylanilines.
Ruthenium-catalyzed three-component reaction of N-alkyl/N-H indoles,
paraformaldehyde, and anilines gave 3-[p-(dialkylamino)benzyl]indoles in up to
82% yield (conversion: up to 95%).

PMID: 20391566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Mol Pharmacol. 2010 Jul;78(1):58-68. doi: 10.1124/mol.110.064311. Epub 2010 Apr
12.

Up-regulation of the mu-opioid receptor gene is mediated through chromatin
remodeling and transcriptional factors in differentiated neuronal cells.

Hwang CK(1), Kim CS, Kim do K, Law PY, Wei LN, Loh HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Minnesota, 6-120 Jackson Hall, 321
Church St. S.E., Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. hwang025@umn.edu

The effects of morphine are mediated mainly through the mu opioid receptor (MOR).
Expression of the MOR is up-regulated during neuronal differentiation in P19
embryonal carcinoma cells and epigenetic changes play an important role in MOR
up-regulation. This study investigates the basis for differentiation-dependent
alterations of MOR chromatin by studying the recruitment or dissociation of
several factors to the remodeled chromatin locus. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays were used to demonstrate the recruitment of the transcriptional activator 
Sp1 and the chromatin remodeling factors Brg1 and BAF155 to this promoter, as
well as the dissociation of repressors [histone deacetylases, mSin3A, Brm, and
methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MeCP2)]. Histone modifications (acetylation,
induction of histone H3-lys4 methylation, and reduction of H3-lys9 methylation)
were consistently detected on this promoter. Overexpression of Sp1 strongly
enhanced MOR promoter activity, and the histone deacetylase inhibitor
trichostatin A also increased promoter activity. In vitro DNA CpG-methylation of 
the promoter partially blocked binding of the Sp1 factor but induced MeCP2
binding. Coimmunoprecipitation studies also found novel evidence of an endogenous
MeCP2 interaction with Sp3 but a weaker interaction with Sp1. Overall, the
results suggest that during neuronal differentiation, MeCP2 and DNA methylation
mediate remodeling of the MOR promoter by chromatin remodeling factors (Brg1 and 
BAF155) from a compacted state to a conformation allowing access for
transcriptional factors. Subsequent recruitment of the activating transcription
factor Sp1 to the remodeled promoter results in MOR up-regulation.

PMCID: PMC2912061
PMID: 20385708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Aug;38(15):4970-84. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq245. Epub 2010
Apr 12.

A SUMO-regulated activation function controls synergy of c-Myb through a
repressor-activator switch leading to differential p300 recruitment.

Molvaersmyr AK(1), Saether T, Gilfillan S, Lorenzo PI, Kvaløy H, Matre V,
Gabrielsen OS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

Synergy between transcription factors operating together on complex promoters is 
a key aspect of gene activation. The ability of specific factors to synergize is 
restricted by sumoylation (synergy control, SC). Focusing on the haematopoietic
transcription factor c-Myb, we found evidence for a strong SC linked to
SUMO-conjugation in its negative regulatory domain (NRD), while AMV v-Myb has
escaped this control. Mechanistic studies revealed a SUMO-dependent switch in the
function of NRD. When NRD is sumoylated, the activity of c-Myb is reduced. When
sumoylation is abolished, NRD switches into being activating, providing the
factor with a second activation function (AF). Thus, c-Myb harbours two AFs, one 
that is constitutively active and one in the NRD being SUMO-regulated (SRAF).
This double AF augments c-Myb synergy at compound natural promoters. A similar
SUMO-dependent switch was observed in the regulatory domains of Sp3 and p53. We
show that the change in synergy behaviour correlates with a SUMO-dependent
differential recruitment of p300 and a corresponding local change in histone H3
and H4 acetylation. We therefore propose a general model for SUMO-mediated SC,
where SUMO controls synergy by determining the number and strength of AFs
associated with a promoter leading to differential chromatin signatures.

PMCID: PMC2926607
PMID: 20385574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Endocrinology. 2010 Jun;151(6):2462-73. doi: 10.1210/en.2009-1150. Epub 2010 Apr 
9.

MicroRNA-27a Indirectly Regulates Estrogen Receptor {alpha} Expression and
Hormone Responsiveness in MCF-7 Breast Cancer Cells.

Li X(1), Mertens-Talcott SU, Zhang S, Kim K, Ball J, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
4466 TAMU, College Station, Texas 77843-4466, USA.

MicroRNA-27a (miR-27a) is expressed in MCF-7 breast cancer cells, and antisense
miR-27a (as-miR-27a) induces ZBTB10, a specificity protein (Sp) repressor. Both
as-miR-27a and overexpression of ZBTB10 decreased Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 mRNA and
protein expression in MCF-7 cells, and this was also accompanied by decreased
levels of estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) mRNA and protein. RNA interference
studies confirmed that basal expression of ERalpha was dependent on Sp1 but not
Sp3 or Sp4 in MCF-7 cells. as-miR-27a and overexpression of ZBTB10 inhibited
17beta-estradiol (E2)-induced transactivation in MCF-7 cells, and this was
accompanied by decreased binding of Sp and ER proteins in cell lysates to
oligonucleotides containing GC-rich motifs or estrogen-responsive elements,
respectively. as-miR-27a and overexpression of ZBTB10 arrested MCF-7 cells in
G(0)/G(1) and inhibited E2-induced G(0)/G(1) to S phase progression. as-miR-27a
induced only a minimal increase in Myt-1, another miR-27a regulated gene, and
this was not accompanied by Myt-1-dependent G(2)/M arrest as observed previously 
in ER-negative MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. Thus, miR-27a indirectly regulates
E2-responsiveness in MCF-7 cells through suppression of ZBTB10, thereby enhancing
expression of ERalpha.

PMCID: PMC2875816
PMID: 20382698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Free Radic Biol Med. 2010 Jul 15;49(2):178-91. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2010.03.027. Epub 2010 Apr 8.

Oxidative-stress-induced alterations in Sp factors mediate transcriptional
regulation of the NR1 subunit in hippocampus during hypoxia.

Hota SK(1), Hota KB, Prasad D, Ilavazhagan G, Singh SB.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Institute of High Altitude Research, Leh, Ladakh, Jammu and Kashmir,
India.

Ascent to high altitude is associated with tissue hypoxia resulting from the
decrease in partial pressure of atmospheric oxygen. The hippocampus, in
particular, is highly vulnerable to hypoxic insult, which at least in part can be
attributed to the occurrence of glutamate excitotoxicity. Although this
excitotoxic damage is often related to increased NMDA receptor activation and
subsequent calcium-mediated free radical generation, the mechanisms involving the
transcriptional regulation of NMDA receptor subunit expression by hypoxic stress 
remains to be explored. Our study reveals a novel mechanism for the regulation of
expression of the NR1 subunit of NMDA receptors by the Sp family of transcription
factors through an oxidative-stress-mediated mechanism that also involves the
molecular chaperone Hsp90. The findings not only show the occurrence of lipid
peroxidation and DNA damage in hippocampal cells exposed to hypoxia but also
reveal a calcium-independent mechanism of selective oxidation and degradation of 
Sp3 by the 20S proteasome. This along with increased DNA binding activity of Sp1 
leads to NR1 upregulation in the hippocampus during hypoxic stress. The study
therefore provides evidence for free radical-mediated regulation of gene
expression in hypoxia and the scope of the use of antioxidants in preventing
excitotoxic neuronal damage during hypoxia.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20381604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2010 Jul;299(1):C51-7. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00081.2010. Epub 2010 Apr 7.

Epidermal growth factor inhibits intestinal NHE8 expression via reducing its
basal transcription.

Xu H(1), Zhang B, Li J, Chen H, Tooley J, Ghishan FK.

Author information: 
(1)University of Arizona Health Sciences Center, Tucson, Arizona 85724, USA.

Sodium/hydrogen exchangers (NHEs) play a major role in Na(+) absorption, cell
volume regulation, and intracellular pH regulation. Of the nine identified
mammalian NHEs, three (NHE2, NHE3, and NHE8) are localized on the apical membrane
of epithelial cells in the small intestine and the kidney. Although the
regulation of NHE2 and NHE3 expression has been extensively studied in the past
decade, little is known about the regulation of NHE8 gene expression under
physiological conditions. The current studies were performed to explore the role 
of epidermal growth factor (EGF) on NHE8 expression during intestinal maturation.
Brush-border membrane vesicles (BBMV) were isolated from intestinal epithelia,
and Western blot analysis was performed to determine NHE8 protein expression of
sucking male rats treated with EGF. Real-time PCR was used to quantitate NHE8
mRNA expression in rats and Caco-2 cells. Human NHE8 promoter activity was
characterized through transfection of Caco-2 cells. Gel mobility shift assays
(GMSAs) were used to identify the promoter sequences and the transcriptional
factors involved in EGF-mediated regulation. Our results showed that intestinal
NHE8 mRNA expression was decreased in EGF-treated rats and Caco-2 cells, and NHE8
protein abundance was also decreased in EGF-treated rats. The activity of the
human NHE8 gene promoter transfected in Caco-2 cells was also reduced by EGF
treatment. This could be explained by reduced binding of transcription factor Sp3
on the NHE8 basal promoter region in the presence of EGF. Pretreatment with
MEK1/2 inhibitor UO-126 could prevent EGF-mediated inhibition of NHE8 gene
expression. In conclusion, this study showed that EGF inhibits NHE8 gene
expression through reducing its basal transcription, suggesting an important role
of EGF in regulating NHE expression during intestinal maturation.

PMCID: PMC2904261
PMID: 20375273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Phys Rev Lett. 2010 Mar 26;104(12):125504. Epub 2010 Mar 26.

Body-centered tetragonal C4: a viable sp3 carbon allotrope.

Umemoto K(1), Wentzcovitch RM, Saito S, Miyake T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geology and Geophysics, University of Minnesota, 421 Washington 
Avenue SE, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA.

We have investigated by first principles the electronic, vibrational, and
structural properties of bct C4, a new form of crystalline sp{3} carbon recently 
found in molecular dynamics simulations of carbon nanotubes under pressure. This 
phase is transparent, dynamically stable at zero pressure, and more stable than
graphite beyond 18.6 GPa. Coexistence of bct C4 with M carbon can explain better 
the x-ray diffraction pattern of a transparent and hard phase of carbon produced 
by the cold compression of graphite. Its structure appears to be intermediate
between that of graphite and hexagonal diamond. These facts suggest that bct C4
is an accessible form of sp{3} carbon along the graphite-to-hexagonal diamond
transformation path.

PMID: 20366546  [PubMed]


302. PLoS One. 2010 Mar 29;5(3):e9912. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009912.

Transcription of human resistin gene involves an interaction of Sp1 with
peroxisome proliferator-activating receptor gamma (PPARgamma).

Singh AK(1), Battu A, Mohareer K, Hasnain SE, Ehtesham NZ.

Author information: 
(1)University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad, India.

BACKGROUND: Resistin is a cysteine rich protein, mainly expressed and secreted by
circulating human mononuclear cells. While several factors responsible for
transcription of mouse resistin gene have been identified, not much is known
about the factors responsible for the differential expression of human resistin.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDING: We show that the minimal promoter of human
resistin lies within approximately 80 bp sequence upstream of the transcriptional
start site (-240) whereas binding sites for cRel, CCAAT enhancer binding protein 
alpha (C/EBP-alpha), activating transcription factor 2 (ATF-2) and activator
protein 1 (AP-1) transcription factors, important for induced expression, are
present within sequences up to -619. Specificity Protein 1(Sp1) binding site
(-276 to -295) is also present and an interaction of Sp1 with peroxisome
proliferator activating receptor gamma (PPARgamma) is necessary for constitutive 
expression in U937 cells. Indeed co-immunoprecipitation assay demonstrated a
direct physical interaction of Sp1 with PPARgamma in whole cell extracts of U937 
cells. Phorbol myristate acetate (PMA) upregulated the expression of resistin
mRNA in U937 cells by increasing the recruitment of Sp1, ATF-2 and PPARgamma on
the resistin gene promoter. Furthermore, PMA stimulation of U937 cells resulted
in the disruption of Sp1 and PPARgamma interaction. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) assay confirmed the recruitment of transcription factors phospho ATF-2,
Sp1, Sp3, PPARgamma, chromatin modifier histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and the
acetylated form of histone H3 but not cRel, C/EBP-alpha and phospho c-Jun during 
resistin gene transcription.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest a complex interplay of Sp1 and PPARgamma along
with other transcription factors that drives the expression of resistin in human 
monocytic U937 cells.

PMCID: PMC2848011
PMID: 20360975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. J Am Chem Soc. 2010 Apr 28;132(16):5590-1. doi: 10.1021/ja101633x.

Brønsted acid-catalyzed cascade cycloisomerization of enynes via acetylene
cations and sp3-hybridized C-H bond activation.

Jin T(1), Himuro M, Yamamoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University, Sendai
980-8578, Japan. tjin@mail.tains.tohoku.ac.jp

A novel Brønsted acid-catalyzed cascade cycloisomerization of cyclic and acyclic 
enynes via acetylene cation cyclization followed by cleavage of the entirely
inactive C(sp(3))-H bond is described. The reaction proceeds efficiently under
mild conditions to afford various tri- and bicyclic compounds in good to high
yields.

PMID: 20355734  [PubMed]


304. J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2010 Jun;10(6):3878-83.

Optical spectroscopic studies of thermally coalesced single-walled carbon
nanotubes.

Shimamoto D(1), Muramatsu H, Kim YJ, Kim YA, Hayashi T, Endo M, Terrones M,
Dresselhaus MS.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Engineering, Shinshu University, 4-17-1 Wakasato, Nagano 380-8553, 
Japan.

Changes in the optical properties of thermally coalesced single-walled carbon
nanotubes (SWCNTs) caused by heat treatment between 1300 and 2800 degrees C in
argon, have been monitored using optical absorption and photoluminescence
spectroscopy. For SWNTs heat treated at 1900 degrees C, we found a complete
disapperance of small-diameter tubes (<1.0 nm) as well as the appearance of
enlarged, defective tubes. The decreased sp2/sp3 ratio for tubes heat treated
below 2100 degrees C suggests that adjacent small-diameter SWNTs transform into
energetically stable larger-diameter SWNTs by the presence of structural non sp2 
defects.

PMID: 20355383  [PubMed]


305. J Am Chem Soc. 2010 Apr 21;132(15):5332-3. doi: 10.1021/ja9109055.

Copper(I)-catalyzed substitution reactions of propargylic amines: importance of
C(sp)-C(sp3) bond cleavage in generation of iminium intermediates.

Sugiishi T(1), Kimura A, Nakamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Gakushuin University, Mejiro,
Toshima-ku, Tokyo 171-8588, Japan.

Substitution reactions of propargylic amines proceed in the presence of copper(I)
catalysts. Mechanistic studies showed that C(sp)-C(sp(3)) bond cleavage assisted 
by nitrogen lone-pair electrons is essential for the reaction, and the resulting 
iminium intermediates undergo amine exchange, aldehyde exchange, and alkyne
addition reactions. Because iminium intermediates are key to
aldehyde-alkyne-amine (A(3)) coupling reactions, this transformation is effective
not only for reconstruction of propargylic amines but also for chiral induction
of racemic compounds in the presence of chiral catalysts.

PMID: 20353176  [PubMed]


306. Pharmacogenomics. 2010 Apr;11(4):547-57. doi: 10.2217/pgs.10.7.

Functional analysis of the role of the TPMT gene promoter VNTR polymorphism in
TPMT gene transcription.

Zukic B(1), Radmilovic M, Stojiljkovic M, Tosic N, Pourfarzad F, Dokmanovic L,
Janic D, Colovic N, Philipsen S, Patrinos GP, Pavlovic S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Genetics & Genetic Engineering, Laboratory of
Molecular Hematology, Vojvode Stepe 444a, 11010 Belgrade, Serbia.

AIMS: Thiopurine S-methyltransferase (TPMT) activity is polymorphic, and a
trimodal distribution has been demonstrated in Caucasians (low, intermediate and 
high methylator groups). The TPMT gene promoter contains a variable number of
three GC-rich tandem repeats, namely A, B and C, ranging from three to nine in
length in a A(n)B(m)C architecture.
MATERIALS & METHODS: Here, we investigated the influence of number and type of
TPMT gene promoter tandem repeats on human TPMT gene transcription in K562 cells 
transiently transfected with reporter constructs bearing various variable number 
of tandem repeats (VNTR) and addressed the interaction of transcription factor
binding to the VNTRs by electrophoretic mobility shift assays.
RESULTS: We found that the distribution patterns of VNTR alleles do not
significantly differ among acute lymphoblastic leukemia patients, acute myeloid
leukemia patients and normal individuals. We also demonstrated that the A repeat 
has a negative effect in TPMT gene transcription and that a positive regulatory
element, identified immediately upstream to the VNTR region of the TPMT gene
promoter, is indispensable for TPMT gene transcription. Our electrophoretic
mobility shift assay analysis indicated that the Sp1 and Sp3 transcription
factors bind to the VNTR repeats.
CONCLUSION: Overall, our data underline that both the number and type of VNTRs,
as well as the upstream regulatory region of the TPMT gene promoter, determine
the overall level of TPMT gene transcription. It remains to be seen whether these
VNTRs can be employed as pharmacogenetic markers to individualize thiopurine
therapy.

PMID: 20350137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Org Chem. 2010 May 7;75(9):2893-902. doi: 10.1021/jo100133z.

Platinum-catalyzed Michael addition and cyclization of tertiary amines with
nitroolefins by dehydrogenation of alpha,beta-sp3 C-H bonds.

Xia XF(1), Shu XZ, Ji KG, Yang YF, Ali S, Liu XY, Liang YM.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Applied Organic Chemistry, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou
730000, People's Republic of China.

Erratum in
    J Org Chem. 2012 Feb 3;77(3):1616. Shaukat, Ali [ corrected to Ali, Shaukat].

A mild platinum-catalyzed oxidative dehydrogenation of alpha,beta-C(sp(3))-H
bonds of tertiary amines in the presence of ambient oxygen is revealed, and the
in situ formed enamines subsequently reacting with various nitroolefins resulted 
in the development of two one-pot synthetic protocols involving Michael
addition-elimination and Michael addition-cyclization. By using different
functionalized nitroolefins compatible with the current oxidative conditions, two
types of structurally divergent products, trisubstituted enamines and
chromano[2,3-b]piperidines, could be expediently accessed, respectively.

PMID: 20345090  [PubMed]


308. J Cell Physiol. 2010 Jul;224(1):28-32. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22078.

Estrogen regulated expression of the p21 Waf1/Cip1 gene in estrogen receptor
positive human breast cancer cells.

Mandal S(1), Davie JR.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, Canada.

The cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor protein p21(Waf1/Cip1) is a potent tumor
suppressor. Here, we demonstrate that estradiol regulates the p21(Waf1/Cip1)
gene. Estradiol induces p21(Waf1/Cip1) mRNA expression within 30-60 min
independent of new protein synthesis in the estrogen receptor alpha (ER alpha)
positive human breast cancer cell line MCF-7. Similar to other estradiol
responsive promoters, the p21(Waf1/Cip1) upstream promoter region has several
estrogen response element (ERE) half-sites nestled in AP-1 binding sites, which
are positioned upstream to Sp1 binding sites. Using the chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay, we show that estradiol stimulation resulted in 
the recruitment of transcription factors ER alpha, Sp1, and Sp3 to the
p21(Waf1/Cip1) upstream promoter element. The Sp1 inhibitor mithramycin A
abrogated Sp1, and to a lesser extent Sp3 binding, and markedly reduced the
estradiol stimulated p21(Waf1/Cip1) gene expression. However, ER alpha binding
was not affected in the mithramycin A and estradiol treated cells. On closer
examination of the half-site ERE/AP-1 sites upstream to the Sp1 sites in a
separate ChIP experiment, we found a pronounced association of ER alpha upon
estradiol treatment compared to almost negligible binding of Sp1 or Sp3. Together
these studies provide evidence that ER alpha is recruited to the half-site
ERE/AP-1 sites in the p21(Waf1/Cip1) upstream promoter element. Although Sp1/Sp3 
is not involved in the recruitment of ER alpha to the promoter, Sp1 is necessary 
for estrogen-induced p21(Waf1/Cip1) promoter activity.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20301197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. PLoS One. 2010 Mar 8;5(3):e9587. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009587.

Specificity protein 2 (Sp2) is essential for mouse development and autonomous
proliferation of mouse embryonic fibroblasts.

Baur F(1), Nau K, Sadic D, Allweiss L, Elsässer HP, Gillemans N, de Wit T, Krüger
I, Vollmer M, Philipsen S, Suske G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Philipps-Universität
Marburg, Marburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The zinc finger protein Sp2 (specificity protein 2) is a member of
the glutamine-rich Sp family of transcription factors. Despite its close
similarity to Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4, Sp2 does not bind to DNA or activate
transcription when expressed in mammalian cell lines. The expression pattern and 
the biological relevance of Sp2 in the mouse are unknown.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Whole-mount in situ hybridization of mouse
embryos between E7.5 and E9.5 revealed abundant expression in most embryonic and 
extra-embryonic tissues. In order to unravel the biological relevance of Sp2, we 
have targeted the Sp2 gene by a tri-loxP strategy. Constitutive Sp2null and
conditional Sp2cko knockout alleles were obtained by crossings with appropriate
Cre recombinase expressing mice. Constitutive disruption of the mouse Sp2 gene
(Sp2null) resulted in severe growth retardation and lethality before E9.5. Mouse 
embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) derived from Sp2null embryos at E9.5 failed to grow.
Cre-mediated ablation of Sp2 in Sp2cko/cko MEFs obtained from E13.5 strongly
impaired cell proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our results demonstrate that Sp2 is essential for early
mouse development and autonomous proliferation of MEFs in culture. Comparison of 
the Sp2 knockout phenotype with the phenotypes of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 knockout
strains shows that, despite their structural similarity and evolutionary
relationship, all four glutamine-rich members of the Sp family of transcription
factors have distinct non-redundant functions in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2833205
PMID: 20221402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 30;285(18):13444-53. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.062430. Epub
2010 Mar 3.

Down-regulation of PROS1 gene expression by 17beta-estradiol via estrogen
receptor alpha (ERalpha)-Sp1 interaction recruiting receptor-interacting protein 
140 and the corepressor-HDAC3 complex.

Suzuki A(1), Sanda N, Miyawaki Y, Fujimori Y, Yamada T, Takagi A, Murate T, Saito
H, Kojima T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiological Laboratory Sciences, Nagoya University
Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya 461-8673, Japan.

Pregnant women show a low level of protein S (PS) in plasma, which is known to be
a risk for deep venous thrombosis. 17Beta-estradiol (E(2)), an estrogen that
increases in concentration in the late stages of pregnancy, regulates the
expression of various genes via the estrogen receptor (ER). Here, we investigated
the molecular mechanisms behind the reduction in PS levels caused by E(2) in
HepG2-ERalpha cells, which stably express ERalpha, and also the genomic ER
signaling pathway, which modulates the ligand-dependent repression of the PSalpha
gene (PROS1). We observed that E(2) repressed the production of mRNA and antigen 
of PS. A luciferase reporter assay revealed that E(2) down-regulated PROS1
promoter activity and that this E(2)-dependent repression disappeared upon the
deletion or mutation of two adjacent GC-rich motifs in the promoter. An
electrophoretic mobility shift assay and DNA pulldown assay revealed that the
GC-rich motifs were associated with Sp1, Sp3, and ERalpha. In a chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay, we found ERalpha-Sp protein-promoter interaction
involved in the E(2)-dependent repression of PROS1 transcription. Furthermore, we
demonstrated that E(2) treatment recruited RIP140 and the NCoR-SMRT-HDAC3 complex
to the PROS1 promoter, which hypoacetylated chromatin. Taken together, this
suggested that E(2) might repress PROS1 transcription depending upon ERalpha-Sp1 
recruiting transcriptional repressors in HepG2-ERalpha cells and, consequently,
that high levels of E(2) leading to reduced levels of plasma PS would be a risk
for deep venous thrombosis in pregnant women.

PMCID: PMC2859504
PMID: 20200160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. BioDrugs. 2010 Apr 1;24(2):131-46. doi: 10.2165/11530840-000000000-00000.

Selective suicide gene therapy of colon cancer exploiting the urokinase
plasminogen activator receptor promoter.

Teimoori-Toolabi L(1), Azadmanesh K, Amanzadeh A, Zeinali S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Department, Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur
Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.

Colon cancer is the third and fourth most prevalent cancer among Iranian men and 
women, respectively. Suicide gene therapy is one of the alternative therapeutic
modalities for cancer. The application of specific promoters for therapeutic
genes should decrease the adverse effects of this modality. The combined aims of 
this study were to design a specific suicide gene therapy construct for colon
cancer and study its effect in distinct representatives of transformed and
nontransformed cells. The KRAS oncogene signaling pathway is one of the most
important signaling pathways activated in colon cancer; therefore, we inserted
the urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR; PLAUR gene) promoter as one
of the upregulated promoters by this pathway upstream of a suicide gene
(thymidine kinase [TK]) and a reporter gene (beta-galactosidase, beta-gal
[LacZ]). This promoter is a natural combination of different motifs responsive to
the RAS signaling pathway, such as the transcription factors AP1 (FOS/JUN), SP1, 
SP3, and AP2alpha, and nuclear factor kappa B (NFkappaB). The reporter plasmid
under the control of the uPAR promoter (PUCUPARLacZ) had the ability to express
beta-gal in colon cancer cells (human colon adenocarcinoma [SW480] and human
colorectal carcinoma [HCT116] cell lines), while it could not express beta-gal in
nontransformed human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) and normal colon
cells. After confirming the ability of pUCUPARTK (suicide plasmid) to express TK 
in SW480 and HCT116 cells by real-time PCR, cytotoxicity assays showed that
pUCUPARTK decreased the viability of these cells in the presence of ganciclovir
20 and 40 microg/mL (and higher), respectively. Although M30 CytoDEATH antibody
could not detect a significant rate of apoptosis induced by ganciclovir in
pUCUPARTK-transfected HCT116 cells, the percentage of stained cells was marked in
comparison with untreated cells. While this antibody could detect apoptosis in
HCT116 cell line transfected with positive control plasmid, it could not detect
apoptosis in SW480 cells transfected with the same positive control. This
discrepancy could be attributed to the different mechanisms of
TK/ganciclovir-induced apoptosis in tumor protein p53 (TP53)-expressing (HCT116) 
and -deficient (SW480) cells. Annexin-propidium iodide staining could detect
apoptosis in treated, pUCUPARTK-transfected SW480 and HCT116 cells. This study
showed that the uPAR promoter can be considered as a suitable candidate for
specific suicide gene therapy of colon cancer and probably other cancers in which
the RAS signaling pathway is involved in their carcinogenesis process.

PMID: 20199127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Am Chem Soc. 2010 Mar 24;132(11):3680-1. doi: 10.1021/ja1010866.

Pd(II)-catalyzed olefination of sp3 C-H bonds.

Wasa M(1), Engle KM, Yu JQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey
Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

The first Pd(II)-catalyzed sp(3) C-H olefination reaction has been developed
using N-arylamide directing groups. Following olefination, the resulting
intermediates were found to undergo rapid 1,4-addition to give the corresponding 
gamma-lactams. Notably, this method was effective with substrates containing
alpha-hydrogen atoms and could be applied to effect methylene C-H olefination of 
cyclopropane substrates.

PMCID: PMC2841429
PMID: 20187642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Mol Biol Rep. 2010 Oct;37(7):3593-600. doi: 10.1007/s11033-010-0008-3. Epub 2010 
Feb 24.

Sp1 and Sp3 mediate basal and serum-induced expression of human CENP-W.

Kim H(1), Lee S, Park B, Che L, Lee S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Brain Korea 21 Project for Biological Science,
Chungnam National University, Daejeon, 305-764, Republic of Korea.

Cancer-upregulated gene 2 (CUG2), which was named since it was originally
identified as a putative oncogene up-regulated in various human cancers, was
recently renamed CENP-W based on the new findings that it is a component of the
centromeric complex playing a crucial role in the assembly of functional
kinetochore complex during mitosis. To understand the transcriptional regulation 
of CENP-W, we analyzed its TATA-less promoter and identified a GC-rich putative
Sp1 binding site located at -46 to -36 that was critical in CENP-W expression.
Competitive electrophoretic gel mobility shift assay using mutated oligos and
supershift assays with Sp1 and Sp3 antibodies demonstrated that both proteins
specifically bound to this promoter region. Moreover, we found that CENP-W was
highly induced by serum stimulation followed by serum deprivation, with Sp1 and
Sp3 transcription factors involved in this transactivation. Taken together, our
results suggest that Sp1 together with Sp3 may function as the main regulator of 
the basal and serum-induced transcription of CENP-W.

PMID: 20180024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Lipid Res. 2010 Jul;51(7):1859-70. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M004234. Epub 2010 Feb 23.

Protein kinase Cbeta mediates hepatic induction of sterol-regulatory element
binding protein-1c by insulin.

Yamamoto T(1), Watanabe K, Inoue N, Nakagawa Y, Ishigaki N, Matsuzaka T, Takeuchi
Y, Kobayashi K, Yatoh S, Takahashi A, Suzuki H, Yahagi N, Gotoda T, Yamada N,
Shimano H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human
Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

Sterol-regulatory element binding protein-1c (SREBP-1c) is a transcription factor
that controls lipogenesis in the liver. Hepatic SREBP-1c is nutritionally
regulated, and its sustained activation causes hepatic steatosis and insulin
resistance. Although regulation of SREBP-1c is known to occur at the
transcriptional level, the precise mechanism by which insulin signaling activates
SREBP-1c promoter remains to be elucidated. Here we show that protein kinase C
beta (PKCbeta) is a key mediator of insulin-mediated activation of hepatic
SREBP-1c and its target lipogenic genes. Activation of SREBP-1c in the liver of
refed mice was suppressed by either adenoviral RNAi-mediated knockdown or dietary
administration of a specific inhibitor of protein kinase C beta. The effect of
PKCbeta inhibition was cancelled in insulin depletion by streptozotocin (STZ)
treatment of mice. Promoter analysis indicated that PKCbeta activates SREBP-1c
promoter through replacement of Sp3 by Sp1 for binding to the GC box in the
sterol regulatory element (SRE) complex, a key cis-element of SREBP-1c promoter. 
Knockdown of Sp proteins demonstrated that Sp3 and Sp1 play reciprocally negative
and positive roles in nutritional regulation of SREBP-1c, respectively. This new 
understanding of PKCbeta involvement in nutritional regulation of SREBP-1c
activation provides a new aspect of PKCbeta inhibition as a potential therapeutic
target for diabetic complications.

PMCID: PMC2882723
PMID: 20179320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Am Chem Soc. 2010 Mar 24;132(11):3965-72. doi: 10.1021/ja910900p.

Auxiliary-assisted palladium-catalyzed arylation and alkylation of sp2 and sp3
carbon-hydrogen bonds.

Shabashov D(1), Daugulis O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Houston, Houston, Texas 77204-5003,
USA.

We have developed a method for auxiliary-directed, palladium-catalyzed
beta-arylation and alkylation of sp(3) and sp(2) C-H bonds in carboxylic acid
derivatives. The method employs a carboxylic acid 2-methylthioaniline- or
8-aminoquinoline amide substrate, aryl or alkyl iodide coupling partner,
palladium acetate catalyst, and an inorganic base. By employing
2-methylthioaniline auxiliary, selective monoarylation of primary sp(3) C-H bonds
can be achieved. If arylation of secondary sp(3) C-H bonds is desired,
8-aminoquinoline auxiliary may be used. For alkylation of sp(3) and sp(2) C-H
bonds, 8-aminoquinoline auxiliary affords the best results. Some functional group
tolerance is observed and amino- and hydroxy-acid derivatives can be
functionalized. Preliminary mechanistic studies have been performed. A
palladacycle intermediate has been isolated, characterized by X-ray
crystallography, and its reactions have been studied.

PMCID: PMC2841226
PMID: 20175511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Med Phys. 2010 Jan;37(1):329-38.

In vivo bioluminescence tomography with a blocking-off finite-difference SP3
method and MRI/CT coregistration.

Klose AD(1), Beattie BJ, Dehghani H, Vider L, Le C, Ponomarev V, Blasberg R.

Author information: 
(1)Columbia University, New York, New York 10027, USA. ak2083@columbia.edu

PURPOSE: Bioluminescence imaging is a research tool for studying gene expression 
levels in small animal models of human disease. Bioluminescence light, however,
is strongly scattered in biological tissue and no direct image of the
light-emitting reporter probe's location can be obtained. Therefore, the authors 
have developed a linear image reconstruction method for bioluminescence
tomography (BLT) that recovers the three-dimensional spatial bioluminescent
source distribution in small animals.
METHODS: The proposed reconstruction method uses third-order simplified spherical
harmonics (SP3) solutions to the equation of radiative transfer for modeling the 
bioluminescence light propagation in optically nonuniform tissue. The SP3
equations and boundary conditions are solved with a finite-difference (FD)
technique on a regular grid. The curved geometry of the animal surface was taken 
into account with a blocking-off region method for regular grids. Coregistered
computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance (MR) images provide information
regarding the geometry of the skin surface and internal organs. The inverse
source problem is defined as an algebraic system of linear equations for the
unknown source distribution and is iteratively solved given multiview and
multispectral boundary measurements. The average tissue absorption parameters,
which are used for the image reconstruction process, were calculated with an
evolution strategy (ES) from in vivo measurements using an implanted pointlike
source of known location and spectrum. Moreover, anatomical information regarding
the location of the internal organs and other tissue structures within the
animal's body are provided by coregistered MR images.
RESULTS: First, the authors recovered the wavelength-dependent absorption
coefficients (average error of 14%) with the ES under ideal conditions by using a
numerical mouse model. Next, they reconstructed the average absorption
coefficient of a small animal by using an artificial implanted light source and
the validated ES. Last, they conducted two in vivo animal experiments and
recovered the spatial location of the implanted light source and the spatial
distribution of a bioluminescent reporter system located in the kidneys. The
source reconstruction results were coregistered to CT and MR images. They further
found that accurate bioluminescence image reconstructions could be obtained when 
segmenting a voidlike cyst with low-scattering and absorption parameters, whereas
inaccurate image reconstructions were obtained when assuming a uniform optical
parameter distribution instead. The image reconstructions were completed within
23 min on a 3 GHz Intel processor.
CONCLUSIONS: The authors demonstrated on in vivo examples that the combination of
anatomical coregistration, accurate optical tissue properties, multispectral
acquisition, and a blocking-off FD-SP3 solution of the radiative transfer model
significantly improves the accuracy of the BLT reconstructions.

PMCID: PMC2803718
PMID: 20175496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 May-Jun;1799(5-6):442-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2010.02.001. Epub 2010 Feb 11.

Sp1 and Sp3 regulate transcription of the chicken GAS41 gene.

Hübner K(1), Phi-van L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Welfare and Animal Husbandry, Dörnbergstr. 25-27, 29223
Celle, Germany.

The 5'-flanking region of the chicken glioma-amplified sequence (GAS) 41 gene is 
close to the 3' end of the lysozyme gene and contains no typical TATA box, but
several GC boxes. In this study, we have localized the GAS 41 promoter to this
narrow region. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and chromatin
immunoprecipitation analyses revealed that Sp1 and Sp3 bind to this promoter.
Mapping by a technique of indirect end labeling demonstrated that the Sp1-binding
sites contained in this region exactly co-map with two previously identified
DNase I hypersensitive (HS) sites, which suggests the important role of Sp1
binding in maintaining an open chromatin structure of the GAS41 promoter. We
further found that Sp1 and Sp3 strongly activate CAT expression controlled by the
putative GAS41 promoter in Drosophila Schneider S2 cells and that deletion of the
Sp1 sites resulted in a loss of promoter activity in chicken HD11 cells. The
results indicate that transcription factors of the Sp family play an important
role in the transcriptional regulation of the chicken GAS41 gene.

PMID: 20153453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 16;285(16):11880-91. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.109843. Epub
2010 Feb 11.

A role for Sp1 in transcriptional regulation of phosphatidylethanolamine
N-methyltransferase in liver and 3T3-L1 adipocytes.

Cole LK(1), Vance DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta TG6 2S2, 
Canada.

Phosphatidylcholine is made in all nucleated mammalian cells via the CDP-choline 
pathway. Another major pathway for phosphatidylcholine biosynthesis in liver is
catalyzed by phosphatidylethanolamine N-methyltransferase (PEMT). We have now
identified 3T3-L1 adipocytes as a cell culture model that expresses PEMT
endogenously. We have found that PEMT mRNA and protein levels increased
dramatically in 3T3-L1 cells upon differentiation to adipocytes. 5'-Deletion
analysis of the PEMT promoter-luciferase constructs stably expressed in 3T3-L1
adipocytes identified a regulatory region between -471 and -371 bp (relative to
the transcriptional start site). Competitive and supershift assays demonstrated
binding sites for transcription factors Sp1, Sp3 (-408 to -413), and YY1 (-417 to
-420). During differentiation of 3T3-L1 cells to adipocytes, the amount of Sp1
protein decreased by approximately 50% just prior to activation of PEMT.
Transduction of 3T3-L1 adipocytes with retrovirus containing Sp1 cDNA
demonstrated that Sp1 inhibited PEMT transcriptional activity. Similarly, short
hairpin RNA directed against Sp1 in 3T3-L1 adipocytes enhanced PEMT
transcriptional activation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays confirmed that
Sp1 binds to the PEMT promoter, and this interaction decreases upon
differentiation to adipocytes. These experiments directly link increased PEMT
expression in adipocytes to decreased transcriptional expression of Sp1. In
addition, our data established that Sp1 binding was required for
tamoxifen-mediated inhibition of Pemt promoter activity.

PMCID: PMC2852925
PMID: 20150657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Biochem J. 2010 Apr 14;427(3):391-400. doi: 10.1042/BJ20091798.

MMP28 gene expression is regulated by Sp1 transcription factor acetylation.

Swingler TE(1), Kevorkian L, Culley KL, Illman SA, Young DA, Parker AE, Lohi J,
Clark IM.

Author information: 
(1)University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK.

MMP-28 (epilysin) is a recently cloned member of the MMP (matrix
metalloproteinase) family. It is highly expressed in the skin by keratinocytes,
the developing and regenerating nervous system and a number of other normal human
tissues, as well as a number of carcinomas. The MMP28 promoter has previously
been cloned and characterized identifying a conserved GT-box that binds Sp1/Sp3
(specificity proteins 1 and 3) proteins and is essential for the basal expression
of the gene. The present study demonstrates that MMP28 expression is induced by
HDAC (histone deacetylase) inhibitors and that this effect is mediated through
the GT-box. Transient transfection assays have shown that the induction of MMP28 
expression by the HDAC inhibitior TSA (trichostatin A) is mediated via Sp1 at the
GT-box. Immunoprecipitation experiments have shown that the acetylation of Sp1
and Sp3 is increased by TSA treatment; however, no effect on DNA binding was
observed. Histone acetyltransferases such as p300 and P/CAF [p300/CREB
(cAMP-response-element-binding protein)-binding protein-associated factor]
increased induction of the MMP28 promoter by Sp1. Knockdown of HDAC1 using siRNA 
(small interfering RNA) also induces the MMP28 promoter. Oligonucleotide pulldown
identified STRAP (serine/threonine kinase receptor-associated protein) as a
further protein recruited to the MMP28 promoter and acting functionally with Sp1.

PMID: 20144149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Chemistry. 2010 Mar 1;16(9):2654-72. doi: 10.1002/chem.200902374.

Functionalization of organic molecules by transition-metal-catalyzed C(sp3)-H
activation.

Jazzar R(1), Hitce J, Renaudat A, Sofack-Kreutzer J, Baudoin O.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Chimie et Biochimie Moléculaires et Supramoléculaires, CNRS
UMR5246, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, 43 bd du 11 Novembre 1918, 69622
Villeurbanne, France.

Erratum in
    Chemistry. 2011 Nov 11;17(46):12846.

Transition-metal-catalyzed C-H activation has recently emerged as a powerful tool
for the functionalization of organic molecules. While many efforts have focused
on the functionalization of arenes and heteroarenes by this strategy in the past 
two decades, much less research has been devoted to the activation of non-acidic 
C-H bonds of alkyl groups. This Minireview highlights recent work in this area,
with a particular emphasis on synthetically useful methods.

PMID: 20143359  [PubMed]


321. J Org Chem. 2010 Mar 5;75(5):1427-36. doi: 10.1021/jo902315t.

Are sp lithiated carbons more nucleophilic than sp2 or sp3 ones? A comparative
DFT study of the condensation of propynyllithium aggregates on formaldehyde.

Fressigné C(1), Maddaluno J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Chimie Théorique, CNRS UMR 7616, Université Pierre et Marie
Curie, Case Courrier 137, 4, place Jussieu, 75252 Paris Cedex 05, France.

The interaction between 1-propynyllithium, taken as a model of sp organolithium
compound, and formaldehyde has been investigated with DFT theoretical methods.
The unsolvated monomer, homogeneous dimer, trimer, tetramer, and hexamer have
been considered, as well as the mixed aggregates with lithium dimethylamide in
various oligomeric forms. In most cases, the separate entities, their docking
complexes, the transition states, and the condensation products have been
characterized. Overall, the general reaction scheme remains the same whatever the
hybridization and the aggregation. However, the dimeric sp nucleophiles are
expected to be more reactive (at least in kinetic conditions), while monomeric
sp(3) entities would be the best nucleophiles in kinetic and thermodynamic
conditions, even if its docking is the least exothermic. This work also suggests 
that the aggregation plays a relatively limited role on the model reaction.

PMID: 20141113  [PubMed]


322. Neurol Res. 2010 Feb;32 Suppl 1:37-42. doi: 10.1179/016164109X12537002793887.

Short term effects by acupuncture to SP3 on the autonomic blood flow control.

Lee S(1), Chae Y, Kim SN, Kim SY, Park JY, Kwark YR, Kang OS, Lee H, Yin CS, Park
HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Acupuncture and Meridian Science Research Center, Kyung Hee University, Seoul 
130-701, Korea.

OBJECTIVES: In this study, we investigated the short term effects of acupuncture 
on autonomic control of blood flow in healthy subjects. We also studied whether
deqi (obtaining qi) sensations are correlated with these autonomic hemodynamic
changes.
METHODS: The experiment had a randomized, crossover design. Five healthy
volunteers (age: 18-26 years) participated in this study. Acupuncture (2 Hz
rotations for 10 seconds to 20 mm deep) was applied either to the acupuncture
point SP3 or KI2 for 5 minutes. Non-invasively obtained continuous hemodynamic
measurements of ultrasound Dopplerography were recorded at the radial artery
before, during and after acupuncture stimulation. Cardiovascular autonomic tone
was also recorded using power spectral analysis of heart rate variability. After 
acupuncture stimulation, the participants completed the acupuncture perception
scales to measure the degree of deqi or pain they had experienced.
RESULTS: Acupuncture stimulation to the acupuncture point SP3, when compared to
the acupuncture point KI2, decreased the maximum systolic velocity. It also
decreased low frequency component and increased high frequency component of heart
rate variability, indicating that the decrease in systolic blood flow velocity
was due to the increased parasympathetic response. Interestingly, warm, radiating
and energetic feeling, which are related to deqi, had close correlations with the
decrease in blood flow velocity.
DISCUSSION: Acupuncture stimulation to the acupuncture point SP3 modulates the
autonomic cardiovascular responses by enhancing parasympathetic function, and
this may help to understand the therapeutic effects of acupuncture.

PMID: 20034443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Eur J Med Chem. 2010 May;45(5):1927-34. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2010.01.034. Epub
2010 Jan 25.

A rationale for the activity profile of arylpiperazinylthioalkyls as
5-HT1A-serotonin and alpha1-adrenergic receptor ligands.

Sharma BK(1), Sarbhai K, Singh P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, S. K. Government College, Silver Jubilee Road, Sikar 
332 001, Rajasthan, India. bksharma_sikar@rediffmail.com

The 5-HT1A and alpha1-receptor binding affinities of the arylpiperazinylthioalkyl
derivatives have been quantitatively expressed in terms of topological and
molecular features. The analysis revealed that a lower value of atomic
composition based index (AAC), higher values of structural information content
(SIC3) and topological charge index (GGI9) would be beneficial to the 5-HT1A
receptor binding. For the alpha1-receptor binding affinity the higher values of
topological charge index (GGI9) and atomic Sanderson electronegativities weighted
descriptor (GATS3e) and more number of hydrogen atoms attached to sp or sp3
hybridized carbon atoms in a molecular structure (H-047) would be favorable. The 
derived significant models may further be used to synthesize new potential and
selective compounds.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20129717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Guang Pu Xue Yu Guang Pu Fen Xi. 2009 Nov;29(11):2909-13.

[Study on spectral emissivity of C/C composites].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhu B(1), Cao WW, Jing M, Dong XG, Wang CG.

Author information: 
(1)Carbon Fiber Center, Institute of Polymer Materials, School of Materials
Science and Engineering, Key Laboratory of Liquid Structure and Heredity of
Materials, Ministry of Education, Shandong University, Ji'nan 250061, China.
zhubo1969@yahoo.cn

Different types of C/C composites were prepared by conventional molding, and the 
changes in normal spectral emissivity of samples were tested. The testing results
show that spectral emissivity of C/C composite reinforced by short cut carbon
fibers is generally higher than the sample reinforced by carbon cloth in the
entire 2500-13000nm wavelength region. The structure of short cut carbon fibers
is relatively loose and the number of material particles is less than other
samples in unit volume, which increases the penetration depth of electromagnetic 
waves. This is the reason for higher normal spectral emissivity and better heat
radiation property. Meanwhile, the test results of normal spectral emissivity for
fiber perform and C/C composite samples show that the spectral emissivity of
resin carbon is better than fiber carbon because of the difference in
microstructure for the two kinds of carbon materials. Laser Raman spectroscopy
was employed to analyze the microstructures of different carbon materials, and
the results show that because sp3 and sp2 hybrid states of carbon atoms in resin 
carbon produced more vibration modes, the resin carbon also has higher normal
spectral emissivity and better characteristics of heat radiation.

PMID: 20101951  [PubMed]


325. J Neurochem. 2010 Apr;113(2):418-31. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.06612.x. Epub 
2010 Jan 22.

Sp proteins play a critical role in histone deacetylase inhibitor-mediated
derepression of CYP46A1 gene transcription.

Nunes MJ(1), Milagre I, Schnekenburger M, Gama MJ, Diederich M, Rodrigues E.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy, iMed.UL - Research Institute for Medicines and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Lisbon, 1649-003 Lisbon, Portugal.

We investigated whether the CYP46A1 gene, a neuronal-specific cytochrome P450,
responsible for the majority of brain cholesterol turnover, is subject to
transcriptional modulation through modifications in histone acetylation. We
demonstrated that inhibition of histone deacetylase activity by trichostatin A
(TSA), valproic acid and sodium butyrate caused a potent induction of both
CYP46A1 promoter activity and endogenous expression. Silencing of Sp
transcription factors through specific small interfering RNAs, or impairing Sp
binding to the proximal promoter, by site-directed mutagenesis, led to a
significant decrease in TSA-mediated induction of CYP46A1 expression/promoter
activity. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay, DNA affinity precipitation assays
and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays were used to determine the multiprotein 
complex recruited to the CYP46A1 promoter, upon TSA treatment. Our data showed
that a decrease in Sp3 binding at particular responsive elements, can shift the
Sp1/Sp3/Sp4 ratio, and favor the detachment of histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1 and
HDAC2 and the recruitment of p300/CBP. Moreover, we observed a dynamic change in 
the chromatin structure upon TSA treatment, characterized by an increase in the
local recruitment of euchromatic markers and RNA polymerase II. Our results show 
the critical participation of an epigenetic program in the control of CYP46A1
gene transcription, and suggest that brain cholesterol catabolism may be affected
upon treatment with HDAC inhibitors.

PMID: 20096088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Nucl Recept Signal. 2009 Dec 31;7:e012. doi: 10.1621/nrs.07012.

Control of oocyte release by progesterone receptor-regulated gene expression.

Robker RL(1), Akison LK, Russell DL.

Author information: 
(1)The Robinson Institute, School of Paediatrics and Reproductive Health,
University of Adelaide, SA, Australia. rebecca.robker@adelaide.edu.au

The progesterone receptor (PGR) is a nuclear receptor transcription factor that
is essential for female fertility, in part due to its control of oocyte release
from the ovary, or ovulation. In all mammals studied to date, ovarian expression 
of PGR is restricted primarily to granulosa cells of follicles destined to
ovulate. Granulosa cell expression of PGR is induced by the pituitary Luteinizing
Hormone (LH) surge via mechanisms that are not entirely understood, but which
involve activation of Protein Kinase A and modification of Sp1/Sp3 transcription 
factors on the PGR promoter. Null mutations for PGR or treatment with PGR
antagonists block ovulation in all species analyzed, including humans. The
cellular mechanisms by which PGR regulates ovulation are currently under
investigation, with several downstream pathways having been identified as
PGR-regulated and potentially involved in follicular rupture. Interestingly, none
of these PGR-regulated genes has been demonstrated to be a direct transcriptional
target of PGR. Rather, in ovarian granulosa cells, PGR may act as an inducible
coregulator for constitutively bound Sp1/Sp3 transcription factors, which are key
regulators for a discrete cohort of ovulatory genes.

PMCID: PMC2807638
PMID: 20087433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Free Radic Biol Med. 2010 Apr 1;48(7):895-904. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2010.01.007. Epub 2010 Jan 14.

CpG methylation attenuates Sp1 and Sp3 binding to the human extracellular
superoxide dismutase promoter and regulates its cell-specific expression.

Zelko IN(1), Mueller MR, Folz RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Louisville, KY 40202, USA.
igor.zelko@louisville.edu

Extracellular superoxide dismutase (EC-SOD) plays an important role in
maintaining normal redox homeostasis in the lung. It is expressed at very high
levels in pulmonary fibroblasts, alveolar type II epithelial cells, and smooth
muscle cells. The molecular mechanisms governing this cell-specific expression of
EC-SOD are mostly unknown. In our previous studies we showed that EC-SOD
cell-specific expression was not attributable to differential transcriptional
regulation, suggesting that other, possibly epigenetic, mechanisms are involved
in regulation of its expression. In this paper, we show high levels of promoter
methylation in A549 cells and correspondingly low levels of methylation in MRC5
cells. Inhibition of DNA methyltransferase activity by 5-azacytidine in A549
cells reactivated EC-SOD transcription (2.75+/-0.16-fold, P<0.001), demonstrating
the importance of methylation in the repression of EC-SOD expression.
Furthermore, methylation of cytosines in the promoter markedly decreased
Sp1/Sp3-driven promoter activity to 30.09+/-2.85% (P<0.001) compared to
unmethylated promoter. This attenuation of transcription of the promoter/reporter
construct was, at least in part, attributable to the binding of the
methyl-binding protein MeCP2 in the insect cells. However, no binding of MeCP2 or
MBD2 protein to the EC-SOD promoter was detected in mammalian cells in vivo. We
also found marked differences in the chromatin organization of the EC-SOD
promoter between these two cell lines, further supporting the important role
epigenetic modifications play in the regulation of EC-SOD expression.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2838251
PMID: 20079429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Cancer Res. 2010 Jan 15;70(2):609-20. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-2327. Epub
2010 Jan 12.

Apoptotic sensitivity of colon cancer cells to histone deacetylase inhibitors is 
mediated by an Sp1/Sp3-activated transcriptional program involving
immediate-early gene induction.

Wilson AJ(1), Chueh AC, Tögel L, Corner GA, Ahmed N, Goel S, Byun DS, Nasser S,
Houston MA, Jhawer M, Smartt HJ, Murray LB, Nicholas C, Heerdt BG, Arango D,
Augenlicht LH, Mariadason JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Montefiore Medical Center, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) induce growth arrest and apoptosis in
colon cancer cells and are being considered for colon cancer therapy. The
underlying mechanism of action of these effects is poorly defined with both
transcription-dependent and -independent mechanisms implicated. We screened a
panel of 30 colon cancer cell lines for sensitivity to HDACi-induced apoptosis
and correlated the differences with gene expression patterns induced by HDACi in 
the five most sensitive and resistant lines. A robust and reproducible
transcriptional response involving coordinate induction of multiple
immediate-early (fos, jun, egr1, egr3, atf3, arc, nr4a1) and stress response
genes (Ndrg4, Mt1B, Mt1E, Mt1F, Mt1H) was selectively induced in HDACi sensitive 
cells. Notably, a significant percentage of these genes were basally repressed in
colon tumors. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that the promoter regions of the
HDACi-induced genes were enriched for KLF4/Sp1/Sp3 transcription factor binding
sites. Altering KLF4 levels failed to modulate apoptosis or transcriptional
responses to HDACi treatment. In contrast, HDACi preferentially stimulated the
activity of Spl/Sp3 and blocking their action attenuated both the transcriptional
and apoptotic responses to HDACi treatment. Our findings link HDACi-induced
apoptosis to activation of a Spl/Sp3-mediated response that involves derepression
of a transcriptional network basally repressed in colon cancer.

PMCID: PMC2939837
PMID: 20068171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Malar J. 2010 Nov 12;9:324. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-9-324.

Intermittent preventive treatment of malaria with sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine
during pregnancy in Burkina Faso: effect of adding a third dose to the standard
two-dose regimen on low birth weight, anaemia and pregnancy outcomes.

Valea I(1), Tinto H, Drabo MK, Huybregts L, Henry MC, Roberfroid D, Guiguemde RT,
Kolsteren P, D'Alessandro U; FSP/MISAME study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Parasitology and Entomology, Centre Muraz, Bobo-Dioulasso,
Burkina Faso. innocentvalea@yahoo.fr.

BACKGROUND: Intermittent preventive treatment with sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine
(IPTp-SP) is being implemented in most malaria endemic countries as a standard
two-doses regimen as it reduces the risk of low birth weight (LBW) and the
prevalence of maternal anaemia. Nevertheless, where the risk of infection close
to delivery is high because of intense transmission, a third IPTp-SP dose may
further reduce the negative effects of malaria on pregnancy outcome.
METHODS: Pregnant women in the 2nd or 3rd trimester were randomized to receive
either 2 (SP2) or 3 doses (SP3) of SP. Trained field workers paid home visits to 
the women for drug administration according to a predefined drug delivery
schedule. Women were encouraged to attend their scheduled ANC visits and to
deliver at the health facilities where the new-born was weighed. The prevalence
of LBW (<2500 g), severe anaemia (Hb < 8 g/dL) and premature birth was analysed
using intention-to-treat (ITT) and per-protocol (PP) analysis.
RESULTS: Data from 1274 singleton pregnancies were analysed (641 in the SP3 and
633 in the SP2 group). The uptake of the intervention appeared to be low. Though 
the prevalence of LBW in both intervention groups was similar (adjusted Incident 
Rate Ratio, AIRR = 0.92, 95%CI: 0.69-1.24) in the ITT analysis, the risk of
severe anaemia was significantly lower in the SP3 group compared to the SP2 group
(AIRR = 0.38, 95%CI: 0.16 - 0.90). The PP analysis showed a trend of reduced risk
of LBW, severe anaemia and premature delivery in the SP3 group, albeit the
difference between two and three IPTp-SP did not reach statistical significance.
CONCLUSION: The risk of LBW and severe anaemia tended to be lower in the SP3
group, though this was not statistically significant, probably due to the low
uptake of the intervention which reduced the power of the study. Further studies 
are needed for establishing whether a third SP dose has a real benefit in
preventing the negative effects of malaria in pregnancy in settings where
transmission is markedly seasonal.

PMCID: PMC2995800
PMID: 24576068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Mar Biol. 2010;157(8):1665-1678. Epub 2010 Apr 20.

Diversity of free-living marine nematodes (Enoplida) from Baja California
assessed by integrative taxonomy.

Pereira TJ(1), Fonseca G(2), Mundo-Ocampo M(3), Guilherme BC(4), Rocha-Olivares
A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Oceanography, Centro de Investigación Científica y de
Educación Superior de Ensenada, Carretera Ensenada-Tijuana 3918, Apdo. Postal
2732, CP 22860 Ensenada, Baja California Mexico ; Department of Nematology,
University of California, Riverside, CA 92521 USA. (2)Centro de Biologia Marinha 
da Universidade de São Paulo, Rod. Manoel Hipolito do Rego km 131.5, São
Sebastião, 11600-000 Brazil. (3)Department of Nematology, University of
California, Riverside, CA 92521 USA. (4)Centro de Educação e Saúde, CES,
Universidade Federal de Campina Grande, Av. Olho D'Água da Bica s/n, Cuité, PB
Brazil. (5)Department of Biological Oceanography, Centro de Investigación
Científica y de Educación Superior de Ensenada, Carretera Ensenada-Tijuana 3918, 
Apdo. Postal 2732, CP 22860 Ensenada, Baja California Mexico.

We used morphological and molecular approaches to evaluate the diversity of
free-living marine nematodes (order Enoplida) at four coastal sites in the Gulf
of California and three on the Pacific coast of Baja California, Mexico. We
identified 22 morphological species belonging to six families, of which
Thoracostomopsidae and Oncholaimidae were the most diverse. The genus
Mesacanthion (Thoracostomopsidae) was the most widespread and diverse. Five
allopatric species, genetically and morphologically differentiated, were found in
two localities in the Gulf of California (M. sp1 and M. sp2) and three in the
Pacific coast (M. sp3, M. sp4 and M. sp5). Overall, we produced 19 and 20
sequences for the 18S and 28S genes, respectively. Neither gene displayed
intraspecific polymorphisms, which allowed us to establish that some
morphological variation was likely either ontogenetic or due to phenotypic
plasticity. Although 18S and 28S phylogenies were topologically congruent
(incongruence length difference test, P > 0.05), divergences between species were
much higher in the 28S gene. Moreover, this gene possessed a stronger
phylogenetic signal to resolve relationships involving Rhabdodemania and
Bathylaimus. On the other hand, the close relationship of Pareurystomina
(Enchilidiidae) with oncholaimids warrants further study. The 28S sequences (D2D3
domain) may be better suited for DNA barcoding of marine nematodes than those
from the 18S rDNA, particularly for differentiating closely related or cryptic
species. Finally, our results underline the relevance of adopting an integrative 
approach encompassing morphological and molecular analyses to improve the
assessment of marine nematode diversity and advance their taxonomy.

PMCID: PMC3873033
PMID: 24391248  [PubMed]


331. Top Curr Chem. 2010;292:281-302.

Cross-dehydrogenative coupling reactions of sp3-hybridized C-H bonds.

Yoo WJ(1), Li CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.

New methodologies in cross-coupling reaction using C-H bonds as substrates is of 
great interest due to the challenges associated with C-H bond activation and the 
potential to streamline synthesis by the elimination of preactivation of coupling
reagents. In this chapter, recent developments in oxidative cross-coupling
reactions will be presented with the focus on the functionalization of sp3 C-H
bonds with other C-H bonds.

PMID: 21500410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Am Chem Soc. 2010 Jan 20;132(2):454-5. doi: 10.1021/ja909240q.

Cleavage of both C(sp3)-C(sp2) bonds of alkylidenecyclopropanes: formation of
ethylene-osmium-vinylidene complexes.

Castro-Rodrigo R(1), Esteruelas MA, López AM, López F, Mascareñas JL, Oliván M,
Oñate E, Saya L, Villarino L.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Inorgánica, Instituto de Ciencia de Materiales de
Aragón, Universidad de Zaragoza-CSIC, 50009 Zaragoza, Spain.

The complex [OsTp(kappa(1)-OCMe)(2)(P(i)Pr(3))]BF(4) [Tp =
hydridotris(pyrazolyl)borate] promotes the cleavage of both C(sp(3))-C(sp(2))
bonds of benzylidenecyclopropane and 3-phenylpropylidenecyclopropane to yield the
complexes [OsTp(=C=CHR)(eta(2)-CH(2)=CH(2))(P(i)Pr(3))]BF(4) (R = Ph,
CH(2)CH(2)Ph). The process is proposed to take place via metallacyclopropene
intermediates stabilized by an ethylene chelation assistant. The driving force
for the fragmentation is the high stability of the resulting
ethylene-Os-vinylidene species.

PMID: 20017552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. BMC Genomics. 2009 Dec 10;10:595. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-10-595.

Deciphering the transcriptional circuitry of microRNA genes expressed during
human monocytic differentiation.

Schmeier S(1), MacPherson CR, Essack M, Kaur M, Schaefer U, Suzuki H, Hayashizaki
Y, Bajic VB.

Author information: 
(1)South African National Bioinformatics Institute, University of the Western
Cape, Modderdam Road, Bellville, South Africa. sebastian.schmeier@kaust.edu.sa

BACKGROUND: Macrophages are immune cells involved in various biological processes
including host defence, homeostasis, differentiation, and organogenesis.
Disruption of macrophage biology has been linked to increased pathogen infection,
inflammation and malignant diseases. Differential gene expression observed in
monocytic differentiation is primarily regulated by interacting transcription
factors (TFs). Current research suggests that microRNAs (miRNAs) degrade and
repress translation of mRNA, but also may target genes involved in
differentiation. We focus on getting insights into the transcriptional circuitry 
regulating miRNA genes expressed during monocytic differentiation.
RESULTS: We computationally analysed the transcriptional circuitry of miRNA genes
during monocytic differentiation using in vitro time-course expression data for
TFs and miRNAs. A set of TF-->miRNA associations was derived from predicted TF
binding sites in promoter regions of miRNA genes. Time-lagged expression
correlation analysis was utilised to evaluate the TF-->miRNA associations. Our
analysis identified 12 TFs that potentially play a central role in regulating
miRNAs throughout the differentiation process. Six of these 12 TFs (ATF2, E2F3,
HOXA4, NFE2L1, SP3, and YY1) have not previously been described to be important
for monocytic differentiation. The remaining six TFs are CEBPB, CREB1, ELK1,
NFE2L2, RUNX1, and USF2. For several miRNAs (miR-21, miR-155, miR-424, and
miR-17-92), we show how their inferred transcriptional regulation impacts
monocytic differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: The study demonstrates that miRNAs and their transcriptional
regulatory control are integral molecular mechanisms during differentiation.
Furthermore, it is the first study to decipher on a large-scale, how miRNAs are
controlled by TFs during human monocytic differentiation. Subsequently, we have
identified 12 candidate key controllers of miRNAs during this differentiation
process.

PMCID: PMC2797535
PMID: 20003307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 2009 Dec 10;9:56. doi: 10.1186/1471-2393-9-56.

Early pregnancy peripheral blood gene expression and risk of preterm delivery: a 
nested case control study.

Enquobahrie DA(1), Williams MA, Qiu C, Muhie SY, Slentz-Kesler K, Ge Z, Sorenson 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
danenq@u.washington.edu

BACKGROUND: Preterm delivery (PTD) is a significant public health problem
associated with greater risk of mortality and morbidity in infants and mothers.
Pathophysiologic processes that may lead to PTD start early in pregnancy. We
investigated early pregnancy peripheral blood global gene expression and PTD
risk.
METHODS: As part of a prospective study, ribonucleic acid was extracted from
blood samples (collected at 16 weeks gestational age) from 14 women who had PTD
(cases) and 16 women who delivered at term (controls). Gene expressions were
measured using the GeneChip(R) Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array. Student's T-test
and fold change analysis were used to identify differentially expressed genes. We
used hierarchical clustering and principle components analysis to characterize
signature gene expression patterns among cases and controls. Pathway and promoter
sequence analyses were used to investigate functions and functional relationships
as well as regulatory regions of differentially expressed genes.
RESULTS: A total of 209 genes, including potential candidate genes (e.g. PTGDS,
prostaglandin D2 synthase 21 kDa), were differentially expressed. A set of these 
genes achieved accurate pre-diagnostic separation of cases and controls. These
genes participate in functions related to immune system and inflammation, organ
development, metabolism (lipid, carbohydrate and amino acid) and cell signaling. 
Binding sites of putative transcription factors such as EGR1 (early growth
response 1), TFAP2A (transcription factor AP2A), Sp1 (specificity protein 1) and 
Sp3 (specificity protein 3) were over represented in promoter regions of
differentially expressed genes. Real-time PCR confirmed microarray expression
measurements of selected genes.
CONCLUSIONS: PTD is associated with maternal early pregnancy peripheral blood
gene expression changes. Maternal early pregnancy peripheral blood gene
expression patterns may be useful for better understanding of PTD pathophysiology
and PTD risk prediction.

PMCID: PMC2799378
PMID: 20003277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Agric Food Chem. 2010 Jan 13;58(1):172-9. doi: 10.1021/jf902731p.

Effects of sulfation on the physicochemical and functional properties of
psyllium.

Liu W(1), Zhang B, Wang Q, Xie Z, Yao W, Gao X, Yu LL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Science, University of Maryland, College
Park, Maryland 20742, USA.

The sulfation of psyllium was carried out with sulfur trioxide-pyridine in
dimethyl formamide. Three sulfated psyllium derivatives, named SP1, SP2, and SP3,
were characterized by sulfur content determination, elemental analysis, FT-IR,
and surface charge analysis. The sulfated derivatives were also evaluated for
their morphological and rheological properties, water uptake capacities, swelling
volumes, and in vitro bile acid-binding abilities. The results showed that
sulfation reduced the gelling capacity of psyllium and the viscosity of its
solution, and significantly increased its bile acid-binding capacity. Sulfation
might also increase the water uptake ability of psyllium but might decrease its
swelling capacity. The three sulfated psyllium derivatives had in vitro binding
capacities against cholic and chenodeoxycholic acids comparable to that of
cholestyramine resin on a per same as it is weight basis. The bile acid-binding
capacity of SP1 was about 8.4-fold of that observed for the original psyllium
preparation under the same assay conditions. The results from this study suggest 
that sulfation is a possible approach to obtain novel psyllium derivatives with
desirable physicochemical, functional, and biological properties for utilization 
in functional foods or supplemental and pharmaceutical products.

PMID: 20000369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Nagoya J Med Sci. 2009 Sep;71(3-4):127-36.

Mutated ras induced PLD1 gene expression through increased Sp1 transcription
factor.

Gao S(1), Murakami M, Ito H, Furuhata A, Yoshida K, Tagawa Y, Hagiwara K, Takagi 
A, Kojima T, Suzuki M, Banno Y, Nozawa Y, Murate T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Technology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Health 
Sciences, Nagoya, Japan.

The underlying mechanisms of oncogene-induced phospholipase D (PLD) activation
have not been fully elucidated. The effect of the mutated-ras on PLD mRNA was
examined using colon cancer cell lines as well as mock- and mutated
ras-transfected NIH3T3 cells. Ras-mutation and activation were correlated, and
cells with enhanced ras-activation showed increased PLD1 mRNA and protein.
Analysis of the 5' PLD1 promoter using a representative cell line, DLD-1 and also
mutated ras-NIH3T3, showed one Sp1-site as the important ras-responsible motif.
Spl inhibition with mithramycin A and Spl siRNA inhibited PLD1 protein expression
and its promoter activity. Sp1 but not Sp3 protein level and increased Sp1-motif 
binding activity were correlated with ras activation. Furthermore, overexpression
of Sp1 in drosophila SL2 cells lacking Sp family proteins increased PLD1 promoter
activity. EMSA and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay confirmed the importance
of Sp1 protein binding to the Sp1-motif in ras-induced PLD1 mRNA expression.

PMID: 19994725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Virology. 2010 Feb 20;397(2):311-21. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2009.11.031. Epub 2009 
Dec 6.

Transcriptional regulation of the ORF61 and ORF60 genes of Kaposi's
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus.

Wang SS(1), Chen LW, Chen LY, Tsai HH, Shih YC, Yang CT, Chang PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medical Sciences, Chang-Gung University,
Taoyuan, Taiwan.

The ORF61 and ORF60 genes of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV)
encode the ribonucleotide reductase large and small subunits, respectively. Here 
we show that ORF50 protein, a latent-lytic switch transactivator, activates the
transcription of these two early-lytic genes through different mechanisms.
Activation of the ORF61 promoter by ORF50 protein is dependent on an intact
RBP-Jkappa-binding site within the identified responsive element and the
expression of RBP-Jkappa protein in cells. The critical element in the ORF60
promoter in response to ORF50 was mapped to a 40-bp region. Binding of YY1,
Sp1/Sp3 or unknown proteins to this element may contribute to repression or
activation of the ORF60 promoter. Although ORF50 protein does not directly bind
to the ORF61 and ORF60 promoters in vitro, we show the association of ORF50
protein with these two promoters in vivo. Our results provide further insights
into the regulatory network of the viral lytic genes in KSHV reactivation.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19969319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Trials. 2009 Dec 3;10:112. doi: 10.1186/1745-6215-10-112.

Acupuncture for dry eye: a randomised controlled trial protocol.

Kim TH(1), Kim JI, Shin MS, Lee MS, Choi JY, Jung SY, Kim AR, Seol JU, Choi SM.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Centre, Division of Standard Research, Korea Institute of
Oriental Medicine, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: Dry eye is usually managed by conventional medical interventions such
as artificial tears, anti-inflammatory drugs and surgical treatment. However,
since dry eye is one of the most frequent ophthalmologic disorders, safer and
more effective methods for its treatment are necessary, especially for vulnerable
patients. Acupuncture has been widely used to treat patients with dry eye. Our
aim is to evaluate the effectiveness and safety of acupuncture for this
condition.
METHODS/DESIGN: A randomised, patient-assessor blinded, sham (non-acupuncture
point, shallow acupuncture) controlled study was established. Participants
allocated to verum acupuncture and sham acupuncture groups will be treated three 
times weekly for three weeks for a total of nine sessions per participant.
Seventeen points (GV23; bilateral BL2, GB4, TE23, Ex1 (Taiyang), ST1 and GB20;
and left SP3, LU9, LU10 and HT8 for men, right for women) have been selected for 
the verum acupuncture; for the sham acupuncture, points have been selected that
do not coincide with a classical acupuncture point and that are located close to 
the verum points, except in the case of the rim of the eye. Ocular surface
disease index, tear film breakup time, the Schirmer I test, medication
quantification scale and general assessment of improvement will be used as
outcome variables for evaluating the effectiveness of acupuncture. Safety will
also be assessed at every visit. Primary and secondary outcomes will be assessed 
four weeks after screening. All statistical analyses will be performed using
analysis of covariance.
DISCUSSION: The results of this trial will be used as a basis for clarifying the 
efficacy of acupuncture for dry eye.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00969280.

PMCID: PMC2797009
PMID: 19958541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo). 2009 Dec;57(12):1335-42.

FAMSD: A powerful protein modeling platform that combines alignment methods,
homology modeling, 3D structure quality estimation and molecular dynamics.

Kanou K(1), Iwadate M, Hirata T, Terashi G, Umeyama H, Takeda-Shitaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Kitasato University, Shirokane, Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

The prediction of a protein three-dimensional (3D) structure is one of the most
important challenges in computational structural biology. We have developed an
automatic protein 3D structure prediction method called FAMSD. FAMSD is based on 
a comparative modeling method which consists of the following four steps: (1)
generating and selecting sequence alignments between target and template
proteins; (2) constructing 3D structure models based on each selected alignment; 
(3) selecting the best 3D structure model and (4) refining the selected model. In
the FAMSD method, sequence alignment programs such as a series of BLAST programs,
SP3 and SPARKS2 programs, the homology modeling program FAMS (Full Automatic
Modeling System), the model quality estimation program CIRCLE and the molecular
dynamics program APRICOT were used in combination to construct high quality
protein models. To assess the FAMSD method we have participated in the 8th
Critical Assessment of Techniques for Protein Structure Prediction (CASP8)
experiment. The results of our original assessment indicate that the FAMSD method
offers excellent capability in packing side-chains with the correct torsion
angles while avoiding the formation of atom-atom collisions. Since side-chain
packing plays a significant role in defining the biological function of proteins,
this method is a valuable resource in biological, pharmaceutical and medicinal
research efforts.

PMID: 19952440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Guang Pu Xue Yu Guang Pu Fen Xi. 2009 Sep;29(9):2438-41.

[First-principles study of vibrational Raman spectra of amorphous carbon].

[Article in Chinese]

Niu L(1), Zhu JQ, Gao W, Du SY.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Composite Materials and Structure, Harbin Institute of Technology, 
Harbin 150080, China. niuli1978@yahoo.com.cn

The vibrational density of states and nonresonant reduced Raman spectra of
amorphous carbon at densities of 2.6, 2.9 and 3.2 g x cm(-3) were calculated by
the use of a first-principles plane-wave pesudopotential method. Three structural
models were generated by liquid-quench method using Car-Parinello molecular
dynamics, their vibrational frequencies and eigenmodes were determined using the 
linear response approach, and Raman coupling tensors were calculated using the
finite electric field method. The calculated results show that the sp3 fraction
increases from 50% to 84.4%, the sp2 configuration changes from mainly rings to
short chains, the position of the G peak moves to higher frequencies, the
intensity ratio of D and G peaks decreases, the position of the T peak moves to
lower frequencies and the intensity ratio of T and G peaks increases as density
increases from 2.6 to 3.2 g x cm(-3). The authors' calculated Raman spectra show 
an overall good agreement with experimental spectra. The analysis in terms of
atomic vibrations confirms that the G and D peaks both come from sp2 C
contribution, G peak is due to the stretching vibration of any pair of sp2 atoms 
and the T peak is due to the C-C sp3 vibration. The authors' analysis also
confirms that the dispersion of G and T peaks is due to bond-length changes. The 
bond length of chains (olefins) is shorter than that of rings, so their
vibrational frequency is higher and the G-peak position moves to higher
frequencies with increasing the sp3 fraction. The number of sp3-sp2 type bonds
decreases as the sp3 fraction increases. These bonds are shorter than pure
sp3-sp3 bonds, hence the T-peak position moves to lower frequencies. The research
results provide a theoretic basis for analyzing experimental Raman spectra of
amorphous carbon.

PMID: 19950647  [PubMed]


341. PLoS One. 2009 Nov 20;4(11):e7919. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007919.

Akt and SHIP modulate Francisella escape from the phagosome and induction of the 
Fas-mediated death pathway.

Rajaram MV(1), Butchar JP, Parsa KV, Cremer TJ, Amer A, Schlesinger LS,
Tridandapani S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio,
United States of America.

Francisella tularensis infects macrophages and escapes phago-lysosomal fusion to 
replicate within the host cytosol, resulting in host cell apoptosis. Here we show
that the Fas-mediated death pathway is activated in infected cells and correlates
with escape of the bacterium from the phagosome and the bacterial burden. Our
studies also demonstrate that constitutive activation of Akt, or deletion of
SHIP, promotes phago-lysosomal fusion and limits bacterial burden in the host
cytosol, and the subsequent induction of Fas expression and cell death. Finally, 
we show that phagosomal escape/intracellular bacterial burden regulate activation
of the transcription factors sp1/sp3, leading to Fas expression and cell death.
These data identify for the first time host cell signaling pathways that regulate
the phagosomal escape of Francisella, leading to the induction of Fas and
subsequent host cell death.

PMCID: PMC2775408
PMID: 19936232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Am Chem Soc. 2009 Dec 23;131(50):18042-3. doi: 10.1021/ja908545b.

Palladium-catalyzed hydroalkylation of styrenes with organozinc reagents to form 
carbon-carbon sp3-sp3 bonds under oxidative conditions.

Urkalan KB(1), Sigman MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Utah, 315 South 1400 East, Salt Lake
City, Utah 84112-085, USA.

An unconventional route for the formation of sp(3)-sp(3) C-C bonds from various
styrenes and an organozinc reagent in a formal alkene hydroalkylation process is 
detailed. Mechanistically, this process is proposed to proceed by initial
transmetalation followed by formation of a Pd-H species, which is subsequently
trapped by the styrene.

PMCID: PMC2794962
PMID: 19929001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Cell Signal. 2010 Mar;22(3):543-52. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2009.11.009.

A role for the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase--protein kinase C zeta--Sp1 pathway 
in the 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 induction of the 25-hydroxyvitamin D3
24-hydroxylase gene in human kidney cells.

Dwivedi PP(1), Gao XH, Tan JC, Evdokiou A, Ferrante A, Morris HA, May BK, Hii CS.

Author information: 
(1)Hanson Institute, Adelaide, 5000, Australia.

The molecular mechanisms that underlie non-genomic induction of the
25-hydroxyvitamin D3 24-hydroxylase (CYP24) gene promoter by the steroid hormone,
1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25D), are poorly understood. Although we have
previously identified a functional inverted GC-box in the early promoter at
-113/-105 bp, it is not known whether this site is important for 1,25D induction 
of the promoter. Using transfected human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293T cells, we
now report the functional characterisation of the GC-box and that 1,25D induction
of the promoter requires PI3-kinase, PKCzeta and Sp1 but not Sp3. The data show
that 1,25D rapidly stimulates PI3-kinase activity which is required for the
activation of PKCzeta and the phosphorylation of Sp1. The effects of the
PI3-kinase inhibitor, LY294002, and a dominant negative PKCzeta mutant on 1,25D
induction of wild-type and a GC-box mutated CYP24 promoter constructs are
consistent with the Sp1 site being the target of both kinases. However, these
kinases are not required for basal expression of the CYP24 promoter. The data
establish a novel non-genomic mechanism which couples 1,25D to the induction of
CYP24 gene transcription via the PI3-kinase--PKCzeta--Sp1 pathway acting through 
the GC-box.

PMID: 19922790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Exp Cell Res. 2010 Mar 10;316(5):836-47. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2009.11.004. Epub
2009 Nov 12.

Isolation and characterization of human monoclonal antibodies specific to MMP-1A,
MMP-2 and MMP-3.

Pfaffen S(1), Hemmerle T, Weber M, Neri D.

Author information: 
(1)ETH Zürich HCI G396, Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Department of
Chemistry and Applied Biosciences, Wolfgang-Pauli-Strasse 10, CH-8093 Zürich,
Switzerland.

Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), a group of more than 20 zinc-containing
endopeptidases, are up-regulated in many diseases, but the use of MMP inhibitors 
for therapeutic purposes has often been disappointing, possibly for the limited
specificity of the drugs used in clinical trials. In principle, individual MMPs
could be specifically drugged by monoclonal antibodies, either by inhibition of
their catalytic activity or by antibody-based pharmacodelivery strategies. In
this article we describe the isolation and affinity maturation of recombinant
antibodies (SP1, SP2, SP3) specific to the murine catalytic domains of MMP-1A,
MMP-2 and MMP-3. These novel reagents allowed a systematic comparative
immunofluorescence analysis of the expression patterns of their cognate antigens 
in a variety of healthy, cancerous and arthritic murine tissues. While all three 
MMPs were strongly expressed in tumor and arthritis specimens, MMP-1A was
completely undetectable in the normal tissues tested, while MMP-2 and MMP-3
exhibited a weak expression in certain normal tissues (e.g., liver). The new
antibodies may serve as building blocks for the development of antibody-based
therapy strategies in mouse models of pathology.

2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19913533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Exp Cell Res. 2010 Apr 1;316(6):940-50. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2009.10.025. Epub
2009 Nov 5.

Expression profiles of nestin in vascular smooth muscle cells in vivo and in
vitro.

Oikawa H(1), Hayashi K, Maesawa C, Masuda T, Sobue K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience (D13), Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, Yamadaoka 2-2, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Nestin is an intermediate filament protein expressed in neural and mesenchymal
stem cells. Here, we investigated the expression of nestin in vascular smooth
muscle cells (VSMCs) in vivo and in vitro. In the developing arteries, medial
VSMCs were found to express nestin; its expression was prominent in embryos but
was down-regulated after birth (3-6 weeks) in a region-dependent manner; its
expression was abolished in the adult. Thus, the expression of nestin is specific
to developing VSMCs. In primary VMSC cultures, nestin expression was induced by
serum, but was independent of cell-cycle progression. Signaling analyses revealed
that the serum-induced nestin expression depended on the extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and protein kinase B (PKB)(Akt) pathways, via the
platelet derived growth factor (PDGF) and epidermal growth factor (EGF)
receptors. Nestin expression was closely related to the up-regulation and
activation of Sp1 and Sp3. Among major serum growth factors and cytokines,
PDGF-BB was the most potent inducer of nestin expression. Nestin was also
up-regulated in arteries undergoing vascular remodeling following balloon injury.
Its expression was particularly strong in the cells lining the lumen of the
neointima, suggesting a possible correlation between nestin expression and the
progression of vascular remodeling.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19896481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2009;48(47):8935-9. doi: 10.1002/anie.200903500.

Rhodium/N-heterocyclic carbene catalyzed direct intermolecular arylation of sp2
and sp3 C-H bonds with chelation assistance.

Kim M(1), Kwak J, Chang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
(KAIST), Daejeon, 305-701, Republic of Korea.

PMID: 19856352  [PubMed]


347. Bioorg Chem. 2010 Feb;38(1):33-6. doi: 10.1016/j.bioorg.2009.09.004. Epub 2009
Oct 2.

Synthesis and NMR properties of the first boron analogues of uracil.

Ruman T(1), Dlugopolska K, Rode W.

Author information: 
(1)Rzeszów University of Technology, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of
Biochemistry and Biotechnology, 6 Powstanców Warszawy Ave., 35-959 Rzeszów,
Poland. tomruman@prz.edu.pl

Synthesis of 4-hydroxyborauracil and 4-hydroxy-3-methylborauracil, the first
boron analogues of uracil, and comparison of their 1H and 13C NMR properties with
those of uracil, are presented. The analyses of NMR-monitored boron
compound-alcohol and boron compound-amine interactions pointed to the existence
of sp3-hybridized, B,B-bis-methoxyborauracils and
pyridine-/n-butylamine-borauracils ate-complexes in solution.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19853882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Dec 18;390(3):827-33. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.10.057. Epub 2009 Oct 22.

Genomic structure and transcriptional regulation of grass carp calmodulin gene.

Huo L(1), Wong AO.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology Division, School of Biological Sciences, The University of Hong 
Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong SAR, China. lhuo@mdanderson.org

A fish calmodulin (CaM) gene was characterized for the first time in grass carp. 
The CaM gene is about 12-Kb in size with identical intron/exon organization as
that of mammalian CaM genes. When compared to mammalian counterparts, the
5'-promoter region of grass carp CaM gene contains a TATA box and has a much
lower GC content and CpG dinucleotide frequency. Interestingly, the 5'-promoter
of carp CaM gene is AT-rich with multiple IRS elements and putative binding sites
for Pit-1, Sp1/Sp3 and AP1. Using luciferase reporter assay, a potent silencer
region was identified in the distal region of grass carp CaM promoter. Besides,
the CaM promoter activity could be upregulated by IGF but suppressed by PACAP,
forskolin and over-expression of Sp1 and Sp3. These findings, taken together,
indicate that grass carp CaM gene does not exhibit the typical features of
housekeeping genes and its expression is under the control of hormone factors,
presumably by coupling with the appropriate signaling pathways/transcription
factors.

PMID: 19853581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Invest New Drugs. 2011 Feb;29(1):41-51. doi: 10.1007/s10637-009-9331-8. Epub 2009
Oct 23.

Tolfenamic acid decreases c-Met expression through Sp proteins degradation and
inhibits lung cancer cells growth and tumor formation in orthotopic mice.

Colon J(1), Basha MR, Madero-Visbal R, Konduri S, Baker CH, Herrera LJ, Safe S,
Sheikh-Hamad D, Abudayyeh A, Alvarado B, Abdelrahim M.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, M. D. Anderson Cancer Center Orlando, Orlando, FL
32806, USA.

The nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), tolfenamic acid (TA) is emerging
as a new anti-cancer agent. TA induces the degradation of specific Specificity
protein (Sp) transcription factors, Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 which are associated with
tumor growth and metastasis. In this study we have evaluated the effect of TA on 
lung cancer using both in vitro and in vivo models. TA in a dose dependent manner
inhibited proliferation and cell viability of two different lung cancer cells,
A549 and CRL5803. TA treatment for 48 h significantly decreased the expression of
Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4. The hepatocyte growth factor receptor, c-Met is overexpressed
in a variety of cancers including lung cancer and Sp proteins mediate the
regulation of c-Met. TA diminished the expression of c-Met protein and modulates 
its downstream signaling pathway. Furthermore, TA treatment significantly
increased the number of apoptotic cells and pro-apoptotic markers c-PARP and Bax 
confirming the activation of apoptotic pathways. In vivo studies using the
orthotopic mice model for lung cancer showed that TA (25 mg/kg/2 days and 50
mg/kg/2 days) resulted in a dose dependent decrease in tumor formation. The
immunohistochemical staining of lung tissue showed high expression of Sp1, Sp3,
Sp4, c-Met and phospho Met in control group and a dose dependent decrease in TA
treated groups. The crucial findings of this study support that targeting c-Met
with a potent inhibitor of Sp proteins is a robust strategy for the implications 
in lung cancer treatment and TA can serve as a therapeutic agent for this
devastating disease.

PMID: 19851711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Tissue Antigens. 2009 Dec;74(6):534-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0039.2009.01360.x.
Epub 2009 Oct 21.

Interaction of functional FCER2 promoter polymorphism and phenotype-associated
haplotypes.

Potaczek DP(1), Wang QH, Sanak M, Tokura T, Matsuda H, Dziedzina S, Nakano N,
Hara M, Ogawa H, Szczeklik A, Okumura K, Nishiyama C.

Author information: 
(1)Atopy (Allergy) Research Center, Juntendo University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

Low-affinity IgE receptor gene (FCER2) rs3760687 polymorphism was found to be
associated with differential binding affinity of transcription factors Sp1 and
Sp3 leading to altered transcriptional activity. Haplotypic interaction of
functional FCER2 polymorphisms (rs28364072, rs2228137 and rs3760687) might
potentially provide a background for genotype-phenotype associations previously
observed for some rather non-functional FCER2 variants.

PMID: 19845913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Jan 15;19(2):250-61. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp484. Epub 2009 Oct
20.

The homeobox gene CHX10/VSX2 regulates RdCVF promoter activity in the inner
retina.

Reichman S(1), Kalathur RK, Lambard S, Aït-Ali N, Yang Y, Lardenois A, Ripp R,
Poch O, Zack DJ, Sahel JA, Léveillard T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Institut de la Vision, INSERM Université Pierre et
Marie Curie-Paris 6, UMR-S 968, Paris, France.

Rod-derived Cone Viability Factor (RdCVF) is a trophic factor with therapeutic
potential for the treatment of retinitis pigmentosa, a retinal disease that
commonly results in blindness. RdCVF is encoded by Nucleoredoxin-like 1 (Nxnl1), 
a gene homologous with the family of thioredoxins that participate in the defense
against oxidative stress. RdCVF expression is lost after rod degeneration in the 
first phase of retinitis pigmentosa, and this loss has been implicated in the
more clinically significant secondary cone degeneration that often occurs. Here, 
we describe a study of the Nxnl1 promoter using an approach that combines
promoter and transcriptomic analysis. By transfection of selected candidate
transcription factors, chosen based upon their expression pattern, we identified 
the homeodomain proteins CHX10/VSX2, VSX1 and PAX4, as well as the zinc finger
protein SP3, as factors that can stimulate both the mouse and human Nxnl1
promoter. In addition, CHX10/VSX2 binds to the Nxnl1 promoter in vivo. Since
CHX10/VSX2 is expressed predominantly in the inner retina, this finding motivated
us to demonstrate that RdCVF is expressed in the inner as well as the outer
retina. Interestingly, the loss of rods in the rd1 mouse, a model of retinitis
pigmentosa, is associated with decreased expression of RdCVF by inner retinal
cells as well as by rods. Based upon these results, we propose an alternative
therapeutic strategy aimed at recapitulating RdCVF expression in the inner
retina, where cell loss is not significant, to prevent secondary cone death and
central vision loss in patients suffering from retinitis pigmentosa.

PMCID: PMC2796890
PMID: 19843539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Int J Audiol. 2009 Aug;48(8):594-600.

Short-term hearing fluctuation in Meniere's disease.

McNeill C(1), Freeman SR, McMahon C.

Author information: 
(1)Healthy Hearing & Balance Care, NSW, Australia. cmcneill@tpg.com.au

This study aimed to assess the extent and implications of short-term hearing
fluctuation in Meniere's disease. Thirty-six subjects diagnosed with Meniere's
were recruited to measure their own hearing using in-situ audiometry via a
hearing aid (Widex Diva) and a portable programmer (SP3). Self-hearing tests
measuring up to 14 frequency bands were conducted three times a day over eight
weeks using the expanded Sensogram. Twenty-three ears showed low frequency
fluctuation while ten fluctuated in mid frequencies with some 'double peak'
audiogram configurations. Eight ears in the later stages of Meniere's, contrary
to expected, also recorded fluctuation across all frequencies. Self-hearing
testing Meniere's ears over eight weeks revealed great hearing fluctuation with
significant changes in audiogram configuration. It suggests that as endolymphatic
hydrops progresses through the cochlea, low frequency fluctuation is followed by 
fluctuation in the mid frequencies, leading to fluctuation across all
frequencies. Use of a self-hearing test may facilitate diagnosis and hearing aid 
fitting for this population, as clinical audiograms may not provide accurate
information of hearing fluctuation.

PMID: 19842814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2010 Mar;73(3):185-91. doi:
10.1016/j.critrevonc.2009.09.001. Epub 2009 Dec 22.

Pdcd4, a colon cancer prognostic that is regulated by a microRNA.

Allgayer H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. Experimental Surgery/Molecular Oncology of Solid Tumors (Collaboration
Unit German Cancer Research Center-DKFZ-Heidelberg), Medical Faculty Mannheim,
Ruprecht-Karls-University Heidelberg, Theodor-Kutzer-Ufer 1-3, 68167 Mannheim,
Germany. heike.allgayer@umm.de

The novel tumor suppressor Pdcd4 inhibits neoplastic transformation, tumor
progression and translation. Furthermore, we and others have recently shown that 
Pdcd4 suppresses invasion and intravasation, at least in part by suppressing
expression of the invasion-related urokinase receptor (u-PAR) gene via the
transcription factors Sp1/Sp3. Nevertheless, relatively little is known about
mechanisms that regulate Pdcd4 expression in cancer. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have been
recently discovered and shown to be naturally occurring non-coding RNAs that
control gene expression via specific sites within the 3'UTR of target miRNAs.
This short review will focus on our recent finding that the microRNA miR-21
posttranscriptionally regulates Pdcd4, as well as invasion, intravasation, and
metastasis. Furthermore, we will review the first translational and clinical
results concerning the prognostic value of Pdcd4, in particular our own data that
show Pdcd4 to be a novel and independent prognostic factor in colorectal cancer, 
and a potential supportive diagnostic tool for discriminating normal colonic
tissues from benign adenomas and colorectal carcinomas.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19836969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. J Am Chem Soc. 2009 Nov 4;131(43):15627-9. doi: 10.1021/ja906930u.

Cleavage of sp3 C-O bonds via oxidative addition of C-H bonds.

Choi J(1), Choliy Y, Zhang X, Emge TJ, Krogh-Jespersen K, Goldman AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Rutgers, The State University of
New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey 08903, USA.

(PCP)Ir (PCP = kappa(3)-C(6)H(3)-2,6-[CH(2)P(t-Bu)(2)](2)) is found to undergo
oxidative addition of the methyl-oxygen bond of electron-poor methyl aryl ethers,
including methoxy-3,5-bis(trifluoromethyl)benzene and methoxypentafluorobenzene, 
to give the corresponding aryloxide complexes (PCP)Ir(CH(3))(OAr). Although the
net reaction is insertion of the Ir center into the C-O bond, density functional 
theory (DFT) calculations and a significant kinetic isotope effect
[k(CH(3))(OAr)/k(CD(3))(OAr) = 4.3(3)] strongly argue against a simple insertion 
mechanism and in favor of a pathway involving C-H addition and alpha-migration of
the OAr group to give a methylene complex followed by hydride-to-methylene
migration to give the observed product. Ethoxy aryl ethers, including
ethoxybenzene, also undergo C-O bond cleavage by (PCP)Ir, but the net reaction in
this case is 1,2-elimination of ArO-H to give (PCP)Ir(H)(OAr) and ethylene. DFT
calculations point to a low-barrier pathway for this reaction that proceeds
through C-H addition of the ethoxy methyl group followed by beta-aryl oxide
elimination and loss of ethylene. Thus, both of these distinct C-O cleavage
reactions proceed via initial addition of a C(sp(3))-H bond, despite the fact
that such bonds are typically considered inert and are much stronger than C-O
bonds.

PMID: 19827768  [PubMed]


355. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2009;48(46):8761-5. doi: 10.1002/anie.200903960.

Iron-catalyzed C(sp3)-C(sp3) bond formation through C(sp3)-H functionalization: a
cross-coupling reaction of alcohols with alkenes.

Zhang SY(1), Tu YQ, Fan CA, Zhang FM, Shi L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Applied Organic Chemistry and Department of Chemistry,
Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730000, China.

PMID: 19827074  [PubMed]


356. J Bone Miner Res. 2010 Apr;25(4):796-808. doi: 10.1359/jbmr.091018.

Identifying a molecular phenotype for bone marrow stromal cells with in vivo
bone-forming capacity.

Larsen KH(1), Frederiksen CM, Burns JS, Abdallah BM, Kassem M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Endocrinology (KMEB), Department of Endocrinology,
University Hospital of Odense and Medical Biotechnology Center, University of
Southern Denmark, Odense C, Denmark.

The ability of bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) to differentiate into
osteoblasts is being exploited in cell-based therapy for repair of bone defects. 
However, the phenotype of ex vivo cultured BMSCs predicting their bone-forming
capacity is not known. Thus we employed DNA microarrays comparing two human bone 
marrow stromal cell (hBMSC) populations: One is capable of in vivo heterotopic
bone formation (hBMSC-TERT(+Bone)), and the other is not (hBMSC-TERT(-Bone)).
Compared with hBMSC-TERT(-Bone), the hBMSC-TERT(+Bone) cells had an increased
overrepresentation of extracellular matrix genes (17% versus 5%) and a larger
percentage of genes with predicted SP3 transcription factor-binding sites in
their promoter region (21% versus 8%). On the other hand, hBMSC-TERT(-Bone) cells
expressed a larger number of immune-response-related genes (26% versus 8%). In
order to test for the predictive value of these markers, we studied the
correlation between their expression levels in six different hBMSC-derived clones
and the ability to form bone in vivo. We found a significant correlation for
decorin, lysyl oxidase-like 4, natriuretic peptide receptor C, and tetranectin.
No significant positive correlation was found for canonical osteoblastic markers 
Runx2, alkaline phosphatase, collagen type I, osteopontin, and bone sialoprotein.
Prospective isolation of four additional hBMSC clones based on their expression
levels of the molecular markers correlated with their in vivo bone-formation
ability. In conclusion, our data suggest an in vitro molecular signature
predictive for hBMSCs' in vivo bone-formation ability. Identifying more of these 
predictive markers would be very useful in the quality control of osteoblastic
cells before use in therapy.

Copyright 2010 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMID: 19821776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. J Cell Mol Med. 2011 Jan;15(1):94-108. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2009.00927.x.

Epigenetic modulation of the protein kinase A RIIa (PRKAR2A) gene by histone
deacetylases 1 and 2 in human smooth muscle cells.

Karolczak-Bayatti M(1), Loughney AD, Robson SC, Europe-Finner GN.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Faculty of Medical
Sciences, Framlington Place, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
magda.karolczak@newcastle.ac.uk

Recently we reported that the expression of the protein kinase A (PKA) regulatory
subunit RIIa is dynamically regulated in human smooth muscle cells of the uterus.
We showed that expression levels of mRNA/protein were substantially increased
during pregnancy and decreased upon labour, changes that were mirrored by
particulate type II PKA activity. This implied an important role for RIIa in
maintaining uterine quiescence during pregnancy. Consequently the purpose of the 
present study was to identify potential mechanisms by which expression of the
RIIa gene was regulated in this tissue. We indicate here that the three SpI-III
(GC) binding domains within the proximal promoter region of the human RIIa gene
may play important roles in modulating expression of the gene in human myometrial
cells. We show that all three GC binding domains are involved in binding Sp1,
Sp3, histone deacetylase (HDACs) 1/2 and RbAp48 transcriptional complexes. The
functional significance of these binding domains was further analysed employing
in vitro luciferase reporter assays with full-length/truncated RIIa promoter
constructs. Importantly we show that treatment of primary human myometrial cell
cultures with the general class I/II HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A results in an 
increase in mRNA/protein levels. Moreover the increase in mRNA levels appeared to
be preceded by an increase in aH3, PolIIa, Sp3 and HDAC 2 binding to the three
SpI-III (GC) binding sites within the RIIa promoter. These results enable us to
provide a model whereby RIIa expression is epigenetically regulated in human
myometrial smooth muscle cells by histone deacetylase(s) activity within the
GC-rich proximal promoter region of the gene.

© 2011 The Author Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine © 2011 Foundation
for Cellular and Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3822497
PMID: 19818097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Dalton Trans. 2009 Oct 28;(40):8626-30. doi: 10.1039/b910798c. Epub 2009 Aug 20.

Synthesis and characterisation of PCsp3P phosphine and phosphinite iridium
complexes. Cyclometallation and dehydrogenation of a cyclohexyl ring.

Arunachalampillai A(1), Olsson D, Wendt OF.

Author information: 
(1)Organic Chemistry, Department of Chemistry, Lund University, P.O. Box 124,
S-221 00, Lund, Sweden.

A cyclohexyl based pincer phosphine ligand undergoes cyclometalation with an
iridium cyclooctadiene precursor to give a highly thermally stable iridium(III)
complex where a C(sp3)-H bond has been oxidatively added. This iridium(III)
hydride complex is reduced with potassium to give a terminal iridium(I)
dinitrogen complex with no tendency to dimerization. The corresponding cyclohexyl
phosphinite ligand undergoes reversible dehydrogenation to give the aromatic
cyclometalated iridium(III) hydride complex together with 3 equivalents of
dihydrogen.

PMID: 19809739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Chem Commun (Camb). 2009 Oct 28;(40):6002-4. doi: 10.1039/b911031c. Epub 2009 Sep
7.

Direct functionalization of benzylic C-Hs with vinyl acetates via Fe-catalysis.

Song CX(1), Cai GX, Farrell TR, Jiang ZP, Li H, Gan LB, Shi ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing National Laboratory of Molecular Sciences (BNLMS) and Key Laboratory
of Bioorganic Chemistry and Molecular Engineering of Ministry of Education,
Peking University, Beijing, China.

Direct cross-coupling to construct sp3 C-sp3 C bonds via Fe-catalyzed benzylic
C-H activation with 1-aryl vinyl acetate was developed.

PMID: 19809624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Dec 15;108(6):1346-55. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22365.

Quercetin-induced upregulation of human GCLC gene is mediated by cis-regulatory
element for early growth response protein-1 (EGR1) in INS-1 beta-cells.

Kang JH(1), Chang SY, Jang HJ, Cho JM, Kim DB, Lee SS, Ko SH, Park YM, Needs PW, 
Jo YH, Kim MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul 137-701, South Korea.

The catalytic subunit of gamma-glutamylcysteine ligase (GCLC) catalyses the
rate-limiting step in the de novo synthesis of glutathione (GSH), which is
involved in maintaining intracellular redox balance. GSH is especially important 
for antioxidant defense system since beta-cells show intrinsically low expression
of antioxidant enzymes. In the present study, we investigated the regulatory
mechanisms by which quercetin, a flavonoid, induces the expression of the GCLC
gene in rat pancreatic beta-cell line INS-1. Promoter study found that the
proximal GC-rich region (from -90 to -34) of the GCLC promoter contained the
quercetin-responsive cis-element(s). The quercetin-responsive region contains
consensus DNA binding site for early growth response 1 (EGR1) at -67
(5'-CGCCTCCGC-3') which overlaps with a putative Sp1 binding site.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay showed that an oligonucleotide containing
the EGR1 site was bound to nuclear factors EGR1, Sp1, and Sp3. In the promoter
analysis, mutation of EGR1 site significantly reduced the quercetin response,
whereas mutation of Sp1 site decreased only the basal activity of the GCLC
promoter. Additionally, the transient overexpression of EGR1 significantly
increased basal activity of the GCLC promoter. Finally, we showed that quercetin 
potently induced both EGR1 mRNA and its protein levels without affecting the
expression of Sp1 and Sp3 proteins. Therefore, we concluded that EGR1 was bound
to GC-rich region of the GCLC gene promoter, which was prerequisite for the
transactivation of the GCLC gene by quercetin.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19798679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. J Org Chem. 2009 Oct 2;74(19):7489-95.

Formation of chiral C(sp3)-C(sp) bond by allylic substitution of secondary
allylic picolinates and alkynyl copper reagents.

Kiyotsuka Y(1), Kobayashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Engineering, Tokyo Institute of Technology, B52,
Nagatsuta-cho 4259, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan.

To establish allylic substitution of secondary allylic alcohol derivatives with
alkynyl copper reagents, allylic esters bearing the (2-pyridine)CO2-,
(2-pyrazine)CO2-, (EtO)2PO2-, C6F5CO2-, o-(Ph2P)C6H4CO2-, MeOCO2-, or AcO- group 
were examined. First, picolinate (R1 = Me, R2 = CH2OPMB) was subjected to
reaction with (TMS-C[triple bond]C)2CuLi.LiBr at 0degreesC. Although no
substitution took place, MgBr2 (3 equiv) was found to promote the reaction to
produce the anti SN2' product in 93% yield with 94% regioselectivity and 99%
chirality transfer. In contrast, substitution of the other esters with the copper
reagent in the presence of MgBr2 were less reactive ((2-pyrazine)CO2-) or
marginally reactive (other cases). Generality of the substitution using
picolinates was established with five picolinates (R1 = Me, Ph(CH2)2, PMBO(CH2)3;
R2 = Me, CH2OPMB, CH2OTBS, C5H11, c-C6H11) and seven alkynyl copper reagents (R3 
= TMS, Ph, p-TBSOC6H4, p- and o-MeOC6H4, p-MeC6H4, p-FC6H4), furnishing anti SN2'
products in 61-93% yields with high regioselectivity (usually >90%) and high
chirality transfer (usually >95%). In addition, transformation of the products
was briefly studied.

PMID: 19787857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Dalton Trans. 2009 Oct 14;(38):8107-10. doi: 10.1039/b911164f. Epub 2009 Aug 10.

Platinum(II) mediated C(sp3)-H activation of tetramethylthiourea.

Fantasia S(1), Pasini A, Nolan SP.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica Inorganica, Metallorganica e Analitica, Universitá
degli Studi di Milano, Via Venezian 21, 20133, Milan, Italy.

The C-H activation of the methyl group of tetramethylthiourea by
cis-[PtL(2)(NO(3))(2)] (L = phosphine or N-heterocyclic carbene) has been
investigated as a function of the ligand L. The presence of an
electron-withdrawing group on the tertiary phosphine was found to promote the
process. Moreover, when an excess of nitrate anion is present in the reaction
mixture, the rate of C-H bond activation is retarded, suggesting the key role of 
an unsaturated tri-coordinate Pt(II) species as intermediate.

PMID: 19771375  [PubMed]


363. J Am Chem Soc. 2009 Oct 14;131(40):14142-3. doi: 10.1021/ja905046n.

A delicate balance between sp2 and sp3 C-H bond activation: a Pt(II) complex with
a dual agostic interaction.

Crosby SH(1), Clarkson GJ, Rourke JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK.

2-tert-Butyl-6-(4-fluorophenyl)pyridine reacts with K(2)PtCl(4) via the
activation of an sp(2) C-H bond to give a cyclometalated complex that contains a 
bifurcated agostic interaction. Rearrangement of this complex results in the
activation of an sp(3) C-H bond, and reaction eventually leads to a doubly
cyclometalated complex where both sp(2) and sp(3) C-H bonds have been activated. 
Deuterium exchange studies show that a delicate balance exists between the two
cyclometalations.

PMID: 19764750  [PubMed]


364. Org Lett. 2009 Oct 15;11(20):4668-70. doi: 10.1021/ol901944b.

Iterative synthesis of (oligo)deoxypropionates via zinc-catalyzed enantiospecific
sp3-sp3 cross-coupling.

Brand GJ(1), Studte C, Breit B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Organische Chemie und Biochemie, Freiburg Institute for Advanced 
Studies (FRIAS), Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, Albertstrasse 21, 79104
Freiburg, Germany.

This group's recently reported mild zinc-catalyzed enantiospecific sp3-sp3
cross-coupling of lactic acid tert-butylester triflate with Grignard reagents was
now applied to an iterative approach in the synthesis of a series of all four
possible diastereomers of the shown trideoxypropionate. Oligodeoxypropionate
structures are a common motif in a large number of biologically relevant natural 
products of polyketide origin thus making our approach a versatile tool in their 
synthesis.

PMID: 19761193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. PLoS One. 2009 Sep 17;4(9):e7085. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007085.

Anti-leukemia activity of MS-275 histone deacetylase inhibitor implicates
4-1BBL/4-1BB immunomodulatory functions.

Vire B(1), de Walque S, Restouin A, Olive D, Van Lint C, Collette Y.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U891, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Marseille,
France.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) have demonstrated promising therapeutic
potential in clinical trials for hematological malignancies. HDACi, such as
SAHA/Vorinostat, Trichostatin A, and MS-275 were found to induce apoptosis of
leukemic blasts through activation of the death receptor pathway and
transcriptional induction of the Tumor Necrosis Factor (TNF)-related
pro-apoptotic family members, TRAIL and FasL. The impact of HDACi on TNF-related 
costimulatory molecules such as 4-1BB ligand (4-1BBL/TNFSF9) is however not
known. Following exposure to SAHA/Vorinostat, Trichostatin A, and MS-275,
transcript levels were determined by real time PCR in Jurkat, Raji and U937
cells. Treatment with HDACi up-regulated TNFSF9 gene expression in the three
leukemia cell lines, yet to different extend and with distinct kinetics, which
did not require de novo protein synthesis and was not associated with DNAse I
hypersensitive chromatin remodeling. Transcriptional activity of TNFSF9
promoter-luciferase constructs was induced up to 12 fold by HDACi, and
implication of Sp1/Sp3 transcription factors binding to functional GC-box
elements was evidenced by reporter gene assays, site-directed mutagenesis, and
electrophoretic mobility shift assays. Functionality of modulated target genes
was assessed in allogeneic mixed leukocyte reaction experiments. MS-275- and to a
lesser extent Trichostatin A- and SAHA-treated Raji cells significantly up
regulated T lymphocytes proliferation which was reduced by about 50% by a 4-1BB
blocking recombinant protein, while MS-275- but neither Trichostatin A- nor
SAHA-treated cells up-regulated IFNgamma secretion by T lymphocytes. Our results 
identify 4-1BBL/4-1BB as a downstream target of HDACi, especially of MS-275
anti-leukemia action in vitro. Thus, HDACi such as MS-275 displaying dual
TNF-dependent proapoptotic and costimulatory activities might be favored for
inclusion in HDACi-based anti-cancer therapeutic strategies.

PMCID: PMC2738963
PMID: 19759901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Int J Mol Sci. 2009 Jul 22;10(7):3255-68. doi: 10.3390/ijms10073255.

Genistein inhibition of topoisomerase IIalpha expression participated by Sp1 and 
Sp3 in HeLa cell.

Zhou N(1), Yan Y, Li W, Wang Y, Zheng L, Han S, Yan Y, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medicine, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang, China.
xiaoban8470@126.com

Genistein (4', 5, 7-trihydroxyisoflavone) is an isoflavone compound obtained from
plants that has potential applications in cancer therapy. However, the molecular 
mechanism of the action of genistein on cancer cell apoptosis is not well known. 
In this study, we investigated the effect of genistein on topoisomerase II-alpha 
(Topo IIalpha), an important protein involved in the processes of DNA replication
and cell proliferation. The results revealed that inhibition of Topo IIalpha
expression through the regulation of Specificity protein 1 and Specificity
protein 3 may be one of the reasons for genistein's induction of HeLa cell
apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC2738924
PMID: 19742137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Chem Rec. 2009;9(4):236-45. doi: 10.1002/tcr.200900011.

Organophosphine syntheses via activation of the phosphorus-silicon bond of
silylphosphines.

Hayashi M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Materials Science and Biotechnology, Graduate School of Science 
and Engineering, Ehime University, 3 Bunkyo-cho, Matsuyama 790-8577, Japan.
hayashi@eng.ehime-u.ac.jp

This paper describes the recent advances in the syntheses of organophosphines by 
forming several types of phosphorus-carbon bonds via activation of the
phosphorus-silicon bond of silylphosphines. In this account, the activation
methods are classified into three types: nucleophile-induced activations,
reactions with Lewis acid-activated electrophiles, and transition metal catalyzed
reactions. Nucleophile-induced activations of silylphosphines, especially by a
fluoride, generated a reactive phosphide equivalent for selective formation of a 
P-C bond. Silylphosphines also reacted selectively with Lewis acid-activated
electrophiles. The Lewis acid mediated/catalyzed additions and substitutions, to 
form sp3-carbon-phosphorus bonds including an asymmetric reaction, are described.
Several important types of transition metal catalyzed reactions of
silylphosphines are also mentioned in this account. Selective formation of a P-C 
bond is achieved through these activations to produce a variety of functional
organophosphines including optically active ones.

Copyright 2009 The Japan Chemical Journal Forum and Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 19739148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. An Sist Sanit Navar. 2009 May-Aug;32(2):199-215.

[Dental health of children and adolescents of Navarra, 2007 (4th edition)].

[Article in Spanish]

Cortés Martinicorena FJ(1), Artázcoz J, Rosel E, González P, Asenjo MA, Sáinz de 
Murieta I, Bravo M.

Author information: 
(1)jcortes@infomed.es

BACKGROUND: With five years having passed since the last survey (2002), a new
survey was carried out, the 4th since 1987. The aim is to determine the state of 
oral health of children and adolescents in Navarre and its evolution.
POPULATION AND METHODS: The sample (n=1.397) was selected through multistage
probability sampling, taking as a unit the classrooms of the 1st and 6th year of 
Primary Education and the 2nd of Compulsory Secondary Education. The fieldwork
was carried out in the months of April and May 2007 by two calibrated teams of
examiners. Health variables studied: caries (measured with WHO criterion and
extended criterion), periodontal state and malocclusion. The data were
computerised with Access XP 2003 SP3; the statistical analysis with SPSS Windows 
v.15.0.
RESULTS: Ten point eight percent of the sample is of foreign origin. The
prevalence of caries in temporary dentition at 6 years is 35.9% with a DFT of
1.26, in permanent dentition, 28.5% and 46.4% at 12 and 14 years; the average of 
affected teeth 0.63 and 1.28 respectively. The index of restoration is 26.1% in
temporary dentition and 68.9 and 74.1% in permanent; those of foreign origin show
more caries (p<0.05) and less treatment (p<0.05) than those of Spanish origin.
Sixty-two point eight percent of 14 year olds show gingival bleeding and 16.8%,
calculus; 14.7% malocclusion and 19.1% wear orthodontic appliances. Conclusions. 
Caries are stabilised in temporary dentition in the general population, but fall 
significantly amongst natives (those of Spanish origin); in permanent dentition
they continue their tendency to fall, although more moderately. Navarre is
amongst the regions with a lower level of caries and a higher index of
restoration. Immigrants show significantly more caries. The index of restoration 
falls slightly with respect to previous years. The periodontal health figures are
poor. Malocclusion and orthodontic appliance wearers are stabilised.

PMID: 19738644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Gene. 2009 Dec 1;448(1):88-101. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2009.08.013. Epub 2009 Sep 3.

A potent enhancer element in the 5'-UTR intron is crucial for transcriptional
regulation of the human ubiquitin C gene.

Bianchi M(1), Crinelli R, Giacomini E, Carloni E, Magnani M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Sciences, University of Urbino Carlo Bo, 61029
Urbino (PU), Italy. marzia.bianchi@uniurb.it

Ubiquitin (Ub) plays a crucial role in almost every aspect of cellular functions.
It is encoded by four genes, of which UbC is known to meet cell demand for
ubiquitin in both basal and stressful conditions. To understand the molecular
mechanisms regulating UbC gene expression, we performed a functional
characterization of the UbC promoter. Deletion analyses on the 5' end of the
-916/+878 promoter region, excluded the functional importance of nt -916/-371 in 
the transcriptional regulation of the gene, while 3' deletions revealed that
intron removal (nt+65/+876) resulted in a marked reduction of promoter activity
in all the reporter constructs, regardless of the cell types. Intron substitution
with a heterologous chimeric intron failed to restore promoter activity, thus
allowing to exclude that the splicing event, per se, can be responsible for the
intron-mediated burst of transcription. Gel shift assays demonstrated nuclear
factor binding with the +137/+766 intron region. Reporter constructs carrying
partial intron deletions confirmed that this sequence is, indeed, required for
maximal transcriptional activity. Computer-based analysis found potential Sp1
binding motifs within the intron sequence and electrophoretic mobility shift and 
supershift assays demonstrated that both Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors
interact, in vitro, with the UbC intron, at multiple binding sites. Moreover,
ectopic expression of Sp1 and Sp3 revealed that both transcription factors
positively regulate UbC promoter activity. Collectively, our data highlight the
very new evidence that the 5'-UTR intron is crucial in regulating UbC gene
expression and provide insights into the pivotal role of Sp1/Sp3 binding to the
intronic enhancer in the regulation of UbC transcription.

PMID: 19733223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. J Mol Neurosci. 2010 Jun;41(2):252-62. doi: 10.1007/s12031-009-9284-6. Epub 2009 
Sep 2.

Trichostatin A stimulates steroid 5alpha-reductase gene expression in rat C6
glioma cells via a mechanism involving Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors.

Her S(1), Lee MS, Morita K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bio-Imaging, Chuncheon Center, Korea Basic Science Institute,
Chuncheon, 200-701, South Korea.

The adrenergic and serotonergic stimulations of rat C6 glioma cells have
previously been shown to induce the activation of steroid 5alpha-reductase
(5alpha-R) gene expression, resulting in their differentiation through the
production of neuroactive 5alpha-reduced steroid metabolites. In addition,
progesterone and histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors have also been reported to
promote the glial cell differentiation with the enhancement of
serotonin-stimulated brain-derived neurotrophic factor gene transcription through
the production of 5alpha-reduced neurosteroids, thus suggesting that glial cell
differentiation is probably implicated in the protection and survival of neuronal
cells in the brain. Therefore, the expression of 5alpha-R gene in glial cells
seems physiologically important in maintaining the neural function in the brain, 
but little is known about the mechanism underlying the regulation of 5alpha-R
gene transcription. In the present study, the effect of a HDAC inhibitor
trichostatin A (TSA) on 5alpha-R gene transcription in the glioma cells was
examined, and TSA was shown to induce the elevation of 5alpha-R mRNA levels
through the activation of the 5alpha-R promoter via a mechanism involving Sp1 and
Sp3 transcription factors in a time- and concentration-dependent manner. Thus,
both Sp1 and Sp3 are considered to play a physiological role in the regulation of
5alpha-R gene expression, and hence the production of 5alpha-reduced
neurosteroids in glial cells.

PMID: 19728174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. J Biol Chem. 2009 Oct 30;284(44):30187-99. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.026948. Epub
2009 Sep 1.

Characterization of a functional ZBP-89 binding site that mediates Gata1 gene
expression during hematopoietic development.

Ohneda K(1), Ohmori S, Ishijima Y, Nakano M, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Takasaki University of Health and
Welfare, Takasaki 370-0033, Japan. kohneda@takasaki-u.ac.jp

GATA-1 is a lineage-restricted transcription factor that plays essential roles in
hematopoietic development. The Gata1 gene hematopoietic enhancer allowed Gata1
reporter expression in erythroid cells and megakaryocytes of transgenic mice. The
Gata1 hematopoietic enhancer activity is strictly dependent on a GATA site
located in the 5' region of the enhancer. However, the importance of the GC-rich 
region adjacent to the 3'-end of this GATA site has been also suggested. In this 
study, we show that this GC-rich region contains five contiguous deoxyguanosine
residues (G(5) string) that are bound by multiple nuclear proteins.
Interestingly, deletion of one deoxyguanosine residue from the G(5) string (G(4) 
mutant) specifically eliminates binding to ZBP-89, a Krüppel-like transcription
factor, but not to Sp3 and other binding factors. We demonstrate that GATA-1 and 
ZBP-89 occupy chromatin regions of the Gata1 enhancer and physically associate in
vitro through zinc finger domains. Gel mobility shift assays and DNA affinity
precipitation assays suggest that binding of ZBP-89 to this region is reduced in 
the absence of GATA-1 binding to the G1HE. Luciferase reporter assays demonstrate
that ZBP-89 activates the Gata1 enhancer depending on the G(5) string sequence.
Finally, transgenic mouse studies reveal that the G(4) mutation significantly
reduced the reporter activity of the Gata1 hematopoietic regulatory domain
encompassing an 8.5-kbp region of the Gata1 gene. These data provide compelling
evidence that the G(5) string is necessary for Gata1 gene expression in vivo and 
ZBP-89 is the functional trans-acting factor for this cis-acting region.

PMCID: PMC2781574
PMID: 19723625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. J Am Chem Soc. 2009 Aug 12;131(31):11203-12. doi: 10.1021/ja903927c.

Carbon-carbon coupling of C(sp3)-F bonds using alumenium catalysis.

Gu W(1), Haneline MR, Douvris C, Ozerov OV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77842,
USA.

Dialkylalumenium cation equivalents coupled with the hexabromocarborane anion
function as efficient and long-lived catalysts for alkylation of aliphatic C-F
bonds (alkylative defluorination or AlkDF) by alkylaluminum compounds. Only
C(sp(3))-F bonds undergo AlkDF; C(sp(2))-F bonds are unaffected. Examples of
compounds undergoing AlkDF include monofluoroalkanes, gem-difluorocyclopentane,
and compounds containing a CF(3) group attached to either an aryl or an alkyl
substituent. Conversion of C-F bonds to C-Me bonds is accomplished with high
fidelity using Me(3)Al as the stoichiometric reagent. In reactions with Et(3)Al, 
hydrodefluorination of the C-F bonds is competitive with alkylation, indicative
presumably of competitive hydride vs alkyl transfer from Et(3)Al. In a
trialkylaluminum reagent, 1.1-1.4 alkyl groups per Al can be used to replace C-F 
bonds. Organoaluminum compounds efficiently remove water from the reaction
mixture, obviating the need for rigorously dry solvents. Some organoaluminum
compounds, especially methylaluminoxane, are capable of AlkDF with more reactive 
substrates, but catalysis by alumenium offers an advantage over the uncatalyzed
C-F activation in terms of both increased rate and, in some cases, a dramatically
increased selectivity.

PMID: 19722677  [PubMed]


373. Mycorrhiza. 2009 Oct;19(8):571-84. doi: 10.1007/s00572-009-0272-z. Epub 2009 Aug 
25.

Morphological and molecular analyses in Scleroderma species associated with some 
Caesalpinioid legumes, Dipterocarpaceae and Phyllanthaceae trees in southern
Burkina Faso.

Sanon KB(1), Bâ AM, Delaruelle C, Duponnois R, Martin F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Microbiologie, Département Productions Forestières, Institut de
l'Environnement et de Recherches Agricoles, Ouagadougou 03, Burkina Faso.
sbkady@gmail.com

A combination of morphotypes, polymerase chain reaction/restriction fragment
length polymorphism (PCR/RFLP) analyses and internal transcribed spacer (ITS)
sequencing was used to investigate Scleroderma species that were collected from
woodlands in Burkina Faso. We harvested 52 specimens from 20 sites during rainy
seasons between 1997 and 2000. According to their morphological features, these
specimens were initially characterised, and we then identified six species of
Scleroderma. Two of the species were clearly determined as Scleroderma
dictyosporum Pat. and S. verrucosum Pers. The four remaining species were
characteristically described as (1) displaying big spores with spines up to 2
microm (Scleroderma sp1), (2) producing spores without ornamentation (Scleroderma
sp2), (3) spores with very small spines (Scleroderma sp3) and (4) with yellow
sporocarps and sub-spherical spores (Scleroderma sp4). The specimens were then
analysed using PCR/RFLP of the intergenic regions of rDNA, ITS and IGS1 and ITS
sequencing. The restriction fragments obtained with two endonucleases, HinfI and 
MboI on ITS and IGS1 regions, showed that some isolates of S. dictyosporum had
the same patterns as isolates and basidiocarps of Scleroderma sp4 (IR265, IR408, 
SP4-2903). Isolates of Scleroderma sp3 (IR252) had common restriction fragments
as isolates of S. verrucosum (IR500, IR600). Intraspecific differences were
observed in the two previously determined species, as well as in Scleroderma sp2.
The ITS sequencing and phylogenetic analyses showed that the ribotypes identified
by PCR/RFLP within these species might be phylogenetic species. Combining these
molecular results allowed regrouping the six morphological species in three sets 
of cryptic species: a first set with two species including S. dictyosporum Pat., 
a second set with four species, including both S. verrucosum Pers. and
Scleroderma sp1 and a third set with two species, including Scleroderma sp2.
These investigations and the combined morphological and molecular analyses used
to sort out species paved the way for identifying larger populations of
Scleroderma species in Burkina Faso and other tropical zones.

PMID: 19705166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Nov-Dec;1789(11-12):681-90. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2009.08.006. Epub 2009 Aug 19.

Transcriptional regulation of neutral sphingomyelinase 2 gene expression of a
human breast cancer cell line, MCF-7, induced by the anti-cancer drug,
daunorubicin.

Ito H(1), Murakami M, Furuhata A, Gao S, Yoshida K, Sobue S, Hagiwara K, Takagi
A, Kojima T, Suzuki M, Banno Y, Tanaka K, Tamiya-Koizumi K, Kyogashima M, Nozawa 
Y, Murate T.

Author information: 
(1)Nagoya University School of Health Sciences, Nagoya, Japan.

Mg(2+)-dependent neutral SMases (NSMases) have emerged as prime candidates for
stress-induced ceramide production. Among isoforms identified, previous reports
have suggested the importance of NSMase2. However, its activation mechanism has
not been precisely reported. Here, we analyzed the mechanism of NSMase2 gene
expression by the anti-cancer drug, daunorubicin (DA). DA increased cellular
ceramides (C16, C18 and C24) and NSMase activity of a human breast cancer cell
line, MCF-7. DA remarkably increased the NSMase2 message and protein, whereas
little change in NSMase1 and NSMase3 mRNAs and only a mild increase in acid SMase
mRNA were observed. Overexpression and a knock down of NSMase2 indicated that
NSMase2 played a role in DA-induced cell death. NSMase2 promoter analysis
revealed that three Sp1 motifs located between -148 and -42bp upstream of the
first exon were important in basic as well as in DA-induced promoter activity.
Consistently, luciferase vectors containing three consensus Sp1-motifs but not
its mutated form showed DA-induced transcriptional activation. DA-treated MCF-7
showed increased Sp3 protein. In SL2 cells lacking Sp family proteins, both Sp1
and Sp3 overexpression increased NSMase promoter activity. Increased binding of
Sp family proteins by DA to three Sp1 motifs was shown by electrophoresis
mobility shift and ChIP assays.

PMID: 19698806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. J Org Chem. 2009 Sep 18;74(18):7157-64. doi: 10.1021/jo901670w.

Organocatalytic activity of cinchona alkaloids: which nitrogen is more
nucleophilic?

Baidya M(1), Horn M, Zipse H, Mayr H.

Author information: 
(1)Department Chemie und Biochemie, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München,
Germany.

The cinchona alkaloids 1a-d react selectively at the quinuclidine ring with
benzyl bromide and at the quinoline ring with benzhydrylium ions (diarylcarbenium
ions). The kinetics of these reactions have been determined photometrically or
conductimetrically and are compared with analogous reactions of quinuclidine and 
quinoline derivatives. Quantum chemical calculations
[MP2/6-31+G(2d,p)//B3LYP/6-31G(d)] show that the products obtained by attack at
the quinuclidine ring (N(sp3)) of quinine are thermodynamically more stable when 
small alkylating agents (primary alkyl) are used, while the products arising from
attack at the quinoline ring (N(sp2)) are more stable for bulkier electrophiles
(Ar(2)CH). In some cases, rate and equilibrium constants for their reactions with
benzhydrylium ions could be determined. These data gave access to the Marcus
intrinsic barriers, which are approximately 20 kJ mol(-1) lower for attack at the
N(sp3)-center than at the N(sp2)-center.

PMID: 19697899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. J Endocrinol. 2009 Nov;203(2):215-29. doi: 10.1677/JOE-09-0189. Epub 2009 Aug 7.

Molecular characterisation and functional interrogation of a local natriuretic
peptide system in rodent pituitaries, alphaT3-1 and LbetaT2 gonadotroph cells.

Thompson IR(1), Chand AN, Jonas KC, Burrin JM, Steinhelper ME, Wheeler-Jones CP, 
McArdle CA, Fowkes RC.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Signalling Group, Veterinary Basic Sciences, Royal Veterinary
College, University of London, Royal College Street, London NW1 0TU, UK.

In the pituitary, C-type natriuretic peptide (CNP) has been implicated as a
gonadotroph-specific factor, yet expression of the CNP gene (Nppc) and CNP
activity in gonadotrophs is poorly defined. Here, we examine the molecular
expression and putative function of a local gonadotroph natriuretic peptide
system. Nppc, along with all three natriuretic peptide receptors (Npr1, Npr2 and 
Npr3), was expressed in both alphaT3-1 and LbetaT2 cells and primary mouse
pituitary tissue, yet the genes for atrial-(ANP) and B-type natriuretic peptides 
(Nppa and Nppb) were much less abundant. Putative processing enzymes of CNP were 
also expressed in alphaT3-1 cells and primary mouse pituitaries. Transcriptional 
analyses revealed that the proximal 50 bp of the murine Nppc promoter were
sufficient for GNRH responsiveness, in an apparent protein kinase C and
calcium-dependent manner. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed Sp1/Sp3
proteins form major complexes within this region of the Nppc promoter. CNP
protein was detectable in rat anterior pituitaries, and electron microscopy
detected CNP immunoreactivity in secretory granules of gonadotroph cells.
Pharmacological analyses of natriuretic peptide receptor activity clearly showed 
ANP and CNP are potent activators of cGMP production. However, functional studies
failed to reveal a role for CNP in regulating cell proliferation or LH secretion.
Surprisingly, CNP potently stimulated the human glycoprotein hormone
alpha-subunit promoter in LbetaT2 cells but not in alphaT3-1 cells. Collectively,
these findings support a role for CNP as the major natriuretic peptide of the
anterior pituitary, and for gonadotroph cells as the major source of CNP
expression and site of action.

PMID: 19666697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2009 Sep;489(1-2):1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2009.08.001. Epub
2009 Aug 8.

An essential set of basic DNA response elements is required for
receptor-dependent transcription of the lecithin:retinol acyltransferase (Lrat)
gene.

Zolfaghari R(1), Ross AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences, Pennsylvania State University, University 
Park, PA 16802, USA.

Lecithin:retinol acyltransferase (LRAT) is essential for vitamin A storage.
Nuclear run-on assays demonstrated transcriptional regulation of the Lrat gene in
vivo by all-trans-retinoic acid (RA) and other retinoids. Analysis of a 2.5 kb
segment of rat genomic DNA revealed that the region approximately 300 bp upstream
from the transcription start site (TSS) is necessary for high luciferase (Luc)
reporter activity in HEK293T and HepG2 cells. Although this region lacks retinoid
receptor binding elements, it responded to the nuclear receptors RARalpha,
RARbeta or RARgamma, with RXRalpha, with and without ligand. Removal of -111 bp
from the TSS, which is well conserved in human, rat and mouse genomes, completely
eliminated activity. This region contains several basic elements (TATA box, SP3
site, AP-1 site, CAAT box), all of which were essential. Nuclear extracts from
RA-treated cells exhibited enhanced binding. Therefore, this proximal region
together with basal transcription factors may be sufficient to drive Lrat
expression.

PMCID: PMC2756149
PMID: 19665987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Phys Rev Lett. 2009 Jul 10;103(2):026804. Epub 2009 Jul 10.

Impurity-induced spin-orbit coupling in graphene.

Castro Neto AH(1), Guinea F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Boston University, 590 Commonwealth Avenue, Boston
Massachusetts 02215, USA.

We study the effect of impurities in inducing spin-orbit coupling in graphene. We
show that the sp3 distortion induced by an impurity can lead to a large increase 
in the spin-orbit coupling with a value comparable to the one found in diamond
and other zinc-blende semiconductors. The spin-flip scattering produced by the
impurity leads to spin scattering lengths of the order found in recent
experiments. Our results indicate that the spin-orbit coupling can be controlled 
via the impurity coverage.

PMID: 19659232  [PubMed]


379. Chem Commun (Camb). 2009 Aug 28;(32):4781-90. doi: 10.1039/b907036b. Epub 2009
Jul 13.

Ligand-enabled Pt(II)-C(sp3) bond functionalization with dioxygen as a direct
oxidant.

Vedernikov AN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Maryland, College
Park, MD 20742, USA. avederni@umd.edu

This feature article summarizes the progress achieved in the field of aerobic
functionalization of Pt(II) monoalkyl complexes in protic solvents, water and
alcohols. These functionalization reactions are possible in the presence of
tripodal semi-labile ligands such as di(2-pyridyl)methanesulfonate (dpms). The
reactions include two subsequent transformations: (i) direct (mediatorless)
oxidation of a Pt(II) monoalkyl or a Pt(II)-oxetane to produce a Pt(IV)(OH) alkyl
or a Pt(IV)(OH)-oxetane, respectively, and (ii) reductive elimination from the
Pt(IV) center of an oxygenated organic derivative with a new C-O bond such as
alcohols (MeOH, HOC2H4OH), ethers (Me2O), or olefin (ethylene, cis-cyclooctene,
norbornene) oxides. All the reactions are highly chemo- and stereoselective.
Mechanisms of dioxygen activation with (dpms)Pt(II) alkyls and C-O reductive
eliminations from a Pt(IV) center are discussed, including the direct C-O
elimination of epoxides from Pt(IV) oxetanes previously undocumented for this
metal. Modification of the "slow" Pt(II)-based systems led to the discovery of a 
"fast" dioxygenase-like acetoxylation of benzylic C-H bonds catalyzed by
homogeneous Pd complexes with O2 as the sole oxidant.

PMID: 19652784  [PubMed]


380. Gene. 2009 Nov 1;447(1):51-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2009.07.014. Epub 2009 Jul 29.

Regulation of the mouse CTP: phosphoethanolamine cytidylyltransferase gene Pcyt2 
during myogenesis.

Zhu L(1), Michel V, Bakovic M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Health and Nutritional Sciences, Animal Science and
Nutrition Building, Room 346, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada N1G
2W1.

The expression of the CTP: phosphoethanolamine cytidylyltransferase gene Pcyt2 is
significantly up-regulated during C2C12 muscle cell differentiation, which was
demonstrated by elevated Pcyt2 protein ( approximately 2.3-fold), mRNA (
approximately 2.6-fold) and promoter activity ( approximately 2-fold) in myotubes
relative to myoblasts. Mutation and 5' deletion analyses of Pcyt2 promoter
established the minimal core sequence and three main upstream regulatory regions.
The core promoter (-111/+29 bp) strongly depends on the binding of cEBP to an
inverse CCAAT-box located at position -82/-77 bp. Transcription factors Sp1 and
Sp3 bind to regions A (-508/-378 bp) and C (-157/-111 bp), and muscle-specific
differentiation factor MyoD targets the region C. Region B (-228/-157 bp) is
weakly regulated by Sp factors and binds unknown protein complexes that acts as
negative regulatory elements. Sp1 is less present in myotubes than in myoblasts
and when over-expressed in myotubes significantly reduces promoter activity.
These results demonstrate that elevated content of MyoD, reduced content of Sp1, 
and changed ratio of Sp1 to Sp3 all together contributed to a stimulated
transcription of Pcyt2 gene during muscle cell differentiation.

PMID: 19646513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Virology. 2009 Sep 15;392(1):34-51. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2009.07.002. Epub 2009
Jul 28.

Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpes virus (KSHV) G protein-coupled receptor (vGPCR) 
activates the ORF50 lytic switch promoter: a potential positive feedback loop for
sustained ORF50 gene expression.

Bottero V(1), Sharma-Walia N, Kerur N, Paul AG, Sadagopan S, Cannon M, Chandran
B.

Author information: 
(1)H. M. Bligh Cancer Research Laboratories, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Chicago Medical School, Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and 
Science, 3333 Green Bay Road, North Chicago, IL 60064, USA.

KSHV vGPCR, a lytic cycle associated protein, induces several signaling pathways 
leading to the activation of various transcription factors and consequently the
expression of cellular and viral genes. Though the role of vGPCR in KSHV
tumorigenicity has been well studied, its function related to the viral life
cycle is poorly understood. Reduction in vGPCR by RNA interference also resulted 
in the reduction in KSHV lytic switch ORF50 gene and protein expression.
Induction of vGPCR by doxycycline in BC3.14 cells also resulted in more KSHV
production. When this was explored, induction of the ORF50 promoter by vGPCR
expression was observed. Further examination of the molecular mechanisms by which
vGPCR regulates the ORF50 promoter, using various ORF50 promoter constructs,
revealed that induction of ORF50 promoter by vGPCR did not involve AP1 but was
dependent on Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors. vGPCR signaling led to an
increase in Sp1 and Sp3 DNA binding activity and a decrease in histone
deacetylase (HDAC) activity. These activities were pertussis toxin independent,
did not involve Rho and Rac-GTPases and involved the heterotrimeric G protein
subunits Galpha12 and Galphaq. Studies using pharmacologic inhibitors and
dominant-negative proteins identified phospholipase C, the novel protein kinase C
(novel PKC) family and protein kinase D (PKD) as part of the signaling initiated 
by vGPCR leading to ORF50 promoter activation. Taken together, this study
suggests a role for vGPCR in the sustained expression of ORF50 which could lead
to a continued activation of lytic cycle genes and ultimately to successful viral
progeny formation.

PMCID: PMC2747482
PMID: 19640558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Proteins. 2009;77 Suppl 9:123-7. doi: 10.1002/prot.22501.

Performance of the Pro-sp3-TASSER server in CASP8.

Zhou H(1), Pandit SB, Skolnick J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Study of Systems Biology, School of Biology, Georgia Institute of
Technology, Atlanta, Georgia 30318, USA.

The performance of the protein structure prediction server pro-sp3-TASSER in
CASP8 is described. Compared to CASP7, the major improvement in prediction is in 
the quality of input models to TASSER. These improvements are due to the
PRO-SP(3) threading method, the improved quality of contact predictions provided 
by TASSER_2.0, multiple short TASSER simulations for building the full-length
model, and the accuracy of model selection using the TASSER-QA quality assessment
method. Finally, we analyze the overall performance and highlight some successful
predictions of the pro-sp3-TASSER server.

Copyright 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2785221
PMID: 19639638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Toxicon. 2010 Feb-Mar;55(2-3):195-203. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2009.07.013. Epub
2009 Jul 23.

Variation in brevetoxin and brevenal content among clonal cultures of Karenia
brevis may influence bloom toxicity.

Errera RM(1), Bourdelais A, Drennan MA, Dodd EB, Henrichs DW, Campbell L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oceanography, 3146 TAMU, Texas A&M University, College Station, 
TX 77843, USA.

Karenia brevis, the major harmful algal (HA) species in the Gulf of Mexico,
produces a suite of brevetoxins and brevenal, a nontoxic brevetoxin antagonist.
K. brevis growth is reported to be optimum at oceanic conditions, yet blooms are 
most problematic in coastal waters. Differences in growth rate, total brevetoxin 
production, brevetoxin profiles and brevenal production were evaluated among
eight K. brevis clones grown at salinities of 35 and 27, but otherwise identical 
conditions. All measured parameters varied significantly among clones and the
individual responses to decreased salinity varied as well. At 27, growth rates of
four clones increased (Wilson, TXB3, SP1 and SP2), but decreased in three others 
(TXB4, SP3 and NBK) as compared to 35. Total brevetoxin cellular concentration
varied up to approximately ten-fold among clones. For most clones (5 of 8), no
significant difference in total toxin production between salinity treatments was 
observed; however, there was a shift in brevetoxin profiles to a higher
proportion of PbTx-1 vs. PbTx-2 (in 7 of 8 clones). Brevenal production decreased
in the majority of the clones (6 of 8) when grown at a salinity of 27. Results
suggest that K. brevis produces more PbTx-1 and less brevenal in lower salinity
waters.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19631681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Int J Cancer. 2010 Jan 15;126(2):416-25. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24761.

Sp1 coordinately regulates de novo lipogenesis and proliferation in cancer cells.

Lu S(1), Archer MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of Toronto, ON, Canada.

Cancers express high levels of fatty acid synthase (FAS) from which they derive
fatty acids for membrane biosynthesis to sustain cell proliferation. How cancer
cells coordinate de novo lipogenesis and proliferation has not been investigated.
Transcription factors Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 are overexpressed in a variety of cancers 
and regulate gene expression by interacting with GC-rich Sp1 binding sites. Genes
encoding FAS and cell cycle proteins such as CDC25A contain Sp1 binding sites in 
their promoters. We demonstrate by RNA interference that Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 all
play a role in regulating CDC25A expression and proliferation in human breast
cancer cells. Only Sp1, however, also regulates FAS. Furthermore, mithramycin,
which blocks Sp1 binding sites, decreased proliferation, inhibited CDC25A and FAS
expression and reduced binding of Sp1 to the promoters of these genes as assessed
by ChIP assays. Conversely, 17beta-estradiol (E(2)) increased proliferation and
CDC25A and FAS expression along with increased binding of Sp1 to the promoters of
the 2 genes. In addition, we showed that the expression of sterol regulatory
element-binding protein-1c (SREBP-1c), the only transcription factor that has
been shown to regulate genes of lipogenic enzymes in cancer cells, is also
regulated by Sp1. Finally, we demonstrated that Sp1 plays a role in sustaining
proliferation and FAS expression in colon as well as prostate cancer cells.
Overall, these observations suggest that Sp1 coordinately regulates de novo
lipogenesis and proliferation in cancer cells.

PMID: 19621387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Jun-Aug;1789(6-8):451-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2009.07.001. Epub 2009 Jul 17.

SUMO association with repressor complexes, emerging routes for transcriptional
control.

Garcia-Dominguez M(1), Reyes JC.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Andaluz de Biología Molecular y Medicina Regenerativa (CABIMER),
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), Av. Americo Vespucio,
41092 Seville, Spain. mario.garcia@cabimer.es

Covalent attachment of the small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) to proteins
constitutes a posttranslational modification intensely studied during the last
decade. From the many proteins that serve as SUMO substrates, multiple functions 
have been assigned to this 100-amino acid polypeptide. Among them, a salient role
in transcriptional regulation, and essentially in repression, prevails.
Association of histone deacetylases (HDACs) with SUMO closely ties sumoylation
with transcriptional repression. However, repressive effects linked to SUMO
modification are not exclusively attributable to HDAC recruitment. Recently,
several reports have revealed the importance of SUMO in the function of a variety
of repressor complexes. In this respect, sumoylation is usually coupled to the
establishment of heterochromatic states in the DNA. In this review, we summarize 
these recent reports and previous results concerning SUMO-mediated
transcriptional repression. The analysis of the available data uncovers the
importance not only of the covalent attachment of SUMO to proteins, but also of
the presence in many proteins of SUMO interacting motifs (SIMs) that mediate
non-covalent association with SUMO. In light of these findings we raise key
questions and discuss why SUMO adopts a prominent role in establishing
transcriptional repression in context of the activity, localization and
architecture of chromatin-associated repressor complexes.

PMID: 19616654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Chem Rev. 2010 Feb 10;110(2):1082-146. doi: 10.1021/cr9000836.

Transition metal-catalyzed direct arylation of substrates with activated
sp3-hybridized C-H bonds and some of their synthetic equivalents with aryl
halides and pseudohalides.

Bellina F(1), Rossi R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica e Chimica Industriale, University of Pisa, Via
Risorgimento 35, 56125 Pisa, Italy.

Erratum in
    Chem Rev. 2010 Jun 9;110(6):3850.

PMID: 19610600  [PubMed]


387. Org Lett. 2009 Aug 6;11(15):3478-81. doi: 10.1021/ol901359n.

sp2-sp3 hybridized mixed diboron: synthesis, characterization, and
copper-catalyzed beta-boration of alpha,beta-unsaturated conjugated compounds.

Gao M(1), Thorpe SB, Santos WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia 24061, USA.

A novel sp(2)-sp(3) hybridized mixed diboron and its reactivity on the
copper-catalyzed beta-boration of alpha,beta-unsaturated conjugated compounds to 
afford the corresponding beta-borated compounds is reported. The presence of
sp(3)-hybridized boron provides a mild beta-boration condition in the absence of 
phosphine and base additives. Finally, our investigations demonstrate that the
sp(2)-hybridized boron of the mixed diboron is selectively transferred to the
beta-carbon of conjugated substrates.

PMID: 19594167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Science. 2009 Jul 10;325(5937):181-4. doi: 10.1126/science.1175005.

Dynamics of chemical bonding mapped by energy-resolved 4D electron microscopy.

Carbone F(1), Kwon OH, Zewail AH.

Author information: 
(1)Physical Biology Center for Ultrafast Science and Technology, Arthur Amos
Noyes Laboratory of Chemical Physics, California Institute of Technology,
Pasadena, CA 91125, USA.

Chemical bonding dynamics are fundamental to the understanding of properties and 
behavior of materials and molecules. Here, we demonstrate the potential of
time-resolved, femtosecond electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) for mapping
electronic structural changes in the course of nuclear motions. For graphite, it 
is found that changes of milli-electron volts in the energy range of up to 50
electron volts reveal the compression and expansion of layers on the subpicometer
scale (for surface and bulk atoms). These nonequilibrium structural features are 
correlated with the direction of change from sp2 [two-dimensional (2D) graphene] 
to sp3 (3D-diamond) electronic hybridization, and the results are compared with
theoretical charge-density calculations. The reported femtosecond time resolution
of four-dimensional (4D) electron microscopy represents an advance of 10 orders
of magnitude over that of conventional EELS methods.

PMID: 19589997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Mol Cancer Res. 2009 Jul;7(7):1169-78. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-08-0473. Epub
2009 Jul 7.

p21 expression is induced by activation of nuclear nerve growth factor-induced
Balpha (Nur77) in pancreatic cancer cells.

Lee SO(1), Chintharlapalli S, Liu S, Papineni S, Cho SD, Yoon K, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M University Health Science
Center, Houston, Texas, USA.

1,1-Bis(3'-indolyl)-1-(p-anisyl)methane (DIM-C-pPhOCH3) activates the orphan
receptor nerve growth factor-induced Balpha (Nur77) in cancer cells, and in this 
study, DIM-C-pPhOCH3 decreased Panc1 pancreatic cancer cell survival and arrested
cells in G0-G1. These responses were accompanied by induction of the
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 in pancreatic cancer cells. Mechanistic
studies showed that induction of p21 mRNA and protein by DIM-C-pPhOCH3 was Nur77 
dependent but did not depend on Krüppel-like factor 4, which was also induced by 
DIM-C-pPhOCH3. Activation of p21 promoter constructs by DIM-C-pPhOCH3 required
the GC-rich proximal region of the promoter, and results of RNA interference
studies showed that Nur77-dependent activation of the p21 promoter involved
interactions with Sp1 and Sp4 but not Sp3. Interactions of Nur77 with the p21
promoter in Panc1 cells treated with DIM-C-pPhOCH3 were also confirmed in
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. These data show that activation of nuclear 
Nur77 results in a novel pathway for induction of p21, which is independent of
Nur77 response elements but dependent on Sp proteins bound to the GC-rich
proximal region of the p21 promoter.

PMCID: PMC2739813
PMID: 19584258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Int J Cancer. 2009 Oct 15;125(8):1965-74. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24530.

Oncogenic microRNA-27a is a target for anticancer agent methyl
2-cyano-3,11-dioxo-18beta-olean-1,12-dien-30-oate in colon cancer cells.

Chintharlapalli S(1), Papineni S, Abdelrahim M, Abudayyeh A, Jutooru I,
Chadalapaka G, Wu F, Mertens-Talcott S, Vanderlaag K, Cho SD, Smith R 3rd, Safe
S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M University Health Science
Center, Houston, TX 77843-4466, USA.

Methyl 2-cyano-3,11-dioxo-18beta-olean-1,12-dien-30-oate (CDODA-Me) is a
synthetic derivative of glycyrrhetinic acid, a triterpenoid phytochemical found
in licorice extracts. CDODA-Me inhibited growth of RKO and SW480 colon cancer
cells and this was accompanied by decreased expression of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4
protein and mRNA and several Sp-dependent genes including survivin, vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and VEGF receptor 1 (VEGFR1 or Flt-1). CDODA-Me
also induced apoptosis, arrested RKO and SW480 cells at G(2)/M, and inhibited
tumor growth in athymic nude mice bearing RKO cells as xenografts. CDODA-Me
decreased expression of microRNA-27a (miR-27a), and this was accompanied by
increased expression of 2 miR-27a-regulated mRNAs, namely ZBTB10 (an Sp
repressor) and Myt-1 which catalyzes phosphorylation of cdc2 to inhibit
progression of cells through G(2)/M. Both CDODA-Me and antisense miR-27a induced 
comparable responses in RKO and SW480 cells, suggesting that the potent
anticarcinogenic activity of CDODA-Me is due to repression of oncogenic miR-27a.

PMCID: PMC2766353
PMID: 19582879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Am Chem Soc. 2009 Jul 29;131(29):9886-7. doi: 10.1021/ja903573p.

Pd(0)/PR3-catalyzed intermolecular arylation of sp3 C-H bonds.

Wasa M(1), Engle KM, Yu JQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey
Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Pd(0)-catalyzed intermolecular arylation of sp(3) C-H bonds has been achieved
using PR(3)/ArI. This protocol can be used to arylate a variety of aliphatic
carboxylic acid derivatives, including a number of bioactive drug molecules. The 
use of fluorinated aryl iodides also allows for the introduction of fluorine into
a molecule of interest.

PMCID: PMC2727875
PMID: 19580277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Chem Commun (Camb). 2009 Jul 21;(27):4124-6. doi: 10.1039/b905275e. Epub 2009 Jun
5.

Copper-catalyzed aerobic phosphonation of sp3 C-H bonds.

Baslé O(1), Li CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, McGill University, 801 Sherbrooke Street West,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 2K6.

An efficient cross-dehydrogenative-coupling (CDC) between sp3 C-H and H-P bonds
was developed using copper salt as catalyst and molecular oxygen as terminal
oxidant; this new methodology provides an easy access to biologically important
alpha-aminophosphonates.

PMID: 19568654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. J Immunol. 2009 Jul 15;183(2):1471-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0900312. Epub 2009
Jun 29.

The induction of IL-10 by zymosan in dendritic cells depends on CREB activation
by the coactivators CREB-binding protein and TORC2 and autocrine PGE2.

Alvarez Y(1), Municio C, Alonso S, Sánchez Crespo M, Fernández N.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología y Genética Molecular, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas, Valladolid, Spain.

Stimulation of human monocyte-derived dendritic cells with the yeast extract
zymosan is characterized by a predominant production of IL-10 and a strong
induction of cyclooxygenase-2, but the molecular mechanisms underlying this
response are only partially understood. To address this issue, the activation of 
transcription factors that may bind to the il10 proximal promoter was studied.
Binding activity to Sp1, Sp3, NF-Y, and cAMP response element (CRE) sites was
detected in the nuclear extracts of dendritic cells; however these binding
activities were not influenced by zymosan. No binding activity to Stat1, Stat3,
and c/EBP sites was detected. Notably, zymosan activated kappaB-binding activity,
but inhibition of NF-kappaB was associated with enhanced IL-10 production. In
sharp contrast, treatments acting on CREB (CRE binding protein), including
8-Br-cAMP, PGE(2), and inhibitors of PKA, COX, and glycogen-synthase kinase-3beta
showed a direct correlation between CREB activation and IL-10 production. Zymosan
induced binding of both P-CREB and CREB-binding protein (CBP) to the il10
promoter as judged from chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, whereas negative
results were obtained with Ab reactive to Sp1, Sp3, c-Maf, and NF-Y. Zymosan also
induced nuclear translocation of the CREB coactivator transducer of regulated
CREB activity 2 (TORC2) and interaction of TORC2 with P-CREB coincidental with
the association of CREB to the il10 promoter. Altogether, our data show that
zymosan induces il10 transcription by a CRE-dependent mechanism that involves
autocrine secretion of PGE(2) and a network of interactions of PKA, MAP/ERK,
glycogen-synthase kinase-3beta, and calcineurin, which regulate CREB
transcriptional activity by binding the coactivators CBP and TORC2 and inhibiting
CBP interaction with other transcription factors.

PMID: 19564345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Dalton Trans. 2009 Jul 14;(26):5182-9. doi: 10.1039/b818091a. Epub 2009 May 13.

The intramolecular sp2 and sp3 C-H bond activation of (p-cymene)ruthenium(II)
N-heterocyclic carbene complexes.

Zhang C(1), Zhao Y, Li B, Song H, Xu S, Wang B.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Elemento-Organic Chemistry, College of Chemistry,
Nankai University, Tianjin, People's Republic of China.

The intramolecular sp2 and sp3 C-H activated products, as well as the
monometalated products, based on the "(p-cymene)Ru(NHC)" framework were
synthesised by treatment of a series of NHCs (1-R-3-methylimidazol-2-ylidene
[R=Ph (1), Bn (2), t-Bu (3), i-Pr (4), Mes (5), Cy (6)] and
1,3-bis(isopropyl)imidazol-2-ylidene (7)) with [(p-cymene)RuCl2]2 under mild
conditions. A new NHC precursor
(1-tert-butyl-3-phenyl-4,5-dihydro-imidazol-2-ylidene) was also designed to
compare the reactivity of sp2 C-H and sp3 C-H bonds upon cyclometalation, and
only the sp3 C-H activated product (8) was observed. The factors that possibly
determine the selectivity of intramolecular sp2 or sp3 C-H activation are
elucidated by a series of experiments. In the cases where activation of both sp2 
C-H and sp3 C-H is possible, steric factors overrode the others to dominate the
regioselectivity of activation. All complexes were characterised by 1H NMR, 13C
NMR and HRMS spectra. The molecular structures of 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, and 8 were
confirmed by X-ray diffraction.

PMID: 19562180  [PubMed]


395. J Am Chem Soc. 2008 Dec 10;130(49):16488-9.

Gold-catalyzed 1,3-addition of a sp3-hybridized C-H bond to alkenylcarbenoid
intermediate.

Bhunia S(1), Liu RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, National Tsing-Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, ROC.

PMID: 19554723  [PubMed]


396. Diagn Cytopathol. 2009 Dec;37(12):865-70. doi: 10.1002/dc.21121.

Estimation of hormone receptor status and HER2 in cytologic cell blocks from
breast cancer using the novel rabbit monoclonal antibodies (SP1, SP2, and SP3).

Nassar A(1), Cohen C, Siddiqui M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota 55902, USA. nassar.aziza@mayo.edu

The determination of estrogen (ER) and progesterone (PR) receptor status has
become standard practice in the evaluation of patients with invasive breast
cancer, having important prognostic and therapeutic implications. HER2 assessment
is important to evaluate the response to Herceptin (Trastuzumab) therapy for
primary and metastatic breast cancer. This study is undertaken to compare rabbit 
monoclonal antibodies (RabMAb) for ER, PR, and HER2 against FDA-approved
monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies (FDAMpab). Cell blocks from primary and
metastatic/recurrent breast carcinomas of 52 breast cancer patients were used.
Immunohistochemistry was performed, following optimized epitope retrieval, with a
polymer based detection system using RabMAb: ER (SP1), PR (SP2), and HER2 (SP3). 
FDA approved Mpab (Dako) used were: ER (1D5); PR (PgR636); and HercepTest kit
according to manufacturer's instructions. HER2 immunostain is correlated with
FISH results. Overall, positive, and negative agreement is as follows: 88.5,
88.9, and 88.2% for ER; 84.6, 70.5, and 91.4% for PR; 58.3, 100, and 50% for
HER2. There is substantial to moderate agreement between RabMAb and FDAMpab for
ER (kappa = 0.75) and PR (kappa = 0.64), respectively. There is poor agreement
(kappa = 0.25) between RabMAb (SP3) and FDApab (HercepTest). SP3 shows better
concordance (93.8%) than HercepTest (46.9%) with FISH results. RabMAb SP clones
are almost comparable with FDA-approved ER and PR, with fair to moderate
agreement. Both are as sensitive as their FDA-approved clones. SP3, on the other 
hand, is superior to HercepTest for detecting HER2 overexpression, with an
excellent concordance with FISH.

PMID: 19530101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. J Soc Biol. 2009;203(2):181-92. doi: 10.1051/jbio/2009022. Epub 2009 Jun 16.

[The vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF): a model of gene regulation and a 
marker of tumour aggressiveness. An obvious therapeutic target?].

[Article in French]

Grépin R(1), Pagès G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Biologie du Développement et Cancer, UMR CNRS 6543, Université de
Nice Sophia Antipolis, Centre Antoine Lacassagne, 33 avenue de Valombrose, 06189 
Nice, France. gpages@unice.fr

VEGF represents a model of gene expression regulation. RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK and PI3
Kinase pathways, activated in response to growth factors stimulation or by
oncogenes, contribute to its expression by activating transcription factors or
inactivating proteins implicated in degradation of its mRNA. These factors
(Sp1/Sp3, HIF-1 and TTP) constitute molecular markers of tumor aggressiveness.
VEGF is overexpressed in solid or hematologic tumors. Thus, numerous compounds
regulating angiogenesis by targeting VEGF have been developed. However, their
effects are not as spectacular as expected. The existence of anti-angiogenic
isoforms of VEGF could be a cause of their less potent activity. These different 
points are discussed in this review article.

PMID: 19527632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Phys Rev Lett. 2009 May 1;102(17):176808. Epub 2009 May 1.

Controlling atomic joints between carbon nanotubes by electric current.

Nagataki A(1), Kawai T, Miyamoto Y, Suekane O, Nakayama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka
University, 2-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Using a transmission electron microscope and a nanomanipulator, we explored the
early head-to-head coalescence of two capped carbon nanotubes (CNTs) under
induction of electric current. We measured detaching forces for coalesced CNTs,
showing discrete identifiable values attributable to van der Waals interaction,
single sp2-like bonds, and double sp3-like bonds by comparing them with forces
obtained using molecular dynamics simulations. Our results underscore the
feasibility of atomically controlled junctions of CNTs tuned by the amount of the
electrical current.

PMID: 19518813  [PubMed]


399. Differentiation. 2009 Jun;77(5):492-504. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2008.12.005. Epub
2009 Feb 23.

The transcriptional repressor ZBP-89 and the lack of Sp1/Sp3, c-Jun and Stat3 are
important for the down-regulation of the vimentin gene during C2C12 myogenesis.

Salmon M(1), Zehner ZE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and the Massey Cancer Center,
Virginia Commonwealth University, School of Medicine, PO Box 980614 Richmond, VA 
23298-0614, USA.

Currently, considerable information is available about how muscle-specific genes 
are activated during myogenesis, yet little is known about how non-muscle genes
are down-regulated. The intermediate filament protein vimentin is known to be
"turned off" during myogenesis to be replaced by desmin, the muscle-specific
intermediate filament protein. Here, we demonstrate that vimentin down-regulation
is the result of the combined effect of several transcription factors. Levels of 
the positive activators, Sp1/Sp3, which are essential for vimentin expression,
decrease during myogenesis. In addition, c-Jun and Stat3, two additional
positive-acting transcription factors for vimentin gene expression, are also
down-regulated. Over-expression via adenoviral approaches demonstrates that the
up-regulation of the repressor ZBP-89 is critical to vimentin down-regulation.
Elimination of ZBP-89 via siRNA blocks the down-regulation of vimentin and
Sp1/Sp3 expression. From these studies we conclude that the combinatorial effect 
of the down-regulation of positive-acting transcription factors such as Sp1/Sp3, 
c-Jun and Stat3 versus the up-regulation of the repressor ZBP-89 contributes to
the "turning off" of the vimentin gene during myogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2770595
PMID: 19505630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Org Lett. 2009 Jul 2;11(13):2908-11. doi: 10.1021/ol900947d.

CuBr-mediated oxyalkylation of vinylarenes under aerobic conditions via cleavage 
of sp3 C-H bonds alpha to oxygen.

Cheng K(1), Huang L, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, People's
Republic of China.

A novel difunctionalization reaction of vinylarenes with cyclic ethers has been
developed by copper catalysis via direct activation of alpha-sp(3) C-H bonds of
oxygen in the presence of 1-1.2 equiv of TBHP under mild aerobic conditions. The 
reaction shows excellent regioselectivities and good functional group tolerance
to give the oxyalkylated products of vinylarenes.

PMID: 19505125  [PubMed]


401. Colloids Surf B Biointerfaces. 2009 Oct 1;73(1):36-41. doi:
10.1016/j.colsurfb.2009.04.026. Epub 2009 May 4.

Synthesis and characterization of stearyl protamine and investigation of their
complexes with DNA for gene delivery.

Liu J(1), Guo S, Li Z, Liu L, Gu J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Shanghai Jiaotong University, 800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai
200240, People's Republic of China.

A novel gene carrier, stearyl protamine (SP) was synthesized by the reaction of
natural protamine with an N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) ester of stearic acid. This 
SP was characterized by FT-IR, stearyl content measurement and dynamic light
scattering (DLS). Then, the SP was evaluated as a gene delivery carrier. The SP
with higher stearyl group content (SP3) can self-assemble into aggregates with an
average diameter of ca. 110 nm in water and has relatively higher in vitro gene
transfection efficiency than protamine and SP with lower stearyl group content. A
possible mechanism is proposed for the formation of complex of SP/DNA. The SP
also shows a low cytotoxicity similar to protamine.

PMID: 19481426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Gene. 2009 Sep 1;444(1-2):1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2009.05.010. Epub 2009 May 27.

Functional characterization of the murine Tnk1 promoter.

Hoare S(1), Hoare K, Reinhard MK, Flagg TO, May WS Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Florida Shands Cancer Center,
P.O. Box No: 103633, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

Tnk1/Kos1 is a non-receptor protein tyrosine kinase found to be a tumor
suppressor. It negatively regulates cell growth by indirectly suppressing Ras
activity. We identified and characterized the critical cis-elements required for 
Tnk1/Kos1's promoter activity. Results indicate that the murine Tnk1 promoter
lacks a conventional TATA, CAAT or initiator element (Inr) but contains multiple 
transcription start sites. Transcription is initiated by a TATA-like element
composed of an AT rich sequence at -30 (30 bp upstream) from the major
transcription start site and an Inr-like element that overlaps the multiple start
sites. Deletion analysis of the m-Tnk1 promoter reveals the presence of both
positive (-25 to -151) and negative (-151 to -1201) regulatory regions. The three
GC boxes which bind Sp1 and Sp3 with high affinity, an AP2 site (that overlaps
with an AML1 site) and a MED1 site comprise the necessary cis-elements of the
proximal promoter required for both constitutive and inducible Tnk1/Kos1
expression. Importantly, results reveal that cellular stress reverses the
repression of Tnk1/Kos1 and induces its expression through increased high
affinity interactions between nuclear proteins Sp1, Sp3, AP2 and MED1 for the
m-Tnk1 promoter. These findings provide a mechanism by which the m-Tnk1 promoter 
can be dynamically regulated during normal growth.

PMCID: PMC2732567
PMID: 19481140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Curr Genomics. 2008;9(5):301-11. doi: 10.2174/138920208785133244.

Post-translational control of sp-family transcription factors.

Waby JS(1), Bingle CD, Corfe BM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University of Sheffield, Royal
Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield, S10 2JF, UK.

Sp-family transcription factors are widely expressed in human tissues and
involved in the regulation of many cellular processes and response to cellular
microenvironment. These responses appear to be mediated by alterations in
transcription factor affinity for DNA rather than altered protein level. How
might such changes be effected? This review will identify the range of known
post-translational modifications (PTMs) of Sp-factors and the sometimes
conflicting literature about the roles of PTMs in regulating activity. We will
speculate on the interaction between cell environment, chromatin microenvironment
and the role of PTM in governing functionality of the proteins and the complexes 
to which they belong.

PMCID: PMC2685645
PMID: 19471608  [PubMed]


404. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 May 15;15(10):3519-29. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-2062.

Folate supplementation limits the aggressiveness of glioma via the remethylation 
of DNA repeats element and genes governing apoptosis and proliferation.

Hervouet E(1), Debien E, Campion L, Charbord J, Menanteau J, Vallette FM, Cartron
PF.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Sante et de la Recherche Medicale U892, Centre de
Recherche en Cancérologie, Equipe Apoptose et Progression Tumorale, Nantes,
France.

PURPOSE: We have investigated whether the folate supplementation could be used to
limit the aggressiveness of glioma through the DNA remethylation because (a) the 
cancer genome is characterized by a low level of DNA methylation (or
5-methylcytosine, 5 mC); and (b) folate is the main generator of
S-adenosyl-methionine, the methyl donor molecule in the DNA methylation reaction 
catalyzed by the DNA methyltranferases.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The effects of folate supplementations were analyzed on the 
global DNA methylation status, the methylation status of DNA repeat element, the 
sensitivity of temozolomide-induced apoptosis, and the proliferation index of
glioma cells. Finally, we analyzed whether the DNA methylation level could be
used as a prognostic factor and/or a biomarker in an antiglioma therapy using
folate supplementation as an adjuvant.
RESULTS: Our data show that gliomagenesis is accompanied by a reduction in 5 mC
levels and that this low level of 5 mC is a poor prognostic factor in
Glioblastoma Multiforme patients. We also show that folate supplementation
enhanced the DNA remethylation through the Sp1/Sp3-mediated transcriptional
up-regulation of genes coding for Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b proteins, two de novo
methyltranferases. Finally, we show that the folate-induced DNA methylation
limits proliferation and increases the sensitivity to temozolomide-induced
apoptosis in glioma cells through methylation of the genes implicated in these
processes (PDGF-B, MGMT, survivin, and bcl-w).
CONCLUSION: This study suggests that folate supplementation could be a promising 
adjuvant for the future design of antiglioma therapies in preclinical and/or
clinical studies.

PMID: 19451595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Gene. 2009 Aug 15;443(1-2):55-63. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2009.05.003. Epub 2009 May 
18.

Regulation of RASSF1A in nasopharyngeal cells and its response to UV irradiation.

Lee VH(1), Chow BK, Lo KW, Chow LS, Man C, Tsao SW, Lee LT.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road,
Hong Kong, China.

RASSF1A, which is frequently found inactivated in human cancers, is revealed as a
tumor suppressor gene in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). Using RASSF1A-expressing
(NP69 and HK-1) and non-RASSF1A-expressing (C666-1) cell models, the
transcriptional regulation of RASSF1A was studied. By deletion analysis of 3.1 kb
of 5' flanking region, the core promoter of RASSF1A was identified in the region 
between -431 and -1 upstream of the translation start site. Sequence analysis of 
this core promoter revealed several putative transcription factor binding sties. 
Using NP69 cells and by block replacement mutagenesis, the presence of three
functional GC-boxes were identified, to which by competitive and supershift
electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA), the in vitro bindings of Sp1 and
Sp3 were suggested. The in vivo functions of Sp-proteins in regulating RASSF1A
gene were then investigated by overexpression studies; among the tested
Sp-proteins, Sp1 or Sp3, but not Sp4, was able to augment promoter activities.
More interestingly, co-expression of Sp1 and Sp3 could synergistically enhance
RASSF1A promoter function. UV irradiation induces oxidation stresses and hence is
routinely used to investigate expressions of oncogenes and tumor suppressors. In 
this report, upon UV irradiation, the RASSF1A promoter activity and endogenous
transcript levels were found to be reduced. By chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) and EMSA, we demonstrated that the binding of Sp1 and Sp3 onto -431 to
-202 were significantly reduced after UV irradiation. This UV-mediated effect on 
RASSF1A promoter, as shown by specific inhibitors that interrupt cellular
pathways, is MEK1-, but not JNK-dependent. In summary, our data provided a simple
model to explain the potential development of NPC, via silencing of the tumor
suppressor RASSF1A by reduced bindings of activators Sp1 and Sp3 onto the
GC-boxes in the core promoter of the gene.

PMID: 19450668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Mar;1789(3):204-11.

Sp1 and Sp3 regulate transcription of the cyclin-dependent kinase 5 regulatory
subunit 2 (p39) promoter in neuronal cells.

Valin A(1), Cook JD, Ross S, Saklad CL, Gill G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cellular Biology, Tufts University School of
Medicine, 136 Harrison Avenue, Boston, MA 02111, USA.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (cdk5) activity is critical for development and
function of the nervous system. Cdk5 activity is dependent on association with
the regulators p35 and p39 whose expression is highly regulated in the developing
nervous system.We have identified a small 200 bp fragment of the p39 promoter
that is sufficient for cell type-specific expression in neuronal cells.
Mutational analysis revealed that a cluster of predicted binding sites for Sp1,
AP-1/CREB/ATF and E box-binding transcription factors is essential for full
activity of the p39 promoter. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed that
Sp1 and Sp3 bound to sequences required for p39 promoter function and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays confirmed binding of these proteins to the endogenous 
p39 promoter. Furthermore, depletion of either Sp1 or Sp3 by siRNA reduced
expression from the p39 promoter. Our data suggest that the ubiquitously
expressed transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 regulate transcription of the cdk5
regulator p39 in neuronal cells, possibly in cooperation with tissue-specific
transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC2775520
PMID: 19437621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Mar;1789(3):175-84.

Transcriptional control of occludin expression in vascular endothelia: regulation
by Sp3 and YY1.

Sade H(1), Holloway K, Romero IA, Male D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, The Open University, Milton Keynes, MK7 6AA, UK.

Endothelium differentiates in response to tissue-specific signals; brain
endothelium expresses tight junctions and transporters which are absent from
other endothelia. The promoter of the tight junction protein occludin exhibited
strong activity in a brain endothelial cell line, hCMEC/D3 but was inactive in
lung endothelial cells. Expression of occludin in brain endothelium corresponded 
with binding of Sp3 to a minimal promoter segment close to the
transcription-start site. However, in lung endothelium Sp-transcription factors
did not bind to this site although they are present in the cell nucleus. In
contrast, repression of occludin in lung endothelium was associated with the
binding of YY1 to a remote site in the promoter region, which was functionally
inactive in brain endothelium. The work identified a group of transcription
factors including Sp3 and YY1, which differentially interact with the occludin
promoter to induce expression of occludin in brain endothelium and repression in 
other endothelia. The mechanism controlling occludin expression is similar to
that which controls tissue-specific expression of the transferrin receptor in
brain endothelium, leading to a scheme for endothelial differentiation, in which 
activation or repression of tissue-specific proteins is maintained by a set of
transcription factors which include Sp3 and YY1.

PMID: 19437620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Oncogene. 2009 Jun 25;28(25):2370-82. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.117. Epub 2009 May
11.

HDAC3 represses the expression of NKG2D ligands ULBPs in epithelial tumour cells:
potential implications for the immunosurveillance of cancer.

López-Soto A(1), Folgueras AR, Seto E, Gonzalez S.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Funcional, Universidad de Oviedo, IUOPA, Principado
de Asturias, Spain.

The expression of the NKG2D ligands on cancer cells leads to their recognition
and elimination by host immune responses mediated by natural killer and T cells. 
UL16-binding proteins (ULBPs) are NKG2D ligands, which are scarcely expressed in 
epithelial tumours, favouring their evasion from the immune system. Herein, we
investigated the epigenetic mechanisms underlying the repression of ULBPs in
epithelial cancer cells. We show that ULBP1-3 expression is increased in tumour
cells after exposure to the inhibitor of histone deacetylases (HDACs)
trichostatin A (TSA), which enhances the natural killer cell-mediated
cytotoxicity of HeLa cells. Our experiments showed that the transcription factor 
Sp3 is crucial in the activation of the ULBP1 promoter by TSA. Furthermore, by
small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown and overexpression of HDAC1-3, we showed
that HDAC3 is a repressor of ULBPs expression in epithelial cancer cells.
Remarkably, TSA treatment caused the complete release of HDAC3 from the ULBP1-3
promoters. HDAC3 is recruited to the ULBP1 promoter through its interaction with 
Sp3 and TSA treatment interfered with this association. Together, we describe a
new mechanism by which cancer cells may evade the immune response through the
epigenetic modulation of the ULBPs expression and provide a model in which HDAC
inhibitors may favour the elimination of transformed cells by increasing the
immunogenicity of epithelial tumours.

PMID: 19430493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2009 May 9;7:41. doi: 10.1186/1477-7827-7-41.

Mechanisms of matrix metalloproteinase-2 (mmp-2) transcriptional repression by
progesterone in jar choriocarcinoma cells.

Goldman S(1), Lovett DH, Shalev E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Research in Reproductive Sciences, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, HaEmek Medical Centre, Afula, Israel. goldman_s@clalit.org.il

BACKGROUND: Although the MMP-2 promoter lacks a canonical progesterone response
element (PRE), the hormone inhibits MMP-2 expression and is part of treatment
protocols in gynecological invasive pathologies, including endometriosis and
endometrial hyperplasia. This study aimed to explore the mechanism by which
progesterone inhibits MMP-2 expression.
METHODS: The effect of progesterone on MMP-2 expression in the JAR human
choriocarcinoma cell line was analyzed by gelatin zymography. MMP-2 transcript
expression was studied using Northern blot and semi-quantitative RT-PCR. Rat
promoter deletion analysis, electrophoretic mobility shift and chromatin
immuno-precipitation assays were performed in order to locate the DNA binding
site and the transcription factors involved in MMP-2 regulation.
RESULTS: Progesterone significantly decreased secretion of pro-MMP-2 and MMP-2
transcript expression level in a dose-dependent manner. Progesterone (1 microM)
significantly decreased both human and rat MMP-2 promoter activity (80.1% +/- 0.3
and 81.3% +/- 0.23, respectively). Progesterone acts through the SP1 family
transcription factors-binding site, located between -1433 and -1342 bp region
from the transcriptional start site of the rat MMP-2 promoter, which are present 
in the orthologous human MMP-2 promoter. Progesterone receptor (PR), SP2, SP3 and
SP4 proteins are constitutively bound to this consensus sequence.
CONCLUSION: Progesterone reduces PR and SP4 binding to the MMP-2 promoter,
thereby suppressing transcription. Progesterone also promotes SP4 degradation.
These novel mechanisms of MMP-2 regulation by progesterone provide the biological
rationale for the use of progesterone in clinical settings associated with
increased MMP-2 expression.

PMCID: PMC2687445
PMID: 19426551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2009 May 14;11(18):3532-8. doi: 10.1039/b818688j. Epub 2009 
Feb 27.

Theoretical and REMPI spectroscopic study on phenylhydrazine and
phenylhydrazine-(Ar)n (n=1, 2) van der Waals complexes.

Xiao D(1), Yu D, Xu X, Yu Z, Cheng M, Du Y, Zheng W, Zhu Q, Zhang C.

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory of Molecular Reaction Dynamics, Institute of
Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, PR China.

Erratum in
    Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2012 Dec 28;14(48):16782-4.

Phenylhydrazine and its van der Waals complexes with one or two argon atoms were 
investigated with theoretical calculations and resonant two photon ionization
(R2PI) spectroscopy. The ab initio and DFT calculations found a conversion of the
orbital hybridization of the Nbeta atom from sp3-like in the S0 state to sp2-like
in the S1 state, suggesting that the lone pair electrons of the Nbeta atom are
involved in a super p-p-pi conjugation over the skeleton of phenylhydrazine in
the S1 state. The structural change of the hydrazino group in the S1<--S0
electronic transition was reflected by the vibrational excitations of the
hydrazino group observed in the 1C-R2PI spectrum. The band origin of the S1<--S0 
transition is determined to be 33610 cm(-1) and the adiabatic ionization energy
(IE) of phenylhydrazine, measured by 2C-R2PI spectroscopy, is 62829+/-15 cm(-1). 
The S1<--S0 electronic transitions of phenylhydrazine-Ar and phenylhydrazine-Ar2 
complexes were also observed in the 1C-R2PI spectrum, and their band origins are,
respectively, red-shifted by 39 and 80 cm(-1) from that of phenylhydrazine.

PMID: 19421558  [PubMed]


411. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2009 Jul;297(1):F63-70. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00039.2009. Epub 2009 May 6.

Sp1 trans-activates the murine H(+)-K(+)-ATPase alpha(2)-subunit gene.

Yu Z(1), Li M, Zhang D, Xu W, Kone BC.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine and of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University 
of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA.

The H(+)-K(+)-ATPase alpha(2) (HKalpha2) gene of the renal collecting duct and
distal colon plays a central role in potassium and acid-base homeostasis, yet its
transcriptional control remains poorly characterized. We previously demonstrated 
that the proximal 177 bp of its 5'-flanking region confers basal transcriptional 
activity in murine inner medullary collecting duct (mIMCD3) cells and that
NF-kappaB and CREB-1 bind this region to alter transcription. In the present
study, we sought to determine whether the -144/-135 Sp element influences basal
HKalpha2 gene transcription in these cells. Electrophoretic mobility shift and
supershift assays using probes for -154/-127 revealed Sp1-containing DNA-protein 
complexes in nuclear extracts of mIMCD3 cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) assays demonstrated that Sp1, but not Sp3, binds to this promoter region
of the HKalpha2 gene in mIMCD3 cells in vivo. HKalpha2 minimal
promoter-luciferase constructs with point mutations in the -144/-135 Sp element
exhibited much lower activity than the wild-type promoter in transient
transfection assays. Overexpression of Sp1, but not Sp3, trans-activated an
HKalpha2 proximal promoter-luciferase construct in mIMCD3 cells as well as in SL2
insect cells, which lack Sp factors. Conversely, small interfering RNA knockdown 
of Sp1 inhibited endogenous HKalpha2 mRNA expression, and binding of Sp1 to
chromatin associated with the proximal HKalpha2 promoter without altering the
binding or regulatory influence of NF-kappaB p65 or CREB-1 on the proximal
HKalpha2 promoter. We conclude that Sp1 plays an important and positive role in
controlling basal HKalpha2 gene expression in mIMCD3 cells in vivo and in vitro.

PMCID: PMC2711706
PMID: 19420113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Carcinogenesis. 2009 Jul;30(7):1193-201. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgp092. Epub 2009
Apr 30.

Tolfenamic acid inhibits esophageal cancer through repression of specificity
proteins and c-Met.

Papineni S(1), Chintharlapalli S, Abdelrahim M, Lee SO, Burghardt R, Abudayyeh A,
Baker C, Herrera L, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX 77843-4466, USA.

The non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug tolfenamic acid (TA) inhibits
proliferation of SEG-1 and BIC-1 esophageal cancer cells with half-maximal growth
inhibitory concentration values of 36 and 48 muM, respectively. TA also increased
Annexin V staining in both cell lines, indicative of proapoptotic activity.
Treatment of SEG-1 and BIC-1 cells with TA for up to 72 h decreased expression of
specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 and this was
accompanied by decreased expression of the well-characterized Sp-regulated genes 
cyclin D1, vascular endothelial growth factor and survivin. TA also decreased
hepatocyte growth factor receptor, (c-Met), a receptor tyrosine kinase that is
overexpressed in esophageal cancer cells and tumors and is an important drug
target. Knockdown of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 by RNA interference in SEG-1 and BIC-1
cells also decreased c-Met expression, demonstrating that c-Met is an
Sp-regulated gene in esophageal cancer cells. Sp1 was overexpressed in esophageal
cancer cells and tumors and increased Sp1 staining was observed in esophageal
tumors from patients. TA (20 mg/kg/day) also decreased tumor growth and weight in
athymic nude mice bearing SEG-1 cells as xenografts and this was accompanied by
increased apoptosis and decreased Sp1 and c-Met staining in tumors from treated
mice. Thus, TA-dependent downregulation of Sp transcription factors and c-Met
defines a novel chemotherapeutic approach for treatment of esophageal cancer.

PMCID: PMC2704282
PMID: 19406933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. J Org Chem. 2009 Jun 5;74(11):4049-54. doi: 10.1021/jo900178c.

Why is the Suzuki-Miyaura cross-coupling of sp3 carbons in alpha-bromo sulfoxide 
systems fast and stereoselective? A DFT study on the mechanism.

Gourlaouen C(1), Ujaque G, Lledós A, Medio-Simon M, Asensio G, Maseras F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemical Research of Catalonia (ICIQ), 43007 Tarragona, Spain.

The stereoselectivity-determining oxidative addition step in the Suzuki-Miyaura
cross-coupling of alpha-bromo sulfoxides is analyzed computationally through DFT 
calculations on a model system defined by Pd(PMe(3))(2) and CH(3)SOCH(2)Br. Both 
monophospine and bisphosphine complexes have been considered, different reaction 
pathways being characterized through location of the corresponding transition
states. The lowest energy transition states correspond to nucleophilic
substitution mechanisms, which imply inversion of configuration at the carbon, in
good agreement with experimental data on the process. The energy-lowering and
stereodirecting role of the sulfinyl substituent is explained through its
attractive interactions with the palladium center, which are only possible in the
most favored mechanisms.

PMID: 19405505  [PubMed]


414. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2009;48(22):3999-4001. doi: 10.1002/anie.200900368.

Platinum(II)-catalyzed intramolecular cyclization of o-substituted aryl alkynes
through sp3 C-H activation.

Yang S(1), Li Z, Jian X, He C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Chicago, 929 East 57th Street, Chicago,
IL 60637, USA.

Ring leader: PtCl(2) catalyzes intramolecular cyclization of o-isopropyl or
o-benzyl aryl alkynes to give substituted indene derivatives with good yields and
high selectivity. This reaction appears to proceed through an sp(3) C-H
activation and 1,4-hydrogen migration pathway (see scheme).

PMID: 19402084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2009 Aug 13;307(1-2):118-24. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2009.04.006.
Epub 2009 Apr 21.

Specificity protein-1 and -3 trans-activate the ovine placental lactogen gene
promoter.

Jeckel KM(1), Limesand SW, Anthony RV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine and
Biomedical Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523-1683, USA.

The proximal promoter (-383/+16) of the ovine placental lactogen (oPL) gene
provides trophoblast-specific expression in vitro. Footprint 6 (FP6; -319/-349)
lies within this region, and transfection of two-base pair mutations across FP6
into BeWo cells identified potential binding sites for CCAAT-enhancer binding
protein (CEBP) and specificity proteins (Sp). Transfection of CEBP dominant
negative or over-expression constructs did not impact transactivation of the
proximal promoter. However, Sp1 and Sp3 over-expression constructs increased
(p<or=0.05) transactivation. Additionally, Sp1 and Sp3 short-hairpin RNA
constructs reduced (p<or=0.01) transactivation of the proximal promoter. In EMSA 
supershift assays, Sp1 and Sp3 antibodies were able to inhibit migration of the
complexes formed with nuclear extracts from BeWo cells and ovine chorionic
binucleate cells (oBNC). Furthermore, Southwestern analysis of oBNC nuclear
extracts identified a nuclear protein corresponding with Sp3, identified by
Western analysis. In conclusion, these results indicate that Sp1 and Sp3 are
capable of interacting with FP6 of the oPL gene proximal promoter and function to
enhance its transactivation.

PMCID: PMC2700009
PMID: 19389461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Guang Pu Xue Yu Guang Pu Fen Xi. 2009 Jan;29(1):268-72.

[XPS and Raman spectral analysis of nitrogenated tetrahedral amorphous carbon
(ta-C : N) films with different nitrogen content].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen WS(1), Zhu JQ, Han JC, Tian G, Tan ML.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Composite Materials, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150080,
China. chenwangshou123@163.com

Nitrogenated tetrahedral amorphous carbon (ta-C : N) films were prepared on the
polished C--Si substrates by introducing highly pure nitrogen gas into the
cathode region and the depositing chamber synchronously using filtered cathodic
vacuum arc (FCVA) technology. The nitrogen content in the films was controlled by
changing the flow rate of nitrogen gas. The configuration of ta-C : N films was
investigated by means of X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and visible Raman
spectroscopy. It was shown that the nitrogen content in the films increased from 
0.84 at% to 5.37 at% monotonously when the nitrogen flow rate was varied from 2
seem to 20 sccm. The peak position of C (1s) core level moved towards higher
binding energy with the increase in nitrogen content. The shift of C (1s) peak
position could be ascribed to the chemical bonding between carbon and nitrogen
atoms even though more three-fold coordinated sp2 configuration as in graphite
was formed when the films were doped with more nitrogen atoms. Additionally, the 
half width of C(1s) peak gradually was also broadened with increasing nitrogen
content. In order to discover clearly the changing regularities of the
microstructure of the films, the XPS C(1s) spectra and Raman spectra were
deconvoluted using a Gaussian-Lorentzian mixed lineshape. It was shown that the
tetrahedral hybridization component was still dominant even though the ratio of
sp2/sp3 obtained from C(1s) spectra rose with the increase in nitrogen content.
The Raman measurements demonstrated that the G peak position shifted towards
higher frequency from 1,561 to 1,578 cm(-1) and the ratio of ID/IG also rose with
the increase in nitrogen content. Both results indicated that the graphitizing
tendency could occur with the increase in nitrogen content in the films.

PMID: 19385255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Chemistry. 2009;15(22):5535-44. doi: 10.1002/chem.200802569.

Methyleneimidazoline complexes of iridium, rhodium, and palladium from selective 
C(sp3)-H bond activation.

Song G(1), Li X, Song Z, Zhao J, Zhang H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Chemistry and Biological Chemistry, School of Physical and
Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 637371,
Singapore.

Palladium, iridium, and rhodium complexes of 2-methyleneimidazolines have been
synthesized by selective phosphine-assisted activation of the 2-methyl C-H bonds 
in 2-methylimidazolium compounds. Metallacycles of various sizes were obtained in
the reaction of phosphine-tethered 2-methylimidazolium compounds and
[{M(cod)X}(2)] (M = Rh or Ir; cod = 1,5-cyclooctadiene; X = alkoxyl or Cl).
Representative complexes were characterized by X-ray crystallography. The
selectivity for aliphatic C(sp(3))H versus aromatic C(sp(2))H activation could be
adjusted by means of the steric bulk of the OR ligand, whereby a bulky OR group
favors activation of the 2-methyl C(sp(3))-H bond. Experimental results confirmed
that a methyl C-H activation product (a seven-membered iridacycle) is the kinetic
product, while the aryl C-H activation product (a six-membered iridacycle) is the
thermodynamic product.

PMID: 19370746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Nat Immunol. 2009 May;10(5):540-50. doi: 10.1038/ni.1725. Epub 2009 Apr 12.

HoxC4 binds to the promoter of the cytidine deaminase AID gene to induce AID
expression, class-switch DNA recombination and somatic hypermutation.

Park SR(1), Zan H, Pal Z, Zhang J, Al-Qahtani A, Pone EJ, Xu Z, Mai T, Casali P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Immunology, School of Medicine and School of Biological
Sciences, University of California, Irvine, California, USA.

The cytidine deaminase AID (encoded by Aicda in mice and AICDA in humans) is
critical for immunoglobulin class-switch recombination (CSR) and somatic
hypermutation (SHM). Here we show that AID expression was induced by the HoxC4
homeodomain transcription factor, which bound to a highly conserved HoxC4-Oct
site in the Aicda or AICDA promoter. This site functioned in synergy with a
conserved binding site for the transcription factors Sp1, Sp3 and NF-kappaB.
HoxC4 was 'preferentially' expressed in germinal center B cells and was
upregulated by engagement of CD40 by CD154, as well as by lipopolysaccharide and 
interleukin 4. HoxC4 deficiency resulted in impaired CSR and SHM because of lower
AID expression and not some other putative HoxC4-dependent activity. Enforced
expression of AID in Hoxc4(-/-) B cells fully restored CSR. Thus, HoxC4 directly 
activates the Aicda promoter, thereby inducing AID expression, CSR and SHM.

PMCID: PMC2753990
PMID: 19363484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Jul 1;18(13):2502-17. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp171. Epub 2009 Apr 
7.

Functional polymorphisms, altered gene expression and genetic association link
NRH:quinone oxidoreductase 2 to breast cancer with wild-type p53.

Yu KD(1), Di GH, Yuan WT, Fan L, Wu J, Hu Z, Shen ZZ, Zheng Y, Huang W, Shao ZM.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Surgery Department, Breast Cancer Institute, Cancer Hospital, Fudan
University, Shanghai, PR China.

We hypothesized that NRH:quinone oxidoreductase 2 (NQO2) is a candidate
susceptibility gene for breast cancer because of its known enzymatic activity on 
estrogen-derived quinones and its ability to stabilize p53. We performed
case-control studies to investigate the contributions of genetic
variants/haplotypes of the NQO2 gene to breast cancer risk. In the first
hospital-based study (n = 1604), we observed significant associations between the
incidence of breast cancer and a 29 bp-insertion/deletion polymorphism (29
bp-I/D) and the rs2071002 (+237A>C) polymorphism, both of which are located
within the NQO2 promoter region. Decreased risk was associated with the D-allele 
of 29 bp-I/D [odds ratio (OR), 0.76; P = 0.0027] and the +237C-allele of
rs2071002 (OR, 0.80; P = 0.0031). Specifically, the susceptibility variants
within NQO2 were notably associated with breast carcinomas with wild-type p53
(the most significant P-value: 3.3 x 10(-6)). The associations were successfully 
replicated in an independent population set (familial/early-onset breast cancer
cases and community-based controls, n = 1442). The combined P-values of the two
studies (n = 3046) are 3.8 x 10(-7) for 29 bp-I/D and 2.3 x 10(-6) for rs2071002.
Furthermore, we revealed potential mechanisms of pathogenesis of the two
susceptibility polymorphisms. Previous work has demonstrated that the risk-allele
I-29 of 29 bp-I/D introduces transcriptional-repressor Sp3 binding sites. Using
promoter reporter-gene assays and electrophoretic-mobility-shift assays, our
present work demonstrated that the other risk-allele, +237A-allele of rs2071002, 
abolishes a transcriptional-activator Sp1 binding site. Furthermore, an ex vivo
study showed that normal breast tissues harboring protective genotypes expressed 
significantly higher levels of NQO2 mRNA than those in normal breast tissues
harboring risk genotypes. Taken together, the data presented here strongly
suggest that NQO2 is a susceptibility gene for breast carcinogenesis.

PMID: 19351655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Cancer Lett. 2009 Sep 18;282(2):177-86. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2009.03.014. Epub
2009 Apr 2.

Mechanisms of decreased expression of transforming growth factor-beta receptor
type I at late stages of HPV16-mediated transformation.

Hypes MK(1), Pirisi L, Creek KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, University of South
Carolina School of Medicine, Columbia, SC, USA.

Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) signaling is disrupted in many
cancers, including cervical cancer, leading to TGF-beta resistance. Although
initially sensitive, human papillomavirus type 16 (HPV16) immortalized human
keratinocytes (HKc/HPV16) become increasingly resistant to the growth inhibitory 
effects of TGF-beta during in vitro progression to a differentiation resistant
phenotype (HKc/DR). We have previously shown that loss of TGF-beta sensitivity in
HKc/DR is attributed to decreased expression of TGF-beta receptor type I
(TGF-beta RI), while the levels of TGF-beta receptor type II (TGF-beta RII)
remain unchanged. The present study explored molecular mechanisms leading to
reduced TGF-beta RI expression in HKc/DR. Using TGF-beta RI and TGF-beta RII
promoter reporter constructs, we determined that acute expression of the HPV16
oncogenes E6 and E7 decreased the promoter activity of TGF-beta RI and TGF-beta
RII by about 50%. However, promoter activity of TGF-beta RI is decreased to a
greater extent than TGF-beta RII as HKc/HPV16 progress to HKc/DR. Reduced
TGF-beta RI expression in HKc/DR was found not to be linked to mutations within
the TGF-beta RI promoter or to promoter methylation. Electrophoretic mobility
shift and supershift assays using probes encompassing Sp1 binding sites in the
TGF-beta RI promoter found no changes between HKc/HPV16 and HKc/DR in binding of 
the transcription factors Sp1 or Sp3 to the probes. Also, Western blots
determined that protein levels of Sp1 and Sp3 remain relatively unchanged between
HKc/HPV16 and HKc/DR. Overall, these results demonstrate that mutations in or
hypermethylation of the TGF-beta RI promoter, along with altered levels of Sp1 or
Sp3, are not responsible for the reduced expression of TGF-beta RI we observe in 
HKc/DR. Rather the HPV16 oncogenes E6 and E7 themselves exhibit an inhibitory
effect on TGF-beta receptor promoter activity.

PMCID: PMC2710415
PMID: 19344999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Mol Biol Cell. 2009 Jun;20(11):2697-708. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E08-10-1079. Epub 2009 
Apr 1.

Connexin43 potentiates osteoblast responsiveness to fibroblast growth factor 2
via a protein kinase C-delta/Runx2-dependent mechanism.

Lima F(1), Niger C, Hebert C, Stains JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

In this study, we examine the role of the gap junction protein, connexin43
(Cx43), in the transcriptional response of osteocalcin to fibroblast growth
factor 2 (FGF2) in MC3T3 osteoblasts. By luciferase reporter assays, we identify 
that the osteocalcin transcriptional response to FGF2 is markedly increased by
overexpression of Cx43, an effect that is mediated by Runx2 via its OSE2 cognate 
element, but not by a previously identified connexin-responsive Sp1/Sp3-binding
element. Furthermore, disruption of Cx43 function with Cx43 siRNAs or
overexpression of connexin45 markedly attenuates the response to FGF2. Inhibition
of protein kinase C delta (PKCdelta) with rottlerin or siRNA-mediated knockdown
abrogates the osteocalcin response to FGF2. Additionally, we show that upon
treatment with FGF2, PKCdelta translocates to the nucleus, PKCdelta and Runx2 are
phosphorylated and these events are enhanced by Cx43 overexpression, suggesting
that the degree of activation is enhanced by increased Cx43 levels. Indeed,
chromatin immunoprecipitations of the osteocalcin proximal promoter with
antibodies against Runx2 demonstrate that the recruitment of Runx2 to the
osteocalcin promoter in response to FGF2 treatment is dramatically enhanced by
Cx43 overexpression. Thus, Cx43 plays a critical role in regulating the ability
of osteoblasts to respond to FGF2 by impacting PKCdelta and Runx2 function.

PMCID: PMC2688549
PMID: 19339281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Inorg Chem. 2009 Apr 6;48(7):3177-84. doi: 10.1021/ic801641u.

New derivatives of PCP-type pincer complexes of nickel.

Castonguay A(1), Beauchamp AL, Zargarian D.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Chimie, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec H3C 3J7,
Canada.

The pincer-type complexes (PC(sp3)P(i-Pr))NiR (PC(sp3)P(i-Pr) =
(i-Pr(2)PCH(2)CH(2))(2)CH) react with HBF(4) (R = C[triple bond]CMe, Ph, Me) or
AgBF(4) (R = Br) to give (PC(sp3)P(i-Pr))Ni(BF(4)), 1, which was found to involve
fluxional Ni-F-BF(3) interactions. Competition experiments revealed that the
relative ease of protonation of the Ni-hydrocarbyl moiety follows the order Ni-Me
> Ni-C[triple bond]CMe > Ni-Ph. Complex 1 reacts with water to give
[(PC(sp3)P(i-Pr))Ni(H(2)O)][BF(4)], 2, that in turn undergoes H(2)O exchange with
CH(3)CN, i-PrNH(2), and CO to give the corresponding cationic adducts 3, 4, and
5; alternatively, 3-5 can also be obtained directly from the reaction of 1 with
CH(3)CN, i-PrNH(2), and CO, respectively. Deprotonation of complex 2 gives the
neutral hydroxo complex (PC(sp3)P(i-Pr))Ni(OH), 6. All complexes have been
characterized by NMR spectroscopy and, in the case of 2-6, by X-ray
crystallography.

PMID: 19326930  [PubMed]


423. Environ Sci Technol. 2009 Feb 15;43(4):1192-8.

Density functional theory studies of chloroethene adsorption on zerovalent iron.

Lim DH(1), Lastoskie CM, Soon A, Becker U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Michigan,
1351 Beal Avenue, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-2125, USA.

Adsorption of perchloroethene (PCE), trichloroethene (TCE), and
cis-dichloroethene (cis-DCE) on zerovalent iron is investigated using density
functional theory (DFT) to evaluate hypotheses concerning the relative reactivity
of these compounds on zerovalent iron. Four different chloroethene adsorption
modes on the Fe(110) surface were studied using periodic DFT and the generalized 
gradient approximation (GGA). Of the adsorption sites examined, the atop site,
where the chloroethene C==C bond straddles a surface iron atom, was the most
energetically favorable site for the adsorption of all three chloroethenes.
Electronic structure and property analyses provide an indication of the extent of
sp2-sp3 hybridization. The strong hybridization of the pi-bonding orbital between
the chloroethene C==C bond and the iron surface suggests that adsorbed
chloroethenes are strongly activated on Fe(110) and are likely precursors for
subsequent chloroethene dissociation on the Fe surface. When the effect of
solvation is indirectly taken into account in the DFT simulations by considering 
the hydration energies of chloroethenes in bulkwater,the ordering ofthe
adsorption energies of chloroethenes from the aqueous phase onto Fe(110) is in
agreement with experimental observation (PCE > TCE > cis-DCE). Electronic
properties of the adsorbed configurations of chloroethenes are also presented.

PMID: 19320179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2009 Jan-Mar;22(1):163-8.

Effect of SP3 silencing on cytokeratin expression pattern in HPV-positive cells.

Lucchese A(1), Serpico R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Odontostomatology, Orthodontics and Surgical Disciplines,
University of Naples (SUN), Naples, Italy. alucchese@hotmail.com

In an attempt to understand the molecular factors underlying squamous cell
carcinogenesis in HPV-infected oral and cervical tissues, we examined the
Sp3-dependent cytokeratin expression in HPV-positive CaSki cells. Two sets of
cytokeratins were examined: the simple epithelial CK 7, 8, 18, 19, and 20, which 
are generally expressed in simple epithelia and CK4, 10, 13, and 17, which are
expressed in squamous epithelia. Two additional CK pairs, i.e. CK6/CK16 and
CK4/CK13 were analyzed as controls of the proliferation/differentiation cell
status, respectively. We report that Sp3 gene silencing specifically hits CK18
and CK19, which are markers of oral and cervical squamous tumors. These data may 
be of help in immunopathological definition of squamous carcinogenesis.

PMID: 19309563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. J Cell Biochem. 2009 May 15;107(2):284-92. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22124.

Sp proteins and Runx2 mediate regulation of matrix gla protein (MGP) expression
by parathyroid hormone.

Suttamanatwong S(1), Jensen ED, Schilling J, Franceschi RT, Carlson AE, Mansky
KC, Gopalakrishnan R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic and Biological Sciences, University of Minnesota
School of Dentistry, Minneapolis, 55455, USA.

As part of its catabolic action in bone, parathyroid hormone (PTH) inhibits
extracellular matrix mineralization. We previously showed that PTH
dose-dependently induces matrix gla protein (MGP) expression in osteoblasts and
this induction is at least partially responsible for PTH-mediated inhibition of
mineralization. Recently, we identified PKA and ERK/MAPK as the key signaling
pathways involved in PTH regulation of MGP expression. The goal of this study was
to further characterize the mechanism by which PTH stimulates expression of MGP. 
Deletion analysis of the murine Mgp gene promoter identified a PTH-responsive
region between -173 bp and-49 bp. Using gel-mobility shift assays we found that
Sp1/Sp3, and Runx2 bind to distinct sites within this region. Mutation of either 
the Sp or the Runx2 site reduced MGP induction by PTH, while mutation of both
sites completely abolished PTH responsiveness. Overexpression of Runx2 or Sp1
activated the Mgp reporter, while Sp3 was a dose-dependent repressor of Sp1 and
PTH-induced MGP expression. Collectively, these data show that PTH regulates MGP 
gene transcription in osteoblasts through altered activities of Sp and Runx2
transcription factors.

2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2747369
PMID: 19306294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 May 8;382(3):620-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.03.087. Epub 2009 Mar 20.

Transcriptional regulation of the human Na+/H+ exchanger NHE3 by serotonin in
intestinal epithelial cells.

Amin MR(1), Ghannad L, Othman A, Gill RK, Dudeja PK, Ramaswamy K, Malakooti J.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Digestive Diseases and Nutrition, Department of Medicine,
University of Illinois at Chicago, 840 S. Wood Street, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Serotonin (5-HT) decreases NHE2 and NHE3 activities under acute conditions in
human intestinal epithelial cells. Here, we have investigated the effects of 5-HT
on expression of the human NHE3 gene and the mechanisms underlying its
transcriptional regulation in differentiated C2BBe1 cells. Treatment of the human
intestinal epithelial cell line, C2BBe1, with 5-HT (20 microM) resulted in a
significant decrease in NHE3 mRNA and protein expression. In transient
transfection studies, 5-HT repressed the NHE3 promoter activity by approximately 
55%. The repression of the NHE3 promoter activity in response to 5-HT was
accompanied by reduced DNA-binding activity of transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 
to the NHE3 promoter without alteration in their nuclear levels. Pharmacological 
inhibitors of protein kinase C reversed the inhibitory effect of 5-HT on the
promoter activity. Our data indicate that 5-HT suppresses the transcriptional
activity of the NHE3 promoter and this effect may be mediated by PKCalpha and
modulation of DNA-binding affinities of Sp1 and Sp3.

PMCID: PMC2676776
PMID: 19303862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Biophys J. 2009 Mar 18;96(6):2119-27. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2008.12.3898.

Protein structure prediction by pro-Sp3-TASSER.

Zhou H(1), Skolnick J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for the Study of Systems Biology, School of Biology, Georgia Institute 
of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

An automated protein structure prediction algorithm,
pro-sp3-Threading/ASSEmbly/Refinement (TASSER), is described and benchmarked.
Structural templates are identified using five different scoring functions
derived from the previously developed threading methods PROSPECTOR_3 and SP(3).
Top templates identified by each scoring function are combined to derive contact 
and distant restraints for subsequent model refinement by short TASSER
simulations. For Medium/Hard targets (those with moderate to poor quality
templates and/or alignments), alternative template alignments are also generated 
by parametric alignment and the top models selected by TASSER-QA are included in 
the contact and distance restraint derivation. Then, multiple short TASSER
simulations are used to generate an ensemble of full-length models. Subsequently,
the top models are selected from the ensemble by TASSER-QA and used to derive
TASSER contacts and distant restraints for another round of full TASSER
refinement. The final models are selected from both rounds of TASSER simulations 
by TASSER-QA. We compare pro-sp3-TASSER with our previously developed MetaTASSER 
method (enhanced with chunk-TASSER for Medium/Hard targets) on a representative
test data set of 723 proteins <250 residues in length. For the 348 proteins
classified as easy targets (those templates with good alignments and global
structure similarity to the target), the cumulative TM-score of the best of top
five models by pro-sp3-TASSER shows a 2.1% improvement over MetaTASSER. For the
155/220 medium/hard targets, the improvements in TM-score are 2.8% and 2.2%,
respectively. All improvements are statistically significant. More importantly,
the number of foldable targets (those having models whose TM-score to native >0.4
in the top five clusters) increases from 472 to 497 for all targets, and the
relative increases for medium and hard targets are 10% and 15%, respectively. A
server that implements the above algorithm is available at
http://cssb.biology.gatech.edu/skolnick/webservice/pro-sp3-TASSER/. The source
code is also available upon request.

PMCID: PMC2717286
PMID: 19289038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. J Mol Biol. 2009 May 1;388(2):299-309. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.03.012. Epub 2009 
Mar 12.

Blood group antigen recognition by a solute-binding protein from a serotype 3
strain of Streptococcus pneumoniae.

Higgins MA(1), Abbott DW, Boulanger MJ, Boraston AB.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, PO Box 3055, STN CSC,
Victoria, BC, Canada V8W 3P6.

Streptococcus pneumoniae is a common bacterial pathogen that is well known for
its ability to cause acute respiratory disease (pneumonia), ear infections, and
other serious illnesses. This Gram-positive bacterium relies on its
carbohydrate-metabolizing capabilities for full virulence in its host; however,
the range of glycan targets that it can attack is presently not fully
appreciated. S. pneumoniae is known to have a fucose utilization operon that in
the TIGR4 strain plays a role in its virulence. Here we identify a second type of
fucose utilization operon that is present in a subset of S. pneumoniae strains,
including the serotype 3 strain SP3-BS71. This operon contains a transporter with
a solute-binding protein, FcsSBP (fucose solute-binding protein), that interacts 
tightly (Ka approximately 1 x 10(6) M(-1)) and specifically with soluble A- and
B-antigen trisaccharides but displays no selectivity between these two sugars.
The structure of the FcsSBP in complex with the A-trisaccharide antigen,
determined to 2.35 A, reveals its mode of binding to the reducing end of this
sugar, thus highlighting this protein's requirement for soluble blood group
antigen ligands. Overall, this report exposes a heretofore unknown capability of 
certain S. pneumoniae strains to transport and potentially metabolize the
histo-blood group antigen carbohydrates of its host.

PMCID: PMC2911475
PMID: 19285508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Phys Rev Lett. 2009 Feb 27;102(8):087402. Epub 2009 Feb 23.

Formation of sp3-bonded carbon nanostructures by femtosecond laser excitation of 
graphite.

Kanasaki J(1), Inami E, Tanimura K, Ohnishi H, Nasu K.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Scientific and Industrial Research, Osaka University, 8-1
Mihogaoka, Ibaraki, Osaka 567-0047, Japan.

A scanning tunneling microscopy study and ab initio total energy calculations
have identified the atomic-level structure of novel sp;{3}-bonded carbon
nanoscale domains formed dynamically from graphite by femtosecond-laser
excitation. The structure is characterized by a pseudo sp;{3}-bonding
configuration that results in inward displacement of surface carbon atoms by 0.5 
A in every third row along the [11[over ]00] orientation. This structural
periodicity is unique and differs from conventional phases of diamond.

PMID: 19257783  [PubMed]


430. J Am Acad Audiol. 2008 May;19(5):430-4.

Hearing aids for Ménière's syndrome: implications of hearing fluctuation.

McNeill C(1), McMahon CM, Newall P, Kalantzis M.

Author information: 
(1)Healthy Hearing and Balance Care, Bondi Junction, Sydney, Australia.
cmcneill@tpg.com.au

Comment in
    J Am Acad Audiol. 2008 May;19(5):1 p preceding 377.

BACKGROUND: Hearing fluctuation imposes the biggest challenge in the fitting of
hearing aids for patients with Ménière's syndrome.
PURPOSE: This study shows that the problem maybe be overcome by allowing the
patients to test their own hearing and to program their own hearing aids to
adjust for hearing fluctuation. RESEARCH DESIGN AND STUDY SAMPLE: A group of 40
participants diagnosed with Ménère's syndrome were fitted with Widex Senso Diva
hearing aids and were provided with a portable Senso Programmer 3 (SP3) that
allowed them to measure their own hearing thresholds at up to 14 different
frequencies and to program their own devices.
INTERVENTION: The participants were instructed to test their hearing three times 
a day for 8 weeks and to program their hearing aids according to the measured
thresholds.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: All participants recorded some degree of hearing
fluctuation during the 8-week trial.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Among participants, 70 percent continued to program
their hearing aids on a regular basis and reported great satisfaction with
amplification because they are now able to adjust their own devices when their
hearing fluctuates.

PMID: 19253813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Chemistry. 2009;15(15):3823-9. doi: 10.1002/chem.200802209.

Acceleration of reductive elimination of [Ar-Pd-C(sp3)] by a
phosphine/electron-deficient olefin ligand: a kinetic investigation.

Zhang H(1), Luo X, Wongkhan K, Duan H, Li Q, Zhu L, Wang J, Batsanov AS, Howard
JA, Marder TB, Lei A.

Author information: 
(1)College of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences, Wuhan University, 430072, PR
China.

The kinetics of the reductive elimination step of a C(sp(3))-C(sp(2)) Negishi
cross-coupling catalyzed by a 1:1 complex 2 of palladium and the
phosphine/electron-deficient olefin ligand
(E)-3-(2-diphenylphosphanylphenyl)-1-phenyl-propenone (1) was studied. Complex 2 
is an exceptionally efficient and highly selective catalyst for Negishi
cross-coupling reactions involving primary and secondary alkylzinc reagents
bearing beta-hydrogen atoms. Turnover numbers (TONs) as high as 10(5) and
turnover frequencies (TOFs) as high as 1000 s(-1) were observed. The reactions
occurred rapidly and selectively even at 0 degrees C. The fact that the reaction 
was first order in [Pd] is consistent with homogeneous catalysis by Pd complexes 
rather than by Pd nanoparticles (NPs). Through systematic kinetic investigations 
of the Negishi coupling of ethyl 2-iodobenzoate with alkylzinc chlorides, the
rate constants for reductive elimination of [Ar-Pd-C(sp(3))] were determined to
be >0.3 s(-1), which is about 4 or 5 orders of magnitude greater than the values 
previously reported for [Pd(dppbz)] and [Pd(PPh(3))(2)] systems (dppbz =
1,2-bis(diphenylphosphino)benzene). The use of a 2:1 ratio of 1:Pd resulted in
reduced catalytic activity and selectivity, presumably because the olefin moiety 
could no longer assist in the reductive elimination step. Importantly,
hydrogenation of the C=C double bond in ligand 1 generated a saturated ligand
(1H(2)), which was not only less effective than 1, but also gave rise to
substantial amount of ethylbenzoate formed by competing beta-hydride elimination.
Thus, the pi-accepting olefin moiety in 1 must enhance reductive elimination
rates, and, consequently, inhibit formation of byproducts resulting from
beta-hydride elimination.

PMID: 19229935  [PubMed]


432. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Apr 15;106(6):1068-78. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22090.

Expression of GLUT8 in mouse intestine: identification of alternative spliced
variants.

Romero A(1), Gomez O, Terrado J, Mesonero JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Pharmacology and Toxicology, Experimental Sciences
and Health Faculty, University CEU - Cardenal Herrera, E-46113 Moncada, Valencia,
Spain.

GLUT8 is a facilitative glucose transporter composed of 10 exons coding for a 477
amino acids protein. It is mainly expressed in the testis, but it has also been
studied in a number of tissues such as brain, adipose tissue, and liver. In this 
work, we have characterized the expression of GLUT8 in the small and large
intestine under normal physiological conditions. Protein assay revealed low GLUT8
protein levels in the intestine compared to the testis, with higher levels in the
colon than in the small intestine. Immunohistochemistry studies showed an
intracellular localization of GLUT8 in enterocytes and colonocytes with a
supranuclear distribution next to the apical membrane. GLUT8 immunoreactivity was
also detected in the crypt cells. Interestingly, we have identified three
additional transcriptional variants in mouse intestine (mGLUT-SP1, mGLUT8-SP2,
and mGLUT8-SP3) produced by the deletion of one, two, and four exons,
respectively, whereas only the entire mRNA was detected in the testis. Expression
of these alternative variants did not have an effect on glucose consumption in
3T3-L1 cells. Although the specific function of GLUT8 in intestine remains
unclear, the alternative splicing of GLUT8 could reflect a mechanism for the
regulation of the gene expression in a tissue-specific manner by targeting GLUT8 
mRNA for nonsense-mediated decay.

Copyright 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19229868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Eur J Hum Genet. 2009 Aug;17(8):1063-9. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.3. Epub 2009 Feb
18.

Novel promoter and exon mutations of the BMPR2 gene in Chinese patients with
pulmonary arterial hypertension.

Wang H(1), Li W, Zhang W, Sun K, Song X, Gao S, Zhang C, Hui R, Hu H.

Author information: 
(1)FuWai Cardiovascular Hospital, Cardiovascular Institute, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.

Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH), which is clinically characterized by a
sustained elevation in mean pulmonary artery pressure leading to significant
morbidity and mortality, is caused by intense remodeling of small pulmonary
arteries by endothelial and smooth muscle proliferation. Genetic studies in
familial PAH (FPAH) have revealed heterozygous germline mutations in the bone
morphogenetic protein type II receptor (BMPR2), a receptor for the transforming
growth factor (TGF)-beta/BMP superfamily. In this study, we conducted mutation
screening in the promoter region and the entire coding regions as well as the
intron/exon boundaries of the BMPR2 gene in 20 Chinese patients with either
idiopathic or FPAH. All novel detected mutations were excluded by their presence 
in a panel of 200 chromosomes from normal individuals. A novel mutation, G-669A, 
in the promoter sequence of the BMPR2 gene was identified in one patient with
FPAH, and no exonic mutations were detected in the proband. This mutation
abolished a potential specificity protein 3 (sp3) transcription factor-binding
site, and a dual luciferase assay showed that the promoter carrying the -669A
allele had significantly decreased transcriptional activity compared with -669G
allele. Of the other 19 patients, three novel heterozygous exonic mutations were 
identified: a frame shift mutation with deletion of TG at the nucleotide position
608-609 in exon 5 (Leu203fsX15), a nonsense mutation at the nucleotide position
292 in exon 3 (Glu98X) and a missense single nucleotide substitution in exon 12
(Ser863Asn).

PMCID: PMC2986562
PMID: 19223935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Mar 1;15(5):1601-11. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-1389.
Epub 2009 Feb 17.

Involvement of FLIP in 2-methoxyestradiol-induced tumor regression in transgenic 
adenocarcinoma of mouse prostate model.

Ganapathy M(1), Ghosh R, Jianping X, Zhang X, Bedolla R, Schoolfield J, Yeh IT,
Troyer DA, Olumi AF, Kumar AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, School of Medicine, University of Texas Health Science 
Center, San Antonio, Texas 78229, USA.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study is to investigate whether Fas-associated death
domain interleukin-1 converting enzyme like inhibitory protein (FLIP) inhibition 
is a therapeutic target associated with 2-methoxyestradiol (2-ME2)-mediated tumor
regression.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Expression and levels of FLIP were analyzed using (a)
real-time PCR and immunoblot analysis in androgen-independent PC-3 cells treated 
with the newly formulated 2-ME2 and (b) immunohistochemistry in different Gleason
pattern human prostate tumors. Transient transfections and chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays were used to identify the transcription factors
that regulate FLIP. Involvement of FLIP in 2-ME2-induced tumor regression was
evaluated in transgenic adenocarcinoma mouse prostate (TRAMP) mice.
RESULTS: High Gleason pattern (5+5) human prostate tumors exhibit significant
increase in FLIP compared with low Gleason pattern 3+3 (P=or<0.04). 2-ME2 reduced
the levels and promoter activity of FLIP (P=0.001) in PC-3 cells. Transient
expression assays show sequences between -503/+242 being sufficient for
2-ME2-induced inhibition of FLIP promoter activity. Cotransfection experiments
show that overexpression of Sp1 activated, whereas Sp3 inhibited, Sp1
transactivation of FLIP promoter activity (P=0.0001). 2-ME2 treatment reduced
binding of Sp1 to the FLIP promoter as evidenced by ChIP. Further, levels of FLIP
associated with Fas or FADD decreased, whereas cleavage of caspase-8, levels of
Bid, and apoptosis increased in response to 2-ME2 treatment in PC-3 cells.
Administration of 2-ME2 regressed established prostate tumors in TRAMP mice that 
were associated with reduced expression of FLIP and Sp1.
CONCLUSION: Targeting Sp1-mediated FLIP signaling pathway may provide a novel
approach for prostate cancer management.

PMCID: PMC2714369
PMID: 19223508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Org Lett. 2009 Mar 19;11(6):1425-8. doi: 10.1021/ol900090f.

Transition-metal-free intermolecular amination of sp3 C-H bonds with
sulfonamides.

Fan R(1), Li W, Pu D, Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Fudan University, 220 Handan Road, Shanghai, 200433, 
China. rhfan@fudan.edu.cn

An efficient transition-metal-free intermolecular benzylic amidation with
sulfonamides is described. Various valuable nitrogen-containing compounds,
including amines, beta-chloro amine, amino alcohol, alpha-, beta-amino ester, and
N-sulfonyl imine, are generated from the preferential N-functionalization of
saturated benzylic C-H bonds. The potential of this reaction system also lies in 
the fact it can be developed into an environmentally friendly intermolecular
amidation process.

PMID: 19222196  [PubMed]


436. PLoS One. 2009;4(2):e4478. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004478. Epub 2009 Feb 12.

Dual role of Sp3 transcription factor as an inducer of apoptosis and a marker of 
tumour aggressiveness.

Essafi-Benkhadir K(1), Grosso S, Puissant A, Robert G, Essafi M, Deckert M,
Chamorey E, Dassonville O, Milano G, Auberger P, Pagès G.

Author information: 
(1)University of Nice-Sophia Antipolis, Institute of Developmental Biology and
Cancer Research UMR CNRS 6543, Centre Antoine Lacassagne, Nice, France.

BACKGROUND: The ambiguous role of transcription factor Sp3 for tumour progression
is still debated since it was described as a transcriptional repressor or
activator. Here we tried to decipher the molecular mechanisms implicated in Sp3
accumulation observed in aggressive tumours.
METHODOLOGY: We generated normal and tumour cell lines conditionally expressing
Sp3. Cell growth was analyzed in vitro and after inoculation in nude mice.
Apoptosis was assessed by pan- caspase activity assays, by counting fragmented
nuclei and by determination of caspase 9 cleavage. Gene expression was determined
by quantitative PCR. Cleavage by different caspases was performed after in vitro 
translation of the Sp3 cDNA in the presence of [S(35)] labelled methionine.
Different tumour cell lines and head and neck tumour samples were tested for the 
presence of Sp3 by western blots. Correlation between Sp3 expression and overall 
survival has been statistically determined.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Conditional over-expression of Sp3 induces apoptosis and
modifies expression of genes implicated in the regulation of cell cycle and pro
and anti apoptotic genes. Sp3 over-expression strongly reduces the development of
tumours in nude mice confirming its pro-apoptotic potential in vivo. However,
cells can survive to apoptosis through selective Sp3 cleavage by caspase. Sp3
induction in established tumours resulted in transient regression then
progression. Progression coincides with re-accumulation of the full length form
of Sp3. Sp3 is over-expressed in tumour cell lines of different origins. The
presence of high levels of the full-length form of Sp3 indicates a poor prognosis
for overall survival of patients with head and neck tumours.
CONCLUSIONS: Full length Sp3 accumulation highlights bypass of tumour cell
apoptotic capacities and is indicative of head and neck tumours aggressiveness.

PMCID: PMC2636865
PMID: 19212434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. J Org Chem. 2009 Feb 20;74(4):1774-6. doi: 10.1021/jo802471u.

Cycloadditions of 1,1-disubstituted benzocyclobutenes obtained by C(sp3)-H
activation.

Chaumontet M(1), Retailleau P, Baudoin O.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Chimie des Substances Naturelles, CNRS UPR2301, Avenue de la
Terrasse, 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

An efficient synthesis of polycyclic molecules has been performed by a sequence
involving palladium-catalyzed C-H activation and [4 + 2] cycloaddition. The
intermediate benzocyclobutenes underwent a microwave-enhanced electrocyclic
ring-opening/cycloaddition process with complete torquoselectivity and
diastereoselectivity.

PMID: 19199655  [PubMed]


438. Nano Lett. 2009 Mar;9(3):1058-63. doi: 10.1021/nl8034256.

Atomic and electronic structure of graphene-oxide.

Andre Mkhoyan K(1), Contryman AW, Silcox J, Stewart DA, Eda G, Mattevi C, Miller 
S, Chhowalla M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Applied and Engineering Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, New
York 14853, USA. mkhoyan@umn.edu

We elucidate the atomic and electronic structure of graphene oxide (GO) using
annular dark field imaging of single and multilayer sheets and electron energy
loss spectroscopy for measuring the fine structure of C and O K-edges in a
scanning transmission electron microscope. Partial density of states and
electronic plasma excitations are also measured for these GO sheets showing
unusual pi* + sigma* excitation at 19 eV. The results of this detailed analysis
reveal that the GO is rough with an average surface roughness of 0.6 nm and the
structure is predominantly amorphous due to distortions from sp3 C-O bonds.
Around 40% sp3 bonding was found to be present in these sheets with measured O/C 
ratio of 1:5. These sp2 to sp3 bond modifications due to oxidation are also
supported by ab initio calculations

PMID: 19199476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2009 Apr;50(3):213-21. doi: 10.1002/em.20454.

Modulation of histone deacetylase activity by dietary isothiocyanates and allyl
sulfides: studies with sulforaphane and garlic organosulfur compounds.

Nian H(1), Delage B, Ho E, Dashwood RH.

Author information: 
(1)Linus Pauling Institute, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon
97331-6512, USA.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors reactivate epigenetically-silenced genes in
cancer cells, triggering cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Recent evidence
suggests that dietary constituents can act as HDAC inhibitors, such as the
isothiocyanates found in cruciferous vegetables and the allyl compounds present
in garlic. Broccoli sprouts are a rich source of sulforaphane (SFN), an
isothiocyanate that is metabolized via the mercapturic acid pathway and inhibits 
HDAC activity in human colon, prostate, and breast cancer cells. In mouse
preclinical models, SFN inhibited HDAC activity and induced histone
hyperacetylation coincident with tumor suppression. Inhibition of HDAC activity
also was observed in circulating peripheral blood mononuclear cells obtained from
people who consumed a single serving of broccoli sprouts. Garlic organosulfur
compounds can be metabolized to allyl mercaptan (AM), a competitive HDAC
inhibitor that induced rapid and sustained histone hyperacetylation in human
colon cancer cells. Inhibition of HDAC activity by AM was associated with
increased histone acetylation and Sp3 transcription factor binding to the
promoter region of the P21WAF1 gene, resulting in elevated p21 protein expression
and cell cycle arrest. Collectively, the results from these studies, and others
reviewed herein, provide new insights into the relationships between reversible
histone modifications, diet, and cancer chemoprevention.

PMCID: PMC2701665
PMID: 19197985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Nano Lett. 2009 Mar;9(3):940-4. doi: 10.1021/nl802798q.

Effect of the chemical functionalization on charge transport in carbon nanotubes 
at the mesoscopic scale.

López-Bezanilla A(1), Triozon F, Latil S, Blase X, Roche S.

Author information: 
(1)CEA, Institut of Nanosciences and Cryogenics, INAC/SPSMS/GT, 17 rue des
Martyrs, 38054 Grenoble Cedex 9, France.

We present first-principles calculations of quantum transport in chemically
functionalized metallic carbon nanotubes with lengths reaching the micrometer
scale and random distributions of functional groups. Two typical cases are
investigated, namely, a sp2-type bonding between carbene groups (CH2) and the
nanotube sidewalls and a sp3-type bonding of nanotubes with paired phenyl groups.
For similar molecular coverage density, charge transport is found to range from a
quasi-ballistic-like to a strongly diffusive regime, with corresponding mean free
paths changing by orders of magnitude depending on the nature of the chemical
bonding.

PMID: 19191494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2009;48(11):2047-9. doi: 10.1002/anie.200805852.

Iridium-catalyzed reactions of trifluoromethylated compounds with alkenes: a
C(sp3)-H bond activation alpha to the trifluoromethyl group.

Guo Y(1), Zhao X, Zhang D, Murahashi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Okayama University of Science, 1-1, Ridai-cho,
Okayama 700-0005, Japan.

Erratum in
    Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2009 Jun 8;48(25):4467. Zhao, Xiaming [corrected to Zhao,
Xiaoming].

Catalytic convenience: The use of iridium or ruthenium catalysts for C(sp(3))-H
bond activation has led to the addition reaction of trifluoromethylated compounds
to alkenes (see scheme). This atom-economical reaction occurs under neutral
reaction conditions and without the formation of undesired defluorinated
by-products, even at high temperature.

PMID: 19180616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2009;48(9):1636-9. doi: 10.1002/anie.200805652.

Oxindole synthesis by direct coupling of C(sp2)-H and C(sp3)-H centers.

Jia YX(1), Kündig EP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organic Chemistry, University of Geneva, 30 Quai Ernest
Ansermet, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

An sp(2)/sp(3) get-together: A novel and efficient method can be used to
synthesize 3,3-disubstitued oxindoles by the direct intramolecular oxidative
coupling of an aryl C(sp(2))-H and a C(sp(3))-H center (see scheme; DMF =
N,N-dimethylformamide).

PMID: 19170152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Endocrinology. 2009 May;150(5):2404-12. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-1239. Epub 2009 Jan 
22.

Opposite effects of interleukin-1alpha and transforming growth factor-beta2
induce stage-specific regulation of junctional adhesion molecule-B gene in
Sertoli cells.

Wang Y(1), Lui WY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, School of Biological Sciences, The University of
Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong.

In the mammalian testis, junctional adhesion molecule-B (JAM-B) is found at the
blood-testis barrier between Sertoli cells and the apical ectoplasmic
specializations between Sertoli and germ cells. The expression of JAM-B is
tightly regulated to allow the transit of developing germ cells across the
blood-testis barrier and the timely release of mature spermatids at stage VIII.
In this study, the basal transcription of JAM-B in the mouse Sertoli cell line,
MSC-1 cells, was examined. We found that the constitutive expression of JAM-B is 
carried out by the binding of specificity proteins (Sps), ETS domain
transcription factor Elk-1 (Elk1), neuron-restrictive silencer factor (NRSF), and
E2F transcription factor 3 (E2F3) to various cis-acting elements including TG
interacting factor (TGIF), Elk-1, NRSF, and proximal Sp1 (pSp1) + E2F binding
motifs. We also investigated the effects of two cytokines IL-1alpha and TGF-beta2
on JAM-B expression. IL-1alpha promotes JAM-B expression by facilitating the
binding of Elk-1 to TGIF and pSp1 + E2F motifs in a p38-dependent manner, which
leads to an additive effect on Sp1- and NRSF-mediated JAM-B transactivation.
TGF-beta2 inhibits JAM-B transcription via the activation of mothers against
decapentaplegic (Smad) proteins and activated Smads compete with specificity
proteins (Sp1 and Sp3) for the TGIF motif, resulting in JAM-B repression.
IL-1alpha and Smad3 expression have been reported to be stage specific. IL-1alpha
is absent in the seminferous epithelium at stages VII-VIII, whereas a high level 
of nuclear Smad3 level is found at the same stages. This study shows for the
first time that IL-1alpha and TGF-beta2 regulate JAM-B expression in an opposite 
manner, and in vitro data obtained herein provide some clues on how junctions are
regulated in the testis.

PMID: 19164472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Chem Commun (Camb). 2009 Jan 28;(4):466-8. doi: 10.1039/b815051f. Epub 2008 Dec
11.

Diels-Alder cycloaddition as a new approach toward stable PC(sp3)P-metalated
compounds.

Azerraf C(1), Shpruhman A, Gelman D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemistry, The Hebrew University, 91904 Jerusalem, Israel.
dgelman@chem.ch.huji.ac.il.

A straightforward synthetic route toward a new family of dibenzobarrelene-based
cyclometalated compounds is described.

PMID: 19137187  [PubMed]


445. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2009;48(4):792-5. doi: 10.1002/anie.200805122.

The copper-catalyzed decarboxylative coupling of the sp3-hybridized carbon atoms 
of alpha-amino acids.

Bi HP(1), Zhao L, Liang YM, Li CJ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Applied Organic Chemistry, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou
730000, PR China.

PMID: 19130438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Inorg Chem. 2009 Feb 2;48(3):795-7. doi: 10.1021/ic8019149.

Double cleavage of sp2 C-H and sp3 C-H bonds on one metal center: DMF-appended
cyclometalated platinum(II) and -(IV) porphyrins.

Yamaguchi S(1), Shinokubo H, Osuka A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University,
Sakyo-Ku, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan.

DMF-appended cyclometalated platinum(II) and -(IV) porphyrins were synthesized
via the double cleavage of sp(2) C-H and sp(3) C-H bonds on one platinum center.

PMID: 19125664  [PubMed]


447. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2009;48(6):1153-6. doi: 10.1002/anie.200805169.

Titanium-catalyzed hydroaminoalkylation of alkenes by C-H bond activation at sp3 
centers in the alpha-position to a nitrogen atom.

Kubiak R(1), Prochnow I, Doye S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Reine und Angewandte Chemie, Universität Oldenburg,
Carl-von-Ossietzky-Strasse 9-11, 26111 Oldenburg, Germany.

PMID: 19116994  [PubMed]


448. Exp Mol Med. 2008 Dec 31;40(6):639-46.

Transcriptional induction of DLC-1 gene through Sp1 sites by histone deacetylase 
inhibitors in gastric cancer cells.

Kim TY(1), Kim IS, Jong HS, Lee JW, Kim TY, Jung M, Bang YJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Laboratory for Cancer Epigenetics, Cancer Research
Institute, Seoul National University College of MedicineSeoul 110-744, Korea.

We previously reported that trichostatin A (TSA), a histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitor, induced DLC-1 mRNA expression and accumulated acetylated histones H3
and H4 associated with the DLC-1 promoter in DLC-1 non-expressing gastric cancer 
cells. In this study, we demonstrated the molecular mechanisms by which TSA
induced the DLC-1 gene expression. Treatment of the gastric cancer cells with TSA
activates the DLC-1 promoter activity through Sp1 sites located at -219 and -174 
relative to the transcription start site. Electrophoretic mobility-shift assay
(EMSA) revealed that Sp1 and Sp3 specifically interact with these Sp1 sites and
showed that TSA did not change their binding activities. The ectopic expression
of Sp1, but not Sp3, enhances the DLC-1 promoter responsiveness by TSA.
Furthermore, the TSA-induced DLC-1 promoter activity was increased by p300
expression and reduced by knockdown of p300. These results demonstrated the
requirement of specific Sp1 sites and dependence of Sp1 and p300 for TSA-mediated
activation of DLC-1 promoter.

PMCID: PMC2679347
PMID: 19116449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2009 Mar;296(3):C489-97. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00482.2008. Epub 2008 Dec 24.

Tumor necrosis factor-{alpha} downregulates intestinal NHE8 expression by
reducing basal promoter activity.

Xu H(1), Chen H, Dong J, Li J, Chen R, Uno JK, Ghishan FK.

Author information: 
(1)University of Arizona Health Sciences Center, Tucson, AZ 85724, USA.

NHE8 transporter is a member of the sodium/hydrogen exchanger (NHE) family. This 
transporter protein is expressed at the apical membrane of epithelial cells of
kidney and intestine and contributes to vectorial Na(+) transport in both
tissues. Although NaCl absorption has been shown to be reduced in diarrhea
associated with colitis and enteritis, little is known about the role of
Na(+)/H(+) exchange and the involvement of NHE isoforms in the pathogenesis of
inflammatory disorders and the mechanism of inflammation-associated diarrhea.
This study investigated the role of NHE8 in the setting of inflammatory states.
Jejunal mucosa was harvested from trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid (TNBS) colitis
rats or lipopolysaccharide (LPS) rats for RNA extraction and brush-border
membrane protein purification. The human NHE8 gene promoter was cloned from human
genomic DNA and characterized in Caco-2 cells. The promoter was further used to
study the mechanisms of TNF-alpha-mediated NHE8 expression downregulation in
Caco-2 cells. Results from Western blot and real-time PCR indicated that NHE8
protein and mRNA were significantly reduced in TNBS rats and LPS rats. In Caco-2 
cells, TNF-alpha produces similar reduction levels in the endogenous NHE8 mRNA
expression observed in our in vivo studies. The downregulation of NHE8 expression
mediated by TNF-alpha could be blocked by transcription inhibitor actinomycin D, 
suggesting the involvement of transcriptional regulation. Further studies
indicated that the human NHE8 gene transcription could be activated by Sp3
transcriptional factor, and TNF-alpha inhibits human NHE8 expression by reducing 
Sp3 interaction at the minimal promoter region of the human NHE8 gene. In
conclusion, our studies suggest that TNF-alpha decreases NHE8 expression in
inflammation induced by TNBS and LPS, which may contribute to the diarrhea
associated with inflammation.

PMCID: PMC2660270
PMID: 19109523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. J Am Chem Soc. 2009 Jan 21;131(2):402-3. doi: 10.1021/ja806068h.

C-H bond functionalization via hydride transfer: Lewis acid catalyzed alkylation 
reactions by direct intramolecular coupling of sp3 C-H bonds and reactive alkenyl
oxocarbenium intermediates.

McQuaid KM(1), Sames D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry Columbia University, New York, New York 10027, USA.

C-H bond functionalization enables strategically new approaches to the synthesis 
of complex organic molecules including biologically active compounds, research
probes and functional organic materials. To address the shortcomings of
transition metal catalyzed processes, we have developed a new approach to direct 
coupling of sp(3) C-H bonds and alkenes based on Lewis acid-promoted hydride
transfer. Activation of alpha,beta-unsaturated aldehydes and ketones with Lewis
acid triggers intramolecular hydride transfer, leading to a zwitterionic
intermediate, which in turn undergoes ionic cyclization to afford the cyclic
alkylation product. The scope of this method is expanded by the generation of
alkenyl-oxocarbenium species as highly activated alkene intermediates capable of 
abstracting a hydride from unreactive carbon centers, including benzyl-, allyl-, 
and crotyl-ethers, as well as primary alkyl ethers, at room temperature. The
alkenyl acetal and ketal substrates show dramatically faster rates of
cyclization, as well as improved chemical yield and diastereoselectivity,
compared to the corresponding carbonyl compounds. Furthermore, the use of boron
trifluoride etherate as the Lewis acid and ethylene glycol as the organocatalyst 
provides a highly active catalytic system, presumably via the in situ formation
of alkenyl-oxocarbenium intermediates, which eliminates the need for expensive
transition metal Lewis acids or the preparation of ketal substrates. This binary 
catalytic system greatly improves the efficiency of the hydride
transfer-initiated alkylation reactions.

PMCID: PMC2954885
PMID: 19099474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Stem Cells. 2009 Mar;27(3):662-9. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2008-0313.

Regulation of surfactant protein B gene expression in bone marrow-derived cells.

Field-Corbett C(1), English K, O'Dea S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, Biology Department, National University of Ireland
Maynooth, Ireland.

While investigating the differentiation potential of bone marrow-derived cells,
we previously demonstrated upregulated expression of the lung-related surfactant 
protein B (SP-B) gene in hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs) when they were
cocultured with macerated lung tissue. During coculture, HPCs differentiated
toward a dendritic-like myeloid cell phenotype (hematopoietic progenitor
cell-derived dendritic-like cells [HPC-DCs]). However, immature dendritic cells
(iDCs) cocultured under identical conditions did not express SP-B mRNA before or 
after coculture. We have now further examined the regulation of SP-B expression
in HPC-DCs and iDCs. Of the transcription factors involved in SP-B gene
expression, neither cell type expressed TTF-1, HNF3alpha, or HNF3beta, but both
cell types expressed Sp1 and Sp3. Sp1 binding to the SP-B promoter was
investigated in these cells. Three novel Sp1 binding motifs were identified in
the mouse SP-B promoter. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation, it was demonstrated
that Sp1 was bound to all three sites in HPC-DCs after coculture with lung
tissue, but not in iDCs. We hypothesized that although genes from multiple
lineages may be active in HPCs, gene silencing events, such as methylation, may
subsequently occur to suppress expression of these genes in more mature myeloid
cells, such as iDCs. Treatment with the demethylating agent 5-azacytidine
resulted in expression of the SP-B gene in iDCs. These data indicate that
tissue-specific transcription factors are not required to express the
lung-related gene SP-B in hematopoietic progenitor cells. Furthermore, silencing 
events, such as methylation, may occur to suppress lung-related gene expression
as progenitor cells become committed toward more mature hematopoietic cell
phenotypes.

PMID: 19096034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Beijing Da Xue Xue Bao. 2008 Dec 18;40(6):557-61.

[Cloning deletion of mouse medullary CD4SP thymocyte subgroups induced by
superantigen staphylococcal enterotoxin B].

[Article in Chinese]

Li J(1), Zhou YB, Zhang Y, Zhang J, Chen WF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Peking University School of Basic Medical Sciences, 
Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the clonal deletion of medullary CD4SP thymocyte
subgroups induced by superantigen SEB, and to understand the stage specificity of
thymic negative selection based on the developmental pathway of medullary CD4SP
thymocytes we established previously.
METHODS: SEB was intravenously injected into C57BL/6 mice, and then the
expression of surface molecules and apoptosis of thymocytes were detected by
FACS. The reduction of each subgroup of medullary CD4SP thymocytes was analyzed
by FACS assay and cell counting.
RESULTS: The percentage of apoptotic CD4SP thymocytes significantly increased
after the intravenous injection of SEB. The cell number of CD4SP decreased about 
43.8%. Among TCR Vbeta8(+)CD4SP thymocytes, the percentage of
6C10(+)CD69(+)Qa-2(-)thymocytes(SP1) was reduced by two thirds and the percentage
of Qa-2(+) thymocytes(SP4) was comparatively increased, while the cell numbers of
SP1 to SP3 decreased over 80% and that of SP4 decreased about 50%.
CONCLUSION: Thymic negative selection occurs during the stage of SP and goes
through the whole developmental progress from SP1 to SP4.The thymocytes in the
stage of SP1 to SP3 are more sensitive to apoptosis than those in the stage of
SP4.

PMID: 19088822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Chem Commun (Camb). 2008 Dec 14;(46):6137-9. doi: 10.1039/b811384j. Epub 2008 Oct
22.

Synthesis of a new olefin polymerization catalyst supported by an sp3-C donor via
insertion of a ligand-appended alkene into the Hf-C bond of a neutral
pyridylamidohafnium trimethyl complex.

Domski GJ(1), Edson JB, Keresztes I, Lobkovsky EB, Coates GW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Baker Laboratory, Cornell
University, Ithaca, NY 14853-1301, USA.

A new living and isoselective propylene polymerization precatalyst was generated 
via the intramolecular insertion of a ligand-appended vinyl group into the Hf-C
bond of a neutral pyridylamidohafnium trimethyl complex.

PMID: 19082098  [PubMed]


454. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2009 Jan;296(1):C13-24. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00263.2008. Epub 2008 Oct 22.

Cell confluency-induced Stat3 activation regulates NHE3 expression by recruiting 
Sp1 and Sp3 to the proximal NHE3 promoter region during epithelial dome
formation.

Su HW(1), Wang SW, Ghishan FK, Kiela PR, Tang MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung 
University, 1 Univ. Road, Tainan 70101, Taiwan.

Activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription-3 (Stat3) during
cell confluency is related to its regulatory roles in cell growth arrest- or
survival-related physiological or developmental processes. We previously
demonstrated that this signaling event triggers epithelial dome formation by
transcriptional augmentation of sodium hydrogen exchanger-3 (NHE3) expression.
However, the detailed molecular mechanism remained unclear. By using serial
deletions, site-directed mutagenesis, and EMSA analysis, we now demonstrate Stat3
binding to an atypical Stat3-response element in the rat proximal NHE3 promoter, 
located adjacent to a cluster of Sp cis-elements (SpA/B/C), within -77/-36 nt of 
the gene. SpB (-58/-55 nt) site was more effective than SpA (-72/-69 nt) site for
cooperative binding of Sp1/Sp3. Increasing cell density had no effect on Sp1/Sp3 
expression but resulted in their increased binding to the SpA/B/C probe along
with Stat3 and concurrently with enhanced nuclear pTyr705-Stat3 level.
Immunoprecipitation performed with the nuclear extracts demonstrated physical
interaction of Stat3 and Sp1/Sp3 triggered by cell confluency. Stat3 inhibition
by overexpression of dominant-negative Stat3-D mutant in MDCK cells or by small
interfering RNA-mediated knockdown in Caco-2 cells resulted in inhibition of the 
cell density-induced NHE3 expression, Sp1/Sp3 binding, and NHE3 promoter activity
and in decreased dome formation. Thus, during confluency, ligand-independent
Stat3 activation leads to its interaction with Sp1/Sp3, their recruitment to the 
SpA/B/C cluster in a Stat3 DNA-binding domain-dependent fashion, increased
transcription, and expression of NHE3, to coordinate cell density-mediated
epithelial dome formation.

PMCID: PMC2637000
PMID: 19064501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Nano Lett. 2008 Dec;8(12):4597-602. doi: 10.1021/nl802940s.

Reversible basal plane hydrogenation of graphene.

Ryu S(1), Han MY, Maultzsch J, Heinz TF, Kim P, Steigerwald ML, Brus LE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Columbia University, New York, New York 10027, USA.

We report the chemical reaction of single-layer graphene with hydrogen atoms,
generated in situ by electron-induced dissociation of hydrogen silsesquioxane
(HSQ). Hydrogenation, forming sp3 C--H functionality on the basal plane of
graphene, proceeds at a higher rate for single than for double layers,
demonstrating the enhanced chemical reactivity of single sheet graphene. The net 
H atom sticking probability on single layers at 300 K is at least 0.03, which
exceeds that of double layers by at least a factor of 15. Chemisorbed hydrogen
atoms, which give rise to a prominent Raman D band, can be detached by thermal
annealing at 100-200 degrees C. The resulting dehydrogenated graphene is
"activated" when photothermally heated it reversibly binds ambient oxygen,
leading to hole doping of the graphene. This functionalization of graphene can be
exploited to manipulate electronic and charge transport properties of graphene
devices.

PMID: 19053793  [PubMed]


456. Am J Chin Med. 2008;36(5):967-80.

Cordycepin is an immunoregulatory active ingredient of Cordyceps sinensis.

Zhou X(1), Luo L, Dressel W, Shadier G, Krumbiegel D, Schmidtke P, Zepp F, Meyer 
CU.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Paediatric Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Children's
Hospital, Johannes Gutenberg University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany.
xzhou@uni-mainz.de

We have reported that cordycepin, an adenosine derivative from the fungus
Cordyceps, increased interleukin (IL)-10 expression, decreased IL-2 expression
and suppressed T lymphocyte activity. In the present study, we further
characterized the regulatory effects of cordycepin on human immune cells.
Moreover, a traditional Chinese drug, Cordyceps sinensis (CS) that contains
cordycepin, was also investigated. Cytometric Bead Array (CBA) was used to
determine the concentrations of IL-1beta, IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10,
IL-12, TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma in culture of peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs). The results showed that both cordycepin and CS up-regulated IL-10,
IL-1beta, IL-6, IL-8 and TNF-alpha; at the same time, they suppressed
phytohemagglutinin (PHA)-induced production of IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IFN-gamma and
IL-12. As compared to cordycepin, CS displayed its regulatory effects on IL-2 and
IL-10 in a similar dose-dependent manner even with higher efficiency. The binding
activity of transcription factors in a human monocytic cell line THP-1 was tested
by the trans-AM method, and a higher binding activity of SP1 and SP3 was observed
in cordycepin or CS treated cells compared to the control. These results led to
the opinion that cordycepin and CS pleiotropically affected the actions of immune
cells and cytokine network in a similar fashion. Cordycepin could be an important
immunoregulatory active ingredient in Cordyceps sinensis. In addition, CS may
contain substances which possess synergism with cordycepin, as CS showed a higher
efficiency in the production of IL-10 and IL-2 than cordycepin. However, merits
of these effects in pharmacology and clinical medicine have yet to be proven and 
the precise mechanism of these immune regulatory actions should be researched.

PMID: 19051361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2008 Aug;8(8):4295-302.

Investigations on silicon/amorphous-carbon and silicon/nanocrystalline palladium/
amorphous-carbon interfaces.

Roy M(1), Sengupta P, Tyagi AK, Kale GB.

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 400085, India.

Our previous work revealed that significant enhancement in sp3-carbon content of 
amorphous carbon films could be achieved when grown on nanocrystalline palladium 
interlayer as compared to those grown on bare silicon substrates. To find out
why, the nature of interface formed in both the cases has been investigated using
Electron Probe Micro Analysis (EPMA) technique. It has been found that a reactive
interface in the form of silicon carbide and/silicon oxy-carbide is formed at the
interface of silicon/amorphous-carbon films, while palladium remains primarily in
its native form at the interface of nanocrystalline palladium/amorphous-carbon
films. However, there can be traces of dissolved oxygen within the metallic layer
as well. The study has been corroborated further from X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopic studies.

PMID: 19049221  [PubMed]


458. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Feb;29(3):929-41. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00961-08. Epub 2008 Dec 1.

Regulation of telomerase activity by interferon regulatory factors 4 and 8 in
immune cells.

Hrdlicková R(1), Nehyba J, Bose HR Jr.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences and Institute for Cellular and Molecular
Biology,University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712-1095, USA.

Telomerase activity is downregulated in somatic cells but is upregulated during
the activation of cells of the immune system. The mechanism of this reactivation 
is not well understood. In this study, we demonstrated that interferon regulatory
factor 4 (IRF-4) and, to a lesser extent, IRF-8 induce telomerase activity. The
suppression of IRF-4 results in decreased levels of TERT (telomerase reverse
transcriptase) mRNA and telomerase activity and reduces cell proliferation. The
overexpression of TERT compensates for this proliferation defect, suggesting that
telomerase contributes to the regulation of cell proliferation by IRF-4. The
induction of telomerase by IRF-4 and IRF-8 correlates with the activation of the 
TERT promoter. IRF-4 binds the interferon response-stimulated element and the
gamma interferon-activated sequence composite binding site in the TERT core
promoter region in vivo. Additionally, the binding of Sp1, Sp3, USF-1, USF-2, and
c-Myc to the TERT promoter is elevated in cells expressing IRF-4. IRF-4, but not 
IRF-8, synergistically cooperates with Sp1 and Sp3 in the activation of the TERT 
promoter. Collectively, these results indicate that IRF-4 and IRF-8, two lymphoid
cell-specific transcription factors, increase telomerase activity by activating
TERT transcription in immune cells.

PMCID: PMC2630682
PMID: 19047367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Clin Sci (Lond). 2009 Jan;116(1):27-35. doi: 10.1042/CS20080068.

Thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1/Nkx2.1/TITF1) gene regulation in the lung.

Boggaram V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The University of Texas Health Science Center
at Tyler, 11937 US Highway 271, Tyler, TX 75708-3154, USA.
vijay.boggaram@uthct.edu

TTF-1 [thyroid transcription factor-1; also known as Nkx2.1, T/EBP
(thyroid-specific-enhancer-binding protein) or TITF1] is a homeodomain-containing
transcription factor essential for the morphogenesis and differentiation of the
thyroid, lung and ventral forebrain. TTF-1 controls the expression of select
genes in the thyroid, lung and the central nervous system. In the lung, TTF-1
controls the expression of surfactant proteins that are essential for lung
stability and lung host defence. Human TTF-1 is encoded by a single gene located 
on chromosome 14 and is organized into two/three exons and one/two introns.
Multiple transcription start sites and alternative splicing produce mRNAs with
heterogeneity at the 5' end. The 3' end of the TTF-1 mRNA is characterized by a
rather long untranslated region. The amino acid sequences of TTF-1 from human,
rat, mouse and other species are very similar, indicating a high degree of
sequence conservation. TTF-1 promoter activity is maintained by the combinatorial
or co-operative actions of HNF-3 [hepatocyte nuclear factor-3; also known as FOXA
(forkhead box A)], Sp (specificity protein) 1, Sp3, GATA-6 and HOXB3 (homeobox
B3) transcription factors. There is limited information on the regulation of
TTF-1 gene expression by hormones, cytokines and other biological agents.
Glucocorticoids, cAMP and TGF-beta (transforming growth factor-beta) have
stimulatory effects on TTF-1 expression, whereas TNF-alpha (tumour necrosis
factor-alpha) and ceramide have inhibitory effects on TTF-1 DNA-binding activity 
in lung cells. Haplo-insufficiency of TTF-1 in humans causes hypothyroidism,
respiratory dysfunction and recurring pulmonary infections, underlining the
importance of optimal TTF-1 levels for the maintenance of thyroid and lung
function. Recent studies have implicated TTF-1 as a lineage-specific
proto-oncogene for lung cancer.

PMID: 19037882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2009;48(1):179-82. doi: 10.1002/anie.200804444.

Synthesis of 3,4-dihydroisoquinolines by a C(sp3)-H activation/electrocyclization
strategy: total synthesis of coralydine.

Chaumontet M(1), Piccardi R, Baudoin O.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Chimie des Substances Naturelles, CNRS UPR2301, Avenue de la
Terrasse, 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

PMID: 19035607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Chemistry. 2009;15(3):793-7. doi: 10.1002/chem.200801665.

Selective benzylic and allylic alkylation of protic nucleophiles with
sulfonamides through double Lewis acid catalyzed cleavage of sp3 carbon-nitrogen 
bonds.

Liu CR(1), Li MB, Yang CF, Tian SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei,
Anhui, 230026, China.

The acid-catalyzed benzylic and allylic alkylation of protic nucleophiles is
fundamentally important for the formation of carbon-carbon and carbon-heteroatom 
bonds, and it is a formidable challenge for benzylic and allylic amine
derivatives to be used as the alkylating agents. Herein we report a highly
efficient benzylic and allylic alkylation of protic carbon and sulfur
nucleophiles with sulfonamides through double Lewis acid catalyzed cleavage of
sp(3) carbon-nitrogen bonds at room temperature. In the presence of a catalytic
amount of inexpensive ZnCl(2)-TMSCl (TMSCl: chlorotrimethylsilane),
1,3-diketones, beta-keto esters, beta-keto amides, malononitrile, aromatic
compounds, thiols, and thioacetic acid can couple with a broad range of
tosyl-activated benzylic and allylic amines to give diversely functionalized
products in good to excellent yields and with high regioselectivity. Furthermore,
the cross-coupling reaction of 1,3-dicarbonyl compounds with benzylic propargylic
amine derivatives has been successfully applied to the one-step synthesis of
polysubstituted furans and benzofurans.

PMID: 19035590  [PubMed]


462. J Am Chem Soc. 2008 Dec 17;130(50):17141-7. doi: 10.1021/ja807254d.

Isolation and crystal structures of both enol and keto tautomer intermediates in 
a hydration of an alkyne-carboxylic acid ester catalyzed by iridium complexes in 
water.

Kanemitsu H(1), Uehara K, Fukuzumi S, Ogo S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Future Chemistry, Kyushu University, 744 Moto-oka, Nishi-ku,
Fukuoka 819-0395, Japan.

Hydration of tetrolic acid ethyl ester as an alkyne-carboxylic acid ester
catalyzed by an Ir-aqua complex [Ir(III)Cp*(bpy)(OH2)]2+ (1, Cp* = eta5-C5Me5,
bpy = 2,2'-bipyridine) in water provides ethyl acetoacetate as a beta-keto acid
ester. We report the successful isolation of both an Ir-enol tautomer
intermediate [IrIIICp*(bpy){CH3C(OH)=CC(O)OC2H5}]+ (2) and an Ir-keto tautomer
intermediate [Ir(III)Cp*(bpy){CH3C(O)CHC(O)OC2H5}]+ (3) in the catalytic
hydration by optimizing the conditions of the isolation, such as pH of the
solution, reaction time, and selection of counteranions. The structures of the
enol and keto complexes with characteristic Ir-(sp2carbon) bond and Ir-(sp3
carbon) bond, respectively, were unequivocally determined by X-ray analysis, IR, 
electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS), and NMR studies including 1H,
13C, distortionless enhancement by polarization transfer (DEPT) and correlation
spectroscopy (COSY) experiments. It was confirmed that the hydration of tetrolic 
acid ethyl ester catalyzed by 2 or 3 as initial catalysts provides ethyl
acetoacetate. Mechanism of the catalytic hydration of tetrolic acid ethyl ester
as an alkyne-carboxylic acid ester is discussed based on isotopic labeling
experiments with the Ir-enol and Ir-keto tautomers.

PMID: 19012369  [PubMed]


463. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jan 30;284(5):2706-18. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M808184200. Epub 2008
Nov 14.

Promoter cloning and characterization of the anti-vascular proliferation gene,
R-ras: role of Ets- and Sp-binding motifs.

Xu L(1), Komatsu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Division of Molecular and Cellular Pathology,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

The R-ras gene encodes a small GTPase of the ras family that is closely related
to H-ras and K-ras. Unlike the prototypic ras genes, the disruption of the R-ras 
gene in mice results in enhanced angiogenesis in tumor implants and sustained
neointimal hyperplasia in response to arterial injury, indicating the in vivo
role of R-ras as a negative regulator of vascular proliferation. R-ras is
abundantly expressed in normal mature blood vessels but significantly
down-regulated in pathologically regenerating vasculature. In this study, we
investigated the roles of cis-acting elements in the transcription of the human
R-ras gene, as well as the transcription factors that interact with these
sequences in cultured endothelial cells and arterial smooth muscle cells. The
findings from vascular cells were then compared with findings from epithelial
tumor cells that aberrantly express R-ras. Deletion analyses on 5 kb of
5'-flanking DNA of the human R-ras gene revealed the functional importance of the
region between -727/-476, which contains two Ets and one Sp1 consensus binding
motifs. Mutation analyses of various consensus binding motifs within this region 
suggest both cell type-dependent and -independent regulatory mechanisms for the
R-ras gene transcription. Electrophoretic mobility shift and antibody disruption 
assays demonstrated that an Ets transcription factor family protein, GA-binding
protein (GABP), binds to the R-ras-derived sequence. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analyses determined the association of endogenous GABP as
well as Sp3 proteins with the -727/-476 region of the R-ras promoter in intact
cells grown in culture. Forced expression of GABP significantly enhanced R-ras
mRNA expression level in endothelial cells. These results map the functional
elements in the R-ras promoter sequence and suggest that the GABP may be critical
for transcription of R-ras and for maintenance of normal blood vessel functions
through the regulation of this gene.

PMID: 19011236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2009 May;41(5):1157-64. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2008.10.020. Epub 2008 Oct 28.

The alpha-1-antitrypsin gene promoter in human A549 lung derived cells, and a
novel transcription initiation site.

Morgan K(1), Chappell S, Guetta-Baranés T, Morley S, Kalsheker N.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Medical Sciences, Institute of Genetics, Queen's Medical
Centre, University of Nottingham, Nottingham NG7 2UH, United Kingdom.
Kevin.morgan@nottingham.ac.uk

Alpha-1-antitrypsin (AAT), also called serine proteinase inhibitor A1 (Serpin
A1), is the most abundant serpin in human plasma. A major physiological role of
AAT is to protect the lung from the destructive effects of excess uninhibited
neutrophil elastase. During inflammation, circulating levels of AAT may increase 
twofold-to-threefold as part of the acute-phase response. The liver is the main
contributor to this increase. However, local synthesis may provide an important
mechanism for controlling neutrophil elastase activity at sites of inflammation, 
and previous studies have shown a marked increase in production after cytokine
stimulation. In the current study we report a distinct transcription initiation
site for AAT expression in the lung alveolar epithelial cell line A549, which is 
located nine bases upstream of the previously mapped full-length monocyte
transcription start-site, and show using site-directed mutagenesis that two Sp1
sites and a putative TATA box are functional. EMSA experiments provide evidence
for Sp1 and Sp3 binding to these two Sp1 sites. We have also mapped the minimal
promoter region and a cell-specific element essential for expression in A549
cells, both of which reside in an 865bp fragment upstream of the transcription
start-site. Understanding the mechanisms of AAT gene regulation in a lung-derived
cell line has important implications for understanding the control of localised
lung tissue damage which occurs as a result of excess proteolytic activity.

PMID: 19010440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Chem Commun (Camb). 2008 Nov 30;(44):5779-81. doi: 10.1039/b814166e. Epub 2008
Oct 1.

Rhodium(I)-catalyzed one-pot synthesis of dialkyl ketones from methanol and
alkenes through directed sp3 C-H bond activation of N-methylamine.

Jo EA(1), Lee JH, Jun CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Centre for Bioactive Molecular Hybrid, Yonsei
University, Seoul, 120-749, Korea.

The hydroacylation of methanol with alkenes was developed using a catalytic
system consisting of Rh(I), 2-amino-4-picoline and benzoic acid; the reaction is 
speculated to occur by the initial N-methylation of 2-amino-4-picoline with
methanol, and the subsequent dehydrogenation of the resulting N-methylamine,
followed by double chelation-assisted hydroimination of alkene with the imine to 
give dialkyl ketones after hydrolysis.

PMID: 19009079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Am J Manag Care. 2008 Nov;14(11 Suppl):SP3-4.

Medication access and vulnerable populations: what's changing. Introduction.

Thorpe KE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Policy and Management, Rollins School of Public Health,
Emory University, 1518 Clifton Rd NE, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.
kthorpe@sph.emory.edu

PMID: 18991479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Endocr J. 2009;56(1):131-9. Epub 2008 Nov 8.

Neonatal exposure to diethylstilbestrol alters expression of DNA
methyltransferases and methylation of genomic DNA in the mouse uterus.

Sato K(1), Fukata H, Kogo Y, Ohgane J, Shiota K, Mori C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioenvironmental Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, Japan.

Perinatal exposure to diethylstilbestrol (DES) can have numerous adverse effects 
on the reproductive organs later in life, such as vaginal clear-cell
adenocarcinoma. Epigenetic processes including DNA methylation may be involved in
the mechanisms. We subcutaneously injected DES to neonatal C57BL/6 mice. At days 
5, 14, and 30, expressions of DNA methyltransferases (Dnmts) Dnmt1, Dnmt3a, and
Dnmt3b, and transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 were examined. We also performed
restriction landmark genomic scanning (RLGS) to detect aberrant DNA methylation. 
Real-time RT-PCR revealed that expressions of Dnmt1, Dnmt3b, and Sp3 were
decreased at day 5 in DES-treated mice, and that those of Dnmt1, Dnmt3a, and Sp1 
were also decreased at day 14. RLGS analysis revealed that 5 genomic loci were
demethylated, and 5 other loci were methylated by DES treatment. Two loci were
cloned, and differential DNA methylation was quantified. Our results indicated
that DES altered the expression levels of Dnmts and DNA methylation.

PMID: 18997445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. J Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Jan;42(1):19-33. doi: 10.1677/JME-08-0088. Epub 2008 Oct
24.

Role of SP transcription factors in hormone-dependent modulation of genes in
MCF-7 breast cancer cells: microarray and RNA interference studies.

Wu F(1), Ivanov I, Xu R, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College
Station, Texas 77843, USA.

17beta-estradiol (E(2)) binds estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) in MCF-7 cells and
increases cell proliferation and survival through induction or repression of
multiple genes. ESR1 interactions with DNA-bound specificity protein (SP)
transcription factors is a nonclassical genomic estrogenic pathway and the role
of SP transcription factors in mediating hormone-dependent activation or
repression of genes in MCF-7 cells was investigated by microarrays and RNA
interference. MCF-7 cells were transfected with a nonspecific oligonucleotide or 
a cocktail of small inhibitory RNAs (iSP), which knockdown SP1, SP3, and SP4
proteins, and treated with dimethylsulfoxide or 10 nM E(2) for 6 h. E(2) induced 
62 and repressed 134 genes and the induction or repression was reversed in
approximately 62% of the genes in cells transfected with iSP (ESR1/SP dependent),
whereas hormonal activation or repression of the remaining genes was unaffected
by iSP (SP independent). Analysis of the ESR1/SP-dependent and SP-independent
genes showed minimal overlap with respect to the GO terms (functional processes) 
in genes induced or repressed, suggesting that the different genomic pathways may
contribute independently to the hormone-induced phenotype in MCF-7 cells.

PMCID: PMC2642616
PMID: 18952783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Brain Res. 2008 Dec 30;1246:1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.09.083. Epub 2008 
Oct 11.

Effects of trichostatin A on neuronal mu-opioid receptor gene expression.

Lin YC(1), Flock KE, Cook RJ, Hunkele AJ, Loh HH, Ko JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Seton Hall University, 400 South Orange
Ave., South Orange, NJ 07079, USA.

In this study, we determined the effects of a histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitor, trichostatin A (TSA), on neuronal mu-opioid receptor (MOR) gene
expression using human neuronal NMB cells, endogenously expressing MOR.
Recruitment of two classes of HDAC, HDAC1 and HDAC2, to MOR promoter region in
situ was detected via chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis with NMB
cells. Functional analysis using the luciferase reporter gene system showed that 
TSA induced an approximately 3-fold increase of the promoter activity as compared
to the vehicle treated group. Mutation analysis demonstrated that TSA response
was mediated by both dsDNA (Sp1/Sp3 binding site) and ssDNA (PolyC binding
protein1, PCBP, binding site) elements located in mouse MOR proximal core
promoter region, further suggesting the functional importance of this
cis-element, which shows high sequence homology between human and mouse MOR
genes. ChIP analysis further suggested that TSA enhanced the recruitment of
Sp1/Sp3 and PCBP to the promoter region, whereas no significant changes of total 
proteins were observed in response to TSA using Western blot analysis. Moreover, 
confocal images showed TSA-induced nuclear hot spots of endogenous PCBP in
neuronal cells, whereas no obvious nuclear PCBP hotspot was observed in vehicle
treated cells. Taken together, these results suggested that TSA enhanced neuronal
MOR gene expression at the transcriptional level. RT-PCR analysis further
revealed that TSA also decreased the steady-state level of MOR mRNA in a
time-dependent manner by enhancing its instability. Thus, data suggest that TSA, 
an epigenetic regulator, affects neuronal MOR gene expression at both
transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels.

PMCID: PMC2639711
PMID: 18950606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. J Phys Chem B. 2004 May 20;108(20):6193-6. doi: 10.1021/jp035856f.

New boron nitride whiskers: showing strong ultraviolet and visible light
luminescence.

Zhu YC(1), Bando Y, Xue DF, Sekiguchi T, Golberg D, Xu FF, Liu QL.

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Materials Laboratory, National Institute for Materials Science, 1-1
Namiki, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0044, Japan.

Boron nitride whiskers with a special structure have been synthesized by a
thermal reaction process. The as-prepared BN whiskers have a length of tens of
micrometers and a mean diameter of 500 nm. High-resolution TEM analysis shows
that the as-prepared BN whiskers can be described as a nanofiber-interweaved
network. Infrared and electron energy loss spectra reveal that the BN whiskers
are composed of both sigma-sp2 and sigma-sp3 chemical bonds. The UV-vis
absorption spectrum displays the energy band gap of the BN whiskers and multiple 
fine absorption peaks of the phonon-electron coupling. Both photoluminescence
(PL) and cathodoluminescence (CL) measurements show the specially structured BN
emits strong UV and visible luminescences, which is a promising material for
deep-blue and UV applications.

PMID: 18950100  [PubMed]


471. Chemistry. 2008;14(34):10656-69. doi: 10.1002/chem.200800977.

A theoretical evaluation of the pKHB and DeltaH[symbol: see text]HB hydrogen-bond
scales of nitrogen bases.

Besseau F(1), Graton J, Berthelot M.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Nantes, CNRS, UMR 6230 Chimie Et Interdisciplinarité: Synthèse, 
Analyse, Modélisation (CEISAM), UFR Sciences et Techniques, Nantes, France.

The experimental pKHB hydrogen-bond (HB) basicity scale and the corresponding
DeltaH[symbol: see text]HB enthalpic scale of nitrogen compounds are extended and
analysed in light of simple theoretical descriptors using the B3LYP density
functional method and a medium-size basis set (6-31+G(d,p)).The selected training
set includes 59 monofunctional unhindered nitrogen bases for which homogeneous
and accurate experimental pKHB and DeltaH[symbol: see text]HB data have been
determined by means of the association equilibrium of the bases with a reference 
hydrogen-bond acid, 4-fluorophenol, in CCl4. The three hybridisation states
encountered in the nitrogen atom, sp, sp2 and sp3, are equally represented in
this data set. A proper estimation of their experimental enthalpy (DeltaH[symbol:
see text]HB) is directly attainable from the theoretical enthalpy of the
complexation reaction with hydrogen fluoride (DeltaH[symbol: see text](HF)).
However, a second parameter is required to calculate with good accuracy the
experimental free energy of association represented by pKHB. About 99% of the
variance of the pKHB scale is described by a bilinear equation using the minimum 
electrostatic potential (Vs,min) of the monomer in addition to the interaction
energy (D0(HF). The equations are tested for an external set of 99 additional
compounds including very different nitrogen bases such as ortho-substituted
pyridines, polyazines and azoles.Theoretical calculations give a reliable
estimation of hydrogen-bond basicity provided that the populations of the
different isomers of the bases are taken into account by using the Boltzmann law,
and that a specific halogen-bond interaction with the solvent CCl4 is considered 
for polybasic molecules.The pKHB scale can thus be extended to important classes 
of species experimentally inaccessible in CCl4, to polynitrogen compounds and to 
molecules of biological significance.

PMID: 18942697  [PubMed]


472. Molecules. 2008;13(10):2570-600. doi: 10.3390/molecules13102570.

Recent synthetic approaches toward non-anomeric spiroketals in natural products.

Favre S(1), Vogel P, Gerber-Lemaire S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Glycochemistry and Asymmetric Synthesis, Ecole Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne, Batochime, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.

Many natural products of biological interest contain [6,5]- and [6,6]-spiroketal 
moieties that can adopt various configurations, benefiting or not from anomeric
conformation stabilizing effects. The spiroketal fragments are often important
for the biological activity of the compounds containing them. Most stable
spiroketal stereoisomers, including those benefiting from conformational anomeric
effects (gauche conformers can be more stable than anti conformers because of a
contra-steric stabilizing effect), are obtained easily under acidic conditions
that permit acetal heterolysis (formation of tertiary oxycarbenium ion
intermediates). The synthesis of less stable stereoisomers requires
stereoselective acetal forming reactions that do not permit their equilibration
with their most stable stereoisomers or, in the case of suitably substituted
derivatives, concomitant reactions generating tricyclic products that quench the 
less stable spiroketal conformers. Ingenuous approaches have been recently
developed for the synthesis of naturally occurring [6,6]- and [5,6]-nonanomeric
spiroketals and analogues. The identification of several parameters that can
influence the stereochemical outcome of spirocyclization processes has led to
seminal improvements in the selective preparation of the non-anomeric isomers
that are discussed herein. This review also gives an up-dated view of
conformational anomeric effect which represents a small fraction of the enthalpic
anomeric effect that makes gem-dioxy substituted compounds much more stable that 
their 1,n-dioxy substituted isomers (n > 1). Although models assuming
sp3-hybridized oxygen atoms have been very popular (rabbit ears for the two
non-bonding electron pairs of oxygen atom), sp2-hybridized oxygen atoms are used 
to describe the conformational anomeric effect.

PMID: 18927519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2008;47(47):9112-4. doi: 10.1002/anie.200802654.

[Ni{N(SiMe2CH2PtBu2)2}]+: direct observation of transannular Si-C(sp3) bond
coordination.

Fan H(1), Fullmer BC, Pink M, Caulton KG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Indiana University, 800 E. Kirkwood Avenue,
Bloomington, IN 47405, USA.

PMID: 18925605  [PubMed]


474. Oncogene. 2009 Jan 15;28(2):243-56. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.371. Epub 2008 Oct 13.

HDAC4 represses p21(WAF1/Cip1) expression in human cancer cells through a
Sp1-dependent, p53-independent mechanism.

Mottet D(1), Pirotte S, Lamour V, Hagedorn M, Javerzat S, Bikfalvi A, Bellahcène 
A, Verdin E, Castronovo V.

Author information: 
(1)Metastasis Research Laboratory, GIGA-Cancer (Center for Experimental Cancer
Research), University of Liège, Liège, Belgium.

Cancer cells have complex, unique characteristics that distinguish them from
normal cells, such as increased growth rates and evasion of anti-proliferative
signals. Global inhibition of class I and II histone deacetylases (HDACs) stops
cancer cell proliferation in vitro and has proven effective against cancer in
clinical trials, at least in part, through transcriptional reactivation of the
p21(WAF1/Cip1)gene. The HDACs that regulate p21(WAF1/Cip1) are not fully
identified. Using small interfering RNAs, we found that HDAC4 participates in the
repression of p21(WAF1/Cip1) through Sp1/Sp3-, but not p53-binding sites. HDAC4
interacts with Sp1, binds and reduces histone H3 acetylation at the Sp1/Sp3
binding site-rich p21(WAF1/Cip1) proximal promoter, suggesting a key role for Sp1
in HDAC4-mediated repression of p21(WAF1/Cip1). Induction of p21(WAF1/Cip1)
mediated by silencing of HDAC4 arrested cancer cell growth in vitro and inhibited
tumor growth in an in vivo human glioblastoma model. Thus, HDAC4 could be a
useful target for new anti-cancer therapies based on selective inhibition of
specific HDACs.

PMID: 18850004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Chemistry. 2008;14(33):10364-8. doi: 10.1002/chem.200801728.

Exploring the reactivity of C(sp3)-cyclometalated Ir(III) compounds in hydrogen
transfer reactions.

Azerraf C(1), Gelman D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemistry, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Edmund Safra
Campus, Givat Ram, 91904 Jerusalem, Israel.

The manuscript describes the synthesis and full characterization of a new
PC(sp(3))P-based cyclometalated Ir(III) complex that manifests an exceptional
thermal stability, as well as outstanding reactivity in hydrogen transfer
reactions. The described compound represents the first example of a new family of
stable C(sp(3))-metalated compounds.

PMID: 18844205  [PubMed]


476. Chemistry. 2008;14(33):10201-5. doi: 10.1002/chem.200801317.

Cross-coupling reaction between alcohols through sp3 C-H activation catalyzed by 
a ruthenium/Lewis acid system.

Zhang SY(1), Tu YQ, Fan CA, Jiang YJ, Shi L, Cao K, Zhang E.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Applied Organic Chemistry and Department of Chemistry,
Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, P. R. China.

PMID: 18844197  [PubMed]


477. J Am Chem Soc. 2008 Oct 29;130(43):14058-9. doi: 10.1021/ja807129e. Epub 2008 Oct
4.

Synthesis of beta-, gamma-, and delta-lactams via Pd(II)-catalyzed C-H activation
reactions.

Wasa M(1), Yu JQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey
Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Pd(II)-catalyzed intramolecular amination of sp2 and sp3 C-H bonds are developed 
using a combination of CuCl2 and AgOAc as the oxidant. The reaction protocol
tolerates the presence of a double bond in the substrates. This catalytic
reaction provides practical access to a wide range of beta-, gamma-, and
delta-lactams.

PMID: 18834119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Braz J Biol. 2008 Aug;68(3):519-28.

Patterns of prey selection of Trypoxylon (Trypargilum) lactitarse Saussure
(Hymenoptera: Crabronidae) in southern Brazil.

Buschini ML(1), Borba NA, Brescovit AD.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biologia, Universidade Estadual do Centro Oeste, Guarapuava,
PR, Brazil. isatunes@yahoo.com.br

This study was carried out in the Parque Municipal das Araucárias, in the
municipality of Guarapuava, southern Brazil. A total of 449 T. lactitarse nests
were collected using trap-nests of different diameters. Fifty three species of
spiders belonging to 7 families were captured by T. lactitarse. Araneidae was the
most captured family and has been strongly represented by the genus Eustala.
Through Bray-Curtis's coefficient and the unweighted pair group method average
(UPGMA), the spiders species can be divided into 3 groups: the smaller group
includes the most abundant species (Eustala sp1, Eustala sp2, Acacesia
villalobosi, Alpaida sp1 and Araneus corporosus), the second group includes
species with intermediate abundance (Wagneriana iguape, Araneus omnicolor,
Eustala sp4, Alpaida grayi, Eustala sp3, Larinia t-notata, Mangora sp1 and
Wagneriana iguape), and the third and largest group includes the least abundant
species (Aysha gr. brevimana 1, Eustala sp5, Wagneriana eupalaestra, Alpaida
scriba, Alpaida veniliae, Araneus aff. omnicolor, Araneus sicki, Eustala sp8,
Mangora sp2, Mangora sp3, Wagneriana juquia, Alpaida sp2, Araneus blumenau,
Eustala sp6, Eustala sp7 and Ocrepeira galianoae). Of 2,029 identified spiders,
1,171 were captured in the Araucaria forest, 612 in grassland areas and 246 in
the swamp. Grassland and swamp areas evidenced greater similarity between them
than to the Araucaria Forest, regarding presence-absence of spider species in T. 
lactitarse's diet, as well as regarding species abundance in these habitats. The 
juvenile number (56%) was significantly higher than the female (38%) and male
(6%) percentages.

PMID: 18833472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. J Am Chem Soc. 2008 Oct 29;130(43):14090-1. doi: 10.1021/ja806867p. Epub 2008 Oct
3.

Catalytic intermolecular allylic C-H alkylation.

Young AJ(1), White MC.

Author information: 
(1)Roger Adams Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, University of Illinois,
Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA.

The first electrophilic Pd(II)-catalyzed allylic C H alkylation is reported,
providing a novel method for formation of sp3-sp3 C C bonds directly from C H
bonds. A wide range of aromatic and heteroaromatic linear
(E)-alpha-nitro-arylpentenoates are obtained as single olefin isomers in
excellent yields directly from terminal olefin substrates and methyl
nitroacetate. The use of DMSO as a pi-acidic ligand was found to be crucial for
promoting functionalization of the pi-allylPd intermediate. Products from this
reaction are valuable synthetic intermediates and are readily transformed to
amino esters via selective reduction and optically enriched
alpha,alpha-disubstituted amino acid precursors via asymmetric conjugate
addition.

PMID: 18831588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Cancer Res. 2008 Oct 1;68(19):8173-82. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2290.

Androgenic control of transforming growth factor-beta signaling in prostate
epithelial cells through transcriptional suppression of transforming growth
factor-beta receptor II.

Song K(1), Wang H, Krebs TL, Kim SJ, Danielpour D.

Author information: 
(1)Case Comprehensive Cancer Center Research Laboratories, The Division of
General Medical Sciences-Oncology, Rainbow Babies and Children's Hospital, Case
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

The androgen receptor cross-talks with transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta)
through mechanisms that remain poorly understood. Here we provide strong evidence
that 5alpha-dihydrotestosterone (DHT) intercepts the ability of prostate
epithelial cells to undergo TGF-beta-induced apoptosis, and present a new model
for this androgenic effect. We report that DHT decreases the level of TGF-beta
receptor II (TbetaRII) through a transcriptional mechanism, leading to
suppression of the ability of TGF-beta to down-regulate expression of Bcl-xL and 
cyclin Ds, activate caspase-3, and induce apoptosis. Promoter analysis, DNA
pulldown, and electrophoretic mobility shift assays support that transcriptional 
down-regulation of TbetaRII by DHT occurs through Sp1/Sp3 response elements, with
the binding of Sp1 to the TbetaRII promoter being suppressed by DHT, largely
driven by loss of Sp1 protein and/or activity. These results provide fresh
insight on the mechanism of growth control by androgens and the progression of
prostate cancer to androgen independence. [Cancer Res 2008;68(19):8173-82].

PMCID: PMC2596934
PMID: 18829577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. J Virol. 2008 Dec;82(23):11723-33. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01322-08. Epub 2008 Sep 24.

Cellular transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 suppress varicella-zoster virus
origin-dependent DNA replication.

Khalil MI(1), Hay J, Ruyechan WT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Witebsky Center for Microbial
Pathogenesis and Immunology, University at Buffalo, The State University of New
York, Buffalo, New York 14214, USA.

The varicella-zoster virus (VZV) origin of DNA replication (oriS) contains a
46-bp AT-rich palindrome and three consensus binding sites for the VZV origin
binding protein (OBP) encoded by VZV ORF51. All three OBP binding sites are
upstream of the palindrome in contrast to the sequence of the herpes simplex
virus oriS, which has required OBP binding sites upstream and downstream of the
AT-rich region. We are investigating the roles that sequences downstream of the
palindrome play in VZV oriS-dependent DNA replication. Computer analysis
identified two GC boxes, GC box 1 and GC box 2, in the downstream region which
were predicted to be binding sites for the cellular transcription factor Sp1.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay and supershift assays showed that two
members of the Sp family (Sp1 and Sp3) stably bind to GC box 1, but not to GC box
2. A predicted binding site for the cellular factor Yin Yang 1 (YY1) that
overlaps with GC box 2 was also identified. Supershift and mutational analyses
confirmed the binding of YY1 to this site. Mutation of GC box 1 resulted in loss 
of Sp1 and Sp3 binding and an increase in origin-dependent replication efficiency
in DpnI replication assays. In contrast, mutation of the YY1 site had a
statistically insignificant effect. These results suggest a model where
origin-dependent DNA replication and viral transcription are coupled by the
binding of Sp1 and Sp3 to the downstream region of the VZV replication origin
during lytic infection. They may also have implications regarding establishment
or reactivation of viral latency.

PMCID: PMC2583665
PMID: 18815296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2008 Sep 22;9:126. doi: 10.1186/1471-2474-9-126.

A new tool for mini-open carpal tunnel release - the PSU retractor.

Wongsiri S(1), Suwanno P, Tangtrakulwanich B, Yuenyongviwat V, Wongsiri E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery and Physical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
Prince of Songkla University, Hat Yai, Songkhla 90110, Thailand.
joesunton@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Mini-open carpal tunnel release has become increasingly popular for
the treatment of carpal tunnel surgery. The main advantages are shortening
recovery time and return-to-work time. However, the risk of neurovascular injury 
still remains worrisome.
METHODS: In this study, we developed a new retractor (herein called the PSU
retractor) modified from the widely used Senn retractor, with the aim of
decreasing the risk of neurovascular problems from normal procedure.
3-Dimensional computer design software (SolidWorks Office Premium 2007 SP3.1) was
used to construct a 3-D PSU retractor prototype. An amputated arm from a
30-year-old woman diagnosed as synovial sarcoma at the shoulder was used to test 
the maximal visual length. A mini-surgical incision was performed at 3 cm distal 
to the transverse wrist crease and a tiny flexible ruler was inserted through the
tunnel beneath the skin to measure the maximal visual length.
RESULTS: Our new retractor showed significantly better maximal visual length
compared to the Senn retractor (47.7(8.1) mm vs. 39.2(6.5) mm). In addition, most
assessors expressed a higher satisfaction rate with the PSU retractor than with
the Senn retractor (7.3 (1.9) vs. 6.3 (1.1)).
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, we have developed a promising new retractor using a
computer design program, which appears to be an improvement on the currently
available equipment used for mini-open carpal tunnel surgery. However, further
clinical studies are needed to confirm our initial findings.

PMCID: PMC2556331
PMID: 18808664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Rinsho Byori. 2008 Aug;56(8):698-704.

[Role of resistin in insulin resistance].

[Article in Japanese]

Onuma H(1), Osawa H, Makino H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Genetic Medicine, Ehime University Graduate School
of Medicine, Toon 791-0295.

Insulin resistance is a major cause of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). To
determine the role of human resistin in T2DM, we analyzed single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNP) in the human resistin gene. We found that the G/G genotype of
a resistin SNP at -420 in the promoter region was associated with T2DM (546 cases
and 564 controls). Meta-analysis of 1,888 cases and 1,648 controls confirmed this
association. Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors specifically recognize 420G and
enhance promoter activity in vitro. Resistin SNP-420 determines its monocyte mRNA
and serum resistin levels. In 198 T2DM and 157 controls, fasting serum resistin
levels were higher in subjects with T2DM than the control, and they were higher
in subjects who carried -420G/G genotypes. Multiple regression analysis revealed 
that the SNP-420 genotype was the strongest determinant of serum resistin. The
level of serum resistin is in the order of G/G, G/C and C/C genotypes, starting
with the highest in the 2,078 community-dwelling Japanese subjects. Serum
resistin level was correlated with insulin resistance, lower HDL cholesterol, and
high-sensitivity C-reactive protein in the Japanese general population.
Furthermore, serum resistin level was correlated with the number of
microangiopathies and the accumulation of metabolic syndrome factor in T2DM.
Together, the specific recognition of 420G by Sp1/3 increases human resistin
promoter activity in monocytes, leading to enhanced serum resistin levels,
thereby inducing insulin resistance, T2DM, and its complications.

PMID: 18800626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Blood. 2008 Dec 1;112(12):4729-38. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-05-159269. Epub 2008
Sep 16.

The Glut1 and Glut4 glucose transporters are differentially expressed during
perinatal and postnatal erythropoiesis.

Montel-Hagen A(1), Blanc L, Boyer-Clavel M, Jacquet C, Vidal M, Sitbon M, Taylor 
N.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique Moléculaire de Montpellier, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche, Montpellier, France.

Glucose is a major source of energy for living organisms, and its transport in
vertebrates is a universally conserved property. Of all cell lineages, human
erythrocytes express the highest level of the Glut1 glucose transporter with more
than 200,000 molecules per cell. However, we recently reported that erythrocyte
Glut1 expression is a specific trait of vitamin C-deficient mammalian species,
comprising only higher primates, guinea pigs, and fruit bats. Here, we show that 
in all other tested mammalian species, Glut1 was transiently expressed in
erythrocytes during the neonatal period. Glut1 was up-regulated during the
erythroblast stage of erythroid differentiation and was present on the vast
majority of murine red blood cells (RBCs) at birth. Notably though, Glut1 was not
induced in adult mice undergoing anemia-induced erythropoiesis, and under these
conditions, the up-regulation of a distinct transporter, Glut4, was responsible
for an increased glucose transport. Sp3 and Sp1 transcriptions factors have been 
proposed to regulate Glut1 transcription, and we find that the concomitant
repression of Glut1 and induction of Glut4 was associated with a significantly
augmented Sp3/Sp1 ratio. Glucose transporter expression patterns in mice and
human erythrocytes are therefore distinct. In mice, there is a postnatal switch
from Glut1 to Glut4, with Glut4 further up-regulated under anemic conditions.

PMID: 18796630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Cancer Res. 2008 Sep 15;68(18):7587-96. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0967.

Epigenetic silencing of cell adhesion molecule 1 in different cancer progenitor
cells of transgenic c-Myc and c-Raf mouse lung tumors.

Reamon-Buettner SM(1), Borlak J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, Fraunhofer Institute of
Toxicology and Experimental Medicine, Hannover, Germany.

Understanding molecular mechanisms underlying lung cancer is a prerequisite
toward treatment. To enable mechanistic investigations into the epigenetic
regulation of the tumor suppressor gene cell adhesion molecule 1 (Cadm1) in lung 
cancer progenitor cells, we developed 10 cell lines from single, spontaneously
transformed lung tumor cells isolated from c-Myc and c-Raf double-transgenic
mice. Specifically, we investigated Cadm1 promoter hypermethylation, which was
significantly induced in transgenic transformed cells. Analysis of 69 CpGs
displayed differential methylation pattern between and within progenitor cell
lines, and the degree of methylation correlated well with transcriptional
repression. Indeed, restoration of Cadm1 gene expression was achieved by
treatment with the experimental demethylating drug 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine.
Furthermore, methylation of core CpGs in the binding sites of Sp1, Sp3, and zinc 
finger 5 along the promoter region of Cadm1 abrogated DNA-protein binding.
Treatment with mithramycin A, an inhibitor of Sp1 or Sp3 binding, resulted in
reduction of Cadm1 gene expression, therefore suggesting a potential role of
Sp1/Sp3 in Cadm1 regulation. Identifying molecular rules for the epigenetic
control of tumor suppressor genes enables mechanistic insights into lung cancer
growth and opportunities for novel therapies.

PMID: 18794147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Cell Signal. 2008 Dec;20(12):2296-301. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2008.08.016. Epub
2008 Aug 28.

The interferon-gamma-mediated inhibition of lipoprotein lipase gene transcription
in macrophages involves casein kinase 2- and phosphoinositide-3-kinase-mediated
regulation of transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3.

Harris SM(1), Harvey EJ, Hughes TR, Ramji DP.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiff School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Museum Avenue, Cardiff CF10
3US, UK.

The mechanisms underlying transcriptional inhibition by interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma) are poorly understood despite the existence of a large number of
genes that are regulated in this manner and the key role of this cytokine in
inflammatory disorders such as atherosclerosis. We have previously identified a
novel mechanism for transcriptional inhibition by IFN-gamma that involves a
reduction in the binding of transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 to regulatory
sequences in the lipoprotein lipase (LPL) gene. In the present study, we have
investigated the signalling pathways that impact on the IFN-gamma-mediated
regulation of Sp1/Sp3 binding and LPL gene transcription in macrophages. The
IFN-gamma-mediated inhibition of LPL promoter activity was prevented by
expression of dominant negative forms of casein kinase 2 (CK2) and protein kinase
B (PKB), a key downstream component of the phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K)
pathway. IFN-gamma activated both the catalytic subunits of CK2 without affecting
their expression. CK2 interacted with both Sp1 and Sp3 and this association was
increased by IFN-gamma. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed that a
CK2-mediated phosphorylation of either cellular extracts or recombinant Sp1
reduced binding to the regulatory region in the LPL gene. The action of PKB was
potentially mediated through mammalian target for rapamycin proteins. Taken
together, these results suggest a key role for CK2 and PI3K signalling pathways
in the IFN-gamma-mediated inhibition of macrophage LPL gene transcription through
the regulation of Sp1/Sp3 binding.

PMCID: PMC2586094
PMID: 18793716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Am J Nephrol. 2009;29(3):203-12. doi: 10.1159/000155658. Epub 2008 Sep 15.

Functional characterization of the regulatory region of human CD2-associated
protein promoter in HEK 293 cells.

Su XM(1), Ren W, Lu C, Chen JQ, Wu SH, Chen RH, Zhou GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, China.

BACKGROUND: The mRNA of CD2-associated protein (CD2AP) was found to be changed in
glomerular diseases. The promoter plays an important role in the regulation of
gene expression, but the characterization of the human CD2AP promoter has not
been systematically analyzed in HEK 293 cells.
AIMS: To analyze in detail the promoter of human CD2AP in HEK 293 cells.
METHODS: The transcriptional initiation sites were identified by 5' RACE.
Promoter activities were detected by series deletion and mutational luciferase
analyses.
RESULTS: Multiple transcriptional start sites were identified. Progressive
deletion analysis from both 5' and 3' ends revealed two kinds of promoter
activity. One basic promoter activity was located within 500 bp upstream of ATG. 
Fragments of further upstream 100 bp increased the promoter activity 5-fold. Two 
Sp1/Sp3 sites were in this region. Mutations of these two sites reduced the
transcriptional activity by 50%. Sp1 increased the activity, whereas Sp3
decreased the activity. Deletion of 9 single nucleotide polymorphism sites and 3 
Lmx1b sites did not change the transcriptional activity.
CONCLUSION: Sp1/Sp3 binding sites play a critical role in the CD2AP regulation.
These findings should facilitate studies on the clinical mutational and
polymorphism analysis.

2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18791326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2008 Nov 25;295(1-2):10-7. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2008.08.016.
Epub 2008 Aug 23.

Molecular and functional characterization of the murine ldh2 promoter region:
Sp-binding GC-box domains are the key cis-elements regulating ldh2 gene
expression during spermatogenesis.

Chen X(1), Yang J, Sung DY, Thompson W, Walker W, Thomas K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Morehouse School of Medicine, Atlanta,
GA 30310, United States.

The goal of the present study was to elucidate the specific transcriptional
mechanisms that regulate ldh2 gene expression during the early stages of
spermatogenesis. DNA sequence analysis of the 1.0-kb ldh2 promoter region
directly upstream of the transcriptional start site indicated the presence of
three SP-protein binding GC-box elements and the absence of TATA and CAAT boxes. 
Functional characterization studies of the mouse ldh2 promoter were performed in 
the SV40 transformed mouse spermatogonial cell line, GC-1 spg.
Transfection/transient expression studies using full-length and truncated ldh2
promoter/luciferase reporter constructs revealed that all three of the SP-binding
cis-regulatory GC-box elements are required for optimal ldh2 promoter activity.
Additional site-directed mutagenesis studies indicated that the two most proximal
GC-box sites play essential regulatory roles in mediating basal ldh2 promoter
activity. These studies suggest that the expression of the ldh2 gene in
spermatogonia and early spermatocytes are regulated by SP-mediated
transcriptional mechanisms.

PMID: 18790003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. J Mol Endocrinol. 2008 Nov;41(5):263-75. doi: 10.1677/JME-08-0103. Epub 2008 Sep 
4.

Non-classical genomic estrogen receptor (ER)/specificity protein and
ER/activating protein-1 signaling pathways.

Safe S(1), Kim K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas 77843-4466, USA. ssafe@cvm.tamu.edu

Erratum in
    J Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Apr;42(4):359. Kim, Kyoungkim [corrected to Kim,
Kyounghyun].

17beta-estradiol binds to the estrogen receptor (ER) to activate gene expression 
or repression and this involves both genomic (nuclear) and non-genomic
(extranuclear) pathways. Genomic pathways include the classical interactions of
ligand-bound ER dimers with estrogen-responsive elements in target gene
promoters. ER-dependent activation of gene expression also involves DNA-bound ER 
that subsequently interacts with other DNA-bound transcriptions factors and
direct ER-transcription factor (protein-protein) interactions where ER does not
bind promoter DNA. Ligand-induced activation of ER/specificity protein (Sp) and
ER/activating protein-1 [(AP-1); consisting of jun/fos] complexes are important
pathways for modulating expression of a large number of genes. This review
summarizes some of the characteristics of ER/Sp- and ER/AP-1-mediated
transactivation, which are dependent on ligand structure, cell context,
ER-subtype (ERalpha and ERbeta), and Sp protein (SP1, SP3, and SP4) and
demonstrates that this non-classical genomic pathway is also functional in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2582054
PMID: 18772268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. DNA Cell Biol. 2008 Nov;27(11):589-600. doi: 10.1089/dna.2008.0766.

Regulation of the mouse Treacher Collins syndrome homolog (Tcof1) promoter
through differential repression of constitutive expression.

Shows KH(1), Shiang R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Molecular Genetics, Virginia Commonwealth University
School of Medicine, Richmond, Virginia 23298-0033, USA. khshows@vcu.edu

Treacher Collins syndrome is an autosomal-dominant mandibulofacial dysostosis
caused by haploinsufficiency of the TCOF1 gene product treacle. Mouse Tcof1
protein is approximately 61% identical and 71% similar to treacle, and
heterozygous knockout of Tcof1 causes craniofacial malformation. Tcof1 expression
is high in developing neural crest, but much lower in other tissues. To
investigate this dual regulation, highly conserved regions upstream of TCOF1
homologs were tested through deletion and mutation reporter assays, and conserved
predicted transcription factor binding sites were assessed through chromatin
binding studies. Assays were performed in mouse P19 embryonic carcinoma cells and
in HEK293 cells to determine differential activation in cell types at different
stages of differentiation. Binding of Cebpb, Zfp161, and Sp1 transcription
factors was specific to the Tcof1 regulatory region in P19 cells. The Zfp161
binding site demonstrated P19 cell-specific repression, while the Sp1/Sp3
candidate site demonstrated HEK293 cell-specific activation. Moreover, presence
of c-myb and Zfp161 transcripts was specific to P19 cells. A minimal promoter
fragment from -253 to +43 bp directs constitutive expression in both cell types, 
and dual regulation of Tcof1 appears to be through differential repression of
this minimal promoter. The CpG island at the transcription start site remains
unmethylated in P19 cells, 11.5 dpc mouse embryonic tissue, and adult mouse ear, 
which supports constitutive activation of the Tcof1 promoter.

PMCID: PMC2925028
PMID: 18771418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Dalton Trans. 2008 Sep 28;(36):4893-902. doi: 10.1039/b807830k. Epub 2008 Jul 30.

Unprecedented long-range 1,7-bromination in gold complexes of N-(aryl)imino
functionalized N-heterocyclic carbenes.

Samantaray MK(1), Pang K, Shaikh MM, Ghosh P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Powai, Mumbai,
400 076, India.

An unique long-range 1,7-bromination reaction is observed in gold(III) complexes 
of N-(aryl)imino functionalized N-heterocyclic carbene with the bromination
occurring at two different carbon (sp2 and sp3) centers spatially separated by
ca. 6.4 A but existing in extended conjugation to each other. In particular, the 
unusual distant 1,7-brominated gold(III) complexes
[1-R-3-{N-(p-bromo-2,6-di-i-propylphenylimino)-2-phenyl-1-bromoethyl}imidazol-2-y
lidene]AuBr3 [R = Me (1d), i-Pr (2d), t-Bu (3d), -CH2Ph (4d)] were synthesized
cleanly at room temperature under ambient conditions from the reactions of
molecular bromine with the gold(I) complexes
[1-R-3-{N-(2,6-di-i-propylphenylimino)-2-phenylethyl}imidazol-2-ylidene]AuCl [R =
Me (1c), i-Pr (2c), t-Bu (3c), -CH2Ph (4c)]. All of the 1,7-bromination products 
(1d, 2d, 3d and 4d) have been structurally verified by X-ray diffraction studies.

PMID: 18766222  [PubMed]


492. Phys Rev Lett. 2008 Aug 15;101(7):077401. Epub 2008 Aug 12.

Direct observation of optically induced transient structures in graphite using
ultrafast electron crystallography.

Raman RK(1), Murooka Y, Ruan CY, Yang T, Berber S, Tománek D.

Author information: 
(1)Physics and Astronomy Department, Michigan State University, East Lansing,
Michigan 48824-2320, USA.

We use ultrafast electron crystallography to study structural changes induced in 
graphite by a femtosecond laser pulse. At moderate fluences of < or =21 mJ/cm2,
lattice vibrations are observed to thermalize on a time scale of approximately 8 
ps. At higher fluences approaching the damage threshold, lattice vibration
amplitudes saturate. Following a marked initial contraction, graphite is driven
nonthermally into a transient state with sp3-like character, forming interlayer
bonds. Using ab initio density functional calculations, we trace the governing
mechanism back to electronic structure changes following the photoexcitation.

PMID: 18764578  [PubMed]


493. Phys Rev Lett. 2008 Aug 15;101(7):075703. Epub 2008 Aug 14.

Tetrahedral clustering in molten lithium under pressure.

Tamblyn I(1), Raty JY, Bonev SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, B3H 3J5,
Canada.

A series of electronic and structural transitions are predicted in molten lithium
from first principles. A new phase with tetrahedral local order characteristic of
sp3 bonded materials and poor electrical conductivity is found at pressures above
150 GPa and temperatures as high as 1000 K. Despite the lack of covalent bonding,
weakly bound tetrahedral clusters with finite lifetimes are predicted to exist.
The stabilization of this phase in lithium involves a unique mechanism of strong 
electron localization in interstitial regions and interactions among core
electrons. The calculations provide evidence for anomalous melting above 20 GPa, 
with a melting temperature decreasing below 300 K, and point towards the
existence of novel low-symmetry crystalline phases.

PMID: 18764552  [PubMed]


494. PLoS Genet. 2008 Aug 22;4(8):e1000162. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000162.

An Sp1/Sp3 binding polymorphism confers methylation protection.

Boumber YA(1), Kondo Y, Chen X, Shen L, Guo Y, Tellez C, Estécio MR, Ahmed S,
Issa JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Leukemia, MD Anderson Cancer Center, University of Texas,
Houston, Texas, United States of America.

Hundreds of genes show aberrant DNA hypermethylation in cancer, yet little is
known about the causes of this hypermethylation. We identified RIL as a frequent 
methylation target in cancer. In search for factors that influence RIL
hypermethylation, we found a 12-bp polymorphic sequence around its transcription 
start site that creates a long allele. Pyrosequencing of homozygous tumors
revealed a 2.1-fold higher methylation for the short alleles (P<0.001). Bisulfite
sequencing of cancers heterozygous for RIL showed that the short alleles are
3.1-fold more methylated than the long (P<0.001). The comparison of expression
levels between unmethylated long and short EBV-transformed cell lines showed no
difference in expression in vivo. Electrophorectic mobility shift assay showed
that the inserted region of the long allele binds Sp1 and Sp3 transcription
factors, a binding that is absent in the short allele. Transient transfection of 
RIL allele-specific transgenes showed no effects of the additional Sp1 site on
transcription early on. However, stable transfection of methylation-seeded
constructs showed gradually decreasing transcription levels from the short allele
with eventual spreading of de novo methylation. In contrast, the long allele
showed stable levels of expression over time as measured by luciferase and
approximately 2-3-fold lower levels of methylation by bisulfite sequencing
(P<0.001), suggesting that the polymorphic Sp1 site protects against
time-dependent silencing. Our finding demonstrates that, in some genes,
hypermethylation in cancer is dictated by protein-DNA interactions at the
promoters and provides a novel mechanism by which genetic polymorphisms can
influence an epigenetic state.

PMCID: PMC2515197
PMID: 18725933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Chem Commun (Camb). 2008 Jun 28;(24):2777-8. doi: 10.1039/b802185f. Epub 2008 Apr
8.

Facile intramolecular C(sp3)-H bond activation with PdII.

Bröring M(1), Kleeberg C.

Author information: 
(1)Fachbereich Chemie, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Hans-Meerwein-Strasse, 35043
Marburg, Germany. Martin.Broering@chemie.uni-marburg.de

The treatment of bis(4-tert-butylthiazolyl)isoindoline (4-tBuBTI) with palladium 
acetate results in the exclusive formation of an organometallic PdII compound
with C-H activated t-butyl group and a hemilabile S-coordinated thiazole donor in
cis-position.

PMID: 18688307  [PubMed]


496. Ultramicroscopy. 2008 Oct;108(11):1484-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ultramic.2008.04.097.
Epub 2008 Jun 26.

Analysis of defects on BN nano-structures using high-resolution electron
microscopy and density-functional calculations.

Bengu E(1), Marks LD, Ovali RV, Gulseren O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Institute of Materials Science and Nanotechnology,
Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey. bengu@fen.bilkent.edu.tr

Cubic boron nitride (c-BN) nucleation takes place on hexagonal boron nitride
(h-BN) layers growing perpendicular to the substrate surface during thin film
synthesis. Studies focused on the nucleation of the cubic phase suggest the
possibility that transient phases and/or defects on these h-BN structures have a 
role in sp3-bonded cubic phase nucleation. In this study, we have investigated
the nature, energetics, and structure of several possible defects on BN basal
planes, including point defects, 4-, and 5-fold BN rings, that may possibly match
the experimentally observed transient phase fine structure. TEM image
observations are used to build approximate atomic models for the proposed
structures, and DFT calculations are used to relax these structures while
minimizing their respective total energies. These optimized atomic geometries are
then used to simulate TEM images, which are compared to the experimentally
observed structures. Data from DFT calculations and analysis of simulated images 
from the proposed atomic structures suggest that 4-fold BN rings are more likely 
to exist on the transient phase possibly leading to c-BN nucleation.

PMID: 18687526  [PubMed]


497. Rev Sci Instrum. 2008 Jul;79(7):073905. doi: 10.1063/1.2949128.

Direct-current cathodic vacuum arc system with magnetic-field mechanism for
plasma stabilization.

Zhang HS(1), Komvopoulos K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of California, Berkeley,
California 94720, USA.

Filtered cathodic vacuum arc (FCVA) deposition is characterized by plasma beam
directionality, plasma energy adjustment via substrate biasing, macroparticle
filtering, and independent substrate temperature control. Between the two modes
of FCVA deposition, namely, direct current (dc) and pulsed arc, the dc mode
yields higher deposition rates than the pulsed mode. However, maintaining the dc 
arc discharge is challenging because of its inherent plasma instabilities. A
system generating a special configuration of magnetic field that stabilizes the
dc arc discharge during film deposition is presented. This magnetic field is also
part of the out-of-plane magnetic filter used to focus the plasma beam and
prevent macroparticle film contamination. The efficiency of the
plasma-stabilizing magnetic-field mechanism is demonstrated by the deposition of 
amorphous carbon (a-C) films exhibiting significantly high hardness and
tetrahedral carbon hybridization (sp3) contents higher than 70%. Such
high-quality films cannot be produced by dc arc deposition without the
plasma-stabilizing mechanism presented in this study.

PMID: 18681714  [PubMed]


498. Adv Synth Catal. 2008 Aug 4;350(11-12):1701-1711. Epub 2008 Jul 9.

Studies Toward the Synthesis of (-)-Zampanolide: Preparation of the Macrocyclic
Core.

Troast DM(1), Yuan J, Porco JA Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Center for Chemical Methodology and Library
Development, Boston University, 590 Commonwealth Avenue, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Studies towards the synthesis of the macrocyclic core of (-)-zampanolide are
reported. The synthetic approach features a one-pot reduction/vinylogous aldol
reaction for construction of the C15-C20 fragment, an intramolecular
silyl-modified Sakurai (ISMS) reaction for construction of the
2,6-cis-disubstituted exo-methylene pyran subunit, and use of an sp(2)-sp(3)
Stille reaction for macrocyclization.

PMCID: PMC3612024
PMID: 23543877  [PubMed]


499. Nat Prod Rep. 2008 Aug;25(4):696-718. doi: 10.1039/b803784c. Epub 2008 Jun 23.

Knipholone and related 4-phenylanthraquinones: structurally, pharmacologically,
and biosynthetically remarkable natural products.

Bringmann G(1), Mutanyatta-Comar J, Knauer M, Abegaz BM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Organic Chemistry, University of Würzburg, Am Hubland, 97074
Würzburg, Germany. bringman@chemie.uni-wuerzburg.de

This review gives the first comprehensive overview of the rapidly emerging young 
class of 4-phenylanthraquinones isolated from the three genera Bulbine,
Bulbinella, and Kniphofia, all from the plant family Aphodelaceae: their
occurrence, structural elucidation (with particular emphasis on the phenomenon of
axial chirality), partial and total synthesis, their pharmacological (i.a.,
antimalarial and antitumoral) activities, and their biosynthetic origin (from
acetate units). Particular emphasis is given to the stereostructure of
knipholone, the most abundant of these naturally occurring phenylanthraquinones. 
The most recent highlight is the discovery of the first dimeric representatives, 
named joziknipholones, involving interesting phenomena of--partially or fully
restricted--rotation at the sp2-sp2 and sp2-sp3 axes.

PMID: 18663391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Org Lett. 2008 Sep 4;10(17):3661-3. doi: 10.1021/ol8012588. Epub 2008 Jul 29.

Copper-catalyzed oxidative sp3 C-H bond arylation with aryl boronic acids.

Baslé O(1), Li CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, McGill University, 801 Sherbrooke Street West,
Montreal, Quebec H3A 2K6, Canada.

An efficient method was developed for arylation of sp(3) C-H bonds using copper
bromide as catalyst in absence of directing group with arylboronic acids. The
oxidative arylation provides easy access to biologically active
tetrahydroisoquinoline derivatives and can either use peroxide or molecular
oxygen as oxidant.

PMID: 18662002  [PubMed]



61. J Org Chem. 2008 Mar 21;73(6):2432-4. doi: 10.1021/jo702457t. Epub 2008 Feb 16.

Synthesis of cyclic thioethers through tandem C(sp3)-S and C(sp2)-S bond
formations from alpha,beta'-dichloro vinyl ketones.

Oh K(1), Kim H, Cardelli F, Bwititi T, Martynow AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Indiana University Purdue
University Indianapolis, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA. oh@chem.iupui.edu

The synthesis of 5- to 8-memebered cyclic thioethers 4 has been achieved through 
a simple two-step sequence. The present methodology utilizes the facile
Friedel-Crafts acylation of terminal alkynes 1 with acid chlorides 2 followed by 
tandem C(sp(3))-S and C(sp(2))-S bond formations with NaSH.xH(2)O.

PMID: 18278938  [PubMed]


62. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2008 Mar;44(3):510-9. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2007.12.008. Epub 
2008 Jan 17.

Fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 gene expression is required for cardiomyocyte
proliferation and is repressed by Sp3.

Seyed M(1), Dimario JX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, The Chicago Medical School, Rosalind
Franklin University of Medicine and Science, 3333 Green Bay Road, North Chicago, 
Illinois 60064, USA.

Fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1) is the only high-affinity FGFR in the
vertebrate myocardium. FGFR1 is a tyrosine kinase receptor and has a
non-redundant role in proliferation and differentiation of cardiomyocytes during 
embryogenesis. Results presented here demonstrate that FGFR1 gene expression
declines as neonatal cardiomyocytes develop into adult cardiomyocytes.
Furthermore, silencing FGFR1 gene expression reduced neonatal cardiomyocyte
proliferation, indicating that FGFR1 gene expression is required for the optimal 
proliferative capacity of cardiomyocytes. To determine the mechanism that governs
FGFR1 gene expression in cardiomyocytes, sequence analysis of the proximal mouse 
FGFR1 promoter identified a potential binding site for Sp transcription factors. 
Mutation of this site increased FGFR1 promoter activity compared to the wild-type
promoter, indicating the presence of a negative transcriptional regulator of the 
FGFR1 promoter at this site in cardiomyocytes. Sp3 expression in neonatal
cardiomyocytes and Drosophila SL2 cells reduced FGFR1 promoter activity in a
dose-dependent manner. Western blots and immunocytochemistry indicated that Sp3
was present in the nuclear and cytoplasmic compartments of neonatal
cardiomyocytes. Chromatin-immunoprecipitation studies verified that endogenous
Sp3 in cardiomyocytes interacts with the FGFR1 promoter. Transient
chromatin-immunoprecipitation studies using wild-type and mutated FGFR1 promoter 
constructs in SL2 cells identified the specific Sp3 binding site within the FGFR1
promoter. These studies implicate Sp3 as a negative transcriptional regulator of 
FGFR1 promoter activity in cardiomyocytes and as a suppressor of cardiomyocyte
proliferation.

PMID: 18275970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008 May;93(5):1915-23. doi: 10.1210/jc.2007-1536. Epub 
2008 Feb 12.

Retinoic acid (RA) regulates 17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2
expression in endometrium: interaction of RA receptors with specificity protein
(SP) 1/SP3 for estradiol metabolism.

Cheng YH(1), Yin P, Xue Q, Yilmaz B, Dawson MI, Bulun SE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Biology Research, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Northwestern University, 303 E. Superior Street, Chicago, IL 60611,
USA. y-cheng@northwestern.edu

CONTEXT: The enzyme 17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 (HSD17B2) exerts a
local antiestrogenic effect by metabolizing biologically active estradiol to
inactive estrone in endometrial epithelial cells. Retinoic acid (RA) induces
HSD17B2 expression, but the underlying mechanism is not known.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to elucidate the molecular mechanisms responsible
for HSD17B2 expression in human endometrial cells.
METHOD: Human endometrial Ishikawa and RL95-2 cell lines were cultured in the
presence or absence of RA to analyze endogenous HSD17B2 expression, transcription
factor complex formation, and promoter activity.
RESULTS: RA induced HSD17B2 mRNA levels in a dose- and time-dependent manner in
endometrial cells. The RA antagonist ANG11273 abolished RA-induced HSD17B2
expression. Small interfering RNA ablation of RA receptor (RAR)alpha or retinoid 
X receptor (RXR)alpha completely blocked RA-induced HSD17B2 gene expression.
Analysis of serial deletion and site-directed mutants of the HSD17B2 promoter
fused to a reporter gene indicated that RA induction requires a cis-regulatory
sequence that binds the specificity protein (SP) class of transcription factors. 
Chromatin-immunoprecipitation-PCR and gel-shift assays showed that
RARalpha/RXRalpha and SP1/SP3 interact with this HSD17B2 promoter sequence. Small
interfering RNA ablation of SP1 and SP3 expression markedly decreased HSD17B2
basal expression and blocked RA-induced expression. Finally,
immunoprecipitationimmunoblotting demonstrated RA-induced interactions between
RARalpha/RXRalpha and SP1/SP3 in intact endometrial cells.
CONCLUSIONS: In endometrial epithelial cells, RA stimulates formation of a
multimeric complex comprised of RARalpha/RXRalpha tethered to transcription
factors SP1 and SP3 on the HSD17B2 promoter. Assembly of this transcriptional
complex is necessary for RA induction of HSD17B2 expression and may be an
important mechanism for local estradiol inactivation in the endometrium.

PMCID: PMC2386682
PMID: 18270252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Mol Endocrinol. 2008 Feb;40(2):75-91. doi: 10.1677/JME-07-0108.

Identification of transcriptional regulatory elements in the human somatostatin
receptor sst2 promoter and regions including estrogen response element half-site 
for estrogen activation.

Kimura N(1), Takamatsu N, Yaoita Y, Osamura RY, Kimura N.

Author information: 
(1)Tokyo Metropolitan Institute for Neuroscience, Tokyo Metropolitan Organization
for Medical Research, 2-6 Musashidai, Fuchu, Tokyo 183-8526, Japan.

The somatostatin receptor subtype 2 (sst2) mediates inhibition of hormone
secretion and cell proliferation, and modulates neurotransmission. Its expression
is widespread in various normal tissues and many malignant cells, and is
up-regulated by estrogen in breast cancer cells. This study was undertaken to
investigate molecular mechanism of transcriptional regulation of the human sst2
gene, for which an additional exon (exon 1) in the 5'-untranslated region was
recently found. Transient transfection and mutational analysis showed that the
immediate 5'-upstream region containing two Sp1 (-54/-45 and -88/-79) and an
ATF/CRE (-69/-62) sites provided full promoter activity. An EMSA together with
transfection analysis in Sp1-deficient Drosophila Schneider line (SL2) cells
showed that Sp1 acted on the proximal Sp1 site, whereas Sp3, Sp1, and Sp2 did on 
the distal Sp1 site. Activating transcription factor-2 (ATF)-2, c-Jun, and cyclic
AMP response element-binding protein (CREB) interacted with the ATF/CRE site.
Transcriptional activation by estrogen occurred through two different regions;
one included these proximal elements and the other existed in the upstream region
containing estrogen response element (ERE) half-site (-348/-344) and GC-rich
sequence (-447/-414). This upstream estrogen responsiveness was observed in a
human breast cancer T47D cell, but not in GH(3) or estrogen receptor alpha
(ERalpha) -expressing HeLa cells, and was potentiated by overexpression of
ERalpha or ERbeta, whose binding to the ERE half-site was verified by EMSAs. A
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay suggested that ERalpha was recruited to the
ERE half-site after estrogen treatment in T47D cells. The present results should 
provide a molecular basis for transcriptional regulation in a variety of
physiological and pathological contexts of sst2-expressing tissues.

PMID: 18234910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Phys Rev Lett. 2008 Jan 18;100(2):026101. Epub 2008 Jan 14.

Bond-counting rule for carbon and its application to the roughness of diamond
(001).

Yang HX(1), Xu LF, Fang Z, Gu CZ, Zhang SB.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics, Institute of
Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, P.O. Box 603, Beijing 100080, China.

Despite that carbon is tetravalent identical to silicon, first-principles
calculations reveal that stable step structures on diamond (001) are entirely
different from those on silicon. Moreover, pristine Si(001) is flat; pristine
diamond (001) could be rough due to negative step formation energies. A generic
bond-counting rule is established, which should apply to most carbon structures
where sp2 and sp3 hybrids coexist: e.g., it provides a qualitative account of the
step energy order without detailed calculation. Our findings agree with
experimental observations.

PMID: 18232887  [PubMed]


66. Ther Drug Monit. 2008 Feb;30(1):16-22. doi: 10.1097/FTD.0b013e318161a21a.

Characterization of the inosine triphosphatase (ITPA) gene: haplotype structure, 
haplotype-phenotype correlation and promoter function.

von Ahsen N(1), Oellerich M, Armstrong VW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, University of Göttingen, Germany.
nahsen@gwdg.de

Inosine triphosphatase (ITPA) cleaves phosphate residues from inosine
triphosphate (ITP) and deoxy ITP (dITP), thereby recovering inosine
monophosphate, which is a substrate for further purine nucleotide pathways.
Deficient ITPA activity leads to intracellular accumulation of ITP/dITP and
would, under thiopurine therapy, lead to accumulation of unusual thio-inosine
metabolites (thio-ITP) with the potential for adverse metabolic effects. ITPA is 
a promising candidate for a more comprehensive understanding of thiopurine
pharmacogenetics. We therefore studied the haplotype structure,
haplotype-phenotype association, and promoter function of ITPA in a Western
European population.ITPA haplotyping was performed based on haplotype tagging
SNPs (selected from HapMap data) in healthy 130 controls. Haplotypes were
reconstructed, and the haplotype-phenotype association was assessed by haplotype 
trend regression. A 1.5 kb upstream region and stepwise deletions thereof were
tested for promoter activity in reporter gene assays in HepG2 and CCRF-CEM cells.
Transcription factor binding (Sp1, Sp3) to the proximal promoter region was
studied by chromatin immunoprecipitation. Among haplotypes with a frequency
greater than 0.01, we did not find any new low-activity haplotypes besides those 
carrying 94C>A or IVS2 + 21A>C variants. Two promoter SNPs had no influence on
promoter activity. An approximately 200 bp sized GC-rich proximal promoter region
was sufficient to fully drive reporter gene activity. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation showed binding of Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors to this
region. Only the two haplotypes carrying 94C>A or IVS2 + 21A>C were associated
with reduced enzyme activity. The gene promoter is associated with a CpG island
and driven by Sp-family transcription factors. There was no evidence for
functional promoter SNPs, and it is suggested that only SNPs within the very
proximal promoter region (approximately 200 bp) have the potential to be
functionally significant.

PMID: 18223458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Am Chem Soc. 2008 Feb 20;130(7):2174-5. doi: 10.1021/ja7107323. Epub 2008 Jan
26.

Direct C(sp3)-O reductive elimination of olefin oxides from Pt(IV)-oxetanes
prepared by aerobic oxidation of Pt(II) olefin derivatives (olefin =
cis-cyclooctene, norbornene).

Khusnutdinova JR(1), Newman LL, Zavalij PY, Lam YF, Vedernikov AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Maryland, College
Park, Maryland 20742, USA.

PMID: 18220400  [PubMed]


68. Biochem J. 2008 May 15;412(1):123-30. doi: 10.1042/BJ20071440.

Growth-dependent repression of human adenine nucleotide translocator-2 (ANT2)
transcription: evidence for the participation of Smad and Sp family proteins in
the NF1-dependent repressor complex.

Luciakova K(1), Kollarovic G, Barath P, Nelson BD.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Vlarska 7, 83391
Bratislava, Slovak Republic. Katarina.Luciakova@savba.sk

NF1 (nuclear factor 1) binds to two upstream elements of the human ANT2 (adenine 
nucleotide translocator-2) promoter and actively represses expression of the gene
in growth-arrested diploid skin fibroblasts [Luciakova, Barath, Poliakova,
Persson and Nelson (2003) J. Biol. Chem. 278, 30624-30633]. ChIP (chromatin
immunoprecipitation) and co-immunoprecipitation analyses of nuclear extracts from
growth-arrested and growth-activated diploid cells demonstrate that NF1, when
acting as a repressor, is part of a multimeric complex that also includes Smad
and Sp-family proteins. This complex appears to be anchored to both the upstream 
NF1-repressor elements and the proximal promoter, Sp1-dependent activation
elements in growth-arrested cells. In growth-activated cells, the repressor
complex dissociates and NF1 leaves the promoter. As revealed by
co-immunoprecipitation experiments, NF1-Smad4-Sp3 complexes are present in
nuclear extracts only from growth-inhibited cells, suggesting that the
growth-state-dependent formation of these complexes is not an ANT2
promoter-specific event. Consistent with the role of Smad proteins in the
repression complex, TGF-beta (transforming growth factor-beta) can fully repress 
ANT2 transcription in normally growing fibroblasts. Finally, pull-down
experiments of in vitro transcribed/translated NF1 isoforms by GST (glutathione
transferase)-Smad and GST-Smad MH fusion proteins indicate direct physical
interactions between members of the two families. These findings suggest a
possible functional relationship between the NF1 and Smad proteins that has not
been previously observed.

PMID: 18215124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Cell Res. 2008 Feb;18(2):302-10. doi: 10.1038/cr.2008.10.

Involvement of Sp1/Sp3 in the activation of the GATA-1 erythroid promoter in K562
cells.

Hou CH(1), Huang J, He QY, Zhang CN, Zhang XJ, Qian RL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of
Sciences, 320 Yueyang Road, Shanghai 200031, China.

GATA-1 is a hematopoietic transcription factor that is essential for the terminal
maturation of proerythroblasts, megakaryocytic cells and mast cells. The
erythroid-specific promoter of the human GATA-1 gene directs the high expression 
of a reporter gene in K562 cells. Multiple putative transcription factor binding 
sites were identified in the promoter from the -860 to the -1 base pair (bp). For
a better understanding of the transcriptional control of human GATA-1 gene
expression, we tested the transcriptional activity of a series of deletions from 
the 5' end of the 860-bp promoter. A region between -221 and -128 bp retains most
of the transcriptional activity of the full-length promoter. Deletion of the
CGCCC box at -195 bp reduced reporter gene activity to 60.4%. Further deletion of
the CACCC box at -173 bp nearly abolished reporter gene expression, indicating
that the CACCC box is more critical. In vitro experiments of electrophoretic
mobility shifts and in vivo studies using chromatin immuno-precipitation (ChIP)
assays show that the Sp1/Sp3 proteins bind the CACCC site in the nuclei of K562
cells. Coincidently, hyperacetylation of histones in the GATA-1 erythroid
promoter was also shown by ChIP assay. Co-transfection of Sp1 expression plasmids
and plasmids with a wild-type promoter showed enhanced reporter gene activity in 
a dose-dependent manner. The combined data demonstrate that Sp1/Sp3, but not
EKLF, is involved in the activation of the GATA-1 erythroid promoter, and that
histones H3 and H4 are highly acetylated in this promoter region for an actively 
transcribed GATA-1 gene in K562 cells in which EKLF is barely detectable.

PMID: 18195733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Adv Enzyme Regul. 2008;48:189-208. doi: 10.1016/j.advenzreg.2007.11.016. Epub
2008 Mar 14.

Nuclear organization and chromatin dynamics--Sp1, Sp3 and histone deacetylases.

Davie JR(1), He S, Li L, Sekhavat A, Espino P, Drobic B, Dunn KL, Sun JM, Chen
HY, Yu J, Pritchard S, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, Canada R3E 0V9. davie@cc.umanitoba.ca

PMID: 18187045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Mol Cancer Res. 2008 Jan;6(1):110-8. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-07-0140. Epub
2008 Jan 9.

Visible light modulates the expression of cancer-retina antigens.

Bazhin AV(1), Schadendorf D, Owen RW, Zernii EY, Philippov PP, Eichmüller SB.

Author information: 
(1)Skin Cancer Unit, German Cancer Research Center, Im Neuenheimer Feld 580,
Heidelberg, Germany. a.bazhin@dkfz.de

Proteins involved in the visual signaling cascade show light-dependent expression
levels in photoreceptor cells. Recently, these proteins have been described to be
expressed in neuroectodermal tumors and to function as cancer-retina antigens.
Here, we show that light can down-regulate gene expression of rhodopsin,
transducin, and cyclic guanosine 3',5'-monophosphate phosphodiesterase 6 (PDE6)
and up-regulate guanylyl cyclase 1, recoverin, and arrestin in human melanoma
cells in vitro, comparable to physiologic changes earlier observed in
photoreceptor cells. Similar modulation can be detected at the protein level in
melanoma cells except for no changes in PDE6 protein levels. Two regulatory
pathways have been identified: Sp1/Sp3/Sp4 proteins for rhodopsin and PDE6, and
mitogen-activated protein kinases for recoverin and arrestin. The visual cascade 
and retinoic acid as its derivate do not play any role in this process. Putative 
explanations for light-dependent modulation of cancer-retina antigen expression
in melanoma cells are discussed.

PMID: 18184973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Org Chem. 2008 Feb 1;73(3):900-11. doi: 10.1021/jo7019916. Epub 2008 Jan 10.

New chromogenic and fluorescent probes for anion detection: formation of a [2 +
2] supramolecular complex on addition of fluoride with positive homotropic
cooperativity.

Chen CY(1), Lin TP, Chen CK, Lin SC, Tseng MC, Wen YS, Sun SS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica, 115 Nankang, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic
of China.

Two new chromogenic and fluorescent probes for anions have been designed,
synthesized, and characterized. These probes contain multiple hydrogen bonding
donors including hydrazine, hydrazone, and hydroxyl functional groups for
potential anion interacting sites. Despite the possible flexible structural
framework due to the presence of sp3 carbon linkage, X-ray structure analysis of 
probe 2 displayed an essentially planar conformation in the solid state owing to 
strong crystal packing interactions comprising a combination of favorable pi-pi
stacking effect and hydrogen bonding to cocrystallized CH3OH molecules. Both
probes 1 and 2 display orange color in DMSO solution and show fairly weak
fluorescence at room temperature. Binding studies revealed that both probes 1 and
2 show noticeable colorimetric and fluorescent responses only to F-, OAc-, and
H2PO4- among the nine anions tested (F-, Cl-, Br-, I-, OAc-, H2PO4-, HSO4-,
ClO4-, and NO3-). The general trend of the sensitivity to anions follows the
order of F- > OAc- > H2PO4- > Cl- > Br- approximately I- approximately HSO4-
approximately ClO4- approximately NO3-. A 1:2 (probe to anion) binding
stoichiometry was found for probe 1 with OAc- and H2PO4- and probe 2 with F-,
OAc-, and H2PO4-. The binding isotherm of probe 1 to F- was found to be
complicated with apparent multiple equilibria occurring in solution. The
formation of an aggregated supramolecular complex upon addition of fluoride is
proposed to rationalize the observed optical responses and is supported by ESI
mass spectrometry and pulsed-field gradient NMR spectroscopy. Data analysis
suggests that the binding of probe 1 to F- shows positive homotropic
cooperativity.

PMID: 18184005  [PubMed]


73. Org Lett. 2008 Feb 7;10(3):373-6. doi: 10.1021/ol7026202. Epub 2008 Jan 10.

New dispiro compounds: synthesis and properties.

Poriel C(1), Rault-Berthelot J, Barrière F, Slawin AM.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Rennes 1 and CNRS UMR 6226 Sciences Chimiques de Rennes Equipe
Matière Condensée et Systèmes Electroactifs (MaCSE) Bat 10C, Campus de Beaulieu, 
35042 Rennes cedex, France. cyril.poriel@univ-rennes1.fr

We report the synthesis and structural characterization of two dispiro compounds.
These two positional isomers have been designed and synthesized through an
efficient method. Because of the rigidity and orthogonality of the spiro bridge, 
both molecules exhibit a well-defined architecture which consists of two fluorene
rings connecting to an indenofluorenyl unit via two sp3 carbon atoms. The
structural, electrochemical, optical, and thermal properties of these dispiro
isomers are discussed.

PMID: 18183993  [PubMed]


74. J Am Chem Soc. 2008 Jan 23;130(3):945-54. doi: 10.1021/ja075892i. Epub 2008 Jan
1.

Quantifying weak hydrogen bonding in uracil and 4-cyano-4'-ethynylbiphenyl: a
combined computational and experimental investigation of NMR chemical shifts in
the solid state.

Uldry AC(1), Griffin JM, Yates JR, Pérez-Torralba M, María MD, Webber AL,
Beaumont ML, Samoson A, Claramunt RM, Pickard CJ, Brown SP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Physics and Astronomy, University of St Andrews, North Haugh, St
Andrews KY16 9SS, UK.

Weak hydrogen bonding in uracil and 4-cyano-4'-ethynylbiphenyl, for which
single-crystal diffraction structures reveal close CH...O=C and C[triple
bond]CH...N[triple bond]C distances, is investigated in a study that combines the
experimental determination of 1H, 13C, and 15N chemical shifts by magic-angle
spinning (MAS) solid-state NMR with first-principles calculations using
plane-wave basis sets. An optimized synthetic route, including the isolation and 
characterization of intermediates, to 4-cyano-4'-ethynylbiphenyl at natural
abundance and with 13C[triple bond]13CH and 15N[triple bond]C labeling is
described. The difference in chemical shifts calculated, on the one hand, for the
full crystal structure and, on the other hand, for an isolated molecule depends
on both intermolecular hydrogen bonding interactions and aromatic ring current
effects. In this study, the two effects are separated computationally by, first, 
determining the difference in chemical shift between that calculated for a plane 
(uracil) or an isolated chain (4-cyano-4'-ethynylbiphenyl) and that calculated
for an isolated molecule and by, second, calculating intraplane or intrachain
nucleus-independent chemical shifts that quantify the ring current effects caused
by neighboring molecules. For uracil, isolated molecule to plane changes in the
1H chemical shift of 2.0 and 2.2 ppm are determined for the CH protons involved
in CH...O weak hydrogen bonding; this compares to changes of 5.1 and 5.4 ppm for 
the NH protons involved in conventional NH...O hydrogen bonding. A comparison of 
CH bond lengths for geometrically relaxed uracil molecules in the crystal
structure and for geometrically relaxed isolated molecules reveals differences of
no more than 0.002 A, which corresponds to changes in the calculated 1H chemical 
shifts of at most 0.1 ppm. For the C[triple bond]CH...N[triple bond]C weak
hydrogen bonds in 4-cyano-4'-ethynylbiphenyl, the calculated molecule to chain
changes are of similar magnitude but opposite sign for the donor 13C and acceptor
15N nuclei. In uracil and 4-cyano-4'-ethynylbiphenyl, the CH hydrogen-bonding
donors are sp2 and sp hybridized, respectively; a comparison of the calculated
changes in 1H chemical shift with those for the sp3 hybridized CH donors in
maltose (Yates et al. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2005, 127, 10216) reveals no marked
dependence on hybridization for weak hydrogen-bonding strength.

PMID: 18166050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Am Chem Soc. 2008 Jan 23;130(3):933-44. doi: 10.1021/ja075905s. Epub 2007 Dec
29.

Oxidations of N-(3-indoleethyl) cyclic aliphatic amines by horseradish
peroxidase: the indole ring binds to the enzyme and mediates electron-transfer
amine oxidation.

Ling KQ(1), Li WS, Sayre LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio
44106, USA.

Although oxidations of aromatic amines by horseradish peroxidase (HRP) are
well-known, typical aliphatic amines are not substrates of HRP. In this study,
the reactions of N-benzyl and N-methyl cyclic amines with HRP were found to be
slow, but reactions of N-(3-indoleethyl) cyclic amines were 2-3 orders of
magnitude faster. Analyses of pH-rate profiles revealed a dominant contribution
to reaction by the amine-free base forms, the only species found to bind to the
enzyme. A metabolic study on a family of congeneric N-(3-indoleethyl) cyclic
amines indicated competition between amine and indole oxidation pathways. Amine
oxidation dominated for the seven- and eight-membered azacycles, where ring size 
supports the change in hybridization from sp3 to sp2 that occurs upon
one-electron amine nitrogen oxidation, whereas only indole oxidation was observed
for the six-membered ring congener. Optical difference spectroscopic binding data
and computational docking simulations suggest that all the arylalkylamine
substrates bind to the enzyme through their aromatic termini with similar binding
modes and binding affinities. Kinetic saturation was observed for a particularly 
soluble substrate, consistent with an obligatory role of an enzyme-substrate
complexation preceding electron transfer. The significant rate enhancements seen 
for the indoleethylamine substrates suggest the ability of the bound indole ring 
to mediate what amounts to medium long-range electron-transfer oxidation of the
tertiary amine center by the HRP oxidants. This is the first systematic
investigation to document aliphatic amine oxidation by HRP at rates consistent
with normal metabolic turnover, and the demonstration that this is facilitated by
an auxiliary electron-rich aromatic ring.

PMID: 18163622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Nano Lett. 2008 Jan;8(1):36-41. Epub 2007 Dec 22.

Raman spectra of graphite oxide and functionalized graphene sheets.

Kudin KN(1), Ozbas B, Schniepp HC, Prud'homme RK, Aksay IA, Car R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544,
USA.

We investigate Raman spectra of graphite oxide and functionalized graphene sheets
with epoxy and hydroxyl groups and Stone-Wales and 5-8-5 defects by
first-principles calculations to interpret our experimental results. Only the
alternating pattern of single-double carbon bonds within the sp2 carbon ribbons
provides a satisfactory explanation for the experimentally observed blue shift of
the G band of the Raman spectra relative to graphite. To obtain these
single-double bonds, it is necessary to have sp3 carbons on the edges of a zigzag
carbon ribbon.

PMID: 18154315  [PubMed]


77. Magn Reson Chem. 2008 Jan;46(1):23-9.

Origin of 13C complexation shifts in the adduct formation of 2-butyl phenyl
ethers with a dirhodium tetracarboxylate complex.

Díaz Gómez E(1), Duddeck H.

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz University Hannover, Institute of Organic Chemistry, Schneiderberg 1B,
D-30167 Hannover, Germany.

Complexation of the oxygen atom in 2-butyl phenyl ethers to a rhodium atom of the
dirhodium tetracarboxylate Rh(II) 2[(R)-(+)-MTPA]4(Rh*, MTPA-H =
methoxytrifluoromethylphenylacetic acid identical with Mosher's acid) deshields
an sp3-hybridized 13C nucleus directly bonded to the ether oxygen; apparently,
the inductive effect of the oxygen is enhanced when it is complexed to the
rhodium atom. On the other hand, deshielding complexation shifts of aromatic
ipso-carbons (alpha-positioned) are minute but ortho- and para-carbon signals are
influenced by the resonance effect of oxygen. This effect can be modulated by
further substituents at the benzene ring. In turn, this modulation of the
resonance correlates linearly ith the magnitude of the inductive effect exerted
on the aliphatic alpha-carbon atoms. Diastereomeric dispersion effects at 13C
signals can be observed for most compounds, indicating that
enantiodifferentiation is possible in this class of ethers.

Copyright (c) 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 18098227  [PubMed]


78. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2008;47(4):726-30.

Activation of sp3 carbon-hydrogen bonds by a ruthenium(II) complex and subsequent
metal-mediated C-C and C-N bond formation.

Foley NA(1), Gunnoe TB, Cundari TR, Boyle PD, Petersen JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC
27695-8204, USA.

PMID: 18067113  [PubMed]


79. J Biol Chem. 2008 Feb 22;283(8):4850-65. Epub 2007 Dec 7.

Interleukin-6 (IL-6) and/or soluble IL-6 receptor down-regulation of human type
II collagen gene expression in articular chondrocytes requires a decrease of
Sp1.Sp3 ratio and of the binding activity of both factors to the COL2A1 promoter.

Porée B(1), Kypriotou M, Chadjichristos C, Beauchef G, Renard E, Legendre F,
Melin M, Gueret S, Hartmann DJ, Malléin-Gerin F, Pujol JP, Boumediene K, Galéra
P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie du Tissu Conjonctif, Université de
Caen/Basse-Normandie, IFR ICORE 146, Faculté de Médecine, CHU niveau 3, Avenue de
la Côte de Nacre, 14032 Caen Cedex, France.

Type II collagen is composed of alpha1(II) chains encoded by the COL2A1 gene.
Alteration of this cartilage marker is a common feature of osteoarthritis.
Interleukin-6 (IL-6) is a pro-inflammatory cytokine that needs a soluble form of 
receptor called sIL-6R to exert its effects in some cellular models. In that
case, sIL-6R exerts agonistic action. This mechanism can make up for the partial 
or total absence of membrane-anchored IL-6 receptors in some cell types, such as 
chondrocytes. Our study shows that IL-6, sIL-6R, or both inhibit type II collagen
production by rabbit articular chondrocytes through a transcriptional control.
The cytokine and/or sIL-6R repress COL2A1 transcription by a -63/-35 sequence
that binds Sp1.Sp3. Indeed, IL-6 and/or sIL-6R inhibit Sp1 and Sp3 expression and
their binding activity to the 63-bp promoter. In chromatin immunoprecipitation
experiments, IL-6.sIL-6R induced an increase in Sp3 recruitment to the detriment 
of Sp1. Knockdown of Sp1.Sp3 by small interference RNA and decoy strategies were 
found to prevent the IL-6- and/or sIL-6R-induced inhibition of COL2A1
transcription, indicating that each of these Sp proteins is required for
down-regulation of the target gene and that a heterotypic Sp1.Sp3 complex is
involved. Additionally, Sp1 was shown to interact with Sp3 and HDAC1. Indeed,
overexpression of a full-length Sp3 cDNA blocked the Sp1 up-regulation of the
63-bp COL2A1 promoter activity, and by itself, inhibits COL2A1 transcription. We 
can conclude that IL-6, sIL-6R, or both in combination decrease both the Sp1.Sp3 
ratio and DNA-binding activities, thus inhibiting COL2A1 transcription.

PMID: 18065760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Acta Crystallogr C. 2007 Dec;63(Pt 12):o723-5. Epub 2007 Nov 14.

Weak C-H...N[triple-bond]C hydrogen bonds in the structures of two
poly(cyano)-substituted ring systems.

Jones PG(1), Hopf H, Mlynek C, Swaminathan VN.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Anorganische und Analytische Chemie, Technische Universität
Braunschweig, Postfach 3329, 38023 Braunschweig, Germany. p.jones@tu-bs.de

In benzene-1,2,3-tricarbonitrile, C9H3N3, the packing of the two independent
molecules is three-dimensional and complex, involving inter alia bifurcated
(C-H)2...N systems from neighbouring CH groups. In
[2.2]paracyclophane-4,5,12,13-tetracarbonitrile, C20H12N4, the
[2.2]paracyclophane systems display the usual distortions, namely lengthened C-C 
bonds and widened sp3 angles in the bridges, narrow angles in the six-membered
rings at the bridgehead atoms, and flattened boat conformations of the rings. The
molecules are linked by a series of C-H...N interactions to form layers parallel 
to the ab plane.

PMID: 18057623  [PubMed]


81. J Cell Mol Med. 2008 Sep-Oct;12(5A):1754-66. Epub 2007 Dec 10.

NFkappaB mediates IL-1beta-induced down-regulation of TbetaRII through the
modulation of Sp3 expression.

Baugé C(1), Beauchef G, Leclercq S, Kim SJ, Pujol JP, Galéra P, Boumédiene K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Connective Tissue Biochemistry, University of Caen, Caen,
France.

We previously showed that interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) down-regulation of type II
TGFbeta receptor (TbetaRII) involves NFkappaB pathway and requires de novo
synthesis of a yet unknown protein. Here, we demonstrate that this effect is
mediated through Sp1 site located at position -25 of human TbetaRII promoter.
Inhibition of transcription factors binding (decoy oligonucleotides or
mithramycin) abolished IL-1beta effect. EMSA and ChIP revealed that this
treatment induced Sp3 binding to cis-sequence whereby IL-1beta exerts its
transcriptional effects whereas it decreased that of Sp1. Moreover, although the 
cytokine did not modulate Sp1 expression, it increased that of Sp3 via NFkappaB
pathway. Experiments of gain and loss of function clearly showed that Sp3
inhibited TbetaRII expression whereas its silencing abolished IL-1beta effect. In
addition, both Sp1 and Sp3 were found to interact with NFkappaB, which therefore 
may indirectly interact with TbetaRII pro moter. Altogether, these data suggest
that IL-1beta decreases TbetaRII expression by inducing Sp3 via NFkappaB and its 
binding on core promote at the expense of Sp1, which could explain the loss of
cell responsiveness in certain conditions. These findings bring new insights in
the knowledge of the interference between two antagonistic transduction pathways 
involved in multiple physiopathological processes.

PMCID: PMC3918091
PMID: 18053089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Nat Mater. 2008 Jan;7(1):38-42. Epub 2007 Nov 25.

Spatially resolved electronic and vibronic properties of single diamondoid
molecules.

Wang Y(1), Kioupakis E, Lu X, Wegner D, Yamachika R, Dahl JE, Carlson RM, Louie
SG, Crommie MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, University of California at Berkeley, California
94720-7300, USA. yywang@berkeley.edu

Diamondoids are a unique form of carbon nanostructure best described as
hydrogen-terminated diamond molecules. Their diamond-cage structures and
tetrahedral sp3 hybrid bonding create new possibilities for tuning electronic
bandgaps, optical properties, thermal transport and mechanical strength at the
nanoscale. The recently discovered higher diamondoids have thus generated much
excitement in regards to their potential versatility as nanoscale devices.
Despite this excitement, however, very little is known about the properties of
isolated diamondoids on metal surfaces, a very relevant system for molecular
electronics. For example, it is unclear how the microscopic characteristics of
molecular orbitals and local electron-vibrational coupling affect electron
conduction, emission and energy transfer in the diamondoids. Here, we report the 
first single-molecule study of tetramantane diamondoids on Au(111) using scanning
tunnelling microscopy and spectroscopy. We find that the diamondoid electronic
structure and electron-vibrational coupling exhibit unique and unexpected spatial
correlations characterized by pronounced nodal structure across the molecular
surfaces. Ab initio pseudopotential density functional calculations reveal that
much of the observed electronic and vibronic properties of diamondoids are
determined by surface hydrogen terminations, a feature having important
implications for designing future diamondoid-based molecular devices.

PMID: 18037893  [PubMed]


83. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Jan;36(1):330-41. Epub 2007 Nov 22.

CpG methylation plays a vital role in determining tissue- and cell-specific
expression of the human cell-death-inducing DFF45-like effector A gene through
the regulation of Sp1/Sp3 binding.

Li D(1), Da L, Tang H, Li T, Zhao M.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

Cell-death-inducing DFF45-like effector A (CIDE-A) belongs to a family of
proapoptotic proteins, the expression of which is highly restricted in human
tissues and cells. Here, the core region of the human CIDE-A promoter was
characterized. Surprisingly, two Sp1/Sp3-binding sites, rather than
tissue-specific transcription factors, were found to be required for the promoter
activity. Although the ubiquitously expressed Sp1 and Sp3 were crucial, they
alone could not adequately regulate the specific expression of CIDE-A. We found
that the expression of CIDE-A was further regulated by CpG methylation of the
promoter region. By performing bisulfite sequencing, we observed dense CpG
methylation of the promoter region in tissues and cells with low or no expression
of CIDE-A but not in tissues with high level of CIDE-A expression. In vitro
methylation of this region showed significantly reduced transcriptional activity.
Treatment of CIDE-A-negative cells with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine demethylated the
CpG sites; this opened the closed chromatin conformation and markedly enhanced
the binding affinity of Sp1/Sp3 to the promoter in vivo, thereby restoring CIDE-A
expression. These data indicated that CpG methylation plays a crucial role in
establishing and maintaining tissue- and cell-specific transcription of the
CIDE-A gene through the regulation of Sp1/Sp3 binding.

PMCID: PMC2248752
PMID: 18033804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Chemistry. 2008;14(1):73-87.

Coordination-driven self-assembly, structures, and dynamic properties of
diplatinum hexatriynediyl and butadiynediyl complexes in which the sp carbon
chains are shielded by sp3 carbon chains: towards endgroup-endgroup interactions.

Owen GR(1), Stahl J, Hampel F, Gladysz JA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Organische Chemie and Interdisciplinary Center for Molecular
Materials, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Henkestrasse 42,
91054 Erlangen, Germany.

Sequential reactions of trans-(C6F5)(p-tol3P)2Pt(C[triple chemical bond]C)3SiEt3 
(PtC6SiEt3) with nBu4N+ F(-) (THF/methanol), PtCl, KPF6/tBuOK, and CuCl give
trans,trans-[(C6F5){(p-tol3P)2}Pt(C[triple chemical bond]C)3Pt{(Pp-tol3)2}(C6F5)]
(PtC6Pt) in 95 % yield on multigram scales. Reactions of PtC6Pt and
Ar2P(CH2)mPAr2 afford substitution products
trans,trans-[(C6F5){(Ar2P(CH2)mPAr2)}Pt(C[triple chemical
bond]C)3Pt{(Ar2P(CH2)mPAr2)}(C6F5)] (PtC6Pt-m/Ar; m/Ar=8/p-tol, 78 %; 10/Ph, 82
%; 11/Ph, 69 %; 12/Ph, 57 %; 14/p-tol, 57 %; 14/p-C6H4-tBu, 71 %), in which the
diphosphines span the square planar platinum endgroups. An analogous reaction
with PEt3 gives a tetrakis PEt3 complex Pt'C6Pt' (72 %). The crystal structures
of PtC6Pt, Pt'C6Pt', PtC6Pt-10/Ph, PtC6Pt-11/Ph, and PtC6Pt-14/p-tol or solvates 
thereof are compared. In PtC6Pt, the endgroups can avoid van der Waals contact,
and define angles of 0 degrees . In PtC6Pt-14/p-tol, the sp3 chains twist around 
the sp chain in a chiral double-helical motif, with an endgroup/endgroup angle of
189 degrees . The sp3 chains are too short to adopt analogous conformations in
the other complexes, but laterally shield the sp chain. NMR spectroscopy shows
that the helical enantiomers of PtC6Pt-14/p-tol rapidly interconvert in solution 
at low temperature. A crystal structure of PtC4Pt shows endgroups that are in van
der Waals contact and define an angle of 41 degrees . Reactions with
Ar2P(CH2)8PAr2 give PtC4Pt-8/Ar (Ar=Ph, 53 %; p-tol, 87 %). Low-temperature NMR
spectroscopy establish non-helical chiral conformations. Electrochemical
oxidations of the diplatinum complexes are analyzed, the reversibilities of which
decrease with increasing sp chain length.

PMID: 18033704  [PubMed]


85. Biochem Soc Trans. 2007 Dec;35(Pt 6):1393-6.

Regulation of the dual-function transcription factor Sp3 by SUMO.

Valin A(1), Gill G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cellular Biology, Tufts University School of
Medicine, 136 Harrison Avenue, Boston, MA 02111, USA.

In eukaryotes, gene expression is controlled by a relatively small number of
regulators. Post-translational modifications dramatically increase the functional
possibilities of those regulators. Modification of many transcription factors and
cofactors by SUMO (small ubiquitin-related modifier) correlates, in most cases,
with inhibition of transcription. Recent studies suggest a model whereby SUMO
conjugation to transcription factors promotes the recruitment of co-repressors
through direct protein-protein interaction with the SUMO protein. HDACs (histone 
deacetylases) are important, but not exclusive, effectors of SUMO-mediated
repression. Sp3 (specificity protein 3), a zinc-finger DNA-binding domain
transcription factor, has the ability to both activate and repress transcription 
in a context-dependent manner. SUMOylation regulates the dual nature of Sp3
function. Current data suggest that Sp3 represses transcription in a
SUMO-dependent manner but independent of HDACs. Recent studies to identify
additional co-repressors associated with SUMO and further investigate regulated
activity of Sp3 are providing a deeper understanding of SUMO-dependent mechanisms
of transcriptional regulation.

PMID: 18031229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Dalton Trans. 2007 Dec 14;(46):5427-33. Epub 2007 Sep 28.

Synthesis and characterisation of PC(sp3)P phosphine and phosphinite platinum(II)
complexes. Cyclometallation and simple coordination.

Olsson D(1), Arunachalampillai A, Wendt OF.

Author information: 
(1)Organic Chemistry, Department of Chemistry, Lund University, PO Box 124, S-221
00 Lund, Sweden.

New and improved preparative routes to the previously known PCP ligands
cis-1,3-bis(di-isopropylphosphinito)cyclohexane and
cis-1,3-bis[(di-tert-butylphosphino)methyl]cyclohexane are reported. They react
with 1 equivalent of dichloro(1,5-cyclooctadiene)platinum(II) [(COD)PtCl2] to
give the cis coordinated complex
cis-[PtCl2{cis-1,3-bis(di-isopropylphosphinito)}cyclohexane] and the C(sp3)-H
activated complex trans-[PtCl{cis-1,3-bis(di-tert-butylphosphino)}cyclohexane].
The new PCP ligand cis-1,3-bis(di-tert-butylphosphinito)cyclohexane was
synthesised and reacts with [(COD)PtCl2] giving the di-nuclear
trans-[PtCl2{cis-1,3-bis(di-tert-butylphosphinito)cyclohexane}]2, which is highly
insoluble. All metal complexes were characterised with X-ray crystallography. DFT
calculations indicate that the inability of the phosphinite ligands to
cyclometallate is due to a kinetic barrier, possibly involving an
axial-equatorial conformational change necessary for the C-H activation process.

PMID: 18026592  [PubMed]


87. Molecules. 2004 Dec 31;9(12):1160-76.

Using variable and fixed topological indices for the prediction of reaction rate 
constants of volatile unsaturated hydrocarbons with OH radicals.

Pompe M(1), Veber M, Randic M, Balaban AT.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Chemistry and Chemical Technology, University of Ljubljana,
Askerceva 5, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia. matevz.pompe@uni-lj.si

Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) play an important role in different
photochemical processes in the troposphere. In order to predict their impact on
ozone formation processes a detailed knowledge about their abundance in the
atmosphere as well as their reaction rate constants is required. The QSPR models 
were developed for the prediction of reaction rate constants of volatile
unsaturated hydrocarbons. The chemical structure was encoded by constitutional
and topological indices. Multiple linear regression models using CODESSA software
was developed with the RMS(CV) error of 0.119 log units. The chemical structure
was encoded by six topological indices. Additionally, a regression model using a 
variable connectivity index was developed. It provided worse cross-validation
results with an RMS(CV) error of 0.16 log units, but enabled a structural
interpretation of the obtained model. We differentiated between three classes of 
carbon atoms: sp2-hybridized, non-allylic sp3-hybridized and allylic
sp3-hybridized. The structural interpretation of the developed model shows that
most probably the most important mechanisms are the addition to multiple bonds
and the hydrogen atom abstraction at allylic sites.

PMID: 18007510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Cancer Res. 2007 Nov 15;67(22):11001-11.

The oncogenic microRNA-27a targets genes that regulate specificity protein
transcription factors and the G2-M checkpoint in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells.

Mertens-Talcott SU(1), Chintharlapalli S, Li X, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas 77843-4466, USA.

There is evidence that specificity proteins (Sp), such as Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4, are 
overexpressed in tumors and contribute to the proliferative and angiogenic
phenotype associated with cancer cells. Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 are expressed in a
panel of estrogen receptor (ER)-positive and ER-negative breast cancer cell
lines, and we hypothesized that regulation of their expression may be due to
microRNA-27a (miR-27a), which is also expressed in these cell lines and has been 
reported to regulate the zinc finger ZBTB10 gene, a putative Sp repressor.
Transfection of ER-negative MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells with antisense miR-27a
(as-miR-27a) resulted in increased expression of ZBTB10 mRNA and decreased
expression of Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 at the mRNA and protein levels and also decreased
activity in cells transfected with constructs containing Sp1 and Sp3 promoter
inserts. In addition, these responses were accompanied by decreased expression of
Sp-dependent survival and angiogenic genes, including survivin, vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and VEGF receptor 1 (VEGFR1). Moreover, similar
results were observed in MDA-MB-231 cells transfected with ZBTB10 expression
plasmid. Both as-miR-27a and ZBTB10 overexpression decreased the percentage of
MDA-MB-231 cells in S phase of the cell cycle; however, ZBTB10 increased the
percentage of cells in G(0)-G(1), whereas as-miR-27a increased the percentage in 
G(2)-M. This latter response was associated with induction of Myt-1 (another
miR-27a target gene), which inhibits G(2)-M through enhanced phosphorylation and 
inactivation of cdc2. Thus, the oncogenic activity of miR-27a in MDA-MB-231 cells
is due, in part, to suppression of ZBTB10 and Myt-1.

PMID: 18006846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Mol Endocrinol. 2008 Feb;22(2):388-402. Epub 2007 Nov 15.

Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 expression is down-regulated by
17beta-estradiol in MCF-7 breast cancer cells by estrogen receptor alpha/Sp
proteins.

Higgins KJ(1), Liu S, Abdelrahim M, Vanderlaag K, Liu X, Porter W, Metz R, Safe
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
4466 TAMU, College Station, TX 77843-4466, USA.

17beta-Estradiol (E2) induces and represses gene expression in breast cancer
cells; however, the mechanisms of gene repression are not well understood. In
this study, we show that E2 decreases vascular endothelial growth factor receptor
2 (VEGFR2) mRNA levels in MCF-7 cells, and this gene was used as a model for
investigating pathways associated with E2-dependent gene repression. Deletion
analysis of the VEGFR2 promoter indicates that the proximal GC-rich motifs at -58
and -44 are critical for the E2-dependent decreased response in MCF-7 cells.
Mutation or deletion of these GC-rich elements results in loss of hormone
responsiveness and shows that the -60 to -37 region of the VEGFR2 promoter is
critical for both basal and hormone-dependent decreased VEGFR2 expression in
MCF-7 cells. Western blot, immunofluorescent staining, RNA interference, and
EMSAs support a role for Sp proteins in hormone-dependent down-regulation of
VEGFR2 in MCF-7 cells, primarily through estrogen receptor (ER)alpha/Sp1 and
ERalpha/Sp3 interactions with the VEGFR2 promoter. Using chromatin
immuno-precipitation and transient transfection/RNA interference assays we show
that the ERalpha/Sp protein-promoter interactions are accompanied by recruitment 
of the co-repressors SMRT (silencing mediator of retinoid and thyroid hormone
receptor) and NCoR (nuclear receptor corepressor) to the promoter and that SMRT
and NCoR knockdown reverse E2-mediated down-regulation of VEGFR2 expression in
MCF-7 cells. This study illustrates that both SMRT and NCoR are involved in
E2-dependent repression of VEGFR2 in MCF-7 cells.

PMCID: PMC2234589
PMID: 18006642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Neurochem. 2008 Mar;104(5):1233-48. Epub 2007 Nov 13.

Specificity proteins Sp1 and Sp3 interact with the rat GTP cyclohydrolase I
proximal promoter to regulate transcription.

Chandran NS(1), Vunnava P, Wu Y, Kapatos G.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Clinical Neurobiology Program, Department of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Neurosciences, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit,
Michigan, USA.

The role of the proximal promoter GC-box in regulating basal and cAMP-dependent
GTP Cyclohydrolase I gene transcription was investigated using a variety of cell 
lines and techniques. These studies show that the GC-box is composed of a triad
of cis-elements that in vitro bind specificity proteins Sp1 and Sp3. Sp1 and Sp3 
were found associated with the native proximal promoter in PC12 cells but were
not recruited to the promoter during cAMP-dependent transcription. Studies using 
Drosophila SL2 cells showed that Sp3 occupies two sites within the GC-box and
enhances transcription when acting alone and synergistically when combined with
nuclear factor-Y (NF-Y) and CCAAT/Enhancer-Binding Protein (C/EBP)beta, cognate
binding proteins for the adjacent cAMP response element (CRE) and CCAAT-box cAMP 
response elements. In contrast, Sp1 bound only one site within the GC-box and did
not enhance transcription unless combined with NF-Y and C/EBPbeta. Studies in SL2
cells also showed that Sp1 and Sp3 do not co-occupy the GC-box, and accordingly
Sp1 competes for Sp3 binding to repress Sp3-dependent transcription. In PC12
cells, complete mutation of the GC-box reduced basal but not cAMP-dependent
transcription, resulting in an overall increase in the cAMP response and
demonstrating that formation of this enhanceosome does not require Sp1 or Sp3.
Experiments in which the GC-box was replaced with a Gal4 element and the promoter
challenged with Gal4 fusion proteins support this conclusion and a role for Sp3
in maintaining high levels of basal transcription in PC12 cells. Equivalent
amounts of Sp1 and Sp3 were found associated with the native proximal promoter in
PC12 and Rat2 cells, which differ 10-fold in basal transcription. Similar levels 
of methylation of CpG dinucleotides located within the GC-box were also observed 
in these two cells lines. These results suggest that Sp1 and Sp3 bound to the
GC-box might help to preserve an open chromatin configuration at the proximal
promoter in cells which constitutively express low levels of GTP Cyclohydrolase
I.

PMCID: PMC2265209
PMID: 18004997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Org Chem. 2007 Dec 7;72(25):9669-78. Epub 2007 Nov 15.

Through-space intramolecular palladium rearrangement in substituted aryl
complexes: theoretical study of the aryl to alkylpalladium migration process.

Mota AJ(1), Dedieu A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química InorgAnica, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de
Granada, Campus de Fuentenueva, 18071-Granada, Spain. mota@ugr.es

DFT/B3LYP calculations have been carried out to study intramolecular 1,n
palladium shifts (n = 3-5) between sp2 and sp3 carbon atoms in alkylarylpalladium
systems. Such shifts, which also involve a concomitant exchange with a hydrogen
atom of the alkylaryl ligand, are quite often a pivotal step of several organic
transformations mediated by palladium complexes. We show that the intimate
mechanism for the 1,3 shift corresponds to a Pd(IV) pathway, whereas a Pd(II)
pathway is favored in the case of 1,5 migrations. In the case of 1,4 migrations, 
both mechanisms are competitive. The Pd(IV) pathway can involve either a true
Pd(IV) intermediate (oxidative addition/reductive elimination mechanism) or a
Pd(IV) transition state (oxidative hydrogen migration mechanism). The energy
barrier is very high for the 1,3 palladium shift, making this process very
unlikely, in contrast to the other ones which have enthalpy barriers ranging
between 22.8 kcal mol-1 (for the 1,5 shift) and 31.9 kcal mol-1 (for the least
favorable 1,4 shift studied here). All of these results are in line with our
previous results for palladium shifts between two sp2 carbon atoms. In addition, 
the sp2 to sp3 shifts have been found to be rather exothermic owing to the
possibility for the alkylaryl ligand in the product to achieve a eta3
coordination mode. This eta3 coordination mode results either from the shift
itself (1,3 case) or from a subsequent rearrangement that comprises a
chain-running mechanism within the alkyl chain bound to the metal (for n > 3).

PMID: 18001098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Am Chem Soc. 2007 Dec 5;129(48):14860-1. Epub 2007 Nov 8.

Palladium-catalyzed decarboxylative sp3-sp3 coupling of nitrobenzene acetic
esters.

Waetzig SR(1), Tunge JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The University of Kansas, 2010 Malott Hall, 1251
Wescoe Hall Drive, Lawrence, Kansas 66045, USA.

Allylic esters of nitrobenzene acetic acids undergo facile palladium-catalyzed
decarboxylative coupling. Both mono- and dinitroarene substrates give high yields
of the coupled products. Moreover, the rates of the reactions suggest that
decarboxylation is rate-limiting and substrates that sterically disfavor
attainment of the reactive conformation for decarboxylation are not viable.
Finally, reduction of the product nitroarenes to the corresponding anilines
provides access to a variety of heterocycles including quinolines and
dihydroquinolones.

PMCID: PMC2707754
PMID: 17988134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Cancer Biol Ther. 2007 Nov;6(11):1733-42. Epub 2007 Aug 3.

Regulation of the CLDN3 gene in ovarian cancer cells.

Honda H(1), Pazin MJ, D'Souza T, Ji H, Morin PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Biology, National Institute on Aging,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

The claudin (CLDN) genes encode a family of proteins involved in the formation
and function of tight junctions. CLDN gene expression is frequently altered in
several human cancers, and in particular, CLDN3 and CLDN4 are commonly
overexpressed in ovarian cancer. However, the mechanisms leading to the
deregulation of these genes in cancer remain unclear. In the present study, we
have examined the CLDN3 promoter and have identified a minimal region containing 
an Sp1 site crucial for its activity. In addition, we find that the CLDN3
promoter is regulated through epigenetic processes. Cells that express high
levels of CLDN3 exhibit low DNA methylation and high histone H3 acetylation of
the critical CLDN3 promoter region, and the reverse is observed in cells that do 
not express this gene. CLDN3-negative cells can be induced to express CLDN3
through treatment with DNA methyltransferase or histone deacetylase inhibitors.
Interestingly, in vitro binding experiments, as well as chip assays show that Sp1
binds the unmethylated promoter much more efficiently, providing a mechanism for 
CLDN3 silencing in non-expressing cells. Finally, siRNA-mediated knockdown of Sp1
led to a significant decrease of CLDN3 expression at both the mRNA and protein
levels, demonstrating a crucial role for this transcription factor in the
regulation of CLDN3. Our data provide a basis for CLDN3 expression in ovarian
cancer cells, as well as a mechanism for the silencing of this promoter in tumors
lacking expression of claudin-3.

PMID: 17986852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Am Chem Soc. 2007 Nov 28;129(47):14544-5. Epub 2007 Nov 7.

Activation of sp3 C-H bonds with cobalt(I): catalytic synthesis of enamines.

Bolig AD(1), Brookhart M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina 27599-3290, USA.

C-H bond activation has been extensively studied with (Cp*)M(L)n (M = Ir, Rh),
but cobalt, the third member of this triad, has not previously been shown to
activate sp3 C-H bonds. Further, practical functionalization of the metal alkyl
products of oxidative addition has not been fully explored. Toward these ends, we
have developed catalytic dehydrogenation of alkyl amines with a Co(I) catalyst.
Amine substrates are protected with vinyl silanes, followed by catalytic transfer
hydrogenation, to yield a broad range of stable protected enamines and
1,2-diheteroatom-substituted alkenes, including several unprecedented
heterocycles. (Cp*)Co(VTMS)2 catalyzes transfer hydrogenation under surprisingly 
mild conditions with high chemo-, regio-, and diastereoselectivity, while
tolerating additional functionality.

PMCID: PMC2536615
PMID: 17985901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Nov 13;104(46):18175-80. Epub 2007 Nov 5.

Developmental pathway of CD4+CD8- medullary thymocytes during mouse ontogeny and 
its defect in Aire-/- mice.

Li J(1), Li Y, Yao JY, Jin R, Zhu MZ, Qian XP, Zhang J, Fu YX, Wu L, Zhang Y,
Chen WF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Peking University Health Science Center, 38 Xue Yuan
Road, Beijing 100083, China.

The newly generated single-positive (SP) thymocytes undergo further maturation in
the thymic medulla before their emigration to the periphery. The present study
was undertaken to validate a developmental program we proposed for CD4SP
medullary thymocytes and to explore the mechanisms regulating this process.
During mouse ontogeny, the emergence of different subsets of CD4SP thymocytes
followed a strict temporal order from SP1 to SP4. Parallel to the transition in
surface phenotype, a steady increase in function was observed. As further
evidence, purified SP1 cells were able to sequentially give rise to SP2, SP3, and
SP4 cells in intrathymic adoptive transfer and in culture. Notably, the
development of CD4SP cells in the medulla seemed to be critically dependent on a 
functionally intact medullary epithelial cell compartment because Relb and Aire
deficiency were found to cause severe blockage at the transition from SP3 to SP4.
Taken together, this work establishes an ontogenetically and functionally
relevant maturation program for CD4SP thymocytes. Precise dissection of this
program should facilitate further inquiry into the molecular mechanisms governing
normal thymocyte development and its disturbance in pathological conditions.

PMCID: PMC2084316
PMID: 17984055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Jan 4;365(1):124-30. Epub 2007 Oct 31.

Cell-specific epigenetic regulation of ChM-I gene expression: crosstalk between
DNA methylation and histone acetylation.

Aoyama T(1), Okamoto T, Kohno Y, Fukiage K, Otsuka S, Furu M, Ito K, Jin Y,
Nagayama S, Nakayama T, Nakamura T, Toguchida J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Frontier Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
blue@frontier.kyoto-u.ac.jp

The expression of the chondromodulin-I (ChM-I) gene, a cartilage-specific gene,
is regulated by the binding of Sp3 to the core promoter region, which is
inhibited by the methylation of CpG in the target genome in the osteogenic
lineage, osteosarcoma (OS) cells. The histone tails associated with the
hypermethylated promoter region of the ChM-I gene were deacetylated by histone
deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) in three ChM-I-negative OS cell lines. Treatment with an
HDAC inhibitor induced the binding of Sp3 in one cell line, which became
ChM-I-positive. This process was associated with acetylation instead of the
dimethylation of histone H3 at lysine 9 (H3-K9) and, surprisingly, the
demethylation of the core promoter region. The demethylation was transient, and
gradually replaced by methylation after a rapid recovery of histone deacetylaion.
These results represent an example of the plasticity of differentiation being
regulated by the cell-specific plasticity of epigenetic regulation.

PMID: 17980151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Science. 2007 Nov 2;318(5851):783-7.

A predictably selective aliphatic C-H oxidation reaction for complex molecule
synthesis.

Chen MS(1), White MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Roger Adams Laboratory, University of Illinois,
Urbana, IL 61801, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2007 Nov 2;318(5851):756-7.

Realizing the extraordinary potential of unactivated sp3 C-H bond oxidation in
organic synthesis requires the discovery of catalysts that are both highly
reactive and predictably selective. We report an iron (Fe)-based small molecule
catalyst that uses hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) to oxidize a broad range of
substrates. Predictable selectivity is achieved solely on the basis of the
electronic and steric properties of the C-H bonds, without the need for directing
groups. Additionally, carboxylate directing groups may be used to furnish
five-membered ring lactone products. We demonstrate that these three modes of
selectivity enable the predictable oxidation of complex natural products and
their derivatives at specific C-H bonds with preparatively useful yields. This
type of general and predictable reactivity stands to enable aliphatic C-H
oxidation as a method for streamlining complex molecule synthesis.

PMID: 17975062  [PubMed]


98. BMC Mol Biol. 2007 Oct 25;8:96.

Regulation of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1) gene expression through the 
post-translational modification of Sp1: a nuclear target protein of PARP-1.

Zaniolo K(1), Desnoyers S, Leclerc S, Guérin SL.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology and Molecular Endocrinology Research Center, Centre de Recherche du
CHUL-CHUQ and Département d'Anatomie-Physiologie, Université Laval, Québec, G1V
4G2, Canada. Karine.zaniolo@crchul.ulaval.ca

BACKGROUND: Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1) is a nuclear enzyme that plays
critical functions in many biological processes, including DNA repair and gene
transcription. The main function of PARP-1 is to catalyze the transfer of
ADP-ribose units from nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) to a large array
of acceptor proteins, which comprises histones, transcription factors, as well as
PARP-1 itself. We have previously demonstrated that transcription of the PARP-1
gene essentially rely on the opposite regulatory actions of two distinct
transcription factors, Sp1 and NFI. In the present study, we examined whether
suppression of PARP-1 expression in embryonic fibroblasts derived from PARP-1
knockout mice (PARP-1-/-) might alter the expression and/or DNA binding
properties of Sp1 and NFI. We also explored the possibility that Sp1 or NFI (or
both) may represent target proteins of PARP-1 activity.
RESULTS: Expression of both Sp1 and NFI was found to be considerably reduced in
PARP-1-/- cells. Co-immunoprecipitation assays revealed that PARP-1 physically
interacts with Sp1 in a DNA-independent manner, but neither with Sp3 nor NFI, in 
PARP-1+/+ cells. In addition, in vitro PARP assays indicated that PARP-1 could
catalyze the addition of polymer of ADP-ribose to Sp1, which also translated into
a reduction of Sp1 binding to its consensus DNA target site. Transfection of the 
PARP-1 promoter into both PARP-1+/+ and PARP-1-/- cells revealed that the lack of
PARP-1 expression in PARP-1-/- cells also results in a strong increase in PARP-1 
promoter activity. This influence of PARP-1 was found to rely on the presence of 
the Sp1 sites present on the basal PARP-1 promoter as their mutation entirely
abolished the increased promoter activity observed in PARP-1-/- cells. Subjecting
PARP-1+/+ cells to an oxidative challenge with hydrogen peroxide to increase
PARP-1 activity translated into a dramatic reduction in the DNA binding
properties of Sp1. However, its suppression by the inhibitor PJ34 improved DNA
binding of Sp1 and led to a dramatic increase in PARP-1 promoter function.
CONCLUSION: Our results therefore recognized Sp1 as a target protein of PARP-1
activity, the addition of polymer of ADP-ribose to this transcription factor
restricting its positive regulatory influence on gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC2175517
PMID: 17961220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Nutr. 2007 Nov;137(11 Suppl):2557S-2562S.

Dietary modulation of GALT.

Sanderson IR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Centre for Gastroenterology, Institute of Cell and Molecular Science,
Barts and The London, Queen Mary's School of Medicine and Dentistry, University
of London, London, UK. i.r.sanderson@qmul.ac.uk

Changes in diet greatly affect the mucosal immune system, particularly in
diseases such as Crohn's disease and necrotizing enterocolitis. This article
examines the hypothesis that alterations in the luminal environment of the
intestine regulate the expression of genes in the enterocyte responsible for
signaling to immune cells. Genes expressed by the epithelium orchestrate
leukocytes in the lamina propria. For example, chemokine expression in the mouse 
intestinal epithelium, through transgenic means, induced the recruitment of
neutrophils and lymphocytes into intestinal tissues. Diet alters the expression
of the genes responsible for signaling by a variety of pathways. The introduction
of a normal diet to a weanling mouse up-regulates MHC class II expression through
a particular isoform of the class II transactivator, a protein that acts in the
nucleus. SCFA concentrations in the intestinal lumen vary markedly with diet.
SCFAs increase IL-8 and insulin-like growth factor binding protein-2 expression
by inhibiting histone deacetylase activity in the enterocyte. Down-regulation of 
gene expression by butyrate can act through acetylation of the inhibitory
transcription factor Sp3. The review therefore describes a number of molecular
pathways, explaining how changes in diet may alter leukocyte recruitment by
regulating enterocyte gene expression. Myofibroblasts enhance enterocyte
chemotactic activity by cleaving inactive precursors; and myofibroblast genes
also are regulated by SCFA. It is likely that other similar regulatory mechanisms
remain to be discovered.

PMCID: PMC4558930
PMID: 17951502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Hum Pathol. 2008 Jan;39(1):87-95. Epub 2007 Oct 18.

Expression and clinical role of DJ-1, a negative regulator of PTEN, in ovarian
carcinoma.

Davidson B(1), Hadar R, Schlossberg A, Sternlicht T, Slipicevic A, Skrede M,
Risberg B, Flørenes VA, Kopolovic J, Reich R.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Clinic, Rikshospitalet-Radiumhospitalet Medical Center, Montebello, 
N-0310 Oslo, Norway. bend@ulrik.uio.no

The aim of this study was to analyze the expression and clinical role of DJ-1, a 
negative regulator of PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 
10), in ovarian carcinoma, and investigate the putative association between DJ-1 
levels and expression of its transcriptional regulators specificity protein 1
(Sp1) and specificity protein 3 (Sp3). Effusions (n = 72) and solid tumors (n =
57, 42 primary and 15 metastases) were analyzed for DJ-1 messenger RNA (mRNA)
expression using reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. Most specimens 
(48 effusions, 50 solid tumors) were additionally analyzed for Sp1 and Sp3 mRNA
expression. PTEN protein expression was analyzed in 201 effusions and 92 solid
tumors using immunohistochemistry. DJ-1 mRNA was expressed in more than 80% of
specimens, with no preferential anatomical site. DJ-1 expression was positively
associated with Sp1 expression in effusions (P = .03) and with Sp1 (P = .02) and 
Sp3 (P = .002) expression in solid tumors. In effusions, DJ-1 expression was
higher in postchemotherapy compared with prechemotherapy specimens (P = .012).
Higher DJ-1 levels (P = .027) and more advanced FIGO stage (IV versus III; P =
.003) correlated with shorter progression-free survival in univariate analysis
for patients with postchemotherapy effusions. PTEN expression was low in
effusions and solid tumors (23% and 13%, respectively), and its expression showed
no association with DJ-1 levels or survival. Our data show that DJ-1 is
frequently expressed in advanced-stage ovarian carcinoma at all anatomical sites 
and is coexpressed with its transcriptional regulators Sp1 and Sp3. In contrast, 
PTEN expression is infrequent in this disease. These findings may provide one of 
the molecular mechanisms that mediate cancer cell survival and aggressiveness in 
this tumor.

PMID: 17949781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Biochem Pharmacol. 2008 Jan 15;75(2):414-26. Epub 2007 Sep 8.

Transcriptional regulation of aldo-keto reductase 1C1 in HT29 human colon cancer 
cells resistant to methotrexate: role in the cell cycle and apoptosis.

Selga E(1), Noé V, Ciudad CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Pharmacy,
University of Barcelona, Av. Diagonal 643, E-08028 Barcelona, Spain.

While studying differentially expressed genes between sensitive and 10(-5)M
Methotrexate (MTX) resistant HT29 human colon cancer cells, we identified some
members of the aldo-keto reductase (AKR) superfamily. The study was followed with
the member AKR1C1 (EC 1.1.1.213), validating its increase in mRNA and protein
levels in MTX resistant cells. The genomic content for AKR1C1 remained unchanged 
between sensitive and resistant cells, thereby excluding a mechanism of AKR1C1
gene amplification. Thus, we cloned the AKR1C1 human promoter and performed
luciferase experiments that revealed a transcriptional regulation of the gene in 
the resistant cells. Computational studies showed a putative binding site for the
transcription factor Sp1. The co-transfection of Sp1 or Sp3 with different
constructs of AKR1C1 promoter deletions, including and excluding the proximal
GC-box, demonstrated a key role for these factors in regulating AKR1C1
transcriptional activity. Gel-shift assays revealed an increase in Sp1 and Sp3
binding in resistant compared to sensitive cells, without differences in Sp1
protein levels. Dephosphorylation of the extracts coincided with a decrease in
Sp1 binding, which is consistent with a process of regulation of Sp1 by
phosphorylation. We also investigated the possible relationship between AKR1C1
expression and MTX action. Overexpression of AKR1C1 counteracted the S-phase
accumulation of cells and apoptosis caused by MTX treatment. This suggests a role
of AKR1C1 in cell proliferation. Finally, overexpression of AKR1C1 in MTX
sensitive HT29 cells conferred resistance to the chemotherapeutic agent and
silencing of AKR1C1 by means of iRNA technology sensitized the cells to MTX.

PMID: 17945194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Dalton Trans. 2007 Nov 7;(41):4644-6. Epub 2007 Sep 3.

Efficient [bis(imino)pyridine-iron]-catalyzed oxidation of alkanes.

Tang J(1), Gamez P, Reedijk J.

Author information: 
(1)Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Leiden University, P. O. Box 9502, 2300 RA
Leiden, The Netherlands.

A [bis(imino)pyridine-iron(II)] complex efficiently catalyses the oxidation of
C(sp3)-H bonds by dihydrogen peroxide, through the attack of the alkyl substrate 
by hydroxyl radicals.

PMID: 17940643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Neurodegener Dis. 2007;4(6):413-23. Epub 2007 Oct 9.

Sp3 and sp4 transcription factor levels are increased in brains of patients with 
Alzheimer's disease.

Boutillier S(1), Lannes B, Buée L, Delacourte A, Rouaux C, Mohr M, Bellocq JP,
Sellal F, Larmet Y, Boutillier AL, Loeffler JP.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U692, Laboratoire de Signalisations Moléculaires et
Neurodégénérescence, Strasbourg, France.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by extracellular Abeta
peptide deposition originating from amyloid precursor protein cleavage and
intracellular neurofibrillary tangles resulting from pathological tau protein
aggregation. These processes are accompanied by dramatic neuronal losses, further
leading to different cognitive impairments. Neuronal death signalings involve
gene expression modifications that rely on transcription factor alterations.
Herein, we investigated the fate of the Sp family of transcription factors in
postmortem brains from patients with AD disease and in different contexts of
neuronal death.
METHODS/RESULTS: By immunohistochemistry we found that the Sp3 and Sp4 levels
were dramatically increased and associated with neurofibrillary tangles and
pathological tau presence in neurons from the CA1 region of the hippocampus, as
well as the entorhinal cortex of AD patient brains. The Sp transcription factor
expression levels were further analyzed in cortical neurons in which death is
induced by amyloid precursor protein signaling targeting. While the Sp1 levels
remained constant, the Sp4 levels were slightly upregulated in response to the
death signal. The Sp3 isoforms were rather degraded. Interestingly, when
overexpressed by transfection experiments, the three Sp family members induced
neuronal apoptosis, Sp3 and Sp4 being the most potent proapoptotic factors over
Sp1.
CONCLUSION: Our data evidence Sp3 and Sp4 as new hallmarks of AD in postmortem
human brains and further point out that Sp proteins are potential triggers of
neuronal death signaling cascades.

Copyright (c) 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 17934324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Org Chem. 2007 Nov 9;72(23):8994-7. Epub 2007 Oct 11.

Delta and alpha SP(3) C-H bond oxidation of sulfonamides with PhI(OAc)(2)/I(2)
under metal-free conditions.

Fan R(1), Pu D, Wen F, Wu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. rhfan@fudan.edu.cn

An efficient delta and alpha sp3 C-H bond oxidation of sulfonamides with
PhI(OAc)2/I2 under metal-free conditions has been reported. The reaction provides
a useful route to pyrrolidines, N-sulfonylimines, and various sulfonamide
derivatives. The potential of this reaction system can be evaluated by its mild
condition and simple process.

PMID: 17929871  [PubMed]


105. Chemistry. 2008;14(2):741-6.

Enantioselective nickel-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions of trialkynylindium
reagents with racemic secondary benzyl bromides.

Caeiro J(1), Pérez Sestelo J, Sarandeses LA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Fundamental, Universidade da Coruña, 15071 A Coruña,
Spain.

The first enantioselective sp-sp3 cross-coupling reaction between alkynyl
organometals and racemic benzyl bromides is reported. The coupling is performed
at room temperature by using NiBr2diglyme and (S)-(iPr)-Pybox as the catalytic
system and trialkynylindium reagents as nucleophiles. The reaction is
stereoconvergent, both enantiomers of the racemic benzyl bromide are converted
into one enantiomer of the product, and stereospecific. The reaction takes place 
efficiently in good yields and with high atom economy, as the triorganoindium
reagents transfer the three organic groups attached to indium (only 40 mol % of
R3In is used).

PMID: 17929335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Chem Asian J. 2007 Dec 3;2(12):1568-73.

O-alkyl S-3,3-dimethyl-2-oxobutyl dithiocarbonates as versatile sulfur-transfer
agents in radical C(sp3)-H functionalization.

Sato A(1), Yorimitsu H, Oshima K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Material Chemistry, Graduate School of Engineering, Kyoto
University, Kyoto-daigaku Katsura, Nishikyo, Kyoto 615-8510, Japan.

Boiling of the title compounds in ethereal solvents or cycloalkanes in the
presence of a radical initiator leads to radical C(sp3)-H functionalization, by
which a sulfur atom is introduced into the ethereal solvents at the oxygenated
carbon atom or into the cycloalkanes. Both acyclic and cyclic ethers, such as
[18]crown-6 and [D8]THF, undergo the sulfur transfer. The reaction is useful for 
the synthesis of monothioacetals, thiols, and sulfides from simple starting
materials.

PMID: 17929230  [PubMed]


107. Biochemistry. 2007 Nov 6;46(44):12868-74. Epub 2007 Oct 10.

Determination of the structure of tetrahedral transition state analogues bound at
the active site of chymotrypsin using 18O and 2H isotope shifts in the 13C NMR
spectra of glyoxal inhibitors.

Spink E(1), Hewage C, Malthouse JP.

Author information: 
(1)UCD School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science, Centre for Synthesis and
Chemical Biology, UCD Conway Institute, University College Dublin, Dublin 4,
Ireland.

The peptide-derived glyoxal inhibitor Z-Ala-Pro-Phe-glyoxal, where Z is
benzyloxycarbonyl, is an extremely potent inhibitor of chymotrypsin. When it is
bound to chymotrypsin both the glyoxal (RCOCHO) keto and aldehyde carbons are sp3
hybridized with chemical shifts of 100.7 and 91.4 ppm, respectively. However it
is has not been shown whether these carbons are bound as hydrates or whether the 
active-site serine has reacted with them to form the corresponding hemiketal or
hemiacetal. In this study we use 18O isotope shifts to determine whether one or
two exchangeable oxygen atoms are attached to the glyoxal keto or aldehyde
carbons when it is free in water or bound to alpha-chymotrypsin. Both the 18O
isotope shifts at the free and enzyme-bound aldehyde carbons were approximately
0.04 ppm showing that it is hydrated in both the free and bound forms. The 18O
isotope shift for the free hydrated keto carbon at 96.6 ppm was 0.046-0.049 ppm, 
but this was reduced to 0.026 ppm when the glyoxal inhibitor was bound to
alpha-chymotrypsin showing that the nonexchangeable serine hydroxyl group has
formed a hemiketal with glyoxal keto carbon. Deuterium isotope shifts on the 13C 
NMR signals from the glyoxal inhibitor when it free and hydrated, when it is
bound to chymotrypsin, as well as when it forms a model hemiketal confirm that
the serine hydroxyl group has formed a hemiketal with the glyoxal keto carbon.
The reasons for the different reaction specificities of glyoxal inhibitors for
the active-site nucleophiles of serine and cysteine proteases are discussed.

PMID: 17927215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Org Chem. 2007 Nov 9;72(23):8770-9. Epub 2007 Oct 9.

Energetics of the allyl group.

Agapito F(1), Nunes PM, Cabral BJ, dos Santos RM, Simões JA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química e Bioquímica, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de
Lisboa, 1749-016, Lisboa, Portugal.

Aiming to improve our understanding of the stability of radicals containing the
allylic moiety, carbon-hydrogen bond dissociation enthalpies (BDEs) in propene,
isobutene, 1-butene, (E)-2-butene, 3-metylbut-1-ene, (E)-2-pentene,
(E)-1,3-pentadiene, 1,4-pentadiene, cyclohexene, 1,3-cyclohexadiene, and
1,4-cyclohexadiene have been determined by quantum chemistry calculations. The
BDEs in cyclohexene, 1,3-cyclohexadiene, and 1,4-cyclohexadiene have also been
obtained by time-resolved photoacoustic calorimetry. The theoretical study
involved a DFT method as well as ab initio complete basis-set approaches,
including the composite CBS-Q and CBS-QB3 procedures, and basis-set extrapolated 
coupled-cluster calculations (CCSD(T)). By taking the C(sp3)-H BDE in propene as 
a reference, we have concluded that one methyl group bonded to C3 in propene
(i.e., 1-butene) leads to a decrease of 12 kJ mol(-1) and that a second methyl
group bonded to C3 (3-methylbut-1-ene) further decreases the BDE by 8 kJ mol(-1).
When the methyl group is bonded to C2 in propene (isobutene), an increase of 7 kJ
mol(-1) is observed. Finally, a methyl group bonded to C1 in propene (2-butene)
has essentially no effect (-1 kJ mol(-1)). While this trend can be rationalized
in terms of stabilization of the corresponding radical (through hyperconjugation 
and pi-delocalization), the BDE values observed for the dienes can only be
understood by considering the thermodynamic stabilities of the parent compounds.

PMID: 17924695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Dec;27(24):8571-82. Epub 2007 Oct 8.

Transcription factor Sp3 knockout mice display serious cardiac malformations.

van Loo PF(1), Mahtab EA, Wisse LJ, Hou J, Grosveld F, Suske G, Philipsen S,
Gittenberger-de Groot AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Mice lacking the zinc finger transcription factor specificity protein 3 (Sp3) die
prenatally in the C57BL/6 background. To elucidate the cause of mortality we
analyzed the potential role of Sp3 in embryonic heart development. Sp3 null
hearts display defective looping at embryonic day 10.5 (E10.5), and at E14.5 the 
Sp3 null mutants have developed a range of severe cardiac malformations. In an
attempt to position Sp3 in the cardiac developmental hierarchy, we analyzed the
expression patterns of >15 marker genes in Sp3 null hearts. Expression of cardiac
ankyrin repeat protein (Carp) was downregulated prematurely after E12.5, while
expression of the other marker genes was not affected. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that Sp3 is bound to the Carp promoter
region in vivo. Microarray analysis indicates that small-molecule metabolism and 
cell-cell interactions are the most significantly affected biological processes
in E12.5 Sp3 null myocardium. Since the epicardium showed distension from the
myocardium, we studied expression of Wt1, a marker for epicardial cells. Wt1
expression was diminished in epicardium-derived cells in the myocardium of Sp3
null hearts. We conclude that Sp3 is required for normal cardiac development and 
suggest that it has a crucial role in myocardial differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2169408
PMID: 17923686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Org Chem. 2007 Oct 26;72(22):8371-5. Epub 2007 Oct 6.

Solvent-controlled stereoselective formation of a cyclic ether in the lewis
acid-mediated allylation of an alpha-chloroacetoxy acyclic ether. Very high
stereoselectivity in CH3CN vs low stereoselectivity in CH2Cl2.

Gridnev ID(1), Kikuchi S, Touchy AS, Kadota I, Yamamoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University, Sendai
980-8578, Japan.

The MgBr2.OEt2-mediated intramolecular allylation of a 4:1 diastereoisomeric
mixture of the alpha-chloroacetoxyl ether 1a bearing the A-G/JK ring system of
brevetoxin B in CH2Cl2 gave a 1:1 diastereoisomeric mixture of the trans- and
cis-cyclization products 4a and 5a having the A-G/I-K ring system, while that in 
CH3CN afforded the trans-isomer 4a nearly as the single product. To help clarify 
a reason for this marked solvent effect in the cyclization of the brevetoxin B
precursor, DFT computations for the starting materials, intermediates, transition
states, and products were carried out. The cyclization would proceed through a
carbocation intermediate 3a having sp2 flat structure (SN1 type mechanism) in
CH2Cl2, in which the activation energies leading to both diastereoisomers are
approximately identical, while in CH3CN alkylnitrilium salts 6a would be formed
through the coordination of CH3CN to the carbocation leading to an sp3-type
intermediate in which sever steric hindrance takes place in the transition state 
leading to the undesired diastereoisomer. The scope of this novel
solvent-controlled stereoselectivity was tested for simple compounds. In small
model compounds the marked solvent dependence was absent, but the model bearing
two consecutive cyclic ether rings 1b exhibited a remarkable solvent effect
similar to that observed in the brevetoxin B system.

PMID: 17918999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Org Lett. 2007 Oct 25;9(22):4507-9. Epub 2007 Oct 5.

Grignard reagents: alkoxide-directed iodine-magnesium exchange at sp3 centers.

Fleming FF(1), Gudipati S, Vu VA, Mycka RJ, Knochel P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Duquesne University, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania 15282-1530, USA. flemingf@duq.edu

Sequential addition of i-PrMgCl and BuLi to sp3 hybridized iodoalcohols triggers 
a facile iodine-metal exchange. Intercepting the resulting cyclic Grignard
reagents with a slight excess of an electrophile leads to a diverse range of
substituted alcohols. The iodine-magnesium exchange strategy is effective with
3-carbon iodoalcohols bearing alkyl substitutents on the carbinol or adjacent
carbons and with the chain-extended homolog 4-iodobutan-1-ol.

PMID: 17918855  [PubMed]


112. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2007;46(46):8790-5.

Ni-catalyzed cascade formation of C(sp3)--C(sp3) bonds by cyclization and
cross-coupling reactions of iodoalkanes with alkyl zinc halides.

Phapale VB(1), Buñuel E, García-Iglesias M, Cárdenas DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Orgánica, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Cantoblanco,
28049 Madrid, Spain.

PMID: 17918274  [PubMed]


113. J Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Oct;39(4):289-304.

Role of specificity protein transcription factors in estrogen-induced gene
expression in MCF-7 breast cancer cells.

Khan S(1), Wu F, Liu S, Wu Q, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A & M University, 
College Station, Texas 77843-4466, USA.

Deletion analysis of several 17beta-estradiol (E(2))-responsive genes have
identified GC-rich sites that are associated with hormone-induced transactivation
in MCF-7 breast cancer cells. However, the role of individual specificity
proteins (Sps) in mediating hormone-induced gene expression has not been
unequivocally determined. In transient transfection studies using E(2)-responsive
GC-rich promoters from the E(2)F1, carbamoylphosphate synthetase/aspartate
transcarbamylase/dihydroorotase (CAD), and retinoic acid receptor alpha (RAR
alpha) genes, RNA interference using small inhibitory RNAs for Sp1 (iSp1), Sp3
(iSp3), and Sp4 (iSp4) decreased both basal and E(2)-induced transactivation. The
contributions of individual Sp proteins to basal and E(2)-induced activity were
promoter dependent. iSp1, iSp3, and iSp4 also significantly inhibited hormonal
induction of E(2)F1, CAD, and RAR alpha mRNA levels; however, the enhanced
inhibitory effects of the latter two small inhibitory RNAs suggest that Sp3 and
Sp4 play a major role in estrogen receptor alpha/Sp-mediated gene expression in
MCF-7 cells.

PMID: 17909268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Leukoc Biol. 2008 Jan;83(1):190-9. Epub 2007 Sep 28.

The interaction with Sp1 and reduction in the activity of histone deacetylase 1
are critical for the constitutive gene expression of IL-1 alpha in human melanoma
cells.

Enya K(1), Hayashi H, Takii T, Ohoka N, Kanata S, Okamoto T, Onozaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Health Sciences, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Nagoya City University, 3-1 Tanabe-dori, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya, Aichi
467-8603, Japan.

A375-6 human melanoma cells are sensitive to the antiproliferative effect of
IL-1. After a long period of culturing, we have obtained cells resistant to IL-1.
The resistant clone A375-R8 constitutively produced IL-1 alpha. In this study, we
identified a sequence, CGCC, located at -48 to -45 upstream of the transcription 
start site, to be essential for the constitutive IL-1 alpha gene activation.
Specificity protein 1 (Sp1) and Sp3 bound to the nucleotide containing the
sequence. Although the binding level to the nucleotide and expression level of
Sp1 and Sp3 are comparable in A375-R8 and A375-6 cells, transactivation activity 
of Sp1 is higher in A375-R8 cells as compared with A375-6 cells. Sp3 could not
transactivate the IL-1 alpha promoter. These results suggest that Sp1 but not Sp3
is important for IL-1 alpha gene activation. Trichostatin A (TSA), an inhibitor
of histone deacetylase (HDAC), greatly augmented the IL-1 alpha promoter activity
in A375-6 cells to the level comparable with that in A375-R8 cells. TSA also
induced IL-1 alpha mRNA expression in A375-6 cells. Sp1 and Sp3 bound to HDAC1 in
A375-R8 and A375-6 cells. The chromatin immunoprecipitation assay revealed the
binding of Sp1 and HDAC1 to the promoter region of the IL-1 alpha gene. The
activities of HDAC bound to Sp1 and Sp3, and that of HDAC1 was lower in A375-R8
cells as compared with A375-6 cells. These results indicate that the reduction in
the activity and interaction of HDAC1 with Sp1 are critical for the constitutive 
IL-1 alpha gene expression.

PMID: 17906119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Oct;1771(10):1271-82. Epub 2007 Aug 17.

The histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A mediates upregulation of
5-lipoxygenase promoter activity by recruitment of Sp1 to distinct GC-boxes.

Schnur N(1), Seuter S, Katryniok C, Rådmark O, Steinhilber D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Chemistry/ZAFES, University of Frankfurt,
Max-von-Laue-Str. 9, D-60438 Frankfurt, Germany.

The histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A (TsA) potently induces
5-lipoxygenase (5-LO) promoter activity in reporter gene assays as well as 5-LO
mRNA expression. We identified two proximal Sp1/Sp3 binding sites in the 5-LO
gene promoter mediating the TsA effect in both 5-LO-negative HeLa cells and in
5-LO expressing Mono Mac 6 (MM6) cells, the tandem GC-boxes, by contrast, were
not important for the TsA effect. TsA neither altered the protein expression
levels of Sp1/Sp3 nor of the histone deacetylases HDAC1/2, nor did it apparently 
change the protein complex formation by these factors. Also, treatment of cells
with TsA did not change the binding affinity of Sp1/Sp3 in cell extracts, as
tested by DAPA analysis using probes containing the proximal GC boxes. However,
in the living cell TsA induced Sp1, Sp3 and RNA polymerase II recruitment to the 
5-LO promoter without changing the acetylation status of histone protein H4.
Cotransfection studies suggest that both Sp1 and Sp3 can mediate the TsA effect. 
This is the first report demonstrating that Sp3 is involved in the regulation of 
5-LO promoter activity. In summary, we show that TsA increases 5-LO promoter
activity by the enhanced recruitment of Sp1 and Sp3 to the 5-LO promoter.

PMID: 17894944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Cell Physiol. 2008 Apr;215(1):47-54.

High extracellular inorganic phosphate concentration inhibits RANK-RANKL
signaling in osteoclast-like cells.

Mozar A(1), Haren N, Chasseraud M, Louvet L, Mazière C, Wattel A, Mentaverri R,
Morlière P, Kamel S, Brazier M, Mazière JC, Massy ZA.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, ERI-12, Amiens, France.

In this work, we investigated the effect of inorganic phosphate (Pi) on the
differentiation of monocyte/macrophage precursors into an "osteoclastic"
phenotype, and we delineated the molecular mechanisms which could be involved in 
this phenomenon. This was achieved by stimulating human peripheral blood
monocytic cells and RAW 264.7 monocyte-macrophage precursor cells to
differentiate into osteoclast-like cells in the presence of receptor activator of
NF-kappaB ligand (RANKL) and macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF). RANKL 
has been previously reported to stimulate the signaling kinases ERK 1/2, p38,
Akt, JNK, and the DNA-binding activity of the transcription factors AP-1 and
NF-kappaB. Increase in extracellular Pi concentration (1.5-4.5 mM)
dose-dependently inhibits both osteoclastic differentiation and bone resorption
activity induced by RANKL and M-CSF. Pi was found to specifically inhibit the
RANKL-induced JNK and Akt activation, while RANKL-induced p38 and ERK 1/2
phosphorylation were not significantly affected. Moreover, we found that Pi
significantly reduced the RANKL-stimulated DNA-binding activity of NF-kappaB. The
effects of Pi on osteoclast differentiation and DNA-binding activity of NF-kappaB
were prevented by Foscarnet, a sodium-phosphate cotransport inhibitor, suggesting
that the effects of Pi occur subsequently to its intake. These results
demonstrate that Pi downregulates the differentiation of osteoclasts via a
negative feedback exerted on RANK-RANKL signaling.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17894387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2008 May;57(5):655-62. Epub 2007 Sep 22.

Ly49G2 receptor blockade reduces tumor burden in a leukemia model but not in a
solid tumor model.

Barber MA(1), Zhang T, Gagne BA, Van Ginderachter JA, De Baetselier P, Sentman
CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Dartmouth Medical School, 6W
Borwell Bldg, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA.

BACKGROUND: NK cell activity is regulated in part by inhibitory receptors that
bind to MHC class I molecules. It is possible to enhance NK cell cytotoxicity
against tumor cells by preventing the interaction of these inhibitory receptors
with their MHC class I ligands.
RESULTS: In this study, we determined that Ly49G2 is an inhibitory receptor in
AKR mice for self-MHC class I, and AKR Ly49G2 has an identical sequence to BALB/c
Ly49G2. Blockade of Ly49G2 receptors in vivo resulted in decreased growth of
BW-Sp3 lymphoma cells when the tumor cells were given i.v. but not when the tumor
cells were inoculated into the flank forming a solid tumor. However, NK cells
were involved in inhibiting the growth of BW-Sp3 tumor cells in the flank.
CONCLUSION: These data demonstrate that the effectiveness of inhibitory receptor 
blockade depends upon the tissue location of the tumor cells.

PMID: 17891395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. N Engl J Med. 2007 Sep 20;357(12):1210-20.

A polymorphism in the CTGF promoter region associated with systemic sclerosis.

Fonseca C(1), Lindahl GE, Ponticos M, Sestini P, Renzoni EA, Holmes AM, Spagnolo 
P, Pantelidis P, Leoni P, McHugh N, Stock CJ, Shi-Wen X, Denton CP, Black CM,
Welsh KI, du Bois RM, Abraham DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Rheumatology, Royal Free and University College Medical School,
London, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2008 Jan 17;358(3):308-9; author reply 309.
    N Engl J Med. 2008 Jan 17;358(3):308; author reply 309.

BACKGROUND: Systemic sclerosis (scleroderma) is a life-threatening autoimmune
disease that is characterized by the presence of specific autoantibodies and
fibrosis of the skin and major internal organs.
METHODS: We genotyped a polymorphism (G-945C) in the promoter of the
connective-tissue growth factor (CTGF) gene in 1000 subjects in two groups: group
1, consisting of 200 patients with systemic sclerosis and 188 control subjects;
and group 2, consisting of 300 patients with systemic sclerosis and 312 control
subjects. The combined groups represented an estimated 10% of patients with
systemic sclerosis in the United Kingdom. We tested the effect of the
polymorphism on the transcription of CTGF.
RESULTS: The GG genotype was significantly more common in patients with systemic 
sclerosis than in control subjects in both groups, with an odds ratio for the
combined group of 2.2 (95% confidence interval [CI], 1.5 to 3.2; P<0.001 for
trend). Analysis of the combined group of patients with systemic sclerosis showed
a significant association between homozygosity for the G allele and the presence 
of anti-topoisomerase I antibodies (odds ratio, 3.3; 95% CI, 2.0 to 5.6; P<0.001)
and fibrosing alveolitis (odds ratio, 3.1; 95% CI, 1.9 to 5.0; P<0.001). We
observed that the substitution of cytosine for guanine created a binding site of 
the transcriptional regulators Sp1 and Sp3. The C allele has high affinity for
Sp3 and is associated with severely reduced transcriptional activity. A chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay showed a marked shift in the ratio of Sp1 to Sp3
binding at this region, demonstrating functional relevance in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: The G-945C substitution represses CTGF transcription, and the -945G 
allele is significantly associated with susceptibility to systemic sclerosis.

Copyright 2007 Massachusetts Medical Society.

PMID: 17881752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Nov;27(22):7871-85. Epub 2007 Sep 17.

In vivo analysis of developmentally and evolutionarily dynamic protein-DNA
interactions regulating transcription of the Pgk2 gene during mammalian
spermatogenesis.

Yoshioka H(1), Geyer CB, Hornecker JL, Patel KT, McCarrey JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas 
78249, USA.

Transcription of the testis-specific Pgk2 gene is selectively activated in
primary spermatocytes to provide a source of phosphoglycerate kinase that is
critical to normal motility and fertility of mammalian spermatozoa. We examined
dynamic changes in protein-DNA interactions at the Pgk2 gene promoter during
murine spermatogenesis in vivo by performing genomic footprinting and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays with enriched populations of murine spermatogenic
cells at stages prior to, during, and following transcription of this gene. We
found that genes encoding the testis-specific homeodomain factor PBX4 and its
coactivator, PREP1, are expressed in patterns that mirror expression of the Pgk2 
gene and that these factors become bound to the Pgk2 enhancer in cells in which
this gene is actively expressed. We therefore suggest that these factors, along
with CREM and SP3, direct stage- and cell type-specific transcription of the Pgk2
gene during spermatogenesis. We propose that binding of PBX4, plus its
coactivator PREP1, is a rate-limiting step leading to the initiation of
tissue-specific transcription of the Pgk2 gene. This study provides insight into 
the developmentally dynamic establishment of tissue-specific protein-DNA
interactions in vivo. It also allows us to speculate about the events that led to
tissue-specific regulation of the Pgk2 gene during mammalian evolution.

PMCID: PMC2169153
PMID: 17875925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Am Chem Soc. 2007 Oct 10;129(40):12131-40. Epub 2007 Sep 15.

Functionalization of zeolitic cavities: grafting NH2 groups in framework T sites 
of B-SSZ-13--a way to obtain basic solids catalysts?

Regli L(1), Bordiga S, Busco C, Prestipino C, Ugliengo P, Zecchina A, Lamberti C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Inorganic, Physical and Materials Chemistry, NIS Centre of
Excellence, and Centro di Riferimento INSTM, University of Turin, Via P. Giuria
7, I-10125, Torino, Italy.

Insertion of B atoms into an Al-free zeolitic framework with CHA topology results
in the formation of B-SSZ-13 zeotype with Si/B = 11. B K-edge NEXAFS testifies
that B forms [B(OSi)4] units in a Td-like geometry (sp3-hybridized B atoms).
According to B K-edge NEXAFS and IR, template burning results in the formation of
[B(OSi)3] units in a D3h-like geometry (sp2-hybridized B atoms) with a break of a
B-O-Si bond and the formation of a Si-OH group. The activated material contains
B(III) Lewis acid centers able to specifically coordinate bases like NH3. Such
[B(OSi)3] units are reactive toward ammonia, resulting in the formation of B-NH2 
surface functionality inside the pores of B-SSZ-13 already under mild conditions,
i.e., 35 mbar of NH3 at 373 K for 30 min and without crystallinity degradation. A
minor fraction of Si-NH2 cannot be excluded owing to the presence of two IR
doublets at 3500 and 3430 cm-1 and at 1600 and 1550 cm-1. Ab initio
B3LYP/6-31+G(d,p) calculations on a cluster model, supported by a single-point
MP2 on B3LYP/6-31+G(D,P) optimized structures, found the break by NH3 of a B-O-Si
bond of the [B(OSi)3] unit with formation of [SiOH] and [H2N-B(OSi)2] species to 
be energetically favored. Comparison between experimental and computed frequency 
shifts shows them to be in semiquantitative agreement. The high stability of the 
B-NH2 surface functionality is probed by N K-edge NEXAFS spectra collected under 
UHV conditions. These findings can open a new route in the preparation of shape
selective solid basic catalysts.

PMID: 17867687  [PubMed]


121. J Invest Dermatol. 2008 Mar;128(3):549-57. Epub 2007 Sep 13.

Crucial roles of MZF1 and Sp1 in the transcriptional regulation of the
peptidylarginine deiminase type I gene (PADI1) in human keratinocytes.

Dong S(1), Ying S, Kojima T, Shiraiwa M, Kawada A, Méchin MC, Adoue V, Chavanas
S, Serre G, Simon M, Takahara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biological Resource Sciences, School of Agriculture,
Ibaraki University, Ami-machi, Inashiki-gun, Ibaraki, Japan.

Peptidylarginine deiminases (PADs) catalyze the conversion of protein-bound
arginine residues into citrulline residues in a calcium-dependent manner. The
PAD1 gene (PADI1) is expressed in a few tissues, including the epidermis, where
the protein is detected with a higher level in the more differentiated
keratinocytes. Using quantitative reverse transcription-PCR experiments, we show 
that PADI1 mRNAs are more abundant in keratinocytes cultured with 1.2 than 0.15
mM calcium. We cloned and characterized the promoter region using human
keratinocytes transfected with variously deleted fragments of the 5'-upstream
region of PADI1 coupled to the luciferase gene. We found that as few as 195 bp
upstream from the transcription initiation site were sufficient to direct
transcription of the reporter gene. Mutations of MZF1- or Sp1-binding sites
markedly reduced PADI1 promoter activity. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
revealed that MZF1 and Sp1/Sp3 bind to this region in vivo. Furthermore, MZF1 or 
Sp1 small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) effectively diminished PADI1 expression in
keratinocytes cultured in both low- and high-calcium-containing medium. In
addition, the expression of MZF1 and PAD1 increased in parallel when normal human
epidermal keratinocytes underwent differentiation. These data indicate that MZF1 
and Sp1/Sp3 binding to the promoter region drive the PADI1 expression.

PMID: 17851584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Chem Commun (Camb). 2007 Jun 21;(23):2378-80.

Evaluation of planarity and aromaticity in sapphyrin and inverted sapphyrin using
a bidirectional NICS (Nucleus-Independent Chemical Shift) scan method?

Yoon ZS(1), Noh SB, Cho DG, Sessler JL, Kim D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Yonsei University, Seoul 120-749, Korea.

Using the bidirectional NICS scan method in conjunction with two-photon
absorption (TPA) measurements, it has proved possible to determine the
relationship between pi-conjugation and aromaticity in two structurally related
expanded porphyrin systems, sapphyrin and inverted sapphyrin, and establish that 
differences in these defining factors depend on the presence or absence of a key 
sp3 hybrid molecular orbital within the macrocyclic periphery.

PMID: 17844752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Chem Commun (Camb). 2007 Jun 21;(23):2342-4.

Alkynylation of alpha-halocarbonyl compounds--a stille-type cross-coupling for
the formation of C(sp)-C(sp3) bonds under neutral conditions.

Shi W(1), Liu C, Yu Z, Lei A.

Author information: 
(1)College of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, P R
China.

A direct alkynylation of readily available alpha-halo esters and amides with high
yields is described herein; a distinct switch from diyne formation to
alkynylation products was attained under neutral conditions.

PMID: 17844740  [PubMed]


124. J Biol Chem. 2007 Nov 9;282(45):33227-36. Epub 2007 Sep 7.

Differential distribution of unmodified and phosphorylated histone deacetylase 2 
in chromatin.

Sun JM(1), Chen HY, Davie JR.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology, University of Manitoba, 675 McDermot
Avenue, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.

Histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) is one of the histone-modifying enzymes that
regulate gene expression by remodeling chromatin structure. Along with HDAC1,
HDAC2 is found in the Sin3 and NuRD multiprotein complexes, which are recruited
to promoters by DNA-binding proteins. In this study, we show that the majority of
HDAC2 in human breast cancer cells is not phosphorylated. However, the minor
population of HDAC2, preferentially cross-linked to DNA by cisplatin, is mono-,
di-, or tri-phosphorylated. Furthermore, HDAC2 phosphorylation is required for
formation of Sin3 and NuRD complexes and recruitment to promoters by
transcription factors including p53, Rb, YY1, NF-kappaB, Sp1, and Sp3. Unmodified
HDAC2 requires linker DNA to associate with chromatin but is not cross-linked to 
DNA by formaldehyde. We provide evidence that unmodified HDAC2 is associated with
the coding region of transcribed genes, whereas phosphorylated HDAC2 is primarily
recruited to promoters.

PMID: 17827154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2008 Jun;62(1):85-96. Epub 2007 Sep 1.

Suppression of thymidine phosphorylase expression by promoter methylation in
human cancer cells lacking enzyme activity.

Guarcello V(1), Blanquicett C, Naguib FN, El Kouni MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Center
for AIDS Research, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294,
USA.

PURPOSE: Thymidine phosphorylase (TP, EC 2.4.2.4) activity varies in different
human cancer cell lines. Nevertheless, little is known about the regulatory
mechanisms of TP expression in such cancers. Promoter methylation of dinucleotide
cytosine-guanine (CpG) sites is a known mechanism of reversible gene expression
silencing.
METHODS: TP promoter methylation was investigated in five cancer cell lines
(SKBR-3, 786-O, HT-29, MDA-231, DLD-1). TP mRNA levels were determined by
real-time quantitative PCR. The degree of methylation was identified by bisulfite
sequencing. Minimal TP promoter activity was determined by Luciferase reporter
assays. DNA-protein interactions were evaluated by electrophoretic mobility shift
assays.
RESULTS: SKBR-3 cells exhibited the highest TP expression, 786-O, HT-29, and
MDA-231 cells exhibited intermediate TP expression, while DLD-1 cells did not
express TP as demonstrated by TP mRNA, protein, and enzyme activity levels.
SKBR-3 lacked methylation in the TP promoter, intron 1 and exon 1 regions, while 
DLD-1 showed extensive methylation. Treatment of DLD-1 and SKBR-3 with the
methylation-inhibitor, 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza-2dC), resulted in a
concentration-dependent increase in TP mRNA and protein levels in DLD-1 but not
SKBR-3 cells. Trichostatin-A treatment, a histone deacetylase inhibitor, improved
the 5-aza-2dC-induced TP re-activation. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays
demonstrated that methylation significantly inhibits transcription factor
binding. Supershift analyses suggest that the Sp1 and Sp3 (to a lesser degree)
transcription factors have a role in the regulation of TP expression.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that TP promoter methylation is a mechanism
for down-regulation of TP expression in cancer cells and may have implications in
modulating prognosis of cancer patients.

PMID: 17805539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Am Chem Soc. 2007 Sep 26;129(38):11750-5. Epub 2007 Sep 6.

Ruthenium catalyzed decarbonylative arylation at sp3 carbon centers in
pyrrolidine and piperidine heterocycles.

Gribkov DV(1), Pastine SJ, Schnürch M, Sames D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Columbia University, New York, New York 10027, USA.

This paper describes the development of a new catalytic transformation, the
ruthenium-catalyzed decarbonylative arylation of cyclic 2-amino esters, which
replaces the ester group with an aryl ring at the sp3 carbon center. For example,
proline ester amidine 1 is converted to 2-arylpyrrolidine 3 in the presence of
arylboronic acids or esters as arene donors and Ru(3)(CO)(12) as the catalyst.
This process provides a rapid access to a variety of 2-arylpyrrolidines and
piperidines from commercially available proline, hydroxyproline, and pipecolinate
esters. The examination of the substrate scope also showed that many arene
boronic acids and boronate esters serve as coupling partners. The high
chemoselectivity of this process was demonstrated and ascribed to the significant
rate difference between the decarbonylative arylation and the C-H arylation. The 
decarbonylative arylation complements the C-H arylation, since the latter process
lacks control over the extent of functionalization, affording a mixture of mono- 
and bis-arylpyrrolidines. When applied in tandem, these two processes provide
2,5-diarylpyrrolidines in two steps from the corresponding proline esters. It was
also demonstrated that the required amidine or iminocarbamate directing group
fulfills two major functions: first, it is essential for the ester activation
step, which occurs via the coordination-assisted metal insertion into the acyl
C-O bond; second, it facilitates the decarbonylation, via the stabilization of a 
metallacycle intermediate, assuring the formation of the 2-arylated products
instead of the corresponding ketones observed before by others.

PMCID: PMC2971670
PMID: 17803274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Eur J Cancer. 2007 Nov;43(16):2404-12. Epub 2007 Aug 30.

Green tea catechin (-)-epicatechin gallate induces tumour suppressor protein ATF3
via EGR-1 activation.

Cho KN(1), Sukhthankar M, Lee SH, Yoon JH, Baek SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Tennessee, 2407 River Drive, Knoxville, TN 37996, USA.

Epicatechin gallate (ECG) is the third major catechin component in green tea, but
it shows strong biological activity in some aspects, including apoptosis, cell
growth inhibition, and membrane transport system in various cells. We previously 
reported that ECG induces activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), which is
involved in pro-apoptosis in HCT-116 cells. In this report, we present a
molecular mechanism by which ECG induces ATF3 expression at the transcriptional
level. We found that Sp3 contributed to the basal expression of the ATF3 gene,
whereas EGR-1 played an important role in ECG-induced ATF3 expression in HCT-116 
cells, as assessed by EMSA and co-transfection experiments. These results
suggested that EGR-1, a tumour suppressor protein, could substantiate ECG's role 
of ATF3 expression in human colorectal cancer cells. We also found that
pro-oxidant activity of ECG contributed to ECG-induced ATF3 expression.

PMCID: PMC2174270
PMID: 17764926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Phys Chem A. 2007 Oct 4;111(39):9924-30. Epub 2007 Aug 31.

HC[triple bond]P and H3C-C[triple bond]P as proton acceptors in protonated
complexes containing two phosphorus bases: structures, binding energies, and
spin-spin coupling constants.

Alkorta I(1), Elguero J, Bene JE.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Química Médica, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, 
Juan de la Cierva, 3, E-28006 Madrid, Spain. ibon@iqm.csic.es

Ab initio calculations at the MP2/aug'-cc-pVTZ level have been carried out to
investigate the structures and binding energies of cationic complexes involving
protonated sp, sp2, and sp3 phosphorus bases as proton donor ions and the
sp-hybridized phosphorus bases H-C[triple bond]P and H3C-C[triple bond]P as
proton acceptors. These proton-bound complexes exhibit a variety of structural
motifs, but all are stabilized by interactions that occur through the pi cloud of
the acceptor base. The binding energies of these complexes range from 6 to 15
kcal/mol. Corresponding complexes with H3C-C[triple bond]P as the proton acceptor
are more stable than those with H-C[triple bond]P as the acceptor, a reflection
of the greater basicity of H3C-C[triple bond]P. In most complexes with sp2- or
sp3-hybridized P-H donor ions, the P-H bond lengthens and the P-H stretching
frequency is red-shifted relative to the corresponding monomers. Complex
formation also leads to a lengthening of the C[triple bond]P bond and a red shift
of the C[triple bond]P stretching vibration. The two-bond coupling constants
2pihJ(P-P) and 2pihJ(P-C) are significantly smaller than 2hJ(P-P) and 2hJ(P-C)
for complexes in which hydrogen bonding occurs through lone pairs of electrons on
P or C. This reflects the absence of significant s electron density in the
hydrogen-bonding regions of these pi complexes.

PMID: 17760429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Chem Commun (Camb). 2007 May 28;(20):2037-9.

Unusual nickel-mediated C-S cleavage of alkyl and aryl sulfoxides.

Schaub T(1), Backes M, Radius U.

Author information: 
(1)Universität Karlsruhe (TH), Institut für Anorganische Chemie, Engesserstr.,
Geb. 30.4, D-76131 Karlsruhe, Germany.

The first examples of transition metal mediated C-S cleavage of sulfoxides
containing sp2- and sp3-hybridized carbon bonds attached to the sulfur atom and
the first example of a structurally characterized complex featuring an
oxygen-bound sulfinyl ligand are presented.

PMID: 17713070  [PubMed]


130. J Biol Chem. 2007 Nov 2;282(44):32000-14. Epub 2007 Aug 13.

Human collagen Krox up-regulates type I collagen expression in normal and
scleroderma fibroblasts through interaction with Sp1 and Sp3 transcription
factors.

Kypriotou M(1), Beauchef G, Chadjichristos C, Widom R, Renard E, Jimenez SA, Korn
J, Maquart FX, Oddos T, Von Stetten O, Pujol JP, Galéra P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie du Tissu Conjonctif, Université de
Caen/Basse-Normandie, IFR ICORE 146, FacultédeMédecine, CHU Niveau 3, Avenue de
la Côte de Nacre, 14032 Caen Cedex, France.

Despite several investigations, the transcriptional mechanisms that regulate the 
expression of both type I collagen genes (COL1A1 and COL1A2) in either
physiological or pathological situations, such as scleroderma, are not completely
known. We have investigated the role of hc-Krox transcription factor on type I
collagen expression by human dermal fibroblasts. hc-Krox exerted a stimulating
effect on type I collagen protein synthesis and enhanced the corresponding mRNA
steady-state levels of COL1A1 and COL1A2 in foreskin fibroblasts (FF), adult
normal fibroblasts (ANF), and scleroderma fibroblasts (SF). Forced hc-Krox
expression was found to up-regulate COL1A1 transcription through a -112/-61-bp
sequence in FF, ANF, and SF. Knockdown of hc-Krox by short interfering RNA and
decoy strategies confirmed the transactivating effect of hc-Krox and decreased
substantially COL1A1 transcription levels in all fibro-blast types. The
-112/-61-bp sequence bound specifically hc-Krox but also Sp1 and CBF. Attempts to
elucidate the potential interactions between hc-Krox, Sp1, and Sp3 revealed that 
all of them co-immunoprecipitate from FF cellular extracts when a c-Krox antibody
was used and bind to the COL1A1 promoter in chromatin immunoprecipitation assays.
Moreover, hc-Krox DNA binding activity to its COL1A1-responsive element is
increased in SF, cells producing higher amounts of type I collagen compared with 
ANF and FF. These data suggest that the regulation of COL1A1 gene transcription
in human dermal fibroblasts involves a complex machinery that implicates at least
three transcription proteins, hc-Krox, Sp1, and Sp3, which could act in concert
to up-regulate COL1A1 transcriptional activity and provide evidence for a
pro-fibrotic role of hc-Krox.

PMID: 17698844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Org Lett. 2007 Sep 13;9(19):3813-6. Epub 2007 Aug 16.

Copper-catalyzed amidation of sp3 C-H bonds adjacent to a nitrogen atom.

Zhang Y(1), Fu H, Jiang Y, Zhao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Bioorganic Phosphorus Chemistry and Chemical Biology,
Ministry of Education, Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing
100084, PR China.

We have developed a novel copper-catalyzed amidation of unactivated sp(3) C-H
bonds adjacent to a nitrogen atom by using an inexpensive catalyst-oxidant
(CuBr/(t)BuOOH) system under mild conditions. The dephenylation was first found
for N-benzylaniline, and the new class of products provide diverse structures for
pharmaceuticals and combinatorial chemistry.

PMID: 17696547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Ernst Schering Found Symp Proc. 2006;(3):77-98.

Isoindolones and related N-heterocycles via palladium nanoparticle-catalyzed
3-component cascade reactions.

Grigg R(1), Sridharan V.

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry Department, Leeds University, LS2 9JT Leeds, UK.

Non-phosphine-containing cyclopalladated N-heterocycles possessing either sp2
C-Pd(II) or sp3 C-Pd(II) bonds and simple Pd(II) salts are precursors of Pd(0)
nanoparticles whose initial morphology is dependent on the nature of the
precursor. Addition of polyvinylpyrrolidone (pvp) dramatically increases catalyst
lifetime. Nanoparticle generation can be achieved at ambient temperature in the
presence of carbon monoxide by a process akin to the water-gas shift reaction.
Allene also lowers the temperature required for nanoparticle generation.
3-Component catalytic cascades employing one or both of these substrates provide 
access to a variety of 5- and 6-membered N-heterocycles including isoindolones,
N-aminoisoindolones, phthalazones, dihydroisoquinolines, and isoquinolones.

PMID: 17695711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. DNA Cell Biol. 2007 Sep;26(9):673-82.

Differences in the expression of cathepsin B in B16 melanoma metastatic variants 
depend on transcription factor Sp1.

Sitabkhan Y(1), Frankfater A.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Biology, Stritch School of Medicine, Loyola University of
Chicago, Maywood, Illinois 60153, USA.

Cathepsin B contributes to the invasiveness of B16 melanoma cells in mice, with
the highly metastatic B16a melanoma producing six- to eightfold more cathepsin B 
mRNA and protein than the less metastatic B16F1 variant. The proximal promoter
region of the cathepsin B (Ctsb) gene (-149 to +94) was previously found to be
capable of reproducing this pattern of differential gene activation in B16
melanoma variants. The binding of B16 melanoma nuclear proteins to this promoter 
region has now been mapped to three GC-boxes (Sp1 transcription factor binding
sites) and a potential X-box [tax response element (TRE)/c-AMP responsive element
(CRE) site]. Mutation of the GC-boxes at -55 and -37 independently decreased the 
expression of a luciferase reporter gene in B16a cells to the level observed in
B16F1 cells. Promoter activity was also attenuated by mutations within the
GC-rich segment between +6 and +16, but not by mutation of the putative X-box.
Both Sp1 and Sp3 bound the GC-boxes in the Ctsb promoter, and western blotting
showed the level of Sp1 to be greater in B16a compared to B16F1 cells. B16F1
cells that were made to express Sp1 at levels observed in B16a cells produced
corresponding increased amounts of endogenous cathepsin B mRNA and enzyme
activity. Thus, the difference in cathepsin B expression between high and low
metastatic B16 melanoma variants is largely due to different levels of Sp1.

PMID: 17691867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Mol Diagn. 2007 Sep;9(4):498-509. Epub 2007 Aug 9.

Undifferentiated small round cell sarcomas with rare EWS gene fusions:
identification of a novel EWS-SP3 fusion and of additional cases with the
EWS-ETV1 and EWS-FEV fusions.

Wang L(1), Bhargava R, Zheng T, Wexler L, Collins MH, Roulston D, Ladanyi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York
Ave., New York, NY 10021, USA.

Comment in
    J Mol Diagn. 2007 Sep;9(4):437-40.

Ewing family tumors (EFTs) are prototypical primitive small round blue cell
sarcomas arising in bone or extraskeletal soft tissues in children or
adolescents. EFTs show fusions of EWS with a gene of the ETS family of
transcription factors, either EWS-FLI1 (90 to 95%) or EWS-ERG (5 to 10%). Rare
cases with fusions of EWS to other ETS family genes, such as ETV1, E1AF, and FEV,
have been identified, but their clinicopathological similarity to classic EFTs
remains unclear. We report four new cases of EFT-like tumors with rare EWS
fusions, including two with EWS-ETV1, one with EWS-FEV, and a fourth case in
which we cloned a novel EWS-SP3 fusion, the first known cancer gene fusion
involving a gene of the Sp zinc finger family. Analysis of these three new cases 
along with data on nine previously reported cases with fusions of EWS to ETV1,
E1AF, or FEV suggest a strong predilection for extraskeletal primary sites.
EFT-like cases with fusions of EWS to non-ETS translocation partners are also
uncommon but involve the same amino-terminal portion of EWS, which in our novel
EWS-SP3 fusion is joined to the SP3 zinc-finger DNA-binding domain. As these data
further support, these types of EWS fusions are associated with primitive
extraskeletal small round cell sarcomas of uncertain lineage arising mainly in
the pediatric population.

PMCID: PMC1975108
PMID: 17690209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Cell Physiol. 2007 Nov;213(2):454-63.

Sp3-mediated VEGF regulation is dependent on phosphorylation by extra-cellular
signals regulated kinases (Erk).

Pagès G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Signalling, Developmental Biology and Cancer Research UMR CNRS
6543, University of Nice-Sophia Antipolis Equipe labellisée Ligue Nationale
contre le Cancer, France. gpages@unice.fr

We have previously demonstrated that phosphorylation by Erk of Sp1 was essential 
for its full activity in the context of the VEGF promoter. Here, we show that
Sp3, which, as Sp1, belongs to the GC-rich binding transcription factor family,
is also phosphorylated by Erk in vitro on serine 73. We have established cell
lines in which expression of wild-type Sp3 or a serine 73 to alanine (S73A)
mutant is controlled by tetracycline. One of these cells lines also express the
Raf:ER chimera which permits stimulation of Erk by tamoxifen. Difference in
electrophoretic mobility and antibody directed against the phosphorylated serine 
73 demonstrate that it is phosphorylated in vivo. Wild-type Sp3 half-life is
increased upon Erk activation but the S73 is poorly implicated in this mechanism 
suggesting that Erk-dependent Sp3 stability depends on other(s) domain(s) of the 
protein. Electro-mobility shift assays and utilization of Gal4/Sp3 chimeric
proteins show that Erk does not alter Sp3 DNA binding capacity but enhances its
transcriptional activity. The S73A mutant Sp3 posses a reduced activity in
Erk-stimulated cells. In the inducible cell lines, expression of wild-type form
of Sp3 increases VEGF production whereas the S73A form has a reduced potential
reflecting its lower transcriptional activity. Altogether our results described a
new link between constitutive Erk activity and the regulation of VEGF expression 
two common denominators implicated in tumor angiogenesis.

PMID: 17685427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. FEBS J. 2007 Sep;274(17):4476-90. Epub 2007 Aug 6.

Transcriptional activity and Sp 1/3 transcription factor binding to the P1
promoter sequences of the human AbetaH-J-J locus.

Feriotto G(1), Finotti A, Breveglieri G, Treves S, Zorzato F, Gambari R.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Center, University of Ferrara, Italy.

Alternative splicing of the locus AbetaH-J-J generates functionally distinct
proteins: the enzyme aspartyl (asparaginyl) beta-hydroxylase, humbug and junctate
(truncated homologs of aspartyl (asparaginyl) beta-hydroxylase with a role in
calcium regulation), and junctin (a structural protein of the sarcoplasmic
reticulum membrane). Aspartyl (asparaginyl) beta-hydroxylase and humbug are
overexpressed in a broad range of malignant neoplasms. We have previously
reported the gene structure of this locus, showing the presence of two putative
promoters, P1 and P2, and characterized the P2 sequences, directing
tissue-specific transcription of junctin, aspartyl (asparaginyl) beta-hydroxylase
and junctate. In addition, aspartyl (asparaginyl) beta-hydroxylase and humbug are
expressed from exon 1 by the P1 promoter. The present study identifies and
functionally characterizes the P1 promoter activity of the AbetaH-J-J locus. We
demonstrate that mRNAs from the P1 promoter are actively transcribed in all the
human tissues and cell lines analyzed, and define the transcription start point
in HeLa and RD cells. To investigate the transcription mechanism we cloned 1.7 kb
upstream of exon 1 from a human BAC clone, and produced progressively deleted
reporter constructs. Our results showed that: (a) the 1.7 kb fragment was a
powerful activator of the reporter gene in human hepatoblastoma (HepG2) and human
embryonic rhabdomyosarcoma (RD) cell lines; (b) 512 bp upstream of the
transcription start site were essential for maximal promoter activity; and (c)
progressive deletions from -512 resulted in gradually decreased reporter
expression. The region responsible for maximal transcription contains at least 12
GC boxes homologous to binding sequences of specific transcription factor 1
(Sp1); by electrophoretic mobility shift assay and supershift analysis, we
identified three GC-rich elements that bind Sp transcription factor family
nuclear factors with very high efficiency. A functional role of Sp transcription 
factors in upregulating P1-directed transcription was demonstrated by analysis of
the effects of: (a) in vitro mutagenesis of the Sp1 transcription factor binding 
sites; (b) transfection with Sp transcription factor 1/3 expression vectors; and 
(c) treatment with decoy oligonucleotides targeting Sp transcription factors. In 
addition, Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factor chromatin immunoprecipitation
demonstrated in vivo binding of these proteins to P1 promoter. Our results
suggest that Sp transcription factors positively regulate the core of the P1
promoter, and the comparison of the two promoters of the AbetaH-J-J locus
demonstrates that they are very different with regard to transcriptional
efficiency and ability to direct tissue-specific transcription.

PMID: 17681019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Phys Rev Lett. 2007 Jun 29;98(26):268501. Epub 2007 Jun 28.

Formation of sp3 hybridized bonds and stability of CaCO3 at very high pressure.

Arapan S(1), Souza de Almeida J, Ahuja R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Condensed Matter Theory Group, Upssala University, Box 
530, S-751 21 Upssala, Sweden. Sergiu.Arapan@fysik.uu.se

By performing ab initio electronic structure calculations, we observed a new
high-pressure phase transition within the Pmcn structure of CaCO3. This
transition is characterized by the change of the carbon's sp hybridization state 
and is driven by the intrinsic property of the carbon atom to form tetrahedral
covalent bonds at high pressure. The formation of sp(3) hybridized bonds explains
the stability of MgCO3 and CaCO3 at Earth's lower mantle pressure conditions and 
may serve as a criterion for searching new possible high-pressure phases of
carbon bearing minerals.

PMID: 17678133  [PubMed]


138. Phys Rev Lett. 2007 Jun 15;98(24):245501. Epub 2007 Jun 14.

Enhancing mechanical properties of multiwall carbon nanotubes via sp3 interwall
bridging.

Xia ZH(1), Guduru PR, Curtin WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering, The University of Akron, Akron, Ohio
44325, USA.

Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations under transverse shear, uniaxial compression,
and pullout loading configurations are reported for multiwall carbon nanotubes
(MWCNTs) with different fraction of interwall sp3 bonds. The interwall shear
coupling in MWCNTs is shown to have a strong influence on load transfer and
compressive load carrying capacity. A new continuum shear-coupled-shell model is 
developed to predict MWCNT buckling, which agrees very well with all MD results. 
This work demonstrates that MWCNTs can be engineered through control of interwall
sp3 coupling to increase load transfer, buckling strength, and energy dissipation
by nanotube pullout, all necessary features for good performance of
nanocomposites.

PMID: 17677972  [PubMed]


139. J Am Chem Soc. 2007 Aug 29;129(34):10522-30. Epub 2007 Aug 3.

Structure of tetracarbonylethyleneosmium: ethylene structure changes upon complex
formation.

Karunatilaka C(1), Tackett BS, Washington J, Kukolich SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona 85721,
USA.

Rotational spectra of seven isotopomers of tetracarbonylethyleneosmium,
Os(CO)4(eta2-C2H4), were measured in the 4-12 GHz range using a
Flygare-Balle-type pulsed-beam Fourier transform microwave spectrometer system.
Olefin-transition metal complexes of this type occur extensively in recent
organic syntheses and serve as important models for transition states in the
metal-mediated transformations of alkenes. Three osmium ((192)Os, (190)Os, and
(188)Os) and three unique 13C isotopomers (13C in ethylene, axial, and equatorial
positions) were observed in natural abundance. Additional spectra were measured
for a perdeuterated sample, Os(CO)4(eta2-C2D4). The measured rotational constants
for the main osmium isotopomer ((192)Os) are A = 929.3256(6), B = 755.1707(3),
and C = 752.7446(3) MHz, indicating a near-prolate asymmetric top molecule. The
approximately 140 assigned b-type transitions were fit using a Watson S-reduced
Hamiltonian including A, B, C, and five centrifugal distortion constants. A
near-complete r0 gas-phase structure has been determined from a least-squares
structural fit using eight adjustable structural parameters to fit the 21
measured rotational constants. Changes in the structure of ethylene on
coordination to Os(CO)4 are large and well-determined. For the complex, the
experimental ethylene C-C bond length is 1.432(5) A, which falls between the free
ethylene value of 1.3391(13) A and the ethane value of 1.534(2) A. The angle
between the plane of the CH2 group and the extended ethylene C-C bond (
angleout-of-plane) is 26.0(3) degrees , indicating that this complex is better
described as a metallacyclopropane than as a pi-bonded olefin-metal complex. The 
Os-C-C-H dihedral angle is 106.7(2) degrees , indicating that the ethylene carbon
atoms have near sp3 character in the complex. Kraitchman analysis of the
available rotational constants gave principal axis coordinates for the carbon and
hydrogen atoms in excellent agreement with the least-squares fit results. The new
results on this osmium complex are compared with earlier work on the similar
complex, tetracarbonylethyleneiron (Fe(CO)4(eta2-C2H4)). The ethylene structural 
changes upon coordination to the metal are found to be larger for the
ethylene-osmium complex than for the analogous ethylene-iron complex, consistent 
with the expected greater pi donation for the osmium atom.

PMID: 17676739  [PubMed]


140. J Biol Chem. 2007 Oct 19;282(42):31038-45. Epub 2007 Aug 1.

High glucose increases angiopoietin-2 transcription in microvascular endothelial 
cells through methylglyoxal modification of mSin3A.

Yao D(1), Taguchi T, Matsumura T, Pestell R, Edelstein D, Giardino I, Suske G,
Rabbani N, Thornalley PJ, Sarthy VP, Hammes HP, Brownlee M.

Author information: 
(1)Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation International Center for Diabetic
Complications Research, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York
10461, USA.

Methylglyoxal is a highly reactive dicarbonyl degradation product formed from
triose phosphates during glycolysis. Methylglyoxal forms stable adducts primarily
with arginine residues of intracellular proteins. The biologic role of this
covalent modification in regulating cell function is not known. Here we report
that in mouse kidney endothelial cells, high glucose causes increased
methylglyoxal modification of the corepressor mSin3A. Methylglyoxal modification 
of mSin3A results in increased recruitment of O-GlcNAc-transferase, with
consequent increased modification of Sp3 by O-linked N-acetylglucosamine. This
modification of Sp3 causes decreased binding to a glucose-responsive GC-box in
the angiopoietin-2 (Ang-2) promoter, resulting in increased Ang-2 expression.
Increased Ang-2 expression induced by high glucose increased expression of
intracellular adhesion molecule 1 and vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 in cells 
and in kidneys from diabetic mice and sensitized microvascular endothelial cells 
to the proinflammatory effects of tumor necrosis factor alpha. This novel
mechanism for regulating gene expression may play a role in the pathobiology of
diabetic vascular disease.

PMID: 17670746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Genes Cells. 2007 Aug;12(8):905-18.

The zinc finger repressor, ZBP-89, recruits histone deacetylase 1 to repress
vimentin gene expression.

Wu Y(1), Zhang X, Salmon M, Zehner ZE.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Biochemistry and the Massey Cancer Center, Medical College
of Virginia Campus of Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23298-0614, 
USA.

Vimentin, a member of the intermediate filament (IF) protein family, exhibits a
complex pattern of tissue- and developmental-specific expression. Although
vimentin is widely expressed in the embryo, its expression becomes restricted
during terminal differentiation. Moreover, it is often expressed in tissue
culture cells despite their embryological origin and is a marker for the
metastatic tumor cell. Previously, the vimentin promoter has been shown to
contain several positive- and negative-acting cis-elements. The negative elements
bind the transcription factor ZBP-89. Interestingly, ZBP-89 can be either an
activator or a repressor of gene expression. For instance, ZBP-89 has been shown 
to activate p21(waf1/cip1) expression by recruiting p300 to the p21 promoter.
Here, we have investigated the mechanism of ZBP-89 repression. The histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor TSA enhances vimentin gene expression requiring the 
proximal promoter region including GC-box 1, a known Sp1/Sp3 binding site.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays document an increase in the
acetylation status of histone H3 on the endogenous vimentin gene concomitant with
TSA treatment. However, EMSAs, DNA precipitation, co-immunoprecipitation and ChIP
data show that it is not Sp1, but rather ZBP-89, which recruits HDAC1. From these
studies we conclude that ZBP-89 functions as a repressor by recruiting HDAC1 to
the vimentin promoter.

PMID: 17663720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Anal Biochem. 2007 Oct 1;369(1):128-35. Epub 2007 Jun 22.

Extraction and analysis of lipophilic brevetoxins from the red tide
dinoflagellate Karenia brevis.

Twiner MJ(1), Bottein Dechraoui MY, Wang Z, Mikulski CM, Henry MS, Pierce RH,
Doucette GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Marine Biotoxins Program, Center for Coastal Environmental Health and
Biomolecular Research, NOAA/National Ocean Service, Charleston, SC 29412, USA.

Efficient extraction and accurate analysis of lipophilic brevetoxins (PbTxs),
produced by the harmful algal bloom (HAB) species Karenia brevis, are essential
when assessing the toxicological potential of this dinoflagellate. One of the
most commonly used brevetoxin extraction methodologies employs C18 solid-phase
extraction (SPE). In this study, C18 SPEC discs were tested for extraction of
spiked PbTx-3 in seawater and naturally produced brevetoxins from K. brevis.
Quantification of brevetoxin in the extracts was determined using four
independent methods: receptor binding assay (RBA), radioimmunoassay (RIA),
neuroblastoma (N2A) cytotoxicity assay, and liquid chromatography/mass
spectrometry (LC/MS). In addition to quantification of the brevetoxin
concentration, LC/MS analysis provided identification of individual congeners and
each of their hydrolyzed products. SPEC disc extractions prepared from sonicated 
cultures of non-brevetoxin-producing Karenia mikimotoi cultures spiked with
PbTx-3 yielded extraction efficiencies of 108, 99, and 125% as determined by the 
RBA, RIA, and N2A cytotoxicity assay, respectively. In SPEC disc extracts of
brevetoxin-producing K. brevis (isolate SP3) cultures, LC/MS analysis yielded the
highest total concentrations, possibly due to the concurrent detection of
hydrolytic brevetoxin congeners that accounted for up to 20% of the congener
profile. Relative to the brevetoxin concentration as determined by LC/MS, the
RBA, RIA, and N2A cytotoxicity assay detected 73, 83, and 51% of the total
brevetoxin concentration. Stability experiments demonstrated that brevetoxins
remain stable on the SPEC discs for at least 30 days, making this extraction
method suitable for shipboard collections.

PMID: 17662954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Endocrinology. 2007 Oct;148(10):4821-8. Epub 2007 Jul 26.

Estrogen regulates KiSS1 gene expression through estrogen receptor alpha and SP
protein complexes.

Li D(1), Mitchell D, Luo J, Yi Z, Cho SG, Guo J, Li X, Ning G, Wu X, Liu M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center, 2121
West Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Kisspeptins are natural ligands of G protein-coupled receptor-54. Activation of
KiSS1/G protein-coupled receptor-54 signaling pathways results in potent
activation of the hypothalamus-pituitary-gonadal axis and initiates puberty.
Recent data have shown that in female mice, KiSS1 is positively regulated by
estradiol (E(2)) in the anteroventral periventricular nucleus, an important
reproductive neuroendocrine brain region, but negatively regulated in the arcuate
nucleus. However, little is known about the molecular mechanisms governing
E(2)-modulated KiSS1 expression. Here, we demonstrate that the expression level
of the KiSS1 gene was up-regulated with the administration of E(2) in estrogen
receptor alpha (ERalpha)-positive hypothalamic GT1-7 cells. Using transient
transfection of human KiSS1 gene promoter coupled to a luciferase reporter, E(2) 
increases promoter activity in the presence of ERalpha. Deletion analysis of
KiSS1 promoter indicates that the E(2)-regulated increase in promoter activity
depends on the Sp1 sites of the proximal promoter region. Using both EMSAs and
chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis, we determined that both Sp1 and Sp3
proteins constitutively associate with the four putative Sp1 sites in vitro,
whereas the association of ERalpha with the KiSS1 promoter is dependent on E(2)
exposure. Sp1 and ERalpha form a complex in vivo to mediate the E(2)-induced
activation of KiSS1 promoter. Interestingly, Sp1 transactivates KiSS1 promoter
activity, whereas Sp3 functions as a transcriptional repressor. Together, these
results demonstrate that E(2)-dependent transcriptional activation of KiSS1 gene 
is mediated by ERalpha through the interaction of Sp1/Sp3 proteins with the
GC-rich motifs of KiSS1 promoter, providing a molecular mechanism of how steroid 
hormone feedback regulates KiSS1 expression.

PMID: 17656465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2007 Jun;7(6):2092-5.

A study of polyaniline deposited nanocrystalline diamond films for glucose
detection.

Xu Z(1), Jeedigunta S, Kumar A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL
33620, USA.

Nitrogen-doped nanocrystalline diamond (NCD) films have been deposited on Si
substrates in CH4/Ar/N2 gas mixtures by the microwave plasma enhanced chemical
vapor deposition (MPECVD) technique. Such films contain very small diamond grains
(10 to 30 nm) with high electrical conductivity (126 ohms(-1) cm(-1)) compared to
un-doped ones. The films were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM)
and Raman spectroscopy. Near edge X-ray fine structure studies showed that the
nitrogen-doped NCD had slightly higher sp2/sp3 bonding ratio compared to the
un-doped sample. A nitrogen-doped NCD electrode was functionalized by conducting 
polymer films (polyaniline) to work as an interface for biomedical applications. 
Glucose sensing has been demonstrated based on this functionalized electrode.
Linear response of the sensor has been observed for glucose concentration up to 9
mM.

PMID: 17654998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2007 Aug;48(8):3490-505.

Laminin reduces expression of the human alpha6 integrin subunit gene by altering 
the level of the transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3.

Gaudreault M(1), Vigneault F, Leclerc S, Guérin SL.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology and Molecular Endocrinology Research Center and the.

PURPOSE: Damage to the corneal epithelium results in the massive secretion of
fibronectin (FN) shortly after corneal injury, which is later replaced by the
secretion of laminin (LM). Laminin is recognized by receptors (alpha6beta1 and
alpha6beta4) that belong to the integrin family. The authors characterized the
regulatory influence exerted by laminin on the Sp1/Sp3-mediated alpha6 gene
promoter function.
METHODS: Recombinant plasmids bearing the CAT reporter gene, fused to various
segments from the alpha6 promoter, were transfected into rabbit corneal
epithelial cells (RCECs) grown on untreated or on LM-coated culture plates or
into Sp1-deficient Drosophila Schneider cells. Expression and DNA binding of
Sp1/Sp3 was monitored with the use of Western blot and electrophoretic mobility
shift assays (EMSAs), respectively. DNA target sites for Sp1/Sp3 in the alpha6
gene promoter were identified in vitro by DNAse I footprinting. Binding of Sp1
and of a few other transcription factors was also examined in vivo by chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays. Expression of the alpha6 mRNA in RCECs grown
on LM-coated culture plates was also assessed by Northern blot and RT-PCR
analyses.
RESULTS: Transfection experiments provided evidence that both Sp1 and Sp3
positively influence alpha6 promoter activity in Sp1/Sp3-deficient SL2 Schneider 
cells. Two GC-rich target sites for Sp1/Sp3 (a proximal and a distal site) were
identified in the alpha6 promoter by DNAse I footprinting. Binding of Sp1/Sp3 was
further validated in vivo by ChIP. Transfections conducted into RCECs grown on
LM-coated culture plates resulted in repression of the activity directed by the
alpha6 promoter. This LM-mediated negative regulatory influence also translated
into a similar reduction in the expression of the endogenous alpha6 mRNA as
revealed by both RT-PCR and Northern blot analyses. Most of all, results from
EMSA and Western blot analyses suggested that the LM-mediated repression of the
alpha6 promoter activity results in part from the proteolytic cleavage of
Sp1/Sp3.
CONCLUSIONS: Unlike FN, which functions as an activator of alpha5 gene
transcription, LM repressed transcription, directed by the alpha6 gene promoter, 
by altering the nuclear levels of Sp1 and Sp3. Reappearance of LM in the basement
membrane after repair of the corneal damage is therefore expected to
substantially contribute to the final steps of this process by influencing the
degree to which genes that encode protein products requested for cell adhesion
and migration, such as integrin genes, are expressed during corneal wound
healing.

PMID: 17652716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Immunol. 2007 Aug 1;179(3):1760-7.

OX40 gene expression is up-regulated by chromatin remodeling in its promoter
region containing Sp1/Sp3, YY1, and NF-kappa B binding sites.

Tone Y(1), Kojima Y, Furuuchi K, Brady M, Yashiro-Ohtani Y, Tykocinski ML, Tone
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

OX40 is a member of the TNFR superfamily (CD134; TNFRSF4) that is expressed on
activated T cells and regulates T cell-mediated immune responses. In this study, 
we have examined the regulation of OX40 gene expression in T cells. Low-level
OX40 mRNA expression was detected in both resting T cells and the nonactivated
EL4 T cell line, and was up-regulated in both types of T cells upon activation
with anti-CD3 Ab. We have shown in this study that basal OX40 promoter activity
is regulated by constitutively expressed Sp1/Sp3 and YY1 transcription factors.
NF-kappaB (p50 and p65) also binds to the OX40 promoter region, but the level of 
direct enhancement of the OX40 promoter activity by this transcription factor is 
not sufficient to account for the observed up-regulation of OX40 mRNA expression 
associated with activation. We have detected by chromatin immunoprecipitation
that histone H4 molecules in the OX40 promoter region are highly acetylated by
activation and NF-kappaB binds to the OX40 promoter in vivo. These findings
suggest that OX40 gene expression is regulated by chromatin remodeling, and that 
NF-kappaB might be involved in initiation of chromatin remodeling in the OX40
promoter region in activated T cells. CD4(+)CD25(+) regulatory T (Treg) cells
also express OX40 at high levels, and signaling through this receptor can
neutralize suppressive activity of this Treg cell. In CD4(+)CD25(+) Treg cells,
histone H4 molecules in the OX40 promoter region are also highly acetylated, even
in the absence of in vitro activation.

PMID: 17641042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Chemistry. 2007;13(29):8271-6.

Emulation of racemase activity by employing a pair of stereocomplementary
biocatalysts.

Gruber CC(1), Nestl BM, Gross J, Hildebrandt P, Bornscheuer UT, Faber K, Kroutil 
W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Organic and Bioorganic Chemistry, University of Graz,
Heinrichstrasse 28, 8010 Graz, Austria.

Racemization is the key step to turn a kinetic resolution process into dynamic
resolution. A general strategy for racemization under mild reaction conditions by
employing stereoselective biocatalysts is presented, in which racemization is
achieved by employing a pair of stereocomplementary biocatalysts that reversibly 
interconvert an sp3 to a sp2 center. The formal interconversion of the
enantiomers proceeds via a prochiral sp2 intermediate the formation of which is
catalyzed either by two stereocomplementary enzymes or by a single enzyme with
low stereoselectivity. By choosing appropriate reaction conditions, the amount of
the prochiral intermediate is kept to a minimum. This general strategy, which is 
applicable to redox enzymes (e.g., by acting on R2CHOH and R2CHNHR groups) and
lyase-catalyzed addition-elimination reactions, was proven for the racemization
of secondary alcohols by employing alcohol dehydrogenases. Thus, enantiopure
chiral alcohols were used as model substrates and were racemized either with
highly stereoselective biocatalysts or by using (rarely found) non-selective
enzymes.

PMID: 17639544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Oct;21(10):2516-28. Epub 2007 Jul 17.

Characterization of the SOCS3 promoter response to prostaglandin E2 in T47D
cells.

Barclay JL(1), Anderson ST, Waters MJ, Curlewis JD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Queensland, Queensland 4072,
Australia.

Suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3), a negative regulator of cytokine
signaling, is expressed in breast cancer cells where it can modify sensitivity
and responsiveness to cytokine signaling through the Janus kinase/signal
transducer and activator of transcription (JAK/STAT) pathways. Although it is
widely accepted that SOCS3 expression is in itself regulated by STATs, we and
others have shown that prostaglandins can also up-regulate SOCS3 expression. Here
we used T47D breast cancer cells treated with prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) to examine 
this pathway. T47D cells responded to PGE2 stimulation with a significant
increase in SOCS3 mRNA that was independent of de novo protein synthesis. PGE2
stimulation resulted in STAT3 serine and tyrosine phosphorylation, although
mutation of either of the two previously characterized STAT response elements on 
the SOCS3 promoter did not affect SOCS3 promoter activation by PGE2. In addition,
overexpression of STAT3 wild-type, constitutively active or dominant-negative
constructs did not affect PGE2-induced SOCS3 promoter activation, indicating that
STATs are unlikely mediators of this pathway in these cells. PGE2 is a known
activator of the cAMP/protein kinase A (PKA) pathway, and in T47D cells,
up-regulation of SOCS3 mRNA by PGE2 was abolished by pretreatment with H89, a PKA
inhibitor and increased by cAMP and forskolin treatment. Consistent with this,
PGE2 treatment increased cAMP response element (CRE)-binding protein serine
phosphorylation. However, mutation of the activator protein 1/CRE on the promoter
did not affect basal or PGE2-stimulated activation, suggesting a role for
cAMP/PKA that is independent of CRE-binding protein binding. Mutation of the
GC-rich region of the SOCS3 promoter, a putative Sp1/Sp3 binding site, abolished 
both basal and PGE2-stimulated activation. Gel-shift assays showed increased
complex formation after treatment, and this was inhibited by the addition of an
Sp1 antibody or pretreatment with PKA inhibitor. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
assay verified Sp1 binding to the promoter in response to PGE2. Sp1
overexpression increased SOCS3 promoter activation, and both basal and
PGE2-induced SOCS3 mRNA expression was prevented by mithramycin, an inhibitor of 
Sp1 DNA binding. Finally, a physiological role for PGE2 was demonstrated with
PGE2 pretreatment reducing lipopolysaccharide-induced STAT3 activation.
Collectively, this study details a novel mechanism of SOCS3 up-regulation by PGE2
in breast cancer cells that appears to be STAT independent and involve Sp1
binding to the promoter. This process has possible implications for cytokine
responsiveness and tumor progression.

PMID: 17636039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2007 Oct;293(4):C1226-38. Epub 2007 Jul 11.

Lacking cytokine production in ES cells and ES-cell-derived vascular cells
stimulated by TNF-alpha is rescued by HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A.

Zampetaki A(1), Zeng L, Xiao Q, Margariti A, Hu Y, Xu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, School of Medicine, King's College London, James
Black Centre, London, UK. anna.zampetaki@kcl.ac.uk

Inflammation and TNF-alpha signaling play a central role in most of the
pathological conditions where cell transplantation could be applied. As shown by 
initial experiments, embryonic stem (ES) cells and ES-cell derived vascular cells
express very low levels of TNF-alpha receptor I (TNFRp55) and thus do not induce 
cytokine expression in response to TNF-alpha stimulation. Transient transfection 
analysis of wild-type or deletion variants of the TNFRp55 gene promoter showed a 
strong activity for a 250-bp fragment in the upstream region of the gene. This
activity was abolished by mutations targeting the Sp1/Sp3 or AP1 binding sites.
Moreover, treatment with trichostatin A (TSA) led to a pronounced increase in
TNFRp55 mRNA and promoter activity. Overexpression of Sp1 or c-fos further
enhanced the TSA-induced luciferase activity, and this response was attenuated by
Sp3 or c-jun coexpression. Additional experiments revealed that TSA did not
affect the Sp1/Sp3 ratio but caused transcriptional activation of the c-fos gene.
Thus, we provide the first evidence that ES and ES-cell-derived vascular cells
lack cytokine expression in response to TNF-alpha stimulation due to low levels
of c-fos and transcriptional activation of Sp1 that can be regulated by
inhibition of histone deacetylase activity.

PMID: 17626239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Biol Chem. 2007 Sep 14;282(37):26725-39. Epub 2007 Jul 10.

v-Src-mediated down-regulation of SSeCKS metastasis suppressor gene promoter by
the recruitment of HDAC1 into a USF1-Sp1-Sp3 complex.

Bu Y(1), Gelman IH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Genetics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Elm and Carlton 
Streets, Buffalo, NY 14263, USA.

SSeCKS (Src-suppressed C kinase substrate), also called gravin/AKAP12, is a large
scaffolding protein with metastasis suppressor activity. Two major isoforms of
SSeCKS are expressed in most cell and tissue types under the control of two
independent promoters, designated alpha and beta, separated by 68 kb. SSeCKS
transcript and protein levels are severely decreased in Src- and Ras-transformed 
fibroblasts and in many epithelial tumors. By dissecting its promoters with
progressive deletion analysis, we identified the sequence between -106 and -49 in
the alpha proximal promoter as the minimal v-Src-responsive element, which
contains E- and GC-boxes bound by USF1 and Sp1/Sp3, respectively. Both E- and
GC-boxes are crucial for v-Src-responsive and basal promoter activities. v-Src
does not alter USF1 binding levels at the E-box, but it increases Sp1/Sp3 binding
to the GC-box despite no change in their cellular protein abundance. SSeCKS alpha
and beta transcript levels in v-Src/3T3 cells can be restored by treatment with
the histone deacetylase inhibitor, trichostatin A, but not with the DNA
demethylation agent, 5-azacytidine. Chromatin changes are found only on the alpha
promoter even though the beta proximal promoter contains a similar E- and GC-box 
arrangement. Recruitment of HDAC1 is necessary and sufficient to cause repression
of alpha proximal promoter activity, and the addition of Sp1 and/or Sp3
potentiates the repression. Our data suggest that suppression of the beta
promoter is facilitated by Src-induced changes in the alpha promoter
chromatinization mediated by a USF1-Sp1-Sp3 complex.

PMID: 17626016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Cell Physiol. 2008 Feb;214(2):334-44.

Expression of CLMP, a novel tight junction protein, is mediated via the
interaction of GATA with the Kruppel family proteins, KLF4 and Sp1, in mouse TM4 
Sertoli cells.

Sze KL(1), Lee WM, Lui WY.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong
Kong.

Regulation of tight junction protein expressions in Sertoli cells is important
for germ cell translocation across the blood-testis-barrier (BTB) during
spermatogenesis. In this study, a novel tight junction transmembrane protein,
CLMP, found expressed in mouse testis was shown to localize at the BTB along with
the tight junction marker ZO-1. By the use of transient transfection assay
performed in a mouse Sertoli cell-cell line, TM4 cells, we showed that the
minimal CLMP promoter was located between nucleotides -550 and -288 relative to
the translation start site. Site-directed mutagenic studies showed that three
motifs, namely GATA, KLF4, and SRY, within this region functionally co-operated
with one another to regulate CLMP gene transcription. Using specific antibodies
in EMSA analysis, a ternary protein complex GATA-1/GATA-6/KLF4 was detected at
all the three motifs, suggesting that a looping mechanism might involve in
regulating CLMP gene transcription. Interestingly, the ubiquitously expressed
transcription factors, Sp1 and Sp3, were also found in this ternary complex over 
the KLF4 motif. Overexpression of KLF4 significantly increased the promoter
activity whilst overexpression of Sp1 or Sp3 exerted an opposite effect. In
particular, co-transfection studies showed that Sp1 could significantly abolish
the KLF4-induced transactivation of the CLMP gene, suggesting that KLF4 and Sp1
might compete for the same binding site on the CLMP promoter. Taken together,
this differential interaction of the transcription factors, GATA-1, GATA-6, KLF4,
Sp1, and Sp3, in CLMP gene expression might provide a precise machinery in
regulating Sertoli cell tight junction dynamics.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17620326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Cancer Res. 2007 Jul 1;67(13):6121-9.

EGFR activation results in enhanced cyclooxygenase-2 expression through p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase-dependent activation of the Sp1/Sp3
transcription factors in human gliomas.

Xu K(1), Shu HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30322,
USA.

Expression of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) has been linked to many cancers and may
contribute to malignant phenotypes, including enhanced proliferation,
angiogenesis, and resistance to cytotoxic therapies. Malignant gliomas are highly
aggressive brain tumors that display many of these characteristics. One prominent
molecular abnormality discovered in these astrocytic brain tumors is alteration
of epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor (EGFR) through gene amplification
and/or mutation resulting in excessive signaling from this receptor. We found
that EGF-mediated stimulation of EGFR tyrosine kinase in human glioma cell lines 
induces expression of both COX-2 mRNA and protein. The p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase (p38-MAPK) pathway was a strong downstream factor in this
activation with inhibition of this pathway leading to strong suppression of COX-2
induction. The p38-MAPK pathway can activate the Sp1/Sp3 transcription factors
and this seems necessary for EGFR-dependent transactivation of the COX-2
promoter. Analysis of COX-2 promoter/luciferase constructs revealed that
transcriptional activation of the COX-2 promoter by EGFR requires the Sp1 binding
site located at -245/-240. Furthermore, Sp1/Sp3 binding to this site in the
promoter is enhanced by EGFR activation both in vitro and in vivo. Enhanced DNA
binding by Sp1/Sp3 requires p38-MAPK activity and correlates with increased
phosphorylation of the Sp1 transcription factor. Thus, EGFR activation in
malignant gliomas can transcriptionally activate COX-2 expression in a process
that requires p38-MAPK and Sp1/Sp3. Finally, treatment of glioma cell lines with 
prostaglandin E2, the predominant product of COX-2 activity, results in increased
vascular endothelial growth factor expression, thus potentially linking
elevations in COX-2 expression with tumor angiogenesis in malignant gliomas.

PMID: 17616668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Org Chem. 2007 Aug 3;72(16):6251-4. Epub 2007 Jun 30.

Synthesis, structural, spectral, and photoswitchable properties of cis- and
trans-2,2,2',2'-tetramethyl-1,1'-indanylindanes.

Shimasaki T(1), Kato S, Shinmyozu T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Materials Chemistry and Engineering (IMCE) and Department of
Molecular Chemistry, Graduate School of Sciences, Kyushu University, Hakozaki
6-10-1, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8581, Japan.

As versatile synthetic intermediates for new photoswitchable molecules with a
tetramethylindanylindane (stiff-stilbene) core, the cis and trans isomers of
5,16-dibromo-2,2,13',13'-tetramethylindanylindanes 2 were synthesized by the
Barton-Kellogg coupling. The bromine atoms of trans-2 could be readily replaced
with alkyl (sp3), aryl (sp2), and ethynyl (sp) groups. The cis isomers of the
parent tetramethylindanylindane 1 and its bromo derivative 2 were isolated, and
their structural and photophysical properties were examined for the first time.
Clean and efficient trans-cis and cis-trans photochemical isomerization processes
were observed in 1.

PMID: 17604396  [PubMed]


154. J Chem Phys. 2007 Jun 21;126(23):234708.

Adsorbed states and scanning tunneling microscopy induced migration of acetylene 
on Cu(110).

Kumagai T(1), Hatta S, Okuyama H, Aruga T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto
606-8502, Japan.

The authors have studied adsorption of acetylene on Cu(110) by means of
low-temperature scanning tunneling microscopy. Adsorbed molecules preferentially 
aggregate at 40 K to yield dimer, trimer, and larger islands on the surface.
Isolated species (monomer) adsorbs on the fourfold hollow site with approximately
sp3 rehybridization as characterized by inelastic electron tunneling
spectroscopy. Tunneling electron induces an acetylene molecule to migrate along
the trough of Cu(110). The migration proceeds in two steps: the molecule first
hops to the adjacent long-bridge site and then to the next fourfold site. The
voltage and current dependencies of the hopping probability show that the
migration is induced by inelastic electron tunneling that causes vibrational
excitation of mainly C-H stretch mode.

PMID: 17600436  [PubMed]


155. J Invest Dermatol. 2008 Jan;128(1):96-103. Epub 2007 Jun 28.

Role of Sp1 in transcription of human ATP2A2 gene in keratinocytes.

Takagi A(1), Nishiyama C, Maeda K, Tokura T, Kawada H, Kanada S, Niwa Y, Nakano
N, Mayuzumi N, Nishiyama M, Ikeda S, Okumura K, Ogawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Atopy Research Center, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo, Japan.

The ATP2A2 gene encodes Ca2+-dependent ATPase, the dysfunction of which causes
Darier disease. In this study, we analyzed the promoter structure of the human
ATP2A2 gene using primary normal human keratinocytes (NHK). Reporter assays
showed that deletion of -550/-529, -488/-472, -390/-362, or -42/-21 resulted in a
significant decrease in human ATP2A2 promoter activity. Electrophoretic mobility 
shift assay (EMSA) showed that Sp1 is a transcription factor that binds to the
-550/-529 and -488/-472 regions of the promoter. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) assay demonstrated that Sp1, but not Sp3, binds to the promoter region of 
the ATP2A2 gene in NHK cells in vivo. Knockdown of Sp1 expression by small
interfering RNA resulted in a marked reduction in ATP2A2 promoter activity and
ATP2A2 mRNA levels in NHK, suggesting that Sp1 positively transactivates the
ATP2A2 promoter in NHK. This is early evidence demonstrating that Sp1 plays an
important and positive role in ATP2A2 gene expression in NHK in vivo and in
vitro.

PMID: 17597815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Dev Dyn. 2007 Aug;236(8):2235-44.

Sp1/Sp3 compound heterozygous mice are not viable: impaired erythropoiesis and
severe placental defects.

Krüger I(1), Vollmer M, Simmons DG, Elsässer HP, Philipsen S, Suske G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Philipps-Universität
Marburg, Marburg, Germany.

Erratum in
    Dev Dyn. 2007 Oct;236(10):2970. Simmons, David [corrected to Simmons, David G].

The ubiquitously expressed zinc finger transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 play
critical roles in embryonic development. Sp1 knockout mice die around embryonic
day 10.5. Mice lacking Sp3 are postnatal lethal. Mice heterozygous for either Sp1
or Sp3 are apparently normal, although slightly smaller. Here, we show that
compound heterozygosity of Sp1 and Sp3 results in embryonic lethality accompanied
by a spectrum of developmental abnormalities, including growth retardation,
morphological alterations of the lung, impaired ossification, anemia, and
placental defects. Anemia in Sp1/Sp3 compound heterozygous mutant embryos is
associated with impaired maturation of erythrocytes. Analyses of the placenta
revealed a markedly reduced spongiotrophoblast layer and a severe disorganization
of the labyrinth layer in Sp1/Sp3 compound heterozygous as well as in
Sp3-deficient mutant embryos. Our findings demonstrate that a threshold of Sp1
and Sp3 activity is required for normal embryonic development, suggesting that
Sp1 and Sp3 act cooperatively to regulate downstream targets.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17584888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Biochemistry. 2007 Jul 17;46(28):8340-9. Epub 2007 Jun 21.

The crystal structure of cytochrome P460 of Nitrosomonas europaea reveals a novel
cytochrome fold and heme-protein cross-link.

Pearson AR(1), Elmore BO, Yang C, Ferrara JD, Hooper AB, Wilmot CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics, The University
of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA.

We have determined the 1.8 A X-ray crystal structure of a monoheme c-type
cytochrome, cytochrome P460, from Nitrosomonas europea. The chromophore possesses
unusual spectral properties analogous to those of the catalytic heme P460 of
hydroxylamine oxidoreductase (HAO), the only known heme in biology to withdraw
electrons from an iron-coordinated substrate. The analysis reveals a homodimeric 
structure and elucidates a new c-type cytochrome fold that is predominantly
beta-sheet. In addition to the two cysteine thioether links to the porphyrin
typical of c-type hemes, there is a third proteinaceous link involving a
conserved lysine. The covalent bond is between the lysine side-chain nitrogen and
the 13'-meso carbon of the heme, which, following cross-link formation, is
sp3-hybridized, demonstrating the loss of conjugation at this position within the
porphyrin. The structure has implications for the analogous tyrosine-heme meso
carbon cross-link observed in HAO.

PMCID: PMC2527454
PMID: 17583915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Chem Soc Rev. 2007 Jul;36(7):1069-84. Epub 2007 Mar 1.

Direct sp3 C-H bond activation adjacent to nitrogen in heterocycles.

Campos KR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Process Research, Merck & Co., P.O. Box 2000, Rahway, NJ 07065, 
USA. Kevin_campos@merck.com

Activation of sp(3) C-H bonds adjacent to nitrogen in heterocycles is an
attractive transformation that is emerging as a practical method in organic
synthesis. This tutorial review aims to summarize the key examples of direct
functionalization of nitrogen-containing heterocycles via metal-mediated and
metal-catalyzed processes, which is meant to serve as a foundation for future
investigations into this rapidly developing area of research. The review covers
functionalization of N-heterocycles via alpha-lithiation with
alkyllithium/diamine complexes, alpha-amino radical formation, metal-catalyzed
direct C-H activation, C-H oxidations and oxidative couplings, and
metal-catalyzed carbene insertions.

PMID: 17576475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Am Chem Soc. 2007 Jul 4;129(26):8296-309. Epub 2007 Jun 13.

sp carbon chains surrounded by sp(3) carbon double helices: directed syntheses of
wirelike Pt(CC)(n)Pt moieties that are spanned by two P(CH(2))(m)P linkages via
alkene metathesis.

de Quadras L(1), Bauer EB, Mohr W, Bohling JC, Peters TB, Martín-Alvarez JM,
Hampel F, Gladysz JA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Organische Chemie and Interdisciplinary Center for Molecular
Materials, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.

Reactions of trans-(C6F5)(Ph2P(CH2)m'CH=CH2)2PtCl (1; m' = a, 6; b, 7; c, 8; d,
9; e, 10) and H(CC)2H (HNEt2, cat. CuI) give
trans-(C6F5)(Ph2P(CH2)m'CH=CH2)2Pt(CC)2H (3a-e, 80-95%). Oxidative homocouplings 
of 3a-d under Hay conditions (O2, cat. CuCl/TMEDA, acetone) yield
trans,trans-(C6F5)(Ph2P(CH2)m'CH=CH2)2Pt(CC)4Pt(Ph2P(CH2)m'CH=CH2)2(C6F5) (4a-d, 
64-84%). Treatment of 3c-e with excess HCCSiEt3 under Hay conditions gives
trans-(C6F5)(Ph2P(CH2)m'CH=CH2)2Pt(CC)3SiEt3 (56-73%). Homocouplings (n-Bu4N+ F-,
Me3SiCl, Hay conditions) afford
trans,trans-(C6F5)(Ph2P(CH2)m'CH=CH2)2Pt(CC)6Pt(Ph2P(CH2)m'CH=CH2)2(C6F5) (13c-e,
59-64%). Reactions of 4a-d and 13c-e with Grubbs' catalyst, followed by
hydrogenation, give mixtures of
trans,trans-(C6F5)(Ph2P(CH2)mPPh2)Pt(CC)nPt(Ph2P(CH2)mPPh2)(C6F5) with
termini-spanning diphosphines and
trans,trans-(C6F5)(Ph2P(CH2)mPPh2)Pt(CC)nPt(Ph2P(CH2)mPPh2)(C6F5) with
trans-spanning diphosphines (m = 2m' + 2; n = 4, 6). The latter (n = 4) are
independently synthesized by similar metatheses/hydrogenations of 1a-d to give
trans-(C6F5)(Ph2P(CH2)mPPh2)PtCl (49-59%), followed by analogous introductions of
(CC)4 chains (66-77%). Crystal structures of complexes with termini-spanning
diphosphines show sp3 chains with both double-helical (m/n = 20/4) and nonhelical
(m/n = 20/6) conformations, and highly shielded sp chains. The sp3 chains of
complexes with trans-spanning diphosphines exhibit double half-clamshell
conformations. The dynamic properties of both classes of molecules are analyzed
in detail.

PMID: 17567011  [PubMed]


160. J Am Chem Soc. 2007 Jul 4;129(26):8282-95. Epub 2007 Jun 13.

sp carbon chains surrounded by sp(3) carbon double helices: coordination-driven
self-assembly of wirelike Pt(CC)(n)Pt moieties that are spanned by two
P(CH(2))(m)P linkages.

Stahl J(1), Mohr W, de Quadras L, Peters TB, Bohling JC, Martín-Alvarez JM, Owen 
GR, Hampel F, Gladysz JA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Organische Chemie and Interdisciplinary Center for Molecular
Materials, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.

Reactions of trans,trans-(C6F5)(p-tol3P)2Pt(CC)4Pt(Pp-tol3)2(C6F5) and
diphosphines Ar2P(CH2)mPAr2 yield
trans,trans-(C6F5)(Ar2P(CH2)mPAr2)Pt(CC)4Pt(Ar2P(CH2)mPAr2)(C6F5), in which the
platinum atoms are spanned via an sp and two sp3 carbon chains (Ar/m = 3, Ph/14, 
87%; 4, p-tol/14, 91%; 5, p-C6H4-t-Bu/14, 77%; 7, Ph/10, 80%; 8, Ph/11, 80%; 9,
Ph/12, 36%; only oligomers form for m > 14). Crystal structures of 3-5 show that 
the sp3 chains adopt chiral double-helical conformations that shield the sp chain
at approximately the van der Waals distance, with both enantiomers in the unit
cell. The platinum square planes define angles of 196.6 degrees -189.9 degrees or
more than a half twist. Crystal structures of 7-9, which have shorter sp3 chains,
exhibit nonhelical conformations. Reaction of the corresponding Pt(CC)6Pt complex
and Ph2P(CH2)18PPh2 gives an analogous adduct (27%). The crystal structure shows 
two independent molecules, one helical and the other not. Low-temperature NMR
data suggest that the enantiomeric helical conformations of 3-5 rapidly
interconvert in solution. Cyclic voltammograms of 3-5 show more reversible
oxidations than model compounds lacking bridging sp3 chains. These are the only
double-helical molecules that do not feature bonding interactions between the
helix strands, or covalent bonds to templates dispersed throughout the strands,
or any type of encoding. The driving force for helix formation is analyzed.

PMID: 17567010  [PubMed]


161. Biochem J. 2007 Oct 1;407(1):101-11.

Sp1 and Sp3 control constitutive expression of the human NHE2 promoter by
interactions with the proximal promoter and the transcription initiation site.

Pearse I(1), Zhu YX, Murray EJ, Dudeja PK, Ramaswamy K, Malakooti J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Section of Digestive Diseases and Nutrition,
University of Illinois at Chicago, 840 South Wood Street, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

We have previously cloned the human Na+/H+ exchanger NHE2 gene and its promoter
region. In the present study, the regulatory elements responsible for the
constitutive expression of NHE2 were studied. Transient transfection assays
revealed that the -40/+150 promoter region contains the core promoter responsible
for the optimal promoter activity. A smaller fragment, -10/+40, containing the
TIS (transcription initiation site) showed minimal activity. We identified a
palindrome that overlaps the TIS and binds to the transcription factors Sp1 and
Sp3. Mutations in the 5' flank of the palindrome abolished the Sp1/Sp3
interaction and reduced promoter activity by approx. 45%. In addition, a
conserved GC-box centered at -25 was found to play a critical role in basal
promoter activity and also interacted with Sp1 and Sp3. An internal deletion in
the GC-box severely reduced the promoter activity. Sp1/Sp3 binding to these
elements was established using gel-mobility shift assays, confirmed by chromatin 
immunoprecipitation and co-transfections in Drosophila SL2 cells. Furthermore, we
identified two positive regulatory elements in the DNA region corresponding to
the 5'-UTR (5'-untranslated region). The results in the present study indicate
that Sp1 and Sp3 are required for constitutive NHE2 expression and that the
positive regulatory elements of the 5'-UTR may co-operate with the 5'-flanking
region to achieve the optimal promoter activity.

PMCID: PMC2267401
PMID: 17561809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Eur J Immunol. 2007 Jul;37(7):1938-53.

Transcriptional regulation of MICA and MICB: a novel polymorphism in MICB
promoter alters transcriptional regulation by Sp1.

Rodríguez-Rodero S(1), González S, Rodrigo L, Fernández-Morera JL, Martínez-Borra
J, López-Vázquez A, López-Larrea C.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Histocompatibilidad y Transplantes, Hospital Universitario Central
de Asturias Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain.

MHC class I-related genes A/B (MICA/B) are ligands of the NKG2D receptor
expressed on T and NK cells. Their expression is highly restricted in normal
tissues, but is up-regulated in tumoral and infected cells. We show that the
minimal promoter of both genes contains a CCAAT box, which binds to NF-Y, and a
GC box, which binds to Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4. We also demonstrate that MICB promoter
is polymorphic, showing three single nucleotide polymorphisms (C>G at +16, -341, 
-408) and a deletion of two base pairs at -66 (AG>--) that is located close to
the CCAAT box (-70) and the GC box (-86). Transcriptional activity associated
with MICB promoter variants carrying this deletion, present in the 45.3% of
Spanish population, showed a remarkable decrease (18-fold, p <0.01). By
functional analysis, we show that the deletion plays a critical role in MICB
promoter activity by diminishing Sp1 transcriptional activation. These important 
variations in MICB expression among normal individuals could imply a significant 
difference in the natural immune response against infections or tumor
transformation, and might thereby contribute to an increased aberrant immune
response against self cells, providing the molecular basis for the associations
of the MICB gene to different autoimmune diseases.

PMID: 17557375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2008 Apr;50(4):806-11.

Retinoic acid induced downregulation of MYCN is not mediated through changes in
Sp1/Sp3.

Kanemaru KK(1), Tuthill MC, Takeuchi KK, Sidell N, Wada RK.

Author information: 
(1)Natural Products and Cancer Biology Program, Cancer Research Center of Hawaii,
Honolulu, Hawaii, USA.

BACKGROUND: Use of retinoic acid (RA) has become the standard of care in the
treatment of high risk neuroblastoma (NB). In vitro, RA induces growth arrest and
differentiation, an effect that likely underlies its activity in the clinical
setting. An important event in differentiation is the transcriptional
downregulation of the MYCN oncogene, which is frequently activated in aggressive 
tumors. While it is known that Sp1/Sp3 and E2F are necessary to drive basal MYCN 
expression, the mechanism for its downregulation by RA remains enigmatic. Changes
in E2F binding have been reported, however these occurred after the actual
transcriptional response. Here, post-translational modifications of Sp proteins
were examined as an alternate mechanism of RA-mediated promoter regulation.
PROCEDURE: Western blot was used to evaluate steady state levels of
nuclear/cytoplasmic Sp1/Sp3. Promoter binding and DNA conformation were
determined by gel shift, circular permutation, and chromatin immunoprecipitation 
assays. Immunoprecipitation/western and (32)P-phosphoamino analyses were used to 
detect glycosylation, acetylation, sumoylation, and phosphorylation.
RESULTS: RA did not affect the cellular level of Sp1/Sp3 proteins, their
nuclear/cytoplasmic distribution, ability to bind the MYCN promoter, degree of
Sp-induced DNA bending, or post-translational modifications.
CONCLUSIONS: MYCN RA response is not mediated solely though the region
controlling basal activity. RA may be exerting its effects via multiple
non-adjacent regulatory regions, potentially including basal motifs, either
within the MYCN promoter or distally, on the same or even different chromosomes. 
Such cooperative trans-type DNA-protein interactions could explain the
inaccessibility of this mechanism to the locus-specific approaches employed up to
this point.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17554788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. FASEB J. 2007 Oct;21(12):3386-97. Epub 2007 Jun 4.

Mechanisms of ceramide-mediated repression of the human telomerase reverse
transcriptase promoter via deacetylation of Sp3 by histone deacetylase 1.

Wooten-Blanks LG(1), Song P, Senkal CE, Ogretmen B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, 173 Ashley Ave., Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

In this study, distinct roles of de novo-generated endogenous ceramides and
mechanisms by which deacetylated Sp3 regulates the hTERT promoter activity in
response to ceramide signaling were explored. The generation of C18-ceramide via 
the expression of ceramide synthase 1 (CerS1), and not C16-ceramide by CerS5 or
CerS6 expression, resulted in repression of the hTERT promoter via deacetylation 
of Sp3 by histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) in A549 human lung adenocarcinoma cells. 
Then roles and mechanisms of action of ceramide-mediated deacetylation of Sp3 in 
inhibiting the hTERT promoter were determined using constitutively deacetylated
or acetylated Sp3 mutants at lysine (K) 551. Expression of the deacetylated Sp3
mutant resulted in repression, whereas its acetylated mutant induced basal hTERT 
promoter activity in Drosophila S2 cells, which do not express any endogenous
Sp3, and in A549 cells. Remarkably, chromatin immunoprecipitation data revealed
that acetylated Sp3 mutant (K551Q-Sp3) did not bind whereas deacetylated Sp3
(K551R-Sp3) mutant bound strongly to the promoter DNA, resulting in the
recruitment of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and inhibition of the association of
RNA polymerase II with the promoter. Mechanistically, increased generation of
C18-ceramide by hCerS1 expression, but not by its catalytically inactive mutant, 
mediated the association and recruitment of the deacetylated Sp3/HDAC1 complex to
the hTERT promoter DNA, resulting in the local histone H3 deacetylation and
repression of the promoter.

PMID: 17548428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2007 Jul;293(1):G374-82. Epub 2007 May
31.

Involvement of Sp1 and Sp3 in differential regulation of human NHE3 promoter
activity by sodium butyrate and IFN-gamma/TNF-alpha.

Amin MR(1), Dudeja PK, Ramaswamy K, Malakooti J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Section of Digestive Diseases and Nutrition,
University of Illinois at Chicago, 840 S. Wood Street, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Previously, we reported that IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha downregulate the expression 
of the human Na(+)/H(+) exchanger (NHE)3 gene by modulating Sp1/Sp3 transcription
factors in C2BBe1 cells. It is reported that butyrate inhibits IFN-gamma and
TNF-alpha signaling pathways. In this study, we have investigated the effect of
sodium butyrate (NaB) and IFN-gamma/TNF-alpha on human NHE3 promoter activity. In
transient transfection studies, NaB (5 mM) led to 10-fold stimulation of NHE3
promoter activity after incubation for 24 h. With 5'-deletion analysis, the
NaB-responsive region was mapped to the NHE3 core promoter, bp -95 to + 5, which 
we had shown previously to confer responsiveness to IFN-gamma/TNF-alpha. The
stimulatory effect of NaB on the NHE3 promoter was reduced by 60% in the presence
of IFN-gamma/TNF-alpha. Mutually, the repressive effect of these cytokines was
attenuated by NaB. Knockdown of Sp1 and Sp3 expression with small interfering RNA
(siRNA) resulted in a significant resistance to NaB effects. NaB treatment showed
no effect on Sp1 and Sp3 protein expression as assessed by Western blot analyses.
Gel mobility shift assays with nuclear proteins from NaB-treated cells showed
enhanced binding of Sp1 and Sp3 to the NHE3 promoter. The phosphatase inhibitor
okadaic acid (200 nM) blocked the stimulatory effect of NaB on the NHE3 promoter.
NaB effects on the NHE3 promoter were significantly attenuated by protein
phosphatase (PP)1alpha- and PP2Aalpha-specific siRNA transfection. Our data
suggest that the differential regulation of NHE3 gene expression by NaB and
IFN-gamma/TNF-alpha is mediated through alternative pathways that converge on
Sp1/Sp3.

PMID: 17540780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(11):3784-96. Epub 2007 May 21.

Sp1 and Sp3 regulate basal transcription of the human APOBEC3G gene.

Muckenfuss H(1), Kaiser JK, Krebil E, Battenberg M, Schwer C, Cichutek K, Münk C,
Flory E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Biotechnology, Paul-Ehrlich-Institut, Paul-Ehrlich-Strasse
51-59, D-63225 Langen, Germany.

APOBEC3G (A3G), a member of the recently discovered family of human cytidine
deaminases, is expressed in peripheral blood lymphocytes and has been shown to be
active against HIV-1 and other retroviruses. To gain new insights into the
transcriptional regulation of this restriction factor, we cloned and
characterized the promoter region of A3G. Transcriptional start sites were
identified by 5'-rapid amplification of cDNA ends analysis. Luciferase reporter
assays demonstrated that a 1025 bp A3G promoter sequence (from -959 to +66
relative to the major transcriptional start site) displayed constitutive promoter
activity. In T cells, the A3G promoter was not inducible by mitogenic
stimulation, interferon treatment or expression of HIV-1 proteins. Using a series
of 5' deletion promoter constructs in luciferase reporter assays, we identified a
180 bp region that was sufficient for full promoter activity. Transcriptional
activity of this A3G core promoter was dependent on a GC-box (located at position
-87/-78 relative to the major transcriptional start site) and was abolished after
mutation of this DNA element. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that the identified GC-box represented a 
binding site for the ubiquitous transcription factors specificity protein (Sp) 1 
and Sp3.

PMCID: PMC1920263
PMID: 17517765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. BMC Mol Biol. 2007 May 20;8:36.

Down-regulation of human topoisomerase IIalpha expression correlates with
relative amounts of specificity factors Sp1 and Sp3 bound at proximal and distal 
promoter regions.

Williams AO(1), Isaacs RJ, Stowell KM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biosciences, Massey University, Palmerston North, New
Zealand. amram.williams@merck.co.nz <amram.williams@merck.co.nz>

BACKGROUND: Topoisomerase IIalpha has been shown to be down-regulated in
doxorubicin-resistant cell lines. The specificity proteins Sp1 and Sp3 have been 
implicated in regulation of topoisomerase IIalpha transcription, although the
mechanism by which they regulate expression is not fully understood. Sp1 has been
shown to bind specifically to both proximal and distal GC elements of the human
topoisomerase IIalpha promoter in vitro, while Sp3 binds only to the distal GC
element unless additional flanking sequences are included. While Sp1 is thought
to be an activator of human topoisomerase IIalpha, the functional significance of
Sp3 binding is not known. Therefore, we sought to determine the functional
relationship between Sp1 and Sp3 binding to the topoisomerase IIalpha promoter in
vivo. We investigated endogenous levels of Sp1, Sp3 and topoisomerase IIalpha as 
well as binding of both Sp1 and Sp3 to the GC boxes of the topoisomerase IIalpha 
promoter in breast cancer cell lines in vivo after short term doxorubicin
exposure.
RESULTS: Functional effects of Sp1 and Sp3 were studied using transient
cotransfection assays using a topoisomerase IIalpha promoter reporter construct. 
The in vivo interactions of Sp1 and Sp3 with the GC elements of the topoisomerase
IIalpha promoter were studied in doxorubicin-treated breast cancer cell lines
using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. Relative amounts of endogenous
proteins were measured using immunoblotting. In vivo DNA looping mediated by
proteins bound at the GC1 and GC2 elements was studied using the chromatin
conformation capture assay. Both Sp1 and Sp3 bound to the GC1 and GC2 regions.
Sp1 and Sp3 were transcriptional activators and repressors respectively, with Sp3
repression being dominant over Sp1-mediated activation. The GC1 and GC2 elements 
are linked in vivo to form a loop, thus bringing distal regulatory elements and
their cognate transcription factors into close proximity with the transcription
start site.
CONCLUSION: These observations provide a mechanistic explanation for the
modulation of topoisomerase IIalpha and concomitant down-regulation that can be
mediated by topoisomerase II poisons. Competition between Sp1 and Sp3 for the
same cognate DNA would result in activation or repression depending on absolute
amounts of each transcription factor in cells treated with doxorubicin.

PMCID: PMC1885802
PMID: 17511886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Org Lett. 2007 Jun 7;9(12):2273-6. Epub 2007 May 16.

Studies toward the total synthesis of sorangiolides and their analogues. A
convergent stereoselective synthesis of the macrocyclic lactone precursors.

Das S(1), Abraham S, Sinha SC.

Author information: 
(1)The Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology and the Department of Molecular
Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA.

Stereoselective synthesis of the fully protected 18-membered macrocyclic lactones
as the immediate precursors of the natural products, sorangiolides A and B, is
described. The key steps used in the synthesis include the sp3-hybridized
carbon-carbon Fu cross coupling, the stereoselective Evans' aldol reaction with
1,5-anti induction, the 1,3-diastereoselective syn reduction of a
beta-hydroxyketone intermediate, and Mukaiyama macrolactonization reactions.

PMID: 17503834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2007 Aug;293(2):H1115-21. Epub 2007 May 11.

Tumor necrosis factor-alpha reduces argininosuccinate synthase expression and
nitric oxide production in aortic endothelial cells.

Goodwin BL(1), Pendleton LC, Levy MM, Solomonson LP, Eichler DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of South Florida College of
Medicine, MDC Box 7, 12901 Bruce B. Downs Blvd., Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

Endothelial dysfunction associated with elevated serum levels of TNF-alpha
observed in diabetes, obesity, and congenital heart disease results, in part,
from the impaired production of endothelial nitric oxide (NO). Cellular NO
production depends absolutely on the availability of arginine, substrate of
endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS). In this report, evidence is provided
demonstrating that treatment with TNF-alpha (10 ng/ml) suppresses not only eNOS
expression but also the availability of arginine via the coordinate suppression
of argininosuccinate synthase (AS) expression in aortic endothelial cells.
Western blot and real-time RT-PCR demonstrated a significant and dose-dependent
reduction of AS protein and mRNA when treated with TNF-alpha with a corresponding
decrease in NO production. Reporter gene analysis demonstrated that TNF-alpha
suppresses the AS proximal promoter, and EMSA analysis showed reduced binding to 
three essential Sp1 elements. Inhibitor studies suggested that the repression of 
AS expression by TNF-alpha may be mediated, in part, via the NF-kappaB signaling 
pathway. These findings demonstrate that TNF-alpha coordinately downregulates
eNOS and AS expression, resulting in a severely impaired citrulline-NO cycle. The
downregulation of AS by TNF-alpha is an added insult to endothelial function
because of its important role in NO production and in endothelial viability.

PMID: 17496212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Org Lett. 2007 May 24;9(11):2231-3. Epub 2007 May 4.

Regio- and stereoselective cross-coupling of tert-propargyl alcohols with
bis(trimethylsilyl)acetylene and its utilization in constructing a fluorescent
donor-acceptor system.

Horita A(1), Tsurugi H, Funayama A, Satoh T, Miura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Chemistry, Faculty of Engineering, Osaka University,
Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

1,1-Disubstituted 3-aryl-2-propyn-1-ols undergo regio- and stereoselective
cross-coupling on treatment with bis(trimethylsilyl)acetylene in the presence of 
a rhodium catalyst via cleavage of C(sp)-C(sp3) and C(sp)-Si bonds to produce the
corresponding 2-hydroxymethyl-(E)-enynes. The subsequent desilylative Sonogashira
coupling followed by base-promoted cyclization affords fluorescent dihydrofuran
derivatives.

PMID: 17477540  [PubMed]


171. J Cell Physiol. 2007 Oct;213(1):167-76.

Regulation of Na,K-ATPase alpha1 subunit gene transcription in response to low
K(+): role of CRE/ATF- and GC box-binding proteins.

Wang G(1), Kawakami K, Gick G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Center for Cardiovascular and Muscle Research,
State University of New York Health Science Center at Brooklyn, Brooklyn, New
York 11203, USA.

Na,K-ATPase expression is upregulated in mammalian cells as a consequence of
persistent inhibition of Na,K-ATPase enzymatic activity by low external K(+). We 
previously demonstrated that exposure of neonatal rat cardiac myocytes to low
K(+) increased Na,K-ATPase alpha1 subunit mRNA content and promoter activity. In 
this work, we utilized transient transfection studies with rat Na,K-ATPase alpha1
subunit 5'-flanking region deletion plasmids to identify DNA sequences required
for low K(+)-mediated stimulation of alpha1 subunit promoter expression in
cardiac myocytes. Maximal low K(+)-responsiveness of the alpha1 promoter was
found to be dependent on nucleotides from -102 to -62 and a downstream region
from +53 to +261. Further analysis of the upstream low K(+)-responsive region
using mutant constructs revealed that a CRE/ATF site at -70 to -63 and a GC box
motif at -57 to -48 were both required for the effect of low K(+) on alpha1
subunit gene transcription. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed that
low K(+) increased binding of transcription factors to the GC box and, to a
lesser extent, to the CRE/ATF site. Western blot analysis demonstrated that
exposure of cardiac myocytes to low K(+) resulted in increased nuclear content of
Sp1, Sp3 and CREB-1. Finally, a selective increase in phosphorylation of Sp1 was 
found in nuclear extracts from low K(+)-treated cells. We conclude that low
K(+)-mediated upregulation of Na,K-ATPase alpha1 subunit gene expression in
neonatal rat cardiac myocytes is dependent, in part, on CRE/ATF- and GC
box-binding transcription factors.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17477345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Androl. 2007 Sep-Oct;28(5):689-97. Epub 2007 Apr 25.

Cryosurvival and in vitro fertilizing capacity postthaw is improved when boar
spermatozoa are frozen in the presence of seminal plasma from good freezer boars.

Hernández M(1), Roca J, Calvete JJ, Sanz L, Muiño-Blanco T, Cebrián-Pérez JA,
Vázquez JM, Martínez EA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Medicina y Cirugía Animal, Facultad de Veterinaria,
Universidad de Murcia, Campus de Espinardo, 30071 Murcia, Spain.

The study evaluated the protective effect of seminal plasma (SP) added to
freezing extender against cryopreservation injuries to boar spermatozoa. Pooled
sperm-rich fractions collected from 9 fertile boars were frozen in 0.5-mL straws 
after being extended in a conventional freezing extender either alone or
supplemented with 5% of SPs (SP1-SP4) collected from the sperm-rich fractions
(diluted 1:1, vol/vol, in Beltsville Thawing Solution extender) from 4 boars
(1-4) with known sperm cryosurvival (poor, moderate, and good sperm freezers).
Cryopreservation injuries were assessed in terms of postthaw sperm motility
(assessed by computer-assisted sperm analysis), viability (plasma membrane and
acrosome integrity assessed simultaneously by flow cytometry), membrane lipid
peroxidation (malondialdehyde [MDA] production), and the ability of thawed
spermatozoa to fertilize in vitro-matured homologous oocytes. The addition of SP 
from good sperm freezers (SP3 and SP4) improved (P < .01) the motility and
viability of thawed spermatozoa without any influence on MDA production.
Moreover, SP from good sperm freezers also increased (P < .05) the percentage of 
penetrated (SP3) and polyspermic oocytes (SP4) with respect to the control.
Neither the total amount of SP proteins, protein profiles, nor antioxidant
capacity of the different SPs were related to the various
cryosurvival/fertilizing capacities of the processed spermatozoa.

PMID: 17460094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Am Chem Soc. 2007 May 23;129(20):6390-1. Epub 2007 Apr 26.

Remarkably facile and reversible Ru-C(sp3) bond cleavage to give a reactive
16-electron Cp*Ru(kappa2-P,carbene) zwitterion.

Rankin MA(1), Schatte G, McDonald R, Stradiotto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.

PMID: 17458970  [PubMed]


174. Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Jul;21(7):1617-29. Epub 2007 Apr 24.

Estrogen-enhanced peptidylarginine deiminase type IV gene (PADI4) expression in
MCF-7 cells is mediated by estrogen receptor-alpha-promoted transfactors
activator protein-1, nuclear factor-Y, and Sp1.

Dong S(1), Zhang Z, Takahara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biological Resource Sciences, School of Agriculture,
Ibaraki University, Ami-machi, Inashiki-gun, Ibaraki 300-0393, Japan.

Human peptidylarginine deiminase type IV (PAD4), a Ca(2+)-dependent enzyme known 
to convert arginine residues to citrulline residues in histones, has been shown
to be associated with the development of rheumatoid arthritis. Recently, it was
noted that the human peptidylarginine deiminase type IV gene (PADI4) regulates
the expression of estrogen-responsive genes by modifying the methylated arginine 
sites in histones H3 and H4. In this study, we demonstrated that PADI4 was
expressed in MCF-7 cells and was responsive to estrogen at the transcriptional
level. Using the luciferase reporter gene fused to wild-type or mutated
5'-flanking region of PADI4, we characterized that as few as 348 bp upstream from
the transcription initiation site were sufficient to direct transcription of the 
reporter gene. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and small interfering RNA assays
revealed that activator protein-1, Sp1/Sp3, and nuclear factor-Y were cis-acting 
factors bound to the minimal promoter of PADI4 and that they regulated gene
expression in a cooperative manner. Moreover, it was indicated that estrogen
stimulated PADI4 expression through binding of estrogen receptor (ER)-alpha to
the upstream of the PADI4 gene and ERalpha-mediated enhancement of activator
protein-1, Sp1, and nuclear factor-Y levels. These findings indicated that
estrogen stimulated PADI4 expression through both of the classical and
nonclassical ER-mediated pathways.

PMID: 17456793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Apr;38(4):481-92.

Sp1 and Sp3 regulate glucokinase gene transcription in the liver of gilthead sea 
bream (Sparus aurata).

Egea M(1), Metón I, Baanante IV.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular, Facultat de Farmàcia,
Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

To better understand the transcriptional machinery that governs glucokinase (GCK)
expression, we have cloned and characterized the proximal promoter region of GCK 
from gilthead sea bream (Sparus aurata). The 5'-flanking region of GCK was
isolated by chromosome walking. SMART RACE-PCR allowed us to locate the
transcription start site 98 bp (bp) upstream from the translational start.
Transfection analysis in HepG2 cells revealed the presence of a functional
promoter in the 1397 bp 5'-flanking isolated fragment (positions -1321 to +76
relative to the transcription start site). Sequential 5'-deletion analysis
indicated a core functional promoter for basal transcription within the 288 bp
upstream from the transcription start site. Transient transfection experiments
performed in HepG2 cells and electrophoretic mobility shift assays denoted that
Sp1 binds and transactivates GCK promoter, whereas Sp3 repressed Sp1-mediated
activation of GCK by competing for the same binding site. Mutations in the Sp
binding site completely abolished the enhancing effect of Sp1. Treatment with
insulin stimulated GCK expression, and increased Sp1 levels in S. aurata liver.
We propose a new mechanism that involves Sp1 and Sp3 to mediate insulin
activation of GCK transcription.

PMID: 17446237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Phys Chem A. 2007 May 10;111(18):3554-9. Epub 2007 Apr 19.

Possible gas-phase reactions of H2/CH4/tetramethylsilane in diamond/beta-SiC
nanocomposite film deposition: an ab-initio study.

Zhao YL(1), Zhang RQ, Srikanth VV, Jiang X.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Material Science and Engineering, Ocean University of China,
Qingdao, Shangdong 266100, China.

The Si-C bond breakings in tetramethylsilane (TMS) when interacting with H/H2 and
the successive H abstractions from SiH4/CH4 in the gas mixture of H2/ CH4/TMS
were studied at the CCSD(T)/6-311+G**//MP2/6-31+G** level of theory. Their rate
constants between 1500 and 2500 K were estimated using a conventional transition 
state theory. The results indicate that (i) it is mainly the H radical that
causes the Si-C bond breaking in TMS, and (ii) the successive H abstractions from
SiH4 are much easier and faster than those from CH4. At low temperatures the
differences of rate constants among the four types of the reactions are large,
but generally reduced at high temperatures. The reaction rates show no
selectivity over the pressure as verified at P = 0.00025, 0.025, 1, and 100 atm, 
respectively. Our results could provide the following microscopic level
understanding of reactions in the synthesis of diamond/beta-SiC nanocomposite
films. Although the Si content is smaller than that of C in the precursor gases, 
the gas mixture activated by microwave plasma technique could provide Si sources 
with a higher rate. The produced Si sources with excellent rigidity in sp3
hybridization competitively occupy the space on the substrate together with C
sources, resulting in the deposition of diamond/beta-SiC nanocomposite films.

PMID: 17441700  [PubMed]


177. Chem Asian J. 2007 Mar 5;2(3):416-33.

Chemoselective C(sp3)-H bond activation for the preparation of condensed
N-heterocycles.

Ren H(1), Li Z, Knochel P.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Department Chemie und Biochemie,
Butenandtstrasse 5-13, Haus F, 81377 München, Germany.

Erratum in
    Chem Asian J. 2015 Sep;10(9):1812.

Condensed N-heterocycles were prepared by using C-H activation reactions
catalyzed by Pd(OAc)2 (5 mol %) and (p-tolyl)3P (10 mol %). The key step of these
ring closures is chemoselective intramolecular C-H activation of the methyl group
at position 2 of the pyrrole ring. Functionalized 9H-pyrrolo[1,2-a]indoles and
pyrrolo[1,2-f]phenanthridine derivatives were prepared in good yields. The
preparation of some complex N-heterocycles by using successive reactions is also 
described.

PMID: 17441179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Am Chem Soc. 2007 May 9;129(18):5810-1. Epub 2007 Apr 13.

Unexpected C=C bond formation via doubly dehydrogenative coupling of two
saturated sp3 C-H bonds activated with a polymolybdate.

Li Q(1), Wei Y, Hao J, Zhu Y, Wang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, People's
Republic of China.

PMID: 17429975  [PubMed]


179. J Phys Chem A. 2007 May 3;111(17):3416-22. Epub 2007 Apr 11.

Probing P-H+-P hydrogen bonds: structures, binding energies, and spin-spin
coupling constants.

Del Bene JE(1), Elguero J, Alkorta I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Youngstown State University, Youngstown, Ohio 44555, 
USA. jedelbene@ysu.edu

Ab initio MP2/aug'-cc-pVTZ calculations have been performed to determine the
structures and binding energies of 22 open and 3 cyclic complexes formed from the
sp2 [H(2)C=PH and HP=PH (cis and trans)] and sp3 [PH2(CH3) and PH3] hybridized
phosphorus bases and their corresponding protonated ions. EOM-CCSD calculations
have been carried out to obtain (31)P-(31)P and (31)P-(1)H coupling constants
across P-H+-P hydrogen bonds. Two equilibrium structures with essentially linear 
hydrogen bonds have been found along the proton-transfer coordinate, except for
complexes with P(CH3)H3+ as the proton donor to the sp2 bases. Although the
isomer having the conjugate acid of the stronger base as the proton donor lies
lower on the potential energy surface, it has a smaller binding energy relative
to the corresponding isolated monomers than the isomer with the conjugate acid of
the weaker base as the donor. The hydrogen bond of the latter has increased
proton-shared character. All of the complexes are stabilized by traditional
hydrogen bonds, as indicated by positive values of the reduced coupling constants
(2h)K(P-P) and (1)K(P-H), and negative values of (1h)K(H-P). (2h)J(P-P)
correlates with the P-P distance, a correlation determined primarily by the
nature of the proton donor. For open complexes, (1)J(P-H) always increases
relative to the isolated monomer, while (1h)J(H-P) is relatively small and
negative. (2h)J(P-P) values are quite large in open complexes, but are much
smaller in cyclic complexes in which the P-H+-P hydrogen bonds are nonlinear.
Thus, experimental measurements of (2h)J(P-P) should be able to differentiate
between open and cyclic complexes.

PMID: 17425291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Am Chem Soc. 2007 May 2;129(17):5472-9. Epub 2007 Apr 6.

Tetraazachlorin-fullerene conjugates: on-off control of electronic communication 
enabled by push-pull substituents.

Fukuda T(1), Masuda S, Kobayashi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University, Sendai
980-8578, Japan.

Novel tetraazachlorin (TAC)-fullerene (C60) conjugates (TAC-C60) and their
analogues (TAiBC-C60 and TABC-C60 where TAiBC = tetraazaisobacteriochlorin and
TABC = tetraazabacteriochlorin) have been synthesized by condensing
1,2-dicyanofullerene (1) and phthalonitrile derivatives (2) in the presence of
nickel chloride in quinoline, and fully characterized using mass spectrometry and
1H and 13C NMR. By arranging the TAC and C60 units at the minimum distance, and
taking also into account the molecular symmetry, the resultant conjugates show
on-off electronic communication behavior, depending on the push-pull properties
of the peripheral substituents in the TAC moiety. Consequently, the UV-vis
absorption spectrum of the electron-releasing butyloxy-substituted TAC-C60 (3a)
contains an unusual group of three absorption bands in the Q-band region (500-900
nm) as a result of a strong electronic communication between the two moieties. On
the other hand, the absorption spectrum of the electron-withdrawing
butylsulfonyl-substituted TAC-C60 (3b) comprises a typically normal TAC spectrum 
with markedly split two-peak Q-bands. A similar phenomenon is observed between
alkoxy-substituted TAiBC-C60 (4a) and butylsulfonyl-substituted TAiBC-C60 (4b).
This study reveals that the electron-donating or -withdrawing nature of the
peripheral substituents on an azachlorin moiety has an important effect on the
electronic structures of our novel azachlorin-C60 conjugates, although the
linking carbon atoms are aliphatic sp3 carbon atoms which generally do not
contribute to aromaticity. The electronic structures of the conjugates have been 
investigated in detail using spectroscopic and electrochemical techniques with
the aid of DFT calculations.

PMID: 17411037  [PubMed]


181. Cancer Res. 2007 Apr 1;67(7):3286-94.

Regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-1 expression by
specificity proteins 1, 3, and 4 in pancreatic cancer cells.

Abdelrahim M(1), Baker CH, Abbruzzese JL, Sheikh-Hamad D, Liu S, Cho SD, Yoon K, 
Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M University Health Science
Center, Houston, Texas, USA.

Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-1 (VEGFR1) is expressed in cancer
cell lines and tumors and, in pancreatic and colon cancer cells, activation of
VEGFR1 is linked to increased tumor migration and invasiveness. Tolfenamic acid, 
a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug, decreases Sp protein expression in Panc-1 
and L3.6pl pancreatic cancer cells, and this was accompanied by decreased VEGFR1 
protein and mRNA and decreased luciferase activity on cells transfected with
constructs (pVEGFR1) containing VEGFR1 promoter inserts. Comparable results were 
obtained in pancreatic cancer cells transfected with small inhibitory RNAs for
Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 and all three proteins bound to GC-rich elements in the VEGFR1 
promoter. These results show that VEGFR1 is regulated by Sp proteins and that
treatment with tolfenamic acid decreases expression of this critical angiogenic
factor. Moreover, in vitro studies in Panc-1 cells show that activation of VEGFR1
by VEGFB to increase mitogen-activated protein kinase 1/2 phosphorylation and
cell migration on collagen-coated plates is also inhibited by tolfenamic acid.
Thus, targeted degradation of Sp proteins is highly effective for inhibiting
VEGFR1 and associated angiogenic responses in pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 17409437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Biochemistry. 2007 Apr 24;46(16):4763-74. Epub 2007 Apr 3.

The role of Ets transcription factors in the basal transcription of the
translocator protein (18 kDa).

Giatzakis C(1), Batarseh A, Dettin L, Papadopoulos V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular and Cellular Biology, Georgetown
University Medical Center, 3900 Reservoir Road NW, Washington, DC 20057, USA.

The translocator protein (18 kDa; TSPO), previously known as peripheral-type
benzodiazepine receptor, is a high-affinity cholesterol- and drug-binding
mitochondrial protein involved in various cell functions including
steroidogenesis, apoptosis, and proliferation. TSPO is highly expressed in
secretory and glandular tissues, especially in steroidogenic cells, and its
expression is altered in certain pathological conditions such as cancer and
neurological diseases. In this study, we characterized the regulatory elements
present in the region of the TPSO promoter extending from 515 to 805 bp upstream 
of the transcription start site, an area previously identified as being important
for transcription. Promoter fragments extending 2.7 kb and 805 bp upstream of the
transcription start site were able to direct enhanced green fluorescent protein
expression to Leydig cells of the testis, theca cells of the ovary, and cells of 
the adrenal cortex in transgenic animals. This expression pattern perfectly
mimicked endogenous TSPO expression. Functional characterization of the 515-805
bp region revealed the presence of one specificity protein 1/specificity protein 
3 (Sp1/Sp3) and two v-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homologue (Ets)
binding sites that are important for transcriptional activity in both MA-10 mouse
Leydig tumor cells and NIH/3T3 whole mouse embryo fibroblasts. GA-binding protein
alpha (GABPalpha), a member of the Ets family of transcription factors, was found
to be associated with the endogenous TSPO promoter. We conclude that Sp1/Sp3 and 
members of the Ets family of transcription factors bind to specific binding sites
in the TSPO promoter to drive basal TSPO gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC2529463
PMID: 17402746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Phys Chem A. 2007 Mar 29;111(12):2307-18. Epub 2007 Mar 8.

Molecular structural formulas as one-electron density and hamiltonian operators: 
the VIF method extended.

Alia JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Minnesota, Morris, Division of Science and Math, 600 East 4th
Street, Morris, Minnesota 56267, USA. Aliaj@morris.umn.edu

The valency interaction formula (VIF) method is given a broader and more general 
interpretation in which these simple molecular structural formulas implicitly
include all overlaps between valence atomic orbitals even for interactions not
drawn in the VIF picture. This applies for VIF pictures as one-electron
Hamiltonian operators as well as VIF pictures as one-electron density operators
that constitute a new implementation of the VIF method simpler in its application
and more accurate in its results than previous approaches. A procedure for
estimating elements of the effective charge density-bond order matrix, Pmunu,
from electron configurations in atoms is presented, and it is shown how these
lead to loop and line constants in the VIF picture. From these structural
formulas, one finds the number of singly, doubly, and unoccupied molecular
orbitals, as well as the number of molecular orbitals with energy lower, equal,
and higher than -1/2Eh, the negative of the hydrogen atom's ionization energy.
The VIF results for water are in qualitative agreement with MP2/6311++G3df3pd, MO
energy levels where the simple VIF for water presented in the earlier literature 
does not agree with computed energy levels. The method presented here gives the
simplest accurate VIF pictures for hydrocarbons. It is shown how VIF can be used 
to predict thermal barriers to chemical reactions. Insertion of singlet carbene
into H2 is given as an example. VIF pictures as one-electron density operators
describe the ground-state multiplicities of B2, N2, and O2 molecules and as
one-electron Hamiltonian operators give the correct electronegativity trend
across period two. Previous implementations of VIF do not indicate singly
occupied molecular orbitals directly from the pictorial VIF rules for these
examples. The direct comparison between structural formulas that represent
electron density and those that represent energy is supported by comparison of a 
simple electronegativity scale, chiD=N/n2, with well-known electronegativity
scales of Pauling, Mulliken, and Allen. This scale comes from the method used to 
calculate Pmumu for sp3 hybridized period-two elements and is comparable to
electronegativity because it has the same form as <1/r> for hydrogenic orbitals. 
It therefore provides a physical basis for the representation of one electron
density and Hamiltonian operators by the same VIF picture.

PMID: 17388324  [PubMed]


184. Proc Inst Mech Eng H. 2007 Feb;221(2):161-72.

Physical properties of ultrafast deposited micro- and nanothickness amorphous
hydrogenated carbon films for medical devices and prostheses.

Zaharia T(1), Sullivan IL, Saied SO, Bosch RC, Bijker MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electronic Engineering and Applied Physics, University of Aston,
Aston Triangle, Birmingham B4 7ET, UK.

Hydrogenated amorphous carbon films with diamond-like structures have been formed
on different substrates at very low energies and temperatures by a
plasma-enhanced chemical vapour deposition (PECVD) process employing acetylene as
the precursor gas. The plasma source was of a cascaded arc type with argon as the
carrier gas. The films grown at very high deposition rates were found to have a
practical thickness limit of approximately 1.5 microm, above which delamination
from the substrate occurred. Deposition on silicon (100), glass, and plastic
substrates has been studied and the films characterized in terms of sp3 content, 
roughness, hardness, adhesion, and optical properties. Deposition rates of up to 
20 nm/s have been achieved at substrate temperatures below 100 degrees C. A
typical sp3 content of 60-75 per cent in the films was determined by
X-ray-generated Auger electron spectroscopy (XAES). The hardness, reduced
modulus, and adhesion of the films were measured using a MicroMaterials NanoTest 
indenter/scratch tester. Hardness was found to vary from 4 to 13 GPa depending on
the admixed acetylene flow and substrate temperature. The adhesion of the film to
the substrate was significantly influenced by the substrate temperature and
whether an in situ d.c. cleaning was employed prior to the deposition process.
The hydrogen content in the film was measured by a combination of the Fourier
transformation infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy and Rutherford backscattering (RBS)
techniques. From the results it is concluded that the films formed by the process
described here are ideal for the coating of long-term implantable medical
devices, such as prostheses, stents, invasive probes, catheters, biosensors, etc.
The properties reported in this publication are comparable with good-quality
films deposited by other PECVD methods. The advantages of these films are the low
ion energy and temperature of deposition, ensuring that no damage is done to
sensitive substrates, very high deposition rates, relatively low capital cost of 
the equipment required, and the ease of adjustment of plasma parameters, which
facilitates film properties to be tailored according to the desired application.

PMID: 17385570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Nat Mater. 2007 Apr;6(4):274-7. Epub 2007 Mar 25.

Laser-shock compression of diamond and evidence of a negative-slope melting
curve.

Brygoo S(1), Henry E, Loubeyre P, Eggert J, Koenig M, Loupias B, Benuzzi-Mounaix 
A, Rabec Le Gloahec M.

Author information: 
(1)Commissariat à l'Energie Atomique, BP 12, 91680 Bruyères le Châtel, France.

Diamond is the only known high-pressure structure of carbon. In spite of its
fundamental and planetary importance, the stability domain of this strong
covalent material is largely unknown. After decades of experimental efforts,
evidence was obtained that the diamond-liquid melting line has a positive slope
above the graphite-diamond-liquid triple point. At higher pressure, theoretical
studies have suggested that the melting curve of diamond should have a maximum,
owing to a loss of stability of the sp3 hybridization in the fluid phase.
Accurate Hugoniot data of diamond exist up to 590 GPa (ref. 6). Higher-pressure
measurements along the diamond Hugoniot have recently been achieved by laser
shocks, showing that diamond probably melts to a conducting fluid. We report here
laser-shock Hugoniot data across the melting transition. The shocked diamond
crystal begins to melt around 750 GPa. Furthermore, a negative volume
discontinuity at melting is observed. This requires a negative melting slope and 
thus supports the existence of a maximum on the diamond melting curve. These
melting data allow us to test various calculations of the phase diagram of carbon
at very high pressure. Finally, the stability domain of the diamond crystal is
now constrained in a relevant region for Uranus-like planetary interiors.

PMID: 17384637  [PubMed]


186. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2007 Jul;293(1):G146-53. Epub 2007 Mar
22.

Sp1 and Sp3 mediate NHE2 gene transcription in the intestinal epithelial cells.

Hua P(1), Xu H, Uno JK, Lipko MA, Dong J, Kiela PR, Ghishan FK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Steele Memorial Children's Research Center, 1501 N. 
Campbell Ave., Tucson, AZ 85724, USA.

Our previous studies have identified a minimal Sp1-driven promoter region (nt
-36/+116) directing NHE2 expression in mouse renal epithelial cells. However,
this minimal promoter region was not sufficient to support active transcription
of NHE2 gene in the intestinal epithelial cells, suggesting the need for
additional upstream regulatory elements. In the present study, we used
nontransformed rat intestinal epithelial (RIE) cells as a model to identify the
minimal promoter region and transcription factors necessary for the basal
transcription of rat NHE2 gene in the intestinal epithelial cells. We identified 
a region within the rat NHE2 gene promoter located within nt -67/-43 upstream of 
transcription initiation site as indispensable for the promoter function in
intestinal epithelial cells. Mutations at nt -56/-51 not only abolished the
DNA-protein interaction in this region, but also completely abolished NHE2 gene
promoter activity in RIE cells. Supershift assays revealed that Sp1 and Sp3
interact with this promoter region, but, contrary to the minimal promoter
indispensable for renal expression of NHE2, both transcription factors expressed 
individually in Drosophila SL2 cells activated rat NHE2 gene promoter. Moreover, 
Sp1 was a weaker transactivator and when coexpressed in SL2 cells it reduced
Sp3-mediated NHE2 basal promoter activity. Furthermore, DNase I footprinting
confirmed that nt -58/-51 is protected by nuclear protein from RIE cells. We
conclude that the mechanism of basal control of rat NHE2 gene promoter activity
is different in the renal and intestinal epithelium, with Sp3 being the major
transcriptional activator of NHE2 gene transcription in the intestinal epithelial
cells.

PMID: 17379926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Am Chem Soc. 2007 Apr 11;129(14):4430-9. Epub 2007 Mar 20.

A density functional study of the 13C NMR chemical shifts in functionalized
single-walled carbon nanotubes.

Zurek E(1), Pickard CJ, Autschbach J.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Festkörperforschung, Heisenbergstrasse1, 70569
Stuttgart, Germany.

The 13C NMR chemical shifts for functionalized (7,0), (8,0), (9,0), and (10,0)
single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) have been studied computationally using
gauge-including projector-augmented plane-wave (GIPAW) density functional theory 
(DFT). The functional groups NH, NCH3, NCH2OH, and CH2NHCH2 have been considered,
and different sites where covalent addition or substitution may occur have been
examined. The shifts of the carbons directly attached to the group are sensitive 
to the bond which has been functionalized and may, therefore, be used to identify
whether the group has reacted with a parallel or a diagonal C-C bond. The
addition of NH to a parallel bond renders the functionalized carbons formally
sp3-hybridized, yielding shifts of around 44 ppm, independent of the SWNT radius.
Reaction with a diagonal bond retains the formal sp2 hybridization of the
substituted carbons, and their shifts are slightly lower or higher than those of 
the unsubstituted carbon atoms. The calculated 1H NMR shifts of protons in the
functional groups are also dependent upon the SWNT-group interaction. Upon
decreasing the degree of functionalization for the systems where the group is
added to a parallel bond, the average chemical shift of the unfunctionalized
carbons approaches that of the pristine tube. At the same time, the shifts of the
functionalized carbons remain independent upon the degree of functionalization.
For the SWNTs where N-R attaches to a parallel bond, the average shift of the sp2
carbons was found to be insensitive to the substituent R. Moreover, the shifts of
the functionalized sp3 carbons, as well as of the carbons within the group
itself, are independent of the SWNT radius. The results indicate that a wealth of
knowledge may be obtained from the 13C NMR of functionalized SWNTs.

PMID: 17371025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Pathol. 2007 May;212(1):102-11.

Transcriptional upregulation and unmethylation of the promoter region of p16 in
invasive basal cell carcinoma cells and partial co-localization with the gamma 2 
chain of laminin-332.

Svensson Månsson S(1), Reis-Filho J, Landberg G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund University,
UMAS, SE-205 02 Malmö, Sweden.

Basal cell carcinoma cells show low proliferation rates at the invasive front and
a concordant upregulation of the cdk-inhibitor p16, limiting proliferative
capacity. Little is known about the mechanisms of p16 regulation in normal and
malignant cells apart from that many transcription factors such as Ets1, Ets2,
SP1, SP3, JunB and the polycomb protein Bmi1 have the potential to induce or
repress p16 expression. Therefore, the aim of this study was to determine how p16
is regulated in basal cell carcinoma with special focus on its upregulation in
invasive cells. By analysing various microdissected areas of basal cell carcinoma
using real-time quantitative PCR we observed upregulation of p16 mRNA in invasive
tumour cells compared to centrally localized tumour cells. The methylation status
of the p16 promoter, analysed by methylation-specific PCR, also showed diminished
methylation in tumour cells at the invasive front, supporting the hypothesis that
promoter methylation can affect the transcriptional activation of p16 in vivo.
There was only sporadic co-localization of Ets, or ERK1/2 phosphorylation with
p16 upregulation at the invasive front, suggesting that these factors were not
directly involved in the regulation of p16. Furthermore, the gamma 2 chain of
laminin-332 has been reported to be increased at the invasive front compared to
the central areas of many tumours. Interestingly, in basal cell carcinoma we
observed partial co-localization between p16 and the gamma 2 chain of laminin-332
in tumour cells towards areas of ulceration and in the majority of clearly
infiltrative tumour cells but not in p16 positive tumour cells with a more
pushing invasive growth pattern. These data suggest that concurrent p16
upregulation and decreased proliferation are more general phenomena in different 
types of invasive growth patterns in basal cell carcinomas and that these only
partially overlap with the gamma 2 chain of laminin-332 associated invasion
patterns.

Copyright (c) 2007 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published
by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 17370299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Cancer Res. 2007 Mar 15;67(6):2816-23.

Betulinic acid inhibits prostate cancer growth through inhibition of specificity 
protein transcription factors.

Chintharlapalli S(1), Papineni S, Ramaiah SK, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M University Health Science
Center, Houston, Texas 77843-4466, USA.

Betulinic acid is a pentacyclic triterpene natural product initially identified
as a melanoma-specific cytotoxic agent that exhibits low toxicity in animal
models. Subsequent studies show that betulinic acid induces apoptosis and
antiangiogenic responses in tumors derived from multiple tissues; however, the
underlying mechanism of action is unknown. Using LNCaP prostate cancer cells as a
model, we now show that betulinic acid decreases expression of vascular
endothelial growth (VEGF) and the antiapoptotic protein survivin. The mechanism
of these betulinic acid-induced antiangiogenic and proapoptotic responses in both
LNCaP cells and in tumors is due to activation of selective proteasome-dependent 
degradation of the transcription factors specificity protein 1 (Sp1), Sp3, and
Sp4, which regulate VEGF and survivin expression. Thus, betulinic acid acts as a 
novel anticancer agent through targeted degradation of Sp proteins that are
highly overexpressed in tumors.

PMID: 17363604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Apr 27;356(1):286-92. Epub 2007 Mar 5.

Sp1 and Sp3 regulate basal transcription of the survivin gene.

Xu R(1), Zhang P, Huang J, Ge S, Lu J, Qian G.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Human Gene Therapy, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai
200025, China.

Survivin, a unique member of the inhibitor of apoptosis protein family, is
overexpressed in many cancers and considered to play an important role in
oncogenesis. In this study, we cloned and identified the proximal 269 bp promoter
of survivin gene, which exhibited strong promoter activity in HeLa cells. The
TATA-less, GC-rich promoter contains 7 putative binding sites for Sp1, two of
which (one at position -148 to -153, the other at position -127 to -140) are
essential in regulating basal survivin promoter activity. Not only Sp1 but also
Sp3 can activate the survivin promoter, which were proven by EMSA, blocking Sp1
or Sp3 using RNAi or mithramycin treatment of HeLa cells, and overexpression of
Sp1 or Sp3. Our results collectively suggest that Sp1 cooperates with Sp3 to
regulate survivin promoter activity.

PMID: 17350596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2007 Jul;293(1):C64-74. Epub 2007 Mar 7.

Molecular mechanism of rat NHE3 gene promoter regulation by sodium butyrate.

Kiela PR(1), Kuscuoglu N, Midura AJ, Midura-Kiela MT, Larmonier CB, Lipko M,
Ghishan FK.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Pediatrics, Steele Children's Research Center, University of Arizona 
Health Sciences Center, 1501 N. Campbell Ave., Tucson, AZ 85724, USA.

Sodium butyrate (NaB) stimulates sodium and water absorption by inducing colonic 
Na(+)/H(+) exchange. NaB induces Na(+)/H(+) exchanger (NHE)3 activity and protein
and mRNA expression both in vivo and in vitro. Our previously published
observations indicated that this induction is Ser/Thr kinase dependent and that
NaB-responsive elements were localized within -320/-34 bp of the rat NHE3
promoter. Here we further delineate the mechanism of NaB-mediated NHE3 gene
transcription. Transient and stable transfection of Caco-2 cells with NHE3 gene
reporter constructs identified Sp binding site SpB at position -58/-55 nt as
critical for NaB-mediated induction. Gel mobility shift (GMSA) and DNA affinity
precipitation assays indicated NaB-induced binding of Sp3 and decreased binding
of Sp1 to SpB element. While no changes in expression of Sp1 or Sp3 were noted,
NaB induced phosphorylation of Sp1 and acetylation of Sp3. Sp3 was a more potent 
inducer of NHE3 gene transcription, which suggested that change in balance,
favoring binding of Sp3 to the SpB site, would result in significant increase in 
NHE3 promoter activity. Small interfering RNA studies in Caco-2 cells and data
from NaB-treated SL2 cells used as a reconstitution model confirmed this
hypothesis. In addition to the SpB site, which played a permissive role, an
upstream novel butyrate response element located at -196/-175 nt was necessary
for maximal induction. GMSA identified a protein-DNA complex with a -196/-175 nt 
probe; this interaction was not affected by NaB treatment, thus suggesting that
in response to NaB Sp3 binding to site SpB precedes and results in recruitment of
the putative factor to this upstream site.

PMID: 17344314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. BMC Mol Biol. 2007 Mar 7;8:20.

Sp1/Sp3 and DNA-methylation contribute to basal transcriptional activation of
human podoplanin in MG63 versus Saos-2 osteoblastic cells.

Hantusch B(1), Kalt R, Krieger S, Puri C, Kerjaschki D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Pathology, Medical University of Vienna, Währinger
Gürtel 18-20, A-1090 Vienna, Austria. brigitte.hantusch@meduniwien.ac.at

BACKGROUND: Podoplanin is a membrane mucin that, among a series of tissues, is
expressed on late osteoblasts and osteocytes. Since recent findings have focussed
on podoplanin's potential role as a tumour progression factor, we aimed at
identifying regulatory elements conferring PDPN promoter activity. Here, we
characterized the molecular mechanism controlling basal PDPN transcription in
human osteoblast-like MG63 versus Saos-2 cells.
RESULTS: We cloned and sequenced 2056 nucleotides from the 5'-flanking region of 
the PDPN gene and a computational search revealed that the TATA and CAAT
box-lacking promoter possesses features of a growth-related gene, such as a
GC-rich 5' region and the presence of multiple putative Sp1, AP-4 and NF-1 sites.
Reporter gene assays demonstrated a functional promoter in MG63 cells exhibiting 
30-fold more activity than in Saos-2 cells. In vitro DNase I footprinting
revealed eight protected regions flanked by DNaseI hypersensitive sites within
the region bp -728 to -39 present in MG63, but not in Saos-2 cells. Among these
regions, mutation and supershift electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA)
identified four Sp1/Sp3 binding sites and two binding sites for yet unknown
transcription factors. Deletion studies demonstrated the functional importance of
two Sp1/Sp3 sites for PDPN promoter activity. Overexpression of Sp1 and Sp3
independently increased the stimulatory effect of the promoter and podoplanin
mRNA levels in MG63 and Saos-2 cells. In SL2 cells, Sp3 functioned as a
repressor, while Sp1 and Sp3 acted positively synergistic. Weak PDPN promoter
activity of Saos-2 cells correlated with low Sp1/Sp3 nuclear levels, which was
confirmed by Sp1/Sp3 chromatin immunoprecipitations in vivo. Moreover,
methylation-sensitive Southern blot analyses and bisulfite sequencing detected
strong methylation of CpG sites upstream of bp -464 in MG63 cells, but
hypomethylation of these sites in Saos-2 cells. Concomitantly, treatment with the
DNA methyltransferase inhibitor 5-azaCdR in combination with trichostatin A (TSA)
downregulated podoplanin mRNA levels in MG63 cells, and region-specific in vitro 
methylation of the distal promoter suggested that DNA methylation rather enhanced
than hindered PDPN transcription in both cell types.
CONCLUSION: These data establish that in human osteoblast-like MG63 cells, Sp1
and Sp3 stimulate basal PDPN transcription in a concerted, yet independent
manner, whereas Saos-2 cells lack sufficient nuclear Sp protein amounts for
transcriptional activation. Moreover, a highly methylated chromatin conformation 
of the distal promoter region confers cell-type specific podoplanin upregulation 
versus Saos-2 cells.

PMCID: PMC1828165
PMID: 17343736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2006 Dec;1091:233-43.

Prostaglandins regulate transcription by means of prostaglandin response elements
located in the promoters of mammalian Na,K-ATPase beta 1 subunit genes.

Matlhagela K(1), Taub M.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Department, 140 Farber Hall, State University of New York at
Buffalo, 3435 Main Street, Buffalo, NY 14214, USA.

Prostaglandins are potent products of arachidonic acid metabolism that play
significant roles in regulating ion transport in the kidney. In the Madin Darby
canine kidney (MDCK) cell line prostaglandin E(1) (PGE(1)) stimulates the
activity of the Na,K-ATPase and regulates transcription. Transient transfection
studies conducted in MDCK cells with a human Na,K-ATPase beta1 subunit
promoter/luciferase construct, pHbeta1-1141 Luc, showed a PGE(1) stimulation. The
PGE(1) stimulation was inhibited by the PGE receptor antagonists SC19220 and
AH6809, indicating the involvement of EP1 receptors (coupled to phospholipase C) 
and EP2 receptors (coupled to adenylate cyclase), respectively. A
prostaglandin-regulatory element (PGRE) within the beta1 subunit promoter (-110
to -92, AGTCCCTGC) is sufficient to elicit a PGE(1) stimulation in a heterologous
promoter (in pLUC-MCS). Studies with promoter mutants indicated that in addition 
to the PGRE, an adjacent Sp1 site was also essential for regulation by PGE(1).
Consistent with the involvement of Sp1 are the results of DNA affinity
precipitation studies, which indicate that Sp1 as well as CREB, and Sp3 all bind 
to the PGRE. The involvement of this PGRE in transcriptional regulation of the
Na,K-ATPase beta1 gene was examined in a number of species. Only human and
chimpanzee promoters possessed an identical PGRE site, unlike dog, rat, and
mouse, which possessed Sp1 sites in similar locations. Two alternative PGREs were
subsequently identified. The sequence of the one of these PGREs (TGACCTTC, -445
to -438) was conserved throughout all species examined, suggesting its
physiologic significance.

PMID: 17341618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Am Chem Soc. 2007 Mar 28;129(12):3510-1. Epub 2007 Mar 3.

Palladium-catalyzed methylation and arylation of sp2 and sp3 C-H bonds in simple 
carboxylic acids.

Giri R(1), Maugel N, Li JJ, Wang DH, Breazzano SP, Saunders LB, Yu JQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry MS015, Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts
02454-9110, USA.

PMID: 17335217  [PubMed]


195. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2007;46(15):2643-5.

Palladium-catalyzed 2-pyridylmethyl transfer from 2-(2-pyridyl)ethanol
derivatives to organic halides by chelation-assisted cleavage of unstrained C(sp3
)--C(sp3) bonds.

Niwa T(1), Yorimitsu H, Oshima K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Material Chemistry, Graduate School of Engineering, Kyoto
University, Kyoto-daigaku Katsura, Nishikyo-ku, Kyoto 615-8510, Japan.

PMID: 17330918  [PubMed]


196. Chemistry. 2007;13(15):4223-9.

Palladium-catalyzed Suzuki-Miyaura reaction involving a secondary sp3 carbon:
studies of stereochemistry and scope of the reaction.

Rodríguez N(1), Ramírez de Arellano C, Asensio G, Medio-Simón M.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Orgánica, Universidad de Valencia, Burjassot-Valencia,
Spain.

Palladium-catalyzed C--C bond formation involving secondary sp3-hybridized carbon
is described. These reactions occur with secondary 1-bromoethyl arylsulfoxides
and different arylboronic acids, to produce the corresponding arylated sulfoxides
in moderate to high yields and with complete stereospecificity. Despite the
presence of beta hydrogens in the substrate, the competitive beta-hydride
elimination is not a significant side reaction when coordinating solvents are
used. The reported cross-coupling involves secondary C(sp3)--C(sp2) bond
formation: this is the first time that a mechanistic study has been carried out
with such substrates. The reaction proceeds with inversion of configuration at
the stereogenic C(sp3) carbon. The high stereospecificity of the coupling and the
mildness of the reaction conditions allow for the preservation of the optical
purities of reagents and products and the preparation of useful chiral targets.

PMID: 17330314  [PubMed]


197. Gene. 2007 Apr 15;391(1-2):252-63. Epub 2007 Jan 26.

Structure of the human 5-HT7 receptor gene and characterization of its promoter
region.

Laenen K(1), Haegeman G, Vanhoenacker P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Eukaryotic Gene Expression and Signal Transduction (LEGEST),
Department of Molecular Biology, Ghent University, UGent, K.L. Ledeganckstraat
35, B-9000 Gent, Belgium.

The molecular mechanism regulating serotonin 5-HT(7) receptor expression is still
unclear. In this study we provide evidence that transcription of the 5-HT(7) gene
is at least partly regulated by Sp1 and Sp3. We isolated and sequenced >3000 bp
of the upstream sequences and identified by RACE a number of transcriptional
initiation sites over a region of 300 bp upstream of the coding region. This
region has a high GC content, but contains no obvious TATA or a CAAT box. Besides
a Sp1/Sp3 consensus motif, regulatory elements for AP2, Egr-1 and MAZ are also
present. Transient transfection assays using deletion variants indicated that the
GC-rich region is essential for full promoter activity. The role of Sp1 in this
was confirmed by transient overexpression of both wild type Sp1 or
dominant-negative forms. By gel shift and supershift analyses, targeting the Sp1 
consensus sequence and the GC-rich region just upstream of the transcription
initiation sites, binding of Sp1 and Sp3 was demonstrated. Both in vitro as well 
as in vivo experiments, using a cell line which endogenously expresses the
5-HT(7) receptor, indicated that mithramycin A, an inhibitor of Sp1/3
transcription factor binding, was able to inhibit 5-HT(7) promoter activity.
Taken together these results support the essential role of Sp factors in
regulating 5-HT(7) promoter activity.

PMID: 17321075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Org Lett. 2007 Mar 15;9(6):981-3. Epub 2007 Feb 24.

Novel intramolecular reactivity of oximes: synthesis of cyclic and spiro-fused
imines.

Savarin CG(1), Grisé C, Murry JA, Reamer RA, Hughes DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Process Research, Merck Research Laboratories, Merck & Co., P.O.
Box 2000, Rahway, NJ 07065, USA. cecilesavarin@gmail.com

Under conventional heat (135-145 degrees C) or microwave irradiation and 1 equiv 
of acetic anhydride, ortho-substituted aryl-oximes undergo a novel sp3 C-H
activated cyclization to produce the corresponding isoindoles, and aliphatic
oximes afford the corresponding dihydropyrroles. The cyclization occurs with
various substrates in good yield (46-82%) leading to unique spiro-fused and
cyclic imines. An initial mechanistic investigation suggests the reaction occurs 
via a nitrenium or vinyl nitrene intermediate. [reaction: see text]

PMID: 17319674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Clin Cancer Res. 2007 Feb 15;13(4):1123-32.

Analysis of specific transcriptional regulators as early predictors of
independent prognostic relevance in resected colorectal cancer.

Maurer GD(1), Leupold JH, Schewe DM, Biller T, Kates RE, Hornung HM, Lau-Werner
U, Post S, Allgayer H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Surgery and Molecular Oncology of Solid Tumors
(German Cancer Research Center), Mannheim Faculty University Heidelberg, Germany.

PURPOSE: Prognostic studies on transcription factors acting at specific promoter 
elements have never been done so far. However, in tumors with long necessary
follow-up, such as colorectal cancer, early-risk predictors would be needed. The 
invasion-related gene u-PAR is regulated via an activator protein 2 (AP-2)/Sp1
(-152/-135) and an AP-1 binding promoter motif (-190/-171), mediating u-PAR
induction by K-Ras and Src. The present study was done to give first evidence for
early prognostic relevance of transcription factors differentially bound to the
u-PAR promoter, and their molecular inducers, in colorectal cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Tumor/normal tissues of 92 prospectively followed (median = 
26.3 months) patients were analyzed for Src activity/protein, K-ras mutations,
and transcription factor binding to both u-PAR promoter motifs (in vivo gel
shift, kinase assay, and PCR).
RESULTS: Kaplan-Meier/Mantel-Cox analysis showed a significant correlation among 
elevated Sp1/Sp3 binding to region -152/-135 (P = 0.002 and P = 0.006), the
combinations of Sp1/AP-2 and Sp1/AP-1 binding to both motifs (P = 0.010 and P =
0.005), and Sp1 binding/high Src protein in tumors (P < 0.001), with poor
survival. Survival decreased with the number of bound transcription factors to
both motifs, with binding of three factors defining a high-risk group (P =
0.021). In multivariate analysis, elevated Sp1 binding, combinations of Sp1/AP-2 
binding and Sp1/AP-1 binding, or Sp1 binding/high Src were independent prognostic
variables; u-PAR expression itself being not yet prognostic. A first molecular
staging model (CART) was defined, providing novel early high-risk groups (mean
survival time as low as for non-curatively resected patients) from these
variables.
CONCLUSIONS: This study defines transcription factors acting at specific promoter
elements of an invasion-related gene, mediating specific signaling, as novel,
independent, early predictors of prognosis in colorectal cancer.

PMID: 17317820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Gene. 2007 May 1;392(1-2):221-9. Epub 2007 Jan 20.

Modulation of Bone Morphogenetic Protein (BMP) 2 gene expression by Sp1
transcription factors.

Xu J(1), Rogers MB.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, UMDNJ-New Jersey Medical School, Newark,
NJ 07101-1709, USA.

Changes in Bone Morphogenetic Protein (BMP) 2 gene expression and activity have
been linked to many pathological conditions including cancer, osteoarthritis, and
birth defects. BMP2 gene polymorphisms have been linked to osteoporosis and
osteoarthritis. Sp1 and related proteins are widely expressed regulators of gene 
expression whose transcription activating abilities vary in different cells and
on different genes. We present data indicating that the ratio of Sp1 and Sp3
isoforms varies in cells that express or do not express BMP2. Furthermore, the
orientation of Sp1 sites conserved between four orders of mammals influences BMP2
expression. Together our data indicate that the stoichiometry and orientation of 
Sp1 and Sp3 complexes on the BMP2 promoter influence BMP2 expression.

PMCID: PMC1934513
PMID: 17317039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Neurochem. 2007 Mar;100(5):1300-14.

Glutamate receptor activation evokes calpain-mediated degradation of Sp3 and Sp4,
the prominent Sp-family transcription factors in neurons.

Mao X(1), Yang SH, Simpkins JW, Barger SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little 
Rock, Arkansas, USA.

Sp-family transcription factors (Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4) contain a zinc-finger domain
that binds to DNA sequences rich in G-C/T. As assayed by RT-PCR analysis of mRNA,
western-blot analysis, immunofluorescence, and antibody-dependent "supershift" of
DNA-binding assays, the prominent Sp-family factors in cerebral neurons were
identified as Sp3 and Sp4. By contrast, glial cells were found to express Sp1 and
Sp3. We previously showed that the pattern of G-C/T binding activity of Sp-family
factors is rapidly and specifically altered by the calcium influx accompanying
activation of glutamate receptors. Here, we demonstrate that Sp-factor activity
is also lost after a cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury in vivo. Consistent
with its calcium-dependent nature, we found that glutamate's effect on Sp-family 
factors could be blocked by inhibitors of calpains, neutral cysteine proteases
activated by calcium. Purified calpain I cleaved Sp3 and Sp4 into products that
retained G-C/T-binding activity, consistent with species observed in
glutamate-treated neurons. These data provide details of an impact of
glutamate-receptor activation on molecular events connected to gene expression.

PMCID: PMC1949346
PMID: 17316402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Immunol. 2007 Mar 1;178(5):3059-66.

17beta-estradiol induces IL-1alpha gene expression in rheumatoid fibroblast-like 
synovial cells through estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) and augmentation of
transcriptional activity of Sp1 by dissociating histone deacetylase 2 from
ERalpha.

Itoh Y(1), Hayashi H, Miyazawa K, Kojima S, Akahoshi T, Onozaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Health Sciences, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Nagoya City University, 3-1 Tanabe-dori, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya, Japan.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) occurs four times more frequently in women than in men,
although the mechanistic basis of the gender difference is unknown. RA is
characterized by the overproliferation of synoviocytes producing proinflammatory 
cytokines such as IL-1, implicated in the pathogenesis of the disease. In this
study we examined whether 17beta-estradiol (E2) induced IL-1alpha mRNA expression
in the rheumatoid fibroblast-like cell line MH7A, as well as in primary synovial 
cells from RA patients, and investigated the underlying molecular mechanisms. E2 
induced IL-1alpha mRNA expression in both cell types in an estrogen
receptor-dependent manner. In MH7A cells ERalpha but not ERbeta mediated the
effects of E2. Deletion and mutation analysis revealed that a GC-rich region
within the IL-1alpha gene promoter was responsible for the response to E2. EMSAs 
showed that Sp1 and Sp3 bound to the GC-rich region and that the transcriptional 
activity of Sp1 was up-regulated by the treatment with E2. Sp1 and ERalpha
interacted physically regardless of the presence of E2. Physical interaction was 
also observed between ERalpha and histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2), and E2 induced
the dissociation of HDAC2 from ERalpha. These results suggest that E2 induces the
dissociation of corepressor HDAC2 from ERalpha, which leads to the augmentation
of Sp1 transcriptional activity through the GC-rich region within the IL-1alpha
gene promoter.

PMID: 17312152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Chem Commun (Camb). 2007 Feb 28;(8):855-7. Epub 2006 Nov 23.

Conversion of a (sp3)C-F bond of alkyl fluorides to (sp3)C-X (X = Cl, C, H, O, S,
Se, Te, N) bonds using organoaluminium reagents.

Terao J(1), Begum SA, Shinohara Y, Tomita M, Naitoh Y, Kambe N.

Author information: 
(1)Science and Technology Centre for Atoms, Molecules and Ions Control, Graduate 
School of Engineering, Osaka University and Department of Applied Chemistry,
Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka.
terao@chem.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp

A simple method for the conversion of (sp(3))C-F bonds of alkyl fluorides to
(sp(3))C-X (X = Cl, C, H, O, S, Se, Te, N) bonds has been achieved by the use of 
a hexane solution of organoaluminum reagents having Al-X bonds.

PMID: 17308654  [PubMed]


204. Oncogene. 2007 Jul 5;26(31):4550-62. Epub 2007 Feb 12.

Tumor suppressor Pdcd4 inhibits invasion/intravasation and regulates urokinase
receptor (u-PAR) gene expression via Sp-transcription factors.

Leupold JH(1), Yang HS, Colburn NH, Asangani I, Post S, Allgayer H.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Experimental Surgery and Molecular Oncology of Solid Tumors,
Medical Faculty Mannheim, University Heidelberg and DKFZ Heidelberg, Germany.

Tumor suppressor Pdcd4 has recently been shown to inhibit invasion by activating 
activator protein-1 (AP-1); however, little is known of the functionally
significant Pdcd4-target genes. The urokinase receptor (u-PAR) promotes
invasion/metastasis, and is associated with poor cancer-patient survival. The
present study was conducted (1) to investigate a role for Pdcd4 in intravasation,
invasion and u-PAR regulation, and (2) to describe mechanisms by which this is
achieved. Fourteen cell lines showed reciprocal expression of u-PAR/Pdcd4.
Resected tumor/normal tissues of 29 colorectal cancer patients demonstrated a
significant inverse correlation between Pdcd4/u-PAR. siRNA-Pdcd4-transfected GEO 
cells significantly increased endogenous u-PAR mRNA/protein. A
u-PAR-promoter-chloramphenicol acetyl transferase (CAT)-reporter was reduced in
activity with increasing Pdcd4 expression in RKO. Deletion of a putative
Sp-1-binding site (-402/-350) inhibited u-PAR promoter regulation by Pdcd4, this 
being paralleled by a reduction of Sp1 binding to this region in
pdcd4-transfected cells. Pdcd4-transfected cells showed an increase in Sp3
binding to u-PAR promoter region -152/-135, the deletion of which reduces the
ability of Pdcd4 to suppress u-PAR promoter activity. Surprisingly, the
u-PAR-AP-1 site was not targeted by Pdcd4. Finally, RKO cells overexpressing
Pdcd4 showed an inhibition of invasion/intravasation (chicken embryo metastasis
assay). These data suggest Pdcd4 as a new negative regulator of intravasation,
and qas the invasion-related gene u-PAR. It is the first study to implicate Pdcd4
regulation of gene expression via Sp1/Sp3.

PMID: 17297470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Neurosci. 2007 Feb 7;27(6):1498-506.

Hypo-osmolar stress induces p75NTR expression by activating Sp1-dependent
transcription.

Ramos A(1), Ho WC, Forte S, Dickson K, Boutilier J, Favell K, Barker PA.

Author information: 
(1)Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
H3A 2B4.

Injury-induced expression of the p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75NTR) in the CNS
facilitates neuronal apoptosis and prevents neuronal regrowth, but the mechanisms
regulating p75NTR expression are poorly characterized. In this study, we showed
that hypo-osmolarity induces p75NTR expression in primary neurons, and, using a
comparative genomics approach, we identified conserved elements in the 25 kb
upstream sequences of the rat, mouse, and human p75NTR genes. We found that only 
one of these, a proximal region rich in Sp1 sites, responds to changes in
hypo-osmolarity. We then showed that Sp1 DNA binding activity is increased in
cells exposed to hypo-osmolarity, established that hypo-osmolarity enhanced Sp1
binding to the endogenous p75NTR promoter, and showed that Sp1 is required for
p75NTR expression induced by hypo-osmolarity. We examined how Sp1 is regulated to
effect these changes and established that Sp1 turnover is strongly inhibited by
hypo-osmolarity. We propose that stress-induced Sp1 accumulation that results
from reductions in Sp1 turnover rate contributes to injury-induced gene
expression.

PMID: 17287525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Int J Cancer. 2007 May 15;120(10):2135-47.

CEBPbeta, JunD and c-Jun contribute to the transcriptional activation of the
metastasis-associated C4.4A gene.

Fries F(1), Nazarenko I, Hess J, Claas A, Angel P, Zöller M.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Tumor Progression and Immune Defense, German Cancer Research
Center, Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

The glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored molecule C4.4A, which shares structural
features with uPAR, is frequently expressed on carcinomas with upregulated
expression during tumor progression. Moreover, rare expression on nontransformed 
epithelial cells is strongly increased during tissue remodeling, e.g., during
wound healing. This strictly regulated expression prompted us to define
transcriptional activation of the C4.4A gene. C4.4A transcription was analyzed in
2 syngenic rat tumor cell lines with low or high metastatic potential,
respectively. Though genomic C4.4A DNA was present in both lines, C4.4A mRNA and 
transcription of a reporter construct containing the C4.4A promoter was only
observed in the metastasizing subline. Deletions and point mutations in the C4.4A
promoter-driven reporter construct revealed that activation of the TATA-less,
GC-rich core promoter (-1 to -50 bp) does not suffice to initiate transcription
that requires coactivation of a proximal response element (-71 to -88 bp) and can
be further increased by more distal response elements (-89 to -133 bp).
Mobility-shift and cotransfection studies showed that Sp3 binding enhances C4.4A 
transcription, whereas potential Sp1 binding sites were ineffective. C4.4A
transcription essentially requires C/EBPbeta binding to a TRE/CCAAT composite
element (-71 to -88 bp) as measured by ChIP assay. C4.4A transcription is
strikingly enhanced by cotransfection with JunD or c-Jun, such that C4.4A is most
strongly transcribed even in the C4.4A-negative tumor cell line after
cotransfection with C/EBPbeta plus JunD or c-Jun. Thus, upregulation of C/EBPbeta
during tumor progression and wound repair may well provide a sufficient trigger
for transcription of the C4.4A gene.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17278103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Mar;1773(3):427-39. Epub 2006 Dec 6.

TGFbeta1 regulation of vimentin gene expression during differentiation of the
C2C12 skeletal myogenic cell line requires Smads, AP-1 and Sp1 family members.

Wu Y(1), Zhang X, Salmon M, Lin X, Zehner ZE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and the Massey Cancer Center, Medical College of
Virginia Campus, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23298-0614, USA.

Vimentin exhibits a complex pattern of developmental and tissue-specific
expression regulated by such growth factors as TGFbeta1, PDGF, FGF, EGF and
cytokines. Vimentin is expressed in the more migratory, mesenchymal cell and its 
expression is often down-regulated to make way for tissue-specific intermediate
filaments proteins such as desmin in muscle. Here, we suggest a mechanism to
explain how TGFbeta1 contributes to the up-regulation of vimentin expression
while blocking myogenesis. TGFbeta1 binds to serine/threonine kinase receptors
resulting in the phosphorylation of Smad2 and Smad3, followed by formation of a
heteromeric complex with Smad4. The translocation of this complex to the nucleus 
modulates transcription of selected genes such as vimentin. However, the vimentin
gene lacks a consensus TGFbeta1 response element. By transient transfection
analysis of vimentin's various promoter elements fused to the CAT reporter gene, 
we have determined that tandem AP-1 sites surrounded by GC-boxes are required for
TGFbeta1 induction. Mutations within this region eliminated the ability of Smad3 
to induce reporter gene expression. DNA precipitation and ChIP assays suggest
that c-Jun, c-Fos, Smad3 and Sp1/Sp3 interact over this region, but this
interaction changes during myogenesis with TGFbeta1 induction.

PMCID: PMC1855268
PMID: 17270292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Med Sci Monit. 2007 Feb;13(2):BR25-31.

Synthesis and pharmacological analysis of a morphine/substance P chimeric
molecule with full analgesic potency in morphine-tolerant rats.

Kream RM(1), Liu NL, Zhuang M, Esposito PL, Esposito TR, Stefano GB, Witmeyer JJ 
3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, SUNY Downstate Medical Center, 450 Clarkson
Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11203, USA. Richard.kream@downstate.edu

BACKGROUND: We have previously explored the functional role of the tachykinin
substance P (SP) in the mediation of opioid-dependent antinociception and now
describe the formulation, synthesis, and initial pharmacological characterization
of a hybrid chimeric molecule, designated MSP9, containing the mu opioid receptor
(MOR) agonist morphine covalently attached through a succinic acid linker to the 
SP receptor (SPR) agonist domain SP3-11.
MATERIAL/METHODS: Pharmacological characterization of MSP9, administered by the
intramuscular route, was achieved in naive and morphine-tolerant male rats
utilizing the tail-flick test.
RESULTS: MSP9 produced significant antinociceptive responses across a wide
concentration range and displayed an atypical bell-shaped analgesic dose response
relationship with peak effect of 40+/-10% reached at 0.2 mg/kg. The
antinociceptive responses achieved by very low concentrations of MSP9 were not
obtained by administration of equivalent low doses of morphine, suggesting that
kinetic and dynamic parameters may contribute to its unusual analgesic
properties. Importantly, MSP9 produces a strong antinociceptive response when
administered to morphine-tolerant rats, suggesting a significant activation of
kappa and/or delta receptors (KORs and DORs, respectively) in the presence of
functionally down regulated MORs.
CONCLUSIONS: Analyses employing selective, blood brain barrier (BBB) permeable,
opioid and SP antagonists administered alone or in combination, indicate an
obligate requirement for coincident activation of populations of CNS opioid and
SP receptors. These combined data suggest that MSP9 activates multiple opioid-
and SPR-expressing systems functionally linked to CNS analgesic responses,
designating this class of hybrid chimeric molecules as prime candidates for
therapeutic development for a wide range of clinical indications.

PMID: 17261977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Arzneimittelforschung. 2006;56(12):856-65.

Quantitative structure-activity relationship modeling of dermatomyositis activity
of drug chemicals.

Kamenska V(1), Dourmishev L, Dourmishev A, Vasilev R, Mekenyan O.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Mathematical Chemistry, University Prof. As. Zlatarov, 8010
Bourgas, Bulgaria.

Dermatomyositis (DM) is an idiopathic inflammatory disorder consisting of skin
and skeletal muscle involvement. Some drugs induce DM or dermatomyositis-like
syndrome (DM-LS), the others provoke polymoysitis (PM) or cause elevation of
serum levels of muscle enzymes (SE) or give muscle damage (M). The unexpected
adverse reactions to drugs causing myositis are not a solved contemporary
problem. The aim of this study was to determine the structural requirements of
eliciting drug-induced DM as compared with drug induced PM. The Common Reactivity
Pattern (COREPA) approach was used to describe the structural requirements for
eliciting side effects of 20 drugs, such as DM and combined activities as
DM+DM-LS and PM+M+SE. The specific atoms (atomic groups) defined to have
characteristic ranges for their electronic properties (atomic charges) were found
to be indicative for the possible active centers responsible for eliciting the
adverse effects. Reduced sulphur in the charge range of -0.07 < Qs < -0.450 a.u. 
and a nitrogen atom (in a cyclical fragment or anticyclical in a
sp3-hybridization) in a charge range of -0.390 < QN < -0.140 a.u. were found as
active centers for DM and DM+DM-LS side effects. In other group of drugs, the
oxygen atoms of carbonyl and hydroxyl groups in the charge range of -0.350 < Qo <
-0.320 a.u. were found to induce PM+M+SE side effects. It was found that DM
requires moderate electrophilicity as compared with other chemical in the
training set, whereas DM+DM-LS effect needs higher electrophilicity in the range 
of -0.220 < ELUMO < 0.250 eV for lowest unoccupied molecular orbital ELUMO.
Similarly, PM+M+SE effect required higher electrophilicity, however, defined
differently--in terms of lower values of nucleophilicity parameter EHOMO, i.e.,
highest occupied molecular orbital.

PMID: 17260674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Org Chem. 2007 Feb 2;72(3):998-1004.

Conformation and stereodynamics of symmetrically ortho-disubstituted aryl
carbinols and aryl ethers.

Casarini D(1), Lunazzi L, Mancinelli M, Mazzanti A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Basilicata, Potenza, Italy.

By making use of low-temperature dynamic NMR spectroscopy, the rotation barriers 
about the sp3-sp2 bond have been determined in a number of hindered benzyl
alcohols symmetrically substituted in the ortho positions, the substituents being
F, Cl, Br, and Me. The free energies of activation covered the range 4.6-10.1
kcal mol-1. Ab initio computations matched satisfactorily the trend of these
values and predicted the conformation adopted by these compounds. In one case,
this result could be also confirmed by the X-ray diffraction structure. In the
case of the corresponding methyl ethers two barriers could be measured,
corresponding to the passage across two distinguishable transition states: the
higher barriers covered the range 5.0-8.1 kcal mol-1 and the lower ones the range
4.7-6.2 kcal mol-1.

PMID: 17253822  [PubMed]


211. Biol Reprod. 2007 May;76(5):825-32. Epub 2007 Jan 24.

Activation of an SP binding site is crucial for the expression of claudin 1 in
rat epididymal principal cells.

Dufresne J(1), Cyr DG.

Author information: 
(1)INRS-Institut Armand-Frappier, Université du Québec, Pointe Claire, Québec,
Canada H9R 1G6.

Claudin 1 (CLDN1) is a tight junctional protein present in the epididymis.
Limited information exists regarding the regulation of Cldn1 transcription. In
the epididymis, the regulation of the 5' flanking region of genes coding for
tight junctional proteins is unknown. The present objectives were to investigate 
the transcriptional regulation of the Cldn1 gene in the rat epididymis. A 1.8-kb 
sequence of the 5' flanking region of the rat Cldn1 gene was cloned. The
transcriptional start site is an adenine located at the -198 position relative to
the first codon, and 26 bp downstream of the putative TATA box. It is the only
start site for the Cldn1 gene transcription in the rat epididymis. The Cldn1
promoter was inserted into a luciferase gene expression vector and transfected
into a rat caput epididymal cell line (RCE-1). Sequential deletion analysis
revealed that minimal promoter activity was achieved with the construct
containing -61 to +164 bp of the promoter. This sequence contained a TATA box and
two consensus SP1 binding sites. Electrophoretic mobility shift and supershift
assays confirmed that SP1 and SP3 were present in RCE-1 cells and epididymal
nuclear extracts, and that they bind to the 5' SP1 binding motif of the promoter.
Site-directed mutagenesis of the 5' SP1 binding site resulted in a 4-fold
decrease in transactivation of the minimal promoter sequence. These findings
indicate that SP1 and SP3 bind to the Cldn1 promoter region, and that this
interaction influences the expression of Cldn1 in the rat epididymis.

PMID: 17251524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Gastroenterology. 2007 Jan;132(1):236-48.

Butyrate induces intestinal sodium absorption via Sp3-mediated transcriptional
up-regulation of epithelial sodium channels.

Zeissig S(1), Fromm A, Mankertz J, Weiske J, Zeitz M, Fromm M, Schulzke JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Infectious Diseases, and Rheumatology,
Charité, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Hindenburgdamm 30, 12200 Berlin, Germany.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The epithelial sodium channel (ENaC) is the rate-limiting
factor for colonic electrogenic sodium absorption. This study aimed to
investigate ENaC regulation by butyrate, a short-chain fatty acid (SCFA) produced
by intestinal bacteria.
METHODS: ENaC was examined in HT-29/B6 cells and glucocorticoid
receptor(GR)-transfected HT-29/B6 cells (HT-29/B6-GR) by reverse-transcription
polymerase chain reaction, real-time polymerase chain reaction, and confocal
microscopy. ENaC promoters were investigated by deletion/mutation analysis,
electrophoretic mobility shift assays, and quantitative chromatin
immunoprecipitation. Sodium transport of HT-29/B6-GR cells and rat distal colon
was quantified in Ussing chambers.
RESULTS: Butyrate up-regulated beta- and gamma-ENaC mRNA expression in HT-29/B6
cells and induced transcription from beta- and gamma-ENaC promoter constructs.
The gamma-ENaC promoter could also be induced by the SCFA propionate but not by
acetate. Deletion/mutation assays revealed that activation of the gamma-ENaC
promoter depended on 2 GC boxes, which were shown to bind Sp1 and Sp3 in vitro.
Although both transcription factors increased butyrate-mediated gamma-ENaC
transcription upon overexpression, chromatin immunoprecipitation revealed that
only Sp3 binds to the gamma-ENaC promoter in vivo and that Sp3 binding is
enhanced by butyrate. Transcriptional ENaC induction by butyrate led to synthesis
of gamma-ENaC subunits, but correct targeting of ENaC channels to the apical cell
membrane was dependent on corticosteroid hormones. Finally, butyrate
substantially increased electrogenic sodium absorption via ENaC in the presence
of corticosteroid hormones in HT-29/B6-GR cells and in rat distal colon.
CONCLUSIONS: Concerted action of SCFA and corticosteroid hormones is required for
induction of ENaC and maintenance of intestinal electrogenic sodium absorption.

PMID: 17241874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. PLoS One. 2007 Jan 17;2(1):e164.

Sp1 is essential for p16 expression in human diploid fibroblasts during
senescence.

Wu J(1), Xue L, Weng M, Sun Y, Zhang Z, Wang W, Tong T.

Author information: 
(1)Peking University Research Center on Aging, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Peking University, Health Science Center, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: p16(INK4a) tumor suppressor protein has been widely proposed to
mediate entrance of the cells into the senescent stage. Promoter of p16(INK4a)
gene contains at least five putative GC boxes, named GC-I to V, respectively. Our
previous data showed that a potential Sp1 binding site, within the promoter
region from -466 to -451, acts as a positive transcription regulatory element.
These results led us to examine how Sp1 and/or Sp3 act on these GC boxes during
aging in cultured human diploid fibroblasts.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Mutagenesis studies revealed that GC-I, II and
IV, especially GC-II, are essential for p16(INK4a) gene expression in senescent
cells. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) and ChIP assays demonstrated 
that both Sp1 and Sp3 bind to these elements and the binding activity is enhanced
in senescent cells. Ectopic overexpression of Sp1, but not Sp3, induced the
transcription of p16(INK4a). Both Sp1 RNAi and Mithramycin, a DNA intercalating
agent that interferes with Sp1 and Sp3 binding activities, reduced p16(INK4a)
gene expression. In addition, the enhanced binding of Sp1 to p16(INK4a) promoter 
during cellular senescence appeared to be the result of increased Sp1 binding
affinity, not an alteration in Sp1 protein level.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: All these results suggest that GC- II is the key site
for Sp1 binding and increase of Sp1 binding activity rather than protein levels
contributes to the induction of p16(INK4a) expression during cell aging.

PMCID: PMC1764714
PMID: 17225865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Bioorg Med Chem. 2007 Mar 1;15(5):2081-91. Epub 2006 Dec 23.

1,4-Bis(alkylamino)benzo[g]phthalazines able to form dinuclear complexes of
Cu(II) which as free ligands behave as SOD inhibitors and show efficient in vitro
activity against Trypanosoma cruzi.

Rodríguez-Ciria M(1), Sanz AM, Yunta MJ, Gómez-Contreras F, Navarro P,
Sánchez-Moreno M, Boutaleb-Charki S, Osuna A, Castiñeiras A, Pardo M, Cano C,
Campayo L.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Orgánica I, Facultad de Química, Universidad
Complutense, 28040 Madrid, Spain.

The synthesis of a new series of 1,4-bis(alkylamino)benzo[g]phthalazines 1-3 is
reported, and their ability to form dinuclear complexes with Cu(II) assayed. The 
geometry of the complexes is dependent on the nature of the electron-donor sites 
at the sidechains. Compounds 1 and 2, that contain sp3 or sp2 nitrogens at the
end of the alkylamino groups, originate monopodal dinuclear complexes which seem 
to include endogenous OH bridges, and the sidechains seem to actively participate
in complexation. However, the substitution of nitrogen by oxygen in 3 leads to a 
tripodal dinuclear complex in which the sidechains are not involved. The in vitro
antiparasitic activity on Trypanosoma cruzi epimastigotes and amastigotes and the
SOD activity inhibition have been evaluated for compounds 1-3, and, as expected, 
1 and 2 show in all cases relevant results, whereas 3 is always the less active
among the three substrates tested.

PMID: 17222558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Chromatogr A. 2007 Mar 2;1143(1-2):16-25. Epub 2006 Dec 22.

Establishing the feasibility of coupled solid-phase extraction-solid-phase
derivatization for acidic herbicides.

Yu LZ(1), Wells MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for the Management, Utilization, and Protection of Water Resources and 
Department of Chemistry, Tennessee Technological University, P.O. Box 5033,
Cookeville, TN 38505, USA.

The significance of this research is that it improves analytical methodology used
for organic chemicals in aqueous solutions by establishing the feasibility of
heterogeneous chemical derivatization at the liquid-solid interface (i.e.,
solid-phase reaction or solid-phase derivatization). A solid-phase derivatization
method for determining chlorinated herbicide acids was developed. Solid-phase
extraction was used to concentrate and retain analytes on sorbents for subsequent
solid-phase derivatization. Background interferences were removed from the
chromatograms by electronically subtracting the responses of blank, nonfortified 
analyses from spiked samples. Two extraction sorbents (octadecyl bonded silica
and polystyrene-divinylbenzene) and two derivatizing reagents (BF3-MeOH and
trimethylsilyldiazomethane) were investigated. Recovery of 13 chlorinated
herbicide acids--including pentachlorophenol, dinoseb, and bentazon (having a
derivatizable functional group, -OH or -NH, bonded directly to a phenyl group);
dicamba, picloram, acifluorfen, 3,5-dichlorobenzoic acid, and dacthal (having a
derivatizable functional group, -COOH, bonded directly to a phenyl group); and
2,4-D, 2,4,5-T, dichlorprop, 2,4,5-TP, and 2,4-DB (having a derivatizable
functional group, -COOH, bonded directly to a sp3 carbon atom)--was tested. The
analytical method developed was proven successful for determining acidic
herbicides, except for the dacthal diacid metabolite, in aqueous samples.

PMID: 17214997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Biol Chem. 2007 Mar 16;282(11):7852-61. Epub 2007 Jan 9.

13C and 1H NMR studies of ionizations and hydrogen bonding in
chymotrypsin-glyoxal inhibitor complexes.

Spink E(1), Cosgrove S, Rogers L, Hewage C, Malthouse JP.

Author information: 
(1)UCD School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science, Centre for Synthesis and
Chemical Biology, UCD Conway Institute, University College Dublin, Dublin 4,
Ireland.

Benzyloxycarbonyl (Z)-Ala-Pro-Phe-glyoxal and Z-Ala-Ala-Phe-glyoxal have both
been shown to be inhibitors of alpha-chymotrypsin with minimal Ki values of 19
and 344 nM, respectively, at neutral pH. These Ki values increased at low and
high pH with pKa values of approximately 4.0 and approximately 10.5,
respectively. By using surface plasmon resonance, we show that the apparent
association rate constant for Z-Ala-Pro-Phe-glyoxal is much lower than the value 
expected for a diffusion-controlled reaction. 13C NMR has been used to show that 
at low pH the glyoxal keto carbon is sp3-hybridized with a chemical shift of
approximately 100.7 ppm and that the aldehyde carbon is hydrated with a chemical 
shift of approximately 91.6 ppm. The signal at approximately 100.7 ppm is
assigned to the hemiketal formed between the hydroxy group of serine 195 and the 
keto carbon of the glyoxal. In a slow exchange process controlled by a pKa of
approximately 4.5, the aldehyde carbon dehydrates to give a signal at
approximately 205.5 ppm and the hemiketal forms an oxyanion at approximately
107.0 ppm. At higher pH, the re-hydration of the glyoxal aldehyde carbon leads to
the signal at 107 ppm being replaced by a signal at 104 ppm (pKa approximately
9.2). On binding either Z-Ala-Pro-Phe-glyoxal or Z-Ala-Ala-Phe-glyoxal to
alpha-chymotrypsin at 4 and 25 degrees C, 1H NMR is used to show that the binding
of these glyoxal inhibitors raises the pKa value of the imidazolium ion of
histidine 57 to a value of >11 at both 4 and 25 degrees C. We discuss the
mechanistic significance of these results, and we propose that it is ligand
binding that raises the pKa value of the imidazolium ring of histidine 57
allowing it to enhance the nucleophilicity of the hydroxy group of the active
site serine 195 and lower the pKa value of the oxyanion forming a zwitterionic
tetrahedral intermediate during catalysis.

PMID: 17213185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Cell Biochem. 2007 Jun 1;101(3):654-64.

Increased expression of integrin beta1 subunit enhances p21WAF1/Cip1
transcription through the Sp1 sites and p300-mediated histone acetylation in
human hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Fang Z(1), Fu Y, Liang Y, Li Z, Zhang W, Jin J, Yang Y, Zha X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Shanghai Medical College,
Fudan University, 138 Yi Xue Yuan Road, Shanghai 200032, PR China.

Integrins, a class of membrane receptors, are major players in transmitting the
mechanical force across the plasma membrane. We previously reported that
overexpression of integrin beta1 subunit imposed a growth inhibitory effect on
the hepatocellular carcinoma cell line SMMC-7721 through transcriptional
activation of p21(WAF1/CIP1) gene. In this study, we further determined the
molecular mechanisms underlying p21(WAF1/CIP1) expression induced by integrin
beta1 overexpression. We report herein that overexpression of integrin beta1
subunit upregulates p21(WAF1/Cip1) transcription through a p53-independent
pathway. The overexpressed integrin beta1 activates the p21(WAF1/Cip1) promoter
through the Sp1/Sp3 sites and makes more transcription factor Sp1 recruited to
the proximal p21 promoter region. In addition, it makes the acetylation value of 
histone proteins increased across some parts of the p21(WAF1/Cip1) gene,
especially in the promoter region. The transcriptional co-activator p300, which
possesses intrinsic histone acetyltransferase, was found to be involved in the
integrin beta1-mediated histone acetylation and p21 transcriptional activation.
Therefore, these findings presented the mechanisms by which integrin beta1
induced the elevated p21 expression in hepatic cancer cells.

PMID: 17211849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Yakugaku Zasshi. 2007 Jan;127(1):143-51.

[Transcription factor EPAS1 regulates insulin signaling pathway].

[Article in Japanese]

Wada T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit of Health Science, College of Pharmacy, Nihon University,
Funabashi City, Japan. taw20@pitt.edu

Obesity, which results from adipose differentiation and adipocyte hypertrophy, is
a primary risk factor of these life-style-diseases. Obesity, is primary risk
factor of these life-style-diseases, results from adipose differentiation and
adipocyte hypertrophy. Adipose differentiation is regulated by several
transcriptional factors, and we have focused here on the roles played by
endothelial PAS domain protein1 (EPAS1) in adipogenesis. EPAS1 was identified as 
a factor responsible for hypoxia responses, such as angiogenesis, here we
demonstrated that EPAS1 is highly induced during adipose differentiation in vivo 
and in vitro. We then analyzed EPAS1 promoter activity during adipose
differentiation in 3T3-L1 cells. We showed that the sequence -478/-445 is
responsible for the up-regulation of EPAS1 expression during adipose
differentiation and that the activity of this region is controlled by Sp1 and
Sp3. To examine whether EPAS1 exerts an influence on adipogenesis, we
overexpressed dominant negative form of EPAS1 in 3T3-L1 cells. The expression of 
EPAS1 (1-485) allowed cells to accumulate only a minimum amount of lipid
droplets. Therefore, induction of EPAS1 expression is necessary for execution of 
adipose differentiation program. The mechanism involves the direct
transcriptional regulation of Glut1, Glut4 and IRS3 genes by EPAS1. These results
also confirmed that the protein level of EPAS1 was increased by insulin
stimulation in adipocytes. Taken together, this result also indicated that EPAS1 
plays a role in the part of insulin action. Therefore, these results suggest that
the quantitative and functional alteration of EPAS1 are involved in metabolic
syndrome occurrence.

PMID: 17202795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Cancer Lett. 2007 Jun 18;251(1):114-31. Epub 2007 Jan 2.

Short nucleotide polymorphic insertions in the MCL-1 promoter affect gene
expression.

Saxena A(1), Moshynska OV, Moshynskyy ID, Neuls ED, Qureshi T, Bosch M, Voralia
M, Bonham K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Royal University Hospital,
College of Medicine, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Canada S7N 0W8.
anurag.saxena@usask.ca <anurag.saxena@usask.ca>

We have recently reported novel short nucleotide (six and eighteen) polymorphic
insertions, in the MCL-1 promoter and their association with higher mRNA and
protein levels. The aim of the present study was to test the hypothesis that
these insertions directly affect MCL-1 gene expression. Haematopoietic and
epithelial human cell lines were transfected with +0, +6, or +18 MCL-1 promoter
fragments positioned upstream of the Firefly luciferase reporter gene. The cells 
were stimulated with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) and granulocyte
macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). Compared to +0, both polymorphic
insertions (+6 and +18) were associated with increased promoter activity.
Although chromatin immunoprecipitation assay showed that there are Sp1/Sp3
binding sites in the MCL-1 promoter, electrophoretic mobility shift assay showed 
that it is unlikely that these sites are in the region harboring these
insertions. These results provide further evidence for the biological effect of
MCL-1 promoter polymorphisms on gene expression.

PMID: 17198743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Cell Signal. 2007 May;19(5):923-31. Epub 2006 Nov 25.

SMAD3 expression is regulated by mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase-1 in
epithelial and smooth muscle cells.

Ross KR(1), Corey DA, Dunn JM, Kelley TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Case Western Reserve University, and Rainbow Babies 
and Children's Hospital, Cleveland, OH 44106-4948, USA.

SMAD3 is a transcription factor that mediates TGF-beta1 signaling and is known to
be important in many of the cellular processes that regulate fibrosis and
inflammation. Although several studies have examined SMAD3 activation, little is 
known about the control of SMAD3 expression. It is well established that the
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway is responsive to TGF-beta1
stimulation and coordinates with SMAD signaling in many cases; therefore, the
hypothesis of this study is that the MAPK pathway will be involved in the
regulation of SMAD3 expression. Using a SMAD3 promoter construct, we demonstrate 
that inhibition of either c-Jun-N-terminal kinase (JNK) or p38 activity has
little effect on SMAD3 promoter function. Inhibition of mitogen-activated protein
kinase kinase-1 (MEK1) with either PD98059 or UO126, however, results in a
substantial dose-dependent inhibition of SMAD3 promoter activity. Further studies
confirm that promoter activity correlates with protein expression by
demonstrating reduced SMAD3 protein expression in A549 cells and airway smooth
muscle cells after treatment with MEK1 inhibitors. Positive regulation of SMAD3
expression is also demonstrated by expression of a constitutively active
(ca)-MEK1 construct, where the presence of ca-MEK1 resulted in increased SMAD3
protein expression. These data lead to the conclusion that MEK1 is an important
regulator of SMAD3 expression.

PMID: 17197157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Biomaterials. 2007 Mar;28(9):1620-8. Epub 2006 Dec 29.

DLC coatings: effects of physical and chemical properties on biological response.

Ma WJ(1), Ruys AJ, Mason RS, Martin PJ, Bendavid A, Liu Z, Ionescu M, Zreiqat H.

Author information: 
(1)Biomaterials and Tissue Engineering Research Unit, Biomedical Engineering,
School of AMME, Camperdown Campus 2006, The University of Sydney, Sydney,
Australia.

Recent trials on diamond-like carbon (DLC) coated medical devices have indicated 
promise for blood interfacing applications. The literature is sparse regarding
structural and compositional effects of DLC on cellular response. An important
goal in optimizing blood-interfacing implants is minimal macrophage attachment,
and maximal albumin:fibrinogen adsorption ratio. DLC coatings deposited by PACVD 
and FAD, were analysed with respect to sp3 content (EELS), hydrogen content
(ERDA), surface composition (XPS), surface roughness (AFM), surface energy,
albumin:fibrinogen adsorption ratio, and macrophage viability and attachment. We 
found that increasing surface roughness and surface energy enhanced the
macrophage viability and the albumin:fibrinogen adsorption ratio. We also found
that the higher the hydrogen content for a-C:Hs deposited by PACVD, the lower the
albumin:fibrinogen adsorption ratio, and macrophage attachment. This suggests
that hydrogen content may be an important factor for influencing the biological
response of DLC surfaces. Macrophage cells spread well on all DLC surfaces, and
the surface results indicated the non-toxic nature of the surfaces on the cells
at the time points tested.

PMID: 17196649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Anal Chem. 2007 Jan 1;79(1):98-105.

Structure and electrochemical properties of carbon films prepared by a electron
cyclotron resonance sputtering method.

Jia J(1), Kato D, Kurita R, Sato Y, Maruyama K, Suzuki K, Hirono S, Ando T, Niwa 
O.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, 1-1-1
Higashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8566, Japan.

This paper describes the characterization, electrochemical properties, and
applications of carbon films prepared by the electron cyclotron resonance (ECR)
sputtering method. The ECR-sputtered carbon film was deposited within several
minutes at room temperature. The optimized sputtering conditions significantly
change the film structure, which includes many more sp3 bonds (sp3/sp2 = 0.702)
than previously reported film (sp3/sp2 = 0.274)1 with an extremely flat surface
(0.7 A). The ECR-sputtered carbon films exhibit excellent electrochemical
properties. For example, they have nearly the same potential window in the
positive direction as that of high-quality, boron-doped diamond (moderately
doped, 10(19)-10(20) boron atoms/cm3)2 and an even wider potential window in the 
negative direction with a low background current, high stability, and suppression
of fouling by electroactive species without pretreatment. The electron-transfer
rates at ECR-sputtered carbon films are similar to those of glassy carbon (GC)
for Ru(NH3)(6)(2+)/(3+) and Fe(CN)(6)(3-)/(4-), whereas they are much slower than
those of GC for Fe2+/3+, dopamine oxidation, and O2 reduction due to weak
interactions between electroactive species and the ECR-sputtered carbon film
surface. Such a response can be attributed to the ultraflat surface and low
surface O/C ratios of ECR-sputtered carbon films. ECR-sputtered carbon film is
advantageous for measuring biochemicals with high oxidation potentials because of
its wide potential window and high stability. Highly reproducible and
well-defined cyclic voltammograms were obtained for histamine and azide ions with
a peak potential at 1.25 and 1.12 V vs Ag/AgCl, respectively. The film is very
stable for continuous voltammetry measurements in 10 microM bisphenol A, which
usually fouls the electrode surface with oxidation products.

PMID: 17194126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Mar;21(3):635-50. Epub 2006 Dec 27.

R5020 and RU486 act as progesterone receptor agonists to enhance
Sp1/Sp4-dependent gene transcription by an indirect mechanism.

Shatnawi A(1), Tran T, Ratnam M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cancer Biology, Medical University of Ohio at
Toledo, 3035 Arlington Avenue, Toledo, Ohio 43614, USA.

It has been suggested that ligand-dependent gene activation by the progesterone
receptor (PR) can result from recruitment of PR by the promoter bound Sp1. A
detailed investigation of the Sp1-dependent agonistic activity of RU486 and R5020
on the folate receptor (FR) type alpha, p27, thymidine kinase 1 and p21 genes
reveals a different mechanism. The FR-alpha P4 promoter and the endogenous
FR-alpha gene were up-regulated by the PR agonist R5020 through either PR-A or
PR-B. The classical antagonist RU486 also activated the promoter but only through
PR-B. The most proximal (essential) G/C-rich (Sp1 binding) element and the
initiator region constituted the minimal promoter responsive to PR regulation;
substitution with a stronger cluster of G/C-rich elements enhanced the magnitude 
of the PR response. In contrast, substitution of the G/C-rich element with a TATA
box resulted in the loss of regulation by PR. Overexpression of Sp1 and Sp4 but
not Sp3 enhanced activation of the FR-alpha promoter by PR, knocking down Sp1
decreased the activation in a manner that was reversed by ectopic Sp1 or Sp4. The
ligand-dependent action of PR on the promoter was delayed compared with its
activation of a classical glucocorticoid response element-driven promoter and
activation of both the promoter and the endogenous FR-alpha gene by PR required
new protein synthesis. Activation by PR paralleled RNA polymerase II recruitment 
but was not accompanied by either association of PR or a change in the
association of Sp1 with the endogenous FR-alpha P4 promoter. Similar observations
were made for PR regulation of the genes encoding p27, thymidine kinase 1, and
p21. The results contradict the current view of Sp1-dependent gene regulation by 
PR and point to the existence of one or more PR target genes whose promoter and
cell context(s) must thus be key determinants of the agonistic activity of RU486 
on a large group of important Sp1-dependent downstream target genes.

PMID: 17192405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Faraday Discuss. 2006;133:415-25; discussion 427-52.

Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, carbon nanoparticles and the diffuse
interstellar bands.

Duley WW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Physics Department, University of Waterloo, Ontario, Canada N2L 3G1.
wwduley@uwaterloo.ca

Observational data on the appearance and properties of the diffuse interstellar
bands (DIBs) are reviewed in the context of a model in which the proposed
carriers of these bands are large carbon molecules and carbon nanoparticles
containing between 30 and several hundred carbon atoms. The abundance of these
carriers, as estimated from the observed strengths of the DIBs, place strong
constraints on their rates of formation and destruction, and suggest that the
strongest bands, including that at 4428 A, could be produced via the
decomposition of larger carbon particles, possibly those particles that have been
postulated to be the source of the 2175 A extinction feature. Such particles are 
of mixed sp2 and sp3 carbon composition, with sizes between that of large
molecules and small macroscopic solids. Any description of their characteristics 
must combine aspects of molecular and condensed matter physics, and this is
incorporated in the present discussion. I discuss recent experimental and
theoretical data related to these matters.

PMID: 17191461  [PubMed]


225. J Phys Chem B. 2006 Dec 28;110(51):26442-7.

Experimental charge density study of estrogens: 17beta-estradiol.urea.

Parrish D(1), Zhurova EA, Kirschbaum K, Pinkerton AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Toledo, 2801 West Bancroft Street,
Toledo, Ohio 43606, USA.

To relate the molecular electrostatic potential to the biological activities of
estrogens, a comparative charge density study of different derivatives has been
initiated. The second completed charge density analysis of this series for
17beta-estradiol*urea is presented here. This is a large organic system with 52
atoms in a noncentrosymmetric space group, therefore special tools such as an
optimal coordinate system and slow, initially constrained refinement have been
used to accomplish this study. Our results for the urea molecule reasonably agree
with previous experimental and theoretical results. In the 17beta-estradiol
molecule, the oxygen atoms appear to be close to sp3 in shape, exhibiting two
consistent, distinct lone pairs despite different chemical environments. No
significant interaction of the hydroxyl group oxygen with the orbitals of the
aromatic ring is observed. Analysis of the electrostatic potential revealed that 
the negative potential in the lone pair region of the two oxygen atoms is quite
different. The topological analysis of the electron density has been performed,
and the atomic charges have been estimated.

PMID: 17181304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Am J Manag Care. 2006 Dec;12 Spec no.:SP3-4.

Innovations to preserve quality and contain cost.

Nicholson S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Policy Analysis and Management, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
14853, USA. sn243@cornell.edu

PMID: 17173489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Prostaglandins Other Lipid Mediat. 2007 Jan;82(1-4):135-46. Epub 2006 Jul 7.

15-lipoxygenase 2 (15-LOX2) is a functional tumor suppressor that regulates human
prostate epithelial cell differentiation, senescence, and growth (size).

Tang DG(1), Bhatia B, Tang S, Schneider-Broussard R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Science Park-Research Division, 1808 Park Rd. 1C, Smithville, TX 78957,
United States. dtang@mdanderson.org

15-Lipoxygenase 2 (15-LOX2) is the major mammalian lipoxygenase expressed in
normal human adult prostate and its expression is decreased or lost in high-grade
prostate intraepithelial neoplasia (HGPIN) and prostate cancer (PCa). Our recent 
work has demonstrated that (1) 15-LOX2 has multiple alternatively spliced
isoforms and is a negative cell-cycle regulator in normal human prostate (NHP)
epithelial cells; (2) 15-LOX2 in NHP cells is positively regulated by Sp1 and
negatively regulated by Sp3; (3) 15-LOX2 in NHP cells may be partially involved
in cell differentiation; (4) 15-LOX2 is cell-autonomously upregulated in cultured
NHP cells and its induction is associated with NHP cell senescence; and (5)
15-LOX2 is a functional prostate tumor suppressor. Here we summarize these new
findings to provide a concise view of the potential biological functions of
15-LOX2 in NHP cells and of its deregulation in PCa development.

PMID: 17164141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Nat Mater. 2007 Jan;6(1):34-8. Epub 2006 Dec 10.

Six-fold coordinated carbon dioxide VI.

Iota V(1), Yoo CS, Klepeis JH, Jenei Z, Evans W, Cynn H.

Author information: 
(1)Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, California 94551, USA.
iota1@llnl.gov

Under standard conditions, carbon dioxide (CO2) is a simple molecular gas and an 
important atmospheric constituent, whereas silicon dioxide (SiO2) is a covalent
solid, and one of the fundamental minerals of the planet. The remarkable
dissimilarity between these two group IV oxides is diminished at higher pressures
and temperatures as CO2 transforms to a series of solid phases, from simple
molecular to a fully covalent extended-solid V, structurally analogous to SiO2
tridymite. Here, we present the discovery of an extended-solid phase of CO2: a
six-fold coordinated stishovite-like phase VI, obtained by isothermal compression
of associated CO2-II (refs 1,2) above 50 GPa at 530-650 K. Together with the
previously reported CO2-V (refs 3-5) and a-carbonia, this extended phase
indicates a fundamental similarity between CO2 (a prototypical molecular solid)
and SiO2 (one of Earth's fundamental building blocks). We present a phase diagram
with a limited stability domain for molecular CO2-I, and suggest that the
conversion to extended-network solids above 40-50 GPa occurs via intermediate
phases II (refs 1,2), III (refs 7,8) and IV (refs 9,10). The crystal structure of
phase VI suggests strong disorder along the c axis in stishovite-like P42/mnm,
with carbon atoms manifesting an average six-fold coordination within the
framework of sp3 hybridization.

PMID: 17160005  [PubMed]


229. J Clin Pathol. 2007 Sep;60(9):1001-5. Epub 2006 Dec 8.

HER2 evaluation using the novel rabbit monoclonal antibody SP3 and CISH in tissue
microarrays of invasive breast carcinomas.

Ricardo SA(1), Milanezi F, Carvalho ST, Leitão DR, Schmitt FC.

Author information: 
(1)IPATIMUP, Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology, University of
Porto, Porto, Portugal.

BACKGROUND: Laboratory methods for HER2 assessment currently include
immunohistochemical (IHC) methods (measuring protein overexpression) and
fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) (measuring gene amplification). The
measure of HER2 protein by IHC is usually assessed by the mouse monoclonal
antibody CB11, and polyclonal antibodies (Herceptest) directed against the
internal portion of the receptor. Recently, chromogenic in situ hybridisation
(CISH), in which HER2 is detected by a peroxidase reaction and the gene
amplification can be determined by regular bright-field microscopy, has emerged
as an alternative to FISH.
AIMS: To evaluate the status of HER2 in tissue microarrays (TMAs) of invasive
breast cancer using the novel rabbit monoclonal antibody SP3 directed against the
external portion of HER2, and correlate the results with CB11 and CISH.
METHODS: IHC was performed with two antibodies (CB11 and SP3) and CISH for HER2
in 10 TMA blocks with 190 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded cases of invasive
breast carcinomas.
RESULTS: The correlation between SP3 and CB11 was significant (p<0.001) with an
agreement rate of 86.9%. When the staining pattern of the two antibodies was
compared, the majority of SP3 immunostainings were assessed more easily, with a
strong complete membrane staining pattern without non-specific cytoplasmic
staining. There was a good correlation between SP3 and CISH (p<0.001). 23/24 SP3 
3+ cases showed gene amplification, 97.3% of the cases without gene amplification
were SP3 negative, and 6/7 SP3 2+ were amplified.
CONCLUSION: The high level of agreement between SP3, a monoclonal antibody that
recognises the extracellular domain of the HER2 receptor, and CB11 and CISH,
shows that this novel antibody is a reliable candidate to evaluate the expression
of HER2 in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC1972418
PMID: 17158643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Jan 26;352(4):925-31. Epub 2006 Dec 4.

Unique CCT repeats mediate transcription of the TWIST1 gene in mesenchymal cell
lines.

Ohkuma M(1), Funato N, Higashihori N, Murakami M, Ohyama K, Nakamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Maxillofacial Orthognathics, Graduate School, Tokyo Medical and Dental
University, Tokyo 113-8549, Japan.

TWIST1, a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, plays critical roles in
embryo development, cancer metastasis and mesenchymal progenitor differentiation.
Little is known about transcriptional regulation of TWIST1 expression. Here we
identified DNA sequences responsible for TWIST1 expression in mesenchymal lineage
cell lines. Reporter assays with TWIST1 promoter mutants defined the -102 to -74 
sequences that are essential for TWIST1 expression in human and mouse mesenchymal
cell lines. Tandem repeats of CCT, but not putative CREB and NF-kappaB sites in
the sequences substantially supported activity of the TWIST1 promoter.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay demonstrated that the DNA sequences with the
CCT repeats formed complexes with nuclear factors, containing, at least, Sp1 and 
Sp3. These results suggest critical implication of the CCT repeats in association
with Sp1 and Sp3 factors in sustaining expression of the TWIST1 gene in
mesenchymal cells.

PMID: 17157810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Biol Chem. 2007 Feb 9;282(6):3594-604. Epub 2006 Dec 6.

Hydroxyurea and interleukin-6 synergistically reactivate HIV-1 replication in a
latently infected promonocytic cell line via SP1/SP3 transcription factors.

Oguariri RM(1), Brann TW, Imamichi T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Retrovirology, Clinical Services Program, Science
Applications International Corporation-Frederick Inc., NCI-Frederick, National
Institutes of Health, Frederick, Maryland 21702, USA.

The existence of viral latency limits the success of highly active antiretroviral
therapy. With the therapeutic intention of reactivating latent virus to induce a 
cure, in this study we assessed the impact of cell synchronizers on HIV gene
activation in latently infected U1 cells and investigated the molecular
mechanisms responsible for such effect. Latently infected U1 cells were treated
with 10 drugs including hydroxyurea (HU) and HIV-1 replication monitored using a 
p24 antigen capture assay. We found that HU was able to induce HIV-1 replication 
by 5-fold. HU has been used in the clinical treatment of HIV-1-infected patients 
in combination with didanosine; therefore, we investigated the impact of HU on
HIV-1 activation in the presence of the proinflammatory cytokines, interleukin 6 
(IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha). IL-6 or TNF-alpha alone
induced HIV replication by 18- and approximately 500-fold, respectively. Of
interest, in the presence of HU, IL-6-mediated HIV-1 activation was enhanced by
>90-fold, whereas TNF-alpha-mediated activation was inhibited by >30%. A reporter
gene assay showed that HU and IL-6 synergized to activate HIV promoter activity
via the Sp1 binding site. Electrophoretic mobility shift and supershift assays
revealed increased binding of the Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors to this
region. Western blot analysis showed that HU and IL-6 co-stimulation resulted in 
increased levels of Sp1 and Sp3 proteins. In contrast, treatment with HU plus
TNF-alpha down-regulated the expression of NF-kappaB. These findings suggest that
Sp1/Sp3 is involved in controlling the HU/IL-6-induced reactivation of HIV-1 in
latently infected cells.

PMID: 17150965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Feb;27(4):1531-43. Epub 2006 Dec 4.

Puralpha and Purbeta collaborate with Sp3 to negatively regulate beta-myosin
heavy chain gene expression during skeletal muscle inactivity.

Ji J(1), Tsika GL, Rindt H, Schreiber KL, McCarthy JJ, Kelm RJ Jr, Tsika R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, University of
Missouri-Columbia, 1201 Rollins Road, Columbia, MO 65211, USA.

Adult skeletal muscle retains the capability of transcriptional reprogramming.
This attribute is readily observable in the non-weight-bearing (NWB) soleus
muscle, which undergoes a slow-to-fast fiber type transition concurrent with
decreased beta-myosin heavy chain (betaMyHC) gene expression. Our previous work
showed that Sp3 contributes to decreased betaMyHC gene expression under NWB
conditions. In this study, we demonstrate that physical and functional
interactions between Sp3, Puralpha, and Purbeta proteins mediate repression of
betaMyHC expression under NWB conditions. Binding of Puralpha or Purbeta to the
single-stranded betaMyHC distal negative regulatory element-sense strand
(dbetaNRE-S) element is markedly increased under NWB conditions. Ectopic
expression of Puralpha and Purbeta decreased betaMyHC reporter gene expression,
while mutation of the dbetaNRE-S element increased expression in C2C12 myotubes. 
The dbetaNRE-S element conferred Pur-dependent decreased expression on a minimal 
thymidine kinase promoter. Short interfering RNA sequences specific for Sp3 or
for Puralpha and Purbeta decreased endogenous Sp3 and Pur protein levels and
increased betaMyHC reporter gene expression in C2C12 myotubes.
Immunoprecipitation assays revealed an association between endogenous Puralpha,
Purbeta, and Sp3, while chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated
Puralpha, Purbeta, and Sp3 binding to the betaMyHC proximal promoter region
harboring the dbetaNRE-S and C-rich elements in vivo. These data demonstrate that
Pur proteins collaborate with Sp3 to regulate a transcriptional program that
enables muscle cells to remodel their phenotype.

PMCID: PMC1800711
PMID: 17145772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Dec 12;103(50):19176-81. Epub 2006 Dec 1.

ESET/SETDB1 gene expression and histone H3 (K9) trimethylation in Huntington's
disease.

Ryu H(1), Lee J, Hagerty SW, Soh BY, McAlpin SE, Cormier KA, Smith KM, Ferrante
RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center, Bedford Veteran's Affairs
Medical Center, Bedford, MA 01730, USA. hoonryu@bu.edu

Chromatin remodeling and transcription regulation are tightly controlled under
physiological conditions. It has been suggested that altered chromatin modulation
and transcription dysfunction may play a role in the pathogenesis of Huntington's
disease (HD). Increased histone methylation, a well established mechanism of gene
silencing, results in transcriptional repression. ERG-associated protein with SET
domain (ESET), a histone H3 (K9) methyltransferase, mediates histone methylation.
We show that ESET expression is markedly increased in HD patients and in
transgenic R6/2 HD mice. Similarly, the protein level of trimethylated histone H3
(K9) was also elevated in HD patients and in R6/2 mice. We further demonstrate
that both specificity protein 1 (Sp1) and specificity protein 3 (Sp3) act as
transcriptional activators of the ESET promoter in neurons and that mithramycin, 
a clinically approved guanosine-cytosine-rich DNA binding antitumor antibiotic,
interferes with the DNA binding of these Sp family transcription factors,
suppressing basal ESET promoter activity in a dose dependent manner. The combined
pharmacological treatment with mithramycin and cystamine down-regulates ESET gene
expression and reduces hypertrimethylation of histone H3 (K9). This polytherapy
significantly ameliorated the behavioral and neuropathological phenotype in the
R6/2 mice and extended survival over 40%, well beyond any existing reported
treatment in HD mice. Our data suggest that modulation of gene silencing
mechanisms, through regulation of the ESET gene is important to neuronal survival
and, as such, may be a promising treatment in HD patients.

PMCID: PMC1748195
PMID: 17142323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006 Nov-Dec;1759(11-12):573-9. Epub 2006 Oct 27.

The Sp family of transcription factors regulates the human laminin alpha1 gene in
JAR choriocarcinoma cells.

Niimi T(1), Hayashi Y, Sekiguchi K, Kitagawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering Sciences, Graduate School of Bioagricultural
Sciences, Nagoya University, Chikusa, Nagoya 464-8601, Japan.
tniimi@agr.nagoya-u.ac.jp

Laminin-111 (alpha1beta1gamma1) is the major component of the embryonic and
extra-embryonic basement membrane. The laminin alpha1 chain shows a restricted
and developmentally regulated expression in basement membranes of distinct
epithelial tissues while beta1 and gamma1 chains have a wide tissue distribution.
To understand how human laminin alpha1 chain expression is controlled, we cloned 
and characterized the 5'-flanking region of the human laminin alpha1 (LAMA1)
gene. Transfection studies using serially deleted promoter constructs and JAR
choriocarcinoma cells revealed that the minimal promoter fragment resided in the 
+31 to -206 region, which contains a number of GC- and GT/A-rich motifs for the
binding of the Sp family of transcription factors. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays and mutational analyses revealed that Sp1 and Sp3 bound specifically to
these elements and are important for the promoter activity. Furthermore, we
showed that Krüppel-like factors KLF4 and KLF6 also activate transcription of the
human LAMA1 gene. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis demonstrated recruitment
of these transcription factors to the promoter region. These results indicate
that transcription of the human LAMA1 gene is controlled by a combination of the 
actions of Sp1/Sp3 and Krüppel-like factors, KLF4 and KLF6.

PMID: 17141338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2006 Dec;132(6):1262-71. Epub 2006 Oct 30.

Myocardial transcription factors are modulated during pathologic cardiac
hypertrophy in vivo.

Azakie A(1), Fineman JR, He Y.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, San Francisco, Department of Surgery, San Francisco,
Calif 94143, USA. azakiet@surgery.ucsf.edu

OBJECTIVES: In the current study we describe and characterize a novel ovine model
of biventricular hypertrophy and heart failure and evaluate the role of selected 
cardiac transcription factors in the regulation of cardiac gene expression during
pathologic hypertrophy in vivo. The cardiac troponin T promoter is used as a
model gene.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Transient transfections of ovine cardiomyocytes in culture
show that Sp1, transcriptional enhancer factor-1, and myocyte enhancer factor-2
activate cardiac troponin T promoter constructs. Cotransfection of Sp3 inhibits
cardiac troponin T promoter activity and represses Sp1-mediated activation of the
cardiac troponin T promoter. By chromatin immunoprecipitation, transcriptional
enhancer factor-1, myocyte enhancer factor-2, NKX2.5, GATA-4, and Sp factors bind
the cardiac troponin T promoter in vivo. To assess the role of cardiac
transcription during pathologic hypertrophy, in vivo, we created surgical
aorta-pulmonary shunts in utero in fetal lambs. Two weeks after spontaneous
delivery, shunted lambs showed failure to thrive, significant biventricular
hypertrophy, and heart failure. Shunted hearts had significant increases in
myosin and cardiac troponin T protein expression. There was a shift in expression
to the high-molecular-weight fetal isoforms. Transcriptional enhancer factor-1,
myocyte enhancer factor-2, GATA-4, NKX2.5, and Sp1 transcription factor levels
were increased in all heart chambers of shunted animals. Sp3 expression was
decreased in shunted ventricles. Immunoprecipitated Sp3 was associated with
significant increases in histone acetyl transferase activity and decreases in
histone-deacetylase activity.
CONCLUSION: The shunted neonatal lamb is a valid, novel model of pathologic
biventricular hypertrophy. During pathologic hypertrophy myocardial
transactivators are upregulated while repressors are downregulated.

PMID: 17140938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Appl Spectrosc. 2004 Feb;58(2):218-23.

Binding of aromatic isocyanides on gold nanoparticle surfaces investigated by
surface-enhanced Raman scattering.

Joo SW(1), Kim WJ, Yun WS, Hwang S, Choi IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Soongsil University, Seoul 156-743, Korea.
sjoo@ssu.ac.kr

The adsorption structure and binding of phenyl isocyanide (PNC), 2,6-dimethyl
phenyl isocyanide (DMPNC), and benzyl isocyanide (BZI) on gold nanoparticle
surfaces have been studied by means of surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS). 
PNC, DMPNC, and BZI have been found to adsorb on gold assuming a standing
geometry with respect to the surfaces. The presence of the nu(CH) band in the
SERS spectra denotes a vertical orientation of the phenyl ring of PNC, DMPNC, and
BZI on Au. The lack of a substantial red shift and significant band broadening of
the ring breathing modes implied that a direct ring pi orbital interaction with
metal substrates should be quite low. For PNC, the band ascribed to the C-NC
stretching vibration was found to almost disappear after adsorption on Au. On the
other hand, the C-NC band remained quite strong for DMPNC after adsorption. This 
result suggests a rather bent angle of C-N[triple bond]C: for the nitrogen atom
of the NC binding group on the surfaces, whereas a linear angle of C-N[triple
bond]C: should be more favorable on gold surfaces due to an intramolecular steric
hindrance of its two methyl groups. SERS of BZI on gold nanoparticles also
supports a bent angle of :C[triple bond]N-CH2 for its nitrogen atom, suggesting a
preference of sp3 (or sp2) hybridization for the nitrogen atom.

PMID: 17140481  [PubMed]


237. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006;34(22):6392-403. Epub 2006 Nov 27.

Evidence of the neuron-restrictive silencer factor (NRSF) interaction with Sp3
and its synergic repression to the mu opioid receptor (MOR) gene.

Kim CS(1), Choi HS, Hwang CK, Song KY, Lee BK, Law PY, Wei LN, Loh HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Minnesota Medical School, 6-120
Jackson Hall, 321 Church Street SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. kimxx313@umn.edu

Previously, we reported that the neuron-restrictive silencer element (NRSE) of mu
opioid receptor (MOR) functions as a critical regulator to repress the MOR
transcription in specific neuronal cells, depending on neuron-restriction silence
factor (NRSF) expression levels [C.S.Kim, C.K.Hwang, H.S.Choi, K.Y.Song, P.Y.Law,
L.N. Wei and H.H.Loh (2004) J. Biol. Chem., 279, 46464-46473]. Herein, we
identify a conserved GC sequence next to NRSE region in the mouse MOR gene. The
inhibition of Sp family factors binding to this GC box by mithramycin A led to a 
significant increase in the endogenous MOR transcription. In the
co-immunoprecipitation experiment, NRSF interacted with the full-length Sp3
factor, but not with Sp1 or two short Sp3 isoforms. The sequence specific and
functional binding by Sp3 at this GC box was confirmed by in vitro gel-shift
assays using either in vitro translated proteins or nuclear extract, and by in
vivo chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. Transient transfection assays showed
that Sp3-binding site of the MOR gene is a functionally synergic repressor
element with NRSE in NS20Y cells, but not in the NRSF negative PC12 cells. The
results suggest that the synergic interaction between NRSF and Sp3 is required to
negatively regulate MOR gene transcription and that transcription of MOR gene
would be governed by the context of available transcription factors rather than
by a master regulator.

PMCID: PMC1702488
PMID: 17130167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Mol Biol. 2007 Feb 2;365(5):1271-84. Epub 2006 Oct 26.

Action of transcription factors in the control of transferrin receptor expression
in human brain endothelium.

Holloway K(1), Sade H, Romero IA, Male D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, The Open University, Milton Keynes MK7 6AA,
UK.

Brain endothelium has a distinctive phenotype, including high expression of
transferrin receptor, p-glycoprotein, claudin-5 and occludin. Dermal endothelium 
expresses lower levels of the transferrin receptor and it is absent from lung
endothelium. All three endothelia were screened for transcription factors that
bind the transferrin receptor promoter and show different patterns of binding
between the endothelia. The transcription factor YY1 has distinct DNA-binding
activities in brain endothelium and non-brain endothelium. The target-sites on
the transferrin receptor promotor for YY1 lie in close proximity to those of the 
transcription initiation complex containing TFIID, so the two transcription
factors potentially compete or interfere. Notably, the DNA-binding activity of
TFIID was the converse of YY1, in different endothelia. YY1 knockdown reduced
transferrin receptor expression in brain endothelium, but not in dermal
endothelium, implying that YY1 is involved in tissue-specific regulation of the
transferrin receptor. Moreover a distinct YY1 variant is present in brain
endothelium and it associates with Sp3. A model is presented, in which expression
from the transferrin receptor gene in endothelium requires the activity of both
TFIID and Sp3, but whether the gene is transcribed in different endothelia, is
related to the balance between activating and suppressive forms of YY1.

PMID: 17125792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. J Phys Chem B. 2006 Nov 30;110(47):23628-32.

How do aryl groups attach to a graphene sheet?

Jiang DE, Sumpter BG, Dai S.

How aryl groups attach to a graphene sheet is an experimentally unanswered
question. Using first principles density functional theory methods, we shed light
on this problem. For the basal plane, isolated phenyl groups are predicted to be 
weakly bonded to the graphene sheet, even though a new single C-C bond is formed 
between the phenyl group and the basal plane by converting a sp2-carbon in the
graphene sheet to sp3. However, the interaction can be strengthened significantly
with two phenyl groups attached to the para positions of the same six-membered
ring to form a pair on the basal plane. The strongest bonding is found at the
graphene edges. A 1,2-addition pair is predicted to be most stable for the
armchair edge, whereas the zigzag edge possesses a unique localized state near
the Fermi level that shows a high affinity for the phenyl group.

PMID: 17125318  [PubMed]


240. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jan 26;282(4):2615-25. Epub 2006 Nov 22.

Molecular mechanisms of transactivation and doxorubicin-mediated repression of
survivin gene in cancer cells.

Estève PO(1), Chin HG, Pradhan S.

Author information: 
(1)New England Biolabs, Ipswich, Massachusetts 01938-2723, USA.

Human maintenance DNA cytosine methyltransferase (DNMT1) regulates gene
expression in a methylation-dependent and -independent manner. Anti-apoptotic
survivin gene down-regulation is mediated by p53 recruitment of DNMT1 to its
promoter. Survivin inhibits programmed cell death, regulates cell division, and
is expressed in cancer cells. The survivin gene promoter is CG-rich containing
several Sp1 canonical, Sp1-like, cell cycle-dependent element/cell cycle gene
homology region, and p53-binding sites. Here we demonstrate that Sp1
transcription factor(s) play a role in transcriptional activation of the survivin
promoter in Drosophila and human cells. Sp1 inhibition in vivo by mithramycin A
leads to down-regulation of a luciferase reporter driven by the human survivin
promoter in transfected cells. Mithramycin A or Sp1-specific short interfering
RNA down-regulated the endogenous survivin gene expression, confirming Sp1 as the
primary determinant for transcriptional activation. Furthermore, immobilized
DNMT1 ligand bound to seven consensus amino acids corresponding to the N-terminal
region of the Sp class of transcription factors in a phage display analysis. In
the co-immunoprecipitation assay, the endogenous Sp1 or Sp3 pulled down DNMT1 and
methyltransferase activity. Similarly, a glutathione S-transferase pulldown assay
between DNMT1 and Sp1 demonstrates a direct interaction between the two proteins.
Fluorescent fusions of DNMT1 and Sp1 co-localized in the mammalian nucleus, thus 
supporting binary complex formation between both the proteins. The kinetics of
survivin promoter occupancy via chromatin immunoprecipitation following
doxorubicin treatment show the presence of Sp1 and gradual accumulation of
transcriptional repressors p53, DNMT1, histone methyltransferase G9a, and HDAC1
onto the promoter along with histone H3K9me2. These data suggest that the Sp1
transcription factor acts as a platform for recruitment of transcriptional
repressors.

PMID: 17124180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Dec 29;351(4):1048-53. Epub 2006 Nov 7.

All-trans retinoic acid increases expression of aquaporin-5 and plasma membrane
water permeability via transactivation of Sp1 in mouse lung epithelial cells.

Nomura J(1), Horie I, Seto M, Nagai K, Hisatsune A, Miyata T, Isohama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemico-Pharmacological Sciences, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kumamoto University, 5-1 Oe-honmachi, Kumamoto 862-0973,
Japan.

Aquaporin-5 (AQP5) is a water-selective channel protein that is expressed in
lacrimal glands, salivary glands, and distal lung. Several studies using AQP5
knockout mice have revealed that AQP5 plays an important role in maintaining
water homeostasis in the lung. We report here that all-trans retinoic acid (atRA)
increases plasma membrane water permeability, AQP5 mRNA and protein expression,
and AQP5 promoter activity in MLE-12 cells. The promoter activation induced by
atRA was diminished by mutation at the Sp1/Sp3 binding element (SBE), suggesting 
that the SBE mediates the effects of atRA. In addition, atRA increased the
binding of Sp1 to the SBE without changing the levels of Sp1 in the nucleus.
Taken together, our data indicate that atRA increases AQP5 expression through
transactivation of Sp1, leading to an increase in plasma membrane water
permeability.

PMID: 17097063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Org Chem. 2006 Nov 10;71(23):8835-41.

Effect of 2,6-disubstituted aryl groups on acyclic conformation: preference for
an antiperiplanar orientation of the geminal and vicinal hydrogens.

Carlier PR(1), Zhang Y, Slebodnick C, Lo MM, Williams ID.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia 24060, USA.
pcarlier@vt.edu

Multiple X-ray crystallographic and 1H NMR spectroscopic studies demonstrate that
2,6-disubstituted aryl groups exert a strong effect on acyclic conformation,
inducing the geminal and vicinal hydrogens on the adjacent sp3-sp3 C-C bond to
adopt an antiperiplanar orientation. Twenty-one examples comprising nitrile,
ketone, and dithiane aldols are provided. A search of the Cambridge Structural
Database uncovered an additional 11 examples of this effect. This preference
causes some unanticipated remote effects on acyclic conformations: in
anti-nitrile aldols, this effect causes 2,6-disubstituted aryls to generally
prefer a gauche, rather than antiperiplanar, relationship to the largest vicinal 
groups. X-ray crystallography, 1H-1H NOESY spectroscopy, and computation
demonstrate that minimization of allylic 1,3-strain and syn-pentane-like
interactions work together in establishing this conformational preference.

PMID: 17081013  [PubMed]


243. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Nov 8;128(44):14220-1.

sp3 C-H bond arylation directed by amidine protecting group: alpha-arylation of
pyrrolidines and piperidines.

Pastine SJ(1), Gribkov DV, Sames D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Columbia University, 3000 Broadway, New York, New
York 10027, USA.

A new ruthenium-catalyzed direct sp3 C-H to C-C bond transformation is disclosed.
Specifically, a method for the alpha-arylation of cyclic amines, containing
either permanent (pyridine, pyrimidine) or removable (amidine) directing groups, 
is described. This cross-coupling reaction involves heating amine substrates with
arylboronate ester at 150 degrees C in a ketone solvent with a catalytic amount
of ruthenium carbonyl [Ru3(CO)12]. Arylboronate esters containing either
electron-withdrawing or electron-donating substituents could be efficiently
coupled. Heteroarene boronates were also effective donors.

PMID: 17076471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Insect Mol Biol. 2006 Oct;15(5):603-14.

Comparative analysis of serine protease-related genes in the honey bee genome:
possible involvement in embryonic development and innate immunity.

Zou Z(1), Lopez DL, Kanost MR, Evans JD, Jiang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology and Plant Pathology, Oklahoma State University,
Stillwater, USA.

We have identified 44 serine protease (SP) and 13 serine protease homolog (SPH)
genes in the genome of Apis mellifera. Most of these genes encode putative
secreted proteins, but four SPs and three SPHs may associate with the plasma
membrane via a transmembrane region. Clip domains represent the most abundant
non-catalytic structural units in these SP-like proteins -12 SPs and six SPHs
contain at least one clip domain. Some of the family members contain other
modules for protein-protein interactions, including disulphide-stabilized
structures (LDL(r)A, SRCR, frizzled, kringle, Sushi, Wonton and Pan/apple),
carbohydrate-recognition domains (C-type lectin and chitin-binding), and other
modules (such as zinc finger, CUB, coiled coil and Sina). Comparison of the
sequences with those from Drosophila led to a proposed SP pathway for
establishing the dorsoventral axis of honey bee embryos. Multiple sequence
alignments revealed evolutionary relationships of honey bee SPs and SPHs with
those in Drosophila melanogaster, Anopheles gambiae, and Manduca sexta. We
identified homologs of D. melanogaster persephone, M. sexta HP14, PAP-1 and
SPH-1. A. mellifera genome includes at least five genes for potential SP
inhibitors (serpin-1 through -5) and three genes of SP putative substrates
(prophenoloxidase, spätzle-1 and spätzle-2). Quantitative RT-PCR analyses showed 
an elevation in the mRNA levels of SP2, SP3, SP9, SP10, SPH41, SPH42, SP49,
serpin-2, serpin-4, serpin-5, and spätzle-2 in adults after a microbial
challenge. The SP41 and SP6 transcripts significantly increased after an
injection of Paenibacillus larva, but there was no such increase after injection 
of saline or Escherichia coli. mRNA levels of most SPs and serpins significantly 
increased by 48 h after the pathogen infection in 1st instar larvae. On the
contrary, SP1, SP3, SP19 and serpin-5 transcript levels reduced. These results,
taken together, provide a framework for designing experimental studies of the
roles of SPs and related proteins in embryonic development and immune responses
of A. mellifera.

PMCID: PMC1761132
PMID: 17069636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Org Chem. 2006 Oct 27;71(22):8459-66.

Asymmetric synthesis of a chiral building block for cyclopentanoids: a novel
enantioselective synthesis of preclavulone A.

Zanoni G(1), Porta A, Brunoldi E, Vidari G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organic Chemistry, University of Pavia, Viale Taramelli,
10-27100 Pavia, Italy. gz@unipv.it

A new asymmetric approach to the hydroxylactone
(+)-(3aR,4R,6aS)-4-(hydroxymethyl)-3a,4-dihydro-3H-cyclopenta[b]furan-2(6aH)-one 
(1), a key synthetic building block for cis-1,2-disubstituted five-membered ring 
derivatives (i.e., isoprostanes, jasmonates, and clavulones), has been described.
A remarkable control of the absolute and relative configuration of the three
stereocenters was achieved. Thus, the use of the Trost's asymmetric allylic
alkylation strategy secured highly enantioenriched
(R)-3-(nitromethyl)cyclopent-1-ene (13), which was smoothly converted to
(R)-cyclopent-2-enecarboxylic acid (15) in excellent yield and high enantiomeric 
purity (>98% ee). 6-exo-trig atom-transfer radical cyclizations of
((R)-cyclopent-2-enyl)methyl 2-iodoacetate (12) produced exclusively the desired 
cis-fused delta-lactone (4aR,7aR)-hexahydro-5-iodocyclopenta[c]pyran-3(1H)-one
(11), which was subsequently elaborated to hydroxylactone 1 through a
stereocontrolled Pd(II)-mediated lactonization reaction. En route to preclavulone
A, a putative elusive intermediate in the biosynthesis of clavulones, the
synthetic utility of compound 1 was demonstrated. The key feature in this
synthesis was the installation of the lower side chain via the Knochel organozinc
sp3-sp C-C coupling protocol.

PMID: 17064020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. J Neurochem. 2007 Jan;100(2):520-31. Epub 2006 Oct 24.

Regulation of neurotrophin-3 gene transcription by Sp3 and Sp4 in neurons.

Ishimaru N(1), Tabuchi A, Hara D, Hayashi H, Sugimoto T, Yasuhara M, Shiota J,
Tsuda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Medicine, University of
Toyama, Sugitani, Japan.

Neurotrophin-3 (NT-3), a neurotrophin member, plays crucial roles in neuronal
development, function and plasticity. Previous studies have demonstrated that
NT-3 gene transcription is driven by alternative promoters A and B, located
upstream of exons 1A (EIA) and 1B (EIB), respectively. However, the transcription
factors and DNA elements that drive NT-3 gene transcription remain to be
identified. Here, we analysed the promoter region of the NT-3 gene and found that
an NT-3 transcript containing EIB is predominantly expressed in cortical neurons 
which preferentially utilize promoter B, and two tandemly repeated GC-boxes,
located between -100 and -60 base pairs within promoter B, are required for the
transcription. Electrophoretic mobility shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays revealed that both specificity protein (Sp)3 and Sp4 were able to bind to 
the Sp1 binding sequences within the GC boxes. Expression of dominant-negative
Sp3 and Sp4 small interfering RNA in cortical neurons reduced the activity of the
NT-3 gene promoter. Over-expression of Sp1 family members, especially Sp4,
resulted in an increase of the NT-3 gene promoter. These findings indicate that
the NT-3 gene is a target gene for Sp4 that is abundantly expressed in the brain.

PMID: 17059557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Chem Phys. 2006 Oct 14;125(14):144311.

Jet cooled spectroscopy of H2DO+: Barrier heights and isotope-dependent tunneling
dynamics from H3O+ to D3O+.

Dong F(1), Nesbitt DJ.

Author information: 
(1)JILA, National Institute of Standards and Technology, University of Colorado, 
Boulder, Colorado 80309, USA.

The first high resolution spectroscopic data for jet cooled H2DO+ are reported,
specifically via infrared laser direct absorption in the OH stretching region
with a slit supersonic jet discharge source. Transitions sampling upper (0-) and 
lower (0+) tunneling states for both symmetric (nu1+ <-- 0+, nu1- <-- 0-, and
nu1- <-- 0+) and antisymmetric (nu3+ <-- 0+ and nu3- <-- 0-) OH stretching bands 
are observed, where +/- refers to wave function reflection symmetry with respect 
to the planar umbrella mode transition state. The spectra can be well fitted to a
Watson asymmetric top Hamiltonian, revealing band origins and rotational
constants for benchmark comparison with high-level ab initio theory. Of
particular importance are detection and assignment of the relatively weak band
(nu1- <-- 0+) that crosses the inversion tunneling gap, which is optically
forbidden in H3O+ or D3O+, but weakly allowed in H2DO+ by lowering of the
tunneling transition state symmetry from D(3h) to C(2v). In conjunction with
other H2DO+ bands, this permits determination of the tunneling splittings to
within spectroscopic precision for each of the ground [40.518(10) cm(-1)], nu1 = 
1 [32.666(6) cm(-1)], and nu3 = 1 [25.399(11) cm(-1)] states. A one-dimensional
zero-point energy corrected potential along the tunneling coordinate is
constructed from high-level ab initio CCSD(T) calculations (AVnZ, n = 3,4,5) and 
extrapolated to the complete basis set limit to extract tunneling splittings via 
a vibrationally adiabatic treatment. Perturbative scaling of the potential to
match splittings for all four isotopomers permits an experimental estimate of
DeltaV0 = 652.9(6) cm(-1) for the tunneling barrier, in good agreement with full 
six-dimensional ab initio results of Rajamaki, Miani, and Halonen (RMH) [J. Chem.
Phys. 118, 10929 (2003)]. (DeltaV0 (RMH) = 650 cm(-1)). The 30%-50% decrease in
tunneling splitting observed upon nu1 and nu3 vibrational excitations arises from
an increase in OH stretch frequencies at the planar transition state,
highlighting the transition between sp2 and sp3 hybridizations of the OHD bonds
as a function of inversion bending angle.

PMID: 17042594  [PubMed]


248. Phys Rev Lett. 2006 Aug 18;97(7):075003. Epub 2006 Aug 18.

Upstream ionization instability associated with a current-free double layer.

Aanesland A(1), Charles C, Lieberman MA, Boswell RW.

Author information: 
(1)SP3, Research School of Physical Sciences and Engineering, The Australian
National University, Australian Capital Territory 0200, Australia.
ane.aanesland@anu.edu.au

A low frequency instability has been observed using various electrostatic probes 
in a low-pressure expanding helicon plasma. The instability is associated with
the presence of a current-free double layer (DL). The frequency of the
instability increases linearly with the potential drop of the DL, and
simultaneous measurements show their coexistence. A theory for an upstream
ionization instability has been developed, which shows that electrons accelerated
through the DL increase the ionization upstream and are responsible for the
observed instability. The theory is in good agreement with the experimental
results.

PMID: 17026239  [PubMed]


249. J Biol Chem. 2006 Nov 24;281(47):35863-72. Epub 2006 Oct 5.

Differential transcriptional control of the superoxide dismutase-2 kappaB element
in neurons and astrocytes.

Mao X(1), Moerman-Herzog AM, Wang W, Barger SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little 
Rock, Arkansas 72205, USA.

In addition to their conventional G-C/T target sequences, Sp1 family
transcription factors (Sp-factors) can interact with a subset of the target
sequences for NFkappaB. Due to the low level of bona fide NFkappaB activity in
most resting cells, this interaction between Sp-factors and kappaB-sites could
play important roles in cell function. Here we used mutagenesis of a canonical
kappaB element from the immunoglobulin and HIV promoters to identify the GC-rich 
sequences at each end required for Sp-factor targeting. Through screening of
multiple kappaB elements, a sequence element located in the second intron of
superoxide dismutase-2 (SOD2) was identified as a good candidate for both
NFkappaB and Sp-factor binding. In neurons, the prominent proteins interacting
with this site were Sp3 and Sp4, whereas Sp1, Sp3, and NFkappaB were associated
with this site in astroglia. The neuronal Sp-factors repressed transcriptional
activity through this kappaB-site. In contrast, astroglial Sp-factors activated
promoter activity through the same element. NFkappaB contributed to control of
the SOD2 kappaB element only in astrocytes. These findings imply that cell-type
specificity of transcription in the central nervous system, particularly with
regard to kappaB elements, may include two unique aspects of neurons: 1) a
recalcitrant NFkappaB and 2) the substitution of Sp4 for Sp1.

PMCID: PMC2063448
PMID: 17023425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Hum Vaccin. 2006 Mar-Apr;2(2):74-7. Epub 2006 Mar 3.

Association between immunogenicity and adsorption of a recombinant Streptococcus 
pneumoniae vaccine antigen by an aluminum adjuvant.

Levesque PM(1), Foster K, de Alwis U.

Author information: 
(1)ID Biomedical Corporation of Northborough, Northborough, Massachusetts 01532, 
USA.

The impact on immunogenicity of the degree of adsorption of three Streptococcus
pneumoniae (Sp) vaccine antigens to aluminum adjuvants was studied. The three
antigens evaluated (Sp1, Sp2 and Sp3) were highly adsorbed by aluminum hydroxide 
adjuvant, but not adsorbed by aluminum phosphate adjuvant. All of the Sp antigens
adjuvanted with aluminum hydroxide elicited higher antibody responses in mice
than formulations prepared with aluminum phosphate or non-adjuvanted antigen.
Varying the percent aluminum-bound Sp antigen in the formulated vaccine affected 
the observed antibody responses. These observations suggest that the antibody
response observed for Sp antigens in this study is stimulated by a depot effect
of the antigen bound to an aluminum adjuvant.

PMID: 17012880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. FASEB J. 2006 Nov;20(13):2375-7. Epub 2006 Sep 28.

Role of cyclooxygenase-2 induction by transcription factor Sp1 and Sp3 in
neuronal oxidative and DNA damage response.

Lee J(1), Kosaras B, Aleyasin H, Han JA, Park DS, Ratan RR, Kowall NW, Ferrante
RJ, Lee SW, Ryu H.

Author information: 
(1)Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center, Bedford Veteran's Affairs
Medical Center, 200 Springs Rd., Bedford, MA 01730, USA.

Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) has been implicated in neuronal survival and death.
However, the precise regulatory mechanisms involved in COX-2 function are
unclear. In the present study we found that COX-2 is induced in response to
glutathione depletion-induced oxidative stress in primary cortical neurons. Two
proximal specific Sp1 and Sp3 binding sites are responsible for the COX-2
promoter activity under normal as well as oxidative stress conditions through
enhanced Sp1 and Sp3 DNA binding activity. Site-directed mutagenesis confirmed
that -268/-267 positions serve as specific Sp1 and Sp3 recognition sites under
oxidative stress. Enforced expression of Sp1 and Sp3 using HSV vectors increased 
the promoter activity, transcription, and protein level of COX-2 in cortical
neurons. The dominant negative form of Sp1 abrogated the oxidative stress-induced
promoter activity and expression of COX-2. We also demonstrated that
adenovirus-mediated COX-2 gene delivery protected neurons from DNA damage induced
by oxidative, genotoxic, and excitotoxic stresses and by ischemic injury.
Moreover, COX-2(-/-) cortical neurons were more susceptible to DNA damage-induced
cell death. These results indicate that in primary neurons Sp1 and Sp3 play an
essential role in the modulation of COX-2 transcription, which mediates neuronal 
homeostasis and survival by preventing DNA damage in response to neuronal stress.

PMID: 17012241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2006 Oct;47(10):4199-210.

Expression of the gene encoding poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 is modulated by
fibronectin during corneal wound healing.

Zaniolo K(1), Gingras ME, Audette M, Guérin SL.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology and Molecular Endocrinology Research Center, Universitaire de Québec 
and Laval University, Québec, Canada.

PURPOSE: Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP)-1 is a nuclear enzyme essential in
several cellular functions such as DNA repair, DNA transcription, carcinogenesis,
and apoptosis. Expression of the PARP-1 gene is mainly dictated by the
transcription factor Sp1. Fibronectin (FN), a component from the extracellular
matrix transiently expressed at high levels during wound healing of the corneal
epithelium, was reported to exert a positive influence on expression of the
alpha5 integrin subunit gene promoter by altering the state of Sp1
phosphorylation, a process that depended on the activation of the ERK signaling
pathway. The present study was undertaken to investigate whether PARP-1 gene
expression might be similarly regulated by FN through the same signaling pathways
and attempted to link expression of this gene to corneal wound healing in vitro.
METHODS: Expression of PARP-1, Sp1/Sp3, ERK1/2, phospho-ERK1/2, P38 and
phospho-P38 was monitored by Western blot in cultures of rabbit corneal
epithelial cells (RCECs) grown on FN in the presence of inhibitors of the MAPK,
PI3K, and P38 signaling pathways. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs)
were conducted to assess the binding of Sp1 and Sp3 in nuclear extracts from
RCECs grown on FN in the presence of inhibitors. Plasmids bearing the PARP-1
promoter fused to the CAT reporter gene were also transfected into RCECs grown
under similar culture conditions to assess the influence of these inhibitors on
PARP-1 promoter activity.
RESULTS: Expression of PARP-1, Sp1, and Sp3 increased considerably in RCECs grown
on FN and translated into increased binding of Sp1 and Sp3 to their DNA target
sites. In addition, FN increased PARP-1 promoter activity in a
cell-density-dependent manner. Inhibition of both the MAPK and the PI3K pathways 
entirely abolished these properties.
CONCLUSIONS: PARP-1 gene expression was strongly activated by FN through
alterations in the phosphorylation state of Sp1 and Sp3 that resulted from the
activation of the MAPK and PI3K signaling pathways, thereby suggesting that
PARP-1 may play a critical function during the highly proliferative phase that
characterizes wound healing of the corneal epithelium.

PMID: 17003407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Oct 4;128(39):12634-5.

Palladium-catalyzed alkylation of sp2 and sp3 C-H bonds with methylboroxine and
alkylboronic acids: two distinct C-H activation pathways.

Chen X(1), Goodhue CE, Yu JQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry MS015, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA 02454-9110,
USA.

Palladium-catalyzed alkylations of sp2 and sp3 C-H bonds with either
methylboroxine or alkylboronic acids were developed. Ag2O or AgCO3 is used as a
crucial oxidant and promoter for the transmetalation step. Ether, ester, alcohol,
and alkene functional groups are tolerated. A new C-H activation pathway
differing from the cyclometalation process is elucidated using methylboroxine as 
the coupling partner.

PMID: 17002342  [PubMed]


254. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Sep 27;128(38):12400-1.

Selective sp3 C-H activation of ketones at the beta position by Ir(I). Origin of 
regioselectivity and water effect.

Feller M(1), Karton A, Leitus G, Martin JM, Milstein D.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Organic Chemistry and Chemical Services, The Weizmann Institute
of Science, Rehovot, 76100, Israel.

The reaction of the cationic (PNP)Ir(I)(cyclooctene) complex (1) (PNP =
2,6-bis-(di-tert-butylphosphinomethyl)pyridine) with 2-butanone or 3-pentanone
results in the selective, quantitative activation of a beta C-H bond, yielding
O,C-chelated complexes. Calculations show that the selectivity is both
kinetically (because of steric reasons in the rate determingin step (RDS)) and
thermodynamically controlled, the latter as a result of carbonyl oxygen
coordination in the product. The RDS is formation of the eta2-C,H intermediates
from the complexed ketone intermediates. Water has a strong influence on the
regioselectivity, and in its presence, reaction of 1 with 2-butanone gives also
the alpha terminal C-H activation product. Computational studies suggest that
water can stabilize the terminal alpha C-H activation product by hydrogen
bonding, forming a six-membered ring with the ketone, as experimentally observed 
in the X-ray structure of the acetonyl hydride aqua complex.

PMID: 16984174  [PubMed]


255. Chemistry. 2006 Dec 4;12(35):8952-60.

The nature of halogen...halogen synthons: crystallographic and theoretical
studies.

Awwadi FF(1), Willett RD, Peterson KA, Twamley B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Jordan University of Science and Technology, Irbid,
Jordan. fawwadi@yahoo.com

A study of the halogen...halogen contacts in organic compounds using ab initio
calculations and the results of previously reported crystallographic studies show
that these interactions are controlled by electrostatics. These contacts can be
represented by the geometric parameters of the C--X1...X2--C moieties (where
theta1=C--X1...X2 and theta2=X1...X2--C; ri=X1...X2 distance). The distributions 
of the contacts within the sum of van der Waals radii (rvdW) versus thetai
(theta1=theta2) show a maximum at theta approximately 150 degrees for X=Cl, Br,
and I. This maximum is not seen in the distribution of F...F contacts. These
results are in good agreement with our ab initio calculations. The theoretical
results show that the position of the maximum depends on three factors: 1) The
type of halogen atom, 2) the hybridization of the ipso carbon atom, and 3) the
nature of the other atoms that are bonded to the ipso carbon atom apart from the 
halogen atom. Calculations show that the strength of these contacts decreases in 
the following order: I...I>Br...Br>Cl...Cl. Their relative strengths decrease as 
a function of the hybridization of the ipso carbon atom in the following order:
sp2>sp>sp3. Attaching an electronegative atom to the carbon atom strengthens the 
halogen...halogen contacts. An electrostatic model is proposed based on two
assumptions: 1) The presence of a positive electrostatic end cap on the halogen
atom (except for fluorine) and 2) the electronic charge is anisotropically
distributed around the halogen atom.

PMID: 16972291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Biol Chem. 2006 Nov 10;281(45):34288-98. Epub 2006 Sep 11.

Regulatory factor interactions and somatic silencing of the germ cell-specific
ALF gene.

Kim M(1), Li D, Cui Y, Mueller K, Chears WC, DeJong J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Texas at Dallas,
Richardson, Texas 75080, USA.

Germ cell-specific genes are active in oocytes and spermatocytes but are silent
in all other cell types. To understand the basis for this seemingly simple
pattern of regulation, we characterized factors that recognize the
promoter-proximal region of the germ cell-specific TFIIA alpha/beta-like factor
(ALF) gene. Two of the protein-DNA complexes formed with liver extracts (C4 and
C5) are due to the zinc finger proteins Sp1 and Sp3, respectively, whereas
another complex (C6) is due to the transcription factor RFX1. Two additional
complexes (C1 and C3) are due to the multivalent zinc finger protein CTCF, a
factor that plays a role in gene silencing and chromatin insulation. An
investigation of CTCF binding revealed a recognition site of only 17 bp that
overlaps with the Sp1/Sp3 site. This site is predictive of other genomic CTCF
sites and can be aligned to create a functional consensus. Studies on the
activity of the ALF promoter in somatic 293 cells revealed mutations that result 
in increased reporter activity. In addition, RNAi-mediated down-regulation of
CTCF is associated with activation of the endogenous ALF gene, and both CTCF and 
Sp3 repress the promoter in transient transfection assays. Overall, the results
suggest a role for several factors, including the multivalent zinc finger
chromatin insulator protein CTCF, in mediating somatic repression of the ALF
gene. Release of such repression, perhaps in conjunction with other members of
the CTCF, RFX, and Sp1 families of transcription factors, could be an important
aspect of germ cell gene activation.

PMID: 16966320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006 Jul;1759(7):367-77. Epub 2006 Jul 21.

The characterisation of the human Wolfram syndrome gene promoter demonstrating
regulation by Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors.

Ricketts C(1), Zatyka M, Barrett T.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Department of Paediatrics and Child
Health, University of Birmingham, The IBR, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK.

Wolfram Syndrome (DIDMOAD) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterised by
insulin deficient diabetes mellitus and neurodegeneration. Mutations in a novel
gene, WFS1, were found in nearly all patients and segregated with the disease.
The WFS1 gene is expressed in all tissue types studied and the 890aa protein
product is localised to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). In this study, we used a 
combination of reporter assays and in vitro and in vivo transcription factor
binding assays to analyse the regulation of expression of the human WFS1 gene in 
neuronal derived cells. A single transcription start site was mapped and a
minimal promoter identified within 25 bp upstream of this site. This minimal
promoter contains two DNA binding motifs (GC boxes) for the transcription factors
Sp1/3/4 and binding of both Sp1 and Sp3 was demonstrated at both motifs in vitro 
and in vivo. The presence of intact GC boxes is essential for minimal promoter
action. Thus, transcription factors of the Sp family are important regulators of 
the WFS1 promoter. A further up-regulating control region was identified
containing three CCAAT box binding motifs; all demonstrated a reduction in
expression after mutation. One CCAAT box represented part of a predicted ER
stress response element.

PMID: 16965966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Chem Phys. 2006 Aug 28;125(8):084701.

Fractal growth mechanism of sp3-bonded 5H-BN microcones by plasma-assisted
pulsed-laser chemical vapor deposition.

Komatsu S(1), Kazami D, Tanaka H, Moriyoshi Y, Shiratani M, Okada K.

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Materials Laboratory, National Institute for Materials Science, 1-1
Namiki, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0044, Japan. komatsu.shojiro@nims.go.jp

Here we propose a repetitive photochemical reaction and diffusion model for the
fractal pattern formation of sp(3)-bonded 5H-BN microcones in laser-assisted
plasma chemical vapor deposition, which was observed experimentally and reported 
previously. This model describing the behavior of the surface density of
precursor species gave explanations to (1) the "line-drawing" nature of the
patterns, (2) the origin of the scale-invariant self-similarity (fractality) of
the pattern, and (3) the temperature-dependent uniform to fractal transition. The
results have implications for controlling the self-organized arrangements of
electron-emitter cones at the micro-and nanoscale by adjusting macroscopically
the boundary condition (L(X),L(Y)) for the deposition, which will be very
effective in improving the electron field emission properties.

PMID: 16965033  [PubMed]


259. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Sep;26(18):6748-61.

Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/protein kinase Czeta-induced phosphorylation of Sp1
and p107 repressor release have a critical role in histone deacetylase
inhibitor-mediated derepression [corrected] of transcription of the luteinizing
hormone receptor gene.

Zhang Y(1), Liao M, Dufau ML.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Molecular Endocrinology, Endocrinology and Reproduction Research
Branch, National Institute of Child Health and Human Development/NIH, 49 Convent 
Drive/ MSC 4510, Bethesda, MD 20892-4510, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Nov;26(21):8214.

We have demonstrated that silencing of luteinizing hormone receptor (LHR) gene
transcription is mediated via a proximal Sp1 site at its promoter. Trichostatin A
(TSA) induced histone acetylation and gene activation in JAR cells that prevailed
in the absence of changes in Sp1/Sp3 expression, their binding activity,
disassociation of the histone deacetylase/mSin3A complex from the Sp1 site, or
demethylation of the promoter. This indicated a different mechanism involved in
TSA-induced derepression. The present studies have revealed that
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/protein kinase Czeta (PI3K/PKCzeta)-mediated Sp1
phosphorylation accounts for Sp1 site-dependent LHR gene activation. TSA caused
marked phosphorylation of Sp1 at serine 641 in JAR and MCF-7 cells. Blockade of
PI3K or PKCzeta activity by specific inhibitors, kinase-deficient mutants, or
small interfering RNA abolished the effect of TSA on the LHR gene and Sp1
phosphorylation. PKCzeta was shown to associate with Sp1, and this association
was enhanced by TSA. Sp1 phosphorylation at serine 641 was required for the
release of the pRb homologue p107 from the LHR gene promoter, while p107 acted as
a repressor of the LHR gene. Inhibition of PKCzeta activity blocked the
dissociation of p107 from the LHR gene promoter and markedly reduced Sp1
phosphorylation and transcription. These results have demonstrated that
phosphorylation of Sp1 by PI3K/PKCzeta is critical for TSA-activated LHR gene
expression. These studies have revealed a novel mechanism of TSA action through
derecruitment of a repressor from the LHR gene promoter in a PI3K/PKCzeta-induced
Sp1 phosphorylation-dependent manner.

PMCID: PMC1592868
PMID: 16943418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Sep 6;128(35):11635-42.

Control of sp2/sp3 carbon ratio and surface chemistry of nanodiamond powders by
selective oxidation in air.

Osswald S(1), Yushin G, Mochalin V, Kucheyev SO, Gogotsi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Materials Science and Engineering Department, A. J. Drexel Nanotechnology
Institute, Drexel University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The presence of large amounts of nondiamond carbon in detonation-synthesized
nanodiamond (ND) severely limits applications of this exciting nanomaterial. We
report on a simple and environmentally friendly route involving oxidation in air 
to selectively remove sp(2)-bonded carbon from ND. Thermogravimetric analysis and
in situ Raman spectroscopy shows that sp(2) and sp(3) carbon species oxidize with
different rates at 375-450 degrees C and reveals a narrow temperature range of
400-430 degrees C in which the oxidation of sp(2)-bonded carbon occurs with no or
minimal loss of diamond. X-ray absorption near-edge structure spectroscopy
detects an increase of up to 2 orders of magnitude in the sp(3)/sp(2) ratio after
oxidation. The content of up to 96% of sp(3)-bonded carbon in the oxidized
samples is comparable to that found in microcrystalline diamond and is
unprecedented for ND powders. Transmission electron microscopy and Fourier
transform infrared spectroscopy studies show high purity 5-nm ND particles
covered by oxygen-containing surface functional groups. The surface
functionalization can be controlled by subsequent treatments (e.g.,
hydrogenization). In contrast to current purification techniques, the air
oxidation process does not require the use of toxic or aggressive chemicals,
catalysts, or inhibitors and opens avenues for numerous new applications of
nanodiamond.

PMID: 16939289  [PubMed]


261. Leukemia. 2006 Oct;20(10):1759-66. Epub 2006 Aug 17.

Jak3- and JNK-dependent vascular endothelial growth factor expression in
cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.

Krejsgaard T(1), Vetter-Kauczok CS, Woetmann A, Lovato P, Labuda T, Eriksen KW,
Zhang Q, Becker JC, Ødum N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute of Molecular Biology and Physiology,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Biopsies from patients with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) exhibit
stage-dependent increase in angiogenesis. However, the molecular mechanisms
responsible for the increased angiogenesis are unknown. Here we show that
malignant CTCL T cells spontaneously produce the potent angiogenic protein,
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Dermal infiltrates of CTCL lesions
show frequent and intense staining with anti-VEGF antibody, indicating a steady, 
high production of VEGF in vivo. Moreover, the VEGF production is associated with
constitutive activity of Janus kinase 3 (Jak3) and the c-Jun N-terminal kinases
(JNKs). Sp600125, an inhibitor of JNK activity and activator protein-1 (AP-1)
binding to the VEGF promoter, downregulates the VEGF production without affecting
Jak3 activity. Similarly, inhibitors of Jak3 inhibit the VEGF production without 
affecting JNK activity. Downregulation of Stat3 with small interfering RNA has no
effect, whereas curcumin, an inhibitor of both Jak3 and the JNKs, almost
completely blocks the VEGF production. In conclusion, we provide evidence of VEGF
production in CTCL, which is promoted by aberrant activation of Jak3 and the
JNKs. Inhibition of VEGF-inducing pathways or neutralization of VEGF itself could
represent novel therapeutic modalities in CTCL.

PMID: 16932349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Dec;20(12):3376-88. Epub 2006 Aug 24.

Leptin increases tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase I (TIMP-1) gene expression
by a specificity protein 1/signal transducer and activator of transcription 3
mechanism.

Lin S(1), Saxena NK, Ding X, Stein LL, Anania FA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Digestive Diseases, Emory University
School of Medicine, Room 248, Whitehead Biomedical Research Building, 615 Michael
Street, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

Leptin has properties of a profibrogenic cytokine. In liver, the activated
hepatic stellate cell (HSC) is responsible for a net production of extracellular 
matrix. A key molecule synthesized is the tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase I
(TIMP-1), which acts to inhibit the activity of matrix metalloproteinases. The
purpose of the present study was to determine how leptin, a gp130 cytokine,
orchestrates the regulation of TIMP-1 gene activation and expression. Transient
transfection of primary HSCs revealed that leptin significantly increased
luciferase activity of a 229-bp TIMP-1 promoter construct (TIMP-1-229). An EMSA
revealed that leptin enhanced specificity protein 1 (Sp1) binding. Site-directed 
mutagenesis for Sp1 reduced the enhancing effect of leptin on TIMP-1
transcriptional activation, and this effect was dose dependent on the number of
Sp1 sites mutated. Chromatin immunoprecipitation revealed that leptin enhanced
binding of Sp1; however, inhibition of signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT) 3 phosphorylation by AG490 also blocked Sp1 phosphorylation 
and significantly reduced leptin-associated TIMP-1-229 promoter activity,
indicating that one mechanism for leptin-increased transcriptional activity is
via phosphorylation of Sp1 and subsequent promoter binding. Finally, we
demonstrate that leptin also results in intranuclear pSTAT3 binding to Sp1. We
propose a novel mechanism whereby leptin-mediated TIMP-1 transcription employs a 
Sp1/pSTAT3-dependent mechanism, one of which is a noncanonical association
between Sp1 and pSTAT3. These data provide a new molecular mechanism whereby the 
adipocytokine leptin plays a role in complications of the metabolic syndrome.

PMCID: PMC2925459
PMID: 16931573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Biol Chem. 2006 Oct 20;281(42):31348-58. Epub 2006 Aug 21.

SerpinB2 is an inducible host factor involved in enhancing HIV-1 transcription
and replication.

Darnell GA(1), Schroder WA, Gardner J, Harrich D, Yu H, Medcalf RL, Warrilow D,
Antalis TM, Sonza S, Suhrbier A.

Author information: 
(1)Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Brisbane, Queensland 4029,
Australia.

The serine protease inhibitor SerpinB2 (plasminogen activator inhibitor-2) is a
major product of activated monocytes and macrophages and is substantially induced
during most inflammatory processes. Distinct from its widely described
extracellular role as an inhibitor of urokinase plasminogen activator, SerpinB2
has recently been shown to have an intracellular role as a retinoblastoma protein
(Rb)-binding protein that inhibits Rb degradation. Here we show that HIV-1
infection and gp120 treatment of human peripheral blood mononuclear cells
resulted in induction of SerpinB2. Furthermore, SerpinB2 expression in THP-1
monocyte/macrophage, Jurkat T, and HeLa cell lines increased replication of HIV-1
and enhanced transcription from the HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR) promoter by 
3-10-fold. Increased HIV-1 gene expression and transcription was also observed in
activated macrophages from SerpinB2+/+ mice compared with macrophages from
SerpinB2-/- mice. The SerpinB2-mediated elevation of Rb protein levels appeared
to be responsible for enhancing transcription from the core promoter region of
the LTR by relieving HDM2-mediated inhibition of Sp1 and/or by increasing the
Sp1/Sp3 expression ratios. This is the first report associating HIV-1 replication
with SerpinB2 expression and illustrates that SerpinB2 is a potentially important
inducible host factor that significantly promotes HIV-1 replication.

PMID: 16923810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Aug 23;128(33):10662-3.

Synthesis of imidazoles through the copper-catalyzed cross-cycloaddition between 
two different isocyanides.

Kanazawa C(1), Kamijo S, Yamamoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University, Sendai
980-8578, Japan.

The copper-catalyzed reaction between two different isocyanides produces the
corresponding heteroaromatization products, imidazoles, in good yields. The
reaction proceeds most probably through the activation of the sp3 C-H bond in the
isocyanides by a copper catalyst, followed by a [3 + 2] cycloaddition between the
cuprioisocyanide intermediates and arylisocyanides.

PMID: 16910644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Biol Chem. 2006 Oct 13;281(41):30419-30. Epub 2006 Aug 10.

Transcriptional regulation of ULBP1, a human ligand of the NKG2D receptor.

López-Soto A(1), Quiñones-Lombraña A, López-Arbesú R, López-Larrea C, González S.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Funcional, Facultad de Medicina, Instituto
Universitario de Oncología del Principado de Asturias, Universidad de Oviedo,
Oviedo, Spain.

Tumor cells expressing ligands of the NKG2D receptor stimulate anti-tumor
immunity mediated by natural killer and T cells. In humans, NKG2D ligands
(NKG2DL) are encoded by MIC and ULBP proteins. NKG2DL exhibit highly restricted
expression in healthy tissues but are widely expressed in tumors. However,
regulation of each NKG2DL differs substantially in different cancer cells. In
this study, we characterized the mechanisms that regulate the expression of
ULBP1. We show that the transcription of ULBP1 strictly depends on the binding of
Sp1 and Sp3 to a CRE(1) site located in the ULBP1 minimal promoter. The mutation 
or deletion of this Sp1/Sp3 binding site abolished the transcription of ULBP1. It
also diminished the transactivation of ULBP1 promoter by Sp3 overexpression, but 
not by Sp1, indicating that Sp3 is the main transcription factor that regulates
ULBP1 through the CRE(1) site. Experiments in SL2 cells showed that the ULBP1
promoter was inactive in the absence of the Sp proteins and indicate that Sp3 is 
the essential activator of ULBP1 transcription, because the overexpression of Sp3
up-regulated its promoter activity > 500-fold. Additionally, we demonstrated that
AP-2alpha repressed the expression of ULBP1 in HeLa cells by interfering with the
binding of Sp3 and Sp1 to the ULBP1 promoter. These data indicate that Sp1, Sp3, 
and AP-2alpha may play an important role in the immunosurveillance against
cancer. Finally, the definition of ULBP1 regulation may have implications for
development of new therapeutic strategies against cancer cells.

PMID: 16901903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Anaerobe. 1998 Apr;4(2):95-102.

Degradation of 2-nitrodiphenylamine, a component of Otto Fuel II, by Clostridium 
spp.

Powell S(1), Franzmann PD, Cord-Ruwisch R, Toze S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological and Environmental Sciences, Murdoch University, Perth,
WA, Australia.

Otto Fuel II, a propellant in torpedoes, is composed of 76% 1,2 propanediol
dinitrate (PGDN), 22.5% di-n-butyl sebacate, and 1.5% 2-nitrodiphenylamine
(NDPA), and is largely recalcitrant to aerobic microbial degradation. Anaerobic
microbial degradation of Otto Fuel II was tested by inoculating anaerobic
enrichment media, containing either 2% (vol:vol) complete Otto Fuel II or 2% of a
0.02% solution of Otto Fuel II in methanol, with soil and water from sites
contaminated with munitions or with landfill leachate. Anaerobic bacterial growth
was completely inhibited by 2% Otto Fuel II. Two mixed bacterial enrichments
developed in anaerobic media containing 2% (v/v) of a 0.02% solution of Otto Fuel
II in methanol. After incubation, PGDN could not be detected in either
enrichment, but was also not detectable in sterile controls, suggesting abiotic
degradation of low concentrations of PGDN in reduced anaerobic medium. NDPA did
not degrade in either enrichment. Similarly, complete Otto Fuel was recalcitrant 
to degradation by highly reducing methanogenic biomass collected from an upflow
anaerobic sludge blanket bioreactor (UASB). A comparison of the degradative
ability of autoclaved and viable biomass showed that low concentrations of PGDN
autodegraded, however unlike the autoclaved anaerobic biomass, the viable
anaerobic biomass degraded the NDPA component of Otto Fuel II. Two strains of
anaerobic clostridia, strains SP3 and SPF, that caused the disappearance of NDPA 
at its limit of solubility in culture media, were isolated from the UASB
bioreactor biomass. SP3 and SPF were shown, by comparison of 16S rDNA sequences, 
to be most closely related to Clostridium butyricum and Clostridium cochlearium
respectively. Although NDPA was lost from cultures of both strains, metabolic end
products were not identified. Neither strain could degrade NDPA unless supplied
with an alternative energy source. In the culture system used, NDPA stimulated
the growth of SP3 but it had no appreciable effect on the growth of SPF. Both SP3
and SPF degraded low concentrations of trinitrotoluene (TNT), without the
production of detectable concentrations of aromatic amines. A possible method for
the remediation of small spills of Otto Fuel II is suggested.

PMID: 16887628  [PubMed]


267. Dalton Trans. 2006 Aug 21;(31):3798-805. Epub 2006 May 8.

A new family of luminescent compounds: platinum(II) imidoylamidinates exhibiting 
pH-dependent room temperature luminescence.

Sarova GH(1), Bokach NA, Fedorov AA, Berberan-Santos MN, Kukushkin VY, Haukka M, 
Fraústo da Silva JJ, Pombeiro AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Química-Física Molecular, Instituto Superior Técnico, 1049-001
Lisboa, Portugal.

The imidoylamidinate platinum(II) compounds [Pt{NH=C(R)NC(Ph)NPh}2] (R = CH2Ph 2,
p-ClC6H43, Ph 4) were prepared by the reaction of the appropriate
trans-[PtCl2(RCN)2] with 4 equiv of the amidine PhC(NH)NHPh giving 2-4 and 2
equivs of the salt PhC(=NH)NHPh.HCl. We also synthesized, by the double
alkylation of 4 with MeOSO2CF3, complex [Pt{NH=C(Ph)N(Me)C(Ph)=NPh}2][CF3SO3]2
(5) which models the bis-protonated form of 4. The complexes were characterized
by 1H, 13C NMR, and IR spectroscopies, FAB-MS and by C, H, N elemental analysis. 
The X-ray crystallography of 4.2CH2Cl2 enables the confirmation of the square
planar coordination geometry of the metal center with almost planar
imidoylamidine ligands, while in 5.2CHCl3 the planarity of the metallacycles is
lost and and the central N atom is sp3-hybridized. The imidoylamidinate complexes
represent a new family of Pt(II)-based luminescent complexes and they are
emissive at room temperature both in solution and in the solid state, with an
emission quantum yield ranging from 3.7 x 10(-4) to 6.2 x 10(-2) in methanol
solution; the emission intensity is pH-dependent, being quenched at low pH.
UV-visible and luminescence spectroscopies indicate that the lowest excited state
of these compounds is 3MLCT or 3IL with significant MLCT character, with emission
lifetimes of a few micros. A blue shift of both the absorption and emission with 
increasing solvent polarity and with decreasing pi-electron withdrawing
properties of the ligand substituent was observed.

PMID: 16883406  [PubMed]


268. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Aug 9;128(31):10231-9.

Synthesis and photophysical properties of borondipyrromethene dyes bearing aryl
substituents at the boron center.

Goze C(1), Ulrich G, Mallon LJ, Allen BD, Harriman A, Ziessel R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Chimie Moléculaire, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique (CNRS), Ecole de Chimie, Polymères, Matériaux (ECPM), 25 rue
Becquerel, 67087 Strasbourg Cedex 02, France.

Several borondipyrromethene (Bodipy) dyes bearing an aryl nucleus linked directly
to the boron center have been prepared under mild conditions. The choice of
Grignard or lithio organo-metallic reagents allows the isolation of B(F)(aryl) or
B(aryl)2 derivatives; where aryl refers to phenyl, anisyl, naphthyl, or pyrenyl
fragments. A single crystal, X-ray structure determination for the bis-anisyl
compound shows that the sp3 hybridized boron center remains pseudo-tetrahedral
and that the B-C bond distances are 1.615 and 1.636 A. All compounds are
electrode active but replacement of the fluorine atoms by aryl fragments renders 
the Bodipy unit more easily oxidized by 100 mV in the B(F)(aryl) and 180 mV in
the B(aryl)2 compounds whereas reduction is made more difficult by a comparable
amount. Strong fluorescence is observed from the Bodipy fluorophore present in
each of the new dyes, with the radiative rate constant being independent of the
nature of the aryl substituent. The fluorescence quantum yields are solvent
dependent and, at least in some cases (aryl = anisyl or pyrenyl), nonradiative
decay from the first-excited singlet state is strongly activated. There is no
indication, however, for population of a charge-transfer state, in which the aryl
substituent acts as donor and the Bodipy fragment functions as acceptor, that is 
strongly coupled to the ground state. Instead, it is conjectured that
nonradiative decay involves a conformational change driven by the solvophobic
effect. Thus, the rate of nonradiative decay in any given solvent increases with 
increasing surface accessibility (or molar volume) of the aryl substituent.
Intramolecular energy transfer from pyrene or naphthalene residues to Bodipy is
quantitative.

PMID: 16881653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Mol Pharmacol. 2006 Oct;70(4):1155-8. Epub 2006 Jul 28.

Is it go or NO go for S-nitrosylation modification-based therapies of cystic
fibrosis transmembrane regulator trafficking?

Zeitlin PL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Eudowood Division of Pediatric Respiratory Sciences,
The Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Park 316, 600 N. Wolfe St., Baltimore, MD
21287, USA. pzeitlin@jhmi.edu

Comment on
    Mol Pharmacol. 2006 Oct;70(4):1435-42.

Nitric-oxide synthases (NOS) are abundant in the respiratory epithelium and
generate the NO radical, which can activate guanylate cyclase, react with
superoxide, or modify proteins by S-nitrosylation (SNO) of Cys thiols. There is
increasing appreciation that SNO modification is analogous to phosphorylation,
because both signaling mechanisms modulate a wide range of cellular functions.
Zaman et al. (p. 1435) in this issue report on the capability of
S-nitrosoglutathione (GSNO) to increase the expression, trafficking, and function
of mutant and wild-type cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator (CFTR). The CFTR 
is a cAMP-regulated chloride channel that functions to regulate salt and water
content in glands and ducts of secretory epithelia. GSNO is a low molecular
weight SNO (S-nitrosothiol) formed during oxidation of NO. The authors use GSNO
as a lead compound to restore mutant CFTR function. Earlier contradictory reports
that GSNO decreased CFTR function by oxidative modification (glutathionylation)
may now be explained by high concentrations of GSNO associated with decreased
CFTR transcription and disruption of CFTR function. Zaman et al. show that at
physiologic concentrations, GSNO and the constitutively active
S-nitroso-glutathione diethyl ester stimulate CFTR transcription through SP1 and 
SP3 and promote normal trafficking. The mechanism behind rescue from the
degradative pathway relies on increasing the expression of cysteine string
proteins and SNO modification of chaperones involved in mediating CFTR transit
through the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus.

PMID: 16877677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Org Chem. 2006 Aug 4;71(16):6204-10.

PtBr2-catalyzed transformation of allyl(o-ethynylaryl)carbinol derivatives into
functionalized indenes. Formal sp3 C-H bond activation.

Bajracharya GB(1), Pahadi NK, Gridnev ID, Yamamoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University, Sendai
980-8578, Japan.

The PtBr2-catalyzed reaction of 1-ethynyl-2-(1-alkoxybut-3-enyl)benzenes at 120
degrees C in CH3CN gave functionalized indenes in good to allowable yields. Most 
probably, the hydrogen at the terminal alkyne is transferred to the adjacent
internal beta-carbon to form an (eta2-vinylidene)platinum carbene intermediate,
which activates the sp3 C-H bond at the benzylic carbon. This reaction pathway is
supported by DFT calculations which suggest that the formation of the
Pt-vinylidene complex is the rate-limiting stage for the whole transformation.

PMID: 16872206  [PubMed]


271. Ultramicroscopy. 2007 Feb-Mar;107(2-3):81-94. Epub 2006 Jul 5.

Evolution of ELNES spectra as a function of experimental settings for any
uniaxial specimen: a fully relativistic study.

Bocquet F(1), Bernier N, Saikaly W, Brosset C, Thibault J, Charaï A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire TECSEN, UMR 6122, Faculté des Sciences, Université Paul
Cézanne-Aix Marseille III, 13397 Marseille Cedex 20, France.
franck.bocquet@univ.u-3mrs.fr

We perform calculations of the fully relativistic, corrected geometrical
weighting of the pi* and sigma* transitions measured from the 1s core loss
electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) spectrum in any uniaxial specimen. We
present a complete calculation of the differential scattering cross-section
(DSCS), taking into account the collection angle, the illumination angle and the 
tilt of the sample over the optical axis. Owing to high electron velocity in an
EELS experiment, the relativistic correction has to be considered. We thus,
present a relativistic, corrected DSCS by using the theory recently developed by 
Jouffrey et al. [Ultramicroscopy 102 (2004) 61] and P. Schattschneider et al.
[Phys. Rev. B 72 (2005) 045142]. The relativistic correction is first performed
in the natural coordinate system of the scattering event. We then point out a
straightforward method to introduce this correction in the microscopic coordinate
system, where all calculations have to be done to be experimentally useful. Using
the fully corrected DSCS, we present an expression predicting the evolution of
the R=pi*/(pi*+sigma*) ratio (related to the ratio of sp2 and sp3 bondings) as a 
function of experimental settings. We show how the R-evolution can be predicted, 
for any experimental setting, by the knowledge of one unique reference value. We 
verify on graphite specimens, the validity of the R-calculation by comparing
theoretical predictions presented in this work with experimental data published
elsewhere [Daniels et al., Ultramicroscopy 96 (2003) 523 and Menon et al.,
Ultramicroscopy 74 (1998) 83].

PMID: 16870339  [PubMed]


272. J Phys Chem B. 2005 Oct 20;109(41):19443-7.

Melting curve and high-pressure chemistry of formic acid to 8 GPa and 600 K.

Montgomery W(1), Zaug JM, Howard WM, Goncharov AF, Crowhurst JC, Jeanloz R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Earth and Planetary Science, University of California, Berkeley,
307 McCone Hall, Berkeley, California 94720-4767, USA. wren@eps.berkeley.edu

We have determined the melting temperature of formic acid (HCOOH) as a function
of pressure to 8.5 GPa using infrared absorption spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy
and visual observation of samples in a resistively heated diamond-anvil cell. The
experimentally determined incongruent melting curve compares favorably with a
two-phase thermodynamic model. Decomposition reactions were observed above the
melting temperature up to a pressure of 6.5 GPa, with principal products being
CO2, H2O, and CO. At pressures above 6.5 GPa, decomposition led to reaction
products that could be quenched as solids to zero pressure, and infrared and
Raman spectra indicate that pressure leads to the presence of sp3 carbon-carbon
bonding in these reaction products.

PMID: 16853512  [PubMed]


273. J Phys Chem B. 2005 Sep 22;109(37):17518-25.

New insights on molybdenum suboxide: nature of carbons in isomerization
reactions.

Torres-García E(1), Rodríguez-Gattorno G, Ascencio JA, Aleman-Vazquez LO,
Cano-Domínguez JL, Martínez-Hernandez A, Santiago-Jacinto P.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Mexicano del Petróleo, Eje Lazaro Cardenas 152, San Bartolo
Atepehuacan 07730 México D.F. México.

MoO3 transformations under isomerization process conditions were studied. The
products obtained after different times under stream (H2/n-heptane mixture, 18.5 
bar, at 370 degrees C) were characterized by X-ray diffraction, Raman
spectroscopy, thermal analysis, and high-resolution transmission electron
microscopy (HRTEM). Theoretical quantum calculations were carried out with the
aim of understanding the paradox of the real active phase in isomerization
reactions. Theoretical calculations predict the existence of a metallic-like MoO 
phase with a structure that matches the X-ray diffraction experimental results.
From experimental and simulated HRTEM images it was possible to identify the
presence of small MoO cubic crystallites inside MoOx matrix phases. These results
also support the previously proposed idea that isomerization reactions take place
as a result of the existence of a bifunctional catalyst. The Raman and
thermo-programmed oxidation (TPO) analyses show the existence of at least two
types of carbonaceous deposits which tend to increase its ordering with the
increase of time under stream. The carbon K edge in electron energy loss
spectroscopy (EELS) of a sample after 24 h under stream shows that these
carbonaceous deposits consist of a mixture of sp2- and sp3-hybridized carbons.

PMID: 16853240  [PubMed]


274. J Phys Chem B. 2005 Aug 11;109(31):15150-60.

On the structure and desorption dynamics of DNA bases adsorbed on gold: a
temperature-programmed study.

Ostblom M(1), Liedberg B, Demers LM, Mirkin CA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Physics, Department of Physics, Chemistry and Biology,
Linköping University, S-581 83 Linköping, Sweden.

The structure and desorption dynamics of mono- and multilayer samples of adenine,
cytosine, guanine, and thymine on polycrystalline gold thin films are studied
using temperature-programmed desorption-infrared reflection absorption
spectroscopy (TPD-IRAS) and temperature-programmed desorption-mass spectroscopy
(TPD-MS). It is shown that the pyrimidines, adenine and guanine, adsorb to gold
in a complex manner and that both adhesive (adenine) and cohesive (guanine)
interactions contribute the apparent binding energies to the substrate surface.
Adenine displays at least two adsorption sites, including a high-energy site (210
degrees C, approximately 136 kJ/mol), wherein the molecule coordinates to the
gold substrate via the NH2 group in an sp3-like, strongly perturbed, nonplanar
configuration. The purines, cytosine and thymine, display a less complicated
adsorption/desorption behavior. The desorption energy for cytosine (160 degrees
C, approximately 122 kJ/mol) is similar to those obtained for adenine and
guanine, but desorption occurs from a single site of dispersed, nonaggregated
cytosine. Thymine desorbs also from a single site but at a significantly lower
energy (100 degrees C, approximately 104 kJ/mol). Infrared data reveal that the
monolayer architectures discussed herein are structurally very different from
those observed for the bases in the bulk crystalline state. It is also evident
that both pyrimidines and purines adsorb on gold with the plane of the molecule
in a nonparallel orientation with respect to the substrate surface. The results
of this work are discussed in the context of improving the understanding of the
design of capturing oligonucleotides or DNA strands for bioanalytical
applications, in particular, for gold nanoparticle-based assays.

PMID: 16852917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. J Phys Chem B. 2005 Apr 28;109(16):7671-85.

Computational study of the structure, dynamics, and photophysical properties of
conjugated polymers and oligomers under nanoscale confinement.

Sumpter BG(1), Kumar P, Mehta A, Barnes MD, Shelton WA, Harrison RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Computer Science and Mathematics Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak 
Ridge, Tennessee 37831, USA. sumpterbg@orn1.gov

Computational simulations were used to investigate the dynamics and resulting
structures of several para-phenylenevinylene (PPV) based polymers and oligomers
(PPV, 2-methoxy-5-(2'-ethyl-hexyloxy)-p-phenylenevinylene --> MEH-PPV and
2,5,2',5'-tetrahexyloxy-7,8'-dicyano-p-phenylenevinylene --> CN-PPV). The results
show how the morphology and structure are controlled to a large extent by the
nature of the solute-solvent interactions in the initial solution-phase
preparation. Secondary structural organization is induced by using the
solution-phase structures to generate solvent-free single molecule nanoparticles.
Isolation of these single molecule nanostructures from microdroplets of dilute
solution results in the formation of electrostatically oriented nanostructures at
a glass surface. Our structural modeling suggests that these oriented
nanostructures consist of folded PPV conjugated segments with folds occurring at 
tetrahedral defects (sp3 C-C bonds) within the polymer chain. This picture is
supported by detailed experimental fluorescence and scanning probe microscopy
studies. We also present results from a fully quantum theoretical treatment of
these systems which support the general conclusion of structure-mediated
photophysical properties.

PMID: 16851891  [PubMed]


276. J Phys Chem B. 2005 Mar 10;109(9):3898-906.

Self-assembled monolayers of alkaneselenolates on (111) gold and silver.

Shaporenko A(1), Ulman A, Terfort A, Zharnikov M.

Author information: 
(1)Angewandte Physikalische Chemie, Universität Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld
253, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) formed from didodecyl diselenide (C12SeSeC12)
and didodecyl selenide (C12SeC12) on (111) Au and Ag substrates were extensively 
characterized by several complementary techniques. C12SeSeC12 was found to form
contamination-free, densely packed, and well-ordered C12Se SAMs on both
substrates, whereas the adsorption of C12SeC12 occurred only on Au and resulted
in the formation of a SAM-like C12SeC12 film with a low packing density and a
conformational disorder. The properties of the C12Se SAMs were compared with
those of dodecanethiolate (C12S) SAMs. The packing density, orientational order, 
and molecular inclination in C12Se/Au and C12S/Au were found to be very similar. 
In contrast, C12Se/Ag exhibited significantly lower packing density, a lower
degree of the conformational and orientational order, and a larger molecular
inclination than C12S/Ag. The results suggest a sp3 bonding configuration for the
selenium atom on Au and Ag and indicate a larger corrugation of the
headgroup-substrate binding energy surface in C12Se/Ag than in C12S/Ag.

PMID: 16851442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Inorg Chem. 2006 Jul 24;45(15):5938-46.

Indole rings in palladium(II) complexes. Dual mode of metal binding and aromatic 
ring stacking causing syn-anti isomerism.

Takani M(1), Takeda T, Yajima T, Yamauchi O.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa 920-1192,
Japan. takani@mail.p.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

In view of the interesting metal-binding properties of lichen substances and the 
indole ring as a potential ligand, we studied the Pd(II) complexes of
indole-containing ligands, N-(indole-3-ethyl)-Delta(2,11)-enaminousnic acid (IEU)
and 4-[2-(indol-3-yl)-ethylamino]pent-3-en-2-one (IEP) obtained by condensation
of tryptamine with usnic acid and its model acetylacetone, respectively.
Reactions of Pd(II) with IEU and IEP gave isomeric complexes resulting from
coordination of the C3 atom of the indole ring in the 3H-indole form,
Pd2(IEUH(-2))(2) (1 and 2) and Pd2(IEPH(-2))(2) (3 and 4) (IEUH(-2) and IEPH(-2) 
denote doubly deprotonated forms of IEU and IEP, respectively). Complexes 1-4
were determined, from the NMR and MS spectra, to have dimeric structures doubly
bridged by the indole rings, which were stacked in different orientations. X-ray 
crystal structure analysis of 3 and 4 established that they are indole-bridged
dimers of the [C,N,O]-donor palladacycles with the Pd(II) centers in a
square-planar geometry formed by a CN(2)O donor set and are anti and syn isomers 
with respect to the bridging indole rings, respectively. On the basis of the
spectral similarity with 4, 1 and 2 were concluded to be stereoisomers assuming
the syn form with the same donor set. The results demonstrate the metal binding
and stacking abilities of the indole ring and the stereoisomerism from the sp3 C3
atom formed upon coordination.

PMID: 16841998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2006 Oct 15;174(8):915-22. Epub 2006 Jul 13.

Functional prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 polymorphism predicts poor
outcome in sarcoidosis.

Hill MR(1), Papafili A, Booth H, Lawson P, Hubner M, Beynon H, Read C, Lindahl G,
Marshall RP, McAnulty RJ, Laurent GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Respiratory Research, Department of Medicine, Royal Free and
University College Medical School, The Rayne Institute, and Department of
Rheumatology, Royal Free Hospital, London WC1E 6JJ, UK. michael.hill@ucl.ac.uk

RATIONALE: The majority of patients with sarcoidosis resolve their condition;
however 5-10% of patients with sarcoidosis develop pulmonary fibrosis with poor
prognosis. Prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (PTGS2) is a key regulatory
enzyme in the synthesis of the antifibrotic agent prostaglandin E(2) and is
reduced in sarcoidosis lung. A promoter polymorphism in PTGS2, -765G>C, is
reported to reduce its expression.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate if -765G>C is associated with susceptibility to, and
poorer outcome within, sarcoidosis and to examine a possible mechanism by which
-765G>C reduces PTGS2 expression.
METHODS: We used a case-control design study and genotyped -765G>C in a white
British population of 198 patients with sarcoidosis and 166 control subjects.
Patients with sarcoidosis were classified before genotyping as having persistent 
or nonpersistent disease using clinical criteria that included chest radiography 
staging, need for treatment, lung function, and longitudinal follow-up.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays were used to identify changes in
transcription factor binding caused by the -765G>C polymorphism.
RESULTS: Carriage of the -765C allele was strongly associated with susceptibility
to sarcoidosis (odds ratio, 2.50; 95% confidence interval, 1.51-4.13; p=0.006)
and, within this disease, with poorer outcome (odds ratio, 3.11; 95% confidence
interval, 1.35-7.13; p=0.008). The association with sarcoidosis was replicated in
a second Austrian population. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed that
the -765C allele causes a loss of Sp1/Sp3 transcription factor binding and an
increase in Egr-1 binding to the region.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that the -765G>C polymorphism identifies individuals
who are susceptible to sarcoidosis and, more importantly, at risk of pulmonary
fibrotic disease. An altered Sp1/Sp3 binding to the -765 region may contribute to
the mechanism by which -765G>C reduces PTGS2 expression.

PMID: 16840740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Phys Chem A. 2005 Jun 23;109(24):5518-26.

Conformational transitions of calixphyrin derivatives monitored by
temperature-dependent NMR spectroscopy. Ab initio interpretation of the spectra.

Bernatkova M(1), Dvorakova H, Andrioletti B, Kral V, Bour P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Analytical Chemistry and NMR Laboratory, Institute of Chemical
Technology, Technicka 5, 166 28 Prague 6, Czech Republic. mikah@centrum.cz

Eight meso-aryl calixphyrin derivatives were synthesized and their conformational
equilibria and transitions studied with temperature-dependent NMR spectroscopy.
On the basis of density functional computations, several conformer species could 
be identified and observed changes in chemical shifts explained. In some
compounds, the aryl group rotation and porphyrin ring flipping could be monitored
independently, as their NMR coalescence temperatures were well-separated.
Calculated relative conformer energies, transition barriers, and isotropic
shieldings agree well with the experimental data. In the meso-substituted
porhyrins (calixphyrins) the sp3 carbon atoms perturb their pi-electron system
and significantly modify the molecular shape and the flexibility. Even when the
conjugation of the pi-electron system was destroyed by the nonplanarity,
far-range electronic induction effects still exist and influence chemical
shielding and molecular geometry. The aryl functional groups moderately modify
the structure of the calixphyrin ring and thus can be used for fine-tuning of the
mechanical and chemical properties of these compounds.

PMID: 16839080  [PubMed]


280. Org Lett. 2006 Jul 20;8(15):3387-90.

Palladium-catalyzed oxidation of Boc-protected N-methylamines with IOAc as the
oxidant: a Boc-directed sp3 C-H bond activation.

Wang DH(1), Hao XS, Wu DF, Yu JQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry MS015, Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts
02454-9110, USA.

[Structure: see text] Pd-catalyzed selective oxidation of Boc-protected
N-methylamines with IOAc as the oxidant is described. Evidence for the
involvement of a Boc-directed C-H activation process is provided.

PMID: 16836412  [PubMed]


281. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Jul 19;128(28):9194-204.

Total syntheses of amphidinolide X and Y.

Fürstner A(1), Kattnig E, Lepage O.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Kohlenforschung, D-45470 Mülheim/Ruhr, Germany.
fuerstner@mpi-muelheim.mpg.de

Concise total syntheses of the cytotoxic marine natural products amphidinolide X 
(1) and amphidinolide Y (2) as well as of the nonnatural analogue
19-epi-amphidinolide X (47) are described. A pivotal step of the highly
convergent routes to these structurally rather unusual secondary metabolites
consists of a syn-selective formation of allenol 17 by an iron-catalyzed ring
opening reaction of the enantioenriched propargyl epoxide 16 (derived from a
Sharpless epoxidation) with a Grignard reagent. Allenol 17 was then cyclized with
the aid of Ag(I) to give dihydrofuran 19 containing the (R)-configured
tetrasubstituted sp3 chiral center at C.19, which was further elaborated into
tetrahydrofuran 25 representing the common heterocyclic motif of 1 and 2. The
aliphatic chain of amphidinolide X featuring an anti-configured stereodiad at
C.10 and C.11 was generated by a palladium-catalyzed, Et2Zn-promoted addition of 
the enantiopure propargyl mesylate 29 to the functionalized aldehyde 28. The
preparation of the corresponding C.1-C.12 segment of amphidinolide Y relies on
asymmetric hydrogenation of an alpha-ketoester, a diastereoselective boron aldol 
reaction, and a chelate-controlled addition of MeMgBr in combination with
suitable oxidation state management for the elaboration of the tertiary acyloin
motif. Importantly, the end games of both total syntheses follow similar
blueprints, involving key fragment coupling processes via the "9-MeO-9-BBN"
variant of the alkyl-Suzuki reaction and final Yamaguchi esterifications to forge
the 16-membered macrodiolide ring of amphidinolide X and the 17-membered
macrolide frame of amphidinolide Y, respectively. This methodological convergence
ensures high efficiency and an excellent overall economy of steps for the entire 
synthesis campaign.

PMID: 16834393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Jul 19;128(28):9048-9.

Intermolecular amidation of unactivated sp2 and sp2 C-H bonds via
palladium-catalyzed cascade C-H activation/nitrene insertion.

Thu HY(1), Yu WY, Che CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Open Laboratory of Chemical Biology of the
Institute of Molecular Technology for Drug Discovery and Synthesis, The
University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong.

This communication describes the Pd(OAc)2-catalyzed intermolecular amidation
reactions of unactivated sp2 and sp3 C-H bonds using primary amides and potassium
persulfate. The substrates containing a pendent oxime or pyridine group were
amidated with excellent chemo- and regioselectivities. It is noteworthy that
reactive C-X bonds were well-tolerated and a variety of primary amides can be
effective nucleophiles for the Pd-catalyzed C-H amidation reactions. For the
reaction of unactivated sp3 C-H bonds, beta-amidation of 1 degrees sp3 C-H bonds 
versus 2 degrees C-H bonds is preferred. The catalytic reaction is initiated by
chelation-assisted cyclopalladation involving C-H bond activation. Preliminary
mechanistic study suggested that the persulfate oxidation of primary amides
should generate reactive nitrene species, which then reacted with the
cyclopalladated complex.

PMID: 16834374  [PubMed]


283. J Phys Chem A. 2005 Sep 22;109(37):8391-7.

Theoretical studies on the structure and aromaticity of Ti2P6+.

Li WQ(1), Tian WQ, Feng JK, Liu ZZ, Ren AM, Zhang G.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Theoretical and Computational Chemistry, Institute of 
Theoretical Chemistry, Jilin University, Changchun 130023, China.

Cationic cluster Ti2P6+ has been studied within density functional theory. The
structure of this cluster is predicted to be a slightly distorted tetragonal
prism. The dissociation energy of this cationic cluster is higher than that of
the known sandwich compound, [(P5)2Ti]2-, because of the different bonding in
these two compounds. In Ti2P6+, the hybridization of P atoms of the ring is sp3. 
The bonding between the metal atoms and the P ring is mainly sigma-pi. While in
[(P5)2Ti]2-, the P atoms take sp2 hybridization, the bonding between the metal
atom and the rings is the typical pi-pi interaction. The electronic
delocalization is another stabilizing factor for Ti2P6+. The nuclear independent 
chemical shift indicates that Ti2P6+ is a three-dimensional aromatic molecule.
The predicted infrared and NMR help to identify the Ti2P6+ conformations in
experiment.

PMID: 16834232  [PubMed]


284. J Phys Chem A. 2005 Jun 30;109(25):5683-8.

C-H...N and C-H...S hydrogen bonds--influence of hybridization on their strength.

Domagala M(1), Grabowski SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Crystallography and Crystal Chemistry, University of Lódz,
Pomorska 149/153, PL-90236 Lódz, Poland.

Simple complexes connected through C-H...S and C-H...N interactions are
investigated: CH4...NH3, C2H4...NH3, C2H2...NH3, CH4...SH2, C2H4...SH2, and
C2H2...SH2. Ab initio and DFT calculations are performed (SCF, MP2, B3LYP) using 
different basis sets up to the MP2/aug-cc-pVQZ//MP2/aug-cc-pVDZ level of
approximation. The Bader theory is applied since MP2/6-311++G(d,p) wave functions
are used to find and to characterize bond critical points in terms of electron
densities and their Laplacians. The influence of hybridization on the properties 
of C-H...S and C-H...N systems is also studied showing that the strength of such 
interactions increases in the following order: C(sp3)-H...Y, C(sp2)-H...Y,
C(sp)-H...Y, where Y = S, N--it is in line with the previous findings on C-H...O 
hydrogen bonds. The results also show that CH4...SH2 and C2H4...SH2 complexes
should be rather classified as van der Waals interactions and not as hydrogen
bonds. The frequency associated with the C-H stretch of C(sp3)-H...S is
blue-shifted.

PMID: 16833901  [PubMed]


285. J Phys Chem A. 2005 May 5;109(17):3822-9.

Structural and conformational properties of 2-propenylgermane (allylgermane)
studied by microwave and infrared spectroscopy and quantum chemical calculations.

Horn A(1), Møllendal H, Demaison J, Petitprez D, Aviles Moreno JR, Benidar A,
Guillemin JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Oslo, P.O. Box 1033 Blindern, NO-0315
Oslo, Norway.

The structural and conformational properties of allylgermane have been
investigated using Stark and Fourier transform microwave spectroscopies, infrared
spectroscopy, and high-level quantum chemical calculations. The parent species
H2C=CHCH2GeH3 was investigated by microwave spectroscopy and infrared
spectroscopy, while three deuterated species, namely, H2C=CDCH2GeH3,
H2C=CHCHDGeH3, and H2C=CHCH2GeD3, were studied only by infrared spectroscopy. The
microwave spectra of the ground vibrational state as well as of the first excited
state of the torsion vibration around the sp2-sp3 carbon-carbon bond were
assigned for the 70Ge, 72Ge, and 74Ge isotopomers of one conformer. This rotamer 
has an anticlinal arrangement for the C=C-C-Ge chain of atoms. The infrared
spectrum of the gas in the 500-4000 cm(-1) range has been assigned. No evidence
of additional rotameric forms other than anticlinal was seen in the microwave and
infrared spectra. Several different high-level ab initio and density functional
theory calculations have been performed. These calculations indicate that a less 
stable form, having a synperiplanar conformation of the C=C-C-Ge link of atoms,
may coexist with the anticlinal form. The energy differences between the
synperiplanar and anticlinal forms were calculated to be 5.6-9.2 kJ/mol depending
on the computational procedure. The best approximation of the equilibrium
structure of the anticlinal rotamer was found in the MP2/aug-cc-pVTZ
calculations. The barrier to internal rotation of the germyl group was found to
be 6.561(17) kJ/mol, from measurements of the splitting of microwave transitions 
caused by tunneling of the germyl group through its threefold barrier.

PMID: 16833698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Phys Chem A. 2005 Apr 14;109(14):3250-6.

Ab initio investigation of vibrational spectra of water-(CO2)n complexes (n = 1, 
2).

Danten Y(1), Tassaing T, Besnard M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Physico-Chimie Moléculaire (U.M.R C.N.R.S 5803), Université
Bordeaux I, 351, Cours de la Libération, 33405 Talence, France.
y.danten@lpcm.u-bordeaux1.fr

In this paper, we have calculated using the ab initio method the IR vibrational
spectra of complexes of CO2 formed with water (sp3 O-donating atom). Binding
energies and structures of the CO2-H2O and water-(CO2)2 complexes have been
determined at the second-order level of the Moller-Plesset perturbation theory
(MP2) using Dunning's basis sets. The results are presented and critically
discussed in terms of the nature of the water-CO2 interactions, electron donor
acceptor (EDA) and weak O...H-O interactions. For water-(CO2)2 trimer, it is also
shown that the contribution to the interaction energy of the irreducible
three-bodies remains relatively negligible. We have analyzed the frequency shifts
and the IR and Raman intensity variations under the complex formation. We have
particularly emphasized the splitting of the 2 bending mode of CO2 and stretching
modes of water, which have been revealed as the most pertinent probes to assess
the nature of the forces involved in the different complexes. Finally, because
water can play the role of Lewis base and acid as well, we found that weak
O...H-O interactions can cooperate with EDA interactions in trimer, leading to
very specific spectral signatures that are further discussed.

PMID: 16833656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J Phys Chem A. 2005 Jan 27;109(3):520-33.

Flexibility of "polyunsaturated fatty acid chains" and peptide backbones: A
comparative ab initio study.

Law JM(1), Setiadi DH, Chass GA, Csizmadia IG, Viskolcz B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S
3H6, USA.

The conformational properties of omega-3 type of polyunsaturated fatty acid
(PUFA) chains and their fragments were studied using Hartree-Fock (RHF/3-21G) and
DFT (B3LYP/6-31G(d)) methods. Comparisons between a unit (U) fragment of the PUFA
chain and a mono N-Ac-glycine-NHMe residue show that both structures have the
same sequence of sp2-sp3-sp2 atoms. The flexibility of PUFA originates in the
internal rotation about the above pairs of sigma bonds. Therefore, potential
energy surfaces (PESs) were generated by a scan around the terminal dihedral
angles (phi t1 and phi t2) as well as the phi 1 and psi 1 dihedrals of both 1U
congeners (Me-CHCH-CH2-CHCHMe and MeCONH-CH2-CONHMe) at the RHF/3-21G level of
theory. An interesting similarity was found in the flexibility between the cis
allylic structure and the trans peptide models. A flat landscape can be seen in
the cis 1U (hepta-2,5-diene) surface, implying that several conformations are
expected to be found in this (PES). An exhaustive search carried out on the 1U
and 2U models revealed that straight chain structures such as trans and cis beta 
(phi 1 approximately psi 1 approximately 120 degrees; phi 2 approximately psi 2
approximately -120 degrees) or trans and cis extended (phi 1 approximately psi 1 
approximately phi 2 approximately psi 2 approximately 120 degrees) can be formed 
at the lowest energy of both isomers. However, forming helical structures, such
as trans helix (phi 1 approximately -120 degrees, psi 1 approximately 12 degrees;
phi 2 approximately -120 degrees, psi 2 approximately 12 degrees) or cis helix
(phi 1 approximately -130 degrees, psi 1 approximately 90 degrees; phi 2
approximately -145 degrees, psi 2 approximately 90 degrees) will require more
energy. These six conformations, found in 2U, were selected to construct longer
chains such as 3U, 4U, 5U, and 6U to obtain the thermochemistry of secondary
structures. The variation in the extension or compression of the chain length
turned out to be a factor of 2 between the helical and nonhelical structures. The
inside diameter of the "tube" of cis helix turned out to be 3.5 A after
discounting the internal H atoms. Thermodynamic functions were computed at the
B3LYP/6-311+G(2d,p)//B3LYP/6-31G(d). The cis-trans isomerization energy of 1.7
+/- 0.2 kcal mol(-1) unit(-1) for all structure pairs indicates that the
conformer selection was consistent. A folding energy of 0.5 +/- 0.1 kcal mol(-1) 
unit(-1) has been extracted from the energy comparison of the helices and most
extended nonhelical structures. The entropy change associated with the folding
(Delta S(folding)) is decreases faster with the degree of polymerization (n) for 
the cis than for the trans isomer. As a consequence, the linear relationships
between (Delta G(folding)) and n for the cis and trans isomer crossed at about n 
= 3. This suggested that the naturally occurring cis isomer less ready to fold
than the trans isomer since a greater degree of organization is exhibited by the 
cis isomer during the folding process. The result of this work leads to the
question within the group additivity rule: could the method applied in our study 
of the folding of polyallylic hydrocarbons be useful in investigating the
thermochemistry of protein folding?

PMID: 16833374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Bioinformatics. 2006 Sep 1;22(17):2168-70. Epub 2006 Jul 4.

Ribostral: an RNA 3D alignment analyzer and viewer based on basepair
isostericities.

Mokdad A(1), Leontis NB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Center for Biomolecular Sciences, Bowling Green
State University, OH 43403, USA. mali@bgsu.edu

RNA atomic resolution structures have revealed the existance of different
families of basepair interactions, each of which with its own isosteric
sub-families. Ribostral (Ribonucleic Structural Aligner) is a user-friendly
framework for analyzing, evaluating and viewing RNA sequence alignments with at
least one available atomic resolution structure. It is the first of its kind that
makes direct and easy- to-understand superposition of the isostericity matrices
of basepairs observed in the structure onto sequence alignments, easily
indicating allowed and unallowed substitutions at each BP position. Potential
mistakes in the alignments can then be corrected using other sequence editing
software. Ribostral has been developed and tested under Windows XP, and is
capable of running on any PC or MAC platform with MATLAB 7.1 (SP3) or higher
installed version. A stand-alone version is also available for the PC
platform.AVAILABILITY: http://rna.bgsu.edu/ribostral.

PMCID: PMC2837919
PMID: 16820430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Spectrochim Acta A Mol Biomol Spectrosc. 2007 Jan;66(1):94-101. Epub 2006 Feb 28.

Spectroscopic studies of molecular interactions involving 2,6-diethylaniline and 
N-ethylaniline donors and iodine as an electron acceptor in different solvents.

El-Gogary TM(1), Diab MA, El-Tantawy SF.

Author information: 
(1)Teacher's College in Jazan, Abo Areesh, P.O. Box 203, Saudi Arabia.
tarekelgogary@yahoo.com

The charge-transfer complexes of 2,6-diethylaniline (DEA) and N-ethylaniline
(NEA) with iodine, as a typical sigma-acceptor were studied
spectrophotometrically in chloroform, dichloromethane and carbontetrachloride
solutions. Spectral data, formation constants and effect of solvent have been
determined. Spectral characteristics and formation constants are discussed in the
terms of donor molecular structure and solvent polarity. The stoichiometry of the
complexes was established to be 1:1. For this purpose, optical data were
subjected to the form of the Rose-Drago equation for 1:1 equilibria. The
formation constant (KAD) and molar absorptivities (epsilonlambda) of complexes
were determined by least square method. Electronic absorption spectra of the
anilines were measured in different solvents. Spectral data were reported and
band maxima were assigned to the appropriate molecular orbital transitions.
Quantum chemical calculations were performed with the aid of the Gaussian 98 set 
of programs. The structure were fully optimized at MP2 level using 6-31+G** basis
set. The computations show that DEA is not planner with the amino group having a 
somewhat sp3 hybridization-like character.

PMID: 16815081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Inorg Chem. 2006 Jul 10;45(14):5257-9.

Self-assembly of a luminescent zinc(II) complex: a supramolecular host-guest
fluorescence signaling system for selective nitrobenzene inclusion.

Das S(1), Bharadwaj PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 208016, India.

A luminescent Zn(II) complex, [Zn(bpy)(aba)2] (1) {bpy = 2,2'-bipyridyl and aba =
4-dimethylaminobenzoate} has been synthesized as a white solid. Complex 1 shows
unusually high selectivity toward nitrobenzene in the presence of other organic
guests in solution, as well as in the vapor phase, resulting in both a dramatic
color change and a concomitant quenching of luminescence. When crystallized from 
nitrobenzene, 1 affords deep red crystals with the composition [Zn(bpy)(aba)2] x 
C6H5NO2 (2) as a hydrogen-bonded channel structure via unusual intermolecular
C-H...C(sp3) and H...H interactions. Inside the channels, nitrobenzene molecules 
form infinite polar linear tapes through strong C-H...O interactions in a
head-to-tail fashion. The desorption and resorption of nitrobenzene can be
achieved in a thermally reversible manner that can be monitored by X-ray powder
diffraction patterns.

PMID: 16813381  [PubMed]


291. Med Sci Monit. 2006 Jul;12(7):BR227-34. Epub 2006 Jun 28.

Up-regulation of p21WAF1 expression is mediated by Sp1/Sp3 transcription factors 
in TGFbeta1-arrested malignant B cells.

Tvrdík D(1), Dundr P, Povýsil C, Pytlík R, Planková M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and General
Faculty Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic. Daniel.Tvrdik@vfn.cz

BACKGROUND: TGFbeta1 has a profound effect on the growth of various mammalian
cell types, including B lymphocytes. The inhibitory action of TGFbeta1 is
mediated by deactivation of the cell cycle machinery. Several feedback-sensitive 
pathways determine whether the cells are stopped in G1 phase or allowed to leave 
G1 phase and enter S phase. Cell cycle-associated molecules, e.g.
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors (CKIs), may become targets for the inhibitory 
signaling pathways induced by TGFbeta1.
MATERIAL/METHODS: Our experimental DoHH2 cell line model was derived from a
patient with malignant non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of follicular origin. The effect of
TGFbeta1 on cell cycle progression was studied by flow cytometry. We examined the
effect of TGFbeta1 on the expression of p21WAF1 by immunoblotting and RT-PCR. The
binding activity of transcription factors to the p21 gene promoter was determined
by gel mobility shift assay (GMSA).
RESULTS: Our results showed that TGFbeta1 treatment increased the number of cells
arrested in G0/G1 phase compared with untreated control cells. Moreover, we found
that p21WAF1 expression was significantly up-regulated on the protein level after
TGFbeta1 treatment. Similarly to the protein level, the expression of p21 mRNA
was increased in TGFbeta1-treated cells. We further examined the binding activity
of the Sp family of transcription factors to examine their role in p21WAF1
up-regulation.
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicated that p21WAF1 over-expression in
TGFbeta1-arrested malignant B cells is mediated by binding of Sp1/Sp3
transcription factors to the (-92/-71), (-77/-58), and (-65/-45) elements of the 
promoter region of the p21 gene.

PMID: 16810128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Science. 2006 Jun 30;312(5782):1941-3.

Molecular recognition in the selective oxygenation of saturated C-H bonds by a
dimanganese catalyst.

Das S(1), Incarvito CD, Crabtree RH, Brudvig GW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Yale University, 225 Prospect Street, Post Office Box
208107, New Haven, CT 06520-8107, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2006 Jun 30;312(5782):1885-6.

Although enzymes often incorporate molecular recognition elements to orient
substrates selectively, such strategies are rarely achieved by synthetic
catalysts. We combined molecular recognition through hydrogen bonding with C-H
activation to obtain high-turnover catalytic regioselective functionalization of 
sp3 C-H bonds remote from the -COOH recognition group. The catalyst contains a
Mn(mu-O)2Mn reactive center and a ligand based on Kemp's triacid that directs a
-COOH group to anchor the carboxylic acid group of the substrate and thus modify 
the usual selectivity for oxidation. Control experiments supported the role of
hydrogen bonding in orienting the substrate to achieve high selectivity.

PMID: 16809537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Biol Reprod. 2006 Oct;75(4):605-14. Epub 2006 Jun 28.

SP1 and SP3 mediate progesterone-dependent induction of the 17beta hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase type 2 gene in human endometrium.

Cheng YH(1), Imir A, Suzuki T, Fenkci V, Yilmaz B, Sasano H, Bulun SE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Biology Research, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Northwestern University, Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago,
Illinois 60611-3095, USA.

The opposing actions of estrogen and progesterone during the menstrual cycle
regulate the cyclical and predictable endometrial proliferation and
differentiation that is required for implantation. Progesterone indirectly
stimulates the expression of 17beta hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2
(HSD17B2), which catalyzes the conversion of biologically potent estradiol to
weakly estrogenic estrone in the endometrial epithelium. We previously
demonstrated upregulation of the HSD17B2 gene in human endometrial epithelial
cells by factors secreted from endometrial stromal cells in response to
progesterone. We investigated the underlying mechanism by which these
stroma-derived, progesterone-induced paracrine factors stimulate HSD17B2
expression. Here, we show that transcription factors SP1 and SP3 interact with
specific motifs in HSD17B2 promoter to upregulate enzyme expression in human
endometrial epithelial cell lines. Conditioned medium (CM) from progestin-treated
stromal cells increased levels of SP1 and SP3 in endometrial epithelial cells and
induced HSD17B2 mRNA expression. Mithramycin A, an inhibitor of SP1-DNA
interaction, reduced epithelial HSD17B2 promoter activity in a dose-dependent
manner. Serial deletion and site-directed mutants of the HSD17B2 promoter
demonstrated that two overlapping SP1 motifs (nt -82/-65) are essential for
induction of promoter activity by CM or overexpression of SP1/SP3. CM markedly
enhanced, whereas anti-SP1/SP3 antibodies inhibited, binding of nuclear proteins 
to this region of the HSD17B2 promoter. In vivo, we demonstrated a significant
spatiotemporal association between epithelial SP1/SP3 and HSD17B2 levels in human
endometrial biopsies. Taken together, these data suggest that HSD17B2 expression 
in endometrial epithelial cells, and, therefore, estrogen inactivation, is
regulated by SP1 and SP3, which are downstream targets of progesterone-dependent 
paracrine signals originating from endometrial stromal cells.

PMID: 16807381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006 May;1759(5):247-56. Epub 2006 May 16.

The role of Sp1 and Sp3 in the constitutive DPYD gene expression.

Zhang X(1), Li L, Fourie J, Davie JR, Guarcello V, Diasio RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD), the initial and rate-limiting enzyme in
the 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) catabolic pathway, has been implicated as one of the
factors determining the efficacy and toxicity of the anticancer agent 5-FU.
Studies have attributed variation in DPD activity partially to alterations at the
transcriptional level of DPYD gene. We investigated the transcription factors
implicated in the constitutive expression of DPYD by utilizing a 174-bp fragment 
of the DPYD promoter region in which three consensus Sp protein binding sites
(SpA, SpB and SpC) were predicted. The binding of Sp1 and Sp3 transcription
factors to this region was detected by electrophoretic mobility shift and
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. By ectopically expressing human Sp1 and Sp3
in Sp-deficient Drosophila S2 cells, we demonstrated that Sp1 is a strong
activator, while Sp3 by its own is a weak activator of the DPYD promoter.
Moreover, Sp3 may serve as a competitor of Sp1, thus decreasing the Sp1 induced
promoter activity. SpA, SpB and SpC sites are all Sp1 inducible. In the full
activation of the DPYD promoter in human cell lines, the SpB site is essential;
the SpC site works cooperatively with SpB, while SpA has minor promoter activity.
These studies provide further insight into the molecular mechanisms underlying
the heterogeneity of DPD activity, and may facilitate the efficacy and safety of 
5-FU-based chemotherapy.

PMID: 16806531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Am J Audiol. 2006 Jun;15(1):75-80.

Test-retest reliability of in situ unaided thresholds in adults.

Smith-Olinde L(1), Nicholson N, Chivers C, Highley P, Williams DK.

Author information: 
(1)University of Arkansas at Little Rock, 2801 S. University, Little Rock, AR
72204, USA. lso@uams.edu

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to examine test-retest reliability of in
situ unaided thresholds measured using a handheld hearing aid programmer coupled 
to a hearing aid transducer in adults with normal hearing.
METHOD: Randomized in situ thresholds at 4 octave frequencies were established in
1 ear of 43 adults twice using the Widex Diva SP3 device with the stimulus
generated by and transduced through a Widex Diva SD-9 behind-the-ear hearing aid.
Insert earphone tips were used in each of the measures to couple the hearing
aid/transducer to the ear canal.
RESULTS: Mean decibel differences between the test and retest thresholds were
less than 1 dB at each frequency. Using an 80% statistical test criterion,
results revealed test-retest reliability within 5 dB for all frequencies: 98% at 
500 Hz, 100% at 1000 and 2000 Hz, and 93% at 4000 Hz.
CONCLUSIONS: Test-retest reliability of in situ unaided thresholds using the
SP3/SD-9 device is equivalent to that of currently accepted audiometric
procedures.

PMID: 16803794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. J Phys Chem B. 2006 Jun 22;110(24):11800-8.

EPR and solid-state NMR studies of poly(dicarbon monofluoride) (C2F)n.

Dubois M(1), Giraudet J, Guérin K, Hamwi A, Fawal Z, Pirotte P, Masin F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire des Matériaux Inorganiques, UMR CNRS 6002-Université Blaise
Pascal, 24 Avenue des Landais, 63177 Aubière Cedex, France.

Poly(dicarbon monofluoride) (C2F)n was studied by electron paramagnetic resonance
(EPR) and solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). The effects of
physisorbed oxygen on the EPR and NMR relaxation were underlined and extrapolated
to poly(carbon monofluoride) (CF)n and semi-covalent graphite fluoride prepared
at room temperature. Physisorbed oxygen molecules are shown to be an important
mechanism of both electronic and nuclear relaxations, resulting in apparent
spin-lattice relaxation time and line width during NMR and EPR measurements,
respectively. The effect of paramagnetic centers on the 19F spin-lattice
relaxation was underlined in accordance with the high electron spin density
determined by EPR. 19F magic angle spinning (MAS) NMR, 13C MAS NMR, and 13C MAS
NMR with 19F to 13C cross polarization (CP) underline the presence of two types
of carbon atoms, both sp3 hybridized: some covalently bonded to fluorine and the 
others linked exclusively to carbon atoms. Finally, a C-F bond length of 0.138
+/- 0.002 nm has been determined thanks to the re-introduction of dipolar
coupling using cross polarization.

PMID: 16800480  [PubMed]


297. Carbohydr Res. 2006 Sep 4;341(12):2019-25. Epub 2006 Jun 22.

Extension of the Nef reaction to C-glycosylnitromethanes.

Petrusová M(1), Vojtech M, Pribulová B, Lattová E, Matulová M, Poláková M,
BeMiller JN, Kren V, Petrus L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemistry, Slovak Academy of Sciences, SK-84538 Bratislava,
Slovakia.

Acid-catalysed methanolysis of
3,4,5,6-tetra-O-acetyl-1,2-dideoxy-l-arabino-hex-1-enitol proceeds via a cascade 
set of consecutive reactions resulting in its regiospecific conversion to a
mixture of alpha- and beta-C-L-arabinofuranosylmethanal dimethyl acetals and a
mixed internal methyl acetal. Structures of the final products of the overall
process provide unique evidence that a kinetically controlled, five-membered-ring
closure precedes a six-membered-ring closure in reversible systems capable of
giving both five-membered and six-membered all-sp3-atom rings. Determination of
the reaction intermediate enabled extension of the Nef reaction to
C-glycosylnitromethanes. Protonated aci-nitro forms of C-glycosylnitromethanes
that are resistant to the Nef reaction in aqueous acidic media undergo a modified
Nef reaction in acidified methanol, and the corresponding C-glycosylmethanal
dimethyl acetals with alpha-L-arabinopyranosyl, beta-D-glucopyranosyl,
beta-D-galactopyranosyl, beta-D-mannopyranosyl and beta-L-rhamnopyranosyl
configurations were obtained in moderate yields.

PMID: 16797501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. J Cell Biochem. 2006 Dec 1;99(5):1233-9.

Regulation of osteoblast differentiation by transcription factors.

Komori T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Reconstructive Medicine, Division of Cell
Biology, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, 1-7-1
Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8588, Japan. komorit@net.nagasaki-u.ac.jp

Runx2, osterix, and beta-catenin are essential for osteoblast differentiation.
Runx2 directs multipotent mesenchymal cells to an osteoblastic lineage, and
inhibits them from differentiating into the adipocytic and chondrocytic lineages.
After differentiating to preosteoblasts, beta-catenin, osterix, and Runx2 direct 
them to immature osteoblasts, which produce bone matrix proteins, blocking their 
potential to differentiate into the chondrocytic lineage. Runx2 inhibits
osteoblast maturation and the transition into osteocytes, keeping osteoblasts in 
an immature stage. Other transcription factors including Msx1, Msx2, Dlx5, Dlx6, 
Twist, AP1(Fos/Jun), Knox-20, Sp3, and ATF4 are also involved in osteoblast
differentiation. To gain an understanding of bone development, it is important to
position these transcription factors to the right places in the processes of
osteoblast differentiation.

2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16795049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2006 Jun 21;98(12):855-68.

Tolfenamic acid and pancreatic cancer growth, angiogenesis, and Sp protein
degradation.

Abdelrahim M(1), Baker CH, Abbruzzese JL, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Health Science Center, Texas A&M
University, Houston, TX 77843-4466, USA.

BACKGROUND: Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 are transcription factors that regulate cell
proliferation and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression and are
overexpressed in many cancer cell lines. For some cancers, Sp1 overexpression is 
associated with poor survival. Cyclooxygenase inhibitors decrease Sp1 expression 
in cancer cells, and therefore different structural classes of nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) were screened for their ability to decrease
levels of Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 and to decrease pancreatic tumor growth and
metastasis in an in vivo model.
METHODS: Levels of Sp1, Sp3, Sp4, and VEGF proteins in pancreatic cancer cell
lines were assessed by immunoblot analysis. mRNA was assessed by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Panc-1 pancreatic cancer cells
transfected with VEGF promoter constructs were used to assess VEGF promoter
activation. Pancreatic tumor weight and size and liver metastasis were assessed
in an orthotopic mouse model of pancreatic cancer (groups of 10 mice). Protein
expression in tumors was assessed immunohistochemically.
RESULTS: Tolfenamic acid and structurally related biaryl derivatives induced
degradation of Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 in pancreatic cancer cells. Tolfenamic acid also
inhibited VEGF mRNA and protein expression in pancreatic cancer cells; this
inhibition was associated with the decreased Sp-dependent activation of the VEGF 
promoter. In the mouse model for pancreatic cancer, treatment with tolfenamic
acid (50 mg/kg of body weight), compared with control treatment, statistically
significantly decreased tumor growth and weight (P = .005), liver metastasis (P =
.027), and levels of Sp3 and VEGF (P = .009) and Sp1 and Sp4 (P = .006) proteins 
in tumors. For example, tumors from mice treated with tolfenamic acid (50 mg/kg) 
had statistically significantly lower VEGF levels (45%, 95% confidence interval =
39% to 51%; P = .009) than tumors from control mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Tolfenamic acid is a new antipancreatic cancer NSAID that activates 
degradation of transcription factors Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4; reduces VEGF expression; 
and decreases tumor growth and metastasis.

PMID: 16788159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Gene. 2006 Sep 1;379:68-78. Epub 2006 May 5.

The modification of Sp3 isoforms by SUMOylation has differential effects on the
SRC1A promoter.

Ellis DJ(1), Dehm SM, Bonham K.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Unit, Health Research Division, Saskatchewan Cancer Agency,
Saskatoon, SK, Canada.

Previously, we had described a housekeeping like promoter that regulates
expression of the SRC gene in many cell types. This promoter was found to be
regulated by Sp1 and hnRNP-K. However, at that time we could find little evidence
supporting a significant role for Sp3 in SRC activation. Interestingly, despite
its first description some 12 years ago, a full length Sp3 clone has only
recently been described. Previous mechanistic studies, including our own,
employed a version of Sp3 that was significantly N-terminally truncated. In
addition, several shorter Sp3 isoforms exist that result from internally
initiated translation sites. To complicate matters further, all Sp3 isoforms can 
be modified by SUMO-1. Due to this newly emerging information few reports exist
that systematically explore these various Sp3 isoforms (SUMOylated or not) and
how they affect activity of specific mammalian promoters. We therefore undertook 
such a study to re-evaluate regulation of SRC by these various Sp3 isoforms.
Using human and insect cells we found that the newly isolated full length version
of Sp3 was only a weak to moderate activator of SRC. However, to our surprise,
the more commonly used N-terminally truncated version of Sp3 was up to five times
more active. We also found that mutations preventing SUMOylation of the shorter
Sp3 isoforms were sufficient to convert them into potent transactivators of SRC. 
In contrast to other studies, however, we found that SUMOylation of full length
Sp3 had little effect on its transcriptional properties. These results provide
new insights into the complexity of Sp3 mediated transcription which appears to
be highly dependent on the isoform bound, SUMOylation status and the promoter
context.

PMID: 16781829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Jun 21;128(24):7758-60.

Combined hydrogen production and storage with subsequent carbon crystallization.

Lueking AD(1), Gutierrez HR, Fonseca DA, Narayanan DL, Van Essendelft D, Jain P, 
Clifford CE.

Author information: 
(1)The Pennsylvania State University, 120 Hosler, University Park, Pennsylvania
16802-5000, USA. adl11@psu.edu

We provide evidence of low-temperature hydrogen evolution and possible hydrogen
trapping in an anthracite coal derivative, formed via reactive ball milling with 
cyclohexene. No molecular hydrogen is added to the process. Raman-active
molecular hydrogen vibrations are apparent in samples at atmospheric conditions
(300 K, 1 bar) for samples prepared 1 year previously and stored in ambient air. 
Hydrogen evolves slowly at room temperature and is accelerated upon sample
heating, with a first increase in hydrogen evolution occurring at approximately
60 degrees C. Subsequent chemical modification leads to the observation of
crystalline carbons, including nanocrystalline diamond surrounded by graphene
ribbons, other sp2-sp3 transition regions, purely graphitic regions, and a
previously unidentified crystalline carbon form surrounded by amorphous carbon.
The combined evidence for hydrogen trapping and carbon crystallization suggests
hydrogen-induced crystallization of the amorphous carbon materials, as metastable
hydrogenated carbons formed via the high-energy milling process rearrange into
more thermodynamically stable carbon forms and molecular hydrogen.

PMID: 16771488  [PubMed]


302. Dalton Trans. 2006 Jun 28;(24):2929-33. Epub 2006 May 22.

Wire-like PtC[triple bond]CC[triple bond]CC[triple bond]CC[triple bond]CPt
moieties surrounded by double-helical "insulation": new motifs featuring
P(CH2)20P and P(CH2)4O(CH2)2O(CH2)4P linkages.

de Quadras L(1), Hampel F, Gladysz JA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Organische Chemie, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Henkestrasse 42, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.

Ring-closing alkene metatheses of trans,trans-(C6F5)(Ph2P-Z-CH=CH2)2Pt(C[triple
bond]C)4Pt(Ph2P-Z-CH=CH2)2(C6F5) (Z = (CH2)9, (CH2)4O(CH2)2), followed by
hydrogenation, give the title compounds; the former exhibits an exceptionally
twisted conformation, and the latter establishes that functional groups can be
incorporated into the flexible sp3 chain.

PMID: 16770450  [PubMed]


303. Biochem Pharmacol. 2006 Nov 30;72(11):1453-9. Epub 2006 May 4.

Unscrambling the role of human parvovirus B19 signaling in systemic autoimmunity.

Tsay GJ(1), Zouali M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Institute of Immunology, Chung Shan Medical
University, 110 Sec. 1 Chien Kuo N. Road, Taichung 402, Taiwan.

Despite enormous progress in understanding how the immune system works, the
pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases still remains unclear. Growing evidence
indicates that infectious agents can be potent initial triggers, subverting and
exploiting host cell signaling pathways. This role is exemplified by the
association of parvovirus B19 (B19) with human autoimmune disease. Infection with
this common virus exhibits striking similarities with systemic autoimmune
diseases, and can be associated with elevated serum autoantibody titers. The B19 
virus produces proline-rich, 11-kDa proteins that have been implicated in
modulation of host signaling cascades involved in virulence and pathogenesis.
Additionally, B19 produces a non-structural protein (NS1) that functions as a
transcription regulator by directly binding the p6 promoter and the Sp1/Sp3
transcription factors. The protein is also involved in DNA replication, cell
cycle arrest and initiation of apoptotic damage, particularly in erythroid cells.
When transfected to non-permissive cells, NS1 recruits the mitochondria cell
death pathway. It is even more remarkable that NS1 functions as a trans-acting
transcription activator for the IL6 promoter, up-regulating IL6 expression in
host cells. Hence, B19 infection may play a pivotal role in triggering
inflammatory disorders. By promoting apoptotic damage and trans-activating
pro-inflammatory cytokine promoters, B19 may break the delicate balance between
cell survival and apoptosis, and may contribute to immune deregulation.
Understanding the mechanisms used by B19 to alter the cell signaling machinery
may provide further insight into the mechanism by which autoimmune diseases
develop.

PMID: 16764828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2006 Nov;291(5):C887-96. Epub 2006 Jun 7.

IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha regulate human NHE3 gene expression by modulating the Sp 
family transcription factors in human intestinal epithelial cell line C2BBe1.

Amin MR(1), Malakooti J, Sandoval R, Dudeja PK, Ramaswamy K.

Author information: 
(1)University of Illinois at Chicago, Dept. of Medicine, Section of Digestive
Diseases and Nutrition, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Diarrhea associated with inflammatory bowel disease has been attributed to
stimulated secretion of proinflammatory cytokines like IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha,
which have been shown to downregulate the expression of the sodium-hydrogen
exchanger-3 (NHE3) gene. In this study, we have investigated the mechanism of
NHE3 gene regulation by IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha in C2BBe1 cells. In response to
both IFN-gamma (30 ng/ml) and TNF-alpha (20 ng/ml), the construct containing the 
bp -95 to +5 region of the human NHE3 promoter, which harbors a number of
cis-elements including four potential Sp1 binding sites, showed a maximum
repression of 60%. Knockdown of Sp1 and Sp3 expression using small interfering
RNA resulted in a significant inhibition of the NHE3 promoter activity and
resistance to cytokines effects. These cytokines showed no effects on the
expression of Sp1 and Sp3 mRNA and protein levels as assessed by RT-PCR and
Western blot analyses, respectively. After treatment with cytokines, the binding 
of Sp1 and Sp3 proteins to NHE3 promoter decreased significantly, as seen by gel 
mobility shift assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. The inhibitory
effects of both cytokines on the NHE3 promoter were completely blocked by the
broad-range kinase inhibitor staurosporine and the selective protein kinase A
(PKA) inhibitor 8-bromoadenosine-3',5'-cyclic monophosphorothioate, Rp-isomer.
The binding affinity of Sp1 and Sp3 proteins for NHE3 Sp1 probe was significantly
decreased after in vitro phosphorylation of nuclear proteins by the
alpha-catalytic subunit of PKA. Our data indicate that IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha
may repress the NHE3 promoter activity in C2BBe1 cells by PKA-mediated
phosphorylation of Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors.

PMID: 16760259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Jun 7;128(22):7144-5.

Electrochemical performance of angstrom level flat sputtered carbon film
consisting of sp2 and sp3 mixed bonds.

Niwa O(1), Jia J, Sato Y, Kato D, Kurita R, Maruyama K, Suzuki K, Hirono S.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Tskuba
Central 6, 1-1-1 Higashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8566, Japan. niwa.o@aist.go.jp

We have developed ultra-flat carbon film electrodes with a wide potential window 
and a low capacitive current by the electron cyclotron resonance (ECR) sputtering
method. The film consists of sp2 and sp3 bonds (sp3/sp2 ratio = 0.702) and is
sufficiently conductive for electrochemical measurements without doping. The film
has average roughness of 0.7 A, which is much flatter than that of
nanocrystalline diamond film. The potential limit of ECR sputtered carbon
(current limit < +/-500 muA/cm2) in the positive direction is 2.0 V vs Ag/AgCl,
which is slightly lower than that of boron-doped diamond (2.1 V) and much wider
than that of a glassy carbon (GC) electrode (1.7 V). In contrast, a much wider
potential window can be obtained in the negative direction. The capacitive
current is also much lower than that of a GC electrode due to the ultra-flat
surface and the low number of oxygen-containing groups at the film surface. ECR
sputtered carbon film can be used to measure each base of oligonucleotides by
electrochemical oxidation without any pretreatment. The ultra-flat surface and
low surface oxygen concentration suppress fouling with electroactive species,
such as oligonucleotides, NADH, and bisphenol A.

PMID: 16734451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Bone Miner Res. 2006 May;21(5):661-73.

Sp1 family of transcription factors regulates the human alpha2 (XI) collagen gene
(COL11A2) in Saos-2 osteoblastic cells.

Goto T(1), Matsui Y, Fernandes RJ, Hanson DA, Kubo T, Yukata K, Michigami T,
Komori T, Fujita T, Yang L, Eyre DR, Yasui N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Institute of Health Biosciences, The University of
Tokushima Graduate School, Japan.

Genes encoding type XI collagen, normally associated with chondrogenesis, are
also expressed by osteoblasts. By studying Saos-2 cells, we showed that the
transcription factors, Sp1, Sp3, and Sp7 (Osterix), regulate COL11A2 expression
through its proximal promoter. The findings indicate both ubiquitous and
osteoblast-specific mechanisms of collagen gene regulation.INTRODUCTION: Type XI 
collagen is essential for skeletal morphogenesis. Collagen XI gene regulation has
been studied in chondrocytes but not in osteoblasts.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We cultured Saos-2 cells, a human osteosarcoma-derived
line of osteoblasts, and analyzed them for alpha2(XI) protein and COL11A2
regulatory mechanisms.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Although types I and V were the dominant collagens
deposited by Saos-2 cells, they expressed COL11A2 mRNA, and alpha2(XI) chains
were present in the extracellular matrix. The COL11A2 promoter region (from -149 
to -40) containing three Sp1 binding sites was required for promoter activity in 
transient transfection assays. All three Sp1 sites were critical for binding by
nuclear proteins in electrophoretic mobility shift assays. Further analysis using
consensus oligonucleotides and specific antibodies as well as chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay implicated Sp1 and Sp3 in binding to this promoter
region. Overexpressing Sp1 or Sp3 significantly increased COL11A2 promoter
activity and endogenous COL11A2 gene expression, an effect that was suppressed by
the Sp1-binding inhibitor mithramycin A. Further experiments showed that Sp1,
Sp3, CREB-binding protein (CBP), p300, and histone deacetylase (HDAC) were
physically associated and HDAC inhibitors (trichostatin A or NaB) upregulated
COL11A2 promoter activity and endogenous gene expression. Another Sp1 family
member, Sp7 (Osterix), was expressed in Saos-2 cells, but not in chondrocytes,
and was shown by chromatin immunoprecipitation to occupy the COL11A2 promoter.
Overexpressing Sp7 increased COL11A2 promoter activity and endogenous gene
expression, an effect also blocked by mithramycin A. Using siRNA to knockdown
Sp1, Sp3, or Sp7, it was shown that depression of any of them decreased COL11A2
promoter activity and endogenous gene expression. Finally, primary cultures of
osteoblasts expressed COL11A2 and Sp7, upregulated COL11A2 promoter activity and 
endogenous gene expression when Sp1, Sp3, or Sp7 were overexpressed, and
downregulated them when Sp1, Sp3, or Sp7 were selectively depressed. The results 
establish that Sp1 proteins regulate COL11A2 transcription by binding to its
proximal promoter and directly interacting with CBP, p300, and HDAC.

PMID: 16734381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Oncogene. 2006 Nov 16;25(54):7192-200. Epub 2006 May 29.

Upregulation of BAK by butyrate in the colon is associated with increased Sp3
binding.

Chirakkal H(1), Leech SH, Brookes KE, Prais AL, Waby JS, Corfe BM.

Author information: 
(1)Human Nutrition Unit, Division of Clinical Sciences North, University of
Sheffield, Northern General Hospital, Sheffield, UK.

Butyrate is a key bioactive product of dietary fibre fermentation thought to play
a key role in cancer prevention. One contributory mechanism in this role is the
regulation of apoptosis by butyrate. As butyrate shows low levels of toxicity,
the mechanisms by which it triggers or regulates apoptosis are of great interest.
We and others have shown that the proapoptotic protein BAK is upregulated by
butyrate. We show here that this observation is conserved across multiple cell
lines, that it occurs in all cells in a population and is at the transcriptional 
level. We have used a promoter-reporter construct to identify the regulatory
regions of the BAK promoter and found that much of the transcriptional activity
occurs via a single Sp1/Sp3 binding site. We have shown that both Sp1 and Sp3
bind, but upon butyrate treatment Sp1 binding decreases in favour of Sp3 binding.
We speculate that this may be an acetylation-mediated event.

PMID: 16732318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. J Phys Chem B. 2006 Jun 1;110(21):10266-71.

Chemical functionalization of carbon nanotubes by carboxyl groups on stone-wales 
defects: a density functional theory study.

Wang C(1), Zhou G, Liu H, Wu J, Qiu Y, Gu BL, Duan W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, People's Republic 
of China.

Chemical functionalization of carbon nanotubes with Stone-Wales (SW) defects by
carboxyl (COOH) groups is investigated by density functional calculations. Due to
the localized donor states induced by the SW defect, the binding of the COOH
group with the defective carbon nanotube is stronger than that with the perfect
one. A quasi-tetrahedral bonding configuration of carbon atoms, indicating sp3
hybrid bonding, is formed in the adsorption site. The charge distribution
analysis shows that, in comparison with benzoic acid, the localized or
delocalized pi states on the nanotube would affect the polarities of chemical
bonds of the COOH group without losing the acidity. Furthermore, it is found that
the double-adsorption system (two COOH groups are respectively adsorbed on two
individual carbon atoms of the SW defect) is more energetically favorable than
the monoadsorption one. The adsorption of COOH groups leads to a significant
change of the electronic states around the Fermi level, which is advantageous for
the electrical conductivity. The functionalization by introducing functional
groups on the topological defects provides a pathway for applications of carbon
nanotubes in chemical sensors and nanobioelectronics.

PMID: 16722728  [PubMed]


309. DNA Cell Biol. 2006 May;25(5):262-76.

Regulation of human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 gene expression by Sp1 and Sp3
interaction with TRE-1 repeat III.

Yao J(1), Grant C, Harhaj E, Nonnemacher M, Alefantis T, Martin J, Jain P,
Wigdahl B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, The
Pennsylvania State University, Hershey, Pennsylvania, USA.

Transcription factors of the Sp family are known to play key roles in the
regulation of both constitutive as well as cell type- and differentiation
stage-specific gene expression. Binding sites for factors of the Sp family (Sp1
and Sp3) have previously been identified within the U3 region of the human T-cell
leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) long terminal repeat (LTR). Although previous
studies have demonstrated that Sp1 and Sp3 can interact with the Tax-responsive
element 1 (TRE-1) repeat III, the sequences required for Sp1/Sp3 binding have not
been mapped in detail. Herein, we demonstrate that the GC-rich regions flanking
the viral cAMP-responsive element (CRE) within TRE-1 repeat III exhibit
substantial affinity for both Sp1 and Sp3. We demonstrate that purified Sp1
competes with purified CREB for binding to TRE-1 repeat III due to the physical
proximity of the Sp1/Sp3 and ATF/CREB binding sites, while purified Sp1 forms a
multiprotein complex with purified CREB in the presence of Tax as demonstrated by
electrophoretic mobility shift (EMS) analyses. Sp1 and Sp3 binding to the U3
region of the HTLV-1 LTR in the presence of Tax in vivo was confirmed by
chromatin immunoprecipitation using HTLV-1-infected T cells (SLB-1 and C8166).
Overexpression of Sp1 was modestly enhanced, while overexpression of Sp3
inhibited basal and Tax-mediated transactivation of the HTLV-1 LTR in U-937 cells
(which express relatively low levels of endogenous Sp1 and Sp3). Furthermore, the
modest upregulation of LTR activation caused by overexpression of Sp1 could be
blocked by site-directed mutagenesis of the GC-rich Sp1/Sp3 binding sites within 
TRE-1 repeat III. These results suggest that both Sp1 and Sp3 transcription
factor binding to TRE-1 repeat III participate in regulation of HTLV-1 viral gene
expression.

PMID: 16716116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Endocr J. 2006 Jun;53(3):331-7. Epub 2006 May 20.

Neonatal exposure to diethylstilbestrol alters the expression of DNA
methyltransferases and methylation of genomic DNA in the epididymis of mice.

Sato K(1), Fukata H, Kogo Y, Ohgane J, Shiota K, Mori C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioenvironmental Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, Chiba, Japan.

Fetal and neonatal exposure to diethylstilbestrol (DES) is known to cause many
abnormalities, such as cancer, in the male and female reproductive tracts later
in life, and epigenetic mechanisms, such as DNA methylation, may be involved in
these processes. In the present study, newborn C57BL/6 male mice were exposed to 
3 mug of DES from postnatal days 1 to 5. Subsequently, the expression levels of
the DNA methyltransferases Dnmt1, Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b and the transcription factors
Sp1 and Sp3, which have been reported to regulate the expression of Dnmts, were
examined at days 5, 14 and 30. Furthermore, restriction landmark genomic scanning
(RLGS), which can analyze genome-wide DNA methylation, was performed to clarify
whether or not aberrant DNA methylation was present in the epididymis of the
DES-treated mice at day 30. Increased expression of Dnmt3b was observed at days 5
and 14, followed by increased expression of Dnmt1 and Dnmt3a at day 30, as
evaluated by real-time RT-PCR. The expression of Sp1 was also increased at day
30. The RLGS analysis revealed that 7 loci of the genomic DNA were demethylated
and 1 locus was methylated in the epididymis of the DES-treated mice. Four of
these loci specifically demethylated in DES-treated mice were cloned, and all
were found to be located within CpG islands near genes. In conclusion, our
results indicated the possibility that DES-induced abnormalities of reproductive 
organs are associated with altered expression levels of DNA methyltransferases
and DNA methylation.

PMID: 16714842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Inorg Chem. 2006 May 29;45(11):4316-8.

Unexpected photoisomerization of a pincer-type amido ligand leads to facial
coordination at Pt(IV).

Harkins SB(1), Peters JC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Arnold and Mabel Beckman
Laboratories of Chemical Synthesis, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena,
California 91125, USA.

The divalent complex (BQA)PtMe undergoes oxidative addition with MeI to afford
the octahedral complex cis-(mer-BQA)PtMe2I {(BQA)- = bis(8-quinolinyl)amide}.
When this molecule is irradiated with visible light, it isomerizes to
(fac-BQA)PtMe2I, where the BQA ligand adopts an unexpected facial coordination
mode. The amide nitrogen in this molecule is sp3 hybridized and can be easily
quarternized with HBF4, resulting in [H(fac-BQA)PtMe2I][BF4], with only minor
perturbation to the coordination sphere.

PMID: 16711673  [PubMed]


312. J Immunol. 2006 Jun 1;176(11):7028-38.

Cytokine-induced hepatic apoptosis is dependent on FGL2/fibroleukin: the role of 
Sp1/Sp3 and STAT1/PU.1 composite cis elements.

Liu M(1), Mendicino M, Ning Q, Ghanekar A, He W, McGilvray I, Shalev I, Pivato D,
Clark DA, Phillips MJ, Levy GA.

Author information: 
(1)Multi-Organ Transplant Program, Toronto General Hospital, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Previous studies from our laboratory have shown that fulminant hepatitis caused
by the mouse hepatitis virus, MHV-3, is dependent on production of the novel
immune coagulant fgl2/fibroleukin. In this study, we investigate the role of
IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha in the induction of fgl2 expression and fgl2-dependent
hepatic apoptosis. Infusion of IFN-gamma in combination with TNF-alpha through
the portal vein of fgl2+/+ mice led to widespread hepatic apoptosis and fibrin
deposition. Livers from fgl2-/- mice were normal, although strong expression of
the fgl2 knockout reporter gene Lac Z was seen in both resident hepatic
macrophages and endothelial cells. In vitro, IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha induced fgl2
expression in a macrophage and endothelial cell-specific manner. In macrophages
(peritoneal and RAW 264.7 cells), IFN-gamma, but not IFN-alpha, LPS, TNF-alpha,
or IL-1 induced fgl2 mRNA transcription and protein expression, while in
endothelial cells TNF-alpha, but not IFN-gamma, induced fgl2 transcription. In
addition, while TNF-alpha enhanced IFN-gamma-induced macrophage fgl2
transcription, IFN-gamma also enhanced TNF-alpha-induced endothelial cell fgl2
transcription. The induction of fgl2 by IFN-gamma in macrophages involved a
STAT1-dependent pathway, involving the composite cis elements Sp1/Sp3 and
GAS/PU.1. The latter interacted with IFN-gamma-dependent Sp1/Sp3, STAT1, and the 
ETS family of transcription factors member PU.1. The interaction of PU.1 with the
IFN-gamma-activated sequence/ETS family of transcription factors site determined 
the macrophage-specific induction of fgl2 by IFN-gamma. Overall, this study
demonstrates that IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha induce hepatocyte apoptosis in vivo,
which is dependent on induction of fgl2, and defines the molecular basis of
transcription of fgl2 in vitro.

PMID: 16709865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Jun 23;345(1):530-7. Epub 2006 May 2.

Interplay of Sps and poly(C) binding protein 1 on the mu-opioid receptor gene
expression.

Rivera-Gines A(1), Cook RJ, Loh HH, Ko JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Seton Hall University, South Orange, NJ 07079, USA.

The proximal promoter of mouse mu-opioid receptor (MOR) gene is the dominant
promoter for directing MOR-1 gene expression in brain. Sp1/Sp3 (Sps) and poly(C) 
binding protein 1 (PCBP) bind to a cis-element of MOR proximal promoter.
Functional interaction between Sps and PCBP and their individual roles on MOR
proximal core promoter were investigated using SL2 cells, devoid of Sps and PCBP.
Each factor contributed differentially to the promoter, with a rank order of
activity Sp1>Sp3>PCBP. Functional analysis suggested the interplay of Sps and
PCBP in an additive manner. The in vivo binding of individual Sps or PCBP to MOR 
proximal promoter was demonstrated using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP).
Re-ChIP assays further suggested simultaneous bindings of Sps and PCBP to the
proximal promoter, indicating physiologically relevant communication between Sps 
and PCBP. Collectively, results documented that a functional coordination between
Sps and PCBP contributed to cell-specific MOR gene expression.

PMID: 16682008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Jun 23;345(1):292-301. Epub 2006 May 2.

Regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 expression in
pancreatic cancer cells by Sp proteins.

Higgins KJ(1), Abdelrahim M, Liu S, Yoon K, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College
Station, TX, USA.

Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 (VEGFR2/KDR) is an important
mediator of angiogenesis, and VEGFR2 mRNA is expressed in several pancreatic
cancer cell lines. Deletion analysis of the VEGFR2 promoter in Panc-1, AsPC-1,
and MiaPaCa-2 pancreatic cancer cells shows that the proximal region of the
promoter is primarily responsible for VEGFR2 expression, and two GC-rich sites at
-58 and -44 are critical elements in all three cell lines. Panc-1, AsPC-1, and
MiaPaCa-2 cells also express Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 proteins which bind to the GC-rich
region of the VEGFR2 promoter in electrophoretic mobility shift and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays. RNA interference with small inhibitory RNAs for Sp1, 
Sp3, and Sp4 decreases VEGFR2 mRNA and reporter gene activity in transfection
assays, confirming that VEGFR2 expression in pancreatic cancer cells is regulated
by Sp proteins. These results suggest that VEGFR2 cannot only be targeted by
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors but also by drugs that downregulate Sp
proteins or block Sp-dependent transactivation.

PMID: 16678129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Jun 23;345(1):124-32. Epub 2006 Apr 25.

Involvement of the GC-rich sequence and specific proteins (Sp1/Sp3) in the basal 
transcription activity of neurogranin gene.

Gui J(1), Song Y, Han NL, Zhou SF, Sheu FS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, 14
Science Drive 4, Singapore 117543, Singapore.

Neurogranin (Ng), a neuronal protein implicated in learning and memory, contains 
a TATA-less promoter. Analysis of 5'-deletion mutations and site-directed
mutations of the mouse Ng promoter revealed that a 258bp 5'-flanking sequence (+3
to +260) conferred the basal transcription activity, and that the GC-rich
sequence (+22 to +33) served as an important determinant of the promoter
activity. Transient transfection of the Sp1 expression plasmid transactivated the
reporter activity in neuroblastoma N2A cells while knocking down of endogenous
Sp1 expression resulted in a 2.5-fold reduction of the reporter activity in HEK
293 cells. Exogenous expression of Sp3 in HEK 293 cells, however, repressed the
reporter activity by 50%. Nevertheless, by gel shift assays, Sp1 and Sp3 were not
found to be responsible for the protein-DNA complexes formed by the GC-rich
sequence. Moreover, a nuclear factor from the mouse brain tissues was discovered 
to bind to multiple AT-rich regions in Ng promoter.

PMID: 16677608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jun 30;281(26):17635-43. Epub 2006 May 3.

The constitutive expression of anticoagulant protein S is regulated through
multiple binding sites for Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors in the protein S
gene promoter.

de Wolf CJ(1), Cupers RM, Bertina RM, Vos HL.

Author information: 
(1)Hemostasis and Thrombosis Research Center, Department of Hematology, Leiden
University Medical Center, Albinusdreef 2, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands.

Protein S (PS) is a vitamin K-dependent plasma protein that inhibits blood
coagulation by serving as a nonenzymatic cofactor for activated protein C in the 
protein C anticoagulant pathway. Low PS levels are a risk factor for the
development of deep venous thrombosis. The regulation of PS levels through
transcriptional regulation of the PS gene was investigated in this report. A
minimal PS gene promoter 370 bp upstream from the translational initiation codon 
was sufficient for maximal promoter activity in transient transfections
regardless of the cell type. A pivotal role for Sp1 in the constitutive
expression of the PS gene was demonstrated through electrophoretic mobility shift
assay experiments, transient expression of mutant PS promoter-reporter gene
constructs, and chromatin immunoprecipitations in HepG2 cells. At least four
Sp-binding sites were identified. The two sites most proximal to the
translational start codon were found to be indispensable for PS promoter
activity, whereas mutation of the two most distal Sp-binding sites had a
negligible influence on basal promoter activity. In addition, all other major
promoter-binding proteins that were found by electrophoretic mobility shift assay
could be positively identified in supershift assays. We identified binding sites 
for the hepatocyte-specific forkhead transcription factor FOXA2, nuclear factor
Y, and the cAMP-response element-binding protein/activating transcription factor 
family of transcription factors. Their relevance was investigated using
site-directed mutagenesis.

PMID: 16672217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Biochem J. 2006 Aug 1;397(3):449-59.

NF-Y and Sp1/Sp3 are involved in the transcriptional regulation of the
peptidylarginine deiminase type III gene (PADI3) in human keratinocytes.

Dong S(1), Kanno T, Yamaki A, Kojima T, Shiraiwa M, Kawada A, Méchin MC, Chavanas
S, Serre G, Simon M, Takahara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biological Resource Sciences, School of Agriculture,
Ibaraki University, Ami-machi, Inashiki-gun, Ibaraki 300-0393, Japan.

Human peptidylarginine deiminase type III gene (PADI3) encodes a crucial
post-translational modification enzyme that converts protein-bound arginine
residues into citrulline residues. Its expression is restricted to a few cell
types, including keratinocytes in the granular layer of the epidermis and in the 
inner root sheath of hair follicles. In these cells, the enzyme is involved in
terminal processing of intermediate filament-binding proteins such as filaggrin
and trichohyalin. To study the molecular mechanisms that control the expression
of PADI3 in human keratinocytes at the transcriptional level, we characterized
its promoter region using human keratinocytes transfected with variously deleted 
fragments of the 5'-upstream region of PADI3 coupled to the luciferase gene. We
found that as few as 129 bp upstream from the transcription initiation site were 
sufficient to direct transcription of the reporter gene. Electrophoretic
mobility-shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed that NF-Y
(nuclear factor Y) and Sp1/Sp3 (specificity protein 1/3) bind to this region in
vitro and in vivo. Moreover, mutation of the Sp1- or NF-Y-binding motif markedly 
reduced PADI3 promoter activity. Furthermore, Sp1 or NF-YA (NF-Y subunit) small
interfering RNAs effectively diminished PADI3 expression in keratinocytes
cultured in both low- and high-calcium medium. These data indicate that PADI3
expression is driven by Sp1/Sp3 and NF-Y binding to the promoter region.

PMCID: PMC1533312
PMID: 16671893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jul 7;281(27):18825-36. Epub 2006 May 1.

A novel estradiol/estrogen receptor alpha-dependent transcriptional mechanism
controls expression of the human prolactin receptor.

Dong J(1), Tsai-Morris CH, Dufau ML.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Molecular Endocrinology, Endocrinology and Reproduction Research
Branch, NICHD, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Prolactin exerts diverse functions in target tissues through its membrane
receptors, and is a potent mitogen in normal and neoplastic breast cells.
Estradiol (E(2)) induces human prolactin receptor (hPRLR) gene expression through
stimulation of its generic promoter (PIII). This study identifies a novel
E(2)-regulated non-estrogen responsive element-dependent transcriptional
mechanism that mediates E(2)-induced hPRLR expression. E(2) stimulated
transcriptional activity in MCF7A(2) cells transfected with PIII lacking an
estrogen responsive element, and increased hPRLR mRNA and protein. The abolition 
of the E(2) effect by mutation of Sp1 or C/EBP elements that bind Sp1/Sp3 and
C/EBPbeta within PIII indicated the cooperation of these transfactors in
E(2)-induced transcription of the hPRLR. DNA affinity protein assay showed that
E(2) induced estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) binding to Sp1/Sp3 and C/EBPbeta
DNA-protein complexes. The ligand-binding domain of ERalpha was essential for its
physical interaction with C/EBPbeta, and E(2) promoted this association, and its 
DNA binding domain was required for transactivation of PIII.
Co-immunoprecipitation studies revealed tethering of C/EBPbeta to Sp1 by
E(2)-activated ERalpha. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis showed that E(2)
induced recruitment of C/EBPbeta, ERalpha, SRC1, p300, pCAF, TFIIB, and Pol II,
with no change in Sp1/Sp3. E(2) also induced promoter-associated acetylation of
H3 and H4. These findings demonstrate that an E(2)/ERalpha, Sp1, and C/EBPbeta
complex with recruitment of coactivators and TFIIB and Pol II are required for
E(2)-activated transcriptional expression of the hPRLR through PIII. Estradiol
produced in breast stroma and adipose tissue, which are major sources of estrogen
in post-menopausal women, could up-regulate hPRLR gene expression and stimulate
breast tumor growth.

PMID: 16651265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. J Invest Dermatol. 2006 Jul;126(7):1469-79. Epub 2006 Apr 27.

Defining the regulatory elements in the proximal promoter of DeltaNp63 in
keratinocytes: Potential roles for Sp1/Sp3, NF-Y, and p63.

Romano RA(1), Birkaya B, Sinha S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, 
New York, USA.

p63, a homolog of the tumor suppressor p53, plays an important role in the
formation of stratified epithelium such as those in the epidermis of the skin.
The p63 gene gives rise to multiple functionally distinct protein isoforms,
including the DeltaNp63 class of isoforms, which lacks the N-terminal
transactivation domain and is synthesized from an internal promoter. DeltaNp63
proteins are the predominant isoforms expressed in keratinocytes and are thought 
to be important for maintenance of the proliferative capacity of these cells.
Here, we have examined the transcriptional control mechanisms that govern the
expression DeltaNp63 in keratinocytes. We first performed DNase I hypersensitive 
site mapping and demonstrated that the promoter region of DeltaNp63 is in open
chromatin state in keratinocytes. To identify the cis-elements that regulate
DeltaNp63, we have performed transient transfection assays in keratinocytes with 
several DeltaNp63 promoter constructs. This identified a short evolutionarily
conserved fragment that harbors most of the transcriptional activity of the
DeltaNp63 promoter. Biochemical studies of this element have revealed critical
roles for CCAAT-box-binding factor (CBF/NF-Y) and Sp1/Sp3 family of proteins. In 
addition, our data suggest that DeltaNp63 is recruited to and can activate its
own promoter, possibly through protein-protein interactions, thus providing an
auto-regulatory loop of self-regulation. These studies support the notion that
unique and distinct pathways control the expression of individual p53 family
members and their various isoforms.

PMID: 16645595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2006 Aug;291(2):H600-11. Epub 2006 Apr 14.

Sp3 inhibits Sp1-mediated activation of the cardiac troponin T promoter and is
downregulated during pathological cardiac hypertrophy in vivo.

Azakie A(1), Fineman JR, He Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Univ. of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94143, USA. azakiet@surgery.ucsf.edu

Combinatorial interactions between cis elements and trans-acting factors are
required for regulation of cardiac gene expression during normal cardiac
development and pathological cardiac hypertrophy. Sp factors bind GC boxes and
are implicated in recruitment and assembly of the basal transcriptional complex. 
In this study, we show that the cardiac troponin T (cTnT) promoter contains a GC 
box that is necessary for basal and cAMP-mediated activity of cTnT promoter
constructs transfected in embryonic cardiomyocytes. Cardiac nuclear proteins bind
the cTnT GC box in a sequence-specific fashion and consist of Sp1, Sp2, and Sp3
protein factors. By chromatin immunoprecipitation, Sp1 binds the cTnT promoter
"in vivo." Cotransfected Sp1 trans-activates the cTnT promoter in cardiomyocytes 
in culture. Sp3 represses Sp1-mediated transcriptional activation of the cTnT
gene in embryonic cardiomyocytes. Sp3 repression of Sp1-mediated cTnT promoter
activation is dose dependent, inferring a mechanism of competitive
binding/inhibition. To evaluate the role of Sp factors in cardiac gene expression
in vivo, we have established a clinically relevant animal model of pathological
cardiac hypertrophy where the fetal cardiac program is activated. In this animal 
model, cardiac hypertrophy results from increased left-right shunting, volume
loading of the left ventricle, and pressure loading of the right ventricle. Sp1
expression is increased in all four hypertrophied cardiac chambers, whereas Sp3
expression is diminished. This observation is consistent with the in vitro
activating function of Sp1 and inhibitory effects of Sp3 on activity of cTnT
promoter constructs. Sp factor levels are modulated during the hypertrophic
cardiac program in vivo.

PMID: 16617124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jun 30;281(26):18043-50. Epub 2006 Apr 7.

Sp1 and Sp3 mediate constitutive transcription of the human hyaluronan synthase 2
gene.

Monslow J(1), Williams JD, Fraser DJ, Michael DR, Foka P, Kift-Morgan AP, Luo DD,
Fielding CA, Craig KJ, Topley N, Jones SA, Ramji DP, Bowen T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Nephrology, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, Heath Park,
Cardiff CF14 4XN, Wales, UK.

The linear glycosaminoglycan hyaluronan (HA) is synthesized at the plasma
membrane by the HA synthase (HAS) enzymes HAS1, -2, and -3 and performs multiple 
functions as part of the vertebrate extracellular matrix. Up-regulation of HA
synthesis in the renal corticointerstitium, and the resultant extracellular
matrix expansion, is a common feature of renal fibrosis. However, the regulation 
of expression of these HAS isoforms at transcriptional and translational levels
is poorly understood. We have recently described the genomic structures of the
human HAS genes, thereby identifying putative promoter regions for each isoform. 
Further analysis of the HAS2 gene identified the transcription initiation site
and showed that region F3, comprising the proximal 121 bp of promoter sequence,
mediated full constitutive transcription. In the present study, we have analyzed 
this region in the human renal proximal tubular epithelial cell line HK-2.
Electrophoretic mobility shift and promoter assay data demonstrated that
transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 bound to three sites immediately upstream of
the HAS2 transcription initiation site and that mutation of the consensus
recognition sequences within these sites ablated their transcriptional response. 
Furthermore, subsequent knockdown of Sp1 or Sp3 using small interfering RNAs
decreased constitutive HAS2 mRNA synthesis. In contrast, significant binding of
HK-2 nuclear proteins by putative upstream NF-Y, CCAAT, and NF-kappaB recognition
sites was not observed. The identification of Sp1 and Sp3 as principal mediators 
of HAS2 constitutive transcription augments recent findings identifying upstream 
promoter elements and provides further insights into the mechanism of HAS2
transcriptional activation.

PMID: 16603733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. J Chem Phys. 2006 Mar 28;124(12):124507.

Real-time propagation time-dependent density functional theory study on the
ring-opening transformation of the photoexcited crystalline benzene.

Tateyama Y(1), Oyama N, Ohno T, Miyamoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), 1-2-1 Sengen, Tsukuba,
Ibaraki 305-0047, Japan. tateyama.yoshitaka@nims.go.jp

Mechanism of the ring-opening transformation in the photoexcited crystalline
benzene is investigated on the femtosecond scale by a computational method based 
on the real-time propagation (RTP) time-dependent density functional theory
(TDDFT). The excited-state dynamics of the benzene molecule is also examined not 
only for the distinction between the intrinsic properties of molecule and the
intermolecular interaction but for the first validation using the vibration
frequencies for the RTP-TDDFT approach. It is found that the vibration
frequencies of the excited and ground states in the molecule are well reproduced.
This demonstrates that the present method of time evolution using the
Suzuki-Trotter-type split operator technique starting with the Franck-Condon
state approximated by the occupation change of the Kohn-Sham orbitals is
adequately accurate. For the crystalline benzene, we carried out the RTP-TDDFT
simulations for two typical pressures. At both pressures, large swing of the C-H 
bonds and subsequent twist of the carbon ring occurs, leading to tetrahedral
(sp3-like) C-H bonding. The nu4 and nu16 out-of-plane vibration modes of the
benzene molecule are found mostly responsible for these motions, which is
different from the mechanism proposed for the thermal ring-opening transformation
occurring at higher pressure. Comparing the results between different pressures, 
we conclude that a certain increase of the intermolecular interaction is
necessary to make seeds of the ring opening (e.g., radical site formation and
breaking of the molecular character) even with the photoexcitation, while the
hydrogen migration to fix them requires more free volume, which is consistent
with the experimental observation that the transformation substantially proceeds 
on the decompression.

PMID: 16599697  [PubMed]


323. Endocrinology. 2006 Jul;147(7):3285-95. Epub 2006 Mar 30.

Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 expression is induced by
17beta-estradiol in ZR-75 breast cancer cells by estrogen receptor alpha/Sp
proteins.

Higgins KJ(1), Liu S, Abdelrahim M, Yoon K, Vanderlaag K, Porter W, Metz RP, Safe
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Texas A&M University, College Station, 77843-4466,
USA.

Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 kinase insert domain receptor
(VEGFR2/KDR) is critical for angiogenesis, and VEGFR2 mRNA and protein are
expressed in ZR-75 breast cancer cells and induced by 17beta-estradiol (E2).
Deletion analysis of the VEGFR2 promoter indicates that the proximal GC-rich
region is required for both basal and hormone-induced transactivation, and
mutation of one or both of the GC-rich motifs at -58 and -44 results in loss of
transactivation. Electrophoretic mobility shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays show that Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 proteins bind the GC-rich region of the VEGFR2
promoter. Results of the chromatin immunoprecipitation assay also demonstrate
that ERalpha is constitutively bound to the VEGFR2 promoter and that these
interactions are not enhanced after treatment with E2, whereas ERalpha binding to
the region of the pS2 promoter containing an estrogen-responsive element is
enhanced by E2. RNA interference studies show that hormone-induced activation of 
the VEGFR2 promoter constructs requires Sp3 and Sp4 but not Sp1, demonstrating
that hormonal activation of VEGFR2 involves a nonclassical mechanism in which
ERalpha/Sp3 and ERalpha/Sp4 complexes activate GC-rich sites where Sp proteins
but not ERalpha bind DNA. These results show for the first time that Sp3 and Sp4 
cooperatively interact with ERalpha to activate VEGFR2 and are in contrast to
previous results showing that several hormone-responsive genes are activated by
ERalpha/Sp1 in breast cancer cell lines.

PMID: 16574784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J Magn Reson. 2006 Jul;181(1):1-8. Epub 2006 Mar 30.

Recoupling of chemical-shift anisotropy powder patterns in MAS NMR.

Orr RM(1), Duer MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Lensfield Road, Cambridge
CB2 1EW, UK.

A comparison of three different implementations of the chemical-shift recoupling 
experiment of Tycko et al. [R. Tycko, G. Dabbagh, P.A. Mirau, Determination of
chemical-shift-anisotropy lineshapes in a two-dimensional magic-angle-spinning
NMR experiment, J. Magn. Reson. 85 (1989) 265-274] is presented. The methods seek
to reduce the effects of artefacts resulting from pulse imperfections and
residual C-H dipolar coupling in organic solids. An optimised and constant time
implementation are shown to give well-defined and artefact free powder pattern
lineshapes in the indirectly observed dimension for both sp2 and sp3 carbon
sites. Experimental setup is no more demanding than for the original experiment, 
and can be implemented using standard commercial hardware.

PMID: 16574445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Gene. 2006 Jun 7;374:87-95. Epub 2006 Mar 29.

Characterization of the human EDF-1 minimal promoter: involvement of NFY and Sp1 
in the regulation of basal transcription.

Bolognese F(1), Pitarque-Martì M, Lo Cicero V, Mantovani R, Maier JA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Milan, Dipartimento di Scienze Precliniche-LITA Vialba, Via GB
Grassi 74, Milan, Italy.

Endothelial Differentiation Factor (EDF)-1 is a calmodulin binding protein
involved in the repression of endothelial cell differentiation, a crucial, late
step in angiogenesis. Its expression is cell cycle regulated, although its
transcriptional regulation is yet to be determined. To map the promoter region
and to understand its regulation, we cloned and fused 2300 bp upstream of EDF-1
translational start site to a luciferase reporter gene. After transient
transfection in HeLa cells, this fragment was shown to possess a promoter
activity. Deletion constructs of the 5' flanking region of EDF-1 lead to the
identification of the minimal promoter region which was highly homologous to the 
mouse sequence. No TATA box was detected, whereas three consensus sequences--two 
GC boxes and a CAAT box--were identified. EMSA supershift and chromatin
immunoprecipitation demonstrated that these sequences were binding sites for
Sp1/Sp3 and NFY, respectively. Deletion of Sp1/Sp3 and NF-Y consensus sequences
resulted in the total loss of EDF-1 promoter activity. Our studies indicate that 
Sp1 and NFY binding is essential for EDF-1 promoter activity.

PMID: 16567061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Org Biomol Chem. 2006 Apr 7;4(7):1206-8. Epub 2006 Feb 20.

First asymmetric synthesis of a differentially silyl-protected
tris(alkynyl)methyl methyl ether.

Convertino V(1), Manini P, Schweizer WB, Diederich F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorium für Organische Chemie, ETH-Hönggerberg, CH-8093 Zürich,
Switzerland.

For an improved synthesis of the recently described expanded octamethoxycubane
with a central C56 core, formally obtained by inserting buta-1,3-diynediyl
moieties into all C(sp3)-C(sp3) bonds of octamethoxycubane, the preparation of
the optically pure methyl ether of a differentially silyl-protected
trispropargylic alcohol was required. The key step of the preparation involved a 
diastereoselective addition of a lithium acetylide to an optically active alkynyl
ketone under Cram chelation control.

PMID: 16557305  [PubMed]


327. J Org Chem. 2006 Mar 31;71(7):2802-10.

Synthesis of marine polyacetylenes callyberynes A-C by transition-metal-catalyzed
cross-coupling reactions to sp centers.

López S(1), Fernandez-Trillo F, Midón P, Castedo L, Saa C.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Organica, Facultade de Química, Universidade de
Santiago de Compostela, 15782 Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

Efficient total syntheses of the sponge-derived hydrocarbon polyacetylenes
callyberynes A-C have been achieved using metal-catalyzed cross-coupling
reactions of highly unsaturated 1,3-diyne fragments as the key steps, namely:
Cadiot-Chodkiewicz reaction under Alami's optimized conditions (sp-sp),
sequential Sonogashira reaction of a cis,cis-divinyl dihalide (sp2-sp), and
Kumada-Corriu reaction of an unactivated alkyl iodide (sp3-sp). This last
approach constitutes the first application of a metal-catalyzed sp3-sp
Kumada-Corriu cross-coupling reaction to the synthesis of a natural product.

PMID: 16555835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Cell Res. 2006 Mar;16(3):319-22.

Functional analysis of two Sp1/Sp3 binding sites in murine Nanog gene promoter.

Wu DY(1), Yao Z.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology,
Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320 Yue Yang Road, Shanghai 200031, China.
dywu@sibs.ac.cn

Nanog gene plays a key role in maintaining pluripotency of ES cells and early
embryonic cells. A 5' flank sequence of the Nanog gene has been reported to be
regulated differentially, and two regulatory elements within the Nanog promoter, 
namely Oct-4 and Sox-2 binding sites, have been identified to regulate the
transcriptional activity of Nanog gene. In this report, we identified the role of
two putative Sp1 binding sites located in the Nanog gene 5'-flanking region in
regulation of murine Nanog gene transcription. Mutation studies showed that the
two sites were essential for the Nanog promoter activity. Gel shift and
supershift analysis showed that both sites specifically bind Sp1 and Sp3.
Furthermore, overexpression of dominant-negative Sp1 or Sp3 mutants significantly
inhibits Nanog promoter activity. These results suggest that the transcription
factor Sp1 and Sp3 are important for Murine Nanog gene expression.

PMID: 16541131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Apr;26(7):2782-90.

Acetylation of p53 at lysine 373/382 by the histone deacetylase inhibitor
depsipeptide induces expression of p21(Waf1/Cip1).

Zhao Y(1), Lu S, Wu L, Chai G, Wang H, Chen Y, Sun J, Yu Y, Zhou W, Zheng Q, Wu
M, Otterson GA, Zhu WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Peking University Health
Science Center, #38 Xueyuan Road, Beijing 100083, China.

Generally, histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor-induced p21(Waf1/Cip1) expression
is thought to be p53 independent. Here we found that an inhibitor of HDAC,
depsipeptide (FR901228), but not trichostatin A (TSA), induces p21(Waf1/Cip1)
expression through both p53 and Sp1/Sp3 pathways in A549 cells (which retain
wild-type p53). This is demonstrated by measuring relative luciferase activities 
of p21 promoter constructs with p53 or Sp1 binding site mutagenesis and was
further confirmed by transfection of wild-type p53 into H1299 cells (p53 null).
That p53 was acetylated after depsipeptide treatment was tested by sequential
immunoprecipitation/Western immunoblot analysis with anti-acetylated lysines and 
anti-p53 antibodies. The acetylated p53 has a longer half-life due to a
significant decrease in p53 ubiquitination. Further study using site-specific
antiacetyllysine antibodies and transfection of mutated p53 vectors
(K319/K320/K321R mutated and K373R/K382R mutations) into H1299 cells revealed
that depsipeptide specifically induces p53 acetylation at K373/K382, but not at
K320. As assayed by coimmunoprecipitation, the K373/K382 acetylation is
accompanied by a recruitment of p300, but neither CREB-binding protein (CBP) nor 
p300/CBP-associated factor (PCAF), to the p53 C terminus. Furthermore, activity
associated with the binding of the acetylated p53 at K373/K382 to the p21
promoter as well as p21(Waf1/Cip1) expression is significantly increased after
depsipeptide treatment, as tested by chromatin immunoprecipitations and Western
blotting, respectively. In addition, p53 acetylation at K373/K382 is confirmed to
be required for recruitment of p300 to the p21 promoter, and the
depsipeptide-induced p53 acetylation at K373/K382 is unlikely to be dependent on 
p53 phosphorylation at Ser15, Ser20, and Ser392 sites. Our data suggest that p53 
acetylation at K373/K382 plays an important role in depsipeptide-induced
p21(Waf1/Cip1) expression.

PMCID: PMC1430330
PMID: 16537920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Biol Chem. 2006 May 12;281(19):13548-58. Epub 2006 Mar 13.

Histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3) and other class I HDACs regulate colon cell
maturation and p21 expression and are deregulated in human colon cancer.

Wilson AJ(1), Byun DS, Popova N, Murray LB, L'Italien K, Sowa Y, Arango D,
Velcich A, Augenlicht LH, Mariadason JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Albert Einstein Cancer Center, Montefiore Medical
Center, Bronx, New York 10467, USA.

Inhibitors of histone deacetylases (HDACs) induce growth arrest, differentiation,
and apoptosis of colon cancer cell lines in vitro and have demonstrated
anti-cancer efficacy in clinical trials. Whereas a role for HDAC1 and -2 in
mediating components of the HDAC inhibitor response has been reported, the role
of HDAC3 is unknown. Here we demonstrate increased protein expression of HDAC3 in
human colon tumors and in duodenal adenomas from Apc1638(N/+) mice. HDAC3 was
also maximally expressed in proliferating crypt cells in normal intestine.
Silencing of HDAC3 expression in colon cancer cell lines resulted in growth
inhibition, a decrease in cell survival, and increased apoptosis. Similar effects
were observed for HDAC2 and, to a lesser extent, for HDAC1. HDAC3 silencing also 
selectively induced expression of alkaline phosphatase, a marker of colon cell
maturation. Concurrent with its effect on cell growth, overexpression of HDAC3
and other Class I HDACs inhibited basal and butyrate-induced p21 transcription in
a Sp1/Sp3-dependent manner, whereas silencing of HDAC3 stimulated p21 promoter
activity and expression. However, the magnitude of the effects elicited by
silencing of individual Class I HDACs was significantly less than that induced by
HDAC inhibitors. These findings identify HDAC3 as a gene deregulated in human
colon cancer and as a novel regulator of colon cell maturation and p21
expression. These findings also demonstrate that multiple Class I HDACs are
involved in repressing p21 and suggest that the growth-inhibitory and apoptotic
effects induced by HDAC inhibitors are probably mediated through the inhibition
of multiple HDACs.

PMID: 16533812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. BMC Mol Biol. 2006 Mar 10;7:10.

Sp1/3 and NF-1 mediate basal transcription of the human P2X1 gene in
megakaryoblastic MEG-01 cells.

Zhao J(1), Ennion SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Leicester, PO
Box 138, Leicester, UK. jz27@le.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: P2X1 receptors play an important role in platelet function as they
can induce shape change, granule centralization and are also involved in thrombus
formation. As platelets have no nuclei, the level of P2X1 expression depends on
transcriptional regulation in megakaryocytes, the platelet precursor cell. Since 
nothing is known about the molecular mechanisms regulating megakaryocytic P2X1
expression, this study aimed to identify and functionally characterize the P2X1
core promoter utilized in the human megakaryoblastic cell line MEG-01.
RESULTS: In order to identify cis-acting elements involved in the transcriptional
regulation of P2X1 expression, the ability of 4.7 kb P2X1 upstream sequence to
drive luciferase reporter gene expression was tested. Low promoter activity was
detected in proliferating MEG-01 cells. This activity increased 20-fold after
phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA) induced differentiation. A transcription
start site was detected 365 bp upstream of the start codon by primer extension.
Deletion analysis of reporter constructs indicated a core promoter located within
the region -68 to +149 bp that contained two Sp1 sites (named Sp1a and Sp1b) and 
an NF-1 site. Individual mutations of Sp1b or NF-1 binding sites severely reduced
promoter activity whereas triple mutation of Sp1a, Sp1b and NF-1 sites completely
abolished promoter activity in both untreated and PMA treated cells. Sp1/3 and
NF-1 proteins were shown to bind their respective sites by EMSA and interaction
of Sp1/3, NF-1 and TFIIB with the endogenous P2X1 core promoter in MEG-01 cells
was demonstrated by chromatin immunoprecipitation. Alignment of P2X1 genes from
human, chimp, rat, mouse and dog revealed consensus Sp1a, Sp1b and NF-1 binding
sites in equivalent positions thereby demonstrating evolutionary conservation of 
these functionally important sites.
CONCLUSION: This study has identified and characterized the P2X1 promoter
utilized in MEG-01 cells and shown that binding of Sp1/3 and NF-1 to elements in 
the direct vicinity of the transcription start site is essential for basal
transcription. Targeting the function of these transcription factors in
megakaryocytes may therefore provide a basis for the future therapeutic
manipulation of platelet P2X1 function.

PMCID: PMC1464135
PMID: 16529657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2006 Mar 27;45(14):2289-92.

Annulative tandem reactions based on Pd0/tBu3P-catalyzed cross-coupling and
C(sp3)-H bond activation.

Dong CG(1), Hu QS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, College of Staten Island and Graduate Center of the
City University of New York, Staten Island, NY 10314, USA.

PMID: 16518774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Mar 8;128(9):3102.

Oxidative C-arylation of free (NH)-heterocycles via direct sp3 C-H bond
functionalization [J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2004, 126, 13244-13246].

Sezen B, Sames D.

Retraction of
    Sezen B, Sames D. J Am Chem Soc. 2004 Oct 20;126(41):13244-6.

PMID: 16506793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Mar 8;128(9):3102.

Selective and catalytic arylation of N-phenylpyrrolidine: (sp3) C-H bond
functionalization in the absence of a directing group [J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2005,
127, 5284-5285].

Sezen B, Sames D.

Retraction of
    Sezen B, Sames D. J Am Chem Soc. 2005 Apr 20;127(15):5284-5.

PMID: 16506792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Org Chem. 2006 Mar 3;71(5):2037-45.

Intramolecular electron transfer in the photochemistry of some
nitrophenyldihydropyridines.

Fasani E(1), Fagnoni M, Dondi D, Albini A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organic Chemistry, University of Pavia, v. Taramelli 10, 27100
Pavia, Italy.

4-Phenyl-1,4-dihydropyridine-3,5-dicarboxylates contain two pi chromophores
separated by an sp3 carbon. The lowest singlet is localized on the
dihydropyridine moiety (1PyH2-Ph) and emits a blue fluorescence (with close to
unitary efficiency in glass at 77 K). In 3-nitrophenyl derivatives (PyH2-PhNO2,
some of which are photolabile drugs) the fluorescence is completely quenched.
Reasonably, this is due to intramolecular electron transfer between the
close-lying donor and acceptor moieties to give the charge-separated species
(PyH2*+-PhNO2*-). In EPA glass at 77 K, back-electron transfer gives the
dihydropyridine-localized triplet (3PyH2-PhNO2), which emits a yellow
phosphorescence. In solution, deprotonation from the radical cation on the
dihydropyridine moiety initiates rearomatization, finally giving Py-PhNO2 with
low quantum yield (5 x 10(-4) to 5 x 10(-3), increasing up to 0.013 by
irradiation at 254 nm, where direct excitation of the nitrophenyl chromophore
contributes). In the presence of triethylamine, the reaction changes to neat
reduction of the nitro group. When a tethered alkylamino group is present,
oxidative degradation of that moiety occurs, again via an electron-transfer
intramolecular process. This has been found with the drug nicardipine, where
photodegration is more efficient (phi 0.02 to 0.1). Donor-acceptor dyads of this 
type, easily available through the Hantzsch synthesis, may be useful for building
new photoinduced electron-transfer systems.

PMID: 16496991  [PubMed]


336. J Virol Methods. 2006 Jul;135(1):1-8. Epub 2006 Feb 21.

Application of the PCR-RFLP method for the rapid differentiation of Spodoptera
exigua nucleopolyhedrovirus genotypes.

Murillo R(1), Muñoz D, Williams T, Mugeta N, Caballero P.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Producción Agraria, Universidad Pública de Navarra, Pamplona
31006, Spain.

Quality control during mass production of Spodoptera exigua multiple
nucleopolyhedrovirus (SeMNPV), and studies on environmental fate following the
use of this virus as a biological pesticide, would be facilitated by a rapid
method for the detection and identification of isolates. A molecular biology tool
was developed that combined the polymerase chain reaction and restriction
fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) to differentiate SeMNPV isolates.
Oligonucleotide primers were designed to amplify five variable SeMNPV genomic
regions (V01, V02, V03, V04, V05). Four wild-type SeMNPV strains isolated from
the United States (US2) and Spain (SP1, SP2, and SP3), and a laboratory cloned
genotype (US1A), were analyzed with 36 different primer-endonuclease
combinations. BglII digestion of the variable region 1 (V01) amplicon was the
only combination that differentiated each of the five virus isolates tested,
although genetic heterogeneity limited the discriminatory power of the technique.
Six novel SeMNPV isolates originating from greenhouse soils in southern Spain
were successfully identified using this method. As judged by sequence analysis,
the V01 region, which comprises the homologous region 1 (hr1), is the most
variable genomic region among the genotypes present in the Spanish isolates. This
method constitutes a useful tool for processing large number of environmental
samples and could be used to address environmental biosafety concerns.

PMID: 16494953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. J Phys Chem A. 2006 Mar 2;110(8):2607-12.

Role of excited state intramolecular charge transfer in the photophysical
properties of norfloxacin and its derivatives.

Cuquerella MC(1), Miranda MA, Bosca F.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Tecnología Química UPV-CSIC/Departamento de Química, Universidad 
Politécnica de Valencia, Avenida de los Naranjos s/n, 46022-Valencia, Spain.

The photophysical properties of
1-ethyl-6-fluoro-7-(1-piperazinyl)-1,4-dihydro-4-oxoquinoline-3-carboxylic acid
(norfloxacin, NFX) and some of its derivatives have been studied to evaluate the 
role of the free carboxylic acid and the nonprotonated piperazinyl group in the
behavior of the 1,4-dihydro-4-oxoquinoline ring. Steady state and time-resolved
fluorescence measurements at different pHs provide clear evidence in favor of
singlet excited-state deactivation of NFX and its N(4')-methyl derivative
pefloxacin (PFX) via intramolecular electron transfer from the N(4') atom of the 
piperazinyl ring to the fluoroquinolone (FQ) main system. This is a very
efficient, energy-wasting pathway, which becomes dramatically enhanced in basic
media. Acetylation at N(4') (as in ANFX) decreases the availability of the lone
pair, making observable its fluorescence and the transient absorption spectrum of
its triplet excited state even at high pH. It also reveals that the geometry of
FQs changes from an almost sp3 hybridization of the N(1') of the piperazinyl
substituent in the ground state to nearly sp2 in the singlet excited state
(rehybridization accompanied by intramolecular charge transfer, RICT);
accordingly, the singlet energy of ANFX is significantly lower than that of NFX
and PFX. The fluorescence measurements using acetonitrile as a polar nonprotic
organic solvent further support deactivation of the singlet excited state of
nonacetylated NFX derivatives via intramolecular electron transfer from the N(4')
atom.

PMID: 16494369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Cell Sci. 2006 Mar 15;119(Pt 6):1063-70. Epub 2006 Feb 21.

Sp1 and Sp3 foci distribution throughout mitosis.

He S(1), Davie JR.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, R3E 0V9, Canada.

The mammalian transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 compete for the same DNA binding 
sites but play different roles in the regulation of expression of numerous genes.
It is known that, in the interphase nucleus, Sp1 and Sp3 are organized into
distinct foci. In this study, we show that throughout the mitotic process, while 
being displaced from the condensed chromosomes and dispersed throughout the cell,
Sp1 and Sp3 maintain their separate punctate distributions. In metaphase, both
Sp1 and Sp3 foci show a high degree of colocalization with microfilaments,
suggesting that F-actin is involved in the organization of Sp1 and Sp3 foci
during mitosis. Constant Sp1 and Sp3 levels were observed during mitosis,
signifying a recovery of the pre-existing Sp1 and Sp3 population in newly formed 
nuclei. In late telophase, Sp1 and Sp3 are equally segregated between daughter
cells, and their subnuclear organization as distinct foci is restored in a
sequential fashion with Sp3 regrouping into the newly formed nuclei prior to Sp1.
Both Sp1 and Sp3 return to the nuclei ahead of RNA polymerase II. Our results
support a model in which entry of Sp1, Sp3 and RNA polymerase II into the newly
formed nuclei is an ordered process.

PMID: 16492704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2006 Mar 3;45(11):1683-4.

A catalytic approach for the functionalization of C(sp3)-H bonds.

Tobisu M(1), Chatani N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Chemisry, Osaka University, Suita, Japan.

PMID: 16491504  [PubMed]


340. Phys Rev Lett. 2005 Dec 31;95(26):267801. Epub 2005 Dec 23.

Temperature-induced density anomaly in Te-Rich liquid germanium tellurides: p
versus sp3 bonding?

Bichara C(1), Johnson M, Raty JY.

Author information: 
(1)CRMCN-CNRS and Aix-Marseille Universities, Campus de Luminy, France.

The density anomaly of liquid Ge(0.15)Te(0.85) measured between 633 and 733 K is 
investigated with ab initio molecular dynamics calculations at four temperatures 
and at the corresponding experimental densities. For box sizes ranging from 56 to
112 atoms, an 8 k-points sampling of the Brillouin zone is necessary to obtain
reliable results. Contrary to other Ge chalcogenides, no sp(3) hybridization of
the Ge bonding is observed. As a consequence, the negative thermal expansion of
the liquid is not related to a tetrahedral bonding as in the case of water or
silica. We show that it results from the symmetry recovery of the local
environment of Ge atoms that is distorted at low temperature by a Peierls-like
mechanism acting in the liquid state in the same way as in the parent solid
phases.

PMID: 16486408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. J Phys Chem B. 2006 Jan 19;110(2):743-7.

Solid-state NMR study of Na versus K doping of para-phenylene oligomers.

Paris M(1), Péres LO, Chauvet O, Froyer G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut des Matériaux Jean Rouxel, UMR CNRS 6502, 2 Rue de la Houssinière, BP
32229, 44322 NANTES Cedex 03, France. Michael.Paris@cnrs-imn.fr

13C solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) experiments were performed on
p-terphenyl, p-quaterphenyl, and p-sexiphenyl either in their pristine or doped
with alkali metals form. The 13C NMR spectra of doped materials show new
resonances by comparison with pristine compounds. For the K-doped materials,
these resonances appear in the 90-135 ppm range, while for Na-doped materials,
they are observed in the larger 20-150 ppm range. It suggests that the
interaction between the alkali ions and the oligomers depends on the nature of
the alkali. It is corroborated by 13C NMR experiments after exposure to air that 
show different behaviors. As expected, air exposure of K-doped samples restores
the pristine spectra. This is not the case for Na doping, where the signature of 
the doped material persists even after exposure to air. In the latter case, some 
13C resonances can be assigned to sp3 hybridized carbons and to the quinoid
group. It suggests that Na doping induces a polymerization of the
oligophenylenes.

PMID: 16471597  [PubMed]


342. Mol Biol Cell. 2006 Apr;17(4):1711-22. Epub 2006 Feb 8.

Sp2 localizes to subnuclear foci associated with the nuclear matrix.

Moorefield KS(1), Yin H, Nichols TD, Cathcart C, Simmons SO, Horowitz JM.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Genomic Sciences, Center for Comparative Medicine and
Translational Research, College of Veterinary Medicine, North Carolina State
University, Raleigh, NC 27606, USA.

We have reported that extracts prepared from many human and mouse cell lines show
little or no Sp2 DNA-binding activity and that Sp2 has little or no capacity to
stimulate transcription of promoters that are activated by Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4.
Using an array of chimeric Sp1/Sp2 proteins we showed further that Sp2
DNA-binding activity and trans-activation are each negatively regulated in
mammalian cells. As part of an ongoing effort to study Sp2 function and
regulation we characterized its subcellular localization in comparison with other
Sp-family members in fixed and live cells. We report that 1) Sp2 localizes
largely within subnuclear foci associated with the nuclear matrix, and 2) these
foci are distinct from promyelocytic oncogenic domains and appear to be stable
during an 18-h time course of observation. Deletion analyses identified a 37
amino acid sequence spanning the first zinc-"finger" that is sufficient to direct
nuclear matrix association, and this region also encodes a bipartite nuclear
localization sequence. A second nuclear matrix targeting sequence is encoded
within the Sp2 trans-activation domain. We conclude that Sp2 preferentially
associates with the nuclear matrix and speculate that this subcellular
localization plays an important role in the regulation of Sp2 function.

PMCID: PMC1415311
PMID: 16467376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Biochem J. 2006 Jun 1;396(2):327-36.

Transcriptional stimulation of the human NHE3 promoter activity by PMA: PKC
independence and involvement of the transcription factor EGR-1.

Malakooti J(1), Sandoval R, Amin MR, Clark J, Dudeja PK, Ramaswamy K.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Digestive and Liver Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of
Illinois at Chicago, 840 South Wood Street, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.
malakoot@uic.edu

NHE3 (Na+/H+ exchanger 3) is essential for Na+ absorption in the ileum and is
expressed in a cell-specific manner in the apical membrane of the intestinal
epithelial cells. In the present study, we report the stimulatory effect of PMA
on the hNHE3 (human NHE3) transcription. Pretreatment with actinomycin D or
cycloheximide blocked the up-regulation of the NHE3 mRNA by PMA, indicating that 
the increased level of NHE3 mRNA expression is regulated by transcriptional
activation and is dependent on de novo protein synthesis. 5'-Deletion of the
promoter region and transfection analysis in C2BBe1 cells revealed that the PMA
effect is mediated through a GC-rich DNA region between nt -88 and -69. Gel
mobility-shift assays demonstrated that in nuclear extracts from C2BBe1 cells
grown under the basal growth conditions, Sp1 (stimulating protein-1) and Sp3
interact with this GC-rich DNA region, while, in PMA-treated nuclear extracts,
PMA-induced EGR-1 (early growth response gene product 1) transcription factor
binds to the same site. Binding of EGR-1 diminished the Sp1 and Sp3 interactions 
with this promoter region significantly. Co-transfection of Sp1 or Sp3 into SL2
cells activated the NHE3-reporter constructs, suggesting that Sp1 and Sp3 act as 
positive regulators of the NHE3 expression. In addition, overexpression of EGR-1 
was sufficient to transactivate the NHE3-reporter gene activity, and knockdown of
EGR-1 with gene-specific small interfering RNA resulted in inhibition of the
PMA-induced up-regulation of the endogenous NHE3 mRNA expression. Furthermore,
the PKC (protein kinase C) inhibitor chelerythrine chloride did not affect
PMA-induced NHE3 promoter activity, suggesting that PMA stimulation of the hNHE3 
gene expression may be PKC-independent.

PMCID: PMC1462713
PMID: 16464174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Eur J Oral Sci. 2006 Feb;114(1):93-5.

Immunohistochemical localization of transcription factor Sp3 during dental enamel
development in rat tooth germ.

Lv P(1), Jia HT, Gao XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cariology and Endodontology, Peking University, School of
Stomatology, Haidan, Beijing 100081, China.

Sp3, a member of the Sp family of transcription factors, has previously been
thought to be ubiquitously expressed, and its expression pattern in tooth
development is not clear. This study was carried out to investigate the
immunolocalization of Sp3 during the development of rat tooth germs.
Sprague-Dawley rats at ages of 1, 3, 7, 10, and 14 d were used to represent
different stages of tooth development. First mandibular molar tooth germs were
sectioned and studied by immunohistochemistry. Sp3 was found to be localized
within the nuclei of cells in developing tooth germs; however, ameloblast nuclei 
showed variable intensities at different developmental stages. At the same time, 
the positive signals in odontoblast nuclei remained stable. The results suggest
that Sp3 may play a role in the development of teeth, specifically in the
transcription of enamel-specific genes.

PMID: 16460348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2006 Feb;42(2):134-41.

Sodium butyrate-mediated Sp3 acetylation represses human insulin-like growth
factor binding protein-3 expression in intestinal epithelial cells.

White NR(1), Mulligan P, King PJ, Sanderson IR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Adult and Paediatric Gastroenterology, Institute of Cell and
Molecular Science, Barts and The London, Queen Mary School of Medicine and
Dentistry, University of London, London E1 2AD, United Kingdom.

OBJECTIVES: Butyrate concentrations in the gastrointestinal tract vary greatly
with age. In intestinal epithelial cells, butyrate enhances gene transcription by
increasing histone acetylation, rendering the nucleosome open to transcription
factors. However, it inhibits human insulin-like growth factor binding protein
(hIGFBP)-3 expression. We therefore hypothesized that butyrate also acts by
regulating transcription factor acetylation.
METHODS: Gene regulation was examined in Caco-2 cells. RNA stability was measured
after interruption of transcription. The activity of deletion mutations of the
hIGFBP-3 promoter was examined in reporter assays. Transcription factor binding
to promoter DNA was analyzed.
RESULTS: Butyrate did not increase the transcription of a repressor because it
inhibited hIGFBP-3 mRNA in the absence of protein synthesis. Nor did butyrate
decrease the stability of hIGFBP-3 mRNA. Analysis of the hIGFBP-3 promoter
demonstrated a butyrate-response element that included the binding sites for p300
and Sp1/Sp3. Transfection of Caco-2 cells with E1A, an inhibitor of p300
acetyltransferase activity, reversed the butyrate-induced repression of hIGFBP-3.
Because Sp3 represses the initiation of transcription, we studied whether
butyrate induced Sp3 acetylation. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays of nuclei
extracted from Caco-2 cells treated with 5 mmol/L butyrate demonstrated an extra,
heavier band in addition to the Sp3-DNA binding in untreated cells. This
corresponded to a protein, detected only in butyrate treated cells, that was
identified both by an anti-Sp3 antibody and by an anti-acetyl lysine antibody.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that butyrate increases the acetylation of a
nonhistone protein, Sp3, catalyzed by p300 acetyltransferase activity.

PMID: 16456404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Rev Med Brux. 2005;26 Spec no:Sp3-4.

[Editorial and homage to Pr. P. Fondu].

[Article in French]

Casimir G.

PMID: 16454225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Cancer Res. 2006 Feb 1;66(3):1363-70.

Transcriptional repression of telomerase RNA gene expression by c-Jun-NH2-kinase 
and Sp1/Sp3.

Bilsland AE(1), Stevenson K, Atkinson S, Kolch W, Keith WN.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Oncology and Applied Pharmacology, University of Glasgow, Scotland,
UK.

Telomerase is essential for immortalization of most human cancer cells.
Expression of the core telomerase RNA (hTR) and reverse transcriptase (hTERT)
subunits is mainly regulated by transcription. However, hTR transcriptional
regulation remains poorly understood. We previously showed that the core hTR
promoter is activated by Sp1 and is repressed by Sp3. Here, we show that the
mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase 1 (MEKK1)/c-Jun-NH(2)-kinase (JNK)
pathway represses hTR expression by a mechanism that involves Sp1 and Sp3.
Promoter activity was induced by the JNK inhibitor SP600125 and was repressed by 
activated MEKK1. Repression by MEKK1 was blocked by SP600125 or enhanced by
coexpression of wild-type but not phosphoacceptor mutated JNK. SP600125 treatment
also increased levels of endogenous hTR. Mutations in the hTR promoter Sp1/Sp3
binding sites attenuated SP600125-mediated promoter induction, whereas
coexpression of MEKK1 with Sp3 enhanced hTR promoter repression. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation showed that levels of immunoreactive Sp1 associated with the 
hTR promoter were low in comparison with Sp3 in control cells but increased after
JNK inhibition with a reciprocal decrease in Sp3 levels. No corresponding changes
in Sp1/Sp3 protein levels were detected. Thus, JNK represses hTR promoter
activity and expression, apparently by enhancing repression through Sp3.

PMID: 16452190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Chem Commun (Camb). 2006 Feb 7;(5):549-51. Epub 2005 Dec 15.

Mechanistic studies of an unusual epoxide-forming elimination of a
beta-hydroxyalkyl rhodium porphyrin.

Han YZ(1), Sanford MS, England MD, Groves JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA.

A new and remarkably facile sp3-C-O bond forming reaction of beta-hydroxyalkyl Rh
porphyrins to form epoxides has been discovered and its mechanism investigated.

PMID: 16432579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. J Chem Phys. 2006 Jan 14;124(2):024711.

Surface reconstructions and stability of X-shaped carbon nanotube junction.

Meng FY(1), Shi SQ, Xu DS, Chan CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong
Kong, China. mmfymeng@polyu.edu.hk

A complete surface reconstruction takes place after a local connection between
two crossed tubes is established, leading to the creation of an extended X-shaped
junction constituted by topological defects with smooth negative curvature.
Molecular-dynamics simulations show that the surface reconstructions occur
through (1) generalized Stone-Wales transformation and (2) the movement of sp and
sp3 atoms and their transformation to sp2 atoms by bond rearrangement. Based on
both the principle of energy minimization and a generalized Euler's rule, it is
demonstrated that the most stable structure for X junctions contains only 12
heptagons. The annealing temperature influences the topological structure and
stability of junctions.

PMID: 16422630  [PubMed]


350. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2006 Apr;34(4):387-93. Epub 2006 Jan 13.

Endogenous S-nitrosoglutathione modifies 5-lipoxygenase expression in airway
epithelial cells.

Zaman K(1), Hanigan MH, Smith A, Vaughan J, Macdonald T, Jones DR, Hunt JF,
Gaston B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Virginia Health System, P.O. Box
800386, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

S-Nitrosoglutathione (GSNO) is an endogenous bronchodilator with several
beneficial pulmonary effects. Levels are decreased in the asthmatic airway, and
GSNO inhalation has been proposed as an asthma therapy. 5-lipoxygenase (5-LO) is 
the rate-limiting enzyme in the synthetic pathway for cysteinyl leukotrienes
(CysLTs), bronchoconstricting agents that are overproduced in asthma. Here, we
have studied the effect of GSNO on the expression of 5-LO in human airway A549
cell lines and in primary normal human tracheobronchial epithelial (NHBE) cells
in vitro. GSNO at concentrations of 0.5-1 microM caused a 3- to 6-fold increase
in 5-LO expression. However, GSNO at>5 microM significantly inhibited both 5-LO
expression and LT production. We also found that airway epithelial cells had
gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (gamma-GT) activity. The effect of 1 microM GSNO on
5-LO expression was prevented by the gamma-GT inhibitor, acivicin, suggesting a
convergence of GSNO and CysLT metabolic pathway that may be relevant to asthma.
Our data demonstrate that GSNO levels<or=1 microM, likely recapitulating those in
the asthmatic airway, increase 5-LO expression, an effect that may increase
inflammation and bronchoconstriction. However, GSNO at concentrations>5microM
suppresses 5-LO expression. These data suggest that GSNO might inhibit 5-LO
expression in the clinical setting.

PMCID: PMC2644202
PMID: 16415251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Cell. 2006 Jan 27;124(2):275-86. Epub 2006 Jan 12.

Methylglyoxal modification of mSin3A links glycolysis to angiopoietin-2
transcription.

Yao D(1), Taguchi T, Matsumura T, Pestell R, Edelstein D, Giardino I, Suske G,
Ahmed N, Thornalley PJ, Sarthy VP, Hammes HP, Brownlee M.

Author information: 
(1)JDRF International Center for Diabetic Complications Research, Albert Einstein
College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Retraction in
    Yao D, Taguchi T, Matsumura T, Pestell R, Edelstein D, Giardino I, Suske G, Ahmed
N, Thornalley PJ, Sarthy VP, Hammes HP, Brownlee M. Cell. 2007 Feb 9;128(3):625.

Comment in
    Cell. 2006 Jan 27;124(2):258-60.

Methylglyoxal is a highly reactive dicarbonyl degradation product formed from
triose phosphates during glycolysis. Methylglyoxal forms stable adducts primarily
with arginine residues of intracellular proteins. The biologic role of this
covalent modification in regulating cell function is not known. Here, we report
that in retinal Müller cells, increased glycolytic flux causes increased
methylglyoxal modification of the corepressor mSin3A. Methylglyoxal modification 
of mSin3A results in increased recruitment of O-GlcNAc transferase to an
mSin3A-Sp3 complex, with consequent increased modification of Sp3 by O-linked
N-acetylglucosamine. This modification of Sp3 causes decreased binding of the
repressor complex to a glucose-responsive GC box in the angiopoietin-2 promoter, 
resulting in increased Ang-2 expression. A similar mechanism involving
methylglyoxal-modification of other coregulator proteins may play a role in the
pathobiology of a variety of conditions associated with changes in methylglyoxal 
concentration, including cancer and diabetic vascular disease.

PMID: 16413606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2005 Dec 30;1738(1-3):37-47. Epub 2005 Dec 27.

GC-rich sequences in the 5-lipoxygenase gene promoter are required for expression
in Mono Mac 6 cells, characterization of a novel Sp1 binding site.

Dishart D(1), Schnur N, Klan N, Werz O, Steinhilber D, Samuelsson B, Rådmark O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Division of Physiological
Chemistry II Karolinska Institutet, S-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

5-lipoxygenase (5LO) catalyzes formation of leukotrienes, mediators with roles in
several inflammatory disorders, including atherosclerosis. The human 5LO gene
promoter contain multiple GC-boxes. The relevance of these for expression of 5LO 
in the human monocytic cell line Mono Mac 6 (MM6) was studied. A downregulating
effect of the GC-box binding compound mithramycin indicated that GC-rich
sequences in the 5LO gene promoter are important for expression of native 5LO. In
DNase I footprinting, mithramycin and Sp1 protected known GC-boxes, but also a
novel Sp1 binding site was found, comprising 20 bp upstream of the major
transcription initiation site, beside an Initiator-like sequence. Mutation of
this site reduced Sp1 binding and expression of reporter genes in MM6 cells,
compatible with a function as basal promoter element for the TATA-less 5LO gene. 
When differentiation was induced by TGFbeta and vitamin D(3), 5LO expression
became prominent, but expression levels of Sp1/3 and Egr-1 were the same as for
control cells. Also, 5LO reporter gene activity in transiently transfected MM6
cells was insensitive to differentiation. Thus, the GC-rich part of the 5LO gene 
promoter, including a novel Sp1 site, appear important for basal (rather than
upregulated) transcription of 5LO in MM6 cells.

PMID: 16413224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Jun;290(6):E1287-95. Epub 2006 Jan 10.

Sp1/Sp3 binding is associated with cell-specific expression of the
glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide receptor gene.

Boylan MO(1), Jepeal LI, Wolfe MM.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Gastroenterology, Boston Medical Center, 650 Albany St., Boston, MA
02118, USA.

The physiological effects of glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP)
are mediated through specific receptors expressed on target cells. Because
aberrant GIP receptor (GIPR) expression has been implicated in abnormal GIP
responses associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus and food-induced Cushing's
syndrome, we sought to identify factors that regulate the GIPR. We previously
demonstrated that sequences between -1 and -100 of the GIPR gene were sufficient 
to direct transcription in a rat insulinoma cell line (RIN38). In the present
study, we compared the 5'-flanking regions of the rat and human GIPR gene and
demonstrated 88% identity within the first 92 bp. Subsequent serial deletion
analyses showed that the region between -85 and -40 is essential for maximal
promoter activity. Within this region, we identified three putative Sp1 binding
motifs, located at positions -77, -60, and -50, that can specifically bind both
Sp1 and Sp3. Whereas mutation of the Sp1 sites at -50 and -60 led to 36 and 40%
reduction in promoter activity, respectively, mutation of the Sp1 motif at -70
did not affect promoter activity. Cotransfection of S2 Schneider cells with
GIPR-luciferase chimeric constructs and either Sp1 or Sp3 expression vectors
indicated that both Sp1 and the long form of Sp3 activate transcription through
binding to the Sp1 sites located between -100 and -40. Lastly, chromatin
immunoprecipitation analyses revealed that both Sp1 and Sp3 bind to the GIPR
promoter region in RIN38 cells. These results indicate that cell-specific
expression of GIPR is associated with the binding of the transcription factors
Sp1 and Sp3 to the GIPR promoter.

PMID: 16403775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Biochemistry. 2006 Jan 17;45(2):571-80.

Mechanistic analysis of the unusual redox-elimination sequence employed by
Thermotoga maritima BglT: a 6-phospho-beta-glucosidase from glycoside hydrolase
family 4.

Yip VL(1), Withers SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada V6T 1Z1.

"Classical" glycosidases utilize either direct or double-displacement mechanisms 
involving oxocarbenium ion-like transition states to catalyze the hydrolysis of
glycosidic bonds. By contrast, the mechanism of the glycosidases in glycoside
hydrolase family 4 has been recently proposed to involve NAD+-mediated redox
steps along with alpha,beta-elimination and addition steps via anionic
intermediates. Support for this mechanism in BglT, a 6-phospho-beta-glucosidase
in family 4, has been provided through mechanistic and X-ray crystallographic
analyses [Yip, V. L.Y., et al. (2004) J. Am. Chem. Soc. 126, 8354-8355] in which 
primary deuterium kinetic isotope effects for the hydride abstraction at C3 and
for the alpha-proton abstraction at C2 indicate that these two steps are both
partially rate-limiting. Current data reveal that there is no secondary deuterium
kinetic isotope effect associated with the rehybridization of the C1 sp3 center
to a sp2 center. Furthermore, a flat linear free energy relationship was
established with a series of aryl 6-phospho-beta-D-glucosides of varying leaving 
group abilities. Taken together, these data indicate that cleavage of the C1-O1
linkage does not occur during a rate-limiting step. Since the deprotonation at C2
is slow and partially rate-limiting while the departure of the leaving group is
not, a stepwise E1(cb)-type mechanism rather than an E1 or a concerted E2-syn
mechanism is proposed. Direct evidence for the role of NAD+ was obtained by
reduction in situ using NaBH4 leading to an inactive enzyme that could be
reactivated by the addition of excess NAD+. This was accompanied by the expected 
UV-vis spectrophotometric changes.

PMID: 16401086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Biol Pharm Bull. 2006 Jan;29(1):49-54.

Transcriptional regulation of the hypoxia inducible factor-2alpha (HIF-2alpha)
gene during adipose differentiation in 3T3-L1 cells.

Wada T(1), Shimba S, Tezuka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Science, College of Pharmacy, Nihon University, Chiba,
Japan.

Adipose differentiation is regulated by coordination of several signaling
pathways and transcription factors. We recently showed that Hypoxia inducible
factor-2alpha (HIF-2alpha) plays several supporting roles in adipose
differentiation and adipocytes functions including regulation of glucose uptake
followed by lipid synthesis. HIF-2alpha expression is increased during
adipogenesis, indicating that its up-regulation is necessary for execution of
adipogenesis and maintenance of mature adipocytes functions. Therefore, in this
study, to understand the mechanism by which HIF-2alpha expression is induced
during adipogenesis, we investigated the promoter activity of HIF-2alpha gene
during adipogenesis in 3T3-L1 cells. A comparison of HIF-2alpha promoter activity
between preadipocytes and adipocytes revealed that the sequence -478/-445 is the 
putative core element that contributes to differentiation-dependent up-regulation
of HIF-2alpha promoter activity. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed the
presence of the specific nuclear factor bound to the sequence -478/-445 in both
preadipocytes and adipocytes. Computer analysis revealed that this element
contains several Sp1/Sp3 binding sites. Indeed, the presence of Sp1/Sp3 consensus
oligonucleotides diminished the formation of the complexes composed of the
sequence -478/-445 and the nuclear factor. Furthermore, specific retarded bands
were supershifted with anti-Sp1 or -Sp3 antibodies. Binding of Sp1 and Sp3 to
this element was also confirmed by chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis. The
element encompassing -478/-445 favors Sp3 in preadipocytes and Sp1 in adipocytes.
Finally, the activity of -478/-445 was increased by Sp1 but decreased by Sp3.
Consequently, these results suggest that Sp1 and Sp3 are involved in
transcriptional regulation of HIF-2alpha expression during adipogenesis in 3T3-L1
cells.

PMID: 16394508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Jan 11;128(1):78-9.

Palladium-catalyzed alkylation of aryl C-H bonds with sp3 organotin reagents
using benzoquinone as a crucial promoter.

Chen X(1), Li JJ, Hao XS, Goodhue CE, Yu JQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry MS015, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA 02454-9110,
USA.

The combination of directed C-H activation, batch-wise addition of tetraalkyltin 
reagents, and rate enhancement by benzoquinone and microwave irradiation provides
a promising strategy for the direct coupling of C-H bonds with organometallic
reagents. A variety of tetraalkyltins were coupled to C-H bonds to give the
alkylated products in good yields by using 5 mol % Pd(OAc)2 as the catalyst.
Benzoquinone was shown to be essential for the C-H activation when substrates
containing non-pi-conjugated chelating groups are used. Monitoring the formation 
and reductive elimination of the Pd(Ar)(Me)L2 complex also revealed that
benzoquinone promotes the reductive elimination step. Microwave irradiation
enhances the reaction rate drastically. The versatility of this protocol was
demonstrated by using substrates containing either oxazoline or pyridine as
directing groups.

PMID: 16390130  [PubMed]


357. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Jan 11;128(1):56-7.

Catalytic allylic alkylation via the cross-dehydrogenative-coupling reaction
between allylic sp3 C-H and methylenic sp3 C-H bonds.

Li Z(1), Li CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, McGill University, 801 Sherbrooke Street West,
Montreal, Quebec H3A 2K6, Canada.

A catalytic allylic alkylation was developed via the
cross-dehydrogenative-coupling reaction of allylic sp3 C-H and methylenic sp3 C-H
catalyzed by copper bromide and cobalt chloride in the presence of an oxidizing
reagent, t-BuOOH. This methodology provides a direct way to use allylic sp3 C-H
bonds for forming C-C bonds.

PMID: 16390119  [PubMed]


358. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Feb 10;340(2):553-9. Epub 2005 Dec 19.

Identification of the proteins specifically binding to the rat LINE1 promoter.

Fedorov AV(1), Lukyanov DV, Podgornaya OI.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cytology, Russian Academy of Sciences, Tikhoretsky pr. 4, 194064 
St-Petersburg, Russia. an_tn@mail.ru

The initial step of LINE1 retrotransposons dissemination requires transcription
from species-specific promoter located within 5'-untranslated region of LINE1.
Although the 5'-untranslated region of the rat LINE1 element shows promoter
activity, no promoter-binding proteins have been discovered so far. Using an EMSA
and Southwestern blotting methods, we identified Sp1 and Sp3 proteins, which
specifically bind to the rat LINE1 promoter in vitro. The Sp1/Sp3-binding motif
within rat LINE1 promoter is located downstream of the major predicted
transcription initiation site.

PMID: 16378599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Biol Chem. 2006 Feb 24;281(8):4718-25. Epub 2005 Dec 23.

HER-2/neu represses the metastasis suppressor RECK via ERK and Sp transcription
factors to promote cell invasion.

Hsu MC(1), Chang HC, Hung WC.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung 807,
Taiwan.

Matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) inhibitory proteins may negatively regulate MMP
activity to suppress tumor metastasis. In this study, we demonstrate that the
HER-2/neu oncogene inhibits the expression of the MMP inhibitor RECK to promote
cell invasion. RECK was inhibited via transcriptional repression in B104-1-1
cells, which express constitutively active HER-2/neu. Overexpression of HER-2/neu
in NIH/3T3 or HaCaT cells also suppressed RECK expression. Deletion and mutation 
assays showed that HER-2/neu repressed RECK via the Sp1-binding site localized in
the -82/-71 region from the translational start site. DNA affinity precipitation 
and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays indicated that binding of Sp1 and Sp3 to
this consensus site was increased in B104-1-1 cells. We also found that HER-2/neu
inhibited RECK via the ERK signaling pathway. Sp1 proteins phosphorylated at
Thr453 and Thr739 by ERK bound preferentially to the RECK promoter, and this
binding was reversed by HER-2/neu and ERK inhibitors. Furthermore, our data
indicate that HER-2/neu obviously increased HDAC1 binding to the Sp1-binding site
localized in the -82/-71 region of the RECK promoter. The histone deacetylase
inhibitor trichostatin A reversed HER-2/neu-induced inhibition of RECK. HER-2/neu
activation was associated with increased MMP-9 secretion and activation.
Re-expression of RECK in HER-2/neu-overexpressing cells inhibited MMP-9 secretion
and cell invasion. Taken together, our results suggest that HER-2/neu induces the
binding of Sp proteins and HDAC1 to the RECK promoter to inhibit RECK expression 
and to promote cell invasion. Restoration of RECK provides a novel strategy for
the inhibition of HER-2/neu-induced metastasis.

PMID: 16377629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. J Invest Dermatol. 2006 Feb;126(2):325-35.

Transcriptional regulation and characterization of the promoter region of the
human ABCC6 gene.

Jiang Q(1), Matsuzaki Y, Li K, Uitto J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, Jefferson Medical College,
Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

ABCC6, a member of the adenosine 5'-triphosphate-binding cassette family of
genes, encodes multidrug resistance-associated protein 6, a putative
transmembrane transporter expressed primarily in the liver and to a significantly
lower extent in other tissues. Mutations in ABCC6 result in pseudoxanthoma
elasticum, a multi-system heritable connective tissue disorder with variable
phenotypic expression. To examine the transcriptional regulation and
tissue-specific expression of this gene, we cloned 2.6 kb of human ABCC6 promoter
and developed a series of 5'-deletion constructs linked to luciferase reporter
gene. Transient transfections in a number of cultured cell lines of diverse
origin identified a specific NF-kappaB-like sequence (-235/-226), which conferred
high level of expression in HepG2 hepatoma cells, inferring liver specificity.
The functionality of the promoter fragments was confirmed in vivo by tail vein
injection followed by luciferase reporter assay. Testing of selected cytokines
revealed that transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta upregulated, while tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha and interferon (IFN)-gamma downregulated the promoter
activity in HepG2 cells. The responsiveness to TGF-beta was shown to reside
primarily within an Sp1/Sp3 cognate-binding site at -58 to -49. The expression of
the ABCC6 promoter was also shown to be markedly enhanced by Sp1 protein, as
demonstrated by cotransfection of ABCC6 promoter-luciferase constructs and an Sp1
expression vector in Drosophila SL2 cells, which are devoid of endogenous Sp1.
Furthermore, four additional transcription factors, with their cognate-binding
sequences present in DNA, were shown to bind the 2.6-kb promoter fragment by
protein/DNA array. Collectively, the results indicate that human ABCC6 displays
tissue-specific gene expression, which can be modulated by proinflammatory
cytokines. These findings may have implications for phenotypic expression of
heritable and acquired diseases involving abnormality in the ABCC6 gene.

PMID: 16374464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Hum Genet. 2006 Mar;119(1-2):61-74. Epub 2005 Dec 14.

Allelic diversity in the TGFB1 regulatory region: characterization of novel
functional single nucleotide polymorphisms.

Shah R(1), Rahaman B, Hurley CK, Posch PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, DC
20007, USA.

Altered TGF-beta1 expression due to polymorphisms affects a wide variety of
normal cellular and disease processes such as T cell activation and
proliferation, tumor progression, and asthma. In this study, a comprehensive
examination of function and diversity was undertaken for the TGFB1 promoter
region and exon 1 (-2,665 to +423). The known TGF-beta1 promoter was extended to 
encompass 463 bases by the identification of a strong enhancer activity for a
distal segment (-2,665 to -2,204). Ten novel polymorphisms and 14 novel alleles
were identified. Most single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) appear to be
randomly associated except c.-768_-769insC and c.+74G > C and a set of five novel
polymorphisms present in a single allele in persons of African descent. The TGFB1
alleles clustered into three phylogenetic groups based on the common functional
SNPs c.-1347C > T (commonly known as -509C-T) and c.+29T > C (commonly known as
+869T-C) suggesting three phenotypic groups. Two SNPs unique to African-Americans
affect the TGFB1 regulatory region. The c.-1287G > A SNP in the promoter alters
the binding affinity of two unidentified transcription factor complexes which
translates into a significant difference in reporter gene expression and the
c.-387C > T SNP in the 5' UTR alters the binding of Stimulating protein 1 and 3. 
Thus, TGFB1 possesses a highly polymorphic, extensive regulatory region that
likely impacts the pathogenesis of numerous TGF-beta1 related diseases.

PMID: 16369764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Agric Food Chem. 2005 Dec 28;53(26):10057-60.

Flavone C-glycosides from leaves of Oxalis triangularis.

Rayyan S(1), Fossen T, Andersen ØM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Bergen, Allégt. 41, N-5007 Bergen,
Norway.

The flavone C-glycosides luteolin
6-C-(2''-O-beta-xylopyranosyl-beta-glucopyranoside) (1), apigenin
6-C-(2''-O-alpha-rhamnopyranosyl-beta-glucopyranoside) (2), apigenin
6-C-(2''-O-beta-xylopyranosyl-beta-glucopyranoside) (3), apigenin
6-C-(2''-O-(6'''-(E)-caffeoylglucoside)-beta-glucopyranoside) (4), and apigenin
6-C-(2''-O-(6'''-(E)-p-coumaroylglucoside)-beta-glucopyranoside) (5) have been
isolated from the purple leaves of Oxalis triangularis. Compound 4 is new, while 
5 has previously been isolated from Cucumis sativus after treatment with silicon 
and infection with Sphaerotheca fuliginea. Signal duplication in the NMR spectra 
of 2, 4, and 5 revealed the presence of rotameric conformers, created by
rotational hindrance at the C(sp3) -C(sp2) glucosyl-flavone linkage in these
flavone C-glycosides.

PMID: 16366694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. J Biol Chem. 2006 Feb 10;281(6):3244-53. Epub 2005 Dec 8.

Activation of the RNA-dependent protein kinase PKR promoter in the absence of
interferon is dependent upon Sp proteins.

Das S(1), Ward SV, Tacke RS, Suske G, Samuel CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Santa Barbara, California 93106, USA.

The protein kinase regulated by RNA (PKR) is interferon (IFN)-inducible and plays
important roles in many cellular processes, including virus multiplication, cell 
growth, and apoptosis. The TATA-less PKR promoter possesses a novel 15-bp DNA
element (kinase conserved sequence (KCS)) unique to the human and mouse PKR genes
that is conserved in sequence and position. We found that Sp1 and Sp3 of the Sp
family of transcription factors bind at the KCS element. Their involvement was
analyzed in the activation of basal and IFN-inducible PKR promoter activity. Both
the small and large isoforms of Sp3 co-purified with KCS protein binding activity
(KBP) by using nuclear extracts from HeLa cells not treated with IFN. Two forms
of the KCS-binding protein complex were demonstrated by electrophoretic mobility 
shift assay analysis; one contained Sp1 and the other Sp3. In mouse cells null
for all Sp3 isoforms, PKR expression was reduced to approximately 50% that of
wild-type cells in the absence of IFN. The IFN-inducible expression of PKR,
however, was Sp3-independent but STAT1- and JAK1-dependent. Overexpression of Sp1
in human U cells resulted in increased PKR promoter activity. In Drosophila SL2
cells lacking Sp proteins, both Sp1 and Sp3 large but not small isoforms
activated PKR promoter expression, with the Sp1-mediated activation dominant.
Mutational analysis of the PKR promoter region indicated a cooperative
interaction between two different Sp sites, one of which is within the KCS
element. These results establish that, in the absence of IFN treatment,
activation of PKR basal expression is mediated by Sp1 and Sp3 proteins in a
cooperative manner.

PMID: 16339759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2005 Dec 20;1731(3):215-24. Epub 2005 Nov 4.

Regulatory elements of microfibril-associated glycoprotein-1 gene expression in
muscle cells.

Segade F(1), Mecham RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA. fsegade@wfubmc.edu

The Mfap2 gene encodes the microfibril-associated glycoprotein-1 (MAGP1), an
extracellular matrix protein of microfibrillar structures. The gene is
transcribed from a major transcription start site embedded in a CpG island.
Mapping of transcriptionally active regions in the 5' flanking sequence
identified a region, located between nucleotides -339 and -109 as the Mfap2 basal
promoter. Site-directed and random mutagenesis demonstrated that a KLF sequence
motif at -256/-270, an E-box at -222/-229, and a GC-box at -117/-125, are
critical for the promoter function. Using electrophoresis mobility shift assays, 
we find that the KLF motif mediates the binding of GKLF/KLF4, whereas the E-box
is a target for both Upstream Stimulatory Factors 1 and 2, and the GC box at
-117/-125 forms complexes with Sp1 and Sp3, but not with Sp4 or AP2alpha. A
sequence element spanning position -150 may represent the binding motif of an
uncharacterized transcription factor. The basal transcriptional regulation of
Mfap2 in muscle cells is discussed.

PMID: 16321658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Am Chem Soc. 2005 Dec 7;127(48):16780-1.

N2 provides insight into the mechanism of H-C(sp3) bond cleavage.

Walstrom A(1), Pink M, Tsvetkov NP, Fan H, Ingleson M, Caulton KG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry & Molecular Structure Center, Indiana University,
Bloomington, USA.

Exchange of deuterium in d6-benzene with all C-H sites in (PNP)Ru(OTf), where PNP
is N(SiMe2CH2PtBu2)2 and OTf is OSO2CF3, is rapid at 22 degrees C. Although
intact planar triplet (PNP)Ru(OTf) binds N2 only very weakly, these reagents are 
observed to react rapidly to give a diamagnetic 1:1 adduct whose structure has
one tBu C-H bond cleaved: the carbon binds to Ru but the hydrogen is on the PNP
nitrogen, creating a secondary amine ligand bound to RuII. It is suggested that
the benzene C-D cleavage and the N2 product of tBu C-H bond heterolysis both
derive from a common intermediate, [HN(SiMe2CH2PtBu2)(SiMe2CH2PtBuCMe2CH2)]
Ru(OTf); the formation energy and structure of this species are discussed on the 
basis of DFT results.

PMID: 16316212  [PubMed]


366. Gene. 2006 Mar 15;369:35-44. Epub 2005 Nov 23.

Identification of functional elements in the murine Gabp alpha/ATP synthase
coupling factor 6 bi-directional promoter.

Patton J(1), Block S, Coombs C, Martin ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65212, USA.

The GA-repeat binding protein (GABP) is a ubiquitous transcription factor
involved in transcriptional regulation of genes encoding proteins involved in a
variety of cellular processes including adipocyte differentiation, mitochondrial 
respiration, and neuromuscular signaling. GABP is composed of two subunits; the
GABP alpha subunit is a member of the Ets-family of transcription factors, and
the unrelated ankyrin repeat containing GABP beta subunit. We previously
identified a bidirectional promoter directing the expression of Gabpa (GAA) gene 
in one direction and ATP Synthase Coupling Factor 6 (Atp5j) (CF6) gene in the
other [Chinenov, Y., Coombs, C. and Martin, M. E., 2000a. "Isolation of a
bi-directional promoter directing the expression of the mouse GABP alpha and ATP 
Synthase Coupling Factor 6 genes. Gene 261:311-320.]. In this study we
characterize sequence elements and regulatory factors contributing to the
promoter activities of the GAA/CF6 bidirectional promoter. The core of the
GAA/CF6 bidirectional promoter is retained within a 400 bp sequence and contains 
four GABP binding sites, a Sp1/3 binding site and an YY1 binding site.
Site-directed mutagenesis demonstrated that while no single factor binding site
was essential for promoter activity in either direction, the GA1 site located
proximal to the previously mapped transcription start sites functioned
cooperatively with the other GABP binding sites and with the Sp1/3 and YY1 sites 
to provide transcriptional activation of the GAA and CF6 promoters. The other
GABP sites and the Sp1/3 and YY1 binding sites were functionally redundant for
basal promoter activities in both directions. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays identified multiple DNA-protein complexes containing GABP alpha, GABP
beta, Sp1, Sp3 or YY1 proteins, including one ternary complex containing GABP
alpha, GABP beta and Sp1 proteins. Binding of GABP to the GAA/CF6 bi-directional 
promoter provides the potential for autoregulation of GABP alpha expression and
confirms the importance of GABP in the coordinate expression of respiratory chain
components.

PMID: 16309857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Chem Commun (Camb). 2005 Dec 14;(46):5772-4. Epub 2005 Nov 4.

Unprecedented reactivity in the Morita-Baylis-Hillman reaction; intramolecular
alpha-alkylation of enones using saturated alkyl halides.

Krafft ME(1), Seibert KA, Haxell TF, Hirosawa C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Florida State University,
Tallahassee, 32306-4390, USA. mek@chem.fsu.edu

sp3 Hybridized electrophiles, never before used in the organomediated
Morita-Baylis-Hillman reaction, now facilitate the formation of five- and
six-membered enone cycloalkylation products.

PMID: 16307141  [PubMed]


368. Matrix Biol. 2006 Mar;25(2):118-29. Epub 2005 Nov 18.

Tandem Sp1/Sp3 sites together with an Ets-1 site cooperate to mediate alpha11
integrin chain expression in mesenchymal cells.

Lu N(1), Heuchel R, Barczyk M, Zhang WM, Gullberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, Division of Physiology, University of Bergen, Jonas
Lies vei 91, 5009 Bergen, Norway.

Alpha11beta1 integrin is a collagen receptor, which is expressed in a highly
regulated manner in a specific subset of ectomesenchymally and mesodermally
derived cells. We previously established that a 3 kb region upstream of the
transcription start site of the ITGA11 gene efficiently induced alpha11
transcription in a cell-type specific manner. Using the human fibrosarcoma cell
line HT1080 and human skin fibroblasts, we now report that the majority of the
activity in the proximal promoter resides in a region spanning nt +25 to nt -176.
Mutation and deletion analyses using luciferase reporter assays showed that
tandem low affinity Sp1/Sp3 binding sites, together with an Ets-1-like binding
site, were needed for the proximal promoter activity in mesenchymal cells. EMSAs 
and supershift assays showed that Sp1 and Sp3 both bind to the Sp1/Sp3 binding
sites, whereas occupation of the Ets-1 binding site appears to be Sp3-dependent. 
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays verified that Sp1, Sp3 and Ets-1 can bind
the promoter in vivo. In heterologous Drosophila SL2 cells, Sp1, Sp3 and Ets-1
all transactivated the alpha11 promoter, with Sp1 being the most efficient
activator. The lack of any synergistic effect of Sp1/Sp3 and Ets-1 in SL2 cells
indicates that an Ets family member other than Ets-1 might be involved in
regulating alpha11 transcription in mesenchymal cells. The central role of Sp1 in
regulating alpha11 RNA transcription was further verified by the ability of the
Sp1 inhibitor mithramycin A to efficiently attenuate alpha11 RNA and protein
levels in primary fibroblasts. The proximal promoter itself was able to confer
cell-type specific transcription on HT1080 cells and embryonic fibroblasts but
not on U2OS and JAR cells. We speculate that the "mesenchymal signature" of
alpha11 integrin gene expression is controlled by the activity of Sp1/Sp3,
fibroblast-specific combinations of Ets family members and yet unidentified
enhancer-binding transcription factors.

PMID: 16300938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Dec 23;338(3):1435-46. Epub 2005 Oct 26.

Expression of SRG3, a core component of mouse SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling
complex, is regulated by cooperative interactions between Sp1/Sp3 and Ets
transcription factors.

Ahn J(1), Ko M, Lee K, Oh J, Jeon SH, Seong RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Institute of Molecular Biology and
Genetics, Research Center for Functional Cellomics, Seoul National University,
Seoul 151-742, Republic of Korea.

SRG3, a mouse homolog of yeast SWI3 and human BAF155, is known to be a core
component of SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complex. We have previously shown that 
SRG3 plays essential roles in early mouse embryogenesis, brain development, and
T-cell development. SRG3 gene expression was differentially regulated depending
on the developmental stages and exhibited tissue-specific pattern. In this study,
we showed that the functional interactions between Sp and Ets family
transcription factors are crucial for the SRG3 expression. Sp1 and Sp3
specifically bound to the two canonical Sp-binding sites (GC boxes) at -152 and
-114, and a non-canonical Sp-binding site (CCTCCT motif) at -108 in the SRG3
promoter. Using Drosophila SL2 cells, we found that various Sp or Ets family
members activate the SRG3 promoter through these Sp- or Ets-binding sites,
respectively, in a dose-dependent manner. Intriguingly, different combinatorial
expression of Ets and Sp factors in SL2 cells resulted in either strong
synergistic activation or repression of the SRG3 promoter activity. Moreover, the
Sp-mediated activation of SRG3 promoter required the intact Ets-binding element. 
Taken together, these results suggest that diverse interactions between Sp1/Sp3
and Ets factors are crucial for the SRG3 gene expression.

PMID: 16288722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Org Lett. 2005 Nov 24;7(24):5429-31.

Room temperature intramolecular hydro-O-alkylation of aldehydes: sp3 C-H
functionalization via a Lewis acid catalyzed tandem 1,5-hydride
transfer/cyclization.

Pastine SJ(1), Sames D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Columbia University, 3000 Broadway, New York, New
York 10027, USA.

[reaction: see text] The scope and limitations of intramolecular
hydro-O-alkylation of aldehyde substrates leading to spiroketals and bicyclic
ketals and aminals is reported. The direct transformation of tertiary and
sterically hindered secondary sp(3) C-H bonds into C-O bonds under the action of 
a catalytic amount of a variety of Lewis acids is described. The mechanism of
these transformations is proposed to involve a tandem hydride
transfer/cyclization sequence.

PMID: 16288523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2006 Mar;290(3):G557-67. Epub 2005 Nov
10.

Functional and biochemical characterization of epithelial
bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein.

Canny G(1), Cario E, Lennartsson A, Gullberg U, Brennan C, Levy O, Colgan SP.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental Therapeutics and Reperfusion Injury, Brigham and
Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.
gcanny@zeus.bwh.harvard.edu

Epithelial cells of many mucosal organs have adapted to coexist with microbes and
microbial products. In general, most studies suggest that epithelial cells
benefit from interactions with commensal microorganisms present at the lumenal
surface. However, potentially injurious molecules found in this microenvironment 
also have the capacity to elicit local inflammatory responses and even systemic
disease. We have recently demonstrated that epithelia cells express the
anti-infective molecule bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein (BPI). Here,
we extend these findings to examine molecular mechanisms of intestinal epithelial
cell (IEC) BPI expression and function. Initial experiments revealed a variance
of BPI mRNA and protein expression among various IEC lines. Studies of BPI
promoter expression in IECs identified regulatory regions of the BPI promoter and
revealed a prominent role for CCAAT/enhancer binding protein and especially
Sp1/Sp3 in the basal regulation of BPI. To assess the functional significance of 
this protein, we generated an IEC line stably transfected with full-length BPI.
We demonstrated that, whereas epithelia express markedly less BPI protein than
neutrophils, epithelial BPI contributes significantly to bacterial killing and
attenuating bacterial-elicted proinflammatory signals. Additional studies in
murine tissue ex vivo revealed that BPI is diffusely expressed along the
crypt-villous axis and that epithelial BPI levels decrease along the length of
the intestine. Taken together, these data confirm the transcriptional regulation 
of BPI in intestinal epithelia and provide insight into the relevance of BPI as
an anti-infective molecule at intestinal surfaces.

PMID: 16282362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Mol Biol Cell. 2006 Feb;17(2):585-97. Epub 2005 Nov 9.

Regulation of histone deacetylase 4 expression by the SP family of transcription 
factors.

Liu F(1), Pore N, Kim M, Voong KR, Dowling M, Maity A, Kao GD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Philadelphia Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, PA 19104, USA.

Histone deacetylases mediate critical cellular functions but relatively little is
known about mechanisms controlling their expression, including expression of
HDAC4, a class II HDAC implicated in the modulation of cellular differentiation
and viability. Endogenous HDAC4 mRNA, protein levels and promoter activity were
all readily repressed by mithramycin, suggesting regulation by GC-rich DNA
sequences. We validated consensus binding sites for Sp1/Sp3 transcription factors
in the HDAC4 promoter through truncation studies and targeted mutagenesis.
Specific and functional binding by Sp1/Sp3 at these sites was confirmed with
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and electromobility shift assays (EMSA).
Cotransfection of either Sp1 or Sp3 with a reporter driven by the HDAC4 promoter 
led to high activities in SL2 insect cells (which lack endogenous Sp1/Sp3). In
human cells, restored expression of Sp1 and Sp3 up-regulated HDAC4 protein
levels, whereas levels were decreased by RNA-interference-mediated knockdown of
either protein. Finally, variable levels of Sp1 were in concordance with that of 
HDAC4 in a number of human tissues and cancer cell lines. These studies together 
characterize for the first time the activity of the HDAC4 promoter, through which
Sp1 and Sp3 modulates expression of HDAC4 and which may contribute to tissue or
cell-line-specific expression of HDAC4.

PMCID: PMC1356571
PMID: 16280357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. J Org Chem. 2005 Sep 30;70(20):7816-28.

A DFT theoretical study of the condensation of aggregates of sp2 organolithium
compounds on formaldehyde.

Fressigné C(1), Lautrette A, Maddaluno J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche en Chimie Organique Fine, UMR 6014 CNRS, Université de
Rouen, 76821 - Mont St Aignan Cedex (France).

[Chemical reaction: See text] The interaction between three different sp2
organolithium compounds (vinyllithium, 2-methoxyvinyllithium and phenyllithium)
and formaldehyde has been investigated using DFT theoretical methods. The
unsolvated monomers and dimers have been considered and compared to the 1:1 mixed
aggregates formed with lithium dimethylamide. In all cases, the separate
entities, their docking complexes, the transition states, and the condensation
products have been characterized and compared to the corresponding situations
involving methyllithium, taken as a prototypic sp3 nucleophile. Regarding the
monomers, this study shows that, in the three cases considered, formaldehyde
forms a pretransition state complex in which the oxygen of the carbonyl interacts
with the lithium cation along one of its lone pair. A small energy barrier (< or 
=2.1 kcal.mol(-1)) brings to the transition state, then to the lithium alcoholate
resulting from the largely exothermic condensation (approximately 40
kcal.mol(-1)). The structure of the homogeneous dimers considered in a second
step has been optimized and lead to arrangements in which a planar quadrilateral 
C-Li-C-Li is always obtained. In the presence of formaldehyde, these entities
provide complexes exhibiting lithium-oxygen interaction similar to those
occurring with the monomers. For the dimers, the geometry at the TS evokes a
pi-complex between the C=O and the lithium cation, particularly pronounced in the
case of phenyllithium. The resulting alcoholates are obtained following a larger 
exothermic reaction (approximately 55 kcal.mol(-1)). The heterogeneous dimers
with lithium dimethylamide have been finally examined. In these cases, the
aldehyde can orientate toward either the carbon or the nitrogen, leading to the
expected lithium alcoholate or alpha-amino alcoholate, respectively. Whatever the
orientation, the complexes present characteristics close to those calculated for 
the homogeneous dimer complexes. These similarities are conserved at the
transition state.

PMID: 16277301  [PubMed]


374. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Nov 15;102(46):16795-800. Epub 2005 Nov 7.

Molecular basis for keratoconus: lack of TrkA expression and its transcriptional 
repression by Sp3.

Lambiase A(1), Merlo D, Mollinari C, Bonini P, Rinaldi AM, D' Amato M, Micera A, 
Coassin M, Rama P, Bonini S, Garaci E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University Campus Bio-Medico, G. B. Bietti Eye
Foundation, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico, Rome, Italy.
a.lambiase@unicampus.it

Keratoconus is the most common corneal dystrophy that leads to severe visual
impairment. Although the major etiological factors are genetic, the pathogenetic 
mechanism(s) is unknown. No medical treatments exist, and the only therapeutic
approach is corneal transplantation. Recent data demonstrate the involvement of
nerve growth factor (NGF) in trophism and corneal wound healing. In this study,
we investigated alterations in the NGF pathway in keratoconus-affected corneas
and found a total absence of the NGF-receptor TrkA (TrkA(NGFR)) expression and a 
decreased expression of NGF and p75(NTR). The absence of TrkA(NGFR) expression
was associated with a strong increase in the Sp3 repressor short isoform(s) and a
lack of the Sp3 activator long isoform. Sp3 is a bifunctional transcription
factor that has been reported to stimulate or repress the transcription of
numerous genes. Indeed, we found that Sp3 short isoform(s) overexpression in cell
culture results in a down-regulation of TrkA(NGFR) expression. We suggest that an
imbalance in Sp transcription-factor isoforms may play a role in controlling the 
NGF signaling, thus contributing to the pathogenesis of keratoconus. This
mechanism for the transcriptional repression of the TrkA(NGFR) gene can provide
the platform for the development of a therapeutic strategy.

PMCID: PMC1283852
PMID: 16275928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Oncol Rep. 2005 Dec;14(6):1577-81.

Complex formations involving both SP-1 and SP-3 at the transcriptional regulatory
sequence correlate with the activation of the Keratin 14 gene in human oral
squamous cell carcinoma cells.

Ohkura S(1), Kondoh N, Hada A, Arai M, Yamazaki Y, Sindoh M, Takahashi M,
Matsumoto I, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry II, National Defense Medical College, 3-2 Namiki,
Tokorozawa-shi, Saitama 359-8513, Japan.

We have previously reported that significantly higher levels of Keratin 14
(Ker-14) was observed in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) and severely
dysplastic tissues, whereas this expression was reversed in hyperplasia and in
mild to moderate dysplasia. In this study, the mechanism of Keratin 14 activation
in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cell lines (HSC-2, HSC-3 and Ca9-22) was
investigated. Reporter analysis demonstrated that an upstream region
(-1759/-1629) accounted for efficient promoter activity. Furthermore,
electromobility sift and supershift assay demonstrated that interactions of the
SP-1/SP-3 complex at the elements resided in -1737/-1702 and -1680/-1652 and may 
be essential for this activation in OSCC cells.

PMID: 16273259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Org Lett. 2005 Nov 10;7(23):5331-3.

Synthesis of the C6-C21 segment of amphidinolide E.

Marshall JA(1), Schaaf G, Nolting A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Virginia, P.O. Box 400319,
Charlottesville, Virginia 22904, USA. jam5x@virginia.edu

[reaction: see text] A convergent approach to a C6-C21 segment of the polyketide 
amphidinolide E has been developed through combination of three subunits by
allenylindium bromide-aldehyde addition and Suzuki sp2-sp3 coupling.

PMID: 16268571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Org Lett. 2005 Nov 10;7(23):5115-8.

Access to isocarbacyclin derivatives via substrate-controlled enolate formation: 
total synthesis of 15-deoxy-16-(m-tolyl)- 17,18,19,20-tetranorisocarbacyclin.

Sheddan NA(1), Mulzer J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Organische Chemie, Währingerstrasse 38, A-1090 Wien, Austria.

[reaction: see text] We describe a convergent and flexible synthesis of
15-deoxy-16-(m-tolyl)-17,18,19,20-tetranorisocarbacyclin (15-deoxy-TIC), a simple
isocarbacyclin derivative. The synthesis takes advantage of two key step
reactions: a regioselective deprotonation of the described ketone under substrate
control which is then trapped, as the enol triflate, to generate the C6-C9alpha
endocyclic double bond, followed by an sp2-sp3 Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling
reaction (C5-C6) with a suitable primary alkyl Grignard reagent. Introduction of 
the C13-C14 (E)-double bond in the omega-side chain is performed by the
Julia-Kocieñski olefination.

PMID: 16268516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Oncol Res. 2005;15(5):265-79.

A bisanthracycline (WP631) represses uPAR gene expression and cell migration of
RKO colon cancer cells by interfering with transcription factor binding to a
chromatin-accessible -148/-124 promoter region.

Nair RR(1), Wang H, Jamaluddin MS, Fokt I, Priebe W, Boyd DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The urokinase receptor (uPAR), transcriptionally activated in several cancers,
contributes to tumor progression by promoting cell migration and proteolysis, and
repressing expression of this gene could be of therapeutic utility. Indeed,
targeting regulatory element(s) in the promoter may represent an efficient means 
for reducing expression because only two alleles have to be neutralized. We
previously identified the -148/-124 promoter region, bound with Sp1 and Sp3, as
regulatory for uPAR expression in vitro. The purpose of this study was twofold:
to determine (a) the accessibility of this region in its natural chromatin
setting and (b) the efficacy of WP631, a bisintercalator favoring GC-rich DNA
sequences, in repressing endogenous uPAR expression in RKO colon cancer cells. In
these cells, DNaseI hypersensitivity, genomic footprinting, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that the -148/-124 uPAR promoter region 
was accessible in chromatin and bound with Sp1, thus validating it as a
therapeutic target. WP631 treatment competed for transcription factor binding to 
this regulatory region and reduced uPAR mRNA/protein. However, a chemically
related compound (WP629), with low DNA binding affinity, failed to diminish uPAR 
protein amount. GAPDH mRNA level was only modestly affected by WP631, arguing
against the possibility that this bisanthracycline universally represses
expression of GC-rich promoter-driven genes. Further, uPAR function, as assessed 
by migration of cells across a vitronectin-coated filter, was attenuated with
WP631. Thus, we have shown that the chromatinized -148/-124 regulatory region of 
the uPAR promoter is accessible to small molecules and that WP631, which disrupts
the interaction of DNA binding proteins with this region, diminishes uPAR
expression and function.

PMID: 16261846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Oncogene. 2006 Mar 9;25(10):1474-84.

Expression of cathepsin L in human tumor cells is under the control of distinct
regulatory mechanisms.

Jean D(1), Rousselet N, Frade R.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U.672 (ex U.354), Immunochimie des Régulations Cellulaires et des
Interactions Virales, Bâtiment G8, Génopole d'Evry, Evry Cedex, France.
jean354@genopole.evry.inserm.fr

Cathepsin L, a cysteine protease, is overexpressed in human tumor cells and plays
a major role in melanoma progression. Our aim was herein to identify molecular
mechanisms, which contribute to its overexpression. We found that cathepsin L
protein expression correlated with mRNA level in tumor cells. Therefore, we
focused on mechanisms involved in cathepsin L mRNA regulation. CpG island was
localized in the 5' region of cathepsin L gene that encompassed regulatory
regions identified as essential for promoter activity. CpG dinucleotides, not
methylated in any melanoma cells analysed, were methylated in a B lymphoma cell
line, which poorly express cathepsin L. Our data demonstrate that in lymphoma
cells, cathepsin L silencing was methylation-dependent. Furthermore, gene
amplification was involved in cathepsin L overexpression in one melanoma cell
line, while transcriptional mechanisms but not mRNA stability are responsible of 
cathepsin L overexpression in others melanoma cells. In addition, NF-Y, Sp1, Sp2 
and Sp3 transcription factors, essential to basal cathepsin L transcription, are 
not directly involved in overexpression. Thus, our data provides the first
demonstration that cathepsin L expression in tumor cells is under the control of 
distinct molecular mechanisms.

PMID: 16261157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Nov;25(22):9741-52.

Interleukin-21 receptor gene induction in human T cells is mediated by T-cell
receptor-induced Sp1 activity.

Wu Z(1), Kim HP, Xue HH, Liu H, Zhao K, Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood
InstituteNational Institutes of Health, Building 10, Room 7N252, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892-1674, USA.

Interleukin-21 (IL-21) plays important roles in regulating the immune response.
IL-21 receptor (IL-21R) mRNA is expressed at a low level in human resting T cells
but is rapidly induced by mitogenic stimulation. We now investigate the basis for
IL21R gene regulation in T cells. We found that the -80 to -20 region critically 
regulates IL-21R promoter activity and corresponds to a major DNase
I-hypersensitive site. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays, DNA affinity
chromatography followed by mass spectrometry, and chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays revealed that Sp1 binds to this region in vitro and in vivo. Moreover,
mutation of the Sp1 motif markedly reduced IL-21R promoter activity, and Sp1
small interfering RNAs effectively diminished IL-21R expression in activated T
cells. Interestingly, upon T-cell receptor (TCR) stimulation, T cells increased
IL-21R expression and Sp1 protein levels while decreasing Sp1 phosphorylation.
Moreover, phosphatase inhibitors that increased phosphorylation of Sp1 diminished
IL-21R transcription. These data indicate that TCR-induced IL-21R expression is
driven by TCR-mediated augmentation of Sp1 protein levels and may partly depend
on the dephosphorylation of Sp1.

PMCID: PMC1280258
PMID: 16260592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. J Virol. 2005 Nov;79(22):13865-74.

Transcriptional regulation of early transposon elements, an active family of
mouse long terminal repeat retrotransposons.

Maksakova IA(1), Mager DL.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Research Centre, 675 West 10th
Avenue, Vancouver, British Columbia V5Z 1L3, Canada.

While early transposon (ETn) endogenous retrovirus (ERV)-like elements are known 
to be active insertional mutagens in the mouse, little is known about their
transcriptional regulation. ETns are transcribed during early mouse embryogenesis
in embryonic stem (ES) and embryonic carcinoma (EC) cell lines. Despite their
lack of coding potential, some ETns remain transposition competent through their 
use of reverse transcriptase encoded by a related group of ERVs-MusD elements. In
this study, we have confirmed high expression levels of ETn and MusD elements in 
ES and EC cells and have demonstrated an increase in the copy number of ETnII
elements in the EC P19 cell line. Using transient transfections, we have shown
that ETnII and MusD LTRs are much more active as promoters in P19 cells than in
NIH 3T3 cells, indicating that genomic context and methylation are not the only
factors determining endogenous transcriptional activity of ETns. Three sites in
the 5' part of the long terminal repeat (LTR) were demonstrated to bind Sp1 and
Sp3 transcription factors and were found to be important for high LTR promoter
activity in P19 cells, suggesting that as yet unidentified Sp binding partners
are involved in the regulation of ETn activity in undifferentiated cells.
Finally, we found multiple transcription start sites within the ETn LTR and have 
shown that the LTR retains significant promoter activity in the absence of its
noncanonical TATA box. These findings lend insight into the transcriptional
regulation of this family of mobile mouse retrotransposons.

PMCID: PMC1280189
PMID: 16254322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. J Cell Physiol. 2006 Apr;207(1):144-57.

Nectin-2 expression in testicular cells is controlled via the functional
cooperation between transcription factors of the Sp1, CREB, and AP-1 families.

Lui WY(1), Sze KL, Lee WM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong.

Nectin-2, a major protein component of the adherens junctions (AJs), is found
between Sertoli cells and germ cells in the seminiferous epithelium. Recent
studies have shown that the expression of nectin-2 gene in testis is crucial to
maintain normal spermatogenesis since male knockout mice lacking nectin-2 gene
are sterile and possess morphologically abnormal spermatozoa. However, the
molecular mechanisms governing its basal transcription remain poorly understood. 
By the use of Sertoli and germ cell-lines (TM4 and GC-2spd(ts) cells,
respectively) in transient transfection studies, we showed that the minimal mouse
nectin-2 promoter was located between nucleotides -316 and -211 (relative to the 
translation start site). Two putative Sp1 motifs and one each of the CRE, AP1,
and AP2 motifs were identified within this region. Mutational studies showed that
these two Sp1 motifs cooperated synergistically with the CRE motif, but not the
AP1 and AP2 motifs, to regulate nectin-2 gene transcription in both TM4 and
GC-2spd(ts) cells. By EMSAs, we found that an AP-1 consensus sequence was able to
inhibit DNA-protein complex formation with the CRE motif, suggesting an
interaction between the AP-1 transcription factor (c-Jun) and CREB within the CRE
motif. Overexpressions of CREB and c-Jun, but not c-Fos, also significantly
increased the promoter activity, which suggests that CREB and c-Jun are the
crucial transcription factors involved in regulating nectin-2 gene transcription.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay has shown that, in vivo, CREB, c-Jun, and Sp1
family proteins are bound to the mouse nectin-2 promoter. Analysis of the staged 
tubules has confirmed that the cyclic expressions of CREB and nectin-2 coincide
with the event of adherens junction restructuring between Sertoli cells and germ 
cells. The cross-talk between CREB, c-Jun, and Sp1 family protein is believed to 
be a major transcription machinery to drive nectin-2 expression in Sertoli cells.

PMID: 16250013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Biochem J. 2006 Feb 1;393(Pt 3):779-88.

Dual promoters control the cell-specific expression of the human cell
death-inducing DFF45-like effector B gene.

Da L(1), Li D, Yokoyama KK, Li T, Zhao M.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

CIDE-B [cell death-inducing DFF45 (DNA fragmentation factor 45)-like effector B] 
is a member of the CIDE family of apoptosis-inducing factors. The highly
restricted pattern of expression of CIDE-B in the liver and spleen suggests that 
a mechanism exists for the tissue- and cell-specific regulation of transcription 
of this gene. We have analysed the promoters of the human CIDE-B gene,
particularly the mechanism of cell-specific transcription. Expression of CIDE-B
is driven by two promoters which are responsible for the synthesis of two types
of transcript, and Sp1 and Sp3 are key regulators of basal transcription from
both the upstream and the internal promoter, as indicated by EMSAs
(electrophoretic mobility-shift assays) and site-directed mutagenesis. Bisulphite
sequencing analysis demonstrated that the upstream promoter was hypermethylated
in cells that did not express the long transcript of CIDE-B, but was
hypomethylated in cells that expressed this transcript. Furthermore, methylation 
of this region in vitro reduced the promoter activity to approximately 5% of the 
control. Thus methylation at CpG sites in the upstream promoter region appeared
to be important for cell-specific synthesis of the long transcript. By contrast, 
HNF4alpha (hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha) bound to the internal promoter and
enhanced its activity. Moreover, the short transcript of CIDE-B gene was
expressed in cells which do not normally express this transcript upon
introduction of exogenous HNF4alpha, demonstrating the involvement of HNF4alpha
in the cell-specific synthesis of the short transcript. Thus our analysis
revealed a novel mechanism for the cell-specific transcription of the human
CIDE-B gene, which involves epigenetic and genetic control at separate respective
promoters.

PMCID: PMC1360731
PMID: 16248853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. J Cell Physiol. 2006 Mar;206(3):831-42.

The feeder layer-mediated extended lifetime of cultured human skin keratinocytes 
is associated with altered levels of the transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3.

Masson-Gadais B(1), Fugère C, Paquet C, Leclerc S, Lefort NR, Germain L, Guérin
SL.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology and Molecular Endocrinology Research Center, Québec, Canada.

Primary cultured epithelial cells that are used for basic research are often
cultivated on plastic whereas those used for clinical purposes are usually
cultured in the presence of a feeder layer. Here, we examined the influence of a 
feeder layer on the expression, affinity and DNA binding ability of the
transcription factors, Sp1 and Sp3 in primary cultures of human skin
keratinocytes. Co-culturing both newborn and adult skin keratinocytes with
lethally irradiated 3T3 cells as a feeder layer contributed to maintain the
cell's morphological and growth characteristics and delayed terminal
differentiation in vitro. 3T3 also stabilized the DNA binding properties of Sp1
without altering its transcription. Stimulation of Sp1/Sp3 expression appears to 
be mediated through cell-cell interactions and by factors secreted by 3T3. Thus, 
we propose that the feeder layer delay terminal differentiation of primary
cultured skin keratinocytes by preventing extinction of transcription factors,
like Sp1 and Sp3, which play pivotal functions in the cell cycle.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16245313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Matrix Biol. 2005 Dec;24(8):550-9. Epub 2005 Oct 17.

Characterization of human collagen XVIII promoter 2: interaction of Sp1, Sp3 and 
YY1 with the regulatory region and a SNP that increases transcription in
hepatocytes.

Armelin-Correa LM(1), Lin CJ, Barbosa A, Bagatini K, Winnischofer SM, Sogayar MC,
Passos-Bueno MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Evolution Biology , Bioscience Institute,
University of São Paulo, Brazil.

Different levels of Collagen XVIII expression have been associated with several
pathological processes such as cancer, liver fibrosis, diabetic retinopathy and
Alzheimer's disease. Understanding the transcriptional regulation of Collagen
XVIII might elucidate some pathways related to the progression of these diseases.
The promoter 2 of COL18A1 gene is poorly understood and is responsible for the
transcription of this gene in several adult tissues such as liver, eyes and
brain. This study focused upon characterization of cis-regulatory elements
interacting with human COL18A1 promoter 2 and identification of SNPs in this
region in different ethnic groups. Our results show that there are five conserved
regions (I to V) between human and mouse promoter 2 and that the human COL18A1
core promoter is located between nucleotides -186 and -21. Sp1 and Sp3 bind to
conserved regions I and V, while Sp3 and YY1 interact with region II. We have
verified that the SNP at position -700 (T>G) is embedded in two common
haplotypes, which have different frequencies between European and African
descendents. The allele -700G increases transcription and binding for a still
unknown transcription factor. SNP -700 affects Sp3 and YY1 interaction with this 
region, even though it is not part of these transcription factors' predicted
binding sites. Therefore, our results show for the first time that Sp3 and YY1
interact with human COL18A1 promoter 2, and that nucleotide -700 is part of a
binding motif for a still unknown TF that is involved in the expression of this
gene in hepatocytes. In addition, we also confirm the involvement of Sp1 in the
regulation of this gene.

PMID: 16229994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Inorg Chem. 2005 Oct 17;44(21):7644-51.

Exploring the universality of unusual conformations of the 17-membered
Pt(d(G*pG*)) macrochelate ring. Dependence of conformer formation on a change in 
bidentate carrier ligand from an sp3 to an sp2 nitrogen donor.

Bhattacharyya D(1), Marzilli PA, Marzilli LG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana
70803, USA.

Early studies on cis-PtA2(d(G*pG*)) (A2 = diamine or two amines, G =
N7-platinated G) and cis-Pt(NH3)2(d(G*pG*)) models for the key cisplatin-DNA
cross-link suggested that they exist exclusively or mainly as the HH1 conformer
(HH1 = head-to-head G bases, with 1 denoting the normal direction of backbone
propagation). These dynamic models are difficult to characterize. Employing
carrier A2 ligands designed to slow dynamic interchange of conformers, we found
two new conformers, DeltaHT (head-to-tail G* bases with a Delta chirality) and
HH2 (with 2 denoting the backbone propagation direction opposite to normal).
However, establishing that the non-HH1 conformations exist as an intrinsic
feature of the 17-membered Pt(d(G*pG*)) ring requires exploring a range of
different carrier ligands. Here we employ the planar aromatic sp(2) N-donor
5,5'-Me(2)bipy (5,5'-dimethyl-2,2'-bipyridine) ligand, having a shape very
different from those of previously used nonplanar sp(3) N-donor bidentate carrier
ligands, which often bear NH groups. The 5,5'-Me(2)bipy H6 and H6' protons
project toward the d(G*pG*) moiety and hinder the dynamic motion of
5,5'-Me(2)bipyPt(d(G*pG*)). We again found HH1, HH2, and DeltaHT conformers with 
typical properties, supporting the conclusions that the new DeltaHT and HH2
conformers exist universally in dynamic cis-PtA2(d(G*pG*)) adducts, including
cis-Pt(NH3)2(d(G*pG*)), and that the carrier ligand typically has little
influence on the overall structure of the Pt(d(G*pG*)) macrocyclic ring of a
given conformer. The sizes of the G H8 to H6/H6' NOE cross-peaks indicate little 
base canting in all 5,5'-Me(2)bipyPt(d(G*pG*)) conformers, suggesting that
carrier-ligand NH groups favor the canting of one G base in the HH1 and HH2
conformers of typical cis-PtA2(d(G*pG*)) adducts.

PMID: 16212391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. J Cell Biochem. 2006 Feb 15;97(3):530-43.

Characterization of the promoter for the alpha3 integrin gene in various tumor
cell lines: roles of the Ets- and Sp-family of transcription factors.

Katabami K(1), Kato T, Sano R, Ogura M, Mizuno H, Itoh S, Tsuji T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Hoshi University School of Pharmacy and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2-4-41 Ebara, Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo 142-8501, Japan.
tsuji@hoshi.ne.jp

The alpha3beta1 integrin is an adhesion receptor for extracellular matrix
proteins, including laminin isoforms, and plays crucial roles in the organization
of epithelial and endothelial tissues. The aberrant expression of this adhesion
molecule on tumor cells is associated with their invasive and metastatic
potentials. In the present study, we analyzed the elements essential for alpha3
integrin gene expression in various tumor cell lines with different tissue
origins by luciferase assay. An approximately 0.3 kb fragment of the 5'-flanking 
region of the mouse alpha3 integrin gene (-260/+84, relative to the major
transcription start site) showed strong promoter activity in all six examined
tumor cell lines. However, we found that these cell lines could be divided into
two groups according to the level of dependency on the putative Ets-transcription
factor binding motif located at -133. This motif was previously shown to be
crucial for alpha3 integrin expression in MKN1 gastric carcinoma cells. The gene 
expression in one group of cell lines was upregulated mainly by the Ets motif,
whereas that in the other group was less dependent on the Ets motif. We then
postulated that additional regulatory elements were responsible for the
expression of alpha3 integrin, and found that a GC-rich motif at -69 was another 
important element. An electrophoretic mobility shift assay using specific
antibodies and a Western blot analysis of nuclear proteins revealed that the
Sp3-transcription factor bound to this GC-rich motif. These results suggest that 
the Sp3 and Ets transcription factors cooperatively regulate alpha3 integrin gene
expression and that the contribution of each element depends on the type of tumor
cells.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16211576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Cancer Res. 2005 Oct 1;65(19):8646-54.

The cell cycle checkpoint gene Rad9 is a novel oncogene activated by 11q13
amplification and DNA methylation in breast cancer.

Cheng CK(1), Chow LW, Loo WT, Chan TK, Chan V.

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, Pokfulam, Hong Kong,
China.

Human Rad9 (hRad9), a structural homologue of yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe
rad9, is involved in cell cycle checkpoints and apoptosis. hRad9 can serve as a
corepressor of androgen receptor in prostate cancer cells, but little is known
about its role in the development of breast or other cancers. In the present
study, semiquantitative reverse transcription-PCR showed that Rad9 mRNA levels
were up-regulated in 52.1% (25 of 48) of breast tumors, and this up-regulation
correlated with tumor size (P = 0.037) and local recurrence (P = 0.033).
Overexpression of Rad9 mRNA was partly due to an increase in Rad9 gene number as 
measured by quantitative PCR. In other breast tumors with Rad9 mRNA
overexpression but without increase in gene number, there was differential
methylation of two putative Sp1/3 binding sites within the first and second
introns of the Rad9 gene, which was similarly found in MCF-7 breast cancer cell
line with increased Rad9 mRNA. Silencing Rad9 expression by RNA interference in
MCF-7 cell line inhibited its proliferation in vitro. Promoter assays indicated
that the Sp1/3 site in intron 2 may act as a silencer. In vivo binding of Sp3 to 
intron 2 was shown by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. Treatment of MCF-7
cell line with 5'-aza-2'-deoxycytidine reduced Rad9 mRNA expression and also
increased binding of Sp3 to the demethylated intron 2 region. Collectively, these
findings suggest that Rad9 is a novel oncogene candidate activated by 11q13
amplification and DNA hypermethylation in breast cancer and may play a role in
tumor proliferation and local invasion.

PMID: 16204032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Phys Rev Lett. 2005 Sep 9;95(11):115502. Epub 2005 Sep 7.

Structures of Si and Ge nanowires in the subnanometer range.

Kagimura R(1), Nunes RW, Chacham H.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Física, ICEX, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, CP 702,
31270-901 Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.

We report an ab initio investigation of several structures of pristine Si and Ge 
nanowires with diameters between 0.5 and 2.0 nm. We consider nanowires based on
the diamond structure, high-density bulk structures, and fullerenelike
structures. Our calculations indicate a transition from sp3 geometries to
structures with higher coordination, for diameters below 1.4 nm. We find that
diamond-structure nanowires are unstable for diameters smaller than 1 nm,
undergoing considerable structural transformations towards amorphouslike wires.
For diameters between 0.8 and 1 nm, filled-fullerene wires are the most stable.
For even smaller diameters (approximately 0.5 nm), we find that a simple
hexagonal structure is particularly stable for both Si and Ge.

PMID: 16197015  [PubMed]


390. J Am Chem Soc. 2005 Oct 5;127(39):13510-1.

Catalytic decarboxylative sp-sp3 coupling.

Rayabarapu DK(1), Tunge JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas 66045, USA.

A palladium-catalyzed 1,4-enyne synthesis was developed based the decarboxylative
coupling of acetylides with allyl electrophiles. Stereochemical studies have
implicated palladium-allyl-acetylides as intermediates. Thus, decarboxylative
metalation was established as an environmentally benign alternative to
transmetalation from alkynyl tin reagents.

PMID: 16190710  [PubMed]


391. Proteins. 2005;61 Suppl 7:152-6.

SPARKS 2 and SP3 servers in CASP6.

Zhou H(1), Zhou Y.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute Center for Single Molecule Biophysics,
Department of Physiology and Biophysics, State University of New York, Buffalo,
New York 14214, USA.

Two single-method servers, SPARKS 2 and SP3, participated in automatic-server
predictions in CASP6. The overall results for all as well as detailed performance
in comparative modeling targets are presented. It is shown that both SPARKS 2 and
SP3 are able to recognize their corresponding best templates for all easy
comparative modeling targets. The alignment accuracy, however, is not always the 
best among all the servers. Possible factors are discussed. SPARKS 2 and SP3 fold
recognition servers, as well as their executables, are freely available for all
academic users on http://theory.med.buffalo.edu.

2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16187357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Am Chem Soc. 2005 Sep 28;127(38):13154-5.

Highly regioselective arylation of sp3 C-H bonds catalyzed by palladium acetate.

Zaitsev VG(1), Shabashov D, Daugulis O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Houston, Houston, Texas 77204-5003,
USA.

A new palladium-catalyzed arylation process based on C-H activation has been
developed. The utilization of pyridine-containing directing groups allows the
beta-arylation of carboxylic acid derivatives and gamma-arylation of amine
derivatives. Both primary and secondary sp3 C-H bonds, as well as sp2 C-H bonds, 
are reactive.

PMID: 16173737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Dalton Trans. 2005 Oct 7;(19):3179-86. Epub 2005 Aug 15.

A complete series of copper(II) halide complexes (X = F, Cl, Br, I) with a novel 
Cu(II)-C(sp3) bond.

Miyamoto R(1), Santo R, Matsushita T, Nishioka T, Ichimura A, Teki Y, Kinoshita
I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Materials Science, Graduate School of Science, Osaka
City University, 3-3-138 Sugimoto, Sumiyoshi-ku, Osaka 558-8585, Japan.

A complete series of copper(ii) halide complexes [CuX(tptm)](X = F (), Cl (), Br 
(), I (); tptm = tris(2-pyridylthio)methyl) with a novel Cu(II)-C(sp(3)) bond has
been prepared by the reactions of [Cu(tptm)(CH(3)CN)]PF(6)(.PF(6)) with
corresponding halide sources of KF or n-Bu(4)NX (X = Cl, Br, I), and the trigonal
bipyramidal structures have been confirmed by X-ray crystallography and/or EPR
spectroscopy. The iodide complex easily liberates the iodide anion in
acetonitrile forming the acetonitrile complex as a result. The EPR spectra of the
complexes showed several superhyperfine structures that strongly indicated the
presence of spin density on the halide ligands through the Cu-X bond. The results
of DFT calculations essentially matched with the X-ray crystallographic and the
EPR spectroscopic results. Cyclic voltammetry revealed a quasi-reversible
reduction wave for Cu(II)/Cu(I) indicating a trigonal pyramidal coordination for 
Cu(I) states. A coincidence of the redox potential for all [CuX(tptm)](0/+)
processes indicates that the main oxidation site in each complex is the tptm
ligand.

PMID: 16172643  [PubMed]


394. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Sep 27;102(39):13921-6. Epub 2005 Sep 19.

Bifurcated converging pathways for high Ca2+- and TGFbeta-induced inhibition of
growth of normal human keratinocytes.

Sakaguchi M(1), Sonegawa H, Nukui T, Sakaguchi Y, Miyazaki M, Namba M, Huh NH.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cell Biology and Bacteriology, Okayama University Graduate
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Shikata-chou, Okayama 700-8558, Japan.

Growth suppression of normal human keratinocytes by high Ca2+ or TGFbeta was
shown to be mediated by p21WAF1/CIP1 and Sp1 [Pardali, K., et al. (2000) J. Biol.
Chem. 275, 29244-29256; Santini, M. P., Talora, C., Seki, T., Bolgan, L. & Dotto,
G. P. (2001) Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 9575-9580; Al-Daraji, W. I., Grant, K.
R., Ryan, K., Saxton, A., & Reynolds, N. J. (2002) J. Invest. Dermatol. 118,
779-788]. We previously demonstrated that S100C/A11 is a key mediator for growth 
inhibition of normal human epidermal keratinocytes (NHK) triggered by high Ca2+
or TGFbeta [Sakaguchi, M., et al. (2003) J. Cell Biol. 163, 825-835; Sakaguchi,
M., et al. (2004) 164, 979-984]. On exposure of NHK cells to either agent,
S100C/A11 is transferred to nuclei, where it induces p21WAF1/CIP1 through
activation of Sp1/Sp3. In the present study, we found that high Ca2+ activated
NFAT1 through calcineurin-dependent dephosphorylation. In growing NHK cells,
Krueppel-like factor (KLF)16, a member of the Sp/KLF family, bound to the
p21WAF1/CIP1 promoter and, thereby, inhibited the transcription of
p21(WAF1/CIP1). Sp1 complexed with NFAT1 in high Ca2+-treated cells or with Smad3
in TGFbeta1-treated cells, but not Sp1 alone, replaced KLF16 from the
p21WAF1/CIP1 promoter and transcriptionally activated the p21WAF1/CIP1 gene.
Thus, high Ca2+ and TGFbeta1 have a common S100C/A11-mediated pathway in addition
to a unique pathway (NFAT1-mediated pathway for high Ca2+ and Smad-mediated
pathway for TGFbeta1) for exhibiting a growth inhibitory effect on NHK cells, and
both pathways were shown to be indispensable for growth inhibition.

PMCID: PMC1216828
PMID: 16172401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2006 Feb;290(2):C337-44. Epub 2005 Sep 14.

Control of Glut1 promoter activity under basal conditions and in response to
hyperosmolarity: role of Sp1.

Hwang DY(1), Ismail-Beigi F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, Ohio 44106-4951, USA.

We previously identified (Hwang DY and Ismail-Beigi F. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 
281: C1365-C1372, 2001) a 44-bp GC-rich segment of the rat proximal glucose
transporter (Glut)1 promoter, located at -104 to -61, as necessary for basal
transcription of the Glut1 gene. Using deletion and mutational analysis and
expression of transfected reporter constructs, we report in the present study
that mutation of the Sp1 site located within this segment of the promoter leads
to a marked ( approximately 4-fold) decrease in basal promoter activity. Double
mutations located in the Sp1 site and in a second downstream GC-rich region (-71 
to -51) did not cause a further decrease in promoter activity. Gel shift and
supershift assays verified the importance of the Sp1 site. Exposure of cells to
trichostatin A resulted in increased expression of the endogenous Glut1 as well
as the transfected wild-type construct. Finally, the presence of the Sp1 site was
found to be essential for the positive response of the promoter to
hyperosmolarity. We conclude that the consensus Sp1 site located in the rat
proximal Glut1 promoter is necessary and sufficient for basal expression of the
Glut1 gene, as well as for its response to hyperosmolarity.

PMID: 16162661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Carcinogenesis. 2006 Feb;27(2):252-61. Epub 2005 Sep 8.

7,12-Dimethylbenzanthracene-dependent transcriptional regulation of adenomatous
polyposis coli (APC) gene expression in normal breast epithelial cells is
mediated by GC-box binding protein Sp3.

Jaiswal AS(1), Balusu R, Narayan S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology and UF Shands Cancer Center, University
of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

In the present investigation, we have examined the transcriptional regulation of 
adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene expression in the spontaneously
immortalized human normal breast epithelial cell line, MCF10A, in response to
carcinogen 7,12-dimethylbenz(a)anthracene (DMBA) treatment. The APC mRNA levels
and the APC gene's promoter (pAPCP) activity were increased in MCF10A cells after
treatment with DMBA. A sequential deletion analysis and site-directed mutagenesis
of the pAPCP promoter revealed that the DMBA response is mediated through a
GC-box element. Also, the GC-box binding agent mithramycin A, which prevents
binding of proteins to the GC-box region, abolished DMBA-mediated increase of the
pAPCP promoter activity. The specificity of the proteins binding to the GC-box
region was characterized by gel-shift analysis. An increased binding of the
GC-box binding proteins was observed in the gel-shift analysis with nuclear
extracts from DMBA-treated MCF10A cells, which corresponded to the increased
levels of Sp1 and Sp3 proteins. However, a super-shift of the DNA-protein
complexes was observed with only anti-Sp3 antibody. Based on the
chromatin-immunoprecipitation assay results, the Sp3 appeared to be a genuine
protein binding to the GC-box site of the pAPCP promoter. In RNA interference
experiments, in which the Sp3 expression was knocked down, the DMBA response on
the pAPCP promoter activity was reduced, suggesting that the binding of Sp3 to
the GC-box site is critical for DMBA-induced pAPCP promoter activity. From these 
results we conclude that the increased pAPCP promoter activity in the MCF10A cell
line in response to DMBA treatment is mediated by Sp3.

PMID: 16150893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. J Cell Biochem. 2005 Nov 1;96(4):821-30.

Characterization of putative cis-regulatory elements that control the
transcriptional activity of the human Oct4 promoter.

Yang HM(1), Do HJ, Oh JH, Kim JH, Choi SY, Cha KY, Chung HM, Kim JH.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Gene Therapy Research Institute, Graduate School of Life Science and 
Biotechnology, Pochon CHA University, 606-13, Seoul, South Korea.

Octamer-binding transcription factor-4 (Oct4), a member of the POU domain
transcription factors, is crucial for both early embryonic development and the
maintenance of stem cell pluripotency. The human Oct4 (hOct4) 5' upstream
sequence contains four conserved regions (CR1, 2, 3, 4) that are homologous in
the murine. In this study, we constructed a series of deletion mutants of the
hOct4 5' upstream region and identified cis-regulatory elements that may be
important determinants for the transcriptional activity of the hOct4 promoter.
Our studies showed that CR2, 3, and 4 each acted as positive cis-regulatory
elements in hOct4 promoter activity. We also newly identified a putative negative
cis-acting element located between CR1 and CR2. In addition, the sequence -380/-1
at CR1 that contains a GC box was sufficient to provide the minimal promoter
activity. Site-directed mutagenesis and electrophoretic mobility shift assays
revealed the GC box located in the -380/-1 region may play a critical role in
controlling the transcriptional activity of hOct4 by the direct binding of Sp1 or
Sp3 transcription factors to the GC box. An overexpression study showed that Sp1 
and Sp3 positively and negatively regulate hOct4 promoter activity. Thus, the
hOct4 promoter upstream region contains multiple regulatory elements, one of
which, the GC box, may be an important cis-regulatory element that regulates the 
transcription of the hOct4 promoter by the binding of Sp family transcription
factors.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16149048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Biomed Sci. 2005 Oct;12(5):741-61. Epub 2005 Nov 9.

Transcriptional regulation of the rat Mrp3 gene promoter by the specificity
protein (Sp) family members and CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins.

Tzeng SJ(1), Chang WC, Huang JD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung 
University, Tainan, Taiwan.

The sequence of the 5'-flanking region of the rat Mrp3 gene was determined up to 
2723 bp upstream of the translation start site. Regulatory regions crucial for
Mrp3 promoter activity were characterized between -157 and -106 bp in hepatoma
cells. Within this sequence we identified putative binding sites for C/EBP and
Sp1. EMSA and supershift assays demonstrated specific binding of Sp1, Sp3,
C/EBPalpha, beta, and delta. In Drosophila SL2 cells, both Sp1 and Sp3
transactivated the Mrp3 minimal promoter (pWT-157). Structural and functional
analysis demonstrated that binding sites for C/EBPs, Sp1 and Sp3 were essential
for transcription of the rat Mrp3 gene in Mrp3-expressing cells (including:
H4IIE, H4IIE C3, BRL 3A, Clone 9, and RAT 2). Cotransfection assays demonstrated 
that C/EBP transcription factors modulated the basal and tissue specific activity
of the Mrp3 gene promoter by recognition of the C/EBP (-157/-140) element and
through functional cooperation with factors interacting with the Sp1 (3) and Sp1 
(4) (-140/-106) cis-acting elements. In this study, we found C/EBPs and Sp1/Sp3
cooperatively regulated the promoter activity of rat Mrp3 gene through proximal
(-157/-106) region. It suggested another fine-tune regulation mechanism may
involve in Mrp3 gene expression.

PMID: 16132117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. J Am Chem Soc. 2005 Sep 7;127(35):12180-1.

Room temperature hydroalkylation of electron-deficient olefins: sp3 C-H
functionalization via a lewis acid-catalyzed intramolecular redox event.

Pastine SJ(1), McQuaid KM, Sames D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Columbia University, New York, New York 10027, USA.

A practical method for the intramolecular hydroalkylation of electron-deficient
olefins has been developed. The direct transformation of benzylic, tertiary, and 
sterically hindered secondary sp3 C-H bonds into C-C bonds under the action of a 
catalytic amount of a variety of Lewis acids is described. The mechanism of these
transformations is proposed to involve a tandem hydride transfer/cyclization
sequence.

PMID: 16131169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Gene. 2005 Oct 24;360(1):20-6. Epub 2005 Aug 24.

The gonadotropin-regulated long-chain acyl CoA synthetase gene: a novel
downstream Sp1/Sp3 binding element critical for transcriptional promoter
activity.

Sheng Y(1), Li J, Dufau ML, Tsai-Morris CH.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Molecular Endocrinology, ERRB, NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland
20892, United States.

The 79 kD gonadotropin-regulated testicular long chain acyl-CoA synthetase gene
(GR-LACS) is a hormone-regulated member of the acyl-CoA synthetase family that is
expressed abundantly in Leydig cells and to a lesser extent in germinal cells of 
the adult testis. GR-LACS possesses an ATP/AMP binding domain and the fatty
acyl-CoA synthetase (FACS) signature motif. To gain insights into the
transcriptional regulation of GR-LACS in gonadal cells, we determined the genomic
organization of the gene, including the upstream flanking sequences. The mouse
GR-LACS gene spans over at least 45 kb and the coding region is encoded by exons 
1-14. All exon-intron junction sites correspond to the consensus splice sequence 
GT-AG. Exon 7 and 11 comprise the conserved ATP/AMP binding domain and the FACS
signature motif, respectively. Primer extension and S1 nuclease analyses
demonstrated four transcriptional start sites located at -266/-216 bp 5' to the
ATG codon. The minimal promoter domain resides within -254/-217 bp 5' to ATG
codon, and upstream sequences to -404 bp (-1035/-405 bp) contribute to the
inhibition of transcription in the expressing mouse Leydig tumor cells. Removal
of -217/-1 bp, containing a 23 nt GC rich sequence (-112/-90) with an Sp1/Sp3
binding element, within the 1st exon of this TATA-less promoter, significantly
reduced GR-LACS gene transcription. Transcriptional activity was abolished by a 2
nt mutation of this element. Thus, functional analyses of this promoter domain
indicate that transcription of GR-LACS gene requires an Sp1/Sp3 binding element
downstream of the transcriptional start sites which is essential for basal
promoter activity.

PMID: 16125341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Se Pu. 2005 May;23(3):223-8.

[Study on relationship between three-dimensional quantitative structure and
retention parameters of chromatography].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang Y(1), Guo Y, Wang Y, Qiao Y.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chinese Materia Medica, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine,
Beijing 100102, China. collean_zhang@163.com

A novel method to predict retention parameters of liquid chromatography is
developed. By determining their lowest energy conformation, molecules are aligned
according to one specific rule and the scope of the molecular field is defined
around the aligned molecules. A positively charged sp3 carbon probe atom is used 
to calculate the characters of the molecular field such as the electrostatic and 
steric interaction energies. Then partial least square (PLS) method is exploited 
to analyze relationships between the a, c parameters of compounds and characters 
of the molecular field and finally comparative molecular field analysis (CoMFA)
models are built, which are exploited to study three-dimensional quantitative
structure-retention relationship (QSRR) between the a, c parameters of compounds 
in methanol/water on a reversed-phase C18 column and the characters of the
molecular field. The models are applied to four different forms of arenes:
alkylation-substituted benzenes, multi-ring arenes, chlorobenzenes and
dinitro-substituted arenes. The results of PLS analyses show that
three-dimensional models are obtained from the first three forms. The
cross-validated q2 of the first three models are all above 0.5 and the
non-cross-validated r2 of the first two forms are even above 0.995, so the
predictive abilities of these models are considerable. The model of
dinitro-substituted arenes is not so reasonable. The possible reason is that the 
nitro-substitutions are on different benzene rings. The novel method explored can
be utilized to predict the retention parameters of the compounds, which are
unknown but have the same kind of structure with the known compounds, and also
provide information about the class of the compounds. The results of this project
can be applied to direct the further study of the relationship between
three-dimensional quantitative structure and retention parameters of liquid
chromatography.

PMID: 16124560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2005 Sep;46(9):3109-20.

Involucrin expression in the corneal epithelium: an essential role for Sp1
transcription factors.

Adhikary G(1), Crish JF, Gopalakrishnan R, Bone F, Eckert RL.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Physiology and Biophysics, Case School of Medicine, 2109
Adelbert Road, Cleveland, OH 44106-4970, USA.

PURPOSE: Identifying the mechanism(s) that regulate gene expression during the
transition of the limbal stem cell to a differentiated superficial cell is an
important area of interest in the corneal epithelium.
METHODS: However, the factors that regulate gene expression during this process
are not well understood. In the present study, the human involucrin (hINV) gene
was used as a model to study gene expression in the corneal epithelium.
Expression was studied in normal human corneal epithelial cell cultures and hINV 
promoter transgenic mice.
RESULTS: Studies in cultured cells revealed that an Sp transcription
factor-binding site, located in the upstream regulatory region of the hINV
promoter, is essential for optimal hINV gene expression. Mutation of this site
reduces promoter activity. Expression of Sp1 results in an Sp1-dependent increase
in activity, whereas expression of dominant-negative Sp1 inhibits promoter
activity. Gel mobility shift analysis showed the interaction of Sp1 and Sp3 with 
the Sp DNA element. Treatment of the corneal epithelial cells with
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate increased hINV gene expression and this
response is associated with increased nuclear factor binding of Sp1 and Sp3 to
the Sp DNA response element. Promoter mutagenesis studies in transgenic mice
confirmed the importance of the Sp site, as removal of this site by promoter
truncation or point mutation resulted in a complete loss of in vivo corneal
epithelial cell gene expression.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies provide in vivo evidence that Sp transcription factor 
input is absolutely necessary for activation of involucrin gene expression in the
differentiating corneal epithelium.

PMID: 16123409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Gene. 2005 Oct 24;360(1):55-64. Epub 2005 Aug 24.

Genomic organization, chromosomal localization, and promoter of human gene for
FK506-binding protein 12.6.

Nakazawa T(1), Takasawa S, Noguchi N, Nata K, Tohgo A, Mori M, Nakagawara K,
Akiyama T, Ikeda T, Yamauchi A, Takahashi I, Yoshikawa T, Okamoto H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sendai 980-8575, Miyagi, Japan.

Cyclic ADP-ribose (cADPR) induces the release of Ca2+ from microsomes of
pancreatic islets for insulin secretion. It has been demonstrated that cADPR
binds to FK506-binding protein 12.6 (FKBP 12.6) on rat islet ryanodine receptor
and that the binding of cADPR to FKBP12.6 frees the ryanodine receptor from
FKBP12.6, causing it to release Ca2+ [Noguchi, N., Takasawa, S., Nata, K., Tohgo,
A., Kato, I., Ikehata, F., Yonekura, H., Okamoto, H., 1997. Cyclic ADP-ribose
binds to FK506-binding protein to release Ca2+ from islet microsomes. J. Biol.
Chem. 272, 3133-3136.]. In this study, we cloned, characterized the structural
organization of the human FKBP12.6, which is highly homologous to human FKBP12,
and analyzed the promoters for FKBP12.6 and FKBP12. Human FKBP12.6 gene spanned
about 16 kb in length and consisted of four exons and three introns. The
positions of exon-intron junction of the FKBP12.6 gene were perfectly matched
with those of FKBP12 gene except that FKBP12 has an additional exon, exon V, to
code exclusively for 3'-UTR. Fluorescence in situ hybridization revealed that the
FKBP12.6 gene was located on chromosome 2 p21-23, which is different from the
locus (chromosome 20 p13) of the FKBP12 gene. Reporter gene analyses revealed
that the regions of -58 approximately -24 of FKBP12.6 and -106 approximately -79 
of FKBP12 are important for promoter activities. The promoters contain a
consensus transcription factor binding sequence for Sp family in FKBP12.6 and
Ets-1 in FKBP12. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed that nuclear
proteins bind to the promoters. The DNA/protein complex on FKBP12.6 promoter was 
competed out by Sp1 consensus probe and the complex was supershifted by anti-Sp3 
antibodies. On the other hand, the DNA/protein complex on FKBP12 promoter was
competed out by Ets-1 consensus probe but not by its mutant probe, indicating
that Sp3 and Ets-1 play an essential role in transcription of FKBP12.6 and
FKBP12, respectively.

PMID: 16122887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Mol Biol. 2005 Sep 23;352(3):608-20.

On the structural basis of the catalytic mechanism and the regulation of the
alpha subunit of tryptophan synthase from Salmonella typhimurium and BX1 from
maize, two evolutionarily related enzymes.

Kulik V(1), Hartmann E, Weyand M, Frey M, Gierl A, Niks D, Dunn MF, Schlichting
I.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institut fur medizinische Forschung, Abteilung fur Biomolekulare
Mechanismen, Jahnstr. 29, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Indole is a reaction intermediate in at least two biosynthetic pathways in maize 
seedlings. In the primary metabolism, the alpha-subunit (TSA) of the bifunctional
tryptophan synthase (TRPS) catalyzes the cleavage of indole 3-glycerol phosphate 
(IGP) to indole and d-glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (G3P). Subsequently, indole
diffuses through the connecting tunnel to the beta-active site where it is
condensed with serine to form tryptophan and water. The maize enzyme, BX1, a
homolog of TSA, also cleaves IGP to G3P and indole, and the indole is further
converted to 2,4-dihydroxy-7-methoxy-2H-1,4-benzoxazin-3(4H)-one, a secondary
plant metabolite. BX1 cleaves IGP significantly faster to G3P and indole than
does TSA. In line with their different biological functions, these two
evolutionary related enzymes differ significantly in their regulatory aspects
while catalyzing the same chemistry. Here, the mechanism of IGP cleavage by TSA
was analyzed using a novel transition state analogue generated in situ by
reaction of 2-aminophenol and G3P. The crystal structure of the complex shows an 
sp3-hybridized atom corresponding to the C3 position of IGP. The catalytic
alphaGlu49 rotates to interact with the sp3-hybridized atom and the 3' hydroxyl
group suggesting that it serves both as proton donor and acceptor in the
alpha-reaction. The second catalytic residue, alphaAsp60 interacts with the atom 
corresponding to the indolyl nitrogen, and the catalytically important loop
alphaL6 is in the closed, high activity conformation. Comparison of the TSA and
TSA-transition state analogue structures with the crystal structure of BX1
suggests that the faster catalytic rate of BX1 may be due to a stabilization of
the active conformation: loop alphaL6 is closed and the catalytic glutamate is in
the active conformation. The latter is caused by a substitution of the residues
that stabilize the inactive conformation in TRPS.

PMID: 16120446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. J Am Chem Soc. 2005 Aug 31;127(34):11898-9.

A reinterpretation of the mechanism of the simplest reaction at an sp3-hybridized
carbon atom: H + CD4 --> CD3 + HD.

Camden JP(1), Bechtel HA, Ankeny Brown DJ, Martin MR, Zare RN, Hu W, Lendvay G,
Troya D, Schatz GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305-5080,
USA.

A comparison between theory and experiment for the benchmark H + CD4 --> HD + CD3
abstraction reaction yields a reinterpretation of the reaction mechanism and
highlights the unexpected contribution of a stripping mechanism. Whereas the best
analytic surface fails to reproduce experiment, a first-principles
direct-dynamics (on the fly) treatment is in good agreement, showing that the H +
CD4 reaction exhibits extreme sensitivity to modest differences in the potential 
energy surface. We find that bent H-D-C transition state geometries play an
important role in the dynamics. A simple model that relates the scattering angle 
impact parameter and cone of acceptance accounts well for the overall reaction
dynamics.

PMID: 16117502  [PubMed]


406. Cancer Lett. 2005 Sep 28;227(2):153-62.

Inhibitory effects of costunolide on the telomerase activity in human breast
carcinoma cells.

Choi SH(1), Im E, Kang HK, Lee JH, Kwak HS, Bae YT, Park HJ, Kim ND.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, and Research Institute for Drug
Development, Pusan National University, Busan 609-735, South Korea.

Costunolide, a natural sesquiterpene compound, has been known having cytotoxic
and chemopreventive effects on various human cancer cells. In the present study, 
we examined the effects of costunolide on telomerase activity and on the
components of telomerase in MCF-7 (wild-type p53) and MDA-MB-231 (mutant p53)
cells. We found that costunolide inhibited the growth and telomerase activity of 
MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells in a concentration- and time-dependent manner. The
expression of hTERT mRNA was also inhibited but hTR mRNA was not. In addition,
the bindings of transcription factors in hTERT promoters were significantly
decreased in both cells by the treatment of costunolide. These results suggest
that costunolide inhibited the growth of both MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells and this
effect was mediated at least in part by a significant reduction in telomerase
activity.

PMID: 16112418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Jan;20(1):100-13. Epub 2005 Aug 18.

Association of the mSin3A-histone deacetylase 1/2 corepressor complex with the
mouse steroidogenic acute regulatory protein gene.

Clem BF(1), Clark BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Louisville
School of Medicine, Louisville, Kentucky 40292, USA.

Several factors have been identified in the transcriptional repression of the
steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR) gene promoter; yet, no associating 
corepressor complexes have been characterized for the mouse promoter in MA-10
mouse Leydig tumor cells. We now report that Sp3, CAGA element binding proteins, 
and a corepressor complex consisting of mSin3A, histone deacetylase (HDAC)1, and 
HDAC2 associates with a transcriptional repressor region within the mouse StAR
promoter. 5'-Promoter deletion analysis localized the negative regulatory region 
between -180 and -150 bp upstream of the transcription start site, and mutations 
in both the CAGA and Sp binding elements were required to relieve the repression 
of basal StAR promoter activity. Protein-DNA binding analysis revealed Sp3 and
specific CAGA element-binding protein(s) associated with the repressor region.
Coimmunoprecipitation analysis identified the presence of the mSin3A, HDAC1, and 
HDAC2 corepressor complex in MA-10 cells. Furthermore, chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays revealed Sp3, mSin3A, and HDAC1/2 association with the
proximal region of the StAR promoter in situ. In addition, HDAC inhibition
resulted in a dose-dependent activation of a mouse StAR reporter construct,
whereas mutations within the repressor region diminished this effect by 44%. In
sum, these data support a novel regulatory mechanism for transcriptional
repression of the mouse StAR promoter by DNA binding of Sp3 and CAGA
element-binding proteins, and association of the Sin3 corepressor complex
exhibiting HDAC activity.

PMID: 16109738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. J Nutr Biochem. 2006 Apr;17(4):272-81. Epub 2005 Jun 13.

Biotin supplementation decreases the expression of the SERCA3 gene (ATP2A3) in
Jurkat cells, thus, triggering unfolded protein response.

Griffin JB(1), Rodriguez-Melendez R, Dode L, Wuytack F, Zempleni J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Health Sciences, University of Nebraska at
Lincoln, 68583-0806, USA.

Protein folding in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) depends on Ca(2+); uptake of
Ca(2+) into the ER is mediated by sarco/endoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPase 3
(SERCA3). The 5'-flanking region of the SERCA3 gene (ATP2A3) contains numerous
binding sites for the transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3. Biotin affects the
nuclear abundance of Sp1 and Sp3, which may act as transcriptional activators or 
repressors. Here we determined whether biotin affects the expression of the
SERCA3 gene and, thus, protein folding in human lymphoid cells. Jurkat cells were
cultured in media containing 0.025 nmol/L biotin (denoted "deficient") or 10
nmol/L biotin ("supplemented"). The transcriptional activity of the full-length
human SERCA3 promoter was 50% lower in biotin-supplemented cells compared to
biotin-deficient cells. Biotin-dependent repressors bind to elements located
731-1312 bp upstream from the transcription start site in the SERCA3 gene. The
following suggest that low expression of SERCA3 in biotin-supplemented cells
impaired folding of secretory proteins in the ER, triggering unfolded protein
response: (i) sequestration of Ca(2+) in the ER decreased by 14-24% in response
to biotin supplementation; (ii) secretion of interleukin-2 into the extracellular
space decreased by 75% in response to biotin supplementation; (iii) the nuclear
abundance of stress-induced transcription factors increased in response to biotin
supplementation; and (iv) the abundance of stress-related proteins such ubiquitin
activating enzyme 1, growth arrest and DNA damage 153 gene, X-box binding protein
1 and phosphorylated eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2alpha increased in
response to biotin supplementation. Collectively, this study suggests that
supplements containing pharmacological doses of biotin may cause cell stress by
impairing protein folding in the ER.

PMCID: PMC1473219
PMID: 16109482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. J Am Chem Soc. 2005 Aug 24;127(33):11610-1.

Radical hydroxyalkylation of C-H bond adjacent to nitrogen of tertiary amides,
ureas, and amines.

Yoshimitsu T(1), Arano Y, Nagaoka H.

Author information: 
(1)Meiji Pharmaceutical University, 2-522-1 Noshio, Kiyose, Tokyo 204-8588,
Japan. takey@my-pharm.ac.jp

Tertiary amides, ureas, and amines undergo direct intermolecular addition to
aldehydes under the Et3B/air conditions, thereby providing a unique and simple
means for the radical sp3 C-H transformation of nitrogen-containing molecules.

PMID: 16104731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Oncogene. 2005 Dec 1;24(54):7984-90.

Induction of p21(WAF1/CIP1) by human synovial sarcoma-associated chimeric
oncoprotein SYT-SSX1.

Tsuda M(1), Watanabe T, Seki T, Kimura T, Sawa H, Minami A, Akagi T, Isobe K,
Nagashima K, Tanaka S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Pathology, Hokkaido University Graduate
School of Medicine, N15, W7, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan.

Oncogenic protein provokes cell cycle arrest termed premature senescence. In this
process Ras has been known to induce cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor (CKI)
p16(INK4A) in primary fibroblasts. Here, we present a novel finding that human
chimeric oncoprotein SYT-SSX1 induces CKI p21(WAF1/CIP1) (p21) for suppression of
cell growth. In human synovial sarcoma cell lines, the expression levels of p21
were high and the transcriptional activity of the p21 gene promoter was
significantly elevated. The transient expression of SYT-SSX1-induced activation
of the p21 gene promoter in human diploid fibroblasts. The N-terminus deletion
form of SYT-SSX1, which failed to bind to hBRM one of the chromatin remodeling
factors, preserved the p21 induction ability. This effect of SYT-SSX1 was similar
in extent in both wild-type and p53-deficient HCT116 cell lines. Furthermore, the
introduction of mutation in Sp1/Sp3 binding sites of the p21 gene promoter
abolished the SYT-SSX1-induced transcriptional activity of its promoter. In SW13 
cells, the stable expression of SYT-SSX1 suppressed cell growth in culture. These
results suggest that SYT-SSX1 is able to induce p21 in a manner independent on
hBRM and p53 but dependent on Sp1/Sp3.

PMID: 16103879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Biol Reprod. 2005 Dec;73(6):1126-34. Epub 2005 Aug 10.

Regulation of the Rhox5 homeobox gene in primary granulosa cells: preovulatory
expression and dependence on SP1/SP3 and GABP.

MacLean JA 2nd(1), Rao MK, Doyle KM, Richards JS, Wilkinson MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Homeobox genes encode transcription factors that regulate embryonic development
and postnatal events. Rhox5 (previously called Pem), the founding member of a
homeobox gene cluster that we recently identified on the X chromosome, is
selectively expressed in granulosa cells in the ovary and other somatic-cell
types in other reproductive organs. In this report, we investigate its regulation
in granulosa cells in the rat ovary. We found that Rhox5 expression in the ovary 
is governed by the Rhox5 distal promoter and is expressed at least as early as
Day 5 postpartum. Rhox5 mRNA levels are regulated during the ovarian cycle,
peaking before ovulation. Deletion analysis revealed a 25-nt element essential
for distal promoter transcription in primary granulosa cells. This distal
promoter element contains two ETS and one SP1 transcription-factor family binding
sites that mutagenesis analysis indicated were essential for high-level
transcription. This element was both necessary and sufficient for transcription, 
because it activated transcription when placed upstream of a heterologous minimal
promoter. Cold competition and electrophoretic mobility shift assay studies
demonstrated that SP1, SP3, and the ETS family transcription factor GABP bound
this element. Dominant-negative forms of GABP and SP3 repressed distal promoter
expression in primary rat granulosa, showing that these factors are crucial for
Rhox5 expression. Cotransfection of dominant-negative mutants indicated that
Rhox5 expression in granulosa cells is regulated by the c-Jun N-terminal protein 
kinase (JNK, MAPK8) and RAS pathways, which are known to be upstream of ETS
family transcription factors. The discovery that Rhox5 expression in granulosa
cells is regulated by MAPK pathways and ETS and SP1 family members provides an
opportunity to understand how these regulatory pathways and factors collaborate
to regulate gene expression during the ovarian cycle.

PMID: 16093360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. J Androl. 2005 Sep-Oct;26(5):610-8.

Kinematic changes during the cryopreservation of boar spermatozoa.

Cremades T(1), Roca J, Rodriguez-Martinez H, Abaigar T, Vazquez JM, Martinez EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Animal Surgery, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Campus de Espinardo, University of Murcia, E-30071 Murcia, Spain.

The present study evaluates the effect that various steps of a conventional cycle
of cryopreservation have on the patterns of movement exhibited by boar
spermatozoa. Sperm-rich ejaculate fractions collected from 24 mature fertile
boars (1 ejaculate per boar) were cryopreserved following a standard freeze-thaw 
procedure with 0.5-mL plastic straws. Overall sperm motility and the individual
kinematic parameters of motile spermatozoa (assessed by the computer-aided sperm 
analysis system Sperm Class Analyzer [SCA]) were recorded in 5 steps of the
cryopreservation procedure. These steps were as follows: 1) at the time that the 
fresh semen was extended, 2) at 17 degrees C, after sperm concentration by
centrifugation and re-extension of the pellet with lactose-egg yolk extender; 3) 
at 5 degrees C, after added freezing extender; 4) at the time that thawed semen
was held in a water bath at 37 degrees C for 30 minutes; and 5) at the time that 
thawed semen was held in a water bath at 37 degrees C for 150 minutes. Data from 
individual motile spermatozoa, defined by 7 kinematic parameters (curvilinear
velocity [VCL], straight-line velocity [VSL], average path velocity [VAP],
linearity [LIN], straightness [STR], mean amplitude of lateral head displacement 
[ALH], and beat cross frequency [BCF]), were analyzed using a pattern analysis
technique (PATN) to identify and quantify populations and subpopulations of
motile sperm within the semen samples. After the first cluster analysis, 3 motile
sperm populations (P) were identified (P1: progressive and/or vigorous cells
[90.4%], P2: poorly progressive cells [8.3%], and P3: nonprogressive cells
[1.3%]). These populations remained constant (P > .05) throughout the 5-step
cryopreservation procedure. A second PATN was carried out within the P1 sperm
population, which identified 3 sperm subpopulations (sP) (eg, sP1: cells with
progressive and vigorous movement [58.7%], sP2: progressive cells only [24.6%],
and sP3: vigorous cells only, hyperactive-like [16.7%]). Although the relative
frequency of these 3 subpopulations varied among ejaculates (boars), there was no
interaction with any cryopreservation step we examined. Whereas sP1 remained
constant (P > .05), sP2 and sP3 varied significantly (P < .05) through the
cryopreservation procedure, with the increase in sP3 after centrifugation at 17
degrees C and during cooling at 5 degrees C considered particularly relevant. In 
conclusion, the present study confirms the heterogeneity of sperm movement
patterns in boar semen, patterns that vary through the cryopreservation
procedure, especially after removal of the seminal plasma by centrifugation and
subsequent extension at 17 degrees C and after the slow cooling at 5 degrees C,
when obvious increases in hyperactivated movement appeared. The vast majority of 
spermatozoa, those exhibiting progressive and vigorous movement, remained
constant during the cryopreservation procedure, although the proportion differed 
among boars.

PMID: 16088038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. J Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Aug;35(1):61-71.

The Sp transcription factors are involved in the cellular expression of the human
glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide receptor gene and overexpressed in
adrenals of patients with Cushing's syndrome.

Baldacchino V(1), Oble S, Décarie PO, Bourdeau I, Hamet P, Tremblay J, Lacroix A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Endocrine Pathophysiology, Department of Medicine, Centre
Hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal, Quebec, Canada.

The best characterized effect of glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide
(GIP) is its stimulatory effect on insulin secretion by pancreatic beta-cells.
Recently, it was demonstrated that some cases of primary adrenal Cushing's
syndrome were secondary to the ectopic expression of non-mutated GIP receptor
(GIP-R) in bilateral adrenal hyperplasias or unilateral adrenal adenomas,
resulting in food-dependent steroidogenesis. Using a human multiple-expression
tissue array, GIP-R was found to be expressed in a large number of human adult
and fetal tissues, but not in the adrenal gland. The analysis of the promoter
region of human (h) GIP-R gene revealed six consensus sequences important in
regulating the reporter gene activity and capable of binding to Sp1 and Sp3
transcription factors. Data obtained by gene array and semi-quantitative RT-PCR
showed an increase in the expression of Sp3 and CRSP9 (co-regulator of Sp1
transcription factor, subunit 9) in the adrenal adenomas or bilateral
macronodular hyperplasias of patients with GIP-dependent Cushing's syndrome; they
were, however, also increased in some patients with non-GIP-dependent
cortisol-secreting adenomas or with ACTH-dependent Cushing's disease. This study 
represents the first step in our understanding of the mechanisms involved in the 
regulation of the expression of the hGIP-R gene.

PMID: 16087722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Ai Zheng. 2005 Aug;24(8):958-64.

[Synergetic cytotoxicity of cisplatin and etoposide to leukemia cell line K562
and its mechanism].

[Article in Chinese]

Ma WD(1), Yin MY, Jiang CW, Xu SR, Zhai LD, Zheng LF, Wang YL, Yan YL.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Division, Institute of Basic Medicine, Hebei Medical University, 
Shijiazhuang, Hebei, P. R. China.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVE: Etoposide (VP-16) is one of the most common chemotherapy 
drugs, but its usage is limited by drug resistance. Some researches on solid
tumors show that cisplatin (DDP) have synergetic effect with VP-16. This study
was to evaluate synergetic cytotoxicity of VP-16 and DDP to leukemia cell line
K562, and explore the mechanism.
METHODS: K562 cells were treated with VP-16 (0 or 5 microg/ml) and DDP (0, 0.3,
3, 15, or 30 microg/ml) in different combination patterns. Inhibitory effect of
VP-16 and DDP on survival of K562 cells was measured by MTT assay. Cell apoptosis
was evaluated by AO/EB double fluorescent labeling. The expression of
topoisomerase (TOPO) II alpha and II beta, and transcription factor Sp1 and Sp3
were measured by semi-quantitive reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction 
(RT-PCR) and Western blot.
RESULTS: MTT assay showed significant synergetic cytotoxicity of VP-16 and DDP.
VP-16 in combination with DDP obviously enhanced cell apoptosis. RT-PCR showed
that DDP significantly up-regulated the expression of TOPO II and Sp1 in
concentration-dependent manners (TOPO II alpha, II beta, and Sp1 were
up-regulated by 36%, 25%, and 75% of control, respectively, when treated with 30 
microg/ml of DDP), and down-regulated Sp3 by 49% of control; VP-16 (5 microg/ml) 
down-regulated TOPO II alpha by 71.9%, and up-regulated Sp3 by 14%; VP-16 (5
microg/ml) in combination with DDP (30 microg/ml) up-regulated TOPO II alpha by
83%, II beta by 11%, and Sp1 by 58% when compared with using VP-16 alone (but the
levels were lower than using DDP alone), and down-regulated Sp3 by 61.3% when
compared with using DDP alone. Western blot showed similar results to RT-PCR.
CONCLUSION: Through up-regulating TOPO II, DDP could enhance the chemotherapeutic
effect of VP-16 on K562 cells by provide more target enzyme to act on.

PMID: 16086873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Sep 23;335(2):377-84.

The D-domain of Sp3 modulates its protein levels and activation of the
p21(CIP1/WAF1) promoter.

Hammill D(1), Jain N, Armstrong S, Mueller CR.

Author information: 
(1)Queen's Cancer Research Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Pathology,
Queen's University, Kingston, Ont., Canada.

A variety of signals result in the transcriptional induction of the
p21(CIP1/WAF1) promoter and both Sp1 and the related Sp3 proteins have been
implicated in this induction. We have characterized the role of the C-terminal
D-domains of both Sp1 and Sp3 proteins in the activation of this promoter in
response to butyrate treatment of Hep G2 cells. We have defined a negative
regulatory domain present in the C-terminus of Sp3. This domain decreases Sp3
protein levels, and this property can be transferred to Sp1. Changes in Sp3
protein levels may bring about growth arrest through the induction of inhibitors 
of the cell cycle such as p21(CIP1/WAF1).

PMID: 16081043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. J Am Chem Soc. 2005 Aug 10;127(31):10846-7.

[(tBu2PCH2SiMe2)2N]RuCH3: the origin of extremely facile, double H-C(sp3)
activation generating a "hydrido-carbene" complex.

Ingleson MJ(1), Yang X, Pink M, Caulton KG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Molecular Structure Center, Indiana University,
Bloomington, IN, USA.

The four-coordinate compound [(tBu2PCH2SiMe2)2N]RuCH3 undergoes rapid double
H-C(sp3) activation at -78 degrees C to generate a "hydrido-carbene" complex. DFT
calculations suggest that the origin of the low barrier to methane elimination is
an alpha-agostic interaction in the low-lying singlet state of the highly
unsaturated (PNP)RuMe. The hydrido-carbene complex can be viewed as a "masked"
resting state of the four-coordinate cyclometalated alkyl complex,
[(tBu2PCH2SiMe2)N(Me2SiCH2P(tBu)(C(CH3)2CH2)]Ru, where hydride migration from
metal to carbon occurs before any subsequent reactivity.

PMID: 16076187  [PubMed]


417. J Am Chem Soc. 2005 Aug 10;127(31):10836-7.

A reaction for sp(3)-sp(3) C-C bond formation via cooperation of Lewis
acid-promoted/Rh-catalyzed C-H bond activation.

Shi L(1), Tu YQ, Wang M, Zhang FM, Fan CA, Zhao YM, Xia WJ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Applied Organic Chemistry and Department of Chemistry,
Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730000, P. R. China.

A new method for intermolecular sp3-sp3 C-C bond formation between primary
aliphatic alcohol and olefin by use of a RhCl(PPh3)3 (cat.)/BF3.OEt2 (2.5
equiv)/BuBr (0.5 equiv)/toluene system was first disclosed, which possessed quite
significant utilities for organic synthesis, especially for that of secondary
alcohols. The most significant aspect is the discovery that rhodium-catalyzed C-H
bond activation of alcohols is feasible under Lewis acid-promoted conditions.

PMID: 16076182  [PubMed]


418. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Aug 1;33(13):4285-310. Print 2005.

Transcription factor binding sites in the pol gene intragenic regulatory region
of HIV-1 are important for virus infectivity.

Goffin V(1), Demonté D, Vanhulle C, de Walque S, de Launoit Y, Burny A, Collette 
Y, Van Lint C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Virologie Moléculaire, Institut de Biologie et de Médecine
Moléculaires (IBMM), Service de Chimie Biologique, Université Libre de Bruxelles 
Rue des Profs Jeener et Brachet 12, 6041 Gosselies, Belgium.

We have previously identified in the pol gene of human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 (HIV-1) a new positive transcriptional regulatory element (nt 4481-4982)
containing recognition sites for nuclear proteins (sites B, C, D and a GC-box)
[C. Van Lint, J. Ghysdael, P. Paras, Jr, A. Burny and E. Verdin (1994) J. Virol. 
68, 2632-2648]. In this study, we have further physically characterized each
binding site and have shown that the transcription factors Oct-1, Oct-2, PU.1,
Sp1 and Sp3 interact in vitro with the pol region. Chromatin immunoprecipitation 
assays using HIV-infected cell lines demonstrated in the context of chromatin
that Sp1, Sp3, Oct-1 and PU.1 are recruited to the HS7 region in vivo. For each
site, we have identified mutations abolishing factor binding to their cognate DNA
sequences without altering the underlying amino acid sequence of the integrase.
By transient transfection assays, we have demonstrated the involvement of the pol
binding sites in the transcriptional enhancing activity of the intragenic region.
Our functional results with multimerized wild-type and mutated pol binding sites 
separately (i.e. in the absence of the other sites) have demonstrated that the
PU.1, Sp1, Sp3 and Oct-1 transcription factors regulate the transcriptional
activity of a heterologous promoter through their respective HS7 binding sites.
Finally, we have investigated the physiological role of the HS7 binding sites in 
HIV-1 replication and have shown that these sites are important for viral
infectivity.

PMCID: PMC1182164
PMID: 16061936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. J Cell Biochem. 2005 Nov 1;96(4):716-27.

Sp1 and Sp3 regulate the basal transcription of receptor activator of nuclear
factor kappa B ligand gene in osteoblasts and bone marrow stromal cells.

Liu J(1), Yang H, Liu W, Cao X, Feng X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama 35294, USA.

Receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B ligand (RANKL), a potent regulator
of osteoclast formation and function, is expressed by osteoblasts and bone marrow
stromal cells. However, the molecular mechanism underlying RANKL expression in
osteoblast/stromal cells remains largely unclear. Here, we characterized the
molecular mechanism controlling RANKL basal transcription in osteoblast/stromal
cells. We cloned a 1,103-bp murine RANKL promoter (from -953 to +150, relative to
the transcription start site). Using a series of deletion mutants of the 1,103-bp
promoter, we identified a 100-bp region (-154 to -54) mediating RANKL basal
transcription in both osteoblasts and bone marrow stromal cells. Electrophoretic 
mobility shift assay (EMSA) using five overlapping oligonucleotides (Probes 1-5) 
spanning the 100-bp region showed that Probes 1 and 2 specifically bound nuclear 
proteins with high affinity from both cell types. Computer analysis revealed that
Probes 1 and 2 contain a putative Sp1-binding site. Supershift assays with Sp1
and Sp3 antibodies confirmed that the nuclear proteins binding to Probes 1 and 2 
are Sp1 and Sp3. Functionally, the mutation of the Sp1/Sp3 site in Probe 1
profoundly reduced the basal promoter activity while the mutation of the one in
Probe 2 resulted in moderate reduction in the basal promoter activity. Moreover, 
the mutation of both sites abrogated the RANKL basal promoter activity,
indicating that Sp1 and Sp3 play a key role in the RANKL basal transcription in
osteoblasts and bone marrow stromal cells.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16052479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Cancer Lett. 2006 May 18;236(2):198-212. Epub 2005 Jul 26.

Inhibition of breast cancer cell growth and induction of cell death by
1,1-bis(3'-indolyl)methane (DIM) and 5,5'-dibromoDIM.

Vanderlaag K(1), Samudio I, Burghardt R, Barhoumi R, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
4466 TAMU, College Station, TX 77843-4466, USA.

1,1-Bis(3'-indolyl)methane (DIM) and the 5,5'-dibromo ring substituted DIM
(5,5'-diBrDIM) inhibited growth of MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells, and 
IC50 values were 10-20 and 1-5 microM, respectively, in both cell lines. DIM and 
5,5'-diBrDIM did not induce p21 or p27 protein levels or alter expression of Sp1 
or Sp3 proteins in either cell line. In contrast, 10 microM 5,5'-diBrDIM
downregulated cyclin D1 protein in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells 12 and 24 h after
treatment. DIM (20 microM) also decreased cyclin D1 in MCF-7 (24 h) and
MDA-MB-231 (12 h), and the DIM/5,5'-diBrDIM-induced degradation of cyclin D1 was 
blocked by the proteasome inhibitor MG132. Both DIM and 5,5'-diBrDIM induced
apoptosis in MCF-7 cells and this was accompanied by decreased Bcl-2, release of 
mitochondrial cytochrome c, and decreased mitochondrial membrane potential as
determined by the red/green fluorescence of JC-1. DIM and 5,5'-diBrDIM induced
extensive necrosis in MDA-MB-231 cells; however, this was accompanied by
decreased mitochondrial membrane potential primarily in cells treated with
5,5'-diBrDIM but not DIM. Thus, DIM and 5,5'-diBrDIM induce cell death in MCF-7
and MDA-MB-231 cells by overlapping and different pathways, and the
ring-substituted DIM represents a novel class of uncharged mitochondrial poisons 
that inhibit breast cancer cell and tumor growth.

PMID: 16051428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2005 Aug 15;1730(2):147-58.

Functional characterization of the promoter of the human glucose transporter 10
gene.

Segade F(1), Allred DC, Bowden DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA. fsegade@wfubmc.edu

The human SLC2A10 gene encodes the high-affinity glucose transporter 10 (GLUT10) 
and is widely expressed in adult tissues, including organs which play major roles
in glucose homeostasis. Its function and genomic location in a region linked to
Type 2 diabetes susceptibility are consistent with a potential role in Type 2
diabetes. Analysis of the CpG-rich promoter revealed the presence of two major
transcription start points with differential use in tissues and cell lines.
Mapping of transcriptionally active regions in the 5' flanking sequence
identified a region, located between nucleotides -70 and -14 (relative to the
major transcription start point) as the SLC2A10 basal promoter. This sequence
harbors consensus binding sites for Sp, AP2alpha, and other transcription
factors. A juxtaposed Sp/AP2alpha motif located between -25 and -11 is critical
for core promoter function. In cells expressing Sp and AP2 factors, the two
motifs are required for maximal activation of the basal promoter. In cells
lacking AP2alpha, transcription is dependent on the integrity of the Sp site.
Using electrophoresis mobility shift assays, we demonstrate that Sp1 and Sp3 bind
to the GC-box in site 5 forming specific complexes. In addition, a silencer
region is present upstream of -696 which down-regulates SLC2A10 promoter activity
independently of its distance to the transcript start site.

PMID: 16051383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Acta Crystallogr B. 2005 Aug;61(Pt 4):464-72. Epub 2005 Jul 19.

A variable-temperature study of a phase transition in barbituric acid dihydrate.

Nichol GS(1), Clegg W.

Author information: 
(1)School of Natural Sciences-Chemistry, Bedson Building, University of Newcastle
upon Tyne, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 7RU, England.

The crystal structure of barbituric acid dihydrate (C4H4N2O3*2H2O) has twice been
reported as orthorhombic, space group Pnma, with all atoms (except for CH(2) H
atoms) lying on the mirror plane [Al-Karaghouli et al. (1977). Acta Cryst. B33,
1655-1660; Jeffrey et al. (1961). Acta Cryst. 14, 881-887]. The present study has
found that at low temperatures, below 200 K, the crystal structure is no longer
orthorhombic but is non-merohedrally twinned monoclinic, space group P2(1)/n.
This phase is stable down to 100 K. Above 220 K the crystal structure is
orthorhombic, and between 200 and 220 K the structure undergoes a phase change,
with the monoclinic-to-orthorhombic phase transition itself taking place at
around 216-217 K. The size of the beta angle in the monoclinic structure is
temperature dependent; at 100 K beta is around 94 degrees and it decreases in
magnitude towards 90 degrees as the temperature increases. Although the
hydrogen-bonding motifs are the same for both crystal systems, there are
significant differences in the crystal packing, in particular the out-of-plane
displacement of the two water molecules and the sp3-hybridized C atom of
barbituric acid.

PMID: 16041097  [PubMed]


423. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2005 Aug 15;1730(2):126-36.

Characterization of the 5'-flanking region of the human transcription factor Sp3 
gene.

Tapias A(1), Monasterio P, Ciudad CJ, Noé V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Pharmacy,
University of Barcelona, Avenue Diagonal 643, Barcelona E-08028, Spain.

A fragment of 1079 bp from the 5'-flanking region of the human Sp3 gene was
isolated and characterized. The Sp3 promoter is a GC-rich region that contains
putative binding sites for Elk-1, c-Myb, NF-1, Ap1, Sp1, NF-Y, Ap2 and USF.
Several transcriptional start sites located between 70 and 132 bp upstream of the
translational start site were identified. The proximal promoter was contained in 
the first 281 bp 5' of the translational start, whereas the region including up
to -225 relative to the translational start was referred as the minimal promoter.
Transient transfections and luciferase assays revealed activation of the Sp3
proximal promoter upon overexpression of either Sp1 or Sp3, alone or in
combination. Gel-shift and supershift assays demonstrated specific binding of Sp1
and Sp3 proteins to the GC box located in the proximal promoter of Sp3.
Overexpression of NF-YA had a synergistic effect on Sp1 overexpression and an
additive effect on Sp3 overexpression. Additionally, overexpression of NF-YA, Sp1
and Sp3 altogether had a synergistic effect on Sp3 promoter activity.
Furthermore, binding of the NF-Y complex to the CCAAT box located in the proximal
promoter of Sp3 was observed in gel-shift assays.

PMID: 16024108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Seikagaku. 2005 Jun;77(6):545-51.

[Sumoylation].

[Article in Japanese]

Kikuchi Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, The University 
of Tokyo, 7-3-1, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-0033 Japan.

PMID: 16022431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Dec;19(12):2964-78. Epub 2005 Jul 14.

Secretoglobin 2A1 is under selective androgen control mediated by a peculiar
binding site for Sp family transcription factors.

Xiao F(1), Mirwald A, Papaioannou M, Baniahmad A, Klug J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Anatomie und Zellbiologie, Justus-Liebig-Universität Giessen,
Aulweg 123, D-35385 Giessen, Germany.

Human secretoglobin (SCGB) 2A1 (or lipophilin C, lacryglobin, mammaglobin B) is a
small protein of unknown function that forms heterodimers with secretoglobin 1D1 
(lipophilin A) in tears and is expressed in the prostate. Here we show that SCGB 
2A1 is under androgen control in the androgen-responsive prostatic cell line
LNCaP and can be induced more than 20-fold by dihydrotestosterone. Only 6 h after
androgen treatment, a strong DNase I-hypersensitive site is induced in the
proximal promoter within chromatin. Within the boundaries of this DNase
I-hypersensitive site a minimal 32-bp peculiar dimeric inverted repeat variant GC
box (dim-IR-GA box) was found to confer androgen but not glucocorticoid
responsiveness in gene transfer experiments. Mutations of both GA boxes that
abolish binding of Sp1 and Sp3 also abrogate the androgen response. In an EMSA
the DNA binding domain of the androgen receptor (AR) was not able to bind
directly to the dim-IR-GA box. However, AR is functionally required for the
hormone response because induction can be inhibited with the nonsteroidal
antagonist bicalutamide. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrated
that AR is recruited to the proximal promoter 10 min after androgen treatment.
Therefore we propose that SCGB 2A1 represents a new class of androgen target
genes that are purely under indirect AR control mediated by DNA-bound Sp factors.

PMID: 16020486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. J Virol. 2005 Aug;79(15):9597-607.

Two Sp1/Sp3 binding sites in the major immediate-early proximal enhancer of human
cytomegalovirus have a significant role in viral replication.

Isomura H(1), Stinski MF, Kudoh A, Daikoku T, Shirata N, Tsurumi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, Chikusa-ku,
Nagoya, Japan.

We previously demonstrated that the major immediate early (MIE) proximal enhancer
containing one GC box and the TATA box containing promoter are minimal elements
required for transcription and viral replication in human fibroblast cells (H.
Isomura, T. Tsurumi, M. F. Stinski, J. Virol. 78:12788-12799, 2004). After
infection, the level of Sp1 increased while Sp3 remained constant. Here we report
that either Sp1 or Sp3 transcription factors bind to the GC boxes located at
approximately positions -55 and -75 relative to the transcription start site
(+1). Both the Sp1 and Sp3 binding sites have a positive and synergistic effect
on the human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) major immediate-early (MIE) promoter. There
was little to no change in MIE transcription or viral replication for recombinant
viruses with one or the other Sp1 or Sp3 binding site mutated. In contrast,
mutation of both the Sp1 and Sp3 binding sites caused inefficient MIE
transcription and viral replication. These data indicate that the Sp1 and Sp3
binding sites have a significant role in HCMV replication in human fibroblast
cells.

PMCID: PMC1181558
PMID: 16014922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Annu Rev Nutr. 2005;25:175-96.

Uptake, localization, and noncarboxylase roles of biotin.

Zempleni J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Health Sciences and Departments of Biochemistry
and Animal Science, University of Nebraska at Lincoln, Nebraska 68583-0806, USA. 
Jzempleni2@unl.edu

Evidence is emerging that biotin participates in processes other than classical
carboxylation reactions. Specifically, novel roles for biotin in cell signaling, 
gene expression, and chromatin structure have been identified in recent years.
Human cells accumulate biotin by using both the sodium-dependent multivitamin
transporter and monocarboxylate transporter 1. These transporters and other
biotin-binding proteins partition biotin to compartments involved in biotin
signaling: cytoplasm, mitochondria, and nuclei. The activity of cell signals such
as biotinyl-AMP, Sp1 and Sp3, nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB, and receptor tyrosine
kinases depends on biotin supply. Consistent with a role for biotin and its
catabolites in modulating these cell signals, greater than 2000 biotin-dependent 
genes have been identified in various human tissues. Many biotin-dependent gene
products play roles in signal transduction and localize to the cell nucleus,
consistent with a role for biotin in cell signaling. Posttranscriptional events
related to ribosomal activity and protein folding may further contribute to
effects of biotin on gene expression. Finally, research has shown that
biotinidase and holocarboxylase synthetase mediate covalent binding of biotin to 
histones (DNA-binding proteins), affecting chromatin structure; at least seven
biotinylation sites have been identified in human histones. Biotinylation of
histones appears to play a role in cell proliferation, gene silencing, and the
cellular response to DNA repair. Roles for biotin in cell signaling and chromatin
structure are consistent with the notion that biotin has a unique significance in
cell biology.

PMID: 16011464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. J Am Chem Soc. 2005 Jul 20;127(28):9968-9.

Bergman cyclization of sterically hindered substrates and observation of
phenyl-shifted products.

Lewis KD(1), Matzger AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and the Macromolecular Science and Engineering
Program, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-1055, USA.

Heating 1,2-bis(phenylethynyl)benzene in the presence of 1,4-cyclohexadiene at
temperatures ranging from 260 to 360 degrees C yielded the expected Bergman
product, 2,3-diphenylnaphthalene, as only a minor product (<3%) under all
reaction conditions studied. The major products, resulting from one or more
phenyl shifts, were 1,3- and 1,4-diphenylnaphthalene which formed in up to 16%
and 11% yield, respectively. Although somewhat less efficiently,
1-ethynyl-2-(phenylethynyl)benzene and (Z)-1,6-diphenylhex-3-ene-2,5-diyne also
yielded products resulting from phenyl shifts. These results are explained
through computations that point to the role of steric repulsion and benzyne
stability in driving these isomerizations. The computed barriers for phenyl
shifting are dramatically higher than those observed in the case of sp3 radicals.
However, these transformations are relevant in solution chemistry as well as in
more extreme environments such as those encountered during combustion, pyrolysis,
and electric discharge heating.

PMID: 16011338  [PubMed]


429. Pflugers Arch. 2005 Sep;450(6):363-71. Epub 2005 Jul 9.

Hypoxia-responsive transcription factors.

Cummins EP(1), Taylor CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Conway Institute for Biomolecular
and Biomedical Research and the Dublin Molecular Medicine Centre, University
College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin, 4, Ireland.

Hypoxia is a common pathophysiological occurrence with a profound impact on the
cellular transcriptome. The consequences of hypoxia-induced or hypoxia-repressed 
gene expression have important implications in disease processes as diverse as
tumour development and chronic inflammation. While the hypoxia-inducible factor
(HIF-1) plays a major role in controlling the ubiquitous transcriptional response
to hypoxia, it is clear that a number of other transcription factors are also
activated either directly or indirectly. In this review, we comprehensively
discuss the transcription factors that have been reported to be
hypoxia-responsive and the signalling mechanisms leading to their activation.
Understanding such events will enhance our understanding of cellular oxygen
sensing.

PMID: 16007431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Mol Immunol. 2006 Feb;43(6):529-41. Epub 2005 Jul 6.

Identification of a ubiquitously active promoter of the murine activation-induced
cytidine deaminase (AICDA) gene.

Yadav A(1), Olaru A, Saltis M, Setren A, Cerny J, Livák F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of
Maryland at Baltimore, 655 West Baltimore St, BRB 13-017, Baltimore, MD 21201,
USA.

Somatic hypermutation and class switch recombination of immunoglobulin genes are 
dependent on the presence of the activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AICDA)
enzyme. AICDA expression is restricted to activated B-lymphocytes in the germinal
centers. It has been suggested that inappropriate expression of AICDA may lead to
genome instability and aberrant affinity maturation of putative autoreactive
antibodies. To better understand the molecular control of its tightly regulated
expression we have identified the transcription initiation site and an upstream, 
conserved promoter region of the murine AICDA gene. The promoter lacks a
consensus TATA box but contains an initiator (Inr) element and is active in
several murine and human cell lines irrespective of endogenous AICDA expression. 
Mutagenesis analysis identified a functionally important Sp-binding site which
binds both Sp1 and Sp3 in vitro in all cell types. Contrary to a recent report,
no evidence was found for direct Pax5-binding at this DNA site. We discuss the
role of ubiquitous and lymphoid-specific factors in the control of AICDA gene
transcription.

PMID: 16005067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Chemistry. 2005 Sep 5;11(18):5377-80.

C2 isomers of C84F40 and C84F44 are cuboid and contain benzenoid and
naphthalenoid aromatic patches.

Darwish AD(1), Martsinovich N, Street JM, Taylor R.

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry Department, University of Sussex, Brighton BN1 9QJ, UK.

A 1:1 mixture of C84F40 and C84F44, both derived from the D2(IV) isomer, has been
isolated from the fluorination of [84]fullerene with either MnF3 or CoF3 at 500
degrees C. The 1D and 2D COSY 19F NMR spectra showed that each derivative is
cuboid, having benzenoid rings at four of the six octahedral sites; the two
remaining sites have naphthalenoid rings for C84F40, and two slightly offset
benzenoid rings for C84F44. The benzenoid rings each have six adjacent
sp3-hybridised carbon atoms whilst the naphthalenoid moieties have eight, thus
facilitating full delocalisation. In terms of the number and size of aromatic
patches, C84F44 is the most aromatic fullerene derivative yet isolated.

PMID: 16003809  [PubMed]


432. Science. 2005 Jul 8;309(5732):278-81.

Isolation of two seven-membered ring C58 fullerene derivatives: C58F17CF3 and
C58F18.

Troshin PA(1), Avent AG, Darwish AD, Martsinovich N, Abdul-Sada AK, Street JM,
Taylor R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Problems of Chemical Physics of Russian Academy of Sciences,
Chernogolovka 142432, Russia.

Fluorination of C60 at 550 degrees C leads to milligram quantities of two stable 
fullerene derivatives with 58-carbon cage structures: C58F18 and C58F17CF3. The
compounds were characterized by mass spectrometry and fluorine nuclear magnetic
resonance spectroscopy, and the data support a heptagonal ring in the framework. 
The resulting strain, which has hindered past attempts to prepare these smaller
quasi-fullerenes, is mitigated here by hybridization change of some of the
carbons in the pentagons from sp2 to sp3 because of fluorine addition. The loss
of carbon from C60 is believed to occur via sequential fluorine addition to a CC 
single bond and an adjacent CC bond, followed by loss of a:CF2 carbene.

PMID: 16002613  [PubMed]


433. Intensive Care Med. 2005 Aug;31(8):1128-31. Epub 2005 Jul 6.

Short-term effects of prone position in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
patients with severe acute hypoxemic and hypercapnic respiratory failure.

Reignier J(1), Lejeune O, Renard B, Fiancette M, Lebert C, Bontemps F, Clementi
E, Martin-Lefevre L.

Author information: 
(1)Medical-Surgical Intensive Care Unit, District Hospital Center, 85025 la
Roche-sur-Yon, France. jean.reignier@chd-vendee.fr

Comment in
    Intensive Care Med. 2005 Aug;31(8):1012-3.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the short-term effects of prone positioning (PP) in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients with severe hypoxemic and
hypercapnic respiratory failure requiring invasive mechanical ventilation.
DESIGN AND SETTING: Prospective observational study in the general intensive care
unit of a university-affiliated hospital.
PATIENTS: 11 consecutive COPD patients with persistent hypoxemia (PaO2/FIO2 < or 
= 200 mmHg with FIO2 > or = 0.6) and hypercapnia requiring invasive mechanical
ventilation. Patients with adult respiratory distress syndrome or left
ventricular failure were excluded. Mean age was 73+/-11 years, mean weight
86+/-31 kg, mean SAPS II 53+/-10, and ICU mortality 36%.
INTERVENTIONS: Patients were turned every 6 h.
MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS: A response to PP (20% or greater PaO2/FIO2 increase)
was noted in 9 (83%) patients. Blood gases were measured in the PP and supine
(SP) positions 3 h after each turn, for 36 h, yielding six measurement sets (SP1,
PP1, SP2, PP2, SP3, and PP3). PaO2/FIO2 was significantly better in PP: 190+/-26 
vs. 113+/-9 mmHg for PP1/SP1, 175+/-22 vs. 135+/-16 mmHg for PP2/SP2, and
199+/-24 vs. 151+/-13 mmHg for PP3/SP3. After PP1 PaO2/FIO2 remained
significantly improved, and the PaO2/FIO2 improvement from SP1 to SP2 was
linearly related to PaO2/FIO2 during PP1 (r=0.8). The tracheal aspirate volume
improved significantly from SP1 to PP1. PaCO2 was not significantly affected by
position.
CONCLUSIONS: PP was effective in treating severe hypoxemia in COPD patients. The 
first turn in PP was associated with increased tracheal aspirate.

PMID: 15999257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Mol Biol Cell. 2005 Sep;16(9):4073-83. Epub 2005 Jun 29.

Differential intranuclear organization of transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3.

He S(1), Sun JM, Li L, Davie JR.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba
R3E 0V9, Canada.

Sp1 and Sp3 are ubiquitously expressed mammalian transcription factors that
activate or repress the expression of a variety of genes and are thought to
compete for the same DNA binding site. We used indirect immunofluorescence
microscopy and image deconvolution to show that Sp1 and Sp3 are organized into
distinct nonoverlapping domains in human breast and ovarian cells. Domains of Sp1
and Sp3 infrequently associate with sites of transcription. Sp3 partitions with
the tightly bound nuclear protein fraction of hormone responsive MCF-7 breast
cancer cells, whereas only a subpopulation of Sp1 is found in that fraction. Both
Sp1 and Sp3 are bound to the nuclear matrix, and the nuclear matrix-associated
sites of Sp1 and Sp3 are different. Indirect immunofluorescence studies
demonstrate that Sp1 and Sp3 associate with histone deacetylases 1 and 2 and with
the estrogen receptor alpha, albeit at low frequencies in MCF-7 cells. Chromatin 
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and re-ChIP assays revealed that although both Sp1 and
Sp3 bind to the estrogen-responsive trefoil factor 1 promoter in MCF-7 cells,
they do not occupy the same promoter. Our results demonstrate the different
features of Sp1 and Sp3, providing further evidence that Sp3 is not a functional 
equivalent of Sp1.

PMCID: PMC1196320
PMID: 15987735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Aug 12;333(4):1123-31.

c-Krox down-regulates the expression of UDP-glucose dehydrogenase in
chondrocytes.

Beauchef G(1), Kypriotou M, Chadjichristos C, Widom RL, Porée B, Renard E,
Moslemi S, Wegrowski Y, Maquart FX, Pujol JP, Galéra P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Connective Tissue Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Caen,
France.

Chondrocyte glycosaminoglycan (GAG) synthesis is regulated by the availability of
UDP-glucuronate, the substrate of glucuronosyl transferases which form the GAG
chains in proteoglycans and hyaluronan. UDP-glucose dehydrogenase (UDPGD) is
therefore a key enzyme in the synthesis of UDP-glucuronate from glucose. However,
the mechanisms regulating its expression in chondrocytes are not fully
understood. We investigated the effect of c-Krox, a zinc-finger transcription
factor previously shown to modulate several matrix genes, on the synthesis of GAG
and transcriptional activity of several UDPGD gene promoter constructs, using
transient transfection and decoy experiments in rabbit articular chondrocytes
(RACs). We show that overexpression of c-Krox inhibits radiosulfate incorporation
into neosynthesized GAG and that the effect was mediated by a cis-sequence
located between +18 and +39bp of the UDPGD gene. Since that sequence can also
bind Sp1/Sp3 factors, it is likely that c-Krox acts in concert with these
proteins to modulate the UDPGD gene expression in articular chondrocytes.

PMID: 15982635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Jul 1;33(Web Server issue):W193-7.

Web-based toolkits for topology prediction of transmembrane helical proteins,
fold recognition, structure and binding scoring, folding-kinetics analysis and
comparative analysis of domain combinations.

Zhou H(1), Zhang C, Liu S, Zhou Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology & Biophysics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute Center 
for Single Molecule Biophysics, State University of New York at Buffalo, 124
Sherman Hall, Buffalo, NY 14214, USA.

We have developed the following web servers for protein structural modeling and
analysis at http://theory.med.buffalo.edu: THUMBUP, UMDHMM(TMHP) and TUPS,
predictors of transmembrane helical protein topology based on a
mean-burial-propensity scale of amino acid residues (THUMBUP), hidden Markov
model (UMDHMM(TMHP)) and their combinations (TUPS); SPARKS 2.0 and SP3, two
profile-profile alignment methods, that match input query sequence(s) to
structural templates by integrating sequence profile with knowledge-based
structural score (SPARKS 2.0) and structure-derived profile (SP3); DFIRE, a
knowledge-based potential for scoring free energy of monomers (DMONOMER), loop
conformations (DLOOP), mutant stability (DMUTANT) and binding affinity of
protein-protein/peptide/DNA complexes (DCOMPLEX & DDNA); TCD, a program for
protein-folding rate and transition-state analysis of small globular proteins;
and DOGMA, a web-server that allows comparative analysis of domain combinations
between plant and other 55 organisms. These servers provide tools for prediction 
and/or analysis of proteins on the secondary structure, tertiary structure and
interaction levels, respectively.

PMCID: PMC1160121
PMID: 15980453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Aug 12;333(4):1254-60.

Upregulation of MUC6 mucin gene expression by NFkappaB and Sp factors.

Sakai H(1), Jinawath A, Yamaoka S, Yuasa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 
Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan.

To clarify the mechanism underlying regulation of MUC6 expression, we isolated
the 5' flanking region of the MUC6 gene (5'-MUC6). We determined the
transcription start site of the MUC6 gene, and found a TATA box at -35 to -29bp, 
a putative NFkappaB consensus sequence at -173 to -164bp, and putative Sp family 
binding sites at -530 to -521 and -847 to -838bp. The luciferase activity of
5'-MUC6 gradually decreased with deletion of these sites. NFkappaB inhibitory
factor IkappaB decreased the luciferase activity, and forced expression of
NFkappaB induced MUC6 transcription. An inhibitor of Sp family binding,
mithramycin A, suppressed MUC6 transcripts, and Sp1 and Sp3 overexpression
up-regulated them. Binding of Sp family members to their putative sites was
confirmed by electrophoretic mobility shift assays. Our results suggest that MUC6
transcription is regulated by NFkappaB and Sp family members.

PMID: 15979574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2005 Oct;289(4):G653-63. Epub 2005 Jun
23.

Zinc finger transcription factor Egr-1 is involved in stimulation of NHE2 gene
expression by phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate.

Malakooti J(1), Sandoval R, Memark VC, Dudeja PK, Ramaswamy K.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Medicine, Section of Digestive and Liver Diseases, University of
Illinois, Chicago, IL 60612, USA. malakoot@uic.edu

The apical membrane Na(+)/H(+) exchanger isoforms NHE2 and NHE3 are involved in
transepithelial Na(+) absorption in the intestine. However, they exhibit
differences in their pattern of tissue expression and regulation of their
activity by various molecular signals. To study the mechanisms involved in the
transcriptional regulation of these genes, we characterized cis-acting elements
within the human NHE2 promoter that regulate NHE2 promoter expression in C2BBe1
cells. A small DNA region (-85/+249) was involved in the regulation of basal
transcriptional activity of the NHE2 promoter as determined by transient
transfection assays. RT-PCR analysis showed that NHE2 mRNA was upregulated in
response to phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA). Results from actinomycin
D-treated cells indicated that the regulation of the NHE2 gene by PMA occurs in
part at the transcriptional level. Furthermore, PMA treatment led to a 100%
increase in promoter activity through elements located on the -415/+249 DNA
fragment. A PMA-induced nuclear factor that bound to the NHE2 promoter was
identified as the transcription factor Egr-1. We identified two PMA response
elements in the -415/+1 promoter region that bind to Sp1 and Sp3 in untreated
nuclear extracts and to Egr-1 in PMA-treated nuclear extracts. In cotransfection 
experiments, Egr-1 was able to transactivate the NHE2 promoter. Our data indicate
that Egr-1 may play a key role in regulated expression of the human NHE2 gene.

PMID: 15976391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. J Am Chem Soc. 2005 Jun 29;127(25):8944-5.

Exceptionally facile CO addition to a saturated ruthenium complex.

Bibal C(1), Smurnyy YD, Pink M, Caulton KG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Molecular Structure Center, Indiana University,
Bloomington, Indiana 47405, USA.

Synthesis and characterization of Cp*Ru[eta3-HC(PPh2NPh)2], 1, reveals it to have
a "piano stool" structure with the ligand bound to Ru(II) via two N and the
unique, sp3 hybridized carbon. While the analogous (cymene)
Ru[eta3-HC(PPh2NPh)2]+ does not react with CO, under the same conditions, 1 adds 
one CO rapidly (25 degrees C, 1 atm CO). Characterization, including an X-ray
structure determination, shows that CO has displaced one chelate ligand nitrogen,
which then hangs off the molecule, free of Ru. DFT calculations reveal a possible
mechanism via a remarkably low energy (+9.3 kcal/mol) intermediate, pendant N,
but with one phenyl on phosphorus stabilizing Ru via donation from a
C(ipso)=C(ortho) bond. DFT calculations show that the electronic energy change
for binding CO is over 20 kcal/mol less favorable for cymene than for C5Me5- as
ligand; the reactivity difference is thus thermodynamic in origin.

PMID: 15969559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2005 May;1041:233-47.

New insight into the transcriptional regulation of vascular endothelial growth
factor expression in the endometrium by estrogen and relaxin.

Koos RD(1), Kazi AA, Roberson MS, Jones JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21201-1559, USA. rkoos@umaryland.edu

Increased uterine capillary permeability, which can be induced by both estrogen
and relaxin, is required for endometrial growth and implantation. This effect is 
mediated in both cases by estrogen receptors (ERs), via stimulation of vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression. The sites on the VEGF promoter
through which induction occurs, however, are completely unclear. We have used the
technique of chromatin immunoprecipitation in vivo to localize the site of ER
action and identify other transcription factors that are involved. We have found 
that ERa associates with Sp1/Sp3 at a GC-rich region of the promoter. More
interesting, however, is the observation that estrogen also induces rapid,
transient binding of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1), which mediates VEGF
transcription in response to hypoxia, to the promoter. The estrogen-induced HIF-1
binding closely matches the estrogen-induced pattern of VEGF expression in the
uterus, suggesting that HIF-1 is involved in that induction, and probably that of
many other genes as well (HIF-1 is now known to regulate the expression of more
than 40 genes). It is likely that studies now under way will also link
relaxin-induced VEGF expression to HIF-1. This is based on the similarities in
the effects of the two hormones on VEGF expression and on their shared ability to
activate the PI3K and MAPK pathways, both of which can activate HIF-1.

PMID: 15956714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. J Biol Chem. 2005 Aug 12;280(32):28867-76. Epub 2005 Jun 10.

Sp1/Sp3-dependent regulation of human telomerase reverse transcriptase promoter
activity by the bioactive sphingolipid ceramide.

Wooten LG(1), Ogretmen B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

In this study, the roles of Sp1/Sp3 transcription factors in the regulation of
the activity of human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) promoter in
response to ceramide were examined in the A549 human lung adenocarcinoma cells.
The activity of the N-terminal truncated hTERT promoter, lacking the c-Myc
recognition (E-box) region but containing multiple Sp1/Sp3 sites, was also
significantly inhibited by C6-ceramide, indicating a role for ceramide in the
regulation of Sp1/Sp3 function. Partial inhibition of Sp1 expression using small 
interfering RNA resulted in a significant inhibition of the hTERT promoter.
Treatment with C6-ceramide inhibited the trans-activation function of
overexpressed Sp1, whereas it induced the repressor effects of exogenous Sp3 on
the hTERT promoter. The interaction between Sp1 and hTERT promoter DNA was
significantly reduced in response to ceramide as assessed by chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis. In contrast, the promoter DNA-binding activity of
Sp3 was slightly increased in response to C6-ceramide, resulting in the increased
ratio of Sp3/Sp1 on the hTERT promoter, which was concomitant with the reduced
recruitment of RNA polymerase II to the promoter. Furthermore, mutations of
various Sp1/Sp3 recognition sequences significantly attenuated the activity of
the promoter in the presence or absence of ceramide, demonstrating the importance
of multiple Sp1/Sp3 recognition sites for the promoter activity. Mechanistically,
the data demonstrated that C6-ceramide reduced the acetylation of Sp3 protein and
partially blocked the activation of the hTERT promoter by the histone deacetylase
inhibitor trichostatin A. The roles of endogenous long chain ceramide generated
in response to gemcitabine in the inhibition of hTERT promoter activity and the
regulation of Sp3 acetylation were also demonstrated.

PMID: 15951564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Org Lett. 2005 Jun 9;7(12):2405-8.

Efficient protiodesilylation of unactivated C(sp3)-SiMe2Ph bonds using
tetrabutylammonium fluoride.

Heitzman CL(1), Lambert WT, Mertz E, Shotwell JB, Tinsley JM, Va P, Roush WR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan
48109-1055, USA.

[reaction: see text] The protiodesilylation of unactivated C(sp3)-SiMe2Ph bonds
proceeds efficiently by treatment with tetrabutylammonium fluoride in wet DMF or 
THF via isolable dimethylsilanol intermediates.

PMCID: PMC2515625
PMID: 15932209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2005 Jun 15;1735(1):1-19.

Transcriptional regulatory networks in lipid metabolism control ABCA1 expression.

Schmitz G(1), Langmann T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, University of
Regensburg, Franz-Josef-Strauss-Allee 11, 93042 Regensburg, Germany.
gerd.schmitz@klinik.uni-regensburg.de

The ATP-binding cassette transporters, ABCA1 and ABCG1, are major players in
mediating cellular efflux of phospholipids and cholesterol to apoA-I containing
lipoproteins including prebeta-HDL and alphaHDL and thereby exert important
antiatherogenic properties. Although the exact mechanisms how ABC transporters
mediate lipid transport are not completely resolved, recent evidence from several
laboratories including ours suggests that vesicular transport processes involving
different interactive proteins like beta2-syntrophin, alpha1-syntrophin, Lin7,
and cdc42 are critically involved in cellular lipid homeostasis controlled by
ABCA1 and ABCG1. Besides sterols and fatty acids as known physiological
modulators of the LXR/RXR and SREBP pathways, a growing list of natural and
synthetic substances and metabolic regulators such as retinoids, PPAR-ligands,
hormones, cytokines, and drugs are particularly effective in modulating ABCA1 and
ABCG1 gene expression. Although ABCA1 protein amounts are regulated at the level 
of stability, the majority of potent activating and repressing mechanisms on
ABCA1 function directly act on the ABCA1 gene promoter. Among the inducing
factors, liver-X-receptors (LXR), retinoic acid receptors (RAR) and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) along with their coactivators provide an
amplification loop for ABCA1 and ABCG1 expression. The ABCA1 promoter is further 
stimulated by the ubiquitous factor Sp1 and the hypoxia-induced factor 1 (HIF1), 
which bind to GC-boxes and the E-box, respectively. Shutdown of ABCA1 expression 
in the absence of sterols or in certain tissues is mediated by corepressor
complexes involving unliganded LXR, sterol-regulatory element binding protein 2
(SREBP2), Sp3, and the SCAN-domain protein ZNF202, which also impacts nuclear
receptor signaling. Thus, a highly sophisticated transcriptional network controls
the balanced expression of ABCA1.

PMID: 15922656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Chem Commun (Camb). 2005 Jun 7;(21):2738-40. Epub 2005 Apr 15.

Synthesis of novel palladium OCN-pincer complexes: unprecedented sequential
C(sp3)-H activation and aerobic oxidation in the reaction of
N,N-dialkyl-3-[(N,N-dimethylamino)methyl]-2-iodoanilines with Pd2(dba)3.

Solé D(1), Vallverdú L, Solans X, Font-Bardia M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratori de Química Orgànica, Facultat de Farmàcia, Universitat de
Barcelona, Av. Joan XXIII s/n, 08028-Barcelona, Spain. dsole@ub.edu

The reaction of N,N-dialkyl-3-[(N,N-dimethylamino)methyl]-2-iodoanilines with
Pd2(dba)3 under O2 gives palladium OCN-pincer complexes by means of an
unprecedented process that involves the formal aerobic oxidation of C(sp3)-H
bonds at the alpha position of the aniline N atom.

PMID: 15917938  [PubMed]


445. Dev Dyn. 2005 Jul;233(3):1157-62.

Characterization and expression pattern of two zebrafish atf7 genes.

Zhao C(1), Qi J, Meng A.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, Department of 
Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.

Members of the ATF/CREB (activating transcription factor/cAMP-responsive element 
binding protein) transcription factor family play diverse roles in controlling
cell proliferation, apoptosis, and oncogenesis, as well as in embryonic
development of vertebrates. We identified two zebrafish orthologs of human ATF7
gene: atf7a and atf7b. Whole-mount in situ hybridization shows that zebrafish
atf7a is first expressed in the notochord precursors at 80% epiboly stage and
then in the developing notochord during segmentation. The expression of atf7a is 
positively regulated by ntl, flh, and spr2, which are involved in development of 
the notochord. In contrast, atf7b is maternally expressed and during
embryogenesis its mRNA is ubiquitously distributed, showing an expression pattern
similar to that of mammalian Atf7.

PMID: 15906372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Drug Metab Dispos. 2005 Aug;33(8):1174-84. Epub 2005 May 17.

Molecular mechanisms regulating human CYP4B1 lung-selective expression.

Poch MT(1), Cutler NS, Yost GS, Hines RN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Medical College of Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank
Rd., Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA. rhines@mail.mcw.edu

Lung-selective cytochrome P450 expression is well recognized; however, little is 
known regarding regulatory mechanisms. To address this knowledge gap, transient
expression of CYP4B1/luciferase constructs was used to identify a proximal,
positively acting regulatory element, position -139 to -45, that functioned in
all cells examined; a negatively acting element, position -457 to -216, that only
functioned in HepG2 hepatoblastoma cells; and a distal, positively acting
element, position -1087 to -1008, that functioned in A549 or BEAS-2B lung-derived
cells but not HepG2 cells or 293 kidney-derived cells. Competitive
electrophoretic mobility shift assays further localized specific A549, but not
HepG2, nuclear protein binding to two sites within the distal element, CYP4B1
position -1052 to -1042 and -1026 to -1008. Several potential lung-selective
transcription factor recognition sequences were identified within these elements.
However, attempts to identify specific factor(s) were unsuccessful. In contrast, 
in vitro DNA/protein binding assays combined with transient expression and
mutagenesis studies identified two functional Sephadex protein/Krüppel-like
factor families of transcription factor sites within the proximal element
(position -118 to -114 and position -77 to -73) that bound both Sephadex protein 
1 (Sp1) and Sephadex protein 3 (Sp3) in vitro. Furthermore, Sp1-dependent
synergistic regulation was observed in A549 cells involving the proximal and
distal regulatory elements. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated
binding of neither Sp1 nor Sp3 to the CYP4B1 proximal element in human liver
tissue, whereas selective Sp1 binding was observed in human lung tissue. Thus,
the composite findings are consistent with both the proximal Sp1 elements and the
distal regulatory element acting to synergistically control CYP4B1 lung-selective
expression.

PMID: 15900016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Jul 1;332(2):456-64.

Epigenetic regulation of the dendritic cell-marker gene ADAM19.

Ehrnsperger A(1), Rehli M, Thu-Hang P, Kreutz M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, University of Regensburg, Franz-Josef
Strauss Allee 11, 93042 Regensburg, Germany.

Human ADAM19 (MADDAM) is a molecular marker for human dendritic cells and not
expressed in macrophages. To investigate its cell-type-specific expression, we
defined the transcriptional start site and the proximal promoter. Sequence
analysis of the promoter revealed putative binding sites for several
transcription factors including Sp1, Sp3, NF-kappaB, and VDR. A minimal promoter 
construct of 150 bp showed little difference in reporter activity between
macrophages and dendritic cells. Transfection of monocytic THP-1 with the 150-bp 
fragment also resulted in significant reporter activity, despite the lack of
endogenous MADDAM expression. TSA, a known inhibitor of histone deacetylation,
led to a dose-dependent induction of MADDAM mRNA in THP-1. ChIP assays
demonstrated high levels of acetylated histone H3 in the proximal promoter region
of the MADDAM gene in TSA-treated THP-1 cells and dendritic cells as compared to 
macrophages, indicating an important role of histone acetylation in the
regulation of the MADDAM gene.

PMID: 15896713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Gene. 2005 May 23;351:83-95.

Genomic organization and promoter analysis of the mouse ADP-ribosylarginine
hydrolase gene.

Aoki K(1), Kato J, Shoemaker MT, Moss J.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary-Critical Care Medicine Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1434, USA.

Mono-ADP-ribosylation is a reversible modification of proteins with NAD:arginine 
ADP-ribosyltransferases and ADP-ribosylarginine hydrolases (ADPRH) catalyzing the
opposing arms of an ADP-ribosylation cycle. The ADPRH cDNA had been cloned from
human, rat, and mouse tissues and high levels of mRNA were found in brain,
spleen, and testis. To begin to understand the molecular mechanisms that regulate
ADPRH gene expression, we cloned the full-length cDNA, determined the genomic
structure of mouse ADPRH, and investigated promoter function. Northern analysis
using different regions of the ADPRH cDNA as probes identified two mRNAs of 1.7
and 3.0 kb, which resulted from the use of alternative polyadenylation signals,
CATAAC and ATTAAA, beginning at positions 1501 and 2885, respectively, of the
nucleotide sequence (A of ATG = 1). The ADPRH gene, represented in two
overlapping genomic clones, spans approximately 9 kilobases with four exons and
three introns. The 5'-flanking region contains the features of a housekeeping
gene; it has neither a TATA nor a CAAT box, but is, instead, highly GC-rich with 
multiple transcription initiation sites. Promoter analysis, assessed using
transient transfection of PC12, NB41A3, NIH/3T3, and Hepa 1-6 cells with
truncated constructs, revealed potent stimulatory (-119 to -89) and inhibitory
(-161 to -119) elements, which were utilized similarly in the different cell
lines. Further mutational analysis of the promoter and electrophoretic
mobility-shift assays identified a positive GC-box element (-107 to -95); Sp1 and
Sp3, which bound to this motif, were also detected by supershift assays. In
co-transfection experiments using Drosophila SL2 cells that lack endogenous Sp1, 
Sp1 trans-activated the ADPRH promoter in a manner dependent on the presence of
an Sp1-binding motif. The promoter activity pattern and involvement of Sp
transcription factors are consistent with prior observations of widespread
hydrolase expression in mammalian tissues.

PMID: 15893437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Endocrinology. 2005 Aug;146(8):3409-16. Epub 2005 May 12.

Transactivation of the parathyroid hormone promoter by specificity proteins and
the nuclear factor Y complex.

Alimov AP(1), Park-Sarge OK, Sarge KD, Malluche HH, Koszewski NJ.

Author information: 
(1)University of Kentucky Medical Center, Division of Nephrology, Bone and
Mineral Metabolism, Lexington, Kentucky 40536-0298, USA.

We previously identified a highly conserved specificity protein 1 (Sp1) DNA
element in mammalian PTH promoters that acted as an enhancer of gene
transcription and bound Sp1 and Sp3 proteins present in parathyroid gland nuclear
extracts. More recently, a nuclear factor (NF)-Y element (NF-Y(prox)) was also
described by our group, which was located approximately 30 bp downstream from the
Sp1 site in the human PTH (hPTH) promoter and by itself acted as a weak enhancer 
of gene transcription. We now report that Sp proteins and NF-Y can
synergistically enhance transcription of a minimal hPTH promoter construct.
Positioning of the Sp1 DNA element appears to be critical for this synergism
because deviations of one half of a helical turn caused an approximate 60%
decrease in transactivation. Finally, examination of the bovine PTH (bPTH)
promoter also revealed Sp1/NF-Y synergism, in conjunction with the identification
of an analogous NF-Y binding site similarly positioned downstream from the bPTH
Sp1 element. In summary, synergistic transactivation of the hPTH and bPTH
promoters is observed by Sp proteins and the NF-Y complex. The conservation of
this transactivation in the human and bovine promoters suggests that this may be 
a principle means of enhancing PTH gene transcription.

PMID: 15890770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Gastroenterology. 2005 May;128(5):1278-91.

Tumor necrosis factor alpha blockade restores growth hormone signaling in murine 
colitis.

DiFedele LM(1), He J, Bonkowski EL, Han X, Held MA, Bohan A, Menon RK, Denson LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Cytokines including tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) may
create a state of growth hormone (GH) resistance in Crohn's disease. Anabolic
effects of GH are mediated via phosphorylation of the signal transducer and
activator of transcription (STAT)5b transcription factor. Although GH resistance 
in other settings has been linked to a defect in janus kinase-STAT signaling, the
molecular basis for GH resistance in colitis was not known. We hypothesized that 
the GH-induced phosphorylation of STAT5b would be impaired in colitis, and that
TNFalpha blockade would restore GH signaling.
METHODS: Growth, body composition, and molecular regulators of GH signaling were 
determined in interleukin-10 null mice with chronic colitis and wild-type
controls, +/- treatment with an anti-TNFalpha antibody.
RESULTS: Interleukin-10 null mice exhibited significant alterations in growth,
body composition, and feed efficiency. Liver insulin-like growth factor 1
expression was reduced in colitic mice. This was associated with down-regulation 
of GH receptor (GHR) expression and impaired GH-dependent STAT5b activation.
Down-regulation of GHR expression was associated with reduced nuclear abundance
and DNA binding of the GHR gene-promoter transactivator, Sp3. TNFalpha
down-regulated GHR abundance and prevented GH-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of
STAT5 in rat hepatocytes in culture. TNFalpha neutralization up-regulated liver
GHR abundance and restored GH activation of STAT5 and serum insulin-like growth
factor 1 levels in colitic mice; this preceded improvements in weight gain and
disease activity.
CONCLUSIONS: GH resistance in experimental colitis is caused by down-regulation
of GHR expression, thereby reducing GH-dependent STAT5 activation. TNFalpha
blockade restores liver GH signaling and improves anabolic metabolism in this
setting.

PMID: 15887111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. J Am Chem Soc. 2005 May 18;127(19):6968-9.

CuBr-catalyzed direct indolation of tetrahydroisoquinolines via
cross-dehydrogenative coupling between sp3 C-H and sp2 C-H bonds.

Li Z(1), Li CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, McGill University, 801 Sherbrooke Street West,
Montreal, Quebec H3A 2K6, Canada.

A novel and efficient C-C bond formation method was developed via the
cross-dehydrogenative coupling (CDC) reaction of indoles and
tetrahydroisoquinolines catalyzed by copper bromide in the presence of an
oxidizing reagent, tert-BuOOH. The CDC reaction provides a simple and efficient
catalytic method to construct indolyl tetrahydroisoquinolines via a combination
of sp3 C-H bond and sp2 C-H bond followed by C-C bond formation.

PMID: 15884937  [PubMed]


452. Mol Pharmacol. 2005 Aug;68(2):317-29. Epub 2005 May 9.

Cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors decrease vascular endothelial growth factor
expression in colon cancer cells by enhanced degradation of Sp1 and Sp4 proteins.

Abdelrahim M(1), Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
4466 TAMU, Vet. Res. Bldg. 409, College Station, TX 77843-4466.
ssafe@cvm.tamu.edu.

Cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) inhibitors, such as celecoxib (Cel), nimesulfide (NM),
and NS-398 [NS; N-[2-(cyclohexyloxy)-4-nitrophenyl]methanesulfonamide] and other 
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs inhibit colon cancer growth and
angiogenesis; however, the mechanism of this response is not well defined.
Treatment of SW-480 colon cancer cells with Cel, NS, or NM decreased vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) mRNA and immunoreactive protein expression. This
was also accompanied by decreased transactivation in cells transfected with
constructs containing VEGF gene promoter inserts. Deletion analysis of the VEGF
promoter indicated that decreased VEGF expression by COX-2 inhibitors was
associated with the proximal -131 to -47 GC-rich region of the VEGF promoter that
binds Sp proteins. Treatment of SW-480 cells with Cel, NM, and NS also decreased 
Sp1 and Sp4 protein expression but not that of Sp2 or Sp3. Similar results were
observed in RKO, HT-29, and DLD colon cancer cells demonstrating comparable
responses in COX-2-expressing and -nonexpressing colon cancer cell lines. COX-2
inhibitors do not affect Sp1 or Sp4 mRNA levels in SW-480 cells; however,
decreased expression of both proteins was accompanied by increased protein
ubiquitination and inhibited by the proteasome inhibitor gliotoxin. These results
suggest that the antiangiogenic activity of COX-2 inhibitors in colon cancer
cells is linked to activation of proteasome-dependent degradation of Sp1 and Sp4 
proteins.

PMID: 15883203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. J Org Chem. 2005 May 13;70(10):4006-12.

A controllable synthesis of homoallyl ketones and multiply substituted
cyclopentadienes by direct insertion of aroyl cyanides to zirconacyclopentenes.

Zhou S(1), Yan B, Liu Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Organometallic Chemistry, Shanghai Institute of
Organic Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 354 Fenglin Lu, Shanghai 200032, 
People's Republic of China.

[reaction: see text] The direct reaction of aroyl cyanides with
zirconacyclopentenes was achieved cleanly under controlled reaction conditions.
This methodology provided an extremely efficient, one-pot, and high-yield route
for the synthesis of homoallyl ketones when the reaction was carried out at -50
degrees C. Trapping of the zirconium intermediate by a variety of electrophiles
afforded functionalized homoallyl ketones. Remarkably, the insertion reaction
occurred with complete chemoselectivity, that means, the Zr-sp3 carbon bond
reacted preferentially, which is different from Cu-mediated elaboration of
zirconacycles. Surprisingly, when the reaction was done at room temperature,
1,2,3-trisubstituted cyclopentadiene derivatives were readily formed in high
yields. The direct insertion reaction of zirconacyclopentanes with acyl cyanides 
was also described. When bicyclic zirconacyclopentanes were used, cyclopentanol
derivatives were obtained with high stereoselectivity.

PMID: 15876089  [PubMed]


454. DNA Cell Biol. 2005 May;24(5):299-310.

Different roles of Sp family members in HIV-1 Tat-mediated manganese superoxide
dismutase suppression in hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Porntadavity S(1), Nath A, Prachayasittikul V, Cota-Gomez A, Flores SC, St Clair 
DK.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Center for Toxicology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky
40536, USA.

The expression of manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) is regulated by agents
associated with cancer development. It has been shown that infection with the
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) is associated with the development of
liver cancer and that the transactivating transcriptional factor (Tat) of human
HIV-1 reduces the expression of MnSOD in several cell types. However, the role of
Tat in the expression of MnSOD in hepatocellular carcinoma is unknown.
Furthermore, the precise mechanisms whereby Tat suppresses MnSOD expression in
hepatocellular carcinoma cells remain unclear. In this report, we build on our
original observations that Tat changes the distribution of Sp family members on
the MnSOD promoter, which accounts for Tat-dependent changes in basal expression.
In hepatic cells, Tat expression upregulates Sp1/Sp3, which play different roles 
in regulating MnSOD transcription. While overexpression of Sp1 stimulates,
overexpression of Sp3 represses transcriptional activity. The transcription
repression effect of Sp3 is not due to Sp3 competing for the binding site with
Sp1 because only the full-length Sp3 but not the truncated Sp3 suppresses MnSOD
promoter activity. These findings suggest a novel mechanism by which Tat
modulates the repression of the MnSOD gene and establish a link between HIV
infection and liver cancer.

PMID: 15869407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Arch Pharm (Weinheim). 2005 Apr;338(4):159-66.

6-substituted purines as inhibitors of 15-lipoxygenase; a structure-activity
study.

Bråthe A(1), Gundersen LL, Malterud KE, Rise F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

15-lipoxygenase (15-LO) has been implicated in oxidation of low-density
lipoproteins (LDL), a process believed to be important for the development of
atherosclerosis, as well as other pathogenic conditions. Potent and selective
inhibitors of 15-LO may have a drug potential. In this study, purines with a
variety of substituents have been examined as inhibitors of 15-lipoxygenase
(15-LO) from soybeans. Several 6-substitued purines where the purine ring and a
phenyl ring in the substituent were separated by a "spacer" were synthesized and 
their ability to inhibit the enzyme was explored. Sepa ration of the purine and
the phenyl rings with none, one or two sp3-carbons resulted in essentially
inactive compounds, trans-styrylpurines and phenylethynylpurines, on the other
hand, they exhibited activity close to the well-known 15-LO inhibitor quercetin. 
High activity was also found when the "spacer" was a trans-cyclopropyl ring. The 
shape of the spacer was important; a corresponding cis-cyclopropylpurine
exhibited much less affinity for the enzyme. Only minor differences in inhibitory
activity against 15-LO were found regardless of whether an N-substituent was
situated on N-9 or N-7, even when the N-substituent was relatively large. Also, a
variety of substituents in the purine 2- and 8-position were well tolerated.

PMID: 15864785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Diabetologia. 2005 Jun;48(6):1150-8. Epub 2005 Apr 30.

Regulation of human resistin gene expression in cell systems: an important role
of stimulatory protein 1 interaction with a common promoter polymorphic site.

Chung SS(1), Choi HH, Kim KW, Cho YM, Lee HK, Park KS.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Research Center for Diabetes and Endocrine Disease, Clinical Research
Institute, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, South Korea.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Resistin is an adipokine that might link obesity and insulin
resistance. A common polymorphism of the human resistin gene, -420C >G, is a
major determinant of plasma resistin concentrations as well as resistin mRNA
expression in human adipose tissue. In this study, we investigated the regulatory
mechanism by which this polymorphism affects resistin expression.
METHODS: Electrophoretic mobility shift assay was performed to identify the
transcription factors binding to the -420G region. Transient transfection and
reporter assay were used to measure promoter activities of the resistin gene. The
binding ability of stimulatory protein 1 (Sp1) in response to adipocyte
differentiation or high glucose concentrations was also measured.
RESULTS: Sp1 and stimulatory protein 3 (Sp3) specifically bound to the region
around -420G of the human resistin gene. Overexpression of Sp1 increased the
promoter activity regardless of -420 genotypes, while the promoter activity of
the -420G construct was two-fold higher than that of the -420C construct. In
contrast, overexpression of Sp3 scarcely increased the promoter activity. The
binding ability of Sp1 to the -420G region was increased in response to adipocyte
differentiation. Mithramycin A, an inhibitor of DNA binding of Sp1, reduced the
effect of high glucose on transcription induction of the resistin gene in
adipocytes.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: These results suggest that Sp1 is an important factor
regulating transcription of human resistin gene. A common polymorphism of the
human resistin promoter, -420C >G, is critical for the binding of Sp1 and
modulates the transcriptional activity of the resistin gene by changing the
binding ability of Sp1. In addition, Sp1 may be involved in the increase of
resistin expression by hyperglycaemia.

PMID: 15864531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Drug Metab Dispos. 2005 Aug;33(8):1244-53. Epub 2005 Apr 28.

Sp1 and Sp3 regulate basal transcription of the human CYP2F1 gene.

Wan J(1), Carr BA, Cutler NS, Lanza DL, Hines RN, Yost GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, 30 South 2000 East, Room 201,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112-5820. gyost@pharm.utah.edu.

Selective transcription of the human CYP2F1 gene in lung tissues may control the 
susceptibilities of this organ to diverse pneumotoxicants and lung carcinogens.
However, the mechanisms responsible for CYP2F1 organ-selective transcription have
not been elucidated. The objectives of the current studies were to identify and
characterize basal transcription elements within the TATA-less promoter region of
CYP2F1. Four putative Sp1-like sites were identified in the CYP2F1 promoter.
Competitive electrophoretic mobility shift assay analysis with mutated
oligonucleotide probes and lung A549 cell nuclear extract, along with supershift 
studies using antibodies to either Sp1 or Sp3 proteins, demonstrated that all
four sites formed three specific protein-DNA complexes. Mutations in any of the
four core Sp1-like motifs abolished protein-DNA binding. Western blot analysis of
both human tissues and cells showed that Sp1 was considerably higher in lung than
liver and that Sp3 was much higher in liver than lung. Promoter activation of a
luciferase reporter construct was sequentially increased by addition of each of
the four Sp1-like motifs in lung A549 cells but not in liver HepG2 cells.
Cotransfection of a Sp1 expression vector with the reporter construct
dramatically increased luciferase activity in either A549 cells or Sp1-deficient 
Drosophila Schneider line 2 (SL-2) cells. However, similar cotransfections with
an Sp3 expression vector failed to increase activity. Cotransfection of both the 
Sp1 and Sp3 expression vectors considerably decreased Sp1-mediated activity in
A549 cells and abolished activity in SL-2 cells. Thus, these studies demonstrated
that four Sp1-dependent proximal promoter elements drive organ-selective CYP2F1
gene transcription, and that Sp1 and Sp3 factors interact to modulate
constitutive CYP2F1 transcription in lung cells.

PMID: 15860659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Gene. 2005 May 23;351:51-9. Epub 2005 Apr 25.

Identification of the promoter of human transcription factor Sp3 and evidence of 
the role of factors Sp1 and Sp3 in the expression of Sp3 protein.

Lou Z(1), Maher VM, McCormick JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Carcinogenesis Laboratory, Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, 
Michigan State University, Food Safety and Toxicology Building, East Lansing,
48824-1302, USA.

In a study of the role of transcription factor Sp1 in the formation of tumors by 
human fibrosarcoma cell lines that overexpress it [Cancer Res., 65 (2005) 1007], 
we found that expression of an Sp1-specific ribozyme, not only reduced the level 
of Sp1 protein, but also that of Sp3 protein, and that when the protein levels of
these two transcription factors in the fibrosarcoma cell lines were reduced to
near that found in normal human fibroblasts, the cell lines could no longer form 
tumors. An Sp1-specific ribozyme could reduce the level of expression of both Sp1
protein and Sp3 protein if the promoter of the Sp1 gene and that of the Sp3 gene 
both have Sp1/Sp3 transcription factor binding sites and if such sites are
critically responsible for the level of expression of both Sp1 and Sp3 protein in
the cells. The Sp1 minimal promoter has been identified and it has two Sp1/Sp3
sites [J. Biol. Chem. 276 (2001) 22126]. To characterize the Sp3 promoter, we
isolated 2.1 kb of the 5'-flanking region of the Sp3 gene, which contains Sp1/Sp3
binding sites, and using an expression reporter assay, showed that it has
promoter activity. We then systematically reduced the size of the 5' flanking
region, and determined that the nt-339 to nt-39 fragment, which contains an
Sp1/Sp3 binding site at nt-181 and another at nt-168, retained the same promoter 
activity as the 2.1 kb region. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays indicated
that both Sp3 protein and Sp1protein bind to these two sites. By mutating either 
or both of these binding sites, we showed using the reporter assay that each site
is required for full promoter activity. We then designed an Sp3-specific
ribozyme, expressed it in a human fibrosarcoma cell line in which Sp1 protein and
Sp3 protein are expressed at high levels, and found that, indeed, the level of
expression of both proteins was significantly reduced.

PMID: 15857802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. J Invest Dermatol. 2005 May;124(5):1026-33.

Regulation of the expression of peptidylarginine deiminase type II gene (PADI2)
in human keratinocytes involves Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors.

Dong S(1), Kojima T, Shiraiwa M, Méchin MC, Chavanas S, Serre G, Simon M, Kawada 
A, Takahara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biological Resource Sciences, School of Agriculture,
Ibaraki University, Ami-machi, Inashiki-gun, Ibaraki, Japan.

Peptidylarginine deiminases (PAD) convert protein-bound arginine residues into
citrulline residues in a Ca(2+) ion-dependent manner. Among the five isoforms
(PAD1, 2, 3, 4, and 6) existing in rodents and humans, PAD2 is the most widely
expressed in both species, tissues, and organs. In order to study the mechanisms 
regulating the expression of the human PAD2 gene, PADI2, we characterized its
promoter region using transfected human keratinocytes. A series of reporter gene 
constructions derived from the 2 kb region upstream of the transcription
initiation site defined a minimal promoter sequence from nucleotides -132 to -41.
This PADI2 region is GC-rich and lacks canonical TATA and CAAT boxes.
Investigation of cis-acting elements in the region, further deletion analyses and
electrophoretic mobility shift assays using specific antibodies revealed four
Sp1-binding sites and identified Sp1 and Sp3 as binding factors important for the
promoter activity. These results suggest that Sp1/Sp3 cooperation may provide a
mechanism to control the transcription of PADI2.

PMID: 15854045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jul 8;280(27):25331-8. Epub 2005 Apr 22.

SP3/SP1 transcription activity regulates specific expression of collagen type X
in hypertrophic chondrocytes.

Magee C(1), Nurminskaya M, Faverman L, Galera P, Linsenmayer TF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cellular Biology, Tufts University, Boston,
Massachusetts 02111, USA.

Previously, we have shown that two non-canonical specificity protein (SP)-binding
sites within the proximal promoter (nucleotide (nt) -139 to +5) of the chicken
Col10a1 gene are involved in conferring tissue-specific expression of type X
collagen to hypertrophic chondrocytes. In the present study, we examined the role
of SP3/SP1 transcription factors in the regulation of the Col10a1 promoter. The
SP3/SP1 ratio is higher in hypertrophic versus non-hypertrophic chondrocytes, due
to the significant decrease in SP1 in hypertrophic cells detected by real-time
PCR and Western blot analyses. Functional analyses by transfection-mediated
overexpression of SP1 and SP3 suggest that SP1 inhibits the Col10a1 promoter.
This effect is negated by an interaction with SP3 in hypertrophic chondrocytes.
Additionally, mutation analysis showed that the 40-bp intervening sequence (nt
-115 to -75) is required for expression of the Col10a1 gene. In this sequence, a 
binding site for Dlx5/6 transcription factors (nt -99 to -87) retards a protein
specific for hypertrophic chondrocytes in electrophoretic mobility shift assay.
Endogenous levels of Dlx5 are 3-fold higher in hypertrophic versus
non-hypertrophic cells by real-time PCR analysis, and overexpression of Dlx5 in
non-hypertrophic chondrocytes activates the proximal Col10a1 promoter 3-fold.
These results indicate that the SP3/SP1 ratio and Dlx5 are important regulators
of the proximal Col10a1 promoter in hypertrophic cartilage and suggest that
interactions between SP3 and SP1 regulate expression of different types of
collagen during chondrocyte differentiation.

PMID: 15849196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Aug;19(8):2020-34. Epub 2005 Apr 14.

Regulation of cytochrome b5 gene transcription by Sp3, GATA-6, and steroidogenic 
factor 1 in human adrenal NCI-H295A cells.

Huang N(1), Dardis A, Miller WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, California 94143-0978, USA.

Sex steroid synthesis requires the 17,20 lyase activity of P450c17, which is
enhanced by cytochrome b5, acting as an allosteric factor to promote association 
of P450c17 with its electron donor, P450 oxidoreductase. Cytochrome b5 is
preferentially expressed in the fetal adrenal and postadrenarchal adrenal zona
reticularis; the basis of this tissue-specific, developmentally regulated
transcription of the b5 gene is unknown. We found b5 expression in all cell lines
tested, including human adrenal NCI-H295A cells, where its mRNA is reduced by
cAMP and phorbol ester. Multiple sites, between -83 and -122 bp upstream from the
first ATG, initiate transcription. Deletional mutagenesis localized all
detectable promoter activity within -327/+15, and deoxyribonuclease I
footprinting identified protein binding at -72/-107 and -157/-197. DNA segments
-65/-40, -114/-70 and -270/-245 fused to TK32/Luc yielded significant activity,
and mutations in their Sp sites abolished that activity; electrophoretic mobility
shift assay (EMSA) showed that Sp3, but not Sp1, binds to these Sp sites. Nuclear
factor 1 (NF-1) and GATA-6, but not GATA-4 bind to the NF-1 and GATA sites in
-157/-197. In Drosophila S2 cells, Sp3 increased -327/Luc activity 58-fold, but
Sp1 and NF-1 isoforms were inactive. Mutating the three Sp sites ablated activity
without or with cotransfection of Sp1/Sp3. In NCI-H295A cells, mutating the three
Sp sites reduced activity to 39%; mutating the Sp, GATA, and NF-1 sites abolished
activity. In JEG-3 cells, GATA-4 was inactive, GATA-6 augmented -327/Luc activity
to 231% over the control, and steroidogenic factor 1 augmented activity to 655%
over the control; these activities required the Sp and NF-1 sites. Transcription 
of cytochrome b5 shares many features with the regulation of P450c17, whose
activity it enhances.

PMID: 15831526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. J Am Chem Soc. 2005 Apr 20;127(15):5284-5.

Selective and catalytic arylation of N-phenylpyrrolidine: sp3 C-H bond
functionalization in the absence of a directing group.

Sezen B(1), Sames D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Columbia University, 3000 Broadway, New York, New
York 10027, USA.

Retraction in
    Sezen B, Sames D. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Mar 8;128(9):3102.

Comment in
    NIH Guide Grants Contracts. 2010 Dec 3;:NOT-OD-11-024.

We herein describe our studies on arylation of N-phenylpyrrolidine, which led to 
the development of a new transformation for the direct and selective arylation of
sp3 C-H bonds in the absence of a directing group. In this method,
Ru(H)2(CO)(PCy3)3 4 was used as the catalyst, and preliminary mechanistic studies
suggested that Ru(Ph)(I)(CO)(PCy3)2 5 is the key intermediate of the catalytic
cycle. A large kinetic isotope effect (kH/kD = 5.4) was observed, which supports 
the proposal that C-H bond metalation is the slow step. Preliminary examination
of the substrate scope showed that in addition to N-phenylpyrrolidine, N-methyl- 
and N-benzylpyrrolidine, as well as N-benzoylpyrrolidine, were arylated under the
reaction conditions.

PMID: 15826142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Dalton Trans. 2005 Apr 21;(8):1422-7. Epub 2005 Mar 9.

C-H Bond activation and C-C bond formation in the reaction of
2,5-dimethylthiophene with TpMe2Ir compounds.

Paneque M(1), Poveda ML, Carmona E, Salazar V.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Químicas-Departamento de Química Inorgánica,
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientificas-Universidad de Sevilla, Avda.
Américo Vespucio 49, Isla de la Cartuja, 41092, Sevilla, Spain.
paneque@iiq.csic.es

The bulky 2,5-dimethylthiophene (2,5-Me2T) reacts at 60 degrees C with
TpMe2Ir(C2H4)2 to give a mixture of two TpMe2Ir(III) hydride products, 3 and 4,
that contain in addition a thienyl (3) or a thienyl-derived ligand (4). For the
generation of 3 only sp2 C-H activation is needed, but the formation of 4
requires also the activation of an sp3 C-H bond and the formation of a new C-C
bond (between vinyl and thienyl fragments). In the presence of 2,5-Me2T, compound
4 reacts further to produce a complex thiophenic structure (5, characterized by
X-ray methods) that derives formally from two molecules of 2,5-Me2T and a vinyl
fragment. Compounds 3-5 can be readily protonated by [H(OEt2)2][BAr'4](Ar'=
3,5-C6H3(CF3)2), with initial generation of carbene ligands (in the case of 3 and
5) as a consequence of H+ attack at the beta-carbon of the Ir-thienyl unit. Free,
substituted thiophenes, derived from the original 2,5-Me2T, may be isolated in
this way.

PMID: 15824780  [PubMed]


464. J Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Apr;34(2):317-29.

Expression of the human melanocortin-4 receptor gene is controlled by several
members of the Sp transcription factor family.

Blondet A(1), Gout J, Durand P, Bégeot M, Naville D.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U418-Inra UMR 1245 and IFR 62, Hôpital Debrousse and Claude Bernard
University, Lyon, France.

The melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4-R) plays a key role in the hypothalamic control 
of food intake, lending importance to the understanding of the mechanisms that
regulate its expression. To identify factors controlling the expression of the
human (h) MC4-R gene, a fragment containing 1253 bp of the 5'-flanking region of 
the hMC4-R gene was isolated. A series of hMC4-R luciferase constructs were
developed and used to transiently transfect HEK293 and GT1-7 cell lines, both
expressing endogenous MC4-R mRNA. Deletion analysis of the 1253 bp fragment
showed that the basal promoter activity is mainly restricted to the 179 bp
upstream of the transcription start site in both cell types. Mutation of a
putative Sp1-binding site located at position -76 bp resulted in a dramatic
reduction of the luciferase activity in HEK293 and GT1-7 cells by 87 and 80%
respectively. Both in vitro and in vivo studies (gel shift and chromatin
immunoprecipitation analyses) revealed binding of both Sp1 and Sp3 to this site
in HEK293 cells. Cotransfection with an Sp1 expression vector in Drosophila cells
that do not express Sp1, in conjunction with treatment of HEK293 cells with
mithramycin A, a specific inhibitor of Sp1, confirmed the role of Sp1. For the
first time, we have demonstrated that the constitutive activity of the hMC4-R
promoter is dependent upon Sp transcription factors.

PMID: 15821099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. J Neurochem. 2005 Apr;93(2):474-82.

Sp1 and Sp3 activate transcription of the human dopamine transporter gene.

Wang J(1), Bannon MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neurosciences, Wayne State University 
School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan 48201, USA.

The dopamine transporter is a plasma membrane protein that controls extracellular
concentrations of the neurotransmitter dopamine. The physiological importance of 
the DAT provides the impetus for studies aimed at understanding the molecular
mechanisms underlying regulation of the DAT gene. In this study, we identified a 
DAT-expressing neuroblastoma cell line (SK-N-AS) and employed it to investigate
the transcriptional regulation of the human DAT gene. Two GC boxes (located at
-130 and -60, respectively, relative to the transcriptional start site) were
identified as important cis-acting elements mediating DAT promoter activity in
dopaminergic SK-N-AS cells. Utilizing Sp-deficient Drosophila Schneider line
(SL-2) cells, we showed that both Sp1 and Sp3 are strong activators of DAT
transcriptional activity. Differential binding of Sp1 and Sp3 to the two GC boxes
was demonstrated by electrophoretic mobility shift assays and super-shift assays.
Our results indicate that the Sp1 family of proteins plays an important role in
controlling the expression of the dopamine transporter gene within dopaminergic
neurons.

PMID: 15816870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. J Neurochem. 2005 Apr;93(2):339-50.

Retinoic acid activates human secretin gene expression by Sp proteins and nuclear
factor I in neuronal SH-SY5Y cells.

Lee LT(1), Tan-Un KC, Lin MC, Chow BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

Secretin is a neuropeptide that is expressed in distinct central neurones. As
there is no information on how the secretin gene is regulated in neuronal cells, 
a well established neuronal differentiation cell model, SH-SY5Y, was used to
study transcriptional regulation of the human secretin gene. High secretin
transcript and peptide levels were found in this cell, and secretin gene
expression and promoter activity were up-regulated upon all-trans retinoic acid
(RA) treatment. Within the promoter, a functional GC-box 1 (-131 from ATG,
relative to the ATG initiation codon) was found to be regulated by a
brain-specific Sp protein, Sp4, and ubiquitous factors Sp1 and Sp3. The human
secretin gene in SH-SY5Y cells is controlled by the (Sp1 + Sp4)/Sp3 ratio and the
RA-induced activation is a partial result of a decrease in Sp3 levels. In
addition to the GC-box 1, an N1 motif in close proximity was also responsible for
RA-induced secretin gene activation. Competitive gel mobility shift and
southwestern blot studies revealed binding of Nuclear Factor I (NFI) with the N1 
motif. Overexpression of NFI-C increased promoter activity upon RA treatment.
Consistent with this observation, NFI-C transcript levels were augmented after RA
treatment. We conclude that RA induction of the secretin gene in neuronal cells
is regulated by the combined actions of reducing Sp3 and increasing NFI-C
expression.

PMID: 15816857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2005 May 1;1728(3):115-25. Epub 2005 Feb 24.

Characterization of the basal promoter element of the human type 5
17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase gene.

Qin K(1), Rosenfield RL.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Medicine, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL
60637, USA.

Testosterone biosynthesis from androstenedione is carried out by androgenic
17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (17beta-HSD) activity. Of the androgenic
17beta-HSD isoenzymes, only type 5 (17beta-HSD5) is expressed ubiquitously,
including the human adrenal gland and ovary. To characterize this gene promoter, 
luciferase constructs of the human 5'-flanking region were transiently
transfected into the H295R human adrenal carcinoma cell line. A series of
fragment deletion constructs and electrophoretic mobility shift assays suggested 
that a sequence of CCTCCTCCT at -65 to -58 bp is the core sequence and
demonstrated Sp1/Sp3 binding to this CCT repeat. Forskolin stimulated the
promoter activity of the HSD17B5 gene through this Sp1/Sp3 binding site. Mutation
of this site resulted in a significant reduction of HSD17B5 promoter basal and
forskolin-induced activity. Mithramycin A, which inhibits the binding of Sp1 and 
Sp3 to DNA, also remarkably decreased HSD17B5 mRNA expression in the H295R cell
line. These results indicate that members of the Sp family of transcription
factors play an important role in regulating constitutive and stimulated
expression of the HSD17B5 gene in H295R cells.

PMID: 15814298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Mol Reprod Dev. 2005 Jul;71(3):263-74.

Distal enhancer of the mouse FGF-4 gene and its human counterpart exhibit
differential activity: critical role of a GT box.

Boer B(1), Luster TA, Bernadt C, Rizzino A.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68198-6805, USA.

Previous studies have shown that there is a strict requirement for fibroblast
growth factor-4 (FGF-4) during mammalian embryogenesis, and that FGF-4 expression
in embryonic stem (ES) cells and embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells are controlled by
a powerful downstream distal enhancer. More recently, mouse ES cells were shown
to express significantly more FGF-4 mRNA than human ES cells. In the work
reported here, we demonstrate that mouse EC cells also express far more FGF-4
mRNA than human EC cells. Using a panel of FGF-4 promoter/reporter gene
constructs, we demonstrate that the enhancer of the mouse FGF-4 gene is
approximately tenfold more active than its human counterpart. Moreover, we
demonstrate that the critical difference between the mouse and the human FGF-4
enhancer is a 4 bp difference in the sequence of an essential GT box.
Importantly, we demonstrate that changing 4 bp in the human enhancer to match the
sequence of the mouse GT box elevates the activity of the human FGF-4 enhancer to
the same level as that of the mouse enhancer. We extended these studies by
examining the roles of Sp1 and Sp3 in FGF-4 expression. Although we demonstrate
that Sp3, but not Sp1, can activate the FGF-4 promoter when artificially tethered
to the FGF-4 enhancer, we show that Sp3 is not essential for expression of FGF-4 
mRNA in mouse ES cells. Finally, our studies with human EC cells suggest that the
factor responsible for mediating the effect of the mouse GT box is unlikely to be
Sp1 or Sp3, and this factor is either not expressed in human EC cells or it is
not sufficiently active in these cells.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc

PMID: 15803454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Biochem J. 2005 Jul 15;389(Pt 2):443-55.

Physical and functional interactions between members of the tumour suppressor p53
and the Sp families of transcription factors: importance for the regulation of
genes involved in cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis.

Koutsodontis G(1), Vasilaki E, Chou WC, Papakosta P, Kardassis D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Sciences, University of Crete Medical School, Heraklion,
Crete, GR-71110, Greece.

In the present study, we have investigated mechanisms of transcriptional
co-operation between proteins that belong to the tumour suppressor p53 and Sp
(specificity protein) families of transcription factors. Such mechanisms may play
an important role in the regulation of genes containing binding sites for both
classes of transcription factors in their promoters. Two of these genes were
analysed in the present study: the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21Cip1 gene
and the PUMA (p53-up-regulated mediator of apoptosis) gene. We found that Sp1 and
Sp3, but not Sp2, co-operate functionally with p53, p73 and p63 for the
synergistic transactivation of the p21Cip1 promoter in Drosophila Schneider SL2
cells that lack endogenous Sp factors. We also found that Sp1 strongly
transactivated the PUMA promoter synergistically with p53, whereas deletion of
the Sp1-binding sites abolished the transactivation by p53. Using p53 mutant
forms in GST (glutathione S-transferase) pull-down assays, we found that the
C-terminal 101 amino acids of p53, which include the oligomerization and
regulatory domains of the protein, are required for the physical interactions
with Sp1 and Sp3, and that deletion of this region abolished transactivation of
the p21Cip1 promoter. Utilizing truncated forms of Sp1, we established that p53
interacted with the two transactivation domains A and B, as well as the
DNA-binding domain. Our findings suggest that Sp factors are essential for the
cellular responses to p53 activation by genotoxic stress. Understanding in detail
how members of the p53 and Sp families of transcription factors interact and work
together in the p53-mediated cellular responses may open new horizons in cancer
chemotherapy.

PMCID: PMC1175122
PMID: 15790310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005 Jun;90(6):3479-90. Epub 2005 Mar 22.

Regulation of expression of the chorionic gonadotropin/luteinizing hormone
receptor gene in the human myometrium: involvement of specificity protein-1
(Sp1), Sp3, Sp4, Sp-like proteins, and histone deacetylases.

Phillips RJ(1), Tyson-Capper Née Pollard AJ, Bailey J, Robson SC, Europe-Finner
GN.

Author information: 
(1)School of Surgical and Reproductive Sciences (Obstetrics and Gynecology),
University of Newcastle upon Tyne, 3rd Floor, William Leech Building, Faculty of 
Medical Sciences, Framlington Place, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, United Kingdom.

At present there is little information on the regulatory processes by which the
chorionic gonadotropin (CG)/LH receptor gene is regulated in the human myometrium
during pregnancy and labor. Employing human primary myometrial cell cultures in
conjunction with DNA affinity purification assays/Western analysis, DNA binding
studies, CG/LH promoter luciferase reporter gene deletion constructs in
transfection assays, and measurement of endogenous mRNA levels in vivo by duplex 
RT-PCR, we have determined the role that the major transcriptional regulatory
sequences from the +1 ATG codon to -2678 bp play in modulating expression of the 
CG/LH receptor gene in the myometrium. We report that the distal -180 to -2678 bp
region of the promoter, although capable of binding members of the Jun family via
the multiple activator protein-1 sites within this region, has no significant
role in regulating the expression of the CG/LH receptor gene in myometrial cells.
In contrast, the two specificity protein-1 to -4 (Sp1-4) GC boxes within the +1
to -180 bp proximal promoter are central to expression of the gene in the
myometrium. However, not only are Sp1/Sp3 proteins involved in this process, but 
Sp4 and a novel Sp-like factor(s) also have an intimate part in transcriptional
regulation of the gene. It would appear that Sp1/Sp3/Sp4 and Sp-like proteins are
involved in recruiting histone deacetylase complexes to the proximal promoter,
preventing chromatin remodeling resulting in transcriptional repression of the
gene. Our data suggest that administration of the histone deacetylase inhibitor
trichostatin A to human myometrial cells in vitro and in vivo substantially
removes this silencing effect on expression of the gene and may implicate the use
of this and similar agents in increasing myometrial CG/LH receptor levels and
subsequent maintenance of uterine relaxation during fetal maturation.

PMID: 15788387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Org Lett. 2005 Mar 31;7(7):1271-4.

Novel 3',6'-anhydro and N12,N13-bridged glycosylated
fluoroindolo[2,3-a]carbazoles as topoisomerase I inhibitors. Fluorine as a
leaving group from sp3 carbon.

Saulnier MG(1), Langley DR, Frennesson DB, Long BH, Huang S, Gao Q, Wu D,
Fairchild CR, Ruediger E, Zimmermann K, St Laurent DR, Balasubramanian BN, Vyas
DM.

Author information: 
(1)Discovery Chemistry, Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceutical Research Institute, 5
Research Parkway, Wallingford, Connecticut 06492, USA. mark.saulnier@bms.com

[reaction: see text] Both 6'- and 4'-fluoro-glycosylated indolo[2,3-a]carbazoles 
are substrates for base-induced loss of fluorine as a leaving group from sp3
carbon. In the case of alpha-N-glycosylated substrate 3, loss of fluorine from
the 6'-position leads to 3,6-anhydroglucose analogue 1. A novel N12,N13-bridged
sugar analogue 2 results from loss of 4'-fluorine from beta-N-glycosylated
analogue 4. Both analogues 1 and 2 display topo I inhibitory potencies similar to
camptothecin.

PMID: 15787484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Phys Rev Lett. 2005 Feb 11;94(5):057407. Epub 2005 Feb 10.

Bonding in liquid carbon studied by time-resolved x-ray absorption spectroscopy.

Johnson SL(1), Heimann PA, MacPhee AG, Lindenberg AM, Monteiro OR, Chang Z, Lee
RW, Falcone RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720,
USA. Steve.Johnson@mailaps.org

Even the most basic properties of liquid carbon have long been debated due to the
challenge of studying the material at the required high temperature and pressure.
Liquid carbon is volatile and thus inherently transient in an unconstrained
environment. In this paper we use a new technique of picosecond time-resolved
x-ray absorption spectroscopy to study the bonding of liquid carbon at densities 
near that of the solid. As the density of the liquid increases, we see a change
from predominantly sp-bonded atomic sites to a mixture of sp, sp2, and sp3 sites 
and compare these observations with molecular dynamics simulations.

PMID: 15783698  [PubMed]


473. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 27;280(21):20642-50. Epub 2005 Mar 21.

Sp4 is expressed in retinal neurons, activates transcription of
photoreceptor-specific genes, and synergizes with Crx.

Lerner LE(1), Peng GH, Gribanova YE, Chen S, Farber DB.

Author information: 
(1)Jules Stein Eye Institute, UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California
90095, USA. leonid.lerner@uphs.upenn.edu

To investigate the molecular mechanisms of photoreceptor-specific gene
transcription, we examined the role of the neuronal-enriched Sp4 nuclear protein 
in transcription from the rod-specific beta-PDE and rod opsin gene promoters and 
compared it to the ubiquitous members of the Sp family, Sp1 and Sp3. Sp4
activates both the rod opsin and beta-PDE promoters, whereas Sp1 activates only
the rod opsin promoter and Sp3 activates neither promoter. Interestingly, Sp1 and
Sp3 competitively repress Sp4-mediated activation of the beta-PDE promoter. In
addition, Sp4, Sp1, and Sp3 each show functional synergy with the
photoreceptor-enriched Crx transcriptional regulator on the rod opsin promoter
but not the beta-PDE promoter, although Sp4-mediated activation was the most
significant. Sp4, Sp1, and Sp3 bind Crx in co-immunoprecipitation experiments,
and their zinc finger domains as well as the Crx homedomain are necessary and
sufficient for these interactions. Chromatin immunoprecipitation showed that the 
rod opsin and beta-PDE promoters are targets of both Sp4 and Crx, which further
supports Sp4-Crx interactions in vivo in the context of retinal chromatin
environment. In situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry demonstrated that Sp4
is abundantly expressed in various neurons of all retinal layers, and thus
co-localizes or overlaps with multiple retina-restricted and -enriched genes, its
putative targets. Our results indicate that photoreceptor-specific gene
transcription is controlled by the combinatorial action of Sp4 and Crx. The other
Sp family members may be involved in photoreceptor-specific transcription
directly or through their competition with Sp4. These data suggest the potential 
importance of Sp4 in retinal neurobiology and pathology.

PMID: 15781457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Gene. 2005 Mar 28;348:135-41.

Sp-family of transcription factors regulates human SHIP2 gene expression.

Ishida S(1), Funakoshi A, Miyasaka K, Iguchi H, Takiguchi S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical Research, National Kyushu Cancer Center, Fukuoka
811-1395, Japan.

We have characterized the regulation of human SH-2 containing inositol
5'-phosphatase 2 (SHIP2) gene expression. First, the transcription initiation
sites and the sequence of the 5' upstream region of human SHIP2 gene were
elucidated. Next, the minimal promoter of the human SHIP2 gene was identified by 
reporter gene assays in HL60 cells and differentiated human subcutaneous white
adipocytes. An Sp1 element proximal to the transcription initiation site was
indispensable for full promoter activity and bound specifically by Sp1 and Sp3
proteins. These findings suggest that human SHIP2 gene expression, like other
housekeeping genes, is controlled by the Sp-family of transcription factors.

PMID: 15777721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Gene. 2005 Mar 28;348:123-34.

Effects of methylation of non-CpG sequence in the promoter region on the
expression of human synaptotagmin XI (syt11).

Inoue S(1), Oishi M.

Author information: 
(1)Kazusa Research Institute, 2-6-7, Kazusa-kamatari, Kisarazu, Chiba 292-0818,
Japan. sinoue@kazusa.or.jp

We have studied the effects of methylation of the promoter region on the
expression of human synaptotagmin XI (syt11), a gene implicated in the onset of
schizophrenia. Sequence analysis showed that cytosine residues not in the CpG
sequence, but still within the promoter region of the gene, are partially
methylated. The methylated cytosine residues are located in the mRNA-coding
(minus) strand of the promoter region (mCmCTTmCTTmCmC). Gel mobility shift assays
showed that when the cytosine residues are methylated, the binding activity of an
Sp family protein, a transcription factor, to the region is significantly
reduced. Furthermore, transient transcription assays using artificially
methylated promoter sequences showed that methylation did reduce the expression
of the reporter gene. The biological significance of the finding is discussed in 
respect to the effect of methylation of non-CpG sequences in promoter regions on 
gene expression.

PMID: 15777718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Biochem J. 2005 Jul 15;389(Pt 2):423-33.

Regulation of the poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 gene expression by the
transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 is under the influence of cell density in
primary cultured cells.

Zaniolo K(1), Rufiange A, Leclerc S, Desnoyers S, Guérin SL.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology and Molecular Endocrinology Research Center, CHUL Research Center,
Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec and Laval University, Sainte-Foy,
Québec, G1V 4G2, Canada.

PARP-1 [poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1) is a nuclear enzyme that is involved in
several cellular functions, including DNA repair, DNA transcription,
carcinogenesis and apoptosis. The activity directed by the PARP-1 gene promoter
is mainly dictated through its recognition by the transcription factors Sp1 and
Sp3 (where Sp is specificity protein). In the present study, we investigated
whether (i) both PARP-1 expression and PARP-1 enzymatic activity are under the
influence of cell density in primary cultured cells, and (ii) whether its pattern
of expression is co-ordinated with that of Sp1/Sp3 at varying cell densities and 
upon cell passages. All types of cultured cells expressed PARP-1 in Western blot 
when grown to sub-confluence. However, a dramatic reduction was observed at
post-confluence. Similarly, high levels of Sp1/Sp3 were observed by both Western 
blot and EMSAs (electrophoretic mobility-shift assays) in sub-confluent,but not
post-confluent, cells. Consistent with these results, the promoter of the rPARP-1
(rat PARP-1) gene directed high levels of activity in sub-confluent, but not
confluent, cells upon transfection of various CAT (chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase)-rPARP-1 promoter constructs into cultured cells. The positive 
regulatory influence of Sp1 was not solely exerted on the rPARP-1 promoter
constructs, as inhibition of endogenous Sp1 expression in HDKs(human dermal
keratinocytes) through the transfection of Sp1 RNAi (RNA interference)
considerably reduced endogenous hPARP-1 (human PARP-1) expression as well. The
reduction in PARP-1 protein expression as cells reached confluence also
translated into a corresponding reduction in PARP-1 activity. In addition,
expression of both Sp1/Sp3, as well as that of PARP-1,was dramatically reduced as
cells were passaged in culture and progressed towards irreversible terminal
differentiation. PARP-1 gene expression therefore appears to be co-ordinated with
that of Sp1 and Sp3 in primary cultured cells, suggesting that PARP-1 may play
some important functions during the proliferative burst that characterizes wound 
healing.

PMCID: PMC1175120
PMID: 15777284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Aug;19(8):2006-19. Epub 2005 Mar 17.

Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis of gene expression in the rat uterus in
vivo: estrogen-induced recruitment of both estrogen receptor alpha and
hypoxia-inducible factor 1 to the vascular endothelial growth factor promoter.

Kazi AA(1), Jones JM, Koos RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 655 West 
Baltimore Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA.

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) plays a pivotal role in the regulation 
of microvascular permeability and angiogenesis, processes essential for normal
endometrial growth and implantation. Estrogen [17beta-estradiol (E2)], via its
receptor (ER alpha), rapidly stimulates VEGF expression in the uterus at the
transcriptional level. The VEGF gene promoter, however, lacks a consensus
estrogen response element (ERE), and attempts to identify the site through which 
E2 induces VEGF expression have yielded contradictory results. To address this
question, we modified the chromatin immunoprecipitation method to identify
transcription factors that interact with the VEGF promoter in the rat uterus in
response to E2. Chromatin immunoprecipitation showed that both Sp1 and Sp3 were
associated with a proximal, GC-rich region of the promoter before E2 treatment.
E2 induced an increase in Sp1 binding and the recruitment of ER alpha, and the
coactivator p300 to this region. The association of ER alpha persisted, however, 
after VEGF mRNA levels had declined again (at 4 h), indicating that other factors
might be involved in that expression. Western analysis showed that both the
alpha- and beta-subunits of the transcription factor hypoxia-inducible factor 1
(HIF-1), which regulates VEGF expression in response to hypoxia and several
hormones and growth factors, were present in the uterus. Furthermore, E2 rapidly 
induced their recruitment to the -944 to -611 bp region of the VEGF promoter,
which contains the hypoxia response element to which HIF-1 binds. This binding
was transient, matching the pattern of E2-induced VEGF expression. These results 
indicate that HIF-1 is an important mediator of E2-induced VEGF expression in the
uterus. In addition, E2 also induced a later increase in HIF-1alpha mRNA and
protein expression in the uterus, suggesting that it may be required for longer
term effects of E2 on the uterus as well. In contrast to the uterus, HEC1A cells 
cultured in 95% air-5% CO2 (and therefore 20% O2) contained no HIF-1alpha,
consistent with the inability of E2 to stimulate the expression of VEGF by these 
and other cell types in vitro.

PMID: 15774498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. J Am Chem Soc. 2005 Mar 23;127(11):3672-3.

Highly efficient copper-catalyzed nitro-Mannich type reaction:
cross-dehydrogenative-coupling between sp3 C-H bond and sp3 C-H bond.

Li Z(1), Li CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, McGill University, 801 Sherbrooke Street West,
Montreal, Quebec H3A 2K6, Canada.

A novel C-C bond formation method was developed via the
cross-dehydrogenative-coupling (CDC) reaction catalyzed by using copper bromide
in the presence of an oxidizing reagent, tert-BuOOH. The CDC reaction provides a 
simple and efficient catalytic method to construct beta-nitroamine via the
reaction between sp3 C-H and sp3 C-H bonds.

PMID: 15771482  [PubMed]


479. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 22;280(16):16508-13. Epub 2005 Mar 8.

Induction of endoplasmic reticulum-induced stress genes in Panc-1 pancreatic
cancer cells is dependent on Sp proteins.

Abdelrahim M(1), Liu S, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A and M University System
Health, Science Center, Houston, Texas 77030-3303, USA.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress plays a critical role in multiple diseases, and
pharmacologically active drugs can induce cell death through ER stress pathways. 
Stress-induced genes are activated through assembly of transcription factors on
ER stress response elements (ERSEs) in target gene promoters. Gel mobility shift 
and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays have confirmed interactions of NF-Y and 
YY1 with the distal motifs of the tripartite ERSE from the glucose-related
protein 78 (GRP78) gene promoter. The GC-rich nonanucleotide (N(9)) sequence,
which forms the ER stress response binding factor (ERSF) complex binds TFII-I and
ATF6; however, we have now shown that in Panc-1 pancreatic cancer cells, this
complex also binds Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 proteins. Sp proteins are constitutively
bound to the ERSE; however, activation of GRP78 protein (or reporter gene) by
thapsigargin or tunicamycin is inhibited after cotransfection with small
inhibitory RNAs for Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4. This study demonstrates that Sp
transcription factors are important for stress-induced responses through their
binding to ERSEs.

PMID: 15760841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Mar 8;33(5):1423-34. Print 2005.

A critical role for the Sp1-binding sites in the transforming growth
factor-beta-mediated inhibition of lipoprotein lipase gene expression in
macrophages.

Irvine SA(1), Foka P, Rogers SA, Mead JR, Ramji DP.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiff School of Biosciences, Cardiff University Museum Avenue, Cardiff CF10 
3US, UK.

Increasing evidence suggests that the cytokine transforming growth factor-beta
(TGF-beta) inhibits the development of atherosclerosis. The lipoprotein lipase
(LPL) enzyme expressed by macrophages has been implicated in the pathogenesis of 
atherosclerosis by stimulating the uptake of lipoprotein particles.
Unfortunately, the action of TGF-beta on the expression of LPL in macrophages
remains largely unclear. We show that TGF-beta inhibits LPL gene expression at
the transcriptional level. Transient transfection assays reveal that the -31/+187
sequence contains the minimal TGF-beta-responsive elements. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays show that Sp1 and Sp3 interact with two regions in the
-31/+187 sequence. Mutations of these Sp1/Sp3 sites abolish the TGF-beta-mediated
suppression whereas multimers of the sequence impart the response to a
heterologous promoter. TGF-beta has no effect on the binding or steady-state
polypeptide levels of Sp1 and Sp3. These results, therefore, suggest a novel
mechanism for the TGF-beta-mediated repression of LPL gene transcription that
involves regulation of the action of Sp1 and Sp3.

PMCID: PMC1062872
PMID: 15755745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Mol Carcinog. 2005 Jun;43(2):75-85.

Transcriptional regulation of connexin 43 expression by retinoids and
carotenoids: similarities and differences.

Vine AL(1), Leung YM, Bertram JS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Center of Hawaii, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu,
Hawaii 96813, USA.

Gap junctions, connexons, are formed by assembly of trans-membrane connexin
proteins and have multiple functions including the coordination of cell
responses. Most human tumors are deficient in gap junctional communication (GJC) 
and restoration of GJC by forced expression of connexins reduces indices of
neoplasia. Expression of connexin 43 (Cx43), the most widely-expressed connexin
family member, is upregulated by cancer-preventive retinoids and carotenoids in
normal and preneoplastic cells; an action considered of mechanistic significance.
However, the molecular mechanism for upregulated expression is poorly understood.
The retinoic acid receptor antagonist Ro 41-5253 was capable of suppressing
retinoid-induction Cx43 luciferase reporter construct in F9 cells, but did not
suppress reporter activity induced by the non-pro-vitamin A carotenoids
astaxanthin or lycopene, indicating that retinoids have separate mechanisms of
gene activation than non-pro-vitamin A carotenoids. Neither class of compound
required protein synthesis for induction of Cx43 mRNA, nor was the 5.0 h
half-life of Cx43 mRNA altered, indicating direct transcriptional activation. The
responsive region was found within -158 bp and +209 bp of the transcription start
site; this contains a Sp1/Sp3 GC-box to which Sp1 and Sp3 were bound, as revealed
by electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA), but no retinoic acid response
element (RARE). Site directed mutagenesis of this GC-box resulted in increased
basal levels of transcription and loss of responsiveness to a synthetic retinoid.
In this construct astaxanthin and lycopene produced marginally, but not
significantly higher, reporter activity than the control.

PMID: 15754312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 27;280(21):20867-78. Epub 2005 Mar 2.

c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) positively regulates NFATc2 transactivation through
phosphorylation within the N-terminal regulatory domain.

Ortega-Pérez I(1), Cano E, Were F, Villar M, Vázquez J, Redondo JM.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares (CNIC), Ronda de Poniente 
5, Tres Cantos, Madrid 28760, Spain.

The nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) family of transcription factors
regulates the transcription of cytokine genes and other genes involved in the
regulation and function of the immune system. NFAT activity is regulated by the
phosphatase calcineurin, which binds and dephosphorylates the NFAT N-terminal
regulatory domain, a critical step required for nuclear translocation and
transcriptional activity. Here we show that the mitogen-activated protein kinase 
(MAPK) JNK activates NFATc2-dependent transcription. Mass spectrometry revealed
that JNK phosphorylates at least six residues within the NFATc2 regulatory domain
in vitro. Transfection of cells with a chimeric construct encoding the GAL-4 DNA 
binding domain linked to wild-type NFATc2 showed that JNK stimulates the NFATc2
transactivation domain in activated Jurkat T lymphocytes, an effect that is
inhibited by dominant-negative versions of JNK. Likewise, the mutation of the
phosphorylation sites identified revealed that Thr(116) and Ser(170) are critical
for the transactivation of NFATc2 by JNK. In addition, clustered mutation of the 
SP-conserved motifs of NFATc2 showed that SP1 and SP2, but not SP3, are also
important for the inducible transactivation of NFATc2. Furthermore, mass
spectrometry analysis of NFATc2-transfected cells indicated that the activation
of the JNK pathway results in the in vivo phosphorylation of Thr(116). Our
results indicate that, unlike other NFAT members, the transcriptional activity of
NFATc2 is up-regulated by JNK. JNK-mediated phosphorylation of NFATs thus appears
to play a differential physiological role among NFAT family members.

PMID: 15743762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Mar 1;33(4):1337-51. Print 2005.

Alpha2(I) collagen gene regulation by protein kinase C signaling in human dermal 
fibroblasts.

Jinnin M(1), Ihn H, Yamane K, Mimura Y, Asano Y, Tamaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo 7-3-1
Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

We investigated the mechanisms by which protein kinase C (PKC) regulates the
expression of the alpha2(I) collagen gene in normal dermal fibroblasts. Reduction
of PKC-alpha activity by treatment with Gö697-6 or by overexpression of a
dominant negative (DN) mutant form decreased alpha2(I) collagen gene expression. 
This decrease required a sequence element in the collagen promoter that contains 
Sp1/Sp3 binding sites. Reduction of PKC-delta activity by rottlerin or
overexpression of DN PKC-delta also decreased alpha2(I) collagen gene expression.
This effect required a separate sequence element containing Sp1/Sp3-binding sites
and an Ets-binding site. In both cases, point mutations within the response
elements abrogated the response to PKC inhibition. Forced overexpression of Sp1
rescued the PKC inhibitor-mediated reduction in collagen protein expression. A
DNA affinity precipitation assay revealed that inhibition of PKC-delta by
rottlerin increased the binding activity of endogenous Fli1 and decreased that of
Ets1. On the other hand, TGF-beta1, which increased the expression of PKC-delta, 
had the opposite effect, increasing the binding activity of Ets1 and decreasing
that of Fli1. Our results suggest that PKC-delta is involved in the regulation of
the alpha2(I) collagen gene in the presence or absence of TGF-beta. Alteration of
the balance of Ets1 and Fli1 may be a novel mechanism regulating alpha2(I)
collagen expression.

PMCID: PMC552962
PMID: 15741186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Am Chem Soc. 2005 Mar 9;127(9):2852-3.

Room-temperature catalytic hydrodefluorination of C(sp3)-F bonds.

Scott VJ(1), Celenligil-Cetin R, Ozerov OV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Brandeis University, MS015, 415 South Street, Waltham
Massachusetts 02454, USA.

Room-temperature catalytic hydrodefluorination of the strong C(sp3)-F bonds in
benzotrifluorides and fluoropentane is catalyzed by Et3Si[B(C6F5)4] and uses
Et3SiH as the source of H. Ar-CF3 compounds are converted to Ar-CH3 and
fluropentane to pentane. The reaction is thought to proceed via abstraction of F-
by Et3Si[B(C6F5)4], and the substituent effects are consistent with this
hypothesis.

PMID: 15740111  [PubMed]


485. Oncogene. 2005 May 12;24(21):3525-34.

E2F suppression and Sp1 overexpression are sufficient to induce the
differentiation-specific marker, transglutaminase type 1, in a squamous cell
carcinoma cell line.

Wong CF(1), Barnes LM, Dahler AL, Smith L, Popa C, Serewko-Auret MM, Saunders NA.

Author information: 
(1)Epithelial Pathobiology Group, Cancer Biology Programme, Centre for Immunology
and Cancer Research, University of Queensland, Princess Alexandra Hospital,
Woolloongabba, Queensland 4102, Australia.

Recently, E2F function has expanded to include the regulation of differentiation 
in human epidermal keratinocytes (HEKs). We extend these findings to report that 
in HEKs, Sp1 is a differentiation-specific activator and a downstream target of
E2F-mediated suppression of the differentiation-specific marker, transglutaminase
type 1 (TG-1). Deletion of elements between -0.084 to -0.034 kb of the TG-1
promoter disabled E2F1-induced suppression of promoter activity. Electrophoretic 
mobility shift assays (EMSAs) demonstrated that Sp1 and Sp3 bound this region.
Protein expression analysis suggested that squamous differentiation was
accompanied by increased Sp1/Sp3 ratio. Cotransfection of proliferating HEKs or
the squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) cell line, KJD-1/SV40, with an E2F inhibitor
(E2Fd/n) and Sp1 expression plasmid was sufficient to activate the TG-1 promoter.
The suppression of Sp1 activity by E2F in differentiated cells appeared to be
indirect since we found no evidence of an Sp1/E2F coassociation on the TG-1
promoter fragment. Moreover, E2F inhibition in the presence of a differentiation 
stimulus induced Sp1 protein. These data demonstrate that (i) Sp1 can act as a
differentiation stimulus, (ii) E2F-mediated suppression of
differentiation-specific markers is indirect via Sp1 inhibition and (iii) a
combination of E2F inhibition and Sp1 activation could form the basis of a
differentiation therapy for SCCs.

PMID: 15735752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Oncogene. 2005 Apr 7;24(15):2547-57.

v-Jun downregulates the alpha 2 (I) collagen target gene indirectly through
Sp1/3.

Chamboredon S(1), Castellazzi M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Virologie Humaine, INSERM-U412, Ecole Normale Supérieure, IFR128
BioSciences Lyon-Gerland, 46 allée d'Italie, 69364 Lyon Cedex 07, France.

Transformation of chick embryo fibroblasts (CEFs) by the v-Jun oncoprotein
correlates with a downregulation of the alpha 2 (I) collagen gene. To investigate
whether this gene constitutes a direct target of v-Jun, an analysis of a large
proximal fragment of the promoter, extending from position -1080 to +109, was
performed. Transient transfections with -1080/+109 and deleted derivatives
revealed that a short proximal fragment, -433/+11, is the target for repression
by v-Jun. Extensive analysis, conducted in CEFs and in Sp1/3-deficient Drosophila
SL2 cells, further showed that (i) high constitutive activity of -433/+11
requires a direct binding of the ubiquitous Sp1 and/or Sp3 transcription factors 
acting on two distinct motifs, that is, a proximal TCC-rich region and an
upstream GC box, and that (ii) repression by v-Jun does not require any direct
binding of the oncoprotein to the DNA, but an indirect binding within a
v-Jun-Sp1/3-DNA chromatin-associated complex. This situation is reminiscent of a 
situation previously reported with the tata-less, SPARC (secreted protein,
acidic, and rich in cysteine) target promoter that regulates the expression of
another extracellular matrix component in the same model of cell transformation. 
Taken together, these data reinforce the view that, at least in CEFs, v-Jun
downregulates a family of direct target genes by binding to the DNA indirectly
through Sp1/3.

PMID: 15735704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Apr 1;329(1):188-96.

Involvement of specific proteins (Sp1/Sp3) and nuclear factor Y in basal
transcription of the distal promoter of the rat pyruvate carboxylase gene in
beta-cells.

Sunyakumthorn P(1), Boonsaen T, Boonsaeng V, Wallace JC, Jitrapakdee S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok
10400, Thailand.

Pyruvate carboxylase plays diverse roles in different biosynthetic pathways,
including glucose-induced insulin secretion in pancreatic beta-cells. We have
localized the control region of the P2 promoter by generating a series of
5'-nested deletion constructs, and both 25- and 9-bp internal deletion
constructs, as well as by performing site-directed mutagenesis. Transient
transfections of these constructs into INS-1 cells identified a CCAAT box and a
GC box that are located at -65/-61 and -48/-41, respectively, as the important
determinants. Disruption of the GC box resulted in a 4-fold reduction of the
reporter activity, while disruption of the proximal CCAAT box (-65/-61) but not
the distal CCAAT box (-95/-91) increased the reporter activity by 3-fold.
Simultaneous disruptions of both the GC box and the CCAAT box reduced the
reporter activity to a level that was close to that of the single GC box
mutation. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs) and supershift EMSAs
using nuclear extract from INS-1 cells demonstrated that Sp1 and Sp3 bind a GC
box while the nuclear factor Y was shown to bind the proximal but not the distal 
CCAAT box.

PMID: 15721292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Jul;19(7):1837-48. Epub 2005 Feb 17.

Follicle-stimulating hormone induction of ovarian insulin-like growth
factor-binding protein-3 transcription requires a TATA box-binding protein and
the protein kinase A and phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase pathways.

Ongeri EM(1), Verderame MF, Hammond JM.

Author information: 
(1)Pennsylvania State University, College of Medicine, Hershey Medical Center,
500 University Drive, Hershey, PA 17033, USA.

The current study was done to elucidate the mechanism of the FSH stimulation of
IGF-binding protein 3 (IGFBP-3) expression and map the FSH response element on
the pig IGFBP-3 promoter. Forskolin induced IGFBP-3 reporter activity in
transiently transfected granulosa cells. The protein kinase A (PKA) inhibitor
[N-[2-(p-bromocinnamyl)amino)ethyl]-5-isoquinolinesulfonamide, 2HCl] (and
cotransfection with a PKA inhibitor expression vector), the
phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase inhibitor
[2-(4-morpholinyl)-8-phenyl-4H-1-benzopyran-4-one], and the ERK inhibitor
[1,4-diamino-2,3-dicyano-1,4-bis(2-aminophenylthio)butadiene], all blocked FSH
stimulation. Use of serial deletion constructs and site-directed mutagenesis show
that a TATA box-binding protein site is required for FSH stimulation and that a
specific protein 1 (Sp1) site is required for basal transcription. Gel shift
assays of nuclear protein with a -61/-25 probe detected four protein-DNA
complexes, with bands I and II having significantly higher intensities in
FSH-treated cells than in controls. Mutation of the Sp1 site prevented formation 
of bands I and II whereas mutation of the TATA box-binding protein site prevented
formation of band IV. Use of specific antibodies showed that Sp1 participates in 
formation of band I, Sp3 band II, and p300 in both I and II. Band III was
nonspecifically competed out. We conclude that FSH stimulation of IGFBP-3
transcription is mediated by cAMP via the PKA pathway and requires the P1-3
kinase and likely the MAPK pathways.

PMID: 15718291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Gene. 2005 Jan 31;345(2):237-47. Epub 2005 Jan 5.

Characterization of the human P-type 6-phosphofructo-1-kinase gene promoter in
neural cell lines.

Hannemann A(1), Jandrig B, Gaunitz F, Eschrich K, Bigl M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, University of Leipzig (Medical Faculty),
Liebigstrasse 16, D-04103 Leipzig, Germany.

In humans three isoforms of 6-phosphofructo-1-kinase (PFK) exist. Among them
platelet-type PFK (PFKP) is highly abundant in the brain. With its distinct
allosteric properties PFKP is regarded to be the key enzyme for the regulation of
glycolysis in this organ. We cloned 1.7 kb of the 5' upstream promoter of the
human PFKP gene and analyzed the promoter activity by deletion and mutation
analysis using a luciferase reporter. The transcription start point was
determined at 48 bp upstream of the start codon. In deletion studies the region
-65 to +48 turned out to be sufficient for promoter activity while fragment -153 
to +48 showed the highest promoter activity. Sequence analysis of the region from
-153 to +48 revealed a stretch of eight adjacent putative transcription factor
binding sites, seven of which are Sp-family specific sites. Sp1 and Sp3 were
shown to bind to most if not all of them. Additionally, an NF-Y binding site was 
identified. Results of deletion and mutation analysis suggest that all of these
transcription factors contribute positively to promoter activity. The methylation
status of the promoter region was analyzed in different neural tumor cell lines
and compared with that in human leukocytes and muscle.

PMID: 15716112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2005 Mar 15;435(2):291-302.

Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors upregulate the proximal promoter of the human
prostate-specific antigen gene in prostate cancer cells.

Shin T(1), Sumiyoshi H, Matsuo N, Satoh F, Nomura Y, Mimata H, Yoshioka H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Biology, and Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Oita
University, 1-1 Idaigaoka, Hasama-machi, Oita 879-5593, Japan.
shintosh@med.oita-u.ac.jp

The serum level of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) is useful as a clinical marker
for diagnosis and assessment of the progression of prostate cancer, and in
evaluating the effectiveness of treatment. We characterized four Sp1/Sp3 binding 
sites in the proximal promoter of the PSA gene. In a luciferase assay, these
sites contributed to the basal promoter activity in prostate cancer cells. In an 
electrophoretic mobility shift assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, we 
confirmed that Sp1 and Sp3 bind to these sites. Overexpression of wild-type Sp1
and Sp3 further upregulated the promoter activity, whereas overexpression of the 
Sp1 dominant-negative form or addition of mithramycin A significantly reduced the
promoter activity and the endogenous mRNA level of PSA. Among the four binding
sites, a GC box located at nucleotides -53 to -48 was especially critical for
basal promoter activity. These results indicate that Sp1 and Sp3 are involved in 
the basal expression of PSA in prostate cancer cells.

PMID: 15708372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Free Radic Biol Med. 2004 Sep 15;37(6):869-80.

HIV-1 Tat regulates the SOD2 basal promoter by altering Sp1/Sp3 binding activity.

Marecki JC(1), Cota-Gomez A, Vaitaitis GM, Honda JR, Porntadavity S, St Clair DK,
Flores SC.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Pulmonary Research Laboratory, University of Colorado Health
Sciences Center, Denver, CO 80262, USA. John.Marecki@UCHSC.edu

Regulation of the basal manganese superoxide dismutase (SOD2) promoter depends on
the transcriptional activity of the Sp family of transcription factors. Here we
report that reduced expression in the presence of Tat is independent of induction
with Tumor necrosis factor alpha and that Tat affects the interaction of Sp1 and 
Sp3 with the basal promoter. Footprinting and electrophoretic mobility shift
assay (EMSA) analyses with extracts from HeLa cells showed that Sp1/Sp3 complexes
populate the proximal SOD2 promoter, and that Tat leads to an increase in the
binding activity of Sp3. In Drosophila S2 cells, both Sp1 and Sp3 activated the
basal SOD2 promoter (88.1 +/- 39.4 fold vs. 10.3 +/- 3.5 fold, respectively),
demonstrating a positive, yet lower transcriptional regulatory function for Sp3. 
Additionally, the inability of Sp3 to synergistically affect promoter activity
indicates an efficient competition of Sp3 with Sp1 for the multiple Sp binding
sites in the SOD2 basal promoter. Tat potentiated both Sp1 and Sp3 activation of 
the promoter in S2 cells, though the activity of Sp3 was still lower than that of
Sp1. Thus, the consequence of a shift by Tat to increased Sp3-containing
complexes on the basal SOD2 promoter is decreased SOD2 expression. Together, our 
studies demonstrate the functional importance of the interaction of Sp1, Sp3, and
Tat, revealing a possible mechanism for the attenuation of basal manganese
superoxide dismutase expression.

PMID: 15706661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Cancer Res. 2005 Feb 1;65(3):1007-17.

Down-regulation of overexpressed sp1 protein in human fibrosarcoma cell lines
inhibits tumor formation.

Lou Z(1), O'Reilly S, Liang H, Maher VM, Sleight SD, McCormick JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Carcinogenesis Laboratory, Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, 
Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA.

Sp1 is a transcription factor for many genes, including genes involved in
tumorigenesis. We found that human fibroblast cells malignantly transformed in
culture by a carcinogen or by stable transfection of an oncogene express Sp1 at
8-fold to 18-fold higher levels than their parental cells. These cell lines form 
fibrosarcomas in athymic mice with a very short latency, and the cells from the
tumors express the same high levels of Sp1. Similar high levels of Sp1 were found
in the patient-derived fibrosarcoma cell lines tested, and in the tumors formed
in athymic mice by these cell lines. To investigate the role of overexpression of
Sp1 in malignant transformation of human fibroblasts, we transfected an Sp1
U1snRNA/Ribozyme into two human cell lines, malignantly transformed in culture by
a carcinogen or overexpression of an oncogene, and into a patient-derived
fibrosarcoma cell line. The level of expression of Sp1 in these transfected cell 
lines was reduced to near normal. The cells regained the spindle-shaped
morphology and exhibited increased apoptosis and decreased expression of several 
genes linked to cancer, i.e., epithelial growth factor receptor, urokinase
plasminogen activator, urokinase plasminogen activator receptor, and vascular
endothelial growth factor. When injected into athymic mice, these cell lines with
near normal levels of Sp1 failed to form tumors or did so only at a greatly
reduced frequency and with a much longer latency. These data indicate that
overexpression of Sp1 plays a causal role in malignant transformation of human
fibroblasts and suggest that for cancers in which it is overexpressed, Sp1
constitutes a target for therapy.

PMID: 15705902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Mol Pharmacol. 2005 May;67(5):1674-83. Epub 2005 Feb 9.

Transcriptional regulation of mouse mu opioid receptor gene: Sp3 isoforms (M1,
M2) function as repressors in neuronal cells to regulate the mu opioid receptor
gene.

Choi HS(1), Hwang CK, Kim CS, Song KY, Law PY, Wei LN, Loh HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Minnesota Medical School,
Minneapolis, 55455, USA. choix074@umn.edu

The 5'-flanking region of the mouse mu opioid receptor (MOR) gene has two
promoters, referred to as distal and proximal. MOR mRNA is predominantly
initiated by the proximal promoter. Previously, several important cis-elements
and trans-factors have been shown to play a functional role in the proximal
promoter of the MOR gene. In this study, we defined another functional, negative 
regulatory element located in the -219- to -189-base pair (translational start
site designed as +1) region of the proximal promoter. It is designated as the Sp 
binding sequence for its sequence homology to the consensus Sp binding element.
Mutation of the Sp binding element led to a 100% increase of MOR promoter
activity in MOR-positive cells (NMB cells), confirming the negative role of the
Sp binding sequence. Surprisingly, electrophoretic mobility shift analysis and
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed that Sp3 and its isoforms (M1 and
M2) were specifically bound to the Sp binding sequence. In cotransfection assays 
of Drosophila melanogaster SL2 cells using cDNA encoding Sp1, Sp3, and the M1 and
M2 isoforms of Sp3, the M1 and M2 isoforms trans-repressed the MOR promoter,
whereas Sp1 and Sp3 trans-activated the MOR promoter. Significantly, ectopic
expression of the M1 and M2 isoforms of Sp3 led to repression of the endogenous
MOR gene transcripts in NMB cells. These results suggest that the binding of the 
M1 and M2 isoforms of the Sp3 transcription factor to the Sp binding sequence may
play a role in mouse MOR gene expression.

PMID: 15703380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Phys Rev Lett. 2004 Dec 31;93(26 Pt 1):265502. Epub 2004 Dec 21.

Stacking-fault based microscopic model for platelets in diamond.

Miranda CR(1), Antonelli A, Nunes RW.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Física "Gleb Wataghin," Universidade Estadual de Campinas, CP
6165, CEP 13083-970, Campinas, SP, Brazil.

Comment in
    Phys Rev Lett. 2005 Sep 23;95(13):139601; author reply 139602.

We propose a new model for {001} platelets in diamond based on the formation of a
metastable stacking-fault. The core of the defect is a double layer of threefold 
coordinated sp2 carbon atoms embedded in the sp3 diamond matrix. The properties
of the model were determined using ab initio calculations. All significant
experimental signatures attributed to the platelets are fully accounted for. The 
model is also very appealing from the point of view of kinetics, since naturally 
occurring shearing processes will lead to the formation of the metastable fault.

PMID: 15697989  [PubMed]


495. Int J Cancer. 2005 Jun 10;115(2):202-13.

Interleukin-6 induces transcriptional activation of vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) in astrocytes in vivo and regulates VEGF promoter activity in
glioblastoma cells via direct interaction between STAT3 and Sp1.

Loeffler S(1), Fayard B, Weis J, Weissenberger J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuropathology, Institute of Pathology, University of Bern, Bern, 
Switzerland.

Interleukin-6 (IL-6) expression is strongly correlated with the degree of human
glioma malignancy and necessary for tumor formation in a mouse model of
spontaneous astrocytomas. Yet, exactly how IL-6 contributes to malignant
progression of these brain tumors is still unclear. We have scrutinized the
mechanism of transcriptional activation of vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) expression by IL-6 in the mouse brain and in glioblastoma cells. We
demonstrate here that IL-6 drives transcriptional upregulation of VEGF in
astrocytes in vivo using glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP)-IL-6/VEGF-green
fluorescent protein (GFP) double transgenic mice. We further show that
IL-6-induced VEGF transcription and VEGF secretion by human glioblastoma cells is
dependent on signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3). By
progressive 5'-deletion analysis we defined the minimal VEGF promoter region for 
IL-6-responsiveness to nucleotides -88/-50. Surprisingly, this promoter region is
rich in GC-boxes and does not contain STAT3 binding elements. Electrophoretic
mobility shift and supershift assays revealed binding of Sp1 and Sp3 to the
-88/-50 element upon IL-6 stimulation. Interestingly, preincubation with STAT3
antibody prevented the binding of Sp1 and Sp3 to the -88/-50 element, indicating 
that STAT3 is involved in IL-6-driven Sp1/Sp3 protein-DNA complex formation.
Physical interaction of STAT3 and Sp1 was demonstrated by coimmunoprecipitation. 
The functional relevance of the STAT3/Sp1 association was corroborated by
transient transfection experiments, which showed that overexpression of
constitutively active STAT3 increased the minimal VEGF promoter activity. Taken
together, our study suggests that IL-6 promotes tumor angiogenesis in gliomas and
describes a novel transcriptional activation mechanism for STAT3 in the context
of a STAT3 binding element (SBE)-free promoter.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc

PMID: 15688401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Am Chem Soc. 2005 Feb 9;127(5):1338-9.

A new mode of reactivity for pyridine N-oxide: C-H activation with uranium(IV)
and thorium(IV) bis(alkyl) complexes.

Pool JA(1), Scott BL, Kiplinger JL.

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA.

Uranium(IV) and thorium(IV) bis(alkyl) complexes of the type (C5Me5)2AnR2 (An =
U, Th; R = CH3, CH2Ph) activate the sp2 and sp3 hybridized C-H bonds in pyridine 
N-oxide and lutidine N-oxide to produce the corresponding cyclometalated
complexes, (C5Me5)2An(R)[eta2-(O,C)-ONC5H4] and
(C5Me5)2An(R)[eta2-(O,C)-ON-2-CH2-5-CH3-C5H3]. These provide rare examples of C-H
activation chemistry mediated by actinide metal centers. This chemistry is in
contrast to the known oxygen atom transfer reactivity patterns of pyridine
N-oxides with oxophilic metal complexes and constitutes a new mode of reactivity 
for pyridine N-oxides.

PMID: 15686342  [PubMed]


497. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2005 Jun;288(6):L1089-98. Epub 2005 Jan 28.

Transcription of macrophage IGF-I exon 1 is positively regulated by the
5'-untranslated region and negatively regulated by the 5'-flanking region.

Wynes MW(1), Riches DW.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cell Biology, Dept. of Pediatrics, Neustadt Rm. D405, National
Jewish Medical and Research Center, 1400 Jackson St., Denver, CO 80206, USA.

Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is an insidious lung disease with no known
cure or effective therapy. Macrophage-derived insulin-like growth factor-I
(IGF-I) is thought to play a role in the pathogenesis of IPF; however, little is 
known about the control of IGF-I expression in macrophages. In this report we
investigated the cis-regulatory elements that control basal expression using
luciferase reporter constructs in RAW 264.7 macrophages. We show that the +95 to 
+329 region contains elements necessary to direct maximal promoter activity,
whereas the +251 to +329 region contains the minimal promoter. Mapping
transcriptional start sites for endogenous IGF-I in primary macrophages revealed 
that the major transcriptional start site is centered at +150, whereas the most
3'-transcriptional start site is centered at +255. Nuclear proteins from primary 
and RAW 264.7 macrophages bind specifically to the region required for maximal
promoter activity (+134 to +173) and to the region required for minimal promoter 
activity (+267 to +299). Antibody supershift assays indicate that Sp3 bound to
the +267 to +299 region. Moreover, mutation of the putative binding site reduced 
Sp3 binding in EMSAs and increased promoter activity in luciferase reporter gene 
assays. We also found that the regions from -1711 to -855 and -855 to -337
contain putative macrophage-specific suppressor elements that do not function in 
HeLa or COS-7 epithelial cell lines. These data support the view that macrophage 
IGF-I expression is positively regulated by elements located in the
5'-untranslated region and negatively regulated by elements in the 5'-flanking
region of the IGF-I gene.

PMID: 15681396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Mar 4;328(1):116-24.

Carvedilol effectively blocks oxidative stress-mediated downregulation of
sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase 2 gene transcription through modification of
Sp1 binding.

Koitabashi N(1), Arai M, Tomaru K, Takizawa T, Watanabe A, Niwano K, Yokoyama T, 
Wuytack F, Periasamy M, Nagai R, Kurabayashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Biological Science, Gunma University Graduate
School of Medicine, Maebashi, Gunma, Japan.

Carvedilol is a beta-adrenoceptor blocker and a potent antioxidant that improves 
cardiac function in patients with heart failure. The restoration of sarcoplasmic 
reticulum Ca2+-ATPase (SERCA2) gene expression may be an underlying mechanism of 
its beneficial effects on cardiac function. In primary cultured neonatal rat
cardiac myocytes, treatment with either carvedilol or its beta-receptor inactive 
metabolite, BM910228, attenuated the hydrogen peroxide-mediated decrease in
SERCA2 mRNA and protein levels, while metoprolol, a pure beta-blocker, had no
effect. Moreover, carvedilol itself significantly enhanced SERCA2 gene
transcription, suggesting that carvedilol specifically restores SERCA2 gene
transcription. Site-directed mutagenesis revealed that two Sp1 sites in the
SERCA2 gene promoter region mediated the response to carvedilol under oxidative
stress. Further, electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed that Sp1 and Sp3 
transcription factors correlated with carvedilol-mediated changes in the promoter
assays. These studies may provide a mechanistic explanation for the beneficial
effects of carvedilol in heart failure.

PMID: 15670758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Endocr Res. 2004 Nov;30(4):805-6.

The Sp transcription factor family is involved in the cellular expression of the 
human GIP-R gene promoter.

Baldacchino V(1), Oble S, Hamet P, Tremblay J, Bourdeau I, Lacroix A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Endocrine Pathophysiology, Department of Medicine, Hôtel-Dieu du
Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal, Montréal, Canada.

PMID: 15666829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Endocr Res. 2004 Nov;30(4):677-84.

In search of the function of the peripheral-type benzodiazepine receptor.

Papadopoulos V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Georgetown University
Medical Center, Washington, District of Columbia 20057, USA.
papadopv@georgetown.edu

The peripheral-type benzodiazepine receptor (PBR) is a mitochondrial protein,
involved in the regulation of cholesterol transport from the outer to the inner
mitochondrial membrane, the rate-determining step in steroid hormone
biosynthesis. Molecular modeling of PBR suggested that it might function as a
channel for cholesterol. Indeed, cholesterol uptake and transport by bacteria
cells was induced upon PBR expression. Amino acid deletion, site-directed
mutagenesis, and structural studies identified a cholesterol
recognition/interaction amino acid consensus sequence in the cytoplasmic
carboxy-terminus of the receptor. In vitro reconstitution experiments
demonstrated that the 18 kDa PBR protein binds with high affinity both drug
ligands and cholesterol. In situ and in vitro studies indicated that in
steroidogenic cells the StAR-induced cholesterol import into mitochondria was
mediated by the outer mitochondrial membrane PBR. In search of the tissue
specificity of PBR expression it was shown that the high levels of PBR expression
in steroidogenic cells are due, at least in part, to the expression of Sp1/Sp3
transcription factors. Moreover, PBR's function in cholesterol transport was
found to be conserved across kingdoms because a PBR-homologous Arabidopsis
sequence when expressed in bacteria protoplasts caused a ligand-induced uptake of
cholesterol suggesting that the Arabidopsis PBR homologue is involved in steroid 
import in plant mitochondria. In conclusion, these studies suggest that PBR's
ability to bind and transport cholesterol is a well-conserved function of this
ubiquitous protein. Expression of specific transcription factors results in the
overexpression of PBR and increased cholesterol transport into mitochondria
associated with a specialized function (steroidogenesis). In other tissues, PBR
expression might be part of the mitochondrial membrane biogenesis process
involved in increased cell proliferation (cancer, gliosis) and tissue repair
(nerve damage and ischemia-reperfusion injury).

PMID: 15666811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2005 Jan;62(2):214-26.

The transcription factor profile of human mast cells in comparison with monocytes
and granulocytes.

Babina M(1), Schülke Y, Kirchhof L, Guhl S, Franke R, Böhm S, Zuberbier T, Henz
BM, Gombart AF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Allergy, University Hospital Charité Campus
Mitte, Schumannstr. 20/21, 10117, Berlin, Germany. magda.babina@charite.de

Expression profiles of mRNAs and proteins for various transcription factors were 
determined for human skin mast cells (sMCs), leukemic HMC-1 MCs, monocytes and
granulocytes. By quantitative RT-PCR, sMCs expressed lower levels of c-fos, PU.1,
C/EBPalpha, and C/EBPepsilon than monocytes and granulocytes, but higher levels
of MITF, SCL, GATA-1 and GATA-2. At the protein level, MITF, SCL, GATA-2, Elf-1
and c-fos were clearly detectable in sMCs. With the exception of c-fos, these
proteins were absent or expressed only slightly in monocytes and granulocytes.
The expression of NF-E2p45, GATA-1, PU.1, Ets-1, C/EBPalpha and C/EBPepsilon was 
below the detection limit in sMCs, but detectable in other myelocytes. The high
expression of SCL and GATA-2 in sMCs is reminiscent of stem cells. The absence of
C/EBPvarepsilon in sMCs, but strong expression in HMC-1, suggests it may impair
MC maturation. In summary, mature human MCs can be characterized as
C/EBPalpha(low), C/EBPvarepsilon-, PU.1(low), GATA-1(low), GATA-2+, SCL+,
MITF(high).

PMID: 15666093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Virol. 2005 Feb;79(3):1397-408.

An Sp1 response element in the Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus open
reading frame 50 promoter mediates lytic cycle induction by butyrate.

Ye J(1), Shedd D, Miller G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University School of
Medicine, 333 Cedar St., New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) can be driven into the lytic cycle
in vitro by phorbol esters and sodium butyrate. This report begins to analyze the
process by which butyrate activates the promoter of KSHV open reading frame 50
(ORF50), the key viral regulator of the KSHV latency to lytic cycle switch. A
short fragment of the promoter, 134 nucleotides upstream of the translational
start of ORF50, retained basal uninduced activity and conferred maximal
responsiveness to sodium butyrate. The butyrate response element was mapped to a 
consensus Sp1-binding site. By means of electrophoretic mobility shift assays,
both Sp1 and Sp3 were shown to form complexes in vitro with the ORF50 promoter at
the Sp1 site. Butyrate induced the formation of a group of novel complexes,
including several Sp3-containing complexes, one Sp1-containing complex, and
several other complexes that were not identified with antibodies to Sp1 or Sp3.
Formation of all butyrate-induced DNA-protein complexes was mediated by the
consensus Sp1 site. In insect and mammalian cell lines, Sp1 significantly
activated the ORF50 promoter linked to luciferase. Chromatin immunoprecipitation 
experiments in a PEL cell line showed that butyrate induced Sp1, CBP, and p300
binding to the ORF50 promoter in vivo in an on-off manner. The results suggest
that induction of the KSHV lytic cycle by butyrate is mediated through
interactions at the Sp1/Sp3 site located 103 to 112 nucleotides upstream of the
translational initiation of ORF50 presumably by enhancing the binding of Sp1 to
this site.

PMCID: PMC544116
PMID: 15650166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Cancer Lett. 2005 Jan 31;218(1):91-8.

Inhibition of glutaminase expression increases Sp1 phosphorylation and Sp1/Sp3
transcriptional activity in Ehrlich tumor cells.

Segura JA(1), Donadio AC, Lobo C, Matés JM, Márquez J, Alonso FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Molecular y Bioquímica, Facultad de Ciencias, Campus 
de Teatinos, Universidad de Málaga, 29071 Málaga, Spain. jsegura@uma.es

Tumor cells expressing antisense glutaminase RNA show a drastic inhibition of
glutaminase activity and they acquire a more differentiated phenotype. We have
studied the expression of Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors in both Ehrlich tumor
cells and their derivative 0.28AS-2 antisense glutaminase expressing cells. The
expression of phosphorylated Sp1 in 0.28AS-2 cells was 3-fold the expression in
EATC. Full length Sp3 was also incremented in 0.28AS-2 cells. Sp1 and Sp3 binding
to a consensus Sp1 probe was higher in 0.28AS-2 nuclear extracts, as determined
by supershift assays. Sp1-DNA binding was inhibited by phosphatase treatment,
demonstrating that phosphorylation of Sp1 is critical for its DNA binding
capacity. The Sp1 and Sp3 DNA binding found in 0.28AS-2 cells was also correlated
with an increased Sp1 activity, as shown in transient transfections assays
carried out with a luciferase reporter plasmid. Incubation of Ehrlich tumor cells
with the differentiation agent PMA could not totally reproduce the Sp1/Sp3
changes observed in 0.28AS-2 cells. However, it was demonstrated that the
intracellular concentration of glutamine, but not glutamate or aspartate, is
increased in 0.28AS-2 cells. In conclusion, the antisense inhibition of
glutaminase leads to an increased expression of phosphorylated Sp1 and that
correlates with an increase in Sp1 activity.

PMID: 15639344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Chem Phys. 2005 Jan 8;122(2):024114.

Improved pseudobonds for combined ab initio quantum mechanical/molecular
mechanical methods.

Zhang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, New York University, New York, New York 10003, USA.
yingkai.zhang@nyu.edu

The pseudobond approach offers a smooth connection at the quantum
mechanical/molecular mechanical interface which passes through covalent bonds. It
replaces the boundary atom of the environment part with a seven-valence-electron 
atom to form a pseudobond with the boundary atom of the active part [Y. Zhang, T.
S. Lee, and W. Yang, J. Chem. Phys. 110, 46 (1999)]. In its original formulation,
the seven-valence-electron boundary atom has the basis set of fluorine and a
parametrized effective core potential. Up to now, only the Cps(sp3)-C(sp3)
pseudobond has been successfully developed; thus in the case of proteins, it can 
only be used to cut the protein side chains. Here we employ a different
formulation to construct this seven-valence-electron boundary atom, which has its
own basis set as well as the effective core potential. We have not only further
improved Cps(sp3)-C(sp3) pseudobond, but also developed Cps(sp3)-C(sp2,carbonyl) 
and Cps(sp3)-N(sp3) pseudobonds for the cutting of protein backbones and nucleic 
acid bases. The basis set and effective core potential for the
seven-valence-electron boundary atom are independent of the molecular mechanical 
force field. Although the parametrization is performed with density functional
calculations using hybrid B3LYP exchange-correlation functional, it is found that
the same set of parameters is also applicable to Hartree-Fock and MP2 methods, as
well as DFT calculations with other exchange-correlation functionals. Tests on a 
series of molecules yield very good structural, electronic, and energetic results
in comparison with the corresponding full ab initio quantum mechanical
calculations.

2005 American Institute of Physics.

PMID: 15638579  [PubMed]


5. J Chem Phys. 2005 Jan 8;122(2):024110.

Improved implementation and application of the individually selecting
configuration interaction method.

Stampfuss P(1), Wenzel W.

Author information: 
(1)Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe, Institut für Nanotechnologie, Postfach 3640,
76021 Karlsruhe, Germany.

We report on the progress of our implementation of the configuration-selecting
multireference configuration interaction method on massively parallel
architectures with distributed memory, which now permits the treatment of Hilbert
spaces of dimension O(10(12)). Of these about 50,000,000 can be selected in the
variational subspace. We provide scaling data for the running time of the code
for the IBM/SP3 and the CRAY-T3E. We present benchmark results for two selected
applications: the energetics of the isomers of dinitrosoethylene and the
benchmark results for the ring closure reaction of enediyene.

2005 American Institute of Physics.

PMID: 15638575  [PubMed]


6. Org Lett. 2004 Dec 23;6(26):4997-9.

Catalytic enantioselective alkynylation of prochiral sp3 C-H bonds adjacent to a 
nitrogen atom.

Li Z(1), Li CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, McGill University, 801 Sherbrooke Street West,
Montreal, Quebec H3A 2K6, Canada.

[reaction: see text] The construction of chiral carbon centers via the first
catalytic asymmetric alkynylation of prochiral CH2 groups was developed by using 
a copper-catalyzed double activation of sp3 and sp C-H bonds. Optically active
1-alkynylated tetrahydroisoquinolines were obtained by this method.

PMID: 15606119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2005 May;288(5):G986-93. Epub 2004 Dec
16.

Alterations in growth hormone receptor abundance regulate growth hormone
signaling in murine obstructive cholestasis.

Held MA(1), Cosme-Blanco W, Difedele LM, Bonkowski EL, Menon RK, Denson LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, USA.

Children with cholestatic liver diseases, in particular biliary atresia, may
develop an acquired growth hormone (GH) resistance. This is characterized by
normal GH secretion, reduced liver GH receptor (GHR) abundance, and reduced
circulating insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I). Consequences include linear
growth failure, reduced muscle mass, and increased perioperative morbidity and
mortality. However, the molecular basis for altered GH signaling in liver and
skeletal muscle in cholestatic liver disease is not known. We hypothesized that
reduced IGF-I expression in obstructive cholestasis would be associated with
downregulation of the GHR and impaired phosphorylation of signal transducers and 
activators of transcription (STAT5). Body composition was determined in C57BL/6J 
male mice after bile duct ligation (BDL) relative to pair-fed (PF) and ad
libitum-fed controls. GHR, STAT5, Sp3, and IGF-I expression and/or DNA binding
were assessed using immunoblots, electrophoretic mobility shift assays, and/or
real time RT-PCR. Fat-free mass was reduced in PF mice relative to ad libitum-fed
controls. BDL led to a further reduction in fat mass and fat-free mass relative
to PF controls. TNF-alpha was increased in liver and skeletal muscle of BDL mice.
This was associated with reduced GH-dependent STAT5 activation and IGF-I RNA
expression. GHR expression was reduced in BDL mice; in liver, this was associated
with reduced Sp3 binding to a GHR gene promoter cis element. Wasting in murine
obstructive cholestasis is due to combined effects of reduced caloric intake and 
biliary obstruction. GH resistance due to downregulation of GHR expression may be
attributed primarily to the obstructive cholestasis; therapies that specifically 
increase GHR expression may restore GH signaling in this setting.

PMID: 15604202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Am Chem Soc. 2004 Dec 15;126(49):15970-1.

Total synthesis of amphidinolide X.

Lepage O(1), Kattnig E, Fürstner A.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Kohlenforschung, D-45470 Mülheim/Ruhr, Germany.

A concise total synthesis of the cytotoxic marine natural product amphidinolide X
(1) is described. A key step of the highly convergent route to this structurally 
rather unusual macrodiolide derivative consists of a newly developed, highly syn 
selective formation of allenol 6 by an iron-catalyzed ring opening reaction of
the enantioenriched propargyl epoxide 5 (derived from a Sharpless epoxidation)
with a Grignard reagent. Allenol 6 was then cyclized with the aid of Ag(I) to
give dihydrofuran 7 containing the (R)-configured quarternary sp3 chiral center
at C19 of the target. The anti-configured chiral centers at C10 and C11 were
formed by the palladium-catalyzed, Et2Zn-promoted addition of propargyl mesylate 
12 to the functionalized aldehyde 11. The key fragment coupling at the C13-C14
bond was achieved by the "9-MeO-9-BBN" variant of the alkyl-Suzuki reaction.
Finally, the 16-membered macrodiolide ring was formed by a Yamaguchi
esterification/lactonization strategy.

PMID: 15584724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Biol Reprod. 2005 Apr;72(4):851-61. Epub 2004 Dec 1.

Cloning and characterization of the 5alpha-reductase type 2 promoter in the rat
epididymis.

Seenundun S(1), Robaire B.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pharmacology and Therapeutics and of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3G 1Y6.

Steroid 5alpha-reductase converts testosterone to the more potent androgen,
dihydrotestosterone. The molecular mechanisms responsible for maintaining high
concentrations of the 5alpha-reductase type 2 mRNA in the caput epididymidis and 
for regulating its region-specific expression are unknown. To gain insight into
its transcriptional regulation, the cloning and characterization of the 5'
upstream region of 5alpha-reductase type 2 were undertaken. Sequential deletion
analysis was done to map the 2243-base pair (bp) cloned 5' upstream region, and
the constructs were transfected into epididymal PC1 cells and prostatic PC3
cells. In both cell lines, regulatory elements and the minimal promoter were
mapped to the 485-bp region upstream of the start codon. Primer extension and 5' 
RACE identified one transcriptional start site at 33-bp upstream of the start
codon. Using electrophoretic mobility shift assay, a specific band was observed
in the -68- to -32-bp region in the presence of nuclear extracts. Supershift and 
mutational studies confirmed the binding of SP1 and, to a lesser extent, SP3 to
the two potential SP1 binding sites and the preference of these proteins to one
binding site over the other. SP1 and SP3 were both predominantly immunolocalized 
to the principal cells of the epididymis and follow distinct distribution
patterns in this tissue. These results provide a framework crucial in the further
investigation of the transcriptional regulation of 5alpha-reductase type 2 in the
rat epididymis.

PMID: 15576829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Org Lett. 2004 Dec 9;6(25):4731-4.

Highly efficient two-step synthesis of C-sp3-centered geminal diiodides.

Cloarec JM(1), Charette AB.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Chimie, Université de Montréal, P.O. Box 6128 Station Downtown,
Montréal, Québec, Canada H3C 3J7.

[reaction: see text] Trisubstituted gem-diiodoalkenes of functionalized chains
are efficiently reduced to the corresponding terminal geminal diiodides in high
yields upon treatment with the diazene precursor, diethyl
4-(hydrazinosulfonyl)-benzyl phosphonate.

PMID: 15575672  [PubMed]


11. Org Lett. 2004 Dec 9;6(25):4683-6.

Tandem functionalization of nonactivated alkenes and alkynes in intramolecular
N-acyloxyiminium ion carbocyclization. Synthesis of 6-substituted hydroindole
2-carboxylic acids.

Hanessian S(1), Tremblay M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Université de Montréal, C.P. 6128, Station
Centre-ville, Montréal, PQ, H3C 3J7 Canada. stephen.hanessian@umontreal.ca

[reaction: see text] Five-membered N-Boc acyliminium ions derived from
L-pyroglutamic acid harboring 4-butenyl and 4-butynyl tethers undergo Lewis
acid-mediated halo and tandem Friedel-Crafts carbocyclization within minutes at
-78 degrees C to give stereodefined 6-substituted octahydroindole and
hexahydroindole 2-carboxylic acid methyl esters, respectively. The cyclic vinyl
bromides are excellent substrates for Pd-catalyzed Suzuki-Miyaura, Heck, and
Stille couplings. The method also provides access to enantiopure sp2- and
sp3-arylated azabicyclics that are novel and versatile scaffolds for chemical
diversification.

PMID: 15575660  [PubMed]


12. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Dec;24(24):10777-91.

Sp3 proteins negatively regulate beta myosin heavy chain gene expression during
skeletal muscle inactivity.

Tsika G(1), Ji J, Tsika R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, University of
Missouri-Columbia, Biochemistry E102 Vet Med Bldg., 1600 Rollins Road, Columbia, 
MO 65211, USA. tsikar@missouri.edu

In adult skeletal muscle, beta myosin heavy chain (betaMyHC) gene expression is
primarily restricted to slow type I fibers; however, its expression is
down-regulated in response to muscle inactivity. Little is known about the
signaling pathways and transcription factors that mediate this important
functional response. This study demonstrates that increased binding of Sp3 to
GC-rich elements in the betaMyHC promoter is a critical event in down-regulation 
of betaMyHC gene expression under non-weight-bearing conditions. Conversely,
binding of Sp3 to these elements decreased while Sp1 binding increased with
nuclear extracts from plantaris muscle exposed to mechanical overload, a stimulus
that increases betaMyHC gene expression. In addition, these experiments revealed 
the existence of an Sp4-DNA binding complex when using adult skeletal muscle
nuclear extract was used but not when nuclear extracts from cultured myotubes
were used. Sp3 proteins are competitive inhibitors of Sp1-mediated betaMyHC
reporter gene transactivation in both Drosophila SL-2 and mouse C2C12 myotubes.
Sp4 is a weak activator of betaMyHC gene expression in SL-2 cells, which lack
endogenous Sp1 activity, but does not activate betaMyHC gene expression in C2C12 
myotubes, which have high levels of Sp1. These results suggest that competitive
binding of Sp family proteins regulate betaMyHC gene transcription in response to
altered neuromuscular activity.

PMCID: PMC533985
PMID: 15572681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Biochem J. 2005 May 1;387(Pt 3):737-45.

Sp3 is involved in the regulation of SOCS3 gene expression.

Ehlting C(1), Häussinger D, Bode JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Infectiology, Heinrich-Heine
University, 40255 Düsseldorf, Germany.

Cytokine-induced expression of SOCS (suppressor of cytokine signalling) molecules
is important for the negative regulatory control of STAT (signal transduction and
activators of transcription)-dependent cytokine signalling, e.g. for the signal
transduction of IL-6 (interleukin-6)-type cytokines through the JAK (Janus
kinase)/STAT cascade. STAT activation itself represents an important step in the 
transcriptional activation of SOCS3 gene expression. However, downstream of the
STAT-responsive element, the SOCS3 gene contains a GC-rich element in its
5'-upstream region. The aim of the present study was to investigate the
implications of this GC-rich element in the transcriptional control of SOCS3 gene
expression. In the present study, we show that mutation of this GC-rich element
abolishes IL-6-dependent transcriptional activation of the SOCS3 promoter and
that Sp3 (specificity protein 3), a ubiquitously expressed transcription factor, 
but not Sp1 binds to this GC-rich motif, suggesting that Sp3 is involved in the
regulation of SOCS3 expression. The results suggest that Sp3 is important for
IL-6-induced transcriptional activation of the SOCS3 (gene) promoter and acts as 
an enhancer of basal as well as induced transcriptional activity, resulting in
enhanced SOCS3 mRNA and protein expression. Mutation of Lys-483, a potential
target for Sp3 acetylation, inhibited Sp3-mediated enhancement of SOCS3 mRNA
expression and SOCS3 promoter activation, indicating that the acetylation of this
lysine residue of Sp3 is important for the enhancing effect of Sp3 on SOCS3
expression.

PMCID: PMC1135004
PMID: 15554904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Inorg Chem. 2004 Nov 29;43(24):7774-83.

Complexes having the fac-[M(CO)3]+ core (M=Tc, Re) useful in
radiopharmaceuticals: X-ray and NMR structural characterization and density
functional calculations of species containing two sp3 N donors and one sp3 O
donor.

Lipowska M(1), Cini R, Tamasi G, Xu X, Taylor AT, Marzilli LG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

Radiopharmaceuticals containing the "fac-[M(CO)3]+ " core (M=99mTc, 186Re, or
188Re) have potential as diagnostic or therapeutic agents. Complexes with this
core with sp3 amine donors have received little attention. We have studied
adducts formed by ENDACH2 (HO2CCH2NHCH2CH2NHCH2CO2H) and ENACH
(NH2CH2CH2NHCH2CO2H). Re(CO)3(ENDACH)-A (1A) and Re(CO)3(ENDACH)-B (1B) isomers
were obtained by the reaction of ENDACH2 with Re(CO)5Cl. Re(CO)3(ENAC) (2) was
obtained by the reaction of ENACH with aqueous [Re(CO)3(H2O)3]+. From
single-crystal X-ray data, the three new neutral complexes, 1A, 1B, and 2, have a
six-coordinate, pseudo-octahedral Re center with facially coordinated carbonyl
ligands. ENDACH- and ENAC- bind facially to Re through both amine nitrogens and
one carboxyl oxygen, forming two five-membered chelate rings. The Re(CO)3(ENDACH)
isomers have an uncoordinated, dangling -CH2CO2H group, which is an ideal
coupling site for attachment to biomolecules. The isomers differ by the
configuration of the NH center bearing this dangling group. The H atom of the
amine (N2) is endo (near the carbonyl ligands in the basal plane) in 1A and exo
(away from carbonyl ligands) in isomer 1B. Isomers reach equilibrium (1A:1B,
70:30) after 3 days at high pH. Density functional structure optimizations were
performed for isolated molecules of the type Tc(I)/Re(I)(CO)3(N2O):
[Re(CO)3(NH3)2(H2O)]+, [Tc(CO)3(NH3)2(H2O)]+, [Re(CO)3(EN)(H2O)]+ (EN,
ethylenediamine), [Tc(CO)3(EN)(H2O)]+, and various models for 1A, 1B, and 2. The 
computed structures are in good agreement with the X-ray structures. The
theoretical and experimental Re-N bond distances usually agree within 0.045 A.
The total electronic energy values for the computed 1A and 1B models differ by
0.815 kcal mol(-1), giving an isomer ratio of 80:20, in good agreement with the
1A/1B ratio (70:30) found.

PMID: 15554642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 18;280(7):5290-9. Epub 2004 Nov 18.

Dystrophin Dp71 expression is down-regulated during myogenesis: role of Sp1 and
Sp3 on the Dp71 promoter activity.

de León MB(1), Montañez C, Gómez P, Morales-Lázaro SL, Tapia-Ramírez V,
Valadez-Graham V, Recillas-Targa F, Yaffe D, Nudel U, Cisneros B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Centro de Investigación y de
Estudios Avanzados del I.P.N., 07360 México.

Dp71 expression is present in myoblasts but declines during myogenesis to avoid
interfering with the function of dystrophin, the predominant Duchenne muscular
dystrophy gene product in differentiated muscle fibers. To elucidate the
transcriptional regulatory mechanisms operating on the developmentally regulated 
expression of Dp71, we analyzed the Dp71 expression and promoter activity during 
myogenesis of the C2C12 cells. We demonstrated that the cellular content of Dp71 
transcript and protein decrease in myotubes as a consequence of the negative
regulation that the differentiation stimulus exerts on the Dp71 promoter.
Promoter deletion analysis showed that the 224-bp 5'-flanking region, which
contains several Sp-binding sites (Sp-A to Sp-D), is responsible for the Dp71
promoter basal activity in myoblasts as well as for down-regulation of the
promoter in differentiated cells. Electrophoretic mobility shift and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays indicated that Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors
specifically bind to the Sp-binding sites in the minimal Dp71 promoter region.
Site-directed mutagenesis assay revealed that Sp-A is the most important binding 
site for the proximal Dp71 promoter activity. Additionally, cotransfection of the
promoter construct with Sp1- and Sp3-expressing vectors into Drosophila SL2
cells, which lack endogenous Sp family, confirmed that these proteins activate
specifically the minimal Dp71 promoter. Endogenous Sp1 and Sp3 proteins were
detected only in myoblasts and not in myotubes, which indicates that the lack of 
these factors causes down-regulation of the Dp71 promoter activity in
differentiated cells. In corroboration, efficient promoter activity was restored 
in differentiated muscle cells by exogenous expression of Sp1 and Sp3.

PMID: 15550398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Exp Cell Res. 2005 Jan 1;302(1):129-42.

Sp1/Sp3 and the myeloid zinc finger gene MZF1 regulate the human N-cadherin
promoter in osteoblasts.

Le Mée S(1), Fromigué O, Marie PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Osteoblast Biology and Pathology, INSERM U606, Lariboisière
Hospital, 75475 Cedex 10 Paris, France.

To determine the molecular mechanisms by which N-cadherin transcription is
regulated, we cloned and sequenced a 3681-bp of the 5'-flanking region of the
human N-cadherin gene. Deletion analysis of the proximal region identified a
minimal 318-bp region with strong promoter activity in human osteoblasts. The
cryptic promoter is characterized by high GC content and a GA-rich binding core
that may bind zing finger transcription factors. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays (EMSA), competition and supershift EMSA revealed that an Sp1/Sp3 binding
site acts as a basal regulatory element of the promoter in osteoblasts.
Incubation of osteoblast nuclear extracts with -163/-131 wild-type probe
containing the GA-rich binding core revealed another specific complex, which was 
not formed with a -163/-131 probe mutated in the GA repeat. EMSA identified the
nuclear factor involved as myeloid zinc finger-1 (MZF1). Mutation analysis showed
that Sp1/Sp3 and MZF1 binding sites contribute to basal promoter activity.
Cotransfection analyses showed that Sp1 and MZF1 overexpression increases whereas
Sp3 antagonizes Sp1-induced N-cadherin promoter activity in osteoblasts. RT-PCR
analysis showed that human osteoblastic cells express MZF1 and that Sp1/MZF1
overexpression increased N-cadherin expression. These results indicate that
Sp1/Sp3 and MZF1 are important transcription factors regulating N-cadherin
promoter activity and expression in osteoblasts.

PMID: 15541732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Exp Cell Res. 2005 Jan 1;302(1):96-107.

Estrogen regulation of trefoil factor 1 expression by estrogen receptor alpha and
Sp proteins.

Sun JM(1), Spencer VA, Li L, Yu Chen H, Yu J, Davie JR.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, R3E 0V9, Canada.

Estrogen-responsive genes in human breast cancer cells often have an estrogen
response element (ERE) positioned next to an Sp1 binding site. In chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays, we investigated the binding of estrogen
receptor alpha (ER), Sp1, and Sp3 to the episomal and native estrogen-responsive 
trefoil factor 1 (TFF1; formerly pS2) promoter in MCF-7 breast cancer cells.
Mutation of the Sp site upstream of the ERE reduced estrogen responsiveness and
prevented binding of Sp1 and Sp3, but not ER to the episomal promoter. In the
absence of estradiol (E2), Sp1, Sp3, histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC), and HDAC2, and
low levels of acetylated H3 and H4 are associated with the native promoter, with 
the histones being engaged in dynamic reversible acetylation. Following E2
addition, levels of ER and acetylated H3 and H4 bound to the native promoter
increases. There is clearance of Sp1, but not of Sp3, from the promoter while
HDAC1 and HDAC2 remain bound. These data are consistent with a model in which Sp1
or Sp3 aid in recruitment of HDACs and histone acetyltransferases (HATs) to
mediate dynamic acetylation of histones associated with the TFF1 promoter, which 
is in a state of readiness to respond to events occurring following the addition 
of estrogen.

PMID: 15541729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jan 21;280(3):1893-900. Epub 2004 Nov 4.

Regulation of ATP-sensitive potassium channel subunit Kir6.2 expression in rat
intestinal insulin-producing progenitor cells.

Hashimoto T(1), Nakamura T, Maegawa H, Nishio Y, Egawa K, Kashiwagi A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Shiga
University of Medical Science, Otsu, Japan.

We have reported that the combined expression of Pdx-1 (pancreatic duodenal
homeobox 1) and Isl-1 (islet 1) enables immature rat enterocytes (IEC-6) to
produce and release insulin. A key component regulating the release of insulin is
the ATP-sensitive potassium channel subunit Kir6.2. To investigate the regulation
of Kir6.2 gene expression, we assessed Kir6.2 expression in IEC-6 cells
expressing Pdx-1 and/or Isl-1. We observed that Kir6.2 protein was expressed de
novo in IEC-6 cells expressing both Pdx-1 and Isl-1 but not in cells expressing
Pdx-1 alone. Next, we analyzed the regions of the Kir6.2 promoter (-1677/-45) by 
performing a luciferase assay and electrophoretic mobility shift assay. The
results have demonstrated that Kir6.2 promoter possesses two regions regulating
the promoter activity: a Foxa2-binding site (-1364 to -1210) and an
Sp1/Sp3-binding site (-1035 to -939). The additional expression of Isl-1 in IEC-6
cells expressing Pdx-1 attenuated overexpression of Foxa2 protein and enhanced
Kir6.2 expression. Finally, knockdown of Isl-1 using the iRNA technique resulted 
in decreased expression of Kir6.2 protein in a rat pancreatic beta-cell line
(RIN-5F cells). These results indicate that expression of Kir6.2 in the rat
intestine is moderated by Isl-1.

PMID: 15528203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Cell Biochem. 2005 Jan 1;94(1):153-67.

Specificity of transcriptional regulation by the zinc finger transcription
factors Sp1, Sp3, and Egr-1.

Al-Sarraj A(1), Day RM, Thiel G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Saarland Medical Center, D-66421 Homburg, Germany.

The transcription factors Sp1, Sp3, and Egr-1 bind with their zinc finger
DNA-binding domains to GC-rich sequences in the regulatory regions of their
target genes. The similarity of the DNA-binding sites of Sp1, Sp3, and Egr-1 has 
triggered the hypothesis that they compete for the same DNA-binding site. We have
investigated the specificity of transcriptional regulation by Sp1, Sp3, and Egr-1
using dominant-negative mutants that block the DNA-binding site of Sp1, Sp3, or
Egr-1, respectively. The results show that constitutive transcription of Sp1
regulated reporter genes, containing Sp1 sites derived from the aldolase C and
p21WAF1/Cip1 genes, or the long terminal repeat of HIV-1, was impaired by
dominant-negative mutants of Sp1 and Sp3, but not by a dominant-negative Egr-1.
Transcription mediated by Egr-1 was induced by transfection of expression vectors
encoding wild-type or mutated Egr-1 or by stimulation of the extracellular
signal-regulated protein kinase pathway via an inducible B-Raf-estrogen receptor 
fusion protein. In all cases transcription of Egr-1-regulated reporter genes,
containing Egr-1 binding sites derived from the Egr-1 or the synapsin I gene was 
impaired by a dominant-negative Egr-1, but not by dominant-negative Sp1 or Sp3
mutants. These results show that there are genuine Sp1/Sp3 or Egr-1 controlled
genes showing no cross-regulation of Sp1/Sp3 and Egr-1 through the same
DNA-binding site. This does not exclude the existence of composite Sp1/Sp3/Egr-1 
binding sites, where competition for a common DNA-binding site occurs.

2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15523672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Mech Dev. 2004 Dec;121(12):1509-22.

A role for nucleoprotein Zap3 in the reduction of telomerase activity during
embryonic stem cell differentiation.

Armstrong L(1), Lako M, van Herpe I, Evans J, Saretzki G, Hole N.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, University of Durham, South
Road, Durham DH1 3LE, UK.

Telomerase, the enzyme which maintains the ends of linear chromosomes in
eukaryotic cells is found in murine embryonic stem cells; however, its activity
is downregulated during in vitro differentiation. Previous work has indicated
that this is due to the transcriptional downregulation of murine reverse
transcriptase unit (mTert) of telomerase. To investigate the factors that cause
the transcriptional repression of mTert we defined a 300 bp region which is
essential for its transcription and performed site directed mutagenesis and
electrophoretic mobility shift assays. This analysis indicated that Sp1, Sp3 and 
c-Myc bind to the GC-boxes and E-boxes, respectively, within the promoter and
help activate the transcription of mTert gene. We also identified a novel binding
sequence, found repeated within the mTert core region, which when mutated caused 
increased mTert expression. Yeast one hybrid screening combined with
electrophoretic mobility shift assays indicated that the nuclear protein Zap3
binds to this site and its overexpression leads to the downregulation of mTert
during differentiation. This suggests that regulation of mTert transcription is a
complex process which depends on a quantitative balance between transcription
factors that cause activation or repression of this gene. Overexpression of Zap3 
in murine embryonic stem cells results in reduction in telomerase activity and
telomere length as well as reduced proliferative capacity and limited ability to 
contribute to the development of haematopoietic cells upon differentiation.

PMID: 15511642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2004 Nov 5;1680(3):158-70.

Transcriptional regulation of the AT1 receptor gene in immortalized human
trophoblast cells.

Duffy AA(1), Martin MM, Elton TS.

Author information: 
(1)Davis Heart and Lung Research Institute, College of Pharmacy, Division of
Pharmacology, The Ohio State University, DHLRI 515, 473 West 12th Avenue,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Retraction in
    Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Sep;1829(9):980.

Comment in
    NIH Guide Grants Contracts. 2013 Jan 18;:NOT-OD-13-023.

Studies investigating the mechanisms that govern the expression of the human
angiotensin II (Ang II) type 1 receptor (hAT1R) gene have progressed slowly due
to the lack of human cell lines that express the AT1R. Recently, however, an
immortalized human trophoblast cell line (HTR-8/SVNeo) was demonstrated to
respond to Ang II. Therefore, we utilized this cell line to characterize the AT1R
expressed on the cell surface and to investigate the mechanisms by which the
hAT1R gene is regulated in these cells. HTR-8/SVNeo cells were shown to express
functional high affinity AT1Rs having a Bmax value of 114+/-11 fmol/mg protein
and a Kd value of 0.14+/-0.1 nM. Additionally, Ang II-induced IP3 production was 
mediated via the AT1R. Deletional analysis of the hAT1R promoter localized a
major basal regulatory sequence within the -105 to -79 bp region, relative to the
transcription start site, in HTR-8/SVNeo cells. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assay (EMSA) and Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay demonstrated that the
transcription factors, Sp1 and Sp3, interact with this region of the hAT1R
promoter in vitro and in vivo. Taken together, our data demonstrate that
HTR-8/SVNeo cells express functional AT1Rs and that basal level expression of
this gene is regulated, in part, by Sp1 and Sp3 in this cell line.

PMID: 15507319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Cell Signal. 2005 Feb;17(2):153-66.

Sumoylation of internally initiated Sp3 isoforms regulates transcriptional
repression via a Trichostatin A-insensitive mechanism.

Spengler ML(1), Kennett SB, Moorefield KS, Simmons SO, Brattain MG, Horowitz JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, NY, USA.

Sp3 is a ubiquitously expressed member of the Sp family of transcription factors 
that encodes three proteins, Sp3, M1 and M2, with differing capacities to
stimulate or repress transcription. As part of ongoing efforts to study the
functions of Sp3 isoforms, we employed a yeast "two-hybrid" screen to identify
Sp3-binding proteins. This screen resulted in the identification of Ubc9, a
SUMO-1 conjugating enzyme, as an M2-binding protein, and consistent with these
results sequence analyses identified consensus sumoylation motifs within several 
Sp family members. Western blots probed with anti-Sp3 detected a high molecular
weight Sp3 isoform that is stabilized by a SUMO-1 hydrolase inhibitor, and this
protein is also bound by anti-SUMO-1 antiserum. Transient transfection assays
with epitope-tagged-SUMO-1 and GFP-SUMO-1 fusion proteins confirmed that Sp3, M1 
and M2 proteins are sumoylated in vivo. Substitution of arginine for lysine at
one putative site of sumoylation, lysine(551), blocked sumoylation of all Sp3
isoforms in vivo and led to a marginal increase in Sp3-mediated trans-activation 
in insect and mammalian cells. In contrast, introduction of this amino acid
substitution within M1 converted it into a potent transcriptional
trans-activator. We conclude that Sp3 isoforms are sumoylated in vivo and this
post-translational modification plays an important role in the regulation of
Sp3-mediated transcription.

PMID: 15494207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Clin Invest. 2004 Oct;114(8):1146-57.

Epigenetic regulation of 11 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 expression.

Alikhani-Koopaei R(1), Fouladkou F, Frey FJ, Frey BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, University Hospital of Berne, Berne
UNK 3010, Switzerland.

The enzyme 11 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 (11 beta HSD2) is
selectively expressed in aldosterone target tissues, where it confers aldosterone
selectivity for the mineralocorticoid receptor by inactivating 11
beta-hydroxyglucocorticoids. Variable activity of 11 beta HSD2 is relevant for
blood pressure control and hypertension. The present investigation aimed to
elucidate whether an epigenetic mechanism, DNA methylation, accounts for the
rigorous control of expression of the gene encoding 11 beta HSD2, HSD11B2. CpG
islands covering the promoter and exon 1 of HSD11B2 were found to be densely
methylated in tissues and cell lines with low expression but not those with high 
expression of HSD11B2. Demethylation induced by 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine and
procainamide enhanced the transcription and activity of the 11 beta HSD2 enzyme
in human cells in vitro and in rats in vivo. Methylation of HSD11B2
promoter-luciferase constructs decreased transcriptional activity. Methylation of
recognition sequences of transcription factors, including those for Sp1/Sp3,
Arnt, and nuclear factor 1 (NF1) diminished their DNA-binding activity. Herein
NF1 was identified as a strong HSD11B2 stimulatory factor. The effect of NF1 was 
dependent on the position of CpGs and the combination of CpGs methylated. A
methylated-CpG-binding protein complex 1 transcriptional repression interacted
directly with the methylated HSD11B2 promoter. These results indicate a role for 
DNA methylation in HSD11B2 gene repression and suggest an epigenetic mechanism
affecting this gene causally linked with hypertension.

PMCID: PMC522246
PMID: 15489962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Mol Immunol. 2004 Nov;41(12):1145-53.

Identification of an Sp factor-dependent promoter in GCET, a gene expressed at
high levels in germinal center B cells.

Steinke JW(1), Hodsdon W, Parenti S, Ostraat R, Lutz R, Borish L, Hagman J.

Author information: 
(1)Allergy Division, University of Virginia Health Sciences Center,
Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

Antigen-stimulated B lymphocytes undergo genetic and phenotypic changes in
germinal centers (GCs), including affinity maturation of immunoglobulin (Ig)
genes and Ig heavy chain isotype switching. Expression of the Germinal Center
Expressed Transcript (GCET) gene is up-regulated in murine GC B cells. The human 
homolog of GCET, HGAL/GCET2, is an important prognostic marker for staging
lymphomas derived from GCs. To identify mechanisms that control cell
type-specific transcription of GCET, we localized promoter sequences using S1
nuclease protection and functional assays. Sequences comprising a TATA-less
promoter were localized to a short region upstream of multiple mRNA start sites. 
In functional assays, the promoter is active in cells irrespectively of
endogenous GCET gene expression. In vitro binding assays identified a
non-consensus binding site for Sp factors near sites of transcriptional
initiation. The site binds Spl and Sp3 in nuclear extracts and recombinant Spl in
vitro, and is required for full promoter function in transient promoter assays.
Activation of the promoter by Spl or Sp3 in Spl/3-deficient cells was largely
dependent on the Sp site. Together, these data provide the first analysis of
regulatory modules necessary for GCET expression, a model for GC B cell-specific 
transcription.

PMID: 15482850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2004 Dec;66(3):285-90.

Carbon isotope fractionation during cis-trans isomerization of unsaturated fatty 
acids in Pseudomonas putida.

Heipieper HJ(1), Neumann G, Kabelitz N, Kastner M, Richnow HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioremediation, Centre for Environmental Research (UFZ)
Leipzig-Halle, Permoserstr. 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany. hermann.heipieper@ufz.de

The molecular mechanism of the unique cis to trans isomerization of unsaturated
fatty acids in the solvent-tolerant bacterium Pseudomonas putida S12 was studied.
For this purpose, the carbon isotope fractionation of the cis-trans isomerase was
estimated. In resting cell experiments, addition of 3-nitrotoluene for activation
of the cis-trans isomerase resulted in the conversion of the cis-unsaturated
fatty acids into the corresponding trans isomers. For the conversion of C16:1 cis
to its corresponding trans isomer, a significant fractionation was measured. The 
intensity of this fractionation strongly depended on the rate of cis-trans
isomerization and the added concentration of 3-nitrotoluene, respectively. The
presence of a significant fractionation provides additional indication for a
transition from the sp carbon linkage of the cis-double bond to an intermediate
sp3 within an enzyme-substrate complex. The sp2 linkage is reconstituted after
rotation to the trans configuration has occurred. As cytochrome c plays a major
role in the catabolism of Cti polypeptide, these findings favour a mechanism for 
the enzyme in which electrophilic iron (Fe(3+)), provided by a heme domain,
removes an electron of the cis double bond thereby transferring the sp2 linkage
into sp3.

PMID: 15480634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Physiol Genomics. 2004 Dec 15;20(1):87-96. Epub 2004 Oct 12.

Polymorphisms in the osteopontin promoter affect its transcriptional activity.

Giacopelli F(1), Marciano R, Pistorio A, Catarsi P, Canini S, Karsenty G,
Ravazzolo R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics G. Gaslini Institute, Genova, Italy.

Understanding the molecular mechanisms that underlie regulation of transcription 
of the human osteopontin encoding gene (OPN) may help to clarify several
processes, such as fibrotic evolution of organ damage, tumorigenesis and
metastasis, and immune response, in which OPN overexpression is observed. With
the aim to evaluate variants with functional effect on transcription, we have
analyzed the promoter region and focused our investigation on three common
variants present in the first 500 bp upstream of the transcription start site.
Transfection of constructs carrying the four most frequent haplotypes relative to
variants at -66, -156, and -443 fused to the luciferase reporter gene in a panel 
of different cell lines showed that one haplotype conferred a significantly
reduced level of reporter gene expression in all tested cell lines. We describe
that the -66 polymorphism modifies the binding affinity for the SP1/SP3
transcription factors, the -156 polymorphism is included in a yet uncharacterized
RUNX2 binding site, and the -443 polymorphism causes differential binding of an
unknown factor. The finding of differential effects of various combination of
variants in haplotypes may contribute to explain data of association studies
reported in several already published articles. Future association studies using 
haplotypes instead of single OPN variants will allow to achieve more accurate
results referable to differential expression of OPN in several common diseases,
in which OPN is considered a candidate susceptibility gene.

PMID: 15479859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Biochem J. 2005 Mar 1;386(Pt 2):297-303.

The roles of Sp1, Sp3, USF1/USF2 and NRF-1 in the regulation and
three-dimensional structure of the Fragile X mental retardation gene promoter.

Kumari D(1), Gabrielian A, Wheeler D, Usdin K.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-0830, USA.

Expansion of a CGG.CCG-repeat tract in the 5'-untranslated region of the FMR1
(Fragile X mental retardation 1) gene causes its aberrant transcription. This
produces symptoms ranging from premature ovarian failure and Fragile X associated
tremor and ataxia syndrome to FMR syndrome, depending on the size of the
expansion. The promoter from normal alleles shows four protein-binding regions in
vivo. We had previously shown that in mouse brain extracts two of these sites are
bound by USF1/USF2 (upstream stimulatory factors 1 and 2) heterodimers and NRF-1 
(nuclear respiratory factor-1). We also showed that these sites are involved in
the positive regulation of FMR1 transcription in neuronally derived cells. In the
present study, we show that Sp1 (specificity protein 1) and Sp3 are also strong
positive regulators of FMR1 promoter activity. We also show that, like Sp1 and
E-box-binding proteins such as USF1 and USF2, NRF-1 causes DNA bending, in this
case producing a bend of 57 degrees towards the major groove. The combined effect
of the four protein-induced bends on promoter geometry is the formation of a
highly compact arch-like structure in which the 5' end of the promoter is brought
in close proximity to the 3' end. We had previously shown that while point
mutations in the GC-boxes decrease promoter activity, deletion of either one of
them leads to an increase in promoter activity. We can reconcile these
observations with the positive effect of Sp1 and Sp3 if protein-induced bending
acts, at least in part, to bring together distally spaced factors important for
transcription initiation.

PMCID: PMC1134794
PMID: 15479157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Am Chem Soc. 2004 Oct 20;126(41):13244-6.

Oxidative C-arylation of free (NH)-heterocycles via direct (sp3) C-H bond
functionalization.

Sezen B(1), Sames D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Columbia University, 3000 Broadway, New York, New
York 10027, USA.

Retraction in
    Sezen B, Sames D. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Mar 8;128(9):3102.

Comment in
    NIH Guide Grants Contracts. 2010 Dec 3;:NOT-OD-11-024.

The development of a new chemical transformation, namely oxidative C-arylation of
saturated (NH)-heterocycles, is described. This reaction combines dehydrogenation
and arylation in one process, leading to cross-coupling of (NH)-heterocycles and 
haloarenes. Typical reaction conditions involve heating the reaction partners in 
anhydrous dioxane at 120-150 degrees C in the presence of RhCl(CO)[P(Fur)3]2 as
the catalyst and Cs2CO3 as the base. Addition of tert-butylethylene as the
hydrogen acceptor increases the chemical yield by diminishing the dehalogenation 
pathway. This method demonstrated a good substrate scope, allowing for
cross-coupling of a variety of (NH)-heterocycles (e.g., pyrrolidine, piperidine, 
piperazine, morpholine) and halo(hetero)arenes to afford valuable heterocyclic
products in one step. The preliminary mechanistic studies provided some insight
regarding the key events in the proposed catalytic cycle, including beta-hydride 
elimination of an amido rhodium complex and carbometalation of the resulting
imine. A large kinetic isotope effect [KIE (kC-H/kC-D) = 4.3] suggests that one
or both beta-hydride elimination steps are rate determining. The central role for
the phosphine ligand was established in controlling the partitioning between the 
oxidative C-arylation and N-arylation pathways.

PMID: 15479077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Neuroendocrinology. 2004;80 Suppl 1:85-93.

Interferon-alpha: regulatory effects on cell cycle and angiogenesis.

Rosewicz S(1), Detjen K, Scholz A, von Marschall Z.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik m.S. Hepatologie und Gastroenterologie,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Campus Virchow-Klinikum, Berlin, Germany.

In the current study, we investigated the effects of interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha)
on proliferation and angiogenesis in neuroendocrine tumor disease. Using a panel 
of human neuroendocrine tumor cell lines, we confirmed functionally active
IFN-alpha signaling by STAT activation and nuclear translocation as well as
transactivation. IFN-alpha results in anchorage-dependent and -independent growth
inhibition due to a delayed progression from S-phase to G2 phase of the cell
cycle. This was due to substantial reduction in cellular cyclin B levels
resulting in the inhibition of Cdc2 kinase activity. In parallel to growth
inhibition, we observed a profound inhibition of VEGF gene transcription by
IFN-alpha in human neuroendocrine tumor cells due to an Sp1/Sp3-dependent
inhibition of VEGF promoter activity. Treatment of neuroendocrine tumors with
IFN-alpha in nude mice resulted in growth inhibition and inhibition of
angiogenesis. Furthermore, treatment of neuroendocrine tumor patients with
IFN-alpha resulted in decreased VEGF expression as well as tumor angiogenesis in 
liver metastases. In summary, IFN-alpha acts via direct antiproliferative effects
as well as inhibition of tumor angiogenesis mediated by suppression of VEGF gene 
expression in neuroendocrine tumor disease.

PMID: 15477724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Clin Cancer Res. 2004 Oct 1;10(19):6750-8.

Sp1-mediated transcriptional control of fibroblast growth factor receptor 4 in
sarcomas of skeletal muscle lineage.

Yu SJ(1), Zheng L, Ladanyi M, Asa SL, Ezzat S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital and University of Toronto, The
Freeman Centre for Endocrine Oncology and The Ontario Cancer Institute, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.

Fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFRs) have been implicated in a multitude of
differentiating and proliferative actions. FGFR4 is expressed mainly in lung,
kidney, pancreas, spleen, and developing muscle. FGFR4 was found to be
overexpressed in some human malignancies, where it has been implicated in their
pathogenesis. Recently, FGFR4 was found to be overexpressed in pediatric
rhabdomyosarcomas, based on cDNA microarray analysis. Using Northern blotting,
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, and Western blotting, we
classified four human rhabdomyosarcoma-derived cell lines based on their relative
expression of FGFR4. We defined a 214 bp (-115/+99) promoter that functioned as a
minimal promoter and examined cis-DNA elements implicated in the control of
expression of the FGFR4 gene in these cells. Overlapping 40- to 50-bp fragments
of the minimal promoter were examined by electrophoretic mobility shift assay
using nuclear extracts from cell lines with high (HS729-1015) or low (HS729-1016)
FGFR4 expression. Fragment C (-65/-26) formed specific complexes with nuclear
extracts from both cell lines. Fragment B (-95/-56), however, formed distinct
complexes mainly with the high FGFR4-expressing HS729-1015 cells. Both fragments 
yielded complexes that were competed by an Sp oligonucleotide and supershifted by
Sp1 and by Sp3 antibodies. Transfection of Sp1 but not Sp3 efficiently activated 
FGFR4 promoter activity, an effect that was significantly more pronounced in the 
HS729-1015 cell line than in the low FGFR4-expressing HS729-1016 cell line.
Deletion of each of the two Sp-binding sites in fragments B and C resulted in
loss of promoter activity. In particular, deletion of the 5' Sp-binding site in
fragment B was associated with the greatest loss of activity. Sp1 protein
expression correlated with FGFR4 expression in cell lines and primary human
rhabdomyosarcomas. Furthermore, transfection of Sp1 and methylation inhibition
was effective in inducing the endogenous FGFR4 gene in HS729-1015 cells. Our
findings point to Sp1 as an important contributor to FGFR4 transcriptional
control and elucidate a potential mechanism for the heterogeneous expression of
FGFR4 in neoplasms derived from the same cell lineage.

PMID: 15475466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Gene. 2004 Oct 27;341:235-47.

Human transcription factor Sp3: genomic structure, identification of a processed 
pseudogene, and transcript analysis.

Moran KM(1), Crusio RH, Chan CH, Grekova MC, Richert JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Georgetown University Medical
Center, 3900 Reservoir Road, NW, Washington, DC 20057, USA.

The human transcription factor Sp3 has been widely studied at the translational
level and has been described as a regulatory factor for a number of genes. Sp3 is
currently characterized as a bifunctional transcription factor having the ability
to behave as both an activator and/or a repressor in various promoter regions.
Previous translational studies have attempted to determine the basis for these
diverse functions with mostly contradictory evidence to date. Little data are
available, however, concerning genomic structure, full-length cDNA, potential
transcript variants, or location of translation initiation sites for the large
isoform of the Sp3 gene. In this study, bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC)
sequencing, reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), genomic
PCR, and database mining indicate that the Sp3 gene encompasses seven exons
spanning more than 55 kb of genomic DNA on Chromosome 2. The 5' end of this
sequence contains a large CpG island. This work also detected a processed
pseudogene, psiSp3, located on Chromosome 13, spanning approximately 4.0 kb.
Northern blot analysis detected three predominant transcripts at 4.0, 6.0 and 2.5
kb. Sequence analysis indicated that alternative splicing of exon 3 allows for
multiple transcripts of Sp3. Each sequenced transcript possesses three to five
potential translation initiation sites. This diversity at the level of gene
expression will likely be key to understanding the diverse functions of Sp3.

PMID: 15474306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Am Chem Soc. 2004 Oct 13;126(40):12792-3.

Ru3(CO)12-catalyzed silylation of benzylic C-H bonds in arylpyridines and
arylpyrazoles with hydrosilanes via C-H bond cleavage.

Kakiuchi F(1), Tsuchiya K, Matsumoto M, Mizushima E, Chatani N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Chemistry, Faculty of Engineering, Osaka University,
Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. kakiuchi@chem.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp

Ruthenium-catalyzed silylation of sp3 C-H bonds at a benzylic position with
hydrosilanes gave benzylsilanes. For this silylation reaction, Ru3(CO)12 complex 
showed high catalytic activity. This silylation proceeded at the methyl C-H bond 
selectively. For this silylation reaction, pyridyl and pyrazolyl groups, and the 
imino group in hydrazones, can function as a directing group. Several
hydrosilanes involving triethyl-, dimethylphenyl-, tert-butyldimethyl-, and
triphenylsilanes can be used as a silylating reagent. Coordination of an sp2
nitrogen atom to the ruthenium complex is important for achieving this silylation
reaction.

PMID: 15469271  [PubMed]


33. Lab Invest. 2004 Dec;84(12):1571-80.

Distinct transcriptional control and action of fibroblast growth factor receptor 
4 in differentiating skeletal muscle cells.

Yu S(1), Zheng L, Trinh DK, Asa SL, Ezzat S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital and University of Toronto, The
Freeman Centre for Endocrine Oncology and The Ontario Cancer Institute, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.

Although FGF signaling promotes myoblast proliferation and represses myogenic
differentiation, one of the FGF receptors (FGFR), FGFR4, is expressed mainly in
mature skeletal muscle. Disruption of FGFR4 signaling interrupts chick limb
muscle formation. To determine the developmental regulation of FGFR4 expression, 
we compared the transcriptional control and action of FGFR4 in myoblasts and
myotubes. We identified higher FGFR4 expression in differentiated myotubes than
precursor myoblasts. FGFR4 promoter activity was localized within a region 115 bp
upstream of the transcription start site. Overlapping fragments of this promoter 
displayed a distinct difference when compared by electromobility shift assay
(EMSA) using nuclear extracts from myoblasts and myotubes. While fragments B
(-95/-56) and C (-65/-26) formed specific complexes in both cell types, these
complexes were consistently more intense in myotubes than myoblasts. These
complexes were efficiently competed by an Sp-type oligonucleotide and were
supershifted by Sp1 and by Sp3 antibodies. Deletions of the Sp-binding sites in
fragment B (-95/-56) confirmed their critical contribution to promoter activity. 
Moreover, Sp1 expression correlated with FGFR4-expression in myotubes. To
determine whether FGFR4 expression regulates myoblast differentiation, we
infected a soluble dominant-negative FGFR4-containing adenovirus into these
cells. This significantly impeded Erk1/2 phosphorylation and differentiation of
myoblasts into MHC-expressing myotubes. Our findings point to distinct
transcriptional regulation and action for FGFR4 in differentiating skeletal
muscle cells.

PMID: 15467729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Blood. 2005 Feb 1;105(3):1060-7. Epub 2004 Oct 5.

The t-PA -7351C>T enhancer polymorphism decreases Sp1 and Sp3 protein binding
affinity and transcriptional responsiveness to retinoic acid.

Wolf AT(1), Medcalf RL, Jern C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Neuroscience, Sahlgrenska University
Hospital/Sahlgrenska, Göteborg University, S-413 45 Göteborg, Sweden.

We have previously identified a common polymorphism at the tissue-type
plasminogen activator (t-PA) locus (-7351C>T), located within a GC-box in the
retinoic acid (RA) and steroid hormone responsive t-PA enhancer. The aim of the
present study was to functionally characterize this t-PA variant. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays (EMSAs) using crude nuclear extracts from human
endothelial, HeLa, and NT2 neuronal cells revealed a 10-fold greater protein
binding affinity to the wild-type C allele compared with the mutant T allele
variant. Sp1 and Sp3 were identified as the GC-box binding proteins. Luciferase
reporter assays showed that the C allele generated higher transcriptional
activity after induction by RA, compared with the T allele variant. Further EMSAs
showed that RA treatment enhanced Sp1/Sp3 binding to the GC-box. Formation of the
Sp1/Sp3 containing complex was inhibited by anti-RA receptor (RAR) antibodies,
suggesting that Sp1/Sp3 and RAR interact. The t-PA -7351C>T polymorphism is
therefore functional at the level of transcription. The reduced binding affinity 
of Sp1/Sp3 to the T allele could explain our earlier observations of a reduced
t-PA release and an increased risk of myocardial infarction in individuals
carrying this allele.

PMID: 15466927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Nov 5;324(1):31-9.

Interferon-gamma regulates ClC-2 chloride channel in lung epithelial cells.

Chu S(1), Blaisdell CJ, Bamford P, Ferro TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, McGuire Research Institute,
USA. schu@hsc.vcu.edu <schu@hsc.vcu.edu>

Epithelial Cl(-) channels mediate Cl(-) and fluid secretion in the lung. In
cystic fibrosis, aberrant Cl(-) secretion is one of the major causes for lung
fluid imbalance. Regulation of Cl(-) channels is therefore an important issue in 
the lung. IFN-gamma regulates Na(+) and Cl(-) channels and fluid transport in the
lung, but the mechanisms involved in these regulations are not clear. In
expression studies, we found that IFN-gamma increased ClC-2 transcripts in Calu-3
cells. Studies of the promoter identified a minimal promoter which interacts with
transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3. However, reporter gene assays showed that
IFN-gamma did not activate the promoter. Instead, IFN-gamma significantly
increased ClC-2 transcript stability. Using Ussing chamber experiments, we
demonstrate that IFN-gamma activates a pH-regulated and Cd(2+)-sensitive short
circuit current, characteristic properties of the ClC-2 Cl(-) channel. These data
suggest that IFN-gamma activates ClC-2 channel activity in lung epithelial cells 
via mRNA stabilization.

PMID: 15464978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Circ Res. 2004 Oct 1;95(7):657-9.

Toll gates and traffic arteries: from endothelial TLR2 to atherosclerosis.

Mullaly SC, Kubes P.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2004 Dec 10;95(12):e96-7.

Comment on
    Circ Res. 2004 Oct 1;95(7):684-91.

PMID: 15459086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Free Radic Biol Med. 2004 Oct 15;37(8):1256-71.

Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors mediate trichostatin A-induced and basal
expression of extracellular superoxide dismutase.

Zelko IN(1), Folz RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Extracellular superoxide dismutase (EC-SOD) is the major extracellular
antioxidant enzyme and may play a critical role in the pathogenesis of a variety 
of pulmonary, neurological, and cardiovascular diseases. We report here that
exposure to the deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA) induces EC-SOD mRNA
levels in mIMCD3 and Hepa 1-6 cells, but reduces EC-SOD mRNA levels in MLg cells.
To determine the molecular mechanism of TSA-mediated EC-SOD gene regulation, we
analyzed EC-SOD's proximal promoter region, which revealed two previously unknown
but putative Sp1 cis elements. Transfection of systematically truncated
5'-flanking sequences revealed that the second Sp1 binding site contributes up to
70% of the constitutive EC-SOD promoter activity. Binding of Sp1 and Sp3
transcription factors to this region was confirmed by DNase I footprinting,
electrophoretic mobility shift assay, super-shift assay, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation. A dominant-negative Sp1 construct considerably reduced
EC-SOD promoter activity in mammalian cells, whereas coexpression of Sp1 and Sp3 
greatly enhanced reporter activity in SL2 cells. An EC-SOD promoter-reporter
construct showed from 5- to 14-fold induction after exposure to TSA, whereas
deletion of the Sp1 binding site significantly reduced reporter activation. These
results are consistent with Sp1/Sp3 transcription factors providing essential
TSA-dependent and basal transcription of the EC-SOD gene and may represent a
novel pharmacological pathway for regulating EC-SOD levels in tissue.

PMID: 15451065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Free Radic Biol Med. 2004 Oct 15;37(8):1231-43.

Sp3 repression of polymorphic human NRH:quinone oxidoreductase 2 gene promoter.

Wang W(1), Jaiswal AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Human NRH:quinone oxidoreductase 2 (NQO2) gene-containing 29-bp
deletion/insertion polymorphic promoters were found to be associated with
susceptibility to Parkinson's disease. Here, we demonstrate that the NQO2 gene is
differentially expressed by the polymorphic promoters in human fibroblasts and
Hep-G2 cells transfected with NQO2 gene reporter constructs. Promoter containing 
the 29-bp insertion polymorphism demonstrated significantly lower NQO2 gene
expression. Deletion mutagenesis and DNase I footprinting analysis of the
promoter without the 29-bp insertion identified three protected regions (region
A, B, and C). Band- and supershift and transfection assays showed binding of
transcription factor Sp1 to regions A and B, which regulated expression of the
NQO2 gene. Similar studies of the NQO2 gene promoter with the 29-bp insertion
polymorphism showed that regions A and C were identical and contributed similarly
as in the promoter without the 29-bp insertion to NQO2 gene expression. However, 
region B was found to be inserted with 29-bp DNA element and bound to both Sp1
and Sp3. Binding of Sp3 led to repression of NQO2 gene transcription by the
promoter containing the 29-bp insertion polymorphism. These studies also suggest 
that alterations in NQO2 activity might be an important factor in susceptibility 
to Parkinson's disease.

PMID: 15451063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Nat Cell Biol. 2004 Oct;6(10):984-90. Epub 2004 Sep 26.

DNA demethylation is necessary for the epigenetic reprogramming of somatic cell
nuclei.

Simonsson S(1), Gurdon J.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute and Department of Zoology, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1QR, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2004 Oct;6(10):920-2.

Nuclear transplantation experiments in amphibia and mammals have shown that
oocyte and egg cytoplasm can extensively reprogram somatic cell nuclei with new
patterns of gene expression and new pathways of cell differentiation; however,
very little is known about the molecular mechanism of nuclear reprogramming. Here
we have used nuclear and DNA transfer from mammalian somatic cells to analyse the
mechanism of activation of the stem cell marker gene oct4 by Xenopus oocytes. We 
find that the removal of nuclear protein accelerates the rate of reprogramming,
but even more important is the demethylation of somatic cell DNA. DNA
demethylation seems to precede gene reprogramming, and is absolutely necessary
for oct4 transcription. Reprogramming by oocytes occurs in the absence of DNA
replication and RNA/protein synthesis. It is also selective, operating only on
the promoter, but not enhancers, of oct4; both a putative Sp1/Sp3 and a GGGAGGG
binding site are required for demethylation and transcription. We conclude that
the demethylation of promoter DNA may be a necessary step in the epigenetic
reprogramming of somatic cell nuclei.

PMID: 15448701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Phys Rev Lett. 2004 Aug 27;93(9):095503. Epub 2004 Aug 26.

Silicon monoxide clusters: the favorable precursors for forming silicon
nanostructures.

Zhang RQ(1), Zhao MW, Lee ST.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Super-Diamond and Advanced Films (COSDAF) and Department of Physics 
and Materials Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.

Using density-functional calculations, we show that the energetically favorable
configurations of silicon monoxide clusters (SiO)n for n> or =5 facilitate the
nucleation and growth of silicon nanostructures as the clusters contain sp3
silicon cores surrounded by silicon oxide sheaths. The frontier orbitals of
(SiO)n clusters are localized to a significant degree on the silicon atoms on the
surface, providing high reactivity for further stacking with other clusters. The 
oxygen atoms in the formed larger clusters prefer to migrate from the centers to 
the exterior surfaces, leading to the growth of sp3 silicon cores.

PMID: 15447112  [PubMed]


41. J Am Chem Soc. 2004 Sep 29;126(38):11810-1.

CuBr-catalyzed efficient alkynylation of sp3 C-H bonds adjacent to a nitrogen
atom.

Li Z(1), Li CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, McGill University, 801 Sherbrooke Street West,
Montreal, Quebec H3A 2K6, Canada.

A simple and effective catalytic method to construct propargylamine was developed
by using copper bromide and tert-BuOOH via a combination of sp3 C-H bond and sp
C-H bond activations followed by C-C bond formation.

PMID: 15382913  [PubMed]


42. Chemistry. 2004 Sep 20;10(18):4546-55.

Iridium-imine and -amine complexes relevant to the (S)-metolachlor process:
structures, exchange kinetics, and C-H activation by Iri causing racemization.

Dorta R(1), Broggini D, Kissner R, Togni A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química, Universidad Simón Bolívar, Caracas 1080A, Venezuela. 
rdorta@usb.ve

Iridium complexes of DMA-imine
[2,6-dimethylphenyl-1'-methyl-2'-methoxyethylimine, 1 a) and (R)-DMA-amine
[(1'R)-2,6-dimethylphenyl-1'-methyl-2'-methoxyethylamine, 2 a] that are relevant 
to the catalytic imine hydrogenation step of the Syngenta (S)-Metolachlor process
were synthesized: metathetical exchange of [Ir2Cl2(cod)2]
(cod=1,5-cyclooctadiene) with [Ag(1 a)2]BF4 and [Ag((R)-2 a)2]BF4 afforded
[Ir(cod)(kappa2- -1 a)]BF4 (11) and [Ir(cod)(kappa2-(R)-2 a)]BF4 ((R)-19)),
respectively. These complexes were then used in stopped-flow experiments to study
the displacement of amine 2 a from complex 19 by imine 1 a to form the imine
complex 11, thus modeling the product/substrate exchange step in the catalytic
cycle. The data suggest a two-step associative mechanism characterized by
k1=(2.6+/-0.3) x 10(2) M(-1) s(-1) and k2=(4.3+/-0.6) x 10(-2) s(-1) with the
respective activation energies EA1=(7.5+/-0.6) kJ mol(-1) and EA2=(37+/-3) kJ
mol(-1). Furthermore, complex 11 reacted with H2O to afford the hydrolysis
product [Ir(cod)(eta(6-)-2,6-dimethylaniline)]BF4 (12), and with I2 to liberate
quantitatively the DMA-iminium salt 14. On the other hand, the chiral amine
complex (R)-19 formed the optically inactive eta6-bound compound
[Ir(cod)(eta6-rac-2 a)]BF4 (rac-18) upon dissolution in THF at room temperature, 
presumably via intramolecular C-H activation. This racemization was found to be a
two-step event with k'1=9.0 x 10(-4) s(-1) and k2=2.89 x 10(-5) s(-1), featuring 
an optically active intermediate prior to sp3 C-H activation. Compounds 11, 12,
rac-18, and (R)-19 were structurally characterized by single-crystal X-ray
analyses.

PMID: 15378634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Shock. 2004 Oct;22(4):333-9.

Impaired induction of IL-10 expression in the lung following hemorrhagic shock.

Khadaroo RG(1), Fan J, Powers KA, Fann B, Kapus A, Rotstein OD.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Surgery, University Health Network and University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The balance between pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines is considered to be an
important determinant of the magnitude of inflammation in a number of disease
states. We previously showed that resuscitated hemorrhagic shock augmented
LPS-induced release of proinflammatory molecules by alveolar macrophages (AM). In
the present studies, we evaluated the expression and regulation of the counter
inflammatory cytokine IL-10 in the lung using this model. We hypothesized that
impaired up-regulation of IL-10 in shock/resuscitated animals might serve as a
mechanism contributing to accentuated lung inflammation. In a rodent model,
animals exposed to LPS alone exhibited enhanced IL-10 mRNA levels in lung tissue 
as well as in AM, but antecedent shock/resuscitation delayed and attenuated the
LPS-induced IL-10 mRNA levels. The ability of shock to attenuate LPS-stimulated
IL-10 was also seen in the protein levels. This effect correlated with an
augmented expression of cytokine-induced neutrophil chemoattractant (CINC) mRNA. 
Shock/resuscitated animals given exogenous IL-10 had reduced proinflammatory
response, as shown by decreased expression of CINC mRNA and decreased neutrophil 
sequestration in the lung. Shock/resuscitation plus LPS markedly reduced the
transcription rate of IL-10 mRNA compared to LPS alone but did not affect IL-10
mRNA stability. Reduced IL-10 transcription was not caused solely by impaired
nuclear translocation of STAT3 and Sp1/Sp3 transcription factors because
LPS-induced nuclear translocation of these factors was augmented by antecedent
shock. Considered together, these findings show that shock/resuscitation
suppresses LPS-induced IL-10 expression by AM in the lung by inhibiting IL-10
gene transcription. Failed up-regulation of counter inflammatory cytokines may
contribute to augmented organ dysfunction in trauma patients.

PMID: 15377888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Cancer Res. 2004 Sep 15;64(18):6740-9.

Role of Sp proteins in regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor
expression and proliferation of pancreatic cancer cells.

Abdelrahim M(1), Smith R 3rd, Burghardt R, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology,Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas 77843-66, USA.

Sp proteins play an important role in angiogenesis and growth of cancer cells,
and specificity protein 1 (Sp1) has been linked to vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) expression in pancreatic cancer cells. RNA interference was used to
investigate the role of Sp family proteins on regulation of VEGF expression and
proliferation of Panc-1 pancreatic cancer cells. Using a series of constructs
containing VEGF promoter inserts, it was initially shown that Sp1 and Sp3 were
required for transactivation, and this was primarily dependent on proximal
GC-rich motifs. We also showed that Sp4 was expressed in Panc-1 cells, and RNA
interference assays suggested that Sp4 cooperatively interacted with Sp1 and Sp3 
to activate VEGF promoter constructs in these cells. However, the relative
contributions of Sp proteins to VEGF expression were variable among different
pancreatic cancer cell lines. Small inhibitory RNAs for Sp3, but not Sp1 or Sp4, 
inhibited phosphorylation of retinoblastoma protein, blocked G0/G1-->S-phase
progression, and up-regulated p27 protein/promoter activity of Panc-1 cells;
similar results were observed in other pancreatic cancer cells, suggesting that
Sp3-dependent growth of pancreatic cancer cells is caused by inhibition of p27
expression.

PMID: 15374992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Cell Biochem. 2004 Oct 15;93(3):463-75.

Transforming growth factor beta stimulation of biglycan gene expression is
potentially mediated by sp1 binding factors.

Heegaard AM(1), Xie Z, Young MF, Nielsen KL.

Author information: 
(1)Nordic Bioscience A/S, Herlev Hovedgade 207, DK-2730 Herlev, Denmark.
amhe@dfuni.dk

Biglycan is a small leucine-rich proteoglycan which is localized in the
extracellular matrix of bone and other specialized connective tissues. Both
biglycan mRNA and protein are up-regulated by transforming growth factor-beta(1) 
(TGF-beta(1)) and biglycan appears to influence TGF-beta(1) activity. In this
study, we have investigated the mechanism by which TGF-beta(1), TGF-beta(2) and
TGF-beta(3) stimulate biglycan mRNA expression in the osteoblastic cell line
MG-63. The cells were transfected with a series of deletional human biglycan
promoter constructs and a region in the biglycan 5' DNA was found to respond to
TGF-beta(1) with increased transcriptional activity in a dose-dependent manner.
Also TGF-beta(2) and TGF-beta(3), two structurally highly related TGF-beta
isoforms stimulated biglycan transcription. A TGF-beta responsive region was
identified within the first 218 bp of the human biglycan promoter upstream from
the transcriptional start site, which contained several binding sites for the
transcription factor Sp1. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays with nuclear
extracts from MG-63 cells showed binding of both Sp1 and Sp3 to a site at -216 to
-208. When the biglycan promoter construct was co-transfected with Sp1 and Sp3
expression vectors in Sp1-deficient Drosophila Schneider-2 cells, Sp1 induced the
transcriptional activity of biglycan. Addition of Sp3 augmented the effect of Sp1
on biglycan gene expression. Induction of biglycan mRNA expression in response to
TGF-beta in MG-63 cells was abrogated by mithramycin, an inhibitor of Sp1 binding
to GC-rich DNA sequences. A mutation in the Sp1 site at -216 to -208 within the
-218 biglycan promoter construct substantially diminished the transcriptional
up-regulation by TGF-beta(1). Taken together this data shows for the first time
that TGF-beta(1) stimulation of human biglycan mRNA expression relies on
increased transcription of the biglycan gene, and is mediated by members of the
Sp1 family of transcription factors.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15372625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2004 Sep 17;1693(3):167-76.

Gene expression profiling after treatment with the histone deacetylase inhibitor 
trichostatin A reveals altered expression of both pro- and anti-apoptotic genes
in pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells.

Moore PS(1), Barbi S, Donadelli M, Costanzo C, Bassi C, Palmieri M, Scarpa A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Patologia, Università degli Studi di Verona, Strada Le Grazie,
8, 37134 Verona, Italy.

The histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA) has been previously shown 
to block cellular growth in G2 and induce apoptosis in human pancreatic cancer
cell lines. In order to better understand this phenomenon, we have analyzed the
gene expression profiles in PaCa44 cells after treatment with TSA using
microarrays containing 22,283 probesets. TSA was found to cause both the
induction and repression of a large number of genes, although the number whose
expression was up-regulated was greater than the number of genes that were
down-regulated. When a threshold value of 3 was used as a cutoff level, a total
of 306 (3.4%) of the detectable genes had altered expression. When categorized
according to cellular function, the differentially expressed genes were found to 
be involved in a wide variety of cellular processes, including cell
proliferation, signaling, regulation of transcription, and apoptosis. Moreover,
Sp1/Sp3 transcription factor binding sites were significantly more abundant among
TSA-induced genes. One prominent feature was the increased ratio between the
levels of expression of pro-apoptotic (BIM) and anti-apoptotic (Bcl-XL and Bcl-W)
genes. This result was confirmed in eight additional pancreatic cancer cell lines
after treatment with TSA, suggesting that this event may be a strong determinant 
for the induction of apoptosis by TSA.

PMID: 15363630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Biochem J. 2005 Jan 15;385(Pt 2):557-64.

Transcriptional regulation of the human DNA methyltransferase 3A and 3B genes by 
Sp3 and Sp1 zinc finger proteins.

Jinawath A(1), Miyake S, Yanagisawa Y, Akiyama Y, Yuasa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine and Dentistry,
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45, Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8519, 
Japan.

The DNMT3A (DNA methyltransferase 3A) and DNMT3B genes encode putative de novo
methyltransferases and show complex transcriptional regulation in the presence of
three and two different promoters respectively. All promoters of DNMT3A and
DNMT3B lack typical TATA sequences adjacent to their transcription start sites
and contain several Sp1-binding sites. The importance of these Sp1-binding sites 
was demonstrated by using a GC-rich DNA-binding protein inhibitor, mithramycin A,
i.e. on the basis of decrease in the promoter activities and mRNA expression
levels of DNMT3A and DNMT3B. Overexpression of Sp1 and Sp3 up-regulated the
promoter activities of these two genes. The physical binding of Sp1 and Sp3 to
DNMT3A and DNMT3B promoters was confirmed by a gel shift assay. Interestingly,
Sp3 overexpression in HEK-293T cells (human embryonic kidney 293T cells) resulted
in 3.3- and 4.0-fold increase in DNMT3A and DNMT3B mRNA expression levels
respectively by quantitative reverse transcriptase-PCR, whereas Sp1
overexpression did not. Furthermore, an antisense oligonucleotide to Sp3
significantly decreased the mRNA levels of DNMT3A and DNMT3B. These results
indicate the functional importance of Sp proteins, particularly Sp3, in the
regulation of DNMT3A and DNMT3B gene expression.

PMCID: PMC1134729
PMID: 15362956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Oncogene. 2004 Oct 21;23(49):8088-96.

KLF2 inhibits Jurkat T leukemia cell growth via upregulation of cyclin-dependent 
kinase inhibitor p21WAF1/CIP1.

Wu J(1), Lingrel JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of
Cincinnati, College of Medicine, 231 Albert Sabin Way, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA.

Kruppel-like factor 2 (KLF2) is a member of the KLF family of zinc-finger
transcription factors and is involved in maintaining T-cell quiescence,
regulating preadipocyte differentiation, endothelial cell function and lung
development. We used a tetracycline-inducible system in Jurkat T leukemia cells
to study the biological role of KLF2 in cellular growth and differentiation. Our 
results show that expression of KLF2 inhibits cell growth in autonomously
proliferating Jurkat cells. Further, 3H-thymidine uptake assays indicate that
KLF2 inhibits DNA synthesis in these cells. Moreover, both activation and
inhibitory domains are required for KLF2 to suppress Jurkat cell proliferation.
In addition, KLF2 upregulates p21WAF1/CIP1 expression. Additionally, we found
that KLF2 upregulates p21WAF1/CIP1 promoter activity in Jurkat, HepG2 and SW480
cells. Our analysis shows that the potential KLF2 responsive elements are located
between -124 and -60 of the p21WAF1/CIP1 promoter. The sole CACCC site, a
sequence recognized by KLF2, in this region is not the element responsive to
KLF2. Finally, we determined that the Sp1-3-binding site is the functional
responsive element of KLF2 in the p21WAF1/CIP1 promoter, and we conclude that
KLF2 directly regulates p21WAF1/CIP1 expression.

PMID: 15361832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Biomacromolecules. 2004 Sep-Oct;5(5):1687-97.

Biodegradation of aliphatic homopolyesters and aliphatic-aromatic copolyesters by
anaerobic microorganisms.

Abou-Zeid DM(1), Müller RJ, Deckwer WD.

Author information: 
(1)Gesellschaft für Biotechnologische Forschung mbH, Mascheroder Weg, D 38124
Braunschweig, Germany.

The anaerobic degradability of natural and synthetic polyesters is investigated
applying microbial consortia (3 sludges, 1 sediment) as well as individual
strains isolated for this purpose. In contrast to aerobic conditions, the natural
homopolyester polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) degrades faster than the copolyester
poly(hydroxybutyrate-co-hydroxyvalerate) (PHBV). For the synthetic polyester
poly(epsilon-caroplacton) (PCL), microbial degradation in the absence of oxygen
could be clearly demonstrated; however, the degradation rate is significantly
lower than for PHB and PHBV. Other synthetic polyesters such as poly(trimethylene
adipate) (SP3/6), poly(tetramethylene adipate) (SP4/6), and aliphatic-aromatic
copolyesters from 1,4-butanediol, terephthalic acid, and adipic acid
(BTA-copolymers) exhibit only very low anaerobic microbial susceptibility. A
copolyester with high amount of terephthalic acid (BTA 40:60) resisted the
anaerobic breakdown even under thermophilic conditions and/or when blended with
starch. For the synthetic polymers, a number of individual anaerobic strain could
be isolated which are able to depolymerize the polymers and selected strains
where identified as new species of the genus Clostridium or Propionispora. Their 
distinguished degradation patterns point to the involvement of different
degrading enzymes which are specialized to depolymerize either the natural
polyhydroxyalkanoates (e.g., PHB), the synthetic polyester PCL, or other
synthetic aliphatic polyesters such as SP3/6. It can be supposed that these
enzymes exhibit comparable characteristics as those described to be responsible
for aerobic polyester degradation (lipases, cutinases, and PHB-depolymerases).

PMID: 15360276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Circ Res. 2004 Oct 1;95(7):684-91. Epub 2004 Sep 2.

Flow-dependent regulation of endothelial Toll-like receptor 2 expression through 
inhibition of SP1 activity.

Dunzendorfer S(1), Lee HK, Tobias PS.

Author information: 
(1)Scripps Research Institute, Department of Immunology, La Jolla, Calif 92037,
USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2004 Oct 1;95(7):657-9.

Innate immune system activation is associated with atherosclerotic lesion
development. The specific sites of lesion development are believed to be defined 
by the shear stress of blood flow. Consequently, we investigated the
responsiveness of human coronary artery endothelial cells (HCAECs) to Toll-like
receptor (TLR) 2 and 4 agonists in an in vitro model of chronic laminar flow.
HCAECs under chronic laminar flow were found to be normally responsive to
lipopolysaccharide (and tumor necrosis factor) in terms of E-selectin expression 
but were found to be hyporesponsive to stimulation with the specific TLR2 ligands
macrophage activating lipopeptide-2, PAM2-Cys, and Lip19; this was observed to be
attributable to downregulation of TLR2 transcription and protein expression. We
found that laminar flow induced SP1 serine phosphorylation by protein kinase CK2 
and thereby blocked SP1 binding to the TLR2 promoter, which is required for TLR2 
expression. This regulatory mechanism also blocked lipopolysaccharide- and tumor 
necrosis factor-induced TLR2 upregulation in HCAECs and could be important for
suppression of other flow-sensitive endothelial proteins. These results extend
the role of flow in controlling endothelial responsiveness. Given the current
evidence that TLRs are proatherogenic, flow suppression of TLR2 expression may be
atheroprotective.

PMID: 15345653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Am J Hum Genet. 2004 Oct;75(4):678-86. Epub 2004 Aug 26.

The G/G genotype of a resistin single-nucleotide polymorphism at -420 increases
type 2 diabetes mellitus susceptibility by inducing promoter activity through
specific binding of Sp1/3.

Osawa H(1), Yamada K, Onuma H, Murakami A, Ochi M, Kawata H, Nishimiya T, Niiya
T, Shimizu I, Nishida W, Hashiramoto M, Kanatsuka A, Fujii Y, Ohashi J, Makino H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Ehime University School of Medicine, Ehime,
Japan.

Insulin resistance is a major cause of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). Resistin,
an adipocyte-secreted hormone, antagonizes insulin. Transgenic mice that
overexpress the resistin gene (Retn) in adipose tissue are insulin-resistant,
whereas Retn (-/-) mice show lower fasting blood glucose, suggesting that the
altered Retn promoter function could cause diabetes. To determine the role of
RETN in human T2DM, we analyzed polymorphisms in its 5' flanking region. We found
that the -420G/G genotype was associated with T2DM (397 cases and 406 controls)
(P=.008; adjusted odds ratio = 1.97 [by logistic regression analysis]) and could 
accelerate the onset of disease by 4.9 years (P=.006 [by multiple regression
analysis]). Meta-analysis of 1,888 cases and 1,648 controls confirmed this
association (P=.013). Linkage disequilibrium analysis revealed that the -420G/G
genotype itself was a primary variant determining T2DM susceptibility.
Functionally, Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors bound specifically to the
susceptible DNA element that included -420G. Overexpression of Sp1 or Sp3
enhanced RETN promoter activity with -420G in Drosophila Schneider line 2 cells
that lacked endogenous Sp family members. Consistent with these findings, fasting
serum resistin levels were higher in subjects with T2DM who carried the -420G/G
genotype. Therefore, the specific recognition of -420G by Sp1/3 increases RETN
promoter activity, leading to enhanced serum resistin levels, thereby inducing
human T2DM.

PMCID: PMC1182055
PMID: 15338456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Biochem J. 2005 Jan 1;385(Pt 1):207-16.

Insulin activates the rat sterol-regulatory-element-binding protein 1c (SREBP-1c)
promoter through the combinatorial actions of SREBP, LXR, Sp-1 and NF-Y
cis-acting elements.

Cagen LM(1), Deng X, Wilcox HG, Park EA, Raghow R, Elam MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, The University of Tennessee Health Science Center,
874 Union Avenue, Memphis, TN 38163, USA. lcagen@utmem.edu

The enhanced synthesis of fatty acids in the liver and adipose tissue in response
to insulin is critically dependent on the transcription factor SREBP-1c
(sterol-regulatory-element-binding protein 1c). Insulin increases the expression 
of the SREBP-1c gene in intact liver and in hepatocytes cultured in vitro. To
learn the mechanism of this stimulation, we analysed the activation of the rat
SREBP-1c promoter and its truncated or mutated congeners driving a luciferase
reporter gene in transiently transfected rat hepatocytes. The rat SREBP-1c
promoter contains binding sites for LXR (liver X receptor), Sp1, NF-Y (nuclear
factor-Y) and SREBP itself. We have found that each of these sites is required
for the full stimulatory response of the SREBP-1c promoter to insulin. Mutation
of either the putative LXREs (LXR response elements) or the SRE (sterol response 
element) in the proximal SREBP-1c promoter reduced the stimulatory effect of
insulin by about 50%. Insulin and the LXR agonist TO901317 increased the
association of SREBP-1 with the SREBP-1c promoter. Ectopic expression of LXRalpha
or SREBP-1c increased activity of the SREBP-1c promoter, and this effect is
further enhanced by insulin. The Sp1 and NF-Y sites adjacent to the SRE are also 
required for full activation of the SREBP-1c promoter by insulin. We propose that
the combined actions of the SRE, LXREs, Sp1 and NF-Y elements constitute an
insulin-responsive cis-acting unit of the SREBP-1c gene in the liver.

PMCID: PMC1134689
PMID: 15330762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Clin Genet. 2004 Sep;66(3):223-8.

Cholesteryl ester transfer protein promoter single-nucleotide polymorphisms in
Sp1-binding sites affect transcription and are associated with high-density
lipoprotein cholesterol.

Thompson JF(1), Lloyd DB, Lira ME, Milos PM.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic and Proteomic Sciences, Pfizer Global Research and Development,
Eastern Point Road, Groton, CT, USA. john_f_thompson@groton.pfizer.com

Genetic variation in the human cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) promoter
has been shown to be associated with high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C)
levels and cardiovascular disease. Some of this variation occurs in Sp1/Sp3
binding sites in the proximal promoter. We find that both the known promoter
polymorphism at -629 and the previously uncharacterized polymorphism at -38 are
associated with HDL-C levels in vivo and affect transcription in vitro. While the
-629 polymorphism is common in all ethnic groups, the -38 polymorphism is found
at significant levels (6.4%) only among African Americans. Those homozygous for
the less common -38A allele have higher HDL-C levels than those with the more
frequent -38G allele. This association was found in a population of African
Americans at risk of cardiovascular disease and then replicated in a different
population chosen from among patients with extremes of HDL-C. When studied in
vitro, the most transcriptionally active allele (-629C/-38G) yields 51% more
reporter protein than the least active allele (-629A/-38A) in HepG2 cells. These 
transcriptional effects reflect the projected impact of increased CETP expression
on HDL-C phenotypes seen in vivo.

PMID: 15324321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Immunol. 2004 Sep 1;173(5):3215-22.

Functional analysis of -571 IL-10 promoter polymorphism reveals a repressor
element controlled by sp1.

Steinke JW(1), Barekzi E, Hagman J, Borish L.

Author information: 
(1)Asthma and Allergic Diseases Center, Beirne Carter Center for Immunology
Research, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.
js3ch@virginia.edu

Transcriptional dysregulation of the IL-10 gene may contribute to the development
and severity of autoimmune, infectious, neoplastic, and allergic diseases. A C to
A base substitution has been identified at -571 bp in the IL-10 promoter and has 
been linked to immune diseases. The role of this polymorphism in IL-10 promoter
function was assessed using luciferase reporter constructs. The presence of an A 
at -571 (A allele) increases promoter activity compared with that of a promoter
with a C at this position (C allele). Binding of nuclear extract proteins from
IL-10-producing human cell lines to DNA sequences including this base exchange
and flanking sequences was demonstrated using EMSAs. Specific binding of the
transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 was demonstrated to a region immediately
upstream of the polymorphism. No differences in the binding affinity of
recombinant Sp1 were observed between the two forms of the promoter.
Reconstitution of Sp1 expression decreased IL-10 promoter function in an
Sp1-deficient cell line, demonstrating that this element functions as a
repressor. The C to A base exchange relieves the repression mediated by Sp1.
Individuals carrying the A allele of the IL-10 promoter may display increased
synthesis of IL-10, resulting in suppressed immune responses and a modulation of 
their susceptibility to autoimmune, infectious, neoplastic, or atopic disease.

PMID: 15322183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Biol Chem. 2004 Oct 29;279(44):46326-34. Epub 2004 Aug 17.

Brg-1 is required for maximal transcription of the human matrix
metalloproteinase-2 gene.

Ma Z(1), Chang MJ, Shah R, Adamski J, Zhao X, Benveniste EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama 35294-0005, USA.

Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are zinc-dependent endopeptidases whose aberrant
expression are correlated with tumor invasion and angiogenesis. The transcription
factors Sp1, Sp3, and AP-2 are required for constitutive expression of MMP-2 in
tumor cells; however, the regulatory mechanisms of MMP-2 expression are not well 
understood. We investigated the involvement of Brg-1, the ATPase subunit of the
SWI/SNF complex, in human MMP-2 gene transcription. Reconstitution of Brg-1
enhances MMP-2 transcription in Brg-1-deficient SW-13 cells. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay demonstrates that Brg-1 is required for recruitment of 
Sp1, AP-2, and polymerase II to the MMP-2 promoter, whereas the binding of Sp3 to
the MMP-2 promoter is decreased upon Brg-1 reconstitution. Furthermore, Sp1
interacts with Brg-1 in vivo. Restriction enzyme accessibility assays indicate
that accessibility of the MMP-2 promoter region is not changed in the absence or 
presence of Brg-1. These results illustrate the connection between the SWI/SNF
complex and optimal expression of MMP-2 and highlight the critical function of
Brg-1 in regulating the recruitment of Sp1, Sp3, AP-2, and polymerase II to the
MMP-2 promoter.

PMID: 15317818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Am Chem Soc. 2004 Aug 18;126(32):10119-29.

Double-proton transfer in adenine-thymine and guanine-cytosine base pairs. A
post-Hartree-Fock ab initio study.

Gorb L(1), Podolyan Y, Dziekonski P, Sokalski WA, Leszczynski J.

Author information: 
(1)Computational Center for Molecular Structure and Interactions, Department of
Chemistry, Jackson State University, 1325 J.R. Lynch St., P.O. Box 17910,
Jackson, Mississippi 39217-0510, USA.

The results of a comprehensive study on the double-proton transfer in
Adenine-Thymine (AT) and Guanine-Cytosine (GC) base pairs at room temperature in 
gas phase and with the inclusion of environmental effects are obtained. The
double-proton-transfer process has been investigated in the AT and GC base pairs 
at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) and MP2/6-31G(d) levels of theory. It has been predicted
that the hydrogen-bonded bases possess nonplanar geometries due to sp3
hybridization of nitrogen atoms and because of the soft intermolecular vibrations
in the molecular complexes. An analysis of the energetic parameters of the local 
minima suggests that rare AT base pair conformation is not populated due to the
shallowness of this minimum, which completely disappears from the Gibbs free
energy surface. The stabilization of canonic or rare forms of the DNA bases by
water molecules and metal cations has been predicted by calculating the optimal
configuration of charges (using differential product/transition state
stabilization approach) followed by calculations of the interactions between the 
base pair and a water/sodium cation.

PMID: 15303888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Circ Res. 2004 Sep 3;95(5):479-87. Epub 2004 Aug 5.

Ets-1 stimulates platelet-derived growth factor A-chain gene transcription and
vascular smooth muscle cell growth via cooperative interactions with Sp1.

Santiago FS(1), Khachigian LM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Vascular Research, The University of New South Wales, and the
Department of Haematology, The Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney, Australia.

The platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) family of ligands (composed of A-, B-, 
C-, and D-chains), potent mitogens, and chemoattractants for cells of mesenchymal
origin has been implicated in numerous vascular pathologies involving smooth
muscle cell (SMC) hyperplasia. Understanding the molecular mechanisms mediating
PDGF transcription would provide new insights into strategies to control
PDGF-dependent pathophysiologic processes. We demonstrated previously that PDGF-A
expression is under the positive regulatory influence of Sp1, Sp3, and Egr-1 and 
is negatively controlled by GCF2, NF-1(X), and WT-1. In this article, we
demonstrate that Ets-1 induces PDGF-A expression in primary rat aortic SMCs at
the level of transcription and mRNA expression. Electrophoretic mobility shift,
supershift, and mutational analyses revealed a functional role for the
(-555)TTCC(-552) motif in the PDGF-A promoter that binds endogenous Ets-1.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis showed the interaction of endogenous and
exogenous Ets-1 or glutathione S-transferase-tagged Ets-1, bearing only the
DNA-binding domain with the authentic PDGF-A promoter. Conversely,
dominant-negative mutant of Ets-1 blocked the promoter interaction of endogenous 
Ets-1. Overexpression of Ets-1 but not the mutant form of Ets-1 activates the
PDGF-A promoter cooperatively with Sp1. Sp1, which interacts with Ets-1, failed
to induce PDGF-A promoter-dependent expression if the promoter contained a
site-specific mutation in this novel Ets-binding site. Small interfering RNA to
Ets-1 and Sp1 blocked PDGF-BB- and serum-inducible PDGF-A expression. SMC growth 
was stimulated by Ets-1 and Sp1 separately and further increased by both factors 
together. Ets-1-inducible mitogenesis is blocked by antibodies neutralizing
PDGF-A and involves activation of the PDGF alpha-receptor, which binds PDGF-A.
These findings identify a functional cis-acting element for Ets-1 in the PDGF-A
promoter and demonstrate that Sp1 and Ets-1 cooperatively activate PDGF-A
transcription in vascular SMCs.

PMID: 15297375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2004 Aug 12;1679(2):141-55.

Murine glypican-4 gene structure and expression; Sp1 and Sp3 play a major role in
glypican-4 expression in 3T3-F442A cells.

Li H(1), Melford K, Judson A, Bensadoun A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nutritional Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.

In this report we describe the genomic organization of the mouse glypican-4
(Gpc4), an analysis of its promoter and its transcriptional regulation in the
3T3-F442A adipocyte cell line. The Gpc4 gene consists of nine exons separated by 
eight introns. A series of deletion mutants and 4391 bp of the 5'-flanking region
were cloned into pGL3-BASIC upstream of the luciferase reporter gene and
transfected into 3T3-F442A adipocytes. Analysis of a 4.3-kb DNA fragment at the
5'-flanking region of this gene revealed that the Gpc4 promoter is a TATA-less
promoter with a large cluster of GC boxes. Competitive electrophoretic mobility
shift and supershift assays identified a cluster of nine functional GC boxes
binding Sp1 and Sp3 in this region. Transactivation experiments in insect cells
showed that both Sp1 and Sp3 are major activators of the Gpc4 promoter. Gpc4 is
expressed in adipocytes where its expression is highest in confluent 3T3-F442A
adipoblasts and decreases dramatically as cells differentiate. Sp protein
analyses demonstrated a major decrease in Sp3 protein in differentiated
adipocytes as compared to undifferentiated adipoblasts. These experiments show
that Gpc4 is developmentally regulated in 3T3-F442A adipocytes and suggest that
Sp transcription factors play a significant role in the regulated expression of
Gpc4.

Copyright 2004 Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 15297147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Aug;33(1):99-119.

YY1 binding within the human HSD3B2 gene intron 1 is required for maximal basal
promoter activity: identification of YY1 as the 3beta1-A factor.

Foti DM(1), Reichardt JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute for Genetic
Medicine, USC Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90033, USA.

The oxidation and isomerization of 3beta-hydroxy-5-ene steroids into keto-4-ene
steroids, a pivotal step in the synthesis of all hormonal steroids, is catalyzed 
by several isoforms of 3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase. In humans, two highly 
homologous isoforms exist, type I expressed by the HSD3B1 gene in peripheral
tissues, and type II expressed by the HSD3B2 gene in steroidogenic organs.
Previously, it was shown that the HSD3B1 gene 3beta1-A element, encompassing 24
nucleotides of intron 1 not perfectly conserved between the two genes and
overlapping with a conserved TG box, contributes to maximal basal promoter
activity by binding the ubiquitous and unidentified 3beta1-A transcription
factor. In this study for the first time we report that similarly, the HSD3B2
gene intron 1 is required for maximal basal promoter activity in reporter gene
analyses, as lack of intron 1 results in a 4- to 10-fold reduction in promoter
activity. Mutational analysis in gel shift assays revealed that the 3beta1-A
factor binds both the HSD3B2 and HSD3B1 gene intron 1 by requiring only seven
nucleotides of a conserved segment within the 3beta1-A element. By competition
analysis and use of anti-YY1 antibody in both gel shift and Western blot
experiments, we identified the 3beta1-A protein as the ubiquitous transcription
factor YY1. In addition, we have characterized another similar YY1 binding site
differently located with respect to the 3beta1-A element in both genes. Deletion 
and mutational analysis in transient transfections experiments revealed that
contrarily to as previously shown for the HSD3B1 gene, lack of YY1 binding to the
type II 3beta1-A element only results in a marginal reduction of basal promoter
activity. Instead, YY1 binding to the second site, placed 35 bp downstream from
the 3beta1-A element, strongly activates the HSD3B2 gene basal promoter activity,
as preventing YY1 binding to this region caused a 50% decrease of basal
transcription. Complete abrogation of YY1 binding within type II intron 1
resulted in a gene reporter activity identical to a reporter construct lacking
the whole intron 1. These results designate YY1 as the factor responsible for the
intron 1-mediated boost of the HSD3B2 gene basal promoter activity. Similarities 
and dissimilarities between YY1 binding within the HSD3B1 and HSD3B2 gene intron 
1 are discussed involving the conserved intron 1 TG box, that suggests different 
mechanisms are implicated in the YY1-mediated stimulation of these two genes
basal promoter activity.

PMID: 15291746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Am Chem Soc. 2004 Aug 11;126(31):9542-3.

Palladium-catalyzed oxygenation of unactivated sp3 C-H bonds.

Desai LV(1), Hull KL, Sanford MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Michigan, 930 North University Avenue, 
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-1055, USA.

This communication describes a new palladium-catalyzed method for the oxygenation
of unactivated sp3 C-H bonds. A wide variety of alkane substrates containing
readily available oxime and/or pyridine directing groups are oxidized with
extremely high levels of chemo-, regio-, and in some cases diastereoselectivity. 
The substrate scope of these reactions is discussed, and the high selectivities
are rationalized on the basis of the requirements of putative palladium alkyl
intermediates.

PMID: 15291549  [PubMed]


61. J Org Chem. 2004 Aug 6;69(16):5395-8.

Gas electron diffraction analysis on S-methyl thioacetate, CH3C(O)SCH3.

Della Védova CO(1), Romano RM, Oberhammer H.

Author information: 
(1)CEQUINOR (CONICET), Departamento de Química, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas,
Universidad Nacional de La Plata, 47 esq. 115, (1900) La Plata, República
Argentina. carlosdv@quimica.unlp.edu.ar

The molecular structure of S-methyl thioacetate, CH3C(O)SCH3, was determined by
gas electron diffraction (GED) with the assistance of quantum chemical
calculations (B3LYP/6-31G and MP2/6-31G). Experimental and theoretical methods
result in a structure with syn conformation (C=O double bond syn with respect to 
the S-C(H3) single bond). The following skeletal geometric parameters were
derived from the GED analysis (ra values with 3sigma uncertainties): C=O =
1.214(3), C-C = 1.499(5), S-C(sp2) = 1.781(6), S-C(sp3) = 1.805(6) angstroms,
O=C-C = 123.4(8) degrees, O=C-S = 122.8(5) degrees and C-S-C = 99.2(9) degrees.

Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society

PMID: 15287787  [PubMed]


62. Biochem Cell Biol. 2004 Aug;82(4):460-71.

Gene regulation by Sp1 and Sp3.

Li L(1), He S, Sun JM, Davie JR.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada.

The Sp family of transcription factors is united by a particular combination of
three conserved Cys2His2 zinc fingers that form the sequence-specific DNA-binding
domain. Within the Sp family of transcription factors, Sp1 and Sp3 are
ubiquitously expressed in mammalian cells. They can bind and act through GC boxes
to regulate gene expression of multiple target genes. Although Sp1 and Sp3 have
similar structures and high homology in their DNA binding domains, in vitro and
in vivo studies reveal that these transcription factors have strikingly different
functions. Sp1 and Sp3 are able to enhance or repress promoter activity.
Regulation of the transcriptional activity of Sp1 and Sp3 occurs largely at the
post-translational level. In this review, we focus on the roles of Sp1 and Sp3 in
the regulation of gene expression.

PMID: 15284899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Biochem J. 2004 Nov 15;384(Pt 1):101-10.

Synergistic role of specificity proteins and upstream stimulatory factor 1 in
transactivation of the mouse carboxylesterase 2/microsomal acylcarnitine
hydrolase gene promoter.

Furihata T(1), Hosokawa M, Satoh T, Chiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Chiba University, Chiba 260-8675, Japan.

Mouse carboxylesterase 2 (mCES2), a microsomal acylcarnitine hydrolase, is
thought to play some important roles in fatty acid (ester) metabolism, and it is 
therefore thought that the level of transcription of the mCES2 gene is under
tight control. Examination of the tissue expression profiles revealed that mCES2 
is expressed in the liver, kidney, small intestine, brain, thymus, lung, adipose 
tissue and testis. When the mCES2 promoter was cloned and characterized, it was
revealed that Sp1 (specificity protein 1) and Sp3 could bind to a GC box, that
USF (upstream stimulatory factor) 1 could bind to an E (enhancer) box, and that
Sp1 could bind to an NFkappaB (nuclear factor kappaB) element in the mCES2
promoter. Co-transfection assays showed that all of these transcription factors
contributed synergistically to transactivation of the mCES2 promoter. Taken
together, our results indicate that Sp1, Sp3 and USF1 are indispensable factors
for transactivation of the mCES2 gene promoter. To our knowledge, this is the
first study in which transcription factors that interact with a CES2 family gene 
have been identified. The results of the present study have provided some clues
for understanding the molecular mechanisms regulating mCES2 gene expression, and 
should be useful for studies aimed at elucidation of physiological functions of
mCES2.

PMCID: PMC1134093
PMID: 15283701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Curr Med Chem. 2004 Aug;11(15):1995-2005.

Regulation of MAO-A and MAO-B gene expression.

Shih JC(1), Chen K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Toxicology, Pharmaceutical Science
Center, University of Southern California, 1985 Zonal Ave. Los Angeles,
California 90033, USA. jcshih@usc.edu

MAO A and B genes are made of 15 exons with identical exon-intron organization.
They are located on X-chromosome organized in opposite direction, tail to tail
with 24 kb apart. Both promoters are GC-rich and regulated by transcription
factor Sp1. However, they have distinctly different features. MAO B gene, but not
MAO A gene, has TATA box. MAO B promoter contains two clusters of overlapping Sp1
sites, the CACCC repressor element. Transcription factors Sp1 and Sp4 can
activate MAO B promoter activity through the proximal cluster of Sp1 sites and
its activation can be repressed by the over-expression of Sp3 and a related
family member, BTEB2. Decreased methylation and transcription repressor Sp3
upregulate human MAO B, but not MAO A, gene expression during Caco-2
differentiation. MAO B, but not MAO A gene, could be activated by PMA (phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate) by protein kinase C, MAPkinase signal transduction
pathway involves cJun and Egr-1. The differences in MAO A and B gene regulation
may explain the different tissue-specific expression and functions of these two
important isoenzymes.

Copyright 2004 Bentham Science Publishers Ltd.

PMID: 15279563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Clin Exp Immunol. 2004 Aug;137(2):329-40.

Disruption of MAP kinase activation and nuclear factor binding to the IL-12 p40
promoter in HIV-infected myeloid cells.

Chambers KA(1), Parks RJ, Angel JB.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Program, Ottawa Health Research Institute, University of
Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Progressive immunodeficiency in HIV infection is paralleled by a decrease in
IL-12 production, a cytokine crucial for cellular immune function. Here we
examine the molecular mechanisms by which HIV infection suppresses IL-12 p40
expression. HIV infection of THP-1 myeloid cells resulted in decreased
LPS-induced nuclear factor binding to the NF-kappaB, AP-1, and Sp1 sites of the
IL-12 p40 promoter. By site-directed mutagenesis we determined that each of these
sites was necessary for transcriptional activation of the IL-12 p40 promoter.
Binding of NF-kappaB p50, c-Rel, p65, Sp1, Sp3, c-Fos, and c-Jun proteins to
their cognate nuclear factor binding sites was somewhat impaired by HV infection,
although a role for other as yet unidentified factors cannot be dismissed. The
cellular levels of these transcription factors were unaffected by HIV infection, 
with the exception of a decrease in expression of NF-kappaB p65, consistent with 
the observed decrease in its binding to the IL-12 p40 promoter following HIV
infection. Analysis of regulation of upstream LPS-induced MAP kinases
demonstrated impaired phosphorylation of JNK and p38 MAPK, and suppressed
phosphorylation and degradation of IkappaBalpha following HIV infection. These
results suggest that alterations in nuclear factor binding to numerous sites in
the IL-12 p40 promoter, together may contribute to the suppression in IL-12 p40
transcription previously reported. These effects on nuclear factor binding may be
a direct effect of HIV infection on the IL-12 p40 promoter, or may occur
indirectly as a consequence of altered MAP kinase activation.

PMCID: PMC1809123
PMID: 15270850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Chem Phys. 2004 Feb 22;120(8):3817-21.

Phase stability of nanocarbon in one dimension: nanotubes versus diamond
nanowires.

Barnard AS(1), Snook IK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Physics, Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology
University, GPO Box 2476V, 3001 Australia. amanda.barnard@physics.org

Since their discovery in 1990, the study of sp2 bonded carbon nanotubes has grown
into a field of research in it's own right; however the development of the sp3
analog, diamond nanowires, has been slow. A number of theoretical models have
been proposed to compare the relative stability of diamond and graphite at the
nanoscale; and more recently, to compare nanodiamonds and fullerenes. Presented
here is a study of the phase stability of nanocarbon in one-dimension. The
structural energies of carbon nanotubes and diamond nanowires have been
calculated using density functional theory within the generalized gradient
approximation, and used to determine the atomic heat of formation as a function
of size.

(c) 2004 American Institute of Physics.

PMID: 15268546  [PubMed]


67. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao. 2004 Jun;26(3):279-84.

[Protective and therapeutic effect of pulmonary surfactant on the experimental
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in hamsters].

[Article in Chinese]

Li L(1), Ruan YM, Meng Y, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Fu Wai Hospital, CAMS and PUMC, Beijing 100037,
China. liclose@yahoo.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the protective and therapeutic effects of pulmonary
surfactant in the pathogenesis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in
hamsters.
METHODS: COPD animal model was established by smoke inhalations and intratracheal
instillations of pancreatic elastase in hamsters. Ninty hamsters were divided
into 9 groups as follows: normal group (N), two groups received smoke inhalations
for 1 and 3 months (S1 and S3), one group received intratracheal instillation of 
surfactant (10 mg/100 g BW) for once after 1 month smoking (SP1), one group was
treated with surfactant after 1.5, 2 and 2.5 months of smoking (SP3), and two
groups received intratracheal administration of elastase (40 U/100 g BW) and were
killed after 1 month and 3 months, respectively (E1 and E3). The surfactant was
injected intratracheally after 1 week, 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, and 2.5 months,
followed by administration with elastase (EP1 and EP3). EP1 group were killed at 
the first month, and EP3 at the third month. Light microscopy and
electromicroscopy observations were performed in each group. Pulmonary mean
linear intercept (MLI), mean alveolar numbers (MAN), and pulmonary alveolar area 
(PAA) was measured by image analysis. The expression of surfactant protein A
(SP-A) were observed by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Smoking for 3 months and instillations of elastase resulted in chronic
bronchitis and emphysema. MLI and PAA increased and MAN decreased in all the
experimental groups compared with in the normal group (P < 0.05 or P < 0.01).
Administration of surfactant for 3 months resulted in statistically significant
inhibition of pulmonary injury. MLI and PAA decreased and MAN increased in SP3
compared with in S3. Only MLI decreased in EP3 compared with E3. The expressions 
of SP-A in the type II alveolar epithelia decreased in S3 and E3 (compared with
the normal group P < 0.01). After pulmonary surfactant intervention, the
expression of SP-A increased significantly.
CONCLUSION: Pulmonary surfactant may have a long-term protective effect on
chronic smoking and elastase-induced COPD.

PMID: 15266830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Biol Chem. 2004 Sep 24;279(39):40451-61. Epub 2004 Jul 20.

Transcriptional regulation of the mouse gene encoding the alpha-4 subunit of the 
GABAA receptor.

Ma L(1), Song L, Radoi GE, Harrison NL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Weill Medical College, Cornell University, New
York, New York 10021, USA.

The gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptors (GABAA-Rs) mediate fast inhibitory
synaptic transmission in the brain. The alpha4 subunit of the GABAA-R confers
distinct pharmacological properties on the receptor and its expression pattern
exhibits plasticity in response to physiological and pharmacological stimuli,
including withdrawal from progesterone and alcohol. We have analyzed the promoter
region of the mouse GABRA4 gene that encodes the alpha4 subunit and found that
the promoter has multiple transcriptional initiation sites and lacks a TATA box. 
The minimal promoter for GABRA4 spans the region between -444 to -19 bp relative 
to the coding ATG and shows high activity in cultured mouse cortical neurons.
Both Sp3 and Sp4 transcription factors can interact with the two Sp1 binding
sites within the minimal promoter and are critical for maximal activity of the
promoter in neurons.

Copyright 2004 American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMID: 15265862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Mol Carcinog. 2004 Aug;40(4):212-31.

Nkx2.1 transcription factor in lung cells and a transforming growth factor-beta1 
heterozygous mouse model of lung carcinogenesis.

Kang Y(1), Hebron H, Ozbun L, Mariano J, Minoo P, Jakowlew SB.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Institute, Cell and Cancer Biology Branch, Rockville, Maryland
20850, USA.

The Nkx2.1 homeobox gene and transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) are
essential for organogenesis and differentiation of the mouse lung. NKX2.1 is a
marker of human lung carcinomas, but it is not known whether this gene
participates in early tumorigenesis. Addition of TGF-beta1 to
TGF-beta1-responsive nontumorigenic mouse lung cells cotransfected with a
NKX2.1Luc luciferase reporter and either a Sp1 or Sp3 plasmid showed a
significant increase or decrease, respectively, in NKX2.1Luc transcription.
Cotransfection of Sp3 and dominant-negative TGF-beta type II receptor plasmids
negated the effect of Sp1. Cotransfected Sp1 plasmid with either
dominant-negative Smad2 or Smad3 or Smad4 plasmids significantly decreased
NKX2.1Luc transcription. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed binding
of Sp1 and Smad4 to the NKX2.1 promoter. With a TGF-beta1 heterozygous mouse
model, Nkx2.1 mRNA and protein in lungs of TGF-beta1 heterozygous mice were
significantly lower compared to wildtype (WT) littermates. Competitive reverse
transcription (RT)-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and immunostaining showed that
Nkx2.1 mRNA and protein decreased significantly in adenomas and adenocarcinomas
compared to normal lung tissue. Our in vitro data showed that regulation of
Nkx2.1 by TGF-beta1 occurs through TGF-beta type II receptor and Smad signaling, 
with Sp1 and Sp3 in lung cells. Our in vivo data showed reduced Nkx2.1 in lungs
of TGF-beta1 heterozygous mice compared to WT mice, that is detectable in
adenomas, and that is further reduced in carcinogenesis, and that correlates with
reduction of Sp1, Sp3, and Smads in lung adenocarcinomas. Our findings suggest
that reduced Nkx2.1 and TGF-beta1 signaling components may contribute to
tumorigenesis in the lungs of TGF-beta1 heterozygous mice.

PMID: 15264213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Hypertension. 2004 Sep;44(3):283-8. Epub 2004 Jul 19.

Transcriptional regulation of type B human natriuretic Peptide receptor gene
promoter: dependence on Sp1.

Rahmutula D(1), Cui J, Chen S, Gardner DG.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center and Department of Medicine, University of California at San
Francisco, USA.

The type B natriuretic peptide receptor (NPR-B) is the cognate receptor for the
C-type natriuretic peptide and, as such, is responsible for signaling
growth-suppressant activity in vascular smooth muscle cells. Here we report the
isolation and characterization of the human (h) NPR-B gene promoter. Using 5'
rapid amplification of cDNA ends analysis, we have identified the 5' terminus of 
the hNPR-B gene transcript approximately 732 base pairs upstream from the
presumed translation start site of the protein. We generated a series of 5'
deletion mutants linked to a luciferase reporter and introduced these constructs 
into rat aortic smooth muscle cells or neonatal rat cardiac fibroblasts. Maximal 
expression was seen with a construct harboring 441 base pairs of 5' flanking
sequence. Site-directed mutagenesis of the proximal promoter revealed a series of
GC-rich sequences, 5 of which contributed modestly (approximately 25%) to basal
hNPR-B promoter activity. Mutation of a sixth GC-rich sequence led to a >90%
reduction in promoter activity. This sequence was shown to associate with Sp1 and
Sp3 in vitro. The same mutation that resulted in loss of functional activity also
resulted in loss of binding activity in vitro. Overexpression of Sp1 or Sp3 in
Drosophila Schneider cells resulted in an increase in hNPR-B promoter activity
that was completely nullified with the Sp1 binding site mutation described above.
These studies provide the first description and characterization of the NPR-B
gene promoter and suggest that this promoter's activity is dominated by a single 
cluster of Sp1-binding elements in the proximal 5' flanking sequence of the gene.

PMID: 15262909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Acta Crystallogr B. 2004 Aug;60(Pt 4):424-32. Epub 2004 Jul 19.

Analysis of the less common hydrogen bonds involving ester oxygen sp3 atoms as
acceptors in the crystal structures of small organic molecules.

Molcanov K(1), Kojic-Prodic B, Raos N.

Author information: 
(1)Rudjer Boskovic Institute, POB 180, HR-10002 Zagreb, Croatia.

An analysis of hydrogen bonds involving ester Osp3 atoms as acceptors has been
performed based on the data extracted from the Cambridge Structural Database
[Allen (2002). Acta Cryst. B58, 380-388; version 5.25, November 2003], using the 
ConQuest package to evaluate the stereochemical and electronic properties of the 
acceptors. Evidence for the existence of this particular type of hydrogen bond
and its structural function in crystal packing is presented. Using a cut-off
limit on residual indices of R < 0.05 (for the structures with hydrogen bonds
involving an oxygen as part of the donor group) and R < 0.085 (for nitrogen as
part of the donor group), 230 structures out of the total CSD entries of 298,100 
were found to contain hydrogen bonds with the ester Osp3 atoms as acceptors. The 
hydrogen-bond donors include water molecules, hydroxyl groups, primary and
secondary amines and, in a few cases, imino groups. Four modes of the
participation of the ester Osp3 atoms in hydrogen bonding are detected: as a
single acceptor, as a double acceptor, as a single acceptor of a H atom involved 
in an intermolecular bifurcated hydrogen bond, and as a shared acceptor function 
with the ester Osp2 atom in a bifurcated hydrogen bond. The role of such directed
noncovalent interactions in crystal packing is demonstrated by a small gallery of
selected structures.

PMID: 15258400  [PubMed]


72. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Oct;18(10):2463-78. Epub 2004 Jul 15.

Coordinate transcription of the ADAMTS-1 gene by luteinizing hormone and
progesterone receptor.

Doyle KM(1), Russell DL, Sriraman V, Richards JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

ADAMTS-1 (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin-like motifs) is
a multifunctional protease that is expressed in periovulatory follicles. Herein
we show that induction of ADAMTS-1 message in vivo and transcription of the
ADAMTS-1 promoter in cultured granulosa cells are dependent on separable but
coordinate actions of LH and the progesterone receptor (PR). To analyze the
molecular mechanisms by which LH and PR regulate this gene, truncations and
site-specific mutants of ADAMTS-1 promoter-luciferase reporter constructs
(ADAMTS-1-Luc) were generated and transfected into rat granulosa cell cultures.
Three regions of the promoter were found to be important for basal activity, two 
of which were guanine cytosine-rich binding sites for specificity proteins
Sp1/Sp3 and the third bound a nuclear factor 1-like factor. Despite the absence
of a consensus PR DNA response element in the proximal ADAMTS-1 promoter,
cotransfection of a PRA (or PRB) expression vector stimulated ADAMTS-1 promoter
activity, a response that was reduced by the PR antagonist ZK98299. Forskolin
plus phorbol myristate acetate also increased promoter activity and, when added
to cells cotransfected with PRA, ADAMTS-1 promoter activity increased further.
Activation of the ADAMTS-1 promoter by PRA involves functional CAAT enhancer
binding protein beta, nuclear factor 1-like factor, and three Sp1/Sp3 binding
sites as demonstrated by transfection of mutated promoter constructs. In summary,
LH and PRA/B exert distinct but coordinate effects on transactivation of the
ADAMTS-1 gene in granulosa cells in vivo and in vitro with PR acting as an
inducible coregulator of the ADAMTS-1 gene.

PMID: 15256533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Chemistry. 2004 Jul 19;10(14):3411-22.

Weak hydrogen bridges: a systematic theoretical study on the nature and strength 
of C--H...F--C interactions.

Hyla-Kryspin I(1), Haufe G, Grimme S.

Author information: 
(1)Organisch-Chemisches Institut der Universität Münster, Corrensstrasse 49,
48149 Münster, Germany. ihk@uni-muenster.de

We present a comparative study on the nature and strength of weak hydrogen
bonding between the C(sp3)-H, C(sp2)-H, and C(sp)-H donor bonds and F-C(sp3)
acceptors. The series of molecules CH3F.CH4 (2 a, 2 b), CH3F.C2H4 (3), CH3F.C2H2 
(4), as well as model complexes of experimentally characterized
2-fluoro-2-phenylcyclopropane derivatives, C3H6.C3H5F (5 a, 5 b) and C3H5F.C3H5F 
(6) were investigated. Comparative studies were also performed for two conformers
of the methane dimer (1 a, 1 b). The calculations were carried out in hierarchies
of basis sets [SV(d,p), TZV(d,p), aug-TZV(d,p), TZV(2df,2pd), aug-TZV(2df,2pd),
QZV(3d2fg,2pd), aug-QZV(3d2fg,2pdf)] by means of ab initio [HF, MP2, QCISD,
QCISD(T)] methods and density functional theory (DFT/B3LYP, DFT/PBE). It is shown
that well-balanced basis sets of at least TZV(2df,2pd) quality are needed for a
proper description of the weakly bonded systems. In the case of 2, 3, 5, and 6,
the dispersion interaction is the dominant term of the entire attraction, which
is not accounted for at the B3LYP level. Significant electrostatic contributions 
are observed for 6 and 3. For 4, these forces have a dominating contribution to
the hydrogen bonding. The C(sp)--H...F--C(sp(3)) interaction in 4, though weak,
exhibits the same characteristics as conventional hydrogen bridges. Despite
showing longer H.F/H contacts compared to 1 a, 2 a, and 5 a the bifurcated
structures, 1 b, 2 b, 5 b, are characterized by larger dispersion interactions
leading to stronger bonding. For the systems with only one H.F contact, the
MP2/QZV(3d2fg,2pd) interaction energy increases in the order 2 a (-1.62 kJ
mol(-1)), 3 (-2.79 kJ mol(-1)), 5 a (-5.97 kJ mol(-1)), 4 (-7.25 kJ mol(-1)), and
6 (-10.02 kJ mol(-1)). This contradicts the estimated proton donor ability of the
C--H bonds (2 a<5 a<3<6<4).

PMID: 15252787  [PubMed]


74. Crit Rev Eukaryot Gene Expr. 2004;14(3):171-81.

Sp1 control of gene expression in myeloid cells.

Resendes KK(1), Rosmarin AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Brown
University, Providence, RI 02912, USA.

Gene transcription plays a critical role in the differentiation of myeloid cells.
However, there is no single, master regulator of all myeloid genes. Rather,
myeloid gene transcription is regulated by the combinatorial effects of a limited
number of key transcription factors. Sp1 is a powerful activator of gene
transcription in many cell types. Although it is wildly expressed, Sp1 binds and 
activates the promoters of a large number of important myeloid genes. This
presents the paradox of how a widely expressed transcription factor can regulate 
lineage-specific gene transcription. This review discusses the structure,
function, and expression patterns of Sp1 and its related Sp family members.
Illustrative examples of the tissue-specific regulation of myeloid target genes
are presented. The roles of post-translational modifications of Sp1, alterations 
in target gene chromatin structure, and important cooperating transcription
factors are discussed. Thus, Sp1 serves as a model of how a widely expressed
transcription factor regulates the expression of tissue-specific genes.

PMID: 15248814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Magn Reson Chem. 2004 Aug;42(8):667-70.

Electronic influences on 3J(C,H) coupling constants via -S-, -S(O)- and -SO2-:
their determination, calculation and comparison of detection methods.

Heydenreich M(1), Koch A, Kovács J, Tóth G, Kleinpeter E.

Author information: 
(1)Chemisches Institut der Universität Potsdam, P.O. Box 69 15 53, D-14415
Potsdam, Germany.

3J(C,H) coupling constants via a sulfur atom in two series of compounds, both
including a sulfide, a sulfoxide and a sulfone, were detected experimentally and 
calculated by quantum mechanical methods. In the first series (1-3) the coupling 
between a hydrogen, bonded to an sp3 carbon, and an sp2 carbon is treated; the
second series (4-6) deals with the coupling between a hydrogen, bonded to an sp3 
carbon, and an sp3 carbon. Different pulse sequences (broadband HMBC, SelJres, 1D
HSQMBC, J-HMBC-2, selective J-resolved long-range experiment and IMPEACH-MBC)
proved to be useful in determining the long-range 3J(C,H) coupling constants.
However, the dynamic behaviour of two of the compounds (4 and 6) led to weighted 
averages of the two coupling constants expected (concerning equatorial and axial 
positions of the corresponding hydrogens). DFT calculations proved to be useful
to calculate not only the 3J(C,H) coupling constants but also the different
contributions of FC, PSO, DSO and SD terms; the calculation of the Fermi contact 
term (FC) was found to be sufficient for the correct estimation of 3J(C,H)
coupling constants.

Copyright 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 15248254  [PubMed]


76. Oncogene. 2004 Sep 9;23(41):6942-53.

Evidence that Sp1 positively and Sp3 negatively regulate and androgen does not
directly regulate functional tumor suppressor 15-lipoxygenase 2 (15-LOX2) gene
expression in normal human prostate epithelial cells.

Tang S(1), Bhatia B, Zhou J, Maldonado CJ, Chandra D, Kim E, Fischer SM, Butler
AP, Friedman SL, Tang DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, Science Park-Research Division, The University
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1808 Park Rd. 1C, Smithville, TX 78957, USA.

In this project, we studied the gene regulation of 15-lipoxygenase 2 (15-LOX2),
the most abundant arachidonate-metabolizing LOX in adult human prostate and a
negative cell-cycle regulator in normal human prostate (NHP) epithelial cells.
Through detailed in silico promoter examination and promoter deletion and
activity analysis, we found that several Sp1 sites (i.e., three GC boxes and one 
CACCC box) in the proximal promoter region play a critical role in regulating
15-LOX2 expression in NHP cells. Several pieces of evidence further suggest that 
the Sp1 and Sp3 proteins play a physiologically important role in positively and 
negatively regulating the 15-LOX2 gene expression, respectively. First, mutations
in the GC boxes affected the 15-LOX2 promoter activity. Second, both Sp1 and Sp3 
proteins were detected in the protein complexes that bound the GC boxes revealed 
by electrophoretic mobility shift assay. Third, importantly, inhibition of Sp1
activity or overexpression of Sp3 both inhibited the endogenous 15-LOX2 mRNA
expression. Since 15-LOX2 is normally expressed in the prostate luminal
epithelial cells, we subsequently explored whether androgen/androgen receptor may
directly regulate its gene expression. The results indicate that androgen does
not directly regulate 15-LOX2 gene expression. Together, these observations
provide insight on how 15-LOX2 gene expression may be regulated in NHP cells.

PMID: 15247906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Oncogene. 2004 Aug 26;23(39):6569-80.

Mechanisms underlying lack of insulin-like growth factor-binding protein-3
expression in non-small-cell lung cancer.

Chang YS(1), Wang L, Suh YA, Mao L, Karpen SJ, Khuri FR, Hong WK, Lee HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Head and Neck Medical Oncology, The University of Texas
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Box 432, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030,
USA.

Expression of insulin-like growth factor-binding protein-3, which (IGFBP-3)
inhibits the proliferation of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells by
inducing apoptosis, is lost in about half of stage I NSCLC cases. Since promoter 
methylation can silence gene expression, we investigated whether hypermethylation
of the IGFBP-3 promoter is involved in loss of IGFBP-3 expression in NSCLC. We
found the IGFBP-3 promoter to be methylated in seven of 13 NSCLC cell lines and
in 16 of 23, seven of 9, eight of 11, and six of six tumor specimens from
patients with stage I, II, III, and IV NSCLC, respectively. Methylation status
correlated with IGFBP-3 mRNA and protein levels in a subset of NSCLC cell lines
tested in our study. However, treatment with 5'-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5'-aza-dC) 
restored IGFBP-3 expression in four of seven NSCLC cell lines with the methylated
promoter, suggesting that multiple mechanisms regulate IGFBP-3 expression in
NSCLC. Gel shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed that methylation
of the Sp-1/Sp-3-binding element in the IGFBP-3 promoter influenced the binding
of Sp-1, methyl-CpG-binding protein-2 (MeCP2), and histone deacetylase (HDAC). A 
luciferase construct expressing IGFBP-3 promoter in which the Sp-1/Sp-3 binding
element was methylated showed significantly reduced transcriptional activity. The
reduction in promoter activity was further suppressed by overexpression of MeCP2,
which was rescued by 5'-aza-dC. Thus interference with Sp-1 transactivation by
MeCP2 may contribute to the transcriptional defect of IGFBP-3 expression in NSCLC
cells with methylated promoter.

PMID: 15247904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Biol Chem. 2004 Oct 1;279(40):42095-105. Epub 2004 Jul 9.

Complexity of translationally controlled transcription factor Sp3 isoform
expression.

Sapetschnig A(1), Koch F, Rischitor G, Mennenga T, Suske G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research, Philipps-University,
Emil-Mannkopff-Strasse 2, D-35033 Marburg, Germany.

Sp3 is a ubiquitous transcription factor closely related to Sp1. Both proteins
contain a highly conserved DNA-binding domain close to the C terminus and two
glutamine-rich domains in the N-terminal moiety. Immunoblot analyses of Sp3
reveal a striking complex protein pattern of up to eight distinct species. This
pattern is not observed in Sp3-deficient cell lines showing that all signals
reflect Sp3 antigen. In this study, we have unraveled the complexity of Sp3
expression. We show that four isoforms of Sp3 that retain different parts of the 
N terminus are expressed in vivo. The four isoforms derive from alternative
translational start sites at positions 1, 37, 856, and 907. An upstream open
reading frame located at position -47 to -18 regulates expression of the two long
isoforms. Unlike Sp1, none of the Sp3 isoforms is glycosylated. However, all four
isoforms become SUMO-modified in vivo and in vitro specifically and exclusively
at lysine residue 551. The transcriptional activity of the two long isoforms
strongly depends on the promoter settings, whereas the small isoforms appear to
be inactive. The transcriptional activity of all the Sp3 isoforms is regulated by
SUMO modification. Our results demonstrate that Sp3 has many unique features and 
is not simply a functional equivalent of Sp1.

PMID: 15247228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Biochem J. 2004 Oct 15;383(Pt 2):393-9.

Sp1 and Smad transcription factors co-operate to mediate TGF-beta-dependent
activation of amyloid-beta precursor protein gene transcription.

Docagne F(1), Gabriel C, Lebeurrier N, Lesné S, Hommet Y, Plawinski L, Mackenzie 
ET, Vivien D.

Author information: 
(1)UMR CNRS 6185, Bd H. Becquerel, BP 5229, 14074 Caen Cedex, France.
docagne@cajal.csic.es

Abnormal deposition of Abeta (amyloid-beta peptide) is one of the hallmarks of AD
(Alzheimer's disease). This peptide results from the processing and cleavage of
its precursor protein, APP (amyloid-beta precursor protein). We have demonstrated
previously that TGF-beta (transforming growth factor-beta), which is
overexpressed in AD patients, is capable of enhancing the synthesis of APP by
astrocytes by a transcriptional mechanism leading to the accumulation of Abeta.
In the present study, we aimed at further characterization of the molecular
mechanisms sustaining this TGF-beta-dependent transcriptional activity. We report
the following findings: first, TGF-beta is capable of inducing the
transcriptional activity of a reporter gene construct corresponding to the
+54/+74 region of the APP promoter, named APP(TRE) (APP TGF-beta-responsive
element); secondly, although this effect is mediated by a transduction pathway
involving Smad3 (signalling mother against decapentaplegic peptide 3) and Smad4, 
Smad2 or other Smads failed to induce the activity of APP(TRE). We also observed 
that the APP(TRE) sequence not only responds to the Smad3 transcription factor,
but also the Sp1 (signal protein 1) transcription factor co-operates with Smads
to potentiate the TGF-beta-dependent activation of APP. TGF-beta signalling
induces the formation of nuclear complexes composed of Sp1, Smad3 and Smad4.
Overall, the present study gives new insights for a better understanding of the
fine molecular mechanisms occurring at the transcriptional level and regulating
TGF-beta-dependent transcription. In the context of AD, our results provide
additional evidence for a key role for TGF-beta in the regulation of Abeta
production.

PMCID: PMC1134081
PMID: 15242331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Indian J Med Res. 2004 May;119 Suppl:57-60.

Nasal associated lymphoid tissue & M cells, a window to persistent streptococcal 
infections.

Cleary PP(1), Zhang Y, Park HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis MN, 55455,
USA. cleary@lenti.med.umn.edu

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVES: Intranasal infection of mice has been used as a model of
streptococcal pharyngitis, as nasal associated lymphoid tissue (NALT) in this
animal is structurally and functionally analogous to human tonsils. The present
study was carried out to determine whether group A streptococci preferentially
colonized or invaded NALT.
METHODS: Lux(+) strain Sp3 was created and exponential phase bacteria were
introduced intranasally into BALB/C female mice, total photon emission from
selected areas was quantified, sections of NALT tissues were used for
immunofluorescent staining and M cell staining.
RESULTS: Intranasal infection of mice with bioluminescent group A streptococci or
unlabeled streptococci demonstrated that NALT was a primary target of this
pathogen. Streptococci readily gained access to the blood stream from this site
of infection. Immunofluorescence microscopy studies showed that M cells,
dispersed along the mucosal epithelium adjacent to NALT, were preferentially
infected and likely to provide the window through which streptococci reached the 
underlying tissue.
INTERPRETATION & CONCLUSION: The present study suggests that this upper
respiratory Gram positive pathogen uses a mechanism similar to that of enteric
pathogens in the intestine to gain access to underlying tissue, lymphatics and
blood.

PMID: 15232163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Glycoconj J. 2004;20(5):339-51.

Transcriptional regulation of the human UDP-galactose:ceramide
galactosyltransferase (hCGT) gene expression: functional role of GC-box and CRE.

Tencomnao T(1), Kapitonov D, Bieberich E, Yu RK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Medical College of Georgia,
Augusta, GA 30912-2697, USA.

UDP-galactose:ceramide galactosyltransferase (CGT, EC 2.4.1.45) is a key enzyme
in the biosynthetic pathway of galactocerebroside (GalC), the most abundant
glycolipid in myelin. Using a GalC expressing cell line, human oligodendroglioma 
(HOG), one which does not express GalC, human neuroblastoma (LAN-5), we
previously demonstrated that the human CGT (hCGT) gene promoter functions in a
cell-specific manner. Because the proximal (-292/-256) and distal (-747/-688)
positive domains were shown to be critically involved in regulating the
expression of several myelin-specific genes, we further investigated the
functional roles of these two motifs in hCGT expression. Mutation analysis
confirmed that a GC-box (-267/-259) and a CRE (-697/-690) were critical for hCGT 
expression. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) demonstrated that these
motifs specifically bound to nuclear extracts from both cell lines. Using
antibodies to Sp1, Sp3, pCREB-1, and ATF-1, these proteins were shown to be
components of the EMSA complexes. However, the only difference between the HOG
and LAN-5 cells was found in the EMSA profile of the CRE complexes. This
difference may account for the differential transcription of the hCGT gene in the
two cell types. Furthermore, the expression levels of ATF-1 detected were much
higher in HOG cells than in LAN-5 cells. Thus, our data suggest that the GC-box
and CRE function cooperatively, and that the CRE regulates the cell-specific
expression of the hCGT gene.

PMID: 15229398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Nippon Med Sch. 2004 Jun;71(3):172-80.

Effect of ionizing irradiation on human esophageal cancer cell lines by cDNA
microarray gene expression analysis.

Bo H(1), Ghazizadeh M, Shimizu H, Kurihara Y, Egawa S, Moriyama Y, Tajiri T,
Kawanami O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Institute of Gerontology, Nippon Medical
School.

To provide new insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying the effect of
irradiation on esophageal squamous cell carcinomas (ESCCs), we used a cDNA
microarray screening of more than 4,000 genes with known functions to identify
genes involved in the early response to ionizing irradiation. Two human ESCC cell
lines, one each of well (TE-1) and poorly (TE-2) differentiated phenotypes were
screened. Subconfluent cells of each phenotype were treated with single doses of 
2.0 Gy or 8.0 Gy irradiations. After a 15 min incubation time-point, the cells
were collected and analyzed. Compared with non-irradiated cells, many genes
revealed at least 2-fold upregulation or downregulation at both doses in well or 
poorly differentiated ESCC cells. The common upregulated genes in well and poorly
differentiated cell types at both irradiation doses included SCYA5, CYP51,
SMARCD2, COX6C, MAPK8, FOS, UBE2M, RPL6, PDGFRL, TRAF2, TNFAIP6, ITGB4, GSTM3,
and SP3 and common downregulated genes involved NFIL3, SMARCA2, CAPZA1, MetAP2,
CITED2, DAP3, MGAT2, ATRX, CIAO1, and STAT6. Several of these genes were novel
and not previously known to be associated with irradiation. Functional
annotations of the modulated genes suggested that at the molecular level,
irradiation appears to induce a regularizing balance in ESCC cell function. The
genes modulated in the early response to irradiation may be useful in our
understanding of the molecular basis of radiotherapy and in developing strategies
to augment its effect or establish novel less hazardous alternative adjuvant
therapies.

PMID: 15226608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Biochem J. 2004 Sep 15;382(Pt 3):975-80.

Characterization and functional analysis of the 5'-flanking region of the mouse
20alpha-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase gene.

Hirabayashi K(1), Ishida M, Suzuki M, Yamanouchi K, Nishihara M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology, Veterinary Medical Science, The
University of Tokyo, 1-1-1, Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.

20alpha-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (20alpha-HSD), which metabolizes
progesterone to an inactive steroid in the corpus luteum of mice and rats but not
of humans, is thought to play a crucial role in shortening the oestrous cycles in
these rodent species. We determined the nucleotide sequence of the 5'-flanking
region of the mouse 20alpha-HSD gene, and examined its promoter activity using a 
rat luteinized granulosa cell culture. A reporter assay, using reporter
constructs of various lengths of the 5'-flanking region, revealed that the region
between -83 and 60 bp upstream of the transcription start site was essential for 
transcriptional activity. Furthermore, mutational analysis demonstrated that a
putative Sp1 site in this region was critical to the expression of the reporter
gene. Electrophoretic mobility-shift assays showed that the interaction of
proteins in a nuclear extract from rat luteinized granulosa cells with this
region was inhibited by a competitor having the wild-type Sp1 sequence in its
promoter, but not a mutated Sp1 sequence. Supershift analysis confirmed that Sp1 
and Sp3 were present in the nuclear extract of these cells, and that these
factors bound to the element. Finally, promoter activity was elevated by the
co-transfection of an Sp1 expression vector, and, to a lesser extent, by an Sp3
expression vector, supporting further the involvement of these factors in the
expression of the 20alpha-HSD gene.

PMCID: PMC1133973
PMID: 15222881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Biol Chem. 2004 Sep 3;279(36):38055-61. Epub 2004 Jun 25.

SOX7 and SOX17 regulate the parietal endoderm-specific enhancer activity of mouse
laminin alpha1 gene.

Niimi T(1), Hayashi Y, Futaki S, Sekiguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Sekiguchi Biomatrix Signaling Project, ERATO, Japan Science and Technology
Agency, Aichi Medical University, Karimata, Yazako, Nagakute, Aichi 480-1195,
Japan.

Laminin-1 is the major component of embryonic basement membrane and consists of
alpha1, beta1, and gamma1 chains. The expression of laminin-1 is induced in mouse
F9 embryonal carcinoma cells upon differentiation into parietal endoderm cells.
We recently identified a parietal endoderm-specific enhancer in the mouse laminin
alpha1 (Lama1) gene and showed that Sp1/Sp3 and YY1 transcription factors were
involved in the enhancer activity. Although here we identified that NF-Y binds to
the enhancer sequence between Sp1/Sp3- and YY1-binding sites, all these
transcription factors are ubiquitously expressed and thus are not sufficient to
explain parietal endoderm-specific enhancer activity. In the present study, we
further showed that SOX7 and SOX17 are involved in the regulation of parietal
endoderm-specific enhancer activity of the mouse Lama1 gene. Northern blot
analysis revealed that the steady-state levels of mouse Sox7 and Sox17 mRNAs
increased in parallel with that of Lama1 mRNA during the differentiation of F9
cells. Both SOX7 and SOX17 markedly trans-activated the transcription of the
Lama1 enhancer-reporter construct in undifferentiated F9 cells in a manner
dependent on high mobility group box-mediated DNA binding. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays and mutational analyses revealed that SOX7 and SOX17 bound 
specifically to two SOX-binding sites within the Lama1 enhancer, and that these
SOX-binding sites functioned synergistically to confer the trans-activation by
SOX7 and SOX17. Furthermore, this trans-activation was dependent on the integrity
of the binding sites for Sp1/Sp3 and NF-Y located at upstream of the two
SOX-binding sites. These results indicate that the transcription of the mouse
Lama1 gene during the differentiation of F9 cells is controlled by a combination 
of the actions of the ubiquitous factors, Sp1/Sp3 and NF-Y, and the parietal
endoderm-specific factors, SOX7 and SOX17.

PMID: 15220343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Nutr Biochem. 2004 Jul;15(7):433-9.

Clusters of biotin-responsive genes in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells.

Wiedmann S(1), Rodriguez-Melendez R, Ortega-Cuellar D, Zempleni J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Health Sciences, University of Nebraska at
Lincoln, 316 Ruth Leverton Hall, Lincoln, NE 68583-0806, USA.

Effects of biotin in cell signaling are mediated by transcription factors such as
nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kappa B) and Sp1/Sp3 as well as by posttranslational
modifications of DNA-binding proteins. These signaling pathways play roles in the
transcriptional regulation of numerous genes. Here we tested the hypothesis that 
biotin-dependent genes are not randomly distributed in the human genome but are
arranged in clusters. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were isolated from
healthy adults before and after supplementation with 8.8 micromol/day biotin for 
21 days. Cells were cultured ex vivo with concanavalin A for 3 hours to stimulate
gene expression. Abundances of mRNA encoding approximately 14,000 genes were
quantified by both DNA microarray and reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction. The expression of 139 genes increased by at least 40% in response to
biotin supplementation, whereas the expression of 131 genes decreased by at least
40% in response to biotin supplementation. The following clusters of
biotin-responsive genes were identified: 1) 16% of biotin-responsive gene
products localized to the cell nucleus; at least 28% of biotin-responsive genes
play roles in signal transduction (these findings are consistent with a role for 
biotin in cell signaling); and 2) of the biotin-responsive genes, 54% clustered
on chromosomes 1, 2, 3, 11, 12, and 19, whereas no biotin-responsive genes were
found on chromosomes 10, 16, 18, 21, and heterosomes. This suggests that position
effects play a role in biotin-dependent gene expression. Collectively, these
findings suggest that the human genome contains clusters of biotin-dependent
genes.

PMID: 15219929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Jul 23;320(2):487-92.

c-Jun and Sp1 family are critical for retinoic acid induction of the lamin A/C
retinoic acid-responsive element.

Okumura K(1), Hosoe Y, Nakajima N.

Author information: 
(1)Biomolecular Engineering Research Institute, 6-2-3 Furuedai, Suita, Osaka
565-0874, Japan. kokumura@ucsd.edu

The expression of A-type lamins, subdivided into lamin A and C, is
developmentally regulated. Retinoic acid (RA)-induced differentiation of P19
embryonic carcinoma cells, in which A-type lamins are absent, increases the
expression of lamin A/C. We previously showed, using P19 cells as a model system,
that the lamin A/C promoter has a retinoic acid-responsive element (L-RARE), and 
that Sp1 and Sp3 bind the CACCC box of the L-RARE. In this study, we report that 
Sp1, Sp3, and c-Jun increase transactivation of the L-RARE during RA treatment.
Sp1 and Sp3 regulate the lamin A/C promoter in Sp1-deficient SL2 cells and
contribute to RA-dependent activation in GAL4-based transcriptional assays.
Overexpression of c-Jun causes transactivation of a chimeric promoter consisting 
of four tandem L-RARE repeats fused with the luciferase gene in P19 cells. c-Jun 
also transactivates a reporter construct with five tandem GAL4-binding sites,
only when co-expressed with either GAL4-Sp1 or Sp3 fusion proteins. Furthermore, 
we detect a physiological interaction between c-Jun with Sp1/Sp3 in RA-treated
cells. Our data suggest that Sp1, Sp3, and c-Jun play an important role in gene
expression through the L-RARE during RA treatment.

PMID: 15219855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2004 Oct;287(4):G822-9. Epub 2004 Jun
24.

Characterization of the 5'-regulatory region of the human thiamin transporter
SLC19A3: in vitro and in vivo studies.

Nabokina SM(1), Said HM.

Author information: 
(1)Veterans Affairs Medical Center-151, Long Beach, CA 90822, USA.

Transcriptional regulation of expression of the human thiamin transporter-2 (the 
product of the SLC19A3 gene) is unknown. In this study, we cloned the
5'-regulatory region of the human SLC19A3 gene (2,016 bp), identified the minimal
promoter region required for basal activity, demonstrated a critical role for
specific cis-regulatory elements in determining the promoter activity, and
confirmed activity and physiological relevance of the cloned SLC19A3 promoter in 
vivo. With the use of transiently transfected human intestinal epithelial Caco-2 
cells and 5'-deletion analysis, the minimal promoter region required for basal
activity of the SLC19A3 promoter was found to be encoded in a sequence between
-77 and +59 by using the start of transcription initiation as position 1. This
minimal region was found to contain a number of putative cis-regulatory elements,
with a critical role for a stimulating protein-1 (SP1)/GC-box binding site (at
position -48/-45 bp) established by means of mutational analysis. With the use of
EMSA and supershift assays, the binding of SP1 and SP3 to the minimal promoter
region was also demonstrated. In transiently transfected Drosophila SL2 cells,
both SP1 and SP3 transactivated the SLC19A3 minimal promoter in a dose-dependent 
manner and in combination demonstrated an additive stimulatory effect.
Functionality of the full-length SLC19A3 promoter was confirmed in vivo in
transgenic mice expressing the promoter-luciferase reporter gene. These studies
report the first characterization of the SLC19A3 promoter in vitro and in vivo
and demonstrate the importance of an SP1 cis-regulatory element in regulating
promoter activity of this important human gene.

PMID: 15217784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Biol Chem. 2004 Aug 20;279(34):36158-65. Epub 2004 Jun 23.

The p38 MAPK pathway mediates transcriptional activation of the plasma
platelet-activating factor acetylhydrolase gene in macrophages stimulated with
lipopolysaccharide.

Wu X(1), Zimmerman GA, Prescott SM, Stafforini DM.

Author information: 
(1)Huntsman Cancer Institute and the Department of Oncological Sciences ,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112, USA.

Administration of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) to experimental animals results in the
up-regulation of expression of the plasma form of platelet-activating factor
acetylhydrolase (PAF AH) in tissue macrophages. To investigate the mechanism
underlying induction of PAF AH by LPS we used murine RAW264.7 and human THP-1
macrophages as model systems. We found that the p38 mitogen-activated protein
kinase (p38 MAPK) pathway mediates transcriptional activation of the PAF AH gene 
through the participation of nucleotides -68/-316 relative to the transcriptional
initiation site. This promoter region spans two Sp1/Sp3 binding sites (SP-A and
SP-B) and is necessary and sufficient for the observed effect. Disruption of
these Sp binding sites significantly reduces promoter activity in LPS-stimulated 
cells. The ability of LPS to induce transcriptional activation of PAF AH is not
due to enhanced Sp1/Sp3 binding to the promoter but involves enhanced
transactivation function of Sp1 via p38 MAPK activation. These studies
characterize the mechanism by which LPS modulates expression of PAF AH at the
transcriptional level, and they have important implications for our understanding
of responses that occur during the development of LPS-mediated inflammatory
diseases.

PMID: 15215249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Int J Oncol. 2004 Jul;25(1):5-16.

A short region of the promoter of the breast cancer associated PLU-1 gene can
regulate transcription in vitro and in vivo.

Catteau A(1), Rosewell I, Solomon E, Taylor-Papadimitriou J.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Cancer Biology Group, Cancer Research UK, Guy's Hospital, London SE1
9RT, UK.

The recently cloned gene PLU-1 shows restricted expression in adult tissues, with
high expression being found in testis, and transiently in the pregnant mammary
gland. However, both the gene and the protein product are specifically
up-regulated in breast cancer. To investigate the control of expression of the
PLU-1 gene, we have cloned and functionally characterised the 5' flanking region 
of the gene, which was found to contain another putative gene. Two transcription 
start sites of the PLU-1 gene were mapped by 5' RACE. A short proximal 249 bp
region was defined using reporter gene assays, which encompasses the major
transcription start site and exhibits a strong constitutive promoter activity in 
all cell lines tested. However, regions upstream of this sequence repress
transcription more effectively in a non-malignant breast cell line as compared to
breast cancer cell lines. The 249 bp region is GC-rich and includes consensus Sp1
sites, GC boxes, cAMP-responsive element (CRE) and other putative cis-elements.
Mutational analysis showed that two intact conserved Sp1 binding sites (shown
here to bind Sp1 and/or Sp3) are critical for constitutive promoter activity,
while a negative role for a neighbouring GC box is indicated. The sequence of the
core promoter is highly conserved in the mouse and Plu-1 expression in the mouse 
embryo has been documented. Using transgenesis, we therefore examined the ability
of the 249 bp fragment to control expression of a reporter gene during
embryogenesis. We found that not only is the core promoter sufficient to activate
transcription in vivo, but that the expression of the reporter gene coincides
both temporally and spatially with regions where endogenous Plu-1 is highly
expressed. This suggests that tissue specific controlling elements are found
within the short fragment and are functional in the embryonic environment.

PMID: 15201984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. SAR QSAR Environ Res. 2004 Apr;15(2):83-99.

A comparative study of quantitative structure-activity relationship methods based
on gallic acid derivatives.

Huang H(1), Ou W, Zhao J, Chen D, Wang L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pollution Control and Resources Reuse, School of the
Environment, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, People's Republic of China.
environment_hh75@yahoo.com.cn

By using hologram quantitative structure-activity relationship (HQSAR) and
comparative molecular field analysis (CoMFA) methods, the relationships between
the structures of 49 gallic acid derivatives and their analgesic activity have
been investigated to yield statistically reliable models with considerable
predictive power. The best HQSAR model was generated using atoms, bond and
connectivity as fragment distinction parameters and fragment size 5-7 from a
hologram length of 307 with 3 components. High conventional r2 (r2 = 0.825) and
cross-validation r2 (r2(cv) = 0.726) values were obtained. CoMFA analyses varying
lattice size and location, grid spacing, probe charges and using, Tripos standard
and Indicator force field were performed. The best model was developed with 4
components using sp3-hybridized carbon atom with +1.0 charge as probe, grid
spacing (2 A), lattice offset (1.0, 3.0, -2.5). The CoMFA model showed a
conventional correlation coefficient r2 of 0.889 and across-validation r2(cv)
equals to 0.633. The robustness and predictive ability of the HQSAR and CoMFA
models have been validated by means of an external test set. The results indicate
that both models possess high statistical quality in the prediction of analgesic 
potency of novel gallic acid analogs.

PMID: 15199945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Gastroenterology. 2004 Jun;126(7):1828-43.

Activin A stimulates vascular endothelial growth factor gene transcription in
human hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Wagner K(1), Peters M, Scholz A, Benckert C, Ruderisch HS, Wiedenmann B, Rosewicz
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatology and Gastroenterology, Charité, Campus
Virchow-Klinikum, Humboldt University, Augustenburger Platz 1, 13353 Berlin,
Germany.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Up-regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor is known
to play a critical role in hepatocellular tumor biology. In an attempt to
identify factors responsible for vascular endothelial growth factor induction in 
human hepatocellular carcinoma, we evaluated the effects of activin A, a member
of the transforming growth factor-beta cytokine superfamily, on vascular
endothelial growth factor gene expression.
METHODS: Expression of vascular endothelial growth factor, activin A, and its
receptors was analyzed by immunohistochemistry, polymerase chain reaction, and
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Functional vascular endothelial growth factor 
promoter analysis and gel shift assays were performed to define minimal promoter 
requirements and potential transcription factors. Nuclear expression and
biochemical modifications of Sp1, as well as subcellular distribution,
expression, and physical interaction of Smad proteins with Sp1, were assessed
with immunoprecipitation and Western blot analysis.
RESULTS: Hepatocellular carcinoma tumors and cell lines expressed activin A and
its receptors. Activin A stimulated vascular endothelial growth factor gene
transcription through Sp1-dependent induction of vascular endothelial growth
factor promoter activity. Furthermore, activin A stimulated the DNA-binding and
transactivation potential of Sp1. Immunoprecipitation showed activin A-dependent 
nuclear translocation of Smad2 and induction of Sp1/Smad2 interaction. The
functional relevance of Sp1/Smad2 interaction was confirmed by transient
transfection experiments, which showed that overexpression of Smad2 increased
vascular endothelial growth factor promoter activity and endogenous vascular
endothelial growth factor protein expression, whereas dominant negative Smad2
blocked activin A responsiveness.
CONCLUSIONS: This study identifies activin A as a novel stimulus of vascular
endothelial growth factor gene expression in hepatocellular carcinoma and
delineates physical and functional cooperation of Sp1 and Smad2 as the underlying
mechanism.

PMID: 15188178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Biochemistry. 2004 Jun 15;43(23):7584-92.

Sp1-targeted inhibition of gene transcription by WP631 in transfected
lymphocytes.

Mansilla S(1), Priebe W, Portugal J.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología Molecular de Barcelona, CSIC, Parc Cientific de
Barcelona, Josep Samitier, 1-5, E-08028 Barcelona, Spain.

The binding of Sp1 transcription factor to DNA is considered a potential target
for small ligands designed to interfere with gene transcription. We attempted to 
distinguish the direct inhibition of the Sp1-binding to DNA in vivo (cell
culture) from more indirect effects due to the network of pathways that modulate 
cell cycle progression, which may decrease transcription without direct
interference with Sp1-DNA interactions. We tested whether the Sp3 protein, whose 
putative binding sequence overlaps the Sp1 site, can inhibit Sp1-activated
transcription and interfere with drug-DNA interactions. A well-characterized
model system consisting of a wtGLUT1 (wild-type glucose transporter 1) gene
promoter, or a mutated mut2GLUT1 promoter, linked to a CAT (chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase) reporter gene, was used to analyze the effects of
overexpressed Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors in transiently transfected Jurkat
T lymphocytes. Bisanthracycline WP631, a potent inhibitor of Sp1-activated
transcription in vitro, was assayed for its ability to specifically inhibit
transcription in transfected Jurkat T lymphocytes. The mut2GLUT1 promoter was
used to further discriminate between the WP631 interference with Sp1-DNA
complexes and Sp3-induced inhibition, since the Sp3-binding site is canceled in
this promoter and replaced by a high-affinity binding site for WP631.

PMID: 15182200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Biol Chem. 2004 Aug 13;279(33):35087-100. Epub 2004 Jun 4.

The cell-specific expression of endothelial nitric-oxide synthase: a role for DNA
methylation.

Chan Y(1), Fish JE, D'Abreo C, Lin S, Robb GB, Teichert AM, Karantzoulis-Fegaras 
F, Keightley A, Steer BM, Marsden PA.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Division and Department of Medicine, St. Michael's Hospital and
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada.

The basis for the endothelial cell-restricted expression of endothelial
nitric-oxide synthase (eNOS) is not known. While transgenic promoter/reporter
mice demonstrated endothelium cell-specific eNOS expression, we found robust
expression of episomal eNOS promoter/reporter constructs in cell types that do
not express the native eNOS transcript. To explore the mechanism underlying this 
differential activity pattern of chromatin-versus episome-based eNOS promoters,
we examined the methylation status of 5'-regulatory sequences of the human eNOS
gene. DNA methylation differed dramatically between endothelial and
nonendothelial cell types, including vascular smooth muscle cells. This same cell
type-specific methylation pattern was observed in vivo in endothelial and
vascular smooth muscle cells of the mouse aorta at the native murine eNOS
promoter. We addressed the functional consequences of methylation on eNOS
transcription using transient transfection of in vitro methylated
promoter/reporter constructs and found that methylated constructs exhibited a
marked decrease in the synergistic action of Sp1, Sp3, and Ets1 on eNOS promoter 
activity. The addition of methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 further reduced the
transcriptional activity of methylated eNOS constructs. Importantly, chromatin
immunoprecipitation demonstrated the presence of Sp1, Sp3, and Ets1 at the native
eNOS promoter in endothelial cells but not in vascular smooth muscle cells.
Finally, robust expression of eNOS mRNA was induced in nonendothelial cell types 
following inhibition of DNA methyltransferase activity with 5-azacytidine,
demonstrating the importance of DNA methylation-mediated repression. This report 
is the first to show that promoter DNA methylation plays an important role in the
cell-specific expression of a constitutively expressed gene in the vascular
endothelium.

PMID: 15180995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Brain Topogr. 2004 Spring;16(3):169-79.

Topographic analysis of painful laser and sural nerve electrical evoked
potentials.

Dowman R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY 13699-5825, USA.
rdowman@clarkson.edu

A quantitative scalp topographic pattern analysis was used to compare evoked
potentials elicited by painful laser (LEP) and electrical stimulation of the
sural nerve (snSEP) in 22 healthy adults. The snSEP and LEP were separated into
stable periods (consecutive time points having the same topographic pattern). The
topographic pattern is dependent upon the number, location, orientation and
relative magnitudes of the brain areas active at that time (source
configuration). Demonstrating that 2 topographies have the same topographic
pattern, therefore, provides evidence that they are generated by the same source 
configuration. The snSEP SP2/3 and SP3 stable periods have similar topographic
features as the stable periods encompassing the LEP N1 and N2 peaks. However, the
quantitative scalp topographic analysis demonstrated that the snSEP SP2/3 and SP3
have a much larger fronto-central negativity. Our earlier work suggests this
difference might be due to the sural nerve electrical stimulus evoking a more
robust pain-evoked response from the anterior cingulate cortex than the laser.
The snSEP SP6 topographic pattern was essentially the same as the LEP P2 peak.
This finding plus the results of our earlier work demonstrate that SP6 is the
snSEP analogue of the LEP P2 peak. These findings have important implications for
the choice of evoking stimulus in investigations of pain processing in humans.
For example, the sural nerve electrical stimulus will be preferred over the laser
in studies of the anterior cingulate's role in cognitive processes related to
pain, such as orienting attention, and/or in studies involving cognitive tasks
that require the presentation of a large number of painful stimuli. The LEP N1
and N2 peaks, on the other hand, will be preferred in studies of the parietal
operculum's role in pain sensation.

PMID: 15162914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Am Chem Soc. 2004 Jun 2;126(21):6556-7.

Cross-coupling of sp(3) C-H bonds and alkenes: catalytic cyclization of
alkene-amide substrates.

DeBoef B(1), Pastine SJ, Sames D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Columbia University, 3000 Broadway, New York, New
York 10027, USA.

We herein present a new oxidative cyclization of alkene-amide substrates under
neutral and catalytic conditions. This overall transformation requires tandem sp3
C-H activation (at the position adjacent to the amide nitrogen) and C-C bond
formation. Specifically, pyrrolidine 1 was converted to pyrrolizidinone 3 and
indolizidinone 4 in 66% and 17% yield, respectively, in the presence of
[Ir(coe)2Cl]2, the carbene ligand IPr (1:1 metal/ligand ratio, 5-10 mol % of Ir),
and the hydrogen acceptor (NBE or TBE, 3-10 equiv). The results presented in this
study suggest that complex 10 [IPr-Ir(Cl)(substrate)] is the key intermediate in 
the catalytic cycle. On the mechanistic front, the key advance was the ability to
facilitate C-H activation and alkene insertion in tandem, and in preference to
beta-hydride elimination, in the context of amide substrates. With respect to
complex synthesis, catalytic and neutral conditions of this method unlock new
exciting opportunities as illustrated by regioselective cyclization of the
proline-derived substrate 16.

PMID: 15161275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 30;279(31):32620-5. Epub 2004 May 20.

Restoration of transforming growth factor-beta signaling through receptor RI
induction by histone deacetylase activity inhibition in breast cancer cells.

Ammanamanchi S(1), Brattain MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, New York 14263, USA. sudhakar.ammanamanchi@roswellpark.org

The loss of transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) response due to the
dysregulation of TGF-beta receptors type I (RI) and type II (RII) is well known
for its contribution to oncogenesis. Estrogen receptor-expressing breast cancer
cells are refractory to TGF-beta-mediated growth control because of the reduced
expression of TGF-beta receptors. Although RII is required for the binding of
TGF-beta to RI, RI is responsible for directly transducing TGF-beta signals
through the Smad protein family. Treatment of estrogen receptor-expressing MCF-7L
and ZR75 breast cancer cells with the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor
suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) led to a dramatic induction of RI.
Accumulation of acetylated histones H3 and H4 was observed in the SAHA-treated
cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis followed by PCR with RI
promoter-specific primers indicated an accumulation of acetylated histones in
chromatin associated with the RI gene, suggesting that histone deacetylation was 
involved in the transcriptional inactivation of RI. SAHA treatment stimulated RI 
promoter activity through the inhibition of Sp1/Sp3-associated HDAC activity.
Histone acetyltransferase p300 stimulated RI promoter activity, thus further
confirming the involvement of HDAC activity in the transcriptional repression of 
RI. Significantly, SAHA-mediated RI regeneration restored the TGF-beta response
in breast cancer cells.

PMID: 15155736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Am Chem Soc. 2004 May 19;126(19):5930-1.

Direct determination of product radical structure reveals the radical
rearrangement pathway in a coenzyme B12-dependent enzyme.

Warncke K(1), Canfield JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30322-2430, USA.
kwarncke@physics.emory.edu

A carbinolamine (1-aminoethan-1-ol-2-yl) structure for the product radical in the
CoII product radical pair catalytic intermediate state in coenzyme B12
(adenosylcobalamin)-dependent ethanolamine deaminase from Salmonella typhimurium 
has been determined by using isotope labeling and techniques of electron
paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy. The presence of nitrogen is detected
from the difference in the EPR line shapes of the product radicals that are
cryotrapped during steady-state turnover on either 14N- or 15N-labeled
aminoethanol substrate. Three-pulse electron spin-echo envelope modulation
(ESEEM) spectroscopy of the product radical labeled with 2H reveals two types of 
beta-2H hyperfine couplings. A structural model is proposed in which the two
beta-2H couplings arise from two C1-C2 product radical rotamer states. The sum of
the dihedral angles between the C2 p-orbital axis and C1-Hbeta bonds is 120
degrees , which indicates sp3-hybridization at C1. This confirms the C1
carbinolamine structure. The identification of the carbinolamine product radical 
indicates that the radical rearrangement in ethanolamine deaminase deviates from 
the solution elimination reaction pathway and proceeds by migration of the amine 
from C2 of the substrate radical to C1 of the product radical.

PMID: 15137734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. FEBS Lett. 2004 May 7;565(1-3):195-202.

Characterization and promoter analysis of the mouse nestin gene.

Cheng L(1), Jin Z, Liu L, Yan Y, Li T, Zhu X, Jing N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology,
Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320 Yue Yang Road, Shanghai 200031, PR
China.

The intermediate filament protein nestin is expressed in the neural stem cells of
the developing central nervous system (CNS). Promoter analysis revealed that the 
minimal promoter of the mouse nestin gene resides in the region -11 to +183 of
the 5'-non-coding and upstream flanking region, and that two adjacent Sp1-binding
sites are necessary for promoter activity. Electrophoretic mobility-shift assays 
(EMSA) and supershift assays showed that Sp1 and Sp3 proteins selectively bind to
the upstream Sp1 site. These results demonstrate an important functionality of
Sp1 and Sp3 in regulating the expression of the mouse nestin gene.

PMID: 15135078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2004 Jun;286(6):G922-31.

Characterization of the rat intestinal Fc receptor (FcRn) promoter:
transcriptional regulation of FcRn gene by the Sp family of transcription
factors.

Jiang L(1), Wang J, Solorzano-Vargas RS, Tsai HV, Gutierrez EM, Ontiveros LO,
Kiela PR, Wu SV, Martín MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Mattel
Children's Hospital, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California
Los Angeles, 90095, USA.

The regulatory elements that control the transcriptional regulation of the
intestinal Fc receptor (FcRn) have not been elucidated. The objective of this
study was to characterize the core promoter region of the rat FcRn gene. Chimeric
clones that contained various regions of the promoter located upstream of the
luciferase reporter were transiently transfected into either IEC-6 or Caco-2 cell
lines and nuclear extracts were used to perform DNase I footprint and DNA binding
assays (EMSA). Transfection of chimeric upstream nested deletions-luciferase
reporter clones into either of these cell lines supported robust reporter
activity and identified the location of the minimal promoter at -157/+135. DNase 
I footprint analysis revealed two complexes located within the gene's core
promoter region, and site-directed mutagenesis identified two regions that were
critical to maintain basal expression. EMSA identified the presence of five Sp
elements within the immediate promoter region that are capable of binding members
of the Sp family of proteins. Among the five Sp elements, one element appears to 
not bind Sp1, Sp2, or Sp3 while influencing the interaction of Sp proteins with
an adjacent Sp site. Overexpression of either Sp1 or Sp3 augments activity of the
minimal promoter in Sp-deficient Drosophila SL2 cells. In summary, we report on
the characterization of the rat FcRn minimal promoter, including the
characterization of five Sp elements within this region that interact with
members of the Sp family of transcriptional factors and drive promoter activity
in intestinal cell lines.

PMID: 15132949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Jul;18(7):1740-55. Epub 2004 Apr 29.

Regulation of the human secretin gene is controlled by the combined effects of
CpG methylation, Sp1/Sp3 ratio, and the E-box element.

Lee LT(1), Tan-Un KC, Pang RT, Lam DT, Chow BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong,
People's Republic of China.

To unravel the mechanisms that regulate the human secretin gene expression, in
this study, we have used secretin-expressing (HuTu-80 cells, human duodenal
adenocarcinoma) and non-secretin-expressing [PANC-1 (human pancreatic ductile
carcinoma) and HepG2 (human hepatocellular carcinoma) cells] cell models for in
vitro and in vivo analyses. By transient transfection assays, within the promoter
region (-11 to -341 from ATG, relative to the ATG initiation codon), we have
initially identified several functional motifs including an E-box and 2 GC-boxes.
Results from gel mobility shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
confirmed further that NeuroD, E2A, Sp1, and Sp3 bind to these E- and GC-boxes in
HuTu-80 cells in vitro and in vivo, whereas only high levels of Sp3 is observed
to bind the promoter in HepG2 cells. In addition, overexpression of Sp3 resulted 
in a dose-dependent repression of the Sp1-mediated transactivation. Collectively,
these data suggest that the Sp1/Sp3 ratio is instrumental to controlling secretin
gene expression in secretin-producing and non-secretin-producing cells. The
functions of GC-box and Sp proteins prompted us to investigate the possible
involvement of DNA methylation in regulating this gene. Consistent with this
idea, we found a putative CpG island (-336 to 262 from ATG) that overlaps with
the human secretin gene promoter. By methylation-specific PCR, all the CpG
dinucleo-tides (26 of them) within the CpG island in HuTu-80 cells are
unmethylated, whereas all these sites are methylated in PANC-1 and HepG2 cells.
The expressions of secretin in PANC-1 and HepG2 cells were subsequently found to 
be significantly activated by a demethylation agent, 5'-Aza-2' deoxycytidine.
Taken together, our data indicate that the human secretin gene is controlled by
the in vivo Sp1/Sp3 ratio and the methylation status of the promoter.

PMID: 15118068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Am Chem Soc. 2004 May 5;126(17):5358-9.

Chirality exchange from sp3 central chirality to axial chirality: benzannulation 
of optically active diaryl-2,2-dichlorocyclopropylmethanols to axially chiral
alpha-arylnaphthalenes.

Nishii Y(1), Wakasugi K, Koga K, Tanabe Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Textile Science and Technology, Shinshu
University, Ueda, Nagano 386-8567, Japan. nishii@giptc.shinshu-u.ac.jjp

Chirality exchange benzannulation of optically active
(1S)-aryl(aryl')-2,2-dichlorocyclopropylmethanols (>99% ee) using TiCl4
successfully proceeded to give axially chiral (M)-alpha-arylnaphthalenes with
excellent levels of stereo induction (>99% ee). This unique transformation
involves the single-step chirality exchange from sp3 central chirality to axial
chirality, that is, a type of excellent memory effect.

PMID: 15113197  [PubMed]


102. Environ Sci Technol. 2004 Apr 1;38(7):2224-31.

Alkaline hydrolysis/polymerization of 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene: characterization of 
products by 13C and 15N NMR.

Thorn KA(1), Thorne PG, Cox LG.

Author information: 
(1)U.S. Geological Survey, P.O. Box 25046, Denver Federal Center, Denver,
Colorado 80225-0046, USA. kathorn@usgs.gov

Alkaline hydrolysis has been investigated as a nonbiological procedure for the
destruction of 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene (TNT) in explosives contaminated soils and
munitions scrap. Nucleophilic substitutions of the nitro and methyl groups of TNT
by hydroxide ion are the initial steps in the alkaline degradation of TNT.
Potential applications of the technique include both in situ surface liming and
ex situ alkaline treatment of contaminated soils. A number of laboratory studies 
have reported the formation of an uncharacterized polymeric material upon
prolonged treatment of TNT in base. As part of an overall assessment of alkaline 
hydrolysis as a remediation technique, and to gain a better understanding of the 
chemical reactions underlying the hydrolysis/polymerization process, the soluble 
and precipitate fractions of polymeric material produced from the calcium
hydroxide hydrolysis of unlabeled and 15N-labeled TNT were analyzed by elemental 
analysis and 13C and 15N nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Spectra
indicated that reactions leading to polymerization included nucleophilic
displacement of nitro groups by hydroxide ion, formation of ketone, carboxyl,
alcohol, ether, and other aliphatic carbons, conversion of methyl groups to
diphenyl methylene carbons, and recondensation of aromatic amines and reduced
forms of nitrite, including ammonia and possibly hydroxylamine, into the polymer.
Compared to the distribution of carbons in TNT as 14% sp3- and 86%
sp2-hybridized, the precipitate fraction from hydrolysis of unlabeled TNT
contained 33% sp3- and 67% sp2-hybridized carbons. The concentration of nitrogen 
in the precipitate was 64% of that in TNT. The 15N NMR spectra showed that, in
addition to residual nitro groups, forms of nitrogen present in the filtrate and 
precipitate fractions include aminohydroquinone, primary amide, indole, imine,
and azoxy, among others. Unreacted nitrite was recovered in the filtrate
fraction. The toxicities and susceptibilities to microbial or chemical
degradation of the polymeric materials remain unknown.

PMID: 15112828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Diabetes. 2004 May;53(5):1222-9.

Bifunctional properties of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma1 in
KDR gene regulation mediated via interaction with both Sp1 and Sp3.

Sassa Y(1), Hata Y, Aiello LP, Taniguchi Y, Kohno K, Ishibashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (KDR) plays a critical role in
mediating a variety of vasculogenic and angiogenic processes, including diabetic 
retinopathy. We previously demonstrated that the promoter activity of the KDR
gene in retinal capillary endothelial cells (RCECs) was regulated in part by the 
relative concentration of positive/negative transcription factors Sp1/Sp3. We
also reported that the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)gamma
ligand could inhibit intraocular angiogenesis. In the present study, the role of 
PPARgamma1 in KDR gene regulation in RCECs was examined. PPARgamma1 protein
physically interacted with both Sp1 and Sp3. Transactivation and electrophoretic 
mobility shift assays clearly demonstrated novel findings that PPARgamma1
increased KDR promoter activity by enhancing the interaction between Sp1, but not
Sp3, and KDR promoter region without its ligand in RCECs. The ligand-binding site
but not the DNA binding site of PPARgamma1 enhanced the interaction between Sp1
and KDR promoter region. Conversely, PPARgamma1 ligand 15-deoxy Delta
(12,14)-prostaglandin J2 dose-dependently suppressed the binding of KDR promoter 
region with both Sp1 and Sp3, resulting an inhibition of KDR gene expression. In 
conclusion, PPARgamma1 has bifunctional properties in the regulation of KDR gene 
expression mediated via interaction with both Sp1 and Sp3.

PMID: 15111490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Biochem J. 2004 Jul 15;381(Pt 2):397-403.

Control of expression of the lectin-like protein Reg-1 by gastrin: role of the
Rho family GTPase RhoA and a C-rich promoter element.

Ashcroft FJ(1), Varro A, Dimaline R, Dockray GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Physiological Laboratory, University of Liverpool, Crown Street, Liverpool L69
3BX, U.K.

The expression of members of the Reg family of secreted lectin-like proteins is
increased in response to stress, inflammation and damage in many tissues. In the 
stomach, Reg is located in enterochromaffin-like cells, where its expression is
stimulated by the gastric hormone gastrin. We have examined the mechanisms by
which gastrin stimulates expression of Reg-1. Deletional mutations of 2.1 to 0.1 
kb of the rat Reg-1 promoter in a luciferase reporter vector were transiently
transfected into gastric cancer AGS-G(R) cells. All promoter fragments tested
showed similar relative increases in luciferase expression in response to gastrin
(1 nM). The response to gastrin of the smallest (104 bp) construct was
4.2+/-0.4-fold over basal. These responses were reduced by Ro-32-0432, a protein 
kinase C inhibitor, by C3-transferase, a Clostridium botulinum toxin and a
selective inhibitor of the Rho family GTPase RhoA, and by co-transfection with a 
dominant negative form of RhoA. Co-transfection with a constitutively active form
of RhoA stimulated expression 11.6+/-1.7-fold over basal. Mutations through the
104 bp construct identified a C-rich element (C-79CCCTCCC-72) required for
responses to gastrin, PKC (protein kinase C) and L63RhoA (the constitutively
active form of human RhoA protein containing a glutamine-to-leucine substitution 
at position 63). EMSAs (electrophoretic-mobility-shift assays) using nuclear
extracts of control and gastrin-stimulated AGS-G(R) cells and a probe spanning
-86 to -64 bp revealed multiple binding proteins. There was no effect of gastrin 
on the pattern of binding. Supershift assays indicated that transcription factors
Sp1 and Sp3 bound the C-rich sequence. We conclude that gastrin stimulates Reg
expression via activation of PKC and RhoA, that a C-rich region (-79 to -72) is
critical for the response and that Sp-family transcription factors bind to this
region of the promoter.

PMCID: PMC1133845
PMID: 15109306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Oncogene. 2004 Jul 8;23(31):5340-9.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors activate INK4d gene through Sp1 site in its
promoter.

Yokota T(1), Matsuzaki Y, Miyazawa K, Zindy F, Roussel MF, Sakai T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular-Targeting Cancer Prevention, Graduate School of
Medical Science, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kawaramachi-Hirokoji, 
Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto 602-8566, Japan.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are known to arrest human tumor cells at
the G1 phase of the cell cycle and activate the cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor, p21(WAF1/Cip1). However, several studies have suggested the existence 
of a p21(WAF1/Cip1)-independent molecular pathway. We report here that HDAC
inhibitors activate a member of the INK4 family, the INK4d gene, causing G1 phase
arrest, in the human T cell leukemia cell line, Jurkat. One of the major
Trichostatin A (TSA)-responsive elements is a specific Sp1 binding site in the
INK4d promoter. Electrophoretic mobility-shift assay revealed that Sp1 and Sp3
can specifically interact with this Sp1 binding site. Furthermore, using
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, we demonstrated that HDAC2 was present in
the INK4d proximal promoter region in the absence, but not the presence, of TSA. 
Taken together, these results suggest that treatment with TSA transcriptionally
activates INK4d by releasing HDAC2 from the histone-DNA complex at the INK4d
promoter. Using a p21(WAF1/Cip1)-deleted human colorectal carcinoma cell line,
HCT116 p21 (-/-), we show that upregulation of p19(INK4d) by TSA is associated
with inhibition of cell proliferation. Moreover, mouse embryo fibroblasts lacking
Ink4d were resistant to the growth inhibitory effects of TSA as compared to their
wild-type counterpart. Our findings suggest that p19(INK4d) in addition to
p21(WAF1/Cip1) is an important molecular target of HDAC inhibitors inducing
growth arrest.

PMID: 15107822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 2;279(27):28789-97. Epub 2004 Apr 23.

Methylation in the core-promoter region of the chondromodulin-I gene determines
the cell-specific expression by regulating the binding of transcriptional
activator Sp3.

Aoyama T(1), Okamoto T, Nagayama S, Nishijo K, Ishibe T, Yasura K, Nakayama T,
Nakamura T, Toguchida J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Frontier Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, 53 Kawahara-cho,
Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Transcriptional regulation of cell- and stage-specific genes is a crucial process
in the development of mesenchymal tissues. Here we have investigated the
regulatory mechanism of the expression of the chondromodulin-I (ChM-I) gene, one 
of the chondrocyte-specific genes, in osteogenic cells using osteosarcoma (OS)
cells as a model. Methylation-specific sequence analyses revealed that the extent
of methylation in the core-promoter region of the ChM-I gene was correlated
inversely with the expression of the ChM-I gene in OS primary tumors and cell
lines. 5-Aza-deoxycytidine treatment induced the expression of the ChM-I gene in 
ChM-I-negative OS cell lines, and the induction of expression was associated
tightly with the demethylation of cytosine at -52 (C(-52)) in the middle of an
Sp1/3 binding site to which the Sp3, but not Sp1, bound. The replacement of
C(-52) with methyl-cytosine or thymine abrogated Sp3 binding and also the
transcription activity of the genomic fragment including C(-52). The inhibition
of Sp3 expression by small interfering RNA reduced the expression of the ChM-I
gene in ChM-I-positive normal chondrocytes, indicating Sp3 as a physiological
transcriptional activator of the ChM-I gene. These results suggest that the
methylation status of the core-promoter region is one of the mechanisms to
determine the cell-specific expression of the ChM-I gene through the regulation
of the binding of Sp3.

PMID: 15107420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Gene. 2004 Apr 28;331:83-94.

Genomic organization and transcriptional analysis of gonadotropin-regulated
testicular RNA helicase--GRTH/DDX25 gene.

Tsai-Morris CH(1), Lei S, Jiang Q, Sheng Y, Dufau ML.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Molecular Endocrinology, ERRB, National Institute of Child Health
and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Building 49-6A36, 49
Convent Dr., Bethesda, MD 20892-4510, USA. morrisch@mail.nih.gov

The gonadotropin-regulated testicular RNA helicase (GRTH/DDX25) is a new member
of the DEAD-box protein family. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that GRTH is
distantly related to other members of the family. GRTH is transcriptionally
up-regulated by gonadotropin, displays ATPase and RNA helicase activities, and
participates in germ cell development. To understand the regulation of GRTH gene 
expression, we investigated its structural organization and aspects of basal
transcriptional regulation at the promoter domain. The 20-kb mouse GRTH gene
contains 12 coding exons and all but one of its conserved helicase motifs are
contained within single exons. GRTH is a TATA-less gene with multiple
transcriptional start sites (TSS), GC-rich sequences and a promoter located
within -205/+63 bp of the gene. Sequences -852/-354 and -501/-354 bp caused
40-60% and >80% inhibition of transcription in expressing and non-expressing
cells, respectively. Transcriptional activity was recovered only in expressing
cells by the addition of upstream sequences (-1085/-852 bp). Sp1/Sp3 supported
basal transcriptional activity in all cell types, while E-box was an
activator-binding site only in non-expressing cells. These findings indicate that
a differential pattern of transcriptional regulation may be involved in the
control of GRTH gene expression in a cell-specific manner.

PMID: 15094194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Cell Signal. 2004 Jun;16(6):675-9.

Involvement of histone deacetylation in ras-induced down-regulation of the
metastasis suppressor RECK.

Chang HC(1), Liu LT, Hung WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung 807, Taiwan.

RECK is a membrane-anchored glycoprotein that may negatively regulate matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP) activity and inhibit tumor metastasis. Previous study
demonstrated that oncogenic ras inhibited RECK expression via an Sp1 binding site
in the RECK promoter. In this study, we investigated the molecular mechanism by
which ras inhibited RECK expression. Co-transfection assay showed that Sp1 and
Sp3 are transactivators, rather than repressors, for RECK gene. So, we tested
whether ras activation induced the binding of histone deacetylases (HDACs) to Sp1
to repress RECK expression. Our data showed Sp1-associated HDAC1 in cells was
increased after ras induction. By using DNA affinity precipitation assay, we
found that induction of oncogenic ras enhanced the binding of HDAC1 to the DNA
probe corresponding to the Sp1 site in the RECK promoter. Additionally, a HDAC
inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA) potently antagonized the inhibitory action of ras 
on RECK. The signaling pathway by which ras suppresses RECK was also addressed.
Induction of oncogenic ras activated extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK),
but not c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38(HOG) kinase in 2-12 cells. Addition
of PD98059 or overexpression of dominant-negative mutant of ERK2 indeed reversed 
ras-mediated inhibition of RECK promoter activity. Taken together, our results
suggest that oncogenic ras represses RECK expression via a histone deacetylation 
mechanism.

PMID: 15093608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jun 25;279(26):26948-58. Epub 2004 Apr 15.

The zinc finger transcription factor transforming growth factor beta-inducible
early gene-1 confers myeloid-specific activation of the leukocyte integrin CD11d 
promoter.

Noti JD(1), Johnson AK, Dillon JD.

Author information: 
(1)Guthrie Research Institute, Sayre, Pennsylvania 18840, USA.
noti_john@guthrie.org

CD11d encodes the alpha(D) subunit for a leukocyte integrin that is expressed on 
myeloid cells. In this study we show that the -100 to -20 region of the CD11d
promoter confers myeloid-specific activation of the CD11d promoter. Transforming 
growth factor beta-inducible early gene-1 (TIEG1) was isolated in a yeast
one-hybrid screen using the -100 to -20 region of the CD11d promoter as bait.
Purified GST.TIEG1 protein was able to bind within the -61 to -45 region that
overlaps a shorter binding site for Sp1. Transient overexpression of TIEG1
activated the CD11d promoter specifically in myeloid cells, whereas,
down-regulation of TIEG1 with small interfering TIEG1 RNA also down-regulated
expression of CD11d. In vivo, TIEG1 does not physically interact with Sp1.
Cotransfection and electrophoretic mobility shift analyses of TIEG1, Sp1, and Sp3
revealed that TIEG1 competes with these Sp proteins for binding to overlapping
sites in the CD11d promoter. Although TIEG1 and Sp1 are ubiquitously expressed in
myeloid and non-myeloid cells, chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed
differential occupancy of the CD11d promoter by these factors. In
undifferentiated myeloid and non-myeloid cells, occupancy of the CD11d promoter
by TIEG1 is similar. Upon differentiation of myeloid cells and subsequent
up-regulation of CD11d expression, TIEG1 occupancy increases. In contrast,
occupancy by TIEG1 remains low in non-myeloid cells exposed to phorbol ester. We 
propose that up-regulation of CD11d expression following differentiation of
myeloid cells is mediated through increased binding of TIEG1 binding to the CD11d
promoter.

PMID: 15087465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 2;279(27):27915-27. Epub 2004 Apr 15.

DNA methyltransferase 1 knock down induces gene expression by a mechanism
independent of DNA methylation and histone deacetylation.

Milutinovic S(1), Brown SE, Zhuang Q, Szyf M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, McGill University, 3655 Sir
William Osler Promenade, Montreal, Quebec H3G 1Y6, Canada.

DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) catalyzes the post-replication methylation of DNA
and is responsible for maintaining the DNA methylation pattern during cell
division. A long list of data supports a role for DNMT1 in cellular
transformation and inhibitors of DNMT1 were shown to have antitumorigenic
effects. It was long believed that DNMT1 promoted tumorigenesis by maintaining
the hypermethylated and silenced state of tumor suppressor genes. We have
previously shown that DNMT1 knock down by either antisense oligonucleotides
directed at DNMT1 or expressed antisense activates a number of genes involved in 
stress response and cell cycle arrest by a DNA methylation-independent mechanism.
In this report we demonstrate that antisense knock down of DNMT1 in human lung
carcinoma A549 and embryonal kidney HEK293 cells induces gene expression by a
mechanism that does not involve either of the known epigenomic mechanisms, DNA
methylation, histone acetylation, or histone methylation. The mechanism of
activation of the cell cycle inhibitor p21 and apoptosis inducer BIK by DNMT1
inhibition is independent of the mechanism of activation of the same genes by
histone deacetylase inhibition. We determine whether DNMT1 knock down activates
one of the nodal transcription activation pathways in the cell and demonstrate
that DNMT1 activates Sp1 response elements. This activation of Sp1 response does 
not involve an increase in either Sp1 or Sp3 protein levels in the cell or the
occupancy of the Sp1 elements with these proteins. The methylation-independent
regulation of Sp1 elements by DNMT1 unravels a novel function for DNMT1 in gene
regulation. DNA methylation was believed to be a mechanism for suppression of
CG-rich Sp1-bearing promoters. Our data suggest a fundamentally different and
surprising role for DNMT1 regulation of CG-rich genes by a mechanism independent 
of DNA methylation and histone acetylation. The implications of our data on the
biological roles of DNMT1 and the therapeutic potential of DNMT1 inhibitors as
anticancer agents are discussed.

PMID: 15087453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 May 7;317(3):801-10.

Regulation of the SM-20 prolyl hydroxylase gene in smooth muscle cells.

Menzies K(1), Liu B, Kim WJ, Moschella MC, Taubman MB.

Author information: 
(1)The Zena and Michael A. Wiener Cardiovascular Institute, Department of
Medicine, The Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA.

SM-20 encodes an intracellular prolyl hydroxylase that acts on hypoxia inducible 
factor (HIF)-1alpha, targeting it for proteasomal degradation. By decreasing
HIF-alpha, SM-20 is thought to modulate the expression of hypoxia-regulated
genes. SM-20 expression in the arterial wall is restricted to smooth muscle
cells, which play a critical role in atherosclerosis and arterial injury. To
further elucidate the regulation of SM-20 in smooth muscle, we cloned and
analyzed the rat SM-20 promoter. In transient transfections, the SM-20 promoter
displayed approximately 6-fold greater activity in smooth muscle cells vs.
fibroblasts. Deletion analysis and electrophoretic mobility shift assays
demonstrated that SM-20 transcription was regulated by two Sp1/Sp3 sites. A shift
in binding to the Sp1/Sp3 sites, a decrease in Sp1 and Sp3 protein levels, and
the emergence of a lower molecular weight form of Sp1 were seen in serum-deprived
or post-confluent SMC, suggesting that SM-20 is regulated during smooth muscle
cell differentiation.

PMID: 15081411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Clin Lab Immunol. 2003;52:23-40.

Antibodies to Acinetobacter bacteria and bovine brain peptides, measured in
bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) in an attempt to develop an ante-mortem
test.

Wilson C(1), Hughes LE, Rashid T, Ebringer A, Bansal S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Health and Life Sciences, King's College London, London, UK.

Bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) is a neurological disease of cattle.
Antibody responses to Acinetobacter radioresistens and six other bacteria, as
well as to bovine myelin basic protein and bovine neurofilaments were measured in
128 BSE positive animals, 63 BSE negative animals and 64 healthy control animals.
Animals positive for BSE had the highest levels of antibodies to Acinetobacter
radioresistens (p < 0.0001) and also autoantibodies to bovine myelin basic
protein (p < 0.0001) and bovine neurofilaments (p < 0.0001). In an endeavour to
develop an antemortem test for BSE, 12 different strains of Acinetobacter were
further tested in a MAN (myelin-Acinetobacter-neurofilament) assay involving 28
BSE positive and 18 BSE negative animals and defined bovine brain peptides. Five 
out of the 12 Acinetobacter bacteria tested [Acinetobacter (sp3), A. haemolyticus
(sp4), A. johnsonii (sp7), A. lwoffii (sp8) and Acinetobacter (sp9)] gave 100%
sensitivity and 100% specificity for detecting BSE. The highest anti-bacterial
antibody level compared to controls was obtained with A. johnsonii. Further field
studies are required to determine the validity of the MAN assay in detecting
animals affected with BSE.

PMID: 15079887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Anticancer Drugs. 2004 Apr;15(4):357-62.

Down-regulation of human topoisomerase IIalpha correlates with altered expression
of transcriptional regulators NF-YA and Sp1.

Allen KA(1), Williams AO, Isaacs RJ, Stowell KM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular BioSciences, Massey University, Palmerston North, New
Zealand.

Topoisomerase IIalpha (Topo IIalpha) is an essential nuclear enzyme with a role
in the maintenance of DNA topology. Topo IIalpha is a target for several
anticancer drugs and the levels of activity of this enzyme have been implicated
in the development of drug resistance. Our objective was to identify regulatory
transcription factors involved in drug-induced down-regulation of Topo IIalpha. A
breast cancer cell line was subjected to a pulsed exposure of doxorubicin and
resistant clones propagated. Whole-cell extracts were studied by immunoblotting
and RT-PCR for drug-induced changes in the amounts Topo IIalpha, Sp1, Sp3, NF-Y
and MDR1. Topo IIalpha levels were reduced in six out of eight cell lines. Of
these, three showed concomitant changes in the expression of Sp1 and NF-YA. Thus,
we provide the first evidence for roles of Sp1 and NF-Y in bringing about the
drug-induced down-regulation of Topo IIalpha gene expression.

PMID: 15057140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jun 18;279(25):26768-79. Epub 2004 Mar 30.

Trans-activators regulating neuronal glucose transporter isoform-3 gene
expression in mammalian neurons.

Rajakumar A(1), Thamotharan S, Raychaudhuri N, Menon RK, Devaskar SU.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neonatology and Developmental Biology, Department of Pediatrics,
David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, California 90095-1752, USA.

The murine facilitative glucose transporter isoform 3 is developmentally
regulated and is predominantly expressed in neurons. By employing the primer
extension assay, the transcription start site of the murine Glut 3 gene in the
brain was localized to -305 bp 5' to the ATG translation start codon. Transient
transfection assays in N2A neuroblasts using murine GLUT3-luciferase reporter
constructs mapped enhancer activities to two regions located at -203 to -177 and 
-104 to -29 bp flanking a previously described repressor element (-137 to -130
bp). Dephosphorylated Sp1 and Sp3 proteins from the 1- and 21-day-old mouse brain
nuclear extracts bound the repressor elements, whereas both dephosphorylated and 
phosphorylated cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB) in N2A, 1- and
21-day-old mouse brain nuclear extracts bound the 5'-enhancer cis-elements (-187 
to -180 bp) of the Glut 3 gene, and the Y box protein MSY-1 bound the sense
strand of the -83- to -69-bp region. Sp3, CREB, and MSY-1 binding to the GLUT 3
DNA was confirmed by the chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, whereas CREB and
MSY-1 interaction was detected by the co-immunoprecipitation assay. Furthermore, 
small interference RNA targeted at CREB in N2A cells decreased endogenous CREB
concentrations, and CREB mediated GLUT 3 transcription. Thus, in the murine brain
similar to the N2A cells, phosphorylated CREB and MSY-1 bound the Glut 3 gene
trans-activating the expression in neurons, whereas Sp1/Sp3 bound the repressor
elements. We speculate that phosphorylated CREB and Sp3 also interacted to bring 
about GLUT 3 expression in response to development/cell differentiation and
neurotransmission.

PMID: 15054091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Apr 23;317(1):235-43.

SP-transcription factors are involved in basal MVP promoter activity and its
stimulation by HDAC inhibitors.

Steiner E(1), Holzmann K, Pirker C, Elbling L, Micksche M, Berger W.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Applied and Experimental Oncology, Institute of Cancer Research,
Medical University Vienna, Borschkegasse 8a, A-1090 Vienna, Austria.

The major vault protein (MVP) has been implicated in multidrug resistance,
cellular transport, and malignant transformation. In this study we aimed to
identify crucial MVP promoter elements that regulate MVP expression. By mutation 
as well as deletion analysis a conserved proximal GC-box element was demonstrated
to be essential for basal human MVP promoter transactivation. Binding of
Sp-family transcription factors but not AP2 to this element in vitro and in vivo 
was shown by EMSA and ChIP assays, respectively. Inhibition of GC-box binding by 
a dominant-negative Sp1-variant and by mithramycin A distinctly attenuated MVP
promoter activity. In Sp-null Drosophila cells, the silent human MVP promoter was
transactivated by several human Sp-family members. In human cells the MVP
promoter was potently stimulated by the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors
butyrate (NaB) and trichostatin A (TSA), resulting in enhanced MVP expression.
This stimulation was substantially decreased by mutation of the single GC-box and
by application of mithramycin A. Treatment with HDAC inhibitors led to a distinct
decrease of Sp1 but increase of Sp3 binding in vivo to the respective promoter
sequence as demonstrated by ChIP assays. Summarising, this study identifies
variations in Sp-transcription factor binding to a single proximal GC-box element
as critical for basal MVP promoter activation and its stimulation by HDAC
inhibitors.

PMID: 15047174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2004 Aug;31(2):234-40. Epub 2004 Mar 25.

Isoprenoid-mediated control of SMAD3 expression in a cultured model of cystic
fibrosis epithelial cells.

Lee JY(1), Elmer HL, Ross KR, Kelley TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Case Western Reserve University, 8th floor BRB,
10900 Euclid Ave., Cleveland, OH 44106-4948, USA.

Several cellular signaling alterations have been identified in cystic fibrosis
(CF) epithelium. One of these alterations is reduced SMAD3 protein expression and
a corresponding reduction in SMAD3-mediated transforming growth factor-beta1
(TGF-beta1) signaling in CF epithelial cells compared with wild-type (wt)
controls. The goal of this study was to identify a mechanism leading to reduced
SMAD3 protein expression in CF epithelium. Based on previous work demonstrating
isoprenoid-mediated regulation of CF-related alterations in signal transducer and
activator of transcription-1 (Stat1) and inducible nitric oxide synthase (NOS2)
expression, the hypothesis of this study is that inhibition of
isoprenoid-dependent signaling will restore SMAD3 expression and signaling in a
model of CF epithelium. Presented data will demonstrate that inhibition of both
farnesyl and geranylgeranyl transferase activities partially restores
SMAD3-mediated TGF-beta1 signaling and normalizes SMAD3 protein expression in one
cultured model of CF cells. Analysis of the human SMAD3 promoter demonstrates
that isoprenoid regulation of SMAD3 expression is dependent on Sp1/Sp3 activity, 
although farnesyl-mediated pathways may be acting through a secondary mechanism
as well. Isoprenoid-mediated regulation of SMAD3 expression, coupled with
previous data demonstrating isoprenoid control of Stat1 and NOS2 expression,
suggest that the isoprenoid/cholesterol synthesis pathway is a critical
intermediate in influencing CF-related cell signaling changes.

PMID: 15044214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2004 Aug;31(2):209-15. Epub 2004 Mar 23.

The PAI-1 gene as a direct target of endothelial PAS domain protein-1 in
adenocarcinoma A549 cells.

Sato M(1), Tanaka T, Maemura K, Uchiyama T, Sato H, Maeno T, Suga T, Iso T,
Ohyama Y, Arai M, Tamura J, Sakamoto H, Nagai R, Kurabayashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Gunma University School of Medicine,
Japan.

Endothelial PAS domain protein-1 (EPAS1) regulates transcription of the genes
encoding erythropoietin and vascular endothelial growth factor, which are
important for maintaining oxygen homeostasis. We have previously shown that
plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) gene expression is induced by hypoxia. 
In this study, we sought to determine whether PAI-1 gene expression is directly
regulated by EPAS1 in cancer cells because activities of proteases and their
inhibitors are tightly regulated for tumor invasion. Hypoxia increased the PAI-1 
mRNA levels in human adenocarcinoma A549 cells. Overexpression of EPAS1
significantly increased the PAI-1 mRNA and protein levels. Transient transfection
assays revealed that EPAS1 increased PAI-1 gene transcription through a sequence 
containing 5'-CACGTACA-3' located at -194 (we refer to it as site HREPAI-1) and
GT-box located at -78. Electrophoretic gel mobility shift assays revealed that
HREPAI-1 serves as a binding site for EPAS1, and Sp1 constitutively binds to
GT-box. In conclusion, PAI-1 expression is induced by EPAS1 through HREPAI-1 and 
through an Sp1-binding site. These results indicate that the PAI-1 gene is a
direct target of EPAS1 and suggest the role of EPAS1 and Sp1 in the hypoxic
response of cancer cells.

PMID: 15039136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Mol Model. 2004 Jun;10(3):178-84. Epub 2004 Mar 16.

Normal coordinate analyses of 3,5-dichlorophenylcyanamide.

Badawi HM(1), Förner W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals, 31261
Dhahran, Saudi Arabia. hbadawi@kfupm.edu.sa

The structure of 3,5-dichlorophenylcyanamide c-C6H3Cl2-NHCN was investigated by
DFT-B3LYP and ab initio MP2 calculations with the 6-311+G** basis set. The planar
to perpendicular rotational barrier was calculated to be of about 5 kcal mol(-1) 
at both levels of calculation. The stability of the planar structure of the
molecule was explained on the basis of conjugation effects between the
cyanamide-NHCN moiety and the phenyl c-C6H5 ring in agreement with earlier NMR
results. The CNC and the HNC bond angles were calculated to be about 120 degrees 
especially by MP2 calculation, which is consistent with sp2 (planar -NH-CN group)
and not sp3 (pyramidal -NH-CN group) structure. The vibrational frequencies of
the d0, d1 and d3 species of 3,5-dichlorophenylcyanamide and the potential energy
distributions among symmetry coordinates of the normal modes of the parent
molecule were computed at the DFT-B3LYP level. The calculated infrared and Raman 
spectra of the molecule were plotted. Complete vibrational assignments were made 
on the basis of isotopic substitution and normal coordinate calculations.

PMID: 15024632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Biol Chem. 2004 May 14;279(20):21021-8. Epub 2004 Mar 15.

Dual functions of transcription factors, transforming growth
factor-beta-inducible early gene (TIEG)2 and Sp3, are mediated by CACCC element
and Sp1 sites of human monoamine oxidase (MAO) B gene.

Ou XM(1), Chen K, Shih JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Pharmacy,
University of Southern California, 1985 Zonal Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

Monoamine oxidases (MAO) A and B catalyze the oxidative deamination of many
biogenic and dietary amines. Abnormal expression of MAO has been implicated in
several psychiatric and neurodegenerative disorders. Human MAO B core promoter
(-246 to -99 region) consists of CACCC element flanked by two clusters of
overlapping Sp1 sites. Here, we show that cotransfection with transforming growth
factor (TGF)-beta-inducible early gene (TIEG)2 increased MAO B gene expression at
promoter, mRNA, protein, and catalytic activity levels in both SH-SY5Y and HepG2 
cells. Mutation of the CACCC element increased the MAO B promoter activity, and
cotransfection with TIEG2 further increased the promoter activity, suggesting
that CACCC was a repressor element. This increase was reduced when the proximal
Sp1 overlapping sites was mutated. Similar interactions were found with Sp3.
These results showed that TIEG2 and Sp3 were repressors at the CACCC element but 
were activators at proximal Sp1 overlapping sites of MAO B. Gel-shift and
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed that TIEG2 and Sp3 bound directly to 
CACCC element and the proximal Sp1 sites in both synthetic oligonucleotides and
natural MAO B core promoter. TIEG2 had a higher affinity to Sp1 sites than CACCC 
element, whereas Sp3 had an equal affinity to both elements. Thus, TIEG2 was an
activator, but Sp3 had no effect on MAO B gene expression. This study provides
new insights into MAO B gene expression and illustrates the complexity of gene
regulation.

PMID: 15024015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Biochem J. 2004 Jun 15;380(Pt 3):705-13.

Epigenetic modifications affect Dnmt3L expression.

Aapola U(1), Mäenpää K, Kaipia A, Peterson P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Institute of Medical Technology, Tampere University
Hospital, University of Tampere, 33014 Tampere, Finland. ulla.aapola@uta.fi

Imprinted genes are expressed from a single allele due to differential
methylation of maternal or paternal alleles during gametogenesis. Dnmt3L (DNA
cytosine-5-methyltransferase 3 like), a member of de novo methyltransferase Dnmt3
protein family, is a regulator of maternal imprinting. In the present study, we
have characterized the promoter region of the mouse Dnmt3L gene. Transient
transfection assays performed with 5'-deletion promoter constructs indicated a
minimal promoter area within 440 bp upstream from the translational start site.
Longer promoter constructs showed decreased activity, suggesting the presence of 
repressor elements within the upstream sequences. According to electrophoretic
mobility-shift assays and mutation analysis, the minimal promoter region
contained four functional binding sites for the Sp1 (specificity protein 1)
family of transcription factors, Sp1 and Sp3. In vitro methylation of Dnmt3L
promoter constructs decreased the transcriptional activity significantly,
demonstrating down-regulation by cytosine methylation. This was supported by the 
results from bisulphite sequencing and real-time quantitative reverse
transcriptase-PCR analysis of different mouse cell lines and tissues. In testis
and embryonic stem cells showing strong Dnmt3L expression, all CpG sites studied 
were fully unmethylated, whereas non-expressive cell lines and tissues with
lesser Dnmt3L expression showed complete or diverse CpG methylation levels.
Treatment of Dnmt3L non-expressive cell lines with deacetylase inhibitor
trichostatin A and methyltransferase inhibitor 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine induced the
expression of Dnmt3L mRNA. Furthermore, we show that the repressional effect of
longer promoter fragments was also relieved by these inhibitors, altogether
indicating an epigenetic control for Dnmt3L gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC1224216
PMID: 15015937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Endocrinology. 2004 Jun;145(6):2713-20. Epub 2004 Mar 4.

Contrasting mammalian parathyroid hormone (PTH) promoters: nuclear factor-Y binds
to a deoxyribonucleic acid element unique to the human PTH promoter and acts as a
transcriptional enhancer.

Alimov AP(1), Langub MC, Malluche HH, Park-Sarge OK, Koszewski NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Bone and Mineral Metabolism, University of Kentucky
Medical Center, Room MN562, 800 Rose Street, Lexington, Kentucky 40536-0298, USA.

The identification of a highly conserved specificity protein 1 (Sp1) DNA element 
in mammalian PTH promoters was recently reported. However, the presence of a
novel DNA-binding complex was subsequently observed exclusively with the human
PTH (hPTH) Sp1 element in mobility shift studies. Point mutations in the hPTH Sp1
element revealed the factor recognized a CAAT-like sequence resulting from a
single nucleotide difference unique to the human sequence relative to other
mammalian promoters. A consensus nuclear factor Y (NF-Y) element was able to
specifically compete for formation of the novel complex, whereas antiserum
directed against the B-subunit of NF-Y supershifted the complex without
disturbing binding by the Sp3/Sp1 proteins. Moreover, immunocytochemistry
confirmed the nuclear localization of NF-Y in parathyroid gland cells. Transient 
expression of a dominant negative form of NF-Y impaired basal hPTH promoter
activity in opossum kidney cells. Studies in Drosophila SL2 cells revealed that
an intact NF-Y complex was required to strongly activate transcription from the
hPTH promoter, and mutational analysis confirmed the identity of the NF-Y and Sp1
DNA elements. Finally, coexpression studies in SL2 cells indicated that NF-Y and 
Sp1 competed for binding to their adjoining sites in the hPTH promoter. In
summary, an NF-Y enhancer DNA element has been identified that is uniquely
positioned in the hPTH promoter and partially overlaps with the species-conserved
Sp1 element. Binding appears to be mutually exclusive by the two transcription
factors to this site and suggests that separate signaling pathways may be using
this DNA locus to enhance transcription of the hPTH gene.

PMID: 15001549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Jul;287(1):E128-35. Epub 2004 Mar 2.

Involvement of Sp1 and SREBP-1a in transcriptional activation of the LDL receptor
gene by insulin and LH in cultured porcine granulosa-luteal cells.

Sekar N(1), Veldhuis JD.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Research Unit, Mayo Clinic and Foundation, 200 First St. SW,
Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Luteinizing hormone (LH) and insulin stimulate transcriptional activity of the
porcine low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor (LDLR) promoter supra-additively
in primary cultures of granulosa-luteal cells. The mechanistic basis of this
bihormonal interaction is unknown. The pig LDLR gene promoter includes three
putative Sp1/Sp3-binding sites and one sterol response element (SRE) site 5'
upstream to the transcriptional start site. To assess the role of SRE-binding
protein (SREBP) in LDLR gene regulation, swine granulosa-luteal cells were
cotransfected with CMV/SREBP-1a or SREBP-2 and the pLDLR1076/luc promoter.
SREBP-1a and SREBP-2 stimulated LDLR gene transcription eight- and fourfold,
respectively. LH alone augmented stimulation by SREBP-1 twofold. Conversely,
cotransfection of a dominant-negative mutant form of SREBP-1a repressed basal and
hormonally stimulated LDLR promoter activity by >80% (P < 0.01). Mutation of the 
SRE -167 ATCACCCCATG -157 to -167 ATCACCgCATG -157 bp decreased basal expression 
by 50% and LH + insulin- and LH + IGF-I-stimulated transcriptional activity by
80% and >90%, respectively (both P < 0.01). Mutations within each of the three
flanking putative Sp1/Sp3 sites at -216/-211, -201/-196, and -151/-146 bp in the 
LDLR gene promoter also reduced basal activity (by >85%) and hormonal
responsiveness (>95%, P < 0.05). EMSA confirmed that presumptive SRE-1 and
Sp1/Sp3 elements bind respective peptides. Mithramycin, an inhibitor of Sp1/Sp3
protein(s) binding, blocked hormonally induced LDLR promoter expression by 80%.
Basal transcription and supra-additive stimulation of porcine LDLR gene
transcription by LH and insulin in granulosa-luteal cells require SREBP-1a and
Sp1/Sp3-binding elements.

PMID: 14998783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Am Chem Soc. 2004 Mar 10;126(9):2708-9.

Efficient stereoselective alkenylation through a homolytic domino reaction
involving a 1,5 sulfur-to-carbon translocation.

Korshin EE(1), Bilokin YV, Zheng H, Bachi MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organic Chemistry, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

An effective method for cis-stereoselective attachment of functionalized alkenyl 
appendages to sp3 carbon is reported. This method is based on a free-radical
process, involving a sequence of addition-elimination steps, resulting in alkenyl
group transposition from divalent sulfur to a prochiral carbon radical. Absolute 
stereoselectivity is secured since the new carbon-carbon bond is formed in a
ring-closure reaction leading to a bridged bicyclic carbon-centered radical
intermediate. The latter undergoes beta-scission of the C-S bond, leaving the
alkenyl side chain in its predetermined position while releasing a thiyl radical.
This thiyl radical is trapped by tri-n-butylstyryltin, affording a
(styrylsulfanyl)methyl side chain and a tri-n-butyltin radical that continues the
chain. When 2-(alkenylsulfanyl)methyl-4-bromo(or iodo)pyrrolidines were used as
starting materials 2,4-cis-disubstituted
4-alkenyl-2-(styrylsulfanyl)methylpyrrolidines were obtained as products (70-90% 
yield). Tri-n-butylstyryltin was used rather then the more common n-Bu3SnH as tin
radicals sources because the latter led predominantly to bridged bicyclic
3-thia-6-azabicyclo[3.2.1]octanes (up to 77% yield). An additional advantage of
using tri-n-butylstyryltin derives from the discovery that the resulting
styrylsulfide functionality is an excellent synthetic equivalent to the formyl
group. Thus, using a Pummerer-type oxidative desulfurization,
4-cis-alkenyl-proline aldehydes were obtained.

PMID: 14995181  [PubMed]


124. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 May;18(5):1144-57. Epub 2004 Feb 26.

GATA-4 and GATA-6 modulate tissue-specific transcription of the human gene for
P450c17 by direct interaction with Sp1.

Flück CE(1), Miller WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Building MR IV, Room 207, University of California
San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143-0978, USA.

Cytochrome P450c17 catalyzes steroidogenic 17alpha-hydroxylase and 17,20 lyase
activities. Expression of the gene for P450c17 is cAMP dependent, tissue
specific, developmentally programmed, and varies among species. Binding of Sp1,
Sp3, and NF1-C (nuclear factor 1-C) to the first 227 bp of 5'flanking DNA
(-227/LUC) is crucial for basal transcription in human NCI-H295A adrenal cells.
Human placental JEG-3 cells contain Sp1, Sp3, and NF1, but do not express
-227/LUC, even when transfected with a vector expressing steroidogenic factor 1
(SF-1). Therefore, other factors are essential for basal expression of P450c17.
Deoxyribonuclease I footprinting and EMSAs identified a GATA consensus site at
-64/-58 and an SF-1 site at -58/-50. RT-PCR identified GATA-4, GATA-6, and SF-1
in NCI-H295A cells and GATA-2 and GATA-3, but not GATA-4, GATA-6, or SF-1 in
JEG-3 cells. Cotransfection of either GATA-4 or GATA-6 without SF-1 activated
-227/LUC in JEG-3 cells, but cotransfection of GATA-2 or GATA-3 with or without
SF-1 did not. Surprisingly, mutation of the GATA binding site in -227/LUC
increased GATA-4 or GATA-6 induced activity, whereas mutation of the Sp1/Sp3 site
decreased it. Furthermore, promoter constructs including the GATA site, but
excluding the Sp1/Sp3 site at -196/-188, were not activated by GATA-4 or GATA-6, 
suggesting an interaction between Sp1/Sp3 and GATA-4 or GATA-6.
Glutathione-S-transferase pull-down experiments and coimmunoprecipitation
demonstrated interaction between GATA-4 or GATA-6 and Sp1, but not Sp3. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays confirmed that this GATA-4/6 interaction with Sp1
occurred at the Sp site in the P450c17 promoter in NCI-H295A cells. Demethylation
with 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine permitted JEG-3 cells to express endogenous P450c17,
SF-1, GATA-4, GATA-6, and transfected -227/LUC. Thus, GATA-4 or GATA-6 and Sp1
together regulate expression of P450c17 in adrenal NCI-H295A cells and
methylation of P450c17, GATA-4 and GATA-6 silence the expression of P450c17 in
placental JEG-3 cells.

PMID: 14988427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Am Chem Soc. 2004 Mar 3;126(8):2312-3.

Multifunctional behavior by a Bis-(phosphinimino)methanide ligand: eta 2- vs eta 
3-coordination vs Bronsted basicity.

Bibal C(1), Pink M, Smurnyy YD, Tomaszewski J, Caulton KG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Molecular Structure Center, Indiana University,
Bloomington, Indiana 47405, USA.

The reaction of [(Cymene)RuCl2]2 with the chelate LiHC(PPh2NPh)2 occurs to remove
both chloride ligands, to furnish a cationic Ru(II) complex with the monoanionic 
ligand bound eta3, through two N and an sp3 carbon. This cation is also produced 
from the conjugate acid of the ligand H2C(PPh2NPh)2 because this molecule can
serve as a Brønsted base, to deprotonate the acidic carbon of another molecule of
H2C(PPh2NPh)2. DFT calculations show an energy surface where
(Cymene)RuHC(PPh2NPh)2L is more stable with a Ru-CH(PPh2NPh)2 bond and with L =
Cl- or MeCN not coordinated to Ru, than to an eta2-HC(PPh2NPh)2 structure with
coordinated L; this is tested experimentally. The greater tendency for this
ligand to be coordinated eta3 vs analogous diketiminates is discussed. The
nucleophilicity of Cgamma in structure 1, vs that of donors L = Cl- or MeCN, is
evaluated to understand the preference of the bis(phosphinimino)methanide to be
bidentate or tridentate.

PMID: 14982428  [PubMed]


126. Free Radic Biol Med. 2004 Mar 1;36(5):641-56.

Evidence for intriguingly complex transcription of human thioredoxin reductase 1.

Rundlöf AK(1), Janard M, Miranda-Vizuete A, Arnér ES.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Nobel Institute for Biochemistry, Department of Medical Biochemistry
and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.

Human thioredoxin reductase 1 (TrxR1, the TXNRD1 gene product) is a ubiquitously 
expressed selenoprotein with many important redox regulatory functions. In this
study, we have further characterized the recently identified core promoter region
of TXNRD1. One critical Sp1/Sp3 site was found to be important in A549 and HeLa
cells, whereas another Sp1/Sp3 site and one Oct1 site bound transcription factors
but were, nonetheless, dispensable for transcription. We also experimentally
identified several 5'-region TXNRD1 transcript variants using 5'-RACE with cDNA
derived from different tissues, and we analyzed all available TXNRD1-derived EST 
sequences. The results show that the core promoter governs transcription of the
clear majority of TXNRD1 transcripts but also that alternative promoters may be
activated under rare conditions or in specific cell types. Furthermore, extensive
alternative splicing occured in the 5' region of TXNRD1. In total, 21 different
transcripts were identified, potentially encoding five isoforms of TrxR1 carrying
alternative N-terminal domains. One isoform encompassed a glutaredoxin domain,
whereas another encoded a predicted mitochondrial localization signal. These
results reveal that the human thioredoxin system is intriguingly complex.
Cell-specific transcription of the TXNRD1 gene encoding different isoforms of
TrxR1 must be taken into account to fully understand the functions of the human
thioredoxin system.

PMID: 14980707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Biochem J. 2004 Jun 15;380(Pt 3):735-47.

Co-operative interactions between NFAT (nuclear factor of activated T cells) c1
and the zinc finger transcription factors Sp1/Sp3 and Egr-1 regulate MT1-MMP
(membrane type 1 matrix metalloproteinase) transcription by glomerular mesangial 
cells.

Alfonso-Jaume MA(1), Mahimkar R, Lovett DH.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Medicine, San Francisco VAMC/University of California, 111J 
Medical Service, 4150 Clement Street, San Francisco, CA 94121, USA.

The transition of normally quiescent glomerular MCs (mesangial cells) to a highly
proliferative phenotype with characteristics of myofibroblasts is a process
commonly observed in inflammatory diseases affecting the renal glomerulus, the
ultimate result of which is glomerulosclerosis. Generation of proteolytically
active MMP (matrix metalloproteinase)-2 by the membrane-associated membrane type 
1 (MT1)-MMP is responsible for the transition of mesangial cells to the
myofibroblast phenotype [Turck, Pollock, Lee, Marti and Lovett (1996) J. Biol.
Chem. 271, 15074-15083]. In the present study, we show that the expression of
MT1-MMP within the context of MCs is mediated by three discrete cis -acting
elements: a proximal non-canonical Sp1 site that preferentially binds Sp1; an
overlapping Sp1/Egr-1-binding site that preferentially binds Egr-1; and a more
distal binding site for the NFAT (nuclear factor of activated T cells) that binds
the NFAT c1 isoform present in MC nuclear extracts. Transfection with an NFAT c1 
expression plasmid, or activation of calcineurin with a calcium ionophore,
yielded major increases in NFAT c1 nuclear DNA-binding activity, MT1-MMP
transcription and protein synthesis, which were additive with the lower levels of
transactivation provided by the proximal Sp1 and the overlapping Sp1/Egr-1 sites.
Specific binding of NFAT c1 to the MT1-MMP promoter was confirmed by chromatin
immunoprecipitation studies, while MT1-MMP expression was suppressed by treatment
with the calcineurin inhibitor, cyclosporin A. These studies are the first
demonstration that a specific NFAT isoform enhances transcription of an MMP
(MT1-MMP) that plays a major role in the proteolytic events that are a dominant
feature of acute glomerular inflammation. Suppression of MT1-MMP by commonly used
calcineurin inhibitors may play a role in the development of renal fibrosis
following renal transplantation.

PMCID: PMC1224202
PMID: 14979875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Blood. 2004 Jul 15;104(2):495-501. Epub 2004 Feb 19.

Imatinib mesylate (STI571) decreases the vascular endothelial growth factor
plasma concentration in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia.

Legros L(1), Bourcier C, Jacquel A, Mahon FX, Cassuto JP, Auberger P, Pagès G.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Hématologie, Hôpital Archet 1, 151, Route de Saint Antoine de
Ginestière, BP 3079, 06202 Nice Cedex 2, France. legros@unice.fr

Increased angiogenesis in bone marrow (BM) is one of the characteristics of
chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), a clonal myeloproliferative disorder that
expresses a chimeric Bcr/Abl protein. Recently, the therapeutic strategy in CML
has been totally modified with the development of a new drug: imatinib mesylate
(STI571), a specific inhibitor of Bcr/Abl tyrosine kinase activity. The aim of
our study was to determine, in patients with CML, the capacity of imatinib
mesylate to modulate one of the most potent regulators of angiogenesis, the
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). In newly diagnosed CML, we observed
significantly increased VEGF secretion by CML BM cells and significantly
increased VEGF plasma concentrations. We showed that low plasma VEGF
concentrations could be one of the characteristics of complete cytogenetic
remission. To understand the molecular mechanisms leading to the inhibition of
VEGF production by imatinib, we focused our experiments on the human cell line
K562, which is Bcr/Abl positive. We demonstrated that imatinib inhibits VEGF gene
transcription by targeting the Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors. Taken together,
our results highlight the potential prognostic value of VEGF concentrations in
evaluating the evolution of CML patients treated with imatinib.

PMID: 14976047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 23;279(17):17449-58. Epub 2004 Feb 16.

NF-kappaB site interacts with Sp factors and up-regulates the NR1 promoter during
neuronal differentiation.

Liu A(1), Hoffman PW, Lu W, Bai G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Dental School, Program in Neuroscience, and
Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Maryland, Baltimore,
Maryland 21201, USA.

The NR1 gene undergoes induction in neurogenesis mainly via promoter
de-repression, and up-regulation during neuronal differentiation by undefined
mechanism(s). Here, we show that in the distal region the NR1 promoter has an
active NF-kappaB site sharing the consensus with the immunoglobulin (Ig)/human
immunodeficiency virus NF-kappaB site. Mutation of this site significantly
reduced NR1 promoter up-regulation during neuronal differentiation of P19 cells. 
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed that P19 nuclei constitutively
contained p50 and that neuronal differentiation not only increased nuclear p50
but also induced p65 nuclear translocation. Responding to this change was an
up-regulation of NF-kappaB-dependent promoter activity. However, inhibition of
NF-kappaB nuclear translocation by an IkappaBalpha super-repressor or decoy DNA
only moderately inhibited NR1 promoter up-regulation. Interestingly, the NR1
NF-kappaB site strongly interacted with Sp3/Sp1, instead of NF-kappaB factors, in
P19 nuclear extracts. This interaction was reduced for Sp3 following neuronal
differentiation, accompanied by dynamic expression of Sp factors. Cotransfection 
of Sp factors (Sp1, 3, or 4) upregulated the NR1 NF-kappaB site dramatically in
differentiated neurons, but only moderately in undifferentiated P19 cells. This
up-regulation was strong for Sp1 in differentiated cells and for Sp3 in
undifferentiated cells. Chromatin-immunoprecipitation assays further demonstrated
that Sp1 and Sp3 interacted with the NR1 NF-kappaB site in situ, and Sp3 lost its
interaction after neuronal differentiation. We conclude that the NF-kappaB site
positively regulates the NR1 promoter during neuronal differentiation via
interacting mainly with Sp factors and neuronal differentiation reduces the
effect of Sp3 factor on this site.

PMID: 14970236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Am Chem Soc. 2004 Feb 18;126(6):1618-9.

Th-C60F24.

Denisenko NI(1), Troyanov SI, Popov AA, Kuvychko IV, Zemva B, Kemnitz E, Strauss 
SH, Boltalina OV.

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry Department, Moscow State University, Moscow 119992, Russia.

The regioselective fluorination of Th-C60Br24 with XeF2 in anhydrous HF at 25
degrees C produced Th-C60F24, which is isostructural with Th-C60Br24. The
compound, the first example of a fluorofullerene with a noncontiguous pattern of 
F-bearing sp3 C atoms, was characterized by EI and ESI mass spectrometry and by
19F NMR (single resonance at delta -144 for all 24 F atoms), 13C NMR (two
resonances at delta 145.9 (C=C) and delta 83.5 (C-F; JCF = 212 Hz), and FTIR
spectroscopy. DFT calculations revealed that at least two other isomers of C60F24
are more stable than Th-C60F24 by >/=280 kJ mol-1, demonstrating that Th-C60F24
is a kinetically stable fluorofullerene.

PMID: 14871077  [PubMed]


131. Clin Dev Immunol. 2003 Jun-Dec;10(2-4):71-81.

Ablation of NK cell function during tumor growth favors Type 2-associated
macrophages, leading to suppressed CTL generation.

Geldhof AB(1), van Ginderachter JA, Liu Y, Noël W, de Baetselier P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Immunology, Free University of Brussels, Flemish
Interuniversity Institute for Biotechnology, B-1640 St.-Genesius Rode, Belgium.
ageldhof@cntnl.jnj.com

Several reports describe regulatory interactions between NK cells and CTLs. We
addressed the issue of NK participation in the early anti-tumor defense by
inoculating alpha-ASGM-1 treated mice with BW-Sp3 T lymphoma. Rejection of BW-Sp3
depends on strong CTL responses. Our results demonstrated that (i) NK cells are a
prerequisite for efficient CTL generation and (ii) the absence of NK cells favors
the outgrowth of alternatively activated macrophages that can suppress CTL
restimulation. In vitro studies demonstrate that in splenic cultures from
NK-deficient, tumor-bearing mice, the presence of alternatively activated
macrophages correlates with a lack of Type 1 cytokines, while the production of
Type 2 cytokines is promoted. Provision of the Type 1 cytokine, IFN-gamma can
boost overall CTL activity but does not revert the dominance of arginase
producing adherent cells in the NK-deficient CTL cultures. The role of NK
effector functions in the efficient switch of the immune system towards Type 1
activation was evaluated in cytotoxicity assays. The results indicate that the
accessory function of NK can depend at least partially on their ability to
preferentially engage arginase-producing cells, suggesting that NK/macrophage
lytic interactions might be involved in the switch from Type 2 to Type
1-dependent immune responses.

PMCID: PMC2485417
PMID: 14768937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Int J Oncol. 2004 Mar;24(3):719-24.

Role of an internal ribosome entry site in the translational control of the human
transcription factor Sp3.

Hernandez EM(1), Chan CH, Xu B, Notario V, Richert JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Georgetown University Medical
Center, Washington, DC 20057, USA.

Sp1 and Sp3 are transcription factors involved in the regulation of numerous
genes involved in oncogenesis. Sp3 is a bi-functional transcription factor with
three different isoforms. Its bi-functional activity may in part be regulated by 
the relative expression of these isoforms. Northern blot analysis of Sp3 detects 
only a single transcript. Analysis of the known Sp3 cDNA sequence shows a high GC
content and seven out-of-frame AUG codons located between the 5'-end of the mRNA 
and the two internal AUG initiation sites. This makes it highly unlikely that
cap-recruited, translation initiation competent ribosomes could reach the
internal start sites. A full human Sp3 expression construct was cloned. A
bicistronic vector using Renilla and firefly luciferase showed internal ribosome 
entry site (IRES) activity in Sp3 RNA immediately 5' to the internal AUG sites.
Also, the two smaller isoforms were translated more efficiently when full-length,
uncapped transcripts were used, while the larger isoform was not translated.
Mutants of Sp3 with AUG codons introduced 5' of the two internal start sites were
generated. Results showed that they were unable to suppress the smaller isoforms 
in vitro. Furthermore, dual non-AUG to AUG mutations showed occlusion of the
second introduced isoform (i.e., the isoform situated more 3') but not of the
internally initiated isoforms. These experiments are consistent with
IRES-mediated translation of the two smaller isoforms of Sp3. The presence of an 
IRES allows the possibility that Sp3 isoform ratios and activity are controlled
at the translational level. This mechanism may allow cells to control the
expression of numerous genes during mitosis and, thus, have profound effects on
cell cycle regulation and tumorigenesis.

PMID: 14767558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Oncogene. 2004 Apr 1;23(14):2454-64.

Identification of a novel SP3 binding site in the promoter of human IGFBP4 gene: 
role of SP3 and AP-1 in regulating promoter activity in CaCo2 cells.

Shen Q(1), Singh P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurosciences, The University of Texas Medical
Branch, Galveston, TX 77555-1043, USA.

Insulin-like growth factor binding protein 4 (IGFBP4/BP4) gene expression plays
an important role in the transition from proliferation to differentiation of a
human colon cancer cell line, CaCo2. We recently cloned and identified multiple
cis elements (including putative binding sites for activator protein 1 (AP-1) and
specificity proteins (Sps) ) in the promoter of human BP4 gene, and measured a
significant upregulation of the promoter activity in response to c-Jun. We
therefore examined the role of the single AP-1 site (-869/-863) and other cis
elements, in regulating the expression of hBP4 gene, in the current studies.
Deletion of a 25 bp sequence from -872 to -848, which contains the AP-1 site,
significantly reduced BP4 promoter activity by approximately 50%. Surprisingly,
mutation of the AP-1 site did not produce significant alteration in the activity 
of the BP4 promoter. However, mutation of 7 bp (5'-TGCTGCA) at the 3' end of the 
AP-1 site resulted in significantly decreasing the promoter activity by >50%.
Proteins bound to the 25 bp probe (-872/-848) could be supershifted by antibodies
specific for JunD and Sp3 in an EMSA. JunD binding was abolished on mutation of
the AP-1 site and Sp3 binding was abolished on mutation of the 7 bp at -861/-855;
binding of the purified Sp3 protein to the 25 bp probe was similarly abolished on
mutation of the newly discovered Sp3 binding site (TGCTGCA). BP4 promoter
activity was upregulated in insect cells in response to Sp3 expression,
confirming a functional importance of the novel Sp3 binding site. These studies
suggest that the Sp3 binding site, rather than the AP-1 site, may be playing a
significant role in regulating the expression of IGFBP4 gene in CaCo2 cells.

PMID: 14767471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Biochem J. 2004 May 15;380(Pt 1):67-74.

Concentration-dependent effects of endogenous S-nitrosoglutathione on gene
regulation by specificity proteins Sp3 and Sp1.

Zaman K(1), Palmer LA, Doctor A, Hunt JF, Gaston B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Virginia School of Medicine, P.O. Box 800356, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

The activities of certain nuclear regulatory proteins are modified by high
concentrations of S-nitrosothiols associated with nitrosative stress. In the
present study, we have studied the effect of physiological (low microM)
concentrations of the endogenous S-nitrosothiol, GSNO (S-nitrosoglutathione), on 
the activities of nuclear regulatory proteins Sp3 and Sp1 (specificity proteins 3
and 1). Low concentrations of GSNO increased Sp3 binding, as well as
Sp3-dependent transcription of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance
regulatory gene, cftr. However, higher GSNO levels prevented Sp3 binding,
augmented Sp1 binding and prevented both cftr transcription and CFTR (cystic
fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator) expression. We conclude that low
concentrations of GSNO favour Sp3 binding to 'housekeeping' genes such as cftr,
whereas nitrosative stress-associated GSNO concentrations shut off Sp3-dependent 
transcription, possibly to redirect cellular resources. Since low micromolar
concentrations of GSNO also increase the maturation and activity of a clinically 
common CFTR mutant, whereas higher concentrations have the opposite effect, these
observations may have implications for dosing of S-nitrosylating agents used in
cystic fibrosis clinical trials.

PMCID: PMC1224145
PMID: 14766015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2004 Jun;286(6):F1107-15. Epub 2004 Feb 3.

Identification of a novel region in the proximal promoter of the mouse renin gene
critical for expression.

Pan L(1), Jones CA, Glenn ST, Gross KW.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Elm
and Carlton Sts., Buffalo, NY 14263-0001, USA.

An enhancer at -2.6 kb and a HOX.PBX-binding site at -60 bp have been
demonstrated to be critical to expression of the mouse renin gene (Ren-1(c)) in
As4.1 cells. In this report, we show that a region (-197 to -70) immediately 5'
to the HOX.PBX-binding site is also critical for Ren-1(c) expression. Deletion of
this region in a construct containing 4.1 kb of the Ren-1(c) 5'-flanking sequence
resulted in a 99% reduction in Ren-1(c) promoter activity in As4.1 cells,
suggesting the pivotal role for the region in the regulation of the mouse renin
gene. Electrophoretic mobility shift and supershift assays have identified two
nuclear factor I-binding sites and a Sp1/Sp3-binding site within the distal
portion of the region (-197 to -103). Mutation of these three sites caused a 90% 
decrease in Ren-1(c) promoter activity. Mutational analysis and electrophoretic
mobility shift assays have also identified three additional transcription
factor-binding sites within the region from -103 to -69, each of which
contributes to high-level expression of Ren-1(c) in As4.1 cells. Finally, we have
shown that the Ren-1(c) enhancer is the target for endothelin-1 (ET-1)-induced
inhibition of Ren-1(c) expression and the transcription factor-binding sites in
the proximal promoter are required for the maximal ET-1 inhibitory effect.

PMID: 14761860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Int J Cancer. 2004 Mar 20;109(2):207-13.

Acetylation of histones associated with the p21WAF1/CIP1 gene by butyrate is not 
sufficient for p21WAF1/CIP1 gene transcription in human colorectal adenocarcinoma
cells.

Kobayashi H(1), Tan EM, Fleming SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Science and Toxicology, University of California,
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

Butyric acid is well recognized as a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, and
changes in histone acetylation are thought to alter gene expression. The
mechanism by which sodium butyrate (NaB) induces p21WAF1/CIP1, a critical gene
involved in the antiproliferative effect of NaB, was studied at the chromatin
level. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay, acetylation of histone
H3 was observed at the proximal region of the promoter within 30 min of NaB
exposure and this extended to the distal region within 2 hr. By contrast, histone
H4 was acetylated both at the proximal and the distal regions of the promoter
within 30 min. NaB did not influence other histone modifications. NaB stimulated 
recruitment of the transcription factors ZBP89 and Sp1 as well as GCN5, but did
not influence recruitment of Sp3, HDAC1, p300, or CBP. As recruitment of HDAC1 to
the promoter appeared not to account for NaB-induced changes in histone
acetylation, we aimed to influence HDAC activity by altering its phosphorylation 
status. The kinase inhibitor, H7, suppressed p21WAF1/CIP1 mRNA in both the
absence and the presence of NaB without influencing the butyrate-induced
hyperacetylation of H3 and H4 associated with the p21WAF1/CIP1 promoter. These
results suggest that acetylation of histones at the p21WAF1/CIP1 promoter is not 
sufficient for NaB to exert antiproliferative effects via transcription of the
p21WAF1/CIP1 gene. Induction of p21WAF1/CIP1 transcription by the phosphatase
inhibitor, okadaic acid, in the absence of changes in association of acetylated
histones with the p21WAF1/CIP1 promoter provides further evidence of the
importance of phosphorylation to p21WAF1/CIP1 transcription.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14750171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Am Chem Soc. 2004 Feb 4;126(4):1018-9.

C-H bond activation of hydrocarbons by an imidozirconocene complex.

Hoyt HM(1), Michael FE, Bergman RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley,
California 94720, USA.

Monomeric imidozirconocene complexes of the type Cp2(L)Zr=NCMe3 (Cp =
cyclopentadienyl, L = Lewis base) have been shown to activate the carbon-hydrogen
bonds of benzene, but not the C-H bonds of saturated hydrocarbons. To our
knowledge, this singularly important class of C-H activation reactions has
heretofore not been observed in imidometallocene systems. The M=NR bond formed on
heating the racemic ethylenebis(tetrahydro)indenyl methyl tert-butyl amide
complex, however, cleanly and quantitatively activates a wide range of n-alkane, 
alkene, and arene C-H bonds. Mechanistic experiments support the proposal of
intramolecular elimination of methane followed by a concerted addition of the
hydrocarbon C-H bond. Products formed by activation of sp2 C-H bonds are
generally more thermodynamically stable than those formed by activation of sp3
C-H bonds, and those resulting from reaction at primary C-H bonds are preferred
over secondary sp3 C-H activation products. There is also evidence that
thermodynamic selectivity among C-H bonds is sterically rather than
electronically controlled.

PMCID: PMC1575917
PMID: 14746459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Cancer Res. 2004 Jan 15;64(2):631-8.

Activator protein 2alpha inhibits tumorigenicity and represses vascular
endothelial growth factor transcription in prostate cancer cells.

Ruiz M(1), Pettaway C, Song R, Stoeltzing O, Ellis L, Bar-Eli M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas, USA.

Activator protein-2alpha (AP-2) is a transcription factor that regulates
proliferation and differentiation in mammalian cells. We have shown previously
that although AP-2 is expressed highly in normal prostatic epithelium, its
expression is lost in high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia and prostate
cancer, suggesting that loss of AP-2 plays a role in prostate cancer development.
We demonstrate that forced AP-2 expression in the prostate cancer cell line
LNCaP-LN3 (AP-2 negative) inhibited dramatically tumor incidence in nude mice. To
identify the genes that might have been responsible for this effect, we used
microchip expression array. We found several genes known to be involved in
malignancy were deregulated, including the vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) gene. Because VEGF was down-regulated by 14.7-fold in the AP-2-transfected
cells and because it is a major angiogenic factor in prostate cancer development 
and progression, we chose to examine the AP-2-VEGF interaction. Our evidence
suggests that AP-2 repressed transcriptionally the VEGF promoter by competing
with the transcriptional activator Sp3. Loss of AP-2 in prostate cancer cells
reduced the AP-2:Sp3 ratio and activated VEGF expression. AP-2 acts as a
tumor-suppressor gene in prostate cancer. Elucidating the molecular events
resulting from loss of AP-2 in the prostate epithelium has implications for the
understanding and prevention of the onset of prostate cancer.

PMID: 14744778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Nat Mater. 2004 Feb;3(2):111-4. Epub 2004 Jan 25.

The formation of sp3 bonding in compressed BN.

Meng Y(1), Mao HK, Eng PJ, Trainor TP, Newville M, Hu MY, Kao C, Shu J,
Hausermann D, Hemley RJ.

Author information: 
(1)HPCAT, Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, Illinois 
60439, USA. ymeng@hpcat.aps.anl.gov

Attributed to their specific atomic bonding, the soft, graphite-like, hexagonal
boron nitride (h-BN) and its superhard, diamond-like, cubic polymorph (c-BN) are 
important technological materials with a wide range of applications. At high
pressure and temperature, h-BN can directly transform to a hexagonal close-packed
polymorph (w-BN) that can be partially quenched after releasing pressure.
Previous theoretical calculations and experimental measurements (primarily on
quenched samples) provided substantial information on the transition, but left
unsettled questions due to the lack of in situ characterization at high
pressures. Using inelastic X-ray scattering to probe the boron and nitrogen near 
K-edge spectroscopy, here we report the first observation of the conversion
process of boron and nitrogen sp(2)- and p-bonding to sp(3) and the directional
nature of the sp(3) bonding. In combination with in situ X-ray diffraction probe,
we have further clarified the structure transformation mechanism. The present
archetypal example opens two enormous, element-specific, research areas on
high-pressure bonding evolutions of boron and nitrogen; each of the two elements 
and their respective compounds have displayed a wealth of intriguing
pressure-induced phenomena that result from bonding changes, including
metallization, superconductivity, semiconductivity, polymerization and
superhardness.

PMID: 14743214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 9;279(15):15025-31. Epub 2004 Jan 23.

Hypoxia-induced activation of the retinoic acid receptor-related orphan receptor 
alpha4 gene by an interaction between hypoxia-inducible factor-1 and Sp1.

Miki N(1), Ikuta M, Matsui T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genomics and Proteomics, Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical 
Science, Fukuyama University, 1 Gakuen-cho, Fukuyama 729-0292, Japan.

Hypoxia plays a key role in the pathophysiology of many disease states, and
expression of the retinoic acid receptor-related orphan receptor alpha (RORalpha)
gene increases under hypoxia. We investigated the mechanism for this transient
hypoxia-induced increase in RORalpha expression. Reverse transcription-coupled
PCR analysis revealed that the steady-state level of mRNA for the RORalpha4
isoform, but not the RORalpha1 isoform, increased in HepG2 cells after 3 h of
hypoxia. Transient transfection studies showed that the hypoxia-induced increase 
in RORalpha4 mRNA occurs at the transcriptional level and is dependent on a
hypoxia-responsive element (HRE) located downstream of the promoter. A
dominant-negative mutant of hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha)
abrogates the transcription activated by hypoxia as well as the transcription
activated by exogenously expressed HIF-1alpha, demonstrating the direct
involvement of HIF-1alpha in the transcriptional activation. However, HIF-1 alone
was not sufficient to activate transcription in hypoxic conditions but, rather,
required Sp1/Sp3, which binds to a cluster of GC-rich sequences adjacent to the
HRE. Deletion of one or more of these GC boxes reduced or eliminated the
HIF-1-dependent transcription. Together, these results suggest that the
hypoxia-responsive region of the RORalpha4 promoter is composed of the HRE and
GC-rich sequences and that the transcriptional activation under hypoxia is
conferred through the cooperation of HIF-1 with Sp1/Sp3.

PMID: 14742449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 2;279(14):13911-24. Epub 2004 Jan 15.

Sp2 DNA binding activity and trans-activation are negatively regulated in
mammalian cells.

Moorefield KS(1), Fry SJ, Horowitz JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine,
North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27606, USA.

Previous studies have indicated that Sp2 binds poorly to GC-rich sequences bound 
by Sp1 and Sp3, and further functional analyses of Sp2 have been limited. To
study Sp2-mediated transcription, we employed a PCR-based protocol to determine
the Sp2 consensus DNA-binding sequence (5'-GGGCGGGAC-3') and performed kinetic
experiments to show that Sp2 binds this consensus sequence with high affinity
(225 pm) in vitro. To determine the functional consequence of Sp2 interaction
with this sequence in vivo, we transformed well characterized Sp-binding sites
within the dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) promoter to consensus Sp2-binding
sites. Incorporation of Sp2-binding sites within the DHFR promoter increased
Sp2-mediated trans-activation in transient co-transfection experiments but also
revealed Sp2 to be a relatively weak trans-activator with little or no capacity
for additive or synergistic trans-activation. Using chimeric molecules prepared
with portions of Sp1 and Sp2 and the human prostate-specific antigen promoter, we
show that Sp2 DNA binding activity and trans-activation are negatively regulated 
in mammalian cells. Taken together, our data indicate that Sp2 is functionally
distinct relative to other Sp family members and suggest that Sp2 may play a
unique role in cell physiology.

PMID: 14726517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Endocrinology. 2004 Apr;145(4):1685-94. Epub 2004 Jan 8.

Transcriptional regulation of the human chorionic gonadotropin beta gene during
villous trophoblast differentiation.

Knöfler M(1), Saleh L, Bauer S, Galos B, Rotheneder H, Husslein P, Helmer H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Vienna, Austria.
martin.knoefler@akh-wien.ac.at

Expression of the trophoblast-specific subunit of human chorionic gonadotropin,
CGbeta, is associated with fusion of cytotrophoblasts into a multinuclear
syncytium. Here, we studied regulation of the CGbeta5 gene in trophoblasts
undergoing in vitro syncytialization. Transfection of luciferase reporters
harboring different lengths of the CGbeta5 upstream sequence revealed that the
proximal promoter region (-345 to +114) is sufficient to govern
differentiation-dependent induction. Mutational analyses suggested that two
selective promoter factor (Sp) and three activating protein 2 (AP-2) recognition 
sequences are necessary for full activity of the promoter. During
syncytialization these elements interacted with increasing amounts of the
transcription factors Sp1, Sp3, and AP-2alpha in electrophoretic mobility shift
assay, but only AP-2alpha binding rose upon elevation of cAMP levels with
forskolin. Increasing expression of different isoforms of Sp1 and Sp3 could also 
be detected by Western blot analyses. Sp1/Sp3 localized to syncytial nuclei both 
in differentiated cultures and in term placental tissue, suggesting assembly of
functional transcriptional complexes. Costaining of the transcription factors
with E-cadherin on term placental sections revealed that 47 and 33% of
cytotrophoblast nuclei were negative for Sp1 and Sp3, respectively. In contrast, 
immunohistochemistry of early tissue demonstrated expression of Sp1 in the
majority of cyto- and syncytiotrophoblasts, whereas Sp3 was absent from the
syncytium. Sp1 and Sp3 induced wild-type/mutant promoter constructs upon
transfection in Sp-deficient SL-2 cells, indicating that the Sp elements function
as activating sequences. The data suggest that increasing concentrations of Sp1, 
Sp3, and AP-2alpha enhance transcription of CGbeta in differentiating term
trophoblasts, whereas a different combination of factors may control expression
in early placentas.

PMID: 14715707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 19;279(12):11188-97. Epub 2004 Jan 7.

Identification and characterization of a phorbol ester-responsive element in the 
murine 8S-lipoxygenase gene.

Kim E(1), Muga SJ, Fischer SM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Science Park-Research
Division, Smithville, Texas 78957, USA.

Murine 8S-lipoxygenase (8S-LOX) is a 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate
(TPA)-inducible lipoxygenase. That is, it is not detected in normal mouse skin,
however, a significant increase in expression is detected in the skin of TPA
promotion-sensitive strains of mice after TPA treatment. In this study, we found 
TPA-induced 8S-LOX mRNA expression is a result of increased transcription in SSIN
primary keratinocytes and further investigated transcriptional regulation of
8S-LOX expression by cloning its promoter. The cloned 8S-LOX promoter (
approximately 2 kb) in which a transcription initiation site was mapped at -27
from the ATG has neither a TATA box nor a CCAAT box. However, the promoter was
highly responsive to TPA in TPA promotion-sensitive SSIN but not in TPA
promotion-resistant C57BL/6J primary keratinocytes. We then identified a Sp1
binding site located -77 to -68 from the ATG that is a TPA-responsive element
(TRE) of the promoter and that Sp1, Sp2, and Sp3 proteins bind to the TRE. We
also found that the binding of these proteins to the TRE was significantly
increased by TPA treatment and inhibition of the binding by mithramycin A
decreased TPA-induced promoter activity as well as 8S-LOX mRNA expression. These 
data suggest that increased binding of Sp1, Sp2, and Sp3 to the TRE of the 8S-LOX
promoter is a mechanism by which TPA induces 8S-LOX expression in keratinocytes.

PMID: 14711820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Jan 16;313(3):612-8.

SP3 acts as a positive regulator on the core promoter of human ZPK gene.

Itoh A(1), Wang Z, Ito Y, Reddy UR, Itoh T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurology Research, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

ZPK (zipper protein kinase)/MUK/DLK/MAP3K12, a member of mixed-lineage kinases
(MLKs), is expressed in a tissue-specific manner, particularly in developing
brain, and likely to contribute to cytodifferentiation, apoptotic elimination,
and migration. To understand the preferential expression of ZPK in neuronal
tissues, we have analyzed the putative core promoter region upstream of the first
exon of the human ZPK gene. The core promoter region is TATA-less, but contains
several potential transcription factor-binding motifs such as a GC-box, all of
which are well conserved between human and mouse. Reporter assays and 'gel-shift'
analysis using SH-SY5Y cells revealed that a xenobiotic responsive element
(XRE)-like motif (GGGCGTGTCC) was preferentially recognized by Sp3, and enhanced 
the core promoter activity. However, the core promoter activity was still potent 
even in HeLa cells which barely express ZPK. Our results suggest that, for the
selective expression of ZPK gene, cell-specific negative regulatory element(s)
which locate outside of the core promoter region repress the potent basic
promoter activity.

PMID: 14697235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Phys Rev Lett. 2003 Dec 12;91(24):247001. Epub 2003 Dec 8.

Superconductivity in doped sp3 semiconductors: the case of the clathrates.

Connétable D(1), Timoshevskii V, Masenelli B, Beille J, Marcus J, Barbara B,
Saitta AM, Rignanese GM, Mélinon P, Yamanaka S, Blase X.

Author information: 
(1)LPMCN, Université Claude Bernard Lyon I and CNRS, UMR 5586, Bâtiment
Brillouin, 43 Bd du 11 Novembre 1918, 69622 Villeurbanne Cedex, France.

We present a joint experimental and theoretical study of the superconductivity in
doped silicon clathrates. The critical temperature in Ba(8)@Si-46 is shown to
strongly decrease with applied pressure. These results are corroborated by ab
initio calculations using MacMillan's formulation of the BCS theory with the
electron-phonon coupling constant lambda calculated from perturbative density
functional theory. Further, the study of I(8)@Si-46 and of gedanken pure silicon 
diamond and clathrate phases doped within a rigid-band approach show that the
superconductivity is an intrinsic property of the sp(3) silicon network. As a
consequence, carbon clathrates are predicted to yield large critical temperatures
with an effective electron-phonon interaction much larger than in C60.

PMID: 14683147  [PubMed]


146. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 5;279(10):8792-801. Epub 2003 Dec 16.

Hepatocyte growth factor regulates angiotensin converting enzyme expression.

Day RM(1), Thiel G, Lum J, Chévere RD, Yang Y, Stevens J, Sibert L, Fanburg BL.

Author information: 
(1)New England Medical Center, Tupper Research Institute, Pulmonary and Critical 
Care Division, Boston, Massachusetts 02111, USA. reginamday@hotmail.com

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) is a mitogen, morphogen, and motogen that
functions in tissue healing and acts as an anti-fibrotic factor. The mechanism
for this is not well understood. Recent studies implicate somatic
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) in fibrosis. We examined the effects of HGF
on ACE expression in bovine pulmonary artery endothelial cells (BPAEC). Short
term treatment of BPAEC with HGF transiently increased both ACE mRNA (3 h) and
activity (24 h), as determined by ACE protease assays and reverse
transcription-PCR. Incubation of BPAEC with HGF for longer periods suppressed ACE
mRNA (6 h) and activity (72 h). In contrast, phorbol ester (PMA) treatment
produced sustained increase in ACE mRNA and activity. We examined the short term 
molecular effects of HGF on ACE using PMA for comparison. HGF and PMA increased
transcription from a luciferase reporter with the core ACE promoter, which
contains a composite binding site for SP1/3 and Egr-1. Immunocytochemistry and
electrophoretic mobility shift assay showed that both HGF and PMA increased Egr-1
binding. HGF also increased SP3 binding, as measured by EMSA. However, HGF and
PMA increased the cellular activity of only Egr-1, not SP3, as measured by
luciferase reporter assays. Deletion of the Egr-1 site in the reporter construct 
completely abrogated HGF-induced transcription but only approximately 50% of
PMA-induced activity. Expression of dominant negative Egr-1 and SP3 blocked
up-regulation of the ACE promoter by HGF but only reduced up-regulation by PMA.
These results show that HGF transiently increases gene transcription of ACE via
activation of Egr-1, whereas PMA regulation involves Egr-1 and additional
factor(s).

PMCID: PMC2441847
PMID: 14679188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Am Chem Soc. 2003 Dec 24;125(51):15760-1.

Rhenium-catalyzed coupling of propargyl alcohols and allyl silanes.

Luzung MR(1), Toste FD.

Author information: 
(1)Center for New Directions in Organic Synthesis, Department of Chemistry,
University of California, Berkeley, California 94720, USA.

A mild method for the regioselective coupling of propargyl alcohols and
allylsilanes is described. The method employs an air- and moisture-tolerant
rhenium-oxo complex ((dppm)ReOCl3) as a catalyst for the formation of
sp3-carbon-sp3-carbon bonds without the need for prior activation of the
propargyl alcohol as a halide or pseudohalide. The stability of the high
oxidation state rhenium complex allows for simple reisolation and reuse of the
catalyst. A broad range of functional groups is tolerated including aryl halides,
olefins, esters, and acid-labile functional groups such as acetals. Furthermore, 
displacement of the alcohol occurs preferentially even in the presence of other
electrophiles such as primary alkyl halides and conjugated esters. The use of
enantiopure crotylsilanes as coupling partners allows for the asymmetric
construction of two adjacent stereocenters. The potential of this reaction is
demonstrated in an asymmetric synthesis of delta-lactone, di-O-methylcalopin.

PMID: 14677963  [PubMed]


148. J Invest Dermatol. 2003 Dec;121(6):1469-78.

Transcriptional control of the mouse Col7a1 gene in keratinocytes: basal and
transforming growth factor-beta regulated expression.

Naso M(1), Uitto J, Klement JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, Jefferson Medical College,
Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

Anchoring fibrils at the cutaneous basement membrane zone of the stratified
squamous epithelia are essential to maintaining skin integrity, as absence of
these structures leads to the chronic blistering disease, dystrophic
epidermolysis bullosa. Type VII collagen, the major component of anchoring
fibrils, is synthesized primarily by basal keratinocytes and to a lesser degree
by dermal fibroblasts. To elucidate the transcriptional control elements of the
type VII collagen gene (Col7a1), 3 kb of 5' flanking sequence of the mouse gene
was cloned, sequenced, and fused to the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
reporter gene. Promoter deletion analyses revealed that 560 bp of Col7a1 5'
flanking sequence was sufficient and necessary for basal level of transcription
in cultured murine keratinocytes. Mutagenesis of DNA sequences with similarity to
consensus binding sites for transcription factors, including Sp1/Sp3, AP2, AP1,
and Smads, within the p-560Col7a1 promoter/chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
construct, coupled with DNA binding assays, revealed the importance of these
sites for basal Col7a1 expression. The effect of transforming growth factor beta,
an activator of Col7a1 expression in keratinocytes and dermal fibroblasts, was
examined using the same Col7a1 promoter/chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
constructs. These analyses demonstrated that transforming growth factor beta1
stimulation of Col7a1 transcription is dependent on a putative interaction
between Smads and AP1. Interestingly, the Smad-like binding site was essential
for both basal and transforming growth factor beta1 stimulated Col7a1
transcription. Collectively, these findings attest to the complex regulation of
Col7a1 transcription in epidermal keratinocytes.

PMID: 14675198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 5;279(10):8558-66. Epub 2003 Dec 11.

The dominant role of Sp1 in regulating the cystathionine beta-synthase -1a and
-1b promoters facilitates potential tissue-specific regulation by Kruppel-like
factors.

Maclean KN(1), Kraus E, Kraus JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Denver,
Colorado 80262, USA. ken.maclean@uchsc.edu

Cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS) catalyzes the condensation of serine with
homocysteine to form cystathionine and occupies a crucial regulatory position
between the methionine cycle and transsulfuration. The human cystathionine
beta-synthase gene promoters -1a and -1b are expressed in a limited number of
tissues and are coordinately regulated with proliferation through a
redox-sensitive mechanism. Site-directed mutagenesis, DNase I footprinting and
deletion analysis of 5276 bp of 5' proximal -1b flanking sequence revealed that
this region does not confer tissue-specific expression and that 210 bp of
proximal sequence is sufficient for maximal promoter activity. As little as 32 bp
of the -1b proximal promoter region is capable of driving transcription in HepG2 
cells, and this activity is entirely dependent upon the presence of a single
overlapping Sp1/Egr1 binding site. Co-transfection studies in Drosophila SL2
cells indicated that both promoters are transactivated by Sp1 and Sp3 but only
the -1b promoter is subject to a site-specific synergistic regulatory interaction
between Sp1 and Sp3. Sp1-deficient fibroblasts expressing both Sp3 and NF-Y were 
negative for CBS activity. Transfection of these cells with a mammalian Sp1
expression construct induced high levels of CBS activity indicating that Sp1 has 
a critical and indispensable role in the regulation of cystathionine
beta-synthase. Sp1 binding to both CBS promoters is sensitive to proliferation
status and is negatively regulated by Kruppel-like factors in co-transfection
experiments suggesting a possible mechanism for the tissue specific regulation of
cystathionine beta-synthase.

PMID: 14670973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Androl. 2004 Jan-Feb;25(1):128-39.

Gonadotropin-mediated regulation of the murine VEGF expression in MA-10 Leydig
cells.

Schwarzenbach H(1), Chakrabarti G, Paust HJ, Mukhopadhyay AK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Hormone and Fertility Research, University of Hamburg, Grandweg 
64, D-22529 Hamburg, Germany.

Presence of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is not only limited to
cells directly involved in angiogenesis but has also been demonstrated in
steroidogenic cells like testicular Leydig cells. Because Leydig cells are
subjected to regulation by gonadotropic hormones and produce steroid hormones, we
have investigated here the effects of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) or
steroid hormones on VEGF expression in cultured mouse tumor Leydig cells (MA-10
cells) and have then analyzed the underlying molecular mechanisms. Northern blot 
analysis and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays revealed increases in VEGF mRNA
and protein levels, respectively, over 3-20 hours in MA-10 cells after
stimulation with hCG or 8-Br-cAMP. Although MA-10 cells lack the classical
progesterone receptor, progesterone was able to stimulate VEGF expression.
Promoter analyses and antibody supershift experiments suggested that the proximal
region is able to constitutively bind the transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3.
Mutations of 2 potential Sp1 binding sites in the proximal region showed the
requirement of these motifs for stimulation of VEGF by hCG and 8-Br-cAMP. The
distal cytosine-rich sequence interacts with so far-unidentified faster migrating
factors. Following stimulation with hCG or 8-Br-cAMP, the binding of these
proteins was increased in the complexes formed in the proximal and distal
regions. VEGF expression in Leydig cells is regulated by gonadotropin via a
cAMP-dependent mechanism, and the transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 appear to be 
involved in the activation of the promoter. Progesterone also appears to play a
role in the regulation of VEGF, acting presumably via a nonconventional receptor 
that remains to be characterized yet.

PMID: 14662796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Gene. 2003 Dec 24;323:163-72.

Regulation of the FGF-4 gene by a complex distal enhancer that functions in part 
as an enhanceosome.

Luster TA(1), Rizzino A.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for the Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, Department of
Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE
68198-6805, USA.

The exact mechanisms by which enhancers regulate transcription are currently
under investigation. For some genes, activation is accomplished by an intricate
array of enhancer cis-regulatory elements that direct the assembly of a
gene-specific activation complex known as an "enhanceosome". Transcription of the
fibroblast growth factor-4 (FGF-4) gene during early development is controlled by
a powerful distal enhancer located 3 kb downstream of the transcription start
site within the 3' untranslated region of the gene. Previous studies have shown
that FGF-4 enhancer function is mediated by at least three critical positive
cis-regulatory elements: an HMG, a POU, and a GT-box motif, which bind the
transcription factors Sox-2, Oct-3, and Sp1/Sp3, respectively. In this study, we 
identify a second essential HMG motif within the FGF-4 enhancer that binds the
transcription factor Sox-2. Moreover, we demonstrate that spatial alignment of
the new HMG motif, relative the other enhancer cis-regulatory elements, is
important. Based on findings presented in this report, and work published
earlier, we propose that the previously identified core HMG and POU
cis-regulatory elements of the FGF-4 enhancer are dependent on one another and
function in an enhanceosome-like manner. In contrast, the HMG motif identified in
this study is only partially dependent on the other enhancer cis-regulatory
elements for its function.

PMID: 14659890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Gene. 2003 Dec 24;323:31-42.

Sp and GATA factors are critical for Apolipoprotein AI downstream enhancer
activity in human HepG2 cells.

Ivanov GS(1), Kater JM, Jha SH, Stutius EA, Sabharwal R, Tricarico MD, Ginsburg
GS, Ozer JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Boston University
School of Medicine, 715 Albany Street, Building R-618, Boston, MA 02118, USA.

The factors that bind to the hepatic-specific human apolipoprotein AI (apoAI)
48-bp downstream enhancer (DSE) were identified and characterized by
electrophoretic mobility shift assays. A significant homology was shown between
the histone 4 (H4) promoters and the hepatic-specific human apoAI DSE at Sp1 and 
H4TF2 binding sites. Human HepG2 nuclear extracts were used to form four specific
complexes with the DSE (referred to as apoAI DSE-1, -2, -3, and -4). The apoAI
DSE-1 and -2 complexes showed similar binding specificity to the Sp/H4TF1
consensus site within the apoAI DSE. The apoAI DSE-1 complex was predominantly
recognized by anti-Sp1 and Sp3 sera in gel shift assays, indicating that the DSE 
was recognized by multiple Sp family members. Nuclear extracts that were prepared
from retinoic acid treated HepG2 cells showed increased levels of Sp factors in
gel shift and Western blot assays. The apoAI DSE-2 complex was identified as
H4TF1 and formed in the absence of magnesium chloride. The apoAI DSE-3 complex
bound to a consensus GATA element within the DSE that was recognized by
recombinant human GATA-6 as well. The apoAI DSE-3 complex was completely
disrupted by a GATA-4 antibody in EMSA. GATA-4 and -6 were detected in nuclear
extracts prepared from retinoic acid treated HepG2 cells using Western blot
assays. The highest apoAI DSE-3 levels were observed with retinoic acid treated
HepG2 cell nuclear extracts in EMSA. ApoAI DSE-4 is a multi-factor complex that
includes an Sp/H4TF1 factor and either H4TF2 or apoAI DSE-3. Because apoAI DSE
mutations revealed transcription defects in transient transfection assays, we
conclude that the entire DSE sequence is required for full apoAI transcriptional 
activity in HepG2 cells.

PMID: 14659877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Science. 2004 Jan 16;303(5656):383-7. Epub 2003 Dec 4.

RNA leaching of transcription factors disrupts transcription in myotonic
dystrophy.

Ebralidze A(1), Wang Y, Petkova V, Ebralidse K, Junghans RP.

Author information: 
(1)Biotherapeutics Development Lab, Harvard Institute of Human Genetics, Harvard 
Medical School and Division of Hematology-Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center, 4 Blackfan Circle, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) is caused by a CUGn expansion (n approximately 50
to 5000) in the 3' untranslated region of the mRNA of the DM protein kinase gene.
We show that mutant RNA binds and sequesters transcription factors (TFs), with up
to 90% depletion of selected TFs from active chromatin. Diverse genes are
consequently reduced in expression, including the ion transporter CIC-1, which
has been implicated in myotonia. When TF specificity protein 1 (Sp1) was
overexpressed in DM1-affected cells, low levels of messenger RNA for CIC-1 were
restored to normal. Transcription factor leaching from chromatin by mutant RNA
provides a potentially unifying pathomechanistic explanation for this disease.

PMID: 14657503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Dec 15;31(24):7264-70.

Transcription factor ZBP-89 is required for STAT1 constitutive expression.

Bai L(1), Merchant JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, 
USA.

Erratum in
    Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Feb 24;32(4):1615.

IFNgamma is a pro-inflammatory cytokine that potentiates p53-independent
apoptosis in a variety of cell types. STAT1 is the primary mediator of IFNgamma
action. ZBP-89 is a transcription factor that binds to the G/C-rich elements and 
mediates p53-independent apoptosis. In this study, site-directed mutagenesis
revealed that a G-rich element from +171 to +179 within the first intron of the
STAT1 gene is critical for optimal STAT1 promoter activity. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays and promoter analysis revealed that ZBP-89 binds directly
to this STAT1 G-rich element along with Sp1 and Sp3. Reduction of ZBP-89 with
siRNA attenuated both basal and IFNgamma-induced STAT1 expression and
subsequently diminished the activation of apoptotic markers, e.g. caspase-3 and
PARP. Taken together, we conclude that ZBP-89 is required for constitutive STAT1 
expression and in this way contributes to the ability of cells to be activated by
IFNgamma.

PMCID: PMC291869
PMID: 14654702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Gene. 2003 Dec 11;322:123-36.

Analysis of the rat connexin 43 proximal promoter in neonatal cardiomyocytes.

Teunissen BE(1), Jansen AT, van Amersfoorth SC, O'Brien TX, Jongsma HJ,
Bierhuizen MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Physiology, University Medical Center Utrecht, P.O. Box 
85060, 3508 AB Utrecht, The Netherlands. B.E.J.Teunissen@med.uu.nl

Altered transcriptional control is likely to contribute to the down-regulation of
connexin 43 (Cx43) expression observed in many forms of heart disease. However,
little is known about the factors regulating Cx43 transcription in the heart
under (patho)physiological conditions. Therefore, a systematic study of rat Cx43 
(rCx43) proximal promoter regulation in rat primary neonatal ventricular
cardiomyocytes (NCM) and, for comparison, different cell types was initiated.
Luciferase assays revealed that, in NCM, the proximal promoter is preserved in a 
conserved region extending from 148 nucleotides upstream towards 281 nucleotides 
downstream relative to the transcription initiation site (TIS). Further
deletional analysis suggested the involvement of four putative Sp- and two
AP1-binding sites. The binding of both Sp1 and Sp3 to the Sp-binding elements and
AP1 to the AP1-binding elements was demonstrated by electrophoretic mobility
shift assays (EMSA). Promoter-luciferase assays using the natural rCx43 proximal 
promoter and mutated derivatives in NCM, HL-1 and A7r5 cells revealed that all
sites contribute to basal promoter activity. Trans-activation of the Cx43
proximal promoter with Sp1 and Sp3 in Drosophila Schneider line 2 (SL2) cells
demonstrated that Sp1 and, to a lesser extent, Sp3 determine rCx43 promoter
activation. Thus Sp1, Sp3 and AP1 determine basal Cx43 expression. In addition,
we studied the effect of the cardiac transcription factor Nkx2.5 on Cx43
regulation. NCM were infected with adenovirus encoding either beta-galactosidase 
(control) or Nkx2.5. Cx43 protein and mRNA were significantly decreased after
Nkx2.5 infection as shown by Western and Northern blot analyses.
Promoter-reporter assays demonstrated that the rCx43 promoter was down-regulated 
approximately twofold upon Nkx2.5 overexpression. Therefore, in NCM, Nkx2.5
appears to play a role in the regulation of Cx43 expression.

PMID: 14644504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2004 Feb;36(2):353-63.

Induction of myofibroblast MMP-9 transcription in three-dimensional collagen I
gel cultures: regulation by NF-kappaB, AP-1 and Sp1.

Takahra T(1), Smart DE, Oakley F, Mann DA.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Toyama Medical and Pharmaceutical
University, 2630 Sugitani, 930-0194, Toyama, Japan.

Chronic liver injury leads to a progressive wound healing response that
eventually results in hepatic fibrosis characterised by net deposition of
fibrillar extracellular matrix (ECM) and a qualitative shift from type IV to type
I/III collagen. The pivotal cellular event underlying this response is hepatic
stellate cell (HSC) activation towards a myofibroblast-like phenotype. Activated 
HSC contribute to ECM remodelling via secretion of type I/III collagens and
matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). Previous studies showed that three-dimensional 
(3D) contact of activated HSC with type I collagen further stimulates the ECM
remodelling properties of HSC by inducing the type IV gelatinase, MMP-9. The aim 
of the current study was to confirm transcriptional activation of the MMP-9 gene 
and identify transcription factors regulating this response. Gelatin zymography
and Northern blotting were used to confirm induction of MMP-9 protein and mRNA
expression in primary rat HSC cultured in a three-dimensional collagen I gel
lattice. MMP-9 promoter studies in transfected HSC and electrophoretic mobility
shift assay (EMSA) were employed to study transcriptional events. Both NF-kappaB 
and AP-1 DNA were induced in HSC cultured in 3D collagen I gels and binding sites
for these factors in the MMP-9 promoter were crucial for induction of
transcription. By contrast removal of an Sp1 site in the promoter enhanced
transcription, while over-expression of either Sp1 or Sp3 repressed
transcription. It is concluded that 3D contact of activated HSC with collagen I
stimulates MMP-9 expression by elevating NF-kappaB and AP-1 activities which are 
able to overcome the repressive influence of Sp1/Sp3 on MMP-9 gene transcription.

PMID: 14643899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Oncogene. 2004 Feb 5;23(5):1052-63.

Estrogen regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor gene expression in
ZR-75 breast cancer cells through interaction of estrogen receptor alpha and SP
proteins.

Stoner M(1), Wormke M, Saville B, Samudio I, Qin C, Abdelrahim M, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX 77843-4466, USA.

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is expressed in multiple
hormone-dependent cancer cells/tumors. Treatment of ZR-75 breast cancer cells
with 17beta-estradiol (E2) induced a greater than fourfold increase of VEGF mRNA 
levels. ZR-75 breast cancer cells were transfected with pVEGF1, a construct
containing a -2018 to +50 VEGF promoter insert, and E2 induced reporter gene
(luciferase) activity. Deletion and mutation analysis of the VEGF gene promoter
identified a GC-rich region (-66 to -47) which was required for E2-induced
transactivation of pVEGF5, a construct containing the minimal promoter (-66 to
+54) that exhibited E2-responsiveness. Interactions of nuclear proteins from
ZR-75 cells with the proximal GC-rich region of the VEGF gene promoter were
investigated by electrophoretic mobility shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation 
assays. The results demonstrate that both Sp1 and Sp3 proteins bound the GC-rich 
motif (-66 to -47), and estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) interactions were
confirmed by chromatin immunoprecipitation. Moreover, E2-dependent activation of 
constructs containing proximal and distal GC/GT-rich regions of the VEGF promoter
was inhibited in ZR-75 cells transfected with small inhibitory RNAs for Sp1 and
Sp3. These results were consistent with a mechanism of hormone activation of VEGF
through ERalpha/Sp1 and ERalpha/Sp3 interactions with GC-rich motifs.

PMID: 14647449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Feb;18(2):471-83. Epub 2003 Nov 26.

CpG methylation and transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 regulate the expression of 
the human secretin receptor gene.

Pang RT(1), Lee LT, Ng SS, Yung WH, Chow BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Hong Kong, Special Administrate Region,
People's Republic of China.

The human secretin receptor (hSR) is an important glycoprotein receptor for
regulating the secretion of pancreatic bicarbonate, water, and electrolytes. In
this study we investigated the transcriptional regulation of the hSR gene. A
minimal 106-bp promoter was identified, and it contains two GC boxes (GC box-A,
-240 to -226; and GC box-B, -203 to -194, from the translation start site). EMSA 
and supershift analyses showed that both GC boxes interact with Sp1 and Sp3
transcription factors. Transient transfection in pancreas-derived human
pancreatic ductule carcinoma (PANC)-1 and bovine pancreatic duct-1 cells showed
that mutation of either GC box-A or -B reduced the promoter strength by 56-67%,
whereas mutation of both GC boxes caused more than 90% reduction of promoter
activity. Cotransfections of the hSR promoter with Sp1 and Sp3 expression vectors
in Sp-deficient Drosophila SL-2 Schneider cells further demonstrated that the
ratio of Sp1 to Sp3 is the key mechanism to modulate hSR gene expression. The
methylation statuses of 27 CpG sites within the promoter region (-400 to -151 bp)
were assessed in various human pancreas and liver cell lines. The hSR promoter is
unmethylated (CAPAN-1, human pancreatic adenocarcinoma) or partially methylated
(PANC-1 and HPAC, human pancreatic adenocarcinoma) in hSR-expressing cell lines
but is completely methylated in hSR nonexpressing HepG2 cells. Methyltransferase 
inhibitor 5-aza-2'deoxycytidine increased hSR gene expression level in PANC-1
cells and induced hSR gene expression in HepG2 cells. Together, our study shows
that, in addition to Sp1 and Sp3, promoter methylation also plays a role in the
regulation of hSR gene expression.

PMID: 14645499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 13;279(7):5110-7. Epub 2003 Nov 26.

E2F and Sp1/Sp3 Synergize but are not sufficient to activate the MYCN gene in
neuroblastomas.

Kramps C(1), Strieder V, Sapetschnig A, Suske G, Lutz W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research, 35033 Marburg, Germany.

Amplification of the MYCN gene, resulting in overexpression of MYCN,
distinguishes a subset of neuroblastomas with poor prognosis. We recently
identified MYCN as a target gene of the E2F transcription factors. Here we show
that Sp1 and Sp3 cooperate with E2F-1 to activate the MYCN promoter. However, in 
a neuroblastoma cell line that does not express MYCN, overexpression of E2F-1 was
not sufficient to activate the MYCN promoter even in the presence of trichostatin
A and 5-aza-cytidine. This was because of a failure of E2F-1 to bind to the MYCN 
promoter in these cells, although access of E2F-1 to the inactive MYCN promoter
was not blocked by a nucleosome. Differences in nucleosomal organization of the
MYCN promoter in different cell lines did not correlate with gene activation per 
se but with the switch from basal to activated transcription. Binding of E2F and 
Sp1/Sp3 to the MYCN promoter in vivo correlated with acetylation of histones H3
and H4 and recruitment of RNA polymerase II and the protein acetyltransferase
Tip60 but not with nucleosome remodeling. Our results define distinct chromatin
states of the MYCN promoter, indicate that factors in addition to E2F and Sp1/Sp3
are required to activate MYCN in neuroblastomas, and provide evidence for a novel
mechanism of controlling access of E2F to selected target genes.

PMID: 14645238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Gene. 2003 Dec 11;322:47-55.

Identification of a novel proliferation-dependent C-rich element that mediates
inhibition of the rat GLUT1 promoter.

Sánchez-Feutrie M(1), Viñals F, Palacín M, Zorzano A.

Author information: 
(1)Parc Cientific de Barcelona and Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia
Molecular, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona, Avda. Diagonal 645,
E-08028 Barcelona, Spain.

Expression of the glucose transporter GLUT1 is high in proliferating and tumour
cells. Conditions in which the transcriptional activity of GLUT1 promoter are
maximal are characterized by the operation of activators such as Sp1 and
inhibitors as Sp3. Here, we have identified an element at -67/-60 (C8 box) in the
rat GLUT1 promoter to which nuclear factors bind in a proliferation-dependent
manner. Competition studies with a series of mutated oligonucleotides suggest
that these nuclear factors are different in the proliferative state and after
confluence. The C8 element does not bind any of the known factors defined in
databases. Mutation of the C8 sequence enhanced transcriptional activity of the
GLUT1 promoter in 10T1/2 fibroblasts and in L6E9 myoblasts but not in myotubes.
Furthermore, the functional activity of the C8 box is maximal in the presence of 
serum. In summary, we have identified a novel inhibitory element, C8 box, in the 
rat GLUT1 promoter that operates in a proliferation-dependent manner. In keeping 
with this view, serum enhances the inhibitory activity of the C8 box, suggesting 
that this is regulated by growth factors.

PMID: 14644496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Endocrinology. 2004 Mar;145(3):1113-23. Epub 2003 Nov 20.

Differential utilization of the promoter of peripheral-type benzodiazepine
receptor by steroidogenic versus nonsteroidogenic cell lines and the role of Sp1 
and Sp3 in the regulation of basal activity.

Giatzakis C(1), Papadopoulos V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, 
DC 20057, USA.

The peripheral-type benzodiazepine receptor (PBR) is involved in many cellular
functions, including steroidogenesis, oxidative processes, cellular
proliferation, and apoptosis. Secretory and glandular tissues, especially steroid
hormone-producing cells, are particularly rich in PBR. To understand the
mechanisms of PBR expression and regulation, we established an mRNA expression
profile in mouse tissues and cell lines and subsequently mapped the transcription
start site and characterized the promoter of the gene. Our findings indicate that
PBR tissue mRNA levels are relatively high in kidney, spleen, muscle, lung,
adrenal gland, thymus, and stomach; are intermediate in pancreas, uterus,
prostate, heart, and testis; and are low in brain and liver. Relatively high
levels of PBR mRNA were also observed in the steroid-synthesizing MA-10 mouse
Leydig tumor cells compared with adrenocortical Y1 mouse cells and
nonsteroidogenic NIH-3T3 mouse fibroblasts, although PBR protein levels were much
higher in both steroidogenic cells compared with fibroblasts. Transcription was
initiated primarily at an adenine nucleotide 61 nucleotides upstream of the
translation start site, but internal initiation was also observed. A 2.7-kb
fragment of the mouse PBR promoter was cloned and sequenced. Sequence analysis
revealed the absence of TATA or CCAAT boxes, but the presence of many putative
transcription factor-binding sites, including Sp1/Sp3, AP2, Ik2, AP1, SOX, GATA, 
and SRY. Functional characterization revealed that two Sp1/Sp3 sites in the
proximal promoter are important for basal activity in all cell lines tested and
that the steroidogenic MA-10 and Y1 cells use different areas of the promoter
compared with nonsteroidogenic NIH-3T3 cells.

PMID: 14630713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Nov 28;311(4):853-63.

AML-1, PU.1, and Sp3 regulate expression of human
bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein.

Lennartsson A(1), Pieters K, Ullmark T, Vidovic K, Gullberg U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

Bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein (BPI) is an antimicrobial protein in
neutrophils, stored in azurophil granules. Expression of BPI is absent in
neutrophils of newborns and patients with secondary granule deficiency (SGD),
possibly contributing to dysfunction of neutrophils. We report two alternative
transcription start sites at 52 and 22bp upstream of the translation start. A
proximal 222bp promoter conferring expression in myeloid cells was identified,
and critical cis-acting sites for myeloid expression were contained within the
159bp upstream of translation start. Within this region, direct binding and
transactivation by AML-1, PU.1, and Sp3 were demonstrated, as judged by
electrophoretic mobility shift analysis. Moreover, transient transfections of
C/EBPalpha or C/EBPepsilon to HeLa cells resulted in increased promoter activity,
indicating a direct or indirect role for C/EBP. In conclusion, we provide
evidence for AML-1, PU.1, and Sp3 cooperatively and directly mediating
BPI-expression during myeloid differentiation.

PMID: 14623259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. FEBS Lett. 2003 Nov 20;554(3):433-8.

Tissue-specific activity of the proximal human calcitonin receptor promoter is
mediated by Sp1 and an epigenetic phenomenon.

Pondel MD(1), Partington GA, Mould R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, St. George's Hospital Medical
School, Cranmer Terrace, London SW17 0RE, UK. mpondel@sghms.ac.uk

To identify cis-acting sequences transcriptionally regulating the human
calcitonin receptor (hCTR) gene, hCTR promoter/luciferase gene constructs were
transiently or stably transfected into hCTR-positive and -negative cell lines.
Luciferase assays demonstrated that the proximal hCTR promoter (hCTRP1) was
transcriptionally active in all cell lines tested. High-level hCTRP1 activity
depended on an 11 bp Sp1/Sp3 binding site. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay
showed that this region bound the transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3. We further
showed that hCTRP1 was strongly activated by the 11 bp Sp1/Sp3 binding site in
hCTRP1/luciferase-, Sp1-transfected Drosophila S2 cells. Bisulphite-mediated
sequencing of genomic DNA from hCTR-expressing and -non-expressing cell lines
demonstrated that the endogenous hCTRP1 was hypomethylated in all cell lines
tested. These results suggest that the hCTRP1 is activated by the
tissue-ubiquitous transcription factor Sp1 and that an epigenetic process
unrelated to CpG methylation represses its activity in hCTR-negative tissues.

PMID: 14623107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Cardiovasc Res. 2003 Nov 1;60(2):347-54.

Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors are required for trans-activation of the human 
SERCA2 promoter in cardiomyocytes.

Brady M(1), Koban MU, Dellow KA, Yacoub M, Boheler KR, Fuller SJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute Division, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial
College London, Guy Scadding Building, Dovehouse Street, London SW3 6LY, UK.

OBJECTIVES: The sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) Ca(2+) ATPase (SERCA) is essential to
the removal of cytosolic calcium following cardiac contraction, and its abundance
and activity are significantly altered during perinatal development and in
failing myocardium. The objective of the current study was to identify cis
regulatory elements and nuclear transcription factors responsible for
transactivating SERCA2 gene expression in cardiomyocytes.
METHODS: Primary cultures of neonatal rat ventricular myocytes were transiently
transfected with luciferase (LUX) reporter gene constructs containing deletions
of the SERCA2 promoter or which harbored mutations in consensus Sp1 transcription
factor binding sites. Cotransfection assays, electrophoretic mobility shift, and 
supershift assays were also performed to delineate the regulatory role of
specific transcription factors.
RESULTS: We identified a putative AP-1-like element and a consensus Egr-1 binding
site, but neither Egr-1 nor 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate (TPA)
significantly modified human SERCA2 promoter activity in vitro. Maximal activity 
of the SERCA2 promoter required the proximal 177 bp, and strong activation was
observed with a 125-bp construct, within which an Sp1 site and a CAAT box were
important. Mutation analysis also revealed the importance of two Sp1 sites
between -125 and -200. Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors were subsequently
identified to bind to oligonucleotide probes corresponding to only the two most
proximal Sp1 sites.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies provide direct evidence that regulation of human
SERCA2 gene expression in cardiomyocytes depends on transactivation events
elicited by Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors.

PMID: 14613864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. EMBO J. 2003 Nov 17;22(22):6078-88.

An SP1-like transcription factor Spr2 acts downstream of Fgf signaling to mediate
mesoderm induction.

Zhao J(1), Cao Y, Zhao C, Postlethwait J, Meng A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Protein Sciences
Laboratory of the MOE, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.

Fgf signaling, mediated in part by the transcription factor Brachyury/Xbra/Ntl,
plays important roles in mesoderm formation during the early development of
vertebrate embryos. We have identified a zebrafish gene, spr2, which encodes a
member of the Sp1-like transcription factor family. spr2 is expressed in both
hypoblast and epiblast cells during late blastulation/early gastrulation, and in 
some mesodermal and neural tissues at later stages. Injection with spr2 mRNA
enhances ntl expression and alleviates the inhibitory effect on ntl of XFD, a
Xenopus dominant-negative FGF receptor. In contrast, morpholino- mediated
knockdown of Spr2 activity inhibits ntl expression and reduces the inductive
effect of Fgfs on ntl. We also demonstrate that Fgf signaling relays mesoderm
induction activity of Nodal signaling and Spr2 is involved in this signal relay
process. Furthermore, the correct spatial expression of spr2 requires Nodal, Fgf 
and Wnt signals. We suggest that expression of spr2 is an immediate-early
response to mesoderm induction by Fgfs, which in turn regulates the expression of
effector genes involved in the development of mesodermal tissues.

PMCID: PMC275448
PMID: 14609954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Biochem J. 2004 Mar 1;378(Pt 2):473-84.

Stimulated initiation of mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase-1 (MKP-1)
gene transcription involves the synergistic action of multiple cis-acting
elements in the proximal promoter.

Ryser S(1), Massiha A, Piuz I, Schlegel W.

Author information: 
(1)Fondation pour Recherche Médicales, University of Geneva, 64 av. de la
Roseraie, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland.

Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) are inactivated by a dual specificity
phosphatase, MAPK phosphatase-1 (MKP-1). MKP-1 is transcribed as an immediate
early response gene (IEG) following various stimuli. In the pituitary cell line
GH4C1, MKP-1 gene transcription is strongly induced by thyrotropin-releasing
hormone (TRH) as well as by epidermal growth factor (EGF) as a consequence of
activated MAPK/extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signalling.
Intriguingly, reporter gene analysis with the MKP-1 promoter showed strong basal 
transcription, but only limited induction by TRH and EGF. Site-directed
mutagenesis of the reporter construct combined with band-shift and in vivo
studies revealed that part of the constitutive activity of the MKP-1 promoter
resides in two GC boxes bound by Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors in the minimal
promoter. Basal transcription of transiently transfected luciferase reporter can 
be initiated by either of the two GC boxes or also by either of the two
cAMP/Ca(2+) responsive elements or by the E-box present in the proximal promoter.
On the other hand, when analysed by stable transfection, the five responsive
elements are acting in synergy to transactivate the MKP-1 proximal promoter. We
show in this study that the MKP-1 promoter can function as a constitutive
promoter or as a rapid and transient sensor for the activation state of
MAPKs/ERKs. This dual mode of transcription initiation may have different
consequences for the control of a block to elongation situated in the first exon 
of the MKP-1 gene, as described previously [Ryser, Tortola, van Haasteren, Muda, 
Li and Schlegel (2001) J. Biol. Chem. 276, 33319-33327].

PMCID: PMC1223957
PMID: 14609431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Nutr. 2003 Nov;133(11):3409-15.

The nuclear abundance of transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 depends on biotin in
Jurkat cells.

Griffin JB(1), Rodriguez-Melendez R, Zempleni J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Science and Dietetics, University of Nebraska at
Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, USA.

Biotin affects gene expression in mammals; however, the signaling pathways
leading to biotin-dependent transcriptional activation and inactivation of genes 
are largely unknown. Members of the Sp/Krüppel-like factor family of
transcription factors (e.g., the ubiquitous Sp1 and Sp3) play important roles in 
the expression of numerous mammalian genes. We tested the hypothesis that the
nuclear abundance of Sp1 and Sp3 depends on biotin in human T cells (Jurkat
cells) mediating biotin-dependent gene expression. Jurkat cells were cultured in 
biotin-deficient (0.025 nmol/L) and biotin-supplemented (10 nmol/L) media for 5
wk prior to transcription factor analysis. The association of Sp1 and Sp3 with
DNA-binding sites (GC box and CACCC box) was 76-149% greater in nuclear extracts 
from biotin-supplemented cells compared with biotin-deficient cells, as
determined by electrophoretic mobility shift assays. The increased DNA-binding
activity observed in biotin-supplemented cells was caused by increased
transcription of genes encoding Sp1 and Sp3, as shown by mRNA levels and
reporter-gene activities; increased transcription of Sp1 and Sp3 genes was
associated with the increased abundance of Sp1 and Sp3 protein in nuclei.
Notwithstanding the important role for phosphorylation of Sp1 and Sp3 in
regulating DNA-binding activity, the present study suggests that the effects of
biotin on phosphorylation of Sp1 and Sp3 are minor. The increased nuclear
abundance of Sp1 and Sp3 in biotin-supplemented cells was associated with
increased transcriptional activity of 5'-flanking regions in Sp1/Sp3-dependent
genes in reporter-gene assays. This study provides evidence that some effects of 
biotin on gene expression might be mediated by the nuclear abundance of Sp1 and
Sp3.

PMID: 14608051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. FASEB J. 2004 Jan;18(1):218-20. Epub 2003 Nov 3.

Helicobacter pylori stimulates host vascular endothelial growth factor-A (vegf-A)
gene expression via MEK/ERK-dependent activation of Sp1 and Sp3.

Strowski MZ(1), Cramer T, Schäfer G, Jüttner S, Walduck A, Schipani E, Kemmner W,
Wessler S, Wunder C, Weber M, Meyer TF, Wiedenmann B, Jöns T, Naumann M, Höcker
M.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik, mit Schwerpunkt Hepatologie und Gastroenterologie,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Campus Virchow-Klinikum, Berlin, Germany.

VEGF-A is a key regulator of inflammatory and tumor-associated angiogenesis. H.
pylori plays a critical role in the pathogenesis of benign and malignant gastric 
diseases. It has been suggested that H. pylori infection is associated with
activation of host angiogenesis, however, underlying mechanisms as well as
angiogenic growth factors activated by the bacterium have not yet been
identified. Therefore, we investigated the influence of the bacterium on VEGF-A
as a candidate host target gene in vivo and in vitro. We show that H. pylori
potently up-regulates production and release of VEGF-A protein as well as vegf-A 
mRNA levels, and we provide strong evidence that enhanced recruitment of Sp1 and 
Sp3 transcription factors to two proximal GC-rich vegf-A promoter elements
mediates H. pylori-triggered vegf-A gene expression. In addition, H. pylori
infection increased the transactivating capacity of both Sp1 and Sp3, which
suggests additional mechanism(s) of vegf-A gene regulation by the bacterium.
Signaling studies identified the MEK>ERK1/-2 kinase cascade as principal host
signaling pathway mediating H. pylori-stimulated vegf-A transcription. By
identifying H. pylori as potent activator of vegf-A gene expression and
characterization of underlying molecular mechanisms, our results provide novel
insights into pathways linking the bacterium to host angiogenesis and may help to
develop strategies to influence vegf-A gene expression in the setting of H.
pylori infection.

PMID: 14597566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Gene. 2003 Nov 13;319:107-16.

Thioredoxin-mediated redox control of the transcription factor Sp1 and regulation
of the thioredoxin gene promoter.

Bloomfield KL(1), Osborne SA, Kennedy DD, Clarke FM, Tonissen KF.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science, Griffith University, Nathan,
Qld, 4111, Australia. K.Tonissen@griffith.edu.au

In recent years, redox control has emerged as a fundamental mechanism of gene
regulation through transcriptional control. Thioredoxin (Trx) is a
dithiol-reducing enzyme known to be involved in the redox regulation of a number 
of transcription factors, and in this study, we have investigated the
redox-dependent regulation of the DNA binding activity of Sp1 by thioredoxin.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays were used to show that both recombinant Sp1
produced in Escherichia coli and endogenous Sp1 expressed by MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer cells is subject to redox regulation. We found that thioredoxin alone or
in conjunction with the full thioredoxin system (comprising thioredoxin,
thioredoxin reductase [TR], and alpha-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
[NADPH]) can increase Sp1 DNA binding activity in vitro to an oligonucleotide
containing the Sp1 consensus sequence. Furthermore, we have provided evidence
that recombinant Sp1 can bind to Sp1 consensus sequences within a 330-base pair
(bp) thioredoxin promoter fragment and that this interaction can also be enhanced
by the presence of thioredoxin. Luciferase reporter assays using this same
minimal thioredoxin promoter region demonstrated that both Sp1 and Sp3 can bind
to the promoter and act to enhance transcription. When the three identified Sp1
consensus sequences within the reporter construct were deleted, there was a loss 
of basal promoter activity, showing that these closely positioned sites are
important for regulation of thioredoxin gene expression.

PMID: 14597176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Curr Hypertens Rep. 2003 Dec;5(6):454-8.

Transcriptional regulation of energy substrate metabolism in normal and
hypertrophied heart.

Tian R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, NMR Laboratory for Physiological Chemistry, Brigham
and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
rtian@rics.bwh.harvard.edu

Impaired myocardial energy metabolism in cardiac hypertrophy and failure is
characterized by decreased fatty-acid oxidation and increased glucose
utilization. Mechanisms involving deactivation of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor alpha/relinoid X receptor alpha
(PPARalpha/RXRalpha),and activation of chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter
transcription factor (COUP-TF), and transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3, lead to
decreased capacity for fatty acid utilization in hypertrophied hearts.
Furthermore, impaired myocardial energetic status stimulates glucose uptake and
glycolysis, which, in combination with the permissive effect due to decreased
fatty acid oxidation, promotes increases in glucose utilization in hypertrophied 
hearts. Finally, shifting substrate utilization toward glucose is likely adaptive
and has the potential to delay transition to heart failure.

PMID: 14594563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Circ Res. 2003 Dec 12;93(12):1202-9. Epub 2003 Oct 30.

Using DNA microarray to identify Sp1 as a transcriptional regulatory element of
insulin-like growth factor 1 in cardiac muscle cells.

Li T(1), Chen YH, Liu TJ, Jia J, Hampson S, Shan YX, Kibler D, Wang PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Center for Cardiovascular Hormone Research, University
of California, Irvine, Calif, USA.

High throughput gene expression profiling with DNA microarray provides an
opportunity to analyze transcriptional regulation of hundreds or thousands of
similarly regulated genes. Transcriptional regulation of gene expression plays an
important role in myocardial remodeling. We have studied cardiac muscle gene
expression with DNA microarray and used a computational strategy to identify
common promoter motifs that respond to insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1)
stimulation in cardiac muscle cells. The analysis showed that the Sp1 binding
site is a likely target of IGF-1 action. Further experiments with gel shift assay
indicated that IGF-1 regulated the Sp1 site in cardiomyocytes, by increasing the 
abundance of Sp1 and Sp3 proteins. Using firefly luciferase as reporter gene,
additional experiments showed that IGF-1 activated the promoter of cyclin D3 and 
Glut1. Both promoters contain one Sp1 site. The effect of IGF-1 on these two
promoters was abolished with siRNA for Sp1. Thus, the transcriptional activation 
of these two promoters by IGF-1 requires the induction of Sp1 protein. These
experiments suggest that the global transcriptional regulatory actions of IGF-1
involve activation of the Sp1 site in cardiac muscle. The computational model we 
have developed is a prototypical method that may be further developed to identify
unique cis- and trans-acting elements in response to hormonal stimulation during 
cardiac muscle growth, repair, and remodeling in normal and abnormal cardiac
muscle.

PMID: 14593001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Endocrinology. 2004 Feb;145(2):659-66. Epub 2003 Oct 30.

Insulin-like growth factor I increases rat peptide YY promoter activity through
Sp1 binding sites.

Wang G(1), Leiter AB, Englander EW, Greeley GH Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The University of Texas Medical Branch, 301 University 
Boulevard, Galveston, TX 77555-0725, USA.

Studies in rodents demonstrate that the mitogen, IGF-I, stimulates intestinal
peptide YY (PYY) expression. To investigate whether the stimulatory influence of 
IGF-I is exerted at the level of gene transcription, rat PYY 5'-upstream
sequences (-2800/+37 bp, -770/+37 bp, -127/+37 bp) fused to the firefly
luciferase (luc) reporter gene were transfected into rat pheochromocytoma cells
(PC12) and luc activity measured after IGF-I treatment. IGF-I increased
transcriptional activity of all constructs similarly; the PYY (-127/+37 bp)-luc
construct was used in subsequent experiments. IGF-I increased PYY (-127/+37
bp)-luc activity in a time- and dose-dependent fashion. Sequence analysis
detected five putative Sp1 binding sites in the -127/+37-bp sequence. EMSA and
supershift experiments using two oligonucleotide fragments of the -127/+37 region
showed that Sp1 and Sp3 proteins bound to putative Sp1 sites. Overexpression of
Sp1 greatly increased PYY (-127/+37 bp)-luc activity and site-directed
mutagenesis of putative Sp1 binding sites decreased basal and IGF-I-induced
elevations in PYY (-127/+37 bp)-luc activity. IGF-I treatment also increased Sp1 
protein levels and binding activity. Blockade of the IGF-I receptor (IGF-IR) with
an IGF-IR antibody decreased the stimulatory influence of IGF-I on Sp1 protein
levels and PYY (-127/+37 bp)-luc activity. Together, these findings indicate that
IGF-I functions as a positive regulator of PYY gene expression and that the
stimulatory effect may be mediated by Sp1 proteins that bind to the proximal PYY 
promoter region.

PMID: 14592960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Nov;23(22):7992-8007.

Regulation of the human MSH6 gene by the Sp1 transcription factor and alteration 
of promoter activity and expression by polymorphisms.

Gazzoli I(1), Kolodner RD.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research. University of California-San Diego
School of Medicine, CMME 3058, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
igazzoli@ucsd.edu

Defects in human DNA mismatch repair have been reported to underlie a variety of 
hereditary and sporadic cancer cases. We characterized the structure of the MSH6 
promoter region to examine the mechanisms of transcriptional regulation of the
MSH6 gene. The 5'-flanking region of the MSH6 gene was found to contain seven
functional Sp1 transcription factor binding sites that each bind Sp1 and Sp3 and 
contribute to promoter activity. Transcription did not appear to require a TATA
box and resulted in multiple start sites, including two major start sites and at 
least nine minor start sites. Three common polymorphisms were identified in the
promoter region (-557 T-->G, -448 G-->A, and -159 C-->T): the latter two were
always associated, and each of these functionally inactivated a different Sp1
site. The polymorphic allele -448 A -159 T was demonstrated to be a common
Caucasian polymorphism found in 16% of Caucasians and resulted in a five-Sp1-site
promoter that had 50% less promoter activity and was more sensitive to
inactivation by DNA methylation than the more common seven Sp1 site promoter
allele, which was only partially inactivated by DNA methylation. In cell lines,
this five-Sp1-site polymorphism resulted in reduced MSH6 expression at both the
mRNA and protein level. An additional 2% of Caucasians contained another
polymorphism, -210 C-->T, which inactivated a single Sp1 site that also
contributes to promoter activity.

PMCID: PMC262342
PMID: 14585961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Org Biomol Chem. 2003 Oct 7;1(19):3430-7.

Crystal structures and properties of mutagenic N-acyloxy-N-alkoxyamides--"most
pyramidal" acyclic amides.

Gillson AM(1), Glover SA, Tucker DJ, Turner P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Chemistry, School of Biological, Biomedical and Molecular
Sciences, University of New England, Armidale 2351, New South Wales, Australia.

X-Ray data for two N-acyloxy-N-alkoxyamides, a class of direct-acting mutagens,
indicate extreme pyramidalisation at the amide nitrogen in keeping with
spectroscopic and theoretically determined properties of amides with
bisoxosubstitution at nitrogen. The combined electronegativity of two oxygens
leads to average angles at nitrogen of 107.8 and 108.1 degrees and [chiN] of 66
degrees and 65 degrees. The sp3 nature of nitrogen results in negligible amide
resonance as evidenced by long N-C(O) bonds, high IR carbonyl stretch
frequencies, carbonyl 13C NMR data and very low amide isomerisation barriers. In 
addition, conformations in the solid state support a strong n(O)-sigma*(NOAc),
anomeric interaction as predicted by molecular orbital theory. HF/6-31G*
calculations on formamide, N-methoxyformamide and N-formyloxy-N-methoxyformamide 
support these findings.

PMID: 14584807  [PubMed]


175. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jan 9;279(2):963-9. Epub 2003 Oct 27.

Tumor necrosis factor-alpha inhibits endothelial nitric-oxide synthase gene
promoter activity in bovine aortic endothelial cells.

Anderson HD(1), Rahmutula D, Gardner DG.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center and Department of Medicine, University of California at San
Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143-0540, USA.

Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) has been shown to reduce endothelial
nitric-oxide synthase (eNOS) gene expression through post-transcriptional
regulation of mRNA stability. The current study documented an independent effect 
of the cytokine on the eNOS gene promoter. TNF-alpha effected a time- and
dose-dependent reduction in activity of a transiently transfected human -1197
eNOS-luciferase reporter. This reduction was inhibited by co-transfection of
dominant negative IKKbeta as well as a nonphosphorylatable constitutively
suppressive mutant of IkappaB implying involvement of the NFkappaB cascade in the
inhibitory effect. The locus of the TNF-alpha-dependent inhibition was traced to 
two Sp1-binding sites positioned between -109 and -95 and -81 and -67 relative to
the transcription start site. Electrophoretic mobility shift analysis and
immunoperturbation studies showed evidence for Sp1 and Sp3 binding to each
element. TNF-alpha treatment had no effect on the binding pattern to the
downstream (-81 to -67) site but did suppress association of Sp1 and Sp3 to the
upstream (-109 to -95) site. Collectively, these data indicate that TNF-alpha
exerts transcriptional, as well as post-transcriptional, effects on eNOS gene
expression and suggest a potential mechanism to account for the endothelial
dysfunction that accompanies disorders such as diabetes mellitus and heart
failure.

PMID: 14581470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Mol Pharmacol. 2003 Nov;64(5):1259-69.

Cloning and Characterization of the Murine and Rat mrp1 Promoter Regions.

Muredda M(1), Nunoya K, Burtch-Wright RA, Kurz EU, Cole SP, Deeley RG.

Author information: 
(1)Queen's University Cancer Research Institute, Botterell Hall Room A315C,
Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada K7L 3N6.

The ATP-binding cassette transporter multidrug resistance protein 1 (MRP1)
confers resistance to a number of clinically important chemotherapeutic agents.
The proximal promoter region of MRP1 is GC-rich and contains binding sites for
members of the Sp1 family of trans-acting factors that seem to be important for
basal expression. As an approach to searching for other elements that may
contribute to expression, we have sequenced and functionally compared the
promoters of the murine and rat mrp1 genes with that of the human gene. All three
promoters are GC-rich, TATA-less, and CAAT-less. Conservation of sequence between
rodent and human promoters is limited to a proximal region of 100 nucleotides
containing binding sites for members of the Sp1 family and a putative activator
protein-1 element. The 5'-untranslated region (UTR) of human MRP1 contains an
insertion of approximately 160 nucleotides comprising a GCC-triplet repeat and a 
GC-rich tandem repeat that is absent from the rodent sequences. Transient
transfection analyses demonstrated that the conserved GC-boxes of all three genes
are the major determinants of basal activity. Based on electrophoretic mobility
shift assays, each GC-box can be bound by Sp1 or Sp3. Unlike the rodent genes,
the human MRP1 5'UTR also binds Sp1 but not Sp3, and the human promoter retains
substantial activity even in the absence of the conserved GC-boxes. Finally, we
show that the tumor suppressor protein p53 can repress the human and rodent
promoters by a mechanism that is independent of the Sp1 elements.

PMID: 14573776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Biochem J. 2004 Feb 1;377(Pt 3):797-808.

Transcriptional activation of the murine Muc5ac mucin gene in epithelial cancer
cells by TGF-beta/Smad4 signalling pathway is potentiated by Sp1.

Jonckheere N(1), Van Der Sluis M, Velghe A, Buisine MP, Sutmuller M, Ducourouble 
MP, Pigny P, Büller HA, Aubert JP, Einerhand AW, Van Seuningen I.

Author information: 
(1)Unité INSERM U560, Place de Verdun, 59045 Lille Cedex, France.

The nucleotide sequence of the pMS1 clone was submitted to the GenBank Nucleotide
Sequence Database under accession number AF288076. Changes in the expression of
mucin genes in gastrointestinal cancers is thought to contribute to the
development of the disease. In our laboratory we have shown previously that
MUC5AC is aberrantly expressed in rectosigmoid villous adenomas. However, the
regulatory mechanisms underlying that altered profile of expression is unknown.
In order to study its regulation at the transcriptional level, we have isolated
and characterized 5.5 kb of the 5'-flanking region of the mouse Muc5ac mucin
gene. The promoter is flanked by a TATA box and a transcriptional start site is
located 22 bp downstream of the TATA box. Analysis of the sequence showed a high 
density of binding sites for Smad4, an essential factor in the signalling cascade
activated by TGF-beta (transforming growth factor-beta), and Sp1, an important
factor in the regulation of MUC5AC. This led us to study Muc5ac regulation by
TGF-beta. We show that exogenous addition of TGF-beta to the cells induces Muc5ac
endogenous expression, promoter activity and Smad4 binding to the promoter. By
co-transfection studies we show that Smad4 is essential for Muc5ac promoter
activation and that it does not synergize with Smad2 or Smad3. By gel-retardation
and co-transfection assays, we identified Sp1 and Sp3 as important regulators of 
Muc5ac expression and showed that Smad4 and Sp1 act in a co-operative manner to
transactivate Muc5ac promoter activity. Altogether these results bring new
insights into the molecular mechanisms of TGF-beta-mediated up-regulation of
Muc5ac and enhance our understanding as to how Muc5ac is regulated in certain
pathologies of the gastrointestinal tract.

PMCID: PMC1223907
PMID: 14570593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Mol Genet Metab. 2003 Sep-Oct;80(1-2):272-80.

N-myc oncogene expression in neuroblastoma is driven by Sp1 and Sp3.

Tuthill MC(1), Wada RK, Arimoto JM, Sugino CN, Kanemaru KK, Takeuchi KK, Sidell
N.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Carcinogenesis Section, Cancer Etiology Program, Cancer Research
Center of Hawaii, The University of Hawaii at Manoa, 1236 Lauhala Street,
Honolulu, HI 96813-2424, USA.

Regulation of N-myc oncogene expression is an important determinant of the
biological behavior of neuroblastoma. The N-myc promoter contains several
potential binding sites for transcription factors of the Sp1 family. Mutation of 
a CT-box motif contained within a 26 bp region required for N-myc downregulation 
by retinoic acid decreased basal transcriptional activity and altered DNA-protein
interactions of the promoter, while mutations flanking this motif did neither. On
super-shift, this region was shown to recruit Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factor
proteins, while a functionally significant CT-box mutation resulted in their
replacement by NF-1 transcription factor. Lysates from Drosophila S2 cells
expressing exogenous Sp1, Sp3, and NF-1 proteins were able to partially mimic gel
shift complexes seen with neuroblastoma nuclear extract and either wild type or
mutant probes. Transient transfections of S2 cells showed that both individually 
and together, Sp1 and Sp3 were able to trans-activate a wild type CT-box-driven
luciferase reporter construct in a dose-dependent manner. Transfection of the
wild type but not mutant CT-box oligonucleotide was able to decrease endogenous
N-myc expression in neuroblastoma cells. Together these results suggest that the 
CT-box element serves a critically functional role, and in the basal state,
allows for N-myc trans-activation by Sp1 and Sp3. Moreover when mutated, the
CT-box may still function as a binding motif for alternate transcription factors 
such as NF-1 that can allow persistent N-myc expression.

PMID: 14567977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Endocrinology. 2004 Feb;145(2):582-91. Epub 2003 Oct 16.

Cathepsin L gene expression and promoter activation in rodent granulosa cells.

Sriraman V(1), Richards JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, One 
Baylor Place, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The cysteine protease cathepsin L exhibits hormone-regulated expression during
ovulation. In situ hybridization analyses of immature and pregnant mare serum
gonadotropin-treated mouse and rat ovaries showed that cathepsin L expression in 
granulosa cells of small, growing follicles increased in periovulatory follicles 
after human chorionic gonadotropin stimulation. In the rat ovary, cathepsin L was
also expressed in follicles with signs of atresia. To determine the molecular
mechanisms that mediate the diverse regulation of this gene in granulosa cells,
rat cathepsin L promoter-reporter constructs were analyzed by transient
transfection assays in rat granulosa cells and EMSAs. A construct containing the 
transcriptional start site and -244 bp of upstream promoter sequence (-244/+33
bp) exhibited inducibility by forskolin, the phorbol ester phorbol myristate
acetate, and an additive effect of both. Within this region, three functional
specificity protein 1 (Sp1) sites, an overlapping early growth response protein-1
site, and a cAMP regulatory element-binding protein site were identified. Single 
or double mutants of the above-mentioned sites did not alter forskolin/phorbol
myristate acetate inducibility of the promoter. Mutation of all three
Sp1/specificity protein 3 (Sp3) sites, which also mutated the early growth
response protein-1 site, reduced the promoter activation. Mutation of the cAMP
regulatory element-binding protein site in the triple Sp1 mutant construct
completely blocked the inducibility of the promoter. When these same constructs
were transfected into MCF-7 human breast cancer cells or were cotransfected with 
an Sp1 expression vector in Drosophila SL2 cells, similar results were obtained. 
Collectively, the data document that three Sp1/specificity protein 3 binding
GC-rich regions and a functional cAMP regulatory element constitute an important 
transcriptional regulatory complex for expression of the cathepsin L gene in rat 
granulosa cells.

PMID: 14563703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Gene. 2003 Oct 16;316:91-101.

Promoter analysis of the human translation termination factor 1 gene.

Dubourg C(1), Toutain B, Le Gall JY, Le Treut A, Guenet L.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, UMR 6061 "Génétique et
Développement", Faculté de Médecine, CS 34317, 2 Avenue du Pr. Leon Bernard,
35043 Cedex, Rennes, France.

The human translation termination factor 1 (ETF1) gene encodes a class-1 release 
factor, eRF1, which catalyses termination of protein synthesis at all three stop 
codons. In this report, we describe the functional organization of the 5'-region 
of the gene. Primer extension and ribonuclease protection mapping revealed three 
transcription start sites clustered within approximately 10 bp. DNase
I-hypersensitive site analysis identified five hypersensitive sites, one of which
was located downstream of the initiation start sites. We used transient
expression assays to define the 5'-regulating regions and in vivo and in vitro
footprinting analysis to identify potential cis-acting regulatory elements. A
basal promoter, spanning nucleotides -210/+117, contained no TATA box but a
putative initiator element (Inr) and multiple potential Sp1/Sp3 binding sites,
and thus displayed some of the features of a housekeeping gene. An additional
upstream promoter containing positive and negative regulatory elements also
regulated ETF1 gene expression. Real-time quantitative RT-PCR analysis showed
tissue-specific expression of ETF1 transcripts in mouse tissues. Our results are 
suggestive of a constitutive expression of the human ETF1 gene but with possible 
cell- and tissue-specific regulation.

PMID: 14563555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Am Chem Soc. 2003 Oct 22;125(42):12700-1.

Cine-substitution in the Stille coupling: evidence for the carbenoid reactivity
of sp3-gem-organodimetallic iodopalladio-trialkylstannylalkane intermediates.

Fillion E(1), Taylor NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada N2L
3G1. efillion@uwaterloo.ca

Two complementary routes to sp3-gem-organodimetallic
iodopalladio-trialkylstannanylalkanes are presented. Such intermediates have been
proposed as Pd-carbenoid precursors in the Busacca-Farina cine-substitution
mechanism in the Stille coupling. The decomposition of
iodomethyltrialkylstannanes by Pd(0) catalysts was monitored by 1H, 2D, and 119Sn
NMR. The formation of ethylene, trace formaldehyde, and iodotrialkylstannanes was
detected. When the reaction was carried out in the presence of norbornene, the
corresponding cyclopropane was produced in good yield. These observations are
consistent with the intermediacy of a Pd-carbenoid species.
sp3-gem-Organodimetallic iodopalladio-trialkylstannanylalkane complexes were also
prepared under stoichiometric conditions via transmetalation from tin to Pd(II). 
Me3SnCH2Sn(CH2CH2CH2)3 reacted with [(D-t-BPF)PdI]+I-, yielding the
(D-t-BPF)Pd(II)ICH2SnMe3 complex that dimerized to form ethylene and
cyclopropanated norbornene. The carbenoid reactivity of
iodopalladio-trialkylstannanylalkanes complexes validates the Busacca-Farina
mechanism of the cine-substitution in the Stille coupling.

PMID: 14558805  [PubMed]


182. J Virol. 2003 Nov;77(21):11425-35.

Chromatin remodeling of the Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus ORF50
promoter correlates with reactivation from latency.

Lu F(1), Zhou J, Wiedmer A, Madden K, Yuan Y, Lieberman PM.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute. Department of Microbiology, School of Dental Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The switch from latent to lytic infection of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus is initiated by the immediate early transcriptional activator protein
Rta/open reading frame 50 (ORF50). We examined the transcriptional regulation of 
the ORF50 core promoter in response to lytic cycle stimulation. We show that the 
ORF50 promoter is highly responsive to sodium butyrate (NaB) and trichostatin A
(TSA), two chemicals known to inhibit histone deacetylases. The NaB and TSA
responsive element was mapped to a 70-bp minimal promoter containing an essential
GC box that binds Sp1/Sp3 in vitro and in vivo. Micrococcal nuclease mapping
studies revealed that a nucleosome is positioned over the transcriptional
initiation and the Sp1/3 binding sites. Stimulation with NaB or TSA increased
histone acetylation and restriction enzyme accessibility of the ORF50 promoter
transcription initiation site. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay was used to
demonstrate that the ORF50 promoter is associated with several different histone 
deacetylase proteins (including HDAC1, 5, and 7) in latently infected cells. NaB 
treatment led to the rapid association of Ini1/Snf5, a component of the Swi/Snf
family of chromatin remodeling proteins, with the ORF50 promoter. Ectopic
expression of the CREB-binding protein (CBP) histone acetyltransferase (HAT)
stimulated plasmid-based ORF50 transcription in a HAT-dependent manner,
suggesting that CBP recruitment to the ORF50 promoter can be an initiating event 
for transcription and viral reactivation. Together, these results suggest that
remodeling of a stably positioned nucleosome at the transcriptional initiation
site of ORF50 is a regulatory step in the transition from latent to lytic
infection.

PMCID: PMC229253
PMID: 14557628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Gene. 2003 Oct 2;315:133-44.

An interplay of Sp1, GKLF and CREB-2 controls human Pre-alpha-Inhibitor gene
(ITIH3) transcription.

Ruminy P(1), Rouet P, Salier JP.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unit 519, Faculté de Médecine-Pharmacie, Institut Fédératif de
Recherches Multidisciplinaires sur les Peptides, 22 Bvd Gambetta, 76183 Rouen
cedex, France.

Pre-alpha-Inhibitor is a plasma protease inhibitor and a heterodimeric molecule
whose one polypeptide chain is encoded by the ITIH3 gene. In order to understand 
the expression of this protein that is regulated in health and disease, we have
analyzed the 5' flanking region of ITIH3, specifically focussing on its proximal 
promoter. A combination of methods including wild-type (wt) or mutant promoter
linked to a reporter cat gene, co-transfections of cat constructs with expression
plasmids for nuclear factors and electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed
that two antagonistic sets of regulatory elements and nuclear proteins are
critical for the activity of this promoter. Indeed, several overlapping
Sp1/Sp3-binding sites are required for a sustained activity. However, a
tripartite complex including CREB-2 and two molecules of the gut-enriched,
Krüppel-like factor cooperate to bind to an upstream area whose 3' end overlaps
the Sp1-binding sites. The resulting competition between this tripartite complex 
and Sp1 results in impaired occupancy of Sp1-binding sites by Sp1 and a
consequent reduction in ITIH3 transcription. Competition between Sp1 and a
Krüppel-like factor for GC-rich sites has been previously reported, but this is
the first description of an elaborate tripartite cooperation of two Krüppel-like 
factors and CREB as a key step in such a competition.

PMID: 14557073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2004 Feb;286(2):L452-9. Epub 2003 Oct 10.

TNF-alpha induces a decrease in eNOS promoter activity.

Neumann P(1), Gertzberg N, Johnson A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Science, Albany Medical College, Albany, NY 12208,
USA.

We determined whether TNF-alpha induces a decrease in activity of the promoter
for the endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) gene in pulmonary microvessel
endothelial monolayers (PMEM). eNOS promoter activity was assessed in PMEM
transfected with plasmids coding the wild-type (F1: -1600 nt from transcription
start site) and truncated (F2: -1189, F4: -779, F5: -494, F6: -166) human eNOS
promoters linked to a luciferase reporter. PMEM lysates were analyzed for the
luciferase/galactosidase ratio (Luc/Gal) after incubation with TNF-alpha (50
ng/ml) for 0.5 or 4 h. TNF-alpha caused a decrease in the Luc/Gal ratio in the
PMEM transfected with wild-type F1 and truncated F2, F4, and F5 plasmids but not 
with truncated F6 plasmid. Truncated-promoter analysis indicated the response
elements (-370)CACCC, (-231)GATA, and (-186)CACCC may regulate the effect of
TNF-alpha on the eNOS promoter. DNA-binding activity of (32)P-labeled
oligonucleotide probes that span the GATA-binding site
((-239)-[(-231)GATA]-(-219)) and the two different CACCC-binding regions
((-379)-[(-370)CACCC]-(-358) and (-196)-[(-186) CACCC]-(-176)) were assessed
using EMSA. In response to TNF-alpha treatment for 4 h, nuclear protein binding
to (32)P oligonucleotides was characterized as: 1) a significant increase in
binding to (-370)CACCC, 2) a significant decrease in binding to (-231)GATA, and
3) no change in (-186)CACCC binding. EMSA supershift analysis indicated that the 
transcription factor protein GATA-4 bound to the (-231)GATA site, and Sp3 bound
to the (-370)CACCC site. Our data indicate TNF causes a decrease in eNOS promoter
activity that may be mediated by GATA-4 and Sp3.

PMID: 14555463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jan 2;279(1):374-84. Epub 2003 Oct 9.

Reduced folate carrier gene silencing in multiple antifolate-resistant tumor cell
lines is due to a simultaneous loss of function of multiple transcription factors
but not promoter methylation.

Rothem L(1), Stark M, Kaufman Y, Mayo L, Assaraf YG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, The Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa
32000, Israel.

The human reduced folate carrier (hRFC) is the major uptake route for antifolates
used in cancer chemotherapy. Here we explored the molecular basis for the
decrease or loss of hRFC gene expression in seventeen tumor cell lines with
resistance to multiple antifolates due to impaired antifolate transport. We
studied the role of various cis-acting elements including CRE/AP-1-like element
and GC-box in hRFC promoters A and B, respectively, as well as AP-2, Mzf-1 and
E-box that are contained within or near four tandemly repeated sequences upstream
of promoter A. Decreased or abolished binding either to [32P]GC-box, Mzf-1, AP-1,
E-box, or CRE oligonucleotides was detected in approximately 50-80% of
antifolate-resistant cell lines. Strikingly, approximately 80% of the cell lines 
displayed a simultaneously decreased binding to three or more of these hRFC
promoter elements, whereas normal AP-2 binding was retained. The possible
contribution of promoter methylation to hRFC gene silencing was also explored.
None of the antifolate-resistant cell lines, except for MDA-MB-231 cells, showed 
hRFC promoter methylation; consistently, MDA-MB-231 was the only cell line that
retained binding to all six cis-acting elements. Western blot analysis
demonstrated decreased expression of transcriptional activators (pCREB-1, pATF-1,
USF-1, c-Fos, c-Jun, Sp1, and Sp3) and/or increased expression of repressors
(short Sp3 isoforms), whereas normal AP2alpha levels were retained. Transient
expression of the relevant transcription factors restored, at least partially,
both promoter binding and hRFC gene expression. This is the first report that
transcriptional silencing of the hRFC gene in multiple tumor cell lines with
resistance to various novel antifolates is a result of a simultaneous loss of
function of multiple transcription factors but not promoter methylation.

PMID: 14551190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Faraday Discuss. 2003;124:111-27; discussion 145-53, 453-5.

Theoretical studies on C-heteroatom bond formation via reductive elimination from
group 10 M(PH3)2(CH3)(X) species (X = CH3, NH2, OH, SH) and the determination of 
metal-X bond strengths using density functional theory.

Macgregor SA(1), Neave GW, Smith C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, School of Engineering and Physical Sciences,
Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, UK EH14 4AS.

Density functional calculations have been used to investigate C-C, C-N and C-O
bond forming reactions via reductive elimination from Group 10
cis-M(PH3)2(CH3)(X) species (X = C-I3, NH2, OH). Both direct reaction from the
four-coordinate species and a three-coordinate mechanism involving initial PH3
loss have been considered. For the four-coordinate pathway the ease of reductive 
elimination to give M(PH3)2 and CH3-X follows the trend M = Pd < Pt < Ni. The
reaction of the cis-M(PH3)2(CH3)(NH2) species is promoted by the formation of
methylamine adducts. Non-planar transition states are located and the
C-heteroatom bond forming processes are characterised by migration of CH3 onto
the cis-heteroatom ligand. For a given ligand, X, activation energies follow the 
trend M = Ni < Pd < Pt. Formation of the three-coordinate M(PH3)(CH3)(X) species 
is promoted by a labilisation of the cis-PH3 ligand in the four-coordinate
reactants when X = NH2 or OH. For the three-coordinate pathway the energy change 
for reductive elimination to give M(PH3) and CH3-X again follows the trend M = Pd
< Pt < Ni and in all cases the initial product is an M(PH3)(XCH3) adduct. The
three-coordinate transition states again involve migration of the CH3 ligand onto
the cis-X ligand and for X = NH2 or OH activation energies follow the trend Ni > 
Pd < Pt. For a given metal activation energies in both the four- and
three-coordinate pathways increase along the series CH3 < NH2 < OH. These trends 
in activation energy can be rationalised in terms of the strength of M-CH3/M-X
bonding as long as the extent of geometrical distortion required to obtain the
transition state geometry is taken into account. Further calculations on
cis-Pd(PH3)2(CH3)(SH) suggest that the more common experimental observation of
C(sp3)-S compared to C(sp3)-O reductive elimination arises from the greater
kinetic accessibility of the former process rather than an intrinsic
thermodynamic preference for C-S bond formation. By comparison, the calculations 
indicate that C(sp3)-N reductive elimination should be feasible from Ni and Pd
systems. DF calculations are shown to reproduce the relative homolytic bond
strengths determined experimentally for Pt-X bonds. In the cis-M(PH3)2(CH3)(X)
systems the M-CH3 homolytic bond strength increases down the group while for
M-NH2 and M-OH bonds the trend is M = N approximately equal to Pd < Pt. M-NH2 and
M-OH are considerably stronger than M-CH3 bonds and the presence of a heteroatom 
ligand serves to weaken M-CH3 bonds even further.

PMID: 14527213  [PubMed]


187. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2003 Oct;35(10):1197-205.

Regulation of the human tumor necrosis factor-alpha promoter by angiotensin II
and lipopolysaccharide in cardiac fibroblasts: different cis-acting promoter
sequences and transcriptional factors.

Sato H(1), Watanabe A, Tanaka T, Koitabashi N, Arai M, Kurabayashi M, Yokoyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Gunma University School of Medicine,
Maebashi 3718511, Japan.

Comment in
    J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2003 Oct;35(10):1179-81.

We recently showed that angiotensin (ANG) II as well as mechanical stretch
stimulated production of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) in cardiac fibroblasts.
Presently, we examined the molecular mechanisms by which ANGII and
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) upregulate TNF-alpha gene expression. In neonatal rat
cardiac fibroblasts, increased transcription of TNF-alpha mRNA was detected as
luciferase activity associated with activity of the TNF-alpha promoter.
Progressive deletion from this promoter located the LPS-responsive region between
-200 and -120 bp from the transcription initiation site, while the sequence
between -120 and -70 bp was required for ANGII-induced expression. Next, we
examined which cis-acting sequences in the TNF-alpha promoter region were
essential for induction of TNF-alpha transcription. Competition analysis by
electrophoretic mobility shift assay with and without specific antibodies showed 
that LPS increased binding of Sp1 and Sp3 to the Sp1-binding site, while Egr-1
was unimportant. With ANGII, binding of ATF-2/c-jun to the CRE site was required 
for TNF-alpha gene induction; neither Ets nor NF-kappaB was essential. Mutation
analysis confirmed that response to LPS relied upon the Sp1 site in the TNF-alpha
promoter, while the CRE-binding site was essential for stimulation by ANGII. We
concluded that since TNF-alpha gene expression is transcriptionally activated by 
ANGII or LPS in cardiac fibroblasts via different cis-acting sequences in the
TNF-alpha promoter and different transcriptional factors, mechanisms inducing TNF
production differ between heart failure or cardiac hypertrophy and infectious
disease.

PMID: 14519430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Biol Chem. 2003 Dec 12;278(50):49901-10. Epub 2003 Sep 26.

Physical and functional interactions between USF and Sp1 proteins regulate human 
deoxycytidine kinase promoter activity.

Ge Y(1), Jensen TL, Matherly LH, Taub JW.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental and Clinical Therapeutics Program, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer
Institute, Detroit, Michigan 48201, USA.

Deoxycytidine kinase (EC 2.7.1.74, dCK) is central to drug activity of anticancer
and antiviral agents such as cytosine arabinoside (araC) and gemcitabine. HepG2
hepatocellular carcinoma cells were used to study the transcriptional regulation 
of dCK. 5'-Deletion and site-directed mutagenesis of the dCK upstream region
(positions -464 to -27) confirmed the importance of two GC-boxes (positions -317 
to -309 and -213 to -206) and two E-boxes (positions -302 to -297 and -278 to
-273). In vitro electromobility shift assays with HepG2 nuclear extracts and in
vivo chromatin immunoprecipitation assays with HepG2 chromatin extracts confirmed
the presence of bound Sp1/Sp3 and USF1/2. Co-transfections in HepG2 cells showed 
that USF1 and USF2a stimulated and Sp1 repressed promoter activity from a
dCK-luciferase reporter gene construct. In Sp- and USF-null Drosophila Mel-2
cells, both Sp1 and USF1 stimulated dCK promoter activity in a dose-dependent
manner, however, both Sp3 and USF2a were effectively inert. Combined Sp1 and USF1
showed additive transactivation at lower concentrations of Sp1. Sp1 was
inhibitory at higher levels. Stimulation by combined USF1/USF2a with Sp1 was
similar to that for USF1 alone with Sp1, whereas transactivation by Sp1 and USF2a
without USF1 was synergistic. Physical interactions between USF and Sp proteins
were confirmed by immunoprecipitations with Sp- and USF-specific antibodies.
Domain mapping of USF1 and USF2a localized the functional interactions between
USF and Sp proteins to the DNA binding domain of USF. Identifying the physical
and functional interactions between Sp and USF proteins may lead to a better
understanding of the basis for differential expression of the dCK gene in tumor
cells and may foster strategies for up-regulating dCK gene expression and
improving chemotherapy with araC and gemcitabine.

PMID: 14514691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Nucleic Acids Res Suppl. 2003;(3):307-8.

Control elements of Dnmt1 gene are regulated in cell-cycle dependent manner.

Kishikawa S(1), Murata T, Ugai H, Yamazaki T, Yokoyama KK.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Engineering Division, Department of Biological Systems, RIKEN BioResource
Center, 3-1-1 Koyadai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0074, Japan.

The Dnmt1 gene is constitutively expressed and is required for the maintenance of
global methylation after DNA replication. We investigated here the effects of
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor and DNA demetylation agent on promoter
activity of mouse Dnmt1 gene in somatic cells. The promoter activity of Dnmt1
gene was increased approximately 2-fold in the treatment of cells by Tricostatin 
A (TSA) at 1 x 10(-8) M, as compared with that without treatment of TSA. By
contrast, treatment with 5-azacytidne (5aza-C) did not affect the promoter
activity of the Dnmt1 gene. This result indicates the Dnmt1 gene is possibly
regulated by histone acetylation. We also examined the expression levels of Dnmt1
gene and of its control elements like Sp1, Sp3 and p300 by the chromatin
immunoprecipitation and Western blot analysis. The expression of Dnmt1 gene is
observed at early S phase. Sp1 is recruited mainly at the G1 phase and Sp3 is
recruited at the early S phase. p300 is also obviously recruited at the second S 
phase. These data indicated that the regulators of Dnmt1 gene were controlled in 
cell-cycle dependent manner.

PMID: 14510503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Oct 28;100(22):12539-42. Epub 2003 Sep 22.

Revealing the hidden atom in graphite by low-temperature atomic force microscopy.

Hembacher S(1), Giessibl FJ, Mannhart J, Quate CF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physics, Electronic Correlations and Magnetism,
Experimentalphysik VI, Universität Augsburg, Universitätsstrasse 1, D-86135
Augsburg, Germany.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Oct 28;100(22):12531-2.

Carbon, the backbone material of life on Earth, comes in three modifications:
diamond, graphite, and fullerenes. Diamond develops tetrahedral sp3 bonds,
forming a cubic crystal structure, whereas graphite and fullerenes are
characterized by planar sp2 bonds. Polycrystalline graphite is the basis for many
products of everyday life: pencils, lubricants, batteries, arc lamps, and brushes
for electric motors. In crystalline form, highly oriented pyrolytic graphite is
used as a diffracting element in monochromators for x-ray and neutron scattering 
and as a calibration standard for scanning tunneling microscopy (STM). The
graphite surface is easily prepared as a clean atomically flat surface by
cleavage. This feature is attractive and is used in many laboratories as the
surface of choice for "seeing atoms." Despite the proverbial ease of imaging
graphite by STM with atomic resolution, every second atom in the hexagonal
surface unit cell remains hidden, and STM images show only a single atom in the
unit cell. Here we present measurements with a low-temperature atomic force
microscope with pico-Newton force sensitivity that reveal the hidden surface
atom.

PMCID: PMC240651
PMID: 14504395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Oct;23(19):6958-72.

Repression of the luteinizing hormone receptor gene promoter by cross talk among 
EAR3/COUP-TFI, Sp1/Sp3, and TFIIB.

Zhang Y(1), Dufau ML.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Molecular Endocrinology, Endocrinology, and Reproduction Research
Branch, National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Transcription of luteinizing hormone receptor (LHR) gene is activated by Sp1/Sp3 
at two Sp1 sites and is repressed by nuclear orphan receptors EAR2 and EAR3
through a direct-repeat (DR) motif. To elucidate the mechanism of the orphan
receptor-mediated gene repression, we explored the functional connection between 
the orphan receptors and Sp1/Sp3 complex, and its impact on the basal
transcription machinery. The Sp1(I) site was identified as critical for the
repression since its mutation reduced the inhibition by EAR2 and abolished the
inhibition by EAR3. Cotransfection analyses in SL2 cells showed that both Sp1 and
Sp3 were required for this process since EAR3 displayed a complete
Sp1/Sp3-dependent inhibitory effect. Functional cooperation between Sp1 and DR
domains was further supported by mutual recruitment of EAR3 and Sp1/Sp3 bound to 
their cognate sites. Deletion of EAR3 N-terminal and DNA-binding domains that
reduced its interaction with Sp1 impaired its inhibitory effect on human LHR
(hLHR) gene transcription. Furthermore, we demonstrate interaction of TFIIB with 
Sp1/Sp3 at the Sp1(I) site besides its association with EAR3 and the TATA-less
core promoter region. Such interaction relied on Sp1 site-bound Sp1/Sp3 complex
and adaptor protein(s) present in the JAR nuclear extracts. We further
demonstrated that EAR3 specifically decreased association of TFIIB to the Sp1(I) 
site without interfering on its interaction with the hLHR core promoter. The
C-terminal region of EAR3, which did not participate in its interaction with Sp1,
was required for its inhibitory function and may affect the association of TFIIB 
with Sp1. Moreover, perturbation of the association of TFIIB with Sp1 by EAR3 was
reflected in the reduced recruitment of RNA polymerase II to the promoter.
Overexpression of TFIIB counteracted the inhibitory effect of EAR3 and activated 
hLHR gene transcription in an Sp1 site-dependent manner. These findings therefore
indicate that TFIIB is a key component in the regulatory control of EAR3 and
Sp1/Sp3 on the initiation complex. Such cross talk among EAR3, TFIIB, and Sp1/Sp3
reveals repression of hLHR gene transcription by nuclear orphan receptors is
achieved via perturbation of communication between Sp1/Sp3 at the Sp1-1 site and 
the basal transcription initiator complex.

PMCID: PMC193922
PMID: 12972613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Mol Cell Biochem. 2003 Aug;250(1-2):151-8.

Counter-regulatory effects of incremental hypoxia on the transcription of a
cardiac fatty acid oxidation enzyme-encoding gene.

Ngumbela KC(1), Sack MN, Essop MF.

Author information: 
(1)Hatter Institute for Cardiology Research, University of Cape Town Medical
School, Cape Town, South Africa.

Cardiac fatty acid oxidation (FAO) enzyme gene expression is known to be
downregulated during hypoxia in concordance with reduced FAO rates. To evaluate
this metabolic switch, the transcriptional control of a cardiac FAO
enzyme-encoding gene (medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase, MCAD) was
characterized in response to hypobaric hypoxia. Transgenic mice harboring 560-bp 
of the human MCAD gene promoter fused to the bacterial chloramphenicol acetyl
transferase (CAT) reporter gene were exposed to moderate (14% O2) or severe (8%
O2) hypoxia for 2 or 7 days. MCAD-CAT activity and gene expression were
significantly downregulated following 7 days of moderate hypoxia versus normoxic 
controls (p < 0.05). In parallel two known transcriptional regulators of MCAD
expression, PPARalpha and Sp3, were concordantly downregulated at 7 days hypoxia.
In contrast, severe hypoxia increased MCAD-CAT activity by 31 +/- 1.4% after 2
days hypoxia, returning to base +/- 4% after 2 days (p < 0.001) and returned to
control levels after 7 days of hypoxia. These data demonstrate that MCAD gene
expression is downregulated after 7 days of moderate hypoxia and inversely
regulated with severe hypoxia. The known MCAD transcriptional regulators
PPARalpha and Sp3 mirror MCAD expression. These data indicate that the
transcriptional regulatory circuits involved in the control of MCAD gene
expression under hypoxic conditions are modulated by upstream factors that are
sensitive to the levels of oxygen.

PMID: 12962153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Guang Pu Xue Yu Guang Pu Fen Xi. 2003 Apr;23(2):276-8.

[FTIR studies of L-threonic acid and its metal compounds].

[Article in Chinese]

Gao SL(1), Chen SP, Ju ZF, Li HY.

Author information: 
(1)Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Physico-Inorganic Chemistry, Department of
Chemistry, Xi'an 710069, China.

Highly pure solid compounds, such as L-threonic acid, calcium L-threonate,
magnesium L-threonate, manganese L-threonate, cobalt L-threonate, nickel
L-theronate, and zinc L-threonate, were prepared, wherein, L-threonic acid was
obtained from calcium L-threonate by strong acid type ion exchange process,
calcium L-threonate or zinc L-threonate was prepared by alcohol extracting the
concentrated filter liquor of the reaction of Vc, H2O2 and CaCO3 or ZnCO3, the
reminder of the compounds were synthesized using alcohol extracting the
concentrated solution derived from the reaction of L-threonic acid solution,
prepared by double decomposition reaction of calcium L-threonate with oxalic
acid, and superfluous MgO, MnCO3, Co2(OH)2CO3 and Ni2(OH)2CO3. The compositions
of the compounds were determined by chemical and elemental analysis, and these
compounds have the formula M(C4H7O5)2.nH2O (M = Ca, Zn, n = 0; M = Mg, Mn, Co, n 
= 1; M = Ni, n = 2). The purity of the compounds was 99.60% by HPLC. The IR
spectra of the complexes were similar with each other but different from that of 
L-threonic acid. The characteristic absorption peaks of water were not observed
in those of calcium L-threonate or zinc L-threonate, which showed that the
molecule of water was not involved in the complexes. Further analyses indicate
that M2+ in the compounds coordinated to oxygen atom of the carboxy group, while 
the proton of the carboxyl group was dissociated and the proton belonging to
hydroxyl was not M2+ coordinated to L-threonic acid through the sp3 hybrizated
fashion. It was assumed that the coordination number of M2+ was 4.

PMID: 12961869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Sep 15;31(18):5368-76.

Stability of the Sp3-DNA complex is promoter-specific: Sp3 efficiently competes
with Sp1 for binding to promoters containing multiple Sp-sites.

Yu B(1), Datta PK, Bagchi S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Biology of Oral Diseases, College of Dentistry (M/C 860),
University of Illinois at Chicago, 801 South Paulina Street, Chicago, IL 60612,
USA.

The transcription regulatory protein Sp3 shares more than 90% sequence homology
with Sp1 in the DNA-binding domain and they bind to the same cognate DNA-element.
However, the transcriptional activities of these two Sp-family factors are not
equivalent. While Sp1 functions strictly as a transcriptional activator, Sp3 has 
been shown to be transcriptionally inactive for promoters containing multiple
Sp-binding sites. In the present study, we show that the DNA-binding property of 
Sp3 is promoter dependent and is different from Sp1. The 116 kDa Sp3 polypeptide 
binds as a monomer to a single Sp-binding site but readily forms slower migrating
complexes with adjacent Sp-binding sites. The slower migrating Sp3-DNA complexes 
are significantly more stable than monomeric Sp3-DNA complexes or multimeric
Sp1-DNA complexes. As a consequence, Sp3 can efficiently compete with Sp1 for
binding to regions containing multiple Sp sites. The transcription regulatory
function of Sp3 is also significantly different from Sp1. Unlike Sp1, Sp3 does
not synergistically activate transcription of promoters containing multiple
Sp-binding sites. Therefore, although Sp3 is a transcription activator, Sp3
reduces Sp1-dependent transcription of promoters containing adjacent Sp-binding
sites by competing with Sp1 for promoter occupancy and thereby blocking the
synergistic transactivation function of Sp1. Taken together, this study provides 
a possible mechanism of the promoter-specific transcription repression function
of Sp3.

PMCID: PMC203306
PMID: 12954773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Virology. 2003 Sep 1;313(2):553-66.

The PKR kinase promoter binds both Sp1 and Sp3, but only Sp3 functions as part of
the interferon-inducible complex with ISGF-3 proteins.

Ward SV(1), Samuel CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Santa Barbara 93106, USA.

The protein kinase regulated by RNA (PKR) is an important mediator of the
antiviral and antiproliferative actions of interferon (IFN). The promoter of the 
PKR gene contains a novel 15-bp element designated KCS that is required for both 
basal and IFN-inducible transcription, with KCS function dependent upon both
position and orientation relative to the ISRE element. Novel inducible protein
complexes (iKIBP1, iKIBP2) that require both the KCS and the ISRE element
sequences for their formation have been identified and characterized.
Transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 were found to be KCS-binding proteins by
electrophoretic mobility shift analyses (EMSA) and Sepharose bead-KCS
oligonucleotide pull-down assays. However, only Sp3 but not Sp1 was a constituent
of the inducible iKIBP complexes. EMSA also identified STAT1, STAT2, and IRF-9 as
components of the iKIBP complexes, indicating that ISGF-3 participates in iKIBP
complex formation. Proteins bound at the KCS element in the absence of ISRE were 
able to recruit both STAT1 and STAT2 to the KCS element; recruitment was
dependent upon IFN-alpha treatment. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed
that the binding of Sp3, similar to STAT1 and STAT2, at the PKR promoter in vivo 
was IFN-dependent, but that Sp1 binding was not dependent upon IFN treatment.
These results, taken together, strongly suggest a role for Sp1 in basal and Sp3
in inducible transcription of PKR and that a potential function of the KCS
element is to facilitate the recruitment of ISGF-3 complex components to the PKR 
promoter to stimulate transcription.

PMID: 12954221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Guang Pu Xue Yu Guang Pu Fen Xi. 2003 Jun;23(3):512-4.

[Raman spectra and XPS analyses of the diamond-like carbon film deposited by
surface wave plasma].

[Article in Chinese]

Huang WD(1), Zhan RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Structure Research Laboratory, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Department of
Modern Physics, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026,
China.

Raman spectrum and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) were used for the
structural analysis of diamond-like carbon (DLC) film deposited by surface wave
plasma. Decomposition methods were used respectively to achieve the quantitative 
measurement of sp3 content of the films deposited under different working times. 
We obtained the result that the sp3 bonding of the films was in the range of
20%-40% and increased with the depositing time by using both analysis methods.

PMID: 12953528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2003 Jun;85(2-5):401-14.

Dual mechanisms of regulation of transcription of luteinizing hormone receptor
gene by nuclear orphan receptors and histone deacetylase complexes.

Zhang Y(1), Dufau ML.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Endocrinology Section, Endocrinology and Reproduction Research
Branch, National Institute of Child Health & Human Development/NIH, 49 Convent
Drive, Building 49, Room 6A-36, Bethesda, MD 20892-4510, USA.

The luteinizing hormone receptor (LHR), a member of the G protein-coupled, seven 
transmembrane receptor family, is essential for normal sexual development and
reproductive function. LHR are expressed primarily in the gonads, but also are
found in non-gonadal and cancer tissues. LH acts through LH receptors in Leydig
cells to maintain general metabolic processes and steroidogenic enzymes, and in
the ovary enhances follicular development and steroidogenesis in granulosa and
luteal cells. The major transcriptional start sites of the LHR gene are located
within the 176bp promoter domain. In the rat, the LHR gene is constitutively
inhibited by upstream sequences (-176/-2056bp) in several cell systems, while in 
the human only a minor inhibitory effect was observed in JAR and HeLa cells
(>20%). The TATA-less human promoter is driven by Sp1 and Sp3 transactivators
that bind to two Sp1 domains at -79bp [Sp1(I)] and -119bp [Sp1(II)] (from ATG)
with additive effects. An imperfect estrogen receptor half-site response element 
direct-repeat within the LHR promoter is an inhibitory locus. Endogenous orphan
receptors, EAR2 and EAR3/COUP-TFI, bind this motif and repress promoter activity 
by 70%. TR4 also binds this motif and stimulates promoter activity (up to
2.5-fold). This is reversed by coexpression of EAR2 or EAR3/COUP-TFI through
competitive binding to this site. Comparative studies of hDR and rDR orphan
receptors binding and function revealed sequence-specific requirements. The A/C
mismatch between hDR and rDR is responsible for the lack of TR4 binding and
function in the rat. The G 3'-adjacent to the hDR core is important for
EAR2/EAR3-COUP-TFI high-affinity binding. The Sp1-1 site is critical for
EAR3/COUP-TFI repression, with minor participation for EAR2, and is not involved 
in the TR4 effect. Interaction of EAR3/COUP-TFI with Sp1 perturbs association of 
TFIIB with Sp1, independently of HDACs, and caused impairment of LHR
transcription. Other aspect of control is through HDAC/mSin3A mechanism.
Inhibition of HDACs by TSA increases LHR promoter activity in JAR cells
(40-fold), association of acetylated H3/H4 with the LHR promoter, recruitment of 
Pol II to the promoter, and LHR mRNA levels. A multiprotein complex is recruited 
to the hLHR promoter via interaction with Sp1/Sp3: HDACs dock directly to Sp1-1
bound DNA and indirectly to Sp3-1 bound DNA through RbAp48, while mSin3A
interacts HDACs and potentiates HDAC1-mediated repression. Our studies have
demonstrated that orphan receptor-ERE complexes, and the HDAC1-HDAC2-mSin3A
complex have important roles in the regulation of LHR gene transcription by
interaction with Sp1/Sp3, and by region-specific changes in histone acetylation
and Pol II recruitment within the LHR promoter.

PMID: 12943729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Genes Cells. 2003 Sep;8(9):747-58.

Identification and characterization of a novel progesterone receptor-binding
element in the mouse prostaglandin E receptor subtype EP2 gene.

Tsuchiya S(1), Tanaka S, Sugimoto Y, Katsuyama M, Ikegami R, Ichikawa A.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 
606-8501, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Gene expression of prostaglandin E receptor EP2 is induced in the
luminal epithelium of the mouse uterus during peri-implantation period (day-5 of 
pseudopregnancy), suggesting the involvement of progesterone and its receptor
(PR) in this expression. However it remains unclear whether PR affects EP2 gene
expression through its binding.
RESULTS: We investigated transcriptional regulation of EP2 gene expression with
reporter gene analysis using HeLa cells with or without expression of the PR. The
5'-flanking region (-3260 to -27, upstream of the translation initiation site)
exhibited progesterone-induced promoter activation and basal promoter activity in
the presence of PR. Using successive deletion analysis, we determined the six
regulatory regions in the EP2 gene. Three regions were found to be involved in
progesterone-induced promoter activation, whereas the other three regions were
involved in basal promoter activity in the presence of PR. We identified a novel 
PR-binding sequence, 5'-G(G/A)CCGGA-3', in the two basal promoter regions and
Sp1- and Sp3-binding in the other basal promoter region.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified a novel PR-binding sequence, which may be involved in 
the regulation of basal promoter activity in the EP2 gene.

PMID: 12940822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Am Chem Soc. 2003 Sep 3;125(35):10498-9.

Decarbonylative cross-coupling of cyclic anhydrides: introducing stereochemistry 
at an sp3 carbon in the cross-coupling event.

O'Brien EM(1), Bercot EA, Rovis T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523,
USA.

Treatment of cyclic anhydrides with stoichiometric amounts of nickel-neocuproine 
complex generates alkylcarboxylato-nickelalactones upon extrusion of CO. These
metalacycles undergo cross-coupling with arylzinc reagents. The generated CO is
sequestered in situ by a nickel-dppb complex. The overall sequence effects a
secondary sp3(electrophile)-sp2(nucleophile) cross-coupling and allows for
control of stereochemistry during the bond-forming event.

PMID: 12940714  [PubMed]


200. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2003 Sep;44(9):3742-55.

Regulation of the integrin subunit alpha5 gene promoter by the transcription
factors Sp1/Sp3 is influenced by the cell density in rabbit corneal epithelial
cells.

Gingras ME(1), Larouche K, Larouche N, Leclerc S, Salesse C, Guérin SL.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology and Molecular Endocrinology Research Center, Hospital Center of the
University of Québec and Laval University, Québec, Canada.

PURPOSE: Expression of the alpha5beta1 fibronectin (Fn) integrin is well
recognized in the corneal epithelium and has been postulated to increase during
wound healing. In the present study, the regulatory influence of the positive
transcription factors Sp1/Sp3 on the activity directed by the promoter of the
alpha5 gene was examined in rabbit corneal epithelial cells (RCECs) primary
cultured at various cell densities.
METHODS: Expression of the alpha5 subunit was assessed at the transcriptional
level by semiquantitative RT-PCR analyses. The regulatory elements necessary to
direct expression of the alpha5 gene were identified by transfecting RCECs with
recombinant plasmids bearing various lengths from the alpha5 gene promoter fused 
to the CAT reporter gene. Binding of Sp1/Sp3 to the alpha5 promoter was assessed 
by both electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs) and DNaseI footprinting.
Endogenous levels of Sp1/Sp3 were determined by Western blot and supershift
analyses. The regulatory influence exerted by Sp1/Sp3 on the alpha5 promoter was 
evaluated both by site-directed mutagenesis and cotransfection in Sp1-deficient
Drosophila SL-2 Schneider cells.
RESULTS: Subconfluent RCECs expressed nearly five times more alpha5 transcript
than 48-hour postconfluent RCECs. The activity directed by the alpha5 promoter
was found to be affected by cell density. Strong promoter activity was observed
in subconfluent RCECs, whereas a dramatic repression was measured in
postconfluent cells. EMSA and DNaseI footprinting provided evidence for the
binding of Sp1 to both a proximal site located within the previously reported
alpha5 fibronectin responsive element (FRE), and a distal site located between
positions -117 and -101. Cotransfection experiments in Schneider cells, as well
as transfection of RCECs with recombinant constructs bearing mutations into the
distal Sp1 site, confirmed the positive regulatory influence of Sp1 on both the
-42/-92 and -92/-132 alpha5 promoter segments. Most of all, EMSA and Western blot
analyses demonstrated the expression of substantial amounts of Sp1/Sp3 in
subconfluent but not postconfluent RCECs.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide support to the hypothesis that the strong
reduction in the activity of the alpha5 promoter when RCECs reach a high cell
density is the consequence of a reduced expression of Sp1/Sp3 under such cell
culture conditions.

PMID: 12939287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 7;278(45):44058-67. Epub 2003 Aug 20.

Transcriptional regulation of CHI3L1, a marker gene for late stages of macrophage
differentiation.

Rehli M(1), Niller HH, Ammon C, Langmann S, Schwarzfischer L, Andreesen R, Krause
SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, University of Regensburg, 93042
Regensburg, Germany. michael.rehli@klinik.uni-regensburg.de

The protein product of the CHI3L1 gene, human cartilage 39-kDa glycoprotein
(HC-gp39), is a tissue-restricted, chitin-binding lectin and member of glycosyl
hydrolase family 18. In contrast to many other monocyte/macrophage markers, its
expression is absent in monocytes and strongly induced during late stages of
human macrophage differentiation. To gain insights into the molecular mechanisms 
underlying its cell type-restricted and maturation-associated expression in
macrophages, we initiated a detailed study of the proximal HC-gp39 promoter.
Deletion analysis of reporter constructs in macrophage-like THP-1 cells localized
a region directing high levels of macrophage-specific reporter gene expression to
approximately 300 bp adjacent to the major transcriptional start site. The
promoter sequence contained consensus binding sites for several known factors,
and specific binding of nuclear PU.1, Sp1, Sp3, USF, AML-1, and C/EBP proteins
was detectable in gel shift assays. In vivo footprinting assays with dimethyl
sulfate demonstrate that the protection of corresponding sequences was enhanced
in macrophages compared with monocytes. Mutational analysis of transcription
factor binding sites indicated a predominant role for a single Sp1 binding site
in regulating HC-gp39 promoter activity. In addition, gel shift assays using
nuclear extracts of monocytes and macrophages demonstrated that the binding of
nuclear Sp1, but not Sp3, markedly increases during macrophage differentiation.
Our results further highlight the important role of Sp1 in macrophage gene
regulation.

PMID: 12933821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Blood. 2003 Dec 1;102(12):4214-22. Epub 2003 Aug 14.

Induction of an embryonic globin gene promoter by short-chain fatty acids.

Dempsey NJ(1), Ojalvo LS, Wu DW, Little JA.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology, Oncology, and Transplantation, Department of Internal Medicine and
Masonic Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, in-care-of LCDB, NIH, Bldg 50, Rm
3154, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) induce adult
erythroid differentiation in murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells, but only SCFAs
concurrently up-regulate expression from the endogenous embryonic globin gene
epsilony. The epsilony promoter, linked to a reporter gene and stably transfected
into MEL cells, was tested during adult erythroid differentiation. Both the
epsilony-CACCC site at -114 bp and enhancer sequences (hypersensitive site 2
[HS2]) from the beta-globin locus control region (LCR) were essential to maximal 
SCFA-mediated induction of expression from these constructs in MEL cells.
Gel-shift analyses of binding activity from SCFA-induced MEL cell nuclear
extracts showed in vitro binding by specificity proteins 1 and 3 (SP1, SP3) and
basic or erythroid Krüppel-like factors (BKLF, EKLF) at the epsilony-CACCC site. 
In a functional analysis, transient cotransfections in nonerythroid NIH/3T3 cells
of SP1, SP3, BKLF, or EKLF and HS2 epsilony promoter-luciferase constructs, with 
or without coactivators (p300, CREB-binding protein [CBP], or p300/CBP-associated
factor [PCAF]) and SCFAs, were performed. SP1, SP3, and EKLF further increased
expression from HS2 epsilony promoter constructs following exposure to SCFAs.
This effect was variably augmented by coactivators and was diminished in EKLF
mutants that were unable to undergo histone/factor-acetyl transferase
(H/FAT)-mediated acetylation. In addition, acetylation of SP1 was detectable in
NIH/3T3 cells following exposure to SCFAs. In sum, LCR sequence and an embryonic 
globin gene promoter CACCC site were essential to that promoter's up-regulation
during SCFA-mediated induction of adult erythroid differentiation in vitro. Of
factors that interact at the CACCC site, SCFA-mediated acetylation is implicated 
in SP1 and EKLF, and may be a mechanism through which SCFAs induce
embryonic/fetal globin gene promoters during adult erythroid differentiation.

PMID: 12920040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. J Thromb Haemost. 2003 Aug;1(8):1688-98.

Functional characterization of transcription factor binding sites for HNF1-alpha,
HNF3-beta (FOXA2), HNF4-alpha, Sp1 and Sp3 in the human prothrombin gene
enhancer.

Ceelie H(1), Spaargaren-Van Riel CC, De Jong M, Bertina RM, Vos HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, the
Netherlands. hceelie@lumc.nl

BACKGROUND: Prothrombin is a key component in blood coagulation. Overexpression
of prothrombin leads to an increased risk of venous thrombosis. Therefore, the
study of the transcriptional regulation of the prothrombin gene may help to
identify mechanisms of overexpression.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of our study was to localize the regions within the
prothrombin enhancer responsible for its activity, to identify the proteins
binding to these regions, and to establish their functional importance.
METHODS: We constructed a set of prothrombin promoter 5' deletion constructs
containing the firefly luciferase reporter gene, which were transiently
transfected in HepG2, HuH7 and HeLa cells. Putative transcription factor (TF)
binding sites were evaluated by electrophoretic mobility shift assays. The
functional importance of each TF binding site was evaluated by site directed
mutagenesis and transient transfection of the mutant constructs.
RESULTS: We confirmed the major contribution of the enhancer region to the
transcriptional activity of the prothrombin promoter. Analysis of this region
revealed putative binding sites for hepatocyte nuclear factor HNF4, HNF3-beta and
specificity protein(Sp)1. We identified six different TFs binding to three
evolutionary conserved sites in the enhancer: HNF4-alpha (site 1), HNF1-alpha,
HNF3-beta and an as yet unidentified TF (site 2) and the ubiquitously expressed
TFs Sp1 and Sp3 (site 3). Mutagenesis studies showed that loss of binding of
HNF3-beta resulted in a considerable decrease of enhancer activity, whereas loss 
of HNF4-alpha or Sp1/Sp3 resulted in milder reductions.
CONCLUSIONS: The prothrombin enhancer plays a major role in regulation of
prothrombin expression. Six different TFs are able to bind to this region. At
least three of these TFs, HNF4-alpha, HNF3-beta and Sp1/Sp3, are important in
regulation of prothrombin expression.

PMID: 12911579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 17;278(42):41047-58. Epub 2003 Jul 31.

Glucose metabolism in cancer: importance of transcription factor-DNA interactions
within a short segment of the proximal region og the type II hexokinase promoter.

Lee MG(1), Pedersen PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, The Johns Hopkins University, School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205-2185, USA.

A common signature of many cancers is a high glucose catabolic rate frequently
dependent on the overexpression of Type II hexokinase (HKII), a mitochondrial
bound enzyme that also suppresses cell death. As the tumor HKII promoter plays a 
significant role in HKII overexpression, studies reported here were undertaken to
identify both the major regions and transcription factors involved under
tumor-like conditions. Reporter gene assays following transfection of hepatoma
cells with decreasing segments of the HKII promoter traced its known strength to 
the proximal region (-281 to -35). Mutational analyses showed that in this short 
region GC boxes 1, 2, 5, and 6, a CCAAT box, an inverted CCAAT box, and CRE are
involved in promoter activation. Other studies demonstrated binding of
transcription factors Sp1, Sp2, and Sp3 to GC boxes 1 and 6, Sp1 and Sp2 to GC
boxes 2 and 5, NF-Y to CCAAT boxes, and CREB, ATF1, and CREM to CRE. In addition,
transfection studies involving Sp1, Sp2, Sp3, CREB, and NFY (dominant negative
form) provided evidence that these proteins are promoter activators. Finally,
alignment of available HK proximal promoters showed strong conservation only
among HKII sequences. These findings implicate signaling pathways directed to a
short segment of the proximal region of the HKII promoter as major contributors
to HKII overexpression in many cancers.

PMID: 12893819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Gastroenterology. 2003 Aug;125(2):510-21.

Transcriptional regulation of the human trefoil factor, TFF1, by gastrin.

Khan ZE(1), Wang TC, Cui G, Chi AL, Dimaline R.

Author information: 
(1)Physiological Laboratory, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, England UK.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: This study aimed to identify gastrin-sensitive genes that may 
mediate the effects of this hormone on gastric epithelial architecture.
METHODS: Gastrin-sensitive genes were identified by messenger RNA (mRNA)
differential display of the gastric fundus from gastrin-deficient (GAS-KO) or
wild-type mice. Gastrin-stimulated expression of the trefoil peptide TFF1 in
mouse fundus and in the gastric cancer cell line AGS-G(R) was determined by
Northern blot and real-time polymerase chain reaction. Transcriptional regulation
of TFF1 in AGS-G(R) cells was studied using promoter-reporter assays and
electrophoretic mobility shift assay. Expression of TFF1 and the
cholecystokinin(B) receptor in response to gastric mucosal injury was determined 
by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: mRNA differential display identified TFF1 as a gastrin-regulated gene.
TFF1 mRNA was reversibly reduced in GAS-KO mice and increased in a
hypergastrinemic transgenic strain versus respective background strains. TFF1
mRNA expression was rapidly and potently induced by gastrin in a gastric cancer
cell line that expresses the gastrin/cholecystokinin(B) receptor. Gastrin
responsiveness of the human TFF1 promoter mapped to a G-C rich region 300 base
pairs upstream of the transcriptional start site. This region bound the
transcription factors SP3 and MAZ. Gastrin activated transcription through a
Raf-, Mek- and Erk-dependent but Ras-independent pathway. TFF1 expression was
induced both directly and by transactivation between neighboring cells. Neither
direct nor indirect gastrin-induced TFF1 expression required activation of the
epidermal growth factor receptor.
CONCLUSIONS: Gastrin exerts tonic control of TFF1 expression but also has the
potential for rapid up-regulation of this trefoil factor. TFF1 is a potential
candidate to counterbalance the proliferative effects of gastrin.

PMID: 12891554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 17;278(42):40550-6. Epub 2003 Jul 30.

Transcriptional regulation of mouse delta-opioid receptor gene by CpG
methylation: involvement of Sp3 and a methyl-CpG-binding protein, MBD2, in
transcriptional repression of mouse delta-opioid receptor gene in Neuro2A cells.

Wang G(1), Wei LN, Loh HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Minnesota Medical School,
Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA. wangx212@umn.edu

Opioid receptors are expressed in a cell type-specific manner. Here we show that 
the mouse delta-opioid receptor (mDOR) gene is regulated by promoter region CpG
methylation. The mDOR promoter containing a putative CpG island is highly
methylated in Neuro2A cells, correlating with the repression of this gene in
these cells. This is in contrast with the unmethylated state of the mDOR promoter
in NS20Y cells, which express a high level of mDOR. Repression of mDOR
transcription in Neuro2A cells could be partially relieved by chemically induced 
demethylation with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine. In addition, in vitro methylation of
the luciferase reporter gene driven by the mDOR promoter resulted in an
inhibition of transcription in NS20Y cells. Methyl-CpG-binding protein complex 1 
(MeCP1) has been implicated in methylation-mediated transcriptional repression of
several genes. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed that fully
methylated, but not unmethylated, mDOR promoter fragment formed a MeCP1-like
protein complex that contained methyl-CpG-binding domain protein 2 (MBD2) and
Sp3. Furthermore, the expression level of Sp3 was decreased when Neuro2A cells
were demethylated with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, and increasing Sp3 levels in
Schneider's Drosophila line 2 cells led to the repression of mDOR promoter
activity when the promoter was methylated. These results demonstrate that Sp3 and
MBD2 are involved in the transcriptional repression of mDOR in Neuro2A cells
through binding to the methylated CpG sites in the promoter region and may play a
role in the cell type-specific expression of mDOR.

PMID: 12890683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Aug 15;308(1):139-47.

Identification of a short PIASx gene promoter that directs male germ
cell-specific transcription in vivo.

Santti H(1), Mikkonen L, Hirvonen-Santti S, Toppari J, Jänne OA, Palvimo JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedicum Helsinki, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Helsinki,
FIN-00014 Helsinki, Finland.

PIASx gene encodes two SUMO E3 ligases that are highly expressed in the testis.
We have isolated and analyzed the promoter of the murine PIASx gene.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays with testicular nuclear extracts showed
that the proximal promoter forms a major DNA-protein complex containing Sp1, Sp2,
and Sp3 transcription factors. Reporter gene assays in cultured cells indicated
that a fragment comprising nucleotides from -168 to +76 relative to transcription
start site is sufficient for basal promoter activity in cultured cells, but these
in vitro assays failed to reveal clear differences in promoter activity between
testis- and non-testis-derived cell lines. Interestingly, however, the proximal
promoter encompasses the elements necessary for a testis-specific transcription
in vivo, as it directed beta-galactosidase expression exclusively to male germ
cells in transgenic mice. In conclusion, we have characterized the minimal PIASx 
promoter that can be used for highly specific targeting of transgene expression
to male germ cells.

PMID: 12890492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 10;278(41):39762-72. Epub 2003 Jul 29.

Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors mediate interleukin-1 beta down-regulation of
human type II collagen gene expression in articular chondrocytes.

Chadjichristos C(1), Ghayor C, Kypriotou M, Martin G, Renard E, Ala-Kokko L,
Suske G, de Crombrugghe B, Pujol JP, Galéra P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie du Tissu Conjonctif, Faculté de Médecine, CHU Niveau 
3, Avenue de la Côte de Nacre, Caen Cedex 14032, France.

Interleukin-1 beta (IL-1 beta) is a pleiotropic cytokine that was shown to
inhibit the biosynthesis of articular cartilage components. Here we demonstrate
that IL-1 beta inhibits the production of newly synthesized collagens in
proliferating rabbit articular chondrocytes and that this effect is accompanied
by a decrease in the steady-state levels of type II collagen mRNA. IL-1 beta
down-regulates COL2A1 gene transcription through a -41/-33 bp sequence that binds
a multimeric complex including Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors. Specificity of 
IL-1 beta effects on COL2A1 promoter activity was demonstrated in experiments in 
which transfection of a wild type -50/+1 sequence of COL2A1 promoter as a decoy
oligonucleotide abolished the IL-1 beta inhibition of a -63/+47 COL2A1-mediated
transcription. By contrast, transfection of the related oligonucleotide harboring
a targeted mutation in the -41/-33 sequence did not modify the negative effect
the cytokine. Because we demonstrated previously that Sp1 was a strong activator 
of COL2A1 gene expression via the -63/+1 promoter region, whereas Sp3
overexpression blocked Sp1-induced promoter activity and inhibited COL2A1 gene
transcription, we conclude that IL-1 beta down-regulation of that gene, as we
found previously for transforming growth factor-beta 1, is mediated by an
increase in the Sp3/Sp1 ratio. Moreover, IL-1 beta increased steady-state levels 
of Sp1 and Sp3 mRNAs, whereas it enhanced Sp3 protein expression and inhibited
Sp1 protein biosynthesis. Nevertheless, IL-1 beta decreased the binding activity 
of both Sp1 and Sp3 to the 63-bp short COL2A1 promoter, suggesting that the
cytokine exerts a post-transcriptional regulatory mechanism on Sp1 and Sp3 gene
expressions. Altogether, these data indicate that modulation of Sp3/Sp1 ratio in 
cartilage could be a potential target to prevent or limit the tissue degradation.

PMID: 12888570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Aug 1;31(15):4293-303.

Functional characterization of cis- and trans-regulatory elements involved in
expression of phospholipid hydroperoxide glutathione peroxidase.

Ufer C(1), Borchert A, Kuhn H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Humboldt University Medical School Charité,
Monbijoustrasse 2, 10117 Berlin, Germany.

Phospholipid hydroperoxide glutathione peroxidase (phGPx) is a member of the
seleno glutathione peroxidase family that is comprised of five selenoproteins
capable of reducing hydroperoxy lipids to the corresponding alcohols. The enzyme 
has been implicated in antioxidative defense, but its high expression level in
testicular tissue suggests a more specific function during sperm maturation. The 
phGPx is encoded for by a joint sperm nucleus/phGPx gene (sn/phGPx) and can be
expressed as a mitochondrial or cytosolic isoform. Although sn/phGPx genes have
been cloned from various mammalian species expression regulation of the enzyme
has not been studied in detail. We investigated the 5'-flanking region of the
murine sn/phGPx gene and observed basic promoter activity in a 200 bp region
localized immediately upstream of the translational initiation site of the
cytosolic isoform (3'-ATG). DNase protection assays indicated the presence of
five distinct protein-binding regions and electrophoretic mobility shift assays
and supershift experiments revealed binding of stimulating protein 1 (SP1),
nuclear factor Y (NF-Y) and members of the SMAD family. Site-directed mutagenesis
of the consensus binding sequences abolished in vitro transcription factor
binding. Expression of reporter genes was most effectively impaired when SP1/SP3 
and NF-Y binding site-deficient constructs were tested. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation suggested the in vivo relevance of these transcription
factors. Our data indicate that the basic phGPx promoter constitutes a 200 bp
oligonucleotide, which is localized immediately upstream of the 3'-ATG and
involves functional SP1/SP3, NF-Y and SMAD binding sites. The corresponding
trans-regulatory proteins may contribute to differential expression regulation of
the mitochondrial and cytosolic phGPx isoforms.

PMCID: PMC169948
PMID: 12888488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Cell Biochem. 2003 Aug 1;89(5):887-901.

Enhanced binding of Sp1/Sp3 transcription factors mediates the hyperoxia-induced 
increased expression of the lung type I cell gene T1alpha.

Cao YX(1), Ramirez MI, Williams MC.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Center, Department of Medicine, Boston University School of
Medicine, 715 Albany Street, Boston, MA 02118, USA.

The transcription factor Sp1 plays an important regulatory role in
transactivation of the lung type I cell differentiation gene T1alpha. Like other 
lung cells, type I cells may encounter changes in oxygen concentration during the
lifetime of the organism. We found that exposure of mice to hyperoxia rapidly
increases expression of T1alpha and other type I cell genes, and that returning
the mice to normoxia quickly decreases expression. Likewise hyperoxia increases
both endogenous T1alpha expression in lung epithelial cell lines and
transcription of luciferase (Luc) from T1alpha promoter deletion constructs.
Using wild-type promoter fragments and gel shift assays, we determined that
Sp1/Sp3 and a key Sp cis-element in the proximal promoter mediate the hyperoxic
response. Mutations of this element and inhibition of Sp-DNA binding by
mithramycin block the hyperoxic response. Western analyses of cell homogenates
show that the overall abundance of Sp1 and Sp3 proteins is not altered by
hyperoxia. However, the abundance of nuclear Sp1 increases after short hyperoxic 
exposures, suggesting that signaling pathways activated by hyperoxia lead to Sp
protein translocation, perhaps as a result of increased Sp phosphorylation.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12874823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Lett Appl Microbiol. 2003;37(2):105-8.

Evidence of the production of silver nanoparticles via pretreatment of Phoma
sp.3.2883 with silver nitrate.

Chen JC(1), Lin ZH, Ma XX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical
University, Beijing, China. jingchunchen@hotmail.com

AIMS: The objective was to demonstrate the size of silver particles produced by
the filamentous fungus Phoma sp.3.2883 via adsorption and accumulation, and to
confirm that this silver was in a reduced state.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Mycelium was freeze-dried and then shake-cultured in a
silver nitrate solution. It was found that up to 13.4 mg of silver was produced
per gram of dry mycelium via atomic absorption spectrometer (AAS) analysis. The
silver particles adsorbed on the mycelium were observed and measured under
transmission electron microscope and their estimated size was 71.06 +/- 3.46 nm. 
Further examination of the particles via X-ray photoelectron spectroscope
confirmed that the adsorbed silver particle had been reduced.
CONCLUSION: The frozen mycelium of Phoma sp3.2883 has the potential for use in
silver nanoparticle production.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: Silver nanoparticles could be used in the
oil industry as an important catalyst and in the field of human medicine as a
bactericide. The fungus Phoma sp3.2883 is a potential biosorbent that could be
used for the production of these silver nanoparticles, and may also be useful in 
waste detoxification and in silver recovery programmes.

PMID: 12859650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Biol Chem. 2003 Sep 19;278(38):36227-35. Epub 2003 Jul 10.

Decreased methylation and transcription repressor Sp3 up-regulated human
monoamine oxidase (MAO) B expression during Caco-2 differentiation.

Wong WK(1), Chen K, Shih JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Neurobiology, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90033, USA.

Monoamine oxidase (MAO) A and B catalyze the oxidative deamination of neuroactive
and dietary monoamines such as serotonin, tyramine, and phenylethylamine. Here we
show that MAO B, but not MAO A, gene expression was induced during Caco-2 cell
differentiation; thus this cell line was used as a model system to study the gene
regulation unique for MAO B. Luciferase and gel shift assays showed that
transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 binding to -246 and -99 bp were responsible for
the observed gene activation. Overexpression of Sp3 inhibited the induction of
MAO B gene by Sp1, and the expression of Sp3 was decreased during Caco-2 cell
differentiation. Computer analysis revealed a putative CpG island containing 22
potential CpG methylation sites between -261 and -58 bp. In vitro methylation of 
MAO B promoter with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, a DNA methyltransferase inhibitor,
up-regulated MAO B gene expression in both HeLa and Caco-2 cells. Sodium
bisulfite sequencing showed a gradually reduced methylation of the CpG sites
during Caco-2 cell differentiation. These results suggested that MAO B gene
expression is selectively induced by a decreased Sp3/Sp1 ratio and reduced DNA
methylation. This new information may provide insights on the tissue-specific
expression of these two isoenzymes.

PMID: 12855685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Biochem J. 2003 Oct 15;375(Pt 2):351-63.

Molecular characterization of the constitutive expression of the plasma
platelet-activating factor acetylhydrolase gene in macrophages.

Wu X(1), McIntyre TM, Zimmerman GA, Prescott SM, Stafforini DM.

Author information: 
(1)Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, 2000 Circle of Hope, Salt Lake 
City, UT 84112-5550, USA.

Plasma platelet-activating factor acetylhydrolase (PAF-AH) is a phospholipase
that inactivates platelet-activating factor (PAF) and PAF-like lipids to generate
products with little or no biological activity. The levels of circulating PAF-AH 
correlate with several disease syndromes. We previously reported that mediators
of inflammation regulate the expression of the human PAF-AH gene at the
transcriptional level. In the present paper, we characterize the constitutive
expression of plasma PAF-AH using the mouse gene as a model system, and we report
comparative results obtained using human and mouse promoter constructs. We first 
cloned, sequenced and analysed the promoter region of the murine plasma PAF-AH
(mPAF-AH) gene and found that this gene lacks a canonical TATA box. We
demonstrated that the cis -elements required for basal transcription are
localized within the -316 to -68 bp region. In vitro band-shift and supershift
assays showed that Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors from RAW264.7 and J774A.1
macrophage nuclear extracts bound strongly to a distal GC-rich site within
-278/-243 [specificity protein (Sp-A)] and to a proximal TC-rich motif within
-150/-114 (Sp-B). In addition, we observed weak binding to a GA-rich site within 
-110/-82 (Sp-C). The regions containing Sp-B and Sp-C are highly conserved
between the human and mouse genes. Forced expression of Sp1 or Sp3 in Sp-lacking 
Drosophila SL2 cells induced markedly the activity of the exogenous mPAF-AH
promoter in a dose-dependent manner, and this induction was dependent on the
presence of intact Sp-A and Sp-B. Interestingly, we found that the Sp1- and
Sp3-associated DNA-binding activities increased during the maturation of primary 
human monocytes into macrophages in cell culture. These results demonstrate that 
Sp1 and Sp3 are key factors that contribute to the basal, constitutive
transcription of the plasma PAF-AH gene in macrophages.

PMCID: PMC1223687
PMID: 12854969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. J Nutr. 2003 Jul;133(7 Suppl):2485S-2493S.

Inhibition of histone deacetylase activity by butyrate.

Davie JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.
davie@cc.umanitoba.ca

This article reviews the effects of the short-chain fatty acid butyrate on
histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity. Sodium butyrate has multiple effects on
cultured mammalian cells that include inhibition of proliferation, induction of
differentiation and induction or repression of gene expression. The observation
that butyrate treatment of cells results in histone hyperacetylation initiated a 
flurry of activity that led to the discovery that butyrate inhibits HDAC
activity. Butyrate has been an essential agent for determining the role of
histone acetylation in chromatin structure and function. Interestingly,
inhibition of HDAC activity affects the expression of only 2% of mammalian genes.
Promoters of butyrate-responsive genes have butyrate response elements, and the
action of butyrate is often mediated through Sp1/Sp3 binding sites (e.g.,
p21(Waf1/Cip1)). We demonstrated that Sp1 and Sp3 recruit HDAC1 and HDAC2, with
the latter being phosphorylated by protein kinase CK2. A model is proposed in
which inhibition of Sp1/Sp3-associated HDAC activity leads to histone
hyperacetylation and transcriptional activation of the p21(Waf1/Cip1) gene;
p21(Waf1/Cip1) inhibits cyclin-dependent kinase 2 activity and thereby arrests
cell cycling. Pending the cell background, the nonproliferating cells may enter
differentiation or apoptotic pathways. The potential of butyrate and HDAC
inhibitors in the prevention and treatment of cancer is presented.

PMID: 12840228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Nutr. 2003 Jul;133(7 Suppl):2456S-2460S.

ZBP-89 mediates butyrate regulation of gene expression.

Merchant JL(1), Bai L, Okada M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, 
USA. merchanj@umich.edu

Inducible p53-independent regulation of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor
p21(Waf1) transcription is mediated through its proximal GC-rich sites. Prior
studies have shown that Sp1, Sp3 and the histone acetyltransferase coactivator
p300 are components of the complexes that bind to these sites. Although Sp1 and
Sp3 collaborate with p300, a direct interaction between Sp1 and p300 does not
occur. Zinc-finger binding protein-89 (ZBP-89, also known as BFCOL1, BERF-1 and
ZNF-148) is a Krüppel-type zinc-finger transcription factor that binds to the
same GC-rich sequences as Sp1. We sought to determine whether ZBP-89 is a target 
of p300 during butyrate induction of p21(Waf1). This review summarizes the
evidence that supports a crucial role for ZBP-89 in butyrate regulation of
p21(Waf1). Adenovirus-mediated expression of ZBP-89 in HT-29 cells reveals that
ZBP-89 potentiates butyrate induction of endogenous p21(Waf1) gene expression.
DNA-protein interaction assays demonstrate that Sp1, Sp3 and ZBP-89 bind the
p21(Waf1) promoter at -245 to -215. Coprecipitation assays reveal that p300
preferentially binds to the N-terminus of ZBP-89. ZBP-89 also induces p21(Waf1)
through stabilization of p53. Although ZBP-89 binds mutant and wild-type p53,
only wild-type p53 is stabilized. Moreover, mutant p53 shifts the subnuclear
location of ZBP-89 to the nuclear periphery, which is a domain rich in
heterochromatin. This finding led to the conclusion that mutant p53 exerts a
dominant negative effect on ZBP-89. We propose that gene silencing by mutant p53 
might be mediated by sequestering ZBP-89 within heterochromatin regions at the
nuclear periphery. Overall, ZBP-89 is a butyrate-regulated coactivator of p53 and
is able to induce p21(Waf1) gene expression through both p53-dependent and
-independent mechanisms to inhibit cell growth.

PMID: 12840224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Org Chem. 2003 Jul 11;68(14):5445-65.

Synthesis and reactivity of (C6F5)3B-N-heterocycle complexes. 1. Generation of
highly acidic sp3 carbons in pyrroles and indoles.

Guidotti S(1), Camurati I, Focante F, Angellini L, Moscardi G, Resconi L,
Leardini R, Nanni D, Mercandelli P, Sironi A, Beringhelli T, Maggioni D.

Author information: 
(1)Basell Polyolefins, Centro Ricerche G. Natta, I-44100 Ferrara, Italy.

The reaction of pyrroles and indoles with B(C(6)F(5))(3) and BCl(3) produces 1:1 
B-N complexes containing highly acidic sp(3) carbons, for example,
N-[tris(pentafluorophenyl)borane]-5H-pyrrole (1) and
N-[tris(pentafluorophenyl)borane]-3H-indole (2), that are formed by a new formal 
N-to-C hydrogen shift, the mechanism of which is discussed. With some
derivatives, restricted rotation around the B-N bond and/or the B-C bonds was
observed by NMR techniques, and some rotational barriers were calculated from
experimental data. The acidity of the sp(3) carbons in these complexes is shown
by their ability to protonate NEt(3), with formation of pyrrolyl- and
indolyl-borate ammonium salts. The driving force for this reaction is given by
the restoration of the aromaticity of the heterocycle.

PMID: 12839436  [PubMed]


217. J Biol Chem. 2003 Sep 12;278(37):35775-80. Epub 2003 Jun 30.

Acetylated sp3 is a transcriptional activator.

Ammanamanchi S(1), Freeman JW, Brattain MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, New York 14263, USA.

Sp3 transcription factor can either activate or repress target gene expression.
However, the molecular event that controls this dual function is unclear. We
previously reported (Ammanamanchi, S., and Brattain, M. G. (2001) J. Biol. Chem. 
276, 3348-3352) that unmodified Sp3 acts as a transcriptional repressor of
transforming growth factor-beta receptors in MCF-7L breast cancer cells. We now
report that histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA) induces
acetylation of Sp3, which acts as a transcriptional activator of transforming
growth factor-beta receptor type II (RII) in MCF-7L cells. Mutation analysis
indicated the TSA response is mediated through a GC box located on the RII
promoter, which was previously identified as an Sp1/Sp3-binding site that was
critical for RII promoter activity. Ectopic Sp3 expression in Sp3-deficient
MCF-7E breast cancer cells repressed RII promoter activity in the absence of TSA.
However, in the TSA-treated MCF-7E cells ectopic Sp3 activated RII promoter.
Histone acetyltransferase p300 was shown to acetylate Sp3. Sp3-mediated RII
promoter activity was stimulated by wild type p300 but not the histone
acetyltransferase domain-deleted mutant p300 in MCF-7L cells, suggesting the
positive effect of p300 acetylase activity on Sp3. Consequently, the results
presented in this manuscript demonstrate that acetylation acts as a switch that
controls the repressor and activator role of Sp3.

PMID: 12837748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Oncogene. 2003 Jun 26;22(26):4047-61.

v-Jun downregulates the SPARC target gene by binding to the proximal promoter
indirectly through Sp1/3.

Chamboredon S(1), Briggs J, Vial E, Hurault J, Galvagni F, Oliviero S, Bos T,
Castellazzi M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Virologie Humaine, INSERM-U412, Ecole Normale Supérieure, 46 allée
d'ltalie, 69364 Lyon cedex 07, France.

Transformation of chick embryo fibroblasts by the v-Jun oncoprotein correlates
with a downregulation of the extracellular matrix protein SPARC and repression of
the corresponding mRNA. Repression of SPARC contributes to the oncogenic process 
by facilitating tumor development in vivo. A proximal promoter fragment,
designated -124/+16, is responsible for high constitutive activity of the SPARC
gene and is the target of repression by v-Jun. In this paper, using
electrophoretic mobility shift and pull-down assays in vitro, and transient
transfections and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays in Sp1/3-deficient
Drosophila SL2 cells and in chick embryo fibroblasts, we show that (i) Sp1 and/or
Sp3 is required for constitutive activation of SPARC transcription, by binding
directly to the GGA-rich -92/-57 fragment; and (ii) v-Jun does not bind -124/+16 
directly, but binds to the GGA-rich fragment indirectly, most likely through a
physical interaction with Sp1/3. Moreover, a transactivation-proficient v-Jun
derivative, designated v-Jun/cebp/glz, which cannot bind Jun DNA motifs anymore
and cannot heterodimerize, is still capable of downregulating SPARC efficiently. 
Taken together, these data strongly suggest that v-Jun downregulates SPARC
through the formation of a DNA-Sp1/3-v-Jun, chromatin-associated complex.

PMID: 12821939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2003 Jun 19;1627(2-3):79-84.

Basal expression of the human MAPEG members microsomal glutathione transferase 1 
and prostaglandin E synthase genes is mediated by Sp1 and Sp3.

Ekström L(1), Lyrenäs L, Jakobsson PJ, Morgenstern R, Kelner MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, UCSD, San Diego, CA, USA.

Microsomal glutathione transferase (MGST1) and prostaglandin E synthase (PGES)
are both members of the MAPEG (Membrane Associated Proteins involved in
Eicosanoid and Glutathione metabolism) superfamily. In humans, their organ
distribution is quite distinct with the former being widely and constitutively
expressed whereas PGES is largely inducible. In order to study the basal
expression of these genes, we characterized the promoter regions and identified
the elements and the transcription factors required using in vitro assays,
including reporter analysis of deletion and mutant clones and EMSA. The results
indicate that Sp1 is the protein mediating the basal transcription of MGST1. It
appears that both the Sp1 and Sp3 proteins are important for the basal expression
of PGES. In addition, mutational analysis of two Barbie-box elements in the PGES 
promoter showed that these were not involved in the down-regulation of PGES by
phenobarbital (PB). These results provide the first description of the basal
regulation of these genes in humans.

PMID: 12818425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Am J Manag Care. 2003 Jun;9 Spec No 1:SP3-12.

Understanding the underlying drivers of inpatient cost growth: a literature
review.

Goetghebeur MM(1), Forrest S, Hay JW.

Author information: 
(1)BioMedCom Consultants Inc, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
mireille_goetghebeur@biomedcom.org

BACKGROUND: After the declining growth in inpatient hospital spending that
occurred from 1994 through 1998, the recent trend in increased spending has been 
of concern to many. Understanding the underlying reasons for this new growth will
aid decision makers in finding best means to manage inpatient costs.
OBJECTIVE: To identify potential contributors to recent growth in inpatient
spending.
STUDY DESIGN: Literature review.
METHODS: Healthcare and economic databases, prominent Web sites, and key journals
were searched to identify potential drivers for the 1999-2001 rise in inpatient
spending. Initial literature review and state-level regression analyses published
in a companion paper were used to identify key explanatory factors, which were
further explored.
RESULTS: Although many of the contributors to the rise in inpatient costs overlap
and are interrelated, the major cost drivers were identified as (1) workforce
shortage; (2) new technology; (3) less tightly managed care; and (4) shifting
hospital business directions. Underlying factors such as legislation, quality of 
care, limited access to noninpatient care, pressures on the safety net,
population aging, and increasing chronic illness prevalence were found to
influence the contributors and healthcare spending in general.
CONCLUSIONS: Future trends in inpatient spending will depend on the response of
the healthcare system to these cost drivers and underlying factors. Potential
avenues to control inpatient spending include expanding access to primary care,
encouraging cost-effective technology and more efficient hospital market
structures, and developing incentives for the healthcare workforce.

PMID: 12817611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Endocrinology. 2003 Jul;144(7):3138-47.

Sp3/Sp1 in the parathyroid gland: identification of an Sp1 deoxyribonucleic acid 
element in the parathyroid hormone promoter.

Alimov AP(1), Langub MC, Malluche HH, Koszewski NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Bone and Mineral Metabolism, University of Kentucky
Medical Center, 800 Rose Street, Lexington, KY 40536-0298, USA.

A highly conserved region in the PTH promoter was identified using the basic
local alignment search tool (BLAST) 2 Sequences comparison. Strong specific
complexes were observed with a DNA probe that contained much of the
computer-derived conserved sequence in the EMSA using bovine parathyroid gland
(bPTG) nuclear extracts. Ethylation interference footprinting indicated that the 
major complex made contacts to a sequence strikingly similar to an Sp1 binding
site. Sp3 was evident in the major DNA-binding complexes, whereas the
contribution by Sp1 was substantially weaker. Specific binding by additional
unidentified bPTG nuclear factors was also evident. Immunocytochemical and
Western blotting analyses established that Sp1 and Sp3 were positively localized 
in the nuclei of chief cells of the bPTG and of the expected molecular weights,
with particularly robust expression of Sp3. Affinity DNA-binding experiments
using the bovine PTH Sp1 element demonstrated specific recovery of intact Sp3 and
Sp1 proteins, although a significant portion of both proteins failed to interact 
with the affinity-tagged DNA. Treatment of the bPTG nuclear extracts with
phosphatase, however, significantly increased the DNA-binding capacity of the
Sp1/Sp3 complexes. Finally, transient transfection analysis indicated that the
bovine Sp1-like element acted as an enhancer of heterologous gene expression. The
present study identified an Sp1 element in the promoter of the PTH gene that
represents a complex DNA-binding site involving interactions primarily with
Sp1/Sp3 proteins. The data, therefore, highlight the likely involvement of the Sp
family in regulating PTH gene expression through interactions with an Sp1 DNA
element in the hormone's promoter.

PMID: 12810570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Photochem Photobiol Sci. 2003 May;2(5):585-90.

Excited state dynamics and rapid internal conversion in a stable dipole molecule.

Reid GD(1), Whittaker DJ, Roth W, Whitaker BJ, Williamson MJ, Beddard GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Leeds, Woodhouse Lane, Leeds, UK LS2
9JT.

The excited singlet state of an azomethine ylide or 'stable dipole' exhibits an
ultrafast radiationless relaxation after femtosecond laser excitation. These
transients are observed before the excited state decays in an almost
activationless manner, the barrier is 440 cm-1, to the ground state with a 1.5 ps
lifetime. Cooling of the hot ground state is also apparent in the transient
absorption data and in methanol decays with a 5.7 ps lifetime. The viscosity
dependence of the fluorescence yield and lifetime in different solvents is small 
and far less pronounced than in triphenylmethane dyes. Surprisingly, the excited 
state decay is not due to twisting about the C-N bond of the ylide but it is
caused by buckling of one of the rings as the nitrogen atom changes character
from sp2 to sp3 hybridisation.

PMID: 12803082  [PubMed]


223. Biol Reprod. 2003 Oct;69(4):1220-30. Epub 2003 Jun 11.

Sp1 and Sp3 Are important regulators of AP-2gamma gene transcription.

Li M(1), Kellems RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas Medical 
School, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

AP-2gamma is a member of the AP-2 transcription factor family, is highly enriched
in the trophoblast cell lineage, and is essential for placental development. In
an effort to identify factors regulating AP-2gamma gene expression, we isolated
and characterized the promoter and 5'-flanking region of the mouse and human
AP-2gamma genes. The transcription start site of the mouse AP-2gamma gene was
mapped by primer extension and 5' rapid amplification of cDNA ends. Deletion
analysis of the 5'-flanking region revealed a 704-base pair (bp) sequence located
approximately 6 kilobases (kb) upstream of the transcription start site that is
required for enhanced expression in trophoblast cells. Additional gene transfer
studies showed that basal promoter activity resides within a highly conserved,
approximately 200-bp DNA sequence located immediately upstream of the
transcription start site. The conserved region is highly GC-rich and lacks
typical TATA or CCAAT boxes. Multiple potential Sp- and AP-2-binding sites are
clustered within this region. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays demonstrated 
that Sp1 and Sp3 bind to three sites in the promoter region of the mouse
AP-2gamma gene. Combined mutation of the three putative Sp sites reduced promoter
activity by 80% in trophoblast and nontrophoblast cells, demonstrating the
functional importance of these sites in regulating AP-2gamma gene expression. In 
summary, we have identified a potential trophoblast cell-specific regulatory
element located approximately 6 kb upstream of the murine AP-2gamma gene
transcription start site, and we have shown that Sp1 and Sp3 bind to
cis-regulatory elements located in the promoter proximal region and contribute to
basal promoter activity.

PMID: 12801994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Jun 15;31(12):3123-33.

Histone deacetylase inhibition is associated with transcriptional repression of
the Hmga2 gene.

Ferguson M(1), Henry PA, Currie RA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Wheeler Institute for
Biomedical Research, Johns Hopkins University Bayview Campus, Baltimore, MD
21224, USA.

The high-mobility-group A2 protein (HMGA2) plays important functional roles in
transcriptional regulation, DNA replication and chromatin structure. In this
study, the effect of histone deacetylase inhibition on the transcriptional
activity of the Hmga2 gene was investigated in vivo both at the endogenous gene
level and in a variety of cell lines using transiently transfected promoter
constructs. Trichostatin A (TSA) repressed both transfected murine and human
Hmga2 promoter constructs 3-8-fold in NIH3T3, F9 and HeLa cells. Steady-state
Hmga2 mRNA levels in NIH3T3 cells decreased 4-5-fold following TSA treatment,
while pre- treatment of NIH3T3 cells with the transcriptional inhibitor,
actinomycin D, completely blocked TSA mediated repression of the Hmga2 gene.
Cross-linked chromatin immunoprecipitation (X-ChIP) analysis revealed a 5-6-fold 
decrease in endogenous Hmga2 promoter bound Sp1 and Sp3 proteins following TSA
treatment in parallel with observed loss of acetylated histone H3 and H4. In
addition, the poly-pyrimidine-tract-binding protein (PTB) was observed to bind to
the Hmga2 promoter in both TSA treated and untreated NIH3T3 cells. Together,
these results suggest TSA treatment leads to a decrease in Hmga2 gene
transcription, and a significant decrease in promoter bound Sp1, Sp3 and
acetylated histones H3 and H4.

PMCID: PMC162237
PMID: 12799440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Am Chem Soc. 2003 May 21;125(20):6076-7.

A mild C-O bond formation catalyzed by a rhenium-oxo complex.

Sherry BD(1), Radosevich AT, Toste FD.

Author information: 
(1)Center for New Directions in Organic Synthesis, Department of Chemistry,
University of California, Berkeley 94720, USA.

A mild method for the regioselective synthesis of propargyl ethers by the
coupling of propargyl alcohols with a range of other alcohols is described. The
method employs an air- and moisture-tolerant rhenium-oxo complex ((dppm)ReOCl3)
as a catalyst for the formation of sp3-carbon-oxygen bonds without the need for
prior activation of the propargyl alcohol or deprotonation of the alcohol
nucleophile. A broad range of functional groups is tolerated, including aryl
halides, olefins, esters, and acid-labile functional groups such as acetals.
Furthermore, displacement of the alcohol occurs preferentially even in the
presence of other electrophiles such as primary alkyl halides and conjugated
esters.

PMID: 12785836  [PubMed]


226. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Jun;23(12):4056-65.

Methylation of adjacent CpG sites affects Sp1/Sp3 binding and activity in the
p21(Cip1) promoter.

Zhu WG(1), Srinivasan K, Dai Z, Duan W, Druhan LJ, Ding H, Yee L,
Villalona-Calero MA, Plass C, Otterson GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine. Department of Pathology, The Ohio State
University-Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

DNA methylation in the promoter of certain genes is associated with
transcriptional silencing. Methylation affects gene expression directly by
interfering with transcription factor binding and/or indirectly by recruiting
histone deacetylases through methyl-DNA-binding proteins. In this study, we
demonstrate that the human lung cancer cell line H719 lacks p53-dependent and
-independent p21(Cip1) expression. p53 response to treatment with gamma
irradiation or etoposide is lost due to a mutation at codon 242 of p53 (C-->W).
Treatment with depsipeptide, an inhibitor of histone deacetylase, was unable to
induce p53-independent p21(Cip1) expression because the promoter of p21(Cip1) in 
these cells is hypermethylated. By analyzing luciferase activity of transfected
p21(Cip1) promoter vectors, we demonstrate that depsipeptide functions on
Sp1-binding sites to induce p21(Cip1) expression. We hypothesize that
hypermethylation may interfere with Sp1/Sp3 binding. By using an electrophoretic 
mobility shift assay, we show that, although methylation within the consensus
Sp1-binding site did not reduce Sp1/Sp3 binding, methylation outside of the
consensus Sp1 element induced a significant decrease in Sp1/Sp3 binding.
Depsipeptide induced p21(Cip1) expression was reconstituted when cells were
pretreated with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine. Our data suggest, for the first time,
that hypermethylation around the consensus Sp1-binding sites may directly reduce 
Sp1/Sp3 binding, therefore leading to a reduced p21(Cip1) expression in response 
to depsipeptide treatment.

PMCID: PMC156121
PMID: 12773551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Jun;23(12):4035-45.

The Sp1 family of transcription factors is involved in p27(Kip1)-mediated
activation of myelin basic protein gene expression.

Wei Q(1), Miskimins WK, Miskimins R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Biomedical Sciences, School of Medicine, University of South
Dakota, Vermillion, South Dakota 57069, USA.

p27(Kip1) levels increase in many cells as they leave the cell cycle and begin to
differentiate. The increase in p27(Kip1) levels generally precedes the expression
of differentiation-specific genes. Previous studies from our laboratory showed
that the overexpression of p27(Kip1) enhances myelin basic protein (MBP) promoter
activity. This activation is specific to p27(Kip1). Additionally, inhibition of
cyclin-dependent kinase activity alone is not sufficient to increase MBP
expression. In this study, we focused on understanding how p27(Kip1) can activate
gene transcription by using the MBP gene in oligodendrocytes as a model. We show 
that the enhancement of MBP promoter activity by p27(Kip1) is mediated by a
proximal region of the MBP promoter that contains a conserved GC box binding
sequence. This sequence binds transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3. Increased
expression of p27(Kip1) increases the level of Sp1 promoter binding to the GC box
but does not change the level of Sp3 binding. The binding of Sp1 to this element 
activates the MBP promoter. p27(Kip1) leads to increased Sp1 binding through a
decrease in Sp1 protein turnover. Enhancement of MBP promoter activity by an
increase in the level of p27(Kip1) involves a novel mechanism that is mediated
through the stabilization and binding of transcription factor Sp1.

PMCID: PMC156141
PMID: 12773549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Jun 1;31(11):2900-14.

ZBP-89 represses vimentin gene transcription by interacting with the
transcriptional activator, Sp1.

Zhang X(1), Diab IH, Zehner ZE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and the Massey Cancer Center, Medical College of
Virginia Campus of Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23298-0614,
USA.

Vimentin, a member of the intermediate filament protein family, is regulated both
developmentally and tissue specifically. It is also a marker of the metastatic
potential of many tumor cells. Pre viously, the human vimentin promoter has been 
shown to contain multiple elements for the binding of both positive- and
negative-acting regulatory factors. Transient transfection analysis of various
vimentin 5'-end promoter sequences and mutants thereof fused to a reporter gene
further defined two regulatory elements, a positive element that binds Sp1 and a 
negative element that binds the protein ZBP-89. ZBP-89 has been shown to be
either a repressor or an activator of gene expression, depending on the promoter.
Here, we show that for vimentin, both ZBP-89 and ZBP-99 repress reporter gene
expression in Schneider (S2) cells. Deletion constructs confirm that the
glutamine-rich region of Sp1 is required to enhance vimentin transcription,
whereas the N-terminus of ZBP-89 is required to interact with Sp1 and repress
gene expression. The overexpression of hTAF(II)130 can alleviate ZBP-89
repression in S2 cells, suggesting how ZBP-89 might serve to block gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC156715
PMID: 12771217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 1;278(31):29192-200. Epub 2003 May 19.

Adjacent sequence controls the response polarity of nitric oxide-sensitive Sp
factor binding sites.

Zhang J(1), Wang S, Wesley RA, Danner RL.

Author information: 
(1)Critical Care Medicine Department, Warren Grant Magnuson Clinical Center,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Nitric oxide (NO*) and cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) inhibitors up-regulate
tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) by decreasing Sp1 binding to a proximal GC
box element. Here, elements flanking GC boxes were tested for their role in
determining whether Sp sites act as activators or repressors. Promoter studies in
receptive human cell lines demonstrated that NO* down-regulated endothelial NO*
synthase (eNOS) but up-regulated TNFalpha. Like TNFalpha, Sp1 binding to the eNOS
promoter was decreased by NO* and a PKA inhibitor, H89, and increased by a PKA
activator, dibutyryl cAMP (Bt2cAMP). For either promoter, mutation of Sp sites
abolished NO* responses. In contrast, mutation of an upstream AP1 site in the
TNFalpha promoter (not present in eNOS) maintained NO* responsiveness, but
reversed the direction of NO* and cAMP effects. Using artificial constructs, NO* 
increased transcription when Sp and AP1 sites were both present (TNFalpha-like
response), but decreased it when the adjacent AP1 site was disrupted (eNOS-like
response). NO*, H89, and Bt2cAMP were found to produce reciprocal protein binding
changes at contiguous AP1 and Sp sites (p < 0.0001 for an interaction). Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that Sp1 and to a lesser extent Sp3 bound
to the GC box regions of eNOS and TNFalpha in intact cells. Thus, this NO*- and
cAMP-responsive regulatory module has a Sp site sensor variably coupled to an
adjacent element that determines response polarity. These results define a
composite element that can utilize secondary inputs to convert off signals to on,
thereby conferring complex functionalities to the same DNA binding motif.

PMID: 12759366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Eur J Biochem. 2003 May;270(10):2274-86.

Gene transcription of fgl2 in endothelial cells is controlled by Ets-1 and Oct-1 
and requires the presence of both Sp1 and Sp3.

Liu M(1), Leibowitz JL, Clark DA, Mendicino M, Ning Q, Ding JW, D'Abreo C, Fung
L, Marsden PA, Levy GA.

Author information: 
(1)Multi Organ Transplant Program, Toronto General Hospital and The University of
Toronto, Canada.

The immune coagulant fgl2/fibroleukin has been previously shown to play a pivotal
role in the pathogenesis of murine and human fulminant hepatitis and fetal loss
syndrome. Constitutive expression of fgl2 transcripts at low levels are seen in
cytotoxic T cells, endothelial, intestinal and trophoblast cells, while specific 
factors (such as virus and cytokines) are required to induce high levels of fgl2 
expression in other cell types including monocytes/macrophages. To address the
transcriptional mechanisms that regulate constitutive expression of fgl2, murine 
genomic clones were characterized and the transcription start site was defined by
5'-RACE and primer extension. A comprehensive assessment of basal fgl2 promoter
activity in murine vascular endothelial cells defined a minimal 119 bp region
responsible for constitutive fgl2 transcription. A complex positive regulatory
domain (PRD) spanning a 39-bp sequence from -87 to -49 (relative to the
transcription start site) was identified. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay
studies in vascular endothelial cells revealed that the nucleoprotein complexes
that form on this positive regulatory domain (PRD) contain Sp1/Sp3 family
members, Oct-1, and Ets-1. Heterologous expression studies in Drosophila
Schneider cells confirmed that the constitutive expression of this gene is
controlled by Ets-1 and requires the presence both of the Sp1 and Sp3
transcription factors. The presence of this complex multicomponent PRD in the
fgl2 proximal promoter is consistent with the observation that, in vivo, fgl2
expression is tightly regulated. Moreover, viral induced fgl2 expression also
requires the presence of this PRD. These results clearly demonstrate that
multiple cis DNA elements in a clustered region work cooperatively to regulate
constitutive fgl2 expression and interact with inducible elements to regulate
viral-induced fgl2 expression in endothelial cells.

PMID: 12752447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jul 18;278(29):26423-34. Epub 2003 May 13.

Functional analysis of the rat N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor 2A promoter:
multiple transcription starts points, positive regulation by Sp factors, and
translational regulation.

Liu A(1), Zhuang Z, Hoffman PW, Bai G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral & Craniofacial Biological Sciences, University of Maryland 
Dental School and Program in Neuroscience, University of Maryland, Baltimore,
Maryland 21201, USA.

N-Methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor subunit 2A (NR2A) is an important modulatory
component of the NMDA subtype of glutamate receptors. To investigate the
transcription mechanism of the NR2A gene, we cloned the 5'-flanking sequence from
a rat genomic library. RNA mapping with rat brain RNA revealed two sets of major 
and several minor transcription start points in a single exon of 1140 bp.
Reporter gene and mutation studies indicated that core promoter activity resided 
in exon 1, whereas the 5'-flanking sequence up to 1.5 kb showed no significant
impact on promoter activity. Fragments containing minor transcription start
points were able to drive a reporter gene in transfected cells and produce
nascent RNAs in an in vitro transcription system. All fragments tested showed
more promoter activity in dissociated neurons of the rat embryonic cerebrocortex 
and cell lines expressing NR2A mRNA than that in glial cultures and non-neuronal 
cells. Within exon 1 there are three GC-box elements that displayed distinct
binding affinity to both Sp1- and Sp4-like factors. Overexpression of Sp1 or Sp4,
but not Sp3, significantly increased the activity of the promoter containing
these elements. Inclusion of exon 2 and 3 sequences, which contain five short
open-reading frames, attenuated promoter-driven reporter activity more than
3-fold but attenuated the level of reporter mRNA less than 1.4-fold. Our results 
suggest that the core promoter of the rat NR2A gene requires exon 1, that Sp
factors positively regulate this core promoter, and that a post-transcriptional
mechanism may negatively regulate expression of the gene.

PMID: 12746457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Chem Commun (Camb). 2003 Apr 7;(7):904-5.

A novel approach to carbon hollow spheres and vessels from CCl4 at low
temperatures.

Xiong Y(1), Xie Y, Li Z, Wu C, Zhang R.

Author information: 
(1)Structure Research Laboratory, University of Science and Technology of China, 
Hefei, Anhui 230026, PR China.

Carbon hollow spheres (400-600 nm) and vessels (400 nm x 3000 nm) have been
synthesized from sp3-CCl4 at 190 and 230 degrees C, respectively. The HRTEM
images and Raman spectra reveal the sp2 nature of the as-obtained products,
indicating that the transformation from carbon sp3 to sp2 occurs in the
reactions. The possible mechanism has also been proposed.

PMID: 12739670  [PubMed]


233. J Neurosci. 2003 May 1;23(9):3597-606.

Sp1 and Sp3 are oxidative stress-inducible, antideath transcription factors in
cortical neurons.

Ryu H(1), Lee J, Zaman K, Kubilis J, Ferrante RJ, Ross BD, Neve R, Ratan RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, 
USA.

Neuronal cell death in response to oxidative stress may reflect the failure of
endogenous adaptive mechanisms. However, the transcriptional activators induced
by oxidative stress in neurons that trigger adaptive genetic responses have yet
to be fully elucidated. We report that basal DNA binding of the zinc finger
transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 is unexpectedly low in cortical neurons in
vitro and is significantly induced by glutathione depletion-induced or hydrogen
peroxide-induced oxidative stress in these cells. The increases in Sp1/Sp3 DNA
binding reflect, in part, increased levels of Sp1 and Sp3 protein in the nuclei
of cortical neurons. Similar induction of Sp1 and Sp3 protein is also observed in
neurons in vivo in a chemical or a genetic model of Huntington's disease, two
rodent models in which neuronal loss has been attributed to oxidative stress.
Sustained high-level expression of full-length Sp1 or full-length Sp3, but not
the Sp1 zinc finger DNA-binding domain alone, prevents death in response to
oxidative stress, DNA damage, or both. Taken together, these results establish
Sp1 and Sp3 as oxidative stress-induced transcription factors in cortical neurons
that positively regulate neuronal survival.

PMID: 12736330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Immunol. 2003 May 15;170(10):5064-74.

Nitric oxide-independent CTL suppression during tumor progression: association
with arginase-producing (M2) myeloid cells.

Liu Y(1), Van Ginderachter JA, Brys L, De Baetselier P, Raes G, Geldhof AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Immunology, Vrije Universiteit Brussel,
Belgium. tmliuyua@vub.ac.be

Most of the mice bearing a s.c. BW-Sp3 lymphoma tumor mount a CD8(+) T
cell-mediated response resulting in tumor regression. Nonetheless, tumor
progression occurs in some of the recipients and is associated with CTL
inactivity. We demonstrated that T cell-activating APC were induced in regressors
whereas T cell suppressive myeloid cells predominated in the spleen of
progressors. Indeed, in vitro depletion of either the adherent or the CD11b(+)
populations restored T cell cytotoxicity and proliferation in these mice. This
CTL inhibition was cell-to-cell contact-dependent but not mediated by NO.
However, the same progressor suppressive cells prevented the activity of in
vitro-restimulated CTLs derived from regressors in a cell-to-cell contact and
NO-dependent fashion. Thus, either the NO-dependent or -independent suppressive
pathway prevailed, depending on the target CTL population. In addition, the
suppressive population expressed a high arginase activity, suggesting an
association of the suppressive phenotype with alternatively activated (M2)
myeloid cells. However, the high arginase activity is not directly involved in
the suppressive process. Our results provide new insights for myeloid
cell-mediated CTL inhibition during cancer progression.

PMID: 12734351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Biochem J. 2003 Aug 1;373(Pt 3):925-32.

Characterization of the human activator protein-2gamma (AP-2gamma) gene: control 
of expression by Sp1/Sp3 in breast tumour cells.

Hasleton MD(1), Ibbitt JC, Hurst HC.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Molecular Oncology Unit, Imperial College of Science,
Technology and Medicine, Hammersmith Hospital, Du Cane Road, London W12 0HS, U.K.

The activator protein-2 (AP-2) family of DNA-binding transcription factors are
developmentally regulated and also play a role in human neoplasia. In particular,
the AP-2gamma protein has been shown to be overexpressed in a high percentage of 
breast tumours. In the present study, we report the complete sequence
determination of the human TFAP2C gene encoding the AP-2gamma transcription
factor plus the mapping of the transcription start site used in breast
tumour-derived cells. The 5'-end of the gene lies within a CpG island and
transcription is initiated at a single site within a classical initiator motif.
We have gone on to investigate why some breast tumour-derived cell lines readily 
express AP-2gamma, whereas others do not, and show that the proximal promoter
(+191 to -312) is differentially active in the two cell phenotypes. DNase
footprinting led to the identification of three Sp1/Sp3-binding sites within this
region, two of which are absolutely required both for promoter function and
cell-type-specific activity. By Western blotting a panel of expressing and
non-expressing breast tumour lines we show that the latter have higher levels of 
Sp3. Furthermore, increasing Sp3 levels in AP-2gamma-expressing cells led to the 
repression of AP-2gamma promoter activity, particularly when Sp3 inhibitory
function was maximized through sumoylation. We propose that differences in the
level and activity of Sp3 between breast tumour lines can determine the
expression level of their AP-2gamma gene.

PMCID: PMC1223543
PMID: 12733991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Nat Struct Biol. 2003 Jun;10(6):475-81.

Structural insights into the catalytic mechanism of cyclophilin A.

Howard BR(1), Vajdos FF, Li S, Sundquist WI, Hill CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake
City, Utah 84132, USA.

Cyclophilins constitute a ubiquitous protein family whose functions include
protein folding, transport and signaling. They possess both sequence-specific
binding and proline cis-trans isomerase activities, as exemplified by the
interaction between cyclophilin A (CypA) and the HIV-1 CA protein. Here, we
report crystal structures of CypA in complex with HIV-1 CA protein variants that 
bind preferentially with the substrate proline residue in either the cis or the
trans conformation. Cis- and trans-Pro substrates are accommodated within the
enzyme active site by rearrangement of their N-terminal residues and with minimal
distortions in the path of the main chain. CypA Arg55 guanidinium group probably 
facilitates catalysis by anchoring the substrate proline oxygen and stabilizing
sp3 hybridization of the proline nitrogen in the transition state.

PMID: 12730686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Lipid Res. 2003 Jul;44(7):1322-31. Epub 2003 May 1.

Regulation of human CETP gene expression: role of SP1 and SP3 transcription
factors at promoter sites -690, -629, and -37.

Le Goff W(1), Guerin M, Petit L, Chapman MJ, Thillet J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) Unité 551
"Dyslipoproteinemias and Atherosclerosis: Genetics, Metabolism and Therapy" ,
Hôpital de la Pitié, 83 boulevard de l'Hôpital, 75651 Paris, France.

Cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) is a key factor in plasma reverse
cholesterol transport and is implicated in the pathophysiology of atherogenic
dyslipidemia. Variations observed in plasma CETP mass and activity in both
normolipidemic and dyslipidemic individuals may reflect differences in CETP gene 
expression. We evaluated the respective roles of the Sp1 and Sp3 transcription
factors on the promoter activity of the human CETP gene at a new Sp1/Sp3 site
identified at position -690, and at two previously described Sp1/Sp3 sites at
positions -37 and -629. In transient transfection in HepG2 cells, site-directed
mutagenesis using luciferase reporter constructs containing a promoter fragment
from +32 to -745 indicated that the new -690 site acts as a repressive element in
reducing CETP promoter activity (-22%; P < 0.05); equally, this site exerts an
additive effect with the -629 site, inducing marked repression (-42%; P < 0.005).
In contrast, in NCTC cells that display a 16-fold lower level of Sp3, the
repressive effect at the -690 site was enhanced 2-fold (-45%; P < 0.05), whereas 
the -629 site exerted no effect. Cotransfection of Sp1 and/or Sp3 in SL2 insect
cells lacking endogenous Sp factors demonstrated that Sp1 and Sp3 act as
activators at the -690 and -37 sites, whereas Sp3 acts as a repressor at the -629
site. Taken together, our data demonstrate that Sp1 and Sp3 regulate human CETP
promoter activity through three Sp1/Sp3 binding sites in a distinct manner, and
that the Sp1/Sp3 ratio is a key factor in determining the relative contribution
of these sites to total promoter activity.

PMID: 12730302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2003 Oct;29(4):499-505. Epub 2003 Apr 24.

Modulation of Sp1 and Sp3 in lung epithelial cells regulates ClC-2 chloride
channel expression.

Holmes KW(1), Hales R, Chu S, Maxwell MJ, Mogayzel PJ Jr, Zeitlin PL.

Author information: 
(1)Eudowood Division of Pediatric Respiratory Sciences, The Johns Hopkins Medical
Institutions, 600 N Wolfe St. Park 316, Baltimore, MD 21287-2533, USA.

ClC-2 is a pH- and voltage-activated chloride channel, which is highly expressed 
in fetal airways and downregulated at birth. The ClC-2 promoter contains
consensus binding sites within the first 237 bp, which bind transcription factors
Sp1 and Sp3(1). This study directly links Sp1 and Sp3 with ClC-2 protein
expression by demonstrating: (i) induction of ClC-2 protein by transient
overexpression of each transcription factor in adult rat Type II cells, which
have low levels of ClC-2; and (ii) reduction of ClC-2 expression by incubation
with a competitive inhibitor of Sp1 and Sp3 in fetal rat Type II cells, which
have high levels of endogenous ClC-2. Endogenous fetal lung Sp1 is differentially
expressed as two major species of 105 kD and 95 kD. Although low-level expression
of Sp1 in adult cells is almost exclusively the 105-kD species, overexpression of
Sp1 results in increased expression of the 95-kD band. These experiments suggest 
that the mechanism for postnatal reduction of ClC-2 expression in lung epithelia 
is based on decreased interaction of Sp1 and Sp3 with the ClC-2 promoter.

PMID: 12714379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jul 4;278(27):24377-87. Epub 2003 Apr 16.

Gap junctional communication modulates gene transcription by altering the
recruitment of Sp1 and Sp3 to connexin-response elements in osteoblast promoters.

Stains JP(1), Lecanda F, Screen J, Towler DA, Civitelli R.

Collaborators: Civitelli R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bone and Mineral Diseases, Washington University School of
Medicine and Barnes-Jewish Hospital, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Loss-of-function mutations of gap junction proteins, connexins, represent a
mechanism of disease in a variety of tissues. We have shown that recessive (gene 
deletion) or dominant (connexin45 overexpression) disruption of connexin43
function results in osteoblast dysfunction and abnormal expression of osteoblast 
genes, including down-regulation of osteocalcin transcription. To elucidate the
molecular mechanisms of gap junction-sensitive transcriptional regulation, we
systematically analyzed the rat osteocalcin promoter for sensitivity to gap
junctional intercellular communication. We identified an Sp1/Sp3 containing
complex that assembles on a minimal element in the -70 to -57 region of the
osteocalcin promoter in a gap junction-dependent manner. This CT-rich
connexin-response element is necessary and sufficient to confer gap junction
sensitivity to the osteocalcin proximal promoter. Repression of osteocalcin
transcription occurs as a result of displacement of the stimulatory Sp1 by the
inhibitory Sp3 on the promoter when gap junctional communication is perturbed.
Modulation of Sp1/Sp3 recruitment also occurs on the collagen Ialpha1 promoter
and translates into gap junction-sensitive transcriptional control of collagen
Ialpha1 gene expression. Thus, regulation of Sp1/Sp3 recruitment to the promoter 
may represent a potential general mechanism for transcriptional control of target
genes by signals passing through gap junctions.

PMID: 12700237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2003 Apr 15;1626(1-3):1-9.

HOXB7 expression is regulated by the transcription factors NF-Y, YY1, Sp1 and
USF-1.

Meccia E(1), Bottero L, Felicetti F, Peschle C, Colombo MP, Carè A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Viale
Regina Elena, 299- 00161, Rome, Italy.

Products of HOX genes are transcription factors responsible for developmental
regulation and postnatal tissue homeostasis. Besides their well-established
function played during embryonic development, we had previously demonstrated the 
direct role of HOXB7 in tumor progression through transactivation of several
genes involved in the proliferative and angiogenic processes. This role is at
first exerted through the deregulated, constitutive expression of this gene. To
define the factors possibly responsible for such activation, we studied the
molecular regulation of HOXB7 in embryonic and neoplastic cells. In a 1.9-kb 5'
promoter region, we identified and functionally tested, at least in vitro,
different regulatory sequences showing a direct binding by the NF-Y, YY1, Sp1/Sp3
and upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF-1) transcription factors. Cell
transfection and site-specific mutagenesis demonstrated Sp1/Sp3, NF-Y, YY1 and
USF-1 binding to be functional and fundamental in driving HOXB7 expression.
Disruption of the corresponding sites reduces gene expression of 65%, 78% and
55%, respectively. Because HOXB7 seems to play an important role in tumor
proliferation and progression, the analysis of its regulatory sequences might
represent an important step for gene targeting according to a new therapeutic
strategy.

PMID: 12697323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Proteins. 2003 May 15;51(3):397-408.

A novel shape complementarity scoring function for protein-protein docking.

Chen R(1), Weng Z.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Program, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.
zhiping@bu.edu

Shape complementarity is the most basic ingredient of the scoring functions for
protein-protein docking. Most grid-based docking algorithms use the total number 
of grid points at the binding interface to quantify shape complementarity. We
have developed a novel Pairwise Shape Complementarity (PSC) function that is
conceptually simple and rapid to compute. The favorable component of PSC is the
total number of atom pairs between the receptor and the ligand within a distance 
cutoff. When applied to a benchmark of 49 test cases, PSC consistently ranks
near-native structures higher and produces more near-native structures than the
traditional grid-based function, and the improvement was seen across all
prediction levels and in all categories of the benchmark. Without any
post-processing or biological information about the binding site except the
complementarity-determining region of antibodies, PSC predicts the complex
structure correctly for 6 test cases, and ranks at least one near-native
structure in the top 20 predictions for 18 test cases. Our docking program ZDOCK 
has been parallelized and the average computing time is 4 minutes using sixteen
IBM SP3 processors. Both ZDOCK and the benchmark are freely available to academic
users (http://zlab.bu.edu/~ rong/dock).

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12696051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Mol Ecol. 2003 May;12(5):1217-23.

Candidate gene analysis of metamorphic timing in ambystomatid salamanders.

Voss SR(1), Prudic KL, Oliver JC, Shaffer HB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40506, USA.
srvoss@uky.edu

Although much is known about the ecological significance of metamorphosis and
metamorphic timing, few studies have examined the underlying genetic architecture
of these traits, and no study has attempted to associate phenotypic variation to 
molecular variation in specific genes. Here we report on a candidate gene
approach (CGA) to test specific loci for a statistical contribution to variation 
in metamorphic timing. Three segregating populations (SP1, SP2 and SP3) were
constructed utilizing three species of paedomorphic Mexican ambystomatid
salamander, including the axolotl, Ambystoma mexicanum. We used these replicated 
species to test the hypothesis that inheritance of alternate genotypes at two
thyroid hormone receptor loci (TRalpha, TRbeta) affects metamorphic timing in
ambystomatid salamanders. A significant TRalpha*SP effect indicated that
variation in metamorphic timing may be influenced by TRalpha genotype, however,
the effect was not a simple one, as both the magnitude and direction of the
phenotypic effect depended upon the genetic background. These are the first data 
to implicate a specific gene in contributing to variation in metamorphic timing. 
In general, candidate gene approaches can be extended to any number of loci and
to any organism where simple genetic crosses can be performed to create
segregating populations. The approach is thus of particular value in ecological
studies where target genes have been identified but the study organism is not one
of the few well-characterized model systems that dominate genetic research.

PMID: 12694285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Eur J Biochem. 2003 Apr;270(8):1855-62.

Sp1 and Sp3 are involved in up-regulation of human deoxyribonuclease II
transcription during differentiation of HL-60 cells.

Chou SF(1), Chen HL, Lu SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine,
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Expression of DNase II in macrophages is potentially crucially important in the
removal of unwanted DNA. We have previously shown that DNase II expression is
up-regulated at the transcriptional level during the phorbol
12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA)-induced differentiation of HL-60 and THP-1 cells.
In this study, we investigated the cis-regulatory elements and transcription
factors involved in this process in HL-60 cells. cis-Regulatory elements in the
DNase II promoter were located by 5' deletion and site-directed mutagenesis of
promoter-luciferase constructs and transient transfection of HL-60 cells.
Furthermore, the binding proteins were identified by electrophoretic mobility
shift assay (EMSA) in the presence of specific antibodies. In the DNase II
promoter, 249 base pairs upstream of the transcription start site were essential 
for maximal promoter activity in both untreated and PMA-treated HL-60 cells and, 
within this region, three Sp1 and Sp3 binding sites were identified as essential 
for transcriptional regulation and PMA induction. Western blot analysis showed
that PMA treatment resulted in increased levels of Sp1 and Sp3 proteins.
Furthermore, cotransfection analysis in Drosophila SL2 cells showed that Sp1 was 
more potent than Sp3 in activating the DNase II promoter. We therefore conclude
that Sp1 and/or Sp3 are involved in the up-regulation of DNase II expression
during the differentiation of HL-60 cells.

PMID: 12694199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Apr 18;303(4):1159-68.

Expression of alpha-ENaC2 is dependent on an upstream Sp1 binding motif and is
modulated by protein phosphatase 1 in lung epithelial cells.

Chu S(1), Cockrell CA, Ferro TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, McGuire Research Institute,
Richmond, VA 23249, USA. schu@hsc.vcu.edu

The amiloride-sensitive Na(+) channel ENaC is expressed in lung epithelium and
plays a pivotal role in lung fluid clearance in the newborn. Multiple splice
variants of the ENaC alpha-subunit have been reported. Among them, alpha-ENaC2
accounts for a considerable portion of alpha-ENaC transcripts in human lung and
kidney, possesses channel functions similar to alpha-ENaC1, and is driven by a
downstream promoter. In the current study, we examine the regulation of
alpha-ENaC2 transcription in lung epithelial cells. We found that transcription
factors Sp1 and Sp3 activate alpha-ENaC2 transcription through a GC-rich element 
(Sp1-binding site) in the promoter. Because alpha-ENaC expression and Sp1
phosphorylation are both significantly up-regulated in the perinatal lung, we
then examined the possible connection between Sp1/Sp3 phosphorylation and
alpha-ENaC2 expression. We found that protein phosphatase 1 (PP1)
dephosphorylates Sp1 and Sp3 in lung epithelial cells, reduces their binding to
the alpha-ENaC2 promoter, and decreases Sp1/Sp3-mediated promoter activity. Our
results suggest that Sp1 and Sp3 are essential for alpha-ENaC2 transcription in
lung epithelial cells and that dephosphorylation of the Sp transcription factors 
by PP1 suppresses alpha-ENaC2 expression. The significance of these findings in
the regulation of gene expression in perinatal lung is discussed.

PMID: 12684058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Blood. 2003 Aug 1;102(3):858-66. Epub 2003 Apr 3.

Impaired hematopoiesis in mice lacking the transcription factor Sp3.

Van Loo PF(1), Bouwman P, Ling KW, Middendorp S, Suske G, Grosveld F, Dzierzak E,
Philipsen S, Hendriks RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC, 3000 DR Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

As the zinc-finger transcription factor specificity protein 3 (Sp3) has been
implicated in the regulation of many hematopoietic-specific genes, we analyzed
the role of Sp3 in hematopoiesis. At embryonic day 18.5 (E18.5), Sp3-/- mice
exhibit a partial arrest of T-cell development in the thymus and B-cell numbers
are reduced in liver and spleen. However, pre-B-cell proliferation and
differentiation into immunoglobulin M-positive (IgM+) B cells in vitro are not
affected. At E14.5 and E16.5, Sp3-/- mice exhibit a significant delay in the
appearance of definitive erythrocytes in the blood, paralleled by a defect in the
progression of differentiation of definitive erythroid cells in vitro. Perinatal 
death of the null mutants precludes the analysis of adult hematopoiesis in Sp3-/-
mice. We therefore investigated the ability of E12.5 Sp3-/- liver cells to
contribute to the hematopoietic compartment in an in vivo transplantation assay. 
Sp3-/- cells were able to repopulate the B- and T-lymphoid compartment, albeit
with reduced efficiency. In contrast, Sp3-/- cells showed no significant
engraftment in the erythroid and myeloid lineages. Thus, the absence of Sp3
results in cell-autonomous hematopoietic defects, affecting in particular the
erythroid and myeloid cell lineages.

PMID: 12676787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. J Med Chem. 2003 Apr 10;46(8):1330-6.

A model for predicting likely sites of CYP3A4-mediated metabolism on drug-like
molecules.

Singh SB(1), Shen LQ, Walker MJ, Sheridan RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Systems Merck Research Laboratories, 126 E. Lincoln
Avenue, RY50SW-100, Rahway, New Jersey 07065-0900, USA. suresh_singh@merck.com

We have developed a rapid semiquantitative model for evaluating the relative
susceptibilities of different sites on drug molecules to metabolism by cytochrome
P450 3A4. The model is based on the energy necessary to remove a hydrogen radical
from each site, plus the surface area exposure of the hydrogen atom. The energy
of hydrogen radical abstraction is conventionally measured by AM1 semiempirical
molecular orbital calculations. AM1 calculations show the following order of
radical stabilities for the hydrogen atom abstractions: sp2 centers > heteroatom 
sp3 centers > carbon sp3 centers. Since AM1 calculations are too time intensive
for routine work, we developed a statistical trend vector model, which is used to
estimate the AM1 abstraction energy of a hydrogen atom from its local atomic
environment. We carried out AM1 and trend vector calculations on 50 CYP3A4
substrates whose major sites of metabolism are known in the literature. A plot of
the lowest hydrogen radical formation energy versus its sterically accessible
surface area exposure for these 50 substrates shows that only those hydrogen
atoms with solvent accessible surface area exposure > or = 8.0 A(2) are
susceptible to CYP3A4-mediated metabolism. This approach forms the basis for our 
general model, which predicts sites on drugs that are susceptible to cytochrome
P450 3A4-mediated hydrogen radical abstraction followed by a hydroxylation
reaction. This model, in conjunction with specific enzyme site binding
requirements, can aid in identifying possible sites of metabolism catalyzed by
other cytochrome P450 enzymes.

PMID: 12672233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2003 Apr 10;112(1-2):153-62.

Role of an AP-2-like element in transcriptional regulation of mouse mu-opioid
receptor gene.

Ko JL(1), Liu HC, Loh HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Minnesota Medical School,
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. kojane@shu.edu

Previously, several important cis-elements and trans-factors have been shown to
play a functional role in the proximal promoter of mouse mu-opioid receptor (MOR)
gene. In this study, we defined another functional element located the in -450 to
-400 bp (translational start site designated as +1) region of the proximal
promoter, which is also essential for the full promoter activity. It is
designated as the morAP-2-like element for its sequence homologous to the
consensus AP-2 element. Surprisingly, electrophoretic mobility shift analysis
(EMSA) revealed that Sp1 and Sp3, but not AP-2 proteins, were specifically bound 
to the morAP-2-like element. Mutation of the morAP-2-like element, resulting in a
loss of Sp binding, led to an approximately 35% decrease in activity, further
confirming the positive role of the morAP-2-like element in MOR gene expression. 
Dephosphorylation of Sp proteins with alkaline phosphatase also decreased Sp
binding to the morAP-2-like element in EMSA, suggesting phosphorylation of Sp is 
essential for its binding to this element. However, direct or indirect activation
of PKA, a classical G-protein coupled signaling pathway, resulted in no
significant change of Sp binding to the morAP-2-like element, nor of the promoter
activity the SH-SY5Y cells, MOR expressing cells, suggesting that phosphorylation
of Sp does not involve PKA. These results suggest that the binding of different
phosphorylated forms of Sp proteins to the morAP-2-like element may contribute to
the fine tuning of MOR expression in different cells.

PMID: 12670713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Zhonghua Shi Yan He Lin Chuang Bing Du Xue Za Zhi. 2002 Sep;16(3):288-91.

[Establishment of a double-antigen sandwich ELISA for detecting total antibodies 
to human immunodeficiency virus type 1/2].

[Article in Chinese]

He H(1), Mao P, Hou J, Hong S, Zhu L, Hu Y, Bai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, The 302nd Hospital of PLA, Beijing 100039, China.

OBJECTIVE: To describe and evaluate a double-antigen sandwich ELISA for detecting
human immunodeficiency virus type 1/2 (HIV-1/2) specific antibodies.
METHODS: The peptides gp41.1(sp1), gp41.2(sp2), gp120(sp3) and p24(sp4) of HIV-1 
and gp36(sp5) of HIV-2 were artificially synthesized. Then sp1, sp3, sp4 and sp5 
were used as coating antigens; sp1, sp2, sp4 and sp5 labeled with HRP were used
as conjugates in this sandwich ELISA.
RESULTS: The specificity and sensitivity of the assay were both 100% in detecting
anti-HIV of 40 control sera of the second generation panel, higher than indirect 
ELISA (specificity 90% and sensitivity, 65%, respectively). All of 210 sera from 
individuals with other diseases were negative for anti-HIV. The consistency rate 
was 100% when our sandwich ELISA and Abbott HIVAB were used to detect anti-HIV in
90 healthy blood donors and 88 HIV infected individuals.
CONCLUSIONS: The results showed that this sandwich ELISA for detection of
anti-HIV is specific, sensitive and convenient, and it is suitable for screening 
blood donors and detecting HIV infection.

PMID: 12665944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2002;507:61-6.

Regulation of leukotriene C4 synthase gene expression by SP1 and SP3 in
mononuclear phagocytes.

Serio KJ(1), Hodulik CR, Bigby TD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veteran Affairs Medical Center, Department of Medicine,
University of California, San Diego, California, USA.

PMID: 12664565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Apr 4;303(2):660-8.

Determinants contributing to estrogen-regulated expression of SK3.

Jacobson D(1), Pribnow D, Herson PS, Maylie J, Adelman JP.

Author information: 
(1)Vollum Institute, Oregon Health and Sciences University, Portland, OR 97201,
USA.

The rSK3 gene encodes a small conductance Ca(2+)-activated K(+) channel that is
transcriptionally regulated by estrogen. To examine determinants of rSK3 gene
expression, the CAP site was defined and the promoter was identified. A 33 bp
sequence adjacent to the promoter was shown to act as an enhancer in L6 cells
that express SK3 and estrogen receptor alpha (ER alpha). The 33 bp enhancer was
unable to stimulate transcription in Cos7 cells that do not express SK3 or ER
alpha. However when cotransfected with ER alpha and stimulated with 17
beta-estradiol (E2) the enhancer was activated. Interestingly, expression of ER
alpha in Cos7 cells and E2 treatment was sufficient to induce expression of the
endogenous SK3 gene. Only Sp1 and Sp3 specifically bound to the enhancer from
Cos7 and L6 nuclear extracts, however, ER alpha increased Sp1s affinity for the
enhancer. The data suggest that estrogen regulates SK3 gene expression through
interactions between ER alpha and Sp1.

PMID: 12659870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2003 Apr;44(4):1447-57.

Influence of sp1/sp3 expression on corneal epithelial cells proliferation and
differentiation properties in reconstructed tissues.

Gaudreault M(1), Carrier P, Larouche K, Leclerc S, Giasson M, Germain L, Guérin
SL.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology and Molecular Endocrinology Research Center, University Hospital
Center of Laval (CHUL) Research Center, Québec, Canada.

PURPOSE: Primary cultured epithelial cells are widely used for the production of 
tissue-engineered substitutes and are gaining popularity as a model for gene
expression studies. However, as such cells are passaged in culture, they often
lose their ability to proliferate by progressing toward terminal cell
differentiation, a process likely to be determined by altered expression of
transcription factors that have functions critical for cell adhesion and
differentiation. This study was designed to determine whether the variable life
span of primary cultured human corneal epithelial cells (HCECs) might be the
consequence of varying expression levels of the well-known transcription factors 
Sp1 and Sp3 (Sp1/Sp3).
METHODS: HCECs were obtained from donor eyes and cultured on irradiated
Swiss-3T3. Sp1/Sp3 expression was monitored by Western blot and electrophoretic
mobility shift assay (EMSA). The Sp1/Sp3 regulatory influence was evaluated by
transfection of HCECs with a recombinant plasmid bearing the Sp1/Sp3-dependent
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (rPARP) promoter fused to the CAT reporter gene.
HCECs that expressed various levels of Sp1/Sp3 were also used for the production 
of corneal substitutes.
RESULTS: Expression of Sp1/Sp3 was dramatically inconsistent between HCECs
isolated from the eyes of different donors. Both factors were highly expressed
during one passage and then totally disappeared as cells terminally
differentiated. Proper stratification of HCECs on reconstructed tissue
substitutes could be obtained only with cells that also had a delayed peak of
Sp1/Sp3 expression when cultured in vitro.
CONCLUSIONS: Expression of Sp1/Sp3 may represent a good predictor for selecting
HCECs that are most likely to proliferate, stratify, and differentiate properly
when used for the production of reconstructed corneal substitutes.

PMID: 12657578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2003 Mar 19;95(6):437-48.

Effects of interferon alpha on vascular endothelial growth factor gene
transcription and tumor angiogenesis.

von Marschall Z(1), Scholz A, Cramer T, Schäfer G, Schirner M, Oberg K,
Wiedenmann B, Höcker M, Rosewicz S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatology, Gastroenterology, Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Charité, Campus Virchow-Klinikum, Humboldt-University, Berlin, Germany.

Comment in
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2003 Mar 19;95(6):420-1.

BACKGROUND: Interferon alpha (IFN-alpha) has antiangiogenic activity, although
the underlying mechanism of action is unclear. Because human neuroendocrine (NE) 
tumors are highly vascularized and sensitive to IFN-alpha, we investigated
whether the therapeutic effects of IFN-alpha result from an inhibition of
angiogenesis mediated by a decrease in vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) 
gene expression.
METHODS: VEGF gene and protein expression was analyzed in NE tumors by
immunohistochemistry and in NE tumor cell lines by quantitative competitive
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). VEGF promoter-reporter gene constructs containing
various deletions or mutations and gel shift assays were used to identify minimal
promoter requirements and potential transcription factors. A xenograft nude mouse
model (five mice per group) was used to determine the effect of IFN-alpha on
tumor growth (NE Bon cells and pancreatic Capan-1 cells) and microvessel density.
Liver metastases from eight patients with NE tumors were analyzed for microvessel
density, VEGF mRNA content, and VEGF plasma levels before and after initiation of
IFN-alpha therapy.
RESULTS: NE tumors and cell lines expressed VEGF mRNA and secreted VEGF protein. 
In vitro, IFN-alpha decreased transcription of VEGF gene expression through an
Sp1- and/or Sp3-dependent inhibition of VEGF promoter activity. Compared with
vehicle treatment in mice, IFN-alpha inhibited tumor growth by 36% and reduced
microvessel density from 56 (95% confidence interval [CI] = 49 to 69) to 37 per
x400 Field (95% CI = 32 to 41, P =.015). Patients with NE tumors had lower VEGF
plasma levels and reduced VEGF mRNA levels and microvessel density in liver
metastasis biopsy material after IFN-alpha treatment.
CONCLUSION: IFN-alpha confers its antitumor activity, at least in part, by its
antiangiogenic activity, which results from Sp1- and/or Sp3-mediated inhibition
of VEGF gene transcription.

PMID: 12644537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 16;278(20):17688-700. Epub 2003 Mar 11.

Egr-1 mediates transcriptional repression of COL2A1 promoter activity by
interleukin-1beta.

Tan L(1), Peng H, Osaki M, Choy BK, Auron PE, Sandell LJ, Goldring MB.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Division, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and New England
Baptist Bone & Joint Institute, Harvard Institutes of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Following induction and activation of the early growth response (Egr)-1
transcription factor in human chondrocytes, interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta)
suppresses the expression of the type II collagen gene (COL2A1), associated with 
induction of Egr-1 binding activity in nuclear extracts. The COL2A1 proximal
promoter contains overlapping binding sites for Egr-1 and Sp1 family members at
-119/-112 bp and -81/-74 bp. Mutations that block binding of Sp1 and Sp3 to
either site markedly reduce constitutive expression of the core promoter.
IL-1beta-induced Egr-1 binds strongly to the -119/-112 bp site, and mutations
that block Egr-1 binding prevent inhibition by IL-1beta. Cotransfection with
pCMV-Egr1 potentiates the inhibition of COL2A1 promoter activity by IL-1beta,
whereas overexpression of dominant-negative Egr-1 mutant, Wilm's tumor-1
(WT1)/Egr1, Sp1, or Sp3 reverses the inhibition by IL-1beta. Cotransfection of
pGL2-COL2/Gal4, in which we substituted the critical residue for Egr-1 binding
with a Gal4 binding domain and a pCMV-Gal4-Egr1 chimera permits an inhibitory
response to IL-1beta that is reversed by overexpression of Gal4-CBP. Our results 
indicate that IL-1beta-induced activation of Egr-1 binding is required for
inhibition of COL2A1 proximal promoter activity and suggest that Egr-1 acts as a 
repressor of a constitutively expressed collagen gene by preventing interactions 
between Sp1 and the general transcriptional machinery.

PMID: 12637574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Electron Microsc (Tokyo). 2002;51(6):391-400.

Mapping of sp2/sp3 in DLC thin film by signal processed ESI series energy-loss
image.

Yan JY(1), Chen FR, Kai JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Engineering and System Science, National Tsing-Hua University,
HsinChu, Taiwan 300, Republic of China. d887101@oz.nthu.edu.tw

A set of signal processing methods comprising fast Fourier transform
interpolation, maximum entropy deconvolution and wavelet transformation has been 
successfully integrated to improve the equality of the extracted C K-edge spectra
from electron spectroscopic imaging (ESI) series. Fast Fourier transform
interpolation is used to improve the dispersion arising from discrete sampling of
ESI series in the energy space. The maximum entropy method is used to dispel the 
convolution effect resulting from that ESI series acquired with a finite energy
window. Wavelet transformation is applied to de-noise the extracted ESI spectrum.
The post-processed ESI spectrum has quality as good as that of a probe-acquired
spectrum and makes semi-quantitative analysis of the two-dimensional sp2/sp3
ratio map in diamond-like carbon thin film possible. In general, this method is
applicable for reconstructing good quality core-loss electron energy-loss spectra
from a nanometre-sized area, so that it may be possible to quantitatively analyse
two-dimensional information about electronic structure in materials with near
nanometre resolution.

PMID: 12630782  [PubMed]


255. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Mar 15;31(6):1693-703.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors stimulate mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase gene
expression via a promoter proximal Sp1 site.

Camarero N(1), Nadal A, Barrero MJ, Haro D, Marrero PF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Pharmacy,
University of Barcelona, Av. Diagonal 643, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.

The expression of mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase in the colon has been correlated
with the levels of butyrate present in this tissue. We report here that the
effect of butyrate on mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase gene expression is exerted
in vivo at the transcriptional level, and that trichostatin A (TSA), a specific
histone deacetylase inhibitor, also induces transcriptional activity and mRNA
expression of the gene in human cell lines derived from colon carcinoma. Using
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, we show that histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) 
is associated with the endogenous mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase promoter and
that TSA induction correlates with hyperacetylation of H4 histone associated with
the 5' flanking region of the gene. Overexpression of HDAC1 activity leads
consistently to mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase promoter hypoacetylation and
reduces its transcriptional activity. The effect of butyrate and TSA maps to a
single Sp1 site present in the proximal promoter of the gene, which is able to
bind Sp1 and Sp3 proteins. Interestingly, the binding affinity of Sp1 and Sp3
proteins to the Sp1 site correlates with the TSA responsiveness of the promoter. 
Using a one-hybrid system (GAL4-Sp1 and GAL4-Sp3), we show that both proteins can
mediate responsiveness to TSA in CaCo-2 cells employing distinct mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC152864
PMID: 12626711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 16;278(20):17785-91. Epub 2003 Mar 6.

Sp family of transcription factors is involved in valproic acid-induced
expression of Galphai2.

Arinze IJ(1), Kawai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee
37208-3599, USA. iarinze@mail.mmc.edu

Valproic acid-induced gene expression has been attributed to the DNA-binding
activity of the transcription factor activator protein 1 (AP-1). Using K562
cells, we have studied valproic acid-induced transcription from the human
Galpha(i2) gene promoter, which lacks AP-1-binding motifs. We find that valproic 
acid-induced expression of Galpha(i2) is inhibited by mithramycin A, a compound
that interferes with Sp1 binding to GC boxes in DNA. Three Sp1-binding sequences,
located at +68/+75, -50/-36, and -92/-85 in the promoter, accounted for about 60%
of this transcriptional effect, as judged by transient transfection assays.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays indicated that these sites bind members of 
the Sp family of transcription factors. Binding to DNA was inhibited by
mithramycin A and was greater in nuclear extracts from cells treated with
valproic acid than in control cells. Okadaic acid, calyculin A, and fostriecin,
which are potent inhibitors of protein phosphatase, suppressed the
transcriptional response to valproic acid. This inhibitory effect was not
observed when promoter constructs containing mutations in the referenced
Sp1-binding sites were used for transfections. In nuclear extracts from cells
cultured in the presence of these inhibitors, the binding of Sp1/Sp3 to DNA
probes was much less than in control cells. Alkaline phosphatase treatment of
nuclear extracts resulted in enhanced binding of Sp proteins to the DNA probes.
These results are consistent with the idea that dephosphorylating conditions
enhanced Sp binding to the DNA probes as well as Sp-mediated transcription
induced by valproic acid. This study demonstrates that the gene
expression-inducing effect of valproic acid occurs, in part, through the Sp
family of transcription factors.

PMID: 12624107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Cancer Res. 2003 Mar 1;63(5):1083-92.

Transforming growth factor beta 1 stimulates vascular endothelial growth factor
gene transcription in human cholangiocellular carcinoma cells.

Benckert C(1), Jonas S, Cramer T, Von Marschall Z, Schäfer G, Peters M, Wagner K,
Radke C, Wiedenmann B, Neuhaus P, Höcker M, Rosewicz S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Visceral and Transplantation Surgery, Charité,
Humboldt-University, 13353 Berlin, Germany.

The expression pattern and functional interaction of proangiogenic factors in
human cholangiocellular carcinoma (CCC) have not been fully defined. We therefore
investigated the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and
transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta 1 as well as their respective receptors in 
human CCC tumor samples and further analyzed their functional interaction in
vitro. Expression of VEGF, TGF-beta 1, and their receptors was examined by
immunohistochemistry, in situ hybridization, quantitative competitive reverse
transcription-PCR, and ELISA. VEGF promoter analysis and identification of
transcription factors involved in promoter regulation were investigated using
transient transfection and electrophoretic mobility shift assays. We observed
strong expression of VEGF in CCC tumor cells and localization of VEGF receptors 1
and 2 in endothelial cells; in addition, coexpression of TGF-beta 1 and its
receptors in tumor cells suggests a possible functional interaction between both 
cytokines. In vitro studies confirmed a paracrine/autocrine stimulation of VEGF
by TGF-beta 1 at a transcriptional level. Additional molecular studies using 5'
deletion and mutational analysis of the human VEGF promoter revealed that
TGF-beta 1 stimulates VEGF through Sp1-dependent transcriptional activation.
These data suggest that overexpression and functional interaction of TGF-beta 1
and VEGF might contribute to the "angiogenic switch" and the malignant phenotype 
in human CCC.

PMID: 12615726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Cancer Res. 2003 Mar 1;63(5):917-22.

Expression of the hypoxia marker carbonic anhydrase IX is critically dependent on
SP1 activity. Identification of a novel type of hypoxia-responsive enhancer.

Kaluz S(1), Kaluzová M, Stanbridge EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, College of Medicine,
University of California at Irvine, California 92717, USA.

In the present study, we further studied mechanisms of transcriptional regulation
of the tumor-associated carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX). We identified PR5 in the
CA9 promoter as another SP1/SP3-binding site. As shown by electromobility shift
assays and block-replacement mutagenesis, PR5 is functionally equivalent to the
SP1/SP3-binding PR1 identified previously. However, there is a strong requirement
for SP1/SP3 activity in the PR1 position, and SP1/SP3 activity from the PR5
position cannot compensate for this. In various cell lines, the expression of
endogenous CAIX and activity of CA9 promoter constructs depend on SP1/SP3
activity as demonstrated by the dose-dependent inhibitory effect of the SP1
inhibitor mithramycin A. The two conditions of the induction of CAIX expression
described previously differ in their sensitivity to mithramycin A inhibition; the
hypoxia-mimic-induced expression is less sensitive than the cell density (mild
hypoxia)-induced expression. Our present study highlights the importance of
SP1/SP3 activity for CAIX expression and provides additional evidence for
distinct mechanisms responsible for true and mild hypoxia-induced CAIX
expression. The presence of a SP1/SP3-binding element in the PR1 position is
absolutely required for mild hypoxia-induced activity, and it significantly
up-regulates the true hypoxic induction. The SP1/SP3 and hypoxia-response element
in the CA9 promoter thus may represent a novel type of enhancer capable of
mounting responses to a wider range of hypoxic conditions.

PMID: 12615703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Biochemistry. 2003 Mar 11;42(9):2680-90.

Insulin induction of apolipoprotein AI, role of Sp1.

Lam JK(1), Matsubara S, Mihara K, Zheng XL, Mooradian AD, Wong NC.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine research group, Department of Medicine, the Faculty of Medicine,
University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada, T2N 4N1.

Apolipoprotein AI (apo AI) is the major protein component of serum high-density
lipoproteins. The abundance of apo AI correlates inversely with the risk of
ischemic heart disease (IHD) and thus enhanced expression of the protein is
expected to reduce the risk of IHD. Our previous studies show that insulin
enhances apo AI promoter activity and this action requires the GC-rich insulin
response core element (IRCE, -411 to -404). The motif binds to a ubiquitous
transcription factor Sp1. We have extended studies that examine insulin induction
of apo AI using a 41 bp (-425 to -385) fragment of apo AI DNA linked to the trout
metallothionein TATA box and fused to luciferase (pIRCE-Luc). Luc activity in Hep
G2 cells transfected with pIRCE-Luc was stimulated by insulin, an insulin mimetic
bisperoxo (1,10-phenanthroline) oxovanadate (bpv) and the phorbol ester (PDBu).
Our previous studies showed that insulin action on apo AI gene transcription
flowed down two signaling pathways: Ras-raf and PI3K, leading to activation of
the MAPK and PKC kinases, respectively. In contrast, PDBu activates only the PKC 
pathway. Although insulin and PDBu activation of apo AI were distinct, the
cascades involved all appeared to target Sp1. Furthermore, exposure of
transfected cells to okadaic acid or a phosphatase inhibitor also increased Luc
activity and suggested a potential role for phosphorylation, likely involving
Sp1. If true, then changes in the IRCE binding activity of Sp1 should be detected
following exposure to MAPK, PKC, or the protein phosphatase I (PPI) alone and in 
various combinations followed by assaying the ability of Sp1 to bind the IRCE.
Sp1 binding activity increased with either MAPK or PKC. Although exposure to PPI 
also affected IRCE binding activity of Sp1, whether it increased or decreased was
dependent on the order of exposure to the protein. In summary, the IRCE alone can
mediate the stimulatory effects of insulin, bpv, and PDBu, and Sp1 enhances these
responses that may arise from phosphorylation of the protein.

PMID: 12614163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Chemistry. 2002 Nov 15;8(22):5241-9.

Novel estradiol derivatives labeled with Ru, W, and Co complexes. Influence on
hormone-receptor affinity of several organometallic groups at the 17 alpha
position.

Top S(1), el Hafa H, Vessiéres A, Huché M, Vaissermann J, Jaouen G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Chimie Organométallique Ecole Nationale Supérieure de Chimie de
Paris, UMR C.N.R.S. 7576 11, rue Pierre et Marie Curie, 75231, Paris, France.
siden@ext.jussieu.fr, jaouen@ext.jussieu.fr

In order to elucidate the extent to which recognition of the estrogen receptor is
influenced by addition of an organometallic substituent at the 17 alpha position,
modification of 17 beta-estradiol at this position was carried out by using the
organometallic groups -C identical to C(eta 5-C5H4)RuCp, CH2-(eta 5-C5H4)RuCp, -C
identical to C-(eta 5-C5H4)-W(CO)3(Me), -(C identical to CCHO)Co2(CO)6, and -(C
identical to CCH2OH)Co2(CO)6. The relative binding affinity (RBA) values for
estradiol receptor alpha showed that recognition was good (RBA between 20 and
13.5%) when the organometallic moiety was attached at the end of a rigid alkyne
spacer. However, the affinity of the modified hormone for the receptor was
severely reduced (RBA = 1%) for a substituent such as -CH2-(eta 5-C5H4)RuCP, in
which the spacer is reduced to a single flexible sp3 carbon atom, allowing the
organometallic moiety greater freedom of movement around the attachment point.
The RBA values found were in agreement with results obtained from a
molecular-modeling study in which 5, an organometallic hormone with a rigid
spacer, or 7, a molecule with a flexible spacer, was inserted into the cavity of 
the recently characterized Ligand-Binding Domain of estrogen receptor alpha.

PMID: 12613043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. EMBO Rep. 2003 Feb;4(2):137-42.

Modification with SUMO. A role in transcriptional regulation.

Verger A(1), Perdomo J, Crossley M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Microbial Biosciences G08, University of Sydney,
Sydney, NSW, 2006, Australia. a.verger@mmb.usyd.edu.au

Small ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO) is a protein moiety that is ligated to
lysine residues in a variety of target proteins. The addition of SUMO can
modulate the ability of proteins to interact with their partners, alter their
patterns of subcellular localization and control their stability. It is clear
that SUMO influences many different biological processes, but recent data suggest
that it is particularly important in the regulation of transcription. Indeed,
several transcription factors, such as Sp3, c-Jun, c-Myb and various nuclear
receptors, have recently been shown to be subject to sumoylation and, although
this modification can have a positive influence, a growing body of evidence
highlights its role in the negative regulation of transcription. This review
summarizes recent experiments focusing on sumoylation and transcriptional
repression.

PMCID: PMC1315836
PMID: 12612601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Gene. 2003 Feb 27;305(2):205-15.

The Xenopus B2 factor involved in TFIIIA gene regulation is closely related to
Sp1 and interacts in a complex with USF.

Penberthy WT(1), Griffin D, Hall RK, Taylor WL.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA
90095-1606, USA. wtpenber@ucla.edu

In the Xenopus laevis oocyte there is a million fold more transcription factor
IIIA (TFIIIA) and its corresponding mRNA than in a somatic cell. These high
levels of TFIIIA gene expression are achieved primarily by transcriptional
regulation. The TATA box along with three positive cis-elements in the control
region of the TFIIIA gene located at positions -269 to -264 (E1), -235 to -220
(E2), and -669 to -636 (E3) are required for this high level of expression in
oocytes. The proteins that bind E1 and E3 of the TFIIIA gene have been identified
as Xenopus USF (Xl-USF) and B3 (homolog of Vg1 RBP/VERA). In this study the B2
protein was found to bind E2 in a zinc-dependent fashion and anti-human Sp1 (but 
not Sp2, Sp3, nor Sp4) supershifted the B2:element 2 complex. The E2 binding
protein was purified by DNA affinity chromatography. Based on supershift
analysis, molecular weight estimation experiments, and purified human Sp1 DNA
binding affinity tests the data strongly support the idea that the B2 protein is 
the Xenopus ortholog of Sp1, but not Sp2, Sp3, nor Sp4. Xl-USF binds to element 1
of the TFIIIA gene which is immediately adjacent to element 2.
Coimmunoprecipitation experiments using crude whole oocyte extracts revealed that
Xenopus Sp1 and USF or closely related factors are present together in a
high-affinity complex. This structure contributes positively to the initiation of
TFIIIA gene transcription in Xenopus oocytes.

PMID: 12609741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Anal Sci. 2003 Feb;19(2):333-4.

Crystal structure of the 1:2:2 adduct of piperazine, o-phthalic acid and water.

Jin ZM(1), Pan YJ, He L, Li ZG, Yu KB.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang University of Technology,
Hangzhou 310014, P. R. China. Zhimin-j@163.net

The adduct of piperazine, o-phthalic acid and water (1:2:2), C20H26N2O10,
crystallizes in the monoclinic space group P21/c with a = 6.129(1), b =
12.810(2), c = 13.137(2)A, beta = 95.87(1) degrees, V = 1026.0(3)A3, Z = 2. The
piperazinium adopts a chair comformer, and is tied with the hydrogen
orthophthalate via a hydrogen bond of the N-H...O type. Because of bifurcated
hydrogen bonding of C(sp3)H-O [3.0801(17) and 3.1408(18)A] and the shortest
hydrogen bond of C(sp3)H-O [2.9758(17)A], C(sp3)H-O hydrogen bonds play important
roles in stablizing the title adduct.

PMID: 12608772  [PubMed]


264. Biol Reprod. 2003 Jun;68(6):2180-8. Epub 2003 Jan 22.

Dexamethasone inhibits transforming growth factor-beta receptor (Tbeta R)
messenger RNA expression in hamster preantral follicles: possible association
with NF-YA.

Roy SK(1), Wang J, Yang P.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Obstetrics, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha,
Nebraska 68198-4515, USA. skroy@unmc.edu

To evaluate the site(s) and mechanism(s) of glucocorticoid-inhibition of
transforming growth factor (TGF) beta receptor (TbetaR) mRNA expression in
ovarian cells, steady-state levels of TbetaR mRNA in hamster preantral follicles 
exposed to FSH or estradiol with or without dexamethasone were determined by
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction and Southern hybridization. The
effect of dexamethasone on follicular DNA and steroid synthesis and the
expression of NF-Y and Sp3 were also investigated. Dexamethasone differentially
inhibited FSH- or estradiol-induced expression of TbetaR mRNA in preantral
follicles at all stages. Dexamethasone also strongly inhibited FSH-induced but
not TGFbeta2-induced follicular DNA synthesis, and the inhibition was completely 
reversed by TGFbeta2. However, TGFbeta2 markedly attenuated FSH +
dexamethasone-stimulated progesterone and FSH-induced follicular estradiol
synthesis. Both FSH and estradiol upregulated NF-YA expression, but the effect
was significantly attenuated by dexamethasone. Our results suggest that
suppression of NF-YA levels is one of the mechanisms whereby dexamethasone
reduces hormone-induced TbetaRI and TbetaRII mRNA levels in hamster preantral
follicles. Dexamethasone potentiates the effect of FSH on granulosa cell
steroidogenesis, whereas TGFbeta counteracts the effect. These data indicate that
glucocorticoid and TGFbeta may form an important regulatory loop to modulate FSH 
regulation of preantral follicular growth and differentiation.

PMID: 12606399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Biol Reprod. 2003 May;68(5):1649-56. Epub 2002 Nov 27.

A GC-box within the proximal promoter region of the rat cathepsin L gene
activates transcription in Sertoli cells of sexually mature rats.

Charron M(1), DeCerbo JN, Wright WW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Bloomberg School of Public Health, The Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

It has been proposed that stage-specific gene expression in Sertoli cells results
from sequential activation and repression of transcription. However, the exact
molecular mechanisms are unknown. As a first step in addressing this fundamental 
issue, we recently demonstrated that a 3-kilobase (kb) genomic fragment
immediately upstream of the rat cathepsin L translation start site directed
stage-specific expression of a reporter gene only in Sertoli cells of transgenic 
mice in a manner comparable to that of the endogenous gene (predominantly in
stages VI-VIII tubules). Supporting the activation/repression model of
regulation, an upstream domain that mediated an inhibitory effect by male germ
cells was identified within this 3-kb promoter region. In the present study, we
localized and characterized the regulatory elements that activate transcription. 
Analyses of a series of 5' deletion constructs demonstrated that a 120-base pair 
(bp) region that spans the transcription start site of the rat cathepsin L gene
was sufficient to activate transcription in Sertoli cells isolated from sexually 
mature rats. Within this region, electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed
that one member of the Sp/XKLF family of factors, Sp3, specifically bound to a
GC-box. Furthermore, Sp1-binding activity was not detected in nuclear extracts
from Sertoli cells of sexually mature rats. Finally, the GC-box was shown to be
essential for promoter activity since mutating this binding motif abolished
promoter activity. Collectively, these results suggest that the GC-box is a
critical regulatory element for the cathepsin L promoter in mature Sertoli cells.

PMID: 12606333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2003 Feb 20;1625(3):280-90.

Regulation of renin enhancer activity by nuclear factor I and Sp1/Sp3.

Pan L(1), Glenn ST, Jones CA, Gronostajski RM, Gross KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Elm and Carlton Streets, Buffalo, NY 14263-0001, USA.

Transcription of the mouse Ren-1(c) gene in kidney tumor-derived As4.1 cells,
which express high levels of renin mRNA, is dependent on a proximal promoter
element and a 242-bp enhancer region located 2.6 kb upstream of the transcription
start site. We showed previously that the enhancer contains a cAMP responsive
element (CRE) and an E-box. Mutation of either element resulted in almost
complete loss of the Ren-1(c) expression. In this report we show that there are
additional transcription factor-binding sites within the Ren-1(c) enhancer
contributing to the enhancer activity. Electrophoretic mobility shift and
supershift assays have identified four nuclear factor I (NFI)-binding sites, an
Sp1/Sp3 site and an unidentified transcription factor-binding site (Ei) located
upstream of the CRE and E-box. Mutation of the Sp1/Sp3 site or Ei reduced
Ren-1(c) expression by 40% or 30%, respectively, while mutations of four
NFI-binding sites resulted in an 89% decrease in expression. Thus, these
protein-DNA interaction sites are essential for transcription of mouse renin
genes. There are four homologous NFI genes (NFI-A, -B, -C and -X) in vertebrates 
and multiple alternatively spliced isoforms from each gene. Real-time reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assays have demonstrated that
NFI-X is the predominant NFI mRNA expressed in As4.1 cells. Direct study of
involvement of NFI-X in regulation of renin genes is underway.

PMID: 12591615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Mech Dev. 2003 Mar;120(3):349-61.

Developmental cooperation of leukemia inhibitory factor and insulin-like growth
factor I in mice is tissue-specific and essential for lung maturation involving
the transcription factors Sp3 and TTF-1.

Pichel JG(1), Fernández-Moreno C, Vicario-Abejón C, Testillano PS, Patterson PH, 
de Pablo F.

Author information: 
(1)Group of Growth Factors in Vertebrate Development, Centro de Investigaciones
Biológicas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Madrid, Spain.

The multifunctional proteins leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) and insulin-like
growth factor I (IGF-I) are expressed in overlapping patterns during development 
and, therefore, may act cooperatively. We show that mice doubly deficient in LIF 
and IGF-I all died at birth of apparent respiratory failure. Growth retardation, 
muscle hypoplasia and delayed ossification in IGF-I-deficient E18.5 mice were
exacerbated by the absence of LIF. The transcription factor Sp3 was decreased in 
the skeleton of the double null mice. Pronounced depletion of olfactory bulb
neurons, in contrast, was only IGF-I-dependent. The lungs displayed reduced air
space in the IGF-I-deficient embryos and neonates, phenotype exacerbated in the
double nulls, which showed abnormal epithelial cells and decreased Sp3
expression. In addition, the transcription factor TTF-1 and the surfactant
protein B were lower in the lung of the double null neonates than in all other
genotypes. LIF and IGF-I, thus, have cooperative and distinct tissue functions
during development. Their essential role in bone ossification apparently involves
Sp3, and in lung maturation Sp3 together with TTF-1.

PMID: 12591604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Biol Chem. 2003 Apr 25;278(17):14753-61. Epub 2003 Feb 12.

Oncogenic Ha-Ras transformation modulates the transcription of the
CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase alpha gene via p42/44MAPK and
transcription factor Sp3.

Bakovic M(1), Waite K, Vance DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Canadian Institutes of Health Research Group on
Molecular and Cell Biology of Lipids, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta
T6G 2S2, Canada.

We have shown previously that expression of the murine CTP:phosphocholine
cytidylyltransferase (CT) alpha gene is regulated during cell proliferation
(Golfman, L. S., Bakovic, M., and Vance, D. E. (2001) J. Biol. Chem. 276,
43688-43692). We have now characterized the role of Ha-Ras in the transcriptional
regulation of the CTalpha gene. The expression of CTalpha and CTbeta2 proteins
and mRNAs was stimulated in C3H10T1/2 murine fibroblasts expressing oncogenic
Ha-Ras. Incubation of cells with the specific inhibitor (PD98059) of p42/44(MAPK)
decreased the expression of both CT isoforms. Transfection of fibroblasts with
CTalpha promoter-luciferase constructs resulted in an approximately 2-fold
enhanced luciferase expression in Ha-Ras-transformed, compared with
nontransformed, fibroblasts. Electromobility shift assays indicated enhanced
binding of the Sp3 transcription factor to the CTalpha promoter in
Ha-Ras-transformed cells. Expression of several forms of Sp3 was increased in
nuclear extracts of Ha-Ras-transformed fibroblasts compared with nontransformed
cells. Tyrosine phosphorylation of one Sp3 form was decreased, whereas
phosphorylation of two other forms of Sp3 was increased in nuclear extracts of
Ha-Ras-transformed cells. When control fibroblasts were transfected with a
Sp3-expressing plasmid, an enhanced expression of CTalpha and CTbeta was
observed. However, the expression of CTalpha or CTbeta was not increased in
Ha-Ras-transformed cells transfected with a Sp3 plasmid presumably because
expression was already maximally enhanced. The results suggest that Sp3 is a
downstream effector of a Ras/p42/44(MAPK) signaling pathway which increases
CTalpha gene transcription.

PMID: 12584202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Blood. 2003 Jun 15;101(12):4765-74. Epub 2003 Feb 6.

Oxidized phospholipids in oxidized low-density lipoprotein down-regulate
thrombomodulin transcription in vascular endothelial cells through a decrease in 
the binding of RARbeta-RXRalpha heterodimers and Sp1 and Sp3 to their binding
sequences in the TM promoter.

Ishii H(1), Tezuka T, Ishikawa H, Takada K, Oida K, Horie S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health, Showa Pharmaceutical University, Machida, Tokyo, 
Japan. h-ishii@ac.shoyaku.ac.jp

The present work investigated the mechanism for down-regulation of thrombomodulin
(TM), an anticoagulant glycoprotein, on cultured umbilical vein endothelial cells
(HUVECs) exposed to lipid extracts from oxidized low-density lipoprotein
(ox-LDL). HUVECs exposed to phospholipid extracts, but not to free cholesterol,
triglyceride, or cholesterol ester, isolated from ox-LDL reduced TM mRNA levels
to nearly the same extent as native ox-LDL. Oxidized
1-palmitoyl-2-arachidonyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (ox-PAPC), but not native
PAPC or a reduced form of ox-PAPC, markedly decreased TM mRNA levels. The
apparent half-life (t 1/2 = 2.7 hours) of TM mRNA in control cells was not
significantly different from that in cells exposed to ox-LDL or ox-PAPC. TM mRNA 
levels were regulated by transcriptional activation via a retinoid receptor beta 
(RARbeta). The binding activities of nuclear proteins from HUVECs treated with
ox-LDL or ox-PAPC to the DR4 or stimulatory protein 1 (Sp1) sequence in the TM
promoter were significantly reduced with decreased expression of RARbeta,
retinoid X receptor alpha (RXRalpha), Sp1, and Sp3 in the nuclei. The promoter
activity in HUVECs transfected with a reporter plasmid expressing the TM promoter
with targeted deletions in the DR4 and Sp1 binding elements was decreased to
about 20% of that with the wild-type construct. Treatment of the cells with
ox-PAPC had no additional effect on the promoter activity. These results suggest 
that oxidized phospholipids in ox-LDL inhibit transcription of the TM gene in
HUVECs by inhibiting the binding of RARbeta-RXRalpha heterodimer and Sp,
including Sp1 and Sp3, to the DR4 element and Sp1 binding element, respectively, 
in the TM promoter with reduced expression of RARbeta, RXRalpha, and Sp1 and Sp3 
in the nuclei.

PMID: 12576329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Feb 1;31(3):1097-107.

Reciprocal regulation of expression of the human adenosine 5'-triphosphate
binding cassette, sub-family A, transporter 2 (ABCA2) promoter by the early
growth response-1 (EGR-1) and Sp-family transcription factors.

Davis W Jr(1), Chen ZJ, Ile KE, Tew KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA 19111,
USA.

The human ABCA2 transporter gene encodes a member of a large family of
ATP-binding proteins that transport a variety of macromolecules across biological
membranes. We have performed luciferase reporter gene assays with promoter
constructs comprising the 5'-flanking region to identify cis-regulatory DNA
elements and have mapped the minimal promoter region to 321 bp upstream of the
translation start site. We have discovered a functional role for two GC-boxes
located in the proximal promoter of the ABCA2 gene that contain overlapping sites
for the EGR-1 and Sp1 transcription factors. We observed that oligonucleotides
containing overlapping EGR-1/Sp1 sites bind the Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 transcription
factors. When BE(2)-M17 cells were treated with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate, 
we observed inducible expression and binding of the EGR-1 transcription factor to
the two GC-boxes. Transfection of Sp1, Sp3 or Sp4 expression constructs into
Drosophila S2 induced a dose-dependent increase in transcriptional activation of 
the ABCA2 promoter, but transfection of EGR-1 alone failed to activate
transcription. When increasing amounts of EGR-1 were transfected into the
BE(2)-M17 neuroblastoma cells we observed a dose-dependent decrease in expression
of the ABCA2 promoter, although expression of the endogenous ABCA2 gene increased
following transfection of EGR-1.

PMCID: PMC149212
PMID: 12560508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Feb 1;31(3):833-43.

Selective inhibition of transcription of the Ets2 gene in prostate cancer cells
by a triplex-forming oligonucleotide.

Carbone GM(1), McGuffie EM, Collier A, Catapano CV.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Genomics, Hollings Cancer Center, Medical University of
South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA. carbonep@musc.edu

The transcription factor Ets2 has a role in cancer development and represents an 
attractive therapeutic target. In this study, we designed a triplex-forming
oligonucleotide (TFO) directed to a homopurine:homopyrimidine sequence in the
Ets2 promoter. Transcription factors of the Sp family bound to this sequence and 
mutation of the Sp1 site reduced Ets2 promoter activity. The Ets2-TFO had high
binding affinity for the target sequence and inhibited binding of Sp1/Sp3 to the 
overlapping site. This effect occurred with a high degree of sequence
specificity. Mismatched oligonucleotides did not inhibit Sp1/Sp3 binding and
mutations in the target sequence that abolished triplex formation prevented
inhibition of Sp1/Sp3 binding by the TFO. The Ets2-TFO inhibited Ets2 promoter
activity and expression of the endogenous gene in prostate cancer cells at
nanomolar concentrations. The TFO did not affect reporter constructs with
mutations in the TFO binding site and promoters of non-targeted genes. Expression
of non-targeted genes was also not affected in TFO-treated cells. Collectively,
these data demonstrated that the anti-transcriptional activity of the Ets2-TFO
was sequence- and target-specific, and ruled out alternative, non-triplex
mediated mechanisms of action. This anti-transcriptional approach may be useful
to examine the effects of selective downregulation of Ets2 expression and may
have therapeutic applications.

PMCID: PMC149218
PMID: 12560478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Leukoc Biol. 2003 Feb;73(2):263-72.

Characterization of promoter elements directing Mona/Gads molecular adapter
expression in T and myelomonocytic cells: involvement of the AML-1 transcription 
factor.

Guyot B(1), Mouchiroud G.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Génétique Moléculaire et Cellulaire, UMR CNRS 5534, Université
Claude Bernard Lyon-1, Bâtiment Gregor Mendel, 16 rue Raphael Dubois, 69622
Villeurbanne Cedex, France.

Monocytic adaptor (Mona, also called Gads) is a molecular adaptor implicated in T
cell activation and macrophage differentiation. The objective of this study was
to identify elements regulating specific expression of Mona/Gads in human T cell 
and myelomonocytic cell lines. We first confirmed that the -2000 to +150 genomic 
region relative to the Mona gene transcription start site is sufficient to direct
specific reporter gene expression in T cell lines, Jurkat, and MOLT-4 and in the 
immature myeloid cell lines, KG1a and RC2A. Deletion analysis and electrophoresis
mobility shift assay identified several cis regulatory elements: overlapping
initiator sequences, one interferon response factor-2 (IRF-2)-binding site at
position -154, one GC box recognized by Sp1 and Sp3 at position -52, and two
acute myeloid leukemia (AML)-1 binding sites at positions -70 and -13.
Site-directed mutagenesis experiments indicated a key role of AML-1 for driving
Mona expression in T cells and myeloid cells, and involvement of Sp1/Sp3 and
IRF-2 transcription factors to modulate Mona expression in a cell-specific
manner.

PMID: 12554803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Mol Endocrinol. 2003 Mar;17(3):436-49. Epub 2002 Dec 12.

Transactivation of the progesterone receptor gene in granulosa cells: evidence
that Sp1/Sp3 binding sites in the proximal promoter play a key role in
luteinizing hormone inducibility.

Sriraman V(1), Sharma SC, Richards JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

LH induction of the progesterone receptor (PR) in granulosa cells is a central
event in ovulation. To identify critical regions of the mouse PR promoter that
confer LH inducibility in granulosa cells, a mouse PR promoter (-384/+680)
genomic fragment was ligated to a luciferase reporter construct and transfected
into primary cultures of granulosa cells. Forskolin/phorbol myristate (PMA)
induced PR promoter-luciferase reporter activity in granulosa cells greater than 
15-fold. A deletion construct comprised only of the distal promoter alone
(-348/+64) was inactive. Conversely, deletion constructs eliminating putative
distal promoter-regulatory elements that bind Sp1, nuclear factor Y, and GATA-4
as well as the transcription start site (+1) failed to reduce forskolin/PMA
activation of reporter activity. Additional 5'-deletions identified a minimal
promoter region (+420/+680) sufficient to bestow cAMP responsiveness
approximately 8- to 10-fold. Two GC-rich regions Sp1(A)[+440/+461] and Sp1(B)
[+473/+490] bound Sp1/Sp3. Site-directed mutagenesis of Sp1(A) and Sp1(B) reduced
activity of the proximal (+357/+680) promoter reporter construct approximately
50% and 99%, respectively. When the same Sp1(B) mutation was introduced into the 
intact promoter (-145/+680), forskolin/PMA induction of promoter activity was
reduced by 70-80%. When the distal GC box as well as the proximal Sp1(B) site
were both mutated in the context of the intact promoter, inducibility of the
transgene was even more severely reduced. The importance of these Sp1/Sp3 binding
regions was confirmed in human MCF-7 cells and Drosophila SL2 cells.
Collectively, these results indicate that the Sp1/Sp3 binding sites within the
mouse PR proximal promoter are essential for transactivation of the gene by
agonists in granulosa cells. The molecular mechanisms by which LH activates
Sp1/Sp3 at this region within the PR gene remain unknown but do not involve
changes in the binding of Sp1/Sp3 to the critical GC boxes. Rather, Sp1/Sp3
appear to recruit other factors to the promoter.

PMID: 12554796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Mol Endocrinol. 2003 Apr;17(4):520-33. Epub 2003 Jan 23.

Egr-1 induction in rat granulosa cells by follicle-stimulating hormone and
luteinizing hormone: combinatorial regulation by transcription factors cyclic
adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate regulatory element binding protein, serum response 
factor, sp1, and early growth response factor-1.

Russell DL(1), Doyle KM, Gonzales-Robayna I, Pipaon C, Richards JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, One 
Baylor Plaza, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Early growth response factor (Egr-1) is an inducible zinc finger transcription
factor that binds specific GC-rich enhancer elements and impacts female
reproduction. These studies document for the first time that FSH rapidly induces 
Egr-1 expression in granulosa cells of small growing follicles. This response is 
transient but is reinitiated in preovulatory follicles exposed to the LH analog, 
human chorionic gonadotropin. Immunohistochemical analysis also showed
gonadotropin induced Egr-1 in theca cells. The Egr-1 gene regulatory region
responsive to gonadotropin signaling was localized within -164 bp of the
transcription initiation site. Binding of Sp1/Sp3 to a proximal GC-box at -64/-46
bp was enhanced by FSH in immature granulosa cells but reduced after human
chorionic gonadotropin stimulation of preovulatory follicles despite constant
protein expression. This dynamic regulation of Sp1 binding was dependent on
gonadotropin-regulated mechanisms that modulate Sp1/3-DNA binding activity. Serum
response factor was active in granulosa cells and bound a consensus
CArG-box/serum response element site, whereas two putative cAMP response elements
within the -164-bp region bound cAMP regulatory element (CRE) binding protein
(CREB) and a second cAMP-inducible protein immunologically related to CREB.
Transient transfection analyses using Egr-1 promoter-luciferase constructs and
site-specific mutations show that the serum response element, GC-box, and CRE-131
are involved in gonadotropin regulation of Egr-1 expression in granulosa cells.
Specific kinase inhibitors of Erk or protein kinase A antagonized this induction 
while exogenously expressed Egr-1 enhanced reporter expression. These
observations indicate that the Egr-1 gene is a target of both FSH and LH action
that may mediate molecular programs of proliferation and/or differentiation
during follicle growth, ovulation, and luteinization.

PMID: 12554779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Anticancer Res. 2002 Nov-Dec;22(6B):3545-54.

Altered expression of the receptor and ligand in the TGF beta signaling pathway
in diffusely infiltrating colon carcinoma.

Nagayama S(1), Onodera H, Toguchida J, Imamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Surgical Basic Science, Graduate School of Medicine,
Department of Tissue Regeneration, Institute for Frontier Medical Sciences, Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan.

A diffusely infiltrating colorectal carcinoma (DICC) is a distinct
clinicopathological entity demonstrating invasive growth with extensive matrix
production and associated with an extremely poor prognosis. The factors producing
these peculiar features, however, remain to be determined. Here we investigated
the receptor and ligand of the transforming growth factor (TGF) beta signaling
pathway in 32 DICCs and 60 common type colorectal carcinomas (CCCs).
Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the expression of TGF beta 1 was
markedly increased in DICC, especially of the schirrous type, compared to CCC,
whereas the expression of the TGF beta type II receptor (RII) was significantly
decreased in DICC compared to CCC. The molecular basis for the reduced expression
of RII was further investigated in 15 cases of DICC with a diminished RII
expression. Two somatic mutations were found: one was a missense mutation in the 
kinase domain (Cys533Tyr), and the other was a G to C transition at the putative 
Sp1 binding site in the core promoter region. The latter mutation reduced the
promoter activity, which may be due to a reduced affinity of the mutant sequence 
to the putative transcriptional regulator, which was neither Sp1 nor Sp3. No
methylated cytosine was found at any CpG sites in the promoter region. These
results suggested the presence of unidentified mechanisms for the diminished
expression of RII in DICC cases.

PMID: 12552954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. DNA Repair (Amst). 2003 Feb 3;2(2):187-98.

Identification of the human HEX1/hExo1 gene promoter and characterization of
elements responsible for promoter activity.

Ladd PD(1), Wilson DM 3rd, Kelley MR, Skalnik DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

HEX1/hExo1 is a Class III nuclease of the RAD2 family with 5' to 3' exonuclease
and flap structure-specific endonuclease activities. HEX1/hExo1 is expressed at
low levels in a wide variety of tissues, but at higher levels in fetal liver and 
adult bone marrow, suggesting HEX1/hExo1 is important for hematopoietic stem cell
development. A putative HEX1/hExo1 promoter fragment extending from -6240 to
+1600bp exhibits cell-type specific activity in transient transfection assays.
This fragment directs high luciferase reporter gene expression in the
hematopoietic cell line K562, chronic myelogenous leukemia cells, but low
luciferase expression in the non-hematopoietic cell line HeLa, human cervical
carcinoma cells. Deletion studies identified a fragment spanning -688 to +1600bp 
that exhibits full transcriptional activity while a slightly shorter fragment
from -658 to +1600bp exhibits significantly decreased promoter activity. In vitro
binding assays revealed DNA-binding activities that interact with -687 to -681bp 
and -665 to -658bp elements. Oligonucleotide competition and antibody disruption 
studies determined that the transcription factor CREB-1 recognizes the -687 to
-681bp element, while transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 recognize the -665 to
-658bp element. Mutation of either the CREB-1 or Sp1/Sp3 binding sites
dramatically reduces HEX1/hExo1 promoter activity and elimination of both
elements abolishes promoter activity.

PMID: 12531389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Gene. 2003 Jan 2;302(1-2):115-27.

Expression of the human Hand1 gene in trophoblastic cells is transcriptionally
regulated by activating and repressing specificity protein (Sp)-elements.

Vasicek R(1), Meinhardt G, Haidweger E, Rotheneder H, Husslein P, Knöfler M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Vienna, Währinger
Gürtel 18-20, A-1090, Vienna, Austria.

The tissue-specific basic helix-loop-helix protein Hand1 is essential for the
formation of trophoblast giant cells of the murine placenta. In humans, Hand1 is 
detectable in trophoblastic tumour cells suggesting an equivalent role in
trophoblast differentiation. To understand its mode of expression we have cloned 
and characterized the human Hand1 gene promoter. Primer extension analyses
suggest that transcription initiates 19 nucleotides downstream of the TATA
element of the proximal 5' flanking region. Expression of luciferase reporter
constructs harboring deletions of the 9.5 kb Hand1 5' flanking sequence defines a
promoter region within 274 bp upstream of the transcriptional start site.
Compared to a reporter bearing only the TATA box, the proximal promoter activates
transcription up to 30-fold. However, transcriptional activity of the region was 
observed in both Hand1-expressing and non-expressing cell lines. Sequencing,
DNAseI footprint analyses and electrophoretic mobility shift assays reveal the
presence of four GC-rich sequences, which show different affinities to the
endogenous specificity proteins (Sp), and a CCAAT box. In vitro, the Sp-elements 
mainly interact with Sp1 and Sp3 while the CCAAT element is recognized by the
alpha CAAT binding factor protein. Mutant luciferase reporters bearing single
active or inactive recognition sites demonstrate that two of the four Sp-binding 
sites (I and IV) contribute little to the overall transcription rate. The two
other Sp-cognate sequences, II and III, downregulate and activate reporter
expression 2.3- and 2.6-fold, respectively. Co-transfections of Sp1/Sp3
expression vectors and mutated reporter constructs in Sp-deficient SL2 cells
indicate that the Sp-binding site II and III indeed function as repressing and
activating enhancer sequences. In summary, the data suggest that constitutive
expression of the Hand1 gene in cultured cells is regulated by a complex
interplay of Sp-proteins interacting with activator and repressor elements.

PMID: 12527202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Biol Chem. 2003 Mar 14;278(11):8935-41. Epub 2003 Jan 7.

Alterations in the expression of transcription factors and the reduced folate
carrier as a novel mechanism of antifolate resistance in human leukemia cells.

Rothem L(1), Aronheim A, Assaraf YG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, the Rappaport Institute for Research in the Medical
Sciences and the B. Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, The Technion-Israel Institute 
of Technology, Haifa 31096, Israel.

The human reduced folate carrier (hRFC) is the dominant transporter mediating the
uptake of reduced folate cofactors and antifolate anticancer drugs. Defective
antifolate uptake due to inactivating mutations in the hRFC gene is an
established mechanism of drug resistance in various tumor cells. However, while
antifolate transport is frequently impaired, either no or only a single hRFC
allele is inactivated, suggesting that additional mechanism(s) of resistance are 
operative. Here we studied the relationship between the expression and function
of transcription factors and antifolate resistance in transport-defective
leukemia cells that poorly express or completely lack RFC mRNA. Stable
transfection with a hRFC expression construct resulted in restoration of normal
RFC mRNA expression and nearly wild type drug sensitivity in these
antifolate-resistant cells. The loss of RFC gene expression prompted us to
explore transcription factor binding to the hRFC promoter. The hRFC promoter
contains an upstream GC-box and a downstream cAMP-response element
(CRE)/AP-1-like element. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and
oligonucleotide competition revealed a substantial loss of nuclear factor binding
to CRE and GC-box in these drug-resistant cell lines. Consistently,
antibody-mediated supershift analysis showed a marked decrease in the binding of 
CRE-binding protein 1 (CREB-1) and specificity protein 1 (Sp1) to CRE and GC-box,
respectively. Western blot analysis revealed undetectable expression of CREB-1,
decreased ATF-1 levels, parental Sp1 levels, and increased levels of the short
Sp3 isoforms, recently shown to repress hRFC gene expression. Transient
transfections into these antifolate-resistant cells demonstrated a marked loss of
GC-box-dependent, and CRE-driven reporter gene activities and introduction of
CREB-1 or Sp1 expression constructs resulted in restoration of hRFC mRNA
expression. These results establish a novel mechanism of antifolate resistance
that is based on altered expression and function of transcription factors
resulting in transcriptional silencing of the hRFC promoter.

PMID: 12519783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Biol Chem. 2003 Mar 14;278(11):9332-8. Epub 2003 Jan 7.

Identification of an upstream enhancer in the mouse laminin alpha 1 gene defining
its high level of expression in parietal endoderm cells.

Niimi T(1), Hayashi Y, Sekiguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Sekiguchi Biomatrix Signaling Project, ERATO, Japan Science and Technology
Corporation, Karimata, Yazako, Nagakute, Aichi 480-1195, Japan.

Laminin-1 is the major component of the embryonic basement membrane and consists 
of alpha1, beta1, and gamma1 chains. The expression of laminin-1 is induced in
mouse F9 embryonal carcinoma cells upon differentiation into parietal endoderm
through transcriptional up-regulation of the genes encoding these subunits. Here,
we identified a 435-bp enhancer in the 5'-flanking region of the mouse laminin
alpha1 (LAMA1) gene that activated its transcription in a
differentiation-dependent manner. This enhancer was also active in PYS-2 parietal
yolk sac-derived cells but not in NIH/3T3 fibroblasts, indicating that it was a
parietal endoderm-specific enhancer. This enhancer was also active in
Engelbreth-Holm-Swarm (EHS) tumor-derived cells characterized by excessive
production of laminin-1 and other basement membrane components, suggesting that
EHS tumors have a transcriptional control mechanism similar to that of parietal
endoderm cells. Electrophoretic mobility shift analyses revealed four protein
binding sites (PBS1-PBS4) in the 435-bp region. However, these DNA-binding
proteins were detected not only in parietal endoderm cells (i.e. differentiated
F9 cells, PYS-2 cells, and EHS tumor-derived cells) but also in undifferentiated 
F9 cells and NIH/3T3 cells. Mutational analyses revealed that three of these
binding sites (PBS2, PBS3, and PBS4) function synergistically to confer the
parietal endoderm-specific enhancer activity. The proteins binding to PBS2 and
PBS4 were identified as the Sp1/Sp3 family of transcription factors and YY1,
respectively.

PMID: 12519763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Biochem J. 2003 Apr 15;371(Pt 2):265-75.

Transcriptional regulation of the human Sp1 gene promoter by the specificity
protein (Sp) family members nuclear factor Y (NF-Y) and E2F.

Nicolás M(1), Noé V, Ciudad CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Pharmacy,
University of Barcelona, E-08028 Barcelona, Spain.

We analysed in detail the minimal promoter of transcription factor Sp1, which
extends 217 bp from the initiation of transcription. Within this sequence we
identified putative binding sites for Sp1, nuclear factor Y (NF-Y), activator
protein 2 ('AP-2'), CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ('C/EBP') and E2F
transcription factors. In one case, the boxes for Sp1 and NF-Y are overlapping.
Gel-shift and supershift assays demonstrated specific binding of Sp1, Sp3 and
NF-Y proteins. Transient transfections and luciferase assays revealed activation 
of the Sp1 minimal promoter upon overexpression of Sp1 itself, NF-Y and E2F.
Whereas overexpression of NF-Y or E2F had an additive effect on Sp1
overexpression, the activation of Sp1 transcription due to Sp1 was counteracted
by Sp3 overexpression. Mutagenesis analysis of the NFY/Sp1-overlapping box
revealed that both factors compete for this box, and that when the NF-Y site of
this overlapping box is specifically mutated there is an increase in Sp1 binding,
thus increasing transcriptional activity. These results help to explain the
complex regulation of the Sp1 gene, which depends on the relative amounts of Sp1,
Sp3, E2F and NF-Y proteins in the cell.

PMCID: PMC1223280
PMID: 12513689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. J Biol Chem. 2003 Mar 7;278(10):8190-8. Epub 2002 Dec 30.

Oxidative stress regulates vascular endothelial growth factor-A gene
transcription through Sp1- and Sp3-dependent activation of two proximal GC-rich
promoter elements.

Schäfer G(1), Cramer T, Suske G, Kemmner W, Wiedenmann B, Höcker M.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik mit Schwerpunkt Hepatologie, Gastroenterologie,
Endokrinologie und Stoffwechsel, Charité, Campus Virchow-Klinikum, 13353 Berlin, 
Germany.

Enhanced VEGF-A (vascular endothelial growth factor A) gene expression is
associated with increased tumor growth and metastatic spread of solid
malignancies including gastric cancer. Oxidative stress has been linked to
tumor-associated neoangiogenesis; underlying mechanisms, however, remained poorly
understood. Therefore, we studied the effect of oxidative stress on VEGF-A gene
expression in gastric cancer cells. Oxidative stress generated by H(2)O(2)
application potently stimulated VEGF-A protein and mRNA levels as determined by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and real-time PCR techniques, respectively, and
elevated the activity of a transfected (-2018) VEGF-A promoter reporter gene
construct in a time- and dose-dependent manner (4-8-fold). These effects were
abolished by the antioxidant N-acetylcysteine, demonstrating specificity of
oxidative stress responses. Functional 5' deletion analysis mapped the oxidative 
stress response element of the human VEGF-A promoter to the sequence -88/-50, and
a single copy of this element was sufficient to confer basal promoter activity as
well as oxidative stress responsiveness to a heterologous promoter system.
Combination of EMSA studies, Sp1/Sp3 overexpression experiments in Drosophila
SL-2 cells, and systematic promoter mutagenesis identified enhanced Sp1 and Sp3
binding to two GC-boxes at -73/-66 and -58/-52 as the core mechanism of oxidative
stress-triggered VEGF-A transactivation. Additionally, in
Gal4-Sp1/-Sp3-Gal4-luciferase assays, oxidative stress increased Sp1 but not Sp3 
transactivating capacity, indicating additional mechanism(s) of VEGF-A gene
regulation. Signaling studies identified a cascade comprising Ras --> Raf -->
MEK1 --> ERK1/2 as the main pathway mediating oxidative stress-stimulated VEGF-A 
transcription. This study for the first time delineates the mechanisms underlying
regulation of VEGF-A gene transcription by oxidative stress and thereby further
elucidates potential pathways underlying redox control of neoangiogenesis.

PMID: 12509426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Cancer Detect Prev. 2002;26(6):435-43.

Transcriptional control of the RECK metastasis/angiogenesis suppressor gene.

Sasahara RM(1), Brochado SM, Takahashi C, Oh J, Maria-Engler SS, Granjeiro JM,
Noda M, Sogayar MC.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Química, Universidade de São Paulo, CP 26077, São Paulo
05513-970, SP, Brazil.

The RECK gene is widely expressed in normal human tissues but is downregulated in
tumor cell lines and oncogenically transformed fibroblasts. RECK encodes a
membrane-anchored glycoprotein that suppresses tumor invasion and angiogenesis by
regulating matrix-metalloproteinases (MMP-2, MMP-9 and MT1-MMP). Understanding of
the transcriptional regulation of tumor/metastasis suppressor genes constitutes a
potent approach to the molecular basis of malignant transformation. In order to
uncover the mechanisms of control of RECK gene expression, the RECK promoter has 
been cloned and characterized. One of the elements responsible for the
Ras-mediated downregulation of mouse RECK gene is the Sp1 site, to which Sp1 and 
Sp3 factors bind. Other regulatory events, such as DNA methylation of the RECK
promoter and histone acetylation/deacetylation have been studied to understand
the underlying mechanisms of RECK expression. Understanding of the mechanisms
which control RECK gene transcription may lead to the development of new
strategies for cancer prevention and treatment.

PMID: 12507228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2003 Jan;284(1):F82-94.

Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors synergistically regulate HGF receptor gene
expression in kidney.

Zhang X(1), Li Y, Dai C, Yang J, Mundel P, Liu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pennsylvania 15261, USA.

We investigated the expression pattern and underlying mechanism that controls
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) receptor (c-met) expression in normal kidney and a
variety of kidney cells. Immunohistochemical staining showed widespread
expression of c-met in mouse kidney, a pattern closely correlated with renal
expression of Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors. In vitro, all types of kidney
cells tested expressed different levels of c-met, which was tightly proportional 
to the cellular abundances of Sp1 and Sp3. Both Sp1 and Sp3 bound to the multiple
GC boxes in the promoter region of the c-met gene. Coimmunoprecipitation
suggested a physical interaction between Sp1 and Sp3. Functionally, Sp1 markedly 
stimulated c-met promoter activity. Although Sp3 only weakly activated the c-met 
promoter, its combination with Sp1 synergistically stimulated c-met
transcription. Conversely, deprivation of Sp proteins by transfection of decoy
Sp1 oligonucleotide or blockade of Sp1 binding with mithramycin A inhibited c-met
expression. The c-met receptor in all types of kidney cells was functional and
induced protein kinase B/Akt phosphorylation in a distinctly dynamic pattern
after HGF stimulation. These results indicate that members of the Sp family of
transcription factors play an important role in regulating constitutive
expression of the c-met gene in all types of renal cells. Our findings suggest
that HGF may have a broader spectrum of target cells and possess wider
implications in kidney structure and function than originally thought.

PMID: 12473536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 21;278(8):5659-68. Epub 2002 Dec 2.

Transcriptional regulation of the rat NHE3 gene. Functional interactions between 
GATA-5 and Sp family transcription factors.

Kiela PR(1), LeSueur J, Collins JF, Ghishan FK.

Author information: 
(1)Departmentf Pediatrics and Physiology, Steele Memorial Children's Research
Center, University of Arizona Health Sciences Center, Tucson, Arizona 85724, USA.

Expression of sodium-hydrogen exchanger isoform 3 (NHE3) in the intestinal and
renal epithelium plays a critical role in sodium absorption and acid/base
homeostasis. To decipher rat NHE3 gene regulation, its cis-acting regulatory
elements and associated transcription factors were characterized by transient
transfection of Caco-2, IEC-6, Qt6, and Drosophila SL2 cells. Deletion and
mutational analyses demonstrated that the atypical TATA box located at bp -26/-31
was not necessary for promoter activity, and that a -20/+8-bp fragment represents
a functional initiator. Within the 81-bp upstream region, three Sp transcription 
factor binding sites were critical because their mutation drastically reduced
promoter activity. The roles of Sp1 and Sp3 were further demonstrated by
electromobility shift assay and by transactivation of the NHE3 promoter in SL2
cells by forced expression of Sp1 and Sp3. Both of these transcription factors
were found to act synergistically with GATA-5 bound to a GATA box in exon 1
(+20/+23 bp). These studies demonstrate that rat NHE3 promoter is
initiator-driven and controlled mainly by Sp1 and Sp3, which functionally
interact with GATA-5. This interaction represents a novel regulatory mechanism,
which is likely to participate in a gradient of intestinal gene expression along 
the crypt-villus axis.

PMID: 12464626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Cell Biochem. 2003 Jan 1;88(1):165-80.

The 5'-untranslated RNA of the human dhfr minor transcript alters transcription
pre-initiation complex assembly at the major (core) promoter.

Blume SW(1), Meng Z, Shrestha K, Snyder RC, Emanuel PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Alabama 
at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama 35294, USA. scott.blume@ccc.uab.edu

The human dhfr minor transcript is distinguished from the predominant dhfr mRNA
by an approximately 400 nucleotide extension of the 5'-untranslated region, which
corresponds to the major (core) promoter DNA (its template). Based on its unusual
sequence composition, we hypothesized that the minor transcript 5'-UTR might be
capable of altering transcription pre-initiation complex assembly at the core
promoter, through direct interactions of the RNA with specific regulatory
polypeptides or the promoter DNA itself. We found that the minor transcript
5'-UTR selectively sequesters transcription factor Sp3, and to a lesser extent
Sp1, preventing their binding to the dhfr core promoter. This allows a third
putative transcriptional regulatory protein, which is relatively resistant to
sequestration by the minor transcript RNA, the opportunity to bind the dhfr core 
promoter. The selective sequestration of Sp3 > Sp1 by the minor transcript 5'-UTR
involves an altered conformation of the RNA, and a structural domain of the
protein distinct from that required for binding to DNA. As a consequence, the
minor transcript 5'-UTR inhibits transcription from the core promoter in vitro
(in trans) in a concentration-dependent manner. These results suggest that the
dhfr minor transcript may function in vivo (in cis) to regulate the
transcriptional activity of the major (core) promoter.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12461786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Circ Res. 2002 Nov 29;91(11):e35-44.

PPARalpha inhibits TGF-beta-induced beta5 integrin transcription in vascular
smooth muscle cells by interacting with Smad4.

Kintscher U(1), Lyon C, Wakino S, Bruemmer D, Feng X, Goetze S, Graf K, Moustakas
A, Staels B, Fleck E, Hsueh WA, Law RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Hypertension, 
University of California, Los Angeles, School of Medicine, Los Angeles, Calif
90095, USA.

Integrins play an important role in vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) migration,
a crucial event in the development of restenosis and atherosclerosis.
Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) is highly expressed in restenotic and 
atherosclerotic lesions, and known to induce integrin expression. Peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARalpha), a member of the nuclear
receptor superfamily, regulates gene expression in a variety of vascular cells.
We investigated the effects of PPARalpha ligands on TGF-beta-induced beta3 and
beta5 integrin expression and potential interaction between PPARalpha and
TGF-beta signaling. PPARalpha ligands WY-14643 (100 micromol/L) and
5,8,11,14-eicosatetranoic acid (ETYA, 50 micromol/L) inhibited TGF-beta-induced
beta5 integrin protein expression by 72+/-6.8% and 73+/-7.1%, respectively (both 
P<0.05). TGF-beta-stimulated beta3 integrin expression was not affected by
PPARalpha ligands. Both PPARalpha ligands also suppressed TGF-beta-induced beta5 
integrin mRNA levels. PPARalpha ligands inhibited TGF-beta-inducible
transcription of beta5 integrin by an interaction with a TGF-beta response
element between nucleotides -63 and -44, which contains a Sp1/Sp3 transcription
factor binding site. Nuclear complexes binding to the TGF-beta response region
contained Sp1/Sp3 and TGF-beta-regulated Smad 2, 3, and 4 transcription factors. 
TGF-beta-stimulated Sp1/Smad4 nuclear complex formation was inhibited by WY-14643
and ETYA with a parallel induction of PPARalpha/Smad4 interactions. However, in
vitro pull-down experiments failed to demonstrate direct binding between
PPARalpha/Smad4. Both PPARalpha ligands blocked PDGF-directed migration of
TGF-beta-pretreated VSMCs, a process mediated, in part, by beta5 integrins. The
present study demonstrates that PPARalpha activators inhibit TGF-beta-induced
beta5 integrin transcription in VSMCs through a novel indirect interaction
between ligand-activated PPARalpha and the TGF-beta-regulated Smad4 transcription
factors. The full text of this article is available at http://www.circresaha.org.

PMID: 12456495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 14;278(7):5156-62. Epub 2002 Nov 20.

Y-box-binding protein YB-1 mediates transcriptional repression of human alpha
2(I) collagen gene expression by interferon-gamma.

Higashi K(1), Inagaki Y, Suzuki N, Mitsui S, Mauviel A, Kaneko H, Nakatsuka I.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Health Science Laboratory, Sumitomo Chemical Company, Ltd.,
Konohana-ku, Osaka 554-8558, Japan. higashik2@sc.sumitomo-chem.co.jp

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2003 Apr 4;278(14):12598.

We have demonstrated previously that a proximal element within the human
alpha2(I) collagen gene (COL1A2) promoter mediates transcriptional repression by 
interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma), and designated this region the IFN-gamma response
element (IgRE). Screening of a human fibroblast cDNA expression library with a
radiolabeled IgRE probe exclusively yielded clones with a sequence identical to
that of the transcription factor YB-1. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays
(EMSA) using various IgRE-derived oligonucleotide probes containing serial
two-base mutations showed that YB-1 protein was preferentially bound to the
pyrimidine-rich sequence within the IgRE. This region is located immediately
downstream of and partly overlaps the previously reported Sp1/Sp3 binding site.
Overexpression of YB-1 in human dermal fibroblasts decreased steady state levels 
of COL1A2 mRNA and repressed COL1A2 promoter activity in a dose-dependent manner.
This inhibitory effect of YB-1 on COL1A2 expression was abolished by mutations of
the IgRE shown to prevent YB-1 binding in EMSA. In addition, these mutations also
abolished the inhibitory effect of IFN-gamma, suggesting that YB-1 mediates the
inhibitory action of IFN-gamma on COL1A2 promoter through its binding to the
IgRE. Also, overexpression of a deletion mutant YB-1, which lacks the
carboxyl-terminal domain, abrogated the repression of COL1A2 transcription by
IFN-gamma. A functional correlation between IFN-gamma and YB-1 was further
supported by luciferase assays using four tandem repeats of the Y-box consensus
oligonucleotide linked to a minimal promoter. EMSA and Western blot analysis
using cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins implied that IFN-gamma promotes the
nuclear translocation of YB-1. Direct evidence for the nuclear translocation of
YB-1 by IFN-gamma was further provided by using a YB-1-green fluorescent protein 
expression plasmid transfected into human fibroblasts. Altogether, this study
represents the definitive identification of the transcription factor responsible 
for IFN-gamma-elicited inhibition of COL1A2 expression, namely YB-1.

PMID: 12446674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Endocrinology. 2002 Dec;143(12):4718-29.

Transcriptional regulation of the epiregulin gene in the rat ovary.

Sekiguchi T(1), Mizutani T, Yamada K, Yazawa T, Kawata H, Yoshino M, Kajitani T, 
Kameda T, Minegishi T, Miyamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Fukui Medical University, Shimoaizuki, Matsuoka,
Fukui 910-1193, Japan.

Ovarian follicular development is initiated by FSH secreted from the pituitary
gland. The FSH-induced follicular development involves granulosa cell
proliferation and differentiation. We demonstrated that a growth factor of
epidermal growth factor (EGF) family epiregulin was rapidly induced in the
primary culture of rat ovarian granulosa cells by FSH within 1 h. Epiregulin gene
expression was also observed in granulosa cells of antral ovarian follicles from 
pregnant mare's serum gonadotropin-primed rats in vivo. To analyze the regulation
of gene expression of epiregulin, we isolated and characterized the rat
epiregulin gene of 22.1 kb, including 3.8 kb of 5'-upstream region as well as all
five exons and four introns. We determined the transcriptional start site of rat 
epiregulin gene by primer extension analysis and then characterized the upstream 
promoter region of the gene. By using a luciferase reporter system, deletion and 
mutation analyses of rat epiregulin gene promoter region revealed that 125 bp
upstream of transcriptional start site was essential, and that two CT boxes and
one GT box within this region were important for the gene expression. We also
demonstrated by EMSAs that Sp1/Sp3 proteins were involved in the epiregulin gene 
expression via the upstream sequence. Involvement of Sp1/Sp3 was also
demonstrated that transfection of Sp1 or Sp3 expression plasmids dramatically
increased the epiregulin gene promoter activities about 90- or 7.9-fold,
respectively, in Drosophila SL2 cells that lack endogenous Sp family proteins.
Such an increase in the promoter activity was also observed in mammalian cells
when NIH-3T3 cells were used. In conclusion, we demonstrated here for the first
time that EGF-type growth factor epiregulin is rapidly and strongly induced in
the ovarian granulosa cells by FSH stimulation, and that two CT boxes and one GT 
box present in the upstream region are essential for the promoter activity of rat
epiregulin. We also demonstrated that Sp family members play crucial roles in the
epiregulin promoter activity through the CT boxes. The restricted and hormonally 
regulated expression of epiregulin in the rat ovarian granulosa cells may
correspond to the physiological relevance of this peptide growth factor to the
FSH-induced ovarian follicular growth and maturation.

PMID: 12446600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Biochem Soc Trans. 2002 Nov;30(Pt 6):1070-2.

Transcription factors acting on the promoter of the rat fatty acid synthase gene.

Schweizer M(1), Roder K, Zhang L, Wolf SS.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, UK.
M.Schweizer@hw.ac.uk

Fatty acid synthase (FAS), one of the main lipogenic enzymes, converts dietary
calories into a storage form of energy. The transcription factors, stimulatory
proteins 1 and 3 (Sp1 and Sp3), nuclear factor Y (NF-Y), upstream stimulatory
factor (USF) and sterol regulatory element binding protein-1 (SREBP-1) have
cognate binding sites on the promoter of the FAS gene. It was shown that Sp1 and 
NF-Y interact co-operatively at the diet-induced DNase I-hypersensitive site at
position -500. Adjacent binding sites for NF-Y and Sp1 have also been found
between -71 and -52, and -91 and -83. cAMP regulation is mediated via the
inverted CAAT element (ICE) at -99 to -92, which binds NF-Y. The FAS
insulin-responsive element 3 (FIRE3)-binding site at -71 to -52 is capable of
binding NF-Y, USF and SREBP-1, and is required for the sterol response in
conjunction with the co-activator NF-Y around -100. Surprisingly, both FIRE3 and 
ICE are also necessary for the response to retinoic acid that plays a role in
development and is an essential component of the diet.

PMID: 12440974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Am Chem Soc. 2002 Nov 27;124(47):13976-7.

Catalyzed intramolecular olefin insertion into a carbon-carbon single bond.

Murakami M(1), Itahashi T, Ito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Synthetic Chemistry and Biological Chemistry, Kyoto University, 
Yoshida, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan. murakami@sbchem.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Intramolecular insertion of a C-C double bond into a C-C single bond was achieved
by treatment of cyclobutanone bearing an o-styryl group at the 3-position with a 
catalytic amount of a cationic rhodium(I)-dppp complex. Initially, rhodium is
inserted between the carbonyl carbon and the alpha-carbon of the cyclobutanone.
Intramolecular coordination of the vinyl group results in its migratory insertion
into the C-Rh linkage. Reductive elimination affords
benzobicyclo[3.2.1]octan-3-one. Notably, a ring-opened alpha,beta-unsaturated
ketone was obtained when dppe was used instead of dppp. In this reaction, rhodium
cleaved the bond between the alpha sp3 carbon and the beta sp3 carbon of the
cyclobutanone. The coordinating vinyl group directs this new regioselectivity of 
cleavage observed with the dppe ligand.

PMID: 12440879  [PubMed]


291. Br J Cancer. 2002 Oct 21;87(9):1042-6.

Vesnarinone, a differentiation inducing drug, directly activates p21(waf1) gene
promoter via Sp1 sites in a human salivary gland cancer cell line.

Omotehara F(1), Kawamata H, Uchida D, Hino S, Nakashiro K, Fujimori T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical and Molecular Pathology, Dokkyo University School of
Medicine, 880 Kitakobayashi, Mibu, Shimo-Tsuga, Tochigi, 321-0293, Japan.

We previously demonstrated that a differentiation inducing drug, vesnarinone
induced the growth arrest and p21(waf1) gene expression in a human salivary gland
cancer cell line, TYS. In the present study, we investigated the mechanism of the
induction of p21(waf1) gene by vesnarinone in TYS cells. We constructed several
reporter plasmids containing the p21(waf1) promoter, and attempted to identify
vesnarinone-responsive elements in the p21(waf1) promoter. By the luciferase
reporter assay, we identified the minimal vesnarinone-responsive element in the
p21(waf1) promoter at -124 to -61 relative to the transcription start site.
Moreover, we demonstrated by electrophoretic mobility shift assay that Sp1 and
Sp3 transcription factors bound to the vesnarinone-responsive element.
Furthermore, we found that vesnarinone induced the histone hyperacetylation in
TYS cells. These results suggest that vesnarinone directly activates p21(waf1)
promoter via the activation of Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors and the histone 
hyperacetylation in TYS cells.

PMCID: PMC2364327
PMID: 12434298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2002 Sep;82(1):7-18.

Sp1 is essential for estrogen receptor alpha gene transcription.

deGraffenried LA(1), Hilsenbeck SG, Fuqua SA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, The University of Texas Health Science Center,
San Antonio 78229, USA.

The exact molecular mechanisms regulating estrogen receptor (ER)alpha expression 
in breast tumors are unclear, but studies suggest that the regulation is at least
partly transcriptional. We therefore undertook a detailed analysis of ERalpha
promoter activity in a number of breast cancer cell lines. We find that the
majority of ERalpha promoter activity lies within the first 245bp of the
5'-flanking region of the gene. Three elements essential for full ERalpha
promoter transcriptional activity were identified within the -245 to -192bp
region in transient transactivation assays using linker-scanner mutation
analysis. These three elements include two binding sites for the Sp1 family of
transcription factors as well as a non-consensus E box. We show that both Sp1 and
Sp3 bind to this region using electrophoretic mobility shift assays. Exogenous
expression of Sp1 or Sp3 in Sp1/3-negative Drosophila Schneider SL2 cells results
in transactivation of the -245 to +212bp fragment of the ERalpha promoter. These 
data demonstrate that transcription of ERalpha is dependent upon the expression
of members of the Sp1 family.

PMID: 12429135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2002 Dec 12;1579(2-3):73-80.

Synergistic regulation of human cystathionine-beta-synthase-1b promoter by
transcription factors NF-YA isoforms and Sp1.

Ge Y(1), Jensen TL, Matherly LH, Taub JW.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental and Clinical Therapeutics Program, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer
Institute, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA.

Cystathionine-beta-synthase (CBS) catalyzes the condensation of serine and
homocysteine to form cystathionine, an intermediate step in the synthesis of
cysteine. We previously described essential transactivating roles for specificity
protein 1 (Sp1), Sp3, nuclear factor Y (NF-Y), and USF-1 in the regulation of the
CBS-1b promoter. Differential binding of Sp1/Sp3 to the CBS-1b promoter due to
differences in Sp1/Sp3 phosphorylation, and Sp1/Sp3 synergism with NF-Y might, in
part, explain cell-specific patterns of CBS expression. In this report, the roles
of various NF-YA isoforms in influencing cell-specific differences in CBS gene
expression were determined in HT1080 and HepG2 cells. Seven unique NF-YA isoforms
were detected in HT1080 by reverse transcriptase-PCR (RT-PCR) and DNA sequencing,
characterized by deletions in the glutamine-rich and/or serine/threonine-rich
domains. Only four of the seven NF-YA isoforms were found in HepG2 cells. The six
alternatively spliced NF-YA isoforms all showed significantly less synergistic
transactivation of the CBS-1b promoter with Sp1 than wild-type NF-YA, as
determined by cotransfections in Drosophila SL2 cells with NF-YB and NF-YC.
Further, all six alternatively spliced NF-YA isoforms inhibited the synergistic
transactivation of the CBS-1b promoter by wild-type NF-Y and Sp1. Thus, the
cellular distributions of these alternatively spliced NF-YA isoforms could impart
an important cell-specific component to CBS transcriptional regulation, by virtue
of their abilities to directly synergize with Sp1/Sp3 and interfere with
transactivation of the CBS-1b promoter by wild-type NF-Y. Characterization of CBS
promoter structure and function should clarify the molecular bases for variations
in CBS gene expression in genetic diseases and the relationship between CBS and
Down's syndrome (DS).

PMID: 12427542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Org Chem. 2002 Nov 15;67(23):8002-9.

Theoretical study and X-ray determination of bianthronyl [corrected] : long C-C
bond length and preferred gauche conformation.

Li PC(1), Wang TS, Lee GH, Liu YH, Wang Y, Chen CT, Chao I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C.

Erratum in
    J Org Chem. 2003 Mar 21;68(6):2528.

Five X-ray crystallographic structures of bianthronyl (1, 2b-5b) revealed the
presence of long central C(sp3)-C(sp3) bonds (> or =1.60 A) and mostly gauche
conformation. DFT calculations were carried out to study the structural features 
of bianthronyl and related model molecules [corrected]. Our B3LYP/6-31G gas-phase
calculation results suggest that steric effect plays a role in causing the long
C-C sigma bond length (>1.60 A), nonplanarity of the anthracenone moiety (>20
degrees ), and preferred gauche conformation. However, when the gauche preference
is weak, environmental effects such as solvation and packing forces can reverse
it. As the degree of nonplanarity of the anthracenone moiety is consistently
larger in the anti conformation than in the gauche and the ease of achieving
nonplanarity is determined by flexibility of the central six-membered rings
directly connected to the C(sp3)-C(sp3) bond, one way to control the structure
and anti-gauche energy difference of closely related compounds is by changing the
clamping group (Z) in the central six-membered ring.

PMID: 12423127  [PubMed]


295. Mol Cell. 2002 Oct;10(4):831-42.

SUMO-1 modification represses Sp3 transcriptional activation and modulates its
subnuclear localization.

Ross S(1), Best JL, Zon LI, Gill G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Children's Hospital, Boston, 
MA 02115, USA.

The GC box binding transcription factor Sp3 both activates and represses
transcription. We have found that Sp3 activity is regulated by SUMO-1
modification. Endogenous Sp3 is sumoylated and localized to the nuclear periphery
and in nuclear dots. Removal of SUMO-1 from Sp3 by mutation of the SUMO acceptor 
lysines or expression of the SUMO-1 protease SuPr-1 converted Sp3 to a strong
activator with a diffuse nuclear localization. Covalent attachment of SUMO-1 to
Sp3 by gene fusion was sufficient to repress Sp3-dependent transcription and
relocalize Sp3 to the nuclear periphery and nuclear dots. These studies reveal a 
direct effect of SUMO-1 modification on activity of a dual function transcription
factor and provide a mechanism for functional specificity within the Sp
transcription factor family.

PMID: 12419227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jan 10;278(2):875-84. Epub 2002 Oct 31.

ESE-1, an enterocyte-specific Ets transcription factor, regulates MIP-3alpha gene
expression in Caco-2 human colonic epithelial cells.

Kwon JH(1), Keates S, Simeonidis S, Grall F, Libermann TA, Keates AC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

We have previously shown that colonic epithelial cells are a major site of
MIP-3alpha production in human colon and that enterocyte MIP-3alpha protein
levels are elevated in inflammatory bowel disease. The aim of this study was to
determine the molecular mechanisms regulating MIP-3alpha gene transcription in
Caco-2 intestinal epithelial cells. We show that a kappaB element at nucleotides 
-82 to -93 of the MIP-3alpha promoter binds p50/p65 NF-kappaB heterodimers and is
a major regulator of basal and interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta)-mediated gene
activation. Scanning mutagenesis of the MIP-3alpha 5'-flanking region also
identified two additional binding elements: Site X (nucleotides -63 to -69) and
Site Y (nucleotides -143 to -154). Site X (CGCCTTC) bound Sp1 and regulated basal
MIP-3alpha gene transcription. Overexpression of Sp1 increased basal luciferase
activity, whereas, substitutions in the Sp1 element significantly reduced
reporter activity. In contrast, Site Y (AAGCAGGAAGTT) regulated both basal and
cytokine-induced gene activation and bound the Ets nuclear factor ESE-1.
Substitutions in the Site Y element markedly reduced inducible MIP-3alpha
reporter activity. Conversely, overexpression of ESE-1 significantly up-regulated
MIP-3alpha luciferase levels. Taken together, our findings demonstrate that
co-ordinate activation and binding of ESE-1, Sp1, and NF-kappaB to the MIP-3alpha
promoter is required for maximal gene expression by cytokine-stimulated Caco-2
human intestinal epithelial cells.

PMID: 12414801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2002 Nov 4;41(21):4102-4.

Control of H-C(sp3) bond cleavage stoichiometry: clean reversible alkyl ligand
exchange with alkane in [LPt(Alk)(H)2]+ (L=[2.1.1]-(2,6)-pyridinophane).

Vedernikov AN(1), Caulton KG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47405-7102, USA. 
avederni@indiana.edu

PMID: 12412095  [PubMed]


298. Mol Biol Evol. 2002 Nov;19(11):2026-9.

5' genomic structure of human Sp3.

Oleksiak MF, Crawford DL.

PMID: 12411611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Gene. 2002 Sep 18;298(1):9-19.

Transcriptional repression of the RET proto-oncogene by a mitogen activated
protein kinase-dependent signalling pathway.

Andrew SD(1), Capes-Davis A, Delhanty PJ, Marsh DJ, Mulligan LM, Robinson BG.

Author information: 
(1)Kolling Institute of Medical Research, Royal North Shore Hospital, Department 
of Molecular Medicine, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2065, Australia.
andrew@clinlabs.path.queensu.ca

Transcription factors play important roles in regulating cell growth and
differentiation. In this study, treatment of the MTC cell line, TT, with phorbol 
12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) was shown to reduce neurite outgrowth which may be 
associated with de-differentiation and loss of the transformed phenotype.
Northern blotting revealed that PMA transiently induced early growth response
gene 1 (Egr-1) expression and decreased RET expression. Transient transfection
analyses using 5'-deletion constructs of the basal RET promoter, demonstrated the
requirement of a region between -70 and -33 bp for PMA-inducible expression. Gel 
shift and supershift studies demonstrated that PMA induced Egr-1 formed part of a
complex capable of binding to the RET minimal promoter. Overexpression of Egr-1
displaced both sephacryl and phosphocellulose protein 1 (Sp1) and Sp3 from a
GC-box element previously found to be important for RET basal expression.
Furthermore, use of a raf-1 inducible TT cell line, that has been previously
shown to downregulate RET expression, revealed that this downregulation may be
linked to the induction of Egr-1. Our data suggest that regulation of RET
expression during development and in medullary thyroid carcinoma may be
determined, at least in part, by this complex of Sp and Egr-1 proteins.

PMID: 12406571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Blood. 2003 Feb 15;101(4):1551-7. Epub 2002 Oct 17.

Transcriptional regulation of the cystathionine-beta -synthase gene in Down
syndrome and non-Down syndrome megakaryocytic leukemia cell lines.

Ge Y(1), Jensen TL, Matherly LH, Taub JW.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental and Clinical Therapeutics Program, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer
Institute, Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital of
Michigan, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

Children with Down syndrome (DS) with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) have
significantly higher event-free survival rates compared to those with non-DS AML,
linked to greater cytosine arabinoside (ara-C) sensitivity and higher transcript 
levels of the chromosome 21-localized gene, cystathionine-beta-synthase (CBS), in
DS myeloblasts. In this study, we examined the transcriptional regulation of the 
CBS gene in the DS megakaryocytic leukemia (AMkL) cell line, CMK, characterized
by significantly higher CBS transcripts compared with the non-DS AMkL cell line, 
CMS. Rapid amplification of 5'-cDNA ends (5'-RACE) analysis demonstrated
exclusive use of the CBS -1b promoter in the cell lines, and transient
transfections with the full-length CBS -1b luciferase reporter gene construct
showed 40-fold greater promoter activity in the CMK than CMS cells.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed enhanced binding of the
transcription factors Sp1/Sp3 to 2 GC/GT-box elements (GC-f and GT-d) in the
upstream regions of the CBS -1b promoter in CMK nuclear extracts and undetectable
binding in CMS cells. Mutation of the GC-f- or GT-d-binding site resulted in an
approximately 90% decrease of the CBS -1b promoter activity in transient
transfections of CMK cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays confirmed in
vivo binding of Sp3, USF-1, and nuclear factor YA (NF-YA) to the CBS -1b promoter
region in chromatin extracts of CMK and CMS cells. Decreased binding of Sp1/Sp3
in CMK nuclear extracts following treatment with calf alkaline phosphatase
suggested a role for phosphorylation of Sp1/Sp3 in regulating CBS promoter
activity and in the differential CBS expression between CMK and CMS cells. The
results of this study with clinically relevant cell line models suggest potential
mechanisms for disparate patterns of CBS gene expression in DS and non-DS
myeloblasts and may, in part, explain the greater sensitivity to chemotherapy
shown by patients with DS AML.

PMID: 12393509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Am Chem Soc. 2002 Oct 30;124(43):12806-15.

Asymmetric crotylation reactions in synthesis of polypropionate-derived
macrolides: application to total synthesis of oleandolide.

Hu T(1), Takenaka N, Panek JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Center for Molecular Library Design, Metcalf
Center for Science and Engineering, 590 Commonwealth Avenue, Boston University,
Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Complete details of a convergent asymmetric synthesis of oleandolide (1), the
aglycon of the macrolide antibiotic oleandomycin, is described. The synthesis has
been achieved through the assembly and coupling of the left- and right-hand
subunits 12 and 38, respectively. These subunits were prepared from chiral
silane-based asymmetric crotylation reactions to control the stereochemical
relationships. The left- and right-hand subunits (C1-C7 and C8-C14) were brought 
together through a Pd(0)-catalyzed sp3-sp2 cross-coupling reaction between the
zinc intermediate 40 and vinyl triflate 38 to give 27. This product was converted
to seco acid 42a and cyclized to lactone 35 under Yamaguchi conditions. This
material was then epoxidized with m-chloroperbenzoic acid (m-CPBA) to install the
correct C8 epoxide as a single diastereomer, which after a short deprotection
sequence completed the synthesis of oleandolide.

PMID: 12392427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Biol Reprod. 2002 Nov;67(5):1509-21.

Expression of steroidogenic factor 1 in the testis requires an interactive array 
of elements within its proximal promoter.

Scherrer SP(1), Rice DA, Heckert LL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas 66160, USA.

Steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1) is an orphan nuclear receptor that is important for
expression of genes involved in sexual differentiation, testicular and adrenal
development, and hormone synthesis and regulation. To better understand the
mechanisms required for SF-1 production, we employed transient transfection
analysis and electrophoretic mobility shift assays to characterize the elements
and proteins required for transcriptional activity of the SF-1 proximal promoter 
in testicular Sertoli and Leydig cells and adrenocortical cells. Direct
comparison of SF-1-promoter activity in testis and adrenal cell types established
that a similar set of regulatory elements (an E box, CCAAT box, and Sp1-binding
sites) is required for proximal promoter activity in these cells. Further
evaluation of the E box and CCAAT box revealed a novel synergism between the two 
elements and identified functionally important bases within the elements.
Importantly, DNA/protein-binding studies uncovered new proteins interacting with 
the E box and CCAAT box. Thus, in addition to the previously identified USF and
NF-Y proteins, newly described complexes, having migration properties that
differed between Sertoli and Leydig cells, were observed bound to the E box and
CCAAT box. Transient transfection analysis also identified several
Sp1/Sp3-binding elements important for expression of SF-1 in the testis, one of
which was previously described for expression in the adrenal gland whereas the
other two were newly disclosed elements.

PMCID: PMC1586108
PMID: 12390883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Blood. 2002 Nov 1;100(9):3325-32.

Binding of Sp1 to the proximal promoter links constitutive expression of the
human uPA gene and invasive potential of PC3 cells.

Ibañez-Tallon I(1), Ferrai C, Longobardi E, Facetti I, Blasi F, Crippa MP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Department of Biological and Technological
Research (DIBIT) and Università Vita-Salute, S. Raffaele Scientific Institute,
Via Olgettina 58, 20132 Milan, Italy.

Activated transcription of the urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) gene
depends on the enhancer, located approximately 2 kb from the start of
transcription. The proximal promoter, driving basal transcription, contains a
GC-/GA-rich sequence immediately upstream of the TATA box. We have investigated
the role played by this element in the transcription of the uPA gene in HeLa and 
PC3 cells, which do not express or constitutively express the gene, respectively.
This region binds either Sp1 or Sp3, as monomers or multimers, but not a
combination of the 2 proteins. The more efficient binding of Sp1 to the proximal 
promoter in PC3 cells is correlated to its phosphorylation state. Polymerase
chain reaction (PCR)-coupled, chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments with
anti-Sp1 antibodies indeed show an enrichment of proximal promoter sequences in
PC3 cells and support the observed difference in transcription levels from
proximal promoter constructs in HeLa versus PC3 cells. Furthermore,
overexpression of Sp1 increases transcription from the reporter construct in HeLa
cells, whereas in PC3 cells, overexpression of Sp3 does not reduce transcription 
from the same construct, indicating that the Sp1/Sp3 balance cannot be shifted.
We conclude that the GC-/GA-rich element of the uPA regulatory region is an
independent functional element, regulated by Sp family proteins. Phosphorylation 
of Sp1 determines the presence in vivo and the functionality of this element in
PC3 cells. Thus, the cellular context determines the relevance of the GC-/GA-rich
region in uPA gene transcription, which contributes to constitutive gene
expression, related, in turn, to the invasive phenotype.

PMID: 12384434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Gene. 2002 Aug 21;296(1-2):221-34.

Sp/Krüppel-like transcription factors are essential for the expression of
mitochondrial glycerol phosphate dehydrogenase promoter B.

Hasan NM(1), MacDonald MJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Children's Diabetes Center, The University of Wisconsin, Room 3550 Medical
Science Center, 1300 University Avenue, Madison 53706, USA.
nmhasan@facstaff.wisc.edu

The human mitochondrial glycerol phosphate dehydrogenase (hmGPD) is abundant in
the normal pancreatic insulin cell and its level is lowered to 50% by high
glucose and diabetes. Using Drosophila and INS-1 cells, we have analysed the
hmGPD gene promoter B to characterize cis-elements and trans-acting factors that 
affect its regulation. We identified ten efficient Sp/Krüppel-like
transcription-factor-binding sites in the promoter sequence. These sites include 
four GC-boxes (CCCGCCC at -227, -68, -46 and GGGCGAG at -382), three GT-boxes
(CCCCACCC at -350, CCCACACCC at -257, and CACCCGCCC at -48), and three
CT/GA-boxes (TCCCTCCC at -262, GGGAGGGAG at -129, and GGGAGGAGGA at -107).
Transfection of Drosophila SL2 cells, which lack Sp/Krüppel-like factors, with
constructs encoding either Sp1, Sp3, Sp4 or erythroid Krüppel-like factor (EKLF) 
specifically activates the hmGPD promoter B up to 50-fold. Promoter activation
requires the Sp1 activation and the DNA binding domains. Co-transfected EKLF was 
synergistic with either Sp1 or Sp3. On the other hand, the basic Krüppel-like
factor (BKLF) inhibited Sp1-and EKLF-mediated promoter activation. Similarly,
constructs encoding either GA-binding protein (GABP) or PU.1 inhibited
Sp1-mediated promoter activation. Oligonucleotide 'decoys' with potential
transcription factor binding sites decreased promoter activity in both INS-1 and 
Drosophila cells. Significant loss of Sp- and EKLF-mediated activation was
observed with some internal as well as sequential 5' deletions of the promoter
DNA. The level of Sp1 protein was reduced by 50% in INS-1 cells chronically
exposed to a high concentration of glucose. The results demonstrate that
Sp/Krüppel-like factors are essential for mGPD gene expression.

PMID: 12383520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Biochemistry. 2002 Oct 22;41(42):12771-84.

The role of Sp1 family members, the proximal GC-rich motifs, and the upstream
enhancer region in the regulation of the human cell cycle inhibitor p21WAF-1/Cip1
gene promoter.

Koutsodontis G(1), Moustakas A, Kardassis D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Sciences, University of Crete Medical School and Institute
of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation of Research and Technology of 
Hellas, Herakleion GR-71110, Greece.

In the present study we establish that specific members of the Sp1 family of
transcription factors (Sp1 and Sp3) bind to all six GC-rich motifs (elements 1-6)
present in the proximal promoter of the human cell cycle inhibitor
p21(WAF-1/Cip1) gene. Competition analysis showed that Sp1 and Sp3 bound with
high affinity to elements 1, 3, 4, and 5/6 and with lower affinity to element 2. 
Transfection experiments in the Sp1-deficient Drosophila SL2 cells established
that Sp1 and Sp3 but not Sp2 are potent transactivators of the p21 promoter.
Transactivation by Sp1 was compromised either by deletion of element 1
(-119/-114) or by using a truncated Sp1 form lacking the C-terminal regulatory
domain D. Point mutagenesis of the -2325/+8 p21 promoter, targeting individual
elements 1-6, showed that mutations in element 3 (-82/-77) caused a dramatic
reduction (90%) in p21 promoter activity whereas mutations in other elements had 
a less severe effect. The mutations in element 3 abolished p21 promoter induction
by upstream enhancer elements in HepG2 cells. Sp1, but not Sp3, mediated the
transactivation of the p21 promoter by the TGFbeta signaling mediator Smad3 and
Smad4 proteins whereas none of the individual mutations in elements 1-6 affected 
the transactivation of the p21 promoter by Smad proteins in HepG2 cells. Our
results suggest that functional interactions between Sp1 family members bound to 
specific elements of the proximal promoter and factors bound to distal enhancer
elements govern the hepatic activity of the human p21 promoter under basal or
inducible conditions.

PMID: 12379120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Diabetologia. 2002 Oct;45(10):1425-33. Epub 2002 Jul 4.

Identification of regulatory elements in the human adipose most abundant gene
transcript-1 ( apM-1) promoter: role of SP1/SP3 and TNF-alpha as regulatory
pathways.

Barth N(1), Langmann T, Schölmerich J, Schmitz G, Schäffler A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, University of Regensburg, 93042 Regensburg,
Germany.

Erratum in
    Diabetologia. 2004 Jan;47(1):153.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The human adipocyte-specific apM-1 (adipose most abundant gene
transcript-1) gene encodes for a secretory protein of the adipose tissue that
seems to play a role in the pathogenesis of obesity-related insulin resistance
and its expression is inhibited by TNF-alpha. Our aim was to characterize the
tissue-specific regulation of the recently cloned apM-1 promoter and the
mechanisms of TNF-alpha-induced downregulation of the apM-1 gene.
METHODS: We characterised the apM-1 gene by electrophoretic mobility shift assays
(EMSA) and luciferase reporter gene assays (LRA).
RESULTS: Although several putative binding sites for transcription factors known 
to be involved in adipogenesis such as C/EBP and PPARgamma are present in the
promoter, we could not detect any binding of these nuclear proteins from
differentiated adipocytes. However, a proximal SP1 binding site specifically
binds both, recombinant SP1 protein and SP1 derived from adipocyte nuclear
extracts. Since the expression of SP1 during adipocyte differentiation has not
yet been analysed, we could show by using EMSA, that binding activity of SP1 is
increased during adipocyte differentiation. The stimulatory activity of SP1 was
confirmed in LRA by cotransfection experiments in S2 Schneider cells lacking
endogenous SP factors. An inhibitory activity of SP3 on the stimulatory effect of
SP1 could be confirmed in LRA by contransfection experiments in adipocytes.
Nuclear extracts from adipocytes incubated with TNF-alpha showed a reduced
binding activity of SP1.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: SP1 is expressed and its binding activity is enhanced 
during adipocyte differentiation. SP1 has stimulatory effects, SP3 has inhibitory
effects on apM-1 promoter activity, mediated by a proximal SP1 binding site. The 
mechanism of TNF-alpha-induced inhibition of apM-1 gene expression is, at least
in part, due to a decrease of transcriptional SP1 binding activity caused by
TNF-alpha and thus provides a new mechanism of TNF-alpha-dependent signalling.

PMID: 12378384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Genomics. 2002 Oct;80(4):443-52.

Localization and analysis of the principal promoter for human tenascin-X.

Wijesuriya SD(1), Bristow J, Miller WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and the Metabolic Research Unit, University of
California, San Francisco, California 94143-0978, USA.

Tenascin-X is a large extracellular matrix protein expressed in connective
tissues. Mutations in TNXB are a cause of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Comparison of
25 kb of human and mouse DNA near the TNXB untranslated exon identified eight
regions of >80% identity. Of 17 cell types and lines screened, TNXB expression
was abundant only in fibroblasts and HT1080 human skin fibrosarcoma cells.
Expression of TNXB promoter/reporter constructs in HT1080 cells showed that
region E, near the untranslated exon, had the greatest activity, and the two
regions of greatest identity, 5.0 and 3.3 kb upstream, had no activity. Mobility 
shift assays identified six protein-binding regions. Regions I, II, and IV bound 
Sp1 and Sp3, but only I and IV were functional in HT1080 cells. Regions III and V
bound unknown proteins and exerted strong enhancer-like activity. Mutation of
regions III and V in promoter/reporter constructs decreased TNXB transcription
and identified functionally important Sp1 and Sp3 sites. These experiments
provide an essential foundation for understanding the regulation of this vital
protein.

PMID: 12376099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Analyst. 2002 Sep;127(9):1261-6.

Principal components analysis for the visualisation of multidimensional chemical 
data acquired by scanning Raman microspectroscopy.

Malecha M(1), Bessant C, Saini S.

Author information: 
(1)Cranfield Centre for Analytical Science, Cranfield University, Bedfordshire,
UK.

Raman microspectroscopy is ideally suited to surface analysis as it allows
detailed chemical information to be acquired from surfaces at a relatively high
spatial resolution (typically 1 microm). Using a motorised sample table or probe,
it is possible to raster scan a surface to obtain spatially resolved chemical
information. Visualisation of the acquired data is a problem, however, as the
spectrum acquired at each point can contain several hundred individual intensity 
measurements. Existing visualisation methods are limited to plotting each scanned
point with an intensity determined from the measured intensity at a single
wavenumber, or the similarly between the point's spectrum and a reference
spectrum. Such methods are wasteful as a lot of acquired information is
discarded, and results are prone to misinterpretation due to background variance 
and instrumental noise. In this paper we introduce a new method that uses
principal components analysis (PCA) to reduce the spectrum at each point to three
factors that are then used to define the red, green and blue components of the
corresponding point on a false colour map. To increase the effective resolution, 
interpolation is used to approximate the colours corresponding to points between 
those actually scanned. To demonstrate the technique, the internal surface of a
beverage can, contaminated with a 40 microm diameter carbonised oven impurity,
consisting mainly of sp2- and sp3-hybridised saturated carbon bonds, has been
used as a case study.

PMID: 12375854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Oncogene. 2002 Oct 10;21(46):7077-91.

Transcriptional upregulation of SPARC, in response to c-Jun overexpression,
contributes to increased motility and invasion of MCF7 breast cancer cells.

Briggs J(1), Chamboredon S, Castellazzi M, Kerry JA, Bos TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Cell Biology, Eastern Virginia
Medical School, P.O. Box 1980, Norfolk, VA 23501, USA.

Overexpression of the c-Jun proto-oncogene in MCF7 breast cancer cells results in
a variety of phenotype changes related to malignant progression including
increased motility and invasion. Concurrent with these phenotypic effects are
changes in the expression of multiple gene targets. We previously demonstrated
that expression of the SPARC/osteonectin gene, while undetectable in the MCF7
cell line, is highly induced in response to stable c-Jun overexpression
(c-Jun/MCF7). Because the SPARC gene product is associated with tumor cell
invasion in a variety of different cancers, we have examined its role in
mediating the phenotypic changes induced by c-Jun in MCF7 cells. We found that
antisense mediated suppression of SPARC dramatically inhibits both motility and
invasion in this c-Jun/MCF7 model. In contrast, stable overexpression of SPARC in
the parental MCF7 cell line is not sufficient to stimulate cell motility or
invasion. Examination of the promoter region of the human SPARC gene reveals
three non-canonical AP-1 sites. We demonstrate that one of these sites binds
c-Jun/Fra1 heterodimers in vitro, but that this and the other AP-1 like sites are
dispensable with respect to c-Jun stimulated SPARC promoter activation. Deletion 
analysis identified a region between -120 and -70 as a c-Jun responsive element
sufficient to induce maximal promoter activation. This region does not contain
any AP-1 sites but does mediate binding by SP1 'like' complexes. Furthermore,
this region is necessary for SP1/SP3 responsiveness in Drosophila SL2 cells.
These results demonstrate that SPARC plays an important role in stimulating
motility and the invasive behavior of c-Jun/MCF7 cells and that SPARC promoter
activation by c-Jun appears to occur through an indirect mechanism.

PMID: 12370830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. EMBO J. 2002 Oct 1;21(19):5206-15.

Transcription factor Sp3 is silenced through SUMO modification by PIAS1.

Sapetschnig A(1), Rischitor G, Braun H, Doll A, Schergaut M, Melchior F, Suske G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Emil-Mannkopff-Strasse 2,
D-35037 Marburg, Germany.

Sp3 is a ubiquitous transcription factor closely related to Sp1. Here we show
that Sp3 is a target for SUMO modification in vivo and in vitro. SUMO
modification of Sp3 occurs at a single lysine located between the second
glutamine-rich activation domain and the DNA-binding domain. Mutational analyses 
identified the sequence IKXE as essential for SUMO conjugation to Sp3. We
identified the protein inhibitor of activated STAT1 (PIAS1) as an interaction
partner of Sp3 and Ubc9. Moreover, PIAS1 strongly stimulated SUMO conjugation to 
Sp3, thus acting as an E3 ligase for SUMO conjugation to Sp3. All mutations that 
prevented SUMO modification in vitro strongly enhanced the transcriptional
activity of Sp3, showing that SUMO modification silences Sp3 activity.
SUMO-modified Sp3 bound to DNA with similar specificity and affinity as
unmodified Sp3. However, DNA-bound Sp3 did not act as a substrate for SUMO
modification.

PMCID: PMC129032
PMID: 12356736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Biol Reprod. 2002 Oct;67(4):1157-64.

H1t/GC-box and H1t/TE1 element are essential for promoter activity of the
testis-specific histone H1t gene.

Wilkerson DC(1), Wolfe SA, Grimes SR.

Author information: 
(1)Research Service (151), Overton Brooks Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Shreveport, Louisiana 71101-4295, USA.

The testis-specific linker histone H1t gene is transcribed exclusively in mid to 
late pachytene primary spermatocytes. Tissue-specific expression of the gene is
mediated primarily through elements located within the proximal promoter.
Previous work in transgenic animals identified a unique 40-base pair promoter
element designated H1t/TE that is essential for spermatocyte-specific expression.
The H1t/TE element contains three subelements designated TE2, GC-box, and TE1
based on in vitro footprinting and electrophoretic mobility shift assays. Because
GC-box is a consensus site for binding of Sp transcription-factor family members,
experiments were performed demonstrating that two Sp family members, Sp1 and Sp3,
were present in testis cells from 9-day-old and adult rats and in pachytene
primary spermatocytes and early spermatids. A 95- to 105-kDa form of Sp1 is most 
abundant in the tissues and cell lines examined, but a 60-kDa form of Sp1 is the 
most abundant species in spermatocytes and early spermatids. Further examination 
of Sp1 and Sp3 from adult testis, primary spermatocytes, and early spermatids
showed that they can bind to the H1t/TE element. In order to determine the
contributions of the subelements to H1t transcription, we mutated each of them in
H1t promoter luciferase reporter vectors. Mutation of the GC-box and TE1
subelement reduced expression 77% and 49%, respectively, compared with the
wild-type H1t promoter in transient expression assays in a testis GC-2spd cell
line that was derived from germinal cells. These studies suggest that Sp
transcription factors may be involved in transcription of the H1t gene and the
GC-box and the TE1 subelement are required for activation of the H1t promoter.

PMID: 12297531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Di Yi Jun Yi Da Xue Xue Bao. 2002 Jun;22(6):481-5.

Regulation of telomerase activity in Jurkat T cells by transcription factors Sp1 
and Sp3.

Pang JX(1), Chen XY, Wu SG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutic Sciences, First Military Medical University,
Guangzhou 510515, China. pjx@fimmu.edu.cn

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 in the
regulation of telomerase activity and human telomerase reverse transcriptase
(hTERT) in Jurkat T cells.
METHODS: By way of lipofectamine, Sp1 and Sp3 expression vectors were transferred
into Jurkat T cells in which the protein expression levels of Sp1 and Sp3 were
examined by Western blotting. Telomerase PCR-ELISA was used to assess the
telomerase activity, and telomerase-mediated DNA- ladders were analyzed by silver
staining and hTERT mRNA level determined by reverse transcriptase-PCR (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: Treatment of Jurkat T cells with Sp1 expression vector for 36 h resulted
in significant increase in Sp1 and Sp3 protein levels by 59.6% (P<0.01) and 36.8%
(P<0.05) respectively. Enhancement of Sp1 expression obviously increased
telomerase activity and hTERT mRNA levels at a rate of 38.5% (P<0.05) and 25.4%
(P<0.05) respectively, whereas Sp3 evinced no significant effect on both
telomerase activity and hTERT mRNA levels.
CONCLUSION: Transcription factor Sp1, but not Sp3, regulates telomerase activity 
by altering hTERT mRNA levels in Jurkat T cells.

PMID: 12297462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Biochem Mol Biol. 2002 May 31;35(3):273-82.

AUA as a translation initiation site in vitro for the human transcription factor 
Sp3.

Hernandez EM(1), Johnson A, Notario V, Chen A, Richert JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Georgetown University Medical
Center, Washington, DC 20007, USA.

Sp3 is a bifunctional transcription factor that has been reported to stimulate or
repress the transcription of numerous genes. Although the size of Sp3 mRNA is 4.0
kb, the size of the known Sp3 cDNA sequence is 3.6 kb. Thus, Sp3 functional
studies have been performed with an artificially introduced start codon, and thus
an aminoterminus that differs from the wild-type. Ideally, full-length cDNA
expression vectors with the appropriate start codon should be utilized for these 
studies. Using 5'rapid amplification of cDNA ends, a full-length Sp3 cDNA clone
was generated and the sequence verified in nine cell lines. No AUG initiation
codon was present. However, stop codons were present in all three frames 5' to
the known coding sequence. In vitro translation of this full-length cDNA clone
produced the expected three isoforms-one at 100 kDa and two in the mid 60 kDa
range. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed that the protein products had
the ability to bind to the Sp1/3 consensus sequence. In vitro studies, using our 
Sp3 clone and site directed mutagenesis, identified the translation initiation
site for the larger isoform as AUA. AUA has not been previously described as an
endogenous initiation codon in eukaryotes.

PMID: 12297010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Chem Commun (Camb). 2002 Sep 7;(17):1854-5.

Synthesis of C60-diphenylaminofluorene dyad with large 2PA cross-sections and
efficient intramolecular two-photon energy transfer.

Chiang LY(1), Padmawar PA, Canteenwala T, Tan LS, He GS, Kannan R, Vaia R, Lin
TC, Zheng Q, Prasad PN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Institute of Nanoscience and Engineering, University 
of Massachusetts Lowell, Lowell, MA 01854, USA. Long_Chiang@uml.edu

The first, highly two-photon active C60 derivative comprised of a A-sp3-D
conjugate structure was synthesized showing effective two-photon absorption
cross-sections (sigma 2' = 196 x 10(-48) cm4 sec-1 molecule-1) in the nanosecond 
regime among the best values for diphenylaminofluorene-based AFX chromophores.

PMID: 12271642  [PubMed]


315. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 22;277(47):44911-9. Epub 2002 Sep 18.

Neuronal kappa B-binding factors consist of Sp1-related proteins. Functional
implications for autoregulation of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor-1 expression.

Mao X(1), Moerman AM, Barger SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of Arkansas for Medical
Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas 72205, USA.

Neurons contain a protein factor capable of binding DNA elements normally bound
by the transcription factor NF-kappaB. However, several lines of evidence suggest
that this neuronal kappaB-binding factor (NKBF) is not bona fide NF-kappaB. We
have identified NKBF from cultures of neocortical neurons as a complex containing
proteins related to Sp1. This complex was bound by antibodies to Sp1, Sp3, and
Sp4 and was competed from binding to an NF-kappaB element by an oligonucleotide
containing an Sp1-binding site. This Sp1 oligonucleotide detected an abundant
factor in neuronal nuclei that migrated in electrophoretic mobility shift assays 
at a position consistent with NKBF. Expression of transfected Sp1 stimulated
transcription in a manner dependent upon a kappaB cis-element. Similar to our
previous reports for NKBF (Mao, X., Moerman, A. M., Lucas, M. M., and Barger, S. 
W. (1999) J. Neurochem. 73, 1851-1858 and Moerman, A. M., Mao, X., Lucas, M. M., 
and Barger, S. W. (1999) Mol. Brain Res. 67, 303-315), the activity of the
Sp1-related factor was reduced by activation of ionotropic glutamate receptors,
consistent with proteolytic degradation of all three Sp1-related factors.
Expression of the N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor-1 (NR1) subunit of glutamate
receptors correlated with the activity of the Sp1-related factor, specifically
through an Sp1 element in the NR1 promoter. These data provide the first evidence
that Sp1 or related family members are responsible for kappaB-binding activity
and are involved in a negative feedback for NR1 in central nervous system
neurons.

PMID: 12244044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 22;277(47):44613-22. Epub 2002 Sep 13.

The Kruppel-like factor Zf9 and proteins in the Sp1 family regulate the
expression of HSP47, a collagen-specific molecular chaperone.

Yasuda K(1), Hirayoshi K, Hirata H, Kubota H, Hosokawa N, Nagata K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Institute for Frontier Medical
Sciences, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8397, Japan.

In several cells and tissues the synthesis of HSP47, a collagen-specific
molecular chaperone in the endoplasmic reticulum, is closely correlated with the 
synthesis of collagen. We previously reported that the Sp1 binding site at -210
bp in the promoter region and the first and second introns are required for the
tissue-specific expression of HSP47 in transgenic mice (Hirata, H., Yamamura, I.,
Yasuda, K., Kobayashi, A., Tada, N., Suzuki, M., Hirayoshi, K., Hosokawa, N., and
Nagata, K. (1999) J. Biol. Chem. 274, 35703-35710). Here, we analyze how these
introns influence the transcriptional regulation of the hsp47 gene in BALB/c 3T3 
cells, which produce high levels of HSP47. In vitro promoter analysis using a
luciferase reporter and gel mobility shift analysis revealed that two cis-acting 
elements in the first and second introns, BS5-B and EP7-D, respectively, are
required for the activation of hsp47 in BALB/c 3T3 cells. Several members of the 
Kruppel-like factor (KLF) family of proteins were identified as BS5-B-binding
proteins by yeast one-hybrid analysis using these elements as baits. One of these
proteins, KLF-6/Zf9, binds to the BS5-B element and activates expression of the
reporter construct when transfected into cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
assay analysis revealed that the endogenous KLF-6/Zf9 binds the BS5-B elements
that contain the CACCC motif, which is a consensus recognition sequence for other
proteins in the KLF family. We also showed that BS5-B and EP7-D are bound by two 
members of the Sp1 family, Sp2 and Sp3. These results suggest that at least three
sequences are required for the constitutive expression of hsp47 in BALB/c 3T3
cells: the -210 bp Sp1 binding site, the BS5-B element in the first intron, and
the EP7-D element in the second intron. We suggest that KLF proteins regulate the
transcription of hsp47 by binding the BS5-B element in cooperation with Sp2
and/or Sp3.

PMID: 12235161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 15;277(46):43873-80. Epub 2002 Sep 12.

The human reduced folate carrier gene is regulated by the AP2 and sp1
transcription factor families and a functional 61-base pair polymorphism.

Whetstine JR(1), Witt TL, Matherly LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State
University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan 48201, USA.

Recently, our laboratory reported an intricate regulation of the human reduced
folate carrier (hRFC) gene, involving multiple promoters and noncoding exons. We 
localized promoter activity to a 452-bp GC-rich region upstream of noncoding exon
A, including a 47-bp basal promoter with a CRE/AP-1-like consensus element that
bound the bZip family of DNA-binding proteins (e.g. CREB-1 and c-Jun). We now
report that three nearly identical tandem repeats (49-61 bp) in the hRFC-A
upstream region are involved in regulating promoter activity. By in vitro binding
assays, multiple transcription factors (e.g. AP2 and Sp1/Sp3) bound this region. 
When AP2 was cotransfected with the hRFC-A reporter construct into HT1080 cells, 
promoter activity increased 3-fold. In Drosophila SL2 cells, Sp1 transactivated
promoter A and showed synergism with CREB-1. However, c-Jun was antagonistic to
the effects of Sp1. A sequence variant in the hRFC-A repeated region was
identified, involving an exact duplication of a 61-bp sequence. This variant had 
an allelic frequency of 78% in 72 genomic DNAs and resulted in a 63% increase in 
promoter activity. These results identify important regions in the hRFC-A
promoter and critical roles for AP2 and Sp1, in combination with the bZip
transcription factors. Moreover, they document a functionally novel polymorphism 
that increases promoter activity and may contribute to interpatient variations in
hRFC expression and effects on tissue folate homeostasis and antitumor response
to antifolates.

PMID: 12228234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Lab Invest. 2002 Sep;82(9):1131-8.

Sp3 expression in immune cells: a quantitative study.

Grekova MC(1), Salerno K, Mikkilineni R, Richert JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Georgetown University Medical
Center, Washington DC 20007, USA.

We previously reported the lack of expression of the bifunctional transcription
factor Sp3 in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from most patients with multiple
sclerosis (MS) (Grekova et al, 1996). An RT-PCR technique was developed to
evaluate Sp3 mRNA levels in peripheral blood mononuclear cell subsets.
Semi-quantitative and quantitative competitive RT-PCR assays were used to compare
the level of Sp3 expression among subjects and among immune cell subsets. The
competitor DNA fragment contained a deletion from the normal Sp3 cDNA sequence.
The wild-type Sp3 cDNA and the competitor DNA fragment amplified with equal
efficiency, and the two PCR products were distinguished by size. These studies
demonstrated that normal CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells, B cells, and macrophages
expressed comparable amounts of Sp3 mRNA. No Sp3 expression could be detected in 
normal natural killer cells nor in any of these cell types from Sp3-negative MS
patients. We propose that transcription of the Sp3 gene is blocked in immune
cells from most patients with MS and that this contributes to the development of 
central nervous system inflammation in the disease.

PMID: 12218073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. J Econ Entomol. 2002 Aug;95(4):651-60.

Field-based evaluation of biopesticide impacts on native biodiversity: malagasy
coleoptera and anti-locust entomopathogenic fungi.

Ivie MA(1), Pollock DA, Gustafson DL, Ivie LL, Rasolomandimby J, Swearingen WD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Montana State University, Bozeman 59717, USA.
mivie@montana.edu

A community of 225 species of Coleoptera was used as a surrogate to evaluate
nontarget effects of entomopathogenic fungi under development as biopesticides
for use against the Malagasy migratory locust Locusta migratoria capito Saussure 
(Orthoptera: Acrididae). Evaluation of a standard chemical treatment of
fenitrothion + esfenvalerate, two indigenous isolates of Metarhiziumflavoviride
Gams & Roszsypol (SP3 and SP9), and an indigenous isolate of Beauveria bassiana
(Balsamo) Vuillemin (SP16) against an untreated control in a replicated field
trial in southern Madagascar showed that one of the isolates of M. flavoviride
(SP3) and fenitrothion + esfenvalerate had distinct effects on nontarget beetle
communities that were similar to each other. The other two isolates had no
detectable effects compared with the untreated control. Based on an evaluation of
the species affected, the similar effects of SP3 and the chemical pesticide are
hypothesized to be the result of a perturbation of predator-prey relationships,
with a distinct tendency to be manifested via predators. The data indicate that
use of SP9 and SP16 would have minimal detrimental effects on the biodiversity of
nontarget beetles, but that SP3 needs further testing.

PMID: 12216803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Cell Biochem. 2002;86(4):716-25.

Sp1 and Sp3 activate the testis-specific histone H1t promoter through the
H1t/GC-box.

Wilkerson DC(1), Wolfe SA, Grimes SR.

Author information: 
(1)Research Service (151), Overton Brooks Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Shreveport, Louisiana 71101-4295, USA.

The testis-specific linker histone H1t gene is transcribed exclusively in mid to 
late pachytene primary spermatocytes. Tissue specific expression of the gene is
mediated in large part through elements located within the proximal promoter.
Previous work in transgenic animals showed that a unique 40 bp promoter element
designated H1t/TE is essential for spermatocyte-specific expression. The H1t/TE
element contains a GC-box, which is a perfect consensus binding site for members 
of the Sp family of transcription factors. We have shown that Sp1 and Sp3 are
present in testis cells from 9-day-old and adult rats and in pachytene primary
spermatocytes and early spermatids and that they can bind to the H1t/GC-box.
Mutagenesis of the GC-box reduced H1t promoter activity. Furthermore, a CpG
dinucleotide within the GC-box was totally unmethylated in rat testis primary
spermatocytes where the gene is transcribed but it was methylated in liver where 
the gene is silenced. These previous studies supported the importance of the
GC-box and suggested that Sp transcription factors contribute to expression of
the H1t gene. In this study, we show that co-transfection of Sp1 and Sp3
expression vectors leads to an upregulation of histone H1t promoter activity in
several cell lines including testis GC-2spd cells. However, very low H1t promoter
activity is seen in GC-2spd cells grown at 39 degrees C, which correlates with
lower levels of Sp1 and Sp3 in these cells grown at this elevated temperature.
Upregulation of the H1t promoter by Sp1 and Sp3 was also seen in cotransfected
NIH3T3 and C127I cell lines. On the other hand, co-transfection of the Sp1 and
Sp3 expression vectors does not lead to upregulation of activity of the
cell-cycle dependent histone H1d promoter.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12210738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 1;277(44):42268-79. Epub 2002 Aug 27.

Loricrin expression in cultured human keratinocytes is controlled by a complex
interplay between transcription factors of the Sp1, CREB, AP1, and AP2 families.

Jang SI(1), Steinert PM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Skin Biology, NIAMS, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892-8023, USA. jangs@mail.nih.gov

The major protein component of the cornified cell envelope barrier structure of
the epidermis is loricrin, and it is expressed late during terminal
differentiation in epidermal keratinocytes. We have previously shown that an AP1 
site located in the proximal promoter region (position -55) is essential for
human loricrin promoter activity (Rossi, A., Jang, S-I., Ceci, R., Steinert, P.
M., and Markova, N. G. (1998) J. Invest. Dermatol. 110, 34-40). In this study we 
show that its regulation requires complex cooperative and competitive
interactions between multiple transcription factors in keratinocytes located in
different compartments of the epidermis. We show that as few as 154 base pairs of
5'-upstream sequences from the cap site can direct the keratinocyte-specific
expression in cultured keratinocytes. Mutation and DNA-protein analyses show that
Sp1, c-Jun, an unidentified regulator, and the co-activator p300/CREB-binding
protein up-regulate whereas Sp3, CREB-1/CREMalpha/ATF-1, Jun B, and an AP2-like
protein (termed the keratinocyte-specific repressor-1 (KSR-1)) suppress loricrin 
promoter activity. We show that CREB protein can compete with c-Jun for the AP1
site and repress loricrin promoter activity. We show here that the protein kinase
A pathway can activate loricrin expression by manipulation of the Sp1, Sp3, and
KSR-1 levels in the nucleus. Thus, in undifferentiated cells, loricrin expression
is suppressed by Jun B, Sp3, and KSR-1 proteins. But in advanced differentiated
cells, levels of Sp3, KSR-1, and CREB proteins are lower; the unidentified
regulator protein can bind; Sp1 and c-Jun are increased; and then p300/CBP is
recruited. Together, these events allow loricrin transcription to proceed.
Indeed, the synergistic effects of the Sp1, c-Jun, and p300 factors indicate that
p300/CBP might act as bridge to form an active transcription complex.

PMID: 12200429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Aug 30;296(4):1005-12.

Trichostatin A, a histone deacetylase inhibitor, activates the IGFBP-3 promoter
by upregulating Sp1 activity in hepatoma cells: alteration of the Sp1/Sp3/HDAC1
multiprotein complex.

Choi HS(1), Lee JH, Park JG, Lee YI.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Cell Signal Transduction Lab., Bioscience Research Division, Korea
Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Taejon 305-606, Republic of
Korea.

We determined the molecular mechanisms by which trichostatin A (TSA) induced
insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 3 (IGFBP-3) gene expression in Hep3B
cells, a p53-mutant human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cell line. TSA induced
the expressions of the IGFBP-3 mRNA and protein and the activation of its
promoter. Using IGFBP-3 promoter deletion constructs, the TSA-responsive element 
was mapped to a region between -115 and -30, relative to the transcription start 
site. Promoter mutation analysis confirmed that the TSA-responsive element
coincides with the Sp1/GC-rich region on the IGFBP-3 promoter. This
transcriptional activation appears to be mediated by both the Sp1 and Sp3
transcription factors and, in particular, by the phosphorylation of Sp1, because 
treatment of Hep3B cells and Schneider (SL2) cells with TSA significantly
activated phosphorylation of Sp1 in a dose-dependent manner. Consistent with the 
transcriptional activation of the IGFBP-3 promoter by TSA, TSA treatment led to
the release of HDAC1 and Sp3 from the Sp1 transcriptional factor complex,
indicating the involvement of multiprotein complexes containing Sp1, Sp3, p300,
and HDAC-1 in IGFBP-3 activation by TSA. Taken together, these results show that 
Sp1 phosphorylation and the modulation of the Sp1/Sp3/HDAC1 multiprotein complex 
play a pivotal role in the transcriptional activation of the IGFBP-3 promoter
through the Sp1/GC-rich site by TSA.

PMID: 12200149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 15;277(46):43903-17. Epub 2002 Aug 16.

Down-regulation of human type II collagen gene expression by transforming growth 
factor-beta 1 (TGF-beta 1) in articular chondrocytes involves SP3/SP1 ratio.

Chadjichristos C(1), Ghayor C, Herrouin JF, Ala-Kokko L, Suske G, Pujol JP,
Galéra P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie du Tissu Conjonctif, Faculté de Médecine, CHU niveau 
3, Avenue de Côte de Nacre, 14032, Caen Cedex, France.

Although transforming growth factor beta1 (TGF-beta1) is generally considered as 
a stimulator of type I collagen production in smooth organs, we found that it can
inhibit type II collagen biosynthesis in primary rabbit articular chondrocytes
(RAC) at transcriptional levels. Constructs of promoter and first intron
sequences associated with the luciferase reporter gene were used to delineate the
gene sequences involved in TGF-beta1 control of human COL2A1 gene transcription. 
Cotransfection of these DNA fragments with a TbetaRII/I cDNA hybrid receptor,
capable of inducing a TGF-beta1 dominant negative effect, showed that TGF-beta1
inhibits specifically COL2A1 gene transcription in RAC by a 63-bp proximal
promoter. Footprint and gel retardation analyses revealed that the
TGF-beta1-induced inhibition effect exerted through the 63-bp promoter sequence
implies a multimeric complex that binds to the -41/-33 sequence and involves Sp1 
and Sp3 transcription factors. Transfection of decoy Sp-binding oligonucleotides 
corroborated the implication of the proximal promoter in the TGF-beta1-induced
inhibition of COL2A1 gene transcription. In addition, TGF-beta1 was found to
increase the expression of Sp3 without significant changes to its binding level, 
but repressed both the biosynthesis and binding activity of Sp1. In functional
assays, Sp3 inhibited the 63-bp promoter activity and prevented Sp1 induction of 
transcription. These findings suggest that TGF-beta1 inhibition of COL2A1 gene
transcription in RAC is mediated by an increase of the Sp3/Sp1 ratio and by the
repression of Sp1 transactivating effects on that gene.

PMID: 12186868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Immunobiology. 2002 Jul;205(3):231-46.

Cloning and characterization of the promoter region of the human CD83 gene.

Berchtold S(1), Mühl-Zürbes P, Maczek E, Golka A, Schuler G, Steinkasserer A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Germany.

Human CD83 (hCD83) is a glycoprotein expressed predominantly on the surface of
dendritic cells (DC). To get insight into the regulation of hCD83 expression, we 
cloned a 3037 bp fragment up-stream of the translation initiation codon. Deletion
mutants were constructed revealing highest promoter activity in the -261 fragment
containing four SP1 binding sites and one NF-kappaB element. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays demonstrated the specific interaction of NF-kappaB factors 
with the NF-kappaB element as well as specific binding of SP1 and SP3 to the SP1 
binding site. The hCD83 promoter was inducible by TNF-alpha. This inducibility
was strictly dependent on the intact NF-kappaB element.

PMID: 12182451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 27;277(39):35783-6. Epub 2002 Aug 9.

The transcriptional repressor Sp3 is associated with CK2-phosphorylated histone
deacetylase 2.

Sun JM(1), Chen HY, Moniwa M, Litchfield DW, Seto E, Davie JR.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology, Winnipeg, Manitoba R3E 0V9, Canada.

Sp1 and Sp3 are ubiquitously expressed mammalian transcription factors that
function as activators or repressors. Although both transcription factors share a
common domain involved in forming multimers, we demonstrate that Sp1 and Sp3 form
separate complexes in estrogen-dependent human breast cancer cells. Sp1 and Sp3
complexes associate with histone deacetylases (HDACs) 1 and 2. Although most
HDAC2 is not phosphorylated in the breast cancer cells, HDAC2 bound to Sp1 and
Sp3 and cross-linked to chromatin in situ is highly enriched in a phosphorylated 
form that has a reduced mobility in SDS-polyacrylamide gels. We show that protein
kinase CK2 is associated with and phosphorylates HDAC2. Alkaline phosphatase
treatment of HDAC2 and Sp1 and Sp3 complexes reduced the associated HDAC
activity. Protein kinase CK2 is up-regulated in several cancers including breast 
cancer, and Sp1 and Sp3 have key roles in estrogen-induced proliferation and gene
expression in estrogen-dependent breast cancer cells. CK2 phosphorylation of
HDAC2 recruited by Sp1 or Sp3 could regulate HDAC activity and alter the balance 
of histone deacetylase and histone acetyltransferase activities and dynamic
chromatin remodeling of estrogen-regulated genes.

PMID: 12176973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Eur J Biochem. 2002 Aug;269(15):3789-800.

The proximal cis-acting elements Sp1, Sp3 and E2F regulate mouse mer gene
transcription in Sertoli cells.

Wong CC(1), Lee WM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, The University of Hong Kong, China.

Mer belongs to the Tyro 3 family of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs). Together
with Axl and Rse, the three RTKs are believed to play important functional roles 
in the male gonads because gene knockout male mice lacking all of these receptors
are infertile. In the present study, postnatal expression of Axl and Rse in mouse
testes decreased during maturation while expression of Mer increased
age-dependently during testicular development. To investigate the transcriptional
regulation of gene expression in the testis, a approximately 1.5 kb fragment of
the 5' flanking sequence of Mer was isolated. The sequence lacks a typical TATA
or CAAT box. 5' RACE revealed that the putative major transcriptional start site 
of Mer is located at +102 bp upstream of the translation initiation site. Using
transient transfections of luciferase reporter constructs driven by various
lengths of the 5' flanking sequence, the gene segment -321/+126 showed the
highest transcriptional activity in a mouse Sertoli cell line (TM4). DNAase I
footprinting experiments revealed four footprints within the region from -321 to 
-26, including three binding sites for the transcriptional factor Specificity
protein 1 (Sp1) and one for an unknown transcriptional factor. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assay (EMSA), supershift assay, mutation studies and
cotransfection demonstrated that those Sp1 cis-acting motifs interacted either
with Sp1 or Sp1/Sp3, depending on location and the nearby nucleotide sequences.
An E2F binding site which down-regulates Mer transcription, as revealed by EMSA, 
deletion and mutation studies, was identified downstream in the proximity of the 
promoter. Taking all of these data together, the study has demonstrated that Sp1,
Sp3, E2F and probably another unknown transcriptional factor play a critical role
in regulating the proximal promoter activities of Mer.

PMID: 12153576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Biol Chem. 2002 Oct 11;277(41):38230-8. Epub 2002 Jul 31.

Sp1 and Sp3 recruit histone deacetylase to repress transcription of human
telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) promoter in normal human somatic cells.

Won J(1), Yim J, Kim TK.

Author information: 
(1)National Creative Research Initiative Center for Genetic Reprogramming,
Institute for Molecular Biology and Genetics, Seoul National University, Seoul
151-742, Korea.

Activation of telomerase is crucial for cells to gain immortality. In human
cells, telomerase activity is tightly regulated by the expression of its
catalytic subunit, human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT). In most normal
human somatic cells, hTERT is not expressed, and its suppression acts as an
important gatekeeper against tumorigenesis. Here we describe the systematic
analyses of hTERT promoter to understand the transcriptional repression mechanism
of the hTERT gene in normal human somatic cells. Through the serial deletion
analysis of hTERT promoter in normal human fibroblasts, we identified a critical 
repressive element on the hTERT promoter. The repressive element formed
DNA-protein complexes with Sp1 and Sp3 in nuclear extracts. Using formaldehyde
cross-linked chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis, we found that Sp1 and Sp3
were associated with the endogenously repressed hTERT promoter in human
fibroblasts. Furthermore, Sp1 and Sp3 interacted with histone deacetylase (HDAC) 
in these cells. Overexpression of dominant-negative mutants of Sp1 and Sp3, which
contained mainly the HDAC2-binding domain, relieved the HDAC-mediated repression 
of the hTERT promoter. Taken together, these results suggest that Sp1 and Sp3
associate with the hTERT promoter, recruiting HDAC for the localized
deacetylation of nucleosomal histones and transcriptional silencing of the hTERT 
gene in normal human somatic cells.

PMID: 12151407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Carcinogenesis. 2002 Aug;23(8):1297-305.

3,3'-Diindolylmethane (DIM) induces a G(1) cell cycle arrest in human breast
cancer cells that is accompanied by Sp1-mediated activation of p21(WAF1/CIP1)
expression.

Hong C(1), Kim HA, Firestone GL, Bjeldanes LF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences and Toxicology, University of California,
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

3,3'-Diindolylmethane (DIM) is a promising cancer chemopreventive agent derived
from Brassica food plants. To determine whether this natural indole has a direct 
growth inhibitory effect on human breast cancer cells, we examined the cell cycle
regulatory effects of DIM in estrogen-dependent (MCF-7) and estrogen-independent 
(MDA-MB-231) human breast cancer cell lines. Results of flow cytometry studies
showed that DIM treatment produced a marked increase (from 51 to 79%) in the
proportion of cells in the G(1) phase of the cell cycle, regardless of
estrogen-receptor status. Analyses of G(1)-acting cell cycle components indicated
that the enzymatic activity of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) 2 was also strongly 
reduced. Western blot analyses showed that, concurrent with the DIM-induced cell 
cycle arrest, DIM stimulated a rapid and pronounced increase in levels of the CDK
inhibitor, p21(WAF1/CIP1) (p21). Northern blot analysis demonstrated that DIM
increased p21 mRNA expression with a maximal 6-7-fold induction, and exposure to 
cycloheximide did not block the response. Similar increases in expression of p21 
protein and mRNA were observed in both MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer
cells, suggesting that DIM induction of p21 expression is independent of
estrogen-receptor signaling and p53. Transient transfection of 5'-deletion
constructs of the p21 promoter demonstrated that the first 291 bp segment of the 
proximal promoter, which contains six promoter specific transcription factor 1
(Sp1) elements, maintained DIM responsiveness. Consistent with a role for Sp1 in 
this response, a reporter construct driven by three consensus Sp1 binding sites
was responsive to DIM. In addition, electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed 
that DIM induced the binding of Sp1 and Sp3 to the consensus Sp1 responsive
element. Thus, our observations have uncovered an antiproliferative pathway for
DIM that implicates Sp1/Sp3-induced expression of p21 as a target for cell cycle 
control in human breast cancer cells.

PMID: 12151347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2002 Aug 19;1577(1):102-8.

Organization of the promoter region of the human NF-IL6 gene.

Yang Y(1), Pares-Matos EI, Tesmer VM, Dai C, Ashworth S, Huai J, Bina M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Purdue University, 1393 Brown Building, West
Lafayette, IN 47907-1393, USA.

In monocyte/macrophages, the human NF-IL6 gene was activated by LPS or PMA.
However, a robust response required stimulation of cells with both LPS and PMA.
To examine the molecular basis of this response, we isolated human genomic DNA
and determined the nucleotide sequence of a segment (6.4 kb) that included the
transcription initiation site of the gene. The unique sequences in the 6.4-kb DNA
include several potential transcription factor-binding elements that may explain 
the molecular basis of the activation of the human NF-IL6 gene by signaling
molecules that control the immune and inflammatory responses. Deletion analysis
localized an LPS+PMA responsive region downstream position -287, with respect to 
the transcription initiation site of the NF-IL6 gene. The responsive region
includes a potential site for interactions with CREB and a region (-287 to -247) 
that interacts with SP1 and SP3. In functional assays, the potential CREB site
responded to cellular stimulation. The region that interacted with SP1 and SP3
augmented the overall level of activity produced in response to LPS+PMA.

PMID: 12151100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Biochem J. 2002 Nov 1;367(Pt 3):629-40.

The human reduced folate carrier gene is ubiquitously and differentially
expressed in normal human tissues: identification of seven non-coding exons and
characterization of a novel promoter.

Whetstine JR(1), Flatley RM, Matherly LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State
University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI, U.S.A.

Our previous study identified two alternate non-coding upstream exons (A and B)
in the human reduced folate carrier (hRFC) gene, each controlled by a separate
promoter. Each minimal promoter was regulated by unique cis -elements and
transcription factors, including stimulating protein (Sp) 1 and Sp3 and the basic
leucine zipper family of proteins, suggesting opportunities for cell- and
tissue-specific regulation. Studies were performed to explore the expression
patterns of hRFC in human tissues and cell lines. Levels of hRFC transcripts were
measured on a multi-tissue mRNA array from 76 human tissues and tumour cell lines
and on a multi-tissue Northern blot of representative tissues, each probed with
full-length hRFC cDNA. hRFC transcripts were ubiquitously expressed, with the
highest level in placenta and the lowest level in skeletal muscle. By rapid
amplification of cDNA 5'-ends assay from nine tissues and two cell lines, hRFC
transcripts containing both A and B 5'-untranslated regions (UTRs) were
identified. However, five additional 5'-UTRs (designated A1, A2, C, D and E) were
detected, mapping over 35 kb upstream from the hRFC translation start site. The
5'-UTRs were characterized by multiple transcription start sites and/or
alternative splice forms. At least 18 unique hRFC transcripts were detected. A
novel promoter was localized to a 453 bp fragment, including 442 upstream of exon
C and 11 bp of exon C. A 346 bp repressor flanked the 3'-end of this promoter.
Our results suggest an intricate regulation of hRFC gene expression involving
multiple promoters and non-coding exons. Moreover, they provide a transcriptional
framework for understanding the role of hRFC in the pathophysiology of folate
deficiency and antifolate drug selectivity.

PMCID: PMC1222932
PMID: 12144527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Gene. 2002 Jun 26;293(1-2):9-19.

Basal transcription activity of the dyskeratosis congenita gene is mediated by
Sp1 and Sp3 and a patient mutation in a Sp1 binding site is associated with
decreased promoter activity.

Salowsky R(1), Heiss NS, Benner A, Wittig R, Poustka A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genome Analysis, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum
(DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

The multisystem disorder dyskeratosis congenita (DKC) is caused by mutations in
the DKC1 gene. The protein dyskerin is a component of the box H+ACA small
nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs) and is also functionally associated with the RNA
component of the human telomerase. The majority of mutations are missense
mutations, although single examples of non-coding mutations have been described. 
One of these is a point mutation in a putative Sp1 binding site in the
5'-upstream region of the DKC1 gene which presumably represents the promoter
region of the gene. In this report, we compare the promoter sequences of both the
human and mouse genes and provide a first functional characterisation of the
human DKC1 promoter. This includes a characterisation of the disease-associated
implications caused by the mutation identified in one patient. By reporter gene
analysis, functional regions of the DKC1 promoter were delineated. The core
promoter region critical for basal level of transcription was found to lie at -10
to -180. Bandshift- and supershift experiments clearly demonstrated a mutual
binding of transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 to two of five putative
GC-box/Sp1-binding sites located within the core promoter region. An additional
GC-box interacts only with the Sp1 transcription factor. Further, we provide
evidence that the DKC1 mutation in one of the Sp1 binding sites results in
reduced promoter activity.

PMID: 12137939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Acta Biochim Pol. 2002;49(1):19-28.

GATA-1 binding to the alphaV promoter negatively regulates expression of the
integrin alphaV subunit in human leukemic K562 cells.

Czyz M(1), Stasiak M, Boncela J, Cierniewsk CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Institute of Physiology and Biochemistry,
Medical University of Lódz Poland. mczyz@csk.am.lodz.pl

Recently we observed that the transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 bind to the
CTCCTCCTC sequence located between positions -194 and -172 of the alphaV promoter
region and are directly involved in the regulation of transcriptional activity of
the alphaV gene in human umbilical vascular endothelial cells (HUVECs) (Czyz &
Cierniewski, 1999, Eur. J. Biochem. 265, 638). In this report we provide evidence
that the GATA-1 factor regulates alphaV expression during differentiation of
pluripotent K562 cells induced either by phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) or
butyric acid (BA) through interaction with the GATA element in the alphaV gene
promoter. DNase I footprinting analysis revealed that region -413 to -408,
covering the GATA binding site, was protected by nuclear extract from K562 cells.
There was no protection of this region by HUVEC nuclear extract. Electrophoretic 
mobility shift assay (EMSA) analysis of nuclear extract of K562 cells treated
with BA revealed an increase in GATA binding activity, which was associated with 
reduced alphaV mRNA and alphaV protein on the cell surface. Stimulation of K562
cells with PMA resulted in opposite effects: lower expression of GATA-1 was
associated with increased levels of alphaV. We conclude that the GATA-1
transcription factor specifically binds to the GATA element in the alphaV gene
promoter and negatively regulates alphaV gene expression.

PMID: 12136940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 27;277(39):36534-43. Epub 2002 Jul 19.

Enhanced expression of the human vacuolar H+-ATPase c subunit gene (ATP6L) in
response to anticancer agents.

Torigoe T(1), Izumi H, Ishiguchi H, Uramoto H, Murakami T, Ise T, Yoshida Y,
Tanabe M, Nomoto M, Itoh H, Kohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Occupational and Environmental 
Health, School of Medicine, 1-1 Iseigaoka, Yahatanishi-ku, Kitakyushu 807-8555,
Japan.

We have isolated two overlapping genomic clones that contain the 5'-terminal
portion of the human vacuolar H(+)-ATPase c subunit (ATP6L) gene. The sequence
preceding the transcription initiation site, which is GC-rich, contains four GC
boxes and one Oct1-binding site, but there is no TATA box or CCAAT box. In vivo
footprint analysis in human cancer cells shows that two GC boxes and the
Oct1-binding site are occupied by Sp1 and Oct1, respectively. We show here that
treatment with anticancer agents enhances ATP6L expression. Although cisplatin
did not induce ATP6L promoter activity, it altered ATP6L mRNA stability. On the
other hand, the DNA topoisomerase II inhibitor, TAS-103, strongly induced
promoter activity, and this effect was completely eradicated when a mutation was 
introduced into the Oct1-binding site. Treatment with TAS-103 increased the
levels of both Sp1/Sp3 and Oct1 in nuclear extracts. Cooperative binding of Sp1
and Oct1 to the promoter is required for promoter activation by TAS-103.
Incubation of a labeled oligonucleotide probe encompassing the -73/-68 GC box and
-64/-57 Oct1-binding site with a nuclear extract from drug-treated KB cells
yielded higher levels of the specific DNA-protein complex than an extract of
untreated cells. Thus, the two transcription factors, Sp1 and Oct1 interact, in
an adaptive response to DNA damage, by up-regulating expression of the vacuolar
H(+)-ATPase genes. Furthermore, combination of the vacuolar H(+)-ATPase
(V-ATPase) inhibitor, bafilomycin A1, with TAS-103 enhanced apoptosis of KB cells
with an associated increase in caspase-3 activity. Our data suggest that the
induction of V-ATPase expression is an anti-apoptotic defense, and V-ATPase
inhibitors in combination with low-dose anticancer agents may provide a new
therapeutic approach.

PMID: 12133827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Biochem J. 2002 Nov 1;367(Pt 3):641-52.

Co-operation of the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 with Sp1 or 
Sp3 leads to transcriptional activation of the human haem oxygenase-1 gene
promoter in a hepatoma cell line.

Takahashi S(1), Matsuura N, Kurokawa T, Takahashi Y, Miura T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Molecular Physiology, School of Life Science,
Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Science, 1432-1, Horinouchi, Hachioji,
Tokyo 192-0392, Japan.

We reported previously that the 5'-flanking region (nucleotides -1976 to -1655)
of the human haem oxygenase-1 ( hHO-1 ) gene enhances hHO-1 promoter activity in 
human hepatoma HepG2 cells, but not in HeLa cells [Takahashi, Takahashi, Ito,
Nagano, Shibahara and Miura (1999) Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1447, 231-235]. To
define more precisely the regulatory elements involved, in the present study we
have functionally dissected this region and localized the enhancer to a 50 bp
fragment (-1793 to -1744). Site-direct mutagenesis analysis revealed that two
regions were responsible for this enhancer activity, i.e. a hepatocyte nuclear
factor-4 (HNF-4) homologous region and a GC box motif homologous region. Mutation
in either region alone moderately decreased enhancer activity. However, mutations
in both regions reduced promoter activity to the basal level. Electrophoretic
mobility-shift assays demonstrated that the P5-2 fragment (-1793 to -1744)
interacted with at least two nuclear factors, i.e. HNF-4 and Sp1/Sp3.
Co-transfection experiments using Drosophila SL2 cells revealed that HNF-4 and
Sp1/Sp3 synergistically stimulated the enhancer activity of the P5-2 fragment.
These results indicate that co-operation of HNF-4 with Sp1 or Sp3 leads to the
activation of hHO-1 gene expression in hepatoma cells.

PMCID: PMC1222919
PMID: 12133007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 27;277(39):36433-42. Epub 2002 Jul 10.

Vascular smooth muscle alpha-actin gene transcription during myofibroblast
differentiation requires Sp1/3 protein binding proximal to the MCAT enhancer.

Cogan JG(1), Subramanian SV, Polikandriotis JA, Kelm RJ Jr, Strauch AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology/Cell Biology, The Ohio State University College of
Medicine and Public Health, Dorothy M. Davis Heart and Lung Research Institute,
Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

The conversion of stromal fibroblasts into contractile myofibroblasts is an
essential feature of the wound-healing response that is mediated by transforming 
growth factor beta1 (TGF-beta1) and accompanied by transient activation of the
vascular smooth muscle alpha-actin (SmalphaA) gene. Multiple positive-regulatory 
elements were identified as essential mediators of basal SmalphaA enhancer
activity in mouse AKR-2B stromal fibroblasts. Three of these elements bind
transcriptional activating proteins of known identity in fibroblasts. A fourth
site, shown previously to be susceptible to single-strand modifying agents in
myofibroblasts, was additionally required for enhancer response to TGF-beta1.
However, TGF-beta1 activation was not accompanied by a stoichiometric increase in
protein binding to any known positive element in the SmalphaA enhancer. By using 
oligonucleotide affinity isolation, DNA-binding site competition, gel mobility
shift assays, and protein overexpression in SL2 and COS7 cells, we demonstrate
that the transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 can stimulate SmalphaA enhancer
activity. One of the sites that bind Sp1/3 corresponds to the region of the
SmalphaA enhancer required for TGF-beta1 amplification. Additionally, the
TGF-beta1 receptor-regulated Smad proteins, in particular Smad3, are
rate-limiting for SmalphaA enhancer activation. Whereas Smad proteins collaborate
with Sp1 in activating several stromal cell-associated promoters, they appear to 
operate independently from the Sp1/3 proteins in activating the SmalphaA
enhancer. The identification of Sp and Smad proteins as essential, independent
activators of the SmalphaA enhancer provides new insight into the poorly
understood process of myofibroblast differentiation.

PMID: 12110667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 6;277(36):33431-8. Epub 2002 Jun 28.

Silencing of transcription of the human luteinizing hormone receptor gene by
histone deacetylase-mSin3A complex.

Zhang Y(1), Dufau ML.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Molecular Endocrinology, Endocrinology and Reproduction Research
Branch, NICHD, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Modification of chromatin structure by histone acetylases and deacetylases is an 
important mechanism in modulation of eukaryotic gene transcription. The present
study investigated regulation of the human luteinizing hormone receptor (hLHR)
gene by histone deacetylases. Inhibition of histone deacetylases (HDACs) by
trichostatin A (TSA) increased hLHR promoter activity by 40-fold in JAR cells and
markedly elevated endogenous hLHR mRNA levels. Acetylated histones H3 and H4
accumulated in TSA-treated cells and associated predominantly with the hLHR
promoter. Furthermore, TSA significantly enhanced the recruitment of RNA
polymerase II to the promoter. One of the two Sp1 sites essential for basal
promoter activity was identified as critical for the TSA effect, but the binding 
of Sp1/Sp3 to this site remained unchanged in the absence or presence of TSA. A
multiprotein complex was recruited to the hLHR promoter via interaction with Sp1 
and Sp3, in which HDAC1 and HDAC2 were docked directly to Sp1-bound DNA and
indirectly to Sp3-bound DNA through RbAp48, while mSin3A interacted with both
HDACs. HDAC1 and HDAC2 were shown to potently repress the hLHR gene
transcription, and mSin3A potentiated the inhibition mediated by HDAC1. Our
studies have demonstrated that the HDAC-mSin3A complex has an important role in
the regulation of hLHR gene transcription by interaction with Sp1/Sp3 and by
region-specific changes in histone acetylation and polymerase II recruitment
within the hLHR promoter.

PMID: 12091390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 30;277(35):31863-70. Epub 2002 Jun 27.

Lipopolysaccharide down-regulates Sp1 binding activity by promoting Sp1 protein
dephosphorylation and degradation.

Ye X(1), Liu SF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Long
Island Jewish Medical Center, Long Island Campus for the Albert Einstein College 
of Medicine, New Hyde Park, New York 11040, USA.

We examined the in vivo effect of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) on Sp1
(promoter-selective transcription factor 1) DNA binding activity and studied the 
mechanisms involved in mouse lungs. The Sp1 DNA complex displayed a major band
composed of Sp1, Sp2, and Sp3 trimer and a minor band composed of Sp3 homodimer. 
Compared with control, nuclear proteins from lungs challenged with LPS for 60,
90, 120, 150, 180, and 240 min, respectively, showed a markedly reduced Sp1
binding activity. Down-regulation of Sp1 binding activity was accompanied by a
reduced expression of two Sp1-dependent genes (endothelial nitric oxide synthase 
and cyclooxygenase-1). Immunoprecipitation-Western blot experiments demonstrated 
that LPS dephosphorylated Sp1 protein at serine and threonine residues but not at
the tyrosine residue. Dephosphorylation of Sp1 protein in vitro significantly
reduced Sp1 DNA binding activity. Deglycosylation of Sp1 protein also reduced Sp1
binding activity. However, LPS did not cause Sp1 deglycosylation. LPS markedly
reduced nuclear Sp1 protein level but had no significant effect on Sp1 mRNA
abundance and on Sp1 protein nuclear translocation. Both Sp1 protein
dephosphorylation and Sp1 protein degradation are temporally correlated to the
reduced Sp1 binding activity. Our results demonstrate that challenge of mice with
LPS in vivo down-regulates Sp1 DNA binding activity through promoting Sp1 protein
dephosphorylation and degradation.

PMID: 12089157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2002 Jun 28;192(1-2):45-53.

Progesterone receptor activates its promoter activity in human endometrial
stromal cells.

Tang M(1), Mazella J, Gao J, Tseng L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics/Gynecology and Reproductive Medicine, School of
Medicine, State University of New York at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, NY 11794,
USA.

Previous studies have shown that progestin increases the content of progesterone 
receptor (hPRA and hPRB) and the hPR mRNA during decidualization of human
endometrial stromal cells suggesting that endogenous hPR enhances the
transcription of the hPR gene. In the present study, we provide evidence that hPR
regulates the promoter activity mediated through an active Sp1 site. In stromal
cells treated with medroxyprogesterone acetate, the promoter activity was
significantly increased when cells were co-transfected with hPR expression
vector. Progressive deletion analysis showed that the highest activity was
derived from the promoter region between -55 and +31 bp. Transactivation by hPR
was dose dependent. The capacity of hPRA was stronger than that of hPRB. The
ligand binding domain, but not DNA binding domain of the hPR was required for the
transactivation. The proximal promoter region lacks a canonical progesterone
response element. Instead, an active Sp1 site (-49 to -43 bp) has been confirmed.
Mutation of the Sp1 site eliminated the effect of hPR activation. The promoter
activity was increased by over expression of Sp1, whereas Sp3 had no effect.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay showed that the promoter region between -55 
and +31 bp bound to Sp1 family proteins, Sp1 (C2 complex) and Sp3 (C1 and C3
complexes) identified by antibodies to Sp1 and Sp3. Sp1 complex formed by
extracts of stromal cells was less intense than that formed by
progestin-decidualized stromal cells. Sp1/DNA binding was enhanced when stromal
cell extracts were incubated with calf intestine alkaline phosphatase (CIP)
suggesting that dephosphorylation of Sp1 enhances the DNA binding. Addition of
protein kinase inhibitor, H-89 or H-7, enhanced the hPR stimulated promoter
activity. Western blot analysis showed that endometrial stromal/decidual cell
extracts contained a wide band of Sp1 spanning from approximately 105 to 96 kDa
and was resolved into one band at 96 kDa by CIP. Decidual cell extracts are
abundant with the 96 kDa Sp1. In addition, the 96 kDa Sp1 was co-precipitated
with ligand-activated hPRA or hPRB in the decidual cell nuclear extracts. These
data suggest that dephosphorylated Sp1, abundant in decidual cells, enhances the 
binding to both DNA and hPR resulting in a robust increase of the hPR promoter
activity.

PMID: 12088866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 6;277(36):32775-80. Epub 2002 Jun 26.

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs inhibit matrix metalloproteinase-2 via
suppression of the ERK/Sp1-mediated transcription.

Pan MR(1), Hung WC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung 807, Taiwan.

Our previous data showed that nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
inhibit matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) expression via repression of gene
transcription in lung cancer cells. In this study, we investigate the molecular
mechanism by which NSAIDs inhibit MMP-2. Promoter deletion and mutation analysis 
indicate that NSAIDs act via the Sp1 transcription factor binding site located
between -91 and -84 in the MMP-2 promoter to suppress gene expression.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays show that Sp1 and Sp3 proteins
constitutively bind to this consensus sequence and overexpression of Sp1 may
enhance MMP-2 expression. NSAID treatment reduces Sp1 DNA binding activity and
phosphorylation and attenuates MMP-2 expression. We also investigate the
signaling pathway that mediates the effect of NSAIDs. Our results suggest that
ERKs are involved in this process. First, NSAIDs suppress basal and
serum-stimulated ERK activity. Second, a MEK inhibitor PD98059 inhibits MMP-2
promoter activity and Sp1 phosphorylation. Third, overexpression of
constitutively active MEK1 stimulates Sp1 phosphorylation and MMP-2 promoter
activity and antagonizes the inhibition of NSAIDs. Collectively, our data suggest
that NSAIDs inhibit MMP-2 by blocking ERK/Sp1-mediated transcription.

PMID: 12087091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 30;277(35):32258-67. Epub 2002 Jun 19.

Induction of MUC2 and MUC5AC mucins by factors of the epidermal growth factor
(EGF) family is mediated by EGF receptor/Ras/Raf/extracellular signal-regulated
kinase cascade and Sp1.

Perrais M(1), Pigny P, Copin MC, Aubert JP, Van Seuningen I.

Author information: 
(1)Unité INSERM 560, Place de Verdun, 59045 Lille Cedex, France.

The 11p15 mucin genes (MUC2, MUC5AC, MUC5B and MUC6) possess a cell-specific
pattern of expression in normal lung that is altered during carcinogenesis.
Growth factors of the epidermal growth factor family are known to target key
genes that in turn may affect the homeostasis of lung mucosae. Our aim was to
study the regulation of the 11p15 mucin genes both at the promoter and protein
levels to assess whether their altered expression may represent a key event
during lung carcinogenesis. Studies were performed in the mucoepidermoid NCI-H292
lung cancer cell line. Cell treatment with epidermal growth factor (EGF),
transforming growth factor alpha (TGF-alpha), or tumor necrosis factor alpha
(TNF-alpha) resulted in a dramatic increase of MUC2 and MUC5AC mRNAs levels,
promoter activity, and apomucin expression, whereas those of MUC5B and MUC6 were 
unchanged. pGL3 deletion mutants of MUC2, MUC5AC, and MUC5B promoters were
constructed and used in transient transfection assays to characterize EGF- and
TGF-alpha-responsive regulatory regions within the promoters. They were located
in the -2627/-2097 and -202/-1 regions of MUC2 and MUC5AC promoters,
respectively. Finally, we demonstrate that transcription factor Sp1 not only
binds and activates MUC2 and MUC5AC promoters but also participates to their EGF-
and TGF-alpha-mediated up-regulation. We also show that Sp3 is a strong inhibitor
of 11p15 mucin gene transcription. In conclusion, MUC2 and MUC5AC are two target 
genes of EGFR ligands in lung cancer cells, and up-regulation of these two genes 
goes through concomitant activation of the EGFR/Ras/Raf/Extracellular
Signal-regulated Kinase-signaling pathway and Sp1 binding to their promoters.

PMID: 12077147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Eur J Biochem. 2002 Jun;269(12):2961-70.

Regulation of transcription of the Dnmt1 gene by Sp1 and Sp3 zinc finger
proteins.

Kishikawa S(1), Murata T, Kimura H, Shiota K, Yokoyama KK.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Engineering Division, Department of Biological Systems, BioResource
Center, RIKEN (The Institute of Physical & Chemical Research), Japan.

The Sp family is a family of transcription factors that bind to cis-elements in
the promoter regions of various genes. Regulation of transcription by Sp proteins
is based on interactions between a GC-rich binding site (GGGCGG) in DNA and
C-terminal zinc finger motifs in the proteins. In this study, we characterized
the GC-rich promoter of the gene for the DNA methyltransferase (Dnmt1) that is
responsible for methylation of cytosine residues in mammals and plays a role in
gene silencing. We found that a cis-element (nucleotides -161 to -147) was
essential for the expression of the mouse gene for Dnmt1. DNA-binding assays
indicated that transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 bound to the same cis-element in
this region in a dose-dependent manner. In Drosophila SL2 cells, which lack the
Sp family of transcription factors, forced expression of Sp1 or Sp3 enhanced
transcription from the Dnmt1 promoter. Stimulation by Sp1 and Sp3 were
independent phenomena. Furthermore, cotransfection reporter assays with a
p300-expression plasmid revealed the activation of the promoter of the Dnmt1 gene
in the presence of Sp3. The transcriptional coactivator p300 interacted with Sp3 
in vivo and in vitro. Our results indicate that expression of the Dnmt1 gene is
controled by Sp1 and Sp3 and that p300 is involved in the activation by Sp3.

PMID: 12071960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 23;277(34):30551-8. Epub 2002 Jun 7.

Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors mediate malondialdehyde-induced collagen alpha 
1(I) gene expression in cultured hepatic stellate cells.

García-Ruiz I(1), de la Torre P, Díaz T, Esteban E, Fernández I, Muñoz-Yagüe T,
Solís-Herruzo JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Research Center, Universidad Complutense
Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre, 28041-Madrid, Spain.

Malondialdehyde, the end product of lipid peroxidation, has been shown to
stimulate collagen alpha1(I) (Col1a1) gene expression. However, mechanisms of
this effect are unclear. The purpose of this study was to clarify these
mechanisms. Rat hepatic stellate cells were cultured in the presence of 200
microm malondialdehyde, and the effects on collagen gene expression and the
binding of nuclear proteins to the col1a1 promoter were analyzed. Malondialdehyde
treatment induced an increase in the cellular levels of col1a1 mRNA that was
abrogated by pretreating cells with cycloheximide, p-hydroxymercuribenzoate,
pyridoxal 5'-phosphate, and mithramycin. Transient transfections showed that
malondialdehyde exerted its effect through regulatory elements located between
-220 and -110 bp of the col1a1 promoter. Gel retardation assays demonstrated that
malondialdehyde increased the binding of nuclear proteins to two elements located
between -161 and -110 bp of the col1a1 promoter. These bindings were supershifted
with Sp1 and Sp3 antibodies. Finally, malondialdehyde increased cellular levels
of the Sp1 and Sp3 proteins and Sp1 mRNA. Our data indicated that treatment of
hepatic stellate cells with malondialdehyde stimulated col1a1 gene expression by 
inducing the synthesis of Sp1 and Sp3 and their binding to two regulatory
elements located between -161 and -110 bp of the col1a1 promoter.

PMID: 12055194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2002 Jul;283(1):C58-65.

NF-kappaB induced by IL-1beta inhibits elastin transcription and myofibroblast
phenotype.

Kuang PP(1), Berk JL, Rishikof DC, Foster JA, Humphries DE, Ricupero DA,
Goldstein RH.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Center and Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of
Medicine, and Boston Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Boston,
Massachusetts 02118, USA.

Interleukin (IL)-1beta released after lung injury regulates the production of
extracellular matrix components. We found that IL-1beta treatment reduced the
rate of elastin gene transcription by 74% in neonatal rat lung fibroblasts.
Deletion analysis of the rat elastin promoter detected a cis-acting element
located at -118 to -102 bp that strongly bound Sp1 and Sp3 but not nuclear factor
(NF)-kappaB. This element mediated IL-1beta-induced inhibition of the elastin
promoter. IL-1beta treatment did not affect the level of Sp1 but did induce
translocation of the p65 subunit of NF-kappaB. Overexpression of p65 decreased
elastin promoter activity and markedly reduced elastin mRNA. Immunoprecipitation 
studies indicated an interaction between the p65 subunit and Sp1 protein.
Microarray analysis of mRNA isolated after overexpression of p65 or treatment
with IL-1beta revealed downregulation of alpha-smooth muscle actin and calponin
mRNAs. Expression of these genes is associated with the myofibroblast phenotype. 
These results indicate that IL-1beta activates the nuclear localization of
NF-kappaB that subsequently interacts with Sp1 to downregulate elastin
transcription and expression of the myofibroblast phenotype.

PMID: 12055073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 May 31;294(1):63-70.

Induction of murine H-rev107 gene expression by growth arrest and histone
acetylation: involvement of an Sp1/Sp3-binding GC-box.

Roder K(1), Kim KH, Sul HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences and Toxicology, University of California,
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

H-rev107 is downregulated in many carcinomas and tumor cell lines. Using
postconfluent NIH3T3 cells, we demonstrated that growth arrest caused by contact 
inhibition, but not serum deprivation, increased H-rev107 expression.
Furthermore, histone deacetylase inhibitors induced H-rev107 expression in NIH3T3
cells and allowed its reexpression in H-rev107-deficient WEHI 7.1 lymphoma cells.
In contrast, no effect of the postconfluent stage or histone deacetylase
inhibitors on H-rev107 levels was observed in tumorigenic H-rev107-expressing
cell lines, HepG2, HeLa, and SKBR3. Transfections showed that TSA treatment
increased luciferase activity 20-fold in NIH3T3 cells. We found that the GC-box
at -83/-75 is a key element for H-rev107 induction by TSA and growth arrest,
although there were no changes in the pattern and intensity of Sp1/Sp3-binding
after induction. These data suggest that contact inhibition of growth and growth 
arrest caused by histone deacetylase inhibitors probably use the same mechanism
to stimulate H-rev107 expression via histone acetylation in NIH3T3 cells and this
might contribute to the development of drugs that can induce H-rev107 expression 
in certain tumors.

PMID: 12054741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 May 3;293(2):793-9.

Murine H-rev107 gene encoding a class II tumor suppressor: gene organization and 
identification of an Sp1/Sp3-binding GC-box required for its transcription.

Roder K(1), Latasa MJ, Sul HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences and Toxicology, University of California,
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

H-rev107, which belongs to class II tumor suppressor genes, is ubiquitously
expressed in normal cells, but is downregulated in many carcinomas and tumor cell
lines. Sequence analysis showed that the murine H-rev107 gene is composed of five
exons and four introns. Transfections revealed that 7.6 kb of the H-rev107
promoter directed a high level expression of the reporter gene. There were no
significant differences in promoter activity when various 5'-deletion promoter
constructs from -7.6 kb to -113 bp were employed. By further deletion and
mutation analysis, we found that the region between -83 and -75 containing a
GC-box was essential for promoter activity in NIH3T3 or REF52 fibroblasts
expressing H-rev107 at moderate to high levels. Gelshifts demonstrated in vitro
binding of Sp1 and Sp3 to this GC-box. Cotransfection of Sp1 and Sp3 functionally
stimulated promoter activity in SL2 cells. By chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays, we observed in vivo binding of Sp1 and Sp3 to the proximal promoter
region in NIH3T3 cells and liver, concluding that the transcription of the
H-rev107 gene is dependent on Sp1/Sp3-binding to the -83/-75 GC-box.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 12054540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Mol Immunol. 2002 Jun;38(15):1151-9.

Combinatorial regulation of the murine RAG-2 promoter by Sp1 and distinct
lymphocyte-specific transcription factors.

Miranda GA(1), Villalvazo M, Galic Z, Alva J, Abrines R, Yates Y, Evans CJ,
Aguilera RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Los Angeles 405 Hilgard Ave, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1606, USA.

The recombination activation genes, RAG-1 and RAG-2, encode the critical
components of the recombinase complex responsible for the generation of
functional antigen receptor genes. In order to gain an insight into the
transcription factors and cis-acting elements that regulate the
lymphocyte-specific expression of RAG-2, the promoter-region of this gene was
isolated and characterized. This analysis demonstrated that a relatively small
promoter fragment could confer lymphocyte-restricted expression to a reporter
construct. Our work and that of others subsequently revealed that RAG-2 promoter 
expression is positively regulated by BSAP (PAX-5) and c-Myb transcription
factors in B- and T-lineage cells, respectively. Although BSAP and c-Myb were
deemed necessary for lymphocyte-specific expression, our analysis also uncovered 
a G-rich region at the 5'-end of the core promoter that was essential for full
activity in lymphocyte cell lines. Site-directed mutagenesis revealed that a
GA-box within the G-rich region was required for full promoter activity and
subsequent DNA binding assays demonstrated that this element was specifically
recognized by Sp1. Apart from showing that Sp1 interacts within the RAG-2
promoter, we also demonstrate that the Sp1-binding site is necessary for the
high-level activation of this promoter.

PMID: 12044781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2002 Jun 3;41(11):1872-6.

Sp carbon chains surrounded by sp3 carbon double helices: a class of molecules
that are accessible by self-assembly and models for "insulated" molecular-scale
devices.

Stahl J(1), Bohling JC, Bauer EB, Peters TB, Mohr W, Martín-Alvarez JM, Hampel F,
Gladysz JA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Organische Chemie, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Henkestrasse 42, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.

PMID: 19750618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2002 Mar 28;189(1-2):85-96.

Species differences in GnRH activation of the LHbeta promoter: role of Egr1 and
Sp1.

Call GB(1), Wolfe MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Kansas
Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Blvd, Kansas City, KS 66160-7401, USA.

Activation of the luteinizing hormone beta (LHbeta) promoter by
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) via the transcription factor early growth
response protein-1 (Egr1) has been well characterized. To determine the
mechanisms affecting Egr1 regulation of LHbeta, we analyzed five different
species of LHbeta promoters (equine, mouse, rat, bovine and human).
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs) identified multiple transcription
factors binding to the Egr regions on the LHbeta promoter. Species-specific
differences existed in the binding affinity for Sp1, Sp3, steroidogenic factor-1 
(SF-1) and Egr1. Upon mutation of the Egr elements, competition for the binding
of all zinc finger proteins was lost, suggesting that the Sp proteins compete for
binding to the same site that Egr1 occupies. In addition, the promoters from
species that had the highest affinity for Sp1 also had the lowest activation by
Egr1 and GnRH. Thus we hypothesize that Sp1 competes for Egr1 binding to the Egr 
elements on the LHbeta promoter and thus inhibits the ability of GnRH and Egr1 to
activate the LHbeta promoter.

PMID: 12039067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Gene. 2002 Feb 20;285(1-2):127-39.

Genomic organization and promoter characterization of the gene encoding a
putative endoplasmic reticulum chaperone, ERp29.

Sargsyan E(1), Baryshev M, Backlund M, Sharipo A, Mkrtchian S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Toxicology, Institute of Environmental Medicine,
Karolinska Institute, 171 77, Stockholm, Sweden.

ERp29 is a soluble protein localized in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) of
eukaryotic cells, which is conserved in all mammalian species. The N-terminal
domain of ERp29 displays sequence and structural similarity to the protein
disulfide isomerase despite the lack of the characteristic double cysteine motif.
Although the exact function of ERp29 is not yet known, it was hypothesized that
it may facilitate folding and/or export of secretory proteins in/from the ER.
ERp29 is induced by ER stress, i.e. accumulation of unfolded proteins in the ER. 
To gain an insight into the mechanisms regulating ERp29 expression we have cloned
and characterized the rat ERp29 gene and studied in details its distribution in
human tissues. Comparison with the murine and human genes and phylogenetic
analysis demonstrated common origin and close ortholog relationships of these
genes. Additionally, we have cloned approximately 3 kb of the 5'-flanking region 
of the ERp29 gene and functionally characterized its promoter. Such
characteristics of the promoter as GC-rich sequence, absence of TATA-box,
multiple transcription start sites taken together with the ubiquitous gene
expression, reaching maximum levels in the specialized secretory tissues,
indicate that ERp29 belongs to the group of the constitutively expressed
housekeeping genes. A 337 bp fragment of the 5' flank was identified as a core
promoter sufficient for the transcriptional activation of the gene. Gel mobility 
shift assay indicated interaction of the predicted GC and E box elements within
the core promoter with Sp1/Sp3 and USF1/USF2 transcription factors, respectively,
suggesting their key role in the basal expression of the gene.

PMID: 12039039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2002 Jun 3;12(11):1537-41.

CoMFA and HQSAR of acylhydrazide cruzain inhibitors.

Rodrigues CR(1), Flaherty TM, Springer C, McKerrow JH, Cohen FE.

Author information: 
(1)LASSBio, Faculdade de Farmácia, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro,
21944-970, Brazil. rangel@pharma.ufrj.br

An approach combining CoMFA and HQSAR methods was used to describe QSAR models
for a series of cruzain inhibitors having the acylhydrazide framework. A CoMFA
study using two alignment orientations (I and II), three different probe atoms
and changes of the lattice spacing (1 and 2 A) was performed. Alignment II and an
sp3 probe carbon atom yielded good cross-validation (q2=0.688) employing lattice 
spacing of 1 A. The best HQSAR model was generated using atoms, bond, and
connectivity as fragment distinction and fragment size default (4-5) showing
similar cross-validated value of CoMFA (q2=0.689). Based upon the information
derived from CoMFA and HQSAR, we have identified some key features that may be
used to design new acylhydrazide derivatives that may be more potent cruzain
inhibitors.

PMID: 12031337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Jun;22(12):4293-308.

Dissection of a complex enhancer element: maintenance of keratinocyte specificity
but loss of differentiation specificity.

Kaufman CK(1), Sinha S, Bolotin D, Fan J, Fuchs E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

In this report, we explored the mechanisms underlying keratinocyte-specific and
differentiation-specific gene expression in the skin. We have identified five
keratinocyte-specific, open chromatin regions that exist within the 6 kb of 5'
upstream regulatory sequence known to faithfully recapitulate the strong
endogenous keratin 5 (K5) promoter and/or enhancer activity. One of these, DNase 
I-hypersensitive site (HSs) 4, was unique in that it acted independently to drive
abundant and keratinocyte-specific reporter gene activity in culture and in
transgenic mice, despite the fact that it was not essential for K5 enhancer
activity. We have identified evolutionarily conserved regulatory elements and a
number of their associated proteins that bind to this compact and complex
enhancer element. The 125-bp 3' half of this element (referred to as 4.2) is by
far the smallest known strong enhancer element possessing keratinocyte-specific
activity in vivo. Interestingly, its activity is restricted to a subset of
progeny of K5-expressing cells located within the sebaceous gland. The other half
of HSs 4 (termed 4.1) possesses activity to suppress sebocyte-specific expression
and induce expression in the channel (inner root sheath) cells surrounding the
hair shaft. Our findings lead us to a view of keratinocyte gene expression which 
is determined by multiple regulatory modules, many of which contain AP-2 and/or
Sp1/Sp3 binding sites for enhancing expression in skin epithelium, but which also
harbor one or more unique sites for the binding of factors which determine
specificity. Through mixing and matching of these modules, additional levels of
specificity are obtained, indicating that both transcriptional repressors and
activators govern the specificity.

PMCID: PMC133856
PMID: 12024040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. J Immunol. 2002 Jun 1;168(11):5629-37.

Transcriptional regulation of the human toll-like receptor 2 gene in monocytes
and macrophages.

Haehnel V(1), Schwarzfischer L, Fenton MJ, Rehli M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, University of Regensburg, Regensburg,
Germany.

This report investigates the molecular basis for tissue-restricted and regulated 
expression of the pattern recognition receptor Toll-like receptor (TLR)2 in human
monocytes and macrophages. To define the proximal promoter, the full 5'-sequence 
and transcriptional start sites of TLR2 mRNA were determined. The human TLR2 gene
was found to consist of two 5' noncoding exons followed by a third coding exon.
Alternative splicing of exon II was detected primarily in human blood monocytes. 
The proximal promoter, exon I, and part of intron I were found to be located in a
CpG island. Although CpG methylation of the proximal human TLR2 promoter in cell 
lines correlated with TLR2 repression, the promoter was unmethylated in primary
cells, indicating that CpG methylation does not contribute to the cell-type
specific expression of human TLR2 in normal tissues. The promoter sequence
contains putative binding sites for several transcription factors, including Sp1 
and Ets family members. Reporter gene analysis revealed a minimal promoter of 220
bp that was found to be regulated by Sp1, Sp3, and possibly PU.1. Interestingly, 
no sequence homology was detected between human and murine TLR2 promoter regions.
In contrast to murine TLR2, expression of human TLR2 in monocytes/macrophages is 
not induced by the proinflammatory stimuli LPS or macrophage-activating
lipopeptide-2, and reporter activity of the promoter was not enhanced by
stimuli-induced NF-kappaB activation in THP-1 or MonoMac-6 cells. Our findings
provide an initial definition of the human TLR2 promoter and reveal profound
differences in the regulation of an important pattern recognition molecule in
humans and mice.

PMID: 12023360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Space Med Med Eng (Beijing). 1999 Oct;12(5):346-50.

[Studies on hereditary variations of millet seed after high altitude balloon
flight].

[Article in Chinese]

Li JG(1), Jiang GY, Wang PS, Zhang J, Jiang XC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, CAS, Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVE: To select high yield, high protein and fatty acid millet.
METHOD: Air-dried seeds of millet were carried by high altitude balloon (HAB) for
8 h. Botany characteristics of these seeds were analyzed and studied after
recovery.
RESULT: Germinating potential rose 21.1%, germinating percentage reduced 5.2% as 
compared with the control; plant height was 6.8 cm lower than that of the control
in SP1; while flag-leaf area and spike weight were 25% and 15.9% higher than
those of the control respectively. Large-spike strains were stable in SP3
pregeny. In SP3(-2), the contents of seed protein and fatty acid were more than
those of control; in SP3(-5), the average spike length was 5.8 cm, and the
content of Fe element in seed was 61.5 mg/kg more than these of control; in SP4
superspike strains, spike character, chlorophyll content and photosynthetic rate 
were significantly higher than the control during growing phase and growing
anaphase, photosynthetic rate in flag-leaf was over 27.9% higher than those in
the control.
CONCLUSION: New strains with high protein and fatty acid and high yield could be 
selected by HAB. The characteristics of these variations in the new strain is
hereditable.

PMID: 12022179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Endocrinology. 2002 Jun;143(6):2139-42.

Complex 5' genomic structure of the human prolactin receptor: multiple
alternative exons 1 and promoter utilization.

Hu ZZ(1), Zhuang L, Meng J, Tsai-Morris CH, Dufau ML.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Molecular Endocrinology, Endocrinology and Reproduction Research
Branch, National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Transcription of the prolactin receptor (PRLR) is under the control of multiple
promoters. Following the recent demonstration of the human non-coding exon 1,
hE1(N) (hE1(N1)) and the generic exon 1 hE1(3), we have identified their
promoters and characterized four other novel human exons 1 (hE1(N2-5)) that are
alternatively spliced to a common non-coding exon 2 in human tissues and breast
cancer cells. Genomic regions containing these exons, and 5'-flanking and
intronic sequences, were determined and their order was established in chromosome
5p14-13. Promoters utilized in the transcription of previously characterized PRLR
exons 1 species hE1(3) (hPII) and hE1(N1) (hP(N1)) were found to employ distinct 
mechanisms for controlling hPRLR transcription. hPIII requires C/EBP beta and
Sp1/Sp3 for basal transcriptional activity, while hP(N1) activity is conferred by
domains containing an Ets element and an NR half-site. The complex promoter
control system that governs transcription of the hPRLR in multiple tissues is of 
relevance for studies on the regulation of PRLR expression in physiological and
pathological states.

PMID: 12021177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Exp Mol Med. 2002 Mar 31;34(1):60-8.

Characterization of cis-acting elements in the rat ATP citrate-lyase gene
promoter.

Moon YA(1), Park SW, Kim KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Institute of Genetic Science, 
Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul Korea.

The cis-acting element in the promoter of the rat ATP-citrate lyase (ACL) and
transcription factors which interact with these elements were determined. Six Sp1
binding sites and CAAT box exist in the region from transcription start site to
-419 bp which showed the highest promoter activity in ACL promoter previously. In
the region from -612 to -419, C/EBP binding site and other protein binding sites 
were also detected. Chloramphenicol acetyltransferase assay of ACL promoter
suggested that multiple Sp1 sites might be involved in the ACL transcription. Gel
mobility shift assay with antibodies against Sp1 and Sp3 revealed that DNA
binding efficiency of Sp1 is increased in the liver of rats re-fed low fat/high
carbohydrate diet after fasting. These results suggest that Sp1 is one of the
most important transcription factors for ACL promoter to produce basal and
induced transcription by low fat/high carbohydrate diet.

PMID: 11989980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 19;277(29):26036-45. Epub 2002 May 1.

A highly active homeobox gene promoter regulated by Ets and Sp1 family members in
normal granulosa cells and diverse tumor cell types.

Rao MK(1), Maiti S, Ananthaswamy HN, Wilkinson MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

One mechanism by which normal cells become converted to tumor cells involves the 
aberrant transcriptional activation of genes that are normally silent. We
characterize a promoter that normally exhibits highly tissue- and stage-specific 
expression but displays ubiquitous expression when cells become immortalized or
malignant, regardless of their lineage or tissue origin. This promoter normally
drives the expression of the Pem homeobox gene in specific cell types in ovary
and placenta but is aberrantly expressed in lymphomas, neuroblastomas,
retinoblastomas, carcinomas, and sarcomas. By deletion analysis we identified a
region between nucleotides -80 and -104 that was absolutely critical for the
expression from this distal Pem promoter (Pem Pd). Site-specific mutagenesis and 
transfection studies revealed that this region contains two consensus Ets sites
and a single Sp1 site that were necessary for Pem Pd expression. Gel shift
analysis showed that Ets and Sp1 family members bound to these sites.
Transfection studies demonstrated that the Ets family members Elf1 and Gabp and
the Sp1 family members Sp1 and Sp3 transactivated the Pem Pd. Surprisingly, we
found that Sp3 was a more potent activator of the Pem Pd than was Sp1; this is
unusual, because Sp3 is either a weak activator or a repressor of most other
promoters. Activation by either Elf1 or Gabp required an intact Sp1 family member
binding site, suggesting that Ets and Sp1 family members cooperate to activate
Pem Pd transcription. Expression from the Pem Pd (either transiently transfected 
or endogenous) depended on the Ras pathway, which could explain both its Ets- and
Sp1-dependent expression in normal cells and its aberrant expression in tumor
cells, in which ras protooncogenes are frequently mutated. We suggest that the
Pem Pd may be a useful model system to understand the molecular mechanism by
which a tissue-specific promoter can be corrupted in tumor cells.

PMID: 11986330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 May 1;30(9):1967-76.

A single cell cycle genes homology region (CHR) controls cell cycle-dependent
transcription of the cdc25C phosphatase gene and is able to cooperate with E2F or
Sp1/3 sites.

Haugwitz U(1), Wasner M, Wiedmann M, Spiesbach K, Rother K, Mössner J, Engeland
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, University of Leipzig, Max Bürger Research
Center, Johannisallee 30, D-04103 Leipzig, Germany.

The cdc25C phosphatase participates in regulating transition from the G2 phase of
the cell cycle to mitosis by dephosphorylating cyclin-dependent kinase 1. The
tumor suppressor p53 down-regulates expression of cdc25C as part of G2/M
checkpoint control. Transcription of cdc25C oscillates during the cell cycle with
no expression in resting cells and maximum transcription in G2. We had identified
earlier a new mechanism of cell cycle-dependent transcription that is regulated
by a cell cycle-dependent element (CDE) in conjunction with a cell cycle genes
homology region (CHR). The human cdc25C gene was the first example. CDE/CHR
tandem elements have since been found in promoters of many cell cycle genes. Here
we show that the mouse cdc25C gene is regulated by a CHR but does not hold a CDE.
Therefore, it is the first identified gene with CHR-dependent transcriptional
regulation during the cell cycle not relying on a CDE located upstream of it. The
CHR leads to repression of cdc25C transcription early in the cell cycle and
directs a release of this repression in G2. Furthermore, we find that this CHR
can cooperate in cell cycle-dependent transcription with elements placed directly
upstream of it binding E2F, Sp1 or Sp3 transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC113852
PMID: 11972334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 12;277(28):25798-814. Epub 2002 Apr 17.

Complex regulation of human neuronal nitric-oxide synthase exon 1c gene
transcription. Essential role of Sp and ZNF family members of transcription
factors.

Saur D(1), Seidler B, Paehge H, Schusdziarra V, Allescher HD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, Technische Universität München, Germany.
Saur@lrz.tu-muenchen.de

Neuronal nitric-oxide synthase (nNOS) is expressed in a variety of human tissues 
and shows a complex transcriptional regulation with the presence of nine
alternative first exons (1a-1i) resulting in nNOS transcripts with differing
5'-untranslated regions. We previously demonstrated that nNOS exon 1c, one of the
predominant transcripts in the human gastrointestinal tract, is driven by a
separate promoter (Saur, D., Paehge, H., Schusdziarra, V., and Allescher, H. D.
(2000) Gastroenterology 118, 849-858). The present study focused on the
quantitative expression of nNOS first exon variants in different human tissues
and the characterization of the basal nNOS exon 1c promoter. In human brain,
skeletal muscle, colon, and TGW-nu-I neuroblastoma cells, first exon expression
patterns were analyzed by quantitative real-time reverse transcription-PCR. In
these tissues/cells exon 1c was one of the most abundant first exons of nNOS. By 
transient transfections of TGW-nu-I and HeLa cells with reporter plasmids
containing a series of 5' and 3' deletions in the exon 1c regulatory region, the 
minimal TATA-less promoter was localized within 44 base pairs. Gel mobility shift
assays of this cis-regulatory region revealed a high complexity of the basal
promoter with a cooperative binding of several transcription factors, like Sp and
ZNF family members. When the Sp binding site of the minimal promoter construct
was mutated, promoter activity was completely abolished in both cell lines,
whereas mutation of the common binding site of ZNF76 and ZNF143 resulted in a
decrease of 53% in TGW-nu-I and 37% in HeLa cells. In Drosophila Schneider cells 
expression of Sp1, the long Sp3 isoform, ZNF76 and ZNF143 potently transactivated
the nNOS exon 1c promoter. These results identify the critical regulatory region 
for the nNOS exon 1c basal promoter and stress the functional importance of
multiple protein complexes involving Sp and ZNF families of transcription factors
in regulating nNOS exon 1c transcription.

PMID: 11960979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 21;277(25):22222-30. Epub 2002 Apr 15.

Activation of human monoamine oxidase B gene expression by a protein kinase C
MAPK signal transduction pathway involves c-Jun and Egr-1.

Wong WK(1), Ou XM, Chen K, Shih JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Pharmacy,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90089-9121, USA.

Monoamine oxidases (MAO) A and B deaminate a number of biogenic amines. Aberrant 
expression of MAO is implicated in several psychiatric and neurogenerative
disorders. In this study, we have shown that phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate
(PMA) increases human MAO B, but not MAO A, gene expression. The sequence between
-246 and -225 bp consists of overlapping binding sites (Sp1/Egr-1/Sp1) that are
recognized by Sp1, Sp3, and PMA-inducible Egr-1 is essential for PMA activation. 
PMA transiently increases egr-1 and c-jun gene expression. Mutation studies show 
that Egr-1 and c-Jun transactivate the MAO B promoter and increase endogenous MAO
B transcripts via the Sp1/Egr-1/Sp1 overlapping binding sites. Sp3 inhibits Sp1
and Egr-1 activation of MAO B gene expression. c-fos gene expression was
increased by PMA but not involved in MAO B gene transcription. Furthermore,
protein kinase C inhibitor blocks the PMA-dependent activation of MAO B.
Co-transfection of the MAO B promoter with dominant negative forms of Ras, Raf-1,
MEKK1, MEK1, MEK3, MEK7, ERK2, JNK1, and p38/RK inhibit the PMA-dependent
activation of the MAO B promoter. These results indicate that MAO B expression is
selectively induced by the activation of protein kinase C and MAPK signaling
pathway and that c-Jun and Egr-1 appear to be the ultimate targets of this
regulation.

PMCID: PMC2861899
PMID: 11956220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 19;277(29):25877-83. Epub 2002 Apr 9.

The rod cGMP-phosphodiesterase beta-subunit promoter is a specific target for Sp4
and is not activated by other Sp proteins or CRX.

Lerner LE(1), Gribanova YE, Whitaker L, Knox BE, Farber DB.

Author information: 
(1)Jules Stein Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, UCLA School of
Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.

The beta-subunit of cGMP-phosphodiesterase (beta-PDE) is a key protein in
phototransduction expressed exclusively in rod photoreceptors. It is necessary
for visual function and for structural integrity of the retina. beta-PDE promoter
deletions showed that the -45/-23 region containing a consensus Crx-response
element (CRE) was necessary for low level transcriptional activity. Overexpressed
Crx modestly transactivated this promoter in 293 human embryonic kidney cells;
however, mutation of CRE had no significant effect on transcription either in
transfected Y79 retinoblastoma cells or Xenopus embryonic heads. Thus, Crx is
unlikely to be a critical beta-PDE transcriptional regulator in vivo.
Interestingly, although the beta/GC element (-59/-49) binds multiple Sp
transcription factors in vitro, only Sp4, but not Sp1 or Sp3, significantly
enhanced beta-PDE promoter activity. Thus, the Sp4-mediated differential
activation of the beta-PDE transcription defines the first specific Sp4 target
gene reported to date and implies the importance of Sp4 for retinal function.
Further extensive mutagenesis of the beta-PDE upstream sequences showed no
additional regulatory elements. Although this promoter lacks a canonical TATA box
or Inr element, it has the (T/A)-rich beta/TA sequence located within the -45/-23
region. We found that it binds purified TBP and TFIIB in gel mobility shift
assays with cooperative enhancement of binding affinity.

PMID: 11943774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Spectrochim Acta A Mol Biomol Spectrosc. 2002 Mar 15;58(5):1069-81.

A reinvestigation of the molecular structures, vibrations and rotation of methyl 
group in o-methylaniline in S0 and S1 states studied by laser induced
fluorescence spectroscopy and ab initio calculations.

Ballesteros B(1), Santos L.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Física, Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, Universidad de 
Castilla-La Mancha, Ciudad Real, Spain. bballest@qifi-cr.uclm.es

The UV fluorescence excitation and dispersed fluorescence spectra of a jet-cooled
o-methylaniline have been obtained for the S1 <-- S0 transition, in which some of
the bands have been observed and assigned for the first time. The origin of the
electronic transition appears at 34,328.4 cm(-1). It was found that the spectra
exhibit an important feature corresponding to the internal rotation of the methyl
group in the electronic ground and excited states. Ab initio calculations at
MP2/6-31 + G* and CIS/6-31 + G* show that the optimised structure of
o-methylaniline in the ground state is not planar with the amino group having sp3
hybridation-like character due to the existence of lone paired electrons on the N
atom. Upon electronic excitation, the C-N bond exhibits a partial double
character, as in the case of other aniline derivatives.

PMID: 11942393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Circ Res. 2002 Apr 5;90(6):728-36.

Characterization of the mouse aortic carboxypeptidase-like protein promoter
reveals activity in differentiated and dedifferentiated vascular smooth muscle
cells.

Layne MD(1), Yet SF, Maemura K, Hsieh CM, Liu X, Ith B, Lee ME, Perrella MA.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care, Divisions and the Department of Medicine, Brigham
and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
mlayne@rics.bwh.harvard.edu

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2002 Apr 5;90(6):628-30.

The dedifferentiation and proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs)
contribute to the formation of vascular lesions. In this study, the regulation of
aortic carboxypeptidase-like protein (ACLP) expression in VSMCs was investigated.
After mouse carotid injury, the expression of ACLP increases in the
dedifferentiated VSMCs of the neointima in a pattern that differs from that of
smooth muscle alpha-actin. To better understand the regulation of ACLP in VSMCs, 
we characterized the 21-exon mouse ACLP gene and 5'-flanking region and examined 
its promoter activity. In transient transfection assays, 2.5 kb of the ACLP
5'-flanking sequence directed high levels of luciferase reporter activity in
primary cultured rat aortic smooth muscle cells, and this activity was not
dependent on serum response factor. We identified a positive element between base
pairs -156 and -122 by analysis of 5' deletion and mutant constructs. By use of
electrophoretic mobility shift assays with rat aortic smooth muscle cell nuclear 
extracts, Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors bound to this region, and
transfection assays in D.Mel.2 cells revealed that both Sp1 and Sp3
transactivated the ACLP promoter. Transgenic mice harboring the -2.5-kb ACLP
promoter upstream from a nuclear-targeted LacZ gene were generated, and
expression was detected in the VSMCs of large blood vessels, arterioles, and
veins. Interestingly, ACLP promoter-LacZ reporter activity increased within the
neointimal VSMCs of injured carotid vessels, consistent with the expression of
the endogenous ACLP protein. The ACLP promoter may provide a novel tool to target
gene expression to dedifferentiated VSMCs.

PMID: 11934842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Biochem J. 2002 Apr 15;363(Pt 2):263-71.

Transcriptional regulation of human 3'-phosphoadenosine 5'-phosphosulphate
synthase 2.

Shimizu C(1), Fuda H, Lee YC, Strott CA.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Steroid Regulation, Endocrinology and Reproduction Research Branch,
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of 
Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892-4510, U.S.A.

Sulphonation is a fundamental process that is essential for normal growth and
development as well as maintenance of the internal milieu. The universal
sulphonate donor molecule essential for all sulphoconjugation reactions is
adenosine 3'-phosphate 5'-phosphosulphate (PAPS), which is produced from ATP and 
inorganic sulphate by the action of bifunctional PAPS synthase. There are two
isozymes encoded by genes located on chromosome 4 (PAPS synthase 1) and
chromosome 10 (PAPS synthase 2). The promoter for PAPS synthase 2 contains
neither a TATAAA nor a CCAAT box, although a consensus initiator motif is
present. Three human cell lines were used to examine promoter activity after
transfection with various lengths of the 5'-flanking region of the PAPS synthase 
2 gene fused to a reporter gene. Proximal promoter activity was located between
bp -84 and bp -124 upstream of the purported transcription start site. This
region contains two GC/GT boxes that are essential for full promoter activity, as
indicated by deletion analysis and supported further by mutagenesis. A nuclear
extract of SW13 cells, which highly express PAPS synthase 2, contained proteins
that bound to probes possessing promoter-specific GC/GT boxes. Furthermore, the
presence of specificity protein (Sp) 1, Sp2 and Sp3 proteins in the nuclear
extract was confirmed by supershift analysis. Co-transfection experiments using
SL2 cells yielded additional support for the involvement of Sp1 in
transcriptional regulation of the PAPS synthase 2 gene; the involvement of Sp2
and/or Sp3 remains to be clarified further.

PMCID: PMC1222474
PMID: 11931653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2002 Apr;26(4):475-83.

Cloning and functional analysis of the mouse 5-lipoxygenase promoter.

Silverman ES(1), Le L, Baron RM, Hallock A, Hjoberg J, Shikanai T, Storm van's
Gravesande K, Auron PE, Lu W.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care Division and Genetics Division, Department of
Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

5-lipoxygenase (ALOX5), an enzyme essential for the formation of all
leukotrienes, is highly regulated at multiple levels, including gene
transcription. The human ALOX5 promoter sequence has been cloned and is well
characterized. Several important cis-acting elements have been identified
including a G+C-rich sequence approximately 145-179 base pairs (bp) upstream from
the ATG start codon. This region contains consensus-binding sites for the
transcription factor serum protein 1, a zinc-finger transcription factor (SP1)
and early growth-response protein 1, a zinc-finger transcription factor (EGR-1)
and is unique in that functionally significant polymorphisms alter these
sequences. To further understand the significance of these polymorphisms and
other regulatory sequences in the promoter we cloned approximately 2,000 bp of
the mouse promoter sequence from a 129/SvJ BAC library for direct comparison with
the human gene. Like the human promoter, the mouse Alox5 promoter lacks a TATA
box and has multiple start sites. The first 292 bp immediately upstream of the
translational start site function as a core promoter that is capable of mediating
high basal transcription in RAW cells but not 3T3 cells. There are vast
differences in the distribution of consensus cis elements between human and mouse
genes; however, three areas of strong homology exist and they contain
consensus-binding sites for the SP1, GATA, GGAGA, and ETS family of transcription
factors. We show that Sp1/Sp3 is essential for constitutive promoter-reporter
activity.

PMID: 11919084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Biochem Cell Biol. 2002;80(1):23-6.

Methoxychlor stimulates the mouse lactoferrin gene promoter through a GC-rich
element.

Zhang Z(1), Teng CT.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Regulation Section, Laboratory of Reproductive and Developmental
Toxicology, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National
Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.

The lactoferrin gene in the mouse uterus is a target gene for natural estrogens
and xenoestrogens. One of the xenoestrogens is methyoxychlor, an insecticide that
displays both estrogenic and antiandrogenic activities. Recently, methyoxychlor
was found to stimulate lactoferrin gene expression in the uterus of an estrogen
receptor null mouse. The present study is designed to uncover the methoxychlor
response region in the mouse lactoferrin gene promoter. A series of different
lengths of the mouse lactoferrin gene 5' flanking region were linked to a
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter construct and transfected into
human endometrial carcinoma HEC-1B cells, an estrogen receptor null cell line, in
order to examine the methoxychlor response. The transfected cells were treated
with methoxychlor or the metabolite of methoxychlor, HPTE, and the CAT reporter
activities were measured. Constructs that contain a mouse lactoferrin 5' region
longer than 100 bp were activated more than twofold by both methoxychlor and
HPTE. The activation of the CAT reporter by the chemicals was dose dependent and 
reached saturation. Additional deletion mutants within the 100-bp region were
tested, and a GC-rich sequence (GC-II) that we have previously characterized as
an epidermal growth factor (EGF) response element was identified to be the region
for the methoxychlor response. GC-II binds Sp1, Sp3, and IKLF transcription
factors, collaborates with the AP1/CREB binding element, and confers the EGF
response. Whether the effect of methoxychlor requires the AP1/CREB binding
element has yet to be established; however, the present finding provides an
alternative signaling pathway for the xenoestrogens.

PMID: 11908639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Bioconjug Chem. 2002 Mar-Apr;13(2):309-16.

Synthesis of new modified DNAs by hyperthermophilic DNA polymerase: substrate and
template specificity of functionalized thymidine analogues bearing an
sp3-hybridized carbon at the C5 alpha-position for several DNA polymerases.

Sawai H(1), Ozaki-Nakamura A, Mine M, Ozaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Chemistry, Gunma University, Kiryu, Gunma 376-8515,
Japan. sawai@chem.gunma-u.ac.jp

Novel thymidine analogue triphosphates, which have an sp3-hybridized carbon at
the C5 alpha-position with amino-linker arms, a methyl ester, or a carboxyl group
at the C5 sidearm, were good substrates for primer-extension reactions by DNA
polymerase from Pyrococcus kodakaraensis (KOD Dash DNA polymerase), yielding
exclusively full-length products. The resulting modified DNA was further allowed 
to react with a functional molecule such as fluorescein isothiocyanate. By
contrast, only truncated products were formed from the thymidine analogue
substrate bearing the amino-linker arm or the negatively charged carboxyl group
using Taq, Tth DNA polymerase, or DNA polymerase I from E. coli (Klenow
fragment). The results indicate either that the thymidine analogue was not
accepted by the enzymes, or that the polymerases could not extend the products,
once the analogue had been incorporated, depending on the type of the analogue. A
conventional thymidine analogue bearing an aminopropenyl group at the C5-position
was accepted by all enzymes, among which KOD Dash DNA polymerase showed the
highest activity for the polymerization with this analogue. Templates bearing the
thymidine analogues in place of one thymidine residue were read by KOD Dash, Taq,
Tth DNA polymerases, and the Klenow fragment giving the full-length product. KOD 
Dash DNA polymerase could expand structural diversities of substrates that can be
used to prepare modified DNAs.

PMID: 11906269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Eur J Biochem. 2002 Mar;269(6):1790-7.

Structures of two histidine ammonia-lyase modifications and implications for the 
catalytic mechanism.

Baedeker M(1), Schulz GE.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Organische Chemie und Biochemie, Albert-Ludwigs-Universität,
Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany.

Histidine ammonia-lyase (EC 4.3.1.3) catalyzes the nonoxidative elimination of
the alpha-amino group of histidine using a 4-methylidene-imidazole-5-one (MIO),
which is formed autocatalytically from the internal peptide segment
142Ala-Ser-Gly. The structure of the enzyme inhibited by a reaction with
l-cysteine was established at the very high resolution of 1.0 A. Five active
center mutants were produced and their catalytic activities were measured. Among 
them, mutant Tyr280-->Phe could be crystallized and its structure could be
determined at 1.7 A resolution. It contains a planar sp2-hybridized 144-N atom of
MIO, in contrast to the pyramidal sp3-hybridized 144-N of the wild-type. With the
planar 144-N atom, MIO assumes the conformation of a putative intermediate
aromatic state of the reaction, demonstrating that the conformational barrier
between aromatic and wild-type states is very low. The data led to a new proposal
for the geometry for the catalyzed reaction, which also applies to the closely
related phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (EC 4.3.1.5). Moreover, it suggested an
intermediate binding site for the released ammonia.

PMID: 11895450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Mar 22;292(1):71-8.

Sp1 and Sp3 activate the rat connexin40 proximal promoter.

Teunissen BE(1), van Amersfoorth SC, Opthof T, Jongsma HJ, Bierhuizen MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Physiology, University Medical Center Utrecht, 3508 AB
Utrecht, The Netherlands. B.E.J.Teunissen@med.uu.nl

The rat gap junction protein connexin40 (rCx40) has a characteristic
developmental and regional expression pattern, for which the exact regulatory
mechanisms are not known. To identify the molecular factors controlling Cx40
expression, its proximal promoter was characterized. The proximal rCx40 promoter 
is the most conserved noncoding region within the Cx40-gene known thus far and
contains five potential binding sites for Sp-family transcription factors. The
binding of both Sp1 and Sp3 to each of these DNA elements was demonstrated by
EMSA. Luciferase assays of the natural rCx40 proximal promoter or mutated
derivatives in Cx40-expressing (NCM, primary rat neonatal cardiomyocytes and
A7r5, rat smooth muscle embryonic thoracic aorta cells) and -nonexpressing cells 
(N2A, mouse neuroblastoma cells) revealed that all sites are contributing to
basal promoter activity. Trans-activation assays in Drosophila Schneider line 2
cells demonstrated that Sp1 and Sp3 activate the rCx40 proximal promoter in a
dose-dependent and additive manner.

(C)2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 11890673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Poult Sci. 2002 Jan;81(1):30-3.

Fatty acid composition and egg components of specialty eggs.

Cherian G(1), Holsonbake TB, Goeger MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Oregon State University, Corvallis 97331-6702, 
USA. Gita.Cherian@orst.edu

Egg components, total fat, and fatty acid content of specialty eggs were
compared. One dozen eggs were collected and analyzed from each of five different 
brands from hens fed a diet free of animal fat (SP1), certified organic
free-range brown eggs (SP2), uncaged unmedicated brown eggs (SP3), cage-free
vegetarian diet brown eggs (SP4), or naturally nested uncaged (SP5). Regular
white-shelled eggs were the control. A significant (P < 0.05) difference was
observed in the egg components and fatty acid content in different brands. The
percentage of yolk was lower (P < 0.05) in SP2 and SP4 with a concomitant
increase (P < 0.05) in the percentage of white. The percentage of shell was lower
(P < 0.05) in SP4 and SP5. The total edible portion was greater in SP4 and SP5.
The yolk:white ratio was greater (P < 0.05) in SP3. The total lipid content was
lower in SP4 eggs. The content of palmitic (C16:0), stearic (C18:0), and total
saturated fatty acids were lower (P < 0.05) in SP1. No difference was observed in
the content of palmitoleic (C16:1), oleic (C18:1), or total monounsaturated fatty
acids. The content of n-3 fatty acids in SP2, SP4, and SP5 were similar to
control eggs. The ratio of total n-6:n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids ranged from 
39.2 for SP5 to 11.5 for SP1 (P < 0.05). No difference was observed in the total 
polyunsaturated fatty acid content of eggs (P > 0.05).

PMID: 11885896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Biol Reprod. 2002 Mar;66(3):675-84.

Sp1 and Egr1 regulate transcription of the Dmrt1 gene in Sertoli cells.

Lei N(1), Heckert LL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas 66160, USA.

Dmrt1 is a recently described gene that is specifically expressed in the gonads
and is required for postnatal testis differentiation. Here, we describe the
transcriptional mechanisms regulating the Dmrt1 proximal promoter in testicular
Sertoli cells. A genomic clone containing exon 1 of the rat Dmrt1 gene and more
than 9 kilobases of 5' flanking sequence was isolated and characterized. Several 
prominent transcriptional start sites were identified, with the major site
located 102 bases from the translational start. The Dmrt1 5' flanking region from
-5000 to +74 was transcriptionally active in primary Sertoli cells, and deletion 
analysis of this fragment identified 2 major regions needed for full Dmrt1
promoter function. These regions were located between -3200 and -2000 base pairs 
(bp) and downstream of -150 bp relative to the major transcriptional start site. 
DNase I footprint analysis of the region downstream of -150 bp revealed 3 regions
that are bound by proteins from Sertoli cell nuclear extracts. Site-directed
mutagenesis of these regions identified 2 elements that activate the Dmrt1
promoter and 2 that repress it. The positive elements bind the transcription
factors Sp1, Sp3, and Egr1, suggesting that these transcription factors play a
critical role in Dmrt1 regulation in the testis.

PMCID: PMC1496933
PMID: 11870074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 10;277(19):16585-91. Epub 2002 Feb 26.

Role of Sp1 and Sp3 in the nutrient-regulated expression of the human asparagine 
synthetase gene.

Leung-Pineda V(1), Kilberg MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA.

The human asparagine synthetase (AS) gene responds to depletion of mammalian
cells for either amino acids or carbohydrates. Five specific cis-elements have
been implicated: three GC boxes (GC-I, GC-II and GC-III) and two nutrient-sensing
response elements (NSRE-1, -2). This study shows that all three GC boxes are
required to maintain basal transcription and to obtain maximal induction of the
AS gene by amino acid limitation. However, there is not complete redundancy among
the three GC boxes, and there is a hierarchy of importance with regard to
transcription (GC-III > GC-II > GC-I). In vitro, two GC boxes formed protein-DNA 
complexes (GC-II and GC-III) with Sp1 and Sp3. Although transcription of the AS
gene is elevated by nutrient limitation, the absolute amount of these protein-DNA
complexes and the total pools of Sp1 and Sp3 did not increase. A small, but
detectable portion of Sp1 was modified by phosphorylation following amino acid
deprivation. In vivo, expression of Sp1 and Sp3 in Drosophila SL2 cells increased
AS promoter activity. Sp1 expression increased basal transcription but did not
cause a further increase when SL2 cells were amino acid-deprived. Sp3 expression 
enhanced both the basal and the starvation-induced transcription.

PMID: 11867623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Gene. 2002 Jan 23;283(1-2):133-43.

Functional analysis of the promoter of human sterol 27-hydroxylase gene in HepG2 
cells.

Garuti R(1), Croce MA, Piccinini L, Tiozzo R, Bertolini S, Calandra S.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche, Università di Modena e Reggio Emilia, Via 
Campi 287, I-41100, Modena, Italy.

Human sterol 27-hydroxylase catalyses the first step in the alternative pathway
of bile acids biosynthesis in hepatocytes. However the gene encoding this enzyme 
(CYP27 gene) is expressed in every tissue and some evidence suggests that this
enzyme plays a role in cholesterol homeostasis. Although modulation of CYP27
expression has been reported, the mechanisms underlying the regulation of this
gene in human tissues is still poorly understood. To elucidate the mechanism
governing CYP27 expression we cloned a 4.3 kb fragment of the 5' flanking region 
of the human CYP27 gene and constructed deletion mutants which were transfected
into HepG2 cells. Functional assays showed that the -217/-10 nucleotide region
from the translation start site (minimal promoter), devoid of TATA and CAAT
boxes, contains all the elements for basal transcription. Foot-printing analysis 
of minimal promoter showed four protected regions (A-D). Regions A, B and D each 
contain one Sp1 binding site, and region C contains a HNF4 site. Electrophoretic 
mobility shift assays demonstrated that Sp1, Sp3 and HNF4 transcription factors
bind these sites. Mutagenesis of any of these sites resulted in the loss of
promoter activity. Co-transfection of the minimal promoter with Sp1 and Sp3
expression vectors transactivated CYP27 gene promoter in Drosophila SL2 cells,
which lack endogenous Sp proteins. Transactivation of the minimal promoter was
also observed in HeLa cells co-transfected with HNF4 expression vector.
Therefore, Sp1, Sp3 and HNF4 co-operate in the expression of the human CYP27 gene
in HepG2 cells.

PMID: 11867220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Mol Biol Evol. 2002 Mar;19(3):216-22.

Evolution of Sp transcription factors.

Kolell KJ(1), Crawford DL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, School of Biological Science, 
University of Missouri-Kansas City.

The Sp family of transcription factors binds GC-rich DNA sequences. The
ubiquitously expressed Sp1 and Sp3 have been well characterized in mammals.
Presented here is the characterization of the only Sp protein expressed in the
liver or heart tissue of the teleost fish Fundulus heteroclitus. This protein,
fSp3, is most similar to and homologous with mammalian Sp3 proteins. The
evolution of the Sp transcription family is described, with Sp1 and Sp3
representing the most recent duplication of the Sp family. Sp4 appears to be the 
most ancestral member. Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 form a monophyletic group without Sp2.
Sp2 is the least similar of the Sp family and is more similar to the non-Sp
transcription factors. These results suggest that Sp2 should not be considered a 
member of the Sp family. Only two domains (zinc fingers and B domain) share
similarity outside the Sp family. The zinc fingers are homologous to other
GC-binding domains, yet the B domain is homologous to protein-protein interacting
domains in the CCAAT-binding/NF-Y transcription factor families. These results
suggest that these different domains have different evolutionary histories.

PMID: 11861880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Virology. 2002 Feb 1;293(1):86-93.

NS1 protein of parvovirus B19 interacts directly with DNA sequences of the p6
promoter and with the cellular transcription factors Sp1/Sp3.

Raab U(1), Beckenlehner K, Lowin T, Niller HH, Doyle S, Modrow S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie und Hygiene, Universität Regensburg,
Franz-Josef-Strauss-Allee 11, 93053 Regensburg, Germany.
ulla.raab@klinik.uni-regensburg.de

The nonstructural proteins of parvovirus exert a variety of disparate functions
during viral infection ranging from promoter regulation, involvement in DNA
replication, and induction of apoptosis. Our interest was focused on the possible
mechanism by which the NS1 protein mediates its effects on the p6 promoter of
parvovirus B19. It is known that the p6 promoter is highly active in different
cell lines and interaction with the viral NS1 protein results in a further
increase of the activity. The protein may function by binding directly to the
viral DNA or via an indirect binding through interaction with cellular
transcription factors bound to the promoter. We examined the interaction of the
NS1 protein with cellular transcription factors which are involved in regulating 
the promoter activity. After purified baculovirus-expressed NS1 protein in gel
retardation assays was added, an altered complex formation was observed,
indicating that NS1 protein interacts with Sp1/Sp3 transcription factors.
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays verified these findings. The direct
interaction of NS1 protein with p6 promoter elements was analyzed by a
coprecipitation assay whereby labeled oligonucleotides spanning the entire
promoter region were incubated with NS1 protein followed by an
immunoprecipitation with NS1-specific antibodies. An eight-nucleotide-long,
almost palindromic sequence (AGGGCGGA) was found as potential NS1-binding motif. 
Footprint analysis with oligonucleotides containing this DNA motif confirmed this
result. Thus, transcriptional regulation by the NS1 protein may involve both the 
interaction with Sp1/Sp3 that binds to the promoter region and direct binding of 
NS1 to the promoter DNA.

PMID: 11853402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. J Biol Chem. 2002 Apr 26;277(17):14647-56. Epub 2002 Feb 15.

In vivo footprinting of the human 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2
promoter: evidence for cell-specific regulation by Sp1 and Sp3.

Nawrocki AR(1), Goldring CE, Kostadinova RM, Frey FJ, Frey BM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Department of Internal Medicine,
University Hospital of Berne, CH-3010 Berne, Switzerland.
andrea.nawrocki@dkf2.unibe.ch

11beta-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 is selectively expressed in
aldosterone target tissues, where it confers aldosterone selectivity for the
mineralocorticoid receptor by inactivating 11beta-hydroxyglucocorticoids with a
high affinity for the mineralocorticoid receptor. The present investigation aimed
to elucidate the mechanisms accounting for the rigorous control of the HSD11B2
gene in humans. Using dimethyl sulfate in vivo footprinting via ligation-mediated
PCR, we identified potentially important regions for HSD11B2 regulation in human 
cell lines: two GC-rich regions in the first exon (I and II) and two upstream
elements (III and IV). The footprints suggest a correlation between the extent of
in vivo protein occupancy at three of these regions (I, II, and III) and the rate
of HSD11B2 transcription in cells with high (SW620), intermediate (HCD, MCF-7,
and HK-2), or low HSD11B2 mRNA levels (SUT). Moreover, gel shift assays with
nuclear extracts from these cell lines revealed that decreased HSD11B2 expression
is related to a decreased binding activity with oligonucleotides containing the
putative regulatory elements. Antibody supershifts identified the majority of the
components of the binding complexes as the transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3.
Finally, transient transfections with various deletion mutant reporters define
positive regulatory elements that might account for basal and selective
expression of 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2.

PMID: 11850421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Feb 22;291(2):270-7.

Transcriptional regulation of the rat Mrp3 promoter in intestine cells.

Tzeng SJ(1), Huang JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan, Taiwan, Republic of China.

The promoter of rat multidrug resistance protein 3 (Mrp3) has been cloned and
analyzed in the rat intestinal cell line (IEC-18 cells). A series of 5' deletion 
mutants of the Mrp3 promoter region were constructed and placed into the
pGL3-Basic vector (luciferase reporter gene). Deletion analysis of the Mrp3
promoter identified a basal transcription element at -123/-106, two negative
response regions at -2723/-1128 and -530/-443, respectively, and two positive
response regions at -1063/-943 and -302/-157. Further site-directed mutagenesis
analysis and gel mobility shift assays provided evidence for Sp1 and Sp3 binding 
within -123/-105 regions. These studies indicate that Sp1 and Sp3 may be involved
in the regulation of the rat Mrp3 gene.

©2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 11846400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Am Chem Soc. 2002 Feb 20;124(7):1158-9.

The first halogen-substituted cyclotrigermenes: a unique halogen walk over the
three-membered ring skeleton and facial stereoselectivity in the Diels-Alder
reaction.

Sekiguchi A(1), Ishida Y, Fukaya N, Ichinohe M, Takagi N, Nagase S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

Dark red crystals of the halogen-substituted cyclotrigermenes [(tBu3Si)3Ge3X; X =
Cl, Br, I] were obtained in good yields by the reaction of [(tBu3Si)3Ge3]+.TTFPB-
(TTFPB- = tetrakis(2,3,5,6-tetrafluorophenyl)borate) with potassium halides (KCl,
KBr, or KI) in diethyl ether. The crystal structures of the halogen-substituted
cyclotrigermenes reveal a cis-bent Ge=Ge double bond, caused by the introduction 
of the electronegative halogen atom on the sp3 germanium atom of cyclotrigermene.
In solution, an intramolecular halogen migration over the three-membered ring
skeleton was observed. Facial stereoselectivity in the Diels-Alder reaction of
new cyclotrigermenes with 2,3-dimethyl-1,3-butadiene is also reported.

PMID: 11841270  [PubMed]


378. J Biol Chem. 2002 Apr 26;277(17):14443-50. Epub 2002 Feb 11.

Identification of sterol-independent regulatory elements in the human ATP-binding
cassette transporter A1 promoter: role of Sp1/3, E-box binding factors, and an
oncostatin M-responsive element.

Langmann T(1), Porsch-Ozcürümez M, Heimerl S, Probst M, Moehle C, Taher M,
Borsukova H, Kielar D, Kaminski WE, Dittrich-Wengenroth E, Schmitz G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical Chemistry, University of Regensburg, 93042 Regensburg, 
Germany, and the Pharma Research Center, Bayer AG, Aprather Wey 18a, D-42096
Wuppertal, Germany.

The ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 (ABCA1) shows a differentiation-, cAMP-, 
and sterol-dependent up-regulation in human monocytes. As part of an ongoing
study, we investigated the proximal promoter regions that are highly conserved
between the human and murine ABCA1 genes. Using reporter gene assays, we show
here that a TATA box 24 bp upstream of the transcription initiation site is
essential for promoter activity in RAW 264.7 and HepG2 cells, whereas further
enhancement of transcriptional activity is mediated by the -175 bp promoter
region. Gel shift assays revealed in vitro binding of Sp1 to a -91 GnC motif as
well as binding of Sp1 and Sp3 to a -157 GnC promoter region. In co-transfection 
experiments using Drosophila S2 cells, we demonstrate that Sp3 competes with Sp1 
for binding to the -157 GnC motif and acts as a repressor. On the other hand,
overexpression of Sp1 increased ABCA1 mRNA expression in HeLa cells and enhanced 
cellular cholesterol and phospholipid efflux in RAW 246.7 macrophages. We also
show here that the conserved E-box at position -140 binds upstream stimulatory
factors 1 and 2 and hepatic nuclear factor 1alpha and that mutagenesis of the
E-box enhanced constitutive ABCA1 expression in RAW 264.7 cells, implying a role 
for this element in silencing ABCA1 expression. Besides the functional importance
for basal gene expression, we have identified that the core promoter region (-175
to +224) is also responsible for the induction of ABCA1 by the cytokine
oncostatin M, resulting in a rapid increase in ABCA1 mRNA levels in HepG2 cells. 
Interestingly, this oncostatin M-induced expression is not dependent on the
currently known sequence motifs in the ABCA1 promoter. In conclusion, a
functional complex of cis-elements within the proximal human ABCA1 promoter
associated with the transcription factors Sp1/3, upstream stimulatory factors 1
and 2, and hepatic nuclear factor 1alpha has been characterized, which allows a
subtle tissue-specific regulation of ABCA1 gene expression.

PMID: 11839742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Biochem J. 2002 Feb 15;362(Pt 1):41-50.

Structural and functional characterization of the human and mouse fibulin-1 gene 
promoters: role of Sp1 and Sp3.

Castoldi M(1), Chu ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, Thomas Jefferson University, 
233 South 10th Street, Philadelphia, PA 19107, U.S.A.

Fibulin-1 is a multifunctional extracellular protein involved in diverse
biological processes including cardiovascular development, haemostasis and
cancer. To investigate the transcriptional regulation of the gene encoding
fibulin-1 we cloned and analysed about 4.0 kb of the 5'-flanking regions of both 
the human and mouse fibulin-1 genes. The human and mouse fibulin-1 promoters
share little sequence similarity except for a short region of approx. 150-170 bp 
immediately upstream of the translation start site. The conserved region contains
a TATA-like sequence (ATAATT) and multiple consensus binding sites for Sp1 and
activator protein 2 (AP-2). That the short conserved region in each gene confers 
basal promoter activity is demonstrated by transient transfections of promoter
deletion constructs for both the human and mouse genes into cells that express
fibulin-1 constitutively. Co-transfections of promoter constructs with expression
plasmids for Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 into Drosophila SL2 cells indicate that Sp1 and Sp3
are essential for transcriptional activation and that these two factors act
synergistically. Electrophoretic mobility-shift assays show that Sp1 and Sp3, but
not AP-2, bind to the basal promoter of the human fibulin-1 gene. The results
demonstrate the functional importance of Sp1 and Sp3 in regulating the expression
of the fibulin-1 gene.

PMCID: PMC1222358
PMID: 11829738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. J Hum Genet. 2002;47(1):7-13.

Molecular cloning and functional analysis of a factor that binds to the proximal 
promoter of human angiotensinogen.

Nakajima T(1), Inoue I, Cheng T, Lalouel JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City 84112-5331,
USA.

A significant association has been reported between a common variant in the
angiotensinogen gene (AGT), allele T235, and essential hypertension. In
subsequent work, it was found that another variant, the presence of an adenine
instead of a guanine 6bp upstream from the initiation site of transcription, was 
in absolute linkage disequilibrium with T235. The nucleotide substitution at the 
-6 position affected the formation of DNA-protein complexes in gel mobility shift
assays and the basal transcription of AGT in transactivation experiments. We have
further examined the potential impact of this polymorphism on AGT promoter
function. In ultraviolet cross-linking analysis. 150- and 75-kDa proteins bound
to the AGT proximal promoter. The possible involvement of factors that bind to
GC-rich domains, including Sp1, Sp3, and AP2, was not supported by gel mobility
shift assays. Screening an expression library with a double-stranded DNA segment 
centered on -6 led to the isolation of cDNA clones encoding the YB1 protein. The 
specificity of the interaction of YB1 with the proximal promoter of AGT was
verified by Southwestern blotting and gel mobility shift assays. In
cotransfection experiments, YB1 reduced basal AGT promoter activity in a
dose-dependent manner. Although these observations suggest a possible role for
YB1 in modulating AGT expression, this function is likely to occur in the context
of complex interactions involving other nuclear factors. The work illustrates the
challenge of developing a molecular understanding of the relationship between
common genetic variants and conditions that are only partly caused by them.

PMID: 11829142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Gene. 2002 Jan 9;282(1-2):103-11.

Lung surfactant protein B promoter function is dependent on the helical phasing, 
orientation and combinatorial actions of cis-DNA elements.

Alam MN(1), Berhane K, Boggaram V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The University of Texas Health Science Center
at Tyler, 11937 US Highway 271, Tyler, TX 75708-3154, USA.

Surfactant protein B (SP-B), a hydrophobic protein of lung surfactant, is
essential for surfactant function, normal respiration and survival. SP-B is
expressed in a cell-type specific manner by the alveolar type II and bronchiolar 
(Clara) epithelial cells of the lung and is developmentally induced. Our previous
studies showed that the activity of the rabbit SP-B minimal promoter (-236/+39
bp) is dependent on the binding of an array of transcription factors including
Sp1, Sp3, thyroid transcription factor 1, hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 and
activating transcription factor/cyclic AMP response element binding protein. The 
SP-B minimal promoter sequence as well as the spacing and orientations of cis-DNA
elements are conserved in human, rabbit and mouse SP-B genes. In the present
study, we investigated the importance of spacing and orientation of cis-DNA
elements on SP-B promoter function in NCI-H441 cells, a human cell line of Clara 
cell lineage. Further we investigated the effects of transcription factors on
SP-B promoter expression by co-transfection experiments. Results showed that
disruptions of helical phasing and orientation of cis-DNA elements reduced SP-B
promoter activity indicating that proper alignment and orientation of cis-DNA
elements are necessary for SP-B promoter function. Co-transfection experiments
showed that transcription factors function in a combinatorial rather than in a
synergistic manner to enhance SP-B promoter activity.

PMID: 11814682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Gene. 2002 Jan 9;282(1-2):75-86.

Characterization of the promoter of human extracellular matrix metalloproteinase 
inducer (EMMPRIN).

Liang L(1), Major T, Bocan T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Pharmacology, Pfizer Global Research and
Development, Ann Arbor Laboratories, Pfizer Inc., 2800 Plymouth Road, Ann Arbor, 
MI 48105, USA.

Monocyte-derived macrophages play a central role in atherosclerotic lesion
formation and potentially plaque destabilization by expression of matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs); however, mechanisms associated with stimulating MMP
production are not clearly understood. EMMPRIN, which is expressed by human
cancer cells and macrophages, present in human, mouse and rabbit atherosclerosis 
and noted to induce MMPs may be involved. A DNA fragment containing 1797 bp 5'
upstream of the EMMPRIN gene and the transcription start site was generated by
polymerase chain reaction and cloned into a luciferase reporter gene vector,
pGL3-basic. The relative luciferase activities driven by this 5'-upstream
fragment and a series of deletion mutants were measured in transiently
transfected human and mouse macrophage THP-1 and Raw264.7 cells, respectively. A 
fragment 471 bp upstream of the EMMPRIN coding region was sufficient to promote
transcription, while a region from -1413 to -1024 bp suppressed activity. Further
deletion analysis of the 471 bp fragment indicated that a 30 bp element from -142
to -112 bp, which contains binding sites for Sp1, AP1TFII and EGR-2, was
important for EMMPRIN transcription in both THP-1 and Raw264.7 macrophages. Using
electrophoretic mobility shift assays, the Sp1 element within 30 bp region
specifically bound Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors. Mutation of the Sp1 element
at -122 to -116 bp of the EMMPRIN promoter significantly diminished promoter
activity and formation of DNA-nuclear protein complex. Transient expression of
Sp1 and/or Sp3 transcription factors in insect cells lacking the Sp family of
transcription factors, stimulated EMMPRIN promoter activity in a synergistic
manner. Together, these results indicate that both Sp1 and Sp3 associate with the
functional Sp1 element on the EMMPRIN promoter and cooperate in the regulation of
EMMPRIN gene expression in macrophages.

PMID: 11814679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001 Dec 15;29(24):4994-5000.

Transcription factor Sp3 is regulated by acetylation.

Braun H(1), Koop R, Ertmer A, Nacht S, Suske G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT), Philipps-University
Marburg, Emil-Mannkopff-Strasse 2, D-35037 Marburg, Germany.

Sp3 is a ubiquitous transcription factor closely related to Sp1. Previous
analyses showed that, unlike Sp1, Sp3 fails to activate transcription in certain 
promoter settings. This is due to the presence of an inhibitory domain located
between the second glutamine-rich activation domain and the DNA-binding domain.
To further analyze the transcriptional properties of Sp3, we have expressed and
purified recombinant Sp3 and Sp1 as epitope-tagged proteins from stable
transfected insect cells. We found that Sp3 does act as a strong activator
similar to Sp1 in an in vitro transcription assay using Sp1/Sp3-depleted HeLa
nuclear extract. However, on the same promoter Sp3 is almost inactive when
transfected into cells. Mutational studies demonstrate that a single lysine
residue is responsible for the low transcriptional activity of Sp3 in vivo. We
show that Sp3, but not a mutant of Sp3 that lacks this lysine residue, is highly 
acetylated in vivo. Our results strongly suggest that the transcriptional
activity of Sp3 is regulated by acetylation. The consequences of acetylation for 
the activity of Sp3 are discussed.

PMCID: PMC97549
PMID: 11812829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Diabetes. 2002 Feb;51(2):293-300.

Transcriptional regulation of adipocyte hormone-sensitive lipase by glucose.

Smih F(1), Rouet P, Lucas S, Mairal A, Sengenes C, Lafontan M, Vaulont S, Casado 
M, Langin D.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unité 317, Institut Louis Bugnard, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de 
Rangueil, Université Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France.

Hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL) catalyzes the rate-limiting step in the
mobilization of fatty acids from adipose tissue, thus determining the supply of
energy substrates in the body. HSL mRNA was positively regulated by glucose in
human adipocytes. Pools of stably transfected 3T3-F442A adipocytes were generated
with human adipocyte HSL promoter fragments from -2,400/+38 to -31/+38 bp linked 
to the luciferase gene. A glucose-responsive region was mapped within the
proximal promoter (-137 bp). Electromobility shift assays showed that upstream
stimulatory factor (USF)-1 and USF2 and Sp1 and Sp3 bound to a consensus E-box
and two GC-boxes in the -137-bp region. Cotransfection of the -137/+38 construct 
with USF1 and USF2 expression vectors produced enhanced luciferase activity.
Moreover, HSL mRNA levels were decreased in USF1- and USF2-deficient mice.
Site-directed mutagenesis of the HSL promoter showed that the GC-boxes, although 
contributing to basal promoter activity, were dispensable for glucose
responsiveness. Mutation of the E-box led to decreased promoter activity and
suppression of the glucose response. Analogs and metabolites were used to
determine the signal metabolite of the glucose response. The signal is generated 
downstream of glucose-6-phosphate in the glycolytic pathway before the triose
phosphate step.

PMID: 11812735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Mol Pharmacol. 2002 Feb;61(2):379-90.

Reciprocal regulation of beta(1)-adrenergic receptor gene transcription by Sp1
and early growth response gene 1: induction of EGR-1 inhibits the expression of
the beta(1)-adrenergic receptor gene.

Bahouth SW(1), Beauchamp MJ, Vu KN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, the University of Tennessee
Health Sciences Center, Memphis, Tennessee 38163, USA. sbahouth@utmem.edu

The beta(1)-adrenergic receptor (beta(1)-AR) plays a key role in regulating heart
rate and contractility in response to catecholamines. Our studies have focused on
defining the factors that regulate the expression of the beta(1)-AR gene. We
determined that a 65-base-pair (bp) region in the beta(1)-AR promoter between bp 
-394 and bp -330 directs basal transcription. An element located between -377 and
-365 can bind Sp1 and Sp3. In Drosophila melanogaster SL2 cells, Sp1 stimulated
the expression of the beta(1)-AR promoter, whereas Sp3 was unable to activate
transcription. Site-directed mutagenesis indicated that an intact Sp1-binding
site is essential for maintaining the activity of the basal promoter. In addition
to binding Sp family members, the nucleotides between -381 and -367 can bind the 
zinc-finger transcription factor Egr-1. The Egr-1 and Sp1 binding sites are
partially overlapping and their binding sequence is conserved among mammalian
beta(1)-AR genes. The induction of Egr-1 in rat neonatal ventricular myocytes
with phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate or in HeLa S3 cells by regulated expression 
of Egr-1 in a tetracycline-responsive promoter, suppressed expression from the
beta(1)-AR promoter. Overexpression of Sp1 in SK-N-MC cells increased beta(1)-AR 
mRNA by 2.4-fold, whereas overexpression of Egr-1 reduced beta(1)-AR mRNA by 40%.
Coexpression of Egr-1 with Sp1 reduced Sp1-mediated up-regulation of beta(1)-AR
mRNA by 60%. Mutagenesis revealed that an intact Sp1-binding site is essential
for observing transcriptional repression by Egr-1 and that Egr-1 suppressed the
transcription of the beta(1)-AR gene by competing with Sp1 for binding to their
overlapping sites. These results reveal a novel physiologically relevant
transcriptional mechanism for reciprocal regulation of beta(1)-AR gene
expression.

PMID: 11809863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Biol Chem. 2002 Apr 5;277(14):11904-9. Epub 2002 Jan 23.

Activation of dynamin I gene expression by Sp1 and Sp3 is required for neuronal
differentiation of N1E-115 cells.

Yoo J(1), Jeong MJ, Kwon BM, Hur MW, Park YM, Han MY.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Laboratory, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Taejon 305-600, Korea.

Dynamin I is a key molecule required for the recycling of synaptic vesicles in
neurons, and it has been known that dynamin I gene expression is induced during
neuronal differentiation. Our previous studies established that neuronal
restriction of dynamin I gene expression is controlled by Sp1 and nuclear
factor-kappaB-like element-1. Here, using a series of deletion constructs and
site-directed mutation, we found that transcription of dynamin I gene during
neuronal differentiation of N1E-115 cells is controlled primarily by the Sp1
element located between -13 to -4 bp of the dynamin I promoter. Gel shift
analysis demonstrated that in addition to Sp1, Sp3 could interact with this Sp1
element. The requirement for Sp family transcription factors in dynamin I gene
expression was confirmed by using mithramycin, an inhibitor of Sp1/Sp3 binding.
Mithramycin repressed dynamin I gene expression and resulted in blocking of
neuronal differentiation of N1E-115 cells. The localization of the dynamin I
protein was also restricted in the peripheral region of the nucleus by the
mithramycin treatment. Thus, all of our results suggest that induction of dynamin
I gene expression during N1E-115 cell differentiation is modulated by Sp1/Sp3
interactions with the dynamin I promoter, and its expression is important for
neuronal differentiation of the N1E-115 cells.

PMID: 11809758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2002 Feb;26(2):246-53.

Stimulation of vascular endothelial growth factor gene transcription by all trans
retinoic acid through Sp1 and Sp3 sites in human bronchioloalveolar carcinoma
cells.

Maeno T(1), Tanaka T, Sando Y, Suga T, Maeno Y, Nakagawa J, Hosono T, Sato M,
Akiyama H, Kishi S, Nagai R, Kurabayashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine and Department of Ophthalmology, Gunma 
University School of Medicine, 3-39-15 Showa-machi, Maebashi, Gunma 371-8511,
Japan.

In this study, we examined the effects of all trans-retinoic acid (at-RA) on the 
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression in human bronchioloalveolar 
carcinoma NCI-H322 cells to evaluate the potential of at-RA to affect tumor
progression. Northern blot and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay analyses
indicate that VEGF production is significantly increased by 1 microM of at-RA. A 
series of 5'-deletion and site-directed mutation analyses indicated that G+C-rich
sequence located at -81 and -52 was required for at-RA- and retinoic acid
receptor alpha-mediated induction of VEGF promoter. Electrophoretic mobility
shift and supershift assays showed that major constituents of nuclear factors
binding to G+C-rich sequences are Sp1 and Sp3. Pretreatment with cycloheximide, a
protein synthesis inhibitor, prevented the at-RA-mediated induction of VEGF mRNA 
expression. Likewise, at-RA-mediated VEGF expression was completely blocked in
the presence of genistein, an inhibitor for tyrosine kinases. These results
suggest that an increase in transcription of the VEGF promoter by at-RA is
mediated through Sp1 site, and both new protein synthesis and tyrosine kinase
activation are necessary for this induction. Because VEGF can promote
neovascularization in cancer cells, an induction of VEGF by at-RA may preclude
the therapeutic application of at-RA to cancer patients.

PMID: 11804877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Biochemistry. 2002 Jan 29;41(4):1229-40.

A polypyrimidine/polypurine tract within the Hmga2 minimal promoter: a common
feature of many growth-related genes.

Rustighi A(1), Tessari MA, Vascotto F, Sgarra R, Giancotti V, Manfioletti G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica, Biofisica e Chimica delle Macromolecole,
Università di Trieste, Italy.

HMGA2 is an architectural nuclear factor which plays an important role in
development and tumorigenesis, but mechanisms regulating its expression are
largely unknown. The proximal promoters of the mouse and human genes coding for
HMGA2 contain a conserved polypyrimidine/polypurine (ppyr/ppur) element which
constitutes a multiple binding site for Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors. In the
present study we report that this region can adopt a single-stranded DNA
conformation, as demonstrated in vitro by S1 nuclease sensitivity on supercoiled 
plasmids, indicative of an intramolecular triple-helical H-DNA structure.
Moreover, we find that PTB (polypyrimidine tract binding protein), a member of
the hnRNP family, binds the pyrimidine strand of Hmga2 as well as similar
ppyr/ppur elements of the c-Ki-ras (R.Y) and c-myc P1 promoters. Transfection
experiments indicate that non-B-DNA conformers of the ppyr/ppur tract of the
Hmga2 promoter contribute to positive transcriptional activity. We propose a
transcriptional mechanism, acting on the Hmga2 non-B-DNA structure and
functioning through interconversion between double-stranded and single-stranded
DNA, that seems to be adopted by an increasing number of genes, mainly
growth-related.

PMID: 11802722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Nutr Cancer. 2001;40(1):28-33.

Mechanisms of organoselenium compounds in chemoprevention: effects on
transcription factor-DNA binding.

Youn BW(1), Fiala ES, Sohn OS.

Author information: 
(1)American Health Foundation, Valhalla, NY 10595, USA.

Data obtained on the effects of selenium compounds on regulatory transcription
factor-DNA binding by other laboratories are briefly reviewed, and some of our
own results in this area are also presented. We assessed the in vitro and in vivo
effects of the organoselenium compound 1,4-phenylenebis(methylene)selenocyanate
(p-XSC) on the binding activities of the transcription factors nuclear
factor-kappa B (NF-kappa B), activator protein-1 (AP-1), Sp1, and Sp3 using the
HCT-116 (human colorectal adenocarcinoma) cell line as a model system. Using
nuclear extracts, electrophoretic mobility shift assays were carried out to
determine the extent of binding of the transcription factors to their respective 
consensus recognition sites on radiolabeled oligonucleotides. p-XSC and sodium
selenite reduced the consensus site binding activity of NF-kappa B in a
concentration-dependent manner when nuclear extracts from cells stimulated with
tumor necrosis factor-alpha were incubated with either compound ("in vitro").
However, only p-XSC inhibited NF-kappa B consensus recognition site binding when 
the cells were pretreated with either compound and were then stimulated with
tumor necrosis factor-alpha ("in vivo"). In contrast, the consensus site binding 
activity of AP-1 was inhibited only with sodium selenite, but not with p-XSC in
vitro or in vivo. p-XSC or sodium selenite reduced the consensus site binding of 
transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 in concentration- and time-dependent manners
when nuclear extracts from cells treated with either compound in vivo were
assayed by electrophoretic mobility shift assay.
1,4-Phenylenebis(methylene)thiocyanate, the sulfur analog of p-XSC, which is
inactive in chemoprevention, had no effect on the oligonucleotide binding of Sp1 
and Sp3. Our observations could provide further clues as to the mechanisms
involved in the chemoprevention of cancer by p-XSC.

PMID: 11799919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 29;277(13):11097-106. Epub 2002 Jan 16.

A novel role of Sp1 and Sp3 in the interferon-gamma -mediated suppression of
macrophage lipoprotein lipase gene transcription.

Hughes TR(1), Tengku-Muhammad TS, Irvine SA, Ramji DP.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiff School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Museum Avenue, P. O. Box
911, Cardiff CF10 3US, United Kingdom.

The regulation of macrophage lipoprotein lipase by cytokines is of potentially
crucial importance in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. We have shown
previously that macrophage lipoprotein lipase expression is suppressed by
interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) at the transcriptional level. We investigated the
regulatory sequence elements and the transcription factors that are involved in
this response. We demonstrated that the -31/+187 sequence contains the minimal
IFN-gamma-responsive elements. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed that 
the binding of proteins to two regions in the -31/+187 sequence was reduced
dramatically when the cells were exposed to IFN-gamma. Both competition
electrophoretic mobility shift assays and antibody supershift assays showed that 
the interacting proteins were composed of Sp1 and Sp3. Mutations of the
Sp1/Sp3-binding sites in the minimal IFN-gamma-responsive elements abolished the 
IFN-gamma-mediated suppression of promoter activity, whereas multimers of the
sequence were able to impart the response to a heterologous promoter. Western
blot analysis showed that IFN-gamma reduced the steady state levels of Sp3
protein. In contrast, the cytokine decreased the DNA binding activity of Sp1
without affecting the protein levels. These studies therefore reveal a novel
mechanism for IFN-gamma-mediated regulation of macrophage gene transcription.

PMID: 11796707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 15;277(11):8989-98. Epub 2002 Jan 4.

Cloning and characterization of the human heparanase-1 (HPR1) gene promoter: role
of GA-binding protein and Sp1 in regulating HPR1 basal promoter activity.

Jiang P(1), Kumar A, Parrillo JE, Dempsey LA, Platt JL, Prinz RA, Xu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery and the Division of Cardiovascular Diseases and 
Critical Care, Department of Medicine, Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical
Center, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

Heparanase-1 (HPR1) is an endoglycosidase that specifically degrades the heparan 
sulfate chains of proteoglycan, a component of blood vessel walls and the
extracellular matrix. Recent studies demonstrated that HPR1 expression is
increased in a variety of malignancies and may play a critical role in tumor
metastases. The HPR1 gene and its genomic structure have been recently cloned and
characterized. To understand the mechanisms of HPR1 gene expression and
regulation, we first mapped the transcription start site of the HPR1 gene and
found that HPR1 mRNA was transcribed from the nucleotide position 101 bp upstream
of the ATG codon. A 3.5-kb promoter region of the HPR1 gene was cloned. Sequence 
analysis revealed that the TATA-less, GC-rich promoter of the HPR1 gene belongs
to the family of housekeeping genes. This 3.5-kb promoter region exhibited strong
promoter activity in two thyroid tumor cell lines. Truncation analysis of the
HPR1 promoter identified a minimal 0.3-kb region that had strong basal promoter
activity. Truncation and mutational analysis of the HPR1 promoter revealed three 
Sp1 sites and four Ets-relevant elements (ERE) significantly contributing to
basal HPR1 promoter activity. Binding to the Sp1 sites by Sp1 and to the ERE
sites by GA-binding protein (GABP) was confirmed by electrophoretic mobility
shift assay and competition and supershift electrophoretic mobility shift assays.
Cotransfection of Sp- and GABP-deficient Drosophila SL-2 cells with the HPR1
promoter-driven luciferase construct plus the expression vector encoding the Sp1,
Sp3, or GABP gene induced luciferase gene expression. Mutation or truncation of
the Sp1 or ERE sites reduced luciferase expression in both SL-2 cells and thyroid
tumor cell lines. Coexpression of GABPalpha/beta and Sp1 or Sp3 further increased
luciferase reporter gene expression. Our results collectively suggest that Sp1
cooperates with GABP to regulate HPR1 promoter activity.

PMID: 11779847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2001 Dec 30;1522(3):195-206.

The transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 are required for human angiotensin II type 
1 receptor gene expression in H295-R cells.

Zhao X(1), Martin MM, Elton TS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Brigham Young University, C206
Benson Building, P.O. Box 25700, Provo, UT 84602-5700, USA.

The peptide hormone angiotensin II regulates a variety of physiological responses
which are mediated by its interaction with high affinity G protein-coupled
receptors localized on the surface of target cells. Our previous studies have
demonstrated that a 145 bp sequence within the promoter region was required for
basal level expression of the human angiotensin II type 1 receptor (hAT(1)R)
gene. In the present study, deletional analysis of the hAT(1)R promoter localized
the major regulatory sequence to two overlapping GC boxes harbored within the
-105 to -85 bp region relative to the transcription start site in H295-R cells.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs) using a double-stranded (ds)
oligonucleotide corresponding to this region and H295-R cell nuclear extract
resulted in five specific DNA-protein complexes. EMSAs performed with competitive
ds-oligonucleotides which harbored the consensus binding site for Sp1 prevented
the formation of the DNA-protein complexes. Supershift EMSAs also demonstrated
that Sp1 and Sp3 could bind to the GC boxes present within the -105 to -85 bp
region of the hAT(1)R promoter. Transactivation experiments utilizing Drosophila 
SL2 cells, which lack endogenous Sp family transcription factors, demonstrated
that Sp1 and Sp3 activated the hAT(1)R promoter and that maximal activation was
only achieved when both GC boxes were present. Taken together, these findings
suggest that Sp1 and Sp3 are necessary for the expression of the hAT(1)R gene in 
H295-R cells.

PMID: 11779634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 22;277(12):9780-9. Epub 2001 Dec 28.

Sp3 represses gene expression via the titration of promoter-specific
transcription factors.

Kennett SB(1), Moorefield KS, Horowitz JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Physiological Sciences, and Radiology, College of
Veterinary Medicine, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina
27606, USA.

We have determined previously that Sp3 encodes three distinct gene products as
follows: a full-length protein (Sp3) that is an activator of transcription and
two isoforms (M1 and M2) derived via internal translational initiation that
function as transcriptional repressors. To identify amino acids and functions
required for transcriptional repression, we employed PCR-directed mutagenesis to 
create a panel of mutated M2 proteins. Biochemical and functional analyses of
these mutated proteins indicate that functions encoded by the M2 carboxyl
terminus, such as DNA binding activity and the capacity to form multimeric
complexes, are not required or sufficient for transcriptional repression.
Instead, a 93-amino acid portion of the trans-activation domain was shown to be
the minimal portion of M2 required to block Sp-dependent gene expression.
Transcriptional analysis of three Sp-dependent promoters showed that mutations
sustained by many M2 proteins result in promoter-specific effects. Regions of M2 
required for physical interactions with five TATA box-associated factors
(TAF(II)s) were mapped, and mutations that disrupt the interaction of M2 with two
of these proteins, TAF(II)70 and TAF(II)40, were identified. We conclude that
Sp3- mediated transcriptional repression is due, at least in part, to competition
for promoter-specific transcription factors.

PMID: 11773047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 15;277(11):9278-85. Epub 2001 Dec 26.

Sp1- and Sp3-mediated transcriptional regulation of the fibroblast growth factor 
receptor 1 gene in chicken skeletal muscle cells.

Parakati R(1), DiMario JX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Chicago Medical School, North Chicago,
Illinois 60064, USA.

Expression of the fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1) gene in skeletal
muscle is positively regulated in proliferating myoblasts and declines during
differentiation. We have characterized the cis-regulatory elements in the
proximal region of the FGFR1 promoter which render positive transcriptional
activity. Multiple elements between -69 and -14 activate the FGFR1 promoter.
Myoblast transfections revealed that potential Sp transcription factor binding
sites are required for promoter activity. Electromobility shift assays indicated 
that myoblast nuclear proteins specifically bind to these cis-elements and that
differentiated myotube nuclear extracts do not form these same complexes. In
addition, Southwestern blot analysis detected binding of the most proximal Sp
motif to a Sp1-like protein present in myoblast nuclear extracts but not in
myotubes. In corroboration, Sp1 and Sp3 proteins were detected only in myoblasts 
and not in differentiated myotubes. Finally, transfection of Drosophila SL2 cells
showed that Sp1 is a positive regulator of FGFR1 promoter activity and that Sp3
is a coactivator via the proximal Sp binding sites. These studies demonstrate
that the FGFR1 promoter is activated by Sp transcription factors in proliferating
myoblasts and demonstrate at least part of the mechanism by which FGFR1 gene
expression is down-regulated in differentiated muscle fibers.

PMID: 11756440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 15;277(11):8890-7. Epub 2001 Dec 20.

The role of Sp1 and NF-kappa B in regulating CD40 gene expression.

Tone M(1), Tone Y, Babik JM, Lin CY, Waldmann H.

Author information: 
(1)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, 
Oxford OX1 3RE, United Kingdom. mtone@molbiol.ox.ac.uk

CD40 is a member of the tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily and is a key
signaling molecule expressed by antigen-presenting cells of the immune system. In
a previous paper, we demonstrated that the expression of CD40 is regulated by
both post-transcriptional and post-translational processes. In this paper, we
show that basal (constitutive) CD40 gene expression is regulated by a TATA-less
promoter, with Sp1 as a key transcription factor. Two Sp1 binding regions were
identified in the mouse CD40 promoter at positions -59 to -50 and -74 to -66.
Surprisingly, Sp1-mediated CD40 transcription was reduced following
lipopolysaccharide stimulation and was associated with a time-dependent reduction
in Sp1 DNA binding activity. This reduction seemed to be mediated by
phosphorylation of the Sp1 molecule. We also show here that CD40 expression in
lipopolysaccharide-stimulated cells is up-regulated by NF-kappaB through two
distinct sites. One of these sites (-128 to -119) was shown to bind p50 and p65
members of the NF-kappaB family, while the other site (-562 to -553) bound only
p65. Transfectants of p65 were generated using RAW 264 cells, and it was shown
that the up-regulation of CD40 mRNA expression was dependent on the presence of
the p65 molecule.

PMID: 11751910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Biochem J. 2002 Jan 1;361(Pt 1):173-84.

Characterization of human cathepsin L promoter and identification of binding
sites for NF-Y, Sp1 and Sp3 that are essential for its activity.

Jean D(1), Guillaume N, Frade R.

Author information: 
(1)Immunochimie des Régulations Cellulaires et des Interactions Virales, INSERM
U.354, Centre INSERM, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, 184 rue du Faubourg Saint-Antoine,
75012 Paris, France.

Cathepsin L is a cysteine protease whose overexpression in human melanoma cells
increases their tumorigenicity and switches their phenotype from non-metastatic
to highly metastatic. Regulation of the transcription of the gene encoding human 
cathepsin L has not been yet studied and only preliminary data exist on the
promoter regulation of the gene encoding rodent cathepsin L. In the present study
we identified molecular elements involved in the transcriptional regulation of
human cathepsin L in melanoma cells. The sequence of the 5'-flanking region of
the gene encoding human cathepsin L was determined up to 3263 bp upstream of the 
translation start site. The major transcription intiation site was located. Three
mRNA splice variants, differing in their 5' untranslated ends, were identified.
Regulatory regions crucial for cathepsin L promoter activity were characterized
between -1489 and -1646 bp. In this region, two GC boxes (-1590/-1595 and
-1545/-1550) and a CCAAT motif (-1571/-1575) were involved in specific
DNA-protein interactions. An electrophoretic mobility-shift assay demonstrated
that Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors bound to these GC boxes, and only the
transcription factor nuclear factor Y (NF-Y) bound to the CCAAT motif.
Mutagenesis studies demonstrated that these binding sites contributed at least
85% of cathepsin L promoter activity. Thus structural and functional analysis
demonstrated that binding sites for NF-Y, Sp1 and Sp3 are essential for
transcription of the gene encoding human cathepsin L in melanoma cells.

PMCID: PMC1222292
PMID: 11742542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. J Immunol. 2001 Dec 15;167(12):6924-32.

NFkappaB and Sp1 elements are necessary for maximal transcription of toll-like
receptor 2 induced by Mycobacterium avium.

Wang T(1), Lafuse WP, Zwilling BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Virology, Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

We have previously reported that Toll-like receptor (TLR) 2 mRNA was induced
after infection with Mycobacterium avium. To investigate the molecular basis of
TLR2 expression in macrophages, we cloned and analyzed the murine putative
5'-proximal promoter. Transient transfection of a 326-bp region from nucleotides 
-294-+32 relative to the first transcription start site was sufficient to induce 
maximal luciferase activity at the basal level and after infection with M. avium 
in J774A.1 cells. Sequence analysis showed that the region lacked a TATA box but 
contained two typical stimulating factor (Sp) 1 sites, two NF-kappaB sites, one
IFN-regulatory factor site and one AP-1 site. Site-directed mutagenesis revealed 
that the NF-kappaB and Sp1 sites but not the IFN-regulatory factor site or the
AP-1 site contributed to the basal level and the induction of luciferase activity
during M. avium infection. Binding of Sp1/Sp3 and NF-kappaB (p50/p65) was
confirmed by EMSA. Further studies showed that three copies of Sp1 elements or
NF-kappaB elements are not sufficient to confer M. avium induction on a
heterologous promoter. By contrast, overexpression of NF-kappaB p65 caused a
strong increase in transcription from an intact TLR2 promoter, whereas it caused 
only a partial increase in promoter activity when cotransfected with the TLR2
promoter with one of the Sp1 sites mutated. Sp1 and NF-kappaB were the minimum
mammalian transcription factors required for effective TLR2 transcriptional
activity when transfected into Drosophila Schneider cells. Together, these data
provide genetic and biochemical evidence for NF-kappaB as well as Sp1 in
regulating TLR2 transcription.

PMID: 11739511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Biochem. 2001 Dec;130(6):885-91.

Sp family members stimulate transcription of the hex gene via interactions with
GC boxes.

Kikkawa E(1), Hinata M, Keng VW, Myint Z, Sato A, Yamada K, Tanaka T, Noguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya University, Chikusa-ku,
Nagoya 464-8601, Japan.

The 5'-flanking region of the mouse Hex gene was examined in order to identify
transcription factors regulating its expression in hepatocytes and haematopoietic
cells. We have identified two further GC boxes (GC boxes 3 and 4 at nucleotide
positions -149 to -140 and -79 to -70, respectively), i.e. in addition to the two
previously determined ones (GC boxes 1 and 2 at nucleotide positions -197 to -188
and -176 to -167, respectively). Luciferase reporter assays revealed that all
four GC boxes are transcriptionally active in both MH(1)C(1) rat hepatoma and
K562 human chronic myelogenous leukemia cells. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays with specific competitors and antibodies showed that members of the Sp
family, namely Sp1 and Sp3, bind to these GC boxes. Overexpression of Sp1 and Sp3
in Drosophila SL2 cells stimulated transcription of the Hex gene through
interactions with GC boxes 1 to 4, Sp1 being a more potent activator than Sp3.
Thus, we conclude that Sp1 and Sp3 stimulate transcription of the Hex gene in
both MH(1)C(1) and K562 cells.

PMID: 11726291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. J Biol Chem. 2002 Feb 8;277(6):4455-64. Epub 2001 Nov 27.

GC box-binding transcription factors control the neuronal specific transcription 
of the cyclin-dependent kinase 5 regulator p35.

Ross S(1), Tienhaara A, Lee MS, Tsai LH, Gill G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (cdk5)/p35 kinase activity is highest in post-mitotic
neurons of the central nervous system and is critical for development and
function of the brain. The neuronal specific activity of the cdk5/p35 kinase is
achieved through the regulated expression of p35 mRNA. We have identified a small
200-bp fragment of the p35 promoter that is sufficient for high levels of
neuronal specific expression. Mutational analysis of this TATA-less promoter has 
identified a 17-bp GC-rich element, present twice, that is both required for
promoter activity and sufficient for neuronal specific transcription. A GC box
within the 17-bp element is critical for both promoter activity and protein-DNA
complex formation. The related transcription factors Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 constitute
most of the GC box DNA binding activity in neurons. We have found that both the
relative contribution of the Sp family proteins to GC box binding and the
transcriptional activity of these proteins is regulated during neuronal
differentiation. Thus, our data show that the GC box-binding Sp proteins
contribute to the regulation of p35 expression in neurons, suggesting changes in 
the Sp transcription factors level and activity may contribute to cell
type-specific expression of many genes in the central nervous system.

PMID: 11724806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Gene. 2001 Nov 14;279(1):49-62.

Species-specific mechanisms control the activity of the Pit1/PIT1 phosphate
transporter gene promoter in mouse and human.

Palmer G(1), Manen D, Bonjour JP, Caverzasio J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bone Diseases, WHO Collaborating Center for Osteoporosis and Bone 
Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital of Geneva, 24 rue 
Micheli-du-Crest, CH-1211 14, Geneva, Switzerland.

The Pit1 phosphate transporter is involved in regulated phosphate handling in
bone forming cells. In this study, we compared the structure of the murine and
human Pit1/PIT1 promoters and characterized cis-acting elements controlling
Pit1/PIT1 expression. The Pit1/PIT1 promoter sequence and its location relative
to the first transcribed exon are conserved and similar transcription factor
binding sites are found at identical positions in mouse and human. Luciferase
reporter gene assays in transiently transfected mouse ATDC5 chondrocytes and
human SaOS-2 osteoblasts indicated that the activity of the mouse Pit1 promoter
depends on several cis-acting elements, including ATF/CREB, Sp1 and AP-1 sites,
an E-box and a TATA box. In contrast, the activity of the human promoter
essentially requires a TATA-like sequence and one single Sp1 site. This Sp1 site 
binds Sp1, Sp3, as well as unidentified proteins present in SaOS-2 nuclear
extracts and co-transfection experiments in SL2 cells indicate that Sp1 and Sp3
activate transcription from the human PIT1 promoter. These data suggest that,
despite similarities in promoter structure, changes in the relative importance of
conserved transcription factor binding sites cause species-dependent differences 
in Pit1 promoter function, which allow Sp1-related proteins to play a
particularly important role in human.

PMID: 11722845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. J Immunol. 2001 Nov 15;167(10):5838-44.

A common single nucleotide polymorphism in the CD14 promoter decreases the
affinity of Sp protein binding and enhances transcriptional activity.

LeVan TD(1), Bloom JW, Bailey TJ, Karp CL, Halonen M, Martinez FD, Vercelli D.

Author information: 
(1)Arizona Respiratory Center, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85724, USA.
Tricia.LeVan@resp-sci.arizona.edu

CD14 is a pattern recognition receptor that plays a central role in innate
immunity through recognition of bacterial lipoglycans, primarily LPS. Recently,
our group has identified a common single nucleotide polymorphism, -159C-->T, in
the CD14 proximal promoter. Homozygous carriers of the T allele have a
significant increase in soluble CD14, but a decreased total serum IgE. This
epidemiologic evidence led us to investigate the molecular basis for the effects 
of CD14/-159C-->T on CD14 regulation in monocytes and hepatocytes, the two major 
cell types known to express this gene in vivo. EMSA analysis showed that the T
allele results in decreased affinity of DNA/protein interactions at a GC box that
contains a binding site for Sp1, Sp2, and Sp3 transcription factors. In reporter 
assays, the transcriptional activity of the T allele was increased in monocytic
Mono Mac 6 cells, which express low levels of Sp3, a member of the Sp family with
inhibitory potential relative to activating Sp1 and Sp2. By contrast, both
alleles were transcribed equivalently in Sp3-rich hepatocytic HepG2 cells. Our
data indicate that the interplay between CD14 promoter affinity and the
[Sp3]:[Sp1 + Sp2] ratio plays a critical mechanistic role in regulating
transcription of the two CD14 alleles. Variation in a key gene of innate immunity
may be important for the pathogenesis of allergy and inflammatory disease through
gene-by-gene and/or gene-by-environment interactions.

PMID: 11698458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2001 Oct 31;1521(1-3):126-9.

Basal level glucose-6-phosphatase gene transcription requires binding sites for
Sp family proteins within the gene promoter.

Wasner C(1), Grempler R, Walther R, Schmoll D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Greifswald, Sauerbruchstrasse, D-17487, Greifswald, Germany.

The significance of two regions (SpA: -19 to -11 and SpB: -63 to -55) within the 
human glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase) gene promoter for gene expression was
examined. The mutation of SpA and SpB together, but not alone, decreased G6Pase
promoter activity. Electromobility shift assays showed that SpA and SpB were able
to bind the transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3.

PMID: 11690644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Nov 9;288(4):940-8.

Involvement of nuclear transcription factor Sp1 in regulating glucose
transporter-1 gene expression during rat trophoblast differentiation.

Okamoto Y(1), Sakata M, Yamamoto T, Nishio Y, Adachi K, Ogura K, Yamaguchi M,
Takeda T, Tasaka K, Murata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Osaka University, Faculty of
Medicine, 2-2 Yamadaoka Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.

Glucose transporter-1 (GLUT1) is important in placental glucose transport.
However, the mechanism of regulation of placental GLUT1 expression remains to be 
elucidated. We show here that the level of GLUT1 protein in rat choriocarcinoma
cells (Rcho-1) decreased during differentiation. To analyze the regulatory
mechanism of rat GLUT1 (rGLUT1) gene expression, we transfected rGLUT1
promoter-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase constructs into Rcho-1 cells. Deletion
analysis of the rGLUT1 promoter suggested that the region -76/-53 bp was
essential for basal transcriptional activity. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays showed that transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 bound two GC boxes in the
region -99/-33 bp of the rGLUT1 promoter. Mutation analysis of the Sp1 binding
sites revealed that the promoter-proximal site located between -76 and -53 bp was
essential for basal rGLUT1 promoter activity. Furthermore, the decreased level of
GLUT1 may result from a decreased level of Sp1 during differentiation. These
findings suggest that Sp1 is involved in the regulation of rGLUT1 gene expression
during rat trophoblast differentiation.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11689000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Oncogene. 2001 Oct 18;20(47):6899-909.

Regulation of the human transforming growth factor beta type II receptor gene
promoter by novel Sp1 sites.

Jennings R(1), Alsarraj M, Wright KL, Muñoz-Antonia T.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Program, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Department of Oncology, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida,
FL 33612, USA.

The transforming growth factor-beta (TGF beta) type II receptor (T beta R-II) is 
responsible for transducing the growth inhibitory signals of TGF beta. The T beta
R-II gene promoter lacks both a TATA box and a CAAT box near the transcription
initiation site, and has been shown to contain binding sequences for several
transcription factors (Sp1, AP1, NF-Y, Cut and ERT) which are important for T
beta R-II gene promoter activity in vitro. However, it is still not clear which
interactions are important for the regulation of T beta R-II gene promoter
activity in vivo. Using in vivo genomic DNA footprinting of normal human
epithelial cells (HaCaT), we have identified two novel identical and strongly
protected sites (ggggctgg) at positions -59 and -102 of the T beta R-II gene
promoter. Mutation of either site significantly reduced promoter activity in
transient transfections. Protein binding to these sites, as determined by
electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA), was specifically competed with
consensus Sp1 oligonucleotides. Furthermore, anti-Sp1/3 antibodies produced band 
shifts when incubated with the T beta R-II -59 and -102 DNA probes. Importantly, 
Sp1 protein binding was influenced by the presence of an intact NF-Y binding site
at position -83. Our data suggests that both Sp1 and NF-Y may play an important
role in regulating T beta R-II gene promoter basal activity in vivo.

PMID: 11687969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Gene. 2001 Aug 22;274(1-2):119-28.

Binding of Sp1/Sp3 to the proximal promoter of the hMOR gene is enhanced by
DAMGO.

Xu Y(1), Carr LG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 4602-5121, USA.

The major binding site for morphine is the mu opioid receptor (MOR), which
mediates morphine's analgesic and euphoric effects. The MOR gene is highly
regulated at the level of transcription. The present study examined DNA-protein
interactions in the human MOR (hMOR) -500 to -292 promoter region, and tested
whether chronic opioid drug treatment could modulate these DNA-protein
interactions. 5'-deletion and transient transfection assays in SK-N-SH cells
revealed four regions that activated hMOR gene transcription. A 60 bp sequence
(-351 to -292) upstream of the proximal transcription initiation site (-252)
contained cis-elements required for basal promoter activity. Sp1 and Sp3 bound to
this 60 bp region, which was confirmed by electromobility shift assays using a
Sp1 consensus oligo as competitor and specific antibodies against Sp1 and Sp3.
Methylation interference analysis localized the Sp1 binding site to the sequence 
CCCTCCTCCC (-310 to -301) and also suggested that additional transcription
factors, other than Sp1-related proteins, contacted the -321 to -301 sequence.
Moreover, the binding of Sp1/Sp3 to the hMOR promoter was significantly enhanced 
by chronic exposure to [D-Ala(2), N-Me-Phe(4), Gly(5)-ol] enkephalin (DAMGO), a
selective MOR agonist, and this effect was attenuated specifically by
pretreatment with a MOR antagonist, naloxone. Taken together, the present studies
demonstrated, for the first time, that the binding of Sp1/Sp3 to the hMOR
proximal promoter could be modulated by chronic DAMGO treatment. Such enhanced
binding of Sp1/Sp3 to the promoter may lead to a functional change in hMOR gene
transcription.

PMID: 11675004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Biochem J. 2001 Nov 1;359(Pt 3):669-77.

Characterization of the MN/CA 9 promoter proximal region: a role for specificity 
protein (SP) and activator protein 1 (AP1) factors.

Kaluzová M(1), Pastoreková S, Svastová E, Pastorek J, Stanbridge EJ, Kaluz S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovak
Republic.

MN/CA IX (MN) is a tumour-associated isoenzyme of the carbonic anhydrase family. 
Previous deletion analysis of the MN promoter established that protected regions 
(PRs) 1 and 2 are crucial for its transcriptional activity. Computer-assisted
searching indicated putative binding sites for activator protein (AP) 2 and
specificity protein (SP) 1 transcription factors, plus a CACCC box in PR1 and an 
AP1 site in PR2. PR1 produced four complexes in electrophoretic mobility-shift
assay (EMSA) with HeLa nuclear extracts. Of these, three were completely competed
with the SP1 and transforming growth factor-beta retinoblastoma control-element
CACCC box (RCE) probes, whereas the AP2 probe competed against the same three
complexes partially. Supershift EMSA identified SP1 in the complex 1 and SP3 in
the complexes 2 and 4. Point mutations in the SP1 site abrogated the PR1
function, while mutations affecting the overlapping CACCC box/AP2 site in PR1 had
minor effect on MN promoter activity. Block-replaced MN promoter mutants that had
a consensus binding site (SP1 or AP2) or the RCE in place of PR1 demonstrated the
stringent selectivity of the PR1 position as only the SP1 mutant reconstituted
the MN promoter activity. The consensus SP1 probe generated the same SP1 and SP3 
complexes as PR1 in EMSA; therefore we conclude that SP activity is both
necessary and sufficient in the PR1 position. The critical role of AP1 in the PR2
position was confirmed by supershift of the PR2 complex with c-Fos antibody and
markedly decreased activity of the construct with a mutated AP1 site. Detailed
deletion analysis proved that PR1+PR2 account for 90% of the MN promoter
activity, while neither PR1 nor PR2 on their own are sufficient for
transactivation. Thus, synergistic co-operation between SP and AP1 factors bound 
to the adjacent PR1 and PR2, respectively, is necessary for MN transcriptional
activity. The PR1+PR2 module also stimulated transcription from a heterologous
promoter. The modulation of AP1 activity with PMA stimulated MN expression and
activated the MN promoter, whereas inhibition of protein kinase C activity had no
effect on MN expression in HeLa cells.

PMCID: PMC1222189
PMID: 11672442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2001 Sep;943:77-88.

Decidual cell-expressed tissue factor maintains hemostasis in human endometrium.

Lockwood CJ(1), Krikun G, Schatz F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, New York University School of
Medicine, New York 10016, USA. schat01@popmail.med.nyu.edu

We showed that decidualized stromal cells of luteal phase and pregnant human
endometrium express tissue factor (TF), the primary initiator of hemostasis,
thereby suggesting a mechanism by which perivascular decidual cells can mitigate 
the risk of hemorrhage during endovascular trophoblast invasion. Progestins
enhanced TF mRNA and protein levels in monolayers of human endometrial stromal
cells (HESCs), with estradiol (E2) + progestin, further enhancing TF levels
despite a lack of response to E2 alone. This differential ovarian steroid
response has been found for several decidualization markers. Further studies with
cultured HESCs established that elevated TF levels are mediated by the
progesterone receptor and are maintained for weeks in response to E2 plus
progestin, thus simulating the chronic upregulation of TF levels observed in
decidualized HESCs in vivo. Recent studies revealed that elevated TF expression
during in vitro decidualization of HESCs involved both the EGFR and progesterone 
receptor. Thus, enhancement of TF mRNA and protein levels in the HESCs required
co-incubation with a progestin (MPA) and an EGFR agonist such as EGF or
TGF-alpha. In correspondence with co-elevation of EGFR and TF in decidualized
HESCs in sections of luteal phase and pregnant endometrium, EGFR levels proved to
be progestin-enhanced in the cultured HESCs. We established that
progestin-enhanced TF expression in HESCs was trancriptionally regulated, then
evaluated the relative roles of SP and EGR-1 sites on the TF promoter in
regulating this expression. Transient transfections with a series of promoter
constructs containing overlapping SP and EGR-1 sites and with constructs in which
the EGR-1 and SP sites were systematically inactivated by site-directed
mutagenesis established the dominance of SP sites in both basal and
progestin-enhanced TF transcriptional activity. Additional experiments involving 
transient transfections with SPloverexpressing vectors and with a specific
blocker of if Sp1 binding to its corresponding GC box specified the importance of
the Sp1 transcription factor. These results were further validated by
immunostaining, which revealed that the ratio of Sp1 to Sp3 increased during
progestin-regulated decidualization of HESCs in vitro and in vivo. The absence of
canonical estrogen and progesterone response elements from either the TF or Sp1
gene promoters suggests that the EGFR may help to mediate progestin-enhanced TF
expression during decidualization of HESCs.

PMID: 11594561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Med Phys. 2001 Sep;28(9):1905-10.

Application of the new MultiTrans SP3 radiation transport code in BNCT dose
planning.

Kotiluoto P(1), Hiisamäki P, Savolainen S.

Author information: 
(1)VTT Chemical Technology, Industrial Physics, Finland. petri.kotiluoto@vtt.fi

Dose planning in boron neutron capture therapy (BNCT) is a complex problem and
requires sophisticated numerical methods. In the framework of the Finnish BNCT
project, new deterministic three-dimensional radiation transport code MultiTrans 
SP3 has been developed at VTT Chemical Technology, based on a novel application
of the tree multigrid technique. To test the applicability of this new code in a 
realistic BNCT dose planning problem, cylindrical PMMA (polymethyl-methacrylate) 
phantom was chosen as a benchmark case. It is a convenient benchmark, as it has
been modeled by several different codes, including well-known DORT and MCNP.
Extensive measured data also exist. In this paper, a comparison of the new
MultiTrans SP3 code with other methods is presented for the PMMA phantom case.
Results show that the total neutron dose rate to ICRU adult brain calculated by
the MultiTrans SP3 code differs less than 4% in 2 cm depth in phantom (in thermal
maximum) from the DORT calculation. Results also show that the calculated
197Au(n,gamma) and 55Mn(n,gamma) reaction rates in 2 cm depth in phantom differ
less than 4% and 1% from the measured values, respectively. However, the photon
dose calculated by the MultiTrans SP3 code seems to be incorrect in this PMMA
phantom case, which requires further studying. As expected, the deterministic
MultiTrans SP3 code is over an order of magnitude faster than stochastic Monte
Carlo codes (with similar resolution), thus providing a very efficient tool for
BNCT dose planning.

PMID: 11585221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Front Biosci. 2001 Oct 1;6:D1216-34.

Transcriptional regulation of the 11p15 mucin genes. Towards new biological tools
in human therapy, in inflammatory diseases and cancer?

Van Seuningen I(1), Pigny P, Perrais M, Porchet N, Aubert JP.

Author information: 
(1)Unite INSERM 377, Place de Verdun, 59045 Lille cedex, France.

Mucin production and secretion by specialized epithelial cells is a common
mechanism used by mammals to protect the underlying mucosae against various
injuries (pollutants, pathogens, pH). The expression of mucin genes is cell- and 
tissue-specific but is submitted to variations during cell differentiation,
inflammatory process, and is altered during carcinogenesis. The molecular
mechanisms responsible for the control of mucin transcription and expression are 
beginning to be understood as mucin gene promoters and regulatory regions are
characterized. The four gel-forming mucin genes, MUC2-MUC5AC-MUC5B-MUC6, are
clustered on the p15 arm of chromosome 11. Common regulatory mechanisms (PKA,
PKC, PKG and Ca2+ signaling, Sp1/Sp3) may account for the capability of
mucous-secreting cells to express several mucin genes simultaneously. In response
to an insult or during carcinogenesis, the normal pattern of expression is
altered and results from specific answers of the cell by activating different
intracellular signaling pathways. 11p15 mucin genes are regulated at the
transcriptional level by pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1beta, IL-6, TNF-alpha), 
pleiotropic cytokines (IL-4, IL-13, IL-9), bacterial exoproduct (LPS), growth
factors (EGF, TGF-alpha), lipid mediator (PAF), retinoids and hormones. To date, 
the only downstream cascade known to activate mucin gene transcription is the
Src/Ras/MAPK/pp90rsk cascade, which leads to the activation of the transcription 
factor NF-kappaB. Mucin gene transcription is also regulated by ATF-1, CREB and
RAR-alpha transcription factors. Finally, repression of mucin transcription in
cancer cells is under the control of the epigenetic mechanism of methylation. As 
transcriptional regulation of mucin genes begins to be unraveled, it becomes
clear that many signaling pathways are involved. Our understanding of mucin gene 
transcriptional regulation, which awaits more data (identification of the
signaling cascades and active cis-elements within promoters and introns), will
most certainly lead to the use of mucin genes as molecular markers in cancer and 
molecular tools in human gene therapy, and to the synthesis of new therapeutic
agents in inflammatory diseases of the epithelium.

PMID: 11578973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Gene. 2001 Sep 5;275(1):185-94.

Promoter characterization of the human and mouse epilysin (MMP-28) genes.

Illman SA(1), Keski-Oja J, Lohi J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Haartman Institute and Biomedicum Helsinki,
University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, FIN-00014 Helsinki,
Finland.

Epilysin (MMP-28) is a recently cloned member of the matrix metalloproteinase
family (Lohi et al., J. Biol. Chem. 276 (2001) 10134). It is expressed at highest
levels in the skin by basal and suprabasal keratinocytes, and in testis by
developing germ cells. To characterize the epilysin promoter, we isolated a 3.0
kb fragment of human genomic DNA containing 5'-flanking sequence of the epilysin 
gene, and a corresponding 660 bp fragment from the mouse. The 5'-flanking
sequences contain no typical TATA-boxes or CCAAT sequences close to the
translation initiation sites. RNase protection assay revealed that two
transcription start sites are utilized in the human epilysin gene, situated 210
and 230 bp upstream from the translation start site. The promoter contains a
GT-box, situated 300 bp upstream from the translation start site, with homology
to the consensus binding site for transcription factors of the Sp family. This
site is perfectly conserved between the human and mouse promoters. For reporter
gene assays a series of constructs with fragments of increasing length of the
epilysin promoter were coupled to the firefly luciferase gene. Reporter gene
assays indicated that deletion or mutation of the GT-box dramatically reduces the
transcriptional activity both in keratinocytes and in spermatogonia. Gel mobility
shift assays showed that several nuclear proteins bind specifically to this
sequence. Supershift assays with antibodies specific for members of the Sp family
identified Sp1 and Sp3 as components of these protein/DNA complexes and hence as 
possible regulators of the epilysin gene. Our results indicate that the epilysin 
promoter has distinctive structural and functional features, which may control
the unique expression and regulation patterns of the epilysin gene.

PMID: 11574168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Biophys J. 2001 Oct;81(4):2001-9.

Tyrosine sulfation enhances but is not required for PSGL-1 rolling adhesion on
P-selectin.

Rodgers SD(1), Camphausen RT, Hammer DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Institute for Medicine and Engineering,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 (PSGL-1) is a large (240 kDa) glycoprotein found
on the surface of nearly all leukocytes. The mature molecule is decorated with
multiple N- and O-linked glycans and displays copies of the tetrasaccharide
sialyl-Lewis(x) (sLe(X)), as well as a cluster of three tyrosine sulfate
(tyr-SO(3)) groups near the N-terminus of the processed protein. Previous studies
have suggested that PSGL-1 needs to be tyrosine-sulfated, in addition to
glycosylated with sLe(X), to successfully interact with P-selectin. To better
understand how biochemical features of the PSGL-1 ligand are related to its
adhesion phenotype, we have measured the dynamics of adhesion under flow of a
series of well-defined PSGL-1 variants that differ in their biochemical
modification, to both P- and E-selectin-coated substrates. These variants are
distinct PSGL-1 peptides: one that possesses sLe(X) in conjunction with three
N-terminal tyr-SO(3) groups (SGP3), one that possesses sLe(X) without tyrosine
sulfation (GP1), and one that lacks sLe(X) but has three N-terminal tyr-SO(3)
groups (SP3). Although all peptides expressing sLe(X), tyr-SO(3), or both
supported some form of rolling adhesion on P-selectin, only peptides expressing
sLe(X) groups showed rolling adhesion on E-selectin. On P-selectin, the PSGL-1
peptides demonstrated a decreasing strength of adhesion in the following order:
SGP3 > GP1 > SP3. Robust, rolling adhesion on P-selectin was mediated by the GP1 
peptide, despite its lack of tyrosine sulfation. However, the addition of
tyrosine sulfation to glycosylated peptides (SGP3) creates a super ligand for
P-selectin that supports slower rolling adhesion at all shear rates and supports 
rolling adhesion at much higher shear rates. Tyrosine sulfation has no similar
effect on PSGL-1 rolling on E-selectin. Such functional distinctions in rolling
dynamics are uniquely realized with a cell-free system, which permits precise,
unambiguous identification of the functional activity of adhesive ligands. These 
findings are consistent with structural and functional characterizations of the
interactions between these peptides and E- and P-selectin published recently.

PMCID: PMC1301674
PMID: 11566773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Int J Oncol. 2001 Oct;19(4):755-61.

c-Myc and Sp1/3 are required for transactivation of hamster telomerase catalytic 
subunit gene promoter.

Park NH(1), Guo W, Kim HR, Kang MK, Park NH.

Author information: 
(1)Dental and Craniofacial Research Institute, University of California, Los
Angeles 90095-1668, USA. npark@dent.ucla.edu

The hamster and human TERT promoters share common critical protein binding sites,
such as the GC-box or E-box, which is known to be a binding site for Sp1/Sp3
transcriptional factors and c-Myc, respectively. Our previous data demonstrated
that Sp1/Sp3 synergistically transactivate the hamster TERT (hamTERT) promoter.
In this study, we determined the role of c-Myc in the regulation of hamTERT, and 
analyzed the relative significance of GC-boxes and the E-box for transcriptional 
activation of hamster TERT. Wild-type, mutated E-box or mutated GC-box hamTERT
core promoter reporter was introduced into 293T cells in combination with murine 
or human Myc expression vectors. The promoter activity was determined using the
luciferase assay, and the transfection efficiency was normalized with CAT
activity. The electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) was done to prove the
nuclear protein binding activity of the GC-box (region II) or E-box.
Overexpression of murine or human Myc transactivated hamTERT core promoter
activity. Inversion mutation in the E-box or substitution mutation in the
GC-boxes abrogated endogenous or Myc induced hamTERT transactivation. Region II
is the single most important Sp1/3 binding site in transcriptional activation,
and multiple combined mutations in the GC-boxes abolished the hamTERT promoter
activity. These results indicate that c-Myc and Sp1/3 are the major regulatory
determinants of the hamTERT transcriptional activation. The mechanism of TERT
gene activation during immortalization and carcinogenesis may be conserved among 
species.

PMID: 11562751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 23;276(47):43570-9. Epub 2001 Sep 18.

Transcriptional regulation of cell-specific expression of the human cystathionine
beta -synthase gene by differential binding of Sp1/Sp3 to the -1b promoter.

Ge Y(1), Matherly LH, Taub JW.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental and Clinical Therapeutics Program, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer
Institute, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan 48201,
USA.

Cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS) catalyzes the condensation of serine and
homocysteine to form cystathionine, an intermediate step in the synthesis of
cysteine. We previously characterized the CBS -1b minimal promoter (-3792 to
-3667) and found that Sp1/Sp3, nuclear factor Y, and USF-1 were involved in the
regulation of basal promoter activity (Ge, Y., Konrad, M. A., Matherly, L. H.,
Taub, J. W. (2001) Biochem. J. 357, 97-105). In this study, the critical
cis-elements and transcription factors in the CBS -1b upstream region (-4046 to
-3792) were examined in HT1080 and HepG2 cells, which differ approximately
10-fold in levels of CBS transcripts transcribed from the CBS -1b promoter. In
DNase I footprint and gel shift analyses and transient transfections of mutant
CBS -1b promoter constructs into HT1080 and HepG2 cells, transcriptionally
important roles for Sp1/Sp3 binding to three GC boxes and one GT box and for
binding of myeloid zinc finger 1-like proteins to two myeloid zinc finger 1
elements were indicated. In gel shift assays, very low levels of Sp1/Sp3
DNA-protein complexes were detected in HT1080 cells compared with HepG2 cells
despite comparable levels of nuclear factor Y and USF-1 binding and similar
levels of Sp1 and Sp3 proteins on Western blots. Mixing of HT1080 and HepG2
nuclear extracts resulted in no difference in total Sp factor binding in gel
shift assays, thus excluding a role for an unknown activator or inhibitor in the 
disparate Sp1/Sp3 binding between the lines. Increased Sp1/Sp3 binding in gel
shift assays was observed upon treatment of HT1080 nuclear extracts with protein 
kinase A, and decreased Sp1/Sp3 binding resulted from treatment of HepG2 nuclear 
extracts with calf alkaline phosphatase, suggesting a role for changes in Sp1/Sp3
phosphorylation in transcription factor binding and transactivation of the CBS
-1b promoter. Characterization of CBS promoter structure and function should
clarify the molecular bases for variations in CBS gene expression in genetic
diseases and the relationship between CBS and Down syndrome.

PMID: 11562358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 23;276(47):43713-22. Epub 2001 Sep 14.

ZBP-89, Sp1, and nuclear factor-kappa B regulate epithelial neutrophil-activating
peptide-78 gene expression in Caco-2 human colonic epithelial cells.

Keates AC(1), Keates S, Kwon JH, Arseneau KO, Law DJ, Bai L, Merchant JL, Wang
TC, Kelly CP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA. akeates@caregroup.harvard.edu

We reported previously that human colonic epithelial cells produce the C-X-C
chemokine epithelial neutrophil-activating peptide-78 (ENA-78) and that its
expression is up-regulated in ulcerative colitis. The aim of this study was to
investigate the transcriptional regulation of ENA-78 gene expression in Caco-2
intestinal epithelial cells. Reporter gene transfection and electrophoretic
mobility shift assay studies demonstrated that cooperation between two regions of
the ENA-78 promoter were required for maximal gene expression in
interleukin-1beta-stimulated Caco-2 cells. Binding of activated p50/p65 nuclear
factor-kappaB to nucleotides -82 to -91 was essential for
interleukin-1beta-dependent gene transcription, whereas binding of constitutively
expressed zinc-requiring nuclear factors to nucleotides -125 to -134 (site A) was
required for basal gene expression. Scanning mutagenesis of site A demonstrated
overlapping binding elements at this locus. One site (CTCCCCC) bound Sp1 and Sp3,
and overexpression of Sp1 (but not Sp3) up-regulated basal ENA-78 transcription. 
Another site (CCCCTCCCCC) was found to bind the zinc finger nuclear factor
ZBP-89, and overexpression of this protein significantly repressed ENA-78
reporter gene activity. This study demonstrates that ENA-78 gene expression in
Caco-2 intestinal epithelial cells is subject to complex regulation involving the
coordinate binding of ZBP-89, Sp1, and nuclear factor-kappaB to the ENA-78
promoter.

PMID: 11559712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Adv Space Res. 1999;24(4):527-30.

Structure and NIR feature of QCC: a laboratory analog of carbon dust.

Goto M(1), Maihara T, Terada H, Wada S, Kaito C, Kimura S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Kyoto University, Kitashirakawa-Oiwakecho, Sakyo,
Kyoto, Japan.

We have produced thin films of quenched carbonaceous composite (QCC) by
hydrocarbon plasma deposition. The effect of thermal annealing on QCC has been
investigated to understand how QCC, as a laboratory analog of carbon dust, is
transformed in the warm environment around evolved stars. Spectroscopic
measurements have indicated that, by heating, the proportion of aromatic sp2 CH
bonds increases relative to sp3 CH bonds. Carbon onion-like spherules of
approximately 10 nm in diameter are found with electron microscopic images after 
"graphitization" of thermal annealing.

PMID: 11543342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Space Med Med Eng (Beijing). 1998 Feb;11(1):21-5.

[A study on the induction of mutation of paddy rice under space conditions].

[Article in Chinese]

Li Y(1), Jiang X, Li J, Qiu H, Li G, Xie J.

Author information: 
(1)Agricultural Science Research Institute of Fuzhon Prefexture Jiangxi Province,
Linchuan, China.

Rice seeds were carried into space by the recoverable satellite. After recovery
the seeds were sowed on the earth so as to observe the character performance and 
genetic variation of their later generations. The preliminary results showed that
the main characters of the SP1 generation didn't show significant difference from
the control. Among the individual plants of the SP2 generation strong
broad-spectrum segregation appeared in the 9 main agronomic characters. Mutation 
frequency is 4.66%. The individual plants of the SP3 generation were obviously
correlated with the SP4 generation in the average character values of the 5 main 
characters. Stable plant strains were obtained in the SP4 generation. The SP5 and
SP6 generations were put into control and polt tests. As a conclusion, it may be 
considered that certain variations of rice seeds induced by the space conditions 
are heritable to the offsprings, therefore, it can be used as a new method for
mutagenic seed breeding.

PMID: 11541262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Genes Cells. 2001 Aug;6(8):689-97.

Complex phenotype of mice homozygous for a null mutation in the Sp4 transcription
factor gene.

Göllner H(1), Bouwman P, Mangold M, Karis A, Braun H, Rohner I, Del Rey A,
Besedovsky HO, Meinhardt A, van den Broek M, Cutforth T, Grosveld F, Philipsen S,
Suske G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Philipps-Universität
Marburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Sp4 is a zinc finger transcription factor which is closely related to
Sp1 and Sp3. All three proteins recognize the same DNA elements and can act as
transcriptional activators through glutamine-rich activation domains. Unlike Sp1 
and Sp3, which are ubiquitous proteins, Sp4 is highly abundant in the central
nervous system, but also detectable in many other tissues.
RESULTS: We have disrupted the mouse Sp4 gene by a targeted deletion of the exons
encoding the N-terminal activation domains. Sp4 knockout mice show a complete
absence of Sp4 expression. They develop until birth without obvious
abnormalities. After birth, two-thirds die within 4 weeks. Surviving mice are
growth retarded. Male Sp4null mice do not breed. The cause for the breeding
defect remains obscure since they show complete spermatogenesis. In addition,
pheromone receptor genes in the vomeronasal organ appear unaffected. Female
Sp4null mice have a smaller thymus, spleen and uterus. In addition, they exhibit 
a pronounced delay in sexual maturation.
CONCLUSIONS: The phenotype of the Sp4null mice differs significantly from those
described for Sp1-/- and Sp3-/- mice. Thus, the structural similarities, the
common recognition motif and the overlapping expression pattern of these three
transcription factors do not reflect similar physiological functions.

PMID: 11532028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Endocrinology. 2001 Sep;142(9):3817-27.

Butyrate, a histone deacetylase inhibitor, activates the human IGF binding
protein-3 promoter in breast cancer cells: molecular mechanism involves an
Sp1/Sp3 multiprotein complex.

Walker GE(1), Wilson EM, Powell D, Oh Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Oregon Health Sciences University, Portland, Oregon 
97201, USA.

Specific cell growth stimulators and inhibitors regulate IGF binding protein-3
(IGFBP-3), where in turn IGFBP-3 mediates their biological effects. The molecular
mechanism(s) by which these factors regulate IGFBP-3 are unknown. Sodium
butyrate, a histone deacetylase inhibitor causing growth arrest and
differentiation, increases IGFBP-3 expression. We investigated the molecular
mechanism of this induction using an IGFBP-3 promoter reporter system in MCF-7
and Hs578T breast cancer cells. IGFBP-3 promoter activity was induced up to
40-fold following a 24-h treatment with sodium butyrate and 46-fold in cells
treated with trichostatin A, a pure histone deacetylase inhibitor. Deletion
analysis of the IGFBP-3 promoter identified key sodium butyrate-responsive
element(s) to a 45-bp region containing consensus binding sites for Sp1 and
activating protein-2. Sp1 binding to the Sp1 site and Sp3 to the activating
protein-2/GA-box played a functional role in sodium butyrate's activation of the 
IGFBP-3 promoter, however, with no change in binding direct sodium butyrate
regulation was attributed to cofactors. The histone acetyltransferase p300 and
histone deacetylase-1 were identified in multiprotein complexes containing DNA
bound Sp1 and Sp3, with p300 accumulating following sodium butyrate treatment.
Taken together, these data suggest that sodium butyrate increases IGFBP-3
expression by activating the IGFBP-3 promoter via an Sp1/Sp3 multiprotein
complex, a mechanism that may be important for other key regulators of IGFBP-3.

PMID: 11517158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. J Synchrotron Radiat. 2001 Mar 1;8(Pt 2):145-9.

X-ray absorption studies of carbon-related materials.

Pong WF(1), Yueh CL, Chang YD, Tsai MH, Chang YK, Chen YY, Lee JF, Wei SL, Wen
CY, Chen LC, Chen KH, Lin IN, Cheng HF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Tamkang University, Tamsui, Taiwan.
wfpong@mail.tku.edu.tw

X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) measurements have been performed on 
nitrogen-doped diamond films with three different dopant concentrations and
iron-layer-stabilized carbon nanotube (CNT) structures with various diameters at 
the C K-absorption edge using the sample drain current mode. The C K-edge XANES
spectra of these N-doped diamond films resemble that of the undoped diamond
regardless of the dopant concentration, which suggest that the overall bonding
configuration of the C atom is unaltered. N dopants are found to reduce the
intensities of both the sp2- and sp3-bond-derived resonance features in the XANES
spectra. On the other hand, the C K-edge XANES spectra of CNTs indicate that the 
intensities of the pi* and sigma* bands and the interlayer-state features vary
with the diameter of the CNT. This phenomenon may be caused by the
Fe-layer-catalysed bending of the graphite sheet and the interaction between C
and Fe atoms.

PMID: 11512713  [PubMed]


420. J Invest Dermatol. 2001 Aug;117(2):301-8.

Spl phosphorylation induced by serum stimulates the human alpha2(I) collagen gene
expression.

Ihn H(1), Ihn Y, Trojanowska M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina, USA. IN-DER@h.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Serum has been known to stimulate collagen production by dermal fibroblasts. As
part of an ongoing study of the molecular mechanisms of collagen production, we
have investigated transcriptional regulation of the human alpha2(I) collagen gene
by serum in human dermal fibroblasts. Serum responsive elements were mapped by
deletion analysis between bp -353 and -264, and between -148 and -108 in the
alpha2(I) collagen promoter. Further functional analysis of the alpha2(I)
collagen promoter containing various substitution mutations revealed that serum
stimulation of this promoter is mediated equally by a GC-rich region located
between bp -303 and -271 and by the TCCTCC motif located between bp -123 and
-128, both of which constitute binding sites for transcription factor Spl and
Sp3. No differences were observed in electrophoretic mobility shift assays
between unstimulated and serum stimulated fibroblasts. The Spl inhibitor
mithramycin blocked stimulation of the alpha2(I) collagen promoter activity by
serum. Furthermore, immunoprecipitation analysis showed that serum stimulation
increased Spl phosphorylation. In conclusion, this study characterized response
elements that mediate serum stimulation of the human alpha2(I) collagen promoter 
and suggests that serum stimulation was mediated via Sp1/Sp3 binding sites in
this promoter.

PMID: 11511308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Atherosclerosis. 2001 Sep;158(1):61-71.

25-hydroxycholesterol induces lipopolysaccharide-tolerance and decreases a
lipopolysaccharide-induced TNF-alpha secretion in macrophages.

Englund MC(1), Karlsson AL, Wiklund O, Bondjers G, Ohlsson BG.

Author information: 
(1)The Wallenberg Laboratory for Cardiovascular Research, Sahlgrenska University 
Hospital, Göteborg University, SE-413 45 Göteborg, Sweden.
mikael.englund@wlab.wall.gu.se

Several different oxysterols are formed when LDL is oxidized. The role of
oxysterols in the inflammatory process in the atherosclerotic plaque is not
totally elucidated. In this study we have investigated the effect of four
different oxysterols on an LPS-induced TNF-alpha secretion in human macrophages. 
Cultured human macrophages were incubated with 7-keto-, 7beta-hydroxy-,
27-hydroxy- and 25-hydroxycholesterol for 24 h before exposure to endotoxin (LPS)
for 3 h. All oxysterols, except 7-ketocholesterol, significantly decreased an
LPS-induced TNF-alpha secretion. The most pronounced effect was obtained with
25-hydroxycholesterol, where the TNF-alpha secretion was reduced to 8%. This
decreased effect was also found on the TNF-alpha mRNA level. The decreased
LPS-induced TNF-alpha secretion coincided with an increased binding of the
transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 to the TNF-alpha promoter. In vitro studies of 
the TNF-alpha promoter suggests possible interactions between Sp1 and Sp3 and the
NF-kappaB transcription factor complex that might affect the transcriptional
initiation.

PMID: 11500175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Biol Chem. 2001 Oct 12;276(41):38010-22. Epub 2001 Aug 8.

Novel transcriptional regulation of the human CYP3A7 gene by Sp1 and Sp3 through 
nuclear factor kappa B-like element.

Saito T(1), Takahashi Y, Hashimoto H, Kamataki T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Drug Metabolism, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Hokkaido University, N12W6, Kita-ku, Sapporo, Hokkaido 060-0812, Japan.

Human CYP3A7 and CYP3A4 are expressed in fetal and adult livers, respectively,
although the 5'-flanking regions of the two genes show 90% homology. The purpose 
of this study was to clarify the mechanism(s) responsible for the transcriptional
regulation of the CYP3A7 gene in human hepatoma HepG2 cells that showed fetal
phenotypes. Transfection studies using a series of the CYP3A7 or CYP3A4
promoter-luciferase chimeric genes identified a nuclear factor kappaB
(NF-kappaB)-like element between nucleotides -2326 and -2297 that conferred the
transcriptional activation of the CYP3A7 gene. A 1-base pair mismatch within the 
corresponding region of the CYP3A4 gene was sufficient for a differential
enhancer activity. A gel shift assay using nuclear extracts from HepG2 cells
showed that Sp1 and Sp3 bound to the NF-kappaB-like element of the CYP3A7 but not
CYP3A4 gene. Specific activation of the CYP3A7 promoter by Sp1 and Sp3 was
confirmed by a co-transfection of the p3A7NF-kappaB or p3A4NF-kappaB reporter
gene with Sp1 or Sp3 expression plasmid into Drosophila cells, which lacked
endogenous Sp family. Additionally, introduction of mutations into binding sites 
for hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta, upstream stimulatory factor 1, and a basic
transcription element in the proximal promoter attenuated luciferase activity to 
20% of the level seen with the intact CYP3A7 promoter. Thus, we conclude that the
expression of the CYP3A7 gene in HepG2 cells is cooperatively regulated by Sp1,
Sp3, hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta, and upstream stimulatory factor 1.

PMID: 11495920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Aug 14;98(17):9575-80. Epub 2001 Aug 7.

Cross talk among calcineurin, Sp1/Sp3, and NFAT in control of p21(WAF1/CIP1)
expression in keratinocyte differentiation.

Santini MP(1), Talora C, Seki T, Bolgan L, Dotto GP.

Author information: 
(1)Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard 
Medical School, Charlestown 02129, USA.

Calcium functions as a trigger for the switch between epithelial cell growth and 
differentiation. We report here that the calcium/calmodulin-dependent phosphatase
calcineurin is involved in this process. Treatment of primary mouse keratinocytes
with cyclosporin A, an inhibitor of calcineurin activity, suppresses the
expression of terminal differentiation markers and of p21(WAF1/Cip1) and
p27(KIP1), two cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors that are usually induced with
differentiation. In parallel with down-modulation of the endogenous genes,
suppression of calcineurin function blocks induction of the promoters for the
p21(WAF1/Cip1) and loricrin differentiation marker genes, whereas activity of
these promoters is enhanced by calcineurin overexpression. The calcineurin-
responsive region of the p21 promoter maps to a 78-bp Sp1/Sp3-binding sequence
next to the TATA box, and calcineurin induces activity of the p21 promoter
through Sp1/Sp3-dependent transcription. We find that the endogenous NFAT-1 and
-2 transcription factors, major downstream targets of calcineurin, associate with
Sp1 in keratinocytes in a calcineurin-dependent manner, and calcineurin
up-regulates Sp1/Sp3-dependent transcription and p21 promoter activity in
synergism with NFAT1/2. Thus, our study reveals an important role for calcineurin
in control of keratinocyte differentiation and p21 expression, and points to a
so-far-unsuspected interconnection among this phosphatase, NFATs, and
Sp1/Sp3-dependent transcription.

PMCID: PMC55494
PMID: 11493684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Aug 10;286(1):55-60.

Cooperative regulation of CYP3A5 gene transcription by NF-Y and Sp family
members.

Iwano S(1), Saito T, Takahashi Y, Fujita K, Kamataki T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Drug Metabolism, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Hokkaido University, N12W6, Kita-ku, Sapporo, Hokkaido 060-0812, Japan.

The purpose of this study was to clarify the mechanism(s) responsible for the
transcriptional regulation of the human CYP3A5 gene. It was found that a region
from nucleotides -90 to -40 was involved in the transcriptional activity of the
CYP3A5 gene by transfection of a series of 5'-truncated promoter-luciferase
chimeric genes into human hepatoma HepG2 cells. A gel shift assay using nuclear
extracts prepared from HepG2 cells showed that nuclear factor-Y (NF-Y) and
specificity protein (Sp) 1 and Sp3 bound to CCAAT box (-78/-68) and a basic
transcription element (BTE) (-67/-46) in the CYP3A5 gene. Furthermore,
introduction of mutations in the CCAAT box, the BTE, or both elements decreased
the transcriptional activity to 10, 21, or 4% of that seen with the intact gene. 
Thus, we conclude that the transcription of the CYP3A5 gene is cooperatively
regulated by NF-Y, Sp1, and Sp3 in HepG2 cells.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11485307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. J Biol Chem. 2001 Oct 19;276(42):39368-78. Epub 2001 Aug 1.

Transcriptional regulation of the p67phox gene: role of AP-1 in concert with
myeloid-specific transcription factors.

Li SL(1), Valente AJ, Wang L, Gamez MJ, Clark RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Texas Health Science Center and South
Texas Veterans Health Care System, Audie L. Murphy Division, San Antonio, Texas
78229-3900, USA.

We have investigated the myeloid-specific transcriptional regulation of
p67(phox), an essential component of phagocyte respiratory burst NADPH oxidase.
Analysis was carried out on the p67(phox) 5'-flanking region from -3669 to -4
(relative to ATG), including the first exon and intron and part of the second
exon. The construct extending from -985 to -4 produced the highest luciferase
activity in myeloid HL-60 cells but was not active in HeLa or Jurkat cells,
indicating myeloid-specific expression. Four active elements were identified:
Sp1/Sp3 at -694, PU.1 at -289, AP-1 at -210, and PU.1/HAF1 at -182, the latter
three being in the first intron. These cis elements bound their cognate
transacting factors both in vitro and in vivo. Mutation of the Sp1, PU.1, or
PU.1/HAF1 site each decreased promoter activity by 35-50%. Mutations in all three
sites reduced promoter activity by 90%. However, mutation of the AP-1 site alone 
nearly abolished promoter activity. The AP-1 site bound Jun and Fos proteins from
HL-60 cell nuclear extract. Co-expression with Jun B in AP-1-deficient cells
increased promoter activity by 3-fold. These data show that full p67(phox)
promoter activity requires cooperation between myeloid-specific and nonmyeloid
transcription factors, with AP-1 being the most critical for function.

PMID: 11483614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2001 Jul 25;1540(1):32-42.

Distinct patterns of protein binding to the MAT2A promoter in normal and leukemic
T cells.

Halim AB(1), LeGros HL Jr, Chamberlin ME, Geller A, Kotb M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Tennessee, Memphis 38104, USA.

The metabolism of S-adenosylmethionine (AdoMet), a key molecule in regulating T
cell differentiation and proliferation, is different in normal and leukemic T
cells. To delineate the basis for these differences we studied the
transcriptional regulation of human methionine adenosyltransferase II (MAT II),
which catalyzes AdoMet synthesis in these cells. Recently, we identified an Sp1
site in the proximal promoter of the MAT2A gene, which encodes the alpha2
catalytic subunit of MAT II, that is essential for the in vitro and in vivo
promoter activity in Jurkat leukemic T cells, and that involves binding of the
nuclear factors Sp2 and Sp3, but not Sp1. Here, the in vitro and in vivo activity
of the proximal MAT2A promoter in normal resting, PHA-stimulated, and leukemic
human T cells was compared. Significantly different patterns of protein factor
interaction in the proximal region of the MAT2A promoter were found. Normal
resting and activated T cells produced complexes of significantly lower molecular
weight than those formed in leukemic T cells. Supershift studies coupled with
analysis of proteins bound to the proximal promoter suggest that low levels of
expression of Sp2 and Sp3 in normal T cells may be responsible for the difference
in the in vitro promoter activity between normal and leukemic cells. Mutation of 
the key Sp1 site equally reduced the in vivo promoter activity in normal and
malignant T cells; by contrast, it had significantly different effects on
protein-DNA interactions in normal and leukemic T cells. Together, the data
support the idea that differences in protein-DNA interactions may contribute to
significant differences in MAT2A regulation in normal and malignant cells.

PMID: 11476892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Nat Struct Biol. 2001 Aug;8(8):689-94.

X-ray snapshots of serine protease catalysis reveal a tetrahedral intermediate.

Wilmouth RC(1), Edman K, Neutze R, Wright PA, Clifton IJ, Schneider TR, Schofield
CJ, Hajdu J.

Author information: 
(1)The Dyson Perrins Laboratory and Oxford Centre for Molecular Sciences,
University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QY, UK.

Studies on the catalytic mechanism and inhibition of serine proteases are widely 
used as paradigms for teaching enzyme catalysis. Ground-breaking work on the
structures of chymotrypsin and subtilisin led to the idea of a conserved
catalytic triad formed by the active site Ser, His and Asp residues. An oxyanion 
hole, consisting of the peptide amide of the active site serine and a
neighbouring glycine, was identified, and hydrogen bonding in the oxyanion hole
was suggested to stabilize the two proposed tetrahedral intermediates on the
catalytic pathway. Here we show electron density changes consistent with the
formation of a tetrahedral intermediate during the hydrolysis of an acyl-enzyme
complex formed between a natural heptapeptide and elastase. No electron density
for an enzyme-product complex was observed. The structures also suggest a
mechanism for the synchronization of hydrolysis and peptide release triggered by 
the conversion of the sp2 hybridized carbonyl carbon to an sp3 carbon in the
tetrahedral intermediate. This affects the location of the peptide in the active 
site cleft, triggering the collapse of a hydrogen bonding network between the
peptide and the beta-sheet of the active site.

PMID: 11473259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Mech Dev. 2001 Aug;106(1-2):77-83.

Impaired ossification in mice lacking the transcription factor Sp3.

Göllner H(1), Dani C, Phillips B, Philipsen S, Suske G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Emil-Mannkopff-Strasse 2,
35037, Marburg, Germany.

Sp3 is a ubiquitously expressed member of the Sp family of transcription factors.
Recently, the mouse Sp3 gene has been disrupted by homologous recombination. Sp3 
null mice die immediately after birth due to respiratory failure. In addition,
these mice show a pronounced defect in late tooth formation. Here we show that
Sp3 is also required for proper skeletal ossification. Both endochondral and
intramembranous ossification are impaired in E18.5 Sp3-/- embryos. The delay in
ossification is reflected by reduced expression of the osteoblast-specific marker
gene osteocalcin. The transcription factor - core binding factor 1 (Cbfa1)--that 
is essential for bone formation, however, is expressed at normal levels. In vitro
differentiation studies using Sp3-/- ES cells further support the conclusion that
Sp3 is needed for correct bone formation. The capacity of Sp3-/- cells to undergo
osteogenic differentiation in vitro is reduced and osteocalcin expression is
significantly diminished. Our studies establish Sp3 as an essential transcription
factor for late bone development.

PMID: 11472836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Gene. 2001 Jul 11;272(1-2):191-7.

Transcriptional regulation of human oxysterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase gene (CYP7B1)
by Sp1.

Wu Z(1), Chiang JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pathology, Northeastern Ohio
Universities College of Medicine, P.O. Box 95, Rootstown, OH 44272, USA.

Oxysterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase catalyzes hydroxylation of oxysterols and
neurosterols and plays a role in the alternative bile acid synthesis pathway.
This gene is widely expressed in many organs and peripheral tissues and may
protect tissues from the toxicity of oxysterols. Mutation in CYP7B1 caused
neonatal cholestasis. To examine the regulatory mechanisms governing CYP7B1
expression, the 5' flanking sequence of the CYP7B1 was analyzed and revealed a
CpG island of about 1.2 kb. Transient transfection assays of deletion mutants of 
the CYP7B1 promoter-luciferase reporter gene in human liver-derived HepG2,
fibroblast NT1088, and human embryonic kidney 293 cell lines revealed that the
region from -291 to +189 was critical for gene transcription. Three GC box
sequences located between -25 and +10 were essential for basal transcription
because mutations of these sequences markedly reduced promoter activity. Sp1 and 
Sp3 bound to these sequences as demonstrated by DNase I footprinting assays and
electrophoretic mobility shift assay. Thus, regulation of CYP7B1 transcription by
Sp1 may play a pivotal role in regulating oxysterol levels, which regulate
cholesterol metabolism.

PMID: 11470525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Mol Endocrinol. 2001 Aug;15(8):1277-93.

NF-1C, Sp1, and Sp3 are essential for transcription of the human gene for P450c17
(steroid 17alpha-hydroxylase/17,20 lyase) in human adrenal NCI-H295A cells.

Lin CJ(1), Martens JW, Miller WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and The Metabolic Research Unit, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143-0978, USA.

Cytochrome P450c17 catalyzes steroid 17alpha-hydroxylase and 17,20 lyase
activities, which are required for the biosynthesis of cortisol and sex steroids.
Human P450c17 is expressed in a cAMP-responsive, cell-specific, developmentally
programmed fashion, but little is known about its transcriptional regulation.
Expression of deletion mutants of up to 2,500 bp of human 5'-flanking DNA in
human adrenal NCI-H295A cells indicated that most regulatory activity was
confined to the first 227 bp. Deoxyribonuclease I footprinting of the proximal
promoter identified the TATA box, an steroidogenic factor-1 site, and three
previously uncharacterized sites at -107/85, at -178/-152, and at -220/-185.
EMSAs and methylation interference assays suggested that the -107/-85 site and
the -178/-152 site bind members of the NF-1 (nuclear factor-1) family of
transcription factors. An NF-1 consensus sequence generated similar DNA/protein
complexes, and antibodies against NF-1C2/CTF2 supershifted the complexes formed
by the -107/-85 site, the -178/-152 site, and the NF-1 consensus site. Western
blots of nuclear extracts from NCI-H295A cells probed with this NF-1 antiserum
identified two NF-1 isoforms between 50 and 55 kDa. The presence of NF-1C2 (CTF2)
and CTF5 in NCI-H295A cells was demonstrated by RT-PCR and sequencing. Mutation
of both the -107/-85 and the -178/-152 NF-1 sites reduced basal transcription by 
half. Supershift assays showed that the ubiquitous proteins Sp1 and Sp3 both bind
to the -227/-184 region, and that mutation of their binding sites reduced
transcription by 75%. Mutation of the Sp1/Sp3 site plus the two NF-1 sites
eliminated almost all detectable transcription. Thus, Sp1 and Sp3 binding to the 
-227/-184 site and NF-1C proteins binding to the -107/-85 and the -178/-152 sites
are crucial for adrenal transcription of the human gene for P450c17.

PMID: 11463853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Jul 20;285(3):838-44.

Role of the Sp family of transcription factors on glucagon receptor gene
expression.

Geiger A(1), Salazar G, Kervran A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U376, CHU Arnaud de Villeneuve, 371, rue Doyen G. Giraud, 34295
Montpellier Cedex 5, France.

The glucagon receptor mediates the actions of glucagon on carbohydrate metabolism
by the liver and on insulin release by the pancreatic beta-cell, which are key
processes in the control of glucose homeostasis. The 5'-region of the mouse
glucagon receptor gene has been recently cloned and two functional promoters were
characterized. In the present study, we show that most of the glucagon receptor
mRNA was transcribed from the distal promoter, in the mouse liver. In the distal 
promoter region, a GC-rich sequence with five putative binding sites for the Sp
family of transcription factors was localized. To elucidate the role of these
Sp1-binding sites in the mouse MIN6 beta-cell line, the expression of reporter
gene constructs containing deletion or point mutation of each site was carried
out. Selective mutation of the second Sp1-binding site decreased the activity of 
the distal promoter. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay with a DNA fragment
spanning the three first Sp1 sites confirmed that the second site bound
specifically MIN6 nuclear proteins, and supershift using specific Sp antibodies
demonstrated that it interacted with Sp3 but not Sp1 transcription factors. These
data illustrate that the basal expression of the mouse glucagon receptor gene,
driven by the distal promoter, requires an Sp1-binding site that binds Sp3
proteins.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11453669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. J Biol Chem. 2001 Sep 21;276(38):35786-93. Epub 2001 Jul 11.

The tumor suppressor gene PTEN can regulate cardiac hypertrophy and survival.

Schwartzbauer G(1), Robbins J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Molecular Cardiovascular Biology,
Children's Hospital Research Foundation, Cincinnati Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

Cardiac hypertrophy is a complex process involving the coordinated actions of
many genes. In a high throughput screen designed to identify transcripts that are
actively translated during cardiac hypertrophy, we identified a number of genes
with established links to hypertrophy, including those coding for Sp3, c-Jun,
annexin II, cathepsin B, and HB-EGF, thus showing the general utility of the
screen. Focusing on a candidate transcript that has not been previously linked to
hypertrophy, we found that protein levels of the tumor suppressor PTEN
(phosphatase and tensin homologue on chromosome ten) were increased in the
absence of increased messenger RNA levels. Increased PTEN expression by
recombinant adenovirus in cultured neonatal rat primary cardiomyocytes caused
cardiomyocyte apoptosis as evidenced by increased caspase-3 activity and cleaved 
poly(A)DP-ribose polymerase. Expression of PTEN was also able to block growth
factor signaling through the phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-triphosphate pathway.
Surprisingly, expression of a catalytically inactive PTEN mutant led to
cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, with increased protein synthesis, cell surface area,
and atrial natriuretic factor expression. This hypertrophy was accompanied by an 
increase in Akt activity and improved cell viability in culture.

PMID: 11448956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. J Biol Chem. 2001 Oct 5;276(40):36881-95. Epub 2001 Jul 10.

Sp3 represses the Sp1-mediated transactivation of the human COL2A1 gene in
primary and de-differentiated chondrocytes.

Ghayor C(1), Chadjichristos C, Herrouin JF, Ala-Kokko L, Suske G, Pujol JP,
Galera P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie du Tissu Conjonctif, Faculté de Médecine, CHU niveau 
3, Avenue de la Côte de Nacre, 14032, Caen Cedex, France.

Sp1 and Sp3 effects on the transcription of the human alpha1(II) procollagen gene
(COL2A1) were investigated in both differentiated and de-differentiated rabbit
articular chondrocytes. Transient transfection with constructs of deleted COL2A1 
promoter sequences driving the luciferase reporter gene revealed that the region 
spanning -266 to +121 base pairs showed Sp1-enhancing effects, whatever the
differentiation state. In contrast, Sp3 did not influence COL2A1 gene
transcription. Concomitant overexpression of the two Sp proteins demonstrated
that Sp3 blocked the Sp1 induction of COL2A1 promoter activity. Moreover,
inhibition of Sp1/Sp3 binding to their target DNA sequence decreased both COL2A1 
gene transcription and Sp1-enhancing effects. DNase I footprinting and gel
retardation assays revealed that Sp1 and Sp3 bind specifically to cis-sequences
of the COL2A1 gene promoter whereby they exert their transcriptional effects. Sp1
and Sp3 levels were found to be reduced in de-differentiated chondrocytes, as
revealed by DNA-binding and immunochemical study. Sp1 specifically activated
collagen neosynthesis whatever the differentiation state of chondrocytes,
suggesting that this factor exerts a major role in the expression of collagen
type II. However, our data indicate that type II collagen-specific expression in 
chondrocytes depend on both the Sp1/Sp3 ratio and cooperation of Sp1 with other
transcription factors, the amounts of which are also modulated by phenotype
alteration.

PMID: 11447232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. J Biol Chem. 2001 Sep 7;276(36):33384-92. Epub 2001 Jul 9.

Molecular cloning and characterization of human nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drug-activated gene promoter. Basal transcription is mediated by Sp1 and Sp3.

Baek SJ(1), Horowitz JM, Eling TE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis, NIEHS, National Institutes of Health, 
Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709, USA.

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug-activated gene (NAG-1) is known to be
associated with anti-tumorigenic activity and belongs to the transforming growth 
factor-beta superfamily. In the present study, we cloned the promoter region
(-3500 to +41) and investigated the transcriptional regulatory mechanisms of the 
basal expression of the human NAG-1 gene. Several potential transcription
factor-binding sites in this region were identified. Based on the results from
clones of nested deletions, the construct between -133 and +41 base pairs
contains three Sp1-binding sites (Sp1-A, Sp1-B, and Sp1-C), which confer basal
transcription specific activity of NAG-1 expression. When the Sp1-C site was
mutated (GG to TT), a 60-80% decrease in promoter activity was observed in
HCT-116 cells. Gel shift, co-transfection, and chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays showed that the Sp transcription factors bind to the Sp1-binding sites and
transactivate NAG-1 expression. In addition, chicken ovalbumin upstream
promoter-transcription factor 1 can interact with the C-terminal region of Sp1
and Sp3 proteins and induce NAG-1 promoter activity through Sp1 and Sp3
transcription factors. These results identify the critical regulatory regions for
the human NAG-1 basal promoter. Furthermore, the results suggest that the level
of expression of the NAG-1 gene will depend on the availability of Sp proteins
and on co-factors such as chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter-transcription
factor 1.

PMID: 11445565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 31;276(35):32854-9. Epub 2001 Jul 6.

5-azaC treatment enhances expression of transforming growth factor-beta receptors
through down-regulation of Sp3.

Ammanamanchi S(1), Brattain MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The University of Texas Health Science Center, San
Antonio, Texas 78229, USA.

We have previously reported that Sp3 acts as a transcriptional repressor of
transforming growth factor-beta receptors type I (RI) and type II (RII). We now
present data suggesting that treatment of MCF-7L breast and GEO colon cancer
cells with 5-aza cytidine (5-azaC) leads to down-regulation of Sp3 and the
concomitant induction of RI and RII. Western blot and gel shift analyses on
5-azaC-treated MCF-7L and GEO nuclear extracts indicated reduced Sp3 protein
levels and decreased binding of Sp3 protein to radiolabeled consensus Sp1
oligonucleotide. Southwestern analysis detected decreased binding of Sp3 to RI
and RII promoters in 5-azaC-treated MCF-7L and GEO cells, suggesting a
correlation between decreased Sp3 binding and enhanced RI and RII expression in
these cells. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and nuclear run-on
data from 5-azaC-treated MCF-7L and GEO cells indicated down-regulation of Sp3
mRNA as a result of decreased transcription of Sp3. We reported earlier that
5-azaC treatment induces RI and RII expression through increased Sp1 protein
levels/activities in these cells. These studies demonstrate that the effect of
5-azaC involves a combination of effects on Sp1 and Sp3.

PMID: 11443124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Arch Med Res. 2001 Jul-Aug;32(4):263-7.

Expression of TCF, TPF/YY1, and the Sp family transcription factors in rabbit
endometrium throughout pregnancy.

Arias J(1), Hernández A, Barrón A, Castro I.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Instituto Nacional de
Perinatología, Mexico City, Mexico.

BACKGROUND: TCF, TPF/YY1, and the Sp family are specific transcription factors
that bind sequences found within the uteroglobin (UG) gene promoter region that
are necessary for transcription. To date, UG gene expression and regulation in
vivo are not fully understood. The purpose of this study was to assess the
expression patterns of these factors in the rabbit endometrium throughout
pregnancy.
METHODS: Endometrial nuclear extracts were obtained from female rabbits on days
0, 3, 5, 7, 15, and 28 after mating. Transcription factor expression was assessed
by DNA-protein binding assays using endometrial nuclear proteins and specific
oligonucleotides. Band shifts were observed on 4% acrylamide gels and analyzed by
densitometry.
RESULTS: The expression patterns of the transcription factors analyzed here
differed, as TPF/YY1 and Sp3/SpR-2 were expressed constitutively while TCF and
Sp1 showed variable expression patterns throughout pregnancy.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that UG gene expression in the intact pregnant
rabbit is controlled by two constitutive and two regulated factors, and that the 
DNA-binding sites are located at the TATA box and the GT1 sites within the gene
promoter.

PMID: 11440780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. J Biol Chem. 2001 Sep 7;276(36):34259-69. Epub 2001 Jul 2.

Transcriptional regulation of the murine acetyl-CoA synthetase 1 gene through
multiple clustered binding sites for sterol regulatory element-binding proteins
and a single neighboring site for Sp1.

Ikeda Y(1), Yamamoto J, Okamura M, Fujino T, Takahashi S, Takeuchi K, Osborne TF,
Yamamoto TT, Ito S, Sakai J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Endocrinology, and Vascular Medicine, Department of
Medicine, the Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai 980-8574,
Japan.

Cytosolic acetyl-CoA synthetase (AceCS1) activates acetate to supply the cells
with acetyl-CoA for lipid synthesis. The cDNA for the mammalian AceCS1 has been
isolated recently, and the mRNA was shown to be negatively regulated by sterols
in cultured cells. In the current study, we describe the molecular mechanisms
directing the sterol-regulated expression of murine AceCS1 by cloning and
functional studies of the 5'-flanking region of the AceCS1 gene. An AceCS1
promoter-reporter gene (approximately 2.1 kilobase pairs) was negatively
regulated when sterols were added to the medium of cultured cells, and the
promoter was markedly induced by co-transfection of a plasmid that expresses the 
transcriptionally active nuclear form of either sterol regulatory element-binding
protein (SREBP)-1a or -2 in HepG2 cells. Sequence analysis suggested that the
AceCS1 promoter contains an E-box, two putative CCAAT-boxes, eight sterol
regulatory element (SRE) motifs, and six GC-boxes. Gel shift assays demonstrated 
that all eight SRE motifs bound purified SREBP-1a in vitro with similar affinity.
Luciferase reporter gene assays revealed that sterol regulation was critically
dependent on three closely spaced SRE motifs and an adjacent GC-box. However,
mutation of two putative upstream CCAAT-boxes did not affect SREBP dependent
activation. Electrophoretic mobility "supershift" analyses confirmed that both
Sp1 and Sp3 bound to the critical GC-box. In addition, transfection studies in
Drosophila SL2 cells demonstrated that SREBP synergistically activated the AceCS1
promoter along with Sp1 or Sp3 but not with nuclear factor-Y.

PMID: 11435428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Eur J Biochem. 2001 Jul;268(13):3736-43.

SP3 and AP-1 mediate transcriptional activation of the lamin A proximal promoter.

Muralikrishna B(1), Parnaik VK.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, India.

Lamin A is a major component of the nuclear lamina that is expressed in various
types of differentiated cells. We have analysed previously the putative promoter 
sequences of the gene and shown that the rat lamin A proximal promoter contains
two essential motifs, a GC box that can bind to Sp1 and Sp3, and an AP-1 motif
that can bind to c-Jun and c-Fos. In this study we have investigated the role of 
Sp1 and Sp3 in transactivation of the promoter. Functional analysis of the
promoter in Drosophila SL2 cells has demonstrated that it is inactive in the
absence of Sp proteins. Activation by expression of Sp3 is more pronounced than
that by Sp1 although both proteins can bind to the GC box in vitro; activation
clearly depends on an intact GC box as deduced from mutant analysis. Promoter
activity in SL2 cells also requires an intact AP-1 motif, which can bind to
endogenous Drosophila Jun and Fos proteins. Furthermore, overexpression of c-Jun 
and c-Fos results in fourfold activation of the promoter in PCC-4 embryonal
carcinoma cells. Our demonstration that activation of the lamin A proximal
promoter is mediated by Sp3 and AP-1 transcription factors affords a basis for
further studies on the regulation of this important gene during development and
disease.

PMID: 11432740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 31;276(35):33101-10. Epub 2001 Jun 21.

Structure and expression of the Ah receptor repressor gene.

Baba T(1), Mimura J, Gradin K, Kuroiwa A, Watanabe T, Matsuda Y, Inazawa J,
Sogawa K, Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Science, Graduate School of Life Science, Tohoku
University, Sendai 980-8578, Japan.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) repressor (AhRR) gene has been isolated and
characterized from a mouse genomic library. The gene is distributed as 11 exons
in a total length of about 60 kilobase pairs. Fluorescence in situ hybridization 
analysis has shown that the AhRR gene is located at mouse chromosome 13C2, at rat
chromosome 1p11.2, and at human chromosome 5p15.3. The AhRR gene has a TATA-less 
promoter and several transcription start sites. In addition, putative regulatory 
DNA sequences such as xenobiotic responsive element (XRE), GC box, and
NF-kappaB-binding sites have been identified in the 5'-upstream region of the
AhRR gene. Transient transfection analyses of HeLa cells with reporter genes that
contain deletions and point mutations in the AhRR promoter revealed that all
three XREs mediated the inducible expression of the AhRR gene by
3-methylcholanthrene treatment, and furthermore, GC box sequences were
indispensable for a high level of inducible expression and for constitutive
expression. Moreover, by using gel mobility shift assays we were able to show
that the AhR/Arnt heterodimer binds to the XREs with very low affinity, which is 
due to three varied nucleotides outside the XRE core sequence. We have also shown
that Sp1 and Sp3 can bind to the GC boxes. Finally, both transient transfection
analysis and gel mobility shift assay revealed that the AhRR gene is up-regulated
by a p65/p50 heterodimer that binds to the NF-kappaB site when the cells has been
exposed to 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate, and this inducible expression
was further enhanced by cotreatment of 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate and
3-methylcholanthrene.

PMID: 11423533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Ultramicroscopy. 2001 Jul;88(2):111-25.

TEM-simulation of amorphous carbon films: influence of supercell packaging.

Schultrich H(1), Schultrich B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Angewandte Physik, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany.
helga.schultrich@physik.tu-dresden.de

Recent developments in thin film technology allow to prepare deliberately
amorphous carbon films with structures widely varying between graphite-like (sp2)
and diamond-like (sp3) atomic bonds. This leads to amorphous structures with
correspondingly varying densities. By periodically changing deposition
conditions, nanometer multilayers may be prepared consisting of carbon layers of 
different density. Simulation of the electron microscopic imaging allows to
differentiate between such real structural details (on the nanometer scale) and
artefacts induced by the imaging procedure. But it must be assured that the
modeled structure reflects the real one with sufficient accuracy. Thorough
comparison of different simulation strategies shows that for the adequate
simulation of TEM imaging of amorphous materials, the thickness of the layer with
independently distributed atoms has to exceed a certain limit. Then, the
statistical scattering of the randomly distributed atoms will be averaged.
Otherwise, if the model of the transmission electron microscopy sample is
constructed as iteration of thin identical supercells, the superposition of
scattering waves with constant phase differences results in enhanced local
fluctuations burying the multilayer structure. For thicker packages of supercells
with independent random distributions, the effect of statistical atomic
arrangements is more and more leveled off. Hence, nanometer structures based on
regions with different density will be visible more distinctively in the random
background. For carbon, this critical thickness amounts to about 4 nm. This is of
special importance for the visualization of nanoscaled heterogeneities like
multilayers or nanotube-like inclusions in amorphous matrices.

PMID: 11419873  [PubMed]


441. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 17;276(33):30923-33. Epub 2001 Jun 19.

Characterization of human mucin gene MUC4 promoter: importance of growth factors 
and proinflammatory cytokines for its regulation in pancreatic cancer cells.

Perrais M(1), Pigny P, Ducourouble MP, Petitprez D, Porchet N, Aubert JP, Van
Seuningen I.

Author information: 
(1)Unité INSERM 377, Place de Verdun, 59045 Lille Cedex, France.

The human mucin gene MUC4 encodes a large transmembrane mucin that is thought to 
play important roles in tumor cell biology and that is overexpressed in human
pancreatic carcinomas. In this report, we describe the structure and functional
activity of the 5'-flanking region, including 1.0 kilobase of the promoter. The
long 5'-untranslated region (2.7 kilobases) is characterized by a high content of
GC in its 3'-end. The first TATA box was located at -2672/-2668. Multiple
transcription start sites and a high density of putative binding sites for Sp1
(GC and CACCC boxes), AP-1/-2/-4, cAMP-responsive element-binding protein, GATA, 
GR, and STAT transcription factors were found within the 5'-flanking region.
Transcriptional activity of the promoter was assessed using pGL3-luciferase
deletion mutants in two MUC4-expressing (CAPAN-1 and CAPAN-2) and one
nonexpressing (PANC-1) pancreatic cancer cell line. Two highly active fragments
(-219/-1 and -2781/-2572) that drive MUC4 transcription in CAPAN-1 and CAPAN-2
cells were identified. Gel retardation assays indicated that Sp1 and Sp3 bind to 
cognate cis-elements found in the 5'-flanking region and that Sp1 transactivates,
whereas Sp3 inhibits the GC-rich region (-464/-1) in CAPAN-2 cells. Activation of
protein kinase C with phorbol ester and treatment of cells with epidermal growth 
factor and transforming growth factor-alpha resulted in up-regulation of the
promoter. Tumor necrosis factor-alpha and interferon (IFN)-gamma inflammatory
cytokines had no or mild effect on MUC4 transcriptional activity when used alone.
However, a very strong synergistic effect (10-12-fold activation) between
IFN-gamma and tumor necrosis factor-alpha or IFN-gamma and transforming growth
factor-alpha was obtained in CAPAN-2 cells. Altogether these results demonstrate 
that the 5'-flanking region of MUC4 contains epithelial cell-specific, positive, 
and negative regulatory cis-elements, that Sp1/Sp3 are important regulators of
MUC4 basal expression, and that its regulation in pancreatic cancer cells
involves complex interplay between several signaling pathways.

PMID: 11418607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Biochem J. 2001 Jul 1;357(Pt 1):97-105.

Transcriptional regulation of the human cystathionine beta-synthase -1b basal
promoter: synergistic transactivation by transcription factors NF-Y and Sp1/Sp3.

Ge Y(1), Konrad MA, Matherly LH, Taub JW.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental and Clinical Therapeutics Program, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer
Institute, 110 East Warren Avenue, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

Cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS) catalyses the condensation of serine and
homocysteine to form cystathionine, an intermediate step in the synthesis of
cysteine. Human CBS encodes five distinct 5' non-coding exons, the most frequent 
termed CBS -1a and CBS -1b, each transcribed from its own unique GC-rich
TATA-less promoter. The minimal transcriptional region (-3792 to -3667) of the
CBS -1b promoter was defined by 5'- and 3'-deletions, and transient transfections
of reporter gene constructs in HepG2 cells, characterized by CBS transcription
exclusively from the -1b promoter. Included in this 125 bp region are 3 GC-boxes 
(termed GC-a, GC-b and GC-c), an inverted CAAT-box and an E-box. By gel-shift and
supershift assays, binding of specificity protein (Sp)1 and Sp3 to the GC-box
elements, upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF-1) to the E-box, and both nuclear
factor (NF)-Y and an NF-1-like factor to the CAAT box could be demonstrated. By
transient trans fections and reporter gene assays in HepG2 and Drosophila SL2
cells, a functional interplay was indicated between NF-Y binding to the CAAT-box,
or between USF-1 binding to the E-box, and Sp1/Sp3 binding to the GC-box
elements. In SL2 cells, NF-Y and Sp1/Sp3 were synergistic. Furthermore, both Sp1 
and the long Sp3 isoform transactivated the CBS -1b minimal promoter; however,
the short Sp3 isoforms were potent repressors. These results may explain the
cell- or tissue-specific regulation of CBS transcription, and clarify the bases
for alterations in CBS gene expression in human disease and Down's syndrome.

PMCID: PMC1221932
PMID: 11415440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Jun 15;284(3):763-70.

Transcriptional regulation of human 3'-phosphoadenosine 5'-phosphosulfate
synthase 1.

Shimizu C(1), Fuda H, Lee YC, Strott CA.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Steroid Regulation, Endocrinology and Reproduction Research Branch,
NICHD, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Sulfonation, which is essential for normal growth, development and maintenance of
the internal milieu, requires the universal sulfonate donor molecule
3'-phosphoadenosine 5'-phosphosulfate (PAPS) produced from ATP and inorganic
sulfate by two bifunctional PAPS synthase isozymes. The gene for PAPS synthase 1 
containing neither a TATA nor a CCAAT box was found to be under the influence of 
the Sp1 family of transcription factors. Multiple GC/GT boxes are present in the 
proximal promoter region and deletion analysis implicated their involvement in
transcription, a finding supported by mutational analysis of specific GC/GT
boxes. Nuclear extract of SW13 cells, which highly express PAPS synthase 1,
contains proteins that bind to probes possessing specific GC/GT boxes;
furthermore, the presence of Sp1, Sp2, and Sp3 proteins in nuclear extracts was
confirmed by supershift analysis. Cotransfection experiments using SL2 cells
yielded additional support for the involvement of Sp1 in transcriptional
regulation of the PAPS synthase 1 gene; the involvement of Sp2 and/or Sp3 is
presently unclear.

PMID: 11396968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. J Mol Graph Model. 2001;19(2):222-31.

Curvature matching and strain relief in bucky-tori: usage of sp3-hybridization
and nonhexagonal rings.

Babic D(1), Klein DJ, Schmalz TG.

Author information: 
(1)Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia.

The relief of different types of curvature strain in bucky-tori of elemental
carbon is considered in a general formal framework. This theory then is used to
aid in the design of several structures, which are treated via molecular
mechanics. Novel illustrations of the remnant strain are made, and some modest
conclusions as to the nature of the structure of the experimentally observed
bucky-tori are suggested.

PMID: 11391873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Jun 19;98(13):7558-63. Epub 2001 Jun 5.

Dopamine receptor regulating factor, DRRF: a zinc finger transcription factor.

Hwang CK(1), D'Souza UM, Eisch AJ, Yajima S, Lammers CH, Yang Y, Lee SH, Kim YM, 
Nestler EJ, Mouradian MM.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Pharmacology Unit, Experimental Therapeutics Branch, National
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892-1406, USA.

Dopamine receptor genes are under complex transcription control, determining
their unique regional distribution in the brain. We describe here a zinc finger
type transcription factor, designated dopamine receptor regulating factor (DRRF),
which binds to GC and GT boxes in the D1A and D2 dopamine receptor promoters and 
effectively displaces Sp1 and Sp3 from these sequences. Consequently, DRRF can
modulate the activity of these dopamine receptor promoters. Highest DRRF mRNA
levels are found in brain with a specific regional distribution including
olfactory bulb and tubercle, nucleus accumbens, striatum, hippocampus, amygdala, 
and frontal cortex. Many of these brain regions also express abundant levels of
various dopamine receptors. In vivo, DRRF itself can be regulated by
manipulations of dopaminergic transmission. Mice treated with drugs that increase
extracellular striatal dopamine levels (cocaine), block dopamine receptors
(haloperidol), or destroy dopamine terminals
(1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine) show significant alterations in
DRRF mRNA. The latter observations provide a basis for dopamine receptor
regulation after these manipulations. We conclude that DRRF is important for
modulating dopaminergic transmission in the brain.

PMCID: PMC34707
PMID: 11390978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. J Clin Invest. 2001 Jun;107(11):1451-8.

TNF-alpha downregulates murine hepatic growth hormone receptor expression by
inhibiting Sp1 and Sp3 binding.

Denson LA(1), Menon RK, Shaufl A, Bajwa HS, Williams CR, Karpen SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Yale Child Health Research Center, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA. lee.denson@yale.edu

Children with chronic inflammatory diseases experience growth failure and
wasting. This may be due to growth hormone resistance caused by cytokine-induced 
suppression of growth hormone receptor (GHR) gene expression. However, the
factors governing inflammatory regulation of GHR are not known. We have reported 
that Sp1 and Sp3 regulate hepatic GHR expression. We hypothesized that TNF-alpha 
suppresses GHR expression by inhibiting Sp1/Sp3 transactivators. LPS
administration significantly reduced murine hepatic GHR expression, as well as
Sp1 and Sp3 binding to GHR promoter cis elements. TNF-alpha was integral to this 
response, as LPS did not affect hepatic Sp1/Sp3 binding or GHR expression in TNF 
receptor 1-deficient mice. TNF-alpha treatment of BNL CL.2 mouse liver cells
reduced Sp1 and Sp3 binding to a GHR promoter cis element and downregulated
activity of a GHR promoter-driven luciferase reporter. Combined mutations within 
adjacent Sp elements eliminated GHR promoter suppression by TNF-alpha without
affecting overall nuclear levels of Sp1 or Sp3 proteins. These studies
demonstrate that murine GHR transcription is downregulated by LPS, primarily via 
TNF-alpha-dependent signaling. Evidence suggests that inhibition of Sp
transactivator binding is involved. Further investigation of these mechanisms may
identify novel strategies for preventing inflammatory suppression of growth.

PMCID: PMC209317
PMID: 11390427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Lipids. 2001 Apr;36(4):421-6.

Fullerene lipids: synthesis of novel nitrogen-bridged.

Jie MS(1), Cheung SW, Ho JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The University of Hong Kong, SAR, China.
hrsclkj@hkucc.hku.hk

Reactions of methyl 6-azido-hexanoate, 8-azidooctanoate, and 12-azido-dodecanoate
with [60]fullerene (1) gave the corresponding aza-[60]fullerene ester derivatives
(2a-2c, 22-35% based on the amount of [60]fullerene reacted). The nitrogen atom
is bonded to the [60]fullerene cage to yield a "[5,6]-open" type aza
substructure. This was confirmed by the appearance of 30-31 sp2 signals at deltac
133-147 in the carbon nuclear magnetic resonance spectra. Reaction of methyl
11-azido-7-undecynoate with [60]fullerene furnished a mixture of
aza-[60]fullerene (2d, 53%) and aziridine-[60]fullerene (2e, 38%) ester
derivatives. Compound 2e was identified as the "[6,6]-closed" type
aziridine-[60]fullerene derivative, which displayed 10 sp2 signals in the region 
deltac 140-145 and one signal at deltac 85.05 for the sp3 carbons of the cage.
Refluxing a solution of compound 2d in toluene for 50 h gave about 50% yield of
compound 2e, but not vice versa.

PMID: 11383696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 10;276(32):30542-51. Epub 2001 May 24.

The core promoter of human thioredoxin reductase 1: cloning, transcriptional
activity, and Oct-1, Sp1, and Sp3 binding reveal a housekeeping-type promoter for
the AU-rich element-regulated gene.

Rundlöf AK(1), Carlsten M, Arnér ES.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Nobel Institute for Biochemistry, Department of Medical Biochemistry
and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, SE-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

The selenoprotein thioredoxin reductase 1 (TrxR1) carries many vital antioxidant 
and redox regulatory functions. Its mRNA levels are known to be
post-transcriptionally modulated via AUUUA motifs (AU-rich elements (AREs)), but 
the promoter yet remains unknown. Here we have cloned and determined the sequence
of a 0.8-kilobase pair human genomic fragment containing the proximal promoter
for TrxR1, which has transcriptional activity in several different cell types.
The core promoter (-115 to +167) had an increased GC content and lacked TATA or
CCAAT boxes. It contained a POU motif binding the Oct-1 transcription factor and 
two sites binding Sp1 and Sp3, which were identified with electrophoretic
mobility shift assays using crude nuclear extracts of A549 cells. The TrxR1
promoter fulfills the typical criteria of a housekeeping gene. To our knowledge
this is the first housekeeping-type promoter characterized for a gene with
post-transcriptional regulation via ARE motifs generally possessed by transiently
expressed proto-oncogenes, nuclear transcription factors, or cytokines and
influencing mRNA stability in response to diverse exogenous factors. Expression
of TrxR1 as an ARE-regulated housekeeping gene agrees with a role for the enzyme 
to maintain a balance between intracellular signaling via reactive oxygen species
and protection of cells from excessive oxidative damage.

PMID: 11375392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. J Gen Virol. 2001 Jun;82(Pt 6):1473-80.

Cellular transcription factors that interact with p6 promoter elements of
parvovirus B19.

Raab U(1), Bauer B, Gigler A, Beckenlehner K, Wolf H, Modrow S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie und Hygiene, Universität Regensburg,
Franz-Josef-Strauss-Allee 11, D-93053 Regensburg, Germany.

All transcripts of the human parvovirus B19 identified so far are regulated by a 
single promoter at map unit 6 of the viral genome, the so-called p6 promoter.
This promoter is active in a wide variety of different cells. In order to
identify cellular transcription factors involved in regulating promoter activity,
we performed gel-retardation and supershift assays using the parts of the p6
promoter sequence shown previously to be protected in footprint experiments.
Thereby, binding was demonstrated of the Oct-1 protein to an octamer motif within
the p6 promoter and of the transcription factor Sp1 to three GC boxes. A specific
preferential interaction of the factor Sp3 with one of these boxes was observed, 
indicating that the ratio Sp1:Sp3 may be involved in the regulation of promoter
activity. Consensus sites for the regulatory protein YY1 are located close to the
GC boxes and the octamer motif, to which this factor binds efficiently.

PMID: 11369893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2001 May 15;176(1-2):97-102.

Ligand activated hPR modulates the glycodelin promoter activity through the Sp1
sites in human endometrial adenocarcinoma cells.

Gao J(1), Mazella J, Seppala M, Tseng L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics/Gynecology and Reproductive Medicine, State
University of New York at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, NY 11790, USA.

Human endometrium produces glycodelin-A (GdA). The GdA mRNA is highly expressed
in progestin-sensitized human endometrial glandular epithelial cells. The
mechanism of GdA gene expression, however, is not clear. To understand the cell
specific GdA gene transcription, our first approach was to identify the
cis-element in the GdA promoter using transfection assay in a human endometrial
adenocarcinoma cell line (HEC-1B, a cell line originally derived from the
glandular component of the endometrium). The GdA promoter (-1900 to +20 bp) was
linked to the luciferase reporter gene to construct p1900Luc, along with two
shorter promoter constructs, p1100Luc and p304Luc. Deletion analysis showed that 
the basal promoter activity was derived from the region between -304 to +20 bp.
This region contains three putative Sp1 binding sites (Sp1-1, -243 to -238 bp;
Sp1-2, -207 to -202 bp; and Sp1-3, -56 to -49 bp). Mutation analysis at the Sp1
sites showed that p304Spm2Luc and p304Spm3Luc reduced the activity by 80%, while 
p304Spm1-2-3Luc reduced the activity by 95%. Sp1-1 mutation, however, had no
effect. These results showed that two of the three Sp1 cis-elements mediate the
basal promoter activity of the GdA gene. Electrophoretic gel mobility shift
showed that at least two specific binding proteins in the nuclear extracts of
HEC-1B cells bound to the oligo containing Sp1-2 or Sp1-3 cis-element. Sp1
antibody reduced the specific binding complex by 70% suggesting that Sp1
transcription factor regulates GdA gene expression. In addition, over expression 
of Sp1 increased the promoter activity. To determine whether progestin would
modulate the promoter activity, HEC-1B cells were transfected with p304Luc and
with progesterone receptor (either hPR-A or hPR-B) expression vector.
Medroxyprogesterone acetate increased the promoter activity (3-fold) derived from
p304Luc but not from the mutant, p304Spm1-2-3Luc. In contrast, the promoter
activity was slightly reduced in cells treated with estradiol and co-transfected 
with estrogen receptor expression vector. These data indicate that
ligand-activated PR stimulates GdA gene expression mediated through the
functional Sp1 sites.

PMID: 11369448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2001 Jan 15;385(2):259-66.

Role of Sp1 and Sp3 in the transcriptional regulation of the fatty acid synthase 
gene.

Wolf SS(1), Roder K, Schweizer M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, United
Kingdom.

Inspection of the 5' region of the sequence of the rat fatty acid synthase (FAS) 
gene revealed a high GC content between -900 and +500, implying several binding
sites for members of the Sp1 family of transcription factors. Using SL2 and H4IIE
cells in conjunction with FAS promoter/luciferase constructs either successively 
deleted or containing defined deletions we characterized six GC boxes--GC-I to
GC-VI--located between -557 and -83 and discovered a seventh, GC-VII, in the
first intron. In vitro DNAse I-footprinting, electrophoretic mobility shift
assays, and the yeast one-hybrid system indicated that Sp1 as well as Sp3
interacts with GC-I to GC-VII. Each of the GC boxes conferred Sp1-dependent
transcription on the FAS-Mini promoter and in the case of GC-I, Sp1, and Sp3
exert an additive effect on FAS promoter activity.

PMID: 11368006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Cancer Res. 2001 May 15;61(10):4143-54.

Constitutive Sp1 activity is essential for differential constitutive expression
of vascular endothelial growth factor in human pancreatic adenocarcinoma.

Shi Q(1), Le X, Abbruzzese JL, Peng Z, Qian CN, Tang H, Xiong Q, Wang B, Li XC,
Xie K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, The University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a key angiogenic molecule that plays
an important role in the growth and metastasis of many types of human cancer,
including pancreatic adenocarcinoma. In this study, we explored the regulation of
VEGF in human pancreatic cancer cells. Over 70% of the human pancreatic cancer
cell lines studied in vitro secreted constitutively high levels of VEGF. High
VEGF-secreting cells also generally expressed an elevated steady-state level of
VEGF mRNA. Kinetic analysis revealed that the elevated steady-state level of VEGF
mRNA was due to enhanced VEGF gene transcription and increased constitutive VEGF 
promoter activity. Deletive mutation analyses of the VEGF promoter revealed that 
the region from -109 to -38 bp was essential for constitutive VEGF promoter
activity. Further deletion and point mutation analyses indicated that mutation of
individual or all of the putative Sp1 binding sites reduced or eliminated the
constitutive VEGF promoter activity and abrogated the differential activity of
the promoter in high and low VEGF-expressing cells. Consistent with the
constitutive VEGF transcription activation, a high level of constitutive Sp1
expression and activity was detected in pancreatic cancer cell lines and
pancreatic cancer tissue specimens overexpressing VEGF. Collectively, our data
demonstrated that constitutive Sp1 activation is essential for the differential
overexpression of VEGF, which in turn plays an important role in the angiogenesis
and progression of human pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 11358838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2001 Feb 16;1517(3):398-409.

Enhanced activity of cloned hamster TERT gene promoter in transformed cells.

Guo W(1), Okamoto M, Lee YM, Baluda MA, Park NH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Dentistry, University of California, Los Angeles 90095-1668, USA.

In 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene-treated hamster pouch epithelial cells,
telomerase activity increased within 1 week of treatment and reached a 6-7-fold
increase within 3 weeks. To investigate this phenomenon, we have cloned and
sequenced the hamster telomerase catalytic subunit (hamTERT) promoter. Transient 
transfection with different genomic segments upstream of the ATG translation
initiation codon linked to the luciferase reporter gene mapped the core promoter 
within a 250 bp region. Three major transcription initiation sites and several
minor sites were found between -42 and -140 bp relative to the ATG site. Like the
human and murine TERT promoters, the hamTERT promoter lacks TATA and CAT boxes
and all three promoters share similar regulatory factor binding sites. DNase I
footprint analysis revealed six protected regions which contain sequences
homologous with known transcription factor binding sites. Three protein binding
regions (I, II, and III) were essential for the promoter activity. Regions I and 
III bound to Sp1 and Sp3 transcriptional factors, whereas region II bound to an
unknown factor. Transient transfection of a promoter-luciferase plasmid into
Drosophila SL2 cells showed that Sp1 and Sp3 regulated the hamster TERT promoter 
in a concentration-dependent and synergistic manner. Telomerase activity showed a
2-4-fold and 8-10-fold increase in immortalized cells and tumor cells,
respectively, but hamTERT expression was only increased 1.7-fold and 2.4-fold,
respectively, in the same cells.

PMID: 11342218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jul 6;276(27):25621-30. Epub 2001 May 3.

A role for Sp1 in the transcriptional regulation of hepatic triacylglycerol
hydrolase in the mouse.

Douglas DN(1), Dolinsky VW, Lehner R, Vance DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Canadian Institute of Health Research, Group on
the Molecular and Cell Biology of Lipids, University of Alberta, Edmonton,
Alberta T6G 2S2, Canada.

Microsomal triacylglycerol hydrolase (TGH) hydrolyzes stored triacylglycerol in
cultured hepatoma cells (Lehner, R., and Vance, D. E. (1999) Biochem. J. 343,
1-10). We studied expression of TGH in murine liver and found both protein and
mRNA increased dramatically at 27 days after birth. Nuclear run-on assays
demonstrated that this was due to increased transcription. We cloned 542 base
pairs upstream of the transcriptional start site of the murine TGH gene.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays demonstrated enhanced binding of hepatic
nuclear proteins from 27-day-old mice to the murine TGH promoter, yielding three 
differentially migrating complexes. DNase I footprint analysis localized these
complexes to two distinct regions: site A contains a putative Sp binding site,
and site B contains a degenerate E box. We transfected primary murine hepatocytes
with a series of 5'-deletion constructs upstream of the reporter luciferase cDNA.
Positive control elements were identified in a segment containing site A.
Competitive electrophoretic mobility shift assays and supershift assays
demonstrated that site A binds Sp1 and Sp3. Transcriptional activation assays in 
Schneider SL-2 insect cells demonstrated that Sp1 is a potent activator of the
TGH promoter. These experiments directly link increased TGH expression at the
time of weaning to transcriptional regulation by Sp1.

PMID: 11337511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jul 6;276(27):24918-24. Epub 2001 May 3.

Regulation of the human MAT2B gene encoding the regulatory beta subunit of
methionine adenosyltransferase, MAT II.

LeGros L(1), Halim AB, Chamberlin ME, Geller A, Kotb M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Tennessee, 956 Court Ave., Memphis, TN
38163, USA.

Methionine adenosyltransferase (MAT) catalyzes the biosynthesis of
S-adenosylmethionine (AdoMet), a key molecule in transmethylation reactions and
polyamine biosynthesis. The MAT II isozyme consists of a catalytic alpha2 and a
regulatory beta subunit. Down-regulation of the MAT II beta subunit expression
causes a 6-10-fold increase in intracellular AdoMet levels. To understand the
mechanism by which the beta subunit expression is regulated, we cloned the MAT2B 
gene, determined its organization, characterized its 5'-flanking sequences, and
elucidated the in vitro and in vivo regulation of its promoter. Transcription of 
the MAT2B gene initiates at position -203 relative to the translation start site.
Promoter deletion analysis defined a minimal promoter between positions +52 and
+93 base pairs, a GC-rich region. Inclusion of the sequences between -4 and +52
enhanced promoter activity; this was primarily because of an Sp1 recognition site
at +9/+15. The inclusion of sequences up to position -115 provided full activity;
this was attributed to a TATA at -32. The Sp1 site at position +9 was key for the
formation of protein.DNA complexes. Mutation of both the Sp1 site at +9 and the
TATA at -32 reduced promoter activity to its minimal level. Supershift assays
showed no effect of the anti-Sp1 antibody on complex formation, whereas the
anti-Sp3 antibody had a strong effect on protein.DNA complex formation,
suggesting that Sp3 is one of the main factors binding to this Sp1 site.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays supported the involvement of both Sp1 and
Sp3 in complexes formed on the MAT2B promoter. The data show that the
5'-untranslated sequences play an important role in regulating the MAT2B gene and
identifies the Sp1 site at +9 as a potential target for modulating MAT2B
expression, a process that can have a major effect on intracellular AdoMet
levels.

PMID: 11337507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Biochem J. 2001 May 15;356(Pt 1):171-80.

Transcriptional regulation of the KEL gene and Kell protein expression in
erythroid and non-erythroid cells.

Camara-Clayette V(1), Rahuel C, Lopez C, Hattab C, Verkarre V, Bertrand O,
Cartron JP.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U76, Institut National de la Transfusion Sanguine, 6, rue Alexandre
Cabanel, 75015 Paris, France.

The Kell blood-group antigen was originally reported to be a protein expressed in
erythroid tissue only. Transcriptional analysis of the KEL promoter activity in
human erythroleukaemia K562 and epithelial HeLa cells by electrophoretic
mobility-shift and supershift assays, chloramphenicol acetyltransferase assays,
co-transfection studies and site-directed mutagenesis provided the following
results: (i) the KEL promoter exhibits a strong transcriptional activity in K562 
cells and, unexpectedly, a basal non-erythroid activity in HeLa cells, (ii)
up-regulation of the 5' distal promoter activity occurs only in the erythroid
context, and (iii) two motifs localized in the exon 1 region, which bind the
Sp1/Sp3 and the human GATA-1/Ku70/80 factors, were required for down-regulation
of the promoter activity, but inhibition of the promoter activity by the
repressing factors in HeLa cells was incomplete. KEL expression in HeLa cells was
performed further by primer-extension analysis, which revealed the presence of a 
low amount of Kell transcript correlating with basal expression of the Kell
protein in these cells, as shown by immunopurification and Western-blot analysis.
DNA sequencing of the transcript revealed a sequence identical to that obtained
from erythroid tissue. In human tissues, KEL expression was investigated by
dot-blot analysis and revealed high levels of Kell mRNAs, particularly in brain
tissues, testis and lymphoid tissues. Moreover, most tissues analysed exhibited
low levels of Kell transcripts. The Kell protein was also detected by
immunohistochemistry in the Sertoli cells of the testis and in lymphoid tissues
like spleen and tonsil, specifically localized in the follicular dendritic cells.
Altogether, the results indicated that KEL expression is not restricted to
erythroid tissue.

PMCID: PMC1221825
PMID: 11336649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Mol Reprod Dev. 2001 May;59(1):17-24.

Involving AP-2 transcription factor in connexin 26 up-regulation during pregnancy
and lactation.

Tu ZJ(1), Pan W, Gong Z, Kiang DT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Oncology, and Transplantation, Department of Medicine,
University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA.

Gap junction connexin 26 (Cx26) is up-regulated in mammary epithelial cells
during pregnancy and lactation. To understand the transcriptional regulation of
Cx26, we identified a protected DNase I footprint region (-140 to -113) in the
rat Cx26 promoter. This rCx26 Promoter Footprinting Region, or CPFR, contains an 
Sp binding site (CCGCCC) overlapping with an AP-2 binding site (GCCCGCGGC), and
is evolutionarily conserved. Nuclear extracts from rat mammary glands and human
MCF-10 mammary epithelial cells formed protein-DNA complexes with the labeled
CPFR probe in the electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA), and these
complexes were markedly enhanced during pregnancy and lactation. Antibody
supershift analysis further identified the presence of Sp1, Sp3, and AP-2 in
these binding complexes. Human mammary epithelial MCF-10A and MCF-12A cells were 
transiently transfected with chimeric mutant rCx26 promoter/luciferase reporter
constructs, and luciferase activities measured. Mutations along the CPFR fragment
drastically reduced the promoter activity, specially at the Sp/AP-2 overlapping
site. Cotransfection of AP-2 with rCx26 promoter/reporter constructs into MCF-10 
cells markedly induced the reporter activity. These data infer that AP-2, along
with previously reported Sp transcription factors, is involved in the
up-regulation of Cx26 gene during pregnancy and lactation.

PMID: 11335942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. J Virol. 2001 Jun;75(11):5240-51.

Autostimulation of the Epstein-Barr virus BRLF1 promoter is mediated through
consensus Sp1 and Sp3 binding sites.

Ragoczy T(1), Miller G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520, USA.

As an essential step in the lytic cascade, the Rta homologues of
gammaherpesviruses all activate their own expression. Consistent with this
biologic function, the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) Rta protein powerfully stimulates
the promoter of its own gene, Rp, in EBV-positive B cells in
transient-transfection reporter-based assays. We analyzed the activity of RpCAT
in response to Rta by deletional and site-directed mutagenesis. Two cognate Sp1
binding sites located at -279 and -45 relative to the transcriptional start site 
proved crucial for Rta-mediated activation. Previously described binding sites
for the cellular transcription factor Zif268 and the viral transactivator ZEBRA
were found to be dispensable for activation of RpCAT by Rta. Gel shift analysis, 
using extracts of B cells in latency or induced into the lytic cycle, identified 
Sp1 and Sp3 as the predominant cellular proteins bound to Rp near -45. During the
lytic cycle, ZEBRA bound Rp near the Sp1/Sp3 site. The binding of Sp1 and Sp3 to 
Rp correlated with the reporter activities in the mutagenesis study, establishing
a direct link between transcriptional activation of Rp by Rta and DNA binding by 
Sp1 and/or Sp3. The relative abundance or functional state of the cellular Sp1
and Sp3 transcription factors may be altered in response to stimuli that induce
the BRLF1 promoter and thereby contribute to the activation of the viral lytic
cycle.

PMCID: PMC114930
PMID: 11333906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jul 6;276(27):25512-9. Epub 2001 Apr 20.

The reciprocal role of Egr-1 and Sp family proteins in regulation of the PTP1B
promoter in response to the p210 Bcr-Abl oncoprotein-tyrosine kinase.

Fukada T(1), Tonks NK.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Demerec Bldg., 1 Bungtown Rd., Cold Spring
Harbor, NY 11724-2208, USA.

Protein-tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B) is an important regulator of
protein-tyrosine kinase-dependent signaling pathways. Changes in expression and
activity of PTP1B have been associated with various human diseases; however, the 
mechanisms by which PTP1B expression is regulated have yet to be characterized.
Previously, we have shown that the expression of PTP1B is enhanced by p210
Bcr-Abl and that PTP1B is a specific antagonist of transformation induced by this
oncoprotein protein-tyrosine kinase. Here we have characterized the PTP1B
promoter and demonstrate that a motif with features of a stress-response element 
acts as a p210 Bcr-Abl-responsive sequence, termed PRS. We have shown that three 
C(2)H(2) zinc finger proteins, namely Sp1, Sp3, and Egr-1, bind to PRS. Whereas
binding of either Sp1 or Sp3 induced promoter function, Egr-1 repressed
Sp3-mediated PTP1B promoter activation. The binding of Egr-1 to PRS is suppressed
by p210 Bcr-Abl due to the inhibition of Egr-1 expression, resulting in the
enhancement of PTP1B promoter activity. Our data indicate that Egr-1 and Sp
family proteins play a reciprocal role in the control of expression from the
PTP1B promoter.

PMID: 11316810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Oncogene. 2001 Feb 22;20(8):962-71.

RB regulates transcription of the p21/WAF1/CIP1 gene.

Decesse JT(1), Medjkane S, Datto MB, Crémisi CE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Oncogénèse, Différenciation et Transduction du Signal, CNRS UPR
9079, Institut André Lwoff, 7 rue Guy Moquet, 94801 Villejuif, France.

We have previously shown that RB plays an important role in the maintenance of
the epithelial phenotype. p21 is also involved in several terminal
differentiation systems including keratinocytes. We report here that p21 is an RB
target gene in epithelial cells, but not in fibroblasts where RB is unable to
transactivate p21 transcriptional expression. In epithelial cells, when RB family
factors were inactivated by SV40 T antigen (LT), p21 expression was strongly
repressed, whereas its expression was not affected when the cells were
transformed by a mutated LT leaving RB active but inactivating p53. Moreover,
retransformation by RB of LT transformed epithelial cells totally restored p21
expression. By cotransfection experiments and using deletions and point mutations
of the p21 promoter, we show that the minimal region required for the RB-mediated
transcriptional activation maps to a GC-rich region located between -83 and -74. 
This region is shown to interact specifically with the transcription factor Sp1
and Sp3. Thus for the first time, we show a positive transcriptional relationship
between RB and p21 in epithelial cells. Since p21 keeps RB in a
hypophosphorylated state important for its transcriptional activity during
differentiation, our results imply an auto-loop of regulation between RB and p21 
that may be essential for the maintenance of the differentiation state. We
propose that this transcriptional relationship might be necessary of their roles 
in cell cycle arrest and in several differentiation pathways.

PMID: 11314031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. DNA Cell Biol. 2001 Mar;20(3):133-9.

The Sp1 transcription factor regulates cell type-specific transcription of MUC1.

Morris JR(1), Taylor-Papadimitriou J.

Author information: 
(1)Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, UK.

Because the MUC1 mucin is highly expressed in breast and other carcinomas,
interest is focused on the MUC1 promoter, particularly in the context of the
delivery of genes to carcinomas. Earlier in vitro studies showed that the region 
between -152 and -66 of the MUC1 promoter is required for transcriptional
activity in MUC1-expressing cells. Experiments reported here showed that
sequences -119/-62 within this region are able to modulate transcription of the
heterologous constitutively active herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase promoter
in a pattern consistent with MUC1 expression. Band-shift experiments showed that 
although several factors (including Sp1 and Sp3) bind to these sequences, the
element important in directing this MUC1 pattern of expression was an Sp1 GC box 
at -97. The data also show that the positioning or phase of the GC box was
crucial for directing expression. The importance of the Sp1 transcription factor 
was confirmed by demonstrating that overexpression of Sp1 in MUC1-nonexpressing
cells increased, not only the expression of a reporter gene driven by the 1.4-kb 
MUC1 promoter, but also the expression of MUC1 from the endogenous gene.
Together, these data define an important role for Sp1 in the cell type-specific
transcription of MUC1.

PMID: 11313016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Mamm Genome. 2001 Apr;12(4):309-17.

Comparative analysis of human, bovine, and murine Oct-4 upstream promoter
sequences.

Nordhoff V(1), Hübner K, Bauer A, Orlova I, Malapetsa A, Schöler HR.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Animal Transgenesis and Germ Cell Research, New Bolton Center, 
School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania 19348, USA.

The Oct-4 gene encodes a transcription factor that is specifically expressed in
embryonic stem cells and germ cells of the mouse embryo. Cells that differentiate
into somatic tissues lose Oct-4 expression. Regulation of Oct-4 gene
transcription involves a TATA-less minimal promoter and two upstream elements:
the proximal (PE) and distal enhancers (DE). We report here the nucleotide
sequence of the 5' upstream regulatory regions of the human and murine Oct-4
genes. A comparative alignment analysis between these regions and those of the
bovine Oct-4 ortholog reveals four conserved regions of homology (CR 1 to 4)
between these species (66-94% conservation). The 1A sequence within the mouse PE 
is located approximately half-way between CR 2 and CR 3. A putative Sp1/Sp3
binding site and the overlapping hormone responsive element (HRE) in CR1 are
identical in all three species. A high number of CCC(A/T)CCC motifs exhibit
various levels of homology in these upstream regions. We discuss the importance
of these and other sequences and present candidate factors that may bind and
regulate Oct-4 gene expression.

PMID: 11309664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Inorg Chem. 2001 Apr 23;40(9):2156-60.

Synthesis, structural characterization, and conformational bias in solution of a 
sterically congested pyrophosphite: experimental and computational evidence for
restricted rotation about an sp3-sp3 P-O single bond.

DeBellis AD(1), Pastor SD, Rihs G, Rodebaugh RK, Smith AR.

Author information: 
(1)Additives Division Research Department, Ciba Specialty Chemicals Corporation, 
540 White Plains Road, P.O. Box 2005, Tarrytown, New York 10591, USA.

The synthesis and structural characterization of the sterically congested
pyrophosphite
6-[(2,4,8,10-tetrakis(1,1-dimethylethyl)-dibenzo[d,f][1,3,2]dioxaphosphepin-6-yl)
oxy]-2,4,8,10-tetrakis(1,1-dimethylethyl)-dibenzo[d,f][1,3,2]dioxaphosphepin, 3, 
is described. In solution at room temperature, a single species was observed that
was consistent with a pyrophosphite structure without any evidence for the
tautomeric diphosphine monoxide. Below the coalescence temperature (T(C)), 0
degrees C, three atropisomers were observed with relative absolute configurations
of (R,R,R), (R,S,R), and (R,R,S). Ring inversion of the seven-membered rings
below the T(C) is slow on the NMR time scale, which leads to observable
diastereoisomerism because of the presence of two independent stereoaxes (sp2-sp2
C-C single bond connecting the two aryl rings). Additionally, a rotation about an
exocyclic P-O single bond connecting the two seven-membered rings, which
constitutes a third stereoaxis, is slowed on the NMR time scale. In the X-ray
crystal structure of 3, the solid-state conformation was found to be the same as 
the major conformation in solution below the T(C), namely, the (R,R,S)
atropisomer. The results of a conformational search, performed with a
specifically parametrized AMBER force field, were in agreement with the 31P NMR
assignment of the major (R,R,S) atropisomer, which was found to be an energy
minimum. Additionally, we could independently assign the relative configuration
of the minor isomers based on the calculated results.

PMID: 11304161  [PubMed]


464. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 22;276(25):22126-32. Epub 2001 Apr 9.

Cloning and characterization of the 5'-flanking region of the human transcription
factor Sp1 gene.

Nicolás M(1), Noé V, Jensen KB, Ciudad CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Pharmacy,
University of Barcelona, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.

The 5'-flanking region of the human Sp1 gene was cloned and characterized.
Sequence analysis of this region showed the absence of both CAAT and TATA boxes
and an initiator element. The proximal promoter of the Sp1 gene is a GC-rich
region that contains multiple GC boxes and Ap2 binding sites. The major
transcription start site is located 63 base pairs upstream of the translation
start site. Transfection experiments demonstrate that all the elements necessary 
to achieve significant basal transcription activity are located between positions
-443 and -20 relative to the translational start. Sp1 and Sp3 proteins bind to
the downstream GC box located in the proximal promoter of Sp1. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that the Sp1 protein activates Sp1 transcription activity; thus the
Sp1 gene is autoregulated.

PMID: 11294852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2001 May;280(5):C1168-75.

Transcriptional regulation of rat Na(+)/H(+) exchanger isoform-2 (NHE-2) gene by 
Sp1 transcription factor.

Bai L(1), Collins JF, Xu H, Ghishan FK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Physiology, Steele Memorial Children's Research
Center, University of Arizona Health Sciences Center, Tucson, Arizona 85724, USA.

The rat Na(+)/H(+) exchanger isoform-2 (NHE-2) gene promoter lacks a TATA box and
is very GC rich. A minimal promoter extending from bp -36 to +116 directs
high-level expression of NHE-2 in mouse inner medullary collecting duct (mIMCD-3)
cells. Four Sp1 consensus elements were found in this region. The introduction of
mutations within these Sp1 consensus elements and DNA footprinting revealed that 
only two of them were utilized and are critical for basal transcriptional
activation in mIMCD-3 cells. The use of Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 antisera in
electrophoretic mobility shift assays demonstrated that Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 bound
to this minimal promoter. We further analyzed the transcriptional regulation of
NHE-2 by members of the Sp1 multigene family. In Drosophila SL2 cells, which lack
endogenous Sp1, the minimal promoter cannot drive transcription. Introduction of 
Sp1 activated transcription over 100-fold, suggesting that Sp1 is critical for
transcriptional regulation. However, neither Sp3 nor Sp4 was able to activate
transcription in these cells. Furthermore, in mIMCD-3 cells, Sp1-mediated
transcriptional activation was repressed by expression of Sp3 and Sp4. These data
suggest that Sp1 is critical for the basal promoter function of rat NHE-2 and
that Sp3 and Sp4 may repress transcriptional activation by competing with Sp1 for
binding to core cis-elements.

PMID: 11287330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Cardiovasc Res. 2001 Apr;50(1):24-33.

Identification of novel, cardiac-restricted transcription factors binding to a
CACC-box within the human cardiac troponin I promoter.

Dellow KA(1), Bhavsar PK, Brand NJ, Barton PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiothoracic Surgery, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College of
Science Technology and Medicine, Dovehouse Street, London SW3 6LY, UK.
k.dellow@ic.ac.uk

Comment in
    Cardiovasc Res. 2001 Apr;50(1):3-6.

OBJECTIVES: The expression of the human cardiac troponin I (hTnIc) gene is
developmentally regulated and tissue-specific. In analysing the putative binding 
elements within the proximal promoter, a CACC-box sequence overlapping a
consensus Sp1 element has been identified. The aim of this study was to
characterise the factors binding to this element and to determine their
importance in the transcriptional activity of the promoter.
METHODS: A combination of supershift and competition electrophoretic mobility
shift assays (EMSA) were used to identify the binding of factors to the
overlapping CACC-box/Sp1 consensus element. The functional importance of this
element was tested by transient transfection into primary neonatal rat cardiac
myocytes in culture.
RESULTS: At least four factors were able to interact with this region including
the zinc finger proteins Sp1, Sp3 and two potentially novel factors. Whereas both
Sp1 and Sp3 bound to the consensus Sp1 element, and to a lesser extent the
CACC-box, two of the complexes required the intact CACC-box for binding.
Site-directed mutagenesis of this region showed that the CACC-box is essential
for hTnIc promoter-reporter activity. Further characterisation using EMSA
indicated that the factors binding the hTnIc CACC-box are unlikely to be zinc
finger proteins as they are insensitive to the addition of divalent cation
chelating agents. They were also unable to bind to other known CACC-box elements.
These factors are present in both human and rat cardiac muscle but absent from a 
number of cell lines including several derived from skeletal muscle.
CONCLUSION: The human cardiac troponin I gene promoter requires an upstream
CACC-box element for full activity. This element binds at least two complexes
which represent novel, tissue-restricted DNA-binding activity present in the
heart which we have named HCB1 and HCB2 for heart CACC-box binding factors.

PMID: 11282075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Cardiovasc Res. 2001 Apr;50(1):3-6.

On the trail of cardiac specific transcription factors.

Flesch M.

Comment on
    Cardiovasc Res. 2001 Apr;50(1):24-33.

PMID: 11282072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 22;276(25):22016-23. Epub 2001 Mar 28.

Mechanism for the reduction of telomerase expression during muscle cell
differentiation.

Nozawa K(1), Maehara K, Isobe K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Gerontology, National Institute for Longevity Sciences,
36-3 Gengo, Morioka-cho, Obu, Aichi 474-8522, Japan.

Telomerase, the reverse transcriptase that maintains telomere DNA, is usually
undetectable in adult human tissues, but is positive in embryonic tissues and in 
cancers. However, in rodents, several organs of normal adult animals express
substantial amounts of telomerase activity. To elucidate relevant control
mechanisms operating on the tissue-specific expression of telomerase in rodents, 
we examined the transcriptional regulation of telomerase reverse transcriptase
(mTERT) gene in muscle cell differentiation. Reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction analysis showed that the reduction of telomerase activity was
caused by the decrease of mTERT mRNA level during myogenesis. Transfections of
mTERT promoter showed that the proximal 225-base pair region is the core promoter
responsible for basal transcriptional activity and also participates in the
reduced transcription after muscle differentiation. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assays showed that this region contained the GC-boxes, which bind to Sp1
family proteins, and the E-box, which binds to c-Myc. Furthermore, DNA binding
activities of Sp1, Sp3, and c-Myc were down-regulated during myogenesis. These
data suggest that Sp1, Sp3, and c-Myc have critical roles of TERT transactivation
in mouse, and the lack of these transcription factors cause down-regulation of
mTERT gene expression in muscle cells differentiation.

PMID: 11279234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. J Biol Chem. 2001 May 11;276(19):16573-9. Epub 2001 Feb 5.

Interaction between GC box binding factors and Smad proteins modulates cell
lineage-specific alpha 2(I) collagen gene transcription.

Inagaki Y(1), Nemoto T, Nakao A, Dijke Pt, Kobayashi K, Takehara K, Greenwel P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Division of Clinical Research, National
Kanazawa Hospital, Kanazawa 920-8650, Japan.

Type I collagen is produced predominantly in mesenchymal cells, but molecular
mechanisms responsible for cell type-specific expression are virtually unknown.
During fibrogenic process in the liver, activated hepatic stellate cells (HSC)
are the main producers of type I collagen, whereas parenchymal hepatocytes
produce little, if any, of this protein. We have previously reported that Sp1 and
an interacting unknown factor(s) bind to the -313 to -255 sequence of the
alpha2(I) collagen gene (COL1A2) and play essential roles for basal and
TGF-beta-stimulated transcription in skin fibroblasts and HSC. Recently, Smad3
has been shown to bind to this region, and its interaction with Sp1 has been
implicated in TGF-beta-elicited COL1A2 stimulation. The present study
demonstrates predominant binding of Sp3 rather than Sp1 to this regulatory
element in parenchymal hepatocytes. In these cells, this region did not exhibit
strong enhancer activity or mediate the effect of TGF-beta. Transfection of HSC
with an Sp3 expression plasmid abolished the COL1A2 response to TGF-beta, whereas
overexpression of Sp1 in hepatocytes increased basal COL1A2 transcription and
conferred TGF-beta responsiveness. Functional and physical interactions between
Sp1 and Smad3, but not between Sp3 and Smad3, were demonstrated using the
bacterial GAL4 system and immunoprecipitation-Western blot analyses. These
results indicate that cell lineage-specific interactions between GC box binding
factors and Smad protein(s) may account, at least in part, for differential
COL1A2 transcription and TGF-beta responsiveness in HSC and parenchymal
hepatocytes.

PMID: 11278686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. J Biol Chem. 2001 May 18;276(20):16749-57. Epub 2001 Feb 7.

Characterization of a rat neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor alpha7
promoter.

Nagavarapu U(1), Danthi S, Boyd RT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, The Ohio State University College of Medicine and 
Public Health, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

Neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) containing the alpha7 subunit
are expressed in the central nervous system, autonomic nervous system, retina,
adrenal medulla, and PC12 cells. alpha7 nAChRs have been implicated in several
important biological activities apart from synaptic transmission such as
mediating neurite growth and presynaptic control of neurotransmitter release. A
178-base pair promoter was sufficient to drive high level expression of the
alpha7 gene in PC12 cells. The alpha7 promoter was also cell-specific, expressing
in PC12 cells but not in L6 rat muscle cells. Within our minimal rat alpha7 nAChR
promoter we identified two sequences important for basal level expression.
Mutation of a GC-rich sequence at -172 relative to the translational start site
led to an increase in activity of the promoter, indicating the presence of a
negative regulatory element. Upstream stimulatory factor-1 acted to regulate
alpha7 expression positively by binding to an E-box at -116. A site directly
adjacent to the upstream stimulatory factor-1 binding site was shown to bind
Egr-1. Sp1 and Sp3 binding also occurred downstream from or overlapping the Egr-1
binding site in the rat alpha7 promoter. Several transcription factors interact
in close proximity to control expression of the rat alpha7 nicotinic receptor
gene.

PMID: 11278551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. J Biol Chem. 2001 May 18;276(20):17533-40. Epub 2001 Feb 5.

A pancreatic beta -cell-specific enhancer in the human PDX-1 gene is regulated by
hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta (HNF-3beta ), HNF-1alpha, and SPs transcription
factors.

Ben-Shushan E(1), Marshak S, Shoshkes M, Cerasi E, Melloul D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Hebrew University Hadassah Medical
Center, 91120 Jerusalem, Israel.

The PDX-1 transcription factor plays a key role in pancreas development. Although
expressed in all cells at the early stages, in the adult it is mainly restricted 
to the beta-cell. To characterize the regulatory elements and potential
transcription factors necessary for human PDX-1 gene expression in beta-cells, we
constructed a series of 5' and 3' deletion fragments of the 5'-flanking region of
the gene, fused to the luciferase reporter gene. In this report, we identify by
transient transfections in beta- and non-beta-cells a novel beta-cell-specific
distal enhancer element located between -3.7 and -3.45 kilobases. DNase I
footprinting analysis revealed two protected regions, one binding the
transcription factors SP1 and SP3 and the other hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta
(HNF-3beta) and HNF-1alpha. Cotransfection experiments suggest that HNF-3beta,
HNF-1alpha, and SP1 are positive regulators of the herein-described human PDX-1
enhancer element. Furthermore, mutations within each motif abolished the binding 
of the corresponding factor(s) and dramatically impaired the enhancer activity,
therefore suggesting cooperativity between these factors.

PMID: 11278466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Apr 10;98(8):4510-5. Epub 2001 Mar 27.

Myc represses the p21(WAF1/CIP1) promoter and interacts with Sp1/Sp3.

Gartel AL(1), Ye X, Goufman E, Shianov P, Hay N, Najmabadi F, Tyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois College of Medicine, 
Chicago, IL 60607, USA. agartel@uic.edu

The cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21((WAF1/CIP1)) inhibits proliferation
both in vitro and in vivo, and overexpression of p21 in normal and tumor cell
lines results in cell cycle arrest. In contrast, ectopic expression of Myc
alleviates G(1) cell cycle arrest. Recent studies showed that Myc can repress p21
transcription, thereby overriding a p21-mediated cell cycle checkpoint. We found 
that activation of a Myc-estrogen receptor fusion protein by 4-hydroxytamoxifen
in mouse cells resulted in suppression of endogenous p21 transcription. This
effect was observed in the absence of de novo protein synthesis and was
independent of histone deacetylase activity. In transient transfection studies,
Myc effectively repressed p21 promoter constructs containing only 119 bp of
sequence upstream of the transcription start site. This region contains multiple 
Sp1-binding sites and a potential initiator element, but no canonical Myc
DNA-binding sites. Deletion of the potential initiator element does not affect
repression of the p21 promoter by c-Myc. Coimmunoprecipitation and glutathione
S-transferase pull-down experiments demonstrate that c-Myc may form complexes
with Sp1/Sp3. We found that the central region of c-Myc interacts with the zinc
finger domain of Sp1. Because Sp1 is required for p21 transcription, it is
possible that Myc may down-regulate p21 transcription, at least in part, by
sequestering Sp1. Repression of the p21 promoter may contribute to the ability of
c-Myc to promote cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC31865
PMID: 11274368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Inorg Chem. 2000 Feb 21;39(4):843-50.

Pentafluorosulfanylnitramide salts.

Sitzmann ME(1), Gilardi R, Butcher RJ, Koppes WM, Stern AG, Thrasher JS, Trivedi 
NJ, Yang ZY.

Author information: 
(1)Naval Surface Warfare Center, Indian Head Division, Maryland 20640, USA.

The synthesis and properties of a new class of inorganic salts, named
pentafluorosulfanylnitramide salts (or pentafluorosulfanylnitraminic acid salts) 
[Z+SF5NNO2-], are described. A number of SF5-nitramide salts (Z+SF5NNO2-) were
successfully prepared via nucleophilic displacements from carbamates and/or ion
exchange techniques, but some salts [M(SF5NNO2)x; M = Li, Mg, Al] decomposed
during isolation procedures and appear to be unstable in the solid state.
Single-crystal X-ray diffraction was used to fully characterize the Z+SF5NNO2-,
and their properties/structures are compared with those of the corresponding
dinitramide salts (or dinitraminic acid salts), Z+N(NO2)2-. X-ray crystallography
revealed major structural differences between N(NO2)2- and SF5N(NO2)- salts
concerning the N-N distances and the angles subtended at the central nitrogen
atom. In the N(NO2)2- salts, there are two nonequivalent N-N (average lengths
1.372(2) and 1.354(2) A) distances and an average N-N-N angle of 115.8(3) degrees
(falls between sp3 and sp2 hybridization). In the SFsNNO2- salts, the average N-N
distance is much shorter, 1.308(9) A, and the average N-N-S angle is 120.0(5)
degrees (closely fits sp2 hybridization). The SF5NNO2- salts show a remarkable
metrical similarity for the SF5 moiety in all structures, indicating a lack of
sensitivity to its steric and electronic environment. This is in marked contrast 
to N(NO2)2-, where there is a wide variation in conformations adopted by these
anions which can be related to their environment.

PMID: 11272586  [PubMed]


474. Ann Neurol. 2001 Mar;49(3):345-54.

Sequence-selective DNA binding drugs mithramycin A and chromomycin A3 are potent 
inhibitors of neuronal apoptosis induced by oxidative stress and DNA damage in
cortical neurons.

Chatterjee S(1), Zaman K, Ryu H, Conforto A, Ratan RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School and The Beth Israel-Deaconess 
Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA.

Global inhibitors of RNA or protein synthesis such as actinomycin D or
cycloheximide abrogate neuronal apoptosis induced by numerous pathological
stimuli in vitro and in vivo. The clinical application of actinomycin D or
cycloheximide to human neurological disease has been limited by the toxicities of
these agents. To overcome these toxicities, strategies must be developed to
inhibit selectively the expression of deleterious proapoptotic proteins, while
leaving the expression of antiapoptotic, proregeneration, and other critical
homeostatic proteins unperturbed. Mithramycin A (trade name Plicamycin) is an
aureolic acid antibiotic that has been used in humans to treat hypercalcemia and 
several types of cancers. This class of agents is believed to act, in part, by
selectively inhibiting gene expression by displacing transcriptional activators
that bind to G-C-rich regions of promoters. Here we demonstrate that mithramycin 
A and its structural analog chromomycin A3 are potent inhibitors of neuronal
apoptosis induced by glutathione depletion-induced oxidative stress or the
DNA-damaging agent camptothecin. We correlate the protective effects of
mithramycin A with its ability to inhibit enhanced DNA binding of the
transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 to their cognate "G-C" box induced by oxidative
stress or DNA damage. The protective effects of mithramycin A cannot be
attributed to global inhibition of protein synthesis. Together, these results
suggest that mithramycin A and its structural analogs may be effective agents for
the treatment of neurological diseases associated with aberrant activation of
apoptosis and highlight the potential use of sequence-selective DNA-binding drugs
as neurological therapeutics.

PMID: 11261509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Mol Pharmacol. 2001 Apr;59(4):852-9.

Regulation of human monoamine oxidase B gene by Sp1 and Sp3.

Wong WK(1), Chen K, Shih JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Neurobiology, School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA.

The human monoamine oxidase (MAO) B plays a major role in the degradation of
biogenic and dietary amines such as phenylethylamine, benzylamine, dopamine, and 
tyramine. We previously showed that the -246/-99 MAO B promoter region exhibited 
the highest activity and contained two clusters of overlapping Sp1 sites, a CACCC
element and a TATA box. Here, using a series of 10 deletion constructs of the
2-kilobase pair 5'-flanking sequence, we identified additional potential
regulatory elements, including activator proteins 1 and 4, CAAT, GATA, upstream
stimulatory factor (USF), estrogen receptor (ER), and sex-determining region
Y-box 5 (SOX5). Analysis of nine site-directed mutations of -246/-99 region
reveals that both clusters of Sp1 sites contribute positively whereas the CACCC
element contributes negatively to the transcriptional activity. Gel shift
analysis demonstrates that in addition to Sp1, Sp3 can interact with both
clusters of Sp1 sites. Cotransfection experiments show that Sp1 and its closely
related family member Sp4 can trans-activate MAO B promoter activity through the 
proximal cluster of Sp1 sites and its activation can be repressed by the
over-expression of Sp3 and a related family member BTEB2. These results suggest
that the binding to the overlapping Sp1 sites by various members of Sp family is 
important for the regulation of the MAO B gene expression.

PMID: 11259630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Gene. 2001 Mar 7;265(1-2):123-31.

Functional characterization of rat gp600/megalin promoter: combination of
proximal Sp1 site and JCV repeat is important in rat gp600/megalin promoter
activation.

Zhao J(1), Oleinikov AV, Oleinikova I, Makker SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Nephrology, School of Medicine,
University of California, CA 95616, Davis, USA.

Gp600/megalin is an endocytic receptor belonging to the low-density lipoprotein
receptor family. Up or down regulation of this protein were observed in certain
disease states. To understand the mechanisms that control gp600/megalin gene
expression, we cloned and functionally characterized a 738-bp fragment of the
5'-flanking region of rat gp600/megalin gene. A transcription start site was
mapped to 33 bp downstream of TAGAAA sequence (TATA-like box). Multiple
transcription factor binding sites were identified. Serial 5' deletions and
transient transfection assays showed that the deletion fragment containing the
Sp1 site proximal to the TATA-like box and a JCV repeat retained 80% of the
promoter activity. Individual mutations of the proximal Sp1 site and JCV repeat
reduced the promoter activity by 60 and 34% respectively. Double mutations of the
proximal Sp1 site and JCV repeat produced a dramatic 80% reduction in the
promoter activity. However, deletions and mutations or double mutations of other 
transcription factor binding sites in the promoter region had a minor effect on
the promoter activity. These results indicate that the combination of proximal
Sp1 site and the JCV repeat are necessary for activation of gp600/megalin
expression. Moreover, Sp1 and Sp3 proteins interacted with the proximal and the
distal Sp1 sites in the nuclear extracts of gp600/megalin expressing cell lines. 
TCF site seems to be involved in negative regulation of this promoter but no
nuclear protein(s) were found to bind to this site. In addition, Ap2 site
responsible for 28% promoter activity is able to bind two dominant unknown
nuclear proteins. This functional characterization of the regulation of
gp600/megalin gene is likely to advance the knowledge of the regulation of this
gene in health and disease.

PMID: 11255015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Endocrinology. 2001 Apr;142(4):1635-42.

Insulin deprivation leads to deficiency of Sp1 transcription factor in H-411E
hepatoma cells and in streptozotocin-induced diabetic ketoacidosis in the rat.

Pan X(1), Solomon SS, Borromeo DM, Martinez-Hernandez A, Raghow R.

Author information: 
(1)Research, Medical, and Pathology Services, Veterans Affairs Medical Center of 
Memphis, University of Tennessee, Memphis, Tennessee 38104, USA.

Members of the family of Sp transcription factors include Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 and
are important regulators of eukaryotic gene expression. We previously reported
that Sp1 mediated stimulation of rat calmodulin I gene expression in response to 
insulin. To test whether other members of the Sp family are direct targets of
insulin action, we compared the levels of Sp1 and Sp3 proteins from nuclear
extracts obtained from both insulin-treated and untreated rat hepatoma (H-411E)
cells. We demonstrated by Western blot analysis that levels of Sp1 and Sp3
proteins were increased more than 2-fold in the insulin-treated group.
Additionally, the up-regulation of both Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors by
insulin was antagonized by tumor necrosis factor-alpha, a known inhibitor of
insulin action. Immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated that H-411E cells
treated with insulin (10,000 microU/ml) had a marked increase in demonstrable Sp1
in the nucleus compared with cells incubated in insulin-free medium. We extended 
these in vitro observations to in vivo studies in the streptozotocin-diabetic rat
model. We demonstrated in rat liver tissue by both Western blot and
immunohistochemical staining with anti-Sp1 antibody that 1) livers of fully
diabetic streptozotocin rats have low levels of Sp1 transcription factor; and 2) 
insulin treatment of the diabetic rat rapidly reversed this process by markedly
stimulating accumulation of Sp1 in rat liver. Studies of the signal transduction 
mechanisms involved in insulin's effect on Sp1 demonstrate a facilitating role
for phosphoinositol 3-kinase and an inhibitory role for cyclic nucleotides. In
summary, insulin stimulates Sp1 protein, a transcription factor that is shown to 
regulate calmodulin gene expression and most likely other, as yet untested,
genes.

PMID: 11250945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Endocrinology. 2001 Apr;142(4):1427-41.

Characterization of 5'-flanking region of rat somatostatin receptor sst2 gene:
transcriptional regulatory elements and activation by Pitx1 and estrogen.

Kimura N(1), Tomizawa S, Arai KN, Osamura RY, Kimura N.

Author information: 
(1)Tokyo Metropolitan Institute for Neuroscience, Tokyo Metropolitan Organization
for Medical Research, Fuchu, Tokyo 183-8526, Japan. kimura@tmin.ac.jp

The sst2 somatostatin receptor mediates the inhibitory effects of somatostatin on
secretive and proliferative processes. We previously showed that sst2 is one of
the major subtypes expressed in the rat pituitary, and its messenger RNA level is
up-regulated by chronic treatment with estrogen. To investigate the molecular
mechanisms regulating sst2 gene expression, we cloned the upstream region (9.5
kb) from the translation initiation codon of the rat sst2 gene. It contained a
single intron (5.0 kb) at the 5'-untranslated region, lacked TATA and CCAAT
boxes, and had multiple transcriptional start sites. Transient transfection
analysis with deleted mutants of a luciferase reporter construct showed that the 
promoter activity was regulated negatively and positively in the distal and
proximal promoter regions, respectively. The promoter activity of each construct 
was more efficient in GH(3) pituitary cells than in nonpituitary cells. The
construct (-77/+172/luc) containing a cAMP response element (CRE; -54/-47)
provided maximum promoter activity, but a further 5'-deleted construct
dramatically reduced the activity. Competitive gel shift and supershift assays
indicated that Sp2 and Sp3 were bound to an Sp1 site (-40/-31), and activating
transcription factor-2 and c-Jun were bound to a CRE site. Both Sp1 and CRE sites
were essential for the full promoter activity. Overexpression of the pituitary
homeoprotein Pitx1 activated the promoter activity of the -4066/+172/luc
construct, and mapping analysis indicated the existence of two Pitx1 response
sites, including the CRE site. Estrogen also increased the promoter activity of
-77/+172/luc in GH(3) cells or in HeLa cells overexpressing both the estrogen
receptor and c-Jun. These studies demonstrated the nature of the rat sst2 gene
and the functional importance of both Sp1 and CRE sites in regulating sst2 gene
expression and suggest that the CRE site mediates, at least partly, the promoter 
activity activated by Pitx1 or estrogen.

PMID: 11250922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Gene. 2001 Feb 7;264(1):19-27.

Characterization and promoter analysis of the mouse gene for transcription factor
Sp4.

Song J(1), Mangold M, Suske G, Geltinger C, Kanazawa I, Sun K, Yokoyama KK.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN (The Institute of Physical and Chemical Research), Tsukuba Institute,
3-1-1 Koyadai, Tsukuba, 305-0074, Ibaraki, Japan.

Transcription factor Sp4 is a member of the Sp1 family. It functions differently 
from other members of this family, such as Sp1 and Sp3, and the gene for Sp4 is
transcribed in a tissue-specific manner. Recent studies in mice suggest that Sp4 
might play an important role in growth, viability, and male fertility. We report 
here the isolation and characterization of the gene for Sp4 from a mouse genomic 
library. The mouse gene for Sp4 was about 80 kb in length and it consisted of six
exons and five introns. The promoter was found in a CpG island and had a high G+C
content. The proximal promoter contained multiple putative binding sites for the 
transcription factors Sp1 and MAZ but lacked a consensus TATA box. Multiple sites
for the initiation of transcription were mapped in a GC-rich region from 286 bp
to 211 bp upstream of the ATG triplet at the site of initiation of translation,
and all of the sites were either C or G. Transfection experiments and deletion
analysis allowed us to localize the promoter to a region that was no more than 93
bp upstream from the first site of initiation of transcription. We also found
that ectopic expression of Sp1 and of MAZ, but not of Sp3, suppressed expression 
of the Sp4 promoter in a dose-dependent manner.

PMID: 11245974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. J Immunol. 2001 Mar 15;166(6):3780-8.

The maturation of dendritic cells results in postintegration inhibition of HIV-1 
replication.

Bakri Y(1), Schiffer C, Zennou V, Charneau P, Kahn E, Benjouad A, Gluckman JC,
Canque B.

Author information: 
(1)E00-13 Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique, Institut National de la
Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Université Paris 6, Paris, France.

Maturation of dendritic cells (DC) is known to result in decreased capacity to
produce HIV due to postentry block of its replicative cycle. In this study, we
compared the early phases of this cycle in immature DC (iDC) and mature DC (mDC) 
generated from monocytes cultured with GM-CSF and IL-4, trimeric CD40 ligand
(DC(CD40LT)), or monocyte-conditioned medium (DC(MCM)) being added or not from
day 5. Culture day 8 cells exposed to X4 HIV-1(LAI) or R5 HIV-1(Ba-L) were
analyzed by semiquantitative R-U5 PCR, which detects total HIV DNA. CXC chemokine
receptor 4(low) (CXCR4(low)) CCR5(+) iDC harbored similar viral DNA amounts when 
exposed to either strain. HIV-1(LAI) entered more efficiently into DC(CD40LT) or 
DC(MCM) with up-regulated CXCR4. CCR5(low) DC(CD40LT) still allowed entry of
HIV-1(Ba-L), whereas CCR5(-) DC(MCM) displayed reduced permissivity to this
virus. Comparing amounts of late (long terminal repeat (LTR)-gag PCR) and total
(R-U5 PCR) viral DNA products showed that HIV-1(Ba-L) reverse transcription was
more efficient than that of HIV-1(LAI), but was not affected by DC maturation.
Southern blot detection of linear, circular, and integrated HIV DNA showed that
maturation affected neither HIV-1 nuclear import nor integration. When assessing 
virus transcription by exposing iDC to pNL4-3.GFP or pNL4-3.Luc viruses
pseudotyped with the G protein of vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV-G), followed by
culture with or without CD40LT or MCM, GFP and luciferase activities decreased by
60-75% in mDC vs iDC. Thus, reduced HIV replication in mDC is primarily due to a 
postintegration block occurring mainly at the transcriptional level. We could not
relate this block to altered expression and nuclear localization of NF-kappa B
proteins and SP1 and SP3 transcription factors.

PMID: 11238620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Blood. 2001 Mar 15;97(6):1721-6.

Allele-dependent transcriptional regulation of the human integrin alpha2 gene.

Jacquelin B(1), Tarantino MD, Kritzik M, Rozenshteyn D, Koziol JA, Nurden AT,
Kunicki TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Roon Research Center for Arteriosclerosis and Thrombosis, Division of
Experimental Hemostasis and Thrombosis of the Department of Molecular and
Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Genetically controlled variation in alpha2beta1 expression by human blood
platelets was previously described. Sixty-two haplotype sequences corresponding
to the proximal 5' regulatory region (-1096 to +1) of the alpha2 gene were
compared, and a dimorphic sequence -52C>T was identified that is located
precisely between 2 tandem Sp1/Sp3 binding elements previously shown to be
absolutely required for transcriptional activity of this gene in epithelial cell 
lines and the erythroleukemic cell line K562. The gene frequency of -52T in a
random Caucasian population is approximately 0.35, and the expression of -52T
correlates directly with reduced densities of platelet alpha2beta1. In mobility
shift analyses, the -52T substitution attenuates complex formation with both Sp1 
and Sp3. When transfected into the erythroleukemia cell line Dami,
promoter-luciferase constructs bearing the -52T sequence exhibit a 5-fold
decrease in activity relative to the -52C construct. In transfected CHRF-288-11
megakaryocytic cells, the corresponding activity decreases by 10-fold. The -52T
sequence appears to be in linkage disequilibrium with the previously defined
allele A3 (807C; HPA-5b), known to be associated with diminished expression of
platelet alpha2beta1. In summary, a natural dimorphism has been identified within
the proximal 5' regulatory region of the human integrin alpha2 gene that is
responsible for decreased expression levels of the integrin alpha2beta1 on blood 
platelets through a mechanism that is probably mediated by the nuclear regulatory
proteins Sp1 and Sp3.

PMID: 11238113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. J Mol Biol. 2001 Mar 9;306(5):985-96.

Sp1 and Sp3 physically interact and co-operate with GABP for the activation of
the utrophin promoter.

Galvagni F(1), Capo S, Oliviero S.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia Molecolare, Università degli Studi di Siena, via
Fiorentina 1, Siena, 53100, Italy.

The utrophin gene codes for a large cytoskeletal protein closely related to
dystrophin which, in the absence of dystrophin, can functionally substitute it.
Utrophin is transcribed by two independently regulated promoters about 50 kb
apart. The upstream promoter is TATA-less and contains a functional GABP binding 
site which, in muscle, restricts the promoter activity to post-synaptic nuclei.
Transient transfections analysis of mutant promoters in rhabdomyosarcoma cells
showed that the upstream promoter contains three functional GC elements that are 
recognised by Sp1 and Sp3 factors in vitro. Co-transfections of the promoter with
Sp1, Sp3 and GABP factors in Drosophila SL2 Schneider cells, which lack of
endogenous Sp factors, demonstrated that both Sp1 and Sp3 are positive regulators
of the utrophin promoter and that they activate transcription synergistically
with GABP. Consistent with this result, we observed physical interaction of both 
Sp factors with the GABPalpha subunit in vitro. Functional domain interaction
analysis of Sp1 and Sp3 revealed that both factors interact with GABPalpha
through their DNA binding zinc finger domain. The modulation and correct
interaction between Sp1, Sp3 and GABP in muscle cells may be critical for the
regulation of the utrophin promoter, and provide new targets for therapies of
Duchenne muscular dystrophy.

PMID: 11237613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. J Mol Biol. 2001 Feb 16;306(2):201-12.

Modulation of Sp1 activity by a cyclin A/CDK complex.

Haidweger E(1), Novy M, Rotheneder H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biochemistry, Division of Molecular Biology, Vienna
Biocenter, University of Vienna, Vienna, A-1030, Austria.

Transcription factors of the Sp1 family are targets of several regulatory
pathways and can induce or inhibit gene expression. Here we show that Sp1 is
associated with a histone 1 kinase activity. This activity is growth regulated
and correlates with the expression of cyclin A. Co-immunoprecipitation
experiments demonstrate, that Sp1 interacts with cyclin A and can be
phosphorylated by a cyclin A associated kinase. The interaction is direct and
requires the zinc-finger region of Sp1 and the amino-terminal domain of cyclin A.
Over-expression of cyclin A enhances the expression of a reporter gene controlled
by an Sp1 responsive promoter. Addition of olomoucine, a specific inhibitor of
CDK2 and CDC2 activity on the other hand reduces the expression of the reporter. 
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays suggest that this is due to a reduction of 
the DNA-binding ability of Sp1 family members. Our results indicate that
phosphorylation of Sp1 and other members of the family by a cyclin A/CDK complex 
may play a role in the growth and cell cycle regulation of its transcriptional
activity.

PMID: 11237594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Neoplasia. 2000 Nov-Dec;2(6):531-9.

Activation of telomerase rna gene promoter activity by NF-Y, Sp1, and the
retinoblastoma protein and repression by Sp3.

Zhao JQ(1), Glasspool RM, Hoare SF, Bilsland A, Szatmari I, Keith WN.

Author information: 
(1)CRC Department of Medical Oncology, University of Glasgow, CRC Beatson
Laboratories, Garscube Estate, Switchback Road, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK.

Expression of the human telomerase RNA component gene, hTERC is essential for
telomerase activity. The hTERC gene is expressed during embryogenesis and then
downregulated during normal development, leaving most adult somatic cells devoid 
of hTERC expression. During oncogenesis, however, hTERC is re-expressed
consequently contributing to the unrestricted proliferative capacity of many
human cancers. Thus the identification of the molecular basis for the regulation 
of the telomerase RNA component gene in normal cells and its deregulation in
cancer cells is of immediate interest. We have previously cloned the hTERC
promoter and in this study have identified several transcription factors that
modulate the expression of hTERC. We demonstrate that NF-Y binding to the CCAAT
region of the hTERC promoter is essential for promoter activity. Sp1 and the
retinoblastoma protein (pRb) are activators of the hTERC promoter and Sp3 is a
potent repressor. These factors appear to act in a species-specific manner.
Whereas Sp1 and Sp3 act on the human, bovine, and mouse TERC promoters, pRb
activates only the human and bovine promoter, and NF-Y is only essential for the 
human TERC gene.

PMCID: PMC1508088
PMID: 11228546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001 Mar 1;29(5):1027-33.

Sp1 phosphorylation regulates inducible expression of platelet-derived growth
factor B-chain gene via atypical protein kinase C-zeta.

Rafty LA(1), Khachigian LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, The Prince of Wales Hospital and Centre for
Thrombosis and Vascular Research, School of Pathology, The University of New
South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia.

Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) is a broadly expressed mitogenic and
chemotactic factor with diverse roles in a number of physiologic and pathologic
settings. The zinc finger transcription factors Sp1, Sp3 and Egr-1 bind to
overlapping elements in the proximal PDGF B-chain promoter and activate
transcription of this gene. The anthracycline nogalamycin has previously been
reported to inhibit the capacity of Egr-1 to bind DNA in vitro. Here we used
electrophoretic mobility shift assays to show that nogalamycin added to cells in 
culture did not alter the interaction of Egr-1 with the PDGF-B promoter. Instead,
it enhanced the capacity of Sp1 to bind DNA. Nogalamycin increased PDGF-B mRNA
expression at the level of transcription, which was abrogated by mutation of the 
Sp1 binding site in the PDGF-B promoter or overexpression of mutant Sp1. Rather
than increasing total levels of Sp1, nogalamycin altered the phosphorylation
state of the transcription factor. Overexpression of dominant-negative PKC-zeta
blocked nogalamycin-inducible Sp1 phosphorylation and PDGF-B promoter-dependent
expression. Nogalamycin stimulated the phosphorylation of PKC-zeta (on residue
Thr(410)). These findings demonstrate for the first time that PKC-zeta and Sp1
phosphorylation mediate the inducible expression of this growth factor.

PMCID: PMC29732
PMID: 11222751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Cancer Res. 2001 Jan 15;61(2):570-6.

The Sp family of transcription factors in the regulation of the human and mouse
MUC2 gene promoters.

Aslam F(1), Palumbo L, Augenlicht LH, Velcich A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Albert Einstein Cancer Center/Montefiore Medical
Center, Bronx, New York 10467, USA.

Modulation of mucin gene expression is an important component both in the early
steps of colon cancer development and in later tumor progression. Previous work
from our laboratory and others has suggested that the Sp family of transcription 
factors may play an important role in the regulation of the human MUC2 gene. To
determine whether this was an essential element, we extended our work to the
cloning and analysis of 3.5 kb of the 5'-flanking region of the mouse Muc2
(mMuc2) gene. Comparative analysis between the mouse and human MUC2 promoter
regions has identified a strong sequence homology between the mouse and human
genes, including the presence of GC-rich boxes, the location and composition of
which are maintained in the mouse and human genes. We show that these GC boxes
are binding sites for Sp-family transcription factors and are functionally
important since mithramycin, an inhibitor of Sp1/Sp3 binding, blocks MUC2 gene
expression in HT29 cells. Furthermore, by a combination of gel shift analysis and
site-directed mutagenesis, we have identified the relative contribution of
individual GC boxes, and of the factors they bind, to the regulation of the mouse
Muc2 promoter, which appears to be different in the mouse and human genes.
Finally, we demonstrate by overexpressing Sp1 and Sp3 that the functional
difference between the proximal promoter region of the MUC2 gene in the two
species is not attributable to differential ability of this region to bind
members of the Sp family of transcription factors, but rather to the different
anatomy of the individual GC boxes in the mouse and human proximal promoters.

PMID: 11212251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Inorg Chem. 2000 Jul 24;39(15):3205-12.

Selective imidazolidine ring opening during complex formation of iron(III),
copper(II), and zinc(II) with a multidentate ligand obtained from
2-pyridinecarboxaldehyde N-oxide and triethylenetetramine.

Boca M(1), Baran P, Boca R, Fuess H, Kickelbick G, Linert W, Renz F, Svoboda I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Inorganic Chemistry, Slovak Technical University, SK-812 37
Bratislava, Slovakia.

The condensation of 2-pyridinecarboxaldehyde N-oxide and triethylenetetramine
yields a product with two imidazolidine rings, as proven by a solid-state X-ray
structure analysis as well as by NMR solution spectra. This ligand, L1, undergoes
a ring-opening reaction on complex formation with Cu(II), yielding [CuL2]2+ where
L2 functions as a pentadentate ligand, containing only one imidazolidine ring. On
complexation with Zn(II) and Fe(III), both rings are opened and the complexes
[ZnL3]2+ and [FeL3]3+ with a hexadentate L3 ligand are formed. The
recrystallization of [ZnL3]2+ from DMSO solution results in the complex
[ZnL1(DMSO)2]2+ in which L1 behaves as a tetradentate ligand. Thus L1, L2, and L3
are structural isomers with two, one, or no imidazolidine rings, as confirmed by 
X-ray structure analyses. The intramolecular ring formation is the result of the 
nucleophilic addition of the N(amino) group to the electrophilic sp2-hybridized
-HC delta+=N site. Owing to the absence of the chelate effect on the
sp3-hybridized carbon atom belonging to the imidazolidine ring, the ring opening 
is facilitated and readily observed upon complex formation with Cu(II), Zn(II),
and Fe(III).

PMID: 11196855  [PubMed]


488. Endocrinology. 2001 Mar;142(3):1041-9.

Physiological concentrations of insulin promote binding of nuclear proteins to
the insulin-like growth factor I gene.

Kaytor EN(1), Zhu JL, Pao CI, Phillips LS.

Author information: 
(1)Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

Limitations in understanding the mechanism of transcriptional regulation by
insulin are due in part to lack of models in which there is insulin-responsive
binding of nuclear factors to critical promoter regions. The insulin-like growth 
factor I (IGF-I) gene responds to diabetes status via a footprinted sequence,
region V, which contains an AT-rich element and a GC-rich site. We tested the
hypothesis that insulin regulates nuclear factor binding to the AT-rich site. Gel
shift analysis with liver nuclear extracts and a region V probe showed binding of
Sp1, Sp3, and B(1), which persisted despite the presence of antibodies against
Sp1 and Sp3. B(1) was detected by a probe mutated in the GC-rich site (VmSp1),
but not by a probe mutated at the AT-rich site (VmAT). We then asked whether B(1)
was responsive to insulin. For both region V and VmSp1 probes, nuclear extracts
from normal rat hepatocytes, H4IIE cells, and CHO-IR cells exposed to 10(-6) M
insulin exhibited an increase in binding, designated insulin-responsive binding
protein (IRBP); IRBP comigrated with B(1) from liver extracts. IRBP binding to
region V was competed by VmSp1, but not by VmAT, indicating specific interactions
with the AT-rich sequence; insulin response elements from other genes also failed
to compete. After addition of insulin, IRBP began to increase by 1 h and rose
further at 24 h, suggesting involvement of both posttranslational and
transcriptional mechanisms. IRBP responded to as little as 10(-10) M insulin,
indicating physiological relevance. Induction of IRBP was blunted by the
phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase inhibitor LY294002, whereas other signal
transduction inhibitors had little effect. IRBP interacts with an important
sequence in the IGF-I gene and may participate in the metabolic regulation of
IGF-I expression. As most insulin-responsive genes do not exhibit
insulin-responsive nuclear factor binding, further studies of IRBP may also
contribute to understanding of the mechanism of insulin action on gene
transcription.

PMID: 11181517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Chirality. 2001 Feb;13(2):81-8.

Spirobipyridopyrans and indolinospiropyridopyrans: Synthesis, X-ray crystal
structure, separation of enantiomers, and barriers to thermal cleavage of the
C(sp(3))-O bond.

Loncar-Tomaskovic L(1), Pustet N, Mrvos-Sermek D, Nagl A, Mintas M, Mannschreck
A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organic Chemistry, Faculty of Chemical Engineering and
Technology, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.

The novel chiral spirobipyridopyrans 1 and 2 were synthesized by the acid
catalyzed aldol type condensation of 5-deoxypyridoxal with the appropriate ketone
and subsequent reaction of the resulting pyrylium salt with base. The
indolinospiropyridopyrans 3-5, which contain the modified B(6) unit, were
prepared by aldol reaction of 5-deoxypyridoxal with
1,3,3-trimethyl-2-methylenindolines. Analytical separation of enantiomers was
accomplished by low-pressure liquid chromatography (LPLC) on triacetylcellulose. 
The barriers to thermal racemization were determined by on-line measurements of
the enriched enantiomers after LPLC. Gibbs energies of activation DeltaG
superset, not equals for reversible cleavage of the C(spiro)-O bond in 1, 3, and 
4 were in the range 103-108 kJ/mol. The lower limits of the barriers in 2 and 5
were estimated to be greater than 102 and 109 kJ/mol by attempted thermal
racemizations. The increase of the barriers from 3 to 4 and 5 was explained by
the influence of electron withdrawing groups, which reduce the stability of the
ring-opened transition states to C(sp3)-O bond cleavage. Geometrical data from
X-ray structure analysis showed that the angle [C3-C2-C3'] around the spiro
carbon atom increases with elongation of the chain in the C3-C3' bridge. This
angle widening is explained by a ring-strain effect, which is greater in the
five-membered ring in the skeleton of 7 than in the six- and seven-membered rings
of 1 and 2.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11170250  [PubMed]


490. Eur J Biochem. 2001 Jan;268(2):205-17.

Characterization of a proximal element in the rat preadipocyte factor-1 (Pref-1) 
gene promoter.

Takemori H(1), Doi J, Katoh Y, Halder SK, Lin XZ, Horike N, Hatano O, Okamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiological Chemistry, Osaka University Medical
School (H-1), 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

Preadipocyte factor-1 (Pref-1) was shown to negatively regulate adipocyte
differentiation. We recently reported that ZOG, a rat homolog of Pref-1, was
specifically expressed in the adrenal zona glomerulosa. Results of the
investigation of Pref-1 expression in preadipocyte and in undifferentiated
adrenal cortex suggested that down-regulation of Pref-1 gene was closely
correlated with the differentiation process. In this study we demonstrate that an
upstream region (from -76 to -47) of the rat Pref-1 gene was essential for its
expression in adrenocortical carcinoma-derived H295R cells. A nucleotide sequence
found in this region, GCGTGGGCGTGGGCGGGGG (Egr/GC-box), seemed to contain three
elements, two early growth response (Egr) elements and one GC-box, overlapping
each other. Mutations of four or five nucleotides in a 7-nucleotides-stretch in
the midst of the Egr/GC-box eliminated the binding of Sp1/3, abolished the
activation by Egr-factor(s) and diminished the Pref-1 promoter activity. When
mutations were introduced into the outside of the middle portion, the binding of 
Sp1/3 to the Egr/GC-box was abolished similarly. However, the decrease in the
promoter activity was less than that found with the construct mutated at the
middle. These results indicated that an element present at the
7-nucleotides-stretch in the midst of the Egr/GC-box might be important for the
Pref-1 promoter activity, and this proximal element was possibly activated by a
still-unidentified nuclear factor(s). This element would function as the promoter
of the Pref-1 gene in H295R cells, but not in HeLa cells.

PMID: 11168353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Feb 9;280(5):1274-8.

Transcriptional regulation of insulin receptor gene promoter in rat hepatocytes.

Fukuda H(1), Noguchi T, Iritani N.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Human and Cultural Studies, Tezukayama Gakuin University, Sakai,
Osaka, 590-0113, Japan.

To investigate the DNA regulatory sequences -618 to -593 (initiator ATG is +1) of
the insulin receptor (IR) promoter required for IR gene expression, primary
cultured hepatocytes of rats were transfected with plasmids containing the
5'-flanking sequences of the rat IR gene fused to the luciferase gene. When three
copies of the nucleotides -618 to -593 of the IR promoter were transfected, the
reporter activity was significantly increased in the presence of glucose and more
increased in the presence of glucose/insulin. The glucose/insulin stimulation was
inhibited by the addition of polyunsaturated fatty acids. These results were
similar to those found earlier for the transcriptions of the fatty acid synthase,
FAS(-57/-35), ATP citrate-lyase, ACL(-64/-41), and leptin(-101/-83) genes, which 
promoter sequences have a high similarity to IR(-618/-593). However, similarly to
the leptin gene, the IR gene was more responsive to glucose stimulation than the 
FAS and ACL genes. Mutation of either one of the Sp1 binding sites (-618/-593)
did not significantly affect the transcription, whereas mutation of three or four
Sp1 binding sites resulted in a loss of responsiveness to glucose/insulin. Gel
mobility shift assays revealed that nuclear factor(s) from rat liver specifically
formed complexes with the sequence of IR(-618/-593). By antibody supershift
assays, the transcription factors Sp1and Sp3 were found to bind with the
IR(-618/-593). The IR, leptin, ACL and FAS genes contain common DNA-sequences
responsible for the glucose/insulin-stimulation, suggesting that these genes are 
similarly regulated.

PMID: 11162666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Blood. 2001 Feb 15;97(4):946-51.

Regulation of human coagulation factor X gene expression by GATA-4 and the Sp
family of transcription factors.

Hung HL(1), Pollak ES, Kudaravalli RD, Arruda V, Chu K, High KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Serine protease factor Xa plays a critical role in the coagulation cascade.
Zymogen factor X is synthesized and modified in the liver. To understand the
mechanisms governing the liver-specific expression of factor X, the proximal
promoter of human factor X was previously characterized. Two crucial cis elements
at -73 and -128 and their cognate binding proteins, HNF-4 and NF-Y, respectively,
were identified. In this report, studies are extended to 3 additional cis
elements within the factor X promoter. Using gel mobility shift assays, the
liver-enriched protein GATA-4 was identified as the protein binding to the GATA
element at -96. GATA-4 transactivates the factor X promoter 28-fold in transient 
transfection experiments. It was also determined that the Sp family of
transcription factors binds 2 DNase I-footprinted sites at -165 and -195.
Disruption of Sp protein binding at either site reduces the promoter activity by 
half. Simultaneous disruption of both sites reduces the promoter activity 8-fold.
This is the first report indicating the involvement of GATA-4 in the regulation
of clotting factor expression. These observations provide novel insight into
mechanisms by which the vitamin K-dependent coagulation factors are regulated.

PMID: 11159521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. J Biol Chem. 2000 Apr 14;275(15):11478-83.

Novel negative regulatory element in the platelet-derived growth factor B chain
promoter that mediates ERK-dependent transcriptional repression.

Rafty LA(1), Khachigian LM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Thrombosis and Vascular Research, The University of New South
Wales, Department of Haematology, Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney, Australia.

Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), which consists of an A and/or B chain,
stimulates migration and proliferation in vascular smooth muscle cells as well as
a large number of other cell types. Investigations over recent years have defined
roles for several positive regulatory transcription factors in the PDGF-B
promoter. However, little is known about the transcriptional mechanisms that
negatively regulate this gene. Here, we used transient transfection and 5'
deletion analysis to define a specific region in the PDGF-B promoter-mediating
repression in vascular smooth muscle cells. Gel retardation assays revealed this 
region is bound by nuclear protein(s) in a specific manner. Supershift assays
excluded the direct association of Sp1, Sp3, and Egr-1. Mutation of the negative 
regulatory element no longer supported nucleoprotein complex formation and, when 
introduced into the PDGF-B promoter, rescued the promoter from repression.
Promoter activity was also restored by transfection of oligonucleotide decoys
bearing the repressor binding site. The MEK1/2 inhibitor, PD98059, and a dominant
negative construct generating inactive ERK1 increased reporter expression driven 
by the PDGF-B promoter. In contrast, the MEK inhibitor had no effect on the
activity of the mutant PDGF-B promoter. These effects were cell type-specific,
since neither suppression of the PDGF-B promoter nor nucleoprotein complex
formation was observed in vascular endothelial cells. These findings define a
distinct negative regulatory element in the PDGF-B promoter that interacts with
nuclear protein(s) and inhibits PDGF-B promoter-dependent gene expression in an
ERK-dependent manner.

PMID: 10753966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. J Biol Chem. 2001 Apr 6;276(14):10817-23. Epub 2001 Jan 9.

Transcriptional regulation of the mouse uncoupling protein-2 gene. Double E-box
motif is required for peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma-dependent 
activation.

Medvedev AV(1), Snedden SK, Raimbault S, Ricquier D, Collins S.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences and Pharmacology and Cancer 
Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

Uncoupling protein-2 (UCP2) is present in many tissues with relevance to fuel
metabolism, and its expression is increased in fat and muscle in response to
elevated circulating free fatty acids resulting from fasting and high fat
feeding. We proposed a role for peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma 
(PPARgamma) as a mediator of these physiological changes in UCP2, because
thiazolidinediones also increase expression of UCP2 in these cell types (). To
determine the molecular basis for this regulation, we isolated the 7.3-kilobase
promoter region of the mouse UCP2 gene. The -7.3-kilobase/+12-base pair fragment 
activates transcription of a reporter gene by 50-100-fold. Deletion and point
mutation analysis, coupled with gel shift assays, indicate the presence of a
43-base pair enhancer (-86/-44) that is responsible for the majority of both
basal and PPARgamma-dependent transcriptional activity. The distal (-86/-76) part
of the enhancer specifically binds Sp1, Sp2, and Sp3 and is indistinguishable
from a consensus Sp1 element in competition experiments. Point mutation in this
sequence reduces basal activity by 75%. A second region (-74/-66) is identical to
the sterol response element consensus and specifically binds ADD1/SREBP1.
However, deletion of this sequence does not affect basal transcriptional activity
or the response to PPARgamma. The proximal portion of the enhancer contains a
direct repeat of two E-Box motifs, which contributes most strongly to basal and
PPARgamma-dependent transcription of the UCP2 promoter. Deletion of this region
results in a 10-20-fold reduction of transcriptional activity and complete loss
of PPARgamma responsiveness. Point mutations in either E-Box, but not in the
spacer region between them, eliminate the stimulatory response to PPARgamma.
However, gel shift assays show that PPARgamma does not bind to this region. Taken
together, these data indicate that PPARgamma activates the UCP2 gene indirectly
by altering the activity or expression of other transcription factors that bind
to the UCP2 promoter.

PMID: 11150307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 30;276(13):9784-91. Epub 2000 Dec 21.

Regulation of the human MAT2A gene encoding the catalytic alpha 2 subunit of
methionine adenosyltransferase, MAT II: gene organization, promoter
characterization, and identification of a site in the proximal promoter that is
essential for its activity.

Halim AB(1), LeGros L, Chamberlin ME, Geller A, Kotb M.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Surgery, The University of Tennessee, Memphis 38163, USA.

Mammalian methionine adenosyltransferase II (MAT II) consists of a catalytic
alpha2/alpha2' and a regulatory beta subunit. Up-regulation of alpha2 subunit
expression is associated with increased intracellular levels of
S-adenosylmethionine, the major methyl group donor and a key compound in cell
metabolism and polyamine synthesis. Previous studies have shown that expression
of the alpha2 subunit is differentially regulated in normal and malignant cells. 
To delineate the molecular basis for the differential regulation of alpha2
subunit expression, we cloned and characterized the human MAT2A gene and its
promoter and defined regions that contain enhancer and repressor elements.
Detailed functional characterization of the proximal promoter of the MAT2A gene
revealed the formation of three major protein-DNA complexes with probes
containing three Sp1 sites (Sp1-1 at -14, Sp1-2 at -47, and Sp1-3 at -69).
Competition with a probe copying sequence between -76 and -54, which contains the
Sp1-3 site only, or mutation of this site, abolished complex formation.
Furthermore, mutation of the Sp1-3 site, but not the Sp1-1 or Sp1-2 sites,
inhibited the in vivo promoter activity by approximately 85%. Supershift assays
showed that the transcription factors Sp2 and Sp3 are part of the complexes
formed at the Sp1-3 site, and that Sp1 does not appear to be directly involved.
The data indicate that complex formation is initiated at site Sp1-3, which
appears to be essential for promoter activity. However, other regions of the
proximal promoter may also contribute to the regulation of MAT2A gene expression.
These studies may lead to the delineation of the molecular basis for the
differential regulation of MAT2A expression in normal and leukemic T cells.

PMID: 11124935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Oncogene. 2000 Nov 23;19(50):5712-9.

Activation of the p21WAF1/CIP1 promoter independent of p53 by the histone
deacetylase inhibitor suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) through the Sp1
sites.

Huang L(1), Sowa Y, Sakai T, Pardee AB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) is a novel histone deacetylase inhibitor
with high potency in inducing differentiation of cultured murine erythroleukemia 
cells. We have recently demonstrated that SAHA induces cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis in human breast cancer cells, accompanied by up-regulation of the
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, p21WAF1/CIP1, via a p53-independent mechanism.
In this study, we used p21 gene expression as a model system to elucidate the
molecular mechanism(s) underlying SAHA-mediated gene activation. Treatment of
human breast cancer cell line MCF7 cells with SAHA induced p21 mRNA as a
consequence of an immediate-early gene activation. Moreover, SAHA activated the
p21 promoter primarily through two Spl sites located at -82 and -69 relative to
the transcription start site. Furthermore, Sp1 and Sp3 proteins were the major
factors binding to the Spl site of the p21 promoter. However, SAHA did not alter 
their DNA binding activities, suggesting that SAHA mediates p21 promoter activity
by a mechanism other than altering the DNA binding activities of Sp1 and Sp3.
Further studies using the GAL4 luciferase assay system demonstrated that both
GAL4-Sp1 and GAL4-Sp3 fusion proteins supported SAHA-mediated gene activation
from a promoter driven by five GAL4 DNA binding sites, and that GAL4-Sp3 fusion
protein was suppressive in the absence of SAHA treatment. Collectively, our
results suggest that SAHA activates the p21 promoter through the Spl sites, and
that both Spl and Sp3 proteins can mediate SAHA-induced gene activation.

PMID: 11126357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 30;276(13):9662-9. Epub 2000 Dec 4.

Cell cycle regulation of the murine cdc25B promoter: essential role for nuclear
factor-Y and a proximal repressor element.

Körner K(1), Jerôme V, Schmidt T, Müller R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT), Philipps University, 
Emil-Mannkopff-Strasse 2, 35033 Marburg, Germany.

Expression of the cdc25B gene is up-regulated late during cell cycle progression 
(S/G(2)). We have cloned the murine cdc25B promoter to identify elements involved
in transcriptional regulation. A detailed structure-function analysis led to the 
identification of several elements that are located upstream of a canonical Inr
motif at the site of transcription initiation and are involved in transcriptional
activation and regulation. Activation of the promoter is largely mediated by NF-Y
and Sp1/3 interacting with one and four proximal binding sites, respectively. In 
addition, NF-Y plays an essential role in cell cycle regulation in conjunction
with a repressor element (cell cycle-regulated repressor) located approximately
30 nucleotides upstream of the putative Inr element and overlapping a consensus
TATA motif. The cell cycle-regulated repressor is unrelated to the previously
described cell cycle-regulated repressor elements. Taken together, our
observations suggest that expression of the cdc25B gene is controlled through a
novel mechanism of cell cycle-regulated transcription.

PMID: 11104768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 16;276(11):7937-42. Epub 2000 Dec 12.

MRG1 expression in fibroblasts is regulated by Sp1/Sp3 and an Ets transcription
factor.

Han B(1), Liu N, Yang X, Sun HB, Yang YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine (Hematology/Oncology), Walther Oncology Center, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

MRG1 (melanocyte-specific gene 1 (MSG1)-related gene), a ubiquitously expressed
transcription factor that interacts with p300/CBP, TATA-binding protein and Lhx2,
is the founding member of a new family of transcription factors. Initial
characterization of this newly discovered transcription factor has underscored
its potential involvement in many important cellular processes through
transcriptional modulation. We previously demonstrated that MRG1 can be induced
by various biological stimuli (Sun, H. B., Zhu, Y. X., Yin, T., Sledge, G., and
Yang, Y. C. (1998) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 95, 13555-13560). As a first
step in understanding its role in different biological processes, we investigated
mechanisms that regulate transcription of the mouse MRG1 gene in fibroblasts.
Transient transfection of Rat1 fibroblast cells with sequential 5'-deletions of
mouse MRG1 promoter-luciferase fusion constructs indicated that the -104 to +121 
region contains the full promoter activity. Deletion and site-directed mutations 
within this region revealed that the Ets-1 site at -97 to -94 and the Sp1 site at
-51 to -46 are critical for MRG1 expression in fibroblasts. Gel mobility shift
and supershift assays performed with Rat1 nuclear extracts identified
nucleoprotein complexes binding to the Ets-1 site and the Sp1 site. In Drosophila
SL2 cells, which lack the Sp and Ets family of transcription factors, expression 
of Sp1, Sp3, and Ets-1 or Elf-1 functionally stimulated MRG1 promoter activity in
a synergistic manner. These results suggest that multiple transcription factors
acting in synergy are responsible for MRG1 expression and the responsiveness of
cells to different biological stimuli.

PMID: 11114295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Bioorg Med Chem. 2000 Nov;8(11):2617-28.

Comparative quantitative structure-activity study of radical scavengers.

Vajragupta O(1), Boonchoong P, Wongkrajang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Mahidol
University,Bangkok, Thailand. pyovj@mahidol.ac.th

Classic and three-dimensional (3-D) QSAR analyses of 13 radical scavengers (1-13)
were performed to derive two classic, two Apex-3-D and one comparative field
analysis (CoMFA) models. Two classical models with predictive cross-validated r2 
(Q2) over 0.96 indicated that the activity was attributed to the electronic COH
and ELUMO, steric molar refractivity (MR) and lipophilic log P. Three-dimensional
quantitative structure-activity relationship (3-D-QSAR) studies were performed by
3-D pharmacophore generation (Apex-3-D) and CoMFA techniques. For Apex-3-D
studies, two best models with high Q2 (0.94 and 0.97) were yielded. Structural
properties contributing to the activity were not only lipophilic but also the
optimum steric property and geometry of side-chain composition. For CoMFA
studies, the sp3 C(+1) probe provided the best Q2 of 0.79 with steric and
electrostatic contributions of 42.3 and 57.7%, respectively. The activity of four
new compounds (14-17) not included in the derivation were predicted with these
models. Although the derived models were from limited data, the statistic
relation was predictive. The linear correlations between the experimental IC50
values and the predicted values from classical and Apex-3-D models were found to 
be high and significant. The predicted activity of 17 from CoMFA was much lower
than the experimental value; this deviation occurred according to the missing of 
hydrophobic field in standard CoMFA study. In vitro and ex vivo antilipid
peroxidation in mouse brain and ESR studies of 14-17 were investigated for the
radical-scavenging ability. The difference between the in vitro results,
antilipid peroxidation and electron spin resonance (ESR) and ex vivo results in
coumarin series was found. Thus, other properties for good bioavailability
besides log P should also be taken into consideration.

PMID: 11092547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 2;276(9):6350-8. Epub 2000 Nov 14.

The basal promoters for the human reduced folate carrier gene are regulated by a 
GC-box and a cAMP-response element/AP-1-like element. Basis for tissue-specific
gene expression.

Whetstine JR(1), Matherly LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Wayne State University School of Medicine,
Detroit, Michigan 48201, USA.

Our laboratory previously identified two functional promoters (designated A and
B) for the human reduced folate carrier (hRFC) gene that result in hRFC
transcripts with differing 5'-untranslated regions. By transiently transfecting
HT1080 and HepG2 cells with a series of 5' and 3' deletions in the hRFC-B and -A 
promoters, the minimal promoters were localized within 46 and 47 base pairs,
respectively. Gel mobility shift assays with the hRFC-B basal promoter region
revealed specific DNA-protein complexes involving a highly conserved GC-box and
Sp1 or Sp3. In Drosophila SL2 cells, both Sp1 and the long Sp3 isoform potently
transactivated the hRFC-B basal promoter; however, the short Sp3 isoforms were
transcriptionally inert and resulted in a potent inhibition of Sp1
transactivation. For the hRFC-A basal promoter, a CRE/AP-1-like element was bound
by the bZip superfamily of DNA-binding proteins. Cell-specific DNA-protein
complexes were identified for hRFC-A (CREB-1 and c-Jun in HT1080 cells; CREB-1
and ATF-1 in HepG2 cells). When the GC-box and CRE/AP-1-like elements were
mutated, a 60--90% decrease in promoter activity was observed in both cell lines.
These results identify the critical regulatory regions for the hRFC basal
promoters and stress the functional importance of the Sp and bZip families of
transcription factors in regulating hRFC expression.

PMID: 11078737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



61. Biochem J. 2000 Apr 1;347 Pt 1:105-14.

Human amiloride-sensitive epithelial Na+ channel gamma subunit promoter:
functional analysis and identification of a polypurine-polypyrimidine tract with 
the potential for triplex DNA formation.

Auerbach SD(1), Loftus RW, Itani OA, Thomas CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa 
City, IA 52242, USA.

The mRNA for the epithelial Na(+) channel gamma subunit (gammaENaC) is regulated 
developmentally in the lung, colon and distal nephron and in response to Na(+)
deprivation and systemic corticosteroids in the distal colon. Because such
regulation is likely to be at the level of gene transcription, we examined the
function of the promoter and other 5' flanking elements of the human gammaENaC
gene. The proximal 5' flanking region contains two GC boxes but does not contain 
a TATA box. A 450 bp human gammaENaC fragment (-459 to +40) directed the
expression of luciferase in H441 cells and primer extension analysis in
transfected cells confirmed the correct initiation of human gammaENaC-luciferase 
chimaeric transcripts. By deletional analysis, GC boxes at -21 and -52 were found
to be critical for this promoter activity. To begin to identify transcription
factors that bind to the core promoter, a double-stranded oligonucleotide that
corresponded to this region was synthesized and tested in a gel mobility-shift
assay. Incubation of this radiolabelled oligonucleotide with nuclear extracts
from H441 and FRTL5 cells resulted in the formation of four specific and distinct
DNA-protein complexes. On the basis of antibody 'supershift' assays, one of these
factors corresponds to Sp1, whereas the other three correspond to Sp3. Further
upstream, an approx. 300 nt (-1143 to -839) polypurine-polypyrimidine tract (PPy 
tract) containing internal mirror repeats was identified. When contained in a
supercoiled plasmid, the approx. 1200 nt 5' flanking region was sensitive to S1
endonuclease, which was consistent with the formation of an intramolecular
triplex DNA ('H-DNA') structure with an unpaired single strand. High-resolution
mapping with S1 endonuclease and sequencing of S1-generated clones confirmed that
all S1-sensitive sites were within the PPy tract. Finally, a negative regulatory 
element was identified between -1525 and -1296 that functioned in lung, colon and
collecting duct cell lines.

PMCID: PMC1220937
PMID: 10727408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Biol Chem. 2000 Mar 24;275(12):8959-69.

Structural and functional characterization of the leukocyte integrin gene CD11d. 
Essential role of Sp1 and Sp3.

Noti JD(1), Johnson AK, Dillon JD.

Author information: 
(1)Guthrie Research Institute, Sayre, Pennsylvania 18840, USA.
jnoti@inet.guthrie.org

CD11d encodes the latest alpha-subunit of the leukocyte integrin family to be
discovered, and it is expressed predominantly in myelomonocytic cells. We have
isolated a genomic clone that contains CD11d and showed this gene to be 11,461 bp
downstream and oriented in the same direction as the related CD11c gene. CD11d
transcription begins 69-79 nucleotides upstream of the ATG codon. Transfection
analysis of CD11d-luc reporter constructs revealed that the -173 to +74 region is
sufficient to confer leukocyte-specific expression of luciferase in
myelomonocytic cells (THP1 and HL60), B-cells (IM9), and T-cells (Jurkat).
Transfection analysis showed that down-regulation of CD11d expression by phorbol 
ester was myelomonocyte-specific and is mediated by one or more cis-elements
within the -173 to +74 region. In vitro DNase I footprint analysis and
electrophoretic mobility shift analysis showed that Sp1 and Sp3 bind at -63 to
-40. Deletion of the Sp-binding site significantly reduced CD11d promoter
activity. Overexpression of either Sp1 or Sp3 in THP1 cells led to activation of 
the CD11d promoter even in the presence of phorbol ester, whereas down-regulation
of either factor by antisense oligonucleotides decreased CD11d promoter activity.
In contrast, overexpression of Sp3 in IM9 and Jurkat cells down-regulated CD11d
promoter expression. In vivo genomic footprinting revealed that the -63 to -40
region is bound by a Sp protein in unstimulated HL60 cells but not in phorbol
ester-stimulated HL60 cells. In contrast, this site is bound in both unstimulated
and phorbol ester-stimulated IM9 and Jurkat cells. Together, these results show
that myelomonocyte-specific phorbol ester down-regulation of CD11d is mediated
through both Sp1 and Sp3.

PMID: 10722744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Biol Chem. 2000 Mar 24;275(12):8903-10.

Cell-specific transcription of leukotriene C(4) synthase involves a Kruppel-like 
transcription factor and Sp1.

Zhao JL(1), Austen KF, Lam BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, and the Division of
Rheumatology, Immunology, and Allergy, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Leukotriene C(4) synthase (LTC(4)S) is responsible for the biosynthesis of
cysteinyl leukotrienes that participate in allergic and asthmatic inflammation.
We analyzed 2.1 kilobases of the 5'-flanking region of the human LTC(4)S gene,
which contains three DNase I hypersensitivity sites, for its transcriptional
activity when fused to a promoterless and enhancerless luciferase gene. Deletion 
analysis revealed a nonspecific basal promoter region between nucleotides -122
and -56 upstream of the translation start site which contains a consensus Sp1
binding site and a putative initiator element (Inr) and cell-specific enhancer
regions further upstream. A single mutation of either the Sp1 binding site
between nucleotides -120 and -115 or the Inr (CAGAC) between nucleotides -66 and 
-62 reduced the expression of the reporter gene by approximately 60%, whereas
double mutations decreased the expression by approximately 80%. The incubation of
nuclear extracts from THP-1 and K562 cells with a (32)P-labeled oligonucleotide
containing the Sp1 site or the Inr sequence gave gel-shifted complexes that were 
blocked by their respective cold oligonucleotides, and antisera specific for Sp1 
and Sp3 provided supershifts for the former. Linker-scanning mutations of a
cell-specific regulatory region revealed that mutations from nucleotides -165 to 
-125 reduced reporter activity. This region contains a tandem CACCC repeat (at
nucleotides -149 to -145 and -139 to -135). An oligonucleotide containing the
distal CACCC motif was gel shifted by THP-1 cell nuclear extract and was
supershifted by antisera to Sp1 and Sp3. Cotransfection of an Sp1 expression
plasmid into Drosophila SL2 cells with a -228 to -3 LTC(4)S reporter construct
transactivated the reporter gene, whereas mutations at the CACCC repeat region
reduced Sp1 transactivation by approximately 66%. Similarly, the Kruppel-like
factor Zf9/CPBP (core promoter-binding protein) transactivated the -228 construct
in COS cells but not its CACCC mutant construct. These findings indicate the
involvement of Sp1 and an Inr in non-cell-specific regulation and a Kruppel-like 
transcription factor and Sp1 in the cell-specific regulation of the LTC(4)S gene.
These are the first such analyses of a member of a newly recognized superfamily
of membrane-associated proteins involved in eicosanoid and glutathione
metabolism, which contains key proteins involved in the generation of both
prostanoids and cysteinyl leukotrienes.

PMID: 10722737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Biol Chem. 2000 Mar 24;275(12):8331-40.

Sp1/Sp3 and PU.1 differentially regulate beta(5) integrin gene expression in
macrophages and osteoblasts.

Feng X(1), Teitelbaum SL, Quiroz ME, Cheng SL, Lai CF, Avioli LV, Ross FP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
Missouri 63110, USA.

Murine osteoclast precursors and osteoblasts express the integrin
alpha(v)beta(5), the appearance of which on the cell surface is controlled by the
beta(5), and not the alpha(v), subunit. Here, we show that a 173-base pair
proximal region of the beta(5) promoter mediates beta(5) basal transcription in
macrophage (osteoclast precursor)-like and osteoblast-like cells. DNase I
footprinting reveal four regions (FP1-FP4) within the 173-base pair region,
protected by macrophage nuclear extracts. In contrast, osteoblast nuclear
extracts protect only FP1, FP2, and FP3. FP1, FP2, and FP3 bind Sp1 and Sp3 from 
both macrophage and osteoblast nuclear extracts. FP4 does not bind osteoblast
proteins but binds PU.1 from macrophages. Transfection studies show that FP1 and 
FP2 Sp1/Sp3 sites act as enhancers in both MC3T3-E1 (osteoblast-like) and J774
(macrophage-like) cell lines, whereas the FP3 Sp1/Sp3 site serves as a silencer. 
Mutation of the FP2 Sp1/Sp3 site totally abolishes promoter activity in J774
cells, with only partial reduction in MC3T3-E1 cells. Finally, we demonstrate
that PU.1 acts as a beta(5) silencer in J774 cells but plays no role in MC3T3-E1 
cells. Thus, three Sp1/Sp3 sites regulate beta(5) gene expression in macrophages 
and osteoblast-like cells, with each element exhibiting cell-type and/or
activation-suppression specificity.

PMID: 10722663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2000 Mar;278(3):L477-84.

Identification of functional TTF-1 and Sp1/Sp3 sites in the upstream promoter
region of rabbit SP-B gene.

Margana R(1), Berhane K, Alam MN, Boggaram V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Health Science Center at 
Tyler, Tyler, Texas 75708-3154, USA.

Surfactant protein B (SP-B) is essential for the maintenance of biophysical
properties and physiological function of pulmonary surfactant. SP-B mRNA is
expressed in a cell type-restricted manner in alveolar type II and bronchiolar
(Clara) epithelial cells of the lung and is developmentally induced. In NCI-H441 
cells, a lung cell line with characteristics of Clara cells, a minimal promoter
region comprising -236 to +39 nucleotides supports high-level expression of
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter activity. In the present
investigation, we characterized the upstream promoter region, -236 to -140
nucleotides, that is essential for promoter activity. Deletion mapping identified
two segments, -236 to -170 and -170 to -140 nucleotides, that are important for
promoter activity. Mutational analysis and gel mobility shift experiments
identified thyroid transcription factor-1, Sp1, and Sp3 as important trans-acting
factors that bind to sequences in the upstream promoter region. Our data suggest 
that SP-B promoter activity is dependent on interactions between factors bound to
upstream and downstream regions of the promoter.

PMID: 10710519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Mol Endocrinol. 2000 Mar;14(3):393-400.

Regulation of tissue factor gene expression in human endometrium by transcription
factors Sp1 and Sp3.

Krikun G(1), Schatz F, Mackman N, Guller S, Demopoulos R, Lockwood CJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, New York University School of
Medicine, Tisch Hospital, New York 10016, USA. krikug01@mcrcr6.med.nyu.edu

Prior studies indicate that tissue factor (TF), the primary cellular initiator of
hemostasis, is persistently up-regulated in human endometrial stromal cells
(HESCs) undergoing progestin-induced decidualization in vivo and in vitro. The
mechanism underlying progestin enhancement of TF mRNA and protein levels in these
cells involves transcriptional activation of the TF gene. Transient transfections
of HESCs with the truncated TF promoters driving the luciferase reporter gene
have demonstrated that the region spanning -111 to +14 bp retained differential
progestin-enhancing effects. We now demonstrate that RU486 displays inhibitory
effects on the progestin-induced TF promoter activity, confirming the involvement
of the progesterone receptor. Since the TF minimal promoter (pTF 111 spanning
-111 to +14 bp) contains three overlapping Sp1 and three Egr-1 sites, the present
study determined whether Sp1 and/or Egr-1 were required for progestin-regulated
TF expression. The results indicate that the three Sp1 sites are primarily
responsible for both the constitutive and progestational activity of the pTF 111 
promoter, whereas the Egr-1 sites have only a minor involvement in both
activities. Overexpression of the Sp1 protein resulted in greater than a 6-fold
induction in TF promoter activity. In contrast, no enhancement was observed when 
the Sp3 protein was overexpressed. The concomitant overexpression of Sp1 and Sp3 
demonstrated that Sp3 completely blocked the induction of TF promoter activity by
Sp1. Moreover, the addition of 10 nM mithramycin, a concentration that inhibits
Sp1 binding to target DNA, blocked the progestational induction of TF mRNA
expression. Immunohistochemical studies demonstrated increased Sp1 levels in
perivascular stromal cells in secretory phase compared with proliferative phase
endometria. In contrast, Sp3 expression was greatly decreased in stromal cells of
secretory, compared with proliferative phase tissues. The levels of Egr-1 were
low in both proliferative and secretory endometria. Immunocytochemistry of E2 vs.
E2 + medroxyprogesterone acetate-treated HESCs demonstrated a dramatic reduction 
in Sp3 expression after progestin treatment, and Northern blots demonstrated
progestational increases in Sp1 and reduction in Sp3 mRNA expression compared
with controls. Taken together, our results demonstrate that progestin enhancement
of TF gene expression in HESCs is mediated principally by Sp1. We propose that
progestins regulate HESC TF gene expression in vivo by altering the ratio of Sp1 
to Sp3 nuclear factors.

PMID: 10707957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. DNA Cell Biol. 2000 Feb;19(2):79-91.

Transcription of human cathepsin B is mediated by Sp1 and Ets family factors in
glioma.

Yan S(1), Berquin IM, Troen BR, Sloane BF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Wayne State University School of Medicine,
Detroit, Michigan 48201, USA.

Cathepsin B expression is increased at both the mRNA and protein levels in a wide
variety of tumors. The mechanisms responsible for this regulation are not well
elucidated. We have isolated a 2.2-kb cathepsin B genomic fragment that contains 
the 5'-flanking region of the cathepsin B gene. Using reporter gene analysis in
human glioblastoma U87MG cells, we have mapped a 228-bp fragment (-172 to +56)
having high promoter activity. This promoter region has a high G+C content;
contains potential Spl, Ets, and USF binding motifs; and lacks canonical TATA and
CAAT boxes immediately upstream of the major transcriptional initiation site.
Cotransfection experiments demonstrated that Spl and Ets1 could trans-activate
cathepsin B transcription, whereas Ets2 could not. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays and supershift assays revealed that three of the four putative Sp1 sites
in this promoter region form a specific complex containing the Sp1 transcription 
factor. Mutating all four of the Spl binding sites individually markedly reduced 
the promoter activity of transfected reporter genes in U87 cells. Cotransfection 
of this cathepsin B promoter construct with Spl family expression vectors in
Schneider's Drosophila line 2 (SL2) cells demonstrated that Spl and Sp3, but not 
Sp4, activated cathepsin B transcription. Taken together, these results suggest
that Sp1, Sp3, and Ets1 are important factors in cathepsin B transcription. The
regulation of cathepsin B transcription by Sp1- and Sp1-related factors is
mediated through multiple GC boxes.

PMID: 10701774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Endocrinology. 2000 Mar;141(3):938-46.

Identification of SP3 as a negative regulatory transcription factor in the
monocyte expression of growth hormone.

Vines CR(1), Weigent DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Alabama, Birmingham
35294-0005, USA.

A number of studies from different laboratories clearly show that cells of the
immune system produce a GH molecule indistinguishable from that produced in the
pituitary. A more recent finding from our studies suggests that monocytes use the
same first exon and promoter sequence for the expression of lymphocyte GH as that
reported for the expression of pituitary GH. In this report we have extended
these results by determining that two members of the SP family of transcription
factors, SP1 and SP3, bind to the region at -138/-133 bp containing a GGGAGG
motif. Confirmation that this region of the monocyte GH promoter-bound SP1 and
SP3 was accomplished using electrophoretic mobility shift assays with SP1
consensus and mutant probes as well as specific antibodies to SP1 and SP3.
Selective mutation of the SP1/SP3 site increased basal transcription by 73%,
indicating that this site is important in transcriptional inhibition.
Overexpression of SP1 had no demonstrable effect on the GH promoter, whereas
overexpression of SP3 caused inhibition of expression in P-388 monocyte cells.
Cotransfection of P-388 cells with overexpression vectors for both SP1 and SP3
transcription factors also resulted in inhibition of basal expression.
Transfection experiments in Drosophila SL-2 cells overexpressing SP1 and/or SP3
suggest that both factors repress the basal expression of GH promoter luciferase 
constructs and that the effect together was additive. Taken together, the results
demonstrate that basal expression of monocyte GH may be negatively regulated by
SP3.

PMID: 10698168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Mar 5;269(1):197-202.

Identification of a novel retinoic acid-responsive element within the lamin A/C
promoter.

Okumura K(1), Nakamachi K, Hosoe Y, Nakajima N.

Author information: 
(1)Biomolecular Engineering Research Institute, 6-2-3 Furuedai, Suita, Osaka,
565-0874, Japan. koichi@beri.co.jp

A-type lamins are not present in either early embryos or the embryonal carcinoma 
(EC) cell line. P19 cells, which are EC cell line, are able to express A-type
lamins upon retinoic acid (RA) treatment. Here we report that a novel
RA-responsive element, termed lamin A/C-RA-responsive element (L-RARE), is
located within the lamin A/C promoter. RA activated the luciferase activity of
the reporter which had four tandem repeats of the wild-type L-RARE, while a loss 
of function mutant, which altered CACCCCC to CACtatC within L-RARE, did not
respond. Four specific binding complexes of L-RARE, Complexes-A, -B, -C, and -D, 
were detected in protein extracts obtained from P19 cells treated with and
without RA. Specific antibodies revealed that Sp1 and Sp3 were included in
Complex-A and Complexes-B and -C, respectively. Thus, L-RARE was important in the
RA-mediated activation of the lamin A/C promoter and was recognized by DNA
binding proteins.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10694499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Feb 29;1490(3):213-24.

A novel DNA element mediates transcription of Nkx2.1 by Sp1 and Sp3 in pulmonary 
epithelial cells.

Li C(1), Ling X, Yuan B, Minoo P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Women's and Children's Hospital, University of
Southern California School of Medicine, General Laboratories Bldg. Room 1G38,
1801 E. Marengo Street, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

NKX2.1 is a member of the NK2 family of homeodomain-containing transcription
factors whose targeted disruption in mouse results in the absence of thyroid
tissue and a severely abnormal lung phenotype. Little is known regarding the
mechanisms that control tissue and temporal specificity of Nkx2.1 gene
expression. The Nkx2.1 gene has been cloned from a number of species and it is
composed of three exons and two introns. Two distinct DNA domains located 5' of
exon I and within intron I have been found to exhibit promoter activity in lung
and thyroid cells. In the current study we used deletional analysis of the 5'
flanking region of exon I and identified a 300 bp TATA-less region that exhibits 
significant promoter activity in H441 cells. The DNA sequence of this region
contains multiple palindromes, composed of G/C-rich elements. DNase I
footprinting demonstrates that this promoter region interacts with nuclear
factors present in H441 cells. In particular electrophoretic mobility shift assay
using antibodies against the Sp family members show that both Sp1 and Sp3 as well
as an as yet unknown H441-specific factor interact with the palindromic structure
within this promoter region. Co-transfection studies show that this promoter
region responds to Sp1 and Sp3 and mutations therein result in a significantly
diminished response to these transcriptional factors. Therefore, we have
identified a novel DNA structure on the Nkx2.1 gene which participates in
transcription of this gene in pulmonary epithelial cells by Sp1 and Sp3
transcription factors.

PMID: 10684967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. EMBO J. 2000 Feb 15;19(4):655-61.

Transcription factor Sp3 is essential for post-natal survival and late tooth
development.

Bouwman P(1), Göllner H, Elsässer HP, Eckhoff G, Karis A, Grosveld F, Philipsen
S, Suske G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Emil-Mannkopff-Strasse 2.

Sp3 is a ubiquitously expressed transcription factor closely related to Sp1
(specificity protein 1). We have disrupted the mouse Sp3 gene by homologous
recombination. Sp3-deficient embryos are growth retarded and invariably die at
birth of respiratory failure. The cause for the observed breathing defect remains
obscure since only minor morphological alterations were observed in the lung, and
surfactant protein expression is indistinguishable from that in wild-type mice.
Histological examinations of individual organs in Sp3(-/-) mice show a pronounced
defect in late tooth formation. In Sp3 null mice, the dentin/enamel layer of the 
developing teeth is impaired due to the lack of ameloblast-specific gene
products. Comparison of the Sp1 and Sp3 knockout phenotype shows that Sp1 and Sp3
have distinct functions in vivo, but also suggests a degree of functional
redundancy.

PMCID: PMC305603
PMID: 10675334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2000 Feb;20(2):507-15.

New functional promoter polymorphism, CETP/-629, in cholesteryl ester transfer
protein (CETP) gene related to CETP mass and high density lipoprotein cholesterol
levels: role of Sp1/Sp3 in transcriptional regulation.

Dachet C(1), Poirier O, Cambien F, Chapman J, Rouis M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), Unité 321,
Hopital de la Pitié-Salpétrière, Paris, France. cdachet@infobiogen.fr

A new polymorphism located at position -629 (CETP/-629A/C) in the promoter of the
cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) gene is described. The -629A allele was
associated with lower CETP mass (P<0. 0001) and higher high density lipoprotein
cholesterol (P<0.001) than the C allele in a sample of 536 control subjects from 
the ECTIM study. Transfection studies in HepG2 cells with a luciferase expression
vector incorporating a 777-bp fragment of the CETP promoter and containing either
A or C at position -629 showed significantly lower luciferase activity with the
promoter fragment of the A allele (-25%, P<0.05). By gel-shift assay, DNA-protein
interactions were evaluated in nuclear extracts of HepG2 cells with the use of 2 
probes (A or C probe) composed of 20 bp of the promoter sequence surrounding the 
polymorphic site. Two specific complexes of distinct migration rate were
identified with the A and the C probe. Competition with an excess of
oligonucleotide containing the Sp1 consensus binding site showed that a
protein(s) of the Sp transcription factor family was implicated in complex
formation with the A probe but not with the C probe. Incubation with specific
antibodies indicated that Sp1 and Sp3 bound specifically to the A probe. We
introduced mutations in the -629-Sp1 binding site to test its functionality and
to define the characteristics of transcription factor binding. We showed, by
gel-shift assay, that no nuclear proteins bound to the mutated sequence.
Transient transfection of HepG2 cells revealed that the expression of the mutated
fragment was significantly increased compared with that of the A promoter
fragment (25%, P<0.05). The mutated fragment displayed the same activity as that 
of the C promoter. These results indicate that Sp1 and/or Sp3 repress CETP
promoter activity, whereas nuclear factors binding the C allele are without
effect on promoter expression.

PMID: 10669650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Biochem J. 2000 Feb 15;346 Pt 1:45-51.

Genomic organization, chromosomal mapping and promoter analysis of the mouse
selenocysteine tRNA gene transcription-activating factor (mStaf) gene.

Adachi K(1), Katsuyama M, Song S, Oka T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, Room 106, Building 8, National
Institutes of Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Disease, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

mStaf is a zinc-finger protein that activates the transcription of the mouse
selenocysteine tRNA gene. The mStaf gene is approx. 35 kb long and split into 16 
exons. All exon-intron junction sequences conform to the GT/AG rule. The
transcription start site is located 83 bp upstream of the initiation codon.
Chromosomal mapping localized the gene to mouse chromosome 7, region E3-F1.
Sequence analysis of the proximal promoter region revealed several potential
regulatory elements; these include the recognition elements of Sp1, Nkx, CP2,
E2A, SIF (SIS-inducible factor), TFII-I and cAMP-responsive element (CRE), but no
TATA sequences. Transfection experiments demonstrated that the 5'-flanking region
(-1894 to +37) of the mStaf gene drives transcription in mouse NMuMG cells and
that a construct containing a fragment from -387 to +37 showed the highest
transcriptional activity. Deletion and mutation experiments suggested that four
Sp1 sites played an important role for the basal promoter activity. Furthermore, 
electrophoretic mobility-shift assays demonstrated that Sp3 but not other Sp
(specificity protein) family members binds to three of the Sp1 sites. Our present
study suggests that Sp3 is involved in the basal transcriptional activation of
the mStaf gene.

PMCID: PMC1220821
PMID: 10657238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2000 Jan;32(1):95-108.

Identification of cis-acting DNA elements required for expression of the human
cardiac troponin I gene promoter.

Bhavsar PK(1), Dellow KA, Yacoub MH, Brand NJ, Barton PJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College School of Medicine,
Dovehouse Street, London, SW3 6LY, UK.

The human cardiac troponin I (TnIc) gene exhibits both cardiac-specific and
developmentally regulated expression. The structure and expression of this gene
as well as the identification of putative regulatory elements have been described
previously. This study shows that a minimal promoter containing 98 bp of sequence
is sufficient to drive transcription in neonatal rat cardiac myocytes. This
region contains several putative cis -regulatory elements including an Initiator 
element surrounding the start site of transcription, an A/T-rich (TATA/MEF-2)
element, two GATA elements and a cytosine-rich region containing overlapping CACC
box and Sp1 elements. Using electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs) this
study demonstrates the binding of MEF-2, Oct-1, and recombinant TBP to the
A/T-rich element and of GATA-4 to both GATA elements. The CACC/Sp element binds
the zinc finger transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 in addition to an unidentified 
complex present in neonatal rat cardiac myocytes. Mutation of each of these sites
has a deleterious effect on promoter activity as assayed by transient
transfection into cardiac myocytes. The data suggest that transcriptional
activity of the human TnIc gene can be driven by a compact promoter region and
that within this region GATA, MEF-2 Sp1 and CACC box-binding factors are required
for optimal activity. Furthermore, a comparison with data obtained for identical 
elements in the promoters of rodent TnIc genes identifies differences between
species which may be of consequence for species-specific promoter function.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10652194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Cell Biochem. 2000 Jan;76(3):360-7.

Differential role for Sp1/Sp3 transcription factors in the regulation of the
promoter activity of multiple cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor genes.

Pagliuca A(1), Gallo P, Lania L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Molecular and General Biology, University of Naples
"Federico II," 80134 Naples, Italy.

Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors play a significant role in cell cycle
progression and in cellular differentiation and their expression is regulated in 
different cellular settings. GC-rich regions in the promoter sequences of the
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor genes p15INK4B and p21CIP1/WAF1 mediate the
transcriptional response of these genes to extracellular stimuli. Similar GC-rich
sequences in the promoter of the p15INK4A and p16INK4B gene can be targeted for
transcriptional inactivation by methylation of cytosine residues. GC-rich regions
represent putative target sites for binding of the ubiquitously expressed Sp1 and
Sp3 transcription factors. Using a combination of functional and biochemical
studies, we analyzed the potential role of the Sp1 and Sp3 factors in the
regulation of CDKI p15, p16, and p21 promoter activities. Using transient
reporter gene assays, we determined that Sp1 is a strong activator of these
promoters, whereas Sp3 functions as a weak transactivator. We have identified
multiple protein-binding sites in the proximal promoter sequences of these genes 
by footprinting analysis. Some of these sites are bound by Sp1 and Sp3, as
demonstrated by gel-shift experiments using Sp1/Sp3-specific antibodies,
permitting the demonstration that a differential role exists for Sp1 and Sp3 in
the regulation of the activity of these promoters.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10649433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Endocrinology. 2000 Feb;141(2):763-71.

Characterization of the murine pituitary tumor transforming gene (PTTG) and its
promoter.

Wang Z(1), Melmed S.

Author information: 
(1)Cedars-Sinai Research Institute, University of California School of Medicine, 
Los Angeles 90048, USA.

We recently isolated rat pituitary tumor transforming gene (PTTG) complementary
DNA and showed its potent in vitro and in vivo transforming activity. We now
characterize the mouse PTTG gene and its promoter. The entire gene is composed of
five exons and four introns and spans about 7 kb. Northern analysis showed that
PTTG was expressed in several tumor cell lines examined, but not in all normal
tissues, implying a correlation between PTTG and tumorigenesis. Using rapid
amplification of 5'-cDNA ends, the transcription start site was localized at -303
nucleotides upstream to the ATG codon in both F9 and AtT20 cells. An
approximately 4.3-kb upstream region demonstrated promoter activity in AtT20
cells as well as other cell lines tested, and in vivo, the cloned promoter
driving an enhanced green fluorescent protein transgene exhibited transcriptional
activation in testis and embryo. Serial deletions showed that -313 bp of the
5'-flanking region was critical for promoter activity. Three elements contribute 
to promoter activity. Both element A (-313/-293) and element C (-180/-160), in an
electrophoretic mobility shift assay using NIH-3T3 nuclear extract, formed three 
specific complexes, which were competed by a known Sp1 oligo; one complex was
supershifted by Sp1 antibody, and the other two complexes were both supershifted 
by an Sp3 antibody. Two mutants disrupting element A resulted in up to 70% loss
of promoter activity and abrogated formation of specific DNA-protein binding
complexes, implying a more important role for element A. Element B (-249/-229)
shows more than 80% homology to a consensus c-myb element, but formed two
specific complexes that differed from that of c-myb in the electrophoretic
mobility shift assay. Thus, the integrity and possible cooperation among these
elements contribute to the basal promoter activity of the mouse PTTG oncogene
homolog.

PMID: 10650958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jan 28;275(4):2763-70.

Nuclear orphan receptors regulate transcription of the gene for the human
luteinizing hormone receptor.

Zhang Y(1), Dufau ML.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Molecular Endocrinology, NICHD, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

An imperfect estrogen receptor half-site response element direct-repeat, located 
within the TATA-less promoter of the human luteinizing hormone receptor (hLHR),
was identified as an inhibitory site for Sp1/Sp3-driven basal transcription.
Isolation of proteins recognizing this site by yeast one-hybrid screening of a
human placenta cDNA library revealed three nuclear orphan receptors, EAR2,
EAR3/COUP-TFI, and TR4. Electrophoresis mobility shift assays demonstrated that
the in vitro translated nuclear orphan receptors specifically bound the
direct-repeat motif of the hLHR promoter. Also, endogenous EAR2 and EAR3/COUP-TFI
from JAR cell and human testis and TR4 from testes bound this motif in
electrophoresis mobility shift assays. Functional analyses in CV-1 cells showed
that EAR2 and EAR3/COUP-TFI repressed the hLHR promoter activity by up to 70% in 
a dose-dependent and sequence-specific manner. Conversely, TR4 activated the hLHR
promoter activity up to 2.5-fold through binding to the same cis-element. The
stimulation was reversed by coexpression of EAR2 or EAR3/COUP-TFI, indicating
their competitive binding for this site. Such recognition of a common cognate
site by the proteins with antagonistic functions implies that a net regulation of
the hLHR gene may result from the relative availability of repressors and
activator in a physiological state. This also may contribute to the differential 
expression of the hLHR gene in gonadal and non-gonadal tissues.

PMID: 10644740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jan 21;275(3):1708-14.

Sp1 binding is critical for promoter assembly and activation of the MCP-1 gene by
tumor necrosis factor.

Ping D(1), Boekhoudt G, Zhang F, Morris A, Philipsen S, Warren ST, Boss JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

The monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 gene (MCP-1) is induced by the
inflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis factor through the coordinate assembly of an
NF-kappaB-dependent distal regulatory region and a proximal region that has been 
suggested to bind Sp1 as well as other factors. To provide a genetic correlation 
for Sp1 activity in this system, a cell line homozygous for a targeted truncation
of the Sp1 gene was derived and examined. We found that the lack of Sp1 binding
activity resulted in the inability of both the distal and proximal regions to
assemble in vivo even though the binding of NF-kappaB to distal region DNA was
unaffected in vitro. We also found that Sp1 and NF-kappaB were the minimal
mammalian transcription factors required for efficient activity when transfected 
into Drosophila Schneider cells. Additionally, Sp3 was able to compensate for Sp1
in the Drosophila tissue cell system but not in the Sp1(-/-) cell line suggesting
that Sp1 usage is site-specific and is likely to depend on the context of the
binding site. Together, these data provide genetic and biochemical proof for Sp1 
in regulating the MCP-1 gene.

PMID: 10636866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jan 14;275(2):1371-6.

p300 collaborates with Sp1 and Sp3 in p21(waf1/cip1) promoter activation induced 
by histone deacetylase inhibitor.

Xiao H(1), Hasegawa T, Isobe K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Gerontology, National Institute for Longevity Sciences,
36-3, Gengo Morioka-Cho, Obu, Aichi, 474-8522 Japan.

We have reported that histone acetylation induced by trichostatin A (TSA)
promotes p21(waf1/cip1) (p21) expression, the GC-box located just upstream of
TATA box was responsible for TSA-induced promoter activation, and both Sp1 and
Sp3 were the working activator of this GC-box. To understand the molecular
pathway from histone acetylation to this Sp1 family factors-mediated promoter
activation, we investigated the function of p300, one of the histone
acetyltransferase, in the present work. The evidence supporting the linkage
between p300 and TSA-induced p21 promoter activation were realized from the
following findings: 1) cotransfection of p300 elevated p21 promoter activity, and
this elevation was dependent on TSA-responsive GC-box; 2) TSA-induced promoter
activation was blocked by the introduction of p300 dominant-negative mutant into 
cells; and 3) Sp1- or Sp3-mediated activation was also suppressed by this p300
dominant-negative mutant. Our data also suggested that p300 collaborates with Sp1
in a way which is different from that when p300 collaborates with p53 in p21
transcription.

PMID: 10625687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jan 14;275(2):847-54.

Transcription of the human c-Src promoter is dependent on Sp1, a novel pyrimidine
binding factor SPy, and can be inhibited by triplex-forming oligonucleotides.

Ritchie S(1), Boyd FM, Wong J, Bonham K.

Author information: 
(1)Saskatoon Cancer Center Research Unit, Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. Division of
Oncology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan S7N 4H4, Canada.

The tyrosine kinase pp60(c-src) has been implicated in the regulation of numerous
normal physiological processes as well the development of several human cancers. 
However, the mechanisms regulating its expression have not been addressed. In the
present study, we report the presence of two Sp1/Sp3 binding sites and three
polypurine:polypyrimidine (Pu:Py) tracts in the c-Src promoter that are essential
for controlling expression. We demonstrate that Sp1, but not Sp3, is capable of
activating the c-Src promoter and that Sp3 is also capable of inhibiting
Sp1-mediated transactivation. The presence of multiple Pu:Py tracts conferred S1 
sensitivity on plasmids in vitro, suggesting they are capable of adopting non
B-DNA conformations. These tracts specifically bind a nuclear factor we named SPy
(Src pyrimidine binding factor), which demonstrates both novel double- and
single-stranded binding specificities. Mutations eliminating SPy binding
compromised Src transcriptional activity, especially in concert with additional
mutations affecting Sp1 binding, suggesting the two factors may cooperate in
regulating c-Src expression. Finally, we demonstrate that triplex-forming
oligonucleotides designed to target both Sp1 and SPy binding sites can
down-regulate c-Src expression in vitro, suggesting a potential therapeutic
approach to controlling c-Src expression in diseases where aberrant expression or
activity has been documented.

PMID: 10625617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Oncogene. 1999 Dec 16;18(54):7755-64.

Ets transcription factors cooperate with Sp1 to activate the human tenascin-C
promoter.

Shirasaki F(1), Makhluf HA, LeRoy C, Watson DK, Trojanowska M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Hollings Cancer Center,
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina, SC 29425-2229, 
USA.

Tenascin-C (TN-C), an extracellular matrix glycoprotein is expressed during
embryonic development, but is present only at low levels in normal adult tissues.
TN-C is re-expressed during wound healing, fibrotic diseases and in cancer. To
better understand the mechanisms that control TN-C gene expression, we examined
the regulation of the human TN-C promoter in human fibroblasts. We demonstrate
that a short segment of the TN-C promoter between bp -133 and -27 contains three 
evolutionarily conserved Ets binding sites (EBS). These three EBSs bind in vitro 
expressed Fli1 protein and mediate transactivation of the TN-C gene by Fli1.
Furthermore, two proximal EBSs contribute significantly to basal activity of the 
TN-C promoter. GABP, which is present in human fibroblast nuclear extracts,
interacts with the two proximal EBSs. In addition, several Sp1 and Sp3 binding
sites have been located in close proximity to the EBSs within this promoter
region. The studies performed in Drosophila cells demonstrate that either Fli1 or
GABPalpha+beta1 functionally interact with Sp1 resulting in a synergistic
stimulation of the TN-C promoter activity. In conclusion, this study shows for
the first time that the TN-C gene is regulated by Ets proteins, which together
with Sp1 act as potent activators of TN-C expression.

PMID: 10618716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. FEBS Lett. 1999 Dec 31;464(3):113-7.

Transcriptional regulation of fatty acid synthase gene and ATP citrate-lyase gene
by Sp1 and Sp3 in rat hepatocytes(1).

Fukuda H(1), Noguchi T, Iritani N.

Author information: 
(1)Tezukayama Gakuin University, 4-cho, Harumidai, Sakai, Osaka, Japan.

When two copies of the sequences spanning -57 to -35 of the fatty acid synthase
(FAS) or -64 to -41 of the ATP citrate-lyase (ACL) gene linked to a reporter gene
were transfected into primary cultured hepatocytes, the reporter activities
significantly increased in response to insulin/glucose treatment. In
cotransfection experiments of the FAS(-57/-35) with the Sp1 or Sp3 expression
vector, the reporter activities of transcription were suppressed by Sp1 and
stimulated by Sp3. In the cotransfection experiments of ACL(-64/-41), the
activities were suppressed by Sp1 but were unchanged by Sp3. A similar effect of 
Sp1 and Sp3 on transcription was seen in mRNA concentrations and enzyme
activities of endogenous FAS and ACL. Moreover, the mRNA concentrations and
enzyme activities of endogenous acetyl-CoA carboxylase were suppressed by Sp1 and
greatly increased by Sp3. Gel mobility super shift assays using antibodies
against Sp1 or Sp3 revealed the binding of the transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 
with the GC rich regions located within FAS(-57/-35) and ACL(-64/-41) genes. The 
formation of DNA-protein complexes was decreased in rats fed a high-carbohydrate 
diet in comparison with that in fasted rats, but feeding the corn oil diet
inhibited this decrease. In Western immunoblotting assay, however, the amount of 
Sp1 and Sp3 remained unchanged in the dietary conditions. Therefore, the binding 
of DNA-protein complexes was not due to changes in the amount of Sp1 and Sp3 but 
to changes in the binding activity, suggesting that these transcription factors
may be an important determinant of lipogenic enzyme expression.

PMID: 10618488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Endocrinology. 2000 Jan;141(1):385-95.

Expression and localization of serum/glucocorticoid-induced kinase in the rat
ovary: relation to follicular growth and differentiation.

Alliston TN(1), Gonzalez-Robayna IJ, Buse P, Firestone GL, Richards JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Expression of serum/glucocorticoid-inducible kinase (Sgk), one member of an
inducible serine/threonine kinase family, is induced by FSH/cAMP in rat granulosa
cells cultured in defined medium. The FSH-stimulated pattern of sgk expression is
biphasic, and transcriptional activation of the sgk gene depends on an intact
Sp1/Sp3 binding site within the proximal promoter. To determine whether sgk was
expressed in a hormone-dependent and physiologically relevant manner in vivo, the
cellular levels of sgk messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein as well as the
subcellular localization of this kinase were analyzed in ovaries containing
follicles and corpora lutea at specific stages of differentiation. To stimulate
follicular development and luteinization, hypophysectomized (H) rats were treated
with estradiol (E; HE) and FSH (FSH; HEF) followed by hCG (hCG; HEF/hCG). To
analyze Sgk in functional corpora lutea, PRL was administered to HEF/hCG rats, or
ovaries of pregnant rats were obtained on day 7, 15, or 22 of gestation. In situ 
hybridization indicated that sgk mRNA was low/undetectable in granulosa cells of 
H and HE rats. An acute injection (i.v.) of FSH to HE rats rapidly increased sgk 
mRNA at 2 and 8 h. Sgk mRNA was also elevated in granulosa cells of preovulatory 
follicles of HEF rats and in luteal cells of HEF/hCG and pregnant rats. Northern 
blots and Western blots confirmed the in situ hybridization data, indicating that
the amount and cellular localization Sgk protein were related to that of sgk
mRNA. When the subcellular localization of this kinase was analyzed by
immunohistochemistry, Sgk protein was nuclear in granulosa cells and some thecal 
cells of large preovulatory follicles. In contrast, Sgk protein was cytoplasmic
in luteal cells as well as some cells within the stromal compartment. Intense
immunostaining was also observed in oocytes present in primordial follicles, but 
not in growing follicles. Collectively, these results show that FSH and LH
stimulate marked increases in the cellular content of Sgk, as well as dramatic
changes in the subcellular distribution of this kinase. The specific nuclear vs. 
cytoplasmic compartmentalization of Sgk in granulosa cells and luteal cells,
respectively, indicates that Sgk controls distinct functions in proliferative vs.
terminally differentiated granulosa cells.

PMID: 10614661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jan;20(2):672-83.

Cyclin D1 is required for transformation by activated Neu and is induced through 
an E2F-dependent signaling pathway.

Lee RJ(1), Albanese C, Fu M, D'Amico M, Lin B, Watanabe G, Haines GK 3rd, Siegel 
PM, Hung MC, Yarden Y, Horowitz JM, Muller WJ, Pestell RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, The Albert Einstein Cancer Center, Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

The neu (c-erbB-2) proto-oncogene encodes a tyrosine kinase receptor that is
overexpressed in 20 to 30% of human breast tumors. Herein, cyclin D1 protein
levels were increased in mammary tumors induced by overexpression of wild-type
Neu or activating mutants of Neu in transgenic mice and in MCF7 cells
overexpressing transforming Neu. Analyses of 12 Neu mutants in MCF7 cells
indicated important roles for specific C-terminal autophosphorylation sites and
the extracellular domain in cyclin D1 promoter activation. Induction of cyclin D1
by NeuT involved Ras, Rac, Rho, extracellular signal-regulated kinase, c-Jun
N-terminal kinase, and p38, but not phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. NeuT induction
of the cyclin D1 promoter required the E2F and Sp1 DNA binding sites and was
inhibited by dominant negative E2F-1 or DP-1. Neu-induced transformation was
inhibited by a cyclin D1 antisense or dominant negative E2F-1 construct in Rat-1 
cells. Growth of NeuT-transformed mammary adenocarcinoma cells in nude mice was
blocked by the cyclin D1 antisense construct. These results demonstrate that
E2F-1 mediates a Neu-signaling cascade to cyclin D1 and identify cyclin D1 as a
critical downstream target of neu-induced transformation.

PMCID: PMC85165
PMID: 10611246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Immunol. 2000 Jan 1;164(1):300-7.

The role of Sp family members, basic Kruppel-like factor, and E box factors in
the basal and IFN-gamma regulated expression of the human complement C4 promoter.

Ulgiati D(1), Subrata LS, Abraham LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Western Australia, Nedlands.

The fourth component of human complement (C4) is a serum protein that is
expressed in the liver and other organs. The promoter region of the C4 gene has
been analyzed in reporter gene assays in two cell lines that represent hepatic
(HepG2) and monocytic (U937) lineages. Analysis indicated that regions important 
for basal transcription in HepG2 cells included Sp1 and E box sites within the
first 100 bp upstream of the transcription initiation site but not the nuclear
factor-1 site important in the control of the mouse C4 gene. Also, a region
encompassing -468 to -310 was able to repress activity 2-fold. However, when a
CACCC or GT box sequence at -140 was mutated the repressive activity of the
upstream region resulted in almost no activity. The -140 region consists of a
series of four closely positioned GT boxes that were shown to bind Sp1, Sp3, and 
basic Krupple-like factor in EMSA. This novel two-part regulatory element may be 
involved in the regulated expression of C4. However, IFN-gamma a major activator 
of C4 expression did not signal through this two-part regulatory element. We were
able to map the position of an IFN-gamma responsive element in U937. IFN-gamma
was able to increase transcription by up to 20-fold with mutations in the E box
sequence at -78 to -73, thus completely abolishing induction. We conclude that
the E box binding factors, which appear to be distinct from upstream stimulatory 
factors 1 and 2, are totally responsible for IFN-gamma induction of C4.

PMID: 10605024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Oncogene. 1999 Nov 4;18(46):6252-61.

Ras induces p21Cip1/Waf1 cyclin kinase inhibitor transcriptionally through
Sp1-binding sites.

Kivinen L(1), Tsubari M, Haapajärvi T, Datto MB, Wang XF, Laiho M.

Author information: 
(1)Haartman Institute, Department of Virology, University of Helsinki, Finland.

Republished in
    J Exp Med. 2010 Jan 18;207(1):83-100, S1-4.

p21Cip1/Waf1 cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor (p21) is inducible by Raf and
mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MAPKK), but the level of regulation is
unknown. We show here by conditional and transient Ras-expression models that Ras
induces p21. Induction of p21 in conditionally Ras-expressing cells is
posttranscriptional utilizing mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway.
Transient, high-level Ras-expression induces transcriptional activation of p21
mediated by a GC-rich region in p21 promoter -83-54 bp relative to the
transcription initiation site containing binding sites for Sp1-family
transcription factors. Mutation of either Sp1-binding site 2 or 4 in this region 
decreases the magnitude of induction of promoter activity by Ras, but only the
simultaneous mutation of both sites abolishes fully the induction.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays using an oligonucleotide corresponding to
Sp1-binding site 2 indicate that both Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors bind to
this region. The results demonstrate that the central cytosolic growth regulator 
Ras is a potent transcriptional and posttranscriptional inducer of the nuclear
growth inhibitor p21.

PMID: 10597223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 1999 Sep;45(6):865-75.

Identification of altered DNA-protein interactions at the lamin A proximal
promoter in quiescent hepatocytes.

Tiwari B(1), Parnaik VK.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, India.

The nuclear lamina of differentiated cells is composed of A-type and B-type
lamins. The expression of the A-type lamins has been shown to be primarily under 
transcriptional control in proliferating cells. In order to gain insights into
the factors involved in downregulation of the promoter in quiescent cells, we
have compared the DNA-protein interactions at the rat lamin A proximal promoter
in fetal (dividing) hepatocytes and adult (quiescent) hepatocytes by DNase I
footprinting analysis, electrophoretic mobility shift assays and UV crosslinking 
experiments. We have identified proteins from adult hepatocyte nuclear extracts
that are bound to sequences within 28 bp downstream of the transcription
initiation site (62 and 48 kDa proteins) and within 20 bp upstream of the
initiation site (54 kDa protein), which may function as transcriptional
repressors of the lamin A proximal promoter.

PMID: 10541482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Biochem J. 1999 Dec 15;344 Pt 3:867-72.

Transcription from the P2 promoter of the growth hormone receptor gene involves
members of the Sp transcription factor family.

Adams TE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Animal Biotechnology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 
3052, Australia. tim.adams@molsci.csiro.au

The P2 promoter of the gene for growth hormone receptor is developmentally
regulated and is differentially active in a number of tissues. Little is known
about the identity of the transcription factors that participate to effect this
pattern of transcription. Deletion analysis and transient transfection were used 
to localize a previously identified cis-acting element within the sheep P2
promoter to between positions -99 and -87. Gel mobility-shift assays with nuclear
extracts from Chinese hamster ovary (CHO-K1) fibroblasts revealed that this
sequence encompasses an atypical binding site for both Sp1 and two isoforms of
Sp3. A gel mobility-shift scan of promoter sequences between -88 and +21
indicated the existence of three other binding sites for Sp1 and Sp3. One of
these, designated site II and found by using a probe spanning -74 to -54,
corresponds to a classical GC box consensus sequence. Site III (-63 to -41) and
site IV (-27 to -5) harbour atypical Sp1/Sp3-binding sequences. Site-directed
mutagenesis of site II or site IV decreased promoter activity by approx. 40%,
whereas a promoter construct incorporating both mutations exhibited negligible
(approx. 1%) activity. Co-transfection of expression plasmids encoding either Sp1
or Sp3 significantly transactivated reporter gene activity from a P2 promoter
construct carrying all four Sp1/Sp3-binding sites (8-fold compared with 7.1-fold 
induction respectively). Sp1 is known to interact with a variety of other
transcription factors to regulate the transcription of a number of differentially
expressed genes. The identification of four binding sites for Sp1 and Sp3 within 
the P2 promoter of the gene for growth hormone receptor might point to other
factors that interact to regulate the activity of this promoter in different
tissues during foetal and post-natal development.

PMCID: PMC1220710
PMID: 10585875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Biol Chem. 1999 Dec 10;274(50):35703-10.

Separate cis-acting DNA elements control cell type- and tissue-specific
expression of collagen binding molecular chaperone HSP47.

Hirata H(1), Yamamura I, Yasuda K, Kobayashi A, Tada N, Suzuki M, Hirayoshi K,
Hosokawa N, Nagata K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Institute for Frontier Medical
Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

HSP47 is a collagen-binding heat shock protein and is assumed to act as a
molecular chaperone in the biosynthesis and secretion of procollagen. As the
synthesis of HSP47 is closely correlated with that of collagen in various cell
lines and tissues, we performed a promoter/reporter assay using HSP47-producing
and nonproducing cells. 280 base pairs (bp(s)) of upstream promoter were shown to
be necessary for the basal expression but not to be enough for the cell
type-specific expression. When the first and the second introns were introduced
downstream of this 280-bp region, marked up-regulation of the reporter activity
was observed in HSP47-producing cells but not in nonproducing cells. This was
confirmed in transgenic mice by staining the lacZ gene product under the control 
of the 280-bp upstream promoter and the introns. Staining was observed in skin,
chondrocytes, precursor of bone, and other HSP47/collagen-producing tissues. A
putative Sp1-binding site at -210 bp in the promoter, to which Sp3 and an
unidentified protein bind, was shown to be responsible for this up-regulation
when combined with the introns. However no difference in the binding to this
probe was observed between HSP47-producing and nonproducing cells. The
responsible region for cell type-specific up-regulation was found to be located
in a 500-bp segment in the first intron. On electrophoresis mobility shift assay 
using this 500-bp probe, specific DNA-protein complexes were only observed in
HSP47-producing cell extracts. These results suggest that two separate elements
are necessary for the cell type-specific expression of the hsp47 gene; one is a
putative Sp1-binding site at -210 bp necessary for basal expression, and the
other is a 500-bp region within the first intron, required for cell type-specific
expression.

PMID: 10585450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1999 Sep 10;155(1-2):1-8.

Composite action of three GC/GT boxes in the proximal promoter region is
important for gastrin gene transcription.

Hansen TO(1), Bundgaard JR, Nielsen FC, Rehfeld JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
tvoh@rh.dk

The proximal region of the human gastrin gene promoter contains three GC/GT boxes
at positions -140 to -134 bp, -108 to -102 bp and -67 to -61 bp. In this study we
have examined the significance of the three elements, and their role in Sp1 and
Sp3 mediated gastrin transcription. In AGS cells, mutation of each of the boxes
caused a moderate decrease in promoter activity from 33 to 63%, whereas double or
triple mutations reduced activity to 3-12%. In Drosophila cells Sp1 activated the
promoter, mainly through the distal GC box. Similarly, co-transfection of
heterologous promoter constructs revealed that only the distal GC box increased
activation by Sp1. The effect of Sp3 was cell-line dependent, since Sp3 inhibited
the gastrin promoter activity in AGS cells and caused a synergistic activation of
the Sp1 stimulated gastrin promoter in Drosophila cells. Both effects were
dependent on the C-terminal DNA binding domain of Sp3. The results indicates that
the combined effect of the GC/GT boxes and the ratio between Sp1 and Sp3 are
important for gastrin gene expression.

PMID: 10580833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Gene. 1999 Nov 29;240(2):261-7.

An Sp1 binding site is essential for basal activity of the human
prostate-specific transglutaminase gene (TGM4) promoter.

Dubbink HJ(1), Cleutjens KB, van der Korput HA, Trapman J, Romijn JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Josephine Nefkens Institute, Erasmus University
Rotterdam, 3000 DR, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Dubbink@path.fgg.eur.nl

Human prostate-specific transglutaminase (hTG(P)) is a cross-linking enzyme
encoded by the TGM4 gene. The TGM4 gene promoter was characterized by deletion
mapping and mutational analysis. Promoter constructs, containing the minimal
promoter requirements, could efficiently drive transcription in the prostate
cancer cell lines PC346C and LNCaP and the hepatic cancer cell line Hep3B. The
region between positions -113 and -61 was demonstrated to be essential for core
promoter activity. Further analysis revealed the functional importance of an Sp1 
binding motif, 5'-ACCCCGCCCC-3', at positions -96 to -87. This sequence is a
binding site of the ubiquitous transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3.

PMID: 10580145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Gene. 1999 Oct 1;238(2):291-300.

The Sp-family of transcription factors.

Suske G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Philipps-Universität
Marburg, Germany. suske@imt.uni-marburg.de

GC-boxes and related motifs are frequently occurring DNA-elements present in many
promoters and enhancers. In contrast to other elements it was generally thought
that the transcription factor Sp1 is the only factor acting through these motifs.
The cloning of paralogous genes of the Sp1 factor uncovered the existence of a
small protein family consisting of Sp1, Sp2, Sp3 and Sp4. All four proteins
exhibit very similar structural features. They contain a highly conserved
DNA-binding domain composed of three zinc fingers close the C-terminus and
serine/threonine- and glutamine-rich domains in their N-terminal regions. The
high degree of structural conservation between these four proteins suggested that
they do exert similar functions. Molecular, genetic and biochemical analyses,
however, demonstrated that Sp2, Sp3 and Sp4 are not simply functional equivalents
of Sp1. Here, I will summarize and discuss recent advances which have been made
towards understanding the mode of action and biological function of individual
family members.

PMID: 10570957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Biol Chem. 1999 Nov 26;274(48):34327-36.

Role of the Sp family of transcription factors in the ontogeny of growth hormone 
receptor gene expression.

Yu JH(1), Schwartzbauer G, Kazlman A, Menon RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

The growth hormone (GH) receptor is essential for the actions of growth hormone
on postnatal growth and metabolism. GH receptor transcripts are characterized by 
the presence of disparate 5'-untranslated exons. Factors regulating the
expression of the GC rich L2 transcript of the murine GH receptor gene have
hitherto remained unidentified. To characterize the mechanisms regulating
expression of the L2 transcript, primer extension and ribonuclease protection
assays were used to identify transcription start sites in RNA from liver of adult
mice. Transient transfection experiments revealed that 2.0 kilobase pairs of the 
L2 5'-flanking sequence exhibited promoter activity in BNL CL.2 (mouse liver)
cells, CV-1 (monkey kidney) cells, and HRP.1 trophoblasts. Deletional analysis
localized a major regulatory region to within 75 base pairs of the 5'
transcription start site. Sequence analysis revealed that the region contained
consensus binding sites for the Sp family of transcription factors. Standard gel 
shift and supershift analysis using liver nuclear extracts established that Sp1
and Sp3 bound this regulatory element. Transfection of wild type but not mutant
decoy oligonucleotides into BNL CL.2 cells decreased the activity of the L2
promoter. Overexpression of Sp1 and Sp3 protein in Drosophila Schneider cells
established that Sp3 is more potent than Sp1 in transactivating the L2 promoter. 
Co-transfection experiments further established that Sp1 antagonizes the activity
of Sp3 to transactivate the L2 promoter. Western blot analysis of liver nuclear
extracts revealed that the levels of Sp3 increase significantly after birth,
suggesting a role for the Sp family of transcription factors in controlling the
fetal to postnatal increase in GH receptor gene expression.

PMID: 10567409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Nov 19;265(2):439-47.

Sp1 and CTF/NF-1 transcription factors are involved in the basal expression of
the Hmgi-c proximal promoter.

Rustighi A(1), Mantovani F, Fusco A, Giancotti V, Manfioletti G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica, Biofisica e Chimica delle Macromolecole,
Università di Trieste, Trieste, Italy.

HMGI-C is a nuclear architectural factor which is expressed during embryogenesis 
but not in adult tissues while it becomes re-expressed following neoplastic
transformation. In this paper we identify the promoter region of the mouse Hmgi-c
gene and by stepwise deletion of the 5' sequences we map the promoter activity of
the most abundant transcript to a very short fragment containing a long
polypyrimidine/polypurine (ppyr/ppur) tract. We demonstrate that this tract is a 
multiple binding site for the transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 and that in
Drosophila SL2 cells, Sp1 activates the Hmgi-c promoter. In addition, another
transcription factor, CTF/NF-1, binds the proximal promoter immediately
downstream of this region and its mutation decreases transcription in NIH-3T3
cells. This study identifies factors responsible for the basal activity of Hmgi-c
gene and provides a foundation for further analysis of the mechanism of its
regulation.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10558886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Nucleic Acids Res. 1999 Dec 1;27(23):4562-9.

Characterization of the structure and regulation of the murine gene encoding
gut-enriched Krüppel-like factor (Krüppel-like factor 4).

Mahatan CS(1), Kaestner KH, Geiman DE, Yang VW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD
21205, USA.

Gut-enriched Krüppel-like factor (GKLF, KLF4) is an epithelial-specific
transcription factor whose expression is associated with growth arrest. In order 
to understand the mechanisms regulating expression of the gene encoding GKLF, we 
isolated a genomic clone containing murine GKLF. The gene spans 5.3 kb and
contains four exons. A major start site of transcription was mapped to an adenine
residue 601 nt 5' of the translation initiation codon. An additional 1 kb of the 
5'-flanking region was sequenced and found to contain multiple cis -elements
homologous to the binding sites of several established transcription factors
including Sp1, AP-1, Cdx, GATA, and USF. In particular, three closely spaced
GC-boxes 5' of the TATA box resemble the established binding site for GKLF. DNase
I protection and electrophoretic mobility shift assays verified that recombinant 
GKLF bound to each of the three GC-boxes. In co-transfection experiments, GKLF
transactivated a reporter gene linked to the GKLF 1 kb 5'-flanking region, as did
Sp1, Sp3 and Cdx-2. Mutations of one or both of the first and second GC-boxes in 
the promoter resulted in diminished transactivation by GKLF. These results
demonstrate that the 5'-flanking sequence of the mouse GKLF gene functions as a
promoter and is subject to autoregulation by its own gene product.

PMCID: PMC148743
PMID: 10556311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Mol Biol. 1999 Nov 19;294(1):103-19.

GLUT1 glucose transporter gene transcription is repressed by Sp3. Evidence for a 
regulatory role of Sp3 during myogenesis.

Fandos C(1), Sánchez-Feutrie M, Santalucía T, Viñals F, Cadefau J, Gumà A, Cussó 
R, Kaliman P, Canicio J, Palacín M, Zorzano A.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular, Facultat de Biologia,
Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

GLUT1 glucose transporters are highly expressed in proliferating and transformed 
cells as well as in tissues during fetal life. However, the mechanisms that
regulate GLUT1 gene expression remain largely unknown. Here, we demonstrate that 
Sp3 proteins bind to the GLUT1 proximal promoter gene and inhibit transcriptional
activity in muscle and non-muscle cells. Two different Sp3 translational products
(110 and 74 kDa) derived from differential translational initiation were detected
in nuclear extracts from myoblast cells, and both Sp3 protein species inhibited
GLUT1 gene transcriptional activity. The inhibitory effect of Sp3 was dominant
over the stimulatory effect of Sp1 on transcriptional activity of GLUT1 gene.
Furthermore, abolition of Sp3 binding to the proximal promoter of GLUT1 gene
completely blocked the response to Sp3. We provide evidence that the expression
of Sp3 protein is subject to regulation in muscle cells and that this is likely
to control GLUT1. Thus, Sp3 protein was up-regulated in the absence of changes in
Sp1 early after the induction of IGF-II-dependent myogenesis. Furthermore, forced
over-expression of MyoD caused an enhancement in the cellular Sp3/Sp1 ratio which
was concomitant to a reduced GLUT1 expression. Later during myogenesis, Sp3
expression was substantial whereas Sp1 was markedly down-regulated. In summary,
we provide direct evidence that the transcription factor Sp3 represses gene
expression in non-muscle and muscle cells and this is likely to operate in fetal 
heart by binding to the GLUT1 gene promoter. This is the first description of a
repressor of GLUT1 gene transcription. Furthermore, we propose that variations in
the ratio of Sp3 versus Sp1 regulate GLUT1 promoter activity and this is crucial 
in the down-regulation of GLUT1 associated to myogenesis.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10556032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Mol Biol. 1999 Nov 12;293(5):1005-15.

Transcription factors of the Sp1 family: interaction with E2F and regulation of
the murine thymidine kinase promoter.

Rotheneder H(1), Geymayer S, Haidweger E.

Author information: 
(1)Vienna Biocenter, University of Vienna, Austria. jr@mol.univie.ac.at

Promoters of growth and cell cycle regulated genes frequently carry binding sites
for transcription factors of the E2F and Sp1 families. We have demonstrated
recently that direct interaction between Sp1 and a subgroup of the E2F factors is
essential for the regulation of certain promoters. We show here that the amino
acids necessary for this interaction in both cases are located within the DNA
binding domain. This is in line with the assumption, that the interaction between
E2F and Sp-factors contributes to promoter-specificity. Cyclin A, which binds to 
E2F-1 in close vicinity to Sp1 does not interfere with this interaction. Moreover
we have investigated the ability of other members of the Sp1 family to interact
with E2F-1 and to regulate the activity of the E2F and Sp1 dependent murine
thymidine kinase promoter. All four factors of the Sp1 family are able to bind
E2F-1 in co-immunoprecipitation and GST-pull down experiments. Mobility shift
assays with oligonucleotides comprising the Sp1, or both the Sp1 and the E2F
binding site suggest that Sp1 and Sp3 supply most if not all activity binding to 
the GC-box of the thymidine kinase promoter in murine fibroblasts. Reporter gene 
assays in Drosophila melanogaster SL2 cells and murine fibroblast 3T6 cells
demonstrate that the thymidine kinase promoter is activated strongly by Sp1 and
Sp3, weakly by Sp4, and not at all by Sp2. Co-expression of E2F-1 results in
synergistic activation in 3T6 but not in SL2 cells.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10547281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Biol Chem. 1999 Nov 5;274(45):31909-16.

trans-Retinoic acid blocks platelet-derived growth factor-BB-induced expression
of the murine monocyte chemoattractant-1 gene by blocking the assembly of a
promoter proximal Sp1 binding site.

Ping D(1), Boekhoudt G, Boss JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia 30322, USA.

Proper regulation of the CC chemokine MCP-1 (monocyte chemoattractant protein-1) 
is important for normal inflammatory responses. MCP-1 is regulated by a wide
variety of agents, including platelet-derived growth factor-BB (PDGF-BB) and
tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF). Using both in vivo and in vitro assays, the
elements required for expression between these two cytokines were compared. In
vivo genomic footprinting showed that PDGF-BB induction occurred through the
occupancy of the proximal regulatory region, and unlike TNF induction, no changes
in the NF-kappaB binding, distal regulatory region occurred. Treatment of cells
with trans-retinoic acid, an inhibitor of PDGF-BB activity, resulted in a 50%
reduction in PDGF-BB-mediated induction and a concomitant block in the assembly
of the proximal regulatory region. trans-Retinoic acid had minimal effect on TNF 
induction or promoter occupancy. An inhibitor of histone deacetylation was found 
to stimulate expression of MCP-1 in a manner that correlated with increased
accessibility to the proximal regulatory region. These results show that the
mechanisms of PDGF-BB and TNF activation of MCP-1 are distinct, although they
both require the proximal regulatory region Sp1 binding site. The results also
suggest that part of the mechanism used by both of these cytokines involves a
process that regulates transcription factor access to the regulatory regions.

PMID: 10542218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Nov 2;264(3):668-75.

Involvement of the Sp1 site in ras-mediated downregulation of the RECK metastasis
suppressor gene.

Sasahara RM(1), Takahashi C, Noda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Kyoto University Graduate School of
Medicine, Yoshida-Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 606-8501, Japan.

We have isolated and characterized the 5'-flanking region of the mouse RECK gene 
aiming to understand the mechanism of oncogene-mediated suppression of RECK gene 
expression. The upstream 52-base region was found to contain a promoter activity 
which is, to some extent, suppressed by the ras oncogene. This region contains
two Sp1-binding motifs, one cEBPb-binding motif, and one CAAT box. Although both 
of the Sp1 sites were found to associate with Sp1 as well as Sp3 proteins, ras
responsiveness seems to be mediated only by the downstream Sp1 site. Our data
indicate that the Sp1 motif in certain contexts can serve as a negative target
for the Ras signal.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10543990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 1999 Jul;45(5):709-16.

Binding of Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors to the Oct-4 gene promoter.

Pesce M(1), Marin Gomez M, Philipsen S, Schöler HR.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Programme, Germ Cell Biology Group, European Molecular Biology
Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany. m.pesce@med.uniroma2.it

Oct-4 is expressed in embryonic stem cells and is one of the first transcription 
factors differentially regulated during mouse development. Recent ablation of
Oct-4 function in vivo has demonstrated that its expression is essential for
preventing embryonic cell differentiation. Several studies have indicated that
activation of the Oct-4 TATA-less promoter is mediated by a GC-box representing a
high affinity binding site for the transcription factor Sp1. In this study, we
have analyzed Oct-4 expression and the activity of the Oct-4 promoter GC box in
Sp1 deficient ES cells. We found that in these cells, Oct-4 RNA and protein
levels were comparable to wt ES cells and the activity of the Oct-4 promoter
GC-box was even increased. Furthermore, the pattern of Oct-4 down-regulation in
Sp1 deficient ES cells was unchanged compared to wt cells. Analysis of GC-box
binding proteins in extracts from Sp1-/- ES cells revealed that Sp3, another
member of the Sp1 transcription factors family, efficiently bound to Sp1 site.
These results show that in ES cells Sp1 is not essential for Oct-4 gene activity.
Thus, Sp1 function in undifferentiated embryonic cells may be complemented by Sp3
and/or by other GC-box binding transcription factors.

PMID: 10512200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Cell Death Differ. 1999 Sep;6(9):873-82.

The activity of the murine Bax promoter is regulated by Sp1/3 and E-box binding
proteins but not by p53.

Schmidt T(1), Körner K, Karsunky H, Korsmeyer S, Müller R, Möröy T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), I F Z, Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Virchowstrasse 173, Germany.

In human cells the expression of the pro-apoptotic protein Bax appears to be
regulated through p53-dependent transcriptional activation. However, in the
mouse, p53-deficiency does not affect Bax expression. To shed more light on the
transcriptional regulation of the bax gene we have analyzed the murine bax
promoter. We find several E-box and Sp1/Sp3 binding sites as well as three
putative p53 binding sites that are conserved in the human promoter sequence. We 
can show that both the Sp1 and the E-box binding sites are necessary for proper
regulation of bax transcription and show by genomic DMS footprinting that all
these sites are occupied in vivo. In contrast, the putative p53 binding sites
were not occupied by protein in vivo in primary murine thymocytes either before
or after induction of p53 by DNA damage. Moreover, p53 was unable to regulate the
transcription of bax promoter fragments up to 6.5 kb in length. Further, steady
state levels of bax mRNA did not correlate with Bax protein expression levels in 
DNA damage-induced cell death. Our findings exclude a direct transcriptional
transactivation of the bax gene by p53 in murine cells suggesting a dominance of 
p53 independent mechanisms for the regulation of Bax protein expression.

PMID: 10510469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Biol Chem. 1999 Oct 8;274(41):29130-7.

The transcription factors Sp1, Sp3, and AP-2 are required for constitutive matrix
metalloproteinase-2 gene expression in astroglioma cells.

Qin H(1), Sun Y, Benveniste EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, The University of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, Alabama 35294, USA.

Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are zinc-dependent endopeptidases that
contribute to pathological conditions associated with angiogenesis and tumor
invasion. MMP-2 is highly expressed in human astroglioma cells, and contributes
to the invasiveness of these cells. The human MMP-2 promoter contains potential
cis-acting regulatory elements including cAMP response element-binding protein,
AP-1, AP-2, PEA3, C/EBP, and Sp1. Deletion and site-directed mutagenesis analysis
of the MMP-2 promoter demonstrates that the Sp1 site at -91 to -84 base pairs and
the AP-2 site at -61 to -53 base pairs are critical for constitutive activity of 
this gene in invasive astroglioma cell lines. Electrophoretic gel shift analysis 
demonstrates binding of specific DNA-protein complexes to the Sp1 and AP-2 sites:
Sp1 and Sp3 bind to the Sp1 site, while the AP-2 transcription factor binds the
AP-2 element. Co-transfection expression experiments in Drosophilia SL2 cells
lacking endogenous Sp factors demonstrate that Sp1 and Sp3 function as activators
of the MMP-2 promoter and synergize for enhanced MMP-2 activation. Overexpression
of AP-2 in AP-2-deficient HepG2 cells enhances MMP-2 promoter activation. These
findings document the functional importance of Sp1, Sp3, and AP-2 in regulating
constitutive expression of MMP-2. Delineation of MMP-2 regulation may have
implications for development of new therapeutic strategies to arrest glioma
invasion.

PMID: 10506168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Eur J Biochem. 1999 Oct;265(2):638-44.

Selective Sp1 and Sp3 binding is crucial for activity of the integrin alphaV
promoter in cultured endothelial cells.

Czyz M(1), Cierniewski CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Chemistry, Institute of Physiology and Biochemistry,
Medical University of Lodz, Poland. mczyz@psk2.am.lodz pl

Human integrin alphavbeta receptors are expressed in a number of cells and their 
expression is regulated at the level of transcription and by post-transcriptional
mechanisms. A substantial body of research exists on the structure, function,
molecular biology and physiological significance of alphav integrin receptors.
However, the importance of particular cis-acting DNA elements or trans-acting
nuclear factors in the regulation of the alphav gene promoter is still not
adequately understood. Previous functional analysis of the alphav gene 5'
flanking region in transfected cultured cells identified cis elements critical
for alphav transcription within a 222-bp region. To define further the location
of this enhancing element, we performed DNase I footprinting of the human alphav 
gene promoter between -522 and the translation initiation site. For this purpose,
nuclear extracts of alphavbeta3-positive cells, human umbilical vein endothelial 
cells, were used. Nuclear proteins of endothelial cells strongly protected
essentially one region corresponding to the sequence between -194 and -172 of the
alphav promoter region. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays with different
oligonucleotides, and competition analysis identified a CTCCTCCTC sequence that
is directly involved in the transcriptional activity of the alphav promoter.
Purified Sp1 alone produced an identical footprint, and DNA binding assays using 
anti-Sp1 and anti-Sp3 antibodies showed that transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3
were the major nuclear proteins bound to this region.

PMID: 10504395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Virology. 1999 Sep 1;261(2):288-94.

Additive effect of Sp1 and Sp3 in regulation of the ED-L1E promoter of the EBV
LMP 1 gene in human epithelial cells.

Tsai CN(1), Lee CM, Chien CK, Kuo SC, Chang YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Chang-Gung University School of
Medicine, Kwei-shan, Taoyuan, Taiwan, Republic of China.

The ED-L1E promoter of the LMP 1 gene is a GC box-containing promoter. To test if
Sp1/Sp3 are important for modulating ED-L1E promoter activity through the GC box,
site-specific mutation and deletion constructs carrying a reporter gene were
transfected into NPCTW076 and C33A cells. Results showed that deletion or
mutation of the GC box abolished ED-L1E activity. Association of Sp1/Sp3 with the
GC box was confirmed by electrophoretic mobility shift and supershift assays
using Sp1- and Sp3-specific antibodies. Transfection of Sp1- and Sp3-expressing
vectors into NPCTW076 and Sp-deficient Drosophila SL2 cells activated ED-L1E in a
dose-dependent fashion and showed an additive effect. Data suggest that both
factors may function as transcriptional activators and regulate the ED-L1E
promoter in human epithelial cells.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10497114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Sep 24;263(2):366-71.

The human luteinizing hormone receptor gene promoter: activation by Sp1 and Sp3
and inhibitory regulation.

Geng Y(1), Tsai-Morris CH, Zhang Y, Dufau ML.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology and Reproduction Research Branch, National Institutes of Child
Health and Human Development, Bethesda, Maryland, 20892, USA.

To understand the transcriptional mechanism(s) of human LH receptor (LHR) gene
expression, we have identified the dominant functional cis-elements that regulate
the activity of the promoter domain (-1 to -176 bp from ATG). Mutagenesis
demonstrated that the promoter activity was dependent on two Sp1 domains (-79 bp,
-120 bp) in a transformed normal placental cell (PLC) and the choriocarcinoma JAR
cell. Both elements interacted with endogenous Sp1 and Sp3 factors but not with
Sp2 or Sp4. In Drosophila SL2 cells, the promoter was activated by either Sp1 or 
Sp3. An ERE half-site (EREhs) at -174 bp was inhibitory (by 100%), but was
unresponsive to estradiol and did not bind the estrogen receptor or orphan
receptors ERR1 and SF-1. The 5' upstream sequence (-177 to -2056 bp) inhibited
promoter activity in PLC by 60%, but only minimally in JAR cells. Activation of
the human LHR promoter through Sp1/3 factors is negatively regulated through
EREhs and upstream sequences to exert control of gene expression.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10491299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Cancer Res. 1999 Sep 1;59(17):4266-70.

Sp3, but not Sp1, mediates the transcriptional activation of the p21/WAF1/Cip1
gene promoter by histone deacetylase inhibitor.

Sowa Y(1), Orita T, Minamikawa-Hiranabe S, Mizuno T, Nomura H, Sakai T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine,
Japan.

We previously reported that both sodium butyrate and trichostatin A (TSA), both
of which are known as inhibitors of histone deacetylase, arrest human tumor cells
at G1 and G2-M and activate the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, the
p21/WAF1/Cip1 gene promoter, through the Sp1 sites. In this study, we identified 
Sp1 and Sp3 as major factors binding to the Sp1 sites of the p21/WAF1/Cip1
promoter in MG63 cells through electrophoretic mobility shift assays and showed
that TSA treatment did not change their binding activities. However, GAL4-Sp3 but
not GAL4-Sp1 fusion protein supported the TSA-mediated gene induction from a
luciferase reporter plasmid driven by five GAL4 DNA-binding sites. Moreover, the 
ectopic expression of dominant negative Sp3 repressed the enhancement by TSA of
the p21/WAF1/Cip1 promoter and Sp1 site-driven promoter. Taken together, these
results suggest that histone deacetylase inhibitor up-regulates p21/WAF1/Cip1
transcription by Sp3 but not by Sp1.

PMID: 10485470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. FEBS Lett. 1999 Sep 3;457(3):429-36.

A novel downstream positive regulatory element mediating transcription of the
human high mobility group (HMG) I-C gene.

Chau K(1), Arlotta P, Patel UA, Crane-Robinson C, Manfioletti G, Ono SJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Schepens Eye Research Institute, Brigham and Women's Hospital, and
Committee on Immunology, Harvard University, 20 Staniford St., Boston, MA 02114, 
USA.

The high mobility group (HMG) I proteins are small, non-histone chromosomal
proteins that promote gene activation during development and within rapidly
dividing cells. They do so by facilitating enhanceosome formation on inducible
genes, via both protein/DNA and protein/protein interactions. The HMG I-C gene is
tightly regulated, normally being expressed exclusively during embryonic
development. However, HMG I-C expression is also observed frequently in a number 
of tumor types, and this expression has been shown to contribute to the malignant
transformation process. With the aim of dissecting pathways that lead to aberrant
expression of HMG I-C in tumor cells, we have analyzed HMG I-C gene regulation in
the human hepatoma cell line PLC/PRF/5. One of the two HMG I-C transcripts
detected in this cell line originates from a novel downstream initiation site at 
nucleotide -161 relative to the first methionine. Transcription from the
downstream initiation site is mediated by a PRE located between nt -222 and -217.
We show here that the Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors interact with the PRE and
transactivate the HMG I-C promoter in a cooperative fashion. This study provides 
the first characterization of this downstream HMG I-C promoter.

PMID: 10471823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Braz J Med Biol Res. 1999 Jul;32(7):891-5.

Oncogene-mediated downregulation of RECK, a novel transformation suppressor gene.

Sasahara RM(1), Takahashi C, Sogayar MC, Noda M.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Química, Universidade de São Paulo, Brasil.
sasahar@quim.iq.usp.br

The RECK gene was initially isolated as a transformation suppressor gene encoding
a novel membrane-anchored glycoprotein and later found to suppress tumor invasion
and metastasis by regulating matrix metalloproteinase-9. Its expression is
ubiquitous in normal tissues, but undetectable in many tumor cell lines and in
fibroblastic lines transformed by various oncogenes. The RECK gene promoter has
been cloned and characterized. One of the elements responsible for the
oncogene-mediated downregulation of mouse RECK gene is the Sp1 site, where the
Sp1 and Sp3 factors bind. Sp1 transcription factor family is involved in the
basal level of promoter activity of many genes, as well as in dynamic regulation 
of gene expression; in a majority of cases as a positive regulator, or, as
exemplified by the oncogene-mediated suppression of RECK gene expression, as a
negative transcription regulator. The molecular mechanisms of the down-regulation
of mouse RECK gene and other tumor suppressor genes are just beginning to be
uncovered. Understanding the regulation of these genes may help to develop
strategies to restore their expression in tumor cells and, hence, suppress the
cells' malignant behavior.

PMID: 10454749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. FEBS Lett. 1999 Jul 30;456(1):149-54.

Involvement of Sp1 in basal and retinoic acid induced transcription of the human 
tissue-type plasminogen activator gene.

Merchiers P(1), Bulens F, De Vriese A, Collen D, Belayew A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Vascular Biology, University of Leuven, Belgium.

Transcription of the human tissue-type plasminogen activator (t-PA) gene is
regulated by a multi-hormonal responsive enhancer at -7 kb. Transient
co-transfections of Drosophila SL2 and human HT1080 fibrosarcoma cells with t-PA 
reporter constructs showed that Sp1 and Sp3 activate the t-PA promoter. Moreover 
Sp1 (but not Sp3) binding to the promoter is involved in induction by retinoic
acid (RA), a response mediated through the enhancer. The role of Sp1 is specific,
since mutation of the CRE element in the promoter did not affect response to RA. 
In contrast, the glucocorticoid induction mediated by the enhancer is independent
of these Sp1 and CRE elements.

PMID: 10452548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Aug;13(8):1402-16.

Activator protein-2 mediates transcriptional activation of the CYP11A1 gene by
interaction with Sp1 rather than binding to DNA.

Pena P(1), Reutens AT, Albanese C, D'Amico M, Watanabe G, Donner A, Shu IW,
Williams T, Pestell RG.

Author information: 
(1)The Albert Einstein Cancer Center, Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein
College of Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

The ovine P45 side chain cleavage (CYP11A1) enzyme gene, which catalyzes the
initial enzymatic step in steroid hormone biosynthesis is transcriptionally
regulated in cultured steroidogenic human trophoblastic JEG-3 cells. The ovine
CYP11A1 promoter contains two GC-rich footprinted regions referred to as ovine
footprints 5 (OF5) and OF3, which are well conserved among the CYP11A1 promoters 
of different species. These GC-rich sequences resemble activator protein-2
(AP-2)/Sp1 binding sites and were previously implicated in basal and
cAMP-regulated activity of the bovine and ovine CYP11A1 promoters. In the current
studies, AP-2 induced the ovine CYP11A1 promoter 4.5-fold in JEG-3 cells with
full induction requiring the previously defined cAMP-responsive elements. Point
mutation of OF3 abolished induction by AP-2, and OF3 was sufficient for induction
by AP-2 when linked to a heterologous promoter. AP-2 induction of the CYP11A1
promoter required the basic region (N165-N278) and the carboxy terminus of AP-2
(N413-N437). In the course of investigating the mechanisms by which OF5 and OF3
regulated CYP11A1 transcription, we found that OF5 and OF3 bound Sp1 and Sp3 in
JEG-3 cells. AP-2 did not bind OF5 or OF3 directly but rather formed a
multiprotein complex with Sp1 in JEG-3 cells. AP-2 associated directly with Sp1
in vitro requiring the AP-2 basic region and the Sp1 carboxy terminus. AP-2
induced Sp1/Sp3 activity independently of AP-2 binding to DNA using a GAL4
paradigm. The Sp1 and Sp3 transactivation domains were linked to the DNA-binding 
domain of GAL4, and their activity was assessed using a luciferase reporter gene 
containing only the GAL4 DNA-binding sites linked to the minimal TATA site. AP-2 
induced Sp1/ Sp3-GAL4 activity 3- to 4-fold, requiring both the amino and extreme
carboxy terminus of AP-2. We conclude that AP-2 can bind to and stimulate Sp1
activity and induces the ovine CYP11A1 promoter through conserved Sp1/Sp3-binding
sites in JEG-3 cells. The induction of Sp1 activity by AP-2 may contribute to the
induction of other genes that bind Sp1.

PMID: 10446912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. FEBS Lett. 1999 Jul 16;455(1-2):105-10.

Induction of 12-lipoxygenase expression by transforming growth factor-alpha in
human epidermoid carcinoma A431 cells.

Chen LC(1), Chen BK, Liu YW, Chang WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan, Taiwan.

Transforming growth factor-alpha (TGF-alpha) increased the expression of
12-lipoxygenase activity in a time-dependent manner in human epidermoid carcinoma
A431 cells. The increase of 12-lipoxygenase activity was accompanied by an
increase in 12-lipoxygenase mRNA. The effect of TGF-alpha on the promoter
activation of 12-lipoxygenase gene was analyzed by using the luciferase fusion
vectors. A dose-dependent effect of TGF-alpha on the reporter activity was
observed, which paralleled with its effect on enzyme activity. Transient
transfection with a series of 5'-deleted constructs showed that the 5'-flanking
region spanning from -224 to -100 bp from translation starting site played an
important role for TGF-alpha response. Site-directed mutagenesis and gel mobility
shift assay indicated that two Sp1 binding sequences residing at -158 to -150 bp 
and 123 to -114 bp were responsible for the TGF-alpha in activation of human
12-lipoxygenase gene transcription. Expression of Sp1, but not Sp3, stimulated
the promoter activity of 12-lipoxygenase in SL2 cells, indicating that the
binding of Sp1 with Sp1 binding sequences played a significant role in the
regulation of 12-lipoxygenase gene.

PMID: 10428482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Dev Dyn. 1999 Aug;215(4):319-31.

1.3 kilobases of the lung type I cell T1alpha gene promoter mimics endogenous
gene expression patterns during development but lacks sequences to enhance
expression in perinatal and adult lung.

Ramirez MI(1), Cao YX, Williams MC.

Author information: 
(1)The Pulmonary Center, Department of Medicine, Boston University School of
Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02118, USA. mramirez@bupula.bu.edu

The T1alpha gene is one of few markers for the type I cell phenotype in the adult
mammalian lung. Type I cells form a large, thin epithelial layer that facilitates
gas exchange and transport of fluids between the air spaces and capillaries. The 
T1alpha gene has a complex pattern of developmental expression in lung and brain;
in vitro studies indicate that expression is regulated in part by thyroid
transcription factor 1, forkhead proteins, and Sp1/Sp3 proteins. To explore the
mechanisms that confine T1alpha expression in intact adult animals to alveolar
type I and choroid plexus epithelial cells, we generated mice bearing a 1.3-kb
T1alpha promoter-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) gene. In situ
hybridization and RNase protection assays show that the 1.3-kb promoter confers a
pattern of CAT expression that largely matches the endogenous T1alpha in embryos 
and mid-term fetuses in lung and central nervous system. However, the 1.3-kb
promoter lacks elements important for perinatal up-regulation of T1alpha in the
lung and maintenance of that expression in the adult lung and brain. The final
adult pattern of T1alpha expression may be directed by elements outside the
1.3-kb fragment, perhaps those 5' to the 1.3-kb fragment as we show herein, or in
3' and intronic regions. Dev Dyn 1999;215:319-331.

Copyright 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10417821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Exp Mol Med. 1999 Jun 30;31(2):108-14.

Characterization of regulatory elements on the promoter region of human
ATP-citrate lyase.

Moon YA(1), Kim KS, Cho UH, Yoon DJ, Park SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yonsei University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

ATP-citrate lyase (ACL), an enzyme catalyzing the first step in biosynthesis of
fatty acids, is induced during the lipogenesis and cholesterologenesis. We
demonstrate that the region -213 to -128 of human ACL promoter is responsible for
conferring glucose-mediated transcription. This region in the ACL promoter
contains Sp1 binding sites determined by DNase I foot-printing assay. Gel
retardation assay using oligonucleotides from -179 to -141 and -140 to -110
showed two specific DNA-protein complexes postulated to be formed by
transcription factor Sp1. Competition gel shift and supershift assays have
confirmed that these DNA-protein complexes were the result of induced Sp1 as well
as another Sp1-related proteins. Western blot analysis also demonstrated that
transcription factor Sp1 was slightly increased in the nuclear proteins extracted
from Alexander cells following supplementation of glucose. In addition,
expression of 110 kDa protein reacting with antibody against Sp3 was dramatically
increased by glucose supplementation, while isoforms of Sp3, about 80 kDa in size
was decreased in its amounts. Our results suggest that changes in the expression 
of Sp1 family proteins play an important role in activation of the ACL promoter
by glucose.

PMID: 10410311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Mol Vis. 1999 Jul 15;5:12.

The transcription factor Sp3 interacts with promoter elements of the lens
specific MIP gene.

Kim S(1), Ge H, Ohtaka-Maruyama C, Chepelinsky AB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Developmental Biology, National Eye Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

PURPOSE: To characterize the cis regulatory elements and their interaction with
transcription factors responsible for the lens specific expression of the MIP
gene, which encodes the Major Intrinsic Protein of the lens fiber membranes.
METHODS: Study interaction of factors present in newborn mouse lens nuclear
extracts with DNA fragments corresponding to mouse MIP gene 5' flanking sequence 
by electrophoresis mobility shift assay (EMSA) and DNase I footprinting.
RESULTS: We found a high degree of identity in the first 100 bp of 5' flanking
sequence of mice and humans, however, a lower degree of conservation is observed 
further upstream. We have found by DNase I footprinting analysis that lens
specific factors may interact with the first 100 bp of 5' flanking sequence. A
domain containing an E box, conserved in mouse and human, may interact with a
lens specific factor. However, general factors may interact with a NF-1 binding
site. An overlapping GC and CT box is present in the mouse MIP gene. In the human
MIP gene GC and CT boxes are found in different domains of the MIP gene promoter.
Both CT boxes interact with factors present in lens nuclear extracts including
Sp3. They are able to interact with purified Sp1but not with Sp1 present in mouse
lens nuclear extracts.
CONCLUSIONS: The transcription factor Sp3 may play an important role in
regulating MIP gene expression in the lens.

PMID: 10407063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jul 9;274(28):19573-80.

Functional interactions between Sp1 or Sp3 and the helicase-like transcription
factor mediate basal expression from the human plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 
gene.

Ding H(1), Benotmane AM, Suske G, Collen D, Belayew A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Vascular Biology, University of Leuven, 3000 Leuven, 
Belgium.

Basal expression of the human plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) is
mediated by a promoter element named B box that binds the helicase-like
transcription factor (HLTF), homologous to SNF/SWI proteins. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays performed on a set of B box point mutants demonstrated two 
HLTF sites flanking and partially overlapping with a GT box binding Sp1 and Sp3. 
Mutations affecting either the Sp1/Sp3 or the two HLTF sites inhibited by 6- and 
2.5-fold, respectively, transient expression in HeLa cells of a reporter gene
fused to the PAI-1 promoter. In Sp1/Sp3-devoid insect cells, co-expression of
PAI-1-lacZ with Sp1 or Sp3 led to a 14-26-fold induction while HLTF had no
effect. Simultaneous presence of Sp1 or Sp3 and the short HLTF form (initiating
at Met-123) provided an additional 2-3-fold synergistic activation suppressed by 
mutations that prevented HLTF binding. Moreover, a DNA-independent interaction
between HLTFMet123 and Sp1/Sp3 was demonstrated by co-immunoprecipitation from
HeLa cell extracts and glutathione S-transferase pull-down experiments. The
interaction domains were mapped to the carboxyl-terminal region of each protein; 
deletion of the last 85 amino acids of HLTFMet123 abolished the synergy with Sp1.
This is the first demonstration of a functional interaction between proteins of
the Sp1 and SNF/SWI families.

PMID: 10391891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jul 2;274(27):19422-8.

Role of Sp1 in cAMP-dependent transcriptional regulation of the bovine CYP11A
gene.

Ahlgren R(1), Suske G, Waterman MR, Lund J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Bergen, N-5009 Bergen,
Norway.

The pituitary peptide hormone ACTH regulates transcription of the cholesterol
side chain cleavage cytochrome P450 (CYP11A) gene via cAMP and activation of
cAMP-dependent protein kinase. A G-rich sequence element conferring
cAMP-dependent regulation has been found to reside within region -118 to -100 of 
the bovine CYP11A promoter. Previous studies have suggested that it binds a
protein antigenically related to the transcription factor Sp1. We now report that
the -118/-100 element binds both Sp1 and Sp3, members of the Sp family of
transcription factors. We have made use of Drosophila SL2 cells, which lack
endogenous Sp factors, to dissect the possible functional roles of Sp1, Sp3, and 
Sp4. All factors stimulated the activity of cotransfected reporter constructs in 
which the promoter of the bovine CYP11A gene regulates luciferase expression. Sp3
did not repress Sp1-dependent activation, as has previously been shown for other 
G-rich promoters. Mutation of the -118/-100 element of CYP11A abolished
Sp1-mediated activation of a CYP11A reporter gene in SL2 cells as well as cAMP
responsiveness in human H295R cells. Furthermore, cotransfection of SL2 cells
with the catalytic subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinase together with Sp1 and
a CYP11A reporter construct enhanced Sp1-dependent activation of the reporter
4.2-fold, demonstrating that Sp1 confers cAMP responsiveness in these cells.
Thus, we show that introduction of Sp1 alone in an Sp-negative cell such as SL2
is sufficient to achieve the cAMP-dependent regulation observed using the
-118/-100 element of CYP11A in adrenocortical cells.

PMID: 10383457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Cancer Lett. 1999 Apr 1;137(2):159-65.

Enhanced Sp1 DNA-binding activity in murine keratinocyte cell lines and epidermal
tumors.

Kumar AP(1), Butler AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Smithville 78957, USA. kumar@odin.mdacc.tmc.edu

Altered regulation of ornithine decarboxylase (ODC) is frequently observed in
epidermal tumors. We have shown that the transcription factor Sp1 is one of the
regulators of ODC expression and that Sp3 antagonizes this Sp1-mediated
activation of ODC expression. These results led us to examine the levels and
binding activity of Sp1 and Sp3 in nuclear extracts prepared from cultured murine
keratinocytes, transformed keratinocyte cell lines and epidermal tumors. Here we 
show that the Sp1 DNA-binding activity is higher in established keratinocyte cell
line extracts than in primary keratinocyte extracts. Sp1 message levels and Sp1
DNA-binding activity was found to be low in 20-week papillomas and high in
squamous cell carcinomas. These results suggest that increased levels of Sp1 and 
enhanced Sp1 DNA binding activity are correlated with epidermal tumor
progression. Based on these results, we propose that increased Sp1 DNA binding
may augment the proliferative capacity of tumor cells through overexpression of
Sp1-responsive genes, possibly including ODC.

PMID: 10374837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jun 18;274(25):17997-8004.

Insulin-induced early growth response gene (Egr-1) mediates a short term
repression of rat malic enzyme gene transcription.

Barroso I(1), Santisteban P.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas "Alberto Sols," Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Arturo Duperier 4,
Madrid E-28029, Spain.

In this report we have studied insulin regulation of malic enzyme (ME) gene
transcription in rat H-35 hepatoma cells and localized the insulin-responsive
region of the ME promoter between positions -177 and -102. This region contains a
putative insulin response element (IRE-II). When nuclear extracts from untreated 
or insulin-treated H-35 cells were incubated with IRE-II, transcription factors
Sp1 and Sp3 were observed to bind constitutively to this element, whereas insulin
induces the quick and transient binding of an insulin response factor. This
induction requires de novo protein synthesis. Competition and supershift assays
demonstrated that the insulin response factor is the immediate-early gene Egr-1. 
In vitro assays revealed that Egr-1 displaces Sp1 from its binding site in
IRE-II. Insulin induces Egr-1 mRNA, with a time course pattern that corresponds
perfectly to the Egr-1 binding to IRE-II. This induction depends on the
activation of mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase, and it is
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-independent, as demonstrated with specific
inhibitors for both pathways. By cotransfecting the wild-type or a dominant
negative Ras, an upstream regulator of MAP kinase, we show that Ras inhibits ME
promoter activity. Furthermore, overexpression of Egr-1 in H-35 cells represses
the ME gene promoter in a dose-dependent manner. These results suggest that
insulin induces a quick, transient, and Ras/MAP kinase-dependent activation of
Egr-1 which leads to a transient repression of ME gene transcription. On a late
phase, insulin would activate a different, Egr-1-independent pathway, which would
result in activation of the ME gene.

PMID: 10364249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Jun 7;259(2):364-9.

Synergistic activation of the human Btk promoter by transcription factors Sp1/3
and PU.1.

Müller S(1), Maas A, Islam TC, Sideras P, Suske G, Philipsen S, Xanthopoulos KG, 
Hendriks RW, Smith CI.

Author information: 
(1)Center for BioTechnology, Karolinska Institute, NOVUM, S-14157 Huddinge,
Sweden. susanne.muller@cgr.ki.se

Analysis of the human Bruton's agammaglobulinemia tyrosine kinase (Btk) gene
promoter revealed that 280 bp upstream of the transcriptional start site is
sufficient for a cell restricted expression pattern. Here, the interplay of the
transcription factors Sp1, Sp3, and PU.1 binding to this promoter area was
analysed. All three proteins are able to independently activate the promoter in
Drosophila Schneider (SL2) cells lacking endogenous Sp- or PU.1-like activities. 
Furthermore, PU.1 is able to act synergistically with Sp1 as well as Sp3 to
transactivate the promoter. This transactivation is mediated through adjacent
binding sites rather than through the more distant Sp binding site, suggesting a 
possible direct interaction between PU.1 and Sp1/3. Expression of Btk was found
in ES cells and levels of expression were the same as in ES cells with a targeted
deletion of the Sp1 gene, suggesting that Sp3 acts as a positive regulator of Btk
in vivo, in the absence of Sp1.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10362515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Oncogene. 1999 May 6;18(18):2872-82.

Cooperation of Sp1 and p300 in the induction of the CDK inhibitor p21WAF1/CIP1
during NGF-mediated neuronal differentiation.

Billon N(1), Carlisi D, Datto MB, van Grunsven LA, Watt A, Wang XF, Rudkin BB.

Author information: 
(1)Differentiation & Cell Cycle Group, Laboratoire de Biologie Moleculaire et
Cellulaire, UMR 49 CNRS/Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, France.

Addition of nerve growth factor (NGF) to PC12 cells promotes neuronal
differentiation while inhibiting cell proliferation. In order to understand how
NGF exerts its antimitogenic effect during differentiation, we have studied the
mechanism by which this factor activates the promoter of the CDK inhibitor
p21W4F1/CIP1. The minimal region of the p21 promoter required for the
NGF-induction was mapped to a contiguous stretch of 10 bp located 83 bases
upstream of the transcription initiation site. This GC-rich region was shown to
interact specifically with the transcription factor Sp1 and the related protein
Sp3, in either exponentially-growing or NGF-treated PC12 cells. The addition of
NGF resulted in an accumulation of the transcriptional co-activator p300 in
complexes associated with the NGF-responsive region. Transcriptional activity of 
Sp1, Sp3 and p300 was specifically induced by NGF in a Gal4-fusion assay,
indicating that induction of p21 during neuronal differentiation may involve
regulation of the activity of these factors by NGF. Furthermore, p300 was able to
act as a co-activator for Sp1-mediated transcriptional activation in PC12 cells, 
suggesting that p300 and Sp1 may cooperate in activating p21 transcription during
the withdrawal of neuronal precursors from the cell cycle. This hypothesis is
supported by experiments showing that p300 and Sp1 form complexes in PC12 cells.

PMID: 10362258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Biochem J. 1999 Jun 1;340 ( Pt 2):425-32.

Expression of the rat liver carnitine palmitoyltransferase I (CPT-Ialpha) gene is
regulated by Sp1 and nuclear factor Y: chromosomal localization and promoter
characterization.

Steffen ML(1), Harrison WR, Elder FF, Cook GA, Park EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, University of Tennessee, 874 
Union Avenue, Memphis, TN 38163, USA.

Carnitine palmitoyltransferase (CPT)-I catalyses the transfer of long-chain fatty
acids from CoA to carnitine for translocation across the mitochondrial inner
membrane. Expression of the 'liver' isoform of the CPT-I gene (CPT-Ialpha) is
subject to developmental, hormonal and tissue-specific regulation. To understand 
the basis for control of CPT-Ialpha gene expression, we have characterized the
proximal promoter of the CPT-Ialpha gene. Here, we report the sequence of 6839
base pairs of the promoter and the localization of the rat CPT-Ialpha gene to
region q43 on chromosome 1. Our studies show that the first 200 base pairs of the
promoter are sufficient to drive transcription of the CPT-Ialpha gene. Within
this region are two sites that bind both Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors. In
addition, nuclear factor Y (NF-Y) binds the proximal promoter. Mutation at the
Sp1 or NF-Y sites severely decreases transcription from the CPT-Ialpha promoter. 
Other protein binding sites were identified within the first 200 base pairs of
the promoter by DNase I footprinting, and these elements contribute to CPT-Ialpha
gene expression. Our studies demonstrate that CPT-Ialpha is a TATA-less gene
which utilizes NF-Y and Sp proteins to drive basal expression.

PMCID: PMC1220267
PMID: 10333485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jun;19(6):4219-30.

Platelet-derived growth factor-stimulated expression of the MCP-1 immediate-early
gene involves an inhibitory multiprotein complex.

Sridhar P(1), Liu Y, Chin LD, Borja CE, Mann M, Skopicki HA, Freter RR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, Columbia University
College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York 10032, USA.

We have demonstrated previously that the seven-nucleotide (nt) motif TTTTGTA (the
heptamer) that is present within the proximal 3' untranslated sequences of
numerous immediate-early genes is essential for platelet-derived growth factor
(PDGF)-stimulated induction of the MCP-1 immediate-early gene. On this basis, the
heptamer was suggested to be a conserved regulatory element involved in
immediate-early gene expression, although its mechanism of action was unknown.
Herein, we demonstrate that the heptamer functions to remove an inhibition of
PDGF induction of MCP-1 maintained by two independently acting inhibitory
elements present in the MCP-1 5' flanking sequences (designated I* elements).
PDGF treatment relieves the I*-mediated inhibition of MCP-1 expression only if
the heptamer is also present. One inhibitory element is contained within a 59-nt 
portion of MCP-1 5' flanking sequences and functions in an
orientation-independent and heptamer-regulated manner. Significantly, proteins
binding to two DNA sequences contribute to the formation of a single multiprotein
complex on the 59-nt I* element. The I*-binding complex contains Sp3, an Sp1-like
protein, and a novel DNA-binding protein. Moreover, the complex does not form on 
two 59-nt sequences containing mutations that reverse the inhibition of PDGF
induction maintained by the wild-type I* element. We propose to call the
multiprotein I*-binding complex a repressosome and suggest that it acts to
repress PDGF-stimulated transcription of MCP-1 in the absence of the heptamer
TTTTGTA.

PMCID: PMC104381
PMID: 10330162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Cell Biochem. 1999 Jun 1;73(3):291-302.

Both Sp1 and Sp3 are responsible for p21waf1 promoter activity induced by histone
deacetylase inhibitor in NIH3T3 cells.

Xiao H(1), Hasegawa T, Isobe K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Gerontology, National Institute for Longevity Sciences,
Aichi, Japan.

Histone deacetylase inhibitor-induced expression of p21WAF1 is p53 independent.
In the present study, we provide evidence that trichostatin A (TSA), a specific
inhibitor of histone deacetylase, can elevate H3 and H4 acetylation and p21WAF1
expression in NIH3T3 cells at first. To identify the transcription factor which
is responsible for histone deacetylase inhibitor-induced expression of p21WAF1
and understand the potential events occurred during this process, we analyze the 
response of the mouse p21WAF1 promoter to TSA in detail. The region responsive to
TSA treatment in the p21 promoter is located -100 bp upstream from transcription 
initiation site and contains a GC-box. The mutation introduced into this GC-box
decreases most of the basal and TSA-induced promoter activity. The results from
gel-shift assay show that Sp1 and Sp3 bind to this GC-rich region. Cotransfection
with Sp1 and/or Sp3 expression constructs elevate both basal and induced promoter
activity, and this elevation is dependent on the present of the GC-box. By
contrast, cotransfection with reverse oriented Sp1 or Sp3 cDNA decreased basal
and induced-promoter activity, as well as GC-box dependency. These findings
provide physical and functional evidence which strongly indicated that both Sp1
and Sp3 are responsible for TSA-induced transactivation of the murine p21WAF1
promoter in NIH3T3 cells.

PMID: 10321829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 1999 Feb;16(4):845-62.

A modified version of the Cornell et al. force field with improved sugar pucker
phases and helical repeat.

Cheatham TE 3rd(1), Cieplak P, Kollman PA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biophysical Chemistry, National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-5626, USA.

We have examined some subtle parameter modifications to the Cornell et al. force 
field, which has proven quite successful in reproducing nucleic acid properties, 
but whose C2'-endo sugar pucker phase and helical repeat for B DNA appear to be
somewhat underestimated. Encouragingly, the addition of a single V2 term
involving the atoms C(sp3)-O-(sp3)-C(sp3)-N(sp2), which can be nicely
rationalized because of the anomeric effect (lone pairs on oxygen are
preferentially oriented relative to the electron withdrawing N), brings the sugar
pucker phase of C2'-endo sugars to near perfect agreement with ab initio
calculations (W near 162 degrees). Secondly, the use of high level ab initio
calculations on entire nucleosides (in contrast to smaller model systems
necessitated in 1994-95 by computer limitations) lets one improve the chi
torsional potential for nucleic acids. Finally, the O(sp3)-C(sp3)- C(sp3)-O(sp3) 
V2 torsional potential has been empirically adjusted to reproduce the ab initio
calculated relative energy of C2'-endo and C3'-endo nucleosides. These
modifications are tested in molecular dynamics simulations of mononucleosides (to
assess sugar pucker percentages) and double helices of DNA and RNA (to assess
helical and sequence specific structural properties). In both areas, the modified
force field leads to improved agreement with experimental data.

PMID: 10217454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Am J Physiol. 1999 Apr;276(4 Pt 1):L614-24.

Perinatal regulation of the ClC-2 chloride channel in lung is mediated by Sp1 and
Sp3.

Chu S(1), Blaisdell CJ, Liu MZ, Zeitlin PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21287-2533, USA. shijian@welchlink.welch.jhu.edu

Mechanisms responsible for regulation of pulmonary epithelial chloride-channel
expression in the perinatal period are under investigation to better understand
normal lung development and airway disease pathogenesis. The ClC-2 epithelial
chloride channel is regulated by changes in pH and volume and is most abundant in
lung during fetal development. In this study, we identify and sequence the ClC-2 
promoter, which is GC rich and lacks a TATA box. By construction of a series of
promoter-luciferase constructs, a 67-bp GC box-containing sequence in the
promoter is shown to be critical to ClC-2 expression in primary and immortalized 
fetal lung epithelial cells. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and antibody
supershifts demonstrate that the Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors are expressed 
in fetal lung nuclei and interact with the GC box sequences in the promoter.
Immunoblotting techniques demonstrate that Sp1 and Sp3 are perinatally
downregulated in the lung with the same temporal sequence as ClC-2
downregulation. This work suggests that Sp1 and Sp3 activate ClC-2 gene
transcription and that reduction in Sp1 and Sp3 at birth explains perinatal
downregulation of ClC-2 in the lung.

PMID: 10198359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Am J Physiol. 1999 Apr;276(4 Pt 1):G800-7.

A novel Sp1-related cis element involved in intestinal alkaline phosphatase gene 
transcription.

Kim JH(1), Meng S, Shei A, Hodin RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical
School and Harvard Digestive Diseases Center, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

We have used sodium butyrate-treated HT-29 cells as an in vitro model system to
study the molecular mechanisms underlying intestinal alkaline phosphatase (IAP)
gene activation. Transient transfection assays using human IAP-CAT reporter genes
along with DNase I footprinting were used to localize a critical cis element
(IF-III) corresponding to the sequence 5'-GACTGGGCGGGGTCAAGATGGA-3'. Deletion of 
the IF-III element resulted in a dramatic reduction in reporter gene activity,
and IF-III was shown to function in the context of a heterologous (SV40) promoter
in a cell type-specific manner, further supporting its functional role in IAP
transactivation. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed that IF-III binds
Sp1 and Sp3, but these factors comprise only a portion of the total nuclear
binding and appear to mediate only a small portion of its transcriptional
activity. IF-III does not correspond to any previously characterized regulatory
region from other intestine-specific genes. We have thus identified a novel,
Sp1-related cis-regulatory element in the human IAP gene that appears to play a
role in its transcriptional activation during differentiation in vitro.

PMID: 10198321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Biol Chem. 1999 Apr 16;274(16):11220-8.

Cloning of the cyclin A1 genomic structure and characterization of the promoter
region. GC boxes are essential for cell cycle-regulated transcription of the
cyclin A1 gene.

Müller C(1), Yang R, Beck-von-Peccoz L, Idos G, Verbeek W, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Research Institute/UCLA School
of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90048, USA. muellerc@CSMC.edu

Cyclin A1 is a recently cloned cyclin with high level expression in meiotic cells
in the testis. However, it is also frequently expressed at high levels in acute
myeloid leukemia. To elucidate the regulation of cyclin A1 gene expression, we
cloned and analyzed the genomic structure of cyclin A1. It consists of 9 exons
within 13 kilobase pairs. The TATA-less promoter initiates transcription from
several start sites with the majority of transcripts beginning within a 4-base
pair stretch. A construct containing a fragment from -190 to +145 showed the
highest transcriptional activity. Transfection of cyclin A1 promoter constructs
into S2 Drosophila cells demonstrated that Sp1 is essential for the activity of
the promoter. Sp1, as well as Sp3, bound to four GC boxes between nucleotides
-130 and -80 as observed by gel shift analysis. Mutations in two or more of the
four GC boxes decreased promoter activity by >80%. The promoter was found to be
cell cycle-regulated with highest activities found in late S and G2/M phase.
Further analyses suggested that cell cycle regulation was accomplished by
periodic repression of the GC boxes in G1 phase. Taken together, our data show
that cyclin A1 promoter activity critically depends on four GC boxes, and members
of the Sp1 family appear to be involved in directing expression of cyclin A1 in
both a tissue- and cell cycle-specific manner.

PMID: 10196209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Biochemistry. 1999 Apr 6;38(14):4398-402.

Alpha-secondary tritium kinetic isotope effects indicate hydrogen tunneling and
coupled motion occur in the oxidation of L-malate by NAD-malic enzyme.

Karsten WE(1), Hwang CC, Cook PF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Oklahoma, Norman
73019, USA.

The NAD-malic enzyme from Ascaris suum catalyzes the divalent metal ion-dependent
oxidative decarboxylation of L-malate to give pyruvate and CO2, with NAD+ as the 
oxidant. Alpha-secondary tritium kinetic isotope effects were measured with NAD+ 
or APAD+ and L-malate-2-H(D) and several different divalent metal ions. The
alpha-secondary tritium kinetic isotope effects are slightly higher than 1 with
NAD+ and L-malate as substrates, much larger than the expected inverse isotope
effect for a hybridization change from sp2 to sp3. The alpha-secondary tritium
kinetic isotope effects are reduced to values near 1 with L-malate-2-D as the
substrate, regardless of the metal ion that is used. Data suggest the presence of
quantum mechanical tunneling and coupled motion in the malic enzyme reaction when
NAD+ and malate are used as substrates. Isotope effects were also measured using 
the D/T method with NAD+ and Mn2+ as the substrate pair. A Swain-Schaad exponent 
of 2.2 (less than the value of 3.26 expected for strictly semiclassical behavior)
is estimated, suggesting the presence of other slow steps along the reaction
pathway. With APAD+ and Mn2+ as the substrate pair, inverse alpha-secondary
tritium kinetic isotope effects are observed, and a Swain-Schaad exponent of 3.3 
is estimated, consistent with rate-limiting hydride transfer and no quantum
mechanical tunneling or coupled motion. Data are discussed in terms of the malic 
enzyme mechanism and the theory developed by Huskey for D/T isotope effects as an
indicator of tunneling [Huskey, W. P. (1991) J. Phys. Org. Chem. 4, 361-366].

PMID: 10194359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Eur J Biochem. 1999 Mar;260(3):743-51.

FIRE3 in the promoter of the rat fatty acid synthase (FAS) gene binds the
ubiquitous transcription factors CBF and USF but does not mediate an insulin
response in a rat hepatoma cell line.

Roder K(1), Wolf SS, Sickinger S, Schweizer M.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Microbiology Department, Institute of Food Research, Norwich, UK.

Several putative insulin-responsive elements (IRE) in the fatty acid synthase
(FAS) promoter have been identified and shown to be functional in adipocytes and 
hepatocytes. Here we report on the insulin-responsiveness in the rat hepatoma
cell line H4IIE of four cis-elements in the FAS promoter: the FAS
insulin-responsive elements, FIRE2 and FIRE3; the inverted CCAAT element, ICE;
and the insulin/glucose-binding element, designated hepatic FIRE element, hFIRE, 
originally identified in rat hepatocytes. Using electrophoretic mobility shift
assay (EMSA) competition experiments together with supershifts and in vitro
transcription/translation we show that FIRE3 (-68/-58) binds not only the
upstream stimulatory factors USF-1/USF-2 but also the CCAAT-binding factor CBF,
also known as the nuclear factor Y, NF-Y. The putative IRE FIRE2, which shows
sequence similarity to FIRE3, is located between -267 and -249. Gel retardation
experiments indicate that USF-1 and USF-2 also bind to this element, which
contains an imperfect E-box motif. Using the same approach we have shown that
hFIRE binds the stimulatory proteins Sp1 and Sp3 in addition to CBF. Transient
transfection experiments using FAS promoter constructs deleted for FIRE2 and
FIRE3 demonstrate that neither of these elements mediates the insulin response of
the FAS promoter in the rat hepatoma cell line H4IIE, however, ICE at -103/-87 is
responsible for mediating the effect of the insulin antagonist cAMP. The hFIRE
element located at -57/-34, in spite of its role in the glucose/insulin response 
in primary rat hepatocytes, is apparently not involved in the insulin regulation 
of the rat FAS promoter in H4IIE cells. The fact that the topology of the
promoters of the FAS genes in rat, human, goose and chicken is conserved
regarding CBF-binding sites and USF-binding sites implies an important role for
these ubiquitously expressed transcription factors in the regulation of the FAS
promoter.

PMID: 10103003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. DNA Cell Biol. 1999 Mar;18(3):253-63.

Identification and functional characterization of the murine Rac2 gene promoter.

Ou X(1), Pollock J, Dinauer MC, Gharehbaghi-Schnell E, Skalnik DG.

Author information: 
(1)Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Department of Pediatrics,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis 46202, USA.

Rac2, a member of the Rho family of GTPases, is highly expressed in myeloid cells
and is a regulator of the NADPH-oxidase complex. A murine genomic clone was
isolated that contains the 5' end and putative promoter region of the Rac2 gene. 
Ribonuclease protection experiments detected 13 transcription initiation sites
scattered 50 to 130 bp upstream of the translation initiation site. Transient
transfection studies revealed that -7 kb to +31 bp (relative to the strongest
transcription initiation site) of the Rac2 gene 5'-flanking region exhibited
strong promoter activity in both RAW 264.7 macrophage cells that express the
endogenous Rac2 gene and NIH-3T3 fibroblast cells that do not express the
endogenous gene. Truncated Rac2 promoter fragments containing as little as the
-74 to +31 bp sequence produced full transcriptional activity. However, a -57 to 
+31 promoter fragment directed significantly less transcription, and a -39 to +31
promoter fragment was transcriptionally inactive. In vitro binding assays
revealed sequence-specific and widely expressed DNA-binding activities that
interacted within the -74 to -58 Rac2 promoter cis element. Oligonucleotide
competition and antibody disruption studies indicated that these complexes
contained the transcription factors Spl and Sp3. Specific ablation of the Sp1/Sp3
binding site significantly decreased Rac2 promoter activity in both RAW 264.7 and
NIH-3T3 cells. Additional cis elements may be required to restrict Rac2 promoter 
activity to hematopoietic cells expressing the endogenous gene.

PMID: 10098607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Endocrinology. 1999 Apr;140(4):1695-701.

Sp1 dependence of natriuretic peptide receptor A gene transcription in rat aortic
smooth muscle cells.

Liang F(1), Schaufele F, Gardner DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco 94143, USA.

The atrial natriuretic peptide receptor (NPR-A) Is expressed in smooth muscle
cells of the vasculature, where it is thought to signal the vasodilatory
properties of the peptide. Despite its important role as a regulator of
cardiovascular homeostasis, relatively little is known of the genomic factors
governing expression of this gene. We show here that NPR-A promoter activity is
reduced by 50-75% when any of three GC-rich sites are mutated. Simultaneous
mutation of all three leads to a >90% reduction in NPR-A promoter activity.
Transfection of wild-type, but not mutant, decoy oliogonucleotides encoding any
one of the sites reduces NPR-A activity, presumably reflecting competition for a 
common transcription factor. Gel shift analyses show that each of the wild-type, 
but not the mutant, sites interferes with the formation of selected DNA-protein
complexes on the other sites. These complexes share similar electrophoretic
mobility. Immunoperturbation studies show that one of these shared complexes
contains Sp1, whereas two others contain Sp3. Overexpression of either Sp1 or Sp3
in a cell type containing very low levels of these transcription factors (i.e.
Drosophila Schneider cells) leads to induction of the wild-type, but not the
mutant, NPR-A promoter. The data suggest that the Sp1 family of transcription
factors plays a central role in NPR-A gene transcription. The association of Sp1 
family members with transcriptional regulation of a number of genes involved in
hemodynamic control will be discussed.

PMID: 10098505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Clin Exp Metastasis. 1998 Jul;16(5):447-59.

Multiple effects of transfection with interleukin 2 and/or interferon gamma on
the behavior of mouse T lymphoma cells.

Geldhof AB(1), Van Ginderachter J, Vandersteen P, Raes G, De Baetselier P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Immunology, Flanders Interuniversity Institute for
Biotechnology, Free University of Brussels, Belgium.

We have previously reported that transfection of mouse interferon gamma
(IFN-gamma) in H-2Kk-positive BW variants (BW-Sp3) abolishes tumorigenicity and
reduces metastatic capacity. To further increase the immunogenicity of BW-Sp3
cells, the gene for human interleukin 2 (huIL-2) was transfected in these cancer 
cells. Single BW-Sp3(huIL-2) and double BW-Sp3(huIL-2+IFN-gamma) transfectants
were generated and their behavior was investigated as compared to parental and
IFN-gamma-transfected BW-Sp3. Although expression of huIL-2 was equally effective
as IFN-gamma in preventing tumor formation and reducing experimental metastasis, 
it did not confer protection to spontaneous metastases and even reversed the
anti-metastatic activity of IFN-gamma. Inoculation of the BW variants in
immunocompromised mice revealed that expression of IL-2 activates both T cells
and aspecific immune effectors. However, in immunocompromised mice a clear
pro-metastatic effect of IL-2 was recorded. Analysis of membrane antigens on the 
different variants showed a selective effect of huIL-2 on the expression of two
surface antigens, i.e. L-selectin and metastatic T cell hybridoma antigen (MTH), 
which may contribute to metastasis. Hence upon expression of huIL-2 in T lymphoma
variants, tumor outcome will depend on the balanced effects of the transfected
cytokines on the immune response and the redirected effect on tumor progression.

PMID: 10091940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Cell Physiol. 1999 Apr;179(1):97-108.

Negative modulation of alpha1(I) procollagen gene expression in human skin
fibroblasts: transcriptional inhibition by interferon-gamma.

Yuan W(1), Yufit T, Li L, Mori Y, Chen SJ, Varga J.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology, University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago
60607-7171, USA.

Interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma), a multifunctional cytokine produced by activated
Th1 lymphocytes, exerts potent effects on the extracellular matrix by regulating 
fibroblast function. In this study, we examined the modulation of alpha1(I)
procollagen gene (COL1A1) expression by recombinant IFN-gamma. The results showed
that IFN-gamma stimulated the rapid accumulation of interferon regulated factor
(IRF)-1 mRNA, followed by a delayed and dose-dependent inhibition of alpha1(I)
procollagen mRNA expression in skin fibroblasts from several different donors.
The inhibitory response was abrogated in fibroblasts stably expressing IRF-1 in
the antisense orientation. A marked decrease in the amount of heterogeneous
nuclear pre-mRNA preceded the inhibition of COL1A1 mRNA expression. In
fibroblasts transiently transfected with COL1A1 promoter-chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase reporter gene plasmids, IFN-gamma selectively inhibited
promoter activity and abrogated its stimulation induced by TGF-beta. The
inhibition by IFN-gamma was not due to downregulation of TGF-beta receptor mRNA
expression in the fibroblasts or decreased ligand binding to the receptor.
IFN-alpha and IFN-beta by themselves had little effect on promoter activity, but 
IFN-alpha augmented the inhibitory effect of IFN-gamma. Using a series of 5'
deletion constructs, a proximal region of the COL1A1 promoter was shown to
function as an IFN-gamma response element. This region of the gene harbors
overlapping binding sites for transcription factors Sp1, Sp3, and NF-1 but no
homologs of previously characterized IFN-gamma response elements. The putative
IFN-gamma response region was sufficient to confer inhibition of reporter gene
expression by treatment with IFN-gamma. Gel mobility shift analysis showed that
two distinct and specific DNA-protein complexes were formed when fibroblast
nuclear extracts were incubated with oligonucleotides spanning the IFN-gamma
response region. IFN-gamma did not modify the ability of nuclear proteins to bind
to this region. The results indicate that IFN-gamma inhibits COL1A1 expression in
fibroblasts principally at the level of gene transcription. Inhibition involves
IRF-1 and is mediated through a short proximal promoter segment but without an
apparent change in promoter occupancy. The findings provide novel insight into
the mechanism of IFN-gamma regulation of fibroblast function.

PMID: 10082137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Biol Chem. 1999 Mar 19;274(12):7756-62.

Constitutive Fas ligand gene transcription in Sertoli cells is regulated by Sp1.

McClure RF(1), Heppelmann CJ, Paya CV.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Immunology, Pathology, and Laboratory Medicine, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

The transcriptional regulation of the Fas ligand (FasL) gene in Sertoli cells was
investigated, as these cells are known to have constitutive expression of FasL
and hence maintain an "immune privileged" environment within the testicle. Using 
the Sertoli cell line TM4, it was demonstrated that a gene segment of the
5'-untranslated region located between -318 and -237 relative to the translation 
start site is required for constitutive FasL transcription. Deletion and mutation
analysis demonstrate that an Sp1 rather than an NFAT or NFKB-like DNA binding
motif present within this region is necessary and sufficient for constitutive
FasL gene transcription. Nuclear extracts of Sertoli cells contain Sp1 and Sp3
that specifically binds to the Sp1 motif present in the FasL gene, and
overexpression of Sp1 but not Sp3 leads to a further increase of transcription
from the FasL promoter-enhancer region. The data presented demonstrates that
constitutive FasL gene transcription in Sertoli cells is regulated by Sp1. In
addition, it is shown that basal FasL expression in Jurkat T cells is also
controlled by Sp1 and this is in contrast to induced FasL expression, which is
NFAT-dependent.

PMID: 10075666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Mar 5;256(1):249-54.

Cloning of a GADD34-like gene that interacts with the zinc-finger transcription
factor which binds to the p21(WAF) promoter.

Hasegawa T(1), Xiao H, Isobe K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Gerontology, National Institute for Longevity Sciences,
36-3, Gengo Morioka-cho, Obu, Aichi, 474-8522, Japan.

A histone deacetylase inhibitor has been shown to induce differentiation of many 
cancer cells and senescence-like state of human fibroblasts. Previously, our data
suggested that the region responsive to trichostatin A (TSA), a specific
inhibitor of histone deacetylase, treatment in the p21(WAF1) promoter is located 
-100 bp upstream from transcription initiation site and contains a GC-box where
both Sp1 and Sp3 are responsible. Here we show that another zinc-finger
transcription factor, BFCOL1, which binds to the proximal proalpha2(I) collagen
promoter, could also bind to this GC-box of the p21 promoter. In addition, we
cloned a gene whose product interacts with this factor by yeast two-hybrid
method. The cloned gene was a variant of GADD34 and lacking one PEST region. We
found that this cDNA product decreased the DNA binding activity of BFCOL1 to the 
GC-rich region of p21 minimal promoter.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10066455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Biochem J. 1999 Mar 1;338 ( Pt 2):343-50.

Differential regulation of the human nidogen gene promoter region by a novel
cell-type-specific silencer element.

Zedlacher M(1), Schmoll M, Zimmermann K, Horstkorte O, Nischt R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Cologne, D-50924 Cologne, Germany.

Transfection analyses of the human nidogen promoter region in nidogen-producing
fibroblasts from adult skin revealed multiple positive and negative cis-acting
elements controlling nidogen gene expression. Characterization of the positive
regulatory domains by gel mobility-shift assays and co-transfection studies in
Drosophila SL2 cells unequivocally demonstrated that Sp1-like transcription
factors are essential for a high expression of the human nidogen gene. Analysis
of the negative regulatory domains identified a novel silencer element between nt
-1333 and -1322, which is bound by a distinct nuclear factor, by using extracts
from adult but not from embryonal fibroblasts. In embryonal fibroblasts, which
express significantly higher amounts of nidogen mRNA as compared with adult
fibroblasts, this inhibitory nidogen promoter region did not affect nidogen and
SV40 promoter activities. The silencer element seems to be active only in
nidogen-producing cells. Therefore this regulatory element might function in vivo
to limit nidogen gene expression in response to external stimuli. However, none
of the identified regulatory elements, including the silencer, contribute
significantly to cell-specific expression of the human nidogen gene. Instead we
provide evidence that gene expression in epidermal keratinocytes that are not
producing nidogen is repressed by methylation-specific and chromatin-dependent
mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC1220059
PMID: 10024509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Feb 16;1444(2):231-40.

Functional studies by site-directed mutagenesis on the role of Sp1 in the
expression of the pyruvate kinase M and aldolase A genes.

Netzker R(1), Fabian D, Weigert C, Brand KA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Fahrstr. 17,
D-91054, Erlangen, Germany.

During the cell cycle of mitogen stimulated rat thymocytes, an 8-10-fold
induction of glycolytic enzymes and a corresponding increase in the mRNA levels
has been observed. This prompted us to study the transcriptional regulation of
the rat aldolase A and pyruvate kinase M genes. cis-Regulatory elements of both
promoters were evaluated by site-directed mutagenesis of promoter/luciferase
constructs and transient transfections of rat hepatoma FTO2B cells. Furthermore, 
the binding proteins were identified by mobility shift assays in the presence of 
specific antibodies. In the aldolase AH1 promoter, five binding sites for Sp1 and
Sp3 and a TPA responsive element were identified as essential for transcriptional
regulation. Most of the promoter activity can be attributed to these regulatory
elements. In the pyruvate kinase M promoter three out of five binding sites of
Sp1 and Sp3 (B box and GC boxes 1 and 3) turned out to be functional in the
transfection assays whereas the disruption of GC box 2 had no effect, and the
disruption of the GC box 4 had only a minor effect on the promoter activity. Both
promoters are stimulated by Sp1 as well as Sp3, as judged by cotransfection
experiments of Drosophila SL2 cells. Therefore, the Sp1- and Sp3-directed
transcription provides a means for common regulatory mechanism of the aldolase A 
and the pyruvate kinase M genes.

PMID: 10023068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Oncogene. 1999 Feb 11;18(6):1333-9.

B-MYB transactivates its own promoter through SP1-binding sites.

Sala A(1), Saitta B, De Luca P, Cervellera MN, Casella I, Lewis RE, Watson R,
Peschle C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Pathology, Consorzio Mario Negri Sud,
S. Maria Imbaro (CH), Italy.

B-MYB is an ubiquitous protein required for mammalian cell growth. In this report
we show that B-MYB transactivates its own promoter through a 120 bp segment
proximal to the transcription start site. The B-MYB-responsive element does not
contain myb-binding sites and gel-shift analysis shows that SP1, but not B-MYB,
protein contained in SAOS2 cell extracts binds to the 120 bp B-myb promoter
fragment. B-MYB-dependent transactivation is cooperatively increased in the
presence of SP1, but not SP3 overexpression. When the SP1 elements of the B-myb
promoter are transferred in front of a heterologous promoter, an increased
response to B-MYB results. In contrast, c-MYB, the prototype member of the Myb
family, is not able to activate the luciferase construct containing the SP1
elements. With the use of an SP1-GAL4 fusion protein, we have determined that the
cooperative activation occurs through the domain A of SP1. These observations
suggest that B-MYB functions as a coactivator of SP1, and that diverse
combinations of myb and SP1 sites may dictate the responsiveness of myb-target
genes to the various members of the myb family.

PMID: 10022815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Biol Chem. 1999 Feb 19;274(8):4702-14.

Transactivation of the urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor gene through
a novel promoter motif bound with an activator protein-2alpha-related factor.

Allgayer H(1), Wang H, Wang Y, Heiss MM, Bauer R, Nyormoi O, Boyd D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas
77030, USA.

The urokinase receptor overexpressed in invasive cancers promotes laminin
degradation. The current study was undertaken to identify cis elements and
trans-acting factors activating urokinase receptor expression through a
footprinted (-148/-124) region of the promoter containing putative activator
protein-2- and Sp1-binding motifs. Mobility shifting experiments using nuclear
extract from a high urokinase receptor-expressing cell line (RKO) indicated that 
Sp1, Sp3, and a factor similar to, but distinct from, activator protein-2alpha
bound to this region. Mutations preventing the binding of the activator protein
2alpha-related factor diminished urokinase receptor promoter activity. In RKO
cells, the expression of a negative regulator of activator protein-2 function
diminished urokinase receptor promoter activity, protein, and laminin
degradation. Conversely, urokinase receptor promoter activity in low urokinase
receptor-expressing GEO cells was increased by activator protein-2alphaA
expression. Although using GEO nuclear extract, little activator
protein-2alpha-related factor bound to the footprinted region, phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate treatment, which induces urokinase receptor expression,
increased complex formation. Mutations preventing the activator
protein-2alpha-related factor and Sp1/Sp3 binding reduced urokinase receptor
promoter stimulation by this agent. Thus, the constitutive and phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate-inducible expression of the urokinase receptor is
mediated partly through trans-activation of the promoter via a sequence
(-152/-135) bound with an activator protein-2alpha-related factor.

PMID: 9988707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Biol Chem. 1999 Feb 12;274(7):4147-54.

A short conserved motif is required for repressor domain function in the
myeloid-specific transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein epsilon.

Angerer ND(1), Du Y, Nalbant D, Williams SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center, Texas 79430, USA.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein epsilon (C/EBPepsilon) is expressed almost
exclusively in the myeloid lineage of the hematopoietic system and functions
during terminal differentiation of neutrophils and macrophages, and in the
regulation of cytokine gene expression in macrophages and T cells. We have
undertaken a series of structure/function studies on the murine C/EBPepsilon
polypeptide to investigate the mechanism by which C/EBPepsilon activates
transcription. Studies with deletion mutants and fusion proteins consisting of
C/EBPepsilon sequences joined to the Gal4 DNA-binding protein identified two
transcriptional activation domains in C/EBPepsilon. Removal of sequences between 
the two activation domains or sequences between the second activation domain and 
the C-terminal DNA binding domain significantly increased the activity of
C/EBPepsilon, suggesting the presence of two separate regulatory domains
(designated RD-1epsilon and RD-2epsilon). RD-1epsilon behaved as a classic active
repressor domain being capable of inhibiting adjacent activation domains
irrespective of their origin and when linked to a heterologous DNA binding
domain. Mutagenesis studies revealed a short motif in RD-1epsilon that appears to
be a target site for protein-protein interactions and is conserved in repressor
domains from C/EBPbeta, Sp3, c-Fos, and FosB. The juxtaposition of activation and
repressor domains may permit C/EBPepsilon to function as a transcriptional
activator or repressor at different stages of myeloid differentiation or as an
inducible transcriptional activator of cytokine genes.

PMID: 9933609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Mol Biol. 1999 Feb 5;285(5):2021-34.

Mechanism of inhibition of DNA (cytosine C5)-methyltransferases by
oligodeoxyribonucleotides containing 5,6-dihydro-5-azacytosine.

Sheikhnejad G(1), Brank A, Christman JK, Goddard A, Alvarez E, Ford H Jr, Marquez
VE, Marasco CJ, Sufrin JR, O'gara M, Cheng X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha 68198-4525, USA.

A key step in the predicted mechanism of enzymatic transfer of methyl groups from
S-adenosyl-l-methionine (AdoMet) to cytosine residues in DNA is the transient
formation of a dihydrocytosine intermediate covalently linked to cysteine in the 
active site of a DNA (cytosine C5)-methyltransferase (DNA C5-MTase).
Crystallographic analysis of complexes formed by HhaI methyltransferase (M.HhaI),
AdoMet and a target oligodeoxyribonucleotide containing 5-fluorocytosine
confirmed the existence of this dihydrocytosine intermediate. Based on the
premise that 5,6-dihydro-5-azacytosine (DZCyt), a cytosine analog with an
sp3-hybridized carbon (CH2) at position 6 and an NH group at position 5, could
mimic the non-aromatic character of the cytosine ring in this transition state,
we synthesized a series of synthetic substrates for DNA C5-MTase containing
DZCyt. Substitution of DZCyt for target cytosines in C-G dinucleotides of
single-stranded or double-stranded oligodeoxyribonucleotide substrates led to
complete inhibition of methylation by murine DNA C5-MTase. Substitution of DZCyt 
for the target cytosine in G-C-G-C sites in double-stranded
oligodeoxyribonucleotides had a similar effect on methylation by M. HhaI.
Oligodeoxyribonucleotides containing DZCyt formed a tight but reversible complex 
with M.HhaI, and were consistently more potent as inhibitors of DNA methylation
than oligodeoxyribonucleotides identical in sequence containing 5-fluorocytosine.
Crystallographic analysis of a ternary complex involving M.HhaI,
S-adenosyl-l-homocysteine and a double-stranded 13-mer oligodeoxyribonucleotide
containing DZCyt at the target position showed that the analog is flipped out of 
the DNA helix in the same manner as cytosine, 5-methylcytosine, and
5-fluorocytosine. However, no formation of a covalent bond was detected between
the sulfur atom of the catalytic site nucleophile, cysteine 81, and the
pyrimidine C6 carbon. These results indicate that DZCyt can occupy the active
site of M.HhaI as a transition state mimic and, because of the high degree of
affinity of its interaction with the enzyme, it can act as a potent inhibitor of 
methylation.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 9925782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Endocrinology. 1999 Feb;140(2):624-31.

Gene expression of the human glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor is regulated by Sp1
and Sp3.

Wildhage I(1), Trusheim H, Göke B, Lankat-Buttgereit B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Philipps University of Marburg, Germany.

The human glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor mediates the insulinotropic
effects of the incretin hormone GLP-1. It is expressed in a cell- and
tissue-specific manner. Recently, we cloned the 5'-region of the GLP-1 receptor
gene and found that tissue and cell specificity is lost by 5'-deletion to -574.
In this region proximal to the main transcription start point three putative
binding sites for Sp1 were localized. Now, in vitro binding of Sp1 was shown by
deoxyribonuclease footprint analysis with DNA fragments using either recombinant 
Sp1 or nuclear extracts from HIT cells. To elucidate the roles of the three
Sp1-binding sites, we mutated each of the sites individually as well as in
different combinations. The activity of each construct was analyzed in comparison
to the wild-type promoter. Mutation of two adjacent Sp1-binding sites showed a
clear reduction of activity. Contrasting results were obtained after mutation of 
the third, more distal Sp1-binding site. Here, a clear increase (approximately
150%) revealed a silencing effect of this cis-regulatory element, possibly
resembling a Sp3-binding site. Electrophoretic mobility shift analysis revealed
binding of Sp1 and Sp3, which was demonstrated by supershifts using specific
antibodies. Cotransfection with Sp1 and Sp3 expression vectors in insect cells
lacking endogenous Sp factors clearly demonstrated the involvement of Sp1 and
Sp3. Therefore, the basal activity of the GLP-1 receptor gene is mediated by two 
proximal Sp1-binding sites, whereas a more distal site acts as a repressor.

PMID: 9927286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Biol Chem. 1999 Feb 5;274(6):3887-96.

Regulation of the transglutaminase I gene. Identification of DNA elements
involved in its transcriptional control in tracheobronchial epithelial cells.

Medvedev A(1), Saunders NA, Matsuura H, Chistokhina A, Jetten AM.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Section, Laboratory of Pulmonary Pathobiology, NIEHS, National
Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709, USA.

The transglutaminase I (TGase I) gene encodes an enzyme that catalyzes the
cross-linking of structural proteins involved in the formation of the cornified
envelope during squamous cell differentiation. To identify DNA elements important
for the transcriptional control of the TGase I gene, we analyzed the ability of a
2.9-kilobase pair (kb) upstream regulatory region to control the expression of a 
reporter gene in vivo and in vitro. Transgenic mice bearing the pTG(-2.9kb)CAT
construct exhibited the same pattern of tissue-specific expression of CAT as
reported for TGase I. Deletion analysis in transiently transfected rabbit
tracheal epithelial cells indicated that two sequences from bp -490 to -470 and
from -54 to -37 are involved in the activation of TGase I transcription. Point
mutation analysis and mobility shift assays showed that the sequence located
between -54 and -37 is a functional Sp1-like transcription element. Sp1 and Sp3, 
but not Sp2, are part of nuclear protein complexes from differentiated RbTE cells
binding to this site. The element TGATGTCA between bp -490 and -470 is contained 
in a larger 22-bp palindrome and resembles the consensus cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB)/AP-1 element recognized by dimeric complexes of
members of the CREB, ATF, Fos, and Jun families. Mutations in this sequence
greatly reduced promoter activity. Supershift analysis identified CREB1, JunB,
c-Fos, Fra-1, and c-Jun in protein complexes isolated from differentiated rabbit 
tracheal epithelial cells binding to this site. Our study shows that the Sp1- and
CREB/AP-1-like sites act in concert to stimulate transcription of the TGase I
gene. The 2.9-kb promoter region could guide expression of specific genes in the 
granular layer of the epidermis and could be useful in gene therapy.

PMID: 9920944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jan 29;274(5):3076-93.

Characterization of the human endothelial nitric-oxide synthase promoter.

Karantzoulis-Fegaras F(1), Antoniou H, Lai SL, Kulkarni G, D'Abreo C, Wong GK,
Miller TL, Chan Y, Atkins J, Wang Y, Marsden PA.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Division and Department of Medicine, St. Michael's Hospital and
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada.

Understanding transcription initiation of the endothelial nitric-oxide synthase
(eNOS) gene appears pivotal to gaining a comprehensive view of NO biology in the 
blood vessel wall. The present study therefore focused upon a detailed dissection
of the functionally important cis-DNA elements and the multiprotein complexes
implicated in the cooperative control of constitutive expression of the human
eNOS gene in vascular endothelium. Two tightly clustered cis-regulatory regions
were identified in the proximal enhancer of the TATA-less eNOS promoter using
deletion analysis and linker-scanning mutagenesis: positive regulatory domains I 
(-104/-95 relative to transcription initiation) and II (-144/-115). Analysis of
trans-factor binding and functional expression studies revealed a surprising
degree of cooperativity and complexity. The nucleoprotein complexes that form
upon these regions in endothelial cells contained Ets family members, Sp1,
variants of Sp3, MAZ, and YY1. Functional domain studies in Drosophila Schneider 
cells and endothelial cells revealed examples of positive and negative
protein-protein cooperativity involving Sp1, variants of Sp3, Ets-1, Elf-1, and
MAZ. Therefore, multiprotein complexes are formed on the activator recognition
sites within this 50-base pair region of the human eNOS promoter in vascular
endothelium.

PMID: 9915847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jan 1;274(1):20-8.

Sp3 and Sp4 can repress transcription by competing with Sp1 for the core
cis-elements on the human ADH5/FDH minimal promoter.

Kwon HS(1), Kim MS, Edenberg HJ, Hur MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute of Genetic
Sciences, Yonsei University School of Medicine, 134, ShinChon-Dong,
SeoDaeMoon-Ku, Seoul, Korea 120-752.

The human alcohol dehydrogenase 5 gene (also known as the formaldehyde
dehydrogenase gene, ADH5/FDH) has a GC-rich promoter with many sites at which
transcription factors bind. A minimal promoter extending from -34 base pairs (bp)
to +61 bp directs high levels of transcription in several different cells,
consistent with the ubiquitous expression of the gene. Nearly the entire minimal 
promoter can be bound by Sp1. We analyzed the transcriptional regulation of
ADH5/FDH by members of the Sp1 multigene family. Two core cis-elements (-22 bp to
+22 bp) had the highest affinity for Sp1. Mutagenesis revealed that these
cis-elements are critical for transcriptional activation. The zinc-finger domains
of Sp3 and Sp4 also bind selectively to the core cis-elements. In Drosophila SL2 
cells, which lack endogenous Sp1, the minimal promoter cannot drive
transcription. Introduction of Sp1 activated transcription over 50-fold,
suggesting that Sp1 is critical in the initiation of transcription. Neither Sp3
nor Sp4 was able to activate transcription in those cells, and transcriptional
activation by Sp1 was repressed by Sp3 or Sp4. These data suggest that Sp3 and
Sp4 can repress transcription by competing with Sp1 for binding to the core
cis-elements. The content of Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 in different cells may be critical
factors regulating transcription of the ADH5/FDH gene.

PMID: 9867805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Mol Endocrinol. 1998 Dec;12(12):1931-8.

Differential up-regulation of gap junction connexin 26 gene in mammary and
uterine tissues: the role of Sp transcription factors.

Tu ZJ(1), Kollander R, Kiang DT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis
55455, USA.

The mRNA and protein expressions of connexin 26 (Cx26) in rat mammary gland and
uterus can be up-regulated during pregnancy as well as by the administration of
human CG (hCG). In the present study, we found that the time course and magnitude
of Cx26 induction by hCG was different in these two tissues. The molecular
mechanism underscoring this difference was therefore investigated. We had
previously demonstrated that both Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors play a
functional role in Cx26 expression. By the electrophoretic mobility shift assay, 
nuclear extracts from both virgin mammary gland and uterus were capable of
binding to a labeled oligonucleotide probe that contained the proximal GC box and
formed three protein-DNA complexes (C1, C2, and C3). In the mammary gland,
pregnancy enhanced the intensity of all three complexes, whereas in the uterine
tissue there was a decrease in the C2 and C3 complexes and an emergence of a new 
major component, C4 complex. In the supershift study, the C1 complex could be
supershifted only by an antibody against Sp1, whereas C2, C3, and C4 could all be
supershifted by an antibody against Sp3, suggesting a potential presence of Sp3
isoforms of various sizes. We therefore conclude that the basal Sp profiles in
virgin mammary gland and uterine tissue are similar. However, in response to
pregnancy, the changes in Sp profile are tissue specific and may account for the 
temporal and quantitative differences between these two tissues in Cx26
induction.

PMID: 9849966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998 Nov 26;1443(1-2):169-81.

Mapping and characterization of the basal promoter of the human connexin26 gene.

Tu ZJ(1), Kiang DT.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Cancer Research Laboratory, Department of Medicine, University of
Minnesota Medical School, Box 286 UMHC, 420 Delaware St. S.E., Minneapolis, MN
55455, USA.

Connexin26 (Cx26) is a major gap junction protein expressed in mammary and
endometrial epithelial cells. Previously, we have cloned the genomic upstream
sequence of the human connexin26 gene. In this paper, we studied the structure
and function of its basal promoter. Various 5'-flanking regions of the human Cx26
gene were inserted upstream of the bacterial chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
(CAT) reporter gene and transfected into human immortalized mammary MCF-10A and
MCF-12A cell lines and endometrial RL95-2 cancer cell line. Through CAT reporter 
gene analysis, we identified the basal promoter of human Cx26 gene in the
proximal 5'-flanking region from -128 to +2 (relative to the transcription
initiation site). Further deletion analyses suggested that the critical
regulatory area was located within a 29 bp region (from -97 to -69), where two GC
consensus boxes (CCGCCC) resided, one at -93 and the other at -81. Labeled
oligonucleotides encompassing these two GC box DNA sequences could bind the
nuclear extracts from MCF-12A and RL95-2 cells in the electrophoretic mobility
shift assay. These binding complexes could be competitively reduced by
non-labeled self or Sp1 consensus oligonucleotide, and supershifted by antibodies
against either Sp1 or Sp3. Mutations in the core sequence of these two GC boxes
from CCGCCC to CCGAAC caused a loss of competitive ability and also produced a
drastic reduction of basal promoter activity when integrated into
promoter/reporter constructs. Furthermore, co-transfection of Sp1 and/or Sp3
expressing plasmids could trans-activate the expression of human Cx26
promoter/reporter constructs in Drosophila Schneider line 2 (SL2) cells. Taken
together, these data indicated that the two GC boxes in the proximal promoter
region play an important role in the control of human Cx26 gene expression.

PMID: 9838096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Nov 18;252(2):517-23.

Serum responsive gene expression mediated by Sp1.

Kumar AP(1), Butler AP.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Science Park-Research
Division, Smithville, Texas, 78957, USA.

We compared the Sp1 binding activity of Rat2 fibroblasts in nuclear extracts
prepared from quiescent cells and cells stimulated with 20% serum. Increased
DNA-binding activity was observed in extracts from serum-stimulated cells when an
Sp1 oligonucleotide was used as radiolabeled probe in electrophoretic mobility
shift assays. This increase in Sp1 DNA-binding activity is not due to changes in 
the amount of Sp1 in the nucleus as shown by immunoblot analysis. The
transcriptional activity of a reporter construct containing six Sp1 sites
upstream of a minimal adenovirus promoter or an Sp1-dependent promoter such as
ornithine decarboxylase (ODC) containing Sp1 sites was enhanced following serum
stimulation in transient transfection assays. Dephosphorylation of the nuclear
extracts with potato acid phosphatase abolished the Sp1 DNA-binding activity,
demonstrating a possible correlation between phosphorylation of Sp1 and
DNA-binding activity. These results implicate a potential role for Sp1 in
mediating signal transduction pathways in response to mitogenic signals.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9826563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. FEBS Lett. 1998 Oct 23;437(3):313-8.

Molecular anatomy of the human glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase core promoter.

Franzè A(1), Ferrante MI, Fusco F, Santoro A, Sanzari E, Martini G, Ursini MV.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Internazionale di Genetica e Biofisica, CNR, Naples, Italy.
franze@iigbna.iigb.na.cnr.it

The gene encoding glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD), which plays a pivotal
role in cell defense against oxidative stress, is ubiquitously expressed at
widely different levels in various tissues; moreover, G6PD expression is
regulated by a number of stimuli. In this study we have analyzed the molecular
anatomy of the G6PD core promoter. Our results indicate that the G6PD promoter is
more complex than previously assumed; G6PD expression is under the control of
several elements that are all required for correct promoter functioning and,
furthermore, a still unidentified mammalian specific factor is needed.

PMID: 9824315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Dec;18(12):6962-70.

p21(WAF1/CIP1) is upregulated by the geranylgeranyltransferase I inhibitor
GGTI-298 through a transforming growth factor beta- and Sp1-responsive element:
involvement of the small GTPase rhoA.

Adnane J(1), Bizouarn FA, Qian Y, Hamilton AD, Sebti SM.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Discovery Program, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center, and Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida
33612, USA.

We have recently reported that the geranylgeranyltransferase I inhibitor GGTI-298
arrests human tumor cells at the G1 phase of the cell cycle and increases the
protein and RNA levels of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21(WAF1/CIP1).
Here, we show that GGTI-298 acts at the transcriptional level to induce
p21(WAF1/CIP1) in a human pancreatic carcinoma cell line, Panc-1. This
upregulation of p21(WAF1/CIP1) promoter was selective, since GGTI-298 inhibited
serum responsive element- and E2F-mediated transcription. A functional analysis
of the p21(WAF1/CIP1) promoter showed that a GC-rich region located between
positions -83 and -74, which contains a transforming growth factor
beta-responsive element and one Sp1-binding site, is sufficient for the
upregulation of p21(WAF1/CIP1) promoter by GGTI-298. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assays showed a small increase in the amount of DNA-bound Sp1-Sp3
complexes. Furthermore, the analysis of Sp1 transcriptional activity in
GGTI-298-treated cells by using GAL4-Sp1 chimera or Sp1-chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase reporter revealed a significant increase in Sp1-mediated
transcription. Moreover, GGTI-298 treatment also resulted in increased Sp1 and
Sp3 phosphorylation. These results suggest that GGTI-298-mediated upregulation of
p21(WAF1/CIP1) involves both an increase in the amount of DNA-bound Sp1-Sp3 and
enhancement of Sp1 transcriptional activity. To identify the geranylgeranylated
protein(s) involved in p21(WAF1/CIP1) transcriptional activation, we analyzed the
effects of the small GTPases Rac1 and RhoA on p21(WAF1/CIP1) promoter activity.
The dominant negative mutant of RhoA, but not Rac1, was able to activate
p21(WAF1/CIP1). In contrast, constitutively active RhoA repressed p21(WAF1/CIP1).
Accordingly, the ADP-ribosyl transferase C3, which specifically inhibits Rho
proteins, enhanced the activity of p21(WAF1/CIP1). Taken together, these results 
suggest that one mechanism by which GGTI-298 upregulates p21(WAF1/CIP1)
transcription is by preventing the small GTPase RhoA from repressing
p21(WAF1/CIP1) induction.

PMCID: PMC109279
PMID: 9819384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Clin Invest. 1998 Nov 15;102(10):1850-9.

Estrogen blocks M-CSF gene expression and osteoclast formation by regulating
phosphorylation of Egr-1 and its interaction with Sp-1.

Srivastava S(1), Weitzmann MN, Kimble RB, Rizzo M, Zahner M, Milbrandt J, Ross
FP, Pacifici R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bone and Mineral Diseases, Washington University School of
Medicine, and Barnes-Jewish Hospital, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Central to the pathogenesis of osteoporosis is the ability of estrogen deficiency
to increase osteoclast formation by enhancing stromal cell production of the
osteoclastogenic cytokine macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF). We report
that stromal cells from ovariectomized mice exhibit increased casein kinase
II-dependent phosphorylation of the nuclear protein Egr-1. Phosphorylated Egr-1
binds less avidly to the transcriptional activator Sp-1 and the resulting higher 
levels of free Sp-1 stimulate transactivation of the M-CSF gene. Estrogen
replacement fails to block M-CSF mRNA expression and osteoclast formation in
ovariectomized mice lacking Egr-1, confirming the critical role played by this
transcription factor in mediating the antiosteoclastogenic effects of estrogen.
Thus, by downregulating formation of a novel Egr-1/Sp-1 complex in stromal cells,
estrogen deficiency results in enhanced levels of free Sp-1 and increased M-CSF
gene expression and osteoclast formation.

PMCID: PMC509135
PMID: 9819371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Hum Mol Genet. 1998 Dec;7(13):2103-12.

Promoter of mDMAHP/Six5: differential utilization of multiple transcription
initiation sites and positive/negative regulatory elements.

Murakami Y(1), Ohto H, Ikeda U, Shimada K, Momoi T, Kawakami K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Department of Cardiology, Jichi Medical School,
Minamikawachi, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan.

We analyzed the expression of mouse DMAHP / Six5 (the myotonic
dystrophy-associated homeodomain protein gene) during embryogenesis and in
various tissues by northern blotting. Expression was observed as early as
embryonic day 7 (E7) and continued to E17. Abundant expression was observed in
neonatal heart and skeletal muscle with potential links to the phenotype of
myotonic dystrophy. The transcription initiation sites of the gene were analyzed 
in mouse E11 and E15 embryos and in adult skeletal and heart muscle. Three major 
transcription initiation sites were identified, the proximal site was specific to
the early E11 embryo, while the other two were common among the heart and
skeletal muscle and E11 and E15 embryos. All transcription initiation sites were 
downstream of the corresponding CTG repeat locus of the mouse gene (-1195),
excluding a possible inclusion of the CUG repeat sequence in mRNA leading to
abnormal splicing or to translation of aberrant protein. For analysis of the
regulatory elements in the promoter region, we used P19 embryonal carcinoma cells
which abundantly express mouse DMAHP / Six5. Multiple positive and negative
elements were identified in the promoter region. All positive elements were
Sp1/Sp3 binding sites and one of the negative elements was a novel factor binding
site. The transcription initiation sites and regulatory elements are conserved
between human and mouse DMAHP.

PMID: 9817928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 1998 Nov;10(6):572-8.

Biology of the scleroderma fibroblast.

Strehlow D(1), Korn JH.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology and Arthritis Center, Boston University School of
Medicine, MA 02118, USA.

Abnormalities of matrix biosynthesis by systemic sclerosis fibroblasts underlie
the cutaneous and visceral fibrosis seen in this disease. The fundamental basis
of the abnormal fibroblast phenotype has not been determined but primary
metabolic abnormalities, responses to abnormal environmental signals, and clonal 
selection have all been hypothesized to play a role. In the past year, evidence
supporting each of these explanations was forthcoming. In a study of Choctaw
Indians with a high incidence of scleroderma, it was shown that genetic linkage
to fibrillin may play a role. This should be considered in light of demonstrated 
abnormalities of fibrillin structure in the tight skin mouse. Other studies have 
shown that abnormalities of transforming growth factor beta receptor levels,
abnormalities of production and response to tissue inhibitor of matrix
metal-loproteinase, and abnormalities of response to endothelial cell factors are
all present in scleroderma fibroblasts. In addition to these studies in
scleroderma fibroblasts, work elucidating the role of transcription factors Sp1, 
Sp3, and cKrox in regulating collagen metabolism provided important data upon
which future studies may build.

PMID: 9812218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Lipid Res. 1998 Oct;39(10):2054-64.

Sp1 and Sp3 transactivate the human lipoprotein lipase gene promoter through
binding to a CT element: synergy with the sterol regulatory element binding
protein and reduced transactivation of a naturally occurring promoter variant.

Yang WS(1), Deeb SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Washington, Seattle 98195, USA.

Lipoprotein lipase (LPL) is a key enzyme in lipoprotein and energy metabolism
and, therefore, regulation of its expression could have an important bearing on
these processes. We have identified an evolutionarily conserved 5'-CCTCCCCCC-3'
motif (from -91 to -83, CT element) in the human LPL gene promoter, deletion or
mutation of which caused approximately 70-80% decrease in promoter activity. We
found that Sp1 and Sp3 in THP-1 nuclear protein extracts bind specifically to
this element. Co-transfection with Sp1 and Sp3 expression plasmids transactivated
the LPL promoter via the CT element in Drosophila SL2 cells devoid of Sp
proteins. Sp3 moderately repressed Sp1-mediated LPL promoter activation when both
were co-expressed in SL2 cells. Furthermore, co-expression of an active sterol
regulatory element binding protein (SREBP-1), with Sp1, but not with Sp3,
synergistically activated the LPL promoter in SL2 cells. We previously reported a
naturally occurring T-->G substitution at position -93 of the human LPL promoter 
which reduces promoter activity by 40-50% in transient transfection assays. In
this study, we showed that this substitution results in reduced binding affinity 
to Sp1/Sp3 and in diminished transactivation by Sp1/Sp3 alone and by the
synergistic action of Spl and SREBP-1 In conclusion, recruitment of Sp1/Sp3 by
the CT element may play an important role in expression of the human lipoprotein 
lipase gene. Synergistic transcriptional activation by Sp1 and SREBP-1 may
provide a mechanism for cross-talk between cholesterol and triglyceride metabolic
pathways.

PMID: 9788252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Biol Chem. 1998 Oct 30;273(44):29230-40.

Biglycan gene expression in the human leiomyosarcoma cell line SK-UT-1. Basal and
protein kinase A-induced transcription involves binding of Sp1-like/Sp3 proteins 
in the proximal promoter region.

Ungefroren H(1), Gellersen B, Krull NB, Kalthoff H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit Molecular Oncology, Clinic for General Surgery and Thoracic
Surgery, Christian-Albrechts University, 24105 Kiel, Germany.
hungefroren@email.uni-kiel.de

In this study we demonstrate that the gene encoding the small leucine-rich
proteoglycan biglycan is expressed in human myometrial tissue and in the human
leiomyosarcoma cell line SK-UT-1. Treatment of SK-UT-1 cells with forskolin or
8-bromo-cAMP strongly increased biglycan mRNA and this effect was transcriptional
as shown by transient transfection experiments with biglycan promoter-luciferase 
reporter fusion genes. The cAMP-mediated induction of the transfected biglycan
promoter in SK-UT-1 cells was abolished by coexpression of a specific protein
kinase A inhibitor, and was mimicked by overexpression of the catalytic subunit
(Cbeta) of protein kinase A. By 5' deletion analysis, part of the cAMP response
was localized to the segment from residues -78 to -46 of the biglycan promoter.
This region conferred strong cAMP responsiveness to a heterologous promoter.
Electrophoretic mobility shift and antibody supershift assays identified two
specific complexes that contained nuclear proteins antigenically related to the
ubiquitous transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3, respectively. The binding site of
these proteins was mapped to a CT-rich sequence extending from -59 to -49 in the 
biglycan promoter. Mutating this sequence eliminated complex formation and
markedly reduced basal and cAMP-dependent promoter activity of transfected
reporter genes. In vitro binding studies using recombinant Sp1 revealed that the 
nuclear factor binding to the CT element was not Sp1 but a Sp1-like protein(s).
Western blot analysis of SK-UT-1 nuclear proteins confirmed expression of Sp3,
Sp1 and nuclear proteins that crossreacted with Sp1 antibody but according to
their molecular weight were not Sp1. These results indicate that all
cAMP-dependent as well as some basal biglycan transcription in SK-UT-1 cells is
mediated through activated protein kinase A and that both functions are conferred
at the promoter level through the interaction of Sp1-like/Sp3 factors with the CT
element at -59 in the biglycan promoter.

PMID: 9786935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Biol Chem. 1998 Oct 30;273(44):29032-42.

Transcriptional regulation of the stem cell leukemia gene by PU.1 and Elf-1.

Bockamp EO(1), Fordham JL, Göttgens B, Murrell AM, Sanchez MJ, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Haematology, Medical Research Council
Centre, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QH, United Kingdom.

The SCL gene, also known as tal-1, encodes a basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factor that is pivotal for the normal development of all hematopoietic lineages. 
SCL is expressed in committed erythroid, mast, and megakaryocytic cells as well
as in hematopoietic stem cells. Nothing is known about the regulation of SCL
transcription in mast cells, and in other lineages GATA-1 is the only
tissue-specific transcription factor recognized to regulate the SCL gene. We have
therefore analyzed the molecular mechanisms underlying SCL expression in mast
cells. In this paper, we demonstrate that SCL promoter 1a was regulated by GATA-1
together with Sp1 and Sp3 in a manner similar to the situation in erythroid
cells. However, SCL promoter 1b was strongly active in mast cells, in marked
contrast to the situation in erythroid cells. Full activity of promoter 1b was
dependent on ETS and Sp1/3 motifs. Transcription factors PU.1, Elf-1, Sp1, and
Sp3 were all present in mast cell extracts, bound to promoter 1b and
transactivated promoter 1b reporter constructs. These data provide the first
evidence that the SCL gene is a direct target for PU.1, Elf-1, and Sp3.

PMID: 9786909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. DNA Cell Biol. 1998 Sep;17(9):811-22.

Regulation of mouse Ah receptor (Ahr) gene basal expression by members of the Sp 
family of transcription factors.

Fitzgerald CT(1), Nebert DW, Puga A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Environmental Genetics and Department of Environmental Health,
University of Cincinnati Medical Center, OH 45267-0925, USA.

The aromatic hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a ligand-activated transcription
factor that regulates the expression of several drug-metabolizing enzymes and has
been implicated in immunosuppression, teratogenesis, cell-specific hyperplasia,
and certain types of malignancies and toxicities. The mouse Ahr gene 5' proximal 
promoter region, which contains four potential Sp1 motifs, is required for
efficient basal expression. Using a fragment spanning the region from nt -174 to 
+70 of the Ahr promoter, we found that four regions corresponding to four Sp1
sites were protected from DNase I digestion using nuclear extracts from MLE-12
(lung), F9 (embryonal carcinoma), Hepa-1 (hepatoma), and 41-5a (epidermal) cells.
The Hepa-1 and F9 cell lines were shown by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction and Western blot to contain mRNA and protein for Sp1 and Sp3, but not
Sp2 and Sp4. In electrophoretic mobility shift assays using oligonucleotide
probes corresponding to the four Ahr Sp1 sites, nuclear extracts from Hepa-1 and 
F9 cells formed complexes that were determined immunologically to contain both
Sp1 and Sp3 protein. The two Ahr proximal Sp1 sites (A and B) were shown to bind 
both Sp1 and Sp3 proteins, whereas the more distal sites (C and D) bound only
Sp1. Competition gel shift experiments showed that sites A and B had 10-fold
higher affinity for Sp factors than did sites C and D. To determine the
transactivation potential of each of the four Ahr Sp1 sites, we fused the Ahr
promoter to a luciferase (LUC) reporter gene and transfected the construct into
the Drosophila cell line Schneider-2, which contains no Sp1 or Sp1-like factors. 
Cotransfection of this construct with expression plasmids for each of the Sp
factors revealed that Sp3 was approximately 1.6-fold more efficient than Sp1 in
Ahr transactivation. Mutation of the four Sp1 sites individually and in
combination demonstrated that each site contributes to the overall level of
expression of the reporter gene and that interactions between these sites play a 
minor role in regulation of the Ahr-LUC construct. These results suggest that
basal Ahr expression may be regulated by the expression and distribution of
Sp1-like factors.

PMID: 9778040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Biol Chem. 1998 Oct 23;273(43):28170-7.

A 69-base pair fragment derived from human transcobalamin II promoter is
sufficient for high bidirectional activity in the absence of a TATA box and an
initiator element in transfected cells. Role of an E box in transcriptional
activity.

Li N(1), Seetharam B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Medical
College of Wisconsin and Veterans Medical Center, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226,
USA.

A 69-base pair (bp) (-581/-513) fragment derived from human transcobalamin II
distal promoter constructed upstream of a chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
reporter gene demonstrated high bidirectional promoter activity in transfected
epithelial Caco-2 cells. DNase I footprinting, gel mobility shift, supershift,
and mutagenesis studies with the 69-bp fragment demonstrated that a GC box
(-568/-559) and an E box (-523/-528), which interacted with Sp1/Sp3 and USF1/USF2
(where USF is upstream stimulatory factor), respectively, were required for the
full transcriptional activity of this fragment. Whereas mutations in the GC box
reduced the promoter activity by 50%, mutations in the E box alone or in both the
E box and GC box resulted in 90% loss of transcriptional activity. The essential 
role of the E box in the bidirectional promoter activity was further demonstrated
by transient transfection in Caco-2, K-562, and HeLa cells using a 29-bp
(-541/-513) fragment that contained only the E box. Based on these results we
suggest that 1) the E box is essential for both the GC box-dependent and
-independent promoter activity of the 69-bp fragment, 2) cooperative interactions
between Sp1/Sp3 and USFs are required for the full activation of the 69-bp
promoter activity, and 3) the single E box is able to mediate bidirectional
transcription in transfected cells in the absence of an obvious TATA box or a
known initiator element.

PMID: 9774437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Biol Chem. 1998 Oct 16;273(42):27678-85.

Transcriptional regulation of mouse mu-opioid receptor gene.

Ko JL(1), Liu HC, Minnerath SR, Loh HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Minnesota Medical School,
Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA.

Previously, the existence of dual promoters was reported in mouse mu-opioid
receptor (mor) gene, with mor transcription in the mouse brain predominantly
initiated by the proximal promoter. In this study, we further analyzed the
proximal promoter region, base pairs -450 to -249, to identify cis-DNA regulatory
elements and trans-acting protein factors that are important for mor promoter
activity. The results revealed that a mor inverted GA (iGA) motif and a canonical
Sp1 binding site are required for the promoter activity. Using electrophoretic
mobility shift analysis, we identified nuclear proteins that specifically bind to
the mor iGA motif and that are immunologically related to Sp1 and Sp3. Mutation
of the mor iGA motif, resulting in a loss of Sp binding, led to a 50% decrease in
activity. Mutation of the canonical Sp1 binding site yielded a lesser
(approximately 25%) loss of activity. Mutation of both motifs together resulted
in an approximately 70% decrease in activity. In cotransfection assays using
Drosophila SL2 cells, Sp1 trans-activated the promoter in a manner dependent on
the presence of mor iGA and canonical Sp1 binding motifs. Sp3 can also
trans-activate the promoter, and furthermore, Sp1 and Sp3 can trans-activate the 
mor promoter additively. Our results suggest that combined or cooperative
interaction of Sp transcription factors within the proximal promoter is necessary
for activation of mor gene transcription.

PMID: 9765304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Biol Chem. 1998 Oct 16;273(42):27474-83.

Sp1 and Sp3 regulate transcriptional activity of the facilitative glucose
transporter isoform-3 gene in mammalian neuroblasts and trophoblasts.

Rajakumar RA(1), Thamotharan S, Menon RK, Devaskar SU.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Neonatology and Developmental Biology, the Department of
Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Magee-Womens Research
Institute, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

The murine facilitative glucose transporter isoform 3 (Glut 3) is developmentally
regulated and is predominantly expressed in neurons and trophoblasts. Employing
the primer extension and RNase protection assays, the transcription start site
(denoted as +1) of the murine Glut 3 gene was localized to 305 base pairs (bp) 5'
to the ATG translation start codon. Transient transfection assays in N2A, H19-7
neuroblasts, and HRP.1 trophoblasts using sequential 5'-deletions of the murine
Glut 3-luciferase fusion gene indicated that the -203 to +237 bp region with
reference to the transcriptional start site contained promoter activity.
Repressor function was limited to the -137 to -130 bp region within the
transcriptional activation domain. The nuclear factors Sp1 and Sp3 bound this
GC-rich region in N2A, H19-7, and HRP.1 cells. Dephosphorylation of Sp1 was
essential for Glut 3 DNA binding. The related Sp3 protein also bound this same
region of mouse Glut 3 in all three cell lines. Mutations of the Sp1-binding site
employed in transient transfection and mobility shift assays confirmed the nature
of the DNA-binding proteins, while supershift assays with anti-Sp1 and anti-Sp3
IgGs characterized the differences in the two DNA-binding proteins.
Co-transfection of the Glut 3-luciferase fusion gene with or without mutations of
the Sp1-binding site along with the Sp1 or Sp3 expression vectors in Drosophila
SL2 cells confirmed a reciprocal effect, with Sp1 suppressing and Sp3 activating 
Glut 3 gene transcription.

PMID: 9765277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Gene. 1998 Sep 18;218(1-2):37-47.

Isolation and characterization of the human prosaposin promoter.

Sun Y(1), Jin P, Witte DP, Grabowski GA.

Author information: 
(1)The Division of Human Genetics, Children's Hospital Research Foundation at
Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH
45229-3039, USA.

Prosaposin is a multifunctional protein that encodes four glycoproteins, named
saposins A, B, C and D. They participate in the catabolism of glycosphingolipids 
in lysosomes. When secreted, intact prosaposin may function as a neuritogenic
factor. Human and mouse prosaposin displayed similar temporal and spatial
regulation of expression. To gain insight into the transcriptional regulation of 
this locus, the 5' region was characterized from the human prosaposin gene. The
putative human promoter was shown to be TATA-less, i.e. it belonged to the
TATA-less housekeeping gene family. The transcription initiation sites were
localized to -23, -27, -31 and -83bp 5' to ATG, compared to -87 and -94bp in the 
mouse. In SK-N-SH neuroblastoma cells, positive regulatory elements were detected
-343 to -813bp upstream of ATG. A negative regulatory region existed between -813
and -2500bp using SK-N-SH, H441 and NS20Y cells. EMSA and DNA-footprint analysis 
showed that Sp1 and Sp3 are involved in human prosaposin gene regulation.
Compared to the mouse promoter, the human promoter is missing a Sp1 cluster
within a 310-bp upstream segment, and has AP-1, Oct-1 and two RORalpha sites that
are protected from DNaseI by selected nuclear extracts.

PMID: 9751800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Biol Chem. 1998 Oct 2;273(40):26225-35.

Transcriptional regulation of the generic promoter III of the rat prolactin
receptor gene by C/EBPbeta and Sp1.

Hu ZZ(1), Zhuang L, Meng J, Dufau ML.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Molecular Endocrinology, Endocrinology and Reproduction Research
Branch, NICHD, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Three promoters are operative in the rat prolactin receptor gene as follows:
promoter I (PI) and II (PII) are specific for the gonads and liver, respectively,
and promoter III (PIII) is common to several tissues. To investigate the
mechanisms controlling the activity of promoter III, its regulatory elements and 
transcription factors were characterized in gonadal and non-gonadal cells. The
TATA-less PIII domain was localized to the region -437 to -179 (ATG +1)
containing the 5'-flanking region and part of the non-coding first exon. Within
the promoter domain, a functional CAAT-box/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP)
(-398) and an Sp1 element (-386), which bind C/EBPbeta and Sp1/Sp3, respectively,
contribute individually to promoter activation in gonadal and non-gonadal cells. 
However, significant redundancy was demonstrated between these elements in
non-gonadal cells. Additionally, an element within the non-coding exon 1 (-338)
is also required for promoter activity. Activation of PIII by the widely
expressed Sp1 and C/EBPbeta factors explains its common utilization in multiple
tissues. Moreover, whereas the rat and mouse PIII share similar structure and
function, the mouse PI lacks the functional SF-1 element and hence is inactive.
These findings indicate that promoter III is of central importance in prolactin
receptor gene transcription across species.

PMID: 9748306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Biol Chem. 1998 Oct 2;273(40):26087-93.

Hypoxia regulates beta-enolase and pyruvate kinase-M promoters by modulating
Sp1/Sp3 binding to a conserved GC element.

Discher DJ(1), Bishopric NH, Wu X, Peterson CA, Webster KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, University of Miami Medical
Center, Miami, Florida 33136, USA.

The transcription rates of glycolytic enzyme genes are coordinately induced when 
cells are exposed to low oxygen tension. This effect has been described in many
cell types and is not restricted to species or phyla. In mammalian cells, there
are 11 distinct glycolytic enzymes, at least 9 of which are induced by hypoxia.
Recent reports described a role for the hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) in the
transcriptional activation of lactate dehydrogenase A, aldolase-A,
phosphoglycerate kinase, and enolase-1 genes. It is not known whether the HIF-1
factor acts exclusively to regulate these genes during hypoxia, or how the other 
genes of the pathway are regulated. In this paper, we describe analyses of the
muscle-specific pyruvate kinase-M and beta-enolase promoters that implicate
additional mechanisms for the regulation of glycolytic enzyme gene transcription 
by hypoxia. Transient transcription of a reporter gene directed by either
promoter was activated when transfected muscle cells were exposed to hypoxia.
Neither of these promoters contain HIF-1 binding sites. Instead, the hypoxia
response was localized to a conserved GC-rich element positioned immediately
upstream of a GATAA site in the proximal promoter regions of both genes. The GC
element was essential for both basal and hypoxia-induced expression and bound the
transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3. Hypoxia caused the progressive depletion of
Sp3 determined by DNA binding studies and Western analyses, whereas Sp1 protein
levels remained unchanged. Overexpression of Sp3 repressed expression of
beta-enolase promoters. It is concluded that hypoxia activates these glycolytic
enzyme gene promoters by down-regulating Sp3, thereby removing the associated
transcriptional repression.

PMID: 9748288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Mol Reprod Dev. 1998 Oct;51(2):218-24.

Effects of differentiation on the transcriptional regulation of the FGF-4 gene:
critical roles played by a distal enhancer.

Lamb KA(1), Rizzino A.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha 68198-6805, USA.

Embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells are used widely as a model system for studying the
expression of developmentally regulated genes, in particular genes that are
regulated at the transcriptional level when EC cells differentiate. This review
focuses on the molecular mechanisms that govern the transcription of the
fibroblast growth factor-4 (FGF-4) gene, which appears to be the first FGF
expressed during mammalian development. Interest in this gene has increased
considerably with the finding that FGF-4 is essential for mammalian
embryogenesis. The FGF-4 gene has also generated considerable interest because it
is inhibited at the transcriptional level when EC cells undergo differentiation
and because this gene is regulated by a powerful distal enhancer located 3 kb
downstream of the transcription start site in the last exon of the gene. Hence,
study of the FGF-4 gene is likely to shed light on the molecular mechanisms by
which distal enhancers regulate gene expression. In addition to being regulated
by the downstream enhancer, the expression of this gene is influenced by a
regulatory region located just upstream of the transcription start site, which
contains two Sp1 motifs and a CCAAT box motif. Examination of the downstream
enhancer has identified three functional cis-regulatory elements: a high mobility
group (HMG) protein binding motif, an octamer binding motif, and an Sp1 motif,
which are likely to bind Sox-2, Oct-3, and Sp1/Sp3, respectively, in vivo.
Interestingly, Sox-2 and Oct-3 expression, like FGF-4 expression, decreases when 
EC cells differentiate, which suggests that the loss of these transcription
factors is responsible, at least in part, for the transcriptional turn-off of the
FGF-4 gene. In view of these and other findings, we present a model for the
differential expression of the FGF-4 gene that includes not only the
contributions of specific transcription factors, but also the contribution of
chromatin structure before and after differentiation.

PMID: 9740330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Hum Mol Genet. 1998 Oct;7(11):1681-94.

Characterization of a double homeodomain protein (DUX1) encoded by a cDNA
homologous to 3.3 kb dispersed repeated elements.

Ding H(1), Beckers MC, Plaisance S, Marynen P, Collen D, Belayew A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular and Vascular Biology and Centre for Human Genetics,
University of Leuven, Herestraat 49, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium.

Target genes for the helicase-like transcription factor (HLTF), a member of the
SNF/SWI family, were immunoprecipitated from HeLa chromatin fragments with an
anti-HLTF antibody. A 182 bp fragment ( HEFT1 ) presented 87% sequence identity
with 3.3 kb dispersed repeats from the 4q35 D4Z4 locus linked to
facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD). The HEFT1 loci were, however, not 
genetically linked to FSHD. Transfection and in vitro binding studies identified 
within HEFT1 a promoter whose basal activity required a GC box activated by Sp1
or Sp3. A 4.4 kb homologous transcript was found mostly in human skeletal muscle 
and heart. A 1.2 kb cDNA fragment was cloned that encoded a 170 amino acid
protein (DUX1) with two paired-type homeodomains. In vitro translated DUX1
specifically interacted in electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) with a P5 
oligonucleotide (5'-GATCTGAGTCTAATTGAGAATTACTGTAC-3'). DUX1 co-expression
activated up to 5-fold transient expression in insect cells of a minimal
promoter-luciferase construct fused to P5. The presence of 20 kDa DUX1 in vivo in
rhabdomyosarcoma TE671 cell extracts was shown by western blotting with a rabbit 
antiserum raised against a DUX1 peptide. This antiserum suppressed a TE671
protein-P5 complex in EMSA with identical migration as the in vitro translated
DUX1-P5 complex. Genomic PCR experiments could not identify a gene fragment
linking the HEFT1 and DUX1 sequences, which present one mismatch in their
overlapping region. However, a similar gene was found in another 3.3 kb element
comprising the HEFT1 promoter and a DUX1 -like open reading frame. In addition,
homologous gene sequences were identified in 3.3 kb elements of the D4Z4/FSHD
locus, considered until now 'junk' DNA.

PMID: 9736770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Virol. 1998 Oct;72(10):8230-9.

Identification of a negative cis element within the ZII domain of the
Epstein-Barr virus lytic switch BZLF1 gene promoter.

Liu P(1), Liu S, Speck SH.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and Molecular Microbiology and Division of Molecular 
Oncology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110,
USA.

The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) lytic switch gene, BZLF1, is tightly regulated in
latently infected B cells. The BZLF1 gene promoter (Zp) contains several cis
elements that have been previously shown to respond to inducers of the viral
lytic cycle. These include four copies of an element referred to as the ZI
domains and an element that contains a consensus CRE/AP-1 motif (ZII domain). In 
addition, Zp is autoregulated through two sites that bind the BZLF1 gene product 
Zta. The ZI domains have been shown to bind the ubiquitous cellular transcription
factors Sp1 and Sp3 and/or the myocyte enhancer factor 2D (Liu et al., EMBO J.
16:143-153, 1997; Liu et al., Virology 228:9-16, 1997). Here we present a
functional analysis of the ZII domain and show: (i) ATF-1 and ATF-2 appear to be 
the predominant cellular factors that bind to the CRE/AP-1 motif present in the
ZII domain; and (ii) the region immediately upstream of the CRE/AP-1 motif
contains a potent negative cis element, mutation of which results in a >10-fold
increase in Zp activity. The negative cis element (ZIIR) in the ZII domain
decreases both basal and induced Zp activity and thus is likely to play an
important role in regulating reactivation of EBV. In addition, analysis of
heterologous promoter constructs indicates that the function of ZIIR is context
sensitive. Attempts to demonstrate a cellular factor binding to ZIIR have been
unsuccessful, leaving unresolved the mechanism by which repression is mediated.

PMCID: PMC110177
PMID: 9733866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Biol Chem. 1998 Sep 18;273(38):24867-73.

Structure and expression of the mouse AhR nuclear translocator (mArnt) gene.

Wang F(1), Gao JX, Mimura J, Kobayashi A, Sogawa K, Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University, Sendai
980-8578, Japan.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) nuclear translocator (Arnt) gene has been
isolated and characterized from a mouse genomic DNA library. The gene is about 60
kilobases long and split into 22 exons. An unusual exon/intron junctional
sequence was found in the 11th intron of the gene that begins with GC at its
5'-end. The exon/intron arrangement of mArnt gene differs greatly from those of
the other members of the same basic-helix-loop-helix/PAS family. The gene is
TATA-less and has several transcription start sites. The promoter region of the
mArnt gene is GC-rich and contains a number of putative regulatory DNA sequences 
such as two GC-boxes, a cAMP-responsive element, E-box, AP-1 site, and CAAT-box. 
Deletion experiments revealed that all these DNA elements made substantial
contributions to a high level of expression of the gene, except for the
cAMP-responsive element. Of all, two GC-boxes displayed the most dominant
enhancing effects. It was demonstrated that there exist specific factors binding 
to these DNA elements in the nuclear extracts of HeLa cells. Among them, Sp1 and 
Sp3, and CAAT-box binding factor-A were identified to bind the GC-boxes and
CAAT-box, respectively. Expression of MyoD in HeLa cells stimulated the Arnt
promoter activity by binding to the E-box.

PMID: 9733792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1998;81(3-4):273-4.

Assignment1 of Sp genes to rat chromosome bands 7q36 (Sp1), 10q31-->q32.1 (Sp2), 
3q24-->q31 (Sp3) and 6q33 (Sp4) and of the SP2 gene to human chromosome bands
17q21.3-->q22 by in situ hybridization.

Scohy S(1), Van Vooren P, Szpirer C, Szpirer J.

Author information: 
(1)Université Libre de Bruxelles, Département de Biologie Moléculaire,
Rhode-Saint-Genèse, Belgium. ssohy@dbm.ulb.ac.be

PMID: 9730617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Mol Endocrinol. 1998 Aug;12(8):1201-14.

Hormone induction of progesterone receptor (PR) messenger ribonucleic acid and
activation of PR promoter regions in ovarian granulosa cells: evidence for a role
of cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate but not estradiol.

Clemens JW(1), Robker RL, Kraus WL, Katzenellenbogen BS, Richards JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, 
USA.

Expression of progesterone receptor (PR) mRNA in granulosa cells of ovarian
preovulatory follicles is induced by LH (1, 2) and is essential for ovulation
(3). Although 17beta-estradiol (E) can induce PR mRNA and activate PR
promoter-reporter constructs in other cell types, the effects of E in granulosa
cells appear to be indirect. We show herein that E alone does not induce the
expression of PR mRNA in preovulatory granulosa cells. Rather, induction of PR
mRNA depends on the differentiation of granulosa cells in response to E and a
physiological amount of FSH followed by exposure to agonists (elevated levels of 
LH, FSH, and forskolin) that markedly increase cAMP. Induction of PR mRNA by
forskolin is blocked by the A-kinase inhibitor H89 and cycloheximide but not by
the E antagonist, ICI 164,384. These results indicate that phosphorylation and
synthesis of some regulatory factor(s) other than or in addition to the estrogen 
receptor (ER) are essential for transactivation of the PR gene. When distal and
proximal PR promoter-reporter constructs that are responsive to E in other cell
types were transiently transfected into differentiated granulosa cells,
forskolin, but not E, induced activity. Likewise, when a vector containing the
consensus vitellogenin B1 gene estrogen response element (ERE) was transfected
into differentiated granulosa cells, forskolin, but not E, induced activity.
Using electrophoretic mobility shift assays, the consensus ERE was shown to bind 
ERbeta, the predominant subtype present in rat granulosa cells, and ERalpha, the 
predominant subtype present in luteal cells, whereas the putative ERE-like region
(ERE3) of the proximal PR promoter did not bind either ER subtype. Although the
identity of the specific factors binding to the ERE3 site remain to be
determined, mutation of this region abolished forskolin-induced activity of
ERE3-PR-CAT constructs. The GC-rich region of the distal PR promoter bound Sp1
and Sp3 but not C/EBPalpha/beta, indicating that factors binding to ERE3 interact
synergistically with Sp1/Sp3 to confer increased responsiveness of the distal
promoter to forskolin. Taken together, these results indicate that activation of 
the A-kinase pathway leads to the phosphorylation of some transcription factor(s)
other than or in addition to ER that is (are) critical for the transactivation of
the PR gene and that this mechanism is selectively activated in differentiated
granulosa cells possessing a preovulatory phenotype.

PMID: 9717846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Biol Chem. 1998 Aug 28;273(35):22807-18.

Multiple promoter elements interact to control the transcription of the potassium
channel gene, KCNJ2.

Redell JB(1), Tempel BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, and the Virginia Merrill Bloedel Hearing Research 
Center, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington 98195,
USA.

Potassium channels play important roles in shaping the electrical properties of
excitable cells. Toward understanding the transcriptional regulation of a member 
of the inwardly rectifying potassium channel family, we have characterized the
genomic structure and 5'-proximal promoter of the murine Kcnj2 gene (also
referred to as IRK1 and Kir2.1). The Kcnj2 transcription unit is composed of two 
exons separated by a 5.5-kilobase pair intron. Deletion analysis of 5'-flanking
sequences identified a promiscuously active 172-base pair minimal promoter,
whereas expression from a construct containing additional upstream sequences was 
cell type-restricted. The minimal promoter contained an E box, a Y box, and three
GC box consensus elements but lacked both TATA and CCAAT box elements. The
activity of the minimal promoter was found to be controlled by a combination of
the activities of the transcription factors Sp1, Sp3, and NF-Y. The interplay
between Sp1, Sp3, and NF-Y within the architecture of the Kcnj2 promoter, the
ubiquitous nature of these trans-acting factors, and the action of
tissue-selective repressor element(s) may combine to enable a wide variety of
cell types to differentially regulate Kcnj2 expression through transcriptional
control.

PMID: 9712915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Eur J Biochem. 1998 Jul 1;255(1):125-32.

31P-NMR spectroscopy of human and Paracoccus denitrificans electron transfer
flavoproteins, and 13C- and 15N-NMR spectroscopy of human electron transfer
flavoprotein in the oxidised and reduced states.

Griffin KJ(1), Degala GD, Eisenreich W, Müller F, Bacher A, Frerman FE.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Colorado, Denver
80262, USA.

Human and Paracoccus denitrificans wild-type electron transfer flavoproteins have
been investigated by 31P-NMR in the oxidised and reduced states. The 31P chemical
shifts of the diphosphate moiety of the protein-bound FAD were similar in the
proteins and were independent of the redox state. The chemical shifts were
remarkably similar to those of ferredoxin-NADP+ reductase and, to a lesser
degree, with those of NADPH-cytochrome P-450 reductase. The wild-type human
electron transfer apoprotein was reconstituted with [2,4a-13C2]FAD,
[4,10a-13C2]FAD, or [U-15N4]FAD. The reconstituted proteins were studied by 13C- 
and 15N-NMR techniques in the oxidised and reduced states. The chemical shifts
were compared with those of free flavin in aqueous solution or in chloroform, and
those of flavoproteins published in the literature. In the oxidised state, strong
hydrogen bonds exist between residues of the apoprotein and C(2)O and N(5) of
FAD. The N(1) atom is also hydrogen bonded and, as shown by X-ray data, involves 
the C'(4)-OH group of FAD. The sp2 hybridisation of N(10) is small compared to
other flavoproteins. In the reduced state, there are strong hydrogen bonds
involving C(2)O and N(5) of FAD. The N(1) atom is ionised as observed also in
other flavoproteins when investigated by NMR. The intramolecular hydrogen bond
between the C'(4)-OH group and the N(1) atom of FAD is maintained in the reduced 
state, suggesting an involvement in the stabilisation of a certain configuration 
of the diphosphate group of protein-bound FAD in both redox states. The N(10)
atom in the reduced protein is highly sp3 hybridised in comparison to those of
other flavoproteins.

PMID: 9692910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 1998 Jul;(352):118-27.

Diamond coated total hip replacements.

Lappalainen R(1), Anttila A, Heinonen H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, University of Helsinki, Finland.

Diamond has many superior, desired characteristics of implant materials such as
low friction, high wear and corrosion resistance, and well bonding surface to
bone. The potential of diamond for total hip replacement implants was studied in 
the form of amorphous diamond coatings on conventional metal implant materials.
Amorphous diamond coatings (sp3 bonding fraction 80%, thickness 0.2 to 10
microns) were deposited on stainless steel AISI316L, Ti6A14V, and CoCrMo alloys
using filtered pulsed plasma are discharge method. Superior attachment of
coatings to the implant materials was achieved by using high energy plasma beams 
to deposit amorphous diamond and proper intermediate layers. Previously it was
shown that these coatings are biocompatible causing no local tissue reactions.
Tribologic studies using a pin on disk apparatus with coated or uncoated implant 
materials in 1 wt.% NaCl distilled water were performed. A simplified hip joint
simulator was used for preliminary testing of metal on polyethylene and metal on 
metal artificial hip joints modified with amorphous diamond coating. The average 
coefficients of friction were typically in the range of 0.03 to 0.11 for
amorphous diamond coated materials. In the case of metal on metal hip implants,
the average friction during initial running in period was improved (coefficient
of friction = 0.07) compared with the same metal on metal pair (coefficient of
friction = 0.22) and sliding was significantly smoother. In pin on disk wear
tests, the average wear factors obtained were 140.10(-6), 5.0.10(-6), and <<
0.1.10(-6) mm3/Nm for the pairs of AISI316L, CoCrMo, and the same materials with 
amorphous diamond coating. The corrosion rates of these implant materials in 10
wt.% HCl solution were decreased by a factor of 10,000 to 15,000 and any damage
of the coatings was not observed in 6 months. The results of the tests show that 
in all the combinations studied, amorphous diamond coating improved definitely
the wear and corrosion resistance compared with the uncoated materials.

PMID: 9678039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jul 31;273(31):19877-83.

Differential effects of heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein K on Sp1- and
Sp3-mediated transcriptional activation of a neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine
receptor promoter.

Du Q(1), Melnikova IN, Gardner PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Biotechnology, University of
Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, Texas 78245-3207, USA.

The neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor gene family consists of 11 members,
alpha2-alpha9 and beta2-beta4. Three of the genes, those encoding the alpha3,
alpha5, and beta4 subunits, are clustered tightly within the genome. These three 
subunits constitute the predominant acetylcholine receptor subtype expressed in
the peripheral nervous system. The genomic proximity of the three genes suggests 
a regulatory mechanism ensuring their coordinate expression. However, it is
likely that gene-specific regulatory mechanisms are also functioning because the 
expression patterns of the three genes, although similar, are not identical.
Previously we identified regulatory elements within the beta4 promoter region and
demonstrated that these elements interact specifically with nuclear proteins. One
of these elements, E1, interacts with the regulatory factor Puralpha as well as
three other unidentified DNA-binding proteins with molecular masses of 31, 65,
and 114 kDa. Another element, E2, interacts with Sp1 and Sp3. Because E1 and E2
are immediately adjacent to one another, we postulated that the proteins that
bind to the elements interact to regulate beta4 gene expression. Here we report
the identification of the 65-kDa E1-binding protein as heterogeneous nuclear
ribonucleoprotein K and demonstrate that it affects the transactivation of beta4 
promoter activity by Sp1 and Sp3 differentially.

PMID: 9677424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Biochem J. 1998 Aug 1;333 ( Pt 3):511-7.

Different Sp1 family members differentially affect transcription from the human
elongation factor 1 A-1 gene promoter.

Nielsen SJ(1), Praestegaard M, Jorgensen HF, Clark BF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostructural Chemistry, Institute of Molecular and Structural
Biology, University of Aarhus, Gustav Wieds Vej 10C, Forskerparken, Arhus,
Denmark.

The GC box is an important transcriptional regulatory element present in the
promoters of many mammalian genes. In the present study we examine the effect of 
known GC-box-binding proteins on the promoter of the human elongation factor 1
A-1 (hEF1A-1) gene in human HeLa cells and Drosophila SL2 cells. In HeLa cells
co-transfection with the GC-box-binding protein BTEB resulted in a 4-10-fold
increase in hEF1A-1 promoter activity. This stimulation was dependent on a single
GC box located between positions -69 and -50 of the promoter. Little or no effect
was observed of other GC-box-binding proteins including Sp1, Sp3, Sp4 and BTEB2. 
In SL2 cells stimulation by Sp1 and Sp3 through the single GC box of the proximal
promoter led to 13-fold and 21-fold increases respectively in promoter activity. 
Inclusion of further upstream sequences resulted in high levels of expression
when Sp1 or Sp3 was co-transfected with the reporter plasmid. In this setting Sp1
stimulated transcription by 750-fold, whereas Sp3 was even more potent, yielding 
a 1150-fold stimulation. Mobility-shift assays performed with the
promoter-proximal GC box demonstrated the binding of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 to this
sequence. To our knowledge, the present study represents the first comparison of 
all known GC-box-binding proteins on a natural promoter.

PMCID: PMC1219611
PMID: 9677307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jul 24;273(30):19294-303.

Transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 alter vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor expression through a novel recognition sequence.

Hata Y(1), Duh E, Zhang K, Robinson GS, Aiello LP.

Author information: 
(1)Research Division, Joslin Diabetes Center, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Kinase domain receptor (KDR) is a high affinity, endothelial cell-specific,
autophosphorylating tyrosine kinase receptor for vascular endothelial growth
factor. This transcriptionally regulated receptor is a critical mediator of
endothelial cell (EC) growth and vascular development. In this study, we identify
a DNA element modulating KDR promoter activity and evaluate the nuclear binding
proteins accounting for a portion of the cell-type specificity of the region. KDR
promoter luciferase activity was retained within -85/+296 and was 10-30-fold
higher in EC than non-EC. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays demonstrated
specific nuclear protein binding to -85/-64, and single point mutations suggested
important binding nucleotides between -79/-68 with five critical bases between
-74/-70 (5'-CTCCT-3'). DNA-protein complexes were displaced by Sp1 consensus
sequence oligodeoxynucleotides and supershifted by Sp1- and Sp3-specific
antibodies. Sp1 and Sp3 protein in EC nuclear extracts bound the -79/-68 region
even when all surrounding classic Sp1 recognition sites were removed. Sp1 protein
in nuclear extracts was 4-24-fold higher in EC than non-EC, whereas Sp3 was
3-7-fold higher. Sp1/Sp3 ratios in EC were 2-10-fold higher. Overexpression of
Sp1 protein increased KDR promoter activity 3-fold in both EC and non-EC, whereas
simultaneous co-expression of Sp3 attenuated this response. An Sp1 consensus
sequence cis element "decoy" reduced EC KDR promoter activity and mRNA expression
by 85 and 69%, respectively. An antisense phosphorothioate oligodeoxynucleotide
to Sp1 inhibited Sp1 and KDR protein expression by 66 and 68%, respectively,
without changing Sp3 protein expression. These data illustrate that Sp1 and Sp3
modulate KDR promoter activity through a novel recognition binding sequence.
However, since Sp1-mediated promoter activation is attenuated by Sp3, endothelial
selective KDR promoter activity may be partially regulated by variations in the
Sp1/Sp3 ratio.

PMID: 9668119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Gene. 1998 Jul 17;215(1):101-10.

Modulation of human alpha1(I) procollagen gene activity by interaction with Sp1
and Sp3 transcription factors in vitro.

Chen SJ(1), Artlett CM, Jimenez SA, Varga J.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology, University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago, 
IL 60607, USA.

In previous work, we delineated a proximal region of the human alpha1(I) collagen
gene (COL1A1) promoter necessary to direct its basal transcription in
fibroblasts. This region has potential recognition sites for a variety of
DNA-binding proteins. Here, we show that the -129/-107-bp sequence in this region
of the promoter, which harbors an inverted CCAAT motif closely linked to a
GC-rich direct repeat and is perfectly conserved between mouse and human,
specifically bound the transcription factors Sp1, Sp3, and CTF/NF-1 in nuclear
extracts from human skin and lung fibroblasts. Drosophila Schneider L2 cells
lacking endogenous Sp activity were used to investigate the effect of expression 
of Sp or CTF/NF-1 transcription factors on COLlAl promoter activity. Expression
of Sp1 caused potent trans-activation of a COL1A1 promoter (-174 to +42bp). In
contrast, expression of Sp3, which binds to the same recognition sites as Sp1,
and CTF/NF-1 stimulated COL1A1 promoter activity only at higher concentrations,
and Sp2 did not transactivate. Expression of a 10-fold excess of Sp3, but not
CTF/NF-1 or Sp2, abrogated the stimulation of COL1A1 promoter activity induced by
Sp1. TGF-beta at concentrations previously shown to increase COL1A1 transcription
caused a decrease in the relative amount of Sp3 in fibroblast nuclear extracts.
These results suggest that both Sp1 and Sp3 bind to the proximal COL1A1 promoter 
and stimulate its activity; however, their interaction with each other may result
in repression of Sp1-induced COL1A1 transcription. Alterations in the relative
amounts or DNA-binding activities of these transcription factors in a cell- or
signal-specific manner may contribute to the control of transcription from the
COL1A1 promoter. The present findings, and recent observations implicating Sp1
and its homologs in regulating the expression of several collagen genes, suggest 
that the family of Sp1 transcription factors play a role in physiological and
pathological modulation of connective tissue accumulation.

PMID: 9666093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Blood. 1998 Jul 15;92(2):653-63.

Full activity from human beta-globin locus control region transgenes requires
5'HS1, distal beta-globin promoter, and 3' beta-globin sequences.

Pasceri P(1), Pannell D, Wu X, Ellis J.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

The locus control region (LCR) activates high-level human beta-globin transgene
expression. LCR cassettes composed of 5'HS2-4 linked to the 815 bp beta-globin
proximal promoter do not express fully. Here, we show that LCR (5'HS2-4)
beta-globin transgenes that also contain either 5'HS1 or the distal promoter fail
to express fully in single- and low-copy transgenic mice. In contrast, full
expression is obtained in the presence of both 5'HS1 and the distal promoter.
Nine factor binding sites were identified in 5'HS1, using in vitro DNaseI
footprint and gel retardation assays, and these include a strong Sp1/Sp3 site,
four GATA-1 sites, and two sites that encompass an ACTAAC motif. LCR (5'HS1-4)
beta-globin transgene constructs with the distal promoter deleted or replaced by 
spacer DNA show that specific distal promoter sequences are required for full
expression. An LCR (5'HS1-4) transgene construct with truncated downstream
beta-globin gene sequences indicates that 3' sequences also play an important
role. These results show that full expression of the beta-globin gene directed by
the LCR requires 5'HS1, the distal beta-globin promoter, and 3' sequences, and
has implications for gene therapy construct design and models of LCR activation.

PMID: 9657768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Eur J Biochem. 1998 May 1;253(3):778-86.

Transcriptional regulation of the non-specific cross-reacting antigen gene, a
member of the carcinoembryonic antigen gene family up-regulated in colorectal
carcinomas.

Koops MD(1), Thompson J, Zimmermann W, Stanners CP.

Author information: 
(1)McGill Cancer Centre, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Human non-specific cross-reacting antigen (NCA), a close relative of the tumor
marker human carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), is also an in vitro homotypic
intercellular adhesion molecule capable of inhibiting differentiation when
expressed ectopically by myoblasts. Moreover, NCA appears to be overexpressed at 
the transcriptional level to a greater extent and more frequently in colorectal
carcinomas than CEA. This study examines the transcriptional control mechanisms
responsible for orchestrating NCA expression. The region within 284 bp upstream
of the translational start site of the NCA gene was found to be capable of
directing high levels of expression in functional promoter assays. Footprinting
experiments identified three cis-acting elements and mobility-shift assays
revealed that the first of these elements is bound by the upstream stimulating
factors USF1 and USF2 while the other two are bound by the stimulatory proteins
Sp1 and Sp3. No cis-acting elements corresponding to CEA footprint FP4 or the
silencer CEA FP5 were detected in the NCA promoter, which may contribute to the
differential expression of NCA versus CEA in tumorigenesis.

PMID: 9654079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jul 10;273(28):17917-25.

The gut-enriched Krüppel-like factor suppresses the activity of the CYP1A1
promoter in an Sp1-dependent fashion.

Zhang W(1), Shields JM, Sogawa K, Fujii-Kuriyama Y, Yang VW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

The gut-enriched Krüppel-like factor (GKLF) is a newly identified zinc
finger-containing transcription factor. Recent studies indicate that GKLF binds
to a core DNA sequence of 5'-(G/A)(G/A)GG(C/T)G(C/T)-3', which is found in an
endogenous cis element, the basic transcription element (BTE) of the cytochrome
P-450IA1 (CYP1A1) promoter. The present study characterizes the ability of GKLF
to regulate CYP1A1 expression. By electrophoretic mobility gel shift assay (EMSA)
and methylation interference assay, GKLF was found to bind BTE in a manner
similar to several other transcription factors known to interact with BTE
including Sp1 and BTEB. Cotransfection studies in Chinese hamster ovary cells
showed that GKLF inhibited the CYP1A1 promoter in a dose- and BTE-dependent
manner. The same experiments also revealed that BTE was responsible for a
significant portion of the CYP1A1 promoter activity. EMSA of nuclear extracts
from Chinese hamster ovary cells showed that Sp1 and Sp3 were two major proteins 
that interacted with BTE. Additional cotransfection studies showed that GKLF
inhibited Sp1-mediated activation of the CYP1A1 promoter. In contrast, GKLF
enhanced Sp3-dependent suppression of the same promoter. Moreover, the ability of
GKLF to inhibit Sp1-dependent transactivation was in part due to physical
interaction of the two proteins. These findings indicate that GKLF is a negative 
regulator of the CYP1A1 promoter in a BTE-dependent fashion and that this
inhibitory effect is in part mediated by physical interaction with Sp1.

PMCID: PMC2275057
PMID: 9651398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 1998 Jun;24(2):183-98.

DNA-protein interactions in the proximal zeta-globin promoter: identification of 
novel CCACCC- and CCAAT-binding proteins.

Sabath DE(1), Koehler KM, Yang WQ, Phan V, Wilson J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Washington School of
Medicine, Seattle 98195, USA. dsabath@u.washington.edu

The human zeta-globin gene is expressed in a tissue- and developmental-specific
pattern, with expression confined to primitive erythroid cells of the embryonic
yolk sac blood islands. Transgenic mouse studies have shown that the proximal
zeta-globin promoter contains sequences that contribute to the stage-specificity 
of expression, but no systematic functional studies of the cis elements in the
proximal zeta-globin promoter have been reported. In this paper, we show that a
number of conserved sequence elements in the zeta-globin promoter are important
for promoter activity in transiently transfected K562 erythroleukemia cells,
which constitutively express zeta-globin. These include a GATA site at -105, a
CCACC site at -93, a CCAAT box at -65, and a TATA box at -29. A highly conserved 
CCTCC sequence at -78 is not important for zeta-globin promoter activity in this 
system. Mutations at these sites do not result in increased promoter activity in 
OCIM1 cells, an erythroid line that does not express zeta-globin, suggesting none
of these sites is a developmental silencer. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays
show that K562 and OCIM1 nuclear extracts contain DNA-binding activities that
interact with the -105 GATA, -65 CCAAT, and -29 TATA sites. In addition K562
cells, but not OCIM1 cells, have an activity that binds the -93 CCACC site.
GATA-1 interacts with the GATA site. The K562 CCACC-binding protein is distinct
from Sp1, Sp2, Sp3, Sp4, EKLF, and BKLF. A specific -65 CCAAT-binding activity is
present in K562 and OCIM1 nuclear extracts that is distinct from other
CCAAT-binding proteins including CBF/NF-Y, C/EBP, NF-1, and CP2. Thus, we have
identified two novel factors that may contribute to the tissue or developmental
stage-specific expression of zeta-globin.

PMID: 9642099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Biochem J. 1998 Jul 1;333 ( Pt 1):209-13.

Sp3 regulates fas expression in lung epithelial cells.

Pang H(1), Miranda K, Fine A.

Author information: 
(1)The Pulmonary Center, Boston University School of Medicine, 80 E. Concord
Street, Boston, MA 02118, USA.

By transducing an apoptotic signal in immune effector cells, Fas has been
directly implicated in the control of immunological activity. Expression and
functional results, however, have also suggested a role for Fas in regulating
cell turnover in specific epithelial populations. To characterize factors
responsible for Fas expression in epithelial cells, approximately 3 kb of the 5' 
flanking region of the mouse Fas gene was isolated. By rapid amplification of
cDNA ends and primer extension, transcriptional start sites were identified
within 50 bp upstream of the translation start site. Transient transfection of
promoter-luciferase constructs in a mouse lung epithelial cell line, MLE-15,
localized promoter activity to the first 77 bp of upstream sequence. By using a
60 bp DNA probe (-18 to -77) in electrophoretic mobility-shift assays, three
shifted complexes were found. Incubation with excess cold Sp1 oligonucleotide or 
an anti-Sp3 antibody inhibited complex formation. Site-directed mutagenesis of
the Sp1 site resulted in 60-70% loss of promoter activity. In Drosophila SL-2
cells, promoter activity was markedly increased by co-transfection of an Sp3
expression construct. These results show that the Sp3 protein is involved in
regulating Fas gene expression in lung epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC1219574
PMID: 9639581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. J Neurovirol. 1998 Jun;4(3):312-23.

Sp1 and related factors fail to interact with the NF-kappaB-proximal G/C box in
the LTR of a replication competent, brain-derived strain of HIV-1 (YU-2).

Millhouse S(1), Krebs FC, Yao J, McAllister JJ, Conner J, Ross H, Wigdahl B.

Author information: 
(1)The Pennsylvania State University, College of Medicine, Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, Hershey 17033, USA.

The HIV-1 LTR promoter proximal G/C box array has been demonstrated to function
by interacting with the Sp1 transcription factor family whose members can act as 
either activators or repressors of transcription. In this regard, we have
examined the interaction of the HIV-1 Sp binding sites with nuclear factors that 
are present in cell types that support HIV-1 replication, including those of
lymphocytic, monocytic, and astrocytic origin. As determined by electrophoretic
mobility shift (EMS) competition analyses using oligonucleotides containing the
sequences of each of the Sp1 sites of HIV-1 strain LAI, the NF-kappaB-proximal Sp
site (site III) displayed the highest binding activity compared to sites I and II
with regard to Sp1 and related factors present in lymphocytic (Jurkat) and
astrocytic (U-373 MG) nuclear extracts. Sp1 and two Sp3 isoforms were detected as
the primary cellular constituents of DNA-protein complexes formed with the
NF-kappaB-proximal site. Only modest differences in Sp1:Sp3 binding ratios were
observed when this site was reacted with either astrocytic or lymphocytic nuclear
extract. However, when nuclear extracts derived from two monocytic cell types
that differ in the degree of differentiation were reacted with the HIV-1 LAI Sp
site III, a large difference in Sp1 and Sp3 binding was observed. To determine if
naturally occurring and replication-competent strains of HIV-1 contain base pair 
alterations within the Sp elements that affect the ability of the site to
interact with Sp1 and related factors, a series of Sp site III variants were
constructed and examined by EMS analyses. One of these sites, obtained from the
published sequence of the YU-2 strain (a brain-derived macrophage tropic strain
of HIV-1), displayed almost no Sp1 or Sp3 binding activity as a result of a
single base pair alteration in Sp site III. This base-pair alteration, when
placed in the context of an HIV-1 LAI LTR-luciferase construct, resulted in a
40-50% reduction in LTR activity in transiently transfected Jurkat and U-373 MG
cells. Overall, these results suggest that specific G/C box sequence alterations 
present in the brain-derived HIV-1 variant YU-2, or possibly other brain-derived 
variants, may exhibit altered replication properties as a result of the low
affinity of the NF-kappaB-proximal G/C box for members of the Sp transcription
factor family.

PMID: 9639074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jun 26;273(26):16104-11.

Characterization of the human transcobalamin II promoter. A proximal GC/GT box is
a dominant negative element.

Li N(1), Seetharam S, Seetharam B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Medical College of Wisconsin and 
Veterans Medical Center, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226, USA.

Deletion and mutagenesis of the 5'-flanking region of the human transcobalamin II
(TC II) transfected in human intestinal epithelial Caco-2 cells have revealed
that TC II promoter activity is: (a) very weak; (b) restricted to a core region
(-29 to -163) that contained multiple transcription initiation sites; (c) not
dependent on other potential elements, such as a distally localized CCAAT box, a 
CF1, a HIP1 binding motif and a MED-1 element; (d) modulated weakly by a
positive-acting GC box (-568-GAGGCGGTGC) and strongly by a proximal GC/GT
overlapping box (-179 CCCCCGCCCCACCCC). Gel shift and immunosupershift analyses
demonstrated that both the positive-acting GC box and the negative-acting GC/GT
box were recognized by Sp1 and Sp3. Co-transfection studies using Sp1 and/or Sp3 
expression plasmids revealed that while Sp1 stimulated, Sp3 repressed
Sp1-mediated transactivation of TC II transcription. The proximal GC/GT box also 
acted as a negative element in human chronic myelogenous leukemia K-562 and HeLa 
cells. These results suggest that tissue/cell specific expression of the TC II
gene may be controlled by the relative ratios of Sp1 and Sp3 that bind to the
GC/GT box and the weak promoter activity of TC II is due to the transcriptional
repression caused by the binding of Sp3 to the proximal GC/GT box.

PMID: 9632663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Jun;18(6):3212-22.

Inhibition of cyclin D1 kinase activity is associated with E2F-mediated
inhibition of cyclin D1 promoter activity through E2F and Sp1.

Watanabe G(1), Albanese C, Lee RJ, Reutens A, Vairo G, Henglein B, Pestell RG.

Author information: 
(1)Albert Einstein Cancer Center, Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College
of Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

Coordinated interactions between cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks), their target
"pocket proteins" (the retinoblastoma protein [pRB], p107, and p130), the pocket 
protein binding E2F-DP complexes, and the Cdk inhibitors regulate orderly cell
cycle progression. The cyclin D1 gene encodes a regulatory subunit of the Cdk
holoenzymes, which phosphorylate the tumor suppressor pRB, leading to the release
of free E2F-1. Overexpression of E2F-1 can induce apoptosis and may either
promote or inhibit cellular proliferation, depending upon the cell type. In these
studies overexpression of E2F-1 inhibited cyclin D1-dependent kinase activity,
cyclin D1 protein levels, and promoter activity. The DNA binding domain, the pRB 
pocket binding region, and the amino-terminal Sp1 binding domain of E2F-1 were
required for full repression of cyclin D1. Overexpression of pRB activated the
cyclin D1 promoter, and a dominant interfering pRB mutant was defective in cyclin
D1 promoter activation. Two regions of the cyclin D1 promoter were required for
full E2F-1-dependent repression. The region proximal to the transcription
initiation site at -127 bound Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4, and the distal region at -143
bound E2F-4-DP-1-p107. In contrast with E2F-1, E2F-4 induced cyclin D1 promoter
activity. Differential regulation of the cyclin D1 promoter by E2F-1 and E2F-4
suggests that E2Fs may serve distinguishable functions during cell cycle
progression. Inhibition of cyclin D1 abundance by E2F-1 may contribute to an
autoregulatory feedback loop to reduce pRB phosphorylation and E2F-1 levels in
the cell.

PMCID: PMC108903
PMID: 9584162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. DNA Cell Biol. 1998 May;17(5):471-9.

Sp family transcription factors regulate expression of rat D2 dopamine receptor
gene.

Yajima S(1), Lee SH, Minowa T, Mouradian MM.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Pharmacology Unit, Experimental Therapeutics Branch, National
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The rat D2 dopamine receptor gene is transcribed from a TATA-less promoter that
has an initiator-like sequence and several putative Sp1 binding sites. We
previously reported that a negative modulator is located between nucleotides -116
and -76 (D2Neg-B) in this gene and that Sp1 as well as another unknown factor
bind to this region (Minowa et al., J. Biol. Chem. 269, 11656, 1994). In the
present investigation employing the in situ filter detection method, we
identified this factor as Sp3. Anti-Sp3 antiserum used in gel-shift assays also
revealed that Sp3 binds to the D2Neg-B sequence. Cotransfection of Drosophila
Schneider's SL2 cells with Sp3 or Sp1 expression plasmids in the presence of CAT 
reporter plasmids containing D2 promoter regions demonstrated that Sp1 increased 
CAT activity in a dose-dependent manner, whereas Sp3, either alone or in the
presence of Sp1, failed to activate or repress transcription. On the other hand, 
using the TATA-containing reporter plasmid BCAT-2, Sp3 coexpression significantly
repressed Sp1-induced trans-activation, although Sp3 alone was ineffective. Thus,
the transcriptional activity of Sp3 is dependent on the promoter context, and the
negative regulation of D2 gene expression appears quite complex and may not
depend simply on known DNA-protein interactions involving only Sp1 and Sp3.

PMID: 9628590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 May 15;26(10):2449-56.

Sp1, but not Sp3, functions to mediate promoter activation by TGF-beta through
canonical Sp1 binding sites.

Li JM(1), Datto MB, Shen X, Hu PP, Yu Y, Wang XF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, NC 27708, USA.

Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) causes growth arrest at the G1 phase
of the cell cycle in most cell types. Both the cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor 
p15(INK4B) and p21(Cip1/WAF1) genes have been found to be induced by TGF-beta in 
human keratinocyte HaCaT cells. Analyses of the human p15 and p21 promoters have 
led to the identification of GC-rich sequences capable of binding to Sp1
transcription factors as necessary elements for the TGF-beta induction of both
promoters. We report here that canonical Sp1 binding sites derived from the SV40 
21 bp repeat could also support promoter induction by TGF-beta when placed
upstream of a minimal luciferase reporter construct containing only the TATA and 
Inr elements. Gel retardation assays identified Sp1, Sp3 and DeltaSp3 as major
factors binding to the canonical Sp1 sites in HaCaT cells and that TGF-beta
treatment did not change their binding activities over a 24 h period. More
importantly, GAL4-Sp1, but not GAL4-Sp3, chimeric protein supported TGF-beta
mediated gene induction from a luciferase reporter construct driven by five GAL4 
DNA binding sites. Our results suggest that Sp1 binding site can function as a
distinct TGF-beta responsive element for TGF-beta mediated promoter expression
and Sp1 per se can mediate this response.

PMCID: PMC147581
PMID: 9580699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Lipid Res. 1998 May;39(5):969-77.

Binding and functional effects of transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 on the
proximal human lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase promoter.

Hoppe KL(1), Francone OL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular and Metabolic Diseases, Pfizer Inc., Groton, CT
06340, USA.

Human lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT) circulates in plasma bound to
high density lipoproteins (HDL) and modulates the rate by which cholesteryl ester
is transported to the liver. So far, little is known about the regulation of the 
expression of the LCAT gene. In this study we have defined the cis-elements,
identified the trans-acting factors and demonstrated their functional effects and
significance in determining transcriptional activity of the proximal LCAT
promoter. Using deletion mutants having 5' variable ends (from nucleotides -72 to
-27), we have identified the presence of two non-consensus GC-rich regions that
stimulate transcription in HepG2 and HeLa cells. These regions designated sites A
(-29 to -47) and B (-49 to -65) contain the CCTCC core sequence which in
electromobility shift analysis is critical for the formation of two DNA-protein
complexes designated I and II. Site-directed mutagenesis suggests that both sites
are equally important in promoter activity, and that cooperative interactions
between both sites are not required for activity. Electromobility shift and
supershift experiments using oligonucleotides spanning sites A and B identified
Sp1 and Sp3 as the transcription factors interacting at these sites. To determine
the significance and functional effects that Sp1 and Sp3 have in regulating LCAT 
promoter activity, we performed transfection experiments in Drosophila SL-2 cells
as they lack endogenous Sp1 and Sp3. Sp1 but not Sp3 activates the human LCAT
promoter and when Sp1 is co-transfected along with Sp3, Sp3 functions as a
dose-dependent repressor of Sp1-mediated activation. These findings indicate that
Sp1 is capable of transactivating a reporter gene linked to the LCAT promoter
containing Sp binding sites and suggests that the levels of Sp3 or the nuclear
Sp1/Sp3 ratio may play an important role in determining the transcriptional
activity of the LCAT promoter in vivo.

PMID: 9610763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Biol Chem. 1998 May 22;273(21):13208-16.

Role of Sp proteins and RORalpha in transcription regulation of murine
prosaposin.

Jin P(1), Sun Y, Grabowski GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Children's Hospital Research Foundation,
Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

Prosaposin is the precursor of four low molecular weight sphingolipid-activating 
proteins (SAPs) or saposins. These four proteins function as intracellular
activators of several lysosomal enzymes involved in the degradation of
glycosphingolipids, and prosaposin itself has neurite outgrowth effects.
Expression of prosaposin is regulated in a temporal and spatial manner with
expression in specific brain neurons and visceral cell types. Here a major
regulatory fragment was characterized within 310 bp 5' to the transcription start
site. Using electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) and DNA footprinting,
members of the Sp family (Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4), the orphan nuclear receptor
(RORalpha), and an unknown transcription factor (U; TGGGGGAG) were shown to bind 
to this region. To evaluate the role of such transcription factor binding sites
for this locus, a series of mutant constructs was generated within this region,
and their function was evaluated in cultured NS20Y neuroblastoma cells. A 3' Sp1 
site, a 5' Sp1/U cluster and the RORalpha binding sites were functional. The data
are consistent with a model in which the factors that bind to the Sp1/U cluster
and RORE site interact negatively to diminish promoter activity to a background
level that is determined primarily by the 3' Sp1 site. These interactions depend 
on the tissue-specific repertoire of transcription factors leading to
differential expression of this locus.

PMID: 9582364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Biol Chem. 1998 May 22;273(21):12786-93.

Nonmyogenic factors bind nicotinic acetylcholine receptor promoter elements
required for response to denervation.

Bessereau JL(1), Laudenbach V, Le Poupon C, Changeux JP.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiologie Moléculaire, UA CNRS D1284, Département des Biotechnologies,
Institut Pasteur 25/28 rue du Dr. Roux, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, France.

Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (AChRs) belong to a class of muscle proteins
whose expression is regulated by muscle electrical activity. In innervated muscle
fiber, AChR genes are transcriptionally repressed outside of the synapse, while
after denervation they become reexpressed throughout the fiber. The myogenic
determination factors (MDFs) of the MyoD family have been shown to play a central
role in this innervation-dependent regulation. In the chicken AChR alpha-subunit 
gene promoter, two E-boxes that bind MDFs are necessary to achieve the
enhancement of transcription following muscle denervation. However, the deletion 
of promoter sequences located upstream to these E-boxes greatly impairs the
response to denervation (Bessereau, J. L., Stratford- Perricaudet, L. D., Piette,
J., Le Poupon, C. and Changeux, J. P. (1994) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 91, 
1304-1308). Here we identified two additional cis-regulatory elements of the
alpha-subunit gene promoter that cooperate with the E-boxes in the denervation
response. One region binds the Sp1 and Sp3 zinc finger transcription factors. The
second region binds at least three distinct factors, among which we identified an
upstream stimulatory factor, a b-ZIP-HLH transcription factor. We propose that
among MDF-responsive muscle promoters, a specific combination between myogenic
and nonmyogenic factors specify innervation-dependent versus
innervation-independent promoters.

PMID: 9582305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Bioorg Med Chem. 1998 Apr;6(4):481-92.

Picrodendrin and related terpenoid antagonists reveal structural differences
between ionotropic GABA receptors of mammals and insects.

Ozoe Y(1), Akamatsu M, Higata T, Ikeda I, Mochida K, Koike K, Ohmoto T, Nikaido
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science and Biotechnology, Shimane University, Japan.
ozoe-y@life.shimane-u.ac.jp

Twenty-eight picrotoxane terpenoids, including picrodendrins isolated from the
Euphorbiaceae plant, Picrodendron baccatum (L.) Krug and Urban, have been
evaluated for their ability to inhibit the specific binding of [3H]EBOB, the
noncompetitive antagonist of ionotropic GABA receptors, to rat-brain and housefly
(Musca domestica L.)-head membranes. Picrodendrin Q was the most potent
competitive inhibitor of [3H]EBOB binding, with IC50 values of 16 nM (rat) and 22
nM (Musca). We find that the spiro gamma-butyrolactone moiety at the 13-position,
which contains a carbonyl group conjugated with an unsaturated bond, and the
substituents at the 4-position play important roles in the interaction of
picrodendrins with their binding site in rat receptors. In contrast, such
structural features are not strictly required in the case of the interaction with
Musca receptors; the spiro saturated gamma-butyrolactone moiety at the
13-position, which bears the 16-sp3 carbon atom, and the hydroxyl groups at
various positions are somewhat tolerated. Quantitative structure-activity studies
have clearly shown that the electronegativity of the 16-carbon atom and the
presence or absence of the 4- and 8-hydroxyl groups are important determinants of
the potency of nor-diterpenes in Musca receptors, while the negative charge on
the 17-carbonyl oxygen atom is likely important in the case of rat receptors.
These findings indicate that there are significant differences between the
structures of the complementary binding sites in rat GABA receptors and Musca
GABA receptors. We also infer differences between native Musca GABA receptors and
the Drosophila Rdl subunit-containing homo-oligomeric GABA receptors in the
structures of their binding sites.

PMID: 9597191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Biochem J. 1998 Mar 15;330 ( Pt 3):1469-74.

Differential transcriptional regulation of the human thrombin receptor gene by
the Sp family of transcription factors in human endothelial cells.

Wu Y(1), Ruef J, Rao GN, Patterson C, Runge MS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, 301
University Boulevard, 9.138 Medical Research Building, Galveston, TX 77555-1064, 
USA.

The mitogenic effects of thrombin are mediated by a G-protein-coupled receptor.
Because the effects of thrombin are strongly influenced by the expression of its 
receptor, an understanding of its regulatory mechanisms is essential. To identify
mechanisms of human thrombin receptor (HTR) gene regulation, a series of
HTR-promoter-luciferase constructs were made and transfected into human
microvascular endothelial cells for analysis. Deletion from bp -303 to -164
abolished reporter gene expression. Dimethyl sulphate treatment in vivo and DNase
I footprinting in vitro demonstrated that a cluster of three GC box consensus
sites was occupied, and electrophoretic mobility-shift assays established that
Sp1 and Sp3 both bind to this 3' GC box cluster. We mutated each of the three GC 
boxes individually and all three collectively within this 3' cluster. Basal
promoter activity was decreased to 46%, 78% and 29% of control for each of the GC
boxes mutated individually, and to 6% when the three were mutated collectively.
To test the individual abilities of Sp1 and Sp3 to activate or repress HTR
transcription, we conducted co-transfection experiments with wild-type or mutated
HTR-promoter-luciferase constructs. Co-transfection with Sp1 significantly
augmented wild-type HTR promoter activity. Sp3 alone did not affect activity, and
inhibited Sp1-mediated activation. Competition for shared binding sites by Sp1
and Sp3 might differentially regulate HTR expression in vascular endothelial
cells.

PMCID: PMC1219297
PMID: 9494121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Biol Chem. 1998 Apr 10;273(15):9168-78.

Transcriptional regulation of the human nonmuscle myosin II heavy chain-A gene.
Identification of three clustered cis-elements in intron-1 which modulate
transcription in a cell type- and differentiation state-dependent manner.

Beohar N(1), Kawamoto S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cardiology, NHLBI, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

In an attempt to identify cis-acting elements for transcriptional regulation of
the human nonmuscle myosin II heavy chain (MHC)-A gene, the region extending 20
kilobases (kb) upstream and 40 kb downstream from the transcription start sites, 
which includes the entire 37-kb intron 1, was examined. Using transient
transfection analysis of luciferase reporter constructs, a 100-base pair (bp)
region (N2d) in intron 1, located 23 kb downstream from the transcriptional start
sites, has been found to activate transcription in a cell type- and
differentiation state-dependent manner. Maximum activity (approximately 20-fold) 
is seen in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts and intermediate activity (7-fold) in
proliferating and undifferentiated C2C12 myoblasts. In contrast, this region is
almost inactive in terminally differentiated C2C12 myotubes, in which endogenous 
nonmuscle MHC-A expression is down-regulated. Gel mobility shift assays and
methylation interference analyses were performed using NIH 3T3 nuclear extracts
to determine the protein-binding elements for transcription factors. Three
binding elements have been identified within the N2d region. Antibody-supershift 
experiments, as well as competition experiments using consensus binding sequences
for specific transcription factors, revealed that the most 5'-element, C
(GGGAGGGGCC) is recognized specifically and exclusively by Sp1 and Sp3
transcriptional factors. Element C is immediately followed by a novel element, A 
(GTGACCC). A third element, F (GTGTCAGGTG), which contains an E-box, is located
50 bp 3' to element A. Element F can be recognized partially by upstream
stimulatory factors, USF1 and/or USF2. Transfection studies with luciferase
reporter constructs which include mutations in all three elements in various
combinations demonstrate that the A and C binding factors cooperatively activate 
transcriptional activity in NIH 3T3 cells. The F binding factor shows an additive
effect on transcription.

PMID: 9535907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Biochem J. 1998 Apr 1;331 ( Pt 1):61-8.

Characterization of human involucrin promoter distal regulatory region
transcriptional activator elements-a role for Sp1 and AP1 binding sites.

Banks EB(1), Crish JF, Welter JF, Eckert RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Case Western Reserve University
School of Medicine, 2109 Adelbert Road, Cleveland, OH 44106-4970, USA.

Human involucrin (hINV) is an important precursor of the keratinocyte cornified
envelope that is specifically expressed in the suprabasal layers of stratifying
epithelia. Previous truncation and mutagenesis experiments have shown that an
activator protein 1 (Ap1) site, AP1-5, located 2100bp upstream of the
transcription start site, is required for optimal promoter activity. These
previous studies suggest that AP1-5 is part of a distal regulatory region
spanning nucleotides -2473 to -2088. In the present report, we study the distal
regulatory region (DRR), which surrounds AP1-5. Our studies show that this region
contains weak and strong activator elements spanning nucleotides -2473/-2216 and 
-2140/-2088, respectively. The strong activator element contains AP1-5 and an
adjacent specificity protein 1 (Sp1) site. The AP1-5 site is absolutely required 
for DRR activity, as its mutation reduces transcription to basal levels.
Mutagenesis studies of the AP1-5 and Sp1 sites in the presence or absence of the 
weak activator element indicate that the Sp1 site and the weak activator element 
synergistically activate the AP1-5 site-dependent transcription. The cooperation 
between the Sp1 and AP1-5 sites is also observed in the context of the
full-length promoter. Gel mobility shift and supershift studies show that Sp1,
but not Sp2, Sp3 or Sp4 binds to the Sp1 site. When the Sp1 site is mutated or
the distance between the AP1-5 and Sp1 site is increased, the binding of AP1
factors to AP1-5 is markedly reduced. Surprisingly, gel shift studies suggest
that activation does not require the formation of a stable AP1/Sp1/DNA ternary
complex. These studies suggest that the AP1-5 site is absolutely required for
transcriptional activation, that the weak activator element and Sp1 sites serve
to enhance this activation, and that the Sp1 site is required for optimal AP1
factor binding at the AP1-5 site.

PMCID: PMC1219321
PMID: 9512462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 1997 Dec;29(12):1313-23.

Transcriptional regulation by the Sp family proteins.

Lania L(1), Majello B, De Luca P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Molecular and General Biology, University of Naples,
Federico II, Italy.

Sp1 is one of the very first cellular transcription factors to be identified and 
cloned in virtue of its binding to a G-rich motif in the SV40 early promoter. Sp1
protein binds to the G-rich sequences present in a variety of cellular and viral 
promoters and stimulates their transcriptional activity. Recently, a number of
other GC and/or GT box-binding factors homologous to Sp1 have been isolated,
namely Sp2, Sp3 and Sp4, and the two more distantly related factors, BTEB and
BTEB2. The discovery of this family highlights a previously unknown level of
complexity of transcriptional regulation of promoters containing GC and/or GT box
motifs. This review focuses primarily on strategies aimed to elucidate the
transcription properties of the Sp1-like factors and discusses the experimental
problems inherent in the attempt to define their respective functions.

PMID: 9570130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Virol. 1998 May;72(5):3635-45.

Cellular transcription factors enhance herpes simplex virus type 1 oriS-dependent
DNA replication.

Nguyen-Huynh AT(1), Schaffer PA.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Department of Microbiology and Molecular
Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) origin of DNA replication, oriS, contains
three binding sites for the viral origin binding protein (OBP) flanked by
transcriptional regulatory elements of the immediate-early genes encoding ICP4
and ICP22/47. To assess the role of flanking sequences in oriS function, plasmids
containing oriS and either wild-type or mutant flanking sequences were tested in 
transient DNA replication assays. Although the ICP4 and ICP22/47 regulatory
regions were shown to enhance oriS function, most individual elements in these
regions, including the VP16-responsive TAATGARAT elements, were found to be
dispensable for oriS function. In contrast, two oriS core-adjacent regulatory
(Oscar) elements, OscarL and OscarR, at the base of the oriS palindrome were
shown to enhance oriS function significantly and additively. Specifically,
mutational disruption of either element reduced oriS-dependent DNA replication by
60 to 70%, and disruption of both elements reduced replication by 90%. The
properties of protein-DNA complexes formed in gel mobility shift assays using
uninfected and HSV-1-infected Vero cell nuclear extracts demonstrated that both
OscarL and OscarR are binding sites for cellular proteins. Whereas OscarR does
not correspond to the consensus binding site of any known transcription factor,
OscarL contains a consensus binding site for the transcription factor Sp1. Gel
mobility shift and supershift experiments using antibodies directed against
members of the Sp1 family of transcription factors demonstrated the presence of
Sp1 and Sp3, but not Sp2 or Sp4, in the protein-DNA complexes formed at OscarL.
The abilities of OscarL and OscarR to bind their respective cellular proteins
correlated directly with the efficiency of oriS-dependent DNA replication.
Cooperative interactions between the Oscar-binding factors and proteins binding
to adjacent OBP binding sites were not observed. Notably, Oscar element mutations
that impaired oriS-dependent DNA replication had no detectable effect on either
basal or induced levels of transcription from the ICP4 and ICP22/47 promoters, as
determined by RNase protection assays. The Oscar elements thus appear to provide 
binding sites for cellular proteins that facilitate oriS-dependent DNA
replication but have no effect on transcription of oriS-flanking genes.

PMCID: PMC109584
PMID: 9557644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Biol Chem. 1998 Mar 27;273(13):7668-74.

A role for Sp and helix-loop-helix transcription factors in the regulation of the
human Id4 gene promoter activity.

Pagliuca A(1), Cannada-Bartoli P, Lania L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Molecular and General Biology, University of Naples
"Federico II," via Mezzocannone 8, 80134 Naples, Italy.

Id family helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins are involved in the regulation of
proliferation and differentiation of several cell types. To identify cis- and
trans-acting factors that regulate Id4 gene expression, we have analyzed the
promoter regulatory sequences of the human Id4 gene in transient transfections
and gel mobility shift assays. We have identified two functional elements, both
located downstream from the TATA motif, that control Id4 promoter activity. One
element contains a consensus E-box, and we demonstrated that the protein complex 
binding to the E-box contains the bHLH-zip upstream stimulatory factor (USF)
transcription factor. Enforced expression of USF1 leads to E-box-mediated
stimulation of promoter activity. The E-box also mediated stimulatory effects of 
several bHLH transcription factors, and co-expression of Id4 blocked the
stimulatory effect mediated by the bHLH factors. A second element is a GA motif, 
located downstream from the transcriptional start sites, mutation of which
resulted in a 20-fold increase in transcriptional activity. Gel-shift analysis
and transfections into Drosophila Schneider SL2 cells showed that the repressor
element is recognized by both Sp1 and Sp3 factors. These data suggest that Id4
transcription control is highly complex, involving both negative and positive
regulatory elements, including a novel inhibitory function exerted by Sp1 and Sp3
transcription factors.

PMID: 9516472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Biol Chem. 1998 Mar 20;273(12):6750-5.

Requirement of a GT box (Sp1 site) and two Ets binding sites for vascular
endothelial cadherin gene transcription.

Gory S(1), Dalmon J, Prandini MH, Kortulewski T, de Launoit Y, Huber P.

Author information: 
(1)CEA, Laboratoire de Transgénèse et Différenciation Cellulaire, Département de 
Biologie Moléculaire et Structurale, 17 rue des Martyrs, 38054 Grenoble, France.

Vascular endothelial cadherin (VE cadherin) gene encodes a Ca2+-dependent cell
adhesion molecule required for the organization of interendothelial junctions.
This gene is exclusively and constitutively expressed in endothelial cells.
Previous data with transgenic mice revealed that the transcriptional regulatory
elements present within a -2486/+24 DNA fragment of mouse VE cadherin gene mimic 
the tissue-specific activity of the endogenous promoter. In this study, we
analyzed elements implicated in the function of the proximal regulatory region.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay identified a GT-rich sequence (positions
-49/-39) interacting with factors related to the Sp1 family. Point mutations
abolished the binding of nuclear proteins in vitro and drastically diminished the
activity of the promoter in transient transfection assay. Supershift assays with 
antibodies against proteins of the Sp1 family revealed that Sp1 and Sp3 interact 
with this region of the VE cadherin promoter. Furthermore, two GGAA motifs,
located at positions -93/-90 and -109/-106, were shown to interact with nuclear
factors. Site-directed mutagenesis of these sequences demonstrated that these Ets
binding sites are essential for promoter activity. In vitro binding assays in the
presence of various antisera suggest that Erg is one of the proteins interacting 
with the -109/-106 site.

PMID: 9506975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Biol Chem. 1998 Mar 6;273(10):5758-64.

Zinc finger transcription factors mediate high constitutive platelet-derived
growth factor-B expression in smooth muscle cells derived from aortae of newborn 
rats.

Rafty LA(1), Khachigian LM.

Author information: 
(1)The Centre for Thrombosis and Vascular Research, School of Pathology, The
University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales 2052, Australia.

Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) B-chain gene is differentially expressed in
smooth muscle cells (SMCs) derived from the rat aortic wall. SMCs cultured from
two week-old rats (pups) express high levels of PDGF-B mRNA, whereas cells
isolated from three month-old rats (adults) express low levels of PDGF-B. Nuclear
run-off experiments indicate that increased PDGF-B gene expression in pups is
mediated, at least in part, at the transcriptional level. We used electrophoretic
mobility shift assays and Western blot analysis to demonstrate that levels of Sp1
and Sp3, two zinc finger transcription factors which mediate basal expression of 
the PDGF-B gene, are elevated in pup nuclei compared with adult nuclei. The
immediate-early transcription factor, Egr-1, which footprints the PDGF-B
promoter, is also constitutively expressed in these cells. Transient transfection
and binding studies show that these factors interact with a region in the
proximal PDGF-B promoter key for basal expression in pup cells. Mutation of this 
proximal element in transfected pup cells attenuates reporter gene expression to 
levels observed in adult cells. Conversely, overexpression of Sp1 in adult cells 
augments PDGF-B promoter-dependent expression. Elevated PDGF-B expression in
cultured newborn rat SMCs may therefore require high constitutive expression of a
number of zinc finger transcription factors and their specific interactions with 
the proximal PDGF-B promoter.

PMID: 9488709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Biol Chem. 1998 Mar 6;273(10):5716-26.

An Sp1-binding silencer element is a critical negative regulator of the
megakaryocyte-specific alphaIIb gene.

Shou Y(1), Baron S, Poncz M.

Author information: 
(1)Program of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Allegheny University of the Health 
Sciences, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The Sp1 family of transcription factors are often involved in the regulated
expression of TATA-less genes, frequently enhancing gene transcription. In this
paper, we demonstrate that an Sp1-binding element inhibits the expression of the 
megakaryocyte-specific alphaIIb gene in all cell lines tested and that this
inhibition is actively overcome only in megakaryocyte-like cell lines. We had
noted previously in primary megakaryocytes that a 50-base pair (bp) deletion from
-150 to -101 bp in the rat alphaIIb promoter region resulted in increased
expression. We now show that deletion of this region markedly increased
expression in both megakaryocytic and non-megakaryocytic cell lines, eliminating 
the tissue specificity of the alphaIIb promoter. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays (EMSA) defined a single complex, which bound to a -145 to -125 bp
subregion. Point mutations within this region, localized the critical point of
binding around bases -136/-135, and expression studies showed that introduction
of the -136/-135 mutation into the rat alphaIIb promoter had a comparable result 
to that seen with the 50-bp deletion. EMSA studies with the homologous human
alphaIIb promoter region gave an identical migrating band. Southwestern blots of 
HeLa nuclear proteins with both the rat -145 to -125 DNA and its human homologue 
bound to a single approximately 110-kDa protein, the known molecular weight of
Sp1. Confirmation that this region of the alphaIIb gene promoter bound Sp1 was
accomplished using EMSA studies with an Sp1 consensus probe, anti-Sp1 and -Sp3
antibodies, and recombinant Sp1 protein. Further support for the role of Sp1 in
the silencing of the alphaIIb promoter was obtained using a Gal4 binding site
substitution for the silencer region of alphaIIb and co-expression of near
full-length Sp1/Gal4 fusion protein expression vectors. Ectopic reinsertion of
the -150 to -101 bp region, back into the -150 to -101 bp deleted promoter,
enhanced rather than decreased expression, suggesting that Sp1's inhibitory role 
at -136/-135 depends on its local interactions. In summary, we believe that we
have identified a cross-species, non-consensus Sp1-binding site that binds Sp1
and that acts as a silencer of alphaIIb expression in many cell lines. A model is
presented as to how this Sp1-binding silencer element contributes to the
megakaryocyte-specific expression of alphaIIb gene.

PMID: 9488704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. J Cell Physiol. 1998 May;175(2):121-8.

Truncation of Sp1 transcription factor by myeloblastin in undifferentiated HL60
cells.

Rao J(1), Zhang F, Donnelly RJ, Spector NL, Studzinski GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, UMDNJ-New Jersey Medical
School, Newark 07103, USA.

When HL60 cells are exposed to 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25D3), they undergo
changes approximating the phenotype of the monocyte. Little is known, however,
about the regulation and the mechanisms of this transition. It was previously
noted that DNA binding by the Sp1 transcription factor in nuclear extracts of
HL60 cells is profoundly altered when these cells are induced to differentiate by
1,25D3. In the present study, we show that in untreated HL60 cells only a
truncated, approximately 30-kDa Sp1 fragment, encompassing the C-terminal region,
binds to the GC element-containing DNA. Full-length 105-kDa Sp1 protein cannot be
detected in these cells, although reverse transriptase-polymerase chain reaction 
reveals the presence of both 5' and 3' ends of Sp1 mRNA. Following treatment with
10(7) M 1,25D3 for 96 hr or in cells made resistant to 1,25D3 or to
1-beta-D-arabinocytosine, the Sp1 protein can be demonstrated. After an exposure 
to purified myeloblastin, a serine protease, purified recombinant Sp1 protein and
extracts of 1,25D3-treated cells show a pattern of DNA binding similar to the
pattern seen using extracts of untreated HL60 cells, indicating that the Sp1
protein is a target for myeloblastin. Because myeloblastin is present in naive
HL60 cells and is downregulated during their differentiation, inhibition of
proteolysis of these transcription factors seems to provide a mechanism through
which differentiating HL60 cells can acquire a new repertoire of gene expression,
perhaps for the maintenance of the differentiated phenotype.

PMID: 9525470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Biol Chem. 1998 Feb 27;273(9):5349-57.

Regulation of the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 promoter and intron I
enhancer by Sp1 family transcription factors.

McEwen DG(1), Ornitz DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Pharmacology, Washington University
Medical School, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) has a complex spatial and temporal
pattern of expression and is essential for the normal development of a diverse
set of tissues. Recently, mutations have been identified in FGFR3 that result in 
constitutive tyrosine kinase activity and cause a number of different human
skeletal disorders. To examine the regulatory mechanisms governing FGFR3
expression, the promoter for the FGFR3 gene was identified and characterized. It 
resides in a CpG island, which encompasses the 5' end of the FGFR3 gene and lacks
classical cis-regulatory motifs. As little as 100 base pairs of sequence 5' to
the initiation site can confer a 20-40-fold increase in transcriptional activity 
upon a promoter-less vector. The transcriptional activity of these cis-regulatory
sequences is further stimulated by elements found within the first intron.
Mapping of the enhancer activity found within intron I identified two purine-rich
sequence motifs between +340 and +395. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays
demonstrated that sequences within this region bind members of the Sp1 family of 
transcription factors. In a background lacking Sp1-like activity, we demonstrate 
that Sp1 can enhance transcription of the minimal promoter (which contains five
classical Sp1 sites), whereas both Sp1 and Sp3 can enhance transcription through 
the elements found in intron I. Although these transcription factors are
ubiquitously expressed, we demonstrate that the sequences between -220 and +609
of the FGFR3 gene are sufficient to promote the tissue-specific expression of a
reporter gene in transgenic mice.

PMID: 9478995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Clin Pharmacokinet. 1998 Feb;34(2):101-54.

Clinical pharmacokinetics of ibuprofen. The first 30 years.

Davies NM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University
of Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

Ibuprofen is a chiral nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) of the 2
arylpropionic acid (2-APA) class. A common structural feature of 2-APANSAIDs is a
sp3-hybridised tetrahedral chiral carbon atom within the propionic acid side
chain moiety with the S-(+)-enantiomer possessing most of the beneficial
anti-inflammatory activity. Ibuprofen demonstrates marked stereoselectivity in
its pharmacokinetics. Substantial unidirectional inversion of the R-(-) to the
S-(+) enantiomer occurs and thus, data generated using nonstereospecific assays
may not be extrapolated to explain the disposition of the individual enantiomers.
The absorption of ibuprofen is rapid and complete when given orally. The area
under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) of ibuprofen is dose-dependent.
Ibuprofen binds extensively, in a concentration-dependent manner, to plasma
albumin. At doses greater than 600mg there is an increase in the unbound fraction
of the drug, leading to an increased clearance of ibuprofen and a reduced AUC of 
the total drug. Substantial concentrations of ibuprofen are attained in synovial 
fluid, which is a proposed site of action for nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs. Ibuprofen is eliminated following biotransformation to glucuronide
conjugate metabolites that are excreted in urine, with little of the drug being
eliminated unchanged. The excretion of conjugates may be tied to renal function
and the accumulation of conjugates occurs in end-stage renal disease. Hepatic
disease and cystic fibrosis can alter the disposition kinetics of ibuprofen.
Ibuprofen is not excreted in substantial concentrations into breast milk.
Significant drug interactions have been demonstrated for aspirin (acetylsalicylic
acid), cholestyramine and methotrexate. A relationship between ibuprofen plasma
concentrations and analgesic and antipyretic effects has been elucidated.

PMID: 9515184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Mol Endocrinol. 1998 Mar;12(3):405-17.

SP1/SP3-binding sites and adjacent elements contribute to basal and cyclic
adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate-stimulated transcriptional activation of the rhesus
growth hormone-variant gene in trophoblasts.

Schanke JT(1), Durning M, Johnson KJ, Bennett LK, Golos TG.

Author information: 
(1)Wisconsin Regional Primate Research Center and Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, University of Wisconsin Medical School, Madison 53715-1299, USA.

Transcriptional activation of the rhesus monkey GH-variant gene in
syncytiotrophoblasts is developmentally regulated by trophoblast-specific and
cAMP-responsive mechanisms. Progressive deletions of 5'-flanking DNA defined the 
most proximal 140 bp as the minimal region retaining full cAMP-stimulated mGH-V
transcription. To identify the regions of this promoter critical for
transcription, transient transfections of reporter plasmids containing systematic
10 base mutations throughout this proximal region were performed. Mutation of the
region from -140/-131 decreased transcription in syncytiotrophoblasts by 50%, and
gel mobility-shift analyses demonstrated that Sp1 and Sp3 bound to a region
containing a GGGAGG motif at -136/-131. Mutation of the -62/-53 region decreased 
transcriptional activation by 66-99%, and Sp1 and Sp3 bound to a GGTGGG motif
overlapping this region (at -65/-60). Selective mutation of this Sp1/Sp3 site
decreased basal transcription by approximately 80%, and cAMP-stimulated
transcription by up to 75% (with the greatest effect in primary
syncytiotrophoblast cultures), indicating that the Sp1/Sp3 site is critical for
transcriptional activation. Mutations in the regions adjacent to the Sp1/Sp3
sites (-130/-111 and -52/-43) also dramatically reduced (by 75%) transcriptional 
activation in trophoblasts. We conclude that two Sp1/Sp3 sites as well as
additional elements directly adjacent to these sites contribute to
trophoblast-specific cAMP-responsiveness of the mGH-V proximal promoter.

PMID: 9514157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Acta Crystallogr C. 1998 Jan 15;54 ( Pt 1):109-11.

(Z)-3-benzylidene-1-ethynyl-1-phenyl-1,3-dihydroisobenzofuran.

Thalji RK(1), Ramos B, Garcia JG, Fronczek FR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge 70803-1804,
USA.

The title compound, C23H16O, has two independent molecules in the asymmetric
unit. The bond lengths and angles of the two molecules are identical. The
conformation of the isobenzofuran ring systems of the molecules, however, differ 
slightly; in molecule A, the sp2-C atom of the five-membered ring deviates the
greatest distance [0.034(2)A] from the benzo plane, while in molecule B, it is
the sp3-C atom of the five-membered ring which has the greatest deviation
[0.027(2)A] from the benzo plane.

PMID: 9485573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jan 30;273(5):2984-92.

Activation of the ferritin H enhancer, FER-1, by the cooperative action of
members of the AP1 and Sp1 transcription factor families.

Tsuji Y(1), Torti SV, Torti FM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cancer Biology, Bowman Gray School of Medicine and
Comprehensive Cancer Center of Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, North
Carolina 27157, USA. ytsuji@bgsm.edu

We have previously reported that the adenovirus E1A oncogene represses the
transcription of the H subunit of the mouse ferritin gene. Subsequent analyses
defined FER-1, a 37-nucleotide sequence located 4.1 kilobases proximal to the
start site of transcription, as the target of E1A-mediated transcriptional
repression and as an enhancer of the ferritin H gene. FER-1 is composed of an
AP1-like sequence followed by an element with dyad symmetry. To achieve maximal
enhancer activity and transcriptional repression by E1A, both elements were
essential. Using gel retardation assays, we now demonstrate that the binding
complex for the AP1-like sequence of FER-1 contains JunD, FosB, and ATF1.
Furthermore, JunD and FosB were able to activate FER-1 enhancer activity by
transient cotransfection with ferritin H-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
reporter constructs. This augmented enhancer activity was inhibited by E1A. In
addition, we have defined the minimal sequence in the dyad element of FER-1
required for protein interaction. This was determined to be a C-rich sequence to 
which Sp1 and Sp3 bind. Experiments with recombinant proteins indicate that
members of both transcription factor families simultaneously bind FER-1. Taken
together, these results elucidate molecular mechanisms involved in the
transcriptional regulation of a pivotal gene in iron metabolism and provide
insights into the contribution of the Sp1 family to the activation of
AP1-dependent enhancers.

PMID: 9446612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Jan 15;26(2):407-14.

Overlapping Sp1 and AP2 binding sites in a promoter element of the lens-specific 
MIP gene.

Ohtaka-Maruyama C(1), Wang X, Ge H, Chepelinsky AB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Developmental Biology, National Eye Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The MIP gene, the founder of the MIP family of channel proteins, is specifically 
expressed in fiber cells of the ocular lens and expression is regulated
temporally and spatially during development. We previously found that a DNA
fragment containing 253 bp of 5'-flanking sequence and 42 bp of exon 1 of the
human MIP gene contains regulatory elements responsible for lens-specific
expression of the MIP gene. In this report we have analyzed the function of
overlapping Sp1 and AP2 binding sites present in the MIP promoter. Using DNase I 
footprinting analysis we found that purified Sp1 and AP2 transcription factors
interact with several domains of the human MIP promoter sequence -253/+42.
Furthermore, addition of purified Sp1 to Drosophila nuclear extracts activates in
vitro transcription from the MIP promoter -253/+42. This promoter activity is
competed by oligonucleotides containing domains footprinted with Sp1. Using
promoter-reporter gene ( CAT ) constructs we found that the sequence -39/-70
contains a cis regulatory element essential for promoter activity in transient
assays in lens cells. EMSA analysis showed that lens nuclear extracts contain
factors that bind to the MIP 5'-flanking sequence containing overlapping Sp1 and 
AP2 binding domains at positions -37/-65. Supershift experiments with lens
nuclear extracts indicated that Sp3 is also able to interact with this regulatory
element, suggesting that Sp1 and Sp3 may be involved in regulation of
transcription of the MIP gene in the lens.

PMCID: PMC147274
PMID: 9421492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Mol Endocrinol. 1997 Dec;11(13):1934-49.

Follicle stimulating hormone-regulated expression of
serum/glucocorticoid-inducible kinase in rat ovarian granulosa cells: a
functional role for the Sp1 family in promoter activity.

Alliston TN(1), Maiyar AC, Buse P, Firestone GL, Richards JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, 
USA.

Recently, a family of novel, serine/threonine protein kinases has been
identified. One of these transcriptionally inducible, immediate-early genes
encodes serum/glucocorticoid inducible-protein kinase, sgk. By in situ
hybridization, we show that sgk expression in the rat ovary is selectively
localized to granulosa cells. In culture, FSH or forskolin, activators of the
protein kinase A (PKA) pathway, rapidly (2 h) and transiently increased sgk mRNA 
levels in undifferentiated granulosa cells. Sgk mRNA exhibited a biphasic
expression pattern, with maximal levels observed at 48 h of FSH/forskolin as
granulosa cells differentiate to the preovulatory phenotype. Deletion analyses
using sgk promoter-reporter constructs (-4.0 kb to -35 bp) identified a region
between -63 and -43 bp that mediated FSH and forskolin-responsive transcription
in undifferentiated and differentiated granulosa cells. This G/C-rich region 1)
conferred both basal and inducible transcription to the minimal -35 sgk promoter 
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter construct, 2) specifically bound Sp1
and Sp3 present in granulosa cell extracts, and 3) bound recombinant Sp1.
Mutation of 2 bp in this region not only prevented Sp1 and Sp3 binding, but also 
abolished the PKA-mediated transactivation observed when using the wild type
construct. Sp1 and Sp3 DNA-binding activity and protein levels did not change
significantly during sgk induction. Collectively, these data indicate that
Sp1/Sp3 transactivation of the sgk promoter likely involves regulated,
phosphorylation-dependent interaction with other factors. Thus the novel,
biphasic induction of sgk that correlates with granulosa cell progression from
proliferation to differentiation appears to involve sequential, coordinated
actions of FSH, PKA, and transcription factors, including Sp1 and Sp3.

PMID: 9415398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Dec 8;241(1):169-74.

Synergism of the ATF/CRE site and GC box in the housekeeping Na,K-ATPase alpha1
subunit gene is essential for constitutive expression.

Kobayashi M(1), Kawakami K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Jichi Medical School, Minamikawachi, Tochigi, Kawachi, 
329-0498, Japan.

Na,K-ATPase alpha1 subunit gene is constitutively expressed in a wide variety of 
tissues. Our previous studies revealed that the promoter region between -77 and
+17 of the transcription initiation site of the rat Na,K-ATPase alpha1 subunit
gene (Atp1a1) is sufficient for the promoter activity. In this region, an ATF/CRE
site with an adjacent GC box exists. To elucidate how these sites are involved in
the promoter activity, we analyzed effects of point mutations at these sites on
transcription by in vitro transcription assays using nuclear extracts prepared
from various rat tissues. Mutation at either site resulted in dramatic reduction 
of the promoter activity in all nuclear extracts, while mutation at both sites
did not lead to further reduction. These results indicate that the ATF/CRE site
and GC box are both essential for promoter activity and show synergistic
activation. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay indicated that Sp1 and/or Sp3
bind to the GC box, and ATF1-CREB heterodimer binds to the ATF/CRE site. Since an
element, ATF/CRE site-GC box, is conserved in mammalian Na,K-ATPase alpha1
subunit genes and in other constitutive promoters, we propose that this element
is a critical unit for constitutive expression.

Copyright 1997 Academic Press.

PMID: 9405252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Biochemistry. 1997 Dec 16;36(50):15555-60.

Slowed enzymatic turnover allows characterization of intermediates by solid-state
NMR.

Studelska DR(1), McDowell LM, Espe MP, Klug CA, Schaefer J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri 63130,
USA.

EPSP (5-enolpyruvylshikimate-3-phosphate) synthase catalyzes condensation of
shikimate 3-phosphate (S3P) and phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) to form EPSP, a
precursor to the aromatic amino acids. S3P and [2-13C]POP were bound to mutant or
wild type E. coli forms of the enzyme prior to lyophilization. CPMAS-echo and
rotational-echo double-resonance (REDOR) NMR experiments, employing a slow
catalytic EPSP synthase mutant and a long prelyophilization incubation interval, 
allowed our observation of the gradual formation of a strong 31P-13C coupling
consistent with the well characterized tetrahedral intermediate. However, after
shorter low temperature incubation intervals of substrates with mutant or
wild-type enzymes, carbon CPMAS-echo NMR spectra showed the 13C label at 155 ppm,
consistent with sp2 geometry of this carbon. REDOR revealed that the phosphorus
of PEP was cleaved. However, phosphorus at a distance of 7.5 A was observed, due 
to the phosphate of a nearby bound S3P. Heating the sample allowed the reaction
to progress, as shown by the diminution of the 155 ppm peak and growth of a peak 
at 108 ppm. The sp3 geometry implied by the 108 ppm peak strongly suggested
formation of a S3P-PEP condensation product. REDOR indicated that phosphorus was 
still distant, but now only 6.1 (wild type) or 5.9 A (mutant) distant. We think
that the early intermediates with peaks at 155 and 108 ppm are covalently bound
to the enzyme. We also think that the tetrahedral intermediate that we observed
was formed after product was generated.

PMID: 9445553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Biol Chem. 1997 Dec 26;272(52):33028-36.

The testis-specific histone H1t gene is strongly repressed by a G/C-rich region
just downstream of the TATA Box.

Clare SE(1), Fantz DA, Kistler WS, Kistler MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, and The School of Medicine,
University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina 29208, USA.

H1t is a testis-specific histone 1 variant restricted to the male germ line and
expressed only in pachytene spermatocytes. Understanding the regulation of the
H1t gene is an interesting challenge as its promoter shares all of the recognized
control elements of standard somatic H1 genes, yet H1t is not expressed in
somatic or in early spermatogenic cells. To investigate the mechanism of this
apparent repression, we exchanged three promoter subregions between H1t and a
major somatic H1 gene (H1d) by introduction of suitable restriction sites just 5'
of the TATA box and 3' of the conserved H1 AC box. Hybrid promoters were joined
to a lacZ reporter gene and assayed by transient transfection in NIH3T3
fibroblasts. In this system the wild type H1d promoter was 20-fold stronger than 
the H1t promoter. Much of this difference in activity was traced to inhibitory
sequences immediately downstream of the TATA box in H1t, although sequences
upstream of the H1t AC box and within the H1t 5'-untranslated region played some 
role as well. A series of deletions and short oligonucleotide mutations scanned
across the region between the TATA box and cap site identified two tracts of C
(GC box 2) as the inhibitory sequences. While both Sp1 and Sp3 bind to this
region weakly in vitro, they are unlikely to be responsible for the inhibitory
effect of GC box 2, and additional binding proteins (CTB-4 and CTB-5) were
identified by electrophoretic mobility shift assays as better candidates for
mediating the repressive effect. When repression of the H1t promoter was relieved
by mutation of GC box 2, additional mutations introduced into GC box 1 upstream
of the CAAT box led to a large decrease in activity, indicating that these two
G/C-rich elements have opposite effects on promoter activity.

PMID: 9407085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Virol. 1998 Feb;72(2):1365-76.

An ATF/CRE element mediates both EBNA2-dependent and EBNA2-independent activation
of the Epstein-Barr virus LMP1 gene promoter.

Sjöblom A(1), Yang W, Palmqvist L, Jansson A, Rymo L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Transfusion Medicine, Göteborg
University, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.
anna.sjoblom@ss.gu.se

The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) is a viral oncogene
whose expression is regulated by both viral and cellular factors. EBV nuclear
antigen 2 (EBNA2) is a potent transactivator of LMP1 expression in human B cells,
and several EBNA2 response elements have been identified in the promoter
regulatory sequence (LRS). We have previously shown that an activating
transcription factor/cyclic AMP response element (ATF/CRE) site in LRS is
involved in EBNA2 responsiveness. We now establish the importance of the ATF/CRE 
element by mutational analysis and show that both EBNA2-dependent activation and 
EBNA2-independent activation of the promoter occur via this site but are mediated
by separate sets of factors. An electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) with 
specific antibodies showed that the ATF-1, CREB-1, ATF-2 and c-Jun factors bind
to the site as ATF-1/CREB-1 and ATF-2/c-Jun heterodimers whereas the Sp1 and Sp3 
factors bind to an adjacent Sp site. Overexpression of ATF-1 and CREB-1 in the
cells by expression vectors demonstrated that homodimeric as well as
heterodimeric forms of the factors transactivate the LMP1 promoter in an
EBNA2-independent manner. The homodimers of ATF-2 and c-Jun did not significantly
stimulate promoter activity. In contrast, the ATF-2/c-Jun heterodimer had only a 
minor stimulatory effect in the absence of EBNA2 but induced a strong
transactivation of the LMP1 promoter when coexpressed with this protein. Evidence
for a direct interaction between the ATF-2/c-Jun heterodimeric complex and EBNA2 
was obtained by EMSA and coimmunoprecipitation experiments. Thus, our results
suggest that EBNA2-induced transactivation via the ATF/CRE site occurs through a 
direct contact between EBNA2 and an ATF-2/c-Jun heterodimer. EBNA2-independent
promoter activation via this site, on the other hand, is mediated by a
heterodimeric complex between the ATF-1 and CREB-1 factors.

PMCID: PMC124615
PMID: 9445037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 1998 Jan;45(5):257-65.

Active antitumor immunotherapy, with or without B7-mediated costimulation,
increases tumor progression in an immunogenic murine T cell lymphoma model.

Raes G(1), Van Ginderachter J, Liu YQ, Brys L, Thielemans K, De Baetselier P,
Geldhof A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Immunology, Flanders Interuniversity Institute of
Biotechnology, Free University of Brussels, Sint-Genesius-Rode, Belgium.

BW-Sp3 is a BW-5147-derived T cell lymphoma with limited immunogenicity since,
despite regression of the majority of subcutaneous tumors, an important fraction 
of the animals will die from metastases. In the present study, the BW-Sp3 cells
were transfected with genes encoding B7-1 or B7-2, known to be involved in the
induction of T cell responses. The resulting transfectants exhibited a reduced
tumorigenicity and did not cause mortality in the syngeneic recipients.
Furthermore, immunization with the B7-1 or B7-2 transfectants resulted in an
increased generation of cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) that lysed both the
transfectants and the wild-type BW-Sp3 cells. Since the B7 transfectants were
completely rejected in syngeneic recipients and induced potent CTL recognizing
the wild-type BW-Sp3 cells, these engineered cells were considered as candidates 
for immunotherapy. Vaccinations with the B7-1 or B7-2 transfectants could
completely protect the animals from metastatic disease when subsequently
challenged with wild-type BW-Sp3 cells. Furthermore, immunization with the B7
transfectants could prolong the survival time of mice that had been challenged
intravenously with BW-Sp3 cells. Surprisingly, however, when these transfectants,
as well as the wild-type BW-Sp3 cells, were used for vaccination of tumor-bearing
animals, the presence of the subcutaneous BW-Sp3 tumors clearly interfered with
the outcome of immunotherapy, resulting in increased malignancy, as reflected by 
a higher incidence of progressing tumors and a reduced survival rate. Possible
implications for immunotherapy in humans are discussed.

PMID: 9439649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. J Biol Chem. 1997 Dec 5;272(49):31149-55.

COUP-TF and Sp1 interact and cooperate in the transcriptional activation of the
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 long terminal repeat in human microglial
cells.

Rohr O(1), Aunis D, Schaeffer E.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 338 INSERM, 5 rue Blaise Pascal, 67084 Strasbourg Cedex, France.

We have recently reported that chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription 
factor (COUP-TF) activates human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) gene
transcription in glial and neuronal cells. Here, we have examined the role of
COUP-TF in microglial cells, the major target cells for HIV-1 infection in brain.
We show that COUP-TF activates gene expression from both the lymphotropic LAI and
the macrophage-tropic JR-FL HIV-1 strains. Although COUP-TF binds to the
-352/-320 nuclear receptor responsive element of the long terminal repeat, it
functions as a transcriptional activator by acting on the -68/+29 minimal
promoter. This region is a direct target of transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3. We
report the discovery and features of a physical and functional interplay between 
COUP-TF and Sp1. Our cotransfection experiments provide evidence for a functional
synergism between Sp1 and COUP-TF leading to enhanced transcriptional activity of
the HIV-1 long terminal repeat through the Sp1 element. In contrast, Sp3
functions as a repressor of Sp1- or COUP-TF-induced activation. We further
demonstrate that COUP-TF and Sp1 are capable of physically interacting, via the
DNA-binding domain of COUP-TF, in vitro and in the cell. These findings reveal
how the novel interplay of Sp1 and COUP-TF families of transcription factors
regulate HIV-1 gene expression.

PMID: 9388268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Cancer Res. 1997 Nov 15;57(22):5004-8.

Down-regulation of topoisomerase IIalpha in CEM cells selected for merbarone
resistance is associated with reduced expression of Sp3.

Mo YY(1), Wang Q, Beck WT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Therapeutics, Cancer Center, University of Illinois 
at Chicago, 60607-7173, USA.

DNA topoisomerase II (topo II) is a target for many clinically useful anticancer 
drugs. However, a major concern in the use of these drugs is the development of
resistance, often manifested by reduced drug accumulation or reduced topo IIalpha
activity, due to mutant enzyme or the enzyme's decreased expression. To date,
little is known of how the topo IIalpha is down-regulated in the resistant cells.
In this study, using CEM cells selected for resistance to merbarone, we found
that topo IIalpha RNA levels were reduced, compared to the parental cells, and
this corresponded to reduced protein levels, whereas there was no significant
difference in the RNA stability among these cell lines. Furthermore, we detected 
a lower level of topo IIalpha promoter activity in these resistant cells compared
to the drug-sensitive parents. Thus, the down-regulation of topo IIalpha appeared
to occur at the transcriptional level. Nucleotide sequencing of the topo IIalpha 
promoter regions up to -1200 bp revealed no mutations, suggesting that some
trans-acting factors are possibly involved in this down-regulation of topo
Ilalpha. In this context, we found by Northern blot analysis that the
transcription factor, sp3, was reduced in the drug-resistant cell lines compared 
to the parental cells. Furthermore, cotransfection experiments revealed that Sp3 
induced topo IIalpha promoter activity in a dose-dependent manner in
drug-sensitive CEM cells, but its induction of topo IIalpha promoter activity was
attenuated in the resistant B12 cells. Our results suggest that down-regulation
of Sp3 might contribute to the reduced expression of topo IIalpha in certain
drug-resistant tumor cells.

PMID: 9371492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Virology. 1997 Oct 13;237(1):137-47.

The locus of Epstein-Barr virus terminal repeat processing is bound with enhanced
affinity by Sp1 and Sp3.

Spain TA(1), Sun R, Miller G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Department of Public Health, Yale University
School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

EBV DNA contains G-rich, repeat regions that are involved in rearrangement and
recombination events including terminal repeat (TR) processing and the EBNA-2
deletion in the EBV strain P3HR-1. Cellular proteins, called terminal or tandem
repeat binding proteins (TRBPs), recognize sequences at the junctions of these
recombination events. In this study, using antibody supershift assays and
expression of recombinant proteins, we show that Sp1 and Sp3 are the
sequence-specific components of TRBP and that Ku is the nonspecific binding
component. Sp1 binds other recombinogenic regions of EBV DNA, but Sp3 does not
bind to the large internal repeat. The sequence GGGGTGGGG, a low affinity site
for Sp1 and Sp3, is the minimal binding site within terminal repeat binding site 
1 (TRBS1). However, 3' flanking sequences in the sequence GGGGTGGGGCATGGGG
augment binding of Sp1 and Sp3 so that their affinity of binding is increased
approximately twofold relative to a classical high-affinity Sp1 site. EBV lytic
cycle induction does not alter the abundance or binding activity of any of the
three identified components of TRBP. Sp1 and Sp3 may act in trans to promote EBV 
terminal repeat processing and possibly other viral and cellular recombination
events.

Copyright 1997 Academic Press.

PMID: 9344916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1997 Sep 26;828:27-37.

Differentiation-dependent and cell-specific regulation of the hIGFBP-1 gene in
human endometrium.

Tseng L(1), Gao J, Mazella J, Zhu HH, Lane B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Medicine, State
University of New York at Stony Brook 11794, USA. Ltseng@epo.hsc.sunysb.edu

We analyzed IGFBP-1 gene promoter activity by transient transfection during the
progressive decidualization of human endometrial stromal cells. A time study over
a 13-day culture period showed that the promoter activity increased exponentially
to > 10(4) fold in cells treated with MPA and RLX correlating with the secretion 
rate and steady-state mRNA levels of the endogenous gene. Deletion analysis
showed that two regions in the IGFBP-1 gene promoter are responsible for the
activation of the IGFBP-1 gene. The basal promoter region between -1 and -300 bp 
contains multiple sections of functional elements homologous either to CRE, PRE, 
or CCAAT. The major difference of IGFBP-1 gene activation in endometrium and the 
hepatic system lies in the distal promoter region, between -2.6 and -3.4 kb,
which mediates 95% of the total promoter activity derived from -3.3 kb to +68 bp.
Functional and binding analysis in the distal promoter region showed that
multiple Sp1 elements interacting with a novel Sp3 transcription factor activates
the hIGFBP-1 gene promoter.

PMID: 9329821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1997 Oct 1;346(1):142-50.

Two Sp sites are important cis elements regulating the upstream promoter region
of the gene for rat type I hexokinase.

Liu W(1), Wilson JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Michigan State University, East Lansing
48824-1319, USA.

Multiple transcriptional start sites have been identified for the gene encoding
the rat Type I isozyme of hexokinase (White, J.A., Liu, W., and Wilson, J. E.,
Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 335, 161-172, 1996); these are clustered at positions
approximately -460, -300, and -100 relative to the translational start codon
(ATG, with A being +1). PC12 cells and H9c2 cells were transfected with
luciferase reporter constructs containing genomic sequence between positions
-3366 and -171. Marked (85%) decrease in promoter activity was associated with
deletion of sequence between -742 and -516. In DNase I footprinting experiments, 
two regions, called P1 (-552 to -529) and P2 (-480 to -458) boxes, were protected
by proteins present in nuclear extracts from PC12 cells. Mutation or deletion of 
the P2 box had no effect on promoter activity; protection in this region, which
includes the most upstream cluster of transcriptional start sites, is attributed 
to binding of RNA polymerase II or associated factors. In contrast, mutations or 
deletions in the P1 box had markedly detrimental effects on promoter activity and
on binding of proteins in PC12 cell nuclear extracts. Maintenance of a consensus 
Sp1 binding site centrally located in the P1 box was critical for both promoter
activity and binding. A second Sp1 site (-570), just upstream from the P1 box,
was also shown to be functionally important but no protection of this region was 
detected in footprinting experiments, presumably reflecting lower affinity at
this site under the conditions used. Supershift experiments demonstrated the
involvement of Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 in formation of complexes with the P1 box region
and implicate these transcription factors in regulating promoter activity
associated with this region. Another series of reporter constructs, including
sequence between -171 and -1, permitted detection of an additional promoter
activity downstream from -364. While not yet extensively characterized, it is
already evident that the cis elements influencing the downstream promoter
activity are distinct from the Sp factors determined to be important in
expression from the upstream promoter region.

PMID: 9328294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Biol Chem. 1997 Oct 10;272(41):25976-82.

Sp1 and Sp3 regulate expression of the neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor 
beta4 subunit gene.

Bigger CB(1), Melnikova IN, Gardner PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Biotechnology, University of
Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, Texas 78245-3207, USA.

Neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors play important roles in signal
transduction within the nervous system. The receptors exist in a variety of
functionally distinct subtypes that are determined by their subunit structures.
The subunits are encoded by 11 genes, alpha2-alpha9 and beta2-beta4. Three of the
genes, alpha3, alpha5, and beta4, are tightly clustered, and their encoded
proteins make up the predominant receptor subtype in the peripheral nervous
system. The tight linkage of the genes suggests there may be a common regulatory 
mechanism underlying their expression. However, although their expression
patterns significantly overlap, they are not identical, indicating that
independent regulatory mechanisms must also exist. Our studies have focused upon 
the gene encoding the beta4 subunit for which we have identified several
transcriptional regulatory elements. One of these elements, E2, specifically
interacts with the general transcription factor Sp1. Here we show that another
member of the Sp family of factors, Sp3, can specifically interact with E2
whereas two other members, Sp2 and Sp4, cannot. Co-transfection experiments
indicate that Sp3 can transactivate a beta4 promoter/reporter gene construct and,
furthermore, that Sp1 and Sp3 can transactivate the beta4 reporter construct
synergistically. The transactivation is dependent upon an intact E2 and may
involve direct interactions between Sp1 and Sp3.

PMID: 9325332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. J Med Chem. 1997 Oct 10;40(21):3336-45.

Effect of a chemical modification on the hydrated adenosine intermediate produced
by adenosine deaminase and a model reaction for a potential mechanism of action
of 5-aminoimidazole ribonucleotide carboxylase.

Groziak MP(1), Huan ZW, Ding H, Meng Z, Stevens WC, Robinson PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Southern Illinois University,
Carbondale 62901-4409, USA.

Using the hydrated adenosine intermediate (6R)-6-amino-1,
6-dihydro-6-hydroxy-9-(beta-D-ribofuranosyl)purine (2) produced by adenosine
deaminase (ADA, EC 3.5.4.4) as a starting point, the active site probe and
inhibitor platform 5-(formylamino)imidazole riboside (FAIRs, 4) was designed by
removal of the-C6(OH)(NH2)-molecular fragment of 2 generated by the early events 
of the enzyme-catalyzed hydrolysis. FAIRs was synthesized directly from the
sodium salt of 5-amino-1-(beta-D-ribofuranosyl)imidazole-4-carboxylic acid (CAIR)
along a reaction sequence involving a tandem N-formylation/decarboxylation that
may have a mechanistic connection to the Escherichia coli purE-catalyzed
constitutional isomerization of N5-CAIR to CAIR. The physical and spectral
properties of FAIRs were elucidated, its X-ray crystal and NMR solution
structures were determined, and its interaction with ADA was investigated.
Crystalline FAIRs exists solely as the Z-formamide rotamer and exhibits many of
the same intramolecular hydrogen bonding events known to contribute to the
association of Ado to ADA. In water and various organic solvents, however, FAIRs 
exists as NMR-distinct, slowly interconverting Z and E rotamers. This truncated
enzymatic tetrahedral intermediate analog was determined to be a competitive
inhibitor of ADA with an apparent Ki binding constant of 40 microM, a value quite
close to that (33 microM) of the natural substrate's K(m). The actual species
selected for binding by ADA, though, is likely the minor hydroxyimino prototropic
form of Z-FAIRs possessing a far lower true Ki value. As the structural features 
of FAIRs appear well-suited to support its use as a template for constructing
active site probes of both ADA and AIR carboxylases, a variety of
carbohydrate-protected versions of FAIRs suitable for facile aglycon elaborations
were synthesized. The N3-alkylation, N3-borane complexation, and C4-iodination of
some of these were investigated in order to assess physicochemical properties
that may assist in the elucidation of mechanisms for the AIR carboxylases. The
survey of these properties taken together with a reasonable mechanism for the
model CAIRs-->FAIRs synthetic transformation is interpreted to support a
mechanism for the purE-catalyzed N5-CAIR-->CAIR biosynthetic one that involves a 
carboxylative sp3-rehybridization of the imidazole C4 atom rather than one
possessing a dipole-stabilized C4 sp2 carbanionic intermediate.

PMID: 9341908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Biol Chem. 1997 Oct 24;272(43):27411-21.

The tax protein of human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 mediates the
transactivation of the c-sis/platelet-derived growth factor-B promoter through
interactions with the zinc finger transcription factors Sp1 and NGFI-A/Egr-1.

Trejo SR(1), Fahl WE, Ratner L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Oncology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Transcriptional up-regulation of the c-sis/platelet-derived growth factor-B
(PDGF-B) proto-oncogene by the Tax protein of human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 
has been implicated as one possible mechanism of cellular transformation by human
T-cell leukemia virus type 1. In previous work, we identified an essential site
in the c-sis/PDGF-B promoter, Tax-responsive element 1 (TRE1), necessary for
transactivation by Tax. We also identified Sp1, Sp3, and NGFI-A/Egr-1 as the
primary nuclear transcription factors binding to TRE1 which mediate Tax
responsiveness. In the present work, we have investigated the mechanism(s)
whereby Tax transactivates the c-sis/PDGF-B proto-oncogene. In vitro
transcription assays showed that Tax was able to significantly increase the
transcriptional activity of a template containing the -257 to +74 region of the
c-sis/PDGF-B promoter. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay analysis showed that 
Tax increased the DNA binding activity of both Sp1 and NGFI-A/Egr-1 using a TRE1 
probe. Analysis of Tax mutants showed that two mutants, IEXC29S and IEXL320G,
were unable to significantly transactivate the c-sis/PDGF-B promoter. Finally,
co-immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that Tax is able to stably bind to both 
Sp1 and NGFI-A/Egr-1. Interestingly, co-immunoprecipitation analysis also
revealed that Tax mutant IEXC29S is unable to interact with NGFI-A/Egr-1, whereas
Tax mutant IEXL320G is able to interact with NGFI-A/Egr-1.

PMID: 9341193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Biol Chem. 1997 Oct 17;272(42):26285-94.

TGT3, thyroid transcription factor I, and Sp1 elements regulate transcriptional
activity of the 1.3-kilobase pair promoter of T1alpha, a lung alveolar type I
cell gene.

Ramirez MI(1), Rishi AK, Cao YX, Williams MC.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Center, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 
02118, USA. mramierz@pupula.bu.edu

Alveolar type I epithelial cells form the major surface for gas exchange in the
lung. To explore how type I cells differ in gene expression from their progenitor
alveolar type II cells, we analyzed transcriptional regulation of T1alpha, a gene
expressed by adult type I but not type II cells. In vivo developmental patterns
of T1alpha expression in lung and brain suggest active gene regulation. We cloned
and sequenced 1.25 kilobase pairs of the T1alpha promoter that can drive reporter
expression in lung epithelial cell lines. Deletion analyses identified regions
important for lung cell expression. The base pair (bp) -100 to -170 fragment
conferred differential regulation in lung epithelial cells compared with
fibroblasts. Sequence alignment of this fragment with type II-specific surfactant
protein B and C promoters shows similar consensus elements arranged in a
different order. Gel retardation studies with alveolar epithelial cell line
nuclear extracts, thyroid transcription factor I (TTF-1) homeodomain, hepatic
nuclear factor (HNF)-3beta, or Sp1 proteins, and supershift assays were used to
characterize TTF-1, HNF-3 (TGT3), and Sp1/Sp3 binding sites. The TGT3 site binds 
factors with binding properties similar to HNF-3/Fkh (hepatic nuclear
factor-3/forkhead) proteins but different from HNF-3alpha or HNF-3beta.
Co-transfection with a TTF-1 expression vector moderately transactivated the -170
bp-reporter construct. Mutational analysis of these three binding sites showed
reduced transcriptional activity of the -170 bp promoter. Therefore, several
regulatory sequences involved in type II cell gene regulation are also present in
the T1alpha promoter, suggesting that genes of the peripheral lung epithelium may
be regulated by similar factors.

PMID: 9334198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Am J Physiol. 1997 Sep;273(3 Pt 2):H1415-26.

Inducible PDGF A-chain transcription in smooth muscle cells is mediated by Egr-1 
displacement of Sp1 and Sp3.

Silverman ES(1), Khachigian LM, Lindner V, Williams AJ, Collins T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA.

Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) A-chain is expressed by vascular smooth
muscle cells (SMC) in a variety of pathological settings. Phorbol 12-myristate
13-acetate (PMA) increases A-chain transcription and was used as a model agonist.
Transient transfection analysis identified a region in the promoter that is
required for inducibility, located between base pairs -71 and -55 from the
transcription start site. This region contains overlapping recognition elements
for members of the Sp and Egr families. Egr-1 transcript and protein increased
after PMA treatment, whereas Sp1 and Sp3 levels remain unchanged. Egr-1
expression and PDGF A-chain promoter activity also increased in cells exposed to 
PDGF or mechanical injury. In vitro binding assays demonstrated that Egr-1, Sp1, 
and Sp3 can bind to this promoter region and that increasing Egr-1 can displace
both Sp1 and Sp3. In an in vivo model of arterial injury, Egr-1 expression was
induced concurrently with the expression of PDGF-A in SMC. Displacement of Sp1
and Sp3 by Egr-1 is correlated with inducible PDGF A-chain expression in the
vessel wall.

PMID: 9321833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Biol Reprod. 1997 Oct;57(4):707-14.

Cell-type expression, immunolocalization, and deoxyribonucleic acid-binding
activity of basic transcription element binding transcription factor, an
Sp-related family member, in porcine endometrium of pregnancy.

Wang Y(1), Michel FJ, Wing A, Simmen FA, Simmen RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, University of Florida, Gainesville 32611-0910,
USA.

Basic transcription element binding (BTEB) protein is a newly identified member
of the C2H2 zinc finger family that also includes the transcription factors, Sp1,
Sp2, Sp3, and Sp4. This family of proteins binds GC-rich motifs widely
distributed in gene promoters, resulting in distinct activation or repression of 
transcriptional activities. Whereas Sp proteins are ubiquitously expressed,
expression of BTEB appears more limited and has not been documented in the female
reproductive tract of any mammalian species. This study was designed to identify 
and characterize the cellular distribution of BTEB in the porcine endometrium and
placenta at known stages of pregnancy. Northern analysis of uterine endometrium
detected BTEB mRNA that corresponds in size (5 kilobases) to that of the major
BTEB transcript in rat brain. The steady-state levels of BTEB mRNA were higher (p
< 0.05) in endometrium than placenta at corresponding days of pregnancy, although
for each tissue, the levels did not change with pregnancy stage (p > 0.05).
Luminal epithelial (LE), glandular epithelial (GE), and stromal (ST) cells
isolated from pregnancy endometrium expressed the BTEB gene, but mRNA abundance
varied with cell type (LE, GE > ST). Western blot analysis using an antiserum
generated against the N-terminal region of a porcine BTEB fusion protein produced
in Escherichia coli revealed the presence of BTEB protein only in endometrium,
not in placenta. Immunohistochemical studies localized BTEB predominantly to the 
nuclei of endometrial GE and LE cells. Consistent with the presence of functional
BTEB protein, binding to a double-stranded oligonucleotide containing multiple GC
motifs was demonstrated in nuclear extracts prepared from endometrium and from
endometrial LE and GE, but not ST, cells by electrophoretic mobility shift assay.
These results demonstrate the preferential endometrial cell-type expression of
BTEB and suggest its regulatory role in pregnancy-associated endometrial
epithelial gene expression.

PMID: 9314570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Biol Chem. 1997 Sep 26;272(39):24666-72.

Oncostatin M stimulates transcription of the human alpha2(I) collagen gene via
the Sp1/Sp3-binding site.

Ihn H(1), LeRoy EC, Trojanowska M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology and Immunology, Medical
University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425-2229, USA.

Oncostatin M (OSM), a member of the hematopoietic cytokine family, has been
implicated in excessive bone growth and in the process of fibrosis. As part of an
ongoing study of the molecular mechanisms of fibrosis, we have investigated the
transcriptional regulation of the alpha2(I) collagen gene by OSM in human
fibroblasts. An OSM response element was mapped by deletional analysis between
base pairs (bp) -148 and -108 in the alpha2(I) collagen promoter. Further
functional analysis of the alpha2(I) collagen promoter containing various
substitution mutations revealed that both the basal activity and OSM stimulation 
of this promoter are mediated by a TCCTCC motif located between bp -128 and -123.
Furthermore, three copies of the 12-bp synthetic alpha2(I) collagen promoter
fragment containing the "TCC" motif conferred OSM inducibility to the otherwise
unresponsive thymidine kinase promoter. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays
demonstrated that the TCCTCC motif constitutes a novel binding site for the
transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3. No differences have been observed in in vitro 
gel shift binding assays between unstimulated and OSM-stimulated fibroblasts.
However, subtle conformational changes were detected in the region of the
promoter surrounding TCC repeats after OSM stimulation using in vivo footprint
analysis. In conclusion, this study characterized a dual-function response
element that mediates the basal activity and OSM stimulation of the human
alpha2(I) collagen promoter.

PMID: 9305936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Biol Chem. 1997 Sep 19;272(38):24038-45.

Sp3 mediates transcriptional activation of the leukocyte integrin genes CD11C and
CD11B and cooperates with c-Jun to activate CD11C.

Noti JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Guthrie Research Institute, Sayre, Pennsylvania 18840, USA.
jnoti@inet.guthrie.org

The leukocyte integrin genes CD11c and CD11b are expressed predominately in
myelomonocytic cells. In previous experiments, the -70 to -65 and -121 to -103
regions of the CD11c promoter and the -66 to -59 region of the CD11b promoter
were shown to be essential for Sp1-mediated activation of these genes. In vivo
genomic footprinting had also revealed cell-specific binding of protein,
presumably Sp1, to these regions. In this study, electrophoretic mobility shift
analysis showed that the Sp1-related factor, Sp3, also binds at or near these
same regions. Cotransfection of Sp3 along with CD11c promoter-luciferase
constructs into Sp-deficient Drosophila Schneider 2 cells showed that Sp3 could
activate the CD11c promoter. Deletion of both the -70 to -65 and -121 to -103
regions of the CD11c promoter resulted in the loss of activation by Sp3. Both
sites showed activation by Sp3; however, the -70 to -65 region was more
responsive to Sp3 than to Sp1. Similar transfection analysis of the -66 to -59
region of the CD11b promoter showed Sp3-dependent expression. Further,
cotransfection analysis in Drosophila cells showed that Sp3, as was previously
shown for Sp1, also synergizes with c-Jun to activate CD11c. Antisense
experiments that knocked out endogenous Sp3 expression in the myelomocytic cell
line, HL60, revealed that Sp3 participates in activation of the CD11c and CD11b
promoters in vivo.

PMID: 9295357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Nucleic Acids Res. 1997 Sep 15;25(18):3712-7.

Sp3 is a transcriptional activator of the human alpha2(I) collagen gene.

Ihn H(1), Trojanowska M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, 171 Ashley Avenue, Charleston, SC 29425-2229, USA.

Sp3 is an ubiquitously expressed transcription factor, closely related to Sp1
but, unlike Sp1, it often functions as a transcriptional repressor. In this study
we investigated the role of Sp3 in regulating the transcription of the human
alpha2(I) collagen gene. We show that Sp1 and Sp3 specifically bind to three of
the previously characterized cis -elements in this promoter, including two
positive cis-elements between -303 and -271 and -128 and -123, and a repressor
site between -164 and -159, but do not bind to the fourth cis-element bound by
CBF. Functional analyses of Sp3 and Sp1 in Drosophila cells indicate that each
protein transactivates the human alpha2(I) collagen promoter with equal potency
and, when tested together, have an additive effect on the promoter activity.
Furthermore, in vitro transcription assays demonstrate that both Sp1 and Sp3 are 
capable of supporting transcription from the collagen promoter independently of
each other. However, when activities of both Sp1 and Sp3 are blocked with
specific antibodies, in vitro transcription from this promoter is almost
completely abolished. The results of this study demonstrate that Sp3 is as potent
an activator of the human alpha2(I) collagen promoter as is Sp1 and that a
transcriptional activity of the human alpha2(I) promoter is dependent on both
proteins.

PMCID: PMC146953
PMID: 9278495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Sep;17(9):5193-200.

Promoter selective transcriptional synergy mediated by sterol regulatory element 
binding protein and Sp1: a critical role for the Btd domain of Sp1.

Athanikar JN(1), Sanchez HB, Osborne TF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California,
Irvine, 92697-3900, USA.

Cellular cholesterol and fatty acid levels are coordinately regulated by a family
of transcriptional regulatory proteins designated sterol regulatory element
binding proteins (SREBPs). SREBP-dependent transcriptional activation from all
promoters examined thus far is dependent on the presence of an additional binding
site for a ubiquitous coactivator. In the low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor,
acetyl coenzyme A carboxylase (ACC), and fatty acid synthase (FAS) promoters,
which are all regulated by SREBP, the coactivator is the transcription factor
Sp1. In this report, we demonstrate that Sp3, another member of the Sp1 family,
is capable of substituting for Sp1 in coactivating transcription from all three
of these promoters. Results of an earlier study showed that efficient activation 
of transcription from the LDL receptor promoter required domain C of Sp1;
however, this domain is not crucial for activation of the simian virus 40
promoter, where synergistic activation occurs through multiple Sp1 binding sites 
and does not require SREBP. Also in the present report, we further localize the
critical determinant of the C domain required for activation of the LDL receptor 
to a small region that is highly conserved between Sp1 and Sp3. This crucial
domain encompasses the buttonhead box, which is a 10-amino-acid stretch that is
present in several Sp1 family members, including the Drosophila buttonhead gene
product. Interestingly, neither the buttonhead box nor the entire C domain is
required for the activation of the FAS and ACC promoters even though both SREBP
and Sp1 are critical players. ACC and FAS each contain two critical SREBP sites, 
whereas there is only one in the LDL receptor promoter. This finding suggested
that buttonhead-dependent activation by SREBP and Sp1 may be limited to promoters
that naturally contain a single SREBP recognition site. Consistent with this
model, a synthetic construct containing three tandem copies of the native LDL
receptor SREBP site linked to a single Sp1 site was also significantly activated 
in a buttonhead-independent fashion. Taken together, these studies indicate that 
transcriptional activation through the concerted action of SREBP and Sp1 can
occur by at least two different mechanisms, and promoters that are activated by
each one can potentially be identified by the number of critical SREBP binding
sites that they contain.

PMCID: PMC232370
PMID: 9271397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Biol Chem. 1997 Aug 22;272(34):21260-7.

Multiple and essential Sp1 binding sites in the promoter for transforming growth 
factor-beta type I receptor.

Ji C(1), Casinghino S, McCarthy TL, Centrella M.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Plastic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520-8041, USA.

Maximal gene expression driven by the promoter for the transforming growth factor
beta type I receptor (TGF-betaRI) occurs with a 1. 0-kilobase pair fragment
immediately upstream of exon 1. This region lacks a typical TATA box but contains
CCAAT boxes, multiple Sp1, and PEBP2/CBFalpha binding sites among other possible 
cis-acting elements. Alterations within two CCAAT box sequences do not mitigate
reporter gene expression driven by the basal promoter, and no nuclear factor
binds to oligonucleotides encompassing these sites. In contrast, other deletions 
or site-specific mutations reveal an essential Sp1 site in the basal promoter and
several dispersed upstream Sp1 sites that contribute to maximal reporter gene
expression. The proportions of transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3, and their
ratios of binding to consensus elements, are maintained in bone cells at
different stages of differentiation. Finally, nuclear factor that binds to
PEBP2/CBFalpha-related cis-acting elements in the basal promoter sequence also
occurs in osteoblasts. Our studies reveal that constitutive expression of
TGF-betaRI may be determined by constitutive nuclear factor binding to Sp1 sites,
whereas other elements may account for the variations in TGF-betaRI levels that
parallel changes in bone cell differentiation or activity.

PMID: 9261136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Biol Chem. 1997 Aug 8;272(32):19738-45.

Sp1 is required for the early response of alpha2(I) collagen to transforming
growth factor-beta1.

Greenwel P(1), Inagaki Y, Hu W, Walsh M, Ramirez F.

Author information: 
(1)Brookdale Center for Developmental and Molecular Biology, Mount Sinai School
of Medicine, New York, New York 10029, USA.

It is currently debated whether AP1 or Sp1 is the factor that mediates
transforming growth factor beta1 (TGF-beta) stimulation of the human alpha2(I)
collagen (COL1A2) gene by binding to an upstream promoter element (TbRE). The
present study was designed to resolve this controversy by correlating expression 
of COL1A2, AP1, and Sp1 in the same cell line and under different experimental
conditions. The results strongly indicate that Sp1 is required for the immediate 
early response of COL1A2 to TGF-beta and AP1 is not. The Sp1 inhibitor
mithramycin blocked stimulation of alpha2(I) collagen mRNA accumulation by
TGF-beta, whereas the AP1 inhibitor curcumin had no effect. Furthermore,
antibodies against Jun-B and c-Jun failed to identify immunologically related
proteins in the TbRE-bound complex, irrespective of whether they were purified
from untreated or TGF-beta-treated cells. AP1 did bind to the TbRE probe in
vitro, but only in the absence of the upstream Sp1 recognition sequence. Based on
this finding and DNA transfection results, we conclude that the AP1 sequence of
the TbRE represents a cryptic site used under experimental conditions that either
eliminate the more favorable Sp1 binding site or force the balance toward the
less probable. Finally, a combination of cell transfections and DNA-binding
assays excluded that COL1A2 transactivation involves the retinoblastoma gene
product (pRb), an activator of Sp1, the pRb-related protein p107, an inhibitor of
Sp1, or the Sp1-related repressor, Sp3.

PMID: 9242631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Oncogene. 1997 Aug 7;15(6):669-76.

Sp1 recognition sites in the proximal promoter of the human vascular endothelial 
growth factor gene are essential for platelet-derived growth factor-induced gene 
expression.

Finkenzeller G(1), Sparacio A, Technau A, Marmé D, Siemeister G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, Tumor Biology Center, Freiburg, Germany.

Stimulation of NIH3T3 cells with platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-BB
enhances expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), an endothelial 
cell-specific mitogen and a key mediator of tumor angiogenesis. Here, we
identified cis-acting VEGF promoter elements and trans-acting factors which are
involved in PDGF-stimulated VEGF expression. By 5'-deletion and transient
transfection analysis, a G + C-rich region at -85 to -50 of the human VEGF
promoter was shown to be necessary and sufficient for both PDGF inducible and
basal expression. The region contains three potential recognition sites for Sp1
transcription factors, which overlap with two Egr-1 sites. Mutations that abolish
the ability of Sp1 to interact with the VEGF promoter element also abrogate
expression induced by PDGF. Mutations of the potential Egr-1 binding sites did
not affect PDGF responsiveness. Gel shift and antibody supershift analyses showed
that Sp1 and Sp3 interact constitutively with the VEGF promoter element. Our data
strongly suggest that enhanced VEGF gene expression in PDGF-induced NIH3T3 cells 
is mediated by Sp1 and/or Sp3 transcription factors bound to the -85 to -50
promoter region of the VEGF gene.

PMID: 9264407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Endocrinology. 1997 Aug;138(8):3417-25.

The proximal promoter region of the gene encoding human 17beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase type 1 contains GATA, AP-2, and Sp1 response elements: analysis of 
promoter function in choriocarcinoma cells.

Piao YS(1), Peltoketo H, Vihko P, Vihko R.

Author information: 
(1)Biocenter Oulu and Department of Clinical Chemistry, University of Oulu,
Finland.

The 5'-flanking region from -78 to +9 in the HSD17B1 gene serves as a promoter,
and an HSD17B1 silencer element is located in position -113 to -78. In the
present studies, we have characterized three regulatory elements in the proximal 
5'-flanking regions of the gene, using electrophoretic mobility shift assays and 
reporter gene analysis. First, nuclear factors recognized by antibodies against
Sp1 and Sp3 were found to bind the Sp1 motif in the region from -52 to -43.
Mutation of the Sp1-binding site decreased the promoter activity to 30% in JEG-3 
cells and to 60% in JAR cells, suggesting that binding to the Sp1 motif has a
substantial role in the complete functioning of the HSD17B1 promoter. Second, the
binding of AP-2 to its motif in the region from -62 to -53 led to reduced binding
of Sp1 and Sp3, and furthermore, mutation of the AP-2 element increased promoter 
activity to 260% in JEG-3 cells. The data thus implied that AP-2 can repress the 
function of the HSD17B1 promoter by preventing binding to the Sp1 motif. Finally,
GATA factors, GATA-3 in particular, were demonstrated to bind their cognate
sequence in the HSD17B1 silencer region, and mutations introduced into the
GATA-binding site increased transcriptional activity to the level seen in
constructs not containing the silencer element. Thus, GATA-3 seems to prevent
transcription in the constructs, and hence, the GATA motif also may operate as a 
negative control element for HSD17B1 transcription.

PMID: 9231796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Nucleic Acids Res. 1997 Aug 1;25(15):3110-7.

Sp3 encodes multiple proteins that differ in their capacity to stimulate or
repress transcription.

Kennett SB(1), Udvadia AJ, Horowitz JM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular Cancer Biology and Microbiology, Box 3686, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

The product of the retinoblastoma (Rb) susceptibility gene ( RB-1 ) regulates
expression of a variety of growth control genes via discrete promoter elements
termed retinoblastoma control elements (RCEs). We have previously shown that RCEs
are bound and regulated by a common set of ubiquitously expressed nuclear
proteins of 115, 95 and 80 kDa, termed retinoblastoma control proteins (RCPs). We
have also previously determined that Sp3 and Sp1, two members of the Sp family of
transcription factors, encode the 115 and 95 kDa RCPs respectively and that Rb
stimulates Sp1/Sp3-mediated transcription in vivo. In this report we have
extended these results by determining that the 80 kDa RCP arises from Sp3 mRNA
via translational initiation at two internal sites located within the Sp3 trans
-activation domain. Internally initiated Sp3 proteins readily bind to Sp1 binding
sites in vitro yet have little or no capacity to stimulate transcription of
Sp-regulated genes in vivo. Instead, these Sp3-derived proteins function as
potent inhibitors of Sp1/Sp3- mediated transcription. Since cell cycle- or
signal- induced expression of a variety of genes, including p21 waf1/cip1, p15
INK4B, CYP11A, mdr1 and acetyl-CoA carboxylase, have been mapped to GC-rich
promoter elements that bind Sp family members, we speculate that alterations of
the protein and/or DNA binding activities of internally initiated Sp3 isoforms
may account in part for the regulation of such differentially expressed genes.

PMCID: PMC146854
PMID: 9224612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. FEBS Lett. 1997 Jul 14;411(2-3):383-8.

RAP1-like binding activity in islet cells corresponds to members of the Sp1
family of transcription factors.

Simon B(1), Wattler F, Merchant JL, Münch K, Schütze HJ, Suske G, Arnold R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Philipps-University, Marburg, Germany.
simonb@post.med.uni-marburg.de

Deletion and mutational analyses of the gastrin promoter have identified a
binding site for the yeast transcription factor RAP1 relevant for transcriptional
activation in islet cells. We here report that the mammalian transcription
factors binding to this site in islet cells are the Sp transcription factor
members Sp1 and Sp3. Furthermore, functional analyses revealed Sp1- and
Sp3-mediated transcriptional activation of gastrin. These data reveal that the
zinc finger proteins Sp1 and Sp3 do have similar binding specificities as the
multifunctional yeast RAP1 protein.

PMID: 9271241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Jul;17(7):3714-22.

The immediate-early gene product Egr-1 regulates the human interleukin-2 receptor
beta-chain promoter through noncanonical Egr and Sp1 binding sites.

Lin JX(1), Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1674, USA.

The interleukin-2 IL-2 receptor beta-chain (IL-2Rbeta) is an essential component 
of the receptors for IL-2 and IL-15. Although IL-2Rbeta is constitutively
expressed by lymphocytes, its expression can be further induced by a number of
stimuli, including phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA). We have now
characterized factors that bind to an enhancer region located between nucleotides
-170 and -139 of the human IL-2Rbeta promoter. Both Sp1 and Sp3 bound to the 5'
portion of this region, whereas a PMA-inducible factor (PIF) mainly bound to its 
3' portion and bound to the Sp binding motifs as well. In Jurkat T cells,
induction of PIF DNA binding activity was rapidly induced, required de novo
protein synthesis, and was sustained at a high level for at least 23 h.
Interestingly, PIF was constitutively activated in human T-cell leukemia virus
type 1-transformed MT-2 cells. In this paper, we demonstrate that PIF is Egr-1
based on its recognition by anti-Egr-1 antisera in gel mobility shift assays,
even though the IL-2Rbeta DNA binding motif differed substantially from the
canonical Egr-1 binding site. In addition, Egr-1 bound to the Sp binding site. In
Jurkat cells, both sites were required for maximal IL-2Rbeta promoter activity,
and in HeLaS3 cells, transfection of Egr-1 could drive activity of a reporter
construct containing both sites. Moreover, Sp1 and Egr-1 could form a complex
with kinetics that correlated with the production of Egr-1 in Jurkat cells upon
PMA stimulation. Thus, Sp1 and Egr-1 physically and functionally cooperate to
mediate maximal IL-2Rbeta promoter activity.

PMCID: PMC232223
PMID: 9199305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1997 Jun 26;1352(3):311-24.

Promoter of the Na,K-ATPase alpha3 subunit gene is composed of cis elements to
which NF-Y and Sp1/Sp3 bind in rat cardiocytes.

Murakami Y(1), Ikeda U, Shimada K, Kawakami K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Jichi Medical School, Kawachi, Tochigi, Japan.

Na,K-ATPase alpha subunit has three isoforms whose expression is regulated
developmentally and hormonally. Na,K-ATPase alpha3 subunit gene (Atpla3) is
expressed only in brain and neonatal heart in a rat. The purpose of this study is
to analyze cis-acting elements and trans-acting factors regulating the
transcription of Atpla3 in cultured neonatal rat cardiocytes. Transient
transfection assays with Atpla3-luciferase chimeric construct and a series of 5' 
sequential deletion mutations revealed the existence of positive regulatory
elements from -74 to -59 and from -59 to -39. A factor was identified to bind
across -59 by gel retardation assay. Methylation interference and DNase I
footprinting analyses revealed the binding region from -74 to -53 (positive
regulatory element (PRE) 1). The binding factor was identified to be NF-Y by gel 
retardation assay using specific antibody. Gel retardation and methylation
interference analyses revealed that factors bind to two other elements from -54
to -43 (PRE2) and from -25 to -13 (PRE3). The binding factors were identified to 
be Sp1/Sp3 using specific antibodies. The functions of above-mentioned three
elements were examined by transient transfection assay with various combinations 
of mutations. They all regulated the transcription positively and a synergistic
enhancement of it was observed. Roles of NF-Y in the transcriptional activation
and synergy are discussed.

PMID: 9224955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Oncogene. 1997 Jun 26;14(25):3039-49.

Transcriptional regulation of the hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) gene by the Sp
family of transcription factors.

Jiang JG(1), Chen Q, Bell A, Zarnegar R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania 15261, USA.

In this study, we have localized an enhancer element in the 5'-flanking region of
the HGF gene promoter and have identified its functional transcriptional factors.
Through transient transfection of NIH3T3 fibroblast cells and gel mobility shift 
assays, the functional binding site was localized to a short region (-318 to -303
bp from the transcription start site) which has a CTCCC sequence. This motif is
also conserved in the human HGF promoter and acts as a binding site for the Sp
family of transcription factors. In the presence of NIH3T3 nuclear protein
extracts, this enhancer region formed specific DNA-protein complexes which were
totally abrogated by excess amounts of consensus Sp1 oligonucleotide. In gel
mobility supershift assays, anti-Sp1 and anti-Sp3 antibodies specifically
recognized these complexes as was evident by their slower migration.
Site-specific mutation of this binding motif resulted in total loss of Sp1 and
Sp3 binding and a concomitant loss of enhancer function within the context of the
HGF promoter. Furthermore, in transient cotransfection assays, overexpression of 
Sp1 and/or Sp3 stimulated HGF promoter activity independently and additively
through binding to the Sp1 binding site in the HGF gene promoter region. DNaseI
hypersensitive analysis of freshly isolated nuclei from NIH3T3 cells revealed
that five hypersensitive sites (HSS) are present within the 2 kb region
immediately upstream of the HGF promoter. One of these sites was mapped to
position -0.3 kb from the transcription start site. These data show that both Sp1
and Sp3 transcription factors upregulate HGF promoter activity by binding to the 
Sp1 binding site at position -318 to -303 bp in the HGF gene promoter.

PMID: 9223667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Jun 10;94(12):6438-43.

A role for Sp and nuclear receptor transcription factors in a cardiac
hypertrophic growth program.

Sack MN(1), Disch DL, Rockman HA, Kelly DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
MO 63110, USA.

During cardiac hypertrophy, the chief myocardial energy source switches from
fatty acid beta-oxidation (FAO) to glycolysis-a reversion to fetal metabolism.
The expression of genes encoding myocardial FAO enzymes was delineated in a
murine ventricular pressure overload preparation to characterize the molecular
regulatory events involved in the alteration of energy substrate utilization
during cardiac hypertrophy. Expression of genes involved in the
thioesterification, mitochondrial import, and beta-oxidation of fatty acids was
coordinately down-regulated after 7 days of right ventricular (RV) pressure
overload. Results of RV pressure overload studies in mice transgenic for the
promoter region of the gene encoding human medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase
(MCAD, which catalyzes a rate-limiting step in the FAO cycle) fused to a
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter confirmed that repression of MCAD gene
expression in the hypertrophied ventricle occurred at the transcriptional level. 
Electrophoretic mobility-shift assays performed with MCAD promoter fragments and 
nuclear protein extracts prepared from hypertrophied and control RV identified
pressure overload-induced protein/DNA interactions at a regulatory unit shown
previously to confer control of MCAD gene transcription during cardiac
development. Antibody "supershift" studies demonstrated that members of the Sp
(Sp1, Sp3) and nuclear hormone receptor [chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter
transcription factor (COUP-TF)/erbA-related protein 3] families interact with the
pressure overload-responsive unit. Cardiomyocyte transfection studies confirmed
that COUP-TF repressed the transcriptional activity of the MCAD promoter. The DNA
binding activities and nuclear expression of Sp1/3 and COUP-TF in normal fetal
mouse heart were similar to those in the hypertrophied adult heart. These results
identify a transcriptional regulatory mechanism involved in the reinduction of a 
fetal metabolic program during pressure overload-induced cardiac hypertrophy.

PMCID: PMC21068
PMID: 9177236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Biochem J. 1997 May 15;324 ( Pt 1):133-40.

Transcriptional activation of human 12-lipoxygenase gene promoter is mediated
through Sp1 consensus sites in A431 cells.

Liu YW(1), Arakawa T, Yamamoto S, Chang WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan, Taiwan 70101, Republic of China.

The functional 5' flanking region of the human 12-lipoxygenase in epidermoid
carcinoma A431 cells was characterized. By a primer extension method, the
transcription initiation sites were mapped at -47 adenosine, -48 guanosine and
-55 guanosine upstream of the ATG translation start codon. Transient transfection
with a series of 5' and 3' deletion constructs showed that the 5' flanking region
spanning from -224 to -100 bp was important for the basal expression of
12-lipoxygenase gene. Gel mobility shift assays with antibodies of transcription 
factors showed that both Sp1 and Sp3 required highly GC-rich Sp1 sites within
this region for binding. Disruption of two Sp1 recognition motifs residing at
-158 to -150 bp and -123 to -114 bp by site-directed mutagenesis markedly reduced
the basal 12-lipoxygenase promoter activity and abolished the retarded bands in a
gel-shift assay, indicating that these two Sp1-binding sites were essential for
gene expression. The same two Sp1-binding sites in this promoter region were also
responsible for epidermal growth factor (EGF)-induced expression of
12-lipoxygenase gene. Moreover, EGF also induced the transcriptional activation
of luciferase driven by SV40 early promoter, which contained rich Sp1-binding
sites. Taken together, the results suggest that two specific Sp1 consensus sites 
are involved in the mediation of the basal promoter activity as well as EGF
induction of the 12-lipoxygenase gene and that Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors 
might have a role in their regulation.

PMCID: PMC1218409
PMID: 9164849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Nucleic Acids Res. 1997 May 15;25(10):2012-9.

Transcription factor Sp3 antagonizes activation of the ornithine decarboxylase
promoter by Sp1.

Kumar AP(1), Butler AP.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Science Park-Research
Division, Smithville, TX 78957, USA.

Ornithine decarboxylase (ODC) expression is important for proliferation and is
elevated in many tumor cells. We previously showed that Sp1 is a major positive
regulator of ODC transcription. In this paper we have investigated
transcriptional regulation of rat ODC by the closely related factor Sp3. While
over-expression of Sp1 caused a dramatic activation of the ODC promoter,
over-expression of Sp3 caused little or no activation in either Drosophila SL2
cells (lacking endogenous Sp1 or Sp3) or in H35 rat hepatoma cells. Furthermore, 
co-transfection studies demonstrated that Sp3 abolished trans -activation of the 
ODC promoter by Sp1. DNase I footprint studies and electrophoretic mobility shift
assays demonstrated that both recombinant Sp1 and Sp3 bind specifically to
several sites within the ODC promoter also protected by nuclear extracts,
including overlapping GC and CT motifs located between -116 and -104. This CT
element is a site of negative ODC regulation. Mutation of either element reduced 
binding, but mutation of both sites was required to eliminate binding of either
Sp1 or Sp3. These results demonstrate that ODC is positively regulated by Sp1 and
negatively regulated by Sp3, suggesting that the ratio of these transcription
factors may be an important determinant of ODC expression during development or
transformation.

PMCID: PMC146696
PMID: 9115370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Neurosurgery. 1997 May;40(5):1050-7; discussion 1057-8.

Transcutaneous pressure-adjustable valves and magnetic resonance imaging: an ex
vivo examination of the Codman-Medos programmable valve and the Sophy adjustable 
pressure valve.

Ortler M(1), Kostron H, Felber S.

Author information: 
(1)Universitätsklinik für Neurochirurgie, Innsbruck, Austria.

Comment in
    Neurosurgery. 1998 Feb;42(2):430.

OBJECTIVE: We investigated the compatibility of magnetically adjustable
cerebrospinal fluid valves with clinical magnetic resonance imaging. Torque
acting on the valves, subjective sensations of valve-carrying volunteers,
extension of artifacts on acquired images, changes in valve pressure setting, and
accurate valve function after repeated exposure to the magnetic field were
tested.
METHODS: Two externally adjustable differential pressure valves, i.e., the
Codman-Medos programmable valve (Medos S.A., Le Locle, Switzerland) (n = 5) and
the Sophy programmable pressure valve (Sophysa, Orsay, France) (Model SP3, n = 4;
Model SU8, n = 3; and Model SM8, n = 2) were exposed to the magnetic fields of
1.5-T clinical scanners. Ferromagnetic properties were investigated according to 
an established protocol. Subjective sensations during positioning and scanning
and image artifacts were investigated using standard clinical imaging protocols. 
Changes in opening pressure setting during repeated magnetic field exposure were 
examined using valves affixed to a dummy.
RESULTS: Deflection forces measured 117 dynes in the Medos valve, and 2439 (Model
SP3), 2172 (Model SU8) and 1914 (Model SM8) dynes in the Sophy valves. Torque
during positioning and during imaging was reported for the Sophy valves.
Distortion of the magnetic field with artifacts on acquired images ranged 6 x 6 x
12 cm around the Sophy valve and 4 x 4 x 4 cm around the Medos valves. Artifact
extension increased with longer TE times on T2-weighted images and when using
gradient-echo sequences. The pressure setting of the Medos valves did not change 
in 31 of 88 tests. Below 170 mm H2O, the maximal disadjustment was 60 mm H2O in
each direction. Minor changes of the pressure setting were observed at 50 and 30 
mm H2O. In 11 of 15 tests at 200 mm H2O, the setting after magnetic field
exposure was below 30 mm H2O. One Medos valve could no longer be programmed after
being exposed four times to the static magnetic field. Sophy valves remained at
or changed to "high" in 68 of 81 tests and to "low" in 9. All Sophy valves
exhibited paramagnetic behavior after the tests. All remained programmable.
Observed changes always occurred within the safety area of the magnet.
CONCLUSION: Subjective disturbances resulting from paramagnetic valve behavior
are absent in Medos valves and are minor in Sophy valves. Image artifacts require
careful planning of valve position. Artifacts observed in magnetic resonance
imaging are less disturbing than those observed in computed tomography. Medos
valves are more stable regarding disadjustment than are Sophy valves.
Radiological control of valve setting after exposure to the magnetic field is
mandatory in both. The 0.5-mT safety line encircling the area that patients with 
pacemakers should not enter is a useful safety borderline for patients with
pressure-adjustable valves. Failure of the programming mechanism of one Medos
valve after several exposures to the magnetic field requires clarification.

PMID: 9149264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Protein Sci. 1997 May;6(5):1016-23.

Identification of a novel bond between a histidine and the essential tyrosine in 
catalase HPII of Escherichia coli.

Bravo J(1), Fita I, Ferrer JC, Ens W, Hillar A, Switala J, Loewen PC.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigación y Desarrollo (C.S.I.C.), Barcelona, Spain.

A bond between the N delta of the imidazole ring of His 392 and the C beta of the
essential Tyr 415 has been found in the refined crystal structure at 1.9 A
resolution of catalase HPII of Escherichia coli. This novel type of covalent
linkage is clearly defined in the electron density map of HPII and is confirmed
by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry analysis of
tryptic digest mixtures. The geometry of the bond is compatible with both the sp3
hybridization of the C beta atom and the planarity of the imidazole ring. Two
mutated variants of HPII active site residues, H128N and N201H, do not contain
the His 392-Tyr 415 bond, and their crystal structures show that the imidazole
ring of His 392 was rotated, in both cases, by 80 degrees relative to its
position in HPII. These mutant forms of HPII are catalytically inactive and do
not convert heme b to heme d, suggesting a relationship between the
self-catalyzed heme conversion reaction and the formation of the His-Tyr linkage.
A model coupling the two processes and involving the reaction of one molecule of 
H2O2 on the proximal side of the heme with compound 1 is proposed.

PMCID: PMC2143697
PMID: 9144772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1997 May 1;341(1):140-52.

Effect of acetaldehyde on Sp1 binding and activation of the mouse alpha 2(I)
collagen promoter.

Miao K(1), Potter JJ, Anania FA, Rennie-Tankersley L, Mezey E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21205-2195, USA.

Acetaldehyde activates the mouse alpha 2(I) collagen promoter and this effect is 
mediated in part by increased binding of nuclear factor I (NF-I). Additional
mechanisms may exist since deletions in the promoter upstream to the NF-I binding
site prevented enhancement by acetaldehyde. Three adjacent areas of binding by
nuclear proteins from activated hepatic stellate cells were identified at -568 to
-554 (region 1), -542 to -518 (region 2), and -473 to -453 (region 3) of the
promoter using DNase I protection analyses. Multiple DNA-protein complexes were
formed in electrophoretic mobility shift assays with oligonucleotide probes
specifying the three regions. Sp1 and NF-1 bound to all three regions, while Sp3 
bound to region 2. Acetaldehyde decreased nuclear protein binding to all three
regions. Mutations of regions 1, 2, and 3 reduced basal activity of the promoter 
and inhibited acetaldehyde stimulation in transfected stellate cells.
Acetaldehyde inhibited the stimulatory effect of the Sp1 vector pPacSp1 on the
promoter in transfected Drosophila cells. In conclusion, three regions of Sp1
binding were identified and are required for optimal activity of the alpha 2(I)
collagen promoter. Sp1 is required for basal activity of the alpha 2(I) collagen 
promoter; however, the enhancing effect of acetaldehyde on the promoter is not
mediated by Sp1.

PMID: 9143363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Biol Chem. 1997 Apr 11;272(15):10196-204.

A GT-rich sequence binding the transcription factor Sp1 is crucial for high
expression of the human type VII collagen gene (COL7A1) in fibroblasts and
keratinocytes.

Vindevoghel L(1), Chung KY, Davis A, Kouba D, Kivirikko S, Alder H, Uitto J,
Mauviel A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, Thomas Jefferson University, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

Type VII collagen is the major component of anchoring fibrils, structural
elements that stabilize the attachment of the basement membrane to the underlying
dermis. In this study, we have dissected the human type VII collagen gene
(COL7A1) promoter to characterize the cis-elements responsible for the expression
of the gene in cultured fibroblasts and keratinocytes. Using transient cell
transfections with various 5' end deletion COL7A1 promoter/chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase reporter gene plasmid constructs, we determined that the region
between nucleotides -524 and -456, relative to the transcription start site, is
critical for high promoter activity in both cell types studied. Gel mobility
shift assays using several DNA fragments spanning this region identified a
GT-rich sequence between residues -512 and -505, necessary for the binding of
nuclear proteins to this region of the promoter. Point mutations abolished the
binding of nuclear proteins in gel shift assays and drastically diminished the
activity of the promoter in transient cell transfections. Supershift assays with 
antibodies against various transcription factors including Sp1, Sp3, c-Jun/AP-1, 
and AP-2, and competition experiments with oligonucleotides containing consensus 
sequences for Sp1 and AP-1 binding identified Sp1 as the transcription factor
binding to this region of the COL7A1 promoter. Indeed, recombinant human Sp1 was 
shown to bind the COL7A1 promoter GT-rich element but not its mutated form in gel
mobility shift assays. In addition, co-transfection of pPacSp1, an expression
vector for Sp1, together with the COL7A1 promoter/chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase construct into Sp1-deficient Drosophila Schneider SL2 cells
unequivocally demonstrated that Sp1 is essential for high expression of the
COL7A1 gene. These data represent the first in-depth analysis of the human COL7A1
promoter transcriptional control.

PMID: 9092567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Mol Biol. 1997 Apr 4;267(3):490-504.

Structural and functional analyses of DNA bending induced by Sp1 family
transcription factors.

Sjøttem E(1), Andersen C, Johansen T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Medical Biology, University of
Tromso, Norway.

DNA bending induced by eukaryotic transcription factors may play a direct role in
the activation of transcription by bringing together factors bound at
non-adjacent sites or facilitate binding of factors involved in the formation of 
an initiation complex. The ubiquitously expressed zinc-finger transcription
factor Sp1 is involved in the regulation of a variety of viral and cellular
genes. During the past few years proteins homologous to Sp1 have been described
constituting a family of Sp1 transcription factors. We have used gel
electrophoretic methods to analyse the extent, location and direction of the DNA 
bend induced by four different Sp1 family proteins upon binding to a consensus GC
box. We found that the Sp1 family proteins induce an asymmetric bend in DNA
directed towards the major groove, with a bend centre displaced towards the 3'
end of the GC box. The zinc-finger domain was alone responsible for introducing
this distortion. The magnitude of the induced bend varied between the different
proteins. Construction of a hybrid protein and mutation of the 3' end of the GC
box indicated that zinc finger 1 is important both for the magnitude of the bend 
angle, location of the bend centre and the binding affinity. Transactivation
studies of a Sp1-dependent promoter revealed that a 5 bp insertion between the
TATA box and the GC box, or inversion of the GC box significantly reduced the
promoter activity, indicating that protein-induced bending could be important for
promoter activity. However, no stimulatory effect could be observed in
cotransfections with the DNA binding domain of Sp1 in Drosophila SL-2 cells,
suggesting that the bending activity alone is not sufficient for transactivation.

PMID: 9126833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Leukemia. 1997 Apr;11 Suppl 3:10-3.

Sp family members preferentially interact with the promoter proximal repeat
within the HTLV-I enhancer.

Wessner R(1), Yao J, Wigdahl B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Pennsylvania State University
College of Medicine, Hershey 17033, USA.

Human T cell lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-I) encodes the transactivator
protein, Tax, which facilitates viral transcription from three 21 bp repeated
elements within the U3 region of the long terminal repeat (LTR). Examination of
the basal factors interacting with the 21 bp repeat elements through
electrophoretic mobility shift (EMS) analyses has demonstrated the formation of
DNA-protein complexes common to each of the 21 bp repeats (C1-C3) as well as
three DNA-protein complexes specific to the promoter proximal (pp) repeat (U1
(U1A/U1B) and U2; 1-4). These studies have indicated that the individual repeats 
are not identical with respect to the cellular factors with which they interact. 
EMS analyses utilizing a series of mutated pp repeat elements demonstrate that
the nucleotide sequence requirements for U1 (U1A/U1B) and U2 formation are
separable from those required for C1-C3 formation. Competition EMS analyses
utilizing Sp1 and CREB binding site oligonucleotides demonstrate that Sp family
members are critical components of U1 (U1A/U1B) and U2 and that ATF/CREB family
members are critical components of C1-C3. EMS supershift analyses have
demonstrated that Sp1 is involved in U1A formation while Sp3 is involved in U1B
and U2 formation. EMS analyses performed with nuclear extracts from
Tax-expressing Jurkat cells and HTLV-I-transformed peripheral blood mononuclear
cells demonstrate that Tax prevents the formation of U1 (U1A/U1B) and U2
DNA-protein complexes. Therefore, Tax appears to inhibit the interaction of Sp
family members with the pp repeat. Based on these observations, it is possible
that the interaction of Sp and ATF/CREB family members with the pp repeat during 
basal and Tax-mediated transcription may play a critical role in viral gene
expression during the initial stages of virus infection or during activation of a
latent infection.

PMID: 9209281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Eur J Biochem. 1997 Apr 1;245(1):174-81.

Role of the stimulatory proteins Sp1 and Sp3 in the regulation of transcription
of the rat pyruvate kinase M gene.

Netzker R(1), Weigert C, Brand K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Medical Faculty, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, 
Germany.

Site-directed mutagenesis of cis-regulatory elements in the 5' flanking region of
the rat pyruvate kinase M gene revealed that two out of the three GC boxes
(-133/-124 and -48/-39) are involved in the stimulation of a core promoter
(-35/+46). These two regions were also protected in DNaseI footprinting assays.
Sp1 and Sp3 were identified as binding proteins to all three GC boxes by
supershift experiments. Cotransfections in Drosophila SL2 cells revealed a strong
stimulatory function of Sp1 and a synergistic effect of Sp3 to Sp1 in the
activation of the pyruvate kinase M promoter. No inhibitory effect of Sp3 was
detected. These data indicate that binding of Sp1 at two GC boxes is required for
full promoter activity of the pyruvate kinase M gene and thus contributes to the 
observed cell-cycle-dependent expression of this enzyme in proliferating rat
thymocytes.

PMID: 9128739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Biol Chem. 1997 Mar 7;272(10):6332-40.

Expression of the smooth muscle myosin heavy chain gene is regulated by a
negative-acting GC-rich element located between two positive-acting serum
response factor-binding elements.

Madsen CS(1), Hershey JC, Hautmann MB, White SL, Owens GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.

To identify cis- and trans-acting factors that regulate smooth muscle-specific
gene expression, we studied the smooth muscle myosin heavy chain gene, a rigorous
marker of differentiated smooth muscle. A comparison of smooth muscle myosin
heavy chain promoter sequences from multiple species revealed the presence of a
highly conserved 227-base pair domain (nucleotides -1321 to -1095 in rat).
Results of a deletion analysis of a 4.3-kilobase pair segment of the rat promoter
(nucleotides -4220 to +88) demonstrated that this domain was necessary for
maximal transcriptional activity in smooth muscle cells. Gel-shift analysis and
site-directed mutagenesis demonstrated that one true CArG and another CArG-like
element contained within this domain were both recognized by the serum response
factor and were both required for the positive activity attributable to this
domain. Additional studies demonstrated that mutation of a GC-rich sequence
within the 227-base pair conserved domain resulted in a nearly 100% increase in
transcriptional activity. Gel-shift analysis showed that this GC-rich repressor
element was recognized by both Sp1 and Sp3. These data demonstrate that
transcriptional control of the smooth muscle myosin heavy chain gene is highly
complex, involving both negative and positive regulatory elements, including CArG
sequences found in the promoters of multiple smooth muscle differentiation marker
genes.

PMID: 9045653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Magn Reson. 1997 Mar;125(1):8-19.

New Semi-empirical Approach for the Calculation of 13C Chemical-Shift Tensors

Sternberg U(1), Priess W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut fur Optik und Quantenelektronik, Friedrich-Schiller-Universitat Jena,
Max-Wien-Platz 1, Jena, D-07743, Germany

The semi-empirical bond polarization theory is applied to the calculation of 13C 
chemical-shift tensors. This method allows prediction of shift tensors with
deviations from experiment comparable to the errors of the ab initio methods. In 
contrast to ab initio calculations, a set of empirical parameters is needed,
which can be estimated from experimental chemical-shift tensors solving a set of 
linear equations. The coefficients of this overdetermined set of equations are
bond polarization energies that must be calculated within the framework of this
theory. The parameters for C-C, C-H, and C-O bonds of sp3 and sp2 hybridized
carbons and C-N bonds of sp3 carbons were obtained from 606 equations formed from
experimental data from 20 substances taken from the literature. The substances
include sugars, aromatic compounds, amino acids, and organic acids. The mean
deviation of calculated from experimental 13C chemical-shift tensor components is
9 ppm.

PMID: 9245355  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


249. J Biol Chem. 1997 Feb 21;272(8):4869-82.

The human POLD1 gene. Identification of an upstream activator sequence,
activation by Sp1 and Sp3, and cell cycle regulation.

Zhao L(1), Chang LS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio 43205, USA.

The promoter of the human POLD1 gene encoding the catalytic subunit of DNA
polymerase delta is G/C-rich and does not contain a TATA box. Transient
transfection analysis in HeLa cells employing POLD1-luciferase chimeric plasmids 
revealed a core promoter region extending 328 base pairs (bp) from the major
transcription initiation site. Multiple elements in this region including two
11-bp direct repeats located between nucleotide positions -92 and -22, play an
important role in POLD1 promoter activity. Deletion or linker-replacement
mutations of the repeats drastically reduced the promoter activity. A 70-bp DNA
fragment containing the two repeats could stimulate the expression of the POLD1
or a heterologous promoter in an orientation-independent manner. DNase I
footprinting and band-shift assays showed that HeLa nuclear extracts contained
proteins specifically binding to the repeat sequences. Southwestern blot and UV
cross-linking analyses identified Sp1 and two 85-kDa proteins that bound to the
repeats. Additionally, screening of HeLa cDNA expression libraries for the
sequence-specific DNA-binding protein using the 11-bp repeat sequences as the
probe, identified a cDNA that corresponds to Sp3, a member of the Sp1 family.
Cotransfection studies in Drosophila SL2 cells showed that both Sp1 and Sp3, but 
not Sp2, could activate the POLD1 promoter through the repeat sequences. The
POLD1 promoter activity was induced about 4-fold at the late G1/S boundary in
serum-stimulated cells. The 11-bp repeats together with an E2F-like sequence,
located adjacent to the major transcription initiation site, were important for
the stimulation. Taken together, this study provides a direct evidence for
transcriptional regulation of the human POLD1 gene.

PMID: 9030545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. J Biol Chem. 1997 Feb 14;272(7):4021-6.

Sp3 is a bifunctional transcription regulator with modular independent activation
and repression domains.

Majello B(1), De Luca P, Lania L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Molecular and General Biology, University of Naples
"Federico II," via Mezzocannone 8, 80134 Naples 10, Italy.

Sp3 is a member of the Sp family of transcription factors and binds to DNA with
affinity and specificity comparable to that of Sp1. We demonstrate that Sp3 is a 
bifunctional transcription factor that can both activate and repress
transcription. Gene fusion experiments in mammalian cells demonstrate that the
Sp3 activation potential is distributed over an extensive glutamine-rich
N-terminal region, whereas the repressor activity has been mapped in a 72-amino
acid region located at the 5' of the zinc finger DNA-binding domain. We
demonstrated that the repression activity is strictly dependent on the context of
the DNA-binding sites bound by Sp3. We found that Sp3 represses transcription of 
promoters bearing multiple GAL4 DNA-binding sites, whereas it activates isogenic 
reporters containing a single GAL4-binding site. Transfection experiments in
Drosophila cells that lack endogenous Sp activity demonstrated that Sp3 does not 
possess an active repression domain that can function in insect cells, rather it 
is a weak transcriptional activator of the c-myc promoter. Our results strongly
suggest that Sp3 is a dual-function regulator whose activity is dependent upon
both the promoter and the cellular context.

PMID: 9020109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Virology. 1997 Feb 3;228(1):11-8.

Binding of the ubiquitous cellular transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 to the ZI
domains in the Epstein-Barr virus lytic switch BZLF1 gene promoter.

Liu S(1), Borras AM, Liu P, Suske G, Speck SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
Missouri 63110, USA.

Induction of the Epstein-Barr virus lytic cycle in latently infected B cells
requires the expression of the immediate-early lytic gene BZLF1. We have
previously identified several cis-elements within the BZLF1 promoter that are
required for induction by known inducers of the lytic cycle [E. Flemington and S.
H. Speck (1990)J. Virol. 64, 1217-1226]. These include four elements termed the
ZI domains (ZIA, ZIB, ZIC, and ZID) that share extensive homology and that have
recently been shown to bind several cellular transcription factors [A. M. Borras,
J. L. Strominger, and S. H. Speck (1996) J. Virol. 70, 3894-3901]. Here Sp1 and
Sp3 are identified as the cellular factors present in crude B cell nuclear
extract preparations that bind to the ZIC domain. In addition, three of the four 
complexes observed in electrophoretic mobility shift analyses employing probes
containing either the ZIA or the ZID domains also represent Sp1 or Sp3 binding.
Binding of Sp1 and Sp3 to the ZI domains was shown to be significantly weaker
than binding of these factors to a consensus Sp1 site. A heterologous promoter
construct containing three repeats of a consensus Sp1 site, cloned upstream of a 
single copy of the ZII (CREB/ AP1) element from the BZLF1 promoter linked to the 
beta-globin TATA box, exhibited phorbol ester inducibility. The latter
observation was consistent with the functional behavior exhibited by a
heterologous promoter construct containing multiple copies of the ZIC domain
liked to the ZII element. However, the basal activity of the heterologous
promoter construct driven by the consensus Sp1 sites was ca. 10-fold higher than 
that of the heterologous reporter construct containing multimerized ZIC sites.
Thus, the low affinity of Sp1 binding to the ZI domains may contribute to the
low-level basal activity of the BZLF1 promoter.

PMID: 9024805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jan 31;272(5):3083-90.

Functional analysis of surfactant protein B (SP-B) promoter. Sp1, Sp3, TTF-1, and
HNF-3alpha transcription factors are necessary for lung cell-specific activation 
of SP-B gene transcription.

Margana RK(1), Boggaram V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The University of Texas Health Science Center
at Tyler, Tyler, Texas 75710, USA.

Surfactant protein B (SP-B) is essential for maintenance of biophysical
properties and physiological function of pulmonary surfactant. SP-B mRNA
expression is restricted to alveolar type II epithelial cells and bronchiolar
epithelial cells (Clara cells) of adult lung. We previously (Margana, R. K., and 
Boggaram, V. (1996) Am. J. Physiol. 270, L601-L612) found that a minimal promoter
region (-236 to +39) of rabbit SP-B gene is sufficient for high level expression 
of chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter gene in NCI-H441 cells, a cell line
with characteristics of Clara cells. In the present study we used mutational
analysis, electrophoretic mobility shift assays, and DNase I footprinting to
identify cis-DNA regulatory elements and trans-acting protein factors required
for lung cell-specific expression of SP-B gene. We found that in addition to
thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) and hepatocyte nuclear factor 3alpha
(HNF-3alpha) binding sites, two spatially separate DNA sequences that bind Sp1
and Sp3 factors are necessary for the maintenance of SP-B promoter activity.
Mutation of any one of the transcription factor binding sites caused a
significant reduction in SP-B promoter activity suggesting that Sp1, Sp3, and
TTF-1 and HNF-3alpha interact cooperatively with SP-B promoter to activate gene
transcription.

PMID: 9006959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jan 10;272(2):1308-14.

Involvement of the Sp3 transcription factor in induction of p21Cip1/WAF1 in
keratinocyte differentiation.

Prowse DM(1), Bolgan L, Molnár A, Dotto GP.

Author information: 
(1)Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown
02129, USA.

The cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 is induced in several in vitro terminal
differentiation systems as well as in differentiating tissues in vivo. To
determine the mechanism responsible for p21 induction during differentiation of
mouse primary keratinocytes, we performed a deletion analysis of the p21
promoter. The minimal region of the p21 promoter required for its induction in
keratinocyte differentiation consists of a contiguous stretch of 78 base pairs,
which contains a GC-rich region as well as the TATA box. We determined that
transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3, present in primary keratinocyte nuclear
extracts, bind the GC region concomitantly. Expression studies established that
both Sp1 and Sp3 activate the p21 promoter, but showed that only Sp3
overexpression enhances promoter inducibility during differentiation.
Furthermore, disruption of the GC-rich region dramatically decreases
transcription factor binding as well as promoter activity and inducibility upon
differentiation. The overexpression of either Sp1 or Sp3 restores the basal
activity of the disrupted promoter, but only Sp3 can restore its inducibility.
These findings show that both Sp1 and Sp3 can contribute to the basal activity of
the p21 promoter, and establish Sp3 as a specific transcription factor involved
in the induction of p21 promoter during keratinocyte differentiation.

PMID: 8995437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jan 10;272(2):1127-35.

An active site substitution, F87V, converts cytochrome P450 BM-3 into a regio-
and stereoselective (14S,15R)-arachidonic acid epoxygenase.

Graham-Lorence S(1), Truan G, Peterson JA, Falck JR, Wei S, Helvig C, Capdevila
JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas 75235, USA.

Cytochrome P450 BM-3 catalyzes the high turnover regio- and stereoselective
metabolism of arachidonic and eicosapentaenoic acids. To map structural
determinants of productive active site fatty acid binding, we mutated two amino
acid residues, arginine 47 and phenylalanine 87, which flank the surface and heme
ends of the enzyme's substrate access channel, respectively. Replacement of
arginine 47 with glutamic acid resulted in a catalytically inactive mutant.
Replacement of arginine 47 with alanine yielded a protein with reduced substrate 
binding affinity and arachidonate sp3 carbon hydroxylation activity (72% of
control wild type). On the other hand, arachidonic and eicosapentaenoic acid
epoxidation was significantly enhanced (154 and 137%, of control wild type,
respectively). As with wild type, the alanine 47 mutant generated
(18R)-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic, (14S,15R)-epoxyeicosatrienoic, and
(17S,18R)-epoxyeicosatetraenoic acids nearly enantiomerically pure. Replacement
of phenylalanine 87 with valine converted cytochrome P450 BM-3 into a regio- and 
stereoselective arachidonic acid epoxygenase ((14S,15R)-epoxyeicosatrienoic acid,
99% of total products). Conversely, metabolism of eicosapentaenoic acid by the
valine 87 mutant yielded a mixture of (14S,15R)- and
(17S,18R)-epoxyeicosatetraenoic acids (26 and 69% of total, 94 and 96% optical
purity, respectively). Finally, replacement of phenylalanine 87 with tyrosine
yielded an inactive protein. We propose that: (a) fatty acid oxidation by P450
BM-3 is incompatible with the presence of residues with negatively charged side
chains at the surface opening of the substrate access channel or a polar aromatic
side chain in the vicinity of the heme iron; (b) the high turnover regio- and
stereoselective metabolism of arachidonic and eicosapentaenoic acids involves
charge-dependent anchoring of the fatty acids at the mouth of the access channel 
by arginine 47, as well as steric gating of the heme-bound oxidant by
phenylalanine 87; and (c) substrate binding coordinates, as opposed to oxygen
chemistries, are the determining factors responsible for reaction rates, product 
chemistry, and, thus, catalytic outcome.

PMID: 8995412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Biomaterials. 1997 Jan;18(1):47-51.

Novel anti-calcification treatment of biological tissues by grafting of
sulphonated poly(ethylene oxide).

Park KD(1), Lee WK, Yun JY, Han DK, Kim SH, Kim YH, Kim HM, Kim KT.

Author information: 
(1)Polymer Chemistry Laboratory, Korea Institute of Science and Technology,
Seoul, Korea.

Biological porcine tissue was modified by the direct coupling of sulphonated
poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO-SO3) containing amino acid end groups after
glutaraldehyde fixation. The calcification of the modified tissue [bioprosthetic 
tissue (BT)-PEO-SO3] and control (BT control) was investigated by in vivo rate
subdermal, canine aorta-illiac shunt and right ventricle-pulmonary artery shunt
implantation models. Less calcium deposition of BT-PEO-SP3 than of BT control was
observed in in vivo tests. Such a reduced calcification of BT-PEO-SO3 can be
explained by decreases of residual glutaraldehyde groups, a space filling effect 
and, therefore, improved biostability and synergistic blood-compatible effects of
PEO and SO3 groups after the covalent binding of PEO-SO3 to tissue. This simple
method can be a useful anti-calcification treatment for implantable tissue
valves.

PMID: 9003896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Mol Reprod Dev. 1997 Jan;46(1):39-44; discussion 44-5.

Transcriptional regulation of the mouse CSF-1 gene.

Harrington M(1), Konicek BW, Xia XL, Song A.

Author information: 
(1)Indiana University, Indianapolis 46202, USA.

Research in our laboratory is aimed at understanding the cellular and molecular
mechanisms that govern colony stimulating factor-1 (CSF-1) gene expression. Our
hypothesis is that a basal set of trans-acting factors is bound to the CSF-1 gene
during fibroblast proliferation, resulting in constitutive CSF-1 gene expression.
Modulation of CSF-1 gene transcription by growth-arrest (decrease) or stimulation
of growth-arrested fibroblasts (re-initiate) is mediated by changes in the basal 
set of factors bound and/or by the addition of stimulus-specific factors. We have
extended our hypothesis to include other cell types (monocytes) to determine if
mechanisms used to control CSF-1 gene expression in fibroblasts are unique or
represent common nontissue-specific regulatory mechanisms. Analysis of CSF-1-CAT 
reporter constructs in transiently transfected fibroblasts and monocytes was used
to identify CSF-1 genomic sequences that affect transcriptional activity. DNase I
protection, electrophoretic mobility shift, and methylation interference assays
were used to identify the putative cis-acting elements. Results of our study
suggest multiple trans-acting factors may regulate CSF-1 gene expression; some
may be tissue specific, while others, such as AP1, CTF/NF1, Sp1, and Sp3, are
shared in common.

PMID: 8981362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Biol Chem. 1996 Nov 15;271(46):28853-60.

Insulin-like growth factor-I regulates transcription of the elastin gene through 
a putative retinoblastoma control element. A role for Sp3 acting as a repressor
of elastin gene transcription.

Conn KJ(1), Rich CB, Jensen DE, Fontanilla MR, Bashir MM, Rosenbloom J, Foster
JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts 02118, USA. foster@med-biochem.bu.edu

Previous studies have demonstrated that insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I)
increases elastin gene transcription in aortic smooth muscle cells and that this 
up-regulation is accompanied by a loss of protein binding to the proximal
promoter. Sp1 has been identified as one of the factors whose binding is lost,
and in the present study we show that Sp3 binding is also abrogated by IGF-I, but
in a selected manner. In functional analyses using Drosophila SL-2 cells, Sp1
expression can drive transcription from the elastin proximal promoter, while
co-expression of Sp3 results in a repression of Sp1 activity. Footprint and gel
shift analyses position the IGF-I responsive sequences to a putative
retinoblastoma control element (RCE). Mutation of the putative RCE sequence as
assessed by transient transfection of smooth muscle cells results in an increase 
in reporter activity equal in magnitude to that conferred by IGF-I on the wild
type promoter. Together these results support the hypothesis that IGF-I-mediated 
increase in elastin transcription occurs via a mechanism of derepression
involving the abrogation of a repressor that appears to be Sp3 binding to the
RCE.

PMID: 8910531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Oncogene. 1996 Nov 7;13(9):1955-64.

Cell specific expression of human Bruton's agammaglobulinemia tyrosine kinase
gene (Btk) is regulated by Sp1- and Spi-1/PU.1-family members.

Müller S(1), Sideras P, Smith CI, Xanthopoulos KG.

Author information: 
(1)Center for BioTechnology, Karolinska Institute, Department of Bioscience at
NOVUM, Huddinge, Sweden.

Bruton's agammaglobulinemia tyrosine kinase (Btk) is a cytoplasmic tyrosine
kinase involved in the human disease X-linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA). The gene 
is expressed in all hematopoietic cells with the exception of T-cells and plasma 
cells. For this expression pattern the first 280 bp upstream of the major
transcriptional start site seems to be sufficient. In vitro footprinting analysis
within this part of the promoter revealed two Sp1 binding sites as well as a
PU-box. The transcription factor Spi-1/PU.1 as well as the closely related factor
Spi-B bound to the PU-box in B-cells. In the erythroleukemia cell line K562, due 
to the absence of Spi-B, only PU.1 bound to the Btk promoter. Mutation of either 
site reduced the expression in transient transfection experiments. However,
mutation of the PU box had no effect in the T-cell line Jurkat, where none of the
Spi-1 family members is expressed. In addition Spi-B as well as PU.1 were able to
transactivate Btk expression. In fetal liver of PU.1-/- mice, which lack lymphoid
and myeloid cells, expression of Btk was reduced two- to threefold but not
abolished. Collectively this study shows that expression of the Btk gene is
regulated by the combined action of Sp1- and PU.1-family members.

PMID: 8934542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Clin Pharmacokinet. 1996 Nov;31(5):331-47.

Clinical pharmacokinetics of tiaprofenic acid and its enantiomers.

Davies NM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University
of Calgary, Canada. ndavies@acs.ucalgary.ca

Tiaprofenic acid is a chiral nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) of the
2-arylpropionic acid (2-APA) class. A common structural feature of 2-APA NSAIDs
is a sp3-hybridised tetrahedral chiral carbon heteroatom within the propionic
acid side chain moiety, with the S-enantiomer possessing most of the beneficial
anti-inflammatory activity. However, all tiaprofenic acid preparations to date
are marketed as the racemate. Tiaprofenic acid has been suggested to exhibit
limited pharmacokinetic stereoselectivity. The synovium is the proposed site of
action of NSAIDs when used for musculoskeletal disorders, and substantial
concentrations of tiaprofenic acid are attained in synovial fluid. Recent data
suggested that possibility of stereoselective distribution of tiaprofenic acid
into synovium and cartilage. Hence, data generated using non-stereospecific
assays may not always be extrapolated to explain the disposition of the
individual enantiomers. Tiaprofenic acid is rapidly and almost completely
absorbed when given orally. The area under the plasma concentration-time curve
(AUC) of tiaprofenic acid is proportional to the oral dose administered. A
sustained release dosage form is available, which may be beneficial due to the
short terminal phase half-life of tiaprofenic acid (3 to 6 hours). The
bioavailability is the same as that with conventional rapid release preparations,
although the peak plasma drug concentration is reduced and time peak is
prolonged. Tiaprofenic acid binds extensively to plasma albumin. These is
negligible R to S inversion upon oral administration. Tiaprofenic acid is
eliminated following extensive biotransformation to glucuronide-conjugated
metabolites. Approximately 60% is eliminated as conjugates excreted in urine, and
little drug is eliminated unchanged. The rate of excretion of tiaprofenic acid
and its conjugates may be related to renal function; accumulation of conjugates
occurs in end-stage renal disease, but not in young individuals or elderly
patients. Potentially clinically important drug interactions with tiaprofenic
acid have been demonstrated for some anticoagulants and probenecid. Relationships
between tiaprofenic acid concentrations in biological matrices and therapeutic or
toxic effects have not yet been elucidated for this drug.

PMID: 9118583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Genomics. 1996 Nov 1;37(3):410-2.

Human Sp3 transcriptional regulator gene (SP3) maps to chromosome 2q31.

Kalff-Suske M(1), Kunz J, Grzeschik KH, Suske G.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinisches Zentrum für Humangenetik, Philipps-Universität, Marburg,
Germany.

PMID: 8938460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Nov;16(11):6178-89.

Sp1 binding plays a critical role in Erb-B2- and v-ras-mediated downregulation of
alpha2-integrin expression in human mammary epithelial cells.

Ye J(1), Xu RH, Taylor-Papadimitriou J, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Center, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA.

The human alpha2-integrin gene is transcriptionally downregulated in a
nontumorigenic human mammary epithelial cell line, MTSV1-7, and its clonal
variant HB2, overexpressing the Erb-B2 oncogene. In this study, we have used
deletion mutations within the alpha2-integrin promoter inserted 5' of the
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase or luciferase reporter genes to identify the
element that is responsible for the Erb-B2-mediated downregulation. The results
of the transient-transfection assay showed that the Sp1 binding element located
in the core region (positions --64 to +1) of the alpha2-integrin promoter plays
an essential role in the alpha2-integrin promoter activity and its downregulation
by Erb-B2. By gel shift assay, we have demonstrated that this element binds with 
a high degree of affinity not only to Sp1, but also to Sp3. The downregulation of
the alpha2-integrin promoter activity could also be achieved by overexpression of
v-Hras (v-ras), suggesting that the signals generated by Erb-B2, which lead to
downregulation of the alpha2-integrin gene expression, may proceed through the
ras pathway. Both the Erb-B2- and the v-ras-overexpressing cells exhibited a Sp1 
DNA binding activity lower than that of the parental line, while the relative
levels of Sp1 protein in these cells were not altered. The Erb-B2- and
v-ras-mediated downregulation could be reversed by the overexpression of Sp1 and 
by a dominant negative variant of ras (rasN17), confirming the importance of Sp1 
and the ras pathway. The inhibitory effects of Erb-B2 on transcriptional activity
of the alpha2-integrin promoter were observed in transient-cotransfection assays 
using alpha2-integrin reporter plasmids and plasmids expressing the Erb-B2 or
v-ras oncogene. The same effects were seen when an alpha2-integrin reporter gene 
construct was transfected into MTSV1-7 or HB2 cells permanently overexpressing
Erb-B2 or v-ras. The effects of Erb-B2 or v-ras on the transcriptional activity
of the alpha2-integrin promoter were observed in nontumorigenic luminal
epithelial cell lines (MTSV1-7 and HB2) as well as in the breast cancer cell line
T47D. These data suggest that in luminal epithelial cells and the breast cancers 
which develop from them, the Erb-B2 proto-oncogene signaling leads to inhibition 
of (alpha)2(beta)1-integrin gene expression and could contribute to the
disruption of tissue architecture seen in breast cancers.

PMCID: PMC231621
PMID: 8887648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. EMBO J. 1996 Oct 15;15(20):5659-67.

An inhibitor domain in Sp3 regulates its glutamine-rich activation domains.

Dennig J(1), Beato M, Suske G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Germany.

Sp3 is a ubiquitously expressed human transcription factor closely related to Sp1
and Sp4. All three proteins contain a highly conserved DNA binding domain and two
glutamine-rich regions, suggesting that they possess similar activation
functions. In our previous experiments, however, Sp3 failed to activate
transcription. Instead, it repressed Sp1-mediated transcriptional activation,
suggesting that it is an inhibitory member of this family of regulatory factors. 
Here we show that Sp3 can also act as a positive regulator of transcription. The 
glutamine-rich domains on their own have a strong activation function and
interact with the TATA box binding protein (TBP)-associated factor dTAFII110.
However, in full-length Sp3 as well as in Gal4-Sp3 fusion proteins, both
activation domains are silenced by an inhibitory domain located between the
second glutamine-rich region and the DNA binding domain. The inhibitory domain
completely suppressed transcriptional activation when fused to a heterologous
glutamine-rich domain but only moderately suppressed transcription when linked to
an acidic activation domain. Site-directed mutagenesis identified a stretch of
highly charged amino acid residues essential for inhibitor function. Substitution
of the amino acid triplet KEE by alanine residues within this region changed the 
almost transcriptionally inactive Sp3 into a strong activator. Our results
suggest that the transcriptional activity of Sp3 might be regulated in vivo by
relief of inhibition.

PMCID: PMC452310
PMID: 8896459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Oct 1;24(19):3661-9.

SP1-binding elements, within the common metaxin-thrombospondin 3 intergenic
region, participate in the regulation of the metaxin gene.

Collins M(1), Bornstein P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle 98195, USA.

Metaxin (Mtx) is an essential nuclear gene which is expressed ubiquitously in
mice and encodes a mitochondrial protein. The gene is located upstream and is
transcribed divergently from the thrombospondin 3 (Thbs3) gene; 1352 nucleotides 
separate the putative translation start sites. Although the Mtx and Thbs3 genes
share a common intergenic region, transient transfection experiments in rat
chondro-sarcoma cells and in NIH-3T3 fibroblasts demonstrated that the elements
required for expression of the Mtx gene are situated within a short proximal
promoter and have no major effect on the transcription of Thbs3. The metaxin
--377 bp promoter contains four clustered GC boxes between nucleotides --146 and 
--58 and an inverted GT box between nucleotides --152 and --161, but does not
contain TATA or CCAAT boxes. Like many genes regulated by a TATA-less promoter,
the transcription start site of metaxin is heterogeneous. The major start site is
only 13 bp upstream from the putative translation start site. Electrophoretic
mobility shift, competition and supershift assays showed that the ubiquitous
transcription factor, Sp1, and, to a lesser extent, the Sp1-related protein, Sp3,
bind to four of these Sp1-binding motifs. Co-transfection of metaxin
promoter-luciferase constructs and an Sp1 expression vector into Schneider
Drosophila cells, which do not synthesize Sp1, demonstrated that the metaxin gene
is activated by Sp1. Deletion of the four upstream Sp1-binding elements, on the
other hand, demonstrated that these motifs are superfluous in context of the
larger Mtx promoter. Thus, despite the potential for common regulatory
mechanisms, the available evidence indicates that the Mtx minimal promoter does
not significantly affect Thbs3 gene expression.

PMCID: PMC146160
PMID: 8871542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Virology. 1996 Oct 1;224(1):281-91.

High Sp1/Sp3 ratios in epithelial cells during epithelial differentiation and
cellular transformation correlate with the activation of the HPV-16 promoter.

Apt D(1), Watts RM, Suske G, Bernard HU.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Papillomavirus Biology, National University of Singapore,
Singapore.

Gene expression of human papillomavirus type 16 (HPV-16) and other HPV types is
epithelial specific. Specificity is brought about by synergism between several
different transcription factors that seem to occur ubiquitously but differ
qualitatively and quantitatively between cells in which HPV genomes are
transcriptionally active or inactive. Here, we report on the contribution to this
combinatorial mechanism by the activator Sp1 and the related antagonist Sp3, both
of which can bind a single site at the E6 promoter of all genital HPVs. In the
Sp-factor-free background of Drosophila cells, Sp1 activates HPV-16
transcription, while Sp3 fails to do so and even inhibits the activation by Sp1. 
The same differential activation occurs in the case of promoters of the
epithelial-specific cellular genes encoding keratin 18 and E-cadherin. All cell
types that we examined contain similar amounts of Sp3 factor. In contrast, Sp1
levels, determined by supershifts and Western blots, are higher in several human 
epithelial cell lines that support HPV transcription than in human fibroblasts,
liver, and muscle cells. This suggests that cell-type differential transcription 
is regulated by Sp1 and Sp3. In primary keratinocytes, Sp3 levels exceed those of
Sp1. This ratio became inverted after differentiating these cells in high
calcium, or methyl cellulose containing medium. The simultaneous transcriptional 
stimulation of the HPV promoter points to a role of the Sp1-Sp3 antagonism during
a differentiation of stratified epithelia in vivo, as these culture techniques
mimick this process in vitro. Transformation in vivo or in vitro seems to
override these cell-type-specific controls and leads to a general increase of Sp1
activity.

PMID: 8862423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Phys Rev B Condens Matter. 1996 Sep 15;54(11):8064-8069.

Separation of the sp3 and sp2 components in the C1s photoemission spectra of
amorphous carbon films.

Díaz J, Paolicelli G, Ferrer S, Comin F.

PMID: 9984485  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


266. J Biol Chem. 1996 Sep 13;271(37):22663-71.

The highly stereoselective oxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids by cytochrome
P450BM-3.

Capdevila JH(1), Wei S, Helvig C, Falck JR, Belosludtsev Y, Truan G,
Graham-Lorence SE, Peterson JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University Medical School, Nashville,
Tennessee 37232, USA.

Cytochrome P450BM-3 catalyzes NADPH-dependent metabolism of arachidonic acid to
nearly enantiomerically pure 18(R)-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid and 14(S),
15(R)-epoxyeicosatrienoic acid (80 and 20% of total products, respectively).
P450BM-3 oxidizes arachidonic acid with a rate of 3.2 +/- 0.4 micromol/min/nmol
at 30 degrees C, the fastest ever reported for an NADPH-dependent, P450-catalyzed
reaction. Fatty acid, oxygen, and NADPH are utilized in an approximately 1:1:1
molar ratio, demonstrating efficient coupling of electron transport to
monooxygenation. Eicosapentaenoic and eicosatrienoic acids, two arachidonic acid 
analogs that differ in the properties of the C-15-C-18 carbons, are also actively
metabolized by P450BM-3 (1.4 +/- 0.2 and 2.9 +/- 0.1 micromol/min/nmol at 30
degrees C, respectively). While the 17,18-olefinic bond of eicosapentaenoic acid 
is epoxidized with nearly absolute regio- and stereochemical selectivity to
17(S),18(R)-epoxyeicosatetraenoic acid (>/=99% of total products, 97% optical
purity), P450BM-3 is only moderately regioselective during hydroxylation of the
eicosatrienoic acid omega-1, omega-2, and omega-3 sp3 carbons, with 17-, 18-, and
19-hydroxyeicosatrienoic acid formed in a ratio of 2.4:2.2:1, respectively. Based
on the above and on a model of arachidonic acid-bound P450BM-3, we propose: 1)
the formation by P450BM-3 of a single oxidant species capable of olefinic bond
epoxidation and sp3 carbon hydroxylation and 2) that product chemistry and, thus,
catalytic outcome are critically dependent on active site spatial coordinates
responsible for substrate binding and productive orientation between heme-bound
active oxygen and acceptor carbon bond(s).

PMID: 8798438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Mol Biol. 1996 Sep 6;261(5):634-45.

Enzymatic C5-cytosine methylation of DNA: mechanistic implications of new crystal
structures for HhaL methyltransferase-DNA-AdoHcy complexes.

O'Gara M(1), Klimasauskas S, Roberts RJ, Cheng X.

Author information: 
(1)W.M. Keck Structural Biology Laboratory Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, NY
11724, USA.

The refined crystal structures of HhaI methyltransferase complexed with cognate
unmethylated or methylated DNA together with S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine, along
with the previously-solved binary and covalent ternary structures, offer a
detailed picture of the active site at individual stages throughout the reaction 
cycle. This picture supports and extends a proposed mechanism for C5-cytosine
methylation that may be general for the whole family of C5-cytosine
methyltransferases. The structures of the two new complexes have been refined to 
crystallographic R-factors of 0.189 and 0.178, respectively, at 2.7 A resolution.
We observe that both unmethylated 2'-deoxycytidine and 5-methyl-2'-deoxycytidine 
flip out of the DNA helix and fit into the active site of the enzyme. The
catalytic sulfur atom of Cys81 interacts strongly with C6. The C5 methyl group of
the flipped 5-methyl-2'-deoxycytidine is bent approximately 50 degrees out of the
plane of the cytosine ring and towards the sulfur atom of
S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine. This unusual position is probably due to partial sp3
character at C5 and C6 and to steric effects of the conserved amino acid residues
Pro80 and Cys81. Two water molecules are held near the hydrophobic edge (C5 and
C6) of the flipped cytosine by two conserved amino acid residues (Gln82 and
Asn304) and the phosphoryl oxygen atom of the phosphate group 3' to the flipped
nucleotide, and one of them may serve as the general base for eliminating the
proton from C5. Protonation of the cytosine N3 during the methylation reaction
may involve Glu119, which itself might be protonated via a water-mediated
interaction between the terminal carboxyl group of Glu119 and the amino group of 
the methionine moiety of S-adenosyl-L-methionine. The cofactor thus plays two key
roles in the reaction.

PMID: 8800212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Virchows Arch. 1996 Sep;429(1):21-6.

Immunohistochemical detection of truncated APC protein in sporadic human
colorectal adenomas and adenocarcinomas.

Akehi S(1), Murao S, Ueda N, Okujima M, Magaribuchi T, Saheki S, Nishimukai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Ehime University School of Medicine, Japan.

Mutations of the APC gene frequently occur in sporadic forms of colorectal
adenomas and adenocarcinomas. Phenotypically, the vast majority of these
mutations result in the truncation of the APC protein. To demonstrate the
defective APC gene product in human colorectal tumors, rabbit region-specific
antisera raised against the APC protein of amino acid sequences between 371 and
390 (SPI) and between 1821 and 1840 (SP3) were used to exhibit the truncated APC 
protein. In all, 86 lesions from 67 cases of sporadic adenoma and adenocarcinoma 
were examined; abnormal staining patterns were distinguished in 43 lesions (50%);
the incidence of abnormalities was not significantly different between adenomas
and carcinomas. The majority, 75% exhibited epitopic change with the SPI-positive
and SP3-negative phenotype (type P1), and 25% exhibited neither of these
phenotypes (type P2). The staining pattern in all lesions was uniform, and
studies of carcinomas arising in adenomas showed the same pattern of staining.
These findings supported the view that the APC lesion is a very early event in
colorectal carcinogenesis. Furthermore, this simple immunohistochemical approach 
demonstrated that different adenomas from the same patient showed different
staining patterns.

PMID: 8865849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Oncogene. 1996 Aug 15;13(4):863-71.

Functional analysis of the SIS proximal element and its activating factors:
regulated transcription of the c-SIS/PDGF-B gene in human erythroleukemia cells.

Liang Y(1), Robinson DF, Kujoth GC, Fahl WE.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin, Madison
53706, USA.

The SIS proximal element (SPE) is essential for the basal transcription of the
c-sis/PDGF-B gene as well as the lineage-specific, activated transcription of
this gene seen in megakaryocytes. In gel mobility shift analyses, the SPE element
forms three gel-shift complexes; the t(op) and b(ottom) complexes were detected
in nuclear extracts from both untreated and phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate
('tetradecanoylphorbol acetate', TPA) treated K562 cells, whereas the m(iddle)
complex was detected only in nuclear extracts from TPA-treated K562 cells.
Site-directed mutagenesis of the SPE revealed a CCACCC motif that was essential
for promoter activity as well as the formation of all three SPE gel-shift
complexes. Nested-deletion analyses showed that the SPE was required for
TPA-inducibility of c-sis/PDGF-B transcription. Antibody supershift analyses
demonstrated that the t gel-shift complex contained both Sp1 and Sp3, and that
the b complex contained only Sp3. In vitro transcription assays demonstrated that
both Sp1 and Sp3 could support c-sis/PDGF-B transcription independent of each
other in untreated K562 cells. However, overexpression of Sp1/Sp3 failed to
significantly increase the c-sis/PDGF-B transcription in K562 cells.

PMID: 8761308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Mol Reprod Dev. 1996 Aug;44(4):460-71.

Binding of transcription factors to widely-separated cis-regulatory elements of
the murine FGF-4 gene.

Lamb K(1), Rosfjord E, Brigman K, Rizzino A.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha 68198-6805, USA.

Embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells and their embryo-derived counterparts, embryonic
stem (ES) cells, have been used extensively to study the transcriptional
regulation of the fibroblast growth factor-4 (FGF-4) gene. The FGF-4 gene is
expressed in EC cells and ES cells, but it is repressed in their retinoic acid
(RA)-induced differentiated counterparts. Previous studies have shown that the
transcription of the FGF-4 gene is controlled by cis-regulatory elements located 
in the 5' flanking region of the gene, and by a powerful enhancer located
approximately 3 kb downstream from the transcription start site. In the current
study, gel mobility shift analysis was used to examine the binding of nuclear
proteins to cis-regulatory elements involved in the transcription of the FGF-4
gene. We demonstrate that the transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 in nuclear
extracts prepared from EC cells bind to three Sp1 motifs, one located in the
downstream enhancer, and two located in the 5' flanking region of the gene. We
also show that Sp1 and Sp3 bind to each of the Sp1 motifs when nuclear extracts
prepared from EC-derived differentiated cells are used. In contrast,
differentiation of EC cells and ES cells drastically reduces the ability of
nuclear factors to bind to an octamer motif and an adjacent High Mobility Group
(HMG) motif, which have been shown previously to play essential roles in the
functioning of the FGF-4 enhancer. Together, these findings provide a mechanistic
explanation of how the distant FGF-4 enhancer promotes transcription of this gene
in EC cells and ES cells, and how differentiation of these cells represses
transcription of the FGF-4 gene.

PMID: 8844688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Biophys J. 1996 Aug;71(2):840-7.

Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopic studies on avidin secondary structure
and complexation with biotin and biotin-lipid assemblies.

Swamy MJ(1), Heimburg T, Marsh D.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry, University of Hyderabad, India.

Fourier-transform infrared studies have been carried out to investigate the
secondary structure and thermal stability of hen egg white avidin and its
complexes with biotin and with a biotinylated lipid derivative, N-biotinyl
dimyristoyl phosphatidylethanolamine (DMBPE) in aqueous dispersion. Analysis of
the amide I stretching band of avidin yielded a secondary structural content
composed of approximately 66% beta-sheet and extended structures, with the
remainder being attributed to disordered structure and beta-turns. Binding of
biotin or specific association with the biotinylated lipid DMBPE did not result
in any appreciable changes in the secondary structure content of the protein, but
a change in hydrogen bond stability of the beta-sheet or extended chain regions
was indicated. The latter effect was enhanced by surface interactions in the case
of the biotin-lipid assemblies, as was demonstrated by electrostatic binding to a
nonspecific negatively charged lipid. Difference spectra of the bound biotin
implicated a direct involvement of the ureido moiety in the ligand interaction
that was consistent with hydrogen bonding to amino acid residues in the avidin
protein. It was found that complexation with avidin leads to a decrease in bond
length of the biotin ureido carbonyl group that is consistent with a reduction of
sp3 character of the C-O bond when it is hydrogen bonded to the protein. Studies 
of the temperature dependence of the spectra revealed that for avidin alone the
secondary structure was unaltered up to approximately 75 degrees C, above which
the protein undergoes a highly cooperative transition to an unfolded state with
concomitant loss of ordered secondary structure. The complexes of avidin with
both biotin and membrane-bound DMBPE lipid assemblies display a large increase in
thermal stability compared with the native protein.

PMCID: PMC1233540
PMID: 8842222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Dev Comp Immunol. 1996 Jul-Aug;20(4):265-72.

Induction of a putative serine protease transcript in immune challenged
Drosophila.

Coustau C(1), Rocheleau T, Carton Y, Nappi AJ, ffrench-Constant RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, University of Wisconsin, Madison 53706, USA.

In an effort to identify serine proteases involved in the insect's immune
response, we used a degenerate PCR approach to amplify putative serine protease
gene fragments in Drosophila. Sequencing of the cloned PCR products identified
one serine protease previously isolated in D. melanogaster (SER1/SER2), as well
as two novel putative serine protease gene fragments (SP2, SP3). The involvement 
of the corresponding genes in the immune response was examined by analyzing their
expression in larval mRNA following both parasitic and bacterial exposures. The
overexpression of one of the serine proteases-related mRNAs in immune challenged 
larvae suggests its involvement in the Drosophila immune response.

PMID: 8915628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Psychophysiology. 1996 Jul;33(4):398-408.

Effects of interstimulus interval on scalp topographies evoked by noxious sural
nerve stimulation.

Dowman R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY 13699-5825, USA.
rdowman@craft.clarkson.edu

The amplitude of the late pain-related negative-positive peak complex, which we
have labeled SP3 (134-150 ms) and SP6 (277-331 ms), respectively, increased with 
increasing interstimulus interval (ISI). This contrasts with the nociceptive
spinal withdrawal reflex and subjective pain rating data, which implied that
nociceptive somatosensory processes were unaffected by ISI at stimulus levels
that were well within the pain range. A scalp topographic analysis strongly
suggested that none of the brain areas responsible for SP3 or SP6 are involved
exclusively in nociception. We also observed a pain-related positive potential
approximately 161-177 ms following sural nerve stimulation that has not been
reported by others. A dipole source localization analysis and the effects of ISI 
and stimulus intensity on this potential suggest that it is generated by the
response of primary somatosensory cortex neurons to inputs arising from the
innocuous peripheral afferents and that this response is inhibited by noxious
inputs.

PMID: 8753940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Ann Neurol. 1996 Jul;40(1):108-12.

Deficient expression in multiple sclerosis of the inhibitory transcription factor
Sp3 in mononuclear blood cells.

Grekova MC(1), Robinson ED, Faerber MA, Katz P, McFarland HF, Richert JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Medicine, Georgetown University Medical Center,
Washington, DC 20007, USA.

To evaluate differential gene expression in multiple sclerosis (MS) patients and 
control subjects, we used differential display to screen for messenger RNAs that 
are differentially expressed in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from
monozygotic twins who are discordant for MS. We identified a 232-bp complementary
DNA fragment, present only in material from the normal twin, that exhibited 100% 
identity with the inhibitory transcription factor Sp3. Oligonucleotide primers
corresponding to Sp3 messenger RNA sequences amplified complementary DNA of
appropriate size from 83% of control subjects but from only 21% of MS patients (p
< 0.001). These results suggest that Sp3 gene transcription is suppressed in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells from most MS patients and that other genes
whose expression is normally suppressed by Sp3 in immune cells may consequently
be overexpressed.

PMID: 8687178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jun 14;271(24):14584-90.

c-sis/PDGF-B promoter transactivation by the Yax protein of human T-cell leukemia
virus type 1.

Trejo SR(1), Fahl WE, Ratner L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Oncology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

The human c-sis proto-oncogene promoter is transactivated by the human T-cell
leukemia virus type 1 Tax protein in human Jurkat T-cells. Transactivation was
>7-fold in Jurkat cells stably expressing the Tax protein (Jurkat-Tax) than in
Jurkat E6.1 cells and was further enhanced in Jurkat-Tax cells stimulated with
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate and the calcium ionophore, ionomycin.
Deletion analysis showed that a 167-base pair promoter fragment retained full Tax
responsiveness. Insertion of this minimal Tax-responsive region into a
heterologous, minimal promoter resulted in approximately a 7-fold increase of
transcriptional activation in the presence of Tax. Linker-scanning insertion
analysis of this region identified Tax-responsive elements at nucleotides -64 to 
-45 (TRE1) and -34 to -15 (TATA box region). TRE1 contains a consensus binding
site for the Sp family of transcription factors. The TATA box region corresponds 
to the TATA box and its 3'-neighboring sequence. Gel-shift and antibody
supershift analysis of TRE1-binding proteins in unstimulated Jurkat E6.1 and
Jurkat-Tax nuclear extracts identified Sp1 and Sp3 as the main TRE1 binding
factors. Nuclear extracts from stimulated Jurkat E6.1 and Jurkat-Tax cells
identified an additional TRE1 binding factor, Egr-1. These studies define a novel
mechanism whereby Tax transactivates the c-sis promoter.

PMID: 8662878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Mol Endocrinol. 1996 Jun;10(6):613-21.

Distal Sp3 binding sites in the hIGBP-1 gene promoter suppress transcriptional
repression in decidualized human endometrial stromal cells: identification of a
novel Sp3 form in decidual cells.

Gao J(1), Tseng L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Medicine, State
University of New York at Stony Brook 11794, USA.

The purpose of this study was to identify the nuclear components that account for
a dramatic transcriptional induction of the human insulin-like growth factor
binding protein-1 (IGFBP-1) gene in decidualized human endometrial stromal cells.
The study focused on the functional analysis and binding characteristics of the
two distal promoter regions, 132 bp -2.732 to -2.6 kb [C/al/Xbal, (CX) fragment] 
and 30 bp [-2830 to -2800 bp, Hincll/ Sphl [HS] fragment]. In the primary culture
of endometrial stromal cells, we have examined the three cis-elements, I, II and 
III, in the 58-bp BsaHl/ Rsal (BR) fragment (a promoter fragment that resides in 
CX) previously identified in HEC-1B cells. When pBRPL (BR 5'-linked to -2600 to
+68 bp IGFBP-1 promoter/chloramphenicol acetyl transferase gene) was transfected 
into cells, only cis-element II (-2660 to -2638 bp) mediated the activation,
whereas I and III (-2675 to -2666 bp and -2637 to -2628 bp) were inactive in both
unstimulated and hormone-stimulated endometrial stromal cells. Promoter activity 
derived from pCXPL was repressed in unstimulated cells. During decidualization of
endometrial stromal cells, the repression was gradually diminished, which was
mediated by cis-element I and III. The binding pattern of the BR fragment
analyzed by electrophoretic mobility shift assay using nuclear extracts of
decidual tissue or cells showed three major specific binding complexes, C1, C2,
and C3, which were abolished by a complementary oligonucleotide of the
Sp1-binding motif dose-dependently. Only two complexes, C2 and C3, were formed by
nuclear extracts of unstimulated stromal cells. A binding study with mutated BR
fragment showed that the binding sites of C1, C2, and C3 resided at cis-elements 
I and III. The Sp3 antibody abolished complexes C1, C2, and C3. The Sp1 and Sp4
antibodies, however, had little effect. The other distal promoter region, 30-bp
HS fragment, which contains a core sequence homologous to the Sp1-binding motif, 
formed a complex with mobility similar to C1. It is transcriptionally active only
in decidualized stromal cells. The binding protein of this complex recognized the
Sp3 antibody. Immunoblot analysis of the nuclear extracts of stromal and decidual
cells showed that Sp3 antibody identified 120-, 82-, and 80-kDa Sp3 proteins. An 
additional 28-kDa Sp3 protein was present only in the extract of decidual cells. 
These findings suggest that decidual Sp3 protein may be responsible, at least in 
part, for the transcriptional regulation in decidualized endometrial stromal
cells.

PMID: 8776721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Biochem J. 1996 Jun 1;316 ( Pt 2):467-73.

The lung enriched transcription factor TTF-1 and the ubiquitously expressed
proteins Sp1 and Sp3 interact with elements located in the minimal promoter of
the rat Clara cell secretory protein gene.

Toonen RF(1), Gowan S, Bingle CD.

Author information: 
(1)DH Department of Toxicology, Medical College of St. Bartholomew's Hospital,
London, U.K.

The mechanisms that direct expression of the Clara cell secretory protein (CCSP) 
gene to the bronchiolar epithelial cells of the lung remain to be elucidated.
Previous studies have identified a number of proteins which bind to a
functionally important region (Region 1) located -132 to -76 bp from the
transcription start site in the rat CCSP gene. Subsequently we have shown that
while Region 1 is an important positive regulator of CCSP gene expression,
sequences 3' of this region (-75 to +38) are sufficient to confer tissue-specific
expression of a reporter gene. In the present study we have used transient
transfections with a deletion series of CCSP-CAT reporter plasmids (where CAT is 
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase) and gel mobility shift assays with a series of
overlapping oligonucleotides covering the whole minimal promoter region to study 
protein-DNA interactions within this region. These studies have identified a
conserved functional binding site for the lung and thyroid enriched homeodomain
transcription factor TTF-1, located between positions -51 and -42 from the
transcription start site. CCSP-CAT chimaeric reporters containing this region are
specifically activated by TTF-1 in co-transfection assays, and nuclear extracts
from cells which express TTF-1 bind to this region, as does in vitro translated
rat TTF-1. Three additional conserved regions were identified, and in further gel
mobility shift studies with an oligonucleotide spanning the conserved region
immediately 5' to the TTF-1 site we identified a binding site for the
ubiquitously expressed zinc-finger-containing proteins Sp1 and Sp3. These studies
suggest that cell-type-restricted and ubiquitous nuclear proteins may play a
combined role in the regulation of the CCSP gene within the bronchiolar
epithelium by interacting with the minimal promoter region.

PMCID: PMC1217373
PMID: 8687389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Biol Chem. 1996 May 31;271(22):12944-50.

Sp1 family proteins recognize the U5 repressive element of the long terminal
repeat of human T cell leukemia virus type I through binding to the CACCC core
motif.

Okumura K(1), Sakaguchi G, Takagi S, Naito K, Mimori T, Igarashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Shionogi Institute for Medical Science, 2-5-1 Mishima, Settsu, Osaka 566,
Japan.

We have identified several nuclear proteins binding to the U5 repressive element 
(U5RE) at the U5 region of the human T cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I) long
terminal repeat (LTR). In gel mobility shift assays with the U5RE DNA probe,
Jurkat T cell nuclear proteins generated five different complexes, named U5RE
binding protein complexes (U5RP)-A1, -A2, -A3, -B, and -C. Only U5RP-C was
affected by pretreatment with an excess of poly(dI-dC) and was immunodepressed by
anti-Ku/p80 antibodies, suggesting that U5RP-C is a nonspecific complex involving
Ku antigen. UV cross-linking showed at least six nuclear proteins involved in the
other complexes, including U5RP-A1, -A2, -A3, and -B. The sequence of the binding
core element of these specific complexes, determined by competition assays and
gel mobility shift assays using a series of the U5RE mutants, is CACCC which is
identical to that for the Sp1 transcription factor. LTR with a mutant U5RE, which
has no ability to bind with the nuclear proteins, showed stronger promoter
activity than LTR with the wild U5RE, suggesting that the specific interaction of
these U5RE-binding proteins might result in the U5-mediated repression. U5RP-A1
was supershifted by anti-Sp1 antibodies and U5RP-A2 and -B were supershifted by
anti-Sp3 antibodies, suggesting that Sp1 or Sp3 is involved in U5RP-A1 or U5RP-A2
and -B, respectively. Although the other nuclear proteins remain to be
characterized, these findings suggest that U5RE-binding proteins in U5RP-A1, -A2,
-A3, and -B are involved in HTLV-I gene repression.

PMID: 8662723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Biol Chem. 1996 May 17;271(20):11792-7.

Transcriptional regulation of the SIS/PDGF-B gene in human osteosarcoma cells by 
the Sp family of transcription factors.

Liang Y(1), Robinson DF, Dennig J, Suske G, Fahl WE.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin, Madison
53706, USA.

Expression of PDGF-B, the gene encoding the platelet-derived growth factor B
chain, has been implicated as a participant in an autocrine growth loop in the
human osteosarcoma cell line U2-OS. In previous work, we identified a primary
site in the PDGF-B promoter, the SIS proximal element (SPE), which is critical
for transcription of the PDGF-B gene in U2-OS cells. We also identified Sp1 as
one of the SPE-binding proteins in U2-OS nuclear extracts. In the present work,
we have identified another SPE-binding protein to be Sp3. Gel mobility shift
assays showed that both Sp1 and Sp3 require the CACCC motif within the SPE for
binding. In vitro transcription assays showed that Sp1 or/and Sp3 is necessary
for transcription of the PDGF-B gene. Cotransfection experiments functionally
demonstrated that Sp1 and Sp3 can independently or additively activate the PDGF-B
promoter through the SPE as well as a synthetic promoter. However, the CACCC
motif within the SPE is not the only site within the minimal PDGF-B promoter
through which Sp1/Sp3 acts; additional nested deletion analyses showed that
multiple cis-acting elements within the minimal promoter are required for full
level transcription of the PDGF-B gene in U2-OS cells.

PMID: 8662647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Invertebr Pathol. 1996 May;67(3):236-52.

Analysis and Modeling of Time-Dose-Mortality of Melanoplus sanguinipes, Locusta
migratoria migratorioides, and Schistocerca gregaria (Orthoptera: Acrididae) from
Beauveria, Metarhizium, and Paecilomyces Isolates from Madagascar

Nowierski RM(1), Zeng Z, Jaronski S, Delgado F, Swearingen W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Montana State University, Bozeman, Montana, 59717

A complementary log-log (CLL) model was used to model time-dose-mortality
relationships from bioassay tests of 26 fungal isolates mostly from Madagascar,
Africa, against three acridid species, all referred to here as "grasshoppers."
The fungal pathogens included 15 isolates of Beauveria bassiana, 9 isolates of
Metarhizium flavoviridae, and 2 isolates of Paecilomyces spp. Grasshopper species
tested included Melanoplus sanguinipes, Locusta migratoria migratorioides, and
Schistocerca gregaria. The scaled deviance, mean deviance, Pearson X2 statistic, 
Hosmer-Lemeshow (H-L) C statistic, and three-dimensional time-dose-mortality
graphs were used to assess extra-binomial variation, data points that were
potential outliers, conformance of the scaled deviance statistic and Pearson's X2
statistic to a chi2 distribution, and the fit of the CLL model. The H-L C
statistic also was found to be useful in showing the goodness of fit of the CLL
model for the fungal isolates prior to modeling the extra-binomial variation.
After the extra-binomial variation was modeled using Williams' method, the slope 
from maximum likelihood estimation, modified log(LD50) estimates (which were
corrected for background mortality using the CLL model), a dynamic ranking of the
log(LD50) values over time, and a three-dimensional plot of time, dose, and
mortality of the three grasshopper species were used to evaluate the
effectiveness of the fungal isolates. In general, the CLL model provided a rather
poor fit of the fungal isolates which had a large number of replicate trials in
the bioassay tests (i.e., a large sample size) due to extra-binomial variation.
The CLL model provided an excellent fit of the time-dose-mortality relationships 
of such isolates after the extra-binomial variation was modeled and included in
the CLL model. Metarhizium isolates MFV and SP5 were found to be the most
virulent isolates tested against M. sanguinipes, followed by Metarhizium
isolates: SP8, SP7, SP9, SP6, and SP1, and Beauveria isolate S33B. Metarhizium
isolates SP3, SP5, SP6, and SP9, and Beauveria isolates SP11, SP12, SP13, and
SP16 showed higher levels of virulence against L. migratoria migratorioides over 
more of the time periods tested than the other pathogen isolates examined.
Metarhizium isolates SP9 and SP5 were the most effective isolates tested against 
S. gregaria. In general, the Metarhizium isolates were more virulent against the 
grasshoppers than the Beauveria isolates, which were more virulent than the
Paecilomyces isolates. The CLL model was found to be very useful in describing
grasshopper mortality as a function of time and dose. This approach combined with
model and fungal isolate assessment statistics will be helpful for determining
which pathogen isolates have the greatest potential for controlling grasshoppers 
and other pests in the future.

PMID: 8812605  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


281. Gastroenterology. 1996 May;110(5):1579-86.

Serum antibodies to carbonic anhydrase I and II in patients with idiopathic
chronic pancreatitis and Sjögren's syndrome.

Kino-Ohsaki J(1), Nishimori I, Morita M, Okazaki K, Yamamoto Y, Onishi S,
Hollingsworth MA.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Kochi Medical School, Japan.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 1997 Mar;112(3):1054-6.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Patients with idiopathic chronic pancreatitis and Sjögren's
syndrome show immune responses against a 60-kilodalton protein isolated from
human pancreas extracts. Monoclonal antibody SP3-1, raised against the
60-kilodalton protein, reacts with ductal cells in several exocrine organs and
cross-reacts with human carbonic anhydrase II. The present study evaluated serum 
from patients with these diseases for antibodies to human carbonic anhydrase I
and II.
METHODS: An enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay was used to quantify serum antibody
against carbonic anhydrase I and II.
RESULTS: Serum antibodies against carbonic anhydrase I and II were detected in 7 
and 11 of 33 patients with idiopathic chronic pancreatitis, respectively, and in 
8 and 13 of 21 patients with Sjögren's syndrome, respectively. The positive
prevalence rates of patients with antibodies of carbonic anhydrase II were
significantly different among patients with idiopathic chronic pancreatitis and
Sjögren's syndrome compared with normal patients (1 of 21). There were no
significant differences in the prevalence rates of patients with alcoholic
chronic pancreatitis (3 of 20), gallstone-related chronic pancreatitis (0 of 7), 
and primary biliary cirrhosis (1 of 11).
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that carbonic anhydrase II is one candidate
target antigen recognized during the autoimmune pathophysiology observed in
idiopathic chronic pancreatitis and Sjögren's syndrome.

PMID: 8613065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Biochemistry. 1996 Apr 16;35(15):4697-703.

Enzyme-substrate complexes of adenosine and cytidine deaminases: absence of
accumulation of water adducts.

Shih P(1), Wolfenden R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, 27599-7260, USA.

Adenosine deaminase has been reported to bind the product inosine (the substrate 
for the reverse reaction) as inosine 1,6-hydrate considered similar in structure 
to the transition state for adenosine deamination (Wilson & Quiocho, 1994)
Accumulation on the enzyme of inosine 1,6-hydrate would be surprising, because
this compound is an actual intermediate, probably approaching the transition
state, in oxygen exchange between water and the C==O group of inosine, a reaction
previously shown to be catalyzed by adenosine deaminase (Wolfenden & Kirsch,
1968). The equilibrium constant for conversion of ES to ES*, in the oxygen
exchange reaction, is less than 10-12. To investigate the structure of
enzyme-bound inosine in a different way, we labeled deoxyinosine with 13C,
excepting an upfield shift of 70-110 ppm if significant rehybridization to sp3
had occurred at the carbonyl group. Instead, the results show a very small shift 
(1.3 ppm), indicating that C-6 of 2'-deoxyinosine retains its sp2 hybridization
after binding by calf intestinal adenosine deaminase. In a separate series of
experiments, [4,5-13C]-2'-deoxyuridine was synthesized and found to retain its
sp2 hybridization at C-4, after binding by Escherichia coli cytidine deaminase,
an enzyme that catalyzes 18O exchange from water into uridine. These findings are
consistent with the general expectation, based on the unfavorable equilibrium of 
activation of enzyme-bound substrates, that enzymes should not accumulate
appreciable concentrations of intermediates whose free energies approach that of 
the transition state in substrate transformation.

PMID: 8664259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Biol Chem. 1996 Apr 12;271(15):8533-6.

Sp3 represses transcription when tethered to promoter DNA or targeted to promoter
proximal RNA.

De Luca P(1), Majello B, Lania L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Molecular and General Biology, University of Naples
"Federico II," via Mezzocannone 8, 80134 Naples, Italy. 10,

Sp3 is a member of the Sp family of transcription factors, and it binds to the GC
box with an affinity and specificity comparable with that of Sp1. Previous
studies have shown that Sp3 repressed Sp1-mediated transcriptional activation,
suggesting that Sp3 is an inhibitory member of the Sp family. The experiments
described here demonstrate that Sp3 contains a portable repression domain that
can function independently from the zinc finger DNA-binding domain. We found that
the amino-terminal region of Sp3 tethered to a promoter DNA by connecting to a
heterologous DNA-binding protein domain represses transcriptional activation by
different positive regulators. Moreover, we determined that Sp3 targeted to a
promoter-proximal RNA sequence acts as a transcriptional repressor. Taken
together, our results suggest that Sp3 functions as a repressor by
protein-protein interaction with components of the general transcription complex.

PMID: 8621476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Mol Graph. 1996 Apr;14(2):62-72, 92-3.

Molecular modeling of substrate-enzyme reactions for the cysteine protease
papain.

Lin Y(1), Welsh WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Missouri-St. Louis 63121, USA.

AM1 quantum mechanical reaction coordinate (RC) calculations were run to simulate
the rate-limiting deacylation (hydrolysis) reaction for a series of
para-X-PhC(O)NHCH2-C(Y)-S-papain intermediates, where X = OCH3, CH3, H, Cl, NO2
and Y = O (thioester) or S (dithioester), for which a large body of structural,
kinetic, and spectroscopic data is available. Several reaction zones, in
particular the so-designated Large Zone and Small Zone, were extracted for these 
RC simulations from the fully solvated and energy-minimized X-ray crystal
structure of papain (pdb9pap) bound to the appropriate substrate moiety. The
major structural difference between these two zones was the absence of the
oxyanion hole in the latter. For both the thioester and dithioester cases, the
calculated Ea value associated with the parent (X = H) acyl-enzyme intermediate
was lower by ca. 10 kcal/mol for the Large Zone than for the Small Zone. The
magnitude of this difference suggests that the oxyanion hole plays a functional
if not essential role in stabilizing the anionic tetrahedral intermediate with
the cysteine proteases. The calculated Ea value was lower by ca. 10 kcal/mol for 
the thioester [-C(O)-S-] than for the corresponding dithioester [-C(S)-S-], in
qualitative agreement with kinetic data for this series of substrates which
reveal that the specific rate constant for deacylation k3 is ca. 60 times larger 
for the former. This difference is also consistent with both AM1 and 6-31G*
calculations on model intermediates, which indicate that the weaker polarity of
the dithioester compared with the thioester [i.e., -C(<--S)-S-versus-C(-->O)-S-] 
renders the former a much poorer site for nucleophilic attack. The anionic
tetrahedral intermediate is energetically more stable for the dithioester than
for the corresponding thioester, a finding that is discussed in terms of its
kinetic and mechanistic implications. The mode of attack by the H2O nucleophile
is "concerted" rather than "sequential" in terms of the order of proton
abstraction by His-159 and nucleophilic attack on the acyl-enzyme intermediate.
While the presumably key Sthiol . . . N nonbonded contact remained almost
constant (ca. 2.90 A) up to formation of the [TS] structure, the substrate
torsion angles phi and psi rotated significantly as the hybridization around the 
reaction site transforms from sp2 to sp3 during formation of the tetrahedral
intermediate. The AM1-calculated frontier molecular orbitals for model thioester 
and dithioester acyl-enzyme intermediates generally associate the HOMOs with the 
reaction site and the LUMOs with the benzamide moiety. Computer graphics images
corroborate our view that, in relation to the Sthiol . . . N interaction, the
HOMOs and LUMOs should be identified, respectively, with Sthiol and N rather than
the reverse, as suggested by other workers.

PMID: 8835773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 1996 Apr;13(5):827-33.

Nonplanar DNA base pairs.

Sponer J(1), Florián J, Hobza P, Leszczynski J.

Author information: 
(1)J. Heyrovský Institute of Physical Chemistry, Academy of Sciences of the Czech
Republic, Prague, Czech Republic. sponer@indy.jh-inst.cas.cz

Three-dimensional structures of a representative set of more than 30
hydrogen-bonded nucleic acids pairs have been studied by reliable ab initio
quantum mechanical methods. We show that many hydrogen-bonded nucleic acid base
pairs are intrinsically nonplanar, mainly due to the partial sp3 hybridization of
nitrogen atoms of their amino groups and secondary electrostatic interactions.
This finding extends the variability of intermolecular interactions of DNA bases 
in that i) flexibility of the base pairs is larger than has been assumed before, 
and ii) attractive proton-proton acceptor interactions oriented out of the base
pair plane are allowed. For example, all four G-A mismatch base pairs are
propeller twisted, and the energy preferences for the nonplanar structures range 
from less than 0.1 kcal/mol to 1.8 kcal/mol. We predict that nonplanarity of the 
amino group of guanine in the G(anti)...A(anti) pair of the ApG step of the
d(CCAAGATTGG)2 crystal structure is an important stabilizing factor that improves
the energy of this structure by almost 3 kcal/mol. Currently used empirical
potentials are not accurate enough to properly cover the interactions associated 
with amino-group and base-pair nonplanarity.

PMID: 8723777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Med Chem. 1996 Mar 29;39(7):1383-95.

Antitumor agents. 163. Three-dimensional quantitative structure-activity
relationship study of 4'-O-demethylepipodophyllotoxin analogs using the modified 
CoMFA/q2-GRS approach.

Cho SJ(1), Tropsha A, Suffness M, Cheng YC, Lee KH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medicinal Chemistry and Natural Products, School of Pharmacy,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, 27599, USA.

Analogs of 4'O-demethylepipodophyllotoxin are considered as potential anticancer 
agents. We have applied comparative molecular field analysis (CoMFA) and a novel 
CoMFA/q2-GRS technique recently developed in our group to identify the essential 
structural requirements for increasing the ability of these compounds to form
cellular protein-DNA complex. In addition, a new method to incorporate different 
types of probe atoms as part of q2-GRS routine has been developed. The best final
model with 101 compounds using a combination of four different sets of probe
atoms and charges [C (sp3, +1), C (sp3, 0), H (+1), and O (sp3, -1)] yielded a q 
2 of 0.584 and the standard error of prediction of 0.660 at 5 principal
components. The steric and electrostatic contour plots of the final model were
compared with the DNA phosphate backbone environment of the
DNA-4'O-demethylepipodophylltoxin analog complex, which was generated using the
X-ray structure of the DNA-nogalamycin complex. The comparison reveals that the
CoMFA steric and electrostatic fields are compatible with stereochemical
properties of the DNA backbone. The results obtained from this study shall guide 
our future synthetic efforts.

PMID: 8691468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J Virol. 1996 Mar;70(3):1331-9.

ras oncogene-dependent activation of the P4 promoter of minute virus of mice
through a proximal P4 element interacting with the Ets family of transcription
factors.

Fuks F(1), Deleu L, Dinsart C, Rommelaere J, Faisst S.

Author information: 
(1)Applied Tumor Virology Unit, Abteilung 0610, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum,
Heidelberg, Germany.

The P4 promoter of parvovirus minute virus of mice (MVMp) directs transcription
of the genes coding for nonstructural proteins. The activity of promoter P4 is
regulated by several cis-acting DNA elements. Among these, a promoter-proximal GC
box was shown to be essential for P4 activity (J.K. Ahn, B.J. Gavin, G. Kumar,
and D.C. Ward, J. Virol. 63:5425-5439, 1989). In this study, a motif homologous
to an Ets transcription factor-binding site (EBS), located immediately upstream
from the GC box, was found to be required for the full activity of promoter P4 in
the ras-transformed rat fibroblast cell line FREJ4. In normal parental FR3T3
cells, the transcriptional function of P4 EBS was insignificant but could be
restored by transient cell transfection with the c-Ha-ras oncogene. P4 EBS may
thus contribute to the stimulation of promoter P4 in ras-transformed cells.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays using crude extracts from FREJ4 cells
revealed the binding of a member(s) of the Ets family of transcription factors to
the P4 EBS, as well as the interaction of two members of the Sp1 family, Sp1 and 
Sp3, with the adjacent GC box. When produced in Drosophila melanogaster SL2
cells, Ets-1 and Sp1 proteins acted synergistically to transactivate promoter P4 
through their respective cognate sites.

PMCID: PMC189952
PMID: 8627649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jan 19;271(3):1385-92.

Sp1 mediates glucose activation of the acetyl-CoA carboxylase promoter.

Daniel S(1), Kim KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, 
USA.

Acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC), the rate-limiting enzyme in the biosynthesis of
fatty acids, is induced in the presence of high glucose levels. The ACC gene
contains two promoters: promoter I (PI) expression is inducible under lipogenic
conditions, while promoter II (PII) expression, even though constitutively
expressed in all tissues, is also controlled under various physiological
conditions. Examination of the expression pattern of a series of deletion
constructs of PII showed that the region from -340 to -249 was essential for ACC 
induction. In addition, by electrophoretic mobility shift assays, supershift
assays, and DNase I footprinting studies, we have detected the binding of the
transcription factor Sp1 at the two GC-rich sequences located within the -340 to 
-249 region of promoter II. Mutations at the GC-rich sequences prevented binding 
of Sp1, and the induction of the PII promoter was no longer observed.
Cotransfection studies, in Drosophila Schneider SL2 cells, with the Sp1
expression vector and PII-CAT constructs, have further confirmed the activation
of promoter II by Sp1. In addition, we have identified Sp3, another member of the
Sp1 family of transcription factors, as a second factor that can bind to the
glucose response elements of PII.

PMID: 8576128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Gene Expr. 1996;6(2):113-27.

TATA box and Sp1 sites mediate the activation of c-myc promoter P1 by
immunoglobulin kappa enhancers.

Geltinger C(1), Hörtnagel K, Polack A.

Author information: 
(1)GSF-National Research Center for Environment and Health, Institute of Clinical
Molecular Biology and Tumour Genetics, München, Germany.

In Burkitt's lymphoma (BL) cells the proto-oncogene c-myc is transcriptionally
activated by chromosomal translocation to the immunoglobulin (Ig) gene loci. This
activation is characterized by preferential transcription from the c-myc promoter
P1 and accomplished by juxtaposed Ig enhancer elements. To identify promoter
elements required for enhancer-activated P1 transcription, we studied the
activation of c-myc reporter gene constructs by the Ig kappa intron and 3'
enhancers. Deletion analysis defined the core promoter with a TATA box and two
adjacent GC/GT boxes upstream sufficient for basal and enhancer-activated
transcription. Gel retardation assays revealed Sp1's binding affinity to the
GC/GT box proximal to the TATA box to be higher than to the distal one. This
difference correlated well with the resulting levels of transcription mediated by
Sp1 in contransfection experiments in BL and Sp1-deficient SL2 cells. Sp3 also
bound to the core promoter in vitro, but failed to transactivate in vivo.
Mutation of the distal Sp1 site moderately affected basal transcription
concomitant with a modest decrease in enhancer stimulation. Mutation of the
proximal Sp1 site almost entirely abolished basal as well as enhanced
transcription. A considerable level of basal transcription was maintained upon
mutation of the TATA box, whereas enhancer-activated transcription largely was
abolished. Stable transfection of the BL cell line Raji with constructs
containing core promoter mutations confirmed that the proximal Sp1 site and the
TATA box are essential for the activation of promoter P1 by the Ig kappa
enhancers.

PMID: 8979089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Virol. 1996 Jan;70(1):188-98.

The promoter activity of long terminal repeats of the HERV-H family of human
retrovirus-like elements is critically dependent on Sp1 family proteins
interacting with a GC/GT box located immediately 3' to the TATA box.

Sjøttem E(1), Anderssen S, Johansen T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Medical Biology, University of
Tromsø, Norway.

The HERV-H family of endogenous retrovirus-like elements is widely distributed in
the human genome, with about 1,000 full-length elements and a similar number of
solitary long terminal repeats (LTRs). HERV-H LTRs have been shown to direct the 
transcription of both HERV-H-encoded and adjacent cellular genes. Transcripts of 
HERV-H elements are especially abundant in placenta, teratocarcinoma cell lines, 
and cell lines derived from testicular and lung tumors. Here we report that only 
a subset of HERV-H LTRs display promoter activity in human cell lines and that
these LTRs are characterized by the presence of a GC/GT box immediately
downstream of the TATA box. This GC/GT box is required for promoter activity,
while, surprisingly, the TATA box is dispensable. The ubiquitously expressed
transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 bound to this GC/GT box and stimulated
transcription from the promoter-active LTRs in the teratocarcinoma cell line
NTera2-D1. However, in HeLa and Drosophila SL-2 cells, Sp1 acted as a
transcriptional activator of the LTRs, while Sp3 acted as a repressor of
Sp1-mediated transcriptional activation. Cotransfection studies also revealed
that the tissue-specific Sp1-related protein BTEB bound to this GC/GT box and
stimulated transcription from the LTR promoters in NTera2-D1 cells. These results
show that members of the Sp1 protein family are crucial determinants for
transcriptional activation of HERV-H LTR promoters and suggest that these
proteins may also be involved in determining the tissue-specific expression
pattern of HERV-H elements.

PMCID: PMC189804
PMID: 8523525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Biochemistry. 1995 Dec 19;34(50):16503-8.

Sp1 trans-activation of cell cycle regulated promoters is selectively repressed
by Sp3.

Birnbaum MJ(1), van Wijnen AJ, Odgren PR, Last TJ, Suske G, Stein GS, Stein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester 01655, USA.

The transcription factor Sp1 plays a key role in the activation of many cellular 
and viral gene promoters, including those that are regulated during the cell
cycle. However, recent evidence indicates that Sp1 belongs to a larger family of 
factors which bind G/C box elements in order to either activate or repress
transcription. Sp3, a member of this family, functions to repress transcriptional
activation in two viral promoters, most likely by competing with Sp1 for GC
box/Sp binding sites. However, the physiological role of Sp3 in the repression of
endogenous cellular promoters has not been experimentally addressed. In the
present study, we analyze the activity and binding of Sp3 on several eukaryotic
promoters that contain G/C boxes and are known to be regulated during cellular
proliferation and the cell cycle. Using antibodies specific for Sp1 and Sp3, we
observe that both of these factors localize to the cell nucleus and have a
similar, dispersed subnuclear distribution. Further, using gel mobility shift
assays, we show that both Sp1 and Sp3 interact specifically with the histone H4
promoter. Transient cotransfections of Drosophila cells with Sp1 and Sp3
expression vectors and with the histone H4, thymidine kinase (TK), or
dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) promoters show that only the DHFR promoter,
containing multiple functional GC boxes, displays Sp3 repression of Sp1
activation. In contrast, the single G/C boxes within the histone H4 or TK
promoters, which confer transcriptional activation via Sp1 binding, are not
responsive to repression by Sp3. Therefore, we demonstrate that the endogenous
cellular DHFR promoter is selectively responsive to Sp3 repression. The data
suggest that Sp3 may contribute to the control of proliferation- and/or
cell-regulated promoters depending upon the context and/or number of functional
Sp1 binding sites.

PMID: 8845379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Phys Rev B Condens Matter. 1995 Dec 1;52(22):15812-15822.

sp3 content of mass-selected ion-beam-deposited carbon films determined by
inelastic and elastic electron scattering.

Kulik J, Lempert GD, Grossman E, Marton D, Rabalais JW, Lifshitz Y.

PMID: 9980956  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


293. Proteins. 1995 Dec;23(4):472-90.

An automated method for dynamic ligand design.

Miranker A(1), Karplus M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Harvard University, Cambridge Massachusetts 02138,
USA.

An automated method for the dynamic ligand design (DLD) for a binding site of
known structure is described. The method can be used for the creation of de novo 
ligands and for the modification of existing ligands. The binding site is
saturated with atoms (sp3 carbon atoms in the present implementation) that form
molecules under the influence of a potential function that joins atoms to each
other with the correct stereochemistry. The resulting molecules are linked to
precomputed functional group minimum energy positions in the binding site. The
generalized potential function allows atoms to sample a continuous parameter
space that includes the Cartesian coordinates and their occupancy and type, e.g.,
the method allows change of an sp3 carbon into an sp2 carbon or oxygen. A
parameter space formulated in this way can then be sampled and optimized by a
variety of methods. In this work, molecules are generated by use of a Monte Carlo
simulated annealing algorithm. The DLD method is illustrated by its application
to the binding site of FK506 binding protein (FKBP), an immunophilin. De novo
ligands are designed and modification of the immunosuppressant drug FK506 are
suggested. The results demonstrate that the dynamic ligand design approach can
automatically construct ligands which complement both the shape and charge
distribution of the binding site.

PMID: 8749844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Biol Chem. 1995 Nov 10;270(45):26750-3.

Transforming growth factor beta activates the promoter of cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor p15INK4B through an Sp1 consensus site.

Li JM(1), Nichols MA, Chandrasekharan S, Xiong Y, Wang XF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina 27708, USA.

Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) causes growth arrest in the G1 phase
in many cell types. One probable pathway for this growth inhibition is through
the TGF-beta-mediated up-regulation of the cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)
inhibitor p15INK4B, which specifically inhibits the enzymatic activities of CDK4 
and CDK6. An active cyclin D-CDK4/6 complex is required for pRb phosphorylation
to allow the cell cycle to progress from G1 to S phase. To study the molecular
mechanism of the p15INK4B induction by TGF-beta, we isolated a 780-base pair
promoter sequence of the human p15 gene and inserted this fragment upstream of a 
luciferase reporter gene. When this construct was transiently transfected into
HaCaT cells, luciferase activity was induced more than 10-fold upon TGF-beta
treatment, indicating that the induction of p15INK4B expression by TGF-beta is
partly exerted at the transcription level. Promoter deletion analysis revealed
that the sequence from -110 to -40 relative to the transcription start site is
capable of conferring the 10-fold induction by TGF-beta. Within this region there
are three Sp1 consensus sites. Mutation of one of these sites, GGGGCGGAG,
substantially reduced both the induction by TGF-beta and the basal promoter
activity, whereas mutations in the other two Sp1 sites and the spacer sequences
had little effect. In addition, gel mobility shift assay indicates that the
transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 bind to this Sp1 site. Taken together, these
data suggest that a specific Sp1 consensus site is involved in the mediation of
TGF-beta induction as well as the basal promoter activity of the p15 gene and
that Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors might be involved in this regulation.

PMID: 7592908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Biochemistry. 1995 Nov 7;34(44):14344-55.

Mechanism of inhibition of human leucocyte elastase by beta-lactams. 3. Use of
electrospray ionization mass spectrometry and two-dimensional NMR techniques to
identify beta-lactam-derived E-I complexes.

Underwood DJ(1), Green BG, Chabin R, Mills S, Doherty JB, Finke PE, MacCoss M,
Shah SK, Burgey CS, Dickinson TA, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Enzymology, Merck Research Laboratories, Rahway, New Jersey
07065, USA.

A combination of NMR spectroscopy and electrospray ionization mass spectrometry
(ESI-MS) was used to probe the identity of beta-lactam-derived complexes with
serine proteases. The carbon and proton NMR chemical shifts of the human
leucocyte elastase (HLE)-inhibitor complex derived from [4-13C]-L-680,833,
[S-(R*,S*)]-4-[(1-(((1-(4-
methylphenyl)butyl)amino)carbonyl)-3,3-diethyl-2-oxo-4-
azetidinyl)oxy]benzeneacetic acid, were consistent with an sp3 hybridized carbon.
The ESI-MS spectrum of the L-680,833-derived HLE-I complex indicated an increase 
of 333 Da over the mass of the free enzyme. The data are consistent with
acylation of the active site serine, loss of p-hydroxybenzeneacetic acid, and
formation of a carbinolamine at the carbon deriving from C-4 of the lactam ring. 
The complexes produced from HLE and the diastereomers of L-680,833 display
identical masses. Since the 4R-isomers produce more stable complexes [Green et
al. (1995) Biochemistry 34, 14331-14343], these data suggest that these complexes
differ in their stereochemistry or conformation. The structural model of the
HLE-I complexes derived from the diastereomers predicts that the hydroxyl of the 
carbinolamine derives from a structurally observed water molecule yielding
S-stereochemistry in all cases. In this model, the 4S- and 4R-diastereomers
produce complexes that differ by the location of the side chain of a
phenylalanine residue. The mass of HLE was increased by that of L-684,481,
(R)-1-(((1-(4-methylphenyl)butyl)amino)carbonyl)-3,3-diethyl-2-azetidino ne,
which lacks a leaving group at C-4 in the complex derived from this compound.
L-691,886, [S-(R*,S*)]-4-[(1-(((1-(4-ethoxyphenyl)butyl)amino)carbonyl)-
3,3-diethyl-4-oxo-2-azetidinyl)-oxy]benzeneacetic acid, produces two complexes of
different mass that reactivate with different rates. The mass of the less stable 
complex is consistent with the acyl-enzyme of 2,2-ethyl-3-oxopropanoic acid while
the mass of the more stable complex is analogous to the carbinolamine observed
during L-680,833 inactivation. Porcine pancreatic elastase (PPE) produces a
complex with a mass consistent with replacement of the C-4 leaving group by water
to produce a carbinolamine from L-684,248,
[S-(R*,S*)]-4-[(1-(((1-(4-methylphenyl)butyl)amino)carbonyl)-3,3-dimethy l -
2-oxo-4-azetidinyl)oxy]benzoic acid. The C-4 diastereomer, L-684,249, produces
two PPE-I complexes with different masses. One of these complexes has a mass
identical to the mass of the complex derived from L-684,248 while the mass of the
other complex indicates the presence of the entire inhibitor molecule.(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 7578038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Oct 25;23(20):4210-9.

HMGI(Y) and Sp1 in addition to NF-kappa B regulate transcription of the MGSA/GRO 
alpha gene.

Wood LD(1), Farmer AA, Richmond A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN 37232-2175, USA.

Expression of the chemokine MGSA/GRO is upregulated as melanocytes progress to
melanoma cells. We demonstrate that constitutive and cytokine induced MGSA/GRO
alpha expression requires multiple DNA regulatory regions between positions -143 
to -62. We have previously shown that the NF-kappa B element at -83 to -65 is
essential for basal and cytokine induced MGSA/GRO alpha promoter activity in the 
Hs294T melanoma and normal retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells, respectively. 
Here, we have determined that the Sp1 binding element located approximately 42
base pairs upstream from the NF-kappa B element binds Sp1 and Sp3 constitutively 
and this element is necessary for basal MGSA/GRO alpha promoter activity. We
demonstrate that the high mobility group proteins HMGI(Y) recognize the AT-rich
motif nested within the NF-kappa B element in the MGSA/GRO alpha promoter. Loss
of either NF-kappa B or HMGI(Y) complex binding by selected point mutations in
the NF-kappa B element results in decreased basal and cytokine induced MGSA/GRO
alpha promoter activity. Thus, these results indicate that transcriptional
regulation of the chemokine MGSA/GRO alpha requires at least three transcription 
factors: Sp1, NF-kappa B and HMGI(Y).

PMCID: PMC307364
PMID: 7479086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Biol Chem. 1995 Oct 20;270(42):24989-94.

Functional analyses of the transcription factor Sp4 reveal properties distinct
from Sp1 and Sp3.

Hagen G(1), Dennig J, Preiss A, Beato M, Suske G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Phillips-Universität
Marburg, Germany.

Sp4 is a human sequence-specific DNA binding protein with structural features
similar to those described for the transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3. These three
proteins contain two glutamine-rich regions and a highly conserved DNA binding
domain composed of three zinc fingers. Consistently, Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 do have
the same DNA binding specificities. In this report, we have embarked on a
detailed analysis of the transcriptional properties of Sp4 in direct comparison
to Sp1 and Sp3. Cotransfection experiments into Drosophila SL2 cells lacking
endogenous Sp factors demonstrate that Sp4 is an activator protein like Sp1.
However, in contrast to Sp1, Sp4 is not able to act synergistically through
adjacent binding sites. The transactivation function of Sp4 resides, like that of
Sp1, in the N-terminal glutamine-rich region. Sp4 can function as a target for
the Sp1 activation domains in a superactivation assay, suggesting that the
activation domains of Sp1 and Sp4 are functionally related. Furthermore, we show 
that Sp4-mediated transcriptional activation can be repressed by Sp3. Taken
together, our results demonstrate that the transcription factor Sp4 exhibits
specific functional properties distinct from Sp1 and Sp3.

PMID: 7559627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Cancer Res. 1995 Sep 1;55(17):3860-4.

DNA topoisomerase II alpha gene expression under transcriptional control in
etoposide/teniposide-resistant human cancer cells.

Kubo T(1), Kohno K, Ohga T, Taniguchi K, Kawanami K, Wada M, Kuwano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Kyushu University School of Medicine, Fukuoka,
Japan.

We previously isolated etoposide/teniposide-resistant cell lines from human
cancer KB cells, designated KB/VP-2 and KB/VM-4, respectively, and we found that 
decreased expression of topoisomerase II alpha was associated with the
acquisition of etoposide/teniposide resistance in both resistant cell lines. In
this study, we studied how the expression of the DNA topoisomerase II alpha gene 
is regulated in drug-resistant cell lines at the transcriptional level. We first 
examined whether the decreased topoisomerase II alpha mRNA level was due to a
shorter lifetime of mRNA molecules in drug-resistant cell lines. A comparison of 
the degradation kinetics of topoisomerase II alpha mRNA demonstrated that there
was no difference in mRNA stability between both resistant cell lines and their
parental counterpart. A run-on experiment with isolated nuclei showed that the
transcriptional activity of topoisomerase II alpha gene of both resistant cell
lines constituted less than 20% of the parental KB cells. The activity of DNA
topoisomerase II alpha promoter in resistant cells was also less than 20% of that
in KB cells when transient transfection assays were performed with the
promoter-driven bacterial chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene. Among the
several transcription factors that might be involved in DNA topoisomerase II
alpha gene expression, expression of Sp3, an inhibitory member of the Sp1 family,
was elevated to about 3-fold higher in both resistant cell lines than their
parental counterpart. These results indicated that the expression of DNA
topoisomerase II alpha gene decreased at the transcriptional level through the
enhanced expression of Sp3 in our two etoposide/teniposide-resistant cell lines.

PMID: 7641205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Med Chem. 1995 Aug 18;38(17):3246-52.

A check on rational drug design: crystal structure of a complex of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 protease with a novel gamma-turn mimetic inhibitor.

Hoog SS(1), Zhao B, Winborne E, Fisher S, Green DW, DesJarlais RL, Newlander KA, 
Callahan JF, Moore ML, Huffman WF, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Macromolecular Sciences, SmithKline Beecham Pharmaceuticals,
King of Prussia, Pennsylvania 19406, USA.

We have previously reported (Newlander et al., J. Med. Chem. 1993, 36, 2321-2331)
the design of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) protease inhibitors
incorporating C7 mimetics that lock three amino acid residues of a peptide
sequence into a gamma-turn. The design of one such compound, SB203238, was based 
on X-ray structures of reduced amide aspartyl protease inhibitors. It
incorporates a gamma-turn mimetic in the P2-P1' position, where the carbonyl of
the C7 ring is replaced with an sp3 methylene group yielding a constrained
reduced amide. It shows competitive inhibition with Ki = 430 nM at pH 6.0. The
three-dimensional structure of SB203238 bound to the active site of HIV-1
protease has been determined at 2.3 A resolution by X-ray diffraction and refined
to a crystallographic R-factor (R = sigma magnitude of Fo magnitude of -
magnitude of Fc magnitude of /sigma magnitude of Fo magnitude of, where Fo and Fc
are the observed and calculated structure factor amplitudes, respectively) of
0.177. The inhibitor lies in an extended conformation in the active site;
however, because of the constrained geometry of the C7 ring, it maintains fewer
hydrogen bonds with the protein than in most other HIV-1 protease-inhibitor
complexes. More importantly, the inhibitor binds to the enzyme differently than
predicted in its design, by binding with the P2-P1' alpha-carbon atoms shifted by
approximately one-half a residue toward the N-terminus from their presumed
positions. This study illustrates the importance of structural information in an 
approach to rational drug design.

PMID: 7650677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Curr Biol. 1995 Aug 1;5(8):923-30.

LMP2+ proteasomes are required for the presentation of specific antigens to
cytotoxic T lymphocytes.

Sibille C(1), Gould KG, Willard-Gallo K, Thomson S, Rivett AJ, Powis S, Butcher
GW, De Baetselier P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Pathologie et de Génétique de Loverval, Gerpinnes, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules present
short peptides generated by intracellular protein degradation to cytotoxic T
lymphocytes (CTL). The multisubunit, non-lysosomal proteinases known as
proteasomes have been implicated in the generation of these peptides. Two
interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma)-inducible proteasome subunits, LMP2 and LMP7, are
encoded within the MHC gene cluster in a region associated with antigen
presentation. The incorporation of these LMP subunits into proteasomes may alter 
their activity so as to favour the generation of peptides able to bind to MHC
class I molecules. It has been difficult, however, to demonstrate a specific
requirement for LMP2 or LMP7 in the presentation of peptide epitopes to CTL.
RESULTS: We describe a T-cell lymphoma, termed SP3, that displays a novel
selective defect in MHC class I-restricted presentation of influenza virus
antigens. Of the MHC-encoded genes implicated in the class I pathway, only LMP2
is underexpressed in SP3 cells. Expression of IFN-gamma in transfected SP3 cells 
simultaneously restores LMP2 expression and antigen presentation to CTL.
Expression of antisense-LMP2 mRNA in these IFN-gamma-transfected cells
selectively represses antigen recognition and the induction of surface class I
MHC expression. Moreover, the expression of this antisense-LMP2 mRNA in L929
fibroblast cells, which constitutively express LMP2 and have no presentation
defect, blocks the presentation of the same influenza virus antigens that SP3
cells are defective in presenting.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that the LMP2 proteasome subunit can directly
influence both MHC class I-restricted antigen presentation and class I surface
expression.

PMID: 7583150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Eur J Clin Chem Clin Biochem. 1995 Jun;33(6):337-42.

Reference limits of apolipoprotein A-I and apolipoprotein B using an IFCC
standardized immunonephelometric method.

Steinmetz J(1), Tarallo P, Fournier B, Caces E, Siest G.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Médecine Préventive, URA CNRS 597, Vandoeuvre-Les-Nancy, France.

An important collaborative study organized by the IFCC enabled the selection of
international reference materials and the standardization of commercially
available methods by the use of common calibrators. In this paper, we report the 
reference limits of apolipoprotein A-I and apolipoprotein B in a selected healthy
French population. The apolipoprotein measurements were performed on BNA Behring 
using reagents and protocols supplied by the manufacturer: the standard sera were
calibrated using the IFCC-WHO reference preparations (SP1 and SP3). In addition, 
the apolipoprotein B protocol was modified by the addition of a supplementary
reagent to reduce the interference by lipaemic samples on immunonephelometric
measurement. In a sample of 115 random serum samples, there was a decrease in
mean concentration between non-standardized and standardized methods: -4.8% for
apolipoprotein A-I and -4.7% for apolipoprotein B. The reference limits for
apolipoprotein A-I are unaffected by gender between 4 and 14 years, thereafter
vary with age and gender until 40 years and with gender alone between 40 and 60
years. For apolipoprotein B, the variation with gender is only significant
between 30 and 49 years.

PMID: 7578614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Med Chem. 1995 May 26;38(11):1966-73.

Cardioselective antiischemic ATP-sensitive potassium channel openers. 2.
Structure-activity studies on benzopyranylcyanoguanidines: modification of the
benzopyran ring.

Atwal KS(1), Grover GJ, Ferrara FN, Ahmed SZ, Sleph PG, Dzwonczyk S, Normandin
DE.

Author information: 
(1)Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceutical Research Institute, Princeton, New Jersey 
08543-4000, USA.

The ATP-sensitive potassium channel (KATP) openers are of considerable interest
as myocardial protecting agents. However, there exists a narrow window of safety 
for the use of first-generation compounds as antiischemic agents due to their
powerful peripheral vasodilating effects, which can result in underperfusion of
the area already at risk. We have recently disclosed the discovery of
benzopyranylcyanoguanidine type KATP openers (BMS-180448) which are more
selective for the ischemic myocardium compared to the first-generation compounds.
This publication deals with structure-activity relationships for the antiischemic
activity of the lead compound 8. The presence of an electron-withdrawing group at
C6, an sp3 center at C4, and a gem-dimethyl group at C2 appears to be essential
for antiischemic activity. Cyanoguanidine can be replaced with a urea moiety. The
results reported here support the hypothesis that distinct structure-activity
relationships exist for antiischemic and vasorelaxant activities of compounds
related to 8 and cromakalim. The trifluoromethyl analog 10 is 550-fold more
selective in vitro for the ischemic myocardium compared to the first-generation
agent cromakalim. The reasons for the selectivity of these compounds for the
ischemic myocardium are not clear at the present time. They may be related to the
existence of receptor subtypes in smooth muscle and the myocardium.

PMID: 7783128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. J Biol Chem. 1995 May 26;270(21):12737-44.

Members of the Sp transcription factor family control transcription from the
uteroglobin promoter.

Dennig J(1), Hagen G, Beato M, Suske G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Philipps-Universität
Marburg, Federal Republic of Germany.

Previous analyses of the uteroglobin promoter revealed seven distinct regions,
which contribute to its overall activity in epithelial cells from endometrium and
lung. Most significantly, a mutation of the promoter sequence around 65 base
pairs upstream of the transcriptional start site severely impairs promoter
activity. The transcription factor acting through this sequence has not been
identified yet. Here, we report that members of the Sp transcription factor
family specifically recognize this non-classical GC box, in addition to another
functional motif located 230 base pairs upstream of the transcriptional start
site. We have characterized in detail the interaction of recombinant Sp3 with
both motifs by DNase I footprinting and methylation protection using the
wild-type uteroglobin promoter and various linker scanning mutants as templates. 
Electrophoretic mobility shift analyses show that Sp1 and Sp3 both bind with
similar affinity to these elements. We demonstrate that the DNA-binding proteins 
in the endometrial cell line Ishikawa which recognize these motifs are also Sp1
and Sp3. Gene transfer experiments into Drosophila Schneider cells that do not
contain endogenous Sp factors revealed that both DNA motifs respond to
transiently expressed Sp1 and Sp3. Our results show thus that the level of
transcription from the uteroglobin promoter is controlled by members of the Sp
transcription factor family through unusual Sp binding sites.

PMID: 7759528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Biochemistry. 1995 May 16;34(19):6552-61.

Allosteric linkages between beta-site covalent transformations and alpha-site
activation and deactivation in the tryptophan synthase bienzyme complex.

Leja CA(1), Woehl EU, Dunn MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of California, Riverside 92521, USA.

This work examines two aspects of the catalytic mechanism and allosteric
regulation of the tryptophan synthase bienzyme complex from Salmonella
typhimurium: (a) the chemical mechanism by which indole and other nucleophiles
react with the enzyme-bound alpha-aminoacrylate Schiff base intermediate, E(A-A),
to form quinonoidal intermediates, E(Q), and (b) the effects of covalent
transformations at the beta-site on the catalytic activity of the alpha-site.
Transient kinetic studies in combination with alpha-secondary deuterium isotope
effects are undertaken to determine the mechanism of nucleophile addition to
E(A-A). These studies establish that nucleophilic attack is best described by a
two-step reaction sequence consisting of a binding step that is followed by
Michael addition to the conjugated double bond of E(A-A). Analysis of isotope
effects suggests that the transition state for indole addition gives an E(A-A)
beta-carbon that resembles an sp3 center, while the stronger nucleophiles,
indoline and beta-mercaptoethanol, have transition states that appear to more
closely resemble an sp2 beta-carbon. The effects of beta-site covalent
transformations on alpha-site catalysis were studied using quasi-stable beta-site
intermediates and the alpha-site substrate analogue 3-[6-nitroindole]-D-glycerol 
3'-phosphate (6-nitro-IGP). It was found that the cleavage of 6-nitro-IGP is
strongly activated by the formation of E(A-A) and various E(Q) species at the
beta-site but not by external aldimine species. Therefore, we conclude that the
conversion of the L-Ser external aldimine to E(A-A) is the beta-site process
which activates the alpha-site, while conversion of E(Q) to the L-Trp external
aldimine triggers deactivation of the alpha-site. These findings are discussed
within the context of allosteric regulation of substrate channeling in tryptophan
synthase catalysis.

PMID: 7756286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Oncogene. 1995 May 4;10(9):1841-8.

Differential transcriptional regulation of c-myc promoter through the same DNA
binding sites targeted by Sp1-like proteins.

Majello B(1), De Luca P, Suske G, Lania L.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Genetica, Biologia Generale e Molecolare, Università Federico 
II, Naples, Italy.

Sp1 and Sp3 are closely related members of a gene family encoding proteins with
very similar structural features. The zinc finger DNA binding domains of Sp1 and 
Sp3 are highly conserved and they bind to GC and GT box with comparable
affinities. To begin to delineate the specific roles of these two members of the 
Sp1-like gene family, here we have analysed the DNA binding specificity and their
effects on activation of human c-myc promoter. We found that both proteins bind
to the same sites of c-myc promoter, upstream to both the P1 and P2 initiation
sites. Cotransfection experiments, in mammalian and insect cells, indicated that 
Sp1 trans-activate c-myc promoter, whereas Sp3 did not. In addition, enforced
expression of Sp3 repressed Sp1-mediated activation of c-myc. Finally, we found
that Sp1 and E2F-1/DP-1 cooperatively trans-activate c-myc promoter. In contrast 
enforced expression of Sp3 fails to repress E2F-1/DP-1-mediated activation.

PMID: 7753559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Environ Res. 1995 May;69(2):96-101.

Urban levels of air pollution increase lung responsiveness in rats.

Pereira P(1), Saldiva PH, Sakae RS, Bohm GM, Martins MA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Patologia, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de São Paulo,
Brazil.

This study was designed to investigate if animals exposed to urban levels of air 
pollution develop pulmonary hyperresponsiveness and to test if this change was
reversed after moving the animals to a nonpolluted environment. One hundred
twenty male Wistar rats were kept in (a) São Paulo (polluted environment) for 3
months (SP3); (b) Atibaia (clean region), for 3 months (A3); (c) São Paulo for 3 
months and then Atibaia for a further 3 months (SPA6); (d) Atibaia for 6 months
(A6). After the exposure period, the rats were submitted to dose-response curves 
to inhaled methacholine. Older animals (SPA6 and A6) had lower responses to
methacholine in terms of respiratory system resistance when compared to the
animals studied after 3 months of experiment (SP3 and A3). However, the response 
in terms of respiratory system elastance of the SP3 group was significantly (P = 
0.0004) greater than those of the other three groups. Our results suggest that
the environmental conditions of the large urban centers can induce pulmonary
hyperresponsiveness in rats that can be reversed when the animals are removed to 
a nonpolluted area.

PMID: 8608776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Toxicon. 1995 May;33(5):615-26.

Fractionation of Bothrops pirajai snake venom: isolation and characterization of 
piratoxin-I, a new myotoxic protein.

Mancuso LC(1), Correa MM, Vieira CA, Cunha OA, Lachat JJ, de Araujo HS, Ownby CL,
Giglio JR.

Author information: 
(1)Departmento de Bioquímica, Faculdade de Medicina de Riberão Preto,
Universidade de São Paulo, Brazil.

Whole desiccated venom of Bothrops pirajai was fractionated on a gel filtration
(Sephadex G-75) column. Phospholipase A2, arginine esterase and clotting activity
profiles of the six fractions (SI to SVI) obtained were determined. Fraction SIV 
from the gel filtration column was subjected to chromatography on SP-Sephadex
C-25. It was resolved into five subfractions (SIV-SP1, to SIV-SP5). Fractions
SIV-SP1, SIV-SP2 and SIV-SP3 showed phospholipase A2 activity but, among these
fractions, only SIV-SP3 was homogeneous. Induction of myonecrosis by SIV-SP3,
SIV-SP4 and SIV-SP5 was demonstrated by their ability to release serum creatine
kinase, and for SIV-SP5, to induce histological alterations in the injected mouse
muscle. Chemical characterization by determination of mol. wts, isoelectric
focusing and direct manual sequencing of the N-terminal region was performed for 
SIV-SP3, SIV-SP4 and SIV-SP5. When compared with bothropstoxin-I, the myotoxin
SIV-SP5 showed the same total number of amino acid residues (121) and constant
molar ratio for all but three amino acids. We have named this toxin piratoxin-I
(PrTX-I).

PMID: 7660366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Apr 25;92(9):3953-7.

Functional interactions between the retinoblastoma (Rb) protein and Sp-family
members: superactivation by Rb requires amino acids necessary for growth
suppression.

Udvadia AJ(1), Templeton DJ, Horowitz JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cancer Biology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, NC 27710, USA.

The transient expression of the retinoblastoma protein (Rb) regulates the
transcription of a variety of growth-control genes, including c-fos, c-myc, and
the gene for transforming growth factor beta 1 via discrete promoter sequences
termed retinoblastoma control elements (RCE). Previous analyses have shown that
Sp1 is one of three RCE-binding proteins identified in nuclear extracts and that 
Rb functionally interacts with Sp1 in vivo, resulting in the "superactivation" of
Sp1-mediated transcription. By immunochemical and biochemical criteria, we report
that an Sp1-related transcription factor, Sp3, is a second RCE-binding protein.
Furthermore, in transient cotransfection assays, we report that Rb
"superactivates" Sp3-mediated RCE-dependent transcription in vivo and that levels
of superactivation are dependent on the trans-activator (Sp1 or Sp3) studied.
Using expression vectors carrying mutated Rb cDNAs, we have identified two
portions of Rb required for superactivation: (i) a portion of the Rb "pocket"
(amino acids 614-839) previously determined to be required for physical
interactions between Rb and transcription factors such as E2F-1 and (ii) a novel 
amino-terminal region (amino acids 140-202). Since both of these regions of Rb
are targets of mutation in human tumors, our data suggest that superactivation of
Sp1/Sp3 may play a role in Rb-mediated growth suppression and/or the induction of
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC42080
PMID: 7732011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1995 Feb 27;108(1-2):51-65.

Multiple upstream promoter elements of the gene for the pregnancy-associated
tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase, uteroferrin bind human endometrial nuclear
proteins.

Gonzalez BY(1), Perera OP, Michel FJ, Simmen RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, University of Florida, Gainesville 32611, USA.

The endometrial expression of the gene encoding porcine uteroferrin (UF), during 
pregnancy is presumed to be mediated by cis-regulatory regions distinct from
those that confer its limited expression to other mammalian tissues and cell
types. In the present study, chimeric DNA constructs of native and progressive 5'
deleted promoter regions fused to the promoter chloramphenicol acetyl-transferase
reporter gene were transiently transfected in the human endometrial carcinoma
cell line ECC-1 to examine their ability to direct UF promoter activity. The
region between -1935 and -831 bp contained negatively acting elements which
drastically reduced basal promoter activity. In contrast, the region between -831
and -484 bp contributed significantly to high level basal activity. Gel
retardation and footprinting assays identified factor-binding sites between -1601
and -484 bp for human endometrial nuclear proteins. One binding site corresponds 
to a heptamer motif (TGCTAGA) present twice within the -1601 to -831 bp region
and previously shown to bind an 80 kDa porcine endometrial protein. This heptamer
bound an 80 kDa nuclear protein from human ECC-1 and human Ishikawa endometrial
cells and a 92 kDa protein from human placental JEG-3 cells. The other binding
region within -831 to -484 bp contained GC-rich sequences, which bind human Sp1. 
The protected GC-rich sequence (GC-Box 1) between -768 and -749 bp also binds a
24 kDa M(r) protein. Nuclear proteins of molecular weight 40-60 kDa and distinct 
from Sp1, Sp2 and Sp3 bound a second GC-rich sequence (GC-Box 3) between -628 and
-616 bp. These studies demonstrate that multiple elements within the UF gene
promoter bind nuclear proteins which are similarly expressed in other endometrial
cells and suggest that common transactivating factors may functionally mediate
expression of endometrial-associated genes.

PMID: 7758840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Mol Plant Microbe Interact. 1995 Jan-Feb;8(1):23-31.

Mutational analysis of the coat protein gene of brome mosaic virus: effects on
replication and movement in barley and in Chenopodium hybridum.

Flasinski S(1), Dzianott A, Pratt S, Bujarski JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Northern Illinois University, DeKalb 60115.

The coat protein (CP) open reading frame (ORF) of brome mosaic virus (BMV) has
been mutated to study host-related CP functions in barley, a systemic host, and
in Chenopodium hybridum L. which supports both local lesion formation and
systemic spread of BMV. To test the role of the N-terminal region of CP, mutants 
C1 to C3, which synthesized the CP lacking first seven amino acids, and mutant
D1, which had Trp 22 and Thr 23 replaced with Phe-Gly-Ser, were generated. C1 to 
C3 inhibited virus systemic spread in C. hybridum but not in barley while D1 only
reduced virus accumulation in noninoculated leaves of C. hybridum. More internal 
CP regions were tested by mutation of Lys 63 to Leu (mutant SP3) and Lys 129 to
Arg (mutant SP1). SP1 behaved similarly to C1 to C3 while SP3 similarly to D1. In
addition, SP3 reduced concentrations of RNA3 and RNA4 in both hosts. Apparently, 
various CP regions differentially affect, either directly or indirectly, virus
translocation in different hosts, suggesting both the CP and host factors to be
important for virus spread. Larger deletions in the CP ORF (mutants BB4 and SX1) 
or a decrease of CP production by using a frameshift mutant C, inhibited virus
systemic spread in both hosts, and delayed the appearance of smaller local
lesions on C. hybridum. Thus, the CP is not required for cell-to-cell movement
but is required for systemic translocation of BMV.

PMID: 7772801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Dev Comp Immunol. 1995 Jan-Feb;19(1):21-9.

Characteristics of allogeneic resorption in Botrylloides from the Mediterranean
coast of Israel.

Rinkevich B(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Oceanography, Haifa, Israel.

Some of the characteristics of allogeneic resorption have been revealed in
studies of chimeras of two Botrylloides subpopulations (SP1 and SP3) inhabiting
the Mediterranean coast of Israel. Both Botrylloides SPs exhibited the same
outcomes, which differ significantly from the resorption documented in the
well-studied botryllid ascidian, Botryllus schlosseri: 1. Resorption in
Botrylloides chimeras was usually a very fast process starting 1 to 26 days after
fusion and terminating in < 9 days thereafter. 2. Resorption occurs at any
blastogenic stage. 3. Resorption is complete, including zooids, buds, blood
vessels and ampullae. 4. Either one of the genotypes can be resorbed in multipair
chimeras of any specific combination. 5. Resorption starts simultaneously in all 
zooids of the partner to be resorbed. 6. Time for resorption and directionality
were not affected by the size ratios between the partners (0.3-1.8). As in B.
schlosseri, other phenomena (disconnection, chimeric death and retreat growth)
interrupt resorption in ca. 60% of the chimeras, under laboratory conditions. We 
propose that external stress conditions also have a significant role in a
nonimmunological expression of resorption in Botrylloides.

PMID: 7615135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Chem Biol. 1994 Dec;1(4):231-4.

Tilted amides in amino acid and peptide derivatives.

Shao H(1), Jiang X, Gantzel P, Goodman M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, San Diego,
La Jolla 92093, USA.

BACKGROUND: Amide bonds in peptides and proteins typically adopt planar cis or
trans conformations. Conversions between cis and trans amide conformations are
necessary for protein folding and for many other processes, but are difficult to 
achieve since they involve disruption of the planarity of the bond. As a first
step to understanding cis-trans isomerization, we set out to synthesize and
characterize peptides that mimic the tilted or twisted amide structures that are 
postulated to form the intermediate states in this process.
RESULTS: We have synthesized a model amino acid and four dipeptide derivatives
containing a methyl-substituted aziridine residue. Single crystals of phenacyl
(2R, 3R)-benzyloxycarbonyl-3-methyl-2-aziridinecarboxylate and phenacyl (2R,
3R)-acetyl-glycyl-3-methyl-2-aziridine-carboxylate were obtained. Using X-ray
diffraction analysis, we determined that the amide nitrogens of the aziridine
rings have tetrahedral sp3-like geometry with tilt angles in the range of 37-38
degrees. The 13C-NMR spectra indicate that the amide carbonyl is dramatically
shifted downfield as a consequence of the tilt.
CONCLUSIONS: In peptides containing a substituted aziridine ring, the orbitals of
the amide nitrogen are constrained into a tilted configuration. These peptides
may mimic the transition state between cis and trans amide conformations. This
technique thus provides a novel strategy for the study of isomerization and other
biorecognition processes.

PMID: 9383395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Nov 25;22(23):4914-21.

Different members of the Sp1 multigene family exert opposite transcriptional
regulation of the long terminal repeat of HIV-1.

Majello B(1), De Luca P, Hagen G, Suske G, Lania L.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Genetica, Biologia Generale e Molecolare, Università Federico 
II, Naples, Italy.

Recently, a family of transcription factors structurally related to Sp1 has been 
described; thus, more than one activator may bind to the GC boxes present in a
number of viral and cellular promoters. We have compared the transactivation
potentials of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 proteins on the human immunodeficiency virus type 
1 (HIV-1) promoter. The long terminal repeat (LTR) of HIV-1 contains three
binding sites for the transcription factor Sp1 (GC boxes) which are involved in
both basal and Tat-mediated transcriptional activation. Moreover, a cooperative
interaction between NF-kappa B and Sp1 is required for HIV enhancer activation.
We now demonstrate that Sp4 is an activator, while the Sp3 protein represses
basal expression of HIV promoter. Remarkably, we found that over-expression of
the transcription factor Sp3 was able to suppress Tat-mediated transactivation.
These inhibitory effects of Sp3 correlate with its DNA binding activity,
suggesting that Sp3 inhibition involves competition with Sp1 for occupancy of the
GC boxes. Next, we have analyzed the role of different Sp1-related proteins in
the stimulation of HIV-1 promoter in response to mitogens. We found that the
binding of NF-kappa B is not by itself sufficient to induce HIV gene expression. 
Instead, an interaction between NF-kappa B and the trans-acting domain (A domain)
of Sp1 bound to an adjacent site must occur. We found that the cooperative
interaction between NF-kappa B and Sp1 is highly specific, since neither Sp3 nor 
Sp4 is capable of cooperating with NF-kappa B.

PMCID: PMC523756
PMID: 7800480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Biochemistry. 1994 Nov 8;33(44):13049-56.

Kinetic and equilibrium alpha-secondary tritium isotope effects on reactions
catalyzed by dCMP hydroxymethylase from bacteriophage T4.

Graves KL(1), Hardy LW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Massachusetts Medical Center,
Worcester 01655.

Deoxycytidylate (dCMP) hydroxymethylase (CH) catalyzes the formation of
5-(hydroxymethyl)-dCMP, essential for DNA synthesis in phage T4, from dCMP and
methylenetetrahydrofolate (CH2THF). The nucleotide analog 5-fluorodeoxuridylate
(FdUMP) stoichiometrically inactivates CH by formation of a covalent complex
containing enzyme, FdUMP, and CH2THF. Similar FdUMP complexes are formed by dTMP 
synthase and dUMP hydroxymethylase, enzymes which are homologous to CH. Both the 
association and the dissociation rate of the FdUMP complex are shown to be
increased by the mutation of active site Asp179 to Asn. The mutated enzyme,
CH(D179N), has an altered substrate preference, favoring dUMP rather than dCMP
[Graves, K. L., et al. (1992) Biochemistry 31, 10315]. A value of 0.8 was
determined for the alpha-secondary tritium equilibrium isotope effect on the
binding of [6-3H]FdUMP to wild-type CH and to CH(D179N), using a mixture of
2-14C- and 6-3H-labeled FdUMP. These effects, similar to that found for TS,
indicate that C6 of the nucleotide is saturated (i.e., sp3 hybridized) in the
covalent complex of CH, FDUMP, and CH2THF. This strongly suggests that catalysis 
by CH proceeds via sequential sp2-->sp3-->sp2 hybridization changes at C6 of
substrate nucleotides, and it is consistent with a transient covalent linkage of 
C6 to the thiol of an essential CH residue, Cys148. The values of the
alpha-secondary 3H kinetic isotope effect (KIE) on kcat/KM for CH-catalyzed
formation of Hm5dCMP caused by 6-3H-substitution of dCMP, with both wild-type CH 
and CH(D179N), were very close to 1.0. However, the KIE for CH-(D179N) with dUMP 
was 0.82.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7947710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Phys Rev B Condens Matter. 1994 Oct 1;50(14):10311-10314.

High-pressure transformations of C60 to diamond and sp3 phases at room
temperature and to sp2 phases at high temperature.

Hodeau JL, Tonnerre JM, Bouchet-Fabre B, Núñez Regueiro M, Capponi JJ, Perroux M.

PMID: 9975115  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


316. J Biol Chem. 1994 Sep 2;269(35):22385-90.

Electrostatic potential surfaces of the transition state for AMP deaminase and
for (R)-coformycin, a transition state inhibitor.

Kline PC(1), Schramm VL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New
York 10461.

The transition state for the hydrolysis of AMP by AMP deaminase has been
characterized by heavy atom kinetic isotope effects (Merkler, D.J., Kline, P.C., 
Weiss, P., and Schramm, V.L. (1993) Biochemistry 32, 12993-13001). The
experimentally established transition state includes a bond order of 0.8 to the
attacking water nucleophile, a full bond order to the exocyclic 6-amino group,
rehybridization of C-6 of the purine ring to sp3 and protonation of N-1 by
Glu633. The transition state is one the path to formation of an unstable
tetrahedral intermediate in which the exocyclic amine undergoes rapid protonation
followed by its departure. In this mechanism, the highest energetic barrier on
the reaction coordinate is the attack of the zinc-activated water. In a further
test of this transition state structure, the electrostatic potential surface for 
the purine ring of the transition state has been determined by molecular orbital 
calculations and compared to that of the base of (R)-coformycin 5'-monophosphate,
a slow onset, tight binding inhibitor of AMP deaminase that binds with an overall
dissociation constant of 10(-11) M. The electrostatic potential surfaces of the
aglycones of the transition state and (R)-coformycin are compared to the adenine 
ring of the substrate and to an alternative transition state structure in which
the transition state is late, with fully bonded hydroxyl and fully protonated
exocyclic amine. The results indicate a near-match of the electrostatic potential
surfaces for the early transition state and (R)-coformycin. The electrostatic
nature of the late transition state with a protonated amine leaving group differs
both from the transition state determine by kinetic isotope effects and from that
of (R)-coformycin analogues. The results provide evidence that the nature of the 
enzyme-stabilized transition state for adenine deamination involves an early
transition state with a partially bonded hydroxyl group. The observed tight
binding inhibition by (R)-coformycin analogues as transition state inhibitors
results from the similarity of the partial charges on the inhibitors to that of
the enzymatic transition state stabilized by AMP deaminase.

PMID: 8071366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Int J Pept Protein Res. 1994 Sep;44(3):262-9.

Inductive effects on the structure of proline residues.

Panasik N Jr(1), Eberhardt ES, Edison AS, Powell DR, Raines RT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison.

4(S)-Hydroxyproline (Hyp) residues constitute about 10% of most forms of
collagen, the most abundant protein in vertebrates. X-Ray diffraction analysis
was used to ascertain how the structure of proline residues is affected by the
inductive effect elicited by the hydroxyl group of Hyp residues. N-Acetylproline 
methylester (1), N-acetyl-4(S)-hydroxyproline methylester (2) and N-acetyl-4(S)- 
fluoroproline methylester (3) were synthesized, and their crystalline structures 
were determined at high resolution. The amide bond of crystalline 1 was in the
cis conformation, which is the minor isomer in solution, and the pyrrolidine ring
of 1 had C gamma-endo pucker. In crystalline 2 and 3 the amide bonds were in the 
trans conformation, and the pyrrolidine rings had C-exo pucker. The lengths of
the bonds between sp3-hybridized carbon atoms in the pyrrolidine ring were
significantly shorter in 2 and 3 than in 1, as was predicted by ab initio
molecular orbital calculations at the RHF/3-21G level of theory. No significant
change in bond length was observed in the other bonds of 1,2 or 3. The
pyramidylization of the nitrogen atom increased dramatically in the order: 1 < 2 
< 3. Together, these results indicate that electron-withdrawing substituents in
the 4-position of proline residues can have a significant influence on the
structure of these residues. In particular, the change in pyramidylization
suggests that such substituents increase the sp3-character of the prolyl nitrogen
atom and could thereby alter the rate of prolyl peptide bond isomerization.

PMID: 7822103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. EMBO J. 1994 Aug 15;13(16):3843-51.

Sp1-mediated transcriptional activation is repressed by Sp3.

Hagen G(1), Müller S, Beato M, Suske G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Philipps-Universität
Marburg, Germany.

Sp1, Sp3 (SPR-2) and Sp4 (SPR-1) are human sequence-specific DNA binding proteins
with very similar structural features. In this report, we have analyzed Sp3 in
direct comparison with Sp1. We have raised antibodies against both Sp1 and Sp3,
and show that Sp3 protein, like Sp1, is expressed in various cell lines.
Co-transfection experiments in different mammalian cell lines reveal that in
contrast to Sp1 and Sp4, Sp3 is not able to activate several Sp1 responsive
promoters. In addition, Sp3 also fails to activate reporter constructs in
Drosophila SL2 cells lacking endogenous Sp factors. Instead, we find that Sp3
represses Sp1-mediated activation in a linear dose-dependent manner. A mutant of 
Sp3 lacking the DNA binding domain does not affect activation by Sp1, suggesting 
that the inhibition is most likely due to the competition with Sp1 for their
common binding sites. To determine if any structurally similar domain of Sp3 is
able to replace partially homologous domains of Sp1, we have generated chimeric
proteins and tested their activation characteristics in gene transfer
experiments. It appears that neither the glutamine-rich domains A and B nor the D
domain of Sp1 can be replaced by the homologous regions of Sp3. Our results
suggest that Sp3 is an inhibitory member of the Sp family.

PMCID: PMC395297
PMID: 8070411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Biochemistry. 1994 Aug 9;33(31):9321-6.

Engineered biosynthesis of novel polyketides: stereochemical course of two
reactions catalyzed by a polyketide synthase.

Fu H(1), McDaniel R, Hopwood DA, Khosla C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Stanford University, California
94305-5025.

A genetically engineered strain expressing the essential components of the
tetracenomycin polyketide synthase (tcm PKS) along with the actinorhodin
ketoreductase (act KR) was found to produce two new (diastereomeric) aromatic
polyketides, designated RM20b and RM20c, in addition to RM20, whose structure was
reported earlier [McDaniel, R., Ebert-Khosla, S., Hopwood, D. A., & Khosla, C.
(1993) Science 262, 1546-1550]. Spectroscopic and in vivo isotopic labeling
analysis of RM20b and RM20c revealed that their polyketide backbones were
identical to that of RM20 with respect to chain length, regiospecificity of
ketoreduction, and regiospecificity of the first intramolecular aldol
condensation. This is consistent with earlier predictions that the essential
components of the PKS--a bifunctional ketosynthase/acyltransferase, a chain
length determining factor, and an acyl carrier protein--are responsible for
controlling each of these features of the polyketide backbone [McDaniel, R.,
Ebert-Khosla, S., Hopwood, D. A., & Khosla, C. (1993) Science 262, 1546-1550;
McDaniel, R., Ebert-Khosla, S., Hopwood, D. A., & Khosla, C. (1993) J. Am. Chem. 
Soc. 115, 11671-11675; Fu, H., Ebert-Khosla, S., Hopwood, D. A., & Khosla, C.
(1994) J. Am. Chem. Soc. 116, 4166-4170]. In addition, however, RM20b and RM20c
possess two unusual features. In both molecules the hydroxyls on sp3 C-9 and C-7 
of the first six-membered ring, which arise as a result of ketoreduction and
aldol condensation, respectively, are intact, rather than being lost via
dehydration. Furthermore, the relative yield of RM20b (in which these hydroxyls
are syn) is 7-fold greater than that of RM20c (in which they are anti).(ABSTRACT 
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 8049233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1994 Jul;92(4):303-15.

SEP topographies elicited by innocuous and noxious sural nerve stimulation. II.
Effects of stimulus intensity on topographic pattern and amplitude.

Dowman R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY 13699-5825.

The effects of innocuous and noxious sural nerve stimulation on the SEP scalp
topography were examined in 15 human subjects. This analysis focused on the 6
stable periods (i.e., consecutive time points where the topography did not
change) that were identified in the companion paper (Dowman 1994). Stable period 
1 (SP1: 58-90 msec post stimulus), SP4 (178-222 msec) and SP5 (223-277 msec)
showed amplitude-stimulus intensity relationships that are similar to those of
neurons involved in the sensory-discriminative aspects of innocuous
somatosensation. The SP1 topographic pattern showed little or no change across
the innocuous and noxious stimulus levels, which together with the amplitude data
suggests that SP1 is largely generated by neurons involved in innocuous
somatosensation. The SP4 topographic pattern did not change appreciably across
the innocuous and noxious stimulus levels, but its amplitude decreased with
increasing noxious stimulation. These data suggest that SP4 is generated by
neurons involved in innocuous somatosensation and that noxious inputs inhibit
these cells. There were differences in the SP5 topographic patterns evoked at the
innocuous and the noxious stimulus levels, which suggest SP5 also receives a
contribution from neurons involved in noxious somatosensation. SP3 (135-157 msec)
and SP6 (282-339 msec) are probably generated by neurons involved in noxious
somatosensation. The topographic patterns of both were different at innocuous and
noxious levels. SP3's amplitude-stimulus intensity function suggests that it is
generated by neurons that respond to noxious inputs in a non-graded fashion. The 
amplitude and offset latency of SP6 increased with increasing noxious
stimulation, which suggests that SP6 is generated by neurons that respond to
noxious inputs in a graded fashion.

PMID: 7517852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1994 Jul;92(4):291-302.

SEP topographies elicited by innocuous and noxious sural nerve stimulation. I.
Identification of stable periods and individual differences.

Dowman R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY 13699-5825.

Scalp potential topographies evoked by innocuous and noxious sural nerve
stimulation were obtained from 15 human subjects. The SEP scalp topography could 
be separated into 6 different stable periods (SP), that is, consecutive time
points where there were no major changes in the topographic pattern. SP1
(occurring 58-90 msec post stimulus) was characterized by a contralateral frontal
positivity and a central negativity oriented ipsilateral to the evoking stimulus;
SP2 (92-120 msec) by a bilateral frontal positivity and a symmetrical central
negativity; SP3 (135-158 msec) by a widespread negativity with a minimum at the
contralateral temporo-frontal region; and SP4 (178-222 msec), SP5 (223-277 msec) 
and SP6 (282-339 msec) by a widespread positivity with a maximum located along
the centro-parietal midline. SP4, SP5, and SP6 could be distinguished by changes 
in the orientation of the isovoltage contour lines and/or by changes in the
location of the maximum. The stable periods had similar onset and offset
latencies and the same major features across subjects. However, the topographic
patterns were not identical across subjects. These individual differences are
likely due to the expected variability in the orientation of the equivalent
regional dipole sources generating these potentials.

PMID: 7517851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Int J Radiat Biol. 1994 Jun;65(6):623-30.

DNA double-strand break measurement in mammalian cells by pulsed-field gel
electrophoresis: an approach using restriction enzymes and gene probing.

Löbrich M(1), Ikpeme S, Kiefer J.

Author information: 
(1)Strahlenzentrum der Justus-Liebig-Universität, Giessen, Germany.

DNA samples prepared from human SP3 cells, which had been exposed to various
doses of X-ray, were treated with NotI restriction endonuclease before being run 
in a contour-clamped homogeneous electrophoresis system. The restriction enzyme
cuts the DNA at defined positions delivering DNA sizes which can be resolved by
pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE). In order to investigate only one of the 
DNA fragments, a human lactoferrin cDNA, pHL-41, was hybridized to the DNA
separated by PFGE. As a result, only the DNA fragment which contains the
hybridized gene was detected resulting in a one-band pattern. The decrease of
this band was found to be exponential with increasing radiation dose. From the
slope, a double-strand break induction rate of (6.3 +/- 0.7) x 10(-3)/Mbp/Gy was 
deduced for 80 kV X-rays.

PMID: 7912711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Med Chem. 1994 May 13;37(10):1518-25.

The [(methyloxy)imino]methyl moiety as a bioisoster of aryl. A novel class of
completely aliphatic beta-adrenergic receptor antagonists.

Macchia B(1), Balsamo A, Breschi MC, Chiellini G, Macchia M, Martinelli A,
Martini C, Nardini C, Nencetti S, Rossello A, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Chimica Farmaceutica e Tossicologica, Universitá di Pisa, Italy.

Previous studies in the field of beta-adrenergic drugs had supported the
hypothesis of the existence of a bioisosterism between the
[(methyleneamino)oxy]methyl moiety (C = NOCH2, MAOMM) of type B beta-blocking
drugs and the aryl (Ar) of type A beta-blocking agents. In the MAOMM, however,
the carbon of the CH2 linked to the oximic oxygen possesses a hybridization (sp3)
and a geometry different from those of the corresponding carbon of Ar which
possesses an sp2 hybridization. Furthermore, in the MAOMM, in its preferred
conformation, the unsaturated portion (C = N) is situated in a spatial area which
does not correspond exactly to the area occupied by Ar. The formal inversion of
the atomic sequence C = NOCH2 of the MAOMM leads to a different type of group,
the [(methyloxy)imino]methyl moiety (CH2ON = C, MOIMM), which, in the E
configuration, appears to present greater steric and electronic analogies with an
Ar, with respect to the MAOMM. On the basis of these observations, some
completely aliphatic (E)-N-(3-amino-2- hydroxypropylidene)(alkyloxy)amino
derivatives of type C (11a,b and 12a, b) were synthesized, the their
beta-adrenergic properties were compared with those of the corresponding
[(methyleneamino)oxy]-methyl isomers of type B (19a, b and 20a, b). The similar
beta-adrenergic properties of 11, 12 and 19, 20 evaluated in vitro both by
radioligand binding assays and by functional tests on isolated preparations, are 
discussed on the basis of considerations regarding the spatial correspondences
and electronic analogies between the MOIMM and the MAOMM.

PMID: 7910217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Pancreas. 1994 May;9(3):374-81.

Identification of autoantibodies to a pancreatic antigen in patients with
idiopathic chronic pancreatitis and Sjögren's syndrome.

Nishimori I(1), Yamamoto Y, Okazaki K, Morita M, Onodera M, Kino J, Tamura S,
Yamamoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Kochi Medical School, Japan.

A serum autoantibody to a pancreatic antigen was identified in patients with
idiopathic chronic pancreatitis and Sjögren's syndrome by radioimmunoassay and
Western immunoblotting. Antigen from porcine and human pancreas extracts was
partially purified using a monoclonal antibody, SP3-1, which recognizes the
antigen in duct cells of various exocrine organs. Solid phase radioimmunoassay of
the pancreatic antigen showed a positive result in 6 of 20 patients with
idiopathic chronic pancreatitis (30%), 3 of 11 patients with Sjögren's syndrome
(27%), and 1 of 15 patients with alcoholic chronic pancreatitis (7%). Among seven
patients with stone-related chronic pancreatitis, six patients with autoimmune
thyroiditis, and 14 normal controls, none showed evidence of autoantibodies to
the pancreatic antigen. Western immunoblotting showed that serum antibody
commonly reacted with a 60-kD molecule of either porcine or human pancreatic
antigen, with which SP3-1 also reacted. These results show the existence of the
autoantibodies to pancreas, especially to an antigen expressed in ductal cells of
exocrine glands, in idiopathic chronic pancreatitis and Sjögren's syndrome, and
suggest the possibility of an autoimmune mechanism in the pathogenesis of
idiopathic chronic pancreatitis.

PMID: 8022761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Biochemistry. 1994 Apr 26;33(16):4885-95.

X-ray crystallographic structures of adipocyte lipid-binding protein complexed
with palmitate and hexadecanesulfonic acid. Properties of cavity binding sites.

LaLonde JM(1), Bernlohr DA, Banaszak LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis 55455.

Adipocyte lipid-binding protein is a 14.6-kDa polypeptide that is responsible for
the intracellular trafficking of fatty acids. Its structure previously has been
solved in the apo and holo forms complexed with stearate and oleate. To examine
the binding of lipids other than those with a carboxylate headgroup, we have
determined the structure of ALBP in complex with a sulfonic acid,
hexadecanesulfonic acid, and compared its structure with the natural fatty acid
analog, palmitate. Crystallographic refinement led to similar models, both with
R-factors of about 20% and a resolution of 1.6 A. results can be compared with
earlier studies on C18 fatty acids, both saturated and unsaturated. The
previously refined complexes with stearate and oleate in combination with the
complexes of palmitate and hexadecanesulfonic acid demonstrate specific positions
for water molecules bound in the internal cavity. Many of the water-binding sites
are present in both the apo form and the holo forms of the protein. With ligand
present, a network of 10 internalized water molecules appear to form a
hydrophobic hydration region. In spite of the sp3 geometry of the sulfonic acid
derivative, the headgroup occupies the same site as that of the planar
carboxylate in natural fatty acids. These results demonstrate that intracellular 
lipid-binding proteins are capable of binding a wider variety of lipids than
previously considered and reveal the importance of interior ordered water
molecules in the binding cavity.

PMID: 8161548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Clin Chem. 1994 Apr;40(4):586-92.

International Federation of Clinical Chemistry standardization project for
measurements of apolipoproteins A-I and B. IV. Comparability of apolipoprotein B 
values by use of International Reference Material.

Marcovina SM(1), Albers JJ, Kennedy H, Mei JV, Henderson LO, Hannon WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Northwest Lipid Research Laboratories, University of
Washington, Seattle 98103.

We performed temporal and thermal stability studies on SP3-07, a
liquid-stabilized reference material for apolipoprotein (apo) B, selected during 
the previous phase of the International Federation of Clinical Chemistry project 
on standardization of apolipoprotein measurements. Results indicate that SP3-07
stored at -70 degrees C has the long-term stability required for a reference
material. We assigned an accuracy-based apo B value of 1.22 g/L to SP3-07, using 
a nephelometric method that was calibrated with freshly isolated low-density
lipoprotein for which the apo B mass value was determined by a standardized
sodium dodecyl sulfate-Lowry procedure. Using a common protocol, the study
participants transferred the assigned mass value from SP3-07 to the individual
calibrators of the analytical systems and measured the apo B concentration of 20 
fresh-frozen samples obtained from individual donors and covering a clinically
relevant range of apo B values. The among-laboratory CV on these samples,
analyzed by 25 analytical systems, ranged from 3.1% to 6.7%. These results
demonstrate the lack of matrix effects of SP3-07 and its ability to provide
accurate and comparable apo B values in a variety of immunochemical methods. On
the basis of the outcome of these studies, the World Health Organization has
endorsed SP3-07 as the International Reference Material for Apolipoprotein B.

PMID: 8149615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Chem Res Toxicol. 1994 Jan-Feb;7(1):73-6.

Structure-genotoxicity relationships of allylbenzenes and propenylbenzenes: a
quantum chemical study.

Tsai RS(1), Carrupt PA, Testa B, Caldwell J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Chimie Thérapeutique, Ecole de Pharmacie, Université de Lausanne, 
Switzerland.

Erratum in
    Chem Res Toxicol 1995 Jan-Feb;8(1):164.

Quantum mechanical calculations at the semiempirical level (AM1 method) were
conducted for estragole (1), methyleugenol (2), safrole (3), alpha-asarone (4),
beta-asarone (5), elemicin (6), allylbenzene (7), eugenol (8), trans-anethole
(9), isosafrole (10), and myristicin (11), and the results compared with the
known genotoxicity of 1-6 and the absence of genotoxicity of 7-11 (unscheduled
DNA synthesis assay). The various compounds showed no significant differences in 
the relative stability of the radical species formed as intermediates in C-sp3
hydroxylation (delta HR(radical)) and in the corresponding enthalpy of activation
(delta H++). In contrast, the carbonium ions of the genotoxic congeners 1-6 were 
shown to be comparatively more stable than those of the inactive compounds 7-11, 
with the exception of eugenol (8). The inactivity of this compound could be due
to a very rapid stabilization of the carbonium ion by deprotonation to form a
quinone methide, as suggested by quantum chemical calculations. The relative
stability of the carbonium ion thus appears to be one of the key factors in the
genotoxicity of allylbenzenes and propenylbenzenes.

PMID: 8155828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Autoimmunity. 1994;19(1):23-9.

Immune complex specific for the pancreatic duct antigen in patients with
idiopathic chronic pancreatitis and Sjögren syndrome.

Onodera M(1), Okazaki K, Morita M, Nishimori I, Yamamoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Kochi Medical School Nankoku, Japan.

Circulating immune complexes (ICs) containing the pancreatic antigen against
SP3-1 monoclonal antibody were measured in patients with idiopathic chronic
pancreatitis (ICP) and Sjögren syndrome (SjS) by Raji cell and solid-phase
radioimmuno-assays (RIA). The mean serum levels of ICs measured by solid-phase
RIA were significantly higher in patients with ICP (n = 23) and SjS (n = 21) than
control (n = 15, p < 0.05, p < 0.02, respectively). ICs were positive in 10
patients with ICP (43%) and 12 SjS patients (57%). Raji cell assay also revealed 
a significantly higher serum ICs levels in patients with ICP (n = 17) and SjS (n 
= 12) compared with those of control (n = 7, p < 0.025, p < 0.005, respectively).
Seven patients with ICP (41%) and 8 SjS patients (67%) had positive ICs. This was
in contrast to the normal level of ICs in patients with alcoholic chronic
pancreatitis, primary biliary cirrhosis, and chronic thyroiditis. Our analysis
demonstrated a significant and positive relationship between RIA and Raji cell
assay (r = 0.70, p < 0.05). Our results suggest that ICs specific for SP3-1 may
play a role in the pathophysiology of ICP and SjS.

PMID: 7749039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Pediatr Pulmonol. 1993 Dec;16(6):347-53.

Evolution of pulmonary function during an acute exacerbation in hospitalized
patients with cystic fibrosis.

Gozal D(1), Bailey SL, Keens TG.

Author information: 
(1)Cystic Fibrosis Comprehensive Care Center, Childrens Hospital Los Angeles, CA 
90027.

Few objective criteria have been validated for serial clinical monitoring in
patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) during pulmonary exacerbations. While
pulmonary function tests (PFT) are often used to monitor clinical improvement, it
is not known which test correlates most closely with clinical improvement. To
answer this, we measured routine PFT in 58 patients with CF before, during, and
at discharge after 2-3 week hospital admission in 71 episodes of pulmonary
exacerbation. Patients with CF were discharged based on clinical, radiological,
and laboratory criteria. In general, all PFTs improved at midadmission and
improved further by discharge, at which time forced expiratory volume in 1 second
(FEV1), forced expiratory flow between 25% and 75% of forced vital capacity
(FEF25-75), vital capacity (VC), maximal voluntary ventilation (MVV), and oxygen 
saturation by pulse oximetry (SPO2) increased. The residual volume to total
capacity ratio (RV/TLC) and the slope of phase 3 in the single breath N2 washout 
curve (SP3 N2) decreased. The change in SP3 N2 was significantly greater than in 
any other PFT (P < 0.01 vs. VC and FEV1; P < 0.02 vs. RV and P < 0.001 vs. SPO2).
A calculated optimal cut-off value for SP3 N2 improvement was significantly more 
sensitive in identifying patient improvement at discharge than any other
pulmonary function test (P = 0.005). We speculate that clinical improvement in
patients with CF is closely linked to improved distribution of ventilation.

PMID: 8134156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Med Chem. 1993 Nov 12;36(23):3606-10.

Transformation of heterocyclic reversible monoamine oxidase-B inactivators into
irreversible inactivators by N-methylation.

Ding CZ(1), Silverman RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois
60208-3113.

3-[4-[(3-Chlorophenyl)methoxy]phenyl]-5-[(methylamino)methyl]- 2-oxazolidinone
(1) is a secondary amine known to be a potent time-dependent irreversible
inactivator of monoamine oxidase B (MAO-B). The primary amine analogues of
derivatives of 1, as well as of the corresponding dihydrofuranone and
pyrrolidinone, had been shown to be time-dependent, but reversible, inhibitors of
MAO-B. Here it is shown that the primary amine analogue of 1 is a time-dependent 
reversible inhibitor of MAO-B and that the secondary and tertiary amine analogues
of the corresponding oxazolidinone, dihydrofuranone, and pyrrolidinone are
time-dependent irreversible inhibitors of MAO-B. The reaction leading to the
irreversible enzyme adduct formation with 1 can be reversed by increasing the
temperature. These results are consistent with a stabilizing stereoelectronic
effect on the enzyme adduct caused by N-methylation which hinders free rotation
and prevents the sp3-orbital containing the nitrogen nonbonded electrons from
being trans to the active site amino acid leaving group.

PMID: 8246228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Biol Chem. 1993 Oct 5;268(28):21271-5.

Inhibition of colony-stimulating factor-1 promoter activity by the product of the
Wilms' tumor locus.

Harrington MA(1), Konicek B, Song A, Xia XL, Fredericks WJ, Rauscher FJ 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis
46202-5121.

Colony-stimulating factor-1 (CSF-1) is a member of the immediate early gene
family, which is expressed in mitogen-stimulated quiescent fibroblasts. The
biological effects of CSF-1 are multifaceted and include stimulation of the
proliferation and differentiation of myeloid progenitors and activity of
circulating monocytes and tissue-specific macrophages. Ablation of circulating
levels of biologically active CSF-1 in mice leads to osteopetrosis and sterility,
thus implicating a role for CSF-1 in bone remodeling and implantation.
Identification of regulatory elements and cognate transcription factors that bind
the csf-1 promoter and mediate such diverse expression patterns is of great
interest. We identified a sequence element at -273 to -265 (relative to the
transcription initiation site) in the murine csf-1 promoter, which contains
overlapping consensus sequences for the Wilms' tumor protein (WT1), EGR-1, SP1,
and SP3 proteins. WT1 and EGR-1 proteins produced in vitro bound to this
sequence, and co-transfection of wt1 with a csf-1-cat reporter plasmid resulted
in repression of promoter activity. Interestingly, nuclear extracts prepared from
serum-stimulated C3H10T1/2 cells contained predominantly SP1 and SP3 binding
activities, which recognized the -273 to -265 site. Thus repression of the csf-1 
promoter by WT1 at this site may involve competition between SP1 family
transcriptional activators and the WT1 repressor. Colony-stimulating factor-1 may
be a physiologically relevant target gene for regulation by the WT1 transcription
factor.

PMID: 8407965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Clin Microbiol. 1993 Sep;31(9):2343-9.

Immune response to synthetic peptides of hepatitis delta antigen.

Poisson F(1), Baillou F, Dubois F, Janvier B, Roingeard P, Goudeau A.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Microbiologie Médicale et Moléculaire, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique, Tours, France.

Hepatitis delta antigen (HDAg) is the only viral protein known to be expressed
during hepatitis delta virus (HDV) infection. Detection of antibody to HDAg
(anti-HD) is the usual method for diagnosis of HDV infection since viremia lasts 
only a few weeks. In an effort to identify the major epitopes recognized by
humans during natural infection, four oligopeptides including residues 2 to 17
(SP1), 155 to 172 (SP2), 168 to 182 (SP3), and 189 to 211 (SP4) of the HDAg
molecule were synthesized and probed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay with a 
panel of 80 serum specimens from 45 patients suffering from either HDV-hepatitis 
B virus coinfections (n = 17) or HDV superinfections (n = 28). Sera from infected
patients recognized these relatively short peptides. Peptide SP2 was the most
antigenic; 71% of serum specimens reacted. Antibody to SP2 was also the commonest
in sera taken early in the course of the disease. Peptide SP2 corresponds to one 
of the two regions which is highly conserved between different isolates. Among
the 63 serum specimens which scored anti-HD positive by a commercial assay, all
but 3 reacted to at least one of the peptides (95% agreement). Peptide assays
appeared to be significantly more sensitive than the commercial assay with native
HDAg early in the course of HDV infection since 14 of 17 (82%) serum specimens
which scored anti-HD negative in the commercial assay reacted to one or more
peptides. All serum specimens giving one or more positive results with the
various peptides were confirmed as being HDV positive by an inhibition assay with
free peptide in solution. The immune response to HDAg peptides vared greatly
between individuals. No specific reactivity profile could be assigned to those
with either HDV-hepatitis B virus coinfections or HDV superinfections. Overall,
HDAg peptides appeared to be convenient reagents in addition to native antigen
for the development of new and improved diagnostic tests for HDV infection.

PMCID: PMC265758
PMID: 8408553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. J Med Chem. 1993 Jul 9;36(14):1964-70.

Quinolone antibacterials: synthesis and biological activity of carbon isosteres
of the 1-piperazinyl and 3-amino-1-pyrrolidinyl side chains.

Laborde E(1), Kiely JS, Culbertson TP, Lesheski LE.

Author information: 
(1)Parke-Davis Pharmaceutical Research, Division of Warner-Lambert Company, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48105.

A series of 6-fluoro-1,4-dihydro-4-oxo-3-quinoline- and
1,8-naphthyridinecarboxylic acids, substituted at the 7-position with
carbon-linked side chains, was synthesized and evaluated for antibacterial
activity and DNA-gyrase inhibition. Structural modifications focused on
replacement of the heterocyclic nitrogen of the frequently found 1-piperazinyl
and 3-amino-1-pyrrolidinyl side chains by an sp2- or an sp3-hybridized carbon.
All new compounds displayed high in vitro and in vivo antibacterial activity.
Potency relative to the standard nitrogenated agents was dependent on ring size
and hybridization of the linking carbon atom of the side chain. Compounds with a 
1,2,3,6-tetrahydro-4-pyridinyl substituent at C-7 were equipotent with their
1-piperazinyl analogs, whereas those having a 4-piperidinyl or a
3-amino-1-cyclopentenyl ring at C-7 were less active than the 1-piperazinyl or
3-amino-1-pyrrolidinyl substituted agents, respectively. This relative difference
in antibacterial potency did not correlate with the observed activity against
gyrase, where the majority of the new compounds were equally or more potent than 
their nitrogenated counterparts.

PMID: 8393112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Microb Ecol. 1993 May;25(3):275-86. doi: 10.1007/BF00171893.

Selecting inocula for the biodegradation of organic compounds at low
concentrations.

Pahm MA(1), Alexander M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Soil, Crop, and Atmospheric Sciences, Cornell University, 14853,
Ithaca, New York, USA.

The inability of many organisms to degrade pollutants at low concentrations is a 
problem when selecting inocula for bioremediation of sites with these low
concentrations. Thus, a study was conducted to determine the effect of low
concentrations of p-nitrophenol (PNP) on growth of four PNP-degrading bacteria
and their abilities to metabolize low concentrations of the compound in culture
and samples from an oligotrophic lake. PNP did not increase the growth rates of
Flavobacterium sp. M4, Pseudomonas sp. K, Flavobacterium sp. M1, and Pseudomonas 
sp. SP3 at concentrations of less than 2, 4, 10, and 100 ng/ml, respectively,
when it was the sole added carbon source in culture, but it stimulated
multiplication at higher concentrations. In liquid culture with the nitro
compound as sole added carbon source, the four bacteria extensively mineralized
PNP at 50 and 100 ng/ml, and three of the four degraded much of the substrate at 
25 ng/ml. Pseudomonas sp. SP3 mineralized more than 20% but the two
Flavobacterium strains converted less than 10% of the substrate to C02 at 10
ng/ml, and none of the three mineralized more than 5% at 1 and 5 ng PNP/ml. Under
conditions where more than 99% of the radioactivity from (14)C-PNP added at 1
ng/ml remained in solution, two of the isolates formed organic products.
Pseudomonas sp. K had no activity at 1, 5, and 10 ng/ml. In contrast, when each
of the bacteria was separately inoculated into samples of water from an
oligotrophic lake and from a well in which PNP was not biodegraded, the bacteria 
were able to mineralize as little as 1 ng PNP/ml. The addition to a salts
solution of 10 ng of glucose per ml resulted in mineralization of PNP at
concentrations too low to be mineralized when the nitro compound was the sole
source of added carbon. Bacteria may thus be able to mineralize substrates in
natural waters at concentrations below those suggested by tests conducted in
culture media, possibly because of the availability of other carbon sources for
the bacteria.

PMID: 24189923  [PubMed]


335. Chem Res Toxicol. 1993 Mar-Apr;6(2):180-7.

Hepatic cytochrome P450 2B-type induction by ethyl/phenyl-substituted congeners
of phenobarbital in the rat.

Nims RW(1), Syi JL, Wink DA, Nelson VC, Thomas PE, Jones CR, Diwan BA, Keefer LK,
Rice JM, Lubet RA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Comparative Carcinogenesis, National Cancer Institute, Frederick
Cancer Research and Development Center, Maryland 21702.

As part of an investigation of the structural requirements for the induction, by 
phenobarbital-type inducers, of a coordinate pleiotropic response consisting of
increases in hepatic cytochrome P450 2B (P450 2B) activity, increases in other
phase I and II enzyme activities, and liver hypertrophy, we have examined a
series of analogues of phenobarbital in which the ethyl/phenyl substitution at
the sp3 carbon of the parent molecule was kept constant while the heterocyclic
portion of the molecule was modified. The induction of hepatic P450 2B protein
and ethoxy-, pentoxy-, and (benzyloxy)resorufin O-dealkylation activities, and
epoxide hydration activity and liver/body weight ratio increase were examined in 
male F344/NCr rats fed the various congeners for 14 days at doses equimolar to
500 ppm phenobarbital. Increases in the measured parameters were maximal in rats 
fed phenobarbital or 5-ethyl-5-phenylhydantoin. The responses to primidone or
2-ethyl-2-phenylsuccinimide were approximately 65% of maximal, while glutethimide
yielded a response approximately 50% of maximal. Induction of this response in
rats fed the ring-opened and decarboxylated analogues, (ethylphenylacetyl)urea
and 2-ethyl-2-phenylmalonamide, were < 25% of maximal.
5-Ethyl-5-phenyloxazolidinedione caused minimal increases in the measured end
points when administered at a dose equimolar to 500 ppm phenobarbital. The
profound differences among the congeners in ability to induce P450 2B protein and
associated catalytic activities were not due to differences in food consumption
by the various groups of rats.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 8477009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Comput Aided Mol Des. 1993 Feb;7(1):23-43.

GenStar: a method for de novo drug design.

Rotstein SH(1), Murcko MA.

Author information: 
(1)Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated, Cambridge, MA 02139.

A novel method, which we call GenStar, has been developed to suggest chemically
reasonable structures which fill the active sites of enzymes. The proposed
molecules provide good steric contact with the enzyme and exist in low-energy
conformations. These structures are composed entirely of sp3 carbons which are
grown sequentially, but which can also branch or form rings. User-selected enzyme
seed atoms may be used to determine the area in which structure generation
begins. Alternatively, GenStar may begin with a predocked 'inhibitor core' from
which atoms are grown. For each new atom generated by the program, several
hundred candidate positions representing a range of reasonable bond lengths, bond
angles, and torsion angles are considered. Each of these candidates is scored,
based on a simple enzyme contact model. The selected position is chosen at random
from among the highest scoring cases. Duplicate structures may be removed using a
variety of criteria. The compounds may be energy minimized and displayed using
standard modeling programs. Also, it is possible to analyze the collection of all
structures created by GenStar and locate binding motifs for common fragments such
as benzene and naphthylene. Tests of the method using HIV protease, FK506 binding
protein (FKBP-12) and human carbonic anhydrase (HCA-II) demonstrated that
structures similar to known potent inhibitors may be generated with GenStar.

PMID: 8473916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Int J Biol Macromol. 1993 Feb;15(1):69-72.

Molecular mechanical parameters (MM2 force field) for the N(sp3)-O(sp3) bond.

Tronchet JM(1), Komaromi I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of Geneva, Switzerland.

Based on results of MP2/6-31G* ab initio calculations an MM2 molecular mechanical
parameter set has been developed for molecules containing N(sp3)-O(sp3) single
bonds, existing parameters concerning the other bonds being retained. The new
parameter set was tested for small organic compounds. A simple, generally
applicable multilinear regression algorithm has been used and a program written
to complement an existing force field (e.g. MM2) with such parameters extracted
from quantum chemical computations.

PMID: 8443136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Jan 15;90(2):403-7.

Evidence for cobinding of self- and allopeptides to human class II major
histocompatibility antigen DR1 by energy transfer.

Kropshofer H(1), Max H, Kalbacher H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Tübingen, Germany.

Purified human class II major histocompatibility antigen HLA-DR1 was subjected to
high-performance gel filtration with fluorescence detection to investigate
simultaneous binding of two classes of peptides: the N-terminally fluoresceinated
allopeptides fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated DR1 beta-(66-78) and
FITC-conjugated DR3 beta-(66-78), derived from the third hypervariable region of 
the beta chain of DR1 and DR3, respectively, and the DR1-associated self-peptide 
SP3, carrying the fluorophor 7-amino-4-methyl-coumarin-3-acetic acid (AMCA) at
the N terminus. By analyzing the dimer-associated fluorescence signals, we
measured an interpeptide energy transfer AMCA-->FITC that proved to be
peptide-specific: it did not occur after replacement of the allopeptide by the
DR1-restricted peptide IM-(18-29) from influenza matrix protein, whereas it was
restored by SP3, due to the high homology of SP3 and allopeptide. Transfer
analyses with truncated AMCA-SP3 and AMCA-IM-(18-29) are consistent with Leu-3
being a common anchor residue of both peptides that allows an interaction with
the hydrophobic specifity pocket around Ala-37 of the alpha 1 domain. This
interaction is mirrored by the intrinsic fluorescence of neighboring Trp-43: we
found the protein-peptide transfer Trp(DR1)-->AMCA with AMCA-SP3 but with none of
the allopeptides. Since each energy transfer affords close proximity of two
fluorophors, the following picture emerges: self- or foreign peptides bind to the
DR1 binding cleft by occupation of previously described specificity pockets.
Simultaneously, allopeptides of the third hypervariable region or homologous
peptides may occupy a cryptic binding site by displacing the beta 1-helix that
normally lines the binding groove. Thus, the described complexes raise additional
possibilities for the molecular basis of auto- or alloreactivity.

PMCID: PMC45670
PMID: 7678456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. J Med Chem. 1993 Jan 8;36(1):148-56.

Further development of hydrogen bond functions for use in determining
energetically favorable binding sites on molecules of known structure. 2. Ligand 
probe groups with the ability to form more than two hydrogen bonds.

Wade RC(1), Goodford PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics, University of Oxford, England.

The specificity of interactions between biological macromolecules and their
ligands may be partially attributed to the directional properties of hydrogen
bonds. We have now extended the GRID method (Goodford, P. J. J. Med. Chem. 1985, 
28, 849. Boobbyer, D. N. A.; Goodford, P. J.; McWhinnie, P. M.; Wade, R. C. J.
Med. Chem. 1989, 32, 1083), of determining energetically favorable ligand binding
sites on molecules of known structure, in order to improve the treatment of
groups which can make multiple hydrogen bonds. In this method, the interaction
energy between a probe (a small chemical group that may be part of a larger
ligand) and a target molecule is calculated using an energy function which
includes a hydrogen bond term which is dependent on the length of the hydrogen
bond, its orientation at the hydrogen-bonding atoms, and their chemical
character. The methods described in the preceding paper (Wade, R. C.; Clark, K.
J.; Goodford, P. J. J. Med. Chem., preceding paper in this issue) for probes
capable of making two hydrogen bonds are here extended to the following probes
which have the ability to make more than two hydrogen bonds: ammonium-NH3+,
amine-NH2, sp3-hybridized hydroxyl, and water. Use of the improved GRID procedure
is demonstrated by the determination of the conformation of an amino acid side
chain at the subunit interface in hemoglobin and of the location of water binding
sites in human lysozyme.

PMID: 8421281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 1992 Dec;10(3):533-50.

Aflatoxin B1 and DNA adducts. Proposed model for surface noncovalent and covalent
complexes with N(7) of guanine. II.

Taylor ER(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Southwestern Louisiana, Lafayette
70504-44370.

An alternate model for surface noncovalent and surface covalent binding of
aflatoxin B1 to N(7) of guanine in DNA is proposed. This model considers the
out-of-plane motions of C(8) of aflatoxin B1 in those interactions. The covalent 
intercalated fit of aflatoxin B1 into DNA arises from steric adjustments made by 
DNA at the covalent intercalation site as well as local strain in the bond angles
about N(7) of guanine and C(8) of aflatoxin B1. The bond angle about N(7)
deviates modestly from the sp2 value toward the sp3 value. This study suggests
that the surface covalent aflatoxin B1-DNA complex serves only a minor role in
aflatoxin's precarcinogenic interaction with DNA and is a likely correctable
error.

PMID: 1492923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 Nov 11;20(21):5519-25.

Cloning by recognition site screening of two novel GT box binding proteins: a
family of Sp1 related genes.

Hagen G(1), Müller S, Beato M, Suske G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Philipps-Universität
Marburg, Germany.

Previous analyses of the uteroglobin gene promoter revealed a GT1 box which is
also found in the SV40 enhancer. The GT1 element in the context of the
uteroglobin promoter is active in Ishikawa cells, a human endometrial cell line, 
but not in HeLa cells. Here we report the cloning by recognition site screening
of two factors (SPR-1 and SPR-2) which bind to this GT1 motif. SPR-1 and SPR-2
are homologues of the transcription factor Sp1. All three proteins are closely
related members of a gene family encoding proteins with very similar structural
features. Like Sp1, SPR-1 and SPR-2 contain glutamine and serine/threonine rich
amino acid stretches. Most significantly, the DNA binding domains of all three
proteins are highly conserved and they recognize GT as well as GC boxes
identically. SPR-2 mRNA is expressed ubiquitously, whereas SPR-1 transcripts are 
abundant in the brain but barely detectable in other organs. The possible
function of these factors for the activity of the uteroglobin promoter is
discussed.

PMCID: PMC334381
PMID: 1454515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Pharm Pharmacol. 1992 Oct;44(10):791-5.

Analogues of triprolidine: structural influences upon antihistamine activity.

Casy AF(1), Ganellin CR, Mercer AD, Upton C.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, University of Bath, UK.

The synthesis of some geometrical isomers related to triprolidine is reported.
Previous configurational assignments, by UV and proton NMR, are validated by high
field nuclear Overhauser enhancement methods and the isomeric purity of tested E-
and Z-isomers was greater than 99.5% as assessed by an HPLC method developed for 
these compounds. Affinity constants for triprolidine (E and Z) in guinea-pig
ileum showed a potency ratio of approximately 600 whereas at cerebellar sites
this ratio was only approximately 100, suggesting that the H1 receptor in these
two tissues may not be identical. In-vivo tests using a lethal dose of compound
48/80 (a potent histamine-releasing agent) demonstrated that triprolidine itself 
was the most active compound to protect the animal among all the isomeric
compounds tested: in all isomeric pairs the E-configuration possessed superior
activity over Z. The disposition of the aryl groups in these geometrically
constrained compounds mimics that seen in the structurally related chiral
pheniramines which are sp3 hybridized and whose absolute stereochemistry is
known.

PMID: 1360502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Oct;12(10):4251-61.

Cloning of GT box-binding proteins: a novel Sp1 multigene family regulating
T-cell receptor gene expression.

Kingsley C(1), Winoto A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley
94720.

Analysis of a T-cell antigen receptor (TCR) alpha promoter from a variable gene
segment (V) revealed a critical GT box element which is also found in upstream
regions of several V alpha genes, TCR enhancer, and regulatory elements of other 
genes. This element is necessary for TCR gene expression and binds several
proteins. These GT box-binding proteins were identified as members of a novel Sp1
multigene family. Two of them, which we term Sp2 and Sp3, were cloned. Sp2 and
Sp3 contain zinc fingers and transactivation domains similar to those of Sp1.
Like Sp1, Sp2 and Sp3 are expressed ubiquitously, and their in vitro-translated
products bind to the GT box in TCR V alpha promoters. Sp3, in particular, also
binds to the Sp1 consensus sequence GC box and has binding activity similar to
that of Sp1. As the GT box has also previously been shown to play a role in gene 
regulation of other genes, these newly isolated Sp2 and Sp3 proteins might
regulate expression not only of the TCR gene but of other genes as well.

PMCID: PMC360348
PMID: 1341900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Exp Med. 1992 Jun 1;175(6):1799-803.

Self-peptide released from class II HLA-DR1 exhibits a hydrophobic two-residue
contact motif.

Kropshofer H(1), Max H, Müller CA, Hesse F, Stevanovic S, Jung G, Kalbacher H.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Center, University of Tübingen, Germany.

Peptide fragments of foreign and self-proteins are of great immunologic
importance as their binding to major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I or 
II molecules makes an interaction with a corresponding T cell receptor possible. 
Recently, allele-specific peptide sequence motifs proved to be responsible for
MHC binding, no matter whether self- or non-self-antigens were involved. Up to
now, all investigated human class II-associated peptides were derived from
foreign antigenic proteins. Therefore, we undertook sequence and binding analyses
with a 16-mer self-peptide (SP3) that has been eluted from HLA-DR1. Here we
demonstrate, by synthetic polyalanine-based 13-mer analogues of SP3, that two
bulky hydrophobic anchor residues with relative spacing i, i + 8 are sufficient
for high affinity binding. This is consistent with the hydrophobic i, i + 8
binding pattern recently found for DR-restricted T cell epitopes. Nevertheless,
highly helical alanine-based design peptides with anchor spacing i, i + 9 exhibit
maximal affinity, whereas replacement of alanine by helix destabilizing proline
abrogates binding. Thus, a two-residue contact motif is the common minimal
requirement of self- and foreign peptides for high affinity anchoring to HLA-DR1.
In contrast to class I, the anchor spacing of DR1-associated peptides seems to
bear some variability due to conformational diversity.

PMCID: PMC2119237
PMID: 1375272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Clin Chem. 1992 May;38(5):658-62.

International Federation of Clinical Chemistry standardization project for
measurements of apolipoproteins A-I and B. II. Evaluation and selection of
candidate reference materials.

Albers JJ(1), Marcovina SM, Kennedy H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle 98103.

The first phase of an international collaborative study for standardization of
test systems for measuring apolipoprotein (apo) A-I and apo B demonstrated that
uniformity of apo A-I and apo B measurements can be achieved if suitable common
reference materials are used to calibrate the different systems. The objective of
the second phase was to evaluate the linearity and parallelism or proportionality
of the candidate reference materials selected in phase one and to determine
whether any of them could be proposed as international reference materials. We
evaluated the proposed reference materials with 37 test systems for apo A-I and
38 for apo B, involving 23 manufacturers and five research laboratories. Two
lyophilized preparations were proposed for apo A-I, SP1 from Behringwerke AG and 
SP2 from Daiichi Pure Chemicals Co., and two liquid preparations were proposed
for apo B, SP3 from Behringwerke AG and SP4 from Reagents Applications. The
linearity of the candidate reference materials was compared with the linearity of
a frozen serum pool or interim serum reference material distributed to all the
participants and with that of a fresh serum pool prepared by each participant.
SP1 and SP3 exhibited linearity and parallelism similar to that of the fresh
frozen serum pool and had among-laboratory CVs less than or similar to those
obtained on normolipidemic serum samples (approximately 6% for apo A-I and
approximately 7% for apo B).

PMID: 1582016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Biochemistry. 1992 Apr 21;31(15):3872-86.

Crystallographic analysis of transition state mimics bound to penicillopepsin:
difluorostatine- and difluorostatone-containing peptides.

James MN(1), Sielecki AR, Hayakawa K, Gelb MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.

Difluorostatine- and difluorostatone-containing peptides have been evaluated as
potent inhibitors of penicillopepsin, a member of the aspartic proteinase family 
of enzymes. Isovaleryl-Val-Val-StaF2NHCH3 [StaF2 =
(S)-4-amino-2,2-difluoro-(R)-3-hydroxy-6-methylheptanoic acid] and
isovaleryl-Val-Val-StoF2NHCH3 [StoF2 =
(S)-4-amino-2,2-difluoro-3-oxo-6-methylheptanoic acid] have measured Ki's of 10 x
10(-9) and 1 x 10(-9) M, respectively, with this fungal proteinase. The
StoF2-containing peptide binds 32-fold more tightly to the enzyme than the
analogous peptide containing the non-fluorinated statine ethyl ester. Each
compound was cocrystallized with penicillopepsin, intensity data were collected
to 1.8-A resolution, and the atomic coordinates were refined to an R factor
[formula: see text] of 0.131 for both complexes. The inhibitors bind in the
active site of penicillopepsin in much the same fashion as do other
statine-containing inhibitors of penicillopepsin analyzed earlier [James, M. N.
G., Sielecki, A. Salituro, F., Rich, D. H., & Hofmann, T. (1982) Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 79, 6137-6141; James, M.N.G., Sielecki, A., & Hofmann, T.
(1985) in Aspartic Proteinases and their Inhibitors (Kosta, V., Ed.) pp 163-177, 
Walter deGruyter, Berlin]. The (R)-3-hydroxyl group in StaF2 binds between the
active site carboxyl groups of Asp33 and Asp213, making hydrogen-bonding contacts
to each one. The ketone functional group of the StoF2 inhibitor is bound as a
hydrated species, with the gem-diol situated between the two aspartic acid
carboxyl groups in a manner similar to that predicted for the tetrahedral
intermediate expected during the catalytic hydrolysis of a peptide bond [James,
M. N. G., & Sielecki, A. (1985) Biochemistry 24, 3701-3713]. One hydrogen-bonding
interaction from the "outer" hydroxyl group is made to O delta 1 of Asp33, and
the "inner" hydroxyl group forms two hydrogen-bonding contacts, one to each of
the carboxyl groups of Asp33 (O delta 2) and Asp213 (O delta 2). The only
structural difference between the StaF2 and StoF2 inhibitors that accounts for
the factor of 10 in their Ki's is the additional (R)-3-OH group on the
tetrahedral sp3 carbon atom of the hydrated StoF2 inhibitor. The intermolecular
interactions involving the fluorine atoms of each inhibitor are normal van der
Waals contacts to one of the carboxyl oxygen atoms of Asp213 (F2-O delta 2
Asp213, 2.9 A). The observed stereochemistry of the bound StoF2 group in the
active site of penicillopepsin has stimulated our reappraisal of the catalytic
pathway for the aspartic proteinases.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 1567842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Anal Chem. 1992 Feb 15;64(4):395-404.

Empirical procedure that uses molecular structure to predict enantioselectivity
of chiral stationary phases.

Berthod A(1), Chang SC, Armstrong DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Missouri-Rolla 65401.

A total of 121 racemic compounds were separated in the normal-phase mode on a
(S)-(1-naphthylethyl)carbamoylated beta-cyclodextrin (S-NEC-beta-CD) bonded phase
and 74 on the R equivalent (R-NEC) chiral stationary phase (CSP). All compounds
are of the type that have four substituents on a stereogenic center, rather than 
an "axis of chirality". It is shown that the binary solvent pair used as the
mobile phase has a significant influence on chiral recognition. However, the
proportions of the components of a specific pair have little effect. From the
results, the individual contributions to chiral recognition by these CSPs were
estimated for 81 different substituents of the stereogenic center. Varying the
arrangement of these 81 substituents could produce over 1.6 million compounds.
Hydrogen was chosen as the reference substituent and was assigned a 0 cal/mol
free energy. The chiral recognition increased when sp2-hybridized carbons were
connected to the stereogenic center. Conversely, sp3-hybridized carbons decreased
the enantioselectivity. Amido groups increased the chiral recognition, especially
when associated with pi-acid (3,5-dinitrobenzoyl) or pi-basic (naphthyl) groups. 
This approach does not allow one to know which enantiomer elutes first. However, 
the "substituent energy" list for chiral compounds can be used to obtain an
estimated value for the enantioselectivity of a compound by adding the energy
contributions of the four substituents connected to the stereogenic center. In
this way one can predict a priori whether or not a compound will separate on a
CSP and estimate its separation factor (alpha). Theoretically, this approach can 
be used for most CSPs, provided a sufficient data base is generated on them.

PMID: 1616129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Digestion. 1992;51(2):71-4.

Sensitization against pancreatic antigen in Sjögren's syndrome and chronic
pancreatitis. Preliminary communication.

Nishimori I(1), Okazaki K, Yamamoto Y, Morita M, Tamura S, Yamamoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Kochi Medical School, Japan.

A fractionated pancreatic antigen was prepared using a monoclonal antibody,
SP3-1, which reacts with the duct cells of various exocrine organs. The
cell-mediated immune response to this antigen was studied by the leukocyte
migration inhibition test (LMT) in patients with chronic pancreatitis (CP),
Sjögren's syndrome (SjS), and chronic sialoadenitis (CSA). The migration index
(MI) for the LMT was 0.97 +/- 0.07 in normal controls (mean +/- SD, n = 11,
range: 0.88-1.08). A positive LMT result (MI less than 0.82 = mean -2 SD in
controls) was obtained in 7/8 (88%) SjS patients, 4/22 (18%) CP patients, 2/3 CP 
patients with SjS, and 0/3 CSA patients. These results indicated sensitization
against the pancreatic antigen in most SjS patients and some CP patients, and may
suggest that an immune response to a common antigenic determinant of the duct
cells of exocrine glands plays a role in the pathophysiology of both diseases.

PMID: 1379949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. J Am Soc Nephrol. 1992 Jan;2(7):1227-34.

Antineutrophil-cytoplasmic antibodies and antiglomerular basement membrane
antibodies in Goodpasture's syndrome and in Wegener's granulomatosis.

Weber MF(1), Andrassy K, Pullig O, Koderisch J, Netzer K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine-Nephrology, University of Erlangen-Nürnberg,
Germany.

Antiglomerular basement membrane (anti-GBM) diseases-including Goodpasture's (GP)
syndrome-and Wegener's granulomatosis (WG) are systemic diseases, which may be
diagnosed by means of circulating autoantibodies. Possible overlap syndromes may 
exist; however, they remain imperfectly defined. We analyzed sera from 31
patients with WG and from 23 patients with anti-GBM disease. All underwent
biopsy. Anti-cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) were demonstrated by indirect
immunofluorescence (IIF); a perinuclear (P-ANCA) or diffuse-cytoplasmic (C-ANCA) 
staining was discerned. In addition, myeloperoxidase (MPO) antibodies (P-ANCA)
and protein 3 (SP3) antibodies (C-ANCA) were analyzed by specific ELISA systems. 
Anti-GBM antibodies (anti-NC1 antibodies) were detected by ELISA and
immunoblotting; the globular domain NC1 of collagen IV was employed as antigen.
All 31 WG patients, as defined by clinical and histological criteria, showed ANCA
by IIF. Twenty-nine of 31 showed a C-ANCA pattern; all were also positive for SP3
antibodies by ELISA. Three of 31 WG patients were P-ANCA positive by IIF and also
had anti-MPO antibodies by ELISA. In one of these patients, SP3 antibodies were
additionally found by IIF and by ELISA (double positive). No patient with WG had 
anti-NC1 antibodies. All 23 serum samples from patients with GP syndrome (N = 19)
or anti-GBM glomerulonephritis (N = 4) had anti-NC1 antibodies. In seven of these
patients, low titers of anti-MPO antibodies were detected by ELISA; however, the 
IIF for ANCA was negative. None of these seven patients had extraglomerular
vasculities. In addition, the clinical prognosis of these patients was similar to
that of those patients who lacked these antibodies.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250
WORDS)

PMID: 1317224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Phys Rev B Condens Matter. 1991 Dec 1;44(21):12039-12042.

Structural properties of sp3-bonded hydrogenated amorphous carbon.

Tersoff J.

PMID: 9999347  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


351. Int J Parasitol. 1991 Dec;21(8):883-9.

The effect of specific immunization or infection with Trichostrongylus
colubriformis on production of eosinophil differentiation factors in guinea pigs.

Bendixsen T(1), Emery DL, Rothwell TL.

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO Division of Animal Health McMaster Laboratory, Glebe, New South Wales,
Australia.

The cultivation of bone marrow was used to quantitate the levels of eosinophil
differentiation factors (EDF) produced in conditioned medium (CM) by incubation
of mesenteric lymph node cells (MLNC) with mitogens or specific antigens from the
intestinal nematode parasite, Trichostrongylus colubriformis. In liquid cultures 
with 20 units ml-1 recombinant murine interleukin-5 (IL-5), bone marrow cells
(BMC) from either normal or infected donors contained less than 5% eosinophils
and differentiated to greater than 50% eosinophils over 2-3 weeks. Conditioned
medium from 3-4 week infected donors produced between 20 and 50% eosinophils when
donor MLNC were stimulated with the specific antigen preparation SP3, but
macrophages predominated when using CM from MLNC incubated with Concanavalin A
(ConA). CM from MLNC of challenged donors incubated with SP3 produced 30-70%
eosinophils in BMC assays, with highest levels induced by CM from high responder 
(HR) donors. Marrow from parasitized or normal donors gave rise to comparable
proportions of eosinophils. CM was also produced from LNC of donors given protein
or parasite antigens in adjuvant where between 28 and 35% eosinophils were
produced in culture. There were no differences between activities attributable to
the antigen, but Freund's complete adjuvant induced earlier differentiation of
BMC than alum-induced CM. The results confirm that high levels of EDF activity
are specifically induced by parasitic infection, and can also be produced by
intraperitoneal and subcutaneous inoculation of adjuvanted antigens. Consistent
with the greater eosinophilia exhibited by HR guinea pigs to infection with
T.colubriformis L3, their MLNC also produced the highest levels of EDF activity.

PMID: 1787028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. J Comput Aided Mol Des. 1991 Oct;5(5):475-504.

COSMIC(90): an improved molecular mechanics treatment of hydrocarbons and
conjugated systems.

Morley SD(1), Abraham RJ, Haworth IS, Jackson DE, Saunders MR, Vinter JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Nottingham, University
Park, U.K.

Four modifications to the COSMIC molecular mechanics force field are described,
which greatly increase both its versatility and the accuracy of calculated
conformational energies. The Hill non-bonded van der Waals potential function has
been replaced by a two-parameter Morse curve and a new H-H potential, similar to 
that in MM3, incorporated. Hydrocarbon energies in particular are much improved. 
A simple iterative Hückel pi-electron molecular orbital calculation allows
modelling of conjugated systems. Calculated bond lengths and rotational barriers 
for a series of conjugated hydrocarbons and nitrogen heterocycles are shown to be
as accurate as those determined by the MM2 SCF method. Explicit hydrogen-bonding 
potentials for H-bond acceptor-donor atom pairs have been included to give better
hydrogen bond energies and lengths. The van der Waals radii of protonic hydrogens
are reduced to 0.5 A and the energy well depth is increased to 1.0 kcal mol-1.
Two new general atom types, N+sp2 and O-sp3, have been introduced which allow a
wide variety of charged conjugated systems to be studied. A minimum of
parameterisation is required, as the new types are easily included in the Hückel 
scheme which automatically adjusts bond and torsional parameters according to the
defined bond-order relationships.

PMID: 1770382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Eur J Biochem. 1991 Sep 15;200(3):731-8.

NMR studies on p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase from Pseudomonas fluorescens and
salicylate hydroxylase from Pseudomonas putida.

Vervoort J(1), Van Berkel WJ, Müller F, Moonen CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Agricultural University, Wageningen, The
Netherlands.

p-Hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase from Pseudomonas fluorescens and salicylate
hydroxylase from Pseudomonas putida have been reconstituted with 13C- and
15N-enriched FAD. The protein preparations were studied by 13C-NMR, 15N-NMR and
31P-NMR techniques in the oxidized and in the two-electron-reduced states. The
chemical shift values are compared with those of free flavin in water or
chloroform. It is shown that the pi electron distribution in oxidized free
p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase is comparable to free flavin in water, and it is
therefore suggested that the flavin ring is solvent accessible. Addition of
substrate has a strong effect on several resonances, e.g. C2 and N5, which
indicates that the flavin ring becomes shielded from solvent and also that a
conformational change occurs involving the positive pole of an alpha-helix
microdipole. In the reduced state, the flavin in p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase is
bound in the anionic form, i.e. carrying a negative charge at N1. The flavin is
bound in a more planar configuration than when free in solution. Upon binding of 
substrate the resonances of N1, C10a and N10 shift upfield. It is suggested that 
these upfield shifts are the result of a conformational change similar, but not
identical, to the one observed in the oxidized state. The 13C chemical shifts of 
FAD bound to apo(salicylate hydroxylase) indicate that in the oxidized state the 
flavin ring is also fairly solvent accessible in the free enzyme. Addition of
substrate has a strong effect on the hydrogen bond formed with O4 alpha. It is
suggested that this is due to the exclusion of water from the active site by the 
binding of substrate. In the reduced state, the flavin is anionic. Addition of
substrate forces the flavin ring to adopt a more planar configuration, i.e. a
sp2-hybridized N5 atom and a slightly sp3-hybridized N10 atom. The NMR results
are discussed in relation to the reaction catalyzed by the enzymes.

PMID: 1915345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Exp Cell Res. 1991 May;194(1):95-9.

Isolation of cDNA for a Xenopus sperm-specific basic nuclear protein (SP4) and
evidence for expression of SP4 mRNA in primary spermatocytes.

Hiyoshi H(1), Uno S, Yokota T, Katagiri C, Nishida H, Takai M, Agata K, Eguchi G,
Abé S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Faculty of Science, Kumamoto University,
Japan.

A cDNA library was prepared in lambda gt 11 from poly(A)+ mRNA isolated from a
pure population of Xenopus round spermatids and screened with an antibody against
SP3-5 (sperm-specific proteins) of Xenopus sperm. Positive clones were sequenced 
and an arginine-rich clone, designated pXSP531, was obtained. The 473-nucleotide 
sequence of pXSP531 contained an open reading frame of 237 nucleotides which was 
preceded by a 5' untranslated region of 67 nucleotides. The 3' untranslated
region contained 149 nucleotides, including a consensus polyadenylation signal
(AAATAAAA). Twenty nucleotides of a poly(A) tail was contained in the pXSP531.
SP3-5 were separated from each other by reverse-phase chromatography and
sequenced. The amino acid sequence of the peptide fragments which were obtained
by digestion of SP4 with V8 protease and separated by reverse-phase
chromatography was identical to the sequence of the N-terminal 43 and C-terminal 
15 amino acids deduced from the nucleotide sequence of pXSP531. This result
demonstrates that pXSP531 encodes SP4. Northern hybridization of RNA extracted
from primary spermatocytes and round spermatids on Days 0 and 6 with SP4 cDNA
probe (pXSP531) showed that SP4 mRNA is present both in primary spermatocytes and
in round spermatids as is protamine mRNA in the rainbow trout. The size of the
SP4 mRNA in round spermatids on Day 0 was longer by 60 nucleotides compared to
that in primary spermatocytes and that in spermatids on Day 6 was shorter by 30
nucleotides compared to that on Day 0. These size differences were due to
differences in the length of the poly(A) tracts because digestion of poly(A) with
ribonuclease H resulted in the shortening of mRNA to the same size for three
stages.

PMID: 2015853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Exp Cell Res. 1991 May;194(1):90-4.

Synthesis of sperm-specific basic nuclear proteins (SPs) in cultured spermatids
from Xenopus laevis.

Abé S(1), Hiyoshi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Faculty of Science, Kumamoto University,
Japan.

The accumulation and synthesis of sperm-specific basic nuclear proteins (SPs) in 
Xenopus spermatids in vitro were studied by acid-urea-Triton polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis and fluorography. In synchronous cultures of round spermatids,
the amount of SP2 and SP3-5 accumulated almost linearly with time, while that of 
SP1 remained almost constant. Fluorography showed that round spermatids
incorporated [14C]arginine mostly into SP1 and SP3-5, very little into SP2, and
none into histones. When [14C]arginine was incorporated into cells for 24 h on
Days 0, 3, and 6, followed by immediate extraction of basic nuclear proteins, the
SP1 band was detected faintly on Day 0 and the intensity increased to the maximum
level by Day 3 and remained constant on Day 6; the SP3-5 bands were first
detected on Day 3 and their intensity increased by Day 6. Thus, SP1 and SP3-5
were synthesized differentially during the culture period. When [14C]arginine or 
[14C]lysine was incorporated into round spermatids on Days 0, 3, and 6 for 15 h
and chased for 3-12 days, the intensity of the SP2 band increased significantly, 
while the intensity of the SP1 band decreased concomitantly. This result
indicates that SP2 was processed from a precursor protein which is probably SP1.

PMID: 1901796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1991 Jan 23;1073(1):33-42.

Reversible binding of peptide aldehydes to papain. Structure-activity
relationships.

Hanzlik RP(1), Jacober SP, Zygmunt J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, University of Kansas, Lawrence 66045-2506.

The hydration of eleven peptide and hipuryl aldehydes has been measured as a
function of temperature by means of NMR spectroscopy. In all cases the aldehydes 
were strongly hydrated (i.e., 90-95%) in aqueous solution. Dehydration of the
hydrates was strongly endothermic, but this was partly offset by a positive
entropy for dehydration. The binding of the aldehydes to papain was measured by
fluorescence titration, and from these data dissociation constants for the
hemithioacetal enzyme adducts were derived. Binding of N-Ac-L-PheNHCH2CHO (1) was
particularly tight (Kd,corr = 0.00043 micro M) whereas that of its D-enantiomer
(2) was 300-fold weaker (Kd,corr = 0.129 microM). The binding constants of the
eleven aldehydes correlated with those for the reversible covalent binding of the
analogous nitriles according to the equation log Kd(CHO) = -2.687 +/- 1.016 log K
d(CN) (r = 0.99), lending support to previous suggestions that both peptide
aldehydes and peptide nitriles behave as transition-state- or reactive
intermediate analogs for papain. This finding is particularly striking in view of
the obvious differences in hybridization (sp2 vs. sp3) and geometry (trigonal vs.
tetrahedral) at the reactive P1 carbon center in their covalent adduct forms
(thioimidate ester vs. hemithioacetal, respectively). A model for the binding of 
substrates, their transition states and analogs thereof is proposed. A key
feature of the model is an obligatory covalent (or developing covalent)
interaction between Cys-25-SH and the carbonyl or equivalent carbon of P1,
augmented by intermolecular P1NH--OC(Asp-158), P2CO--HN(Gly-66) and
P2NH--OC(Gly-66) hydrogen bonds and a hydrophobic P2-S2 interaction. The latter
three interactions are optimum or nearly optimum when P2 is a hydrophobic L-amino
acid with an N-acyl substituent. Data presented suggest that hippuryl derivatives
are relatively non-specific substrates or inhibitors for papain and,
consequently, are of diminished value as probes for binding and catalytic
studies.

PMID: 1991144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. J Antibiot (Tokyo). 1990 Nov;43(11):1464-70.

Improved antitumor effects of 3'-deamino-3'-morpholino derivatives of
pirarubicin.

Ajito K(1), Ikeda D, Nosaka C, Komuro K, Kondo S, Takeuchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbial Chemistry, Tokyo, Japan.

The preparation and antitumor effects of 3'-deamino-3'-morpholino derivatives of 
pirarubicin are described. Di-N-alkylation of pirarubicin with
bis(2-iodoethyl)ether gave 3'-morpholino-pirarubicin, which was converted into
its 13-tosylhydrazone, 13-deoxy derivative and 13-(S)- and 13-(R)-dihydro
derivatives. Intraperitoneal administration to murine tumors indicated that the
effective dose ranges of the compounds having sp3 carbon at C-13 position were
broader than those of the compounds having sp2 carbon. By oral administration,
13-(S)-dihydro isomer was more effective than 13-(R)-dihydro isomer.

PMID: 2272921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Biochemistry. 1990 Aug 14;29(32):7491-500.

Studies of the mechanism of the delta 5-3-ketosteroid isomerase reaction by
substrate, solvent, and combined kinetic deuterium isotope effects on wild-type
and mutant enzymes.

Xue LA(1), Talalay P, Mildvan AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205.

delta 5-3-Ketosteroid isomerase (EC 5.3.3.1) catalyzes the isomerization of delta
5-3-ketosteroids to delta 4-3-ketosteroids by a conservative tautomeric transfer 
of the 4 beta-proton to the 6 beta-position using Tyr-14 as a general acid and
Asp-38 as a general base [Kuliopulos, A., Mildvan, A. S., Shortle, D., & Talalay,
P. (1989) Biochemistry 28, 149]. On deuteration of the 4 beta-position (97.0%) of
the substrate, kcat(H)/kcat(4 beta-D) is 6.1 in H2O and 6.3 in D2O. The solvent
isotope effect, kcat(H2O)/kcat(D2O), is 1.6 for both the 4 beta-H and 4 beta-D
substrates. Mutation of Tyr-55 to Phe lowers kcat 4.3-fold; kcat(H)/kcat/4
beta-D) is 5.3 in H2O and 5.9 in D2O, and kcat(H2O)/kcat(D2O) with the 4 beta-H
and 4 beta-D substrates is 1.5 and 1.7, respectively, indicating concerted
general acid-base catalysis in either the enolization or the ketonization step of
both the wild-type and the Tyr-55----Phe (Y55F) mutant enzymes. An additional
slow step occurs with the Y55F mutant. Smaller isotope effects on Km are used to 
estimate individual rate constants in the kinetic schemes of both enzymes. On
deuteration of the 4 alpha-position (88.6%) of the substrate, the secondary
isotope effect on kcat/Km corrected for composition is 1.11 +/- 0.02 with the
wild-type enzyme and 1.12 +/- 0.02 with the Y55F mutant. These effects decrease
to 1.06 +/- 0.01 and 1.07 +/- 0.01, respectively, when the 4 beta-position is
also deuterated, thereby establishing these to be kinetic (rather than
equilibrium) secondary isotope effects and to involve a proton-tunneling
contribution. Deuteration of the 6-position of the substrate (92.0%) produces no 
kinetic isotope effects on kcat/Km with either the wild-type (1.00 +/- 0.01) or
the Y55F mutant (1.01 +/- 0.01) enzyme. Since a change in hybridization from sp3 
to sp2 occurs at C-4 only during enolization of the substrate and a change in
hybridization at C-6 from sp2 to sp3 occurs only during reketonization of the
dienol intermediate, enolization of the substrate constitutes the concerted
rate-limiting step. Concerted enolization is consistent with the right angle or
antarafacial orientations of Tyr-14 and Asp-38 with respect to the enzyme-bound
substrate and with the additive effects on kcat of mutation of these catalytic
residues [Kuliopulos, A., Talalay, P., & Mildvan, A. S. (1990) Biophys. J. 57,
39a].

PMID: 2223781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Biol Chem. 1990 Jun 25;265(18):10244-9.

Cytochrome P-450-dependent oxidation of arachidonic acid to 16-, 17-, and
18-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids.

Falck JR(1), Lumin S, Blair I, Dishman E, Martin MV, Waxman DJ, Guengerich FP,
Capdevila JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas 75235.

Incubation of rat liver microsomal fractions with arachidonic acid in the
presence of NADPH results in the formation of three novel monohydroxylated fatty 
acid metabolites. Utilizing chromatographic and mass spectral techniques, these
metabolites have been identified as 16-, 17-, and 18-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic
acids. The NADPH-dependent microsomal metabolism of arachidonic acid to 16-, 17-,
18-, and 19-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids is induced after animal treatment with 
beta-naphthoflavone. Reconstitution of the arachidonic acid oxygenase utilizing
individual purified cytochrome P-450 enzymes demonstrates regioselectivity,
controlled by the protein catalyst, for the hydroxylation of the sp3 carbon atoms
adjacent to the methyl end of the fatty acid.

PMID: 2113050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Acta Crystallogr C. 1990 Jun 15;46 ( Pt 6):1155-7.

Dendrobine support studies. The structure of a novel
3-azatricyclo[6.2.1.0(4,11)]-undecane derivative.

Lynch VM(1), Li W, Martin SF, Davis BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Texas, Austin 78712.

(1S*, 4R*, 8S*, 11R*)-3-Diphenylmethyl-11-methyl-3-
azatricyclo[6.2.1.0(4,11)]undec-5-en-2-one, C24H25NO, Mr = 343.47, monoclinic,
P2(1), a = 10.248 (3), b = 8.859 (2), c = 10.344 (2) A, beta = 99.816 (14)
degrees, V = 925.4 (3) A3, Z = 2, D chi = 1.23 g cm-1 (163 K), lambda(Mo K alpha)
= 0.7107 A, mu = 0.6927 cm-1, F(000) = 368, T = 163 K, R = 0.0423 for 2569
reflections. The compound is spontaneously resolved upon crystallization. The N
atom appears to be sp2 hybridized [N is 0.0901 (13) A from plane through three
ligand atoms] and in conjugation with the carbonyl group [short N--C bond 1.351
(2) A]. The tricyclic ring system is concave. Ring strain appears to affect C--C 
bond lengths of the central atom of the 3-ring system. The average C--C bond
length for this atom to other ring atoms is 1.551 (2) while the average for all
other sp3 C--sp3 C bonds is 1.530 (2) A.

PMID: 1975499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Nihon Shokakibyo Gakkai Zasshi. 1990 Apr;87(4):1040-9.

[Specific immune response to pancreas antigen (PA3) in chronic pancreatitis and
Sjögren syndrome].

[Article in Japanese]

Nishimori I(1), Yamamoto Y, Okazaki K, Morita M, Yamamoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Kochi Medical School.

The pancreas antigen (PA3) was prepared by an interspecies cross-reactive
monoclonal antibody (SP3-1, IgM), which reacts with duct cells of multiple
exocrine organs. Cell-mediated immunity to PA3 was examined using a lymphocyte
proliferation test, and serum antibody to PA3 was measured by radioimmunoassay.
Lymphocyte sensitization and serum antibody to PA3 were demonstrated in patients 
with idiopathic chronic pancreatitis (CP) and Sjögren syndrome with high rate and
high titer. In normal controls and patients with alcoholic CP, stone related CP, 
PBC, SLE and chronic thyroiditis, they were rarely detected. The antigen detected
by serum antibodies in patients with idiopathic CP and Sjögren syndrome was 60
kDa on Western immunoblot. These results revealed a possibility that PA3 was the 
target antigen for immune response in the pathogenesis of idiopathic CP and/or
Sjögren syndrome.

PMID: 2376900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Int J Pancreatol. 1989 Dec;5(4):359-77.

Interspecies crossreactive antigen of the pancreatic duct cell prepared by
monoclonal antibody. A preliminary study of its immunological significance in
patients with chronic pancreatitis associated with Sjögren's syndrome.

Okazaki K(1), Tamura S, Morita M, Nishimori I, Yamamoto Y, Yamamoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Kochi Medical School, Japan.

An interspecies cross-reactive antigen (mol wt 60,000) for pancreatic duct cells 
was prepared by a monoclonal antibody (SP3-1; IgM). Homogenized pig pancreatic
tissues were separated by gel filtration chromatography with Sephadex G-100 and
ion-exchange column chromatography with DEAE-Sephacel and used as immunogens.
Immunohistochemically, antigens against SP3-1 were distributed in duct cells of
the pancreas, salivary gland, lacrimal gland, esophageal gland, bile duct, and
the distal renal tubule in the pig, monkey, and human. The antigenic determinant 
contained protein, but not sialic acid or monosaccharide. Preliminary leukocyte
migration inhibition test (n = 5) showed positive in four patients with definite 
Sjögren's syndrome (SS), whereas one patient without autoantibodies similar to SS
showed negative. These findings suggest that this antigen may be involved in the 
pathophysiology in these conditions.

PMID: 2514234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Acta Crystallogr C. 1989 Nov 15;45 ( Pt 11):1794-7.

Structure of strychnine hydrochloride sesquihydrate.

Ghosh R(1), Roychowdhury P, Chattopadhyay D, Iitaka Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics (X-ray Laboratory), Calcutta University, University
College of Science, India.

C21H23N2O2+.Cl-.1.5H2O, Mr = 397.90, monoclinic, P2(1), a = 7.617 (1), b = 32.463
(2), c = 7.849 (1) A, beta = 90.40 (2) degrees, V = 1940.8 (4) A3 Z = 4, Dm =
1.39, Dx = 1.36 g cm-3, lambda (Cu K alpha) = 1.5418 A, mu = 19.724 cm-1, F(000) 
= 844, final R = 0.047 for 3368 observed reflections. Strychnine hydrochloride is
a naturally occurring alkaloid in its protonated form. One of the N atoms accepts
the proton from hydrochloric acid changing its hybridization to sp3. The indole N
atom is sp2 hybridized with its lone-pair electron involved in conjugation with
the carbonyl group. The hydrogen bonds form a complex zigzag network which
stabilizes the structure.

PMID: 2610965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Fiziol Zh. 1989 Sep-Oct;35(5):47-53.

[Immunologic status in physiological pregnancy].

[Article in Russian]

Chernyshov VP, Valetskii VL, Radysh TV.

The levels of T gamma- and T mu-lymphocytes, functional activity of ConA-induced 
T-suppressors and the concentrations of SP1 and SP3 were determined in 164 normal
pregnant women during 8-40 weeks of gestation. It is found that formation of the 
suppressor dominant is necessary for the immunological maintenance during 8-32
weeks of gestation. This dominant is intended to block superfluous maternal
immune response to fetal alloantigens. The formation of such a dominant is evoked
by high functional activity of ConA-induced T-suppressors and high levels of T
gamma-lymphocytes with immunodeficiency of T mu-cells. Results of correlation
analysis have shown a relationship between functional activity of T-suppressors
and accumulation of two specific pregnancy proteins. It permits determining
physiological role of SP1 and SP3 as natural endogenous immunoregulators of
T-suppressors.

PMID: 2531686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Virol. 1989 Sep;63(9):3586-94.

Transcription-inhibition and RNA-binding domains of influenza A virus matrix
protein mapped with anti-idiotypic antibodies and synthetic peptides.

Ye ZP(1), Baylor NW, Wagner RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Virginia Medical School,
Charlottesville 22908.

We have undertaken by biochemical and immunological experiments to locate the
region of the matrix (M1) protein responsible for down-regulating endogenous
transcription of A/WSN/33 influenza virus. A more refined map of the antigenic
determinants of the M1 protein was obtained by binding of epitope-specific
monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) to chemically cleaved fragments. Epitope 2-specific 
MAb 289/4 and MAb 7E5 reverse transcription inhibition by M1 protein and react
with a 4-kilodalton cyanogen bromide fragment extending from amino acid Gly-129
to Gln-164. Anti-idiotype serum immunoglobulin G prepared in rabbits immunized
with MAb 289/4 or MAb 7E5 mimicked the action of M1 protein by inhibiting
transcription in vitro of influenza virus ribonucleoprotein cores. This
transcription-inhibition activity of anti-MAb 7E5 immunoglobulin G and anti-MAb
289/4 immunoglobulin G could be reversed by MAb 7E5 and MAb 289/4 or could be
removed by MAb 7E5-Sepharose affinity chromatography. Transcription of influenza 
virus ribonucleoprotein was inhibited by one of three synthetic oligopeptides, a 
nonodecapeptide SP3 with an amino acid sequence corresponding to Pro-90 through
Thr-108 of the M1 protein. Of all the structural proteins of influenza virus,
only NP and M1 showed strong affinity for binding viral RNA or other extraneous
RNAs. The 4-kilodalton cyanogen bromide peptide (Gly-129 to Gln-164), exhibited
marked affinity for viral RNA, the binding of which was blocked by epitope
2-specific MAb 7E5 but not by MAbs directed to three other epitopes. Viral RNA
also bound strongly to the nonodecapeptide SP3 and rather less well to
anti-idiotype anti-MAb 7E5; these latter viral RNA-binding reactions were only
slightly blocked by preincubation of anti-MAb 7E5 or SP3 with MAb 7E5. These
experiments suggest the presence of at least two RNA-binding sites, which also
serve as transcription-inhibition sites, centered around amino acid sequences 80 
through 109 (epitope 4?) and 129 through 164 (epitope 2) of the 252 amino acid M1
protein of A/WSN/33 influenza virus. A hydropathy plot of the M1 protein
calculated by free-energy transfer suggests that the two hydrophilic
transcription-inhibition RNA-binding domains are brought into close proximity by 
an alpha-helix-forming intervening hydrophobic domain.

PMCID: PMC250948
PMID: 2474671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Phys Rev B Condens Matter. 1989 Aug 15;40(5):3176-3181.

Reduced intrachain spin diffusion in trans-polyacetylene due to sp3 orbital
defects.

Cao Y, Gaines JR, Epstein AJ, Arbuckle G, MacDiarmid AG.

PMID: 9992255  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


367. Biull Eksp Biol Med. 1989 Aug;108(8):229-31.

[Comparative analysis of pregnancy proteins and regulation of the functional
activity of T-suppressors in pregnancy].

[Article in Russian]

Chernyshov VP, Valetskii VL, Radysh TV.

The relationship between the pregnancy specific proteins (SP1, SP3) and the
functional activity of ConA-induced T-suppressors has been studied during normal 
gestation. There were a positive correlation between the activity of
T-suppressors and the level of SP1 during 8-28 weeks of gestation; between the
activity of T-suppressors and the level of SP3 during 8-36 weeks, especially
during 29-36 weeks of gestation. It was shown that a progressive accumulation of 
these proteins apparently necessary for the formation a suppression's dominant in
the condition of the immunoregulatory branches during gestation. These findings
suggest that SP1 and SP3 as a natural endogenous immunoregulators may play an
important role in reproductive strategy of human gestation.

PMID: 2529922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Biochemistry. 1989 Mar 7;28(5):2106-11.

Alpha-secondary isotope effects in the lipoxygenase reaction.

Wiseman JS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Merrell Dow Research Institute, Cincinnati, Ohio 45215.

Isotope effects for the oxidation of [5,6,8,9,11,12,14,15-3H]arachidonic acid
catalyzed by soybean lipoxygenase and by 5-lipoxygenase were measured. This
labeling pattern represents substitution at each of the vinylic hydrogens of the 
substrate. The observed isotope effect for soybean lipoxygenase was 1.16 +/- 0.02
and for 5-lipoxygenase was 1.11 +/- 0.05. These isotope effects are inconsistent 
with any change in hybridization (sp2 to sp3) at the vinylic carbons prior to or 
during the rate-determining step and are concluded to be most consistent with the
formation of a carbanion-like intermediate or transition state. In contrast, the 
oxidation of arachidonic acid by Ce(IV), which is thought to proceed via a cation
radical intermediate, exhibited at most a small isotope effect (1.02 +/- 0.01).
The reduction potential for the cation radical formed from arachidonic acid in
this reaction is estimated to be 2.7 V vs NHE by comparison of the rates of
oxidation of arachidonic acid and cyclohexene by Ce(IV). This is similar to the
potential for the cation radical of 2-butene. No isotope effect (1.00 +/- 0.03)
was observed in the 5-lipoxygenase reaction for conversion of the initially
formed product 5-hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoic acid to the epoxide leukotriene A4. 
From this it is concluded that there is little carbon-oxygen bond formation prior
to or during the rate-determining step for epoxide formation.

PMID: 2497775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. J Neurophysiol. 1989 Jan;61(1):106-15.

Patterns of spontaneous discharge in primate spinothalamic neurons.

Surmeier DJ(1), Honda CN, Willis WD.

Author information: 
(1)Marine Biomedical Institute, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston
77550.

1. The spontaneous discharge of 30 spinothalamic tract (STT) neurons in the
lumbosacral spinal cord of anesthetized monkeys was studied. Interval,
correlation, and spectral analyses were performed. 2. Three patterns of discharge
were found; these were referred to as the SP1, SP2, and SP3 patterns. 3. The SP1 
group had moderately regular discharge trains that were devoid of short-interval 
spike bursts. 4. The SP2 group had spike trains dominated by short-interval
bursts without evidence of low-frequency rhythmicity. 5. The SP3 group had spike 
trains with features of both the SP1 and SP2 groups. 6. Some correlations were
found between the mean discharge rate and stimulus-response classes previously
defined by our group (25). Correlations were deduced from a parent data set of
221 STT neurons. Type 1 neurons, which were driven primarily by tactile
afferents, were found to have significantly lower mean rates than other
"within-neuron" groups. On the other hand, type C neurons, which had strong input
from afferents signalling pressure and noxious stimuli, were found to have
significantly higher mean rates than all other "across-neuron" classes. 7. A weak
relationship was found between the pattern of discharge and the within-neuron
stimulus-response classification. Neurons with a largely tactile coding
orientation (types 1 and 2) were most frequently of the SP1 and SP2 classes,
whereas neurons with a more prominent nociceptive input (types 3 and 4) were most
frequently of the SP2 and SP3 classes. No relationship was apparent between
discharge pattern and the across-neuron classes.

PMID: 2918338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Anim Genet. 1989;20(1):43-9.

Genetic polymorphism of horse serum protein 3 (SP3).

Juneja RK(1), Sandberg K, Kuryl J, Gahne B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Breeding and Genetics, Swedish University of Agricultural
Sciences, Uppsala.

Two-dimensional agarose gel (pH 8.6)-horizontal polyacrylamide gel (pH 9.0)
electrophoresis of horse serum samples, followed by general protein staining,
revealed genetic polymorphism of an unidentified protein tentatively designated
serum protein 3 (SP3). The SP3 fractions appeared distinctly when a 14%
concentration of acrylamide was used in the separation gels. The 2-D mobilities
of SP3 fractions were quite similar to that of albumin. Family data were
consistent with the hypothesis that the observed SP3 phenotypes were controlled
by four co-dominant, autosomal alleles (D, F, I, S). Evidence was provided that
the F allele can be further divided into two alleles (F1 and F2); the mobilities 
of F1 and F2 variants were very similar. Each of the SP3 alleles gave rise to one
fraction and each of the heterozygous types showed two fractions. More than 600
horses representing five different breeds (Swedish Trotter, North-Swedish
Trotter, Thoroughbred, Arab and Polish Tarpan) were typed for SP3, and allele
frequency estimates were calculated. SP3 was highly polymorphic in all breeds
studied.

PMID: 2729672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Am J Hum Genet. 1989 Jan;44(1):20-4.

Precise localization of NF1 to 17q11.2 by balanced translocation.

Ledbetter DH(1), Rich DC, O'Connell P, Leppert M, Carey JC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030.

A female patient is described with von Recklinghausen neurofibromatosis (NF1) in 
association with a balanced translocation between chromosome 17 and 22
[46,XX,t(17;22)(q11.2;q11.2)]. The breakpoint in chromosome 17 is cytogenetically
identical to a previously reported case of NF1 associated with a 1;17 balanced
translocation and suggests that the translocation events disrupt the NF1 gene.
This precisely maps the NF1 gene to 17q11.2 and provides a physical reference
point for strategies to clone the breakpoint and therefore the NF1 gene. A
human-mouse somatic cell hybrid was constructed from patient lymphoblasts which
retained the derivative chromosome 22 (22pter----22q11.2::17q11.2----17qter) but 
not the derivative 17q or normal 17. Southern blot analysis with genes and
anonymous probes known to be in proximal 17q showed ErbA1, ErbB2, and granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor (CSF3) to be present in the hybrid and therefore distal
to the breakpoint, while pHHH202 (D17S33) and beta crystallin (CRYB1) were absent
in the hybrid and therefore proximal to the breakpoint. The gene cluster
including ErbA1 is known to be flanked by the constitutional 15;17 translocation 
breakpoint in hybrid SP3 and by the acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL)
breakpoint, which provides the following gene and breakpoint order:
cen-SP3-(D17S33,CRYB1)-NF1-(CSF3,ERBA1, ERBB2)-APL-tel. The flanking breakpoints 
of SP3 and API are therefore useful for rapidly localizing new markers to the
neurofibromatosis critical region, while the breakpoints of the two translocation
patients provide unique opportunities for reverse genetic strategies to clone the
NF1 gene.

PMCID: PMC1715462
PMID: 2491776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Br J Pharmacol. 1988 Sep;95(1):121-30.

Characterization of neuropeptide-induced histamine release from human dispersed
skin mast cells.

Lowman MA(1), Benyon RC, Church MK.

Author information: 
(1)Immunopharmacology Group, Southampton General Hospital.

1. Human skin mast cells, unlike other human mast cells so far studied, released 
histamine in a concentration-related manner in response to substance P,
vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) and somatostatin (1 microM to 30 microM). In 
contrast, eledoisin, physalaemin, neurokinin A, neurokinin B, calcitonin
gene-related peptide (CGRP), neurotensin, bradykinin and Lys-bradykinin induced
negligible histamine release. 2. The low histamine releasing activity of
physalaemin, eledoisin, neurokinin A and neurokinin B relative to substance P
suggests that the human skin mast cell activation site is distinct from the
tachykinin NK-1, NK-2 or NK-3 receptors described in smooth muscle. 3. The
relative potencies of substance P and its fragments SP2-11, SP3-11, SP4-11 and
SP1-4 in releasing histamine from human skin mast cells suggests that both the
basic N-terminal amino acids and the lipophilic C-terminal portion of substance P
are essential for activity. 4. Peptide-induced histamine release, like that
induced by compound 48/80, morphine and poly-L-lysine, is rapid, reaching
completion in 10-20 s, is largely independent of extracellular calcium but
requires intact glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation. 5. The substance P
analogue, [D-Pro4,D-Trp7,9,10] SP4-11 (SPA), not only reduced substance P-induced
histamine release in a concentration-related manner but also inhibited that
induced by VIP, somatostatin, compound 48/80, poly-L-lysine and morphine but not 
anti-IgE. 6. The similar characteristics of histamine release induced by
substance P, VIP, somatostatin, compound 48/80, poly-L-lysine and morphine
suggest that they share a common pathway of activation-secretion coupling
distinct from that of IgE-dependent activation. Furthermore, the ability of human
skin mast cells to respond to basic non-immunological stimuli including
neuropeptides may reflect a specialised function for these cells.

PMCID: PMC1854121
PMID: 2464382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Phys Rev B Condens Matter. 1988 May 15;37(14):8262-8268.

Properties of trans-polyacetylene with sp3 defects.

Jeyadev S, Conwell EM.

PMID: 9944161  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


374. Acta Crystallogr C. 1988 Jan 15;44 ( Pt 1):187-9.

Structure of the ABC ring synthon of dendrobine.

Lynch VM(1), Li W, Martin SF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Texas, Austin 78712.

(1R,4S,8S,11R)-11-Methyl-3-[(R)-alpha-phenyl-ethyl]-3-
azatricyclo[6.2.1.0(4.11)]undec-5-en-2-one, C19H23NO, Mr = 281.40, orthorhombic, 
P2(1)2(1)2(1), a = 9.534 (2), b = 11.055 (4), C = 14.372 (4) A, V = 1514.8 (8) A,
Z = 4, Dx = 1.23 (163 K), Dm = 1.15 g cm-3 (295 K), lambda(Mo K alpha) = 0.71069 
A, mu = 0.702 cm-1, F(000) = 608, T = 163 K, R = 0.0387 for 2310 reflections. The
absolute configuration is assigned on the basis of internal comparison with the
alpha-methylbenzylamine moiety. The tricyclic ring system is concave. The N
appears to be sp2 hybridized [N is 0.0661 (1) A from the plane through C atoms
bound to it] and conjugated through the carbonyl group [short C-N bond [1.351 (2)
A]]. Ring strain appears to cause a slight increase in the C-C bond lengths of
the center atom of the tricyclic ring system. The average bond length from this
atom to the three other ring C atoms is 1.557 (1) A while the average bond length
for all other sp3-C to sp3-C bonds is 1.529 (1) A.

PMID: 2908428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 1988;243(2):61-8.

Serum levels of six tumor markers in patients with benign and malignant
gynecological disease.

Fukazawa I(1), Inaba N, Ota Y, Sato N, Shirotake S, Iwasawa H, Sato T, Takamizawa
H, Wiklund B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Chiba, Japan.

We studied the pretreatment serum levels of 6 tumor markers in gynecological
patients with and without malignant disease. The tumor markers were
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), tissue polypeptide antigen (TPA), ferritin,
Schwangerschaftsprotein 1 (SP1), Schwangerschaftsprotein 3 (SP3) and cancer
antigen 125 (CA125). The results were as follows: (1) Serum CA125 and TPA levels 
were raised in 81% and 57% of patients with ovarian serous cystadenocarcinoma;
CEA and SP3, in 52% and 43% respectively of patients with ovarian mucinous
cystadenocarcinoma; CA125, TPA and SP3, in 76%, 48% and 48% respectively of
patients with other ovarian malignancies; and TPA and SP3, in 56% and 40%
respectively of patients with endometrial carcinoma. (2) Serum levels of TPA,
ferritin and CA125 were more often raised with advancing stages of malignant
disease. (3) Serum TPA levels were elevated in 55% of patients with stage I
endometrial carcinoma, and serum SP3 levels were elevated in 35% of patients with
a stage I malignant ovarian neoplasm and in 45% of patients with endometrial
carcinoma. (4) One of the 6 tumor markers showed a raised level in 84% of
patients with gynecologic malignancy as against 56% in those with benign
gynecologic diseases.

PMID: 3401042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 1988;243(3):157-64.

Interaction between pregnancy zone protein and plasmin.

Poulsen OM(1), Hau J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Odense, Denmark.

Pregnancy zone protein (PZP, alpha 2-PAG, SP3) was found to bind to plasmin in
crossed affino-immunoelectrophoresis using sodium caseinate in the first
dimension gel. The plasmin presence in the PZP-plasmin complex was confirmed by
addition of antiserum against plasminogen to the gel. In crossed
affino-immunoelectrophoresis using plasmin in the first dimension gel a non
migrative PZP immunoreactive peak appeared, similar to the peak obtained with
casein in the first dimension gel. Incubation of mixtures of PZP and plasmin also
demonstrated complex formation between PZP and plasmin. The complex between PZP
and plasmin could be precipitated not only by anti-PZP antibodies, but also by
anti-plasminogen antibodies, confirming the interaction between the two
molecules. The significance of the binding between plasmin and PZP remains to be 
elucidated, but it is tempting to speculate that PZP, present on the
trophoblastic surface, immobilizes plasmin, rendering this molecule able to
perform a local fibrinolytic activity.

PMID: 2971340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Pulm Pharmacol. 1988;1(3):113-8.

Airway responses to substance P and substance P fragments in the guinea pig.

Shore SA(1), Drazen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Biology Program, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA
02115.

Airway responses to rapid intravenous infusions of substance P (SP), selected
carboxy terminal fragments (SP3-11, SP5-11, SP7-11, and SP9-11), and an amino
terminal fragment (SP1-9) were measured in anesthetized, mechanically ventilated 
guinea pigs. The dose of each peptide required to decrease pulmonary conductance 
(GL) to 50% of baseline value was calculated in each animal. The order of ED50GL 
was: SP5-11 less than SP3-11 less than SP less than SP7-11. SP9-11 and SP1-9 were
inactive at doses up to 1000 nmol/kg i.v. The effects of the neutral
metalloendopeptidase (NEP) inhibitor, thiorphan, and the angiotensin converting
enzyme (ACE) inhibitor, captopril, on airway responses to SP5-11 were examined in
order to test the hypothesis that differences in degradation of SP and SP5-11
contribute to the difference in airway responsiveness to the two peptides.
Thiorphan (0.5 mg/animal, i.v.) caused a significant decrease in ED50GL for
SP5-11, as has been previously noted for SP. In contrast, captopril (1.7
mg/animal i.v.) had no effect on ED50GL for SP5-11, although it has a substantial
effect on SP responses. These results indicate that while the carboxy terminal of
SP is essential for peptide bronchoactivity, loss of amino terminal peptides (up 
to four residues) actually enhances bronchoconstrictor responses to the peptide. 
Part of this enhancement appears to result from differences in the degradation of
SP and SP5-11 by ACE. The data suggest that cleavage of SP by dipeptidyl
aminopeptidases could enhance its bioactivity.

PMID: 2485179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Biochemistry. 1987 Dec 15;26(25):8450-7.

Adenosine deaminase converts purine riboside into an analogue of a reactive
intermediate: a 13C NMR and kinetic study.

Kurz LC(1), Frieden C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Washington University School of Medicine, 
St. Louis, Missouri 63110.

The 13C NMR spectra of [2-13C]- and [6-13C]purine ribosides have been obtained
free in solution and bound to the active site of adenosine deaminase. The
positions of the resonances of the bound ligand are shifted relative to those of 
the free ligand as follows: C-2, -3.7 ppm; C-6, -73.1 ppm. The binary complexes
are in slow exchange with free purine riboside on the NMR time scale, and the
dissociation rate constant is estimated to be 13.5 s-1 from the slow exchange
broadening of the free signal. In aqueous solution, protonation of purine
riboside at N-1 results in changes in 13C chemical shift relative to those of the
free base as follows: C-2, -4.9 ppm; C-6, -7.9 ppm. The changes in chemical shift
that occur when purine riboside binds to the enzyme indicate that the
hybridization of C-6 changes from sp2 to sp3 in the binary complex with formation
of a new bond to oxygen or sulfur. A change in C-2 hybridization can be
eliminated as can protonation at N-1 as the sole cause of the chemical shift
changes. The kinetic constants for the adenosine deaminase catalyzed hydrolysis
of 6-chloro- and 6-fluoropurine riboside have been compared, and the reactivity
order implies that carbon-halogen bond breaking does not occur in the
rate-determining step. These observations support a mechanism for the enzyme in
which formation of a tetrahedral intermediate is the most difficult chemical
step. Enzymic stabilization of this intermediate may be an important catalytic
strategy used by the enzyme to lower the standard free energy of the preceding
transition state.

PMID: 3442668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Agents Actions. 1987 Apr;20(3-4):178-80.

Action of the SP2-11 and SP3-11 fragments of substance P on rat peritoneal mast
cells.

Piotrowski W, Mead M, Foreman JC.

The ability of the SP fragments SP2-11 and SP3-11 to release histamine from rat
peritoneal mast cells has been compared with that of the whole peptide. SP1-11
was found to be about 3.4 times more active than SP2-11 and about 10.4 times more
active than SP3-11. The substance P antagonist [D-Pro4, D-Trp7,9,10] SP4-11 was
equally effective at antagonizing the histamine releasing action of SP1-11,
SP2-11 and SP3-11. Benzalkonium chloride was found to be a competitive antagonist
of SP and SP3-11: the dissociation constants for the benzalkonium
chloride-receptor interaction being about the same when either SP1-11 or SP3-11
was used as the agonist.

PMID: 2440265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. J Hirnforsch. 1987;28(3):301-14.

[Effects of cyclic adenosine-3',5'-monophosphate and cyclo(Lys-Pro).HCl
neuronotrophic factors in tissue culture].

[Article in German]

Lindner G(1), Grosse G, Wenzel M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Anatomie des Bereiches Medizin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin.

Explants and cell cultures of embryonic chick ganglia trigeminalia, telencephalon
and retina or hippocampus from fetal rats were incubated in maximow chambers in
the presence of cyclic AMP and the dipeptide cyclo(Lys-Pro).HCL under various
conditions. Maintenance of nerve cells and growth of nerve fibers were observed
by morphometrical methods. 1. Cyclo(Lys-Pro).HCL promoted the maintenance of
neuroblasts and the growth of nerve fibres in explants of the ganglion trigeminal
and retinal cell cultures. The effect depended on the presence of serum in the
medium by use of poly-I-lysine substrate. 2. Extern applicated cyclic AMP and the
dipeptide SP3-4 = cyclo(Lys-Pro).HCL facilitated neurite growth in PNS cultures. 
In the presence of the drugs the length of nerve fibers increased for a short
term. On CNS explants substance P (SP1-11) and SP3-4 were without effect. Cyclic 
AMP stimulated the growth of nerve fibers in CNS explants and cell cultures in
number and length. 3. Discussed is the effect of SP1-11 and cyclo(Lys-Pro).HCL
for competence of nerve fibre regeneration in vitro in relation to increasing
cAMP levels, which may then act as an initial second messenger. It is suggested
that explants and cell cultures of nervous tissues will be useful as a tool for
the further characterisation of factors with neuronotrophic activities.

PMID: 2822794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Phys Rev B Condens Matter. 1986 Nov 15;34(10):7080-7088.

Calculated electron densities and sp3-bonding character for binary and ternary
Zintl phases.

Pawlowska Z, Christensen NE, Satpathy S, Jepsen O.

PMID: 9939361  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


382. J Med Chem. 1986 Oct;29(10):2080-7.

Design and synthesis of potent and specific renin inhibitors containing
difluorostatine, difluorostatone, and related analogues.

Thaisrivongs S, Pals DT, Kati WM, Turner SR, Thomasco LM, Watt W.

Peptides that contain difluorostatine and difluorostatone residues have been
shown to be potent inhibitors of the aspartyl protease renin. The readily
hydrated fluoro ketone is proposed to mimic the tetrahedral intermediate that
forms during the enzyme-catalyzed hydrolysis of a peptidic bond. It is suggested 
that the sp3-hybridized ketal acts as a transition-state analogue renin
inhibitor. The fluoro ketone is shown to be a much more effective inhibitor than 
the corresponding nonfluorinated ketone, which acts as a pseudosubstrate. More
lipophilic side chains at the P1 site can enhance the inhibitory potency of the
difluorostatine analogue, but this cannot be demonstrated in the difluorostatone 
series. Additionally, high renin specificity has been shown for a
difluorostatone-containing peptide.

PMID: 3531517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. J Am Chem Soc. 1986 Apr 1;108(9):2420-4. doi: 10.1021/ja00269a047.

Stereochemistry of the R1(X:)C(sp2)-N(sp3)R2R3 fragment. Mapping of the cis-trans
isomerization path by rotation around the carbon-nitrogen bond from
crystallographic structural data.

Gilli G, Bertolasi V, Bellucci F, Ferretti V.

PMID: 22175594  [PubMed]


384. J Med Chem. 1986 Apr;29(4):478-82.

Kinetics and mechanism of interaction of 10-propargyl-5,8-dideazafolate with
thymidylate synthase.

Pogolotti AL Jr, Danenberg PV, Santi DV.

The interaction of Lactobacillus casei thymidylate synthase (TS) with
10-propargyl-5,8-dideazafolate (NPQ) in the presence of 2'-deoxyuridylate (dUMP) 
has been investigated. After formation of a rapidly reversible dUMP-NPQ-enzyme
complex, a slow isomerization occurs to provide a ternary complex that can be
isolated on nitrocellulose membranes or by gel filtration. Unusual features of
the isolable complex are the slow rate by which it is formed (t1/2 = 0.88 h) and 
the slow rate at which it dissociates (t1/2 = 26.5 h). The ternary complexes
contain 2 mol of dUMP and 2 mol of NPQ bound per mol of dimeric enzyme.
Ultraviolet difference spectra of the dUMP-NPQ-TS complex shows a high wavelength
maximum that has been attributed to perturbations of the enzyme and/or ligand
chromophores that occur upon binding. Data are presented that suggest that the
formation of the isolable ternary complex involves nucleophilic attack by a
catalytic thiol group of the enzyme to the 6-position of dUMP. Evidence for this 
is as follows: first, there is a decrease in the absorbance of the pyrimidine
chromophore at 265 nm that occurs at the same rate as the formation of the
isolable complex; second, using [6-3H]dUMP there is a large, inverse
alpha-secondary kinetic isotope effect (kappa H/kappa T = 0.83) upon formation of
the complex that is in accord with sp2 to sp3 rehybridization of the 6-carbon of 
the heterocycle. Treatment of the complex with sodium dodecyl sulfate (NaDodSO4) 
results in the dissociation of both ligands in an unmodified form, which is
consistent with proposed structure of the complex. Isolable ternary complexes are
also formed when the enzyme is incubated with 5-fluoro-2'-deoxyuridylate (FdUMP) 
and NPQ. Interestingly, the dissociation of FdUMP from these complexes is
biphasic, with one-half of the bound nucleotide dissociating at an exceedingly
slow rate (t1/2 congruent to 100 h). The findings are discussed with relationship
to the possible use of NPQ as an anticancer agent.

PMID: 3754285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Regul Pept. 1986 Mar;14(1):21-31.

Catabolism of substance P and neurotensin in the rat stomach wall is susceptible 
to inhibitors of angiotensin converting enzyme.

Orloff MS, Turner AJ, Bunnett NW.

The purpose of this investigation was to examine the pathway of substance P (SP) 
and neurotensin (NT) catabolism in the gastric wall of the rat and identify some 
of the enzymes involved. Under anaesthesia an infusion catheter and a bundle of
dialysis fibres were implanted into the stomach wall of the rat. Experiments
commenced on conscious rats 2 days after surgery. In control experiments
[3H]-SP(Pro-2,4) or [3H]-NT(Tyr-3,11) were injected into gastric tissues through 
the catheter and catabolites were collected in the dialysis fibres and separated 
by high pressure liquid chromatography. In other studies captopril, MK422
(inhibitors of angiotensin converting enzyme) or phosphoramidon (an inhibitor of 
endopeptidase-24.11, 'enkephalinase') were injected into gastric tissues before
the peptide label. SP1-11 was degraded to mainly SP1-2, SP3-4 with some SP1-6,
SP1-7 and SP1-8. Catabolism was partially but significantly (5% level) inhibited 
by MK422 and captopril, but not by phosphoramidon. NT1-13 was degraded to NT1-8, 
NT9-13, NT1-11 and NT1-12. NT catabolism was partially but significantly (5%
level) inhibited by MK422. It is concluded that an enzyme resembling angiotensin 
converting enzyme is involved in the initial stages of SP and NT catabolism in
the rat stomach. The involvement of other peptidases cannot be excluded because
inhibition of breakdown was not complete.

PMID: 2424051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Endocr Res. 1986;12(3):293-304.

Studies on high-affinity [3H]substance P binding sites in bovine pineal gland.

Govitrapong P, Ebadi M.

The presence of substance P in numerous mammalian pineal glands prompted us to
search for its binding sites in the bovine pineal gland. The binding assays to
pineal membrane were carried out in polypropylene microcentrifuge tubes in a
final volume of 500 microliters of 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.4) containing
aliquots of 200-500 micrograms protein, 0.02% BSA, 6 micrograms/ml chymostatin, 4
micrograms/ml leupeptin, 40 micrograms/ml bacitracin, 5 mM MnCl2, and 50
microliters of [3H]substance P (3H-SP, 45.7 Ci/mmol to yield a final
concentration of 0.02-20 nM) to start the reactions, which were incubated for 20 
min at 20 degrees C. The reactions were terminated by centrifugation in a Fisher 
Microcentrifuge Model 235A for 30 seconds at 13,000 X g, and the pellets were
washed twice with 1 ml of ice-cold 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer containing 0.02% BSA, 6 
micrograms/ml chymostatin, 4 micrograms/ml leupeptin, 40 micrograms/ml
bacitracin, 5 mM MnCl2, 120 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, and 1 mM CaCl2. The
bottoms of the tubes were cut, the membrane pellets were dissolved in 5 ml of
Triton X-100/toluene fluor (1:3) scintillation fluid, and the radioactivity was
counted. The specific [3H]-substance P binding at 1-2 nM was 40-50% of the total 
binding, and the non-specific binding was assessed by using 2 microM of
unlabelled substance P. These studies identified in bovine pineal gland a high
affinity receptor site for [3H]SP with a KD value of 0.43 nM and a Bmax value of 
71.14 fmol/mg protein. The relative affinity of various substance P analogues or 
fragments was: substance P greater than physalaemin greater than SP2-11 greater
than SP3-11 greater than SP4-11 greater than SP6-11 greater than substance K =
eledoisin greater than kassinin greater than SP7-11 greater than SP free acid.
Substance P did not alter the basal or the norepinephrine-induced stimulation of 
the activity of serotonin N-acetyltransferase in rat pineal gland in culture.

PMID: 2430788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Behring Inst Mitt. 1985 Dec;(78):70-82.

New pregnancy and placental proteins and their possible diagnostic significance.

Bohn H.

In our laboratory a large number of, for the most part, new proteins have been
detected by immunochemical methods in extracts from human term placentae: namely 
3 pregnancy proteins (SP1, SP2 and SP3), around 40 soluble placental tissue
proteins (PPs) and at least 11 different solubilized, apparently
membrane-associated, tissue proteins. A great deal of the new proteins has been
already isolated to purity and characterized. The treatise gives an overview of
what is known of the physico-chemical properties and of the possible biological
role of these proteins as well as of their occurrence in tissues and body fluids.
It also summarizes the possible diagnostic significance of detection and
measurement of these proteins on the one hand in pregnant women, on the other
hand in patients with tumours and other diseases, as far as this has been already
investigated.

PMID: 3833243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Eur J Biochem. 1985 Nov 4;152(3):581-7.

Nuclear magnetic resonance studies of the old yellow enzyme. 2. 13C NMR of the
enzyme recombined with 13C-labeled flavin mononucleotides.

Beinert WD, Rüterjans H, Müller F, Bacher A.

The apoenzyme of NADPH oxidoreductase, 'old yellow enzyme', was reconstituted
with selectively 13C-enriched flavin mononucleotides and investigated by 13C NMR 
spectroscopy. The 13C NMR results confirm the results obtained by 15N NMR
spectroscopy and yield additional information about the coenzyme-apoenzyme
interaction. A strong deshielding of the C(2) and C(4) atoms of enzyme-bound FMN 
both in the oxidized and reduced state is observed, which is supposed to be
induced by hydrogen-bond formation between the protein and the two carbonyl
groups at C(2) and C(4) of the isoalloxazine ring system. The chemical shifts of 
all 13C resonances of the flavin in the two-electron-reduced state indicate that 
the N(5) atom is sp3-hybridized. From 31P NMR measurements it is concluded that
the FMN phosphate group is not accessible to bulk solvent. The unusual 31P
chemical shift of FMN in old yellow enzyme seems to indicate a different binding 
mode of the FMN phosphate group in this enzyme as compared to the flavodoxins.
The 13C and 15N NMR data on the old-yellow-enzyme--phenolate complexes show that 
the atoms of the phenolate are more deshielded whereas the atoms of the
enzyme-bound isoalloxazine ring are more shielded upon complexation. A non-linear
correlation exists between the chemical shifts of the N(5) and the N(10) atoms
and the pKa value of the phenolate derivative bound to the protein. Since the
chemical shifts of N(5), N(10) and C(4a) are influenced most on complexation it
is suggested that the phenolate is bound near the pyrazine ring of the
isoalloxazine system. 15N NMR studies on the complex between FMN and
2-aminobenzoic acid indicate that the structure of this complex differs from that
of the old-yellow-enzyme--phenolate complexes.

PMID: 4054124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Eur J Biochem. 1985 Nov 4;152(3):573-9.

Nuclear magnetic resonance studies of the old yellow enzyme. 1. 15N NMR of the
enzyme recombined with 15N-labeled flavin mononucleotides.

Beinert WD, Rüterjans H, Müller F.

The apoenzyme of NADPH oxidoreductase, 'old yellow enzyme', was reconstituted
with specifically 15N-labeled flavin mononucleotide and investigated by 15N NMR
spectroscopy in the oxidized and reduced state. The results indicate that in the 
oxidized state a hydrogen bond is formed between the N(5) atom and the
apoprotein. In addition, hydrogen bonds exist between the N(1) and N(3) atoms of 
FMN and the apoprotein. The resonance position of N(10) indicates that this atom 
is somewhat sp3-hybridized, i.e. lifted out of the molecular plane of the
isoalloxazine ring system. In the reduced state the N(1) atom is negatively
charged and the N(3) atom forms a hydrogen bond with the apoprotein. The N(10)
atom in protein-bound FMN exhibits about the same hybridization state as in free 
anionic reduced FMN, i.e. it is located in the plane of the isoalloxazine ring.
The chemical shift of the N(5) resonance indicates that this atom is almost
completely sp3-hybridized. This interpretation can also be derived from the
15N(5)-1H coupling constant. Among the flavoproteins thus far studied by NMR
techniques, old yellow enzyme is the only protein that shows a conformation of
the reduced prosthetic group with the N(5) atom lifted out of the molecular
plane. The isoelectric focussing properties of old yellow enzyme and a new easy
method for the preparation of the apoprotein are also reported.

PMID: 4054123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Cesk Gynekol. 1985 Nov;50(9):640-4.

[Monitoring trophoblast-specific-beta-1-globulin (SP1) and alpha 2-glycoprotein
(SP3) in women with risk pregnancies].

[Article in Czech]

Mikulíková L, Cerný V, Bauer J, Fialová L, Malbohan J.

PMID: 3878735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Biochem J. 1984 Dec 15;224(3):817-21.

On the antiperiplanar lone pair hypothesis and its application to catalysis by
glycosidases.

Sinnott ML.

The idea that sp3 lone pairs of electrons on a heteroatom direct the departure of
a leaving group from an adjacent tetrahedral carbon centre is shown to be
untenable as a general principle, and the permissive evidence in favour of it to 
be accounted for by the principle of least nuclear motion. The application of the
idea to the majority of glycopyranosidases, which work by a double-displacement
mechanism, is shown to require implausible contortions of the pyranose ring.

PMCID: PMC1144517
PMID: 6525177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Med Chem. 1984 Dec;27(12):1648-57.

Functional group contributions to drug-receptor interactions.

Andrews PR, Craik DJ, Martin JL.

The binding constants and structural components of 200 drugs and enzyme
inhibitors have been used to calculate the average binding energies of 10 common 
functional groups. As expected, charged groups bind more strongly than polar
groups, which in turn bind more tightly than nonpolar groups. The derived
intrinsic binding energies (in kcal/mol) are (i) charged groups, CO-2, 8.2;
PO2-4, 10.0; N+, 11.5; (ii) polar groups, N, 1.2; OH, 2.5; CO, 3.4; O or S
ethers, 1.1; halogens, 1.3; (iii) nonpolar groups, C (sp2), 0.7; C (sp3), 0.8.
These values may be used to determine the goodness of fit of a drug to its
receptor. This is done by comparing the observed binding constant to the average 
binding energy calculated by summing the intrinsic binding energies of the
component groups and then subtracting two entropy related terms (14 kcal/mol for 
the loss of overall rotational and translational entropy and 0.7 kcal/mol for
each degree of conformational freedom). Drugs that match their receptors
exceptionally well have a measured binding energy that substantially exceeds this
calculated average value--examples include diazepam and biotin. Conversely, if
the observed binding energy is very much less than the calculated average value, 
then the drug apparently matches its receptor less well than average. Examples of
this type include methotrexate and buprenorphine.

PMID: 6094812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. J Gen Virol. 1984 Nov;65 ( Pt 11):2073-6.

SP3: a flagellotropic bacteriophage of Bacillus subtilis.

Shea TB, Seaman E.

Bacillus subtilis bacteriophage SP3 was shown to be flagellotropic. Mechanical
deflagellation of host strain 168wt prevented phage adsorption but adsorption was
normal when deflagellated 186wt was allowed sufficient time to regenerate
flagella. Two host strains lacking flagella (130 fla- and 19 fla-) did not adsorb
SP3. Two host strains with paralysed flagella (38mot- and 13mot-) adsorbed SP3
inefficiently. Revertants of fla- and mot- strains to the motile phenotype
adsorbed SP3 normally. A temperature-sensitive host mutant, ts46, with reduced
numbers of flagella at 46 degrees C was incapable of efficient SP3 adsorption at 
this temperature. However, transfection of ts46 by SP3 DNA occurred with
virtually identical efficiency at either temperature. Adsorption of a
non-flagellotropic phage, SP82, to all bacterial strains used was unaffected by
absence of flagella. Isolated flagella adsorbed SP3 inefficiently. Spontaneously 
non-motile strains of 168wt had lost the ability to support growth of SP3 but
SP82 grew normally. Revertants of these strains to the motile phenotype regained 
the ability to support SP3 growth. Strains derived from surviving bacteria in SP3
lysates of 168wt were non-motile.

PMID: 6438275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Lab Invest. 1984 Jun;50(6):653-8.

Correlation of lung macrophage age and surface antigen in the hamster.

Harbison ML, Godleski JJ, Mortara M, Brain JD.

A monoclonal antibody specific for a surface antigen found on hamster lung
macrophages has been produced. Macrophages obtained from LSH Syrian golden
hamsters by pulmonary lavage have varying amounts of this antigen on their
surface. We compared the age of alveolar macrophages (using 3H-thymidine) with
the amount of surface antigen. Lung macrophages were obtained by repeated saline 
lavage at 1, 3, 5, and 10 days after 3H-thymidine injection. Monoclonal antibody 
was then reacted with these cells followed by fluorescein
isothiocyanate-conjugated protein A. Cell size and fluorescence were analyzed by 
flow cytometry. A wide range of fluorescent intensity was observed; the cells
were sorted into four subpopulations (SPs). SP1 had the lowest fluorescence per
cell, and SP4 had the highest. The sorted cells were placed on glass slides, and 
autoradiographs were made. The percentage of labeled macrophages in each SP was
determined. At 1 day after thymidine injection, cells with a paucity of antigen
(SP1) were the most highly labeled; 12.5% of SP1 macrophages were labeled, but
only 1.4 and 1.1% of SP3 and SP4 were labeled, respectively. The labeling was
relatively even in all four SPs at 3 days, but at 5 days the labeling of cells in
SP2 and SP3 was highest. By day 10, labeled macrophages had large amounts of
surface antigen and were in SP3 and SP4. These findings suggest that pulmonary
macrophages that have recently synthesized DNA lack surface antigen. As time
passes, cells mature and more antigen is acquired. The amount of surface antigen 
reflects cell age and provides a useful tool to isolate and study macrophage SPs.

PMID: 6727298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. J Biol Chem. 1984 Feb 25;259(4):2429-34.

On the mechanism of the acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of uridine to uracil. Evidence 
for 6-hydroxy-5,6-dihydrouridine intermediates.

Prior JJ, Santi DV.

In acidic media, the 5,6-double bond of uridine is rapidly hydrated to give a
small amount of 6-hydroxy-5,6-dihydrouridine (Urd-H2O), the mechanism of which is
known from studies of the acid-catalyzed dehydration of Urd-H2O (Prior, J. J.,
Maley, J., and Santi, D. V. (1984) J. Biol. Chem. 258, 2422-2428). In addition to
dehydration, Urd-H2O also undergoes direct hydrolysis of the N-glycosidic bond in
acidic solution. The kinetics of the above reaction demonstrates that Urd-H2O, or
an intermediate in the pathway leading from Urd to Urd-H2O, is kinetically
competent to account for the hydrolysis of the N-glycosidic bond of Urd. The
hydrolysis of (1'-2H)Urd proceeds with an alpha-secondary deuterium isotope
effect of kH/kD of 1.11 at 25 degrees C. This isotope effect is sufficiently
large to implicate carbonium ion character at the 1'-carbon during hydrolysis
but, since it is not the maximal value expected, suggests that N-glycoside
cleavage is rate-determining with a transition state intermediate between
reactant and products. Importantly, the hydrolysis of [6-3H]Urd proceeds with a
substantial inverse secondary isotope effect of kT/kH = 1.15 at 25 degrees C
which indicates some degree of sp2 to sp3 rehybridization of C-6 of the
pyrimidine moiety during hydrolysis. From the data available, it appears that an 
important pathway in the hydrolysis of the N-glycoside bond of Urd involves
either spontaneous cleavage of Urd which is protonated at the 5-carbon or a
protonated species of Urd-H2O. The studies described here, together with the
known susceptibility of the 6-position of pyrimidine heterocycles toward
nucleophiles, permits the proposal of chemically reasonable mechanisms for
enzyme-catalyzed cleavage of N-glycosidic bonds of pyrimidines.

PMID: 6546573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. J Biol Chem. 1984 Feb 10;259(3):1577-85.

Proposed structure for the noncovalently associated heme prosthetic group of
dissimilatory nitrite reductases. Identification of substituents.

Timkovich R, Cork MS, Taylor PV.

The substituents of the noncovalently associated heme prosthetic group of the
bacterial nitrite reductase-cytochrome oxidase (EC 1.9.6.1 or EC 1.9.3.2.) from
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (ATCC 19429) and Paracoccus denitrificans (ATCC 13456)
have been identified. This was accomplished by 1H NMR, infrared, visible, and
mass spectroscopic techniques applied to semi-purified heme and purified methyl
ester derivatives of the iron-free porphyrin. The main structural features are as
follows. 1) The macrocycle is a reduced porphyrin of the chlorin type, that is,
one of the pyrrole rings has been saturated so that the beta-carbons have
sp3-hybridization. 2) The chlorin is a tetracarboxylic acid. 3) The substituents 
of the saturated pyrrole ring are two methyl groups and two hydroxymethyl groups.
4) The substituents of the unsaturated pyrrole rings are: (i) two methyl groups
(ii) a propionic acid (iii) an acrylic acid, and (iv) two directly bonded formic 
acid groups. No firm evidence has been obtained for the relative positions of
these unsaturated beta-pyrrolic substituents around the macrocyclic ring, but a
proposed structure will be discussed. Several previously inexplicable chemical
properties of the heme in extracts or in the intact enzyme can be now interpreted
in view of the proposed structure. The trivial name "acrylochlorin" is suggested 
for the macrocycle.

PMID: 6420411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Int J Neurosci. 1984 Feb;22(3-4):235-51.

Subcortical correlates of the auditory brain stem potentials in the monkey:
bipolar EEG and multiple unit activity responses.

Velasco M, Velasco F, Romo R, Almanza X.

Bipolar EEG and multiple unit activity (MUA) responses correlated to the vertex
auditory brain stem potentials (ABSP) were recorded in different brain stem and
diencephalic primary auditory pathways and other anatomically related structures 
of large monkeys under barbiturate anesthesia. Bipolar EEG responses were
recorded bilaterally to monaural stimulation and were formed by 3 or more of 6
consecutive components labeled A, B, C, D, E and F (peak latencies of 3.8, 4.2,
4.6, 5.0, 7.8 and 11.8 msec) correlated in latency with waves III, IV, V, VI, VII
and SP3 of the ABSP, respectively. Component B was prominent and showed clearcut 
reverse polarity at the trapezoid body (TB) and superior olivary complex (SOC),
while components C and F inverted and everted polarity at the mesencephalic
reticular formation (MRF) and medial geniculate nucleus thalami (MG). Subcortical
MUA peaks A, B, C, D and E time locked to the stimulus presentation correlated in
latency to those of the bipolar EEG responses. In addition, a significant
correlation was found between percentage amplitude of the subcortical EEG
response components and MUA peaks in different structures contra- (r = 0.847) and
ipsilateral (r = 0.973) to the stimulated ear. Although a single wave of the
vertex ABSP correlated in latency with more than one response component in
different subcortical loci, amplitude of component A was significantly larger (P 
less than or equal to 0.02) at TB ipsilateral, B at TB and SOC bilateral, and C
and F at MRF, and D and E at MG contralateral to the stimulated ear.

PMID: 6706477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Eur J Biochem. 1984 Jan 16;138(2):239-45.

The 2-oxoglutarate binding site of prolyl 4-hydroxylase. Identification of
distinct subsites and evidence for 2-oxoglutarate decarboxylation in a ligand
reaction at the enzyme-bound ferrous ion.

Majamaa K, Hanauske-Abel HM, Günzler V, Kivirikko KI.

The structure and function of the 2-oxoglutarate binding site of prolyl
4-hydroxylase was studied by assaying the inhibitory potential of 24 selected
aliphatic or aromatic compounds. All except one of them inhibited the enzyme
competitively with respect to 2-oxoglutarate and noncompetitively with respect to
Fe2+, the Ki values ranging from 0.8 microM to over 15 mM. The Ki values for the 
two most effective inhibitors, pyridine 2,5-dicarboxylate and 2,4-dicarboxylate, 
were about 0.8 microM and 2 microM, these compounds being the most potent
inhibitors of prolyl 4-hydroxylase with respect to 2-oxoglutarate known so far.
Only one of the compounds tested, 2-oxoadipinate, was able to support
hydroxylation by replacing 2-oxoglutarate as a cosubstrate. The data suggest that
the 2-oxoglutarate binding site can be divided into three distinct subsites.
Subsite I is probably a positively charged side chain of the enzyme that
ionically binds the C5 carboxyl group of the 2-oxoglutarate, subsite II consists 
of two cis-positioned equatorial coordination sites of the enzyme-bound ferrous
ion and is chelated by the C1-C2 moiety, while subsite III involves a hydrophobic
binding site in the C3-C4 region of the cosubstrate. The sp3 rehybridization of
C2 within the chelating moiety of the cosubstrate appears to be a crucial event
during decarboxylation that proceeds in the form of a ligand reaction inside the 
Fe2+ coordination sphere.

PMID: 6321169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Z Mikrosk Anat Forsch. 1984;98(1):107-18.

[The effect of N and C terminal sequences of substance P on non-neuronal cells in
vitro (nerve tissue culture)].

[Article in German]

Lindner G.

The effect of peptides (SP1-2, SP3-4 and SP5-11) of substance P (SP1-11) on the
morphology of the areas of growth of explants of the ganglion trigeminale from
chick embryos after incubation in Maximow chambers was observed. N- and
C-terminal sequences effected the growth of cultures differently. In
dipeptide-treated (= N-terminal sequences) cultures the areas of growth
increased. In heptapeptide-treated cultures (= C-terminal sequence SP5-11) the
areas of growth decreased. Only the dipeptide SP3-4 effects a mitogenic effect on
nonneuronal cells in short time tests. The C-terminal sequence SP5-11 stimulates 
neither the growth of nerve fibres nor the proliferation of cells. Finally the
importance of this in-vitro-tests in relation to the in-vivo-situation is
discussed.

PMID: 6202072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Biochem J. 1983 Dec 15;216(3):567-74.

Synthesis of spore proteins during development of Dictyostelium discoideum.

Wilkinson DG, Wilson J, Hames BD.

The pattern of synthesis of the spore coat proteins during development of
Dictyostelium discoideum has been determined by using immunoprecipitation with
spore protein antibody. SP170, SP103, 'SP94', SP82, SP76 and SP55 are all first
synthesized just prior to the 'Mexican hat' stage of development (16-18h), but
the synthesis of SP72 is delayed. This protein is apparently synthesized as a
precursor, P66, which is modified during spore maturation to yield SP72. The
nature of the modification is unknown. At their peak period of synthesis during
early culmination (18-20h), the spore coat proteins account for 5-9% of total
protein synthesis. Shortly after synthesis, these proteins are inserted into the 
spore coat, where all except SP103 become disulphide-cross-linked during the
period 24-30h. SP3 does not accumulate until disulphide-cross-linking of the
major spore coat proteins occurs and is itself disulphide-cross-linked into the
spore coat. Several additional proteins that are accumulated during development
have also been identified, namely P31, P25, P21 and P18. P25 first appears at
18-20h and then continues to be made throughout development. P31 synthesis begins
at 12-14h and then largely ceases after approx. 20 h of development. The genes
for both P21 and P18 are first expressed early in development, starting at 9-12h.
P21 synthesis ceases at approx. 14h, but P18 continues to be synthesized
throughout the rest of development. The marked differences in the time period of 
accumulation of these proteins compared with the co-ordinated syntheses of SP170,
SP103, 'SP94', SP82, SP76 and SP55 provide a useful system for analysis of the
mechanism of temporal gene expression during development.

PMCID: PMC1152547
PMID: 6667257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1983 Sep 14;747(1-2):16-25.

A new spatial structure for the axial methionine observed in cytochrome c5 from
Pseudomonas mendocina. Correlations with the electronic structure of heme c.

Senn H, Wüthrich K.

Cytochrome c5 from Pseudomonas mendocina has been isolated and the coordination
geometry at the heme iron was investigated by 1H nuclear magnetic resonance and
circular dichroism spectroscopy. Individual assignments were obtained for heme c 
and the axial ligands. From studies of nuclear Overhauser enhancements the axial 
histidine imidazole ring orientation relative to the heme group was found to
coincide with that of other c-type cytochromes. In contrast, a new structure was 
observed for the axial methionine. This includes S chirality at the iron-bound
sulfur atom, but compared to cytochromes c-551 from Pseudomonads and
Rhodopseudomonas gelatinosa, which also contain S-chiral methionine, the spatial 
arrangement of the gamma- and beta-methylene groups and the alpha carbon of
methionine is markedly different. Analysis of the electron spin density
distribution in ferricytochrome c5 in the light of this new coordination geometry
provides additional support for the hypothesis that the electronic structure of
heme c is primarily governed by the orientation of the sp3 lone-pair orbital of
the axial sulfur atom with respect to the heme plane.

PMID: 6309240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Cancer Res. 1983 Sep;43(9):4248-52.

Rat natural killer cell activity against lymphoid and nonlymphoid tumor cells and
normal rat cell lines.

Rees RC, Reynolds CW, Herberman RB.

Natural cytotoxicity in the rat was assessed against solid tumors and normal and 
embryonic rat monolayer culture lines, and the results were compared with rat
natural killer activity towards syngeneic, allogeneic, and xenogeneic lymphoma
targets. The targets tested showed a very wide range of susceptibility to lysis
by peripheral blood and spleen effector cells in both 4- and 18-hr cytotoxicity
assays. Cytotoxicity toward the mouse lymphoma, YAC-1, and rat sarcoma LT1
targets was relatively high in a 4-hr assay, compared with that toward the other 
cell lines used in the study. At 18 hr, increased killing was seen against YAC-1,
LT1, SP3 (rat pheochromoblastoma), F2304 (rat embryonic cells), and normal rat
kidney cells, while a significant increase in susceptibility with time was not
observed with other rat targets: W/Fu-T (sarcoma); ERTh/V-G (sarcoma); R35
(mammary tumor); and W/Fu-P21 (embryo fibroblasts) targets. The cytotoxicity
against all of the targets tested was not age restricted and was potentiated by
rat interferon. Natural cytotoxic reactivity was seen with effector cells from
the blood, spleen, and peritoneal cavity of both W/Fu (euthymic) and Rowett nude 
(congenitally athymic) rats. Cytotoxic effector cells from the blood were present
in the low-density fractions recovered from discontinuous Percoll density
gradients and, as shown previously for lymphoma target cells, a strong
correlation was observed between the killing of embryonic, normal, and solid
tumor targets and the presence of large granular lymphocytes. These results
indicate that the naturally cytotoxic rat effector cells for normal fibroblast
and bone marrow targets, lymphomas-leukemias, embryonic cell lines, and solid
tumor targets are all included in the large granular lymphocyte subpopulation.

PMID: 6871862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Nihon Naibunpi Gakkai Zasshi. 1983 Jul 20;59(7):993-1003.

[Placental tissue concentration of pregnancy-associated proteins in early and
term pregnancies].

[Article in Japanese]

Ito M, Imaizumi H, Hayakawa S, Katou K, Nishiyama Y, Sugiyama Y, Nose Y.

We examined the localization of five pregnancy-associated proteins such as
pregnancy specific beta 1-glycoprotein (SP1), human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG),
human placental lactogen (HPL), alpha 2-PA-glycoprotein (SP3) and
pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A (PAPP-A) in the placentae of early and term
pregnancies by means of the PAP method in immunohistochemical technology. It was 
found that the degree of staining of these proteins did not reflect their
concentration in serum at each gestational age. Therefore, the concentrations of 
these proteins in the solution extracted from the placenta were measured. 1)
Placental tissues were fixed with a 10% neutral formaldehyde solution and these
were embedded into paraffin blocks. These specimens were used for the PAP method.
The localizations of five pregnancy-associated proteins from 10 placentae at the 
gestational age of 7 to 10 weeks were compared with those at the gestation age of
38 to 41 weeks from 7 patients. The staining degree of SP1 in free villi was pale
in both early and term pregnancies. HCG was stained deeply in early pregnancy but
pale at term pregnancy. HPL was stained deeply at both gestational ages.
Horseradish peroxidase reaction products from SP1, HCG and HPL were located
chiefly in the syncytiotrophoblast. SP3 was not stained on the placental tissue. 
PAPP-A was stained to a greater extent in the cytotrophoblast in early pregnancy 
but pale in the syncytiotrophoblast at term pregnancy. 2) The concentrations of
SP1, HCG, HPL, SP3 and PAPP-A were measured in the placental tissues in both
early and term pregnancies. Placental tissues were obtained from 24 normal
pregnancy patients aborted artificially at 8 to 11 weeks gestation and from 28
patients terminated by normal deliveries at 38 to 40 weeks gestation. The tissue 
was homogenated with 3 volumes of 1/2 PBS (0.005M phosphate-buffered 0.07M sodium
chloride, pH 7.4). The supernatant was removed after centrifugation and stored at
-20 degrees C until assayed. The concentration of SP1 was measured by single
radial immunodiffusion. That of HCG was assayed by a directed Latex agglutination
test (Gestate Slide Eiken). The concentrations of HPL, SP3 and PAPP-A were
quantified by rocket immunoelectrophoresis. No significant difference in SP1
levels was shown between early and term pregnancies, and the SP1 level was 4.3
+/- 1.3 (mean +/- 1 S.D.) mg/dl at term pregnancy. The HCG level was 1,100 +/-
300 IU/ml in early pregnancy and at least 20-fold higher than that at term
pregnancy.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 6195024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Xenobiotica. 1983 Mar;13(3):139-46.

The metabolism of trans-sobrerol in the rat.

Ventura P, Schiavi M, Serafini S.

The biotransformation of trans-sobrerol, a potent mucofluidifying agent, has been
investigated in rat urine, bile and faeces after single p.o. and i.v.
administration. The identification of the isolated metabolites was carried out by
g.l.c.-mass spectrometry, n.m.r. and i.r. spectroscopy. The metabolic pathways
involve oxidation of the allylic C (sp3) atoms, and mono-beta-glucuronylation of 
the secondary or tertiary alcoholic group. The mono-beta-glucuronides of sobrerol
excreted in bile undergo enterohepatic circulation.

PMID: 6613159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Eur J Biochem. 1983 Jan 1;129(3):637-43.

Characterisation of the spore coat proteins of Dictyostelium discoideum.

Wilkinson DG, Hames BD.

Using a rapid purification protocol designed to minimise proteolysis in vivo and 
in vitro, combined with high-resolution one-dimensional and two-dimensional
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, 11 spore coat proteins have been identified
in Dictyostelium discoideum AX2 spores with apparent molecular weights of 170 000
(SP170), 103 000 (SP103), 97 000 (SP97), 90 000 (SP90), 82 000 (SP82), 76 000
(SP76), 72 000 (SP72), 55 000 (SP55), 39 000 (SP39), 33 000 (SP33) and 3400
(SP3). Control experiments rule out the possibility that any of these components 
are generated by crosslinking or proteolytic degradation artifacts. All of these 
spore coat proteins are disulphide-crosslinked in the spore coat except for
SP103, the majority of which is extracted in the absence of thiol reagent. All of
the spore coat proteins are single polypeptides as judged by two-dimensional
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis except for SP33 which is consistently composed
of four isoelectric variants. SP170, SP103, SP97, SP90, SP82 and SP72 are
extremely acidic with pI values in the range pH 4.5-4.7, SP76 and SP55 are
slightly less acidic with pI values of 5.7 and 5.9 respectively, whilst the four 
SP33 polypeptides have pI values of pH 6.6-7.5. SP170, SP103, SP90, SP82 and SP76
are all glycoproteins as judged both by periodic acid/Schiff staining and
radiolabelling in vivo with mannose, glucosamine and fucose.

PMID: 6825680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Z Mikrosk Anat Forsch. 1983;97(1):65-74.

[Morphological studies of the effect of substance P partial sequences on nerve
tissue culture].

[Article in German]

Lindner G, Grosse G.

Explants of the telencephalon and of the ganglion trigeminale from chick embryos 
were cultivated in the presence of 10(-7) M of substance P partial sequences SP
1-2 (Arg-Pro . 22HCl) and SP3-4 (Lys(Z)-Pro . HCl or Lys-Pro . 2HBr). The
morphology of the living outgrowth in fact the growth of nerve fibers, cell
migration and proliferation was observed. SP1-2 and SP3-4 influenced particularly
the morphology of pns cultures.

PMID: 6195835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Biomed Biochim Acta. 1983;42(1):73-81.

Effect of substance P sequences on isolated neurons of Lymnaea stagnalis.

Richter R, Oehme P.

Effects of peptides and of acetylcholine (Ach) on electrical properties of nerve 
cells were compared using isolated neurons from brain of the freshwater mollusc, 
Lymnaea stagnalis. The peptides included certain partial sequences of Substance P
(SP) and eledoisin (E). The essential C-terminal pentapeptide of eledoisin
(E7-11) did not significantly influence the resting membrane potential (MP). SP
hexapeptide (SP6-11) caused a dramatic depolarization. SP nonapeptide (SP3-11)
had a qualitatively similar effect, but of less magnitude. Both SP6-11 and SP3-11
had a maximal effect on MP when used at a concentration of 10(-6) M. Ach also
caused depolarization of the membrane, but recovery subsequent to wash-out was
shorter after Ach than after peptide. Ach depolarization was blocked by
d-tubocurarine chloride whereas SP6-11-induced depolarization was not
antagonized. Unlike Ach, an eledoisin related peptide (EH) was found to decrease 
discharge rate of spontaneously discharging neurons, and whereas Ach increased
membrane conductance, EH did not. These results would further suggest that Ach
and these neurotropic peptides act via different mechanisms.

PMID: 6192812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Int J Neurosci. 1982 Dec;17(4):199-208.

Subcortical correlates of the auditory brainstem potentials in the monkey:
referential responses.

Velasco M, Velasco F, Pacheco MT, Martinez A, Olvera A.

Referential responses correlated with the vertex auditory brain-stem potentials
(ABSP) were recorded from different brainstem and diencephalic structures of
large monkeys under barbiturate anesthesia. Polarity, latency, and amplitude of
various response components were determined from structures located 2 mm apart
along five different vertical trajectories aiming at the trapezoid body (TB),
superior olivary complex (SOC), mesencephalic reticular formation (MRF), medial
geniculate nucleus thalami (MG), and inferior colliculus (IC). Latency
correlations, amplitude differences, voltage profiles,
current-source-density-distribution, and current flows of the various response
components were subsequently calculated. Subcortical referential responses were
formed by seven initial fast positive components (I, II, A, B, C, D and E) and
one late slow negative component (F) correlated to waves I to VII and SP3 of the 
vertex ABSP respectively. Positive components C and D' also correlated to SP1 and
SN1 of ABSP respectively. Amplitude of component B at contralateral SOC and C, D'
and F at contralateral MRF was significantly larger than those of other
subcortical responses and vertex ABSP. A single component of the subcortical
referential responses accompanied changes in voltage, CSD, and current flows of
various brainstem structures. However, considering only major changes in these
parameters, component B accompanied a voltage positive and a CSD
positive-negative peak and an ascending current flow at the SOC; component C
accompanied similar changes at MRF, and components D' and F accompanied voltage
negative and CSD negative-positive-negative peaks and ascending and descending
current flows at MRF. In contrast, no systematic changes in voltage, CSD and
current flows accompanied components I, II, A, D and E.

PMID: 6820359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1982 Oct;79(19):6052-5.

A single domain of human prostatic acid phosphatase shows antibody-mediated
restoration of catalytic activity.

Choe BK, Dong MK, Walz D, Gleason S, Rose NR.

By limited proteolysis with mouse submaxillaris protease, human prostatic acid
phosphatase (EC 3.1.3.2) was cleaved into three fragments, Sp1, Sp2, and Sp3,
which individually had no enzymatic activity. One of the fragments, Sp3, regained
enzymatic activity after interaction with rabbit antibody to prostatic acid
phosphatase. The Sp3 fragment was purified and characterized as to its molecular 
weight, amino acid composition, and carbohydrate content. The Sp3 fragment
behaved like the parent molecule in L(+)-tartrate affinity and in trapping of a
phosphoryl intermediate. The same Sp3 fragment also bears the most prominent
antigenic determinants. This evidence suggest that Sp3 is the enzymatically
active domain of prostatic acid phosphatase.

PMCID: PMC347050
PMID: 6193513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Chem Biol Interact. 1982 Sep;41(3):327-39.

Metabolism of 1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)-ethane and
1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethane in the mouse.

Gold B, Brunk G.

The metabolites of 1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethane (DDT) and
1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethane (DDD) found in the urine of female
Swiss mice are reported. The metabolites of DDT are DDD,
1-chloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethene (DDMU),
1,1-dichloro-2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethene (DDE), 2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)acetic
acid (DDA), 2-hydroxy-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)acetic acid (alpha OH-DDA) and
2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethanol (DDOH), while DDD afforded DDMU, DDE, DDA, alpha
OH-DDA and DDOH. The relative excreted levels of DDA and DDOH and the absence of 
2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)acetaldehyde (DDCHO) are not consistent with the generally
accepted pathway for DDA formation, which involves sequential metabolism of DDT
and DDD via DDOH to afford DDA. The quantitative results are interpreted to mean 
that DDA is formed by hydroxylation at the chlorinated sp3-side chain carbon of
DDD to give 2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)acetyl chloride (DDA-Cl), which in turn is
hydrolyzed to DDA. The excretion of alpha OH-DDA from both DDT- and DDD-treated
mice has never been previously observed. It is suggested that this metabolite
arises from the initial epoxidation of DDMU, a metabolite of DDT and DDD, to
yield 1,2-epoxy-1-chloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethane (DDMU-epoxide). This
chloroepoxide is then hydrolyzed and oxidized to produce the alpha OH-DDA.

PMID: 7105253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. J Reprod Fertil. 1982 Sep;66(1):299-303.

Photoperiodic suppression of gonadotrophin secretion in castrated male hamsters.

Urbanski HF, Simpson SM.

Male golden hamsters were transferred from long to short days and castrated on
the day of transfer (Group SP0) or 1, 2 or 3 weeks afterwards (Groups SP1, SP2 & 
SP3). Animals in Group LP were castrated and maintained on long days. After 7
weeks of short days, plasma levels of LH and FSH were low in Groups SP1, SP2, and
SP3. In Group SP0 LH output was also low and FSH secretion, although greater than
in Groups SP1, SP2 and SP3, was lower than in the long-day controls (Group LP).
This photoperiodic control of gonadotrophin secretion in castrated hamsters
raises doubts about the significance of hypothetical alterations in
hypothalamo-pituitary sensitivity to sex steroids.

PMID: 6811737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. J Med Chem. 1982 Jan;25(1):68-70.

2,3-dihydro and carbocyclic analogues of tryptamines: interaction with serotonin 
receptors.

Glennon RA, Jacyno JM, Salley JJ Jr.

Several dihydro and carbocyclic analogues of tryptamine were evaluated in order
to determine the role of the heterocyclic portion of the indole nucleus on the
interaction of indolealkylamines with the serotonin receptors of the rat fundus. 
Reduction of the C2--C3 double bond or replacement of the indole nitrogen with an
sp3-hybridized carbon atom results in a 50% decrease in receptor affinity.
Complete removal of the five-membered ring of N,N-dimethyltryptamine reduces
affinity by an order of magnitude. It appears that an intact indole nucleus,
though not entirely necessary, results in an optimal receptor interaction for the
indolealkylamines examined.

PMID: 7086824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Br J Cancer. 1981 Oct;44(4):487-95.

Collaborative study of bronchial tumour-associated antigens.

Gennings JN, Bagshawe KD, Axelsen NH, Sizaret P.

Eleven groups of workers submitted a total of 21 bronchial tumour-associated
antigen preparations and 19 antisera for comparative studies. Many of the
antisera proved to be polyspecific despite absorption procedures. Most of the
antigen preparations contained some material reactive towards a reference
antiserum to normal human serum proteins. While it appeared that no participants 
were studying identical antigen-antibody reactions, several cross-reactivities
were identified in the antisera. When immune reactions to CEA, AFP, NCA,
ferritin, lactoferrin, human pepsin and gastricsin, and the pregnancy proteins,
SP1 and SP3 were excluded by use of reference antisera and
electroimmunoprecipitation methods, there remained 5 antigen-antibody reactions
defining unique antigens. The clinical usefulness of any of these 5 antigens has 
yet to be determined.

PMCID: PMC2010799
PMID: 6170300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Biophys J. 1981 Jun;34(3):465-98.

Structural features and the reaction mechanism of cytochrome oxidase: iron and
copper X-ray absorption fine structure.

Powers L, Chance B, Ching Y, Angiolillo P.

X-ray edge absorption of copper and extended fine structure studies of both
copper and iron centers have been made of cytochrome oxidase from beef heart,
Paracoccus dentrificans, and HB-8 thermophilic bacteria (1-2.5 mM in heme). The
desired redox state (fully oxidized, reduced CO, mixed valence formate and CO) in
the x-ray beam was controlled by low temperature (-140 degrees C) and was
continuously monitored by simultaneous optical spectroscopy and by electron
paramagnetic resonance (EPR) monitoring every 30 min of x-ray exposure. The
structure of the active site, a cytochrome a3-copper pair in fully oxidized and
in mixed valence formate states where they are spin coupled, contains a sulphur
bridge with three ligands 2.60 +/- 0.03 A from Fea3 and 2.18 +/- 0.03 A from
Cua3. The distance between Fea3 and Cua3 is 3.75 +/- 0.05 A, making the sulphur
bond angle 103 degrees reasonable for sp3 sulphur bonding. The Fea3 first shell
has four typical heme nitrogens (2.01 +/- 0.03 A) with a proximal nitrogen at
2.14 +/- 0.03 A. The sixth ligand is the bridging sulphur. The Cua3 first shell
is identical to oxidized stellacyanin containing two nitrogens and a bridging
sulphur. Upon reduction with CO, the active site is identical to reduced
stellacyanin for the Cua3 first shell and contains the sulphur that forms the
bridge in fully oxidized and mixed valence formate states. The Fea3 first shell
is identical to oxyhemoglobin but has CO instead of O2. The other redox centers, 
Fea and the other "EPR detectable" Cu are not observed in higher shells of Fea3. 
Fea has six equidistant nitrogens and Cua has one (or two) nitrogens and three
(or two) sulphurs with typical distances; these ligands change only slight on
reduction. These structures afford the basis for an oxygen reduction mechanism
involving oxy- and peroxy intermediates.

PMCID: PMC1327488
PMID: 6264990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Zentralbl Gynakol. 1981;103(13):758-62.

[Is prognostic information obtainable from serum PZ level with imminent abortion?
(author's transl)].

[Article in German]

Stranz G, Röpcke G.

Reported in this paper are 359 abortion patients and 550 women with normal
pregnancy from whom serum PZ (pregnancy zone protein), SP3, PAG, was determined, 
between 1974 and 1979. Serum PZ failed to enable any safe prognostic assessment
of endangerment to early pregnancy. Evaluable diagnostic information was found to
be not obtainable before the tenth week of pregnancy. Any drop of data below the 
critical limit of 200 mg/l must be taken to indicate with high probability that
pregnancy is no longer intact.

PMID: 7293548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Eur J Biochem. 1980 Aug;109(2):603-12.

Model studies on the coordination of copper in biological systems. The
deprotonated peptide nitrogen as a potential binding site for copper(II).

Kroneck PM, Vortisch V, Hemmerich P.

1. A large number of potentially bidentate and tridentate amides, X-Y-CONH-Z,
were used as model ligands to investigate the complex formation of Cu(II) with
the deprotonated peptide nitrogen in biological molecules. A combination of
potentiometric titration, spectrophotometry and electron paramagnetic resonance
was applied to analyse the structure of the Cu(II) chelates formed at neurtal and
basic pH. 2. By systematic variation of the primary binding function X, the ring 
size of the chelate, and the spatial properties of the C-terminal and N-terminal 
substituents, three classes of amide ligands could be established with reference 
to their capacity for Cu(II)-induced deprotonation of NHCO and metal binding. 3. 
Under physiological conditions of pH, peptide (class A) chelates are only formed 
by those bidentate amide ligands with X being an imidazole (sp2) nitrogen or a
terminal (sp3) amino nitrogen. Mercaptide sulfur must also be considered to
belong in this group of strong copper(II)-binding sites, but in our
low-molecular-weight model ligands the redox equilibrium 2 Cu(II) + 2 RSH in
equilibrium or formed from 2 CU(II) + RSSR + 2 H+ interferes, yielding insoluble 
Cu(I)-S polymers above pH 4. In addition to the unidentate binding strength of X,
entropy effects play an important role. Depending on whether X is an imidazole or
amino nitrogen, only five-membered or six-membered monocyclic chelate structures 
respectively cause coordination of the deprotonated peptide function. 4. Biuret
(class B) Cu(II) chelates are only formed under non-physiological conditions at
pH > 11.5 producing the well known violet chromophores CuIIN4(-). In general
these complexes, which also include the Cu(II) biguanides, show a clearly
resolved electron paramagnetic resonance spectrum with nitrogen superhyperfine
structure. 5. A third class of peptide model ligands (class C) consists of those 
amides where the CuII-X bond does not provide enough thermodynamic stability. The
binding site of these class C amides includes functional groups such as
carboxylate (COO-), methionine sulfur (RSR'), aliphatic or aromatic hydroxyl (OH)
and amide nitrogen (NHCO) itself. When X is a pyridine (sp2) nitrogen or an amino
(sp3) nitrogen, NHCO deprotonation is only promoted in five-membered but not
six-membered ring chelates. On the other hand, a combination of COO- and NH2, as 
in asparagine, will allow deprotonation of NHCO in the presence of Cu(II). And
third, despite a pronounced unidentate affinity of the imidazole nitrogen for
Cu(II), N-acetylhistamine acts as a class C amine, in contrast to
imidazolylacetamide, which forms a stable Cu(II) peptide chelate. This difference
in Cu binding is explained on the basis of space-filling models. These clearly
demonstrate that in the case of the 2:1 complex of Cu(II) with N-acetylhistamine,
the planarity of the ionised peptide function can not be retained in a square
planar arrangement of the two amide ligands around the copper center.

PMID: 6250848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. J Reprod Fertil. 1980 Jul;59(2):437-40.

Placental proteins and steroid hormones in the soluble fraction of human
syncytiotrophoblast plasma membrane.

Johnson PM, Ogbimi AO, Diver MJ, Thomson AW, Bremner RD, Horne CH.

Placental protein 5 (PP5), pregnancy-specific glycoprotein (SP1),
pregnancy-associated alpha 2-glycoprotein (SP3) and chorionic gonadotrophin could
not be demonstrated in appreciable molar quantities in the soluble fraction from 
microvillous plasma membrane preparations isolated from the syncytiotrophoblast
of full-term human placentae. However, progesterone, total oestriol and placental
lactogen may have some association with this membrane.

PMID: 7431301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. J Biol Chem. 1980 Jun 25;255(12):5538-44.

Interaction of thymidylate synthetase with 5-nitro-2'-deoxyuridylate.

Wataya Y, Matsuda A, Santi DV.

5-Nitro-2'-deoxyuridylate (NO2dUMP) is a potent mechanism-based inhibitor of dTMP
synthetase. After formation of a reversible enzymeìnhibitor complex, there is a
rapid first order loss of enzyme activity which can be protected against by the
nucleotide substrate dUMP. From studies of model chemical counterparts and the
NO2dUMPdTMP synthetase complex, it has been demonstrated that a covalent bond is 
formed between a nucleophile of the enzyme and carbon 6 of NO2dUMP. The covalent 
NO2dUMPènzyme complex is sufficiently stable to permit isolation on
nitrocellulose membranes, and dissociates to give unchanged NO2-dUMP with a first
order rate constant of 8.9 x 10(-3) min-1. Dissociation of the complex formed
with [6-3H]NO2dUMP shows a large alpha-secondary isotope effect of 19%, verifying
that within the covalent complex, carbon 6 of the heterocycle is sp3-hybridized. 
The spectral changes which accompany formation of the NO2dUMPènzyme complex
support the structural assignment and, when used to tritrate the binding sites,
demonstrate that 2 mol of NO2dUMP are bound/mol of dimeric enzyme. The
interaction of NO2dUMP with dTMP synthetase is quite different than that of other
mechanism-based inhibitors such as 5-fluoro-2'-deoxyuridylate in that it neither 
requires nor is facilitated by the concomitant interaction of the folate
cofactor, 5,10-CH2-H4folate, and that the covalent complex formed is unstable to 
protein denaturants.

PMID: 6769917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Nucleic Acids Symp Ser. 1980;(8):s55-8.

Use of alpha-secondary isotope effects in nucleophile-promoted reactions of
pyrimidine derivatives; evidence for transient 5,6-dihydropyrimidine
intermediates.

Wataya Y, Kawada R, Itadani A, Hayatsu H, Bruice TW, Garrett C, Matsuda A, Santi 
DV.

alpha-Secondary isotope effect provides a useful tool for detection of transient 
5,6-dihydropyrimidine intermediates which have been indirectly implicated in a
number of chemical and enzymic conversions of pyrimidine heterocycles. The method
involves the use of kinetic secondary alpha-hydrogen isotope effects which are
expected to accompany sp2 to sp3 rehybridization of C-6 of the pyrimidine ring if
they occur prior to or at the rate determining step. Thus, using 6-tritiated
pyrimidines, and measurement of the isotopic ratio of reactant and products,
kT/kH values of 1.15 or greater would be indicative of rehybridization. Using
this method, we have studied the inhibition of thymidylate synthetase by
5-fluorodeoxyuridylate and 5-nitro-deoxyuridylate as well as the chemical and
enzymic dehalogenation of 5-bromodeoxyuridine and 5-bromodeoxyuridylate. Large
secondary isotope effects observed in all of these reactions provided strong
evidence for the formation of 5,6-dihydropyrimidine intermediates.

PMID: 7255197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. J Gynecol Obstet Biol Reprod (Paris). 1980;9(4):419-24.

[Serial levels of HLP, SP1, SP3, and different proteins in pregnancy compared for
their prognostic value (author's transl)].

[Article in French]

Viala JL, Bastide JM, Guibal J, Oudghiri T, Donati R.

A systematic study was carried out on a thousand samples in order to study the
distribution of the levels of HPL, SP1 and SP3 in pregnancy. Levels of alpha
feto-protein and of alpha antitrypsin as well as of orosomucoid were also studied
but only in high-risk pregnancies. When a retrospective study had been carried
out after delivery with the object of finding out the value of these levels it
was shown that only the levels of SP1 and HLP were useful prognostically. SP1
levels were more reliable apparently as an indicator of feto-placental function. 
(HLP is the equivalent of HPL human placental lactogen. HP1 is pregnancy specific
beta 4-glycoprotein and SP3 is alpha 2-acute phase glycoprotein).

PMID: 6161151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. J Gen Virol. 1979 Nov;45(2):515-8.

Electron microscopy of the morphogenesis of Bacillus subtilis bacteriophage SP3.

Shea TB, Harrison B, Seaman E.

The capsid of Bacillus subtilis bacteriophage SP3 is assembled via a prohead
intermediate which subsequently encapsulates DNA and attaches a tail. The prohead
contains a ring-like core structure. The spokes which extend from the core to the
inner prohead surface are thought to form a scaffold for the polymerization of
the prohead. Ninety percent of the proheads are assembled prior to the onset of
DNA encapsulation. The first mature phage particles are observed at 45 min after 
infection; titres of intracellular phage demonstrate their infectivity. The core 
is visible in phage ghosts.

PMID: 120413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1979 Jul 26;563(2):393-9.

Methods for limiting the action of SP3 DNAase and for the determination of the
direction of hydrolysis of processive exonucleases.

Ho NW.

The action of the exonuclease SP3 DNAase is inhibited by chemical modification of
DNA with the cation N-cyclohexyl-N'-beta-(4-methylmorpholinium)-ethylcarbodiimide
(CME). The limited activity of the enzyme on CMA-modified DNA makes it possible
to demonstrate that the enzyme also initiates its attack on
polydeoxyribonucleotides at the 5'-termini. This was determined by the analysis
of the products from the digestion of CME-modified DNA containing labeled
5'-terminal phosphate groups. Such procedure can be adopted as a general approach
for the determination of the direction of hydrolysis of other processive
exonucleases. SP3 DNAase has been shown able to degrade oligo- and
polydeoxyribonucleotides with or without 5'-terminal phosphate groups with equal 
efficiency (Aposhian, H.V., Friedman, N., Nichihara M., Heimer, E.P., and
Nussbaum, A.L. (1970) J. Mol. Biol. 49, 367-379). The present work also shows
that the enzyme can even hydrolyze oligo- and polynucleotides containing
derivatized phosphate groups.

PMID: 111714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Biofizika. 1979 Jan-Feb;24(1):9-14.

[Relationship between the electron structure of phosphates and the problem of ATP
synthesis and utilization].

[Article in Russian]

Goncharova NV, Evstigneev VB.

The nature of macroergic bonds and some problems of ATP formation and utilization
are considered in terms of electron structure of phosphates. The main acting
compound in the ATP synthesis and in the reactions of transfer and utilization of
the energy of macroergic bonds as well, is ATP terminal phosphate or phosphoryl
group which in the free state is a monomeric methaphosphate-ion. High reactive
ability of monomeric methaphosphate-ion, its affinity of lown electrom pairs is
conditioned by the presence of a vacant sp3-orbitals in phosphor atom of
methaphosphate-ion. Therefore in the reactions with ATP participation the
phosphoryl group plays the role of electrophilic agent. Formation of intermediate
methaphosphate-ion preceding the synthesis of ATP from ADP during substrate
phosphorylation results from the breakage of O--P bond, during which both
electrons which form the bond stay in the oxygen atom. Another possible pathway
of methaphosphate-ion formation is the ejaction of the electron from
ortophosphate dianion with the help of suitable acceptor of the electrons, by
light-stimulated pigment system of chloroplasts or chromatophores or singlet
oxygen liberated during the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide with catalase. Due
to the redistribution of electron density in the phosphate radical the latter
turns into the monomeric methaphosphate-ion bound to ADP with the formation of
ATP.

PMID: 435548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Biochemistry. 1978 Sep 5;17(18):3854-9.

Nitrogen-15 and carbon-13 nuclear magnetic resonance of reduced flavins.
Comparative study with oxidized flavins.

Kawano K, Ohishi N, Suzuki AT, Kyogoku Y, Yagi K.

Nitrogen-15 and carbon-13 nuclear magnetic resonance spectra of the fully reduced
form of flavin were studied with riboflavin tetrabutyrate (RBUT), an organic
solvent-soluble derivative of riboflavin. For the measurement of 15N resonances, 
99% enriched [1,3-15N]RBUT and [1,3,5-15N]RBUT wwere synthesized. In order to
assign the 13C resonances, 90% enriched [2-13C]RBUT, [4a-13C]RBUT,
[4,10a-13C]RBUT, and [8-2H3]RBUT were employed. The upfield shift of N(5)
resonance upon reduction was remarkable (286 ppm), while the N(1) signal moved
only by 79 ppm. The one-bond 15N-H spin-spin coupling constant 1J[15N(5)-H] of
the reduced RBUT was smaller than its 1J[15N(1)-H] and 1J[15N(3)-H]. These
observations indicate that N(5) changed into sp3 hybridization upon reduction and
lost the character of planar nitrogen. Most of the 13C nuclei of the reduced form
resonated at higher field than did those of the oxidized form, which is well
explained by the increase in pi-electron densities. Among the 13C resonances, the
upfield shift of C(4a) was remarkable (32 ppm), which explains the reactivity of 
C(4a) in oxygen flavoprotein complexation. 13C--15N spin-spin coupling constants 
were obtained from the measurements of 13C magnetic resonance of 15N-enriched
RBUT. The values of the one-bond 13C--15N coupling constants increased markedly
with protonation at N(1) and N(5) upon reduction.

PMID: 698202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. J Am Chem Soc. 1976 Mar 31;98(7):1962-4.

Letter: Hydride transfer from NADH models to sp3-hybridized carbon. Competition
with enamine alkylation.

van Bergen TJ, Kellogg RM.

PMID: 176191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. J Am Chem Soc. 1976 Feb 18;98(4):1057-9.

Letter: General base catalysis in nucleophilic attack at sp3 carbon of methylase 
model compounds.

Coward JK, Lok R, Takagi O.

PMID: 1441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1975 Nov 4;407(4):420-9.

Barrier to rotation and conformation of the -NR2 group in cytosine and its
derivatives. Part II. Experimental and theoretical dipole moments of methylated
cytosines.

Kulakowska I, Geller M, Lesyng B, Bolewska K, Wierzchowski KL.

The dipole moments of several cytosine, methylaminocytosine and
dime-thylaminocytosine derivatives with and without an ortho methyl group were
determined experimentally in dioxane and benzene. Calculations of total energies 
and dipole moments were performed by the CNDO/2 and INDO methods for sp2 and sp3 
hybridization of exocyclic nitrogen for different values of rotational angle
phiC-N. Comparison of the experimental dipole moments with those calculated for
the energy minima suggests that the conformation of the dimethylamino group is
not planar and differs from that found in cytosine. 1,5,7-Trimethylcytosine, with
the dipole moment of 7 Deby units, was considered to be the model compound which 
closely reproduces the dipole moment of cytosine.

PMID: 1182183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1975 Nov 4;407(4):407-19.

Barrier to rotation and conformation of the NB2 group in cytosine and its
derivatives. Part I. Theoretical study of cytosine.

Geller M, Lesyng B.

A theoretical investigation of the conformation of the amino group in cytosine
has been performed by the CNDO/2 and INDO methods. The results suggest that from 
the energetical point of view the conformation of the amino group is not stable
in the course of rotation. It changes its hybridization from sp2-like in the
planar case to sp3-like in the transition state. The physical basis of the
barrier to rotation of this group around the C4-N7 bond are discussed. Some
comments on the solvent dependence of the electronic absorption spectra of
cytosine are presented.

PMID: 1182182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Int Arch Allergy Appl Immunol. 1975;48(1):101-15.

Immunological comparison of various human pregnancy-associated plasma proteins.

Lin TM, Halbert SP.

Direct immunodiffusion comparison with specific antisera demonstrated that all of
the four pregnancy-associated plasma proteins (PAPPs) described in our laboratory
are distinct from the pregnancy zone protein (von Schoultz);
alpha2-pregnoglobulin (Berne); pregnancy-associated alpha2-glycoprotein (SP3)
(Bohn); new serum alpha2-macroglobulin (Stimson); PAG (Horne);
pregnancy-associated alpha2-globulin (Kasukawa); Pal (McLaren), and Xh protein
(Dunston). All the latter proved to be immunologically idnetical to each other,
and apparently represent the same protein described under different names. It was
confirmed that none of the PAPPs is immunochemically related to placental
alkaline phosphatase. PAPP-A, PAPP-C, and the pregnancy zone protein, but not HPL
(PAPP-D), showed a decreased anodic mobility when treated with neuraminidase;
their reactivities with antibody were essentially unaffected by the ezyme,
however. Certain detergents had no effect on the immunological reactivities of
the PAPPs and the pregnancy zone protein in whole plasma, while butanol and
desoxycholate partially, and urea, SDS and cetylpyridinium largely inactivated
them.

PMID: 163802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Folia Haematol Int Mag Klin Morphol Blutforsch. 1975;102(4):418-30.

[The estrogen dependence of the pregnancy associated alpha glycoprotein "SP3" and
its occurrence in sera of patients with various malignant and benign diseases].

[Article in German]

Neppert J, Hoffmann L.

The pregnancy associated alpha-2-glycoprotein "SP3" is a macroprotein; the serum 
concentration of which is markedly enhanced by the increase of endogenous and
exogenous estrogen. As regards the bronchial and uterine cancer the frequent
presence of enhanced SP3 serum concentrations in tumour patients can be explained
by an enhanced production of endogenous estrogen. This enhanced production has
been described in literature. SP3 does not occur in healthy men and women without
application of estrogen. In 26% of the cases it can be proved in cases of benign 
disease and in 52% in malignant cases having received no therapy of estrogen.

PMID: 54290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. J Mol Biol. 1970 Apr 28;49(2):367-79.

Sequential cleavage of dinucleotides from DNA by SP3 DNase. 3. Substrate
specificity and initiation of the hydrolysis from the 5-terminus of
polynucleotides.

Aposhian HV, Friedman N, Nishihara M, Heimer EP, Nussbaum AL.

PMID: 4988526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Acta Virol. 1968 Jul;12(4):367-70.

Influence of hydroxylamine and beta-propiolactone on the kinetics of plaque
growth of SP3 and SP8 phages of Bacillus subtilis.

Kaláb D.

PMID: 4386022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1968 May;60(1):214-21.

Sequential cleavage of dinucleotides from DNA by phage Sp3 DNAse.

Trilling DM, Aposhian HV.

PMCID: PMC539104
PMID: 4968633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. J Bacteriol. 1965 Dec;90(6):1655-63.

Characterization of Bacillus subtilis bacteriophages.

Brodetsky AM, Romig WR.

Brodetsky, Anna M. (University of California, Los Angeles), and W. R. Romig.
Characterization of Bacillus subtilis bacteriophages. J. Bacteriol. 90:1655-1663.
1965.-A group of six phages, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, and SP13, which use the
Marburg strain of Bacillus subtilis as host was characterized. These phages,
referred to as group 1, were examined for the following properties: host range,
plaque morphology, stability, adsorption kinetics, one-step growth
characteristics, calcium requirements, serum neutralization, thermal
inactivation, and inactivation by ultraviolet irradiation. Five unrelated B.
subtilis phages, SP3, SP10, PBS1, SP alpha, and SP beta, were included in the
studies. When first isolated, none of the group 1 phages was able to replicate
efficiently on B. subtilis SB19, a mutant of the "transforming" B. subtilis 168. 
Host range mutants capable of growth in SB19 were isolated for all of the group 1
phages except SP13, and are designated the "star" phages (SP5* through SP9*). For
characterization, SB19 was used as host for the star phages, and another B.
subtilis mutant, 168B, was host for SP13.

PMCID: PMC315874
PMID: 4955056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1965 Aug;54(2):622-8.

A deoxyribonuclease found after infection of Bacillus subtilis with phage SP3.

Trilling DM, Aposhian HV.

PMCID: PMC219713
PMID: 4955655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. J Bacteriol. 1964 Nov;88:1230-9.

TEMPERATURE-SENSITIVE MUTANTS OF BACILLUS SUBTILIS BACTERIOPHAGE SP3. II. IN VIVO
COMPLEMENTATION STUDIES.

NISHIHARA M, ROMIG WR.

Nishihara, Mutsuko (University of California, Los Angeles), and W. R. Romig.
Temperature-sensitive mutants of Bacillus subtilis bacteriophage SP3. II. In vivo
complementation studies. J. Bacteriol. 88:1230-1239. 1964.-A plate-spotting
procedure was used in initial attempts to group the temperature-sensitive
Bacillus subtilis phage SP3 mutants by complementation. The results obtained did 
not show any clear patterns of reactions among the mutants. Crosses were,
therefore, repeated in broth at a temperature of 49 C, which greatly reduced the 
extent of replication of each mutant type alone. The data on mixed infections
indicated that there was a minimum of six complementation groups. Of the 12
isolates, 7 did not seem to complement with each other; the rest complemented
with each other and with the seven noncomplementing mutants. There was a positive
correlation between the complementation reaction of a pair and the recovery of
wild-phenotype phages from a 49 C broth lysate. The relative proportion of phages
capable of forming wild-phenotype plaques on plates incubated at 46 C to the
total number of plaque-forming units was higher in a lysate of a mixed infection 
with two mutants than in lysates of each mutant alone. Moreover, this frequency
was higher for a mixed lysate made at 49 C than for a lysate of the same two
mutants made at 37 C. These observations suggested that genetic recombination
might occur at 49 C, and that the increased recovery of wild-phenotype phages in 
lysates made at this temperature might be due to a selective advantage for these 
phages. Recombination experiments at 37 C with some complementing pairs gave
frequencies of 2.0 to 4.8%. The ratio of wild-phenotype revertants to total
phages in the stock lysates used for these crosses at 37 C was less than 10(-6). 
The noncomplementing mutants were not conclusively shown to be nonidentical.

PMCID: PMC277398
PMID: 14234775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. J Bacteriol. 1964 Nov;88:1220-9.

TEMPERATURE-SENSTIVIE MUTANTS OF BACILLUS SUBTILIS BACTERIOPHAGE SP3. I.
ISOLATION AND CHARACTERIZATION.

NISHIHARA M, ROMIG WR.

Nishihara, Mutsuko (University of California, Los Angeles), and W. R. Romig.
Temperature-sensitive mutants of Bacillus subtilis bacteriophage SP3. I.
Isolation and characterization. J. Bacteriol. 88:1220-1229. 1964.-Twelve
temperature-sensitive mutants of Bacillus subtilis bacteriophage SP3 were
isolated from a suspension of the wild type treated with nitrous acid. The
mutants were detected because of an impaired ability to replicate in the host
cell at 45 C, in contrast to the parental wild type which has essentially the
same burst size at temperatures between 37 and 48 C. However, the latent period
of the wild-type phages was decreased as growth temperatures were varied from 37 
to 49 C. The reduction of burst size at temperatures above 48 C is probably the
result of the effect of higher temperatures on the metabolism of the host,
because the bacterial growth rate is decreased between 45 and 51 C. A temperature
effect on the mutants was studied by infecting cells at 45 C, and then
transferring portions of the mixture to 37 C at two time intervals. One transfer 
was made within the expected 45 C latent period, and the other was made about 10 
min after the end of the latent period. In both cases, removal of the
phage-bacterium complexes from the inhibitory condition of high temperature did
not result in an immediate increase of plaque-forming units. A delay was observed
which might correspond to the time necessary to complete the
temperature-sensitive synthesis in the infected cells. In experiments with three 
of the mutants, cells infected at 37 C were transferred to 45 C at various times 
during the 37 C latent period. The extent of inhibition upon transfer to the high
temperature was found to decrease progressively with increasing time of prior
incubation at 37 C.

PMCID: PMC277397
PMID: 14234774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


