
1. J Pharm Sci. 2016 Apr;105(4):1434-43. doi: 10.1016/j.xphs.2016.02.005.

Characterization of Factors Affecting Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis Results With
Synthetic and Protein Nanoparticles.

Krueger AB(1), Carnell P(2), Carpenter JF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Colorado Center for
Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Aurora, Colorado 80045. (2)Malvern Instruments
Ltd., Amesbury, Wiltshire SP4 7RT, UK. (3)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
University of Colorado Center for Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Aurora, Colorado 
80045. Electronic address: John.Carpenter@ucdenver.edu.

In many manufacturing and research areas, the ability to accurately monitor and
characterize nanoparticles is becoming increasingly important. Nanoparticle
tracking analysis is rapidly becoming a standard method for this
characterization, yet several key factors in data acquisition and analysis may
affect results. Nanoparticle tracking analysis is prone to user input and bias on
account of a high number of parameters available, contains a limited analysis
volume, and individual sample characteristics such as polydispersity or complex
protein solutions may affect analysis results. This study systematically
addressed these key issues. The integrated syringe pump was used to increase the 
sample volume analyzed. It was observed that measurements recorded under flow
caused a reduction in total particle counts for both polystyrene and protein
particles compared to those collected under static conditions. In addition, data 
for polydisperse samples tended to lose peak resolution at higher flow rates,
masking distinct particle populations. Furthermore, in a bimodal particle
population, a bias was seen toward the larger species within the sample. The
impacts of filtration on an agitated intravenous immunoglobulin sample and
operating parameters including "MINexps" and "blur" were investigated to optimize
the method. Taken together, this study provides recommendations on instrument
settings and sample preparations to properly characterize complex samples.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 27019960  [PubMed - in process]


2. Vet Rec. 2016 Mar 26;178(13):323. doi: 10.1136/vr.i1690.

Babesia canis infection in ticks in Essex.

Hansford KM(1), Medlock JM(1), Swainsbury C(2), Phipps LP(3), Marco Mdel M(3),
Hernández-Triana LM(3), Johnson N(3), Fooks AR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Entomology and Zoonoses Ecology, Emergency Response Department, Public
Health England, Porton Down SP4 0JG. (2)Forest Veterinary Centre, Eastwick Lodge,
Harlow, Essex CM20 2QT. (3)Animal and Plant Health Agency, Woodham Lane, New Haw,
Surrey KT15 3NB e-mail: Nick.Johnson@apha.gsi.gov.uk.

PMID: 27013570  [PubMed - in process]


3. Ticks Tick Borne Dis. 2016 Mar 2. pii: S1877-959X(16)30036-X. doi:
10.1016/j.ttbdis.2016.02.022. [Epub ahead of print]

First report of Rickettsia raoultii in field collected Dermacentor reticulatus
ticks from Austria.

Duscher GG(1), Hodžic A(2), Weiler M(3), Vaux AG(4), Rudolf I(5), Sixl W(6),
Medlock JM(7), Versteirt V(8), Hubálek Z(9).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Parasitology, Department of Pathobiology, University of
Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Veterinaerplatz 1, 1210 Vienna, Austria. Electronic
address: georg.duscher@vetmeduni.ac.at. (2)Institute of Parasitology, Department 
of Pathobiology, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Veterinaerplatz 1,
1210 Vienna, Austria. Electronic address: adnan.hodzic@vetmeduni.ac.at.
(3)NBC-Defense School, Austrian Armed Forces, Platz der Eisenbahnpioniere 1, 2100
Korneuburg, Austria; Molecular Parasitology, Institute of Specific Prophylaxis
and Tropical Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, Kinderspitalgasse 15,
Vienna, Austria. Electronic address: martin.weiler@gmx.at. (4)Medical Entomology 
and Zoonoses Ecology, Emergency Response Science and Technology, Public Health
England, Porton Down, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, United Kingdom. Electronic address:
Alexander.Vaux@phe.gov.uk. (5)Institute of Vertebrate Biology, v.v.i., Academy of
Sciences of the Czech Republic, Kvetná 8, Brno, Czech Republic. Electronic
address: rudolf@ivb.cz. (6)Institute of Hygiene, University of Graz,
Universitatsplatz 4, A-8010 Graz, Austria. Electronic address:
wolfdieter.sixl@chello.at. (7)Medical Entomology and Zoonoses Ecology, Emergency 
Response Science and Technology, Public Health England, Porton Down, Wiltshire
SP4 0JG, United Kingdom; Health Protection Research Unit in Emerging Infections &
Zoonoses, Public Health England, Porton Down, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, United Kingdom. 
Electronic address: Jolyon.Medlock@phe.gov.uk. (8)Avia-GIS, Risschotlei 33,
Zoersel, Belgium. Electronic address: vversteirt@avia-gis.com. (9)Institute of
Vertebrate Biology, v.v.i., Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Kvetná 8, 
Brno, Czech Republic. Electronic address: zhubalek@brno.cas.cz.

In a set of pooled field collected Dermacentor reticulatus ticks, Rickettsia
raoultii, the causative agent of Tick-borne lymphadenopathy/Dermacentor-borne
necrosis erythema and lymphadenopathy, was found for the first time in Austria.
The coordinates of the positive locations for tick and pathogen abundance are
given and shown in a map.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26976704  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 5. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7925. [Epub ahead of print]

Specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 are non-oncogene 
addiction genes in cancer cells.

Hedrick E(1), Cheng Y(1), Jin UH(1), Kim K(2), Safe S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX 77843, USA. (2)Environmental Health, University of
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA.

Specificity protein (Sp) transcription factor (TF) Sp1 is overexpressed in
multiple tumors and is a negative prognostic factor for patient survival. Sp1 and
also Sp3 and Sp4 are highly expressed in cancer cells and in this study, we have 
used results of RNA interference (RNAi) to show that the three TFs individually
play a role in the growth, survival and migration/invasion of breast, kidney,
pancreatic, lung and colon cancer cell lines. Moreover, tumor growth in athymic
nude mice bearing L3.6pL pancreatic cancer cells as xenografts were significantly
decreased in cells depleted for Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 (combined) or Sp1 alone.
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) of changes in gene expression in Panc1
pancreatic cancer cells after individual knockdown of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4
demonstrates that these TFs regulate genes and pathways that correlated with the 
functional responses observed after knockdown but also some genes and pathways
that inversely correlated with the functional responses. However, causal IPA
analysis which integrates all pathway-dependent changes in all genes strongly
predicted that Sp1-, Sp3- and Sp4-regulated genes were associated with the
pro-oncogenic activity. These functional and genomic results coupled with
overexpression of Sp transcription factors in tumor vs. non-tumor tissues and
decreased Sp1 expression with age indicate that Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 are non-oncogene
addiction (NOA) genes and are attractive drug targets for individual and combined
cancer chemotherapies.

PMID: 26967243  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Int J Vasc Med. 2016;2016:7928681. doi: 10.1155/2016/7928681. Epub 2016 Feb 7.

Dependence of Proximal GC Boxes and Binding Transcription Factors in the
Regulation of Basal and Valproic Acid-Induced Expression of t-PA.

Ulfhammer E(1), Larsson P(1), Magnusson M(1), Karlsson L(1), Bergh N(1), Jern
S(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Wallenberg Laboratory for Cardiovascular Research, Institute of Medicine, 
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, 413 45 Gothenburg, Sweden.

Objective. Endothelial tissue-type plasminogen activator (t-PA) release is a
pivotal response to protect the circulation from occluding thrombosis. We have
shown that the t-PA gene is epigenetically regulated and greatly induced by the
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor valproic acid (VPA). We now investigated
involvement of known t-PA promoter regulatory elements and evaluated dependence
of potential interacting transcription factors/cofactors. Methods. A reporter
vector with an insert, separately mutated at either the t-PA promoter CRE or GC
box II or GC box III elements, was transfected into HT-1080 and HUVECs and
challenged with VPA. HUVECs were targeted with siRNA against histone acetyl
transferases (HAT) and selected transcription factors from the Sp/KLF family.
Results. An intact VPA-response was observed with CRE mutated constructs, whereas
mutation of GC boxes II and III reduced the magnitude of the induction by 54 and 
79% in HT-1080 and 49 and 50% in HUVECs, respectively. An attenuated induction of
t-PA mRNA was observed after Sp2, Sp4, and KLF5 depletion. KLF2 and p300 (HAT)
were identified as positive regulators of basal t-PA expression and Sp4 and KLF9 
as repressors. Conclusion. VPA-induced t-PA expression is dependent on the
proximal GC boxes in the t-PA promoter and may involve interactions with Sp2,
Sp4, and KLF5.

PMCID: PMC4761389
PMID: 26966581  [PubMed]


6. Parasite. 2016;23:10. Epub 2016 Mar 8.

Sero-epidemiological survey of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus in Tunisia.

Wasfi F(1), Dowall S(2), Ghabbari T(3), Bosworth A(2), Chakroun M(4), Varghese
A(2), Tiouiri H(5), Ben Jemaa M(6), Znazen A(6), Hewson R(7), Zhioua E(1),
Letaief A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur de Tunis, Laboratory of Vector Ecology, 13 Place Pasteur,
1002 Tunis, Tunisia. (2)Public Health England, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire 
SP4 0JG, UK. (3)Infectious Diseases Department, Farhat Hached University
Hospital, 4004 Sousse, Tunisia. (4)Infectious Diseases Department, Fatouma
Bourguiba University Hospital, 5000 Monastir, Tunisia. (5)Infectious Diseases
Department, 3000 Sfax, Tunisia. (6)Laboratory of Microbiology, 3000 Sfax,
Tunisia. (7)Public Health England, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK 
- National Institute of Health Research, Health Protection Research Unit in
Emerging and Zoonotic Infections, L3 5RF Liverpool, UK.

Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) is a tick-borne disease associated with a 
high case fatality rate and transmitted mainly by Hyalomma marginatum. The
geographical distribution of H. marginatum covers most of the Western
Mediterranean basin. We aimed to investigate whether CCHF virus (CCHFv) is
circulating in Tunisia. Samples from unexplained acute febrile patients (n = 181)
and a high risk group of humans, mainly slaughter workers (n = 38), were
collected in the summer of 2014 and analyzed for exposure to CCHFv using
serological tests and real-time RT-PCR. Ticks were collected from Northern and
Southern Tunisia during May-June 2014 and examined for the presence of CCHFv by
real-time RT-PCR. Of the 181 febrile patients, 5 showed only high titers of IgM
suggesting a recent exposure to CCHFv. Among 38 slaughter workers, 2 had IgG
anti-CCHFv responses yielding a seroprevalence of 5.2%. No CCHFv was detected in 
ticks and sera. Our results provide evidence of human exposure to CCHFv in
Tunisia.

© F. Wasfi et al., published by EDP Sciences, 2016.

PMCID: PMC4783585
PMID: 26956221  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Vet Rec. 2016 Mar 5;178(10):243-4. doi: 10.1136/vr.i1265.

Babesia canis detected in dogs and associated ticks from Essex.

Phipps LP(1), Del Mar Fernandez De Marco M(1), Hernández-Triana LM(1), Johnson
N(1), Swainsbury C(2), Medlock JM(3), Hansford K(3), Mitchell S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Animal and Plant Health Agency, Woodham Lane, New Haw, Surrey KT15<U+202F>3NB,
e-mail: Nick.Johnson@apha.gsi.gov.uk. (2)Forest Veterinary Centre, Eastwick
Lodge, Harlow, Essex CM20 2QT. (3)Medical Entomology and Zoonoses Ecology,
Emergency Response Department, Public Health England, Porton Down SP4 0JG.
(4)APHA Carmarthen, Jobs Well Road, Johnstown, Carmarthen SA31<U+202F>3EZ.

PMID: 26940416  [PubMed - in process]


8. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2016 Feb 22. pii: AAC.02712-15. [Epub ahead of
print]

A flow cytometry method for rapidly assessing M. tuberculosis responses to
antibiotics with different modes of action.

Hendon-Dunn CL(1), Doris KS(2), Thomas SR(1), Allnutt JC(1), Marriott AA(1),
Hatch KA(1), Watson RJ(1), Bottley G(3), Marsh PD(1), Taylor SC(1), Bacon J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Public Health England, National Infection Service, Porton Down, Salisbury,
Wiltshire, SP4 0JG, UK. (2)National Institute for Biological Standards and
Control, Blanche Lane, South Mimms, Potters Bar, Hertfordshire EN6 3QG.
(3)InCytometry, Moreton Road, Todenham, Gloucestershire, GL56 9NY, UK. (4)Public 
Health England, National Infection Service, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire,
SP4 0JG, UK joanna.bacon@phe.gov.uk.

Current methods for assessing the drug susceptibility of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis are lengthy and do not capture information about viable organisms
that are not immediately culturable under standard laboratory conditions as a
result of antibiotic-exposure. We have developed a rapid dual-fluorescence flow
cytometry method using markers for cell viability and death. We show that the
fluorescent marker, Calcein Violet-AM (CV-AM), could differentiate between
populations of M. tuberculosis growing at different rates, while SYTOX-green (SG)
could differentiate between live and dead mycobacteria. M. tuberculosis was
exposed to isoniazid or rifampicin at different concentrations over time, and
either dual-stained with CV-AM/SG and analysed by flow cytometry or plated to
determine their viability. Although similar trends in the loss of viability were 
observed when the flow cytometry and plate counting methods were compared, there 
was a lack of correlation between these two approaches as the flow cytometry
analysis was potentially capturing information about cell populations that are
unable to grow under standard conditions. The flow cytometry approach had an
additional advantage in that it could provide insights into the mode of action of
the drug; antibiotics targeting the cell wall gave a distinctive flow cytometry
profile compared to those inhibiting intracellular processes. This rapid drug
susceptibility method could identify more effective antimycobacterials, provide
information about their potential mode of action, and accelerate their progress
to the clinic.

Copyright © 2016 Hendon-Dunn et al.

PMID: 26902767  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. EBioMedicine. 2015 Oct 6;2(11):1613-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2015.10.004.
eCollection 2015.

Whole Genome Analysis of Injectional Anthrax Identifies Two Disease Clusters
Spanning More Than 13 Years.

Keim P(1), Grunow R(2), Vipond R(3), Grass G(4), Hoffmaster A(5), Birdsell DN(6),
Klee SR(2), Pullan S(3), Antwerpen M(7), Bayer BN(6), Latham J(7), Wiggins K(8), 
Hepp C(6), Pearson T(6), Brooks T(3), Sahl J(1), Wagner DM(6).

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Microbial Genetics and Genomics, Northern Arizona University,
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-4073, USA; The Pathogen Genomics Division, The Translational 
Genomics Research Institute, 3051 W. Shamrell Blvd, Suite 106, Flagstaff, AZ
86001 USA. (2)The Robert Koch Institute, Berlin, Germany. (3)Public Health
England, Porton Down, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, United Kingdom; NIHR Health Protection
Research Unit in Emerging and Zoonotic Infections, Liverpool L69 7BE, United
Kingdom. (4)Bundeswehr Institute of Microbiology, Munich, Germany. (5)The Center 
for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA. (6)The Center for Microbial
Genetics and Genomics, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 86011-4073,
USA. (7)Public Health England, Porton Down, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, United Kingdom.
(8)The Pathogen Genomics Division, The Translational Genomics Research Institute,
3051 W. Shamrell Blvd, Suite 106, Flagstaff, AZ 86001 USA.

BACKGROUND: Anthrax is a rare disease in humans but elicits great public fear
because of its past use as an agent of bioterrorism. Injectional anthrax has been
occurring sporadically for more than ten years in heroin consumers across
multiple European countries and this outbreak has been difficult to trace back to
a source.
METHODS: We took a molecular epidemiological approach in understanding this
disease outbreak, including whole genome sequencing of Bacillus anthracis
isolates from the anthrax victims. We also screened two large strain repositories
for closely related strains to provide context to the outbreak.
FINDINGS: Analyzing 60 Bacillus anthracis isolates associated with injectional
anthrax cases and closely related reference strains, we identified 1071 Single
Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs). The synapomorphic SNPs (350) were used to
reconstruct phylogenetic relationships, infer likely epidemiological sources and 
explore the dynamics of evolving pathogen populations. Injectional anthrax
genomes separated into two tight clusters: one group was exclusively associated
with the 2009-10 outbreak and located primarily in Scotland, whereas the second
comprised more recent (2012-13) cases but also a single Norwegian case from 2000.
INTERPRETATION: Genome-based differentiation of injectional anthrax isolates
argues for at least two separate disease events spanning > 12 years. The genomic 
similarity of the two clusters makes it likely that they are caused by separate
contamination events originating from the same geographic region and perhaps the 
same site of drug manufacturing or processing. Pathogen diversity within single
patients challenges assumptions concerning population dynamics of infecting B.
anthracis and host defensive barriers for injectional anthrax.
FUNDING: This work was supported by the United States Department of Homeland
Security grant no. HSHQDC-10-C-00,139 and via a binational cooperative agreement 
between the United States Government and the Government of Germany. This work was
supported by funds from the German Ministry of Defense (Sonderforschungsprojekt
25Z1-S-431,214). Support for sequencing was also obtained from Illumina, Inc.
These sources had no role in the data generation or interpretation, and had not
role in the manuscript preparation.
PANEL 1 RESEARCH IN CONTEXT SYSTEMATIC REVIEW: We searched PubMed for any article
published before Jun. 17, 2015, with the terms "Bacillus anthracis" and "heroin",
or "injectional anthrax". Other than our previously published work (Price et al.,
2012), we found no other relevant studies on elucidating the global phylogenetic 
relationships of B. anthracis strains associated with injectional anthrax caused 
by recreational heroin consumption of spore-contaminated drug. There were,
however, publically available genome sequences of two strains involved (Price et 
al., 2012, Grunow et al., 2013) and the draft genome sequence of Bacillus
anthracis UR-1, isolated from a German heroin user (Ruckert et al., 2012) with
only limited information on the genotyping of closely related strains (Price et
al., 2012, Grunow et al., 2013).
LAY PERSON INTERPRETATION: Injectional anthrax has been plaguing heroin drug
users across Europe for more than 10 years. In order to better understand this
outbreak, we assessed genomic relationships of all available injectional anthrax 
strains from four countries spanning a > 12 year period. Very few differences
were identified using genome-based analysis, but these differentiated the
isolates into two distinct clusters. This strongly supports a hypothesis of at
least two separate anthrax spore contamination events perhaps during the drug
production processes. Identification of two events would not have been possible
from standard epidemiological analysis. These comprehensive data will be
invaluable for classifying future injectional anthrax isolates and for future
geographic attribution.

PMCID: PMC4740342
PMID: 26870786  [PubMed - in process]


10. Biomed Microdevices. 2016 Feb;18(1):18. doi: 10.1007/s10544-016-0031-9.

Simple and rapid sample preparation system for the molecular detection of
antibiotic resistant pathogens in human urine.

Valiadi M(1,)(2), Kalsi S(1,)(2), Jones IG(1,)(2), Turner C(3), Sutton JM(3),
Morgan H(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Electronics and Computer Science, University of Southampton, Southampton, SO17
1BJ, UK. (2)Institute for Life Sciences, University of Southampton, Southampton, 
SO17 1BJ, UK. (3)National Infections Service, Public Health England, Porton Down,
Salisbury, SP4 0JG, UK. (4)Electronics and Computer Science, University of
Southampton, Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK. hm@ecs.soton.ac.uk. (5)Institute for Life
Sciences, University of Southampton, Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK.
hm@ecs.soton.ac.uk.

Antibiotic resistance in urinary tract infections (UTIs) can cause significant
complications without quick detection and appropriate treatment. We describe a
new approach to capture, concentrate and prepare amplification-ready DNA from
antibiotic resistant bacteria in human urine samples. Klebsiella pneumoniae
NCTC13443 (bla CTX-M-15 positive) spiked into filtered human urine was used as a 
model system. Bacteria were captured using anion exchange diaethylaminoethyl
(DEAE) magnetic microparticles and concentrated 200-fold within ~3.5 min using a 
custom, valve-less microfluidic chip. Eight samples were processed in parallel,
and DNA was released using heat lysis from an integrated resistive heater. The
crude cell lysate was used for real time Recombinase Polymerase Amplification
(RPA) of the bla CTX-M-15 gene. The end to end processing time was approximately 
15 min with a limit of detection of 1000 bacteria in 1 mL urine.

PMCID: PMC4742488
PMID: 26846875  [PubMed - in process]


11. Cytometry A. 2016 Feb 3. doi: 10.1002/cyto.a.22809. [Epub ahead of print]

Using multispectral imaging flow cytometry to assess an in vitro intracellular
Burkholderia thailandensis infection model.

Jenner D(1), Ducker C(2), Clark G(1), Prior J(1), Rowland CA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Biomedical Sciences Department,
Porton down, Salisbury, SP4 0JQ, United Kingdom. (2)School of Biological
Sciences, The University of Kent, Kent, Canterbury, CT2 7NZ, United Kingdom.

The use of in vitro models to understand the interaction of bacteria with host
cells is well established. In vitro bacterial infection models are often used to 
quantify intracellular bacterial load by lysing cell populations and subsequently
enumerating the bacteria. Modern established techniques employ the use of
fluorescence technologies such as flow cytometry, fluorescent microscopy, and/or 
confocal microscopy. However, these techniques often lack either the
quantification of large data sets (microscopy) or use of gross fluorescence
signal which lacks the visual confirmation that can provide additional confidence
in data sets. Multispectral imaging flow cytometry (MIFC) is a novel emerging
field of technology. This technology captures a bright field and fluorescence
image of cells in a flow using a charged coupled device camera. It allows the
analysis of tens of thousands of single cell images, making it an extremely
powerful technology. Here MIFC was used as an alternative method of analyzing
intracellular bacterial infection using Burkholderia thailandensis E555 as a
model organism. It has been demonstrated that the data produced using traditional
enumeration is comparable to data analyzed using MIFC. It has also been shown
that by using MIFC it is possible to generate other data on the dynamics of the
infection model rather than viable counts alone. It has been demonstrated that it
is possible to inhibit the uptake of bacteria into mammalian cells and identify
differences between treated and untreated cell populations. The authors believe
this to be the first use of MIFC to analyze a Burkholderia bacterial species
during intracellular infection. © 2016 Crown copyright. Published by Wiley
Periodicals Inc. on behalf of ISAC.

© 2015 International Society for Advancement of Cytometry.

PMID: 26841315  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. Nature. 2016 Feb 11;530(7589):228-32. doi: 10.1038/nature16996. Epub 2016 Feb 3.

Real-time, portable genome sequencing for Ebola surveillance.

Quick J, Loman NJ, Duraffour S, Simpson JT, Severi E, Cowley L, Bore JA,
Koundouno R, Dudas G, Mikhail A, Ouédraogo N, Afrough B, Bah A, Baum JH,
Becker-Ziaja B, Boettcher JP, Cabeza-Cabrerizo M, Camino-Sánchez Á, Carter LL,
Doerrbecker J, Enkirch T, García-Dorival I, Hetzelt N, Hinzmann J, Holm T,
Kafetzopoulou LE, Koropogui M, Kosgey A, Kuisma E, Logue CH, Mazzarelli A, Meisel
S, Mertens M, Michel J, Ngabo D, Nitzsche K, Pallasch E, Patrono LV, Portmann J, 
Repits JG, Rickett NY, Sachse A, Singethan K, Vitoriano I, Yemanaberhan RL,
Zekeng EG, Racine T, Bello A, Sall AA, Faye O, Faye O, Magassouba N, Williams CV,
Amburgey V, Winona L, Davis E, Gerlach J, Washington F, Monteil V, Jourdain M,
Bererd M, Camara A, Somlare H, Camara A, Gerard M, Bado G, Baillet B, Delaune D, 
Nebie KY, Diarra A, Savane Y, Pallawo RB, Gutierrez GJ, Milhano N, Roger I,
Williams CJ, Yattara F, Lewandowski K, Taylor J, Rachwal P, Turner DJ, Pollakis
G, Hiscox JA, Matthews DA, O'Shea MK, Johnston AM, Wilson D, Hutley E, Smit E, Di
Caro A, Wölfel R, Stoecker K, Fleischmann E, Gabriel M, Weller SA, Koivogui L,
Diallo B, Keïta S, Rambaut A, Formenty P, Günther S, Carroll MW.

Comment in
    Nature. 2016 Feb 11;530(7589):167.

The Ebola virus disease epidemic in West Africa is the largest on record,
responsible for over 28,599 cases and more than 11,299 deaths. Genome sequencing 
in viral outbreaks is desirable to characterize the infectious agent and
determine its evolutionary rate. Genome sequencing also allows the identification
of signatures of host adaptation, identification and monitoring of diagnostic
targets, and characterization of responses to vaccines and treatments. The Ebola 
virus (EBOV) genome substitution rate in the Makona strain has been estimated at 
between 0.87<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-3) and 1.42<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-3) mutations per site per year. This is
equivalent to 16-27 mutations in each genome, meaning that sequences diverge
rapidly enough to identify distinct sub-lineages during a prolonged epidemic.
Genome sequencing provides a high-resolution view of pathogen evolution and is
increasingly sought after for outbreak surveillance. Sequence data may be used to
guide control measures, but only if the results are generated quickly enough to
inform interventions. Genomic surveillance during the epidemic has been sporadic 
owing to a lack of local sequencing capacity coupled with practical difficulties 
transporting samples to remote sequencing facilities. To address this problem,
here we devise a genomic surveillance system that utilizes a novel nanopore DNA
sequencing instrument. In April 2015 this system was transported in standard
airline luggage to Guinea and used for real-time genomic surveillance of the
ongoing epidemic. We present sequence data and analysis of 142 EBOV samples
collected during the period March to October 2015. We were able to generate
results less than 24 h after receiving an Ebola-positive sample, with the
sequencing process taking as little as 15-60 min. We show that real-time genomic 
surveillance is possible in resource-limited settings and can be established
rapidly to monitor outbreaks.

PMID: 26840485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2016 Feb 2:0. [Epub ahead of print]

Repeated high-dose (5 × 10(8)TCID50) toxicity study, of a third generation
smallpox vaccine (IMVAMUNE), in New Zealand white rabbits.

Tree JA(1), Hall G(1), Rees P(2), Vipond J(1), Funnell SG(1), Roberts AD(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Microbiological Services, Public Health England, Porton Down , Salisbury ,
Wiltshire , SP4 0JG , UK. (2)b Envigo CRS Limited, Barric Lane, Occold , Eye ,
Suffolk , IP23 7PX.

Concern over the release of variola virus as an agent of bioterrorism remains
high and a rapid vaccination regimen is desirable for use in the event of a
confirmed release of virus. A single, high-dose (5×10 (8) TCID50) of Bavarian
Nordic's IMVAMUNE was tested in a Phase-II clinical trial, in humans, as a
substitute for the standard (1×10 (8) TCID50), using a two-dose, 28-days apart
regimen. Prior to this clinical trial taking place a Good Laboratory Practice,
repeated high-dose, toxicology study was performed using IMVAMUNE, in New Zealand
white rabbits and the results are reported here. Male and female rabbits were
dosed twice, subcutaneously, with 5×10 (8) TCID50of IMVAMUNE (test) or saline
(control), 7-days apart. The clinical condition, body-weight, food consumption,
haematology, blood chemistry, immunogenicity, organ-weight, and macroscopic and
microscopic pathology were investigated. Haematological investigations indicated 
changes within the white blood cell profile that were attributed to treatment
with IMVAMUNE; these comprised slight increases in neutrophil and monocyte
numbers, on study days 1-3 and a marginal increase in lymphocyte numbers on day
10. Macroscopic pathology revealed reddening at the sites of administration and
thickened skin in IMVAMUNE, treated animals. After the second dose of IMVAMUNE
9/10 rabbits seroconverted, as detected by antibody ELISA on day 10, by day 21,
10/10 rabbits seroconverted. Treatment-related changes were not detected in other
parameters. In conclusion, the subcutaneous injection of two high-doses of
IMVAMUNE, to rabbits, was well tolerated producing only minor changes at the site
of administration. Vaccinia-specific antibodies were raised in
IMVAMUNE-vaccinated rabbits only.

PMID: 26836234  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Future Med Chem. 2016 Feb;8(2):195-210. doi: 10.4155/fmc.15.173. Epub 2016 Jan
29.

An overview of bacterial efflux pumps and computational approaches to study
efflux pump inhibitors.

Jamshidi S(1), Sutton JM(2), Rahman KM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Science, King's College London, Britannia House, 7
Trinity Street, London, SE1 9NH, UK. (2)Public Health England, National Infection
Service, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JG, UK.

Micro-organisms express a wide range of transmembrane pumps known as multidrug
efflux pumps that improve the micro-organism's ability to survive in severe
environments and contribute to resistance against antibiotic and antimicrobial
agents. There is significant interest in developing efflux inhibitors as an
adjunct to treatment with current and next generation of antibiotics. A greater
understanding of drug recognition and transport by multidrug efflux pumps is
needed to develop clinically useful inhibitors, given the breadth of molecules
that can be effluxed by these systems. We summarize some structural and
functional data that could provide insights into the inhibition of transport
mechanisms of these intricate molecular nanomachines with a focus on the advances
in computational approaches.

PMID: 26824720  [PubMed - in process]


15. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Nov 1;8(11):13834-52. eCollection 2015.

Mixed group of Rhizobiales microbes in lung and blood of a patient with fatal
pulmonary illness.

Lo SC(1), Hung GC(1), Li B(1), Lei H(1), Li T(1), Nagamine K(1), Tsai S(1),
Zucker MJ(2), Olesnicky L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Tissue Microbiology Laboratory, Division of Cellular and Gene Therapies,
Office of Cellular, Tissue and Gene Therapies, Center for Biologics Evaluation
and Research, Food and Drug Administration Silver Spring, Maryland 20993, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Newark Beth Israel Medical Center Newark, New Jersey
07112, USA. (3)Department of Pathology, Newark Beth Israel Medical Center Newark,
New Jersey 07112, USA.

We examined the microbial composition in the diseased lung and early-phase
microbial cultures from the blood of a patient with a rapidly progressing fatal
pulmonary illness. Although no microbes could be isolated from such cultures
during the initial study, the HTS-microbiome study revealed the presence of a
unique mixture of alphaproteobacteria, composed mainly of different families of
Rhizobiales microbes. Microbial 16S rDNA sequences matching closely to Afipia
cberi were identified mainly in the patient's diseased lung tissue, but only
rarely in the early-phase blood cultures. Conversely, the high abundance of
sequences found in early-phase blood cultures of different broth media matched
closely with those of the families Methylobacteriaceae, Phyllobacteriaceae and
Sphingomonadaceae. The two species that successfully adapted to grow in a
laboratory culture system were A. cberi and Mesorhizobium hominis, which
eventually were isolated from a previously cryopreserved blood culture of SP4
broth. Many other species, including members of the Bradyrhizobiaceae and
Phyllobacteriaceae families, and all members of the Methylobacteriaceae and
Sphingomonadaceae families identified by HTS remained non-cultivated. We
developed specific PCR primers and FISH probes, which detected the target
Rhizobiales microbes in former blood cultures and autopsy lung tissues. It is
unclear what role these Rhizobiales microbes might have played in the patient's
complex disease process. However, the above mentioned assays should help in
rapidly detecting and identifying these previously unrecognized Rhizobiales
microbes in patients.

PMCID: PMC4713483
PMID: 26823697  [PubMed - in process]


16. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 2016 Feb;110(2):98-106. doi: 10.1093/trstmh/trv116.

Lack of evidence for the efficacy of enhanced surveillance compared to other
specific interventions to control neonatal healthcare-associated infection
outbreaks.

Birt J(1), Le Doare K(2), Kortsalioudaki C(3), Lawn J(4), Heath PT(3), Sharland
M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Public Health England, Manor Farm Road, Porton Down SP4 0JG, UK Manchester
University, Oxford Rd, Manchester M13 9PL, UK. (2)Public Health England, Manor
Farm Road, Porton Down SP4 0JG, UK St George's University of London, Blackshaw
Road, London SW17 0TE, UK Centre for International Child Health, Imperial College
London, Norfolk Place, London W2 1PG, UK K.mehring-le-doare@ic.ac.uk. (3)St
George's University of London, Blackshaw Road, London SW17 0TE, UK. (4)London
School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Keppel St, London WC1E 7HT, UK.

BACKGROUND: Despite current prevention efforts, outbreaks of
healthcare-associated infections in neonatal units remain high globally, with a
considerable burden of mortality and morbidity.
METHODS: We searched Medline, Cochrane Library and Outbreak database to identify 
studies of neonatal healthcare-associated outbreaks between 2005 and 2015 that
described interventions to control outbreaks. All studies were evaluated using
the ORION guidance.
RESULTS: Thirty studies were identified including 17 102 infants of whom 664
(3.9%) became infected. No single intervention was identified that reduced
duration or mortality. Studies that introduced multiple interventions had
significantly reduced case fatality ratio and outbreak duration compared to those
that used basic surveillance only. Low and low-middle income countries reported
the fewest interventions to control outbreaks and these studies were also
associated with higher mortality than that found in middle and high income
countries.
CONCLUSIONS: Systematic reporting and formal evaluation of interventions used to 
reduce healthcare-associated neonatal infection outbreaks is key to identifying
containment strategies worldwide.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Royal
Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene.

PMCID: PMC4731007
PMID: 26822602  [PubMed - in process]


17. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2016 Jan 27. pii: jnnp-2015-312272. doi:
10.1136/jnnp-2015-312272. [Epub ahead of print]

Genome-wide association study of sporadic brain arteriovenous malformations.

Weinsheimer S(1), Bendjilali N(2), Nelson J(3), Guo DE(3), Zaroff JG(4), Sidney
S(4), McCulloch CE(5), Al-Shahi Salman R(6), Berg JN(7), Koeleman BP(8), Simon
M(9), Bostroem A(9), Fontanella M(10), Sturiale CL(11), Pola R(12), Puca A(11),
Lawton MT(13), Young WL(3), Pawlikowska L(14), Klijn CJ(15), Kim H(16); GEN-AVM
Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Mental Health Center, Sct. Hans MHS-Capital Region of Denmark, Institute of
Biological Psychiatry, Roskilde, Denmark. (2)Department of Mathematics, Rowan
University, Glassboro, New Jersey, USA. (3)Department of Anesthesia and
Perioperative Care, Center for Cerebrovascular Research, University of
California, San Francisco, California, USA. (4)Division of Research, Kaiser
Permanente of Northern California, Oakland, California, USA. (5)Department of
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California, San Francisco,
California, USA. (6)Centre for Clinical Brain Sciences, University of Edinburgh, 
Edinburgh, UK. (7)Department of Clinical Genetics, University of Dundee, Dundee, 
UK. (8)Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. (9)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Bonn Medical Center,
Bonn, Germany. (10)Division of Neurosurgery, University of Torino, University of 
Brescia, Brescia, Italy. (11)Institute of Neurosurgery, Catholic University of
Rome, Rome, Italy. (12)Institute of Medicine, Catholic University of Rome, Rome, 
Italy. (13)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California, San
Francisco, California, USA. (14)Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care, 
Center for Cerebrovascular Research, University of California, San Francisco,
California, USA Institute for Human Genetics, University of California, San
Francisco, California, USA. (15)Department of Neurology, Radboud University
Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (16)Department of Anesthesia and
Perioperative Care, Center for Cerebrovascular Research, University of
California, San Francisco, California, USA Department of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, University of California, San Francisco, California, USA Institute
for Human Genetics, University of California, San Francisco, California, USA.

BACKGROUND: The pathogenesis of sporadic brain arteriovenous malformations
(BAVMs) remains unknown, but studies suggest a genetic component. We estimated
the heritability of sporadic BAVM and performed a genome-wide association study
(GWAS) to investigate association of common single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) with risk of sporadic BAVM in the international, multicentre Genetics of
Arteriovenous Malformation (GEN-AVM) consortium.
METHODS: The Caucasian discovery cohort included 515 BAVM cases and 1191 controls
genotyped using Affymetrix genome-wide SNP arrays. Genotype data were imputed to 
1000 Genomes Project data, and well-imputed SNPs (>0.01 minor allele frequency)
were analysed for association with BAVM. 57 top BAVM-associated SNPs (51 SNPs
with p<10(-05) or p<10(-04) in candidate pathway genes, and 6 candidate BAVM
SNPs) were tested in a replication cohort including 608 BAVM cases and 744
controls.
RESULTS: The estimated heritability of BAVM was 17.6% (SE 8.9%, age and
sex-adjusted p=0.015). None of the SNPs were significantly associated with BAVM
in the replication cohort after correction for multiple testing. 6 SNPs had a
nominal p<0.1 in the replication cohort and map to introns in EGFEM1P, SP4 and
CDKAL1 or near JAG1 and BNC2. Of the 6 candidate SNPs, 2 in ACVRL1 and MMP3 had a
nominal p<0.05 in the replication cohort.
CONCLUSIONS: We performed the first GWAS of sporadic BAVM in the largest BAVM
cohort assembled to date. No GWAS SNPs were replicated, suggesting that common
SNPs do not contribute strongly to BAVM susceptibility. However, heritability
estimates suggest a modest but significant genetic contribution.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 26818729  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


18. J Infect. 2016 Mar;72(3):283-94. doi: 10.1016/j.jinf.2015.12.014. Epub 2016 Jan
4.

Risk factors for Group B Streptococcus colonisation and disease in Gambian women 
and their infants.

Le Doare K(1), Jarju S(2), Darboe S(3), Warburton F(4), Gorringe A(5), Heath
PT(6), Kampmann B(7).

Author information: 
(1)Imperial College, Norfolk Place, London W2 1PG, UK; MRC Unit, Atlantic Road,
Fajara, Gambia; Public Health England, Manor Farm Road, Porton Down SP4 0JG, UK; 
St George's University of London, Cranmer Terrace, London SW17 0RE, UK.
Electronic address: K.mehring-le-doare@ic.ac.uk. (2)MRC Unit, Atlantic Road,
Fajara, Gambia. Electronic address: shjarju@mrc.gm. (3)MRC Unit, Atlantic Road,
Fajara, Gambia. Electronic address: sdarboe@mrc.gm. (4)Public Health England, 61 
Colindale Avenue, London NW9 5EQ, UK. Electronic address:
Fiona.warburton@phe.gov.uk. (5)Public Health England, Manor Farm Road, Porton
Down SP4 0JG, UK. Electronic address: Andrew-gorringe@phe.gov.uk. (6)St George's 
University of London, Cranmer Terrace, London SW17 0RE, UK. Electronic address:
pheath@sgul.ac.uk. (7)Imperial College, Norfolk Place, London W2 1PG, UK; MRC
Unit, Atlantic Road, Fajara, Gambia. Electronic address: b.kampmann@ic.ac.uk.

OBJECTIVES: To determine risk factors for GBS colonisation in Gambian mothers and
in their infants from birth to day 60-89 of age.
METHODS: Swabs and breastmilk from mothers/infant pairs were collected and
cultured on selective agar. Negative samples were analysed for GBS DNA via
real-time PCR. Positive isolates were serotyped using multiplex PCR and
gel-agarose electrophoresis.
RESULTS: Seven hundred and fifty women/infant pairs were recruited. 253 women
(33.7%) were GBS-colonised at delivery. The predominant serotypes were: V (55%), 
II (16%), III (10%), Ia (8%) and Ib (8%). 186 infants were colonised (24.8%) at
birth, 181 (24.1%) at 6 days and 96 at day 60-89 (14%). Infants born before 34
weeks of gestation and to women with rectovaginal and breastmilk colonisation at 
delivery had increased odds of GBS colonisation at birth. Season of birth was
associated with increased odds of persistent infant GBS colonisation (dry season 
vs. wet season AOR 2.9; 95% CI 1.6-5.2).
CONCLUSION: GBS colonisation is common in Gambian women at delivery and in their 
infants to day 60-89 and is dominated by serotype V. In addition to maternal
colonisation, breastmilk and season of birth are important risk factors for
infant GBS colonisation.

Crown Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4769314
PMID: 26763186  [PubMed - in process]


19. Microb Pathog. 2016 Mar;92:50-3. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2015.12.013. Epub 2015
Dec 25.

Survival protein A is essential for virulence in Yersinia pestis.

Southern SJ(1), Scott AE(2), Jenner DC(2), Ireland PM(2), Norville IH(2),
Sarkar-Tyson M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Biomedical Sciences, Porton Down,
Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ, UK. Electronic address:
sjsouthern@mail.dstl.gov.uk. (2)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory,
Biomedical Sciences, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ, UK. (3)Defence
Science and Technology Laboratory, Biomedical Sciences, Porton Down, Salisbury,
Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ, UK; University of Western Australia, QEII Medical Centre,
Nedlands, WA, Australia.

Plague is a highly pathogenic disease caused by the bacterium Yersinia pestis.
There is currently no vaccine available for prophylaxis and antibiotic resistant 
strains have been isolated, thus there is a need for the development of new
countermeasures to treat this disease. Survival protein A (SurA) is a chaperone
that has been linked to virulence in several species of bacteria, including the
close relative Yersinia pseudotuberculosis. In this study, we aimed to evaluate
the role of SurA in virulence of the highly pathogenic Y. pestis by creating an
unmarked surA deletion mutant. The Y. pestis <U+0394>surA mutant was found to be more
susceptible to membrane perturbing agents and was completely avirulent in a mouse
infection model when delivered up to 2.1 × 10(5) CFU by the subcutaneous route.
This provides strong evidence that SurA would make a promising antimicrobial
target.

Crown Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26724738  [PubMed - in process]


20. BMC Struct Biol. 2015 Dec 29;15:24. doi: 10.1186/s12900-015-0051-3.

The crystal structure of the Hazara virus nucleocapsid protein.

Surtees R(1,)(2), Ariza A(3,)(4), Punch EK(5), Trinh CH(6), Dowall SD(7), Hewson 
R(8), Hiscox JA(9,)(10), Barr JN(11), Edwards TA(12).

Author information: 
(1)Public Health England, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JG, UK.
bs06ras@leeds.ac.uk. (2)School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty of
Biological Sciences, and Astbury Centre for Molecular and Structural Biology,
University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK. bs06ras@leeds.ac.uk. (3)School of
Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, and Astbury
Centre for Molecular and Structural Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT,
UK. antonio.ariza@path.ox.ac.uk. (4)Present address: Sir William Dunn School of
Pathology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3RE, UK.
antonio.ariza@path.ox.ac.uk. (5)School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty
of Biological Sciences, and Astbury Centre for Molecular and Structural Biology, 
University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK. bsekp@leeds.ac.uk. (6)School of
Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, and Astbury
Centre for Molecular and Structural Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT,
UK. C.H.Trinh@leeds.ac.uk. (7)Public Health England, Porton Down, Salisbury,
Wiltshire, SP4 0JG, UK. Stuart.Dowall@phe.gov.uk. (8)Public Health England,
Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JG, UK. Roger.Hewson@phe.gov.uk.
(9)School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, and 
Astbury Centre for Molecular and Structural Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds, 
LS2 9JT, UK. Julian.Hiscox@liverpool.ac.uk. (10)Present address: Department of
Infection Biology, Institute of Infection and Global Health, University of
Liverpool, Liverpool, UK. Julian.Hiscox@liverpool.ac.uk. (11)School of Molecular 
and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, and Astbury Centre for
Molecular and Structural Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK.
j.n.barr@leeds.ac.uk. (12)School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty of
Biological Sciences, and Astbury Centre for Molecular and Structural Biology,
University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK. t.a.edwards@leeds.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Hazara virus (HAZV) is a member of the Bunyaviridae family of
segmented negative stranded RNA viruses, and shares the same serogroup as
Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFV). CCHFV is responsible for fatal
human disease with a mortality rate approaching 30 %, which has an increased
recent incidence within southern Europe. There are no preventative or therapeutic
treatments for CCHFV-mediated disease, and thus CCHFV is classified as a hazard
group 4 pathogen. In contrast HAZV is not associated with serious human disease, 
although infection of interferon receptor knockout mice with either CCHFV or HAZV
results in similar disease progression. To characterise further similarities
between HAZV and CCHFV, and support the use of HAZV as a model for CCHFV
infection, we investigated the structure of the HAZV nucleocapsid protein (N) and
compared it to CCHFV N. N performs an essential role in the viral life cycle by
encapsidating the viral RNA genome, and thus, N represents a potential
therapeutic target.
RESULTS: We present the purification, crystallisation and crystal structure of
HAZV N at 2.7 Å resolution. HAZV N was expressed as an N-terminal glutathione
S-transferase (GST) fusion protein then purified using glutathione affinity
chromatography followed by ion-exchange chromatography. HAZV N crystallised in
the P212121 space group with unit cell parameters a = 64.99, b = 76.10, and c =
449.28 Å. HAZV N consists of a globular domain formed mostly of alpha helices
derived from both the N- and C-termini, and an arm domain comprising two long
alpha helices. HAZV N has a similar overall structure to CCHFV N, with their
globular domains superposing with an RMSD = 0.70 Å, over 368 alpha carbons that
share 59 % sequence identity. Four HAZV N monomers crystallised in the asymmetric
unit, and their head-to-tail assembly reveals a potential interaction site
between monomers.
CONCLUSIONS: The crystal structure of HAZV N reveals a close similarity to CCHFV 
N, supporting the use of HAZV as a model for CCHFV. Structural similarity between
the N proteins should facilitate study of the CCHFV and HAZV replication cycles
without the necessity of working under containment level 4 (CL-4) conditions.

PMCID: PMC4696240
PMID: 26715309  [PubMed - in process]


21. Environ Sci Technol. 2016 Jan 19;50(2):961-9. doi: 10.1021/acs.est.5b03966. Epub 
2015 Dec 31.

New Insights on the Influence of Organic Co-Contaminants on the Aquatic
Toxicology of Carbon Nanomaterials.

Sanchís J(1), Olmos M(1), Vincent P(2), Farré M(1), Barceló D(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Environmental Assessment and Water Research (IDAEA-CSIC) ,
C/Jordi Girona, 18-26, 08034 Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain. (2)NanoSight Ltd. ,
Minton Park, London Road, Amesbury, Wiltshire SP4 7RT, United Kingdom. (3)Catalan
Institute of Water Research (ICRA) , C/Emili Grahit, 101, 17003 Girona,
Catalonia, Spain.

At present, there is a lack of understanding of the combined ecotoxicity of
carbon-based nanomaterials and co-contaminants. In this paper, we report on the
toxicity of three carbon nanomaterials (fullerene-soot, multiwall carbon
nanotubes, and graphene). Two standardized toxicity bioassays, the immobilization
of the invertebrate Daphnia magna and the bioluminescence inhibition of the
marine bacteria Vibrio fischeri, have been used. Synergistic and antagonistic
effects of binary mixtures composed of fullerene soot and organic co-contaminants
as malathion, glyphosate, diuron, triclosan, and nonylphenol were assessed. The
isobologram method was used to evaluate the concentrations producing an effect,
in comparison to those effects expected by a simple additive approach. In this
study, antagonism was the predominant effect. However, synergism was also
observed as in the case of D. magna exposed to mixtures of malathion and
fullerene soot. D. magna was shown to be the most sensitive assay when carbon
nanomaterials were present. Toxicity to D. magna was as follows: fullerene soot >
multiwall carbon nanotubes > graphene. These results were proportional to the
size of aggregates, smaller aggregates being the most toxic. The vector function 
of nanomaterials aggregates and the unexpected release inside living organisms
was proven for malathion. These results highlight new insights on the risks
associated with the release of carbon nanomaterials into the environment.

PMID: 26694946  [PubMed - in process]


22. Chem Biol. 2015 Dec 17;22(12):1622-32. doi: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2015.10.015.

Unraveling the B. pseudomallei Heptokinase WcbL: From Structure to Drug
Discovery.

Vivoli M(1), Isupov MN(1), Nicholas R(1), Hill A(1), Scott AE(2), Kosma P(3),
Prior JL(2), Harmer NJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, University of Exeter, Henry Wellcome Building,
Stocker Road, Exeter EX4 4QD, UK. (2)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory,
Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK. (3)University of Natural Resources
and Life Sciences-Vienna, Muthgasse 18, 1190 Vienna, Austria. (4)Department of
Biosciences, University of Exeter, Henry Wellcome Building, Stocker Road, Exeter 
EX4 4QD, UK. Electronic address: n.j.harmer@exeter.ac.uk.

Gram-negative bacteria utilize heptoses as part of their repertoire of
extracellular polysaccharide virulence determinants. Disruption of heptose
biosynthesis offers an attractive target for novel antimicrobials. A critical
step in the synthesis of heptoses is their 1-O phosphorylation, mediated by
kinases such as HldE or WcbL. Here, we present the structure of WcbL from
Burkholderia pseudomallei. We report that WcbL operates through a sequential
ordered Bi-Bi mechanism, loading the heptose first and then ATP. We show that
dimeric WcbL binds ATP anti-cooperatively in the absence of heptose, and
cooperatively in its presence. Modeling of WcbL suggests that heptose binding
causes an elegant switch in the hydrogen-bonding network, facilitating the
binding of a second ATP molecule. Finally, we screened a library of drug-like
fragments, identifying hits that potently inhibit WcbL. Our results provide a
novel mechanism for control of substrate binding and emphasize WcbL as an
attractive anti-microbial target for Gram-negative bacteria.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4691232
PMID: 26687481  [PubMed - in process]


23. BMC Cancer. 2015 Dec 16;15:974. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1956-8.

Sulindac sulfide inhibits colon cancer cell growth and downregulates specificity 
protein transcription factors.

Li X(1), Pathi SS(2), Safe S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology & Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX, 77843-4466, USA. (2)Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation,
825 NE 13th St., Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA. (3)Department of Veterinary
Physiology & Pharmacology, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, 77843-4466,
USA. ssafe@cvm.tamu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors play pivotal roles in 
maintaining the phenotypes of many cancers. We hypothesized that the
antineoplastic effects of sulindac and its metabolites were due, in part, to
targeting downregulation of Sp transcription factors.
METHODS: The functional effects of sulindac, sulindac sulfone and sulindac
sulfide on colon cancer cell proliferation were determined by cell counting.
Effects of these compounds on expression of Sp1, Sp3, Sp4 and pro-oncogenic
Sp-regulated genes were determined by western blot analysis of whole cell lysates
and in transient transfection assays using GC-rich constructs.
RESULTS: Sulindac and its metabolites inhibited RKO and SW480 colon cancer cell
growth and the order of growth inhibitory potency was sulindac sulfide>>sulindac 
sulfone>sulindac. Treatment of SW480 and RKO cells with sulindac sulfide
downregulated expression of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 proteins. Sulindac sulfide also
decreased expression of several Sp-regulated genes that are critical for cancer
cell survival, proliferation and angiogenesis and these include survivin, bcl-2, 
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), cyclin D1, p65 subunit of NF<U+03BA>B and
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Sulindac sulfide also induced reactive
oxygen species (ROS) and decreased the level of microRNA-27a in colon cancer
cells, which resulted in the upregulation of the Sp-repressor ZBTB10 and this
resulted in downregulation of Sp proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that the cancer chemotherapeutic effects of
sulindac in colon cancer cells are due, in part, to its metabolite sulindac
sulfide which downregulates Sp transcription factors and Sp-regulated
pro-oncogenic gene products.

PMCID: PMC4682223
PMID: 26673922  [PubMed - in process]


24. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 16;5:17513. doi: 10.1038/srep17513.

A Novel Inhibitor Prevents the Peripheral Neuroparalysis of Botulinum
Neurotoxins.

Azarnia Tehran D(1), Zanetti G(1), Leka O(1), Lista F(2), Fillo S(2), Binz T(3), 
Shone CC(4), Rossetto O(1), Montecucco C(1,)(5), Paradisi C(6), Mattarei A(6),
Pirazzini M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Via U. Bassi 58/B, 35121, Padova, Italy.
(2)Histology and Molecular Biology Section, Army Medical and Veterinary Research 
Center, Via Santo Stefano Rotondo 4, 00184 Roma, Italy. (3)Institut für
Biochemie, OE 4310, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, 30623 Hannover, Germany.
(4)Public Health England, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 OJG, UK.
(5)Italian National Research Council Institute of Neuroscience, University of
Padova, Via U. Bassi 58/B, 35121, Padova, Italy. (6)Department of Chemical
Sciences, University of Padova, Via F. Marzolo 1, 35131 Padova, Italy.

Botulinum neurotoxins (BoNTs) form a large class of potent and deadly
neurotoxins. Given their growing number, it is of paramount importance to
discover novel inhibitors targeting common steps of their intoxication process.
Recently, EGA was shown to inhibit the action of bacterial toxins and viruses
exhibiting a pH-dependent translocation step in mammalian cells, by interfering
with their entry route. As BoNTs act in the cytosol of nerve terminals, the entry
into an appropriate compartment wherefrom they translocate the catalytic moiety
is essential for toxicity. Herein we propose an optimized procedure to synthesize
EGA and we show that, in vitro, it prevents the neurotoxicity of different BoNT
serotypes by interfering with their trafficking. Furthermore, in mice, EGA
mitigates botulism symptoms induced by BoNT/A and significantly decreases the
lethality of BoNT/B and BoNT/D. This opens the possibility of using EGA as a lead
compound to develop novel inhibitors of botulinum neurotoxins.

PMCID: PMC4680858
PMID: 26670952  [PubMed - in process]


25. BMJ. 2015 Dec 9;351:h6585. doi: 10.1136/bmj.h6585.

Full range of effects of Tasers still needs to be characterised.

Sheridan RD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK 
rdsheridan@dstl.gov.uk.

Comment on
    BMJ. 2015;351:h6070.

PMID: 26656100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Biosci Rep. 2015 Nov 18;36(1). pii: e00294. doi: 10.1042/BSR20150203.

Biochemical and structural characterization of polyphosphate kinase 2 from the
intracellular pathogen Francisella tularensis.

Batten LE(1), Parnell AE(1), Wells NJ(1), Murch AL(2), Oyston PC(3), Roach PL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Southampton, Southampton, SO17 1BJ,
U.K. (2)Department of Chemistry, University of Southampton, Southampton, SO17
1BJ, U.K. Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 
OJQ, U.K. (3)Institute for Life Sciences, University of Southampton, Southampton,
SO17 1BJ, U.K. Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury,
SP4 OJQ, U.K. (4)Department of Chemistry, University of Southampton, Southampton,
SO17 1BJ, U.K. Institute for Life Sciences, University of Southampton,
Southampton, SO17 1BJ, U.K. plr2@soton.ac.uk.

The metabolism of polyphosphate is important for the virulence of a wide range of
pathogenic bacteria and the enzymes of polyphosphate metabolism have been
proposed as an anti-bacterial target. In the intracellular pathogen Francisella
tularensis, the product of the gene FTT1564 has been identified as a
polyphosphate kinase from the polyphosphate kinase 2 (PPK2) family. The isogenic 
deletion mutant was defective for intracellular growth in macrophages and was
attenuated in mice, indicating an important role for polyphosphate in the
virulence of Francisella. Herein, we report the biochemical and structural
characterization of F. tularensis polyphosphate kinase (FtPPK2) with a view to
characterizing the enzyme as a novel target for inhibitors. Using an HPLC-based
activity assay, the substrate specificity of FtPPK2 was found to include purine
but not pyrimidine nts. The activity was also measured using (31)P-NMR. FtPPK2
has been crystallized and the structure determined to 2.23 Å (1 Å=0.1 nm)
resolution. The structure consists of a six-stranded parallel ß-sheet surrounded 
by 12 a-helices, with a high degree of similarity to other members of the PPK2
family and the thymidylate kinase superfamily. Residues proposed to be important 
for substrate binding and catalysis have been identified in the structure,
including a lid-loop and the conserved Walker A and B motifs. The <U+0394>FTT1564 strain
showed significantly increased sensitivity to a range of antibiotics in a manner 
independent of the mode of action of the antibiotic. This combination of
biochemical, structural and microbiological data provide a sound foundation for
future studies targeting the development of PPK2 small molecule inhibitors.

© 2016 Authors.

PMCID: PMC4748334
PMID: 26582818  [PubMed - in process]


27. Bioanalysis. 2015 Nov;7(21):2735-40. doi: 10.4155/bio.15.178. Epub 2015 Nov 13.

The practicalities of a 'fit-for-purpose' validation.

Burton NK(1), Wood SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Q3 Analytical Ltd, Building 115, Tetricus Science Park, Salisbury, Wiltshire, 
SP4 0JQ, UK.

PMID: 26564530  [PubMed - in process]


28. Br J Psychiatry. 2015 Nov 5. pii: bjp.bp.114.152140. [Epub ahead of print]

Specificity proteins 1 and 4, hippocampal volume and first-episode psychosis.

Fusté M(1), Meléndez-Pérez I(1), Villalta-Gil V(1), Pinacho R(1), Villalmanzo
N(1), Cardoner N(1), Menchón JM(1), Haro JM(1), Soriano-Mas C(1), Ramos B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Montserrat Fusté, MBBS, MSc, Unitat de recerca, Parc Sanitari Sant Joan de
Déu, Fundació Sant Joan de Déu, Universitat de Barcelona, CIBERSAM, Sant Boi de
Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain and Department of Psychosis Studies, Institute of
Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK; Iria 
Meléndez-Pérez, MSc, Unitat de recerca, Parc Sanitari Sant Joan de Déu, Fundació 
Sant Joan de Déu, Universitat de Barcelona, CIBERSAM, Sant Boi de Llobregat
(Barcelona), Spain; Victoria Villalta-Gil, PhD, Unitat de recerca, Parc Sanitari 
Sant Joan de Déu, Fundació Sant Joan de Déu, Universitat de Barcelona, CIBERSAM, 
Sant Boi de Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain and Affective Neuroscience Laboratory,
Department of Psychology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, USA;
Raquel Pinacho, MSc, Núria Villalmanzo, Unitat de recerca, Parc Sanitari Sant
Joan de Déu, Fundació Sant Joan de Déu, Universitat de Barcelona, CIBERSAM, Sant 
Boi de Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain; Narcís Cardoner, MD, PhD, José M. Menchón,
MD, PhD, Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute-IDIBELL, Psychiatry Department, 
Bellvitge University Hospital, CIBERSAM and Department of Clinical Sciences,
School of Medicine, University of Barcelona, Spain; Josep Maria Haro, MD, PhD,
Unitat de recerca, Parc Sanitari Sant Joan de Déu, Fundació Sant Joan de Déu,
Universitat de Barcelona, CIBERSAM, Sant Boi de Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain;
Carles Soriano-Mas, PhD, Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute-IDIBELL,
Psychiatry Department, Bellvitge University Hospital, CIBERSAM and Department of 
Psychobiology and Methodology of Health Sciences, Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona, Spain; Belén Ramos, PhD, Unitat de recerca, Parc Sanitari Sant Joan de
Déu, Fundació Sant Joan de Déu, Universitat de Barcelona, CIBERSAM, Sant Boi de
Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain. (2)Montserrat Fusté, MBBS, MSc, Unitat de recerca, 
Parc Sanitari Sant Joan de Déu, Fundació Sant Joan de Déu, Universitat de
Barcelona, CIBERSAM, Sant Boi de Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain and Department of
Psychosis Studies, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's
College London, London, UK; Iria Meléndez-Pérez, MSc, Unitat de recerca, Parc
Sanitari Sant Joan de Déu, Fundació Sant Joan de Déu, Universitat de Barcelona,
CIBERSAM, Sant Boi de Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain; Victoria Villalta-Gil, PhD,
Unitat de recerca, Parc Sanitari Sant Joan de Déu, Fundació Sant Joan de Déu,
Universitat de Barcelona, CIBERSAM, Sant Boi de Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain and 
Affective Neuroscience Laboratory, Department of Psychology, Vanderbilt
University, Nashville, Tennessee, USA; Raquel Pinacho, MSc, Núria Villalmanzo,
Unitat de recerca, Parc Sanitari Sant Joan de Déu, Fundació Sant Joan de Déu,
Universitat de Barcelona, CIBERSAM, Sant Boi de Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain;
Narcís Cardoner, MD, PhD, José M. Menchón, MD, PhD, Bellvitge Biomedical Research
Institute-IDIBELL, Psychiatry Department, Bellvitge University Hospital, CIBERSAM
and Department of Clinical Sciences, School of Medicine, University of Barcelona,
Spain; Josep Maria Haro, MD, PhD, Unitat de recerca, Parc Sanitari Sant Joan de
Déu, Fundació Sant Joan de Déu, Universitat de Barcelona, CIBERSAM, Sant Boi de
Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain; Carles Soriano-Mas, PhD, Bellvitge Biomedical
Research Institute-IDIBELL, Psychiatry Department, Bellvitge University Hospital,
CIBERSAM and Department of Psychobiology and Methodology of Health Sciences,
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Spain; Belén Ramos, PhD, Unitat de recerca,
Parc Sanitari Sant Joan de Déu, Fundació Sant Joan de Déu, Universitat de
Barcelona, CIBERSAM, Sant Boi de Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain bramos@fsjd.org.

We assessed specificity protein 1 (SP1) and 4 (SP4) transcription factor levels
in peripheral blood mononuclear cells and conducted a voxel-based morphometry
analysis on brain structural magnetic resonance images from 11 patients with
first-episode psychosis and 14 healthy controls. We found lower SP1 and SP4
levels in patients, which correlated positively with right hippocampal volume.
These results extend previous evidence showing that such transcription factors
may constitute a molecular pathway to the development of psychosis.

© The Royal College of Psychiatrists 2015.

PMID: 26541691  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


29. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 Jan;1863(1):1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2015.10.005.
Epub 2015 Oct 18.

Specificity protein 4 (Sp4) transcriptionally regulates inhibitory GABAergic
receptors in neurons.

Nair B(1), Johar K(1), Priya A(1), Wong-Riley MT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Road, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA. (2)Department of 
Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of Wisconsin, 8701
Watertown Plank Road, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA. Electronic address: mwr@mcw.edu.

Previous studies in our laboratory have shown that the neuron-specific
specificity protein 4 (Sp4) transcriptionally regulates many excitatory
neurotransmitter receptor subunit genes, such as those for GluN1, GluN2A, and
GluN2B of N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptors and Gria2 of
a-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptors. It also
regulates Atp1a1 and Atp1b1 subunit genes of Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase, a major
energy-consuming enzyme, as well as all 13 subunits of cytochrome c oxidase
(COX), an important energy-generating enzyme. Thus, there is a tight coupling
between energy consumption, energy production, and excitatory neuronal activity
at the transcriptional level in neurons. The question is whether inhibitory
neurotransmitter receptors are also regulated by Sp4. In the present study, we
tested our hypothesis that Sp4 regulates receptor subunit genes of a major
inhibitory neurotransmitter, GABA, specifically GABAA receptors. By means of
multiple approaches, including in silico analysis, electrophoretic mobility shift
and supershift assays, real-time quantitative PCR, chromatin immunoprecipitation,
promoter mutational analysis, over-expression and shRNA of Sp4, functional
assays, and western blots, we found that Sp4 functionally regulates the
transcription of Gabra1 (GABAA a1) and Gabra2 (GABAA a2), but not Gabra3 (GABAA
a3) subunit genes. The binding sites of Sp4 are conserved among rats, humans, and
mice. Thus, our results substantiate our hypothesis that Sp4 plays a key role in 
regulating the transcription of GABAA receptor subunit genes. They also indicate 
that Sp4 is in a position to transcriptionally regulate the balance between
excitatory and inhibitory neurochemical expressions in neurons.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4658289 [Available on 2017-01-01]
PMID: 26469128  [PubMed - in process]


30. Sci Rep. 2015 Oct 13;5:14964. doi: 10.1038/srep14964.

Characterization of spatio-temporal epidural event-related potentials for mouse
models of psychiatric disorders.

Wang X(1), Pinto-Duarte A(1), Behrens MM(1), Zhou X(2), Sejnowski TJ(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and the Salk Institute for Biological Studies,
La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (2)Department of Psychiatry, University of California at
San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. (3)Division of Biological Sciences,
University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Distinctive features in sensory event-related potentials (ERPs) are
endophenotypic biomarkers of psychiatric disorders, widely studied using
electroencephalographic (EEG) methods in humans and model animals. Despite the
popularity and unique significance of the mouse as a model species in basic
research, existing EEG methods applicable to mice are far less powerful than
those available for humans and large animals. We developed a new method for
multi-channel epidural ERP characterization in behaving mice with high precision,
reliability and convenience and report an application to time-domain ERP feature 
characterization of the Sp4 hypomorphic mouse model for schizophrenia. Compared
to previous methods, our spatio-temporal ERP measurement robustly improved the
resolving power of key signatures characteristic of the disease model. The high
performance and low cost of this technique makes it suitable for high-throughput 
behavioral and pharmacological studies.

PMCID: PMC4602219
PMID: 26459883  [PubMed - in process]


31. Curr Pharmacol Rep. 2015 Apr;1(2):73-78. Epub 2015 Jan 11.

MicroRNA-Specificity Protein (Sp) Transcription Factor Interactions and
Significance in Carcinogenesis.

Safe S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
4466 TAMU, College Station, TX 77843-4466 USA, Tel: 979-845-5989, ,
ssafe@cvm.tamu.edu.

Specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors (TFs) such as Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 are
overexpressed in tumors and Sp1 is a negative prognostic factor for multiple
tumor types. Sp TFs regulate expression of pro-oncogenic factors important for
cell proliferation, survival, angiogenesis, migration/invasion and inflammation
and the high expression of Sp TFs in tumors is primarily due to miRNAs. For
example, expression of tumor-suppressor-like miRNAs such as miR-200b/c, miR-335, 
miR-22, miR-149 and others that inactivate Sp1 expression is low in many tumor
types. Research in our laboratory has also demonstrated that high expression of
Sp TFs is also due to miRNA-dependent inhibition of the transcriptional
repressors ZBTB10 and ZBTB4 by miR-27a and miR-20a/miR-17p, respectively. Thus,
miRNAs play a critical role in maintaining high levels of Sp1, Sp3, Sp4 and
pro-oncogenic Sp-regulated genes in tumors and cancer cells, and there is ample
evidence that anticancer agents targeting the miRNASp TF axis can be highly
effective for cancer chemotherapy.

PMCID: PMC4596546
PMID: 26457240  [PubMed]


32. Biosci Rep. 2015 Oct 8;35(6). pii: e00268. doi: 10.1042/BSR20150229.

Biochemical studies on Francisella tularensis RelA in (p)ppGpp biosynthesis.

Wilkinson RC(1), Batten LE(1), Wells NJ(1), Oyston PC(2), Roach PL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Southampton, Southampton, SO17 1BJ,
U.K. (2)Institute for Life Sciences, University of Southampton, Southampton, SO17
1BJ, U.K. DSTL, Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 OJQ, U.K. (3)Department of Chemistry,
University of Southampton, Southampton, SO17 1BJ, U.K. Institute for Life
Sciences, University of Southampton, Southampton, SO17 1BJ, U.K.
plr2@soton.ac.uk.

The bacterial stringent response is induced by nutrient deprivation and is
mediated by enzymes of the RSH (RelA/SpoT homologue; RelA, (p)ppGpp synthetase I;
SpoT, (p)ppGpp synthetase II) superfamily that control concentrations of the
'alarmones' (p)ppGpp (guanosine penta- or tetra-phosphate). This regulatory
pathway is present in the vast majority of pathogens and has been proposed as a
potential anti-bacterial target. Current understanding of RelA-mediated responses
is based on biochemical studies using Escherichia coli as a model. In comparison,
the Francisella tularensis RelA sequence contains a truncated regulatory
C-terminal region and an unusual synthetase motif (EXSD). Biochemical analysis of
F. tularensis RelA showed the similarities and differences of this enzyme
compared with the model RelA from Escherichia coli. Purification of the enzyme
yielded a stable dimer capable of reaching concentrations of 10 mg/ml. In
contrast with other enzymes from the RelA/SpoT homologue superfamily, activity
assays with F. tularensis RelA demonstrate a high degree of specificity for GTP
as a pyrophosphate acceptor, with no measurable turnover for GDP. Steady state
kinetic analysis of F. tularensis RelA gave saturation activity curves that best 
fitted a sigmoidal function. This kinetic profile can result from allosteric
regulation and further measurements with potential allosteric regulators
demonstrated activation by ppGpp (5',3'-dibisphosphate guanosine) with an EC50 of
60±1.9 µM. Activation of F. tularensis RelA by stalled ribosomal complexes formed
with ribosomes purified from E. coli MRE600 was observed, but interestingly,
significantly weaker activation with ribosomes isolated from Francisella
philomiragia.

© 2015 Authors.

PMCID: PMC4708007
PMID: 26450927  [PubMed - in process]


33. Br J Psychiatry. 2015 Oct 8. pii: bjp.bp.114.151688. [Epub ahead of print]

Role played by the SP4 gene in schizophrenia and major depressive disorder in the
Han Chinese population.

Chen J(1), He K(1), Wang Q(1), Li Z(1), Shen J(1), Li T(1), Wang M(1), Wen Z(1), 
Li W(1), Qiang Y(1), Wang T(1), Ji J(1), Wu N(1), Wang Z(1), Zhang B(1), Feng
G(1), He L(1), Xu Y(2), Shi Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Jianhua Chen, MD, PhD, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Psychotic Disorders,
Shanghai Mental Health Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 
and Bio-X Institutes, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and
Neuropsychiatric Disorders (Ministry of Education), Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China; Kuanjun He, PhD, Qingzhong Wang, PhD, Zhiqiang Li,
PhD, Jiawei Shen, PhD, Tao Li, PhD, Meng Wang, MSc, Zujia Wen, PhD, Wenjin Li,
PhD, Yu Qiang, MSc, Ti Wang, PhD, Jue Ji, BS, Na Wu, BS, Zhiqiao Wang, BS, Bo
Zhang, BS, Bio-X Institutes, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and
Neuropsychiatric Disorders (Ministry of Education), Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China; Guoyin Feng, BS, Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Psychotic Disorders, Shanghai Mental Health Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China; Lin He, PhD, Bio-X Institutes, Key
Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and Neuropsychiatric Disorders
(Ministry of Education), Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China; Yifeng
Xu, MD, MSc, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Psychotic Disorders, Shanghai Mental
Health Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China;
Yongyong Shi, PhD, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Psychotic Disorders, Shanghai
Mental Health Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine Bio-X
Institutes, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and Neuropsychiatric
Disorders (Ministry of Education), Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
Shanghai Changning Mental Health Center, Shanghai, Institute of Neuropsychiatric 
Science and Systems Biological Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
and Institute of Social Cognitive and Behavioral Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China. (2)Jianhua Chen, MD, PhD, Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Psychotic Disorders, Shanghai Mental Health Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
School of Medicine, and Bio-X Institutes, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of
Developmental and Neuropsychiatric Disorders (Ministry of Education), Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China; Kuanjun He, PhD, Qingzhong Wang, PhD,
Zhiqiang Li, PhD, Jiawei Shen, PhD, Tao Li, PhD, Meng Wang, MSc, Zujia Wen, PhD, 
Wenjin Li, PhD, Yu Qiang, MSc, Ti Wang, PhD, Jue Ji, BS, Na Wu, BS, Zhiqiao Wang,
BS, Bo Zhang, BS, Bio-X Institutes, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of
Developmental and Neuropsychiatric Disorders (Ministry of Education), Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China; Guoyin Feng, BS, Shanghai Key Laboratory
of Psychotic Disorders, Shanghai Mental Health Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China; Lin He, PhD, Bio-X Institutes,
Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and Neuropsychiatric Disorders
(Ministry of Education), Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China; Yifeng
Xu, MD, MSc, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Psychotic Disorders, Shanghai Mental
Health Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China;
Yongyong Shi, PhD, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Psychotic Disorders, Shanghai
Mental Health Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine Bio-X
Institutes, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and Neuropsychiatric
Disorders (Ministry of Education), Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
Shanghai Changning Mental Health Center, Shanghai, Institute of Neuropsychiatric 
Science and Systems Biological Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
and Institute of Social Cognitive and Behavioral Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China shiyongyong@gmail.com hyyyyb@gmail.com.

BackgroundPsychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia and major depressive
disorder (MDD) are likely to be caused by multiple susceptibility genes, each
with small effects in increasing the risk of illness. Identifying DNA variants
associated with schizophrenia and MDD is a crucial step in understanding the
pathophysiology of these disorders.AimsTo investigate whether the SP4 gene plays 
a significant role in schizophrenia or MDD in the Han Chinese population.MethodWe
focused on nine single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) harbouring the SP4 gene
and carried out case-control studies in 1235 patients with schizophrenia, 1045
patients with MDD and 1235 healthy controls recruited from the Han Chinese
population.ResultsWe found that rs40245 was significantly associated with
schizophrenia in both allele and genotype distributions (Pallele = 0.0005,
Pallele = 0.004 after Bonferroni correction; Pgenotype = 0.0023, Pgenotype =
0.0184 after Bonferroni correction). The rs6461563 SNP was significantly
associated with schizophrenia in the allele distributions (Pallele = 0.0033,
Pallele = 0.0264 after Bonferroni correction).ConclusionsOur results suggest that
common risk factors in the SP4 gene are associated with schizophrenia, although
not with MDD, in the Han Chinese population.

© The Royal College of Psychiatrists 2015.

PMID: 26450579  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


34. Biochem Pharmacol. 2015 Dec 1;98(3):522-30. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2015.09.023. Epub 
2015 Oct 9.

Inhibition of botulinum neurotoxins interchain disulfide bond reduction prevents 
the peripheral neuroparalysis of botulism.

Zanetti G(1), Tehran DA(1), Pirazzini M(1), Binz T(2), Shone CC(3), Fillo S(4),
Lista F(4), Rossetto O(1), Montecucco C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche, Università di Padova, Via U. Bassi 58/B,
35121 Padova, Italy. (2)Institut für Biochemie, OE 4310, Medizinische Hochschule 
Hannover, 30623 Hannover, Germany. (3)Public Health England, Porton Down,
Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 OJG, UK. (4)Histology and Molecular Biology Section,
Army Medical and Veterinary Research Center, Via Santo Stefano Rotondo 4, 00184
Rome, Italy. (5)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche, Università di Padova, Via U. 
Bassi 58/B, 35121 Padova, Italy; Istituto CNR di Neuroscienze, Università di
Padova, Via U. Bassi 58/B, 35121 Padova, Italy. Electronic address:
cesare.montecucco@gmail.com.

Botulinum neurotoxins (BoNTs) form a growing family of metalloproteases with a
unique specificity either for VAMP, SNAP25 or syntaxin. The BoNTs are grouped in 
seven different serotypes indicated by letters from A to G. These neurotoxins
enter the cytosol of nerve terminals via a 100 kDa chain which binds to the
presynaptic membrane and assists the translocation of a 50 kDa metalloprotease
chain. These two chains are linked by a single disulfide bridge which plays an
essential role during the entry of the metalloprotease chain in the cytosol, but 
thereafter it has to be reduced to free the proteolytic activity. Its reduction
is mediated by thioredoxin which is continuously regenerated by its reductase.
Here we show that inhibitors of thioredoxin reductase or of thioredoxin prevent
the specific proteolysis of VAMP by the four VAMP-specific BoNTs: type B, D, F
and G. These compounds are effective not only in primary cultures of neurons, but
also in preventing the in vivo mouse limb neuroparalysis. In addition, one of
these inhibitors, Ebselen, largely protects mice from the death caused by a
systemic injection. Together with recent results obtained with BoNTs specific for
SNAP25 and syntaxin, the present data demonstrate the essential role of the
thioredoxin-thioredoxin reductase system in reducing the interchain disulfide
during the nerve intoxication mechanism of all serotypes. Therefore its
inhibitors should be considered for a possible use to prevent botulism and for
treating infant botulism.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26449594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Nov 13;467(2):341-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.09.155. Epub 2015 Oct 6.

O-GlcNAc modification of Sp3 and Sp4 transcription factors negatively regulates
their transcriptional activities.

Ha C(1), Lim K(2).

Author information: 
(1)ASAN Institute for Life Science, ASAN Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of
Korea. (2)Center for Vaccine Biology and Immunology, University of Rochester
Medical Center, NY 14642, USA. Electronic address: Kihong_Lim@urmc.rochester.edu.

The addition of O-linked N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) on serine or threonine
modifies a myriad of proteins and regulates their function, stability and
localization. O-GlcNAc modification is common among chromosome-associated
proteins, such as transcription factors, suggesting its extensive involvement in 
gene expression regulation. In this study, we demonstrate the O-GlcNAc status of 
the Sp family members of transcription factors and the functional impact on their
transcriptional activities. We highlight the presence of O-GlcNAc residues in Sp3
and Sp4, but not Sp2, as demonstrated by their enrichment in GlcNAc positive
protein fractions and by detection of O-GlcNAc residues on Sp3 and Sp4
co-expressed in Escherichia coli together with O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT) using
an O-GlcNAc-specific antibody. Deletion mutants of Sp3 and Sp4 indicate that the 
majority of O-GlcNAc sites reside in their N-terminal transactivation domain.
Overall, using reporter gene assays and co-immunoprecipitations, we demonstrate a
functional inhibitory role of O-GlcNAc modifications in Sp3 and Sp4 transcription
factors. Thereby, our study strengthens the current notion that O-GlcNAc
modification is an important regulator of protein interactome.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26431879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Sensors (Basel). 2015 Sep 29;15(10):25015-32. doi: 10.3390/s151025015.

Optimisation and Characterisation of Anti-Fouling Ternary SAM Layers for
Impedance-Based Aptasensors.

Miodek A(1), Regan EM(2), Bhalla N(3), Hopkins NA(4), Goodchild SA(5), Estrela
P(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, University of Bath, Bath 
BA2 7AY, UK. a.miodek@bath.ac.uk. (2)Department of Electronic and Electrical
Engineering, University of Bath, Bath BA2 7AY, UK. ed_regan@hotmail.com.
(3)Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, University of Bath, Bath 
BA2 7AY, UK. n.bhalla@bath.ac.uk. (4)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory,
Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JQ, UK. nahopkins@dstl.gov.uk. (5)Defence Science
and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JQ, UK.
sagoodchild@dstl.gov.uk. (6)Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, 
University of Bath, Bath BA2 7AY, UK. p.estrela@bath.ac.uk.

An aptasensor with enhanced anti-fouling properties has been developed. As a case
study, the aptasensor was designed with specificity for human thrombin. The
sensing platform was developed on screen printed electrodes and is composed of a 
self-assembled monolayer made from a ternary mixture of 15-base thiolated DNA
aptamers specific for human thrombin co-immobilised with 1,6-hexanedithiol (HDT) 
and further passivated with 1-mercapto-6-hexanol (MCH). HDT binds to the surface 
by two of its thiol groups forming alkyl chain bridges and this architecture
protects from non-specific attachment of molecules to the electrode surface.
Using Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS), the aptasensor is able to
detect human thrombin as variations in charge transfer resistance (Rct) upon
protein binding. After exposure to a high concentration of non-specific Bovine
Serum Albumin (BSA) solution, no changes in the Rct value were observed,
highlighting the bio-fouling resistance of the surface generated. In this paper, 
we present the optimisation and characterisation of the aptasensor based on the
ternary self-assembled monolayer (SAM) layer. We show that anti-fouling
properties depend on the type of gold surface used for biosensor construction,
which was also confirmed by contact angle measurements. We further studied the
ratio between aptamers and HDT, which can determine the specificity and
selectivity of the sensing layer. We also report the influence of buffer pH and
temperature used for incubation of electrodes with proteins on detection and
anti-fouling properties. Finally, the stability of the aptasensor was studied by 
storage of modified electrodes for up to 28 days in different buffers and
atmospheric conditions. Aptasensors based on ternary SAM layers are highly
promising for clinical applications for detection of a range of proteins in real 
biological samples.

PMCID: PMC4634408
PMID: 26426017  [PubMed - in process]


37. Eur J Pharm Biopharm. 2015 Oct;96:437-41. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpb.2015.09.013. Epub
2015 Sep 28.

Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide-co-allylamine) (PNIPAM-co-ALA) nanospheres for the
thermally triggered release of Bacteriophage K.

Hathaway H(1), Alves DR(1), Bean J(1), Esteban PP(2), Ouadi K(3), Sutton JM(4),
Jenkins AT(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Bath, BA2 7AY, UK. (2)Department of
Chemical Engineering, University of Bath, BA2 7AY, UK. (3)Department of Biology
and Biochemistry, University of Bath, BA2 7AY, UK. (4)Technology Development
Group, Public Health England, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK.
(5)Department of Chemistry, University of Bath, BA2 7AY, UK. Electronic address: 
a.t.a.jenkins@bath.ac.uk.

Due to the increased prevalence of resistant bacterial isolates which are no
longer susceptible to antibiotic treatment, recent emphasis has been placed on
finding alternative modes of treatment of wound infections. Bacteriophage have
long been investigated for their antimicrobial properties, yet the utilization of
phage therapy for the treatment of wound infections relies on a suitable delivery
system. Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM) is a thermally responsive polymer
which undergoes a temperature dependent phase transition at a critical solution
temperature. Bacteriophage K has been successfully formulated with PNIPAM
nanospheres copolymerized with allylamine (PNIPAM-co-ALA). By utilizing a
temperature responsive polymer it has been possible to engineer the nanospheres
to collapse at an elevated temperature associated with a bacterial skin
infection. The nanogels were reacted with surface deposited maleic anhydride in
order to anchor the nanogels to non-woven fabric. Bacteriophage incorporated
PNIPAM-co-ALA nanospheres demonstrated successful bacterial lysis of a clinically
relevant bacterial isolate - Staphylococcus aureus ST228 at 37°C, whilst
bacterial growth was unaffected at 25°C, thus providing a thermally triggered
release of bacteriophage.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26423908  [PubMed - in process]


38. Genome Med. 2015 Sep 28;7:97. doi: 10.1186/s13073-015-0222-7.

The Murray collection of pre-antibiotic era Enterobacteriacae: a unique research 
resource.

Baker KS(1), Burnett E(2), McGregor H(2), Deheer-Graham A(2), Boinett C(1),
Langridge GC(1), Wailan AM(3), Cain AK(1), Thomson NR(1,)(4), Russell JE(2),
Parkhill J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, CB10 1SA, UK. (2)National Collection
of Type Cultures, Public Health England, Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JG, UK.
(3)University of Queensland, St Lucia, QLD, 4072, Australia. (4)Department of
Pathogen Molecular Biology, the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine,
London, UK. (5)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, CB10 1SA, UK.
parkhill@sanger.ac.uk.

Studies of historical isolates inform on the evolution and emergence of important
pathogens and phenotypes, including antimicrobial resistance. Crucial to studying
antimicrobial resistance are isolates that predate the widespread clinical use of
antimicrobials. The Murray collection of several hundred bacterial strains of
pre-antibiotic era Enterobacteriaceae is an invaluable resource of historical
strains from important pathogen groups. Studies performed on the Collection to
date merely exemplify its potential, which will only be realised through the
continued effort of many scientific groups. To enable that aim, we announce the
public availability of the Murray collection through the National Collection of
Type Cultures, and present associated metadata with whole genome sequence data
for over half of the strains. Using this information we verify the metadata for
the collection with regard to subgroup designations, equivalence groupings and
plasmid content. We also present genomic analyses of population structure and
determinants of mobilisable antimicrobial resistance to aid strain selection in
future studies. This represents an invaluable public resource for the study of
these important pathogen groups and the emergence and evolution of antimicrobial 
resistance.

PMCID: PMC4584482
PMID: 26411565  [PubMed - in process]


39. Toxicol In Vitro. 2015 Dec 25;30(1 Pt B):454-61. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2015.09.016. 
Epub 2015 Sep 25.

Effect of exposure area on nerve agent absorption through skin in vitro.

Dalton C(1), Graham S(2), Jenner J(2).

Author information: 
(1)CBR Division, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK. Electronic address:
chdalton@dstl.gov.uk. (2)CBR Division, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.

Diffusion cells are used to determine the penetration of chemicals through skin
in vitro. The cells have a limited surface area defined by the edge of the donor 
chamber. Should the penetrant spread rapidly to this containment limit the
penetration rate can be accurately quantified. For the hazard assessment of small
droplets of toxic chemicals, such as cholinesterase inhibitors, limiting skin
surface spread in vitro could lead to underestimation of percutaneous penetration
and hence underestimation of systemic toxicity in vivo. The current study
investigated the dependency of the percutaneous penetration of undiluted
radiolabelled nerve agents (VX and soman (GD), 10µl) on skin surface spread (pig 
and guinea pig) using Franz-type glass diffusion cells with an area available for
diffusion of either 2.54cm(2) or 14.87cm(2). Both VX and GD spread to the edge of
the 2.54cm(2) cells, but, not the 14.87cm(2) cells over the study duration.
Amounts of VX and GD penetrating pig and guinea pig skin in the 2.54cm(2) cells
were less than in the 14.87cm(2) cells (except for GD under unoccluded
conditions); however, penetration rates expressed per unit area were similar.
Artificial limitation of skin surface spread in vitro does not impact
percutaneous penetration in vitro as long as penetration is expressed in terms of
mass per unit area.

Crown Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26391143  [PubMed - in process]


40. J Int Adv Otol. 2015 Aug;11(2):114-7. doi: 10.5152/iao.2015.426.

Binaural Interaction Component in Speech Evoked Auditory Brainstem Responses.

Uppunda AK(1), Bhat J, D'costa PE, Raj M, Kumar K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Audiology, All India Institute of Speech and Hearing, Mysore,
Karnataka, India. kaushlendra.kumar@manipal.edu.

OBJECTIVE: This article aims to describe the characteristics of the binaural
interaction component (BIC) of speech-evoked auditory brainstem response (ABR).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: All 15 subjects had normal peripheral hearing sensitivity.
ABRs were elicited by speech stimulus /da/.
RESULTS: The first BIC (BIC-SP1) in the speech-evoked ABR occurred at around 6 ms
in the region of peak V. The second BIC (BIC-SP2) was present around 8 ms in the 
latency region of peak A. The third and fourth BICs of speech-evoked ABR (BIC-SP3
& BIC-SP4) were observed at around 36 ms and 46 ms, respectively, in the latency 
regions of peaks E and F, respectively. BIC-SP1 and BIC-SP2 were present in all
subjects tested (100%), whereas BIC-SP3 and BIC-SP4 were present in 11 (73%).
CONCLUSION: Because ABRs are not affected by sleep and mature early, this tool
can be evaluated in identifying binaural interaction in younger and
difficult-to-test populations.

PMID: 26380999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. BMC Genomics. 2015 Sep 15;16(1):691. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1883-8.

Transcriptome analysis of complex I-deficient patients reveals distinct
expression programs for subunits and assembly factors of the oxidative
phosphorylation system.

van der Lee R(1), Szklarczyk R(2,)(3), Smeitink J(4), Smeets HJ(5), Huynen MA(6),
Vogel R(7).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular and Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud Institute for
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud university medical center, PO BOX 9101, 6500 HB,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Robin.vanderLee@radboudumc.nl. (2)Centre for Molecular
and Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences,
Radboud university medical center, PO BOX 9101, 6500 HB, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands. radek.szklarczyk@maastrichtuniversity.nl. (3)Department of Clinical 
Genetics, Unit Clinical Genomics, Maastricht University Medical Centre, 6200 MD, 
Maastricht, The Netherlands. radek.szklarczyk@maastrichtuniversity.nl.
(4)Nijmegen Center for Mitochondrial Disorders, Department of Pediatrics, Radboud
Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud university medical center, PO BOX 
9101, 6500 HB, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. jan.smeitink@radboudumc.nl. (5)Unit
Clinical Genomics, Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, School for Growth and
Development and for Cardiovascular Research, Maastricht University Medical
Centre, Maastricht, The Netherlands. bert.smeets@maastrichtuniversity.nl.
(6)Centre for Molecular and Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud Institute for
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud university medical center, PO BOX 9101, 6500 HB,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Martijn.Huijnen@radboudumc.nl. (7)Nijmegen Center for 
Mitochondrial Disorders, Department of Pediatrics, Radboud Institute for
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud university medical center, PO BOX 9101, 6500 HB,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. rutger.vogel@radboudumc.nl.

BACKGROUND: Transcriptional control of mitochondrial metabolism is essential for 
cellular function. A better understanding of this process will aid the
elucidation of mitochondrial disorders, in particular of the many genetically
unsolved cases of oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) deficiency. Yet, to date
only few studies have investigated nuclear gene regulation in the context of
OXPHOS deficiency. In this study we performed RNA sequencing of two control and
two complex I-deficient patient cell lines cultured in the presence of compounds 
that perturb mitochondrial metabolism: chloramphenicol, AICAR, or resveratrol. We
combined this with a comprehensive analysis of mitochondrial and nuclear gene
expression patterns, co-expression calculations and transcription factor binding 
sites.
RESULTS: Our analyses show that subsets of mitochondrial OXPHOS genes respond
opposingly to chloramphenicol and AICAR, whereas the response of nuclear OXPHOS
genes is less consistent between cell lines and treatments. Across all samples
nuclear OXPHOS genes have a significantly higher co-expression with each other
than with other genes, including those encoding mitochondrial proteins. We found 
no evidence for complex-specific mRNA expression regulation: subunits of
different OXPHOS complexes are similarly (co-)expressed and regulated by a common
set of transcription factors. However, we did observe significant differences
between the expression of nuclear genes for OXPHOS subunits versus assembly
factors, suggesting divergent transcription programs. Furthermore, complex I
co-expression calculations identified 684 genes with a likely role in OXPHOS
biogenesis and function. Analysis of evolutionarily conserved transcription
factor binding sites in the promoters of these genes revealed almost all known
OXPHOS regulators (including GABP, NRF1/2, SP1, YY1, E-box factors) and a set of 
novel candidates (ELK1, KLF7, SP4, EHF, ZNF143, and TEL2).
CONCLUSIONS: OXPHOS genes share an expression program distinct from other genes
encoding mitochondrial proteins, indicative of targeted nuclear regulation of a
mitochondrial sub-process. Within the subset of OXPHOS genes we established a
difference in expression between mitochondrial and nuclear genes, and between
nuclear genes encoding subunits and assembly factors. Most transcription
regulators of genes that co-express with complex I are well-established factors
for OXPHOS biogenesis. For the remaining six factors we here suggest for the
first time a link with transcription regulation in OXPHOS deficiency.

PMCID: PMC4570683
PMID: 26369791  [PubMed - in process]


42. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2015 Nov;46(5):538-45. doi:
10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2015.07.014. Epub 2015 Aug 31.

Evaluation of antibiotic efficacy against infections caused by planktonic or
biofilm cultures of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Klebsiella pneumoniae in Galleria 
mellonella.

Benthall G(1), Touzel RE(2), Hind CK(2), Titball RW(3), Sutton JM(2), Thomas
RJ(3), Wand ME(4).

Author information: 
(1)Public Health England, Microbiology Services Division, Porton Down, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK; College of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of 
Exeter, Exeter, Devon EX4 4QD, UK. (2)Public Health England, Microbiology
Services Division, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK. (3)College of
Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, Devon EX4 4QD, UK.
(4)Public Health England, Microbiology Services Division, Porton Down, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK. Electronic address: matthew.wand@phe.gov.uk.

The lack of novel antibiotics for more than a decade has placed increased
pressure on existing therapies to combat the emergence of multidrug-resistant
(MDR) bacterial pathogens. This study evaluated the Galleria mellonella insect
model in determining the efficacy of available antibiotics against planktonic and
biofilm infections of MDR Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Klebsiella pneumoniae
strains in comparison with in vitro minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC)
determination. In general, in vitro analysis agreed with the G. mellonella
studies, and susceptibility in Galleria identified different drug resistance
mechanisms. However, the carbapenems tested appeared to perform better in vivo
than in vitro, with meropenem and imipenem able to clear K. pneumoniae and P.
aeruginosa infections with strains that had bla(NDM-1) and bla(VIM)
carbapenemases. This study also established an implant model in G. mellonella to 
allow testing of antibiotic efficacy against biofilm-derived infections. A
reduction in antibiotic efficacy of amikacin against K. pneumoniae and P.
aeruginosa biofilms was observed compared with a planktonic infection.
Ciprofloxacin was found to be less effective at clearing a P. aeruginosa biofilm 
infection compared with a planktonic infection, but no statistical difference was
seen between K. pneumoniae biofilm and planktonic infections treated with this
antibiotic (P>0.05). This study provides important information regarding the
suitability of Galleria as a model for antibiotic efficacy testing both against
planktonic and biofilm-derived MDR infections.

Crown Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26364845  [PubMed - in process]


43. Int J Infect Dis. 2015 Nov;40:1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2015.09.003. Epub 2015 Sep
7.

Immune profiling of the progression of a BALB/c mouse aerosol infection by
Burkholderia pseudomallei and the therapeutic implications of targeting HMGB1.

Laws TR(1), Clark GC(1), D'Elia RV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, DSTL Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JQ, UK. (2)Biomedical
Sciences, DSTL Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JQ, UK. Electronic address:
rvdelia@dstl.gov.uk.

INTRODUCTION: The role of damage-associated molecular pattern HMGB1 signalling in
a murine BALB/c model of severe respiratory melioidosis (Burkholderia
pseudomallei infection) was explored in this study.
METHODS: Time course experiments were performed.
RESULTS: It was established that HMGB1 was released in concert with increasing
weight of organs and increasing concentration of liver enzymes in the blood a
short time after cytokine release. Differences in the cytokine response between
organs were observed, where the lungs contained higher concentrations of
chemokines and interleukin 17, while the spleen produced more interferon-gamma,
which is essential in the host defence against B. pseudomallei. This is evidence 
as to why the disease is seemingly more severe in the respiratory form. The
effect of depleting HMGB1 using an antibody was also evaluated. It was found that
this treatment significantly reduced bacterial load in the liver, spleen, and, to
a greater degree, in the lungs. Cytokine quantification indicated that this
reduction in bacterial load is likely due to the treatment reducing the release
of a variety of pro-inflammatory cytokines.
CONCLUSION: It is concluded that anti-HMGB1 treatment would be effective
alongside other therapeutics, where it would reduce the characteristic
over-inflammation associated with late stage infection.

Crown Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26358857  [PubMed - in process]


44. Toxicol Lett. 2016 Feb 26;244:154-60. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2015.08.013. Epub
2015 Sep 19.

Pharmacokinetic profile and quantitation of protection against soman poisoning by
the antinicotinic compound MB327 in the guinea-pig.

Price ME(1), Docx CJ(2), Rice H(2), Fairhall SJ(2), Poole SJ(2), Bird M(2),
Whiley L(2), Flint DP(2), Green AC(2), Timperley CM(2), Tattersall JE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Chemical, Biological and Radiological Division, Defence Science and Technology
Laboratory (DSTL), Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK. Electronic
address: meprice1@dstl.gov.uk. (2)Chemical, Biological and Radiological Division,
Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (DSTL), Porton Down, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK.

Current organophosphorus nerve agent medical countermeasures do not directly
address the nicotinic effects of poisoning. A series of antinicotinic
bispyridinium compounds has been synthesized in our laboratory and screened in
vitro. Their actions can include open-channel block at the nicotinic receptor
which may contribute to their efficacy. The current lead compound from these
studies, MB327 1,1'-(propane-1,3-diyl)bis(4-tert-butylpyridinium) as either the
diiodide (I2) or dimethanesulfonate (DMS) has been examined in vivo for efficacy 
against nerve agent poisoning. MB327 I2 (0-113mgkg(-1)) or the oxime HI-6 DMS
(0-100mgkg(- 1)), in combination with atropine and avizafone (each at 3mgkg(-1)) 
was administered to guinea-pigs 1min following soman poisoning. Treatment
increased the LD50 of soman in a dose-dependent manner. The increase was
statistically significant (p<0.01) at the 33.9mgkg(-1) (MB327) or 30mgkg(-1)
(HI-6) dose with a comparable degree of protection obtained for both compounds.
Following administration of 10mgkg(-1) (i.m.), MB327 DMS reached plasma Cmax of
22µM at 12min with an elimination t1/2 of 22min. In an adverse effect study, in
the absence of nerve agent poisoning, a dose of 100mgkg(-1) or higher of MB327
DMS was lethal to the guinea-pigs. A lower dose of MB327 DMS (30mgkg(-1)) caused 
flaccid paralysis accompanied by respiratory impairment. Respiration normalised
by 30min, although the animals remained incapacitated to 4h. MB327 or related
compounds may be of utility in treatment of nerve agent poisoning as a component 
of therapy with atropine, anticonvulsant and oxime, or alternatively as an
infusion under medical supervision.

Crown Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26325216  [PubMed - in process]


45. Kardiologiia. 2015;55(3):75-84.

[Personalized Risk Assessment of Adverse Cardiovascular Events in Young Patients 
With Connective Tissue Dysplasia].

[Article in Russian]

Druk IV, Nechaeva GI, Oseeva OV, Pomorgailo EG, Maksimov VN, Ivanoshchuk DE,
Gol'tiapin VV.

Adverse cardiovascular manifestations (ACVM) were registered during 7-year
follow-up of young patients with undifferentiated connective tissue dysplasia
(CTD). ACVM developed in 28.42% of patients. Most frequent ACVMs were
extension/aneurysm of the thoracic aorta (10.75%), cerebral vascular syndrome
(10.56%), and arrhythmias (9.11%). Most significant risk factors for
extension/aneurysm of the aorta were pathology of vertebral arteries, common risk
factors (arterial hypertension, alcohol/drugs, smoking, heavy physical work,
sports activities), bicuspid aortic valve); for pathology of cerebral
vessels--completely open Willis' Circle, pathology of vertebral arteries, CTD
related changes of skin and spine, diagnostic CTD coefficient > 23, chronic
diseases of veins; clinically significant cardiac rhythm disturbances--combined
valve manifestations of CTD, myxomatous degeneration of heart valves, pathology
of the aorta, male sex, metabolic changes of the myocardium, deviations of
circadian index, predominance of sympathetic tone, and diastolic dysfunction.
Analysis of clinical characteristics (age, symptoms and severity of CTD, QTc
dispersion = 50 ms) and presence of unfavorable genetic polymorphisms in
ß1-adrenergic receptor gene (Ser49Gly, rs1801252), transcription factor Sp4 gene 
(A80807T, rs1011168), genes of matrix metalloproteinases type 3 (5A/6A) and type 
9 (8202 A/G) allowed to evaluate overall risk of ACVM.

PMID: 26320294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Theriogenology. 2015 Dec;84(9):1536-41. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2015.07.038. Epub 2015 Aug 4.

Sperm head phenotype and male fertility in ram semen.

Maroto-Morales A(1), Ramón M(2), García-Álvarez O(1), Montoro V(1), Soler AJ(1), 
Fernández-Santos MR(1), Roldan ER(3), Pérez-Guzmán MD(2), Garde JJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)SaBio IREC (UCLM-CSIC-JCCM), Campus Universitario, Albacete, Spain.
(2)Regional Center of Animal Selection and Reproduction (CERSYRA) JCCM,
Valdepeñas, Spain. (3)Reproductive Ecology and Biology Group, Museo Nacional de
Ciencias Naturales (CSIC), Madrid, Spain. (4)SaBio IREC (UCLM-CSIC-JCCM), Campus 
Universitario, Albacete, Spain. Electronic address: Julian.garde@uclm.es.

Although there is ample evidence for the effects of sperm head shape on sperm
function, its impact on fertility has not been explored in detail at the
intraspecific level in mammals. Here, we assess the relationship between sperm
head shape and male fertility in a large-scale study in Manchega sheep (Ovis
aries), which have not undergone any selection for fertility. Semen was collected
from 83 mature rams, and before insemination, head shapes were measured for five 
parameters: area, perimeter, length, width, and p2a (perimeter(2)/2×p×area) using
a computer-assisted sperm morphometric analysis. In addition, a cluster analysis 
using sperm head length and p2a factor was performed to determine sperm
subpopulations (SPs) structure. Our results show the existence of four sperm SPs,
which present different sperm head phenotype: SP1 (large and round), SP2 (short
and elongated), SP3 (shortest and round), and SP4 (large and the most elongated).
No relationships were found between males' fertility rates and average values of 
sperm head dimensions. However, differences in fertility rates between rams were 
strongly associated to the proportion of spermatozoa in an ejaculate SP with
short and elongated heads (P < 0.001). These findings show how the heterogeneity 
in sperm head shape of the ejaculate has an effect on reproductive success, and
highlight the important role of modulation of the ejaculate at the intraspecific 
level.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26318229  [PubMed - in process]


47. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 22;6(28):26359-72. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4560.

Specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors and metformin regulate expression 
of the long non-coding RNA HULC.

Gandhy SU(1), Imanirad P(2), Jin UH(1), Nair V(2), Hedrick E(2), Cheng Y(2),
Corton JC(3), Kim K(4), Safe S(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health Sciences Center,
Houston, TX, USA. (2)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas 
A&M University, College Station, TX, USA. (3)Integrated Systems Toxicology
Division, US-EPA, MD B143-06, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA. (4)Department of
Environmental Health, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA.

Specificity protein 1 (Sp1) transcription factor (TF) regulates expression of
long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells. RNA
interference (RNAi) studies showed that among several lncRNAs expressed in HepG2,
SNU-449 and SK-Hep-1 cells, highly upregulated in liver cancer (HULC) was
regulated not only by Sp1 but also Sp3 and Sp4 in the three cell lines. Knockdown
of Sp transcription factors and HULC by RNAi showed that they play important
roles in HCC cell proliferation, survival and migration. The relative
contribution of Sp1, Sp3, Sp4 and HULC on these responses in HepG2, SNU-449 and
SK-Hep-1 cells were cell context- and response-dependent. In the poorly
differentiated SK-Hep-1 cells, knockdown of Sp1 or HULC resulted in genomic and
morphological changes, indicating that Sp1 and Sp1-regulated HULC are important
for maintaining the mesenchymal phenotype in this cell line. Genomic analysis
showed an inverse correlation between expression of genes after knockdown of HULC
and expression of those genes in liver tumors from patients. The antidiabetic
drug metformin down-regulates Sp proteins in pancreatic cancer, and similar
results including decreased HULC expression were observed in HepG2, SNU-449 and
SK-Hep-1 cells treated with metformin, indicating that metformin and other
antineoplastic agents that target Sp proteins may have clinical applications for 
HCC chemotherapy.

PMCID: PMC4694907
PMID: 26317792  [PubMed - in process]


48. J Gen Virol. 2015 Aug;96(8):1975-8. doi: 10.1099/jgv.0.000241.

In memoriam--Richard M. Elliott (1954-2015).

Brennan B(1), Weber F(2), Kormelink R(3), Schnettler E(1), Bouloy M(4), Failloux 
AB(4), Weaver SC(5), Fazakerley JK(6), Fragkoudis R(6), Harris M(7), Barr JN(7), 
Palese P(8), García-Sastre A(8), Dalziel RG(9), Dutia BM(9), Lowen AC(10), Steel 
J(10), Randall RE(11), Paul Duprex W(12), Rice CM(13), Tesh RB(14), Murphy
FA(14), Ebihara H(15), Vasconcelos PF(16), Nunes MR(16), Fooks AR(17), Smith
GL(18), Goodfellow I(18), Pappu HR(19), Lamb RA(20), Paterson RG(20), Higgs
S(21), Vanlandingham DL(22), Dietzgen RG(23), Stephen Lodmell J(24), Nichol
ST(25), Daly J(26), Ullman DE(27), Plyusnin A(28), Plyusnina A(28), Efstathiou
S(29), Hewson R(30), Tordo N(31), Cherry S(32), Boutell C(1), Hosie MJ(1), Murcia
PR(1), Neil JC(1), Palmarini M(1), Patel AH(1), Willett BJ(1), Kohl A(1),
McLauchlan J(1).

Author information: 
(1)1<U+200B>MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research, Glasgow G61 1QH,
Scotland, UK. (2)2<U+200B>Institute for Virology, FB10 - Veterinary Medicine,
Justus-Liebig University, 35392 Gießen, Germany. (3)3<U+200B>Laboratory of Virology,
Department of Plant Sciences, Wageningen University, 6708 PB Wageningen, The
Netherlands. (4)4<U+200B>Institut Pasteur, 25-28 rue du Dr Roux, 75724 Paris cedex 15,
France. (5)5<U+200B>University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston National Laboratory,
Galveston, TX 77555-0610, USA. (6)6<U+200B>The Pirbright Institute, Pirbright, Woking,
Surrey GU24 0NF, UK. (7)7<U+200B>Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds,
Leeds LS2 9JT, UK. (8)8<U+200B>Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, , New York, NY
10029, USA. (9)9<U+200B>The University of Edinburgh, Easter Bush, Midlothian EH25 9RG,
UK. (10)10<U+200B>Emory University School of Medicine, Rollins Research Center, Atlanta,
Georgia, GA 30322, USA. (11)11<U+200B>Biomolecular Sciences Research Complex, University
of St Andrews, North Haugh, St Andrews KY16 9ST, UK. (12)12<U+200B>Department of
Microbiology, Boston University School of Medicine and National Emerging
Infectious Diseases Laboratories, Boston University, Boston, MA 02118, USA.
(13)13<U+200B>Laboratory of Virology & Infectious Disease, The Rockefeller University,
New York, NY 10065, USA. (14)14<U+200B>Department of Pathology, University of Texas
Medical Branch, Galveston, TX 77555-0609, USA. (15)15<U+200B>Laboratory of Virology,
Division of Intramural Research, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Hamilton, MT 59840, USA. (16)16<U+200B>Seção de
Arbovirologia e Febres Haemorrágicas, Instituto Evandro Chagas, Ministério da
Saúde, CEP 67030000, Ananindeua, Pará, Brasil. (17)17<U+200B>APHA Weybridge, Woodham
Lane, New Haw, Addlestone, Surrey KT15 3NB, UK. (18)18<U+200B>Division of Virology,
Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital,
Cambridge CB2 2QQ, UK. (19)19<U+200B>Department of Plant Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA 99164, USA. (20)20<U+200B>Department of Molecular Biosciences,
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA. (21)21<U+200B>Biosecurity Research
Institute, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS 66506-7600, USA.
(22)22<U+200B>Department of Diagnostic Medicine/Pathobiology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Kansas State University, KS 66506, USA. (23)23<U+200B>The University of
Queensland, St Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia. (24)24<U+200B>Division of Biological
Sciences, University of Montana, Missoula, MT 59812, USA. (25)25<U+200B>Viral Special
Pathogens Branch, Division of High Consequence Pathogens and Pathology, Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, , Atlanta, GA 30329-4027, USA. (26)26<U+200B>School 
of Veterinary Medicine and Science, University of Nottingham, Leicestershire LE12
5RD, UK. (27)27<U+200B>Department of Entomology, University of California, Davis, CA
95616, USA. (28)28<U+200B>Department of Virology, 00014 University of Helsinki, Finland.
(29)29<U+200B>National Institute for Biological Standards and Control, Blanche Lane,
South Mimms, Potters Bar, Hertfordshire EN6 3QG, UK. (30)30<U+200B>Public Health England
- Microbiology Services, , Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG, UK. (31)31<U+200B>WHO
Collaborative Centre for Arboviruses and Viral Haemorrhagic Fevers, OIE Reference
Laboratory for RVFV and CCHFV, Institut Pasteur, 25 rue du Dr Roux, 75724 Paris
cedex 15, France. (32)32<U+200B>University of Pennsylvania, 304K Lynch Laboratories,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

PMID: 26315040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2015 Aug 24. doi: 10.1071/RD15231. [Epub ahead of print]

Effect of seminal plasma proteins on the motile sperm subpopulations in ram
ejaculates.

Luna C, Yeste M, Rivera Del Alamo MM, Domingo J, Casao A, Rodriguez-Gil JE,
Pérez-Pé R, Cebrián-Pérez JA, Muiño-Blanco T.

It has been proposed that seminal plasma proteins (SPP) support survival of ram
spermatozoa, exerting a dual effect, both capacitating and decapacitating. In
this study, changes in motility patterns of ram spermatozoa capacitated in the
presence of epidermal growth factor (EGF) were evaluated. Clustering procedures
were used to determine the presence of sperm subpopulations with specific motion 
characteristics. Four sperm subpopulations (SP) were defined after the
application of a principal component analysis procedure. Progressive spermatozoa 
with high straightness (STR) were found in SP1, reflected in the high linearity
(LIN) and STR values and low amplitude of lateral head movement (ALH; rapid,
non-hyperactivated spermatozoa). SP2 spermatozoa seemed to be starting to acquire
hyperactivated motility, while the SP3 group consisted of rapid, hyperactivated
spermatozoa. SP4 showed less-vigorous spermatozoa, with non-linear motility. The 
addition of SPP before in vitro capacitation with EGF induced a decrease in SP1
and an increase in SP3. However, a reduction in the chlortetracycline-capacitated
sperm rate and protein tyrosine phosphorylation was found, which corroborates
with the hypothesis that the SPP protective effect on spermatozoa is related to
their decapacitating role. These findings allow us to deduce that ram spermatozoa
are able to undergo capacitation with no hyperactivation and that SPP are able to
induce hyperactivation in spermatozoa but maintain them in a decapacitated state.

PMID: 26300553  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


50. J Gen Virol. 2015 Sep;96(9):2693-6. doi: 10.1099/jgv.0.000226. Epub 2015 Jun 30.

Semliki Forest virus and Sindbis virus, but not vaccinia virus, require
glycolysis for optimal replication.

Findlay JS(1), Ulaeto D(1).

Author information: 
(1)CBR Division, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.

Viruses are obligate intracellular pathogens which rely on the cell's machinery
to produce the energy and macromolecules required for replication. Infection is
associated with a modified metabolic profile and one pathway which can be
modified is glycolysis. In this study, we investigated if the glycolysis pathway 
is required for alphavirus replication. Pre-treatment of Vero cells with three
different glycolysis inhibitors (2-deoxyglucose, lonidamine and oxamate) resulted
in a significant reduction (but not abrogation) of Semliki Forest virus and
Sindbis virus replication, but not of the unrelated virus, vaccinia virus.
Reduced virus yield was not associated with any significant cytotoxic effect and 
delayed treatment up to 3<U+200A>h post-infection still resulted in a significant
reduction. This suggested that glycolysis is required for optimal replication of 
alphaviruses by supporting post-entry life cycle steps.

PMID: 26297236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Biosens Bioelectron. 2015 Dec 15;74:996-1004. doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2015.07.076.
Epub 2015 Jul 31.

Comparative investigations for adenovirus recognition and quantification: Plastic
or natural antibodies?

Altintas Z(1), Pocock J(2), Thompson KA(3), Tothill IE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Cranfield University, Cranfield, Bedfordshire, MK43 0AL England, UK.
Electronic address: zeynep.altintas@cranfield.ac.uk. (2)Cranfield University,
Cranfield, Bedfordshire, MK43 0AL England, UK. (3)Public Health England,
Salisbury, SP4 0JG England, UK. (4)Cranfield University, Cranfield, Bedfordshire,
MK43 0AL England, UK. Electronic address: i.tothill@cranfield.ac.uk.

Comparative and comprehensive investigations for adenovirus recognition and
detection were conducted using plastic and natural antibodies to compare three
different strategies. The implementation of molecularly imprinted polymer (MIP)
technology for specific and sensitive recognition of viruses with the combination
of biosensors was reported. Plastic antibodies (MIPs nanoparticles) were produced
for adenovirus by employing a novel solid phase synthesis method. MIP receptors
were then characterised using dynamic light scattering (DLS) and transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) techniques prior to immobilisation on a surface plasmon
resonance (SPR) sensor as affinity receptor for adenovirus detection. Two
different templates were also imprinted as control MIPs (vancomycin-MIP and
MS2-MIP). The specific recognition of adenovirus was investigated in the
concentration range of 0.01-20 pM and the limit of detection was achieved as 0.02
pM. As an alternative to MIP receptors, direct and sandwich assays were developed
for adenovirus quantification using natural antibodies. The detection limit of
direct and sandwich assays were found as 0.3 pM and 0.008 pM, respectively. The
kinetic data analyses were performed for three different adenovirus recognition
methods and cross-reactivity studies were also conducted using MS2 phage as
control virus and an excellent specificity was achieved with all assays types.
This work confirmed the suitability of the MIPs SPR sensor for the detection of
viruses.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26264266  [PubMed - in process]


52. Phys Rev Lett. 2015 Jul 24;115(4):044302. Epub 2015 Jul 21.

Boundary-Layer Effects on Acoustic Transmission Through Narrow Slit Cavities.

Ward GP(1), Lovelock RK(1), Murray AR(1), Hibbins AP(1), Sambles JR(1), Smith
JD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics and Astronomy, Electromagnetic and Acoustic Materials
Group, University of Exeter, Stocker Road, Devon EX4 4QL, United Kingdom.
(2)DSTL, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, United Kingdom.

We explore the slit-width dependence of the resonant transmission of sound in air
through both a slit array formed of aluminum slats and a single open-ended slit
cavity in an aluminum plate. Our experimental results accord well with Lord
Rayleigh's theory concerning how thin viscous and thermal boundary layers at a
slit's walls affect the acoustic wave across the whole slit cavity. By measuring 
accurately the frequencies of the Fabry-Perot-like cavity resonances, we find a
significant 5% reduction in the effective speed of sound through the slits when
an individual viscous boundary layer occupies only 5% of the total slit width.
Importantly, this effect is true for any airborne slit cavity, with the reduction
being achieved despite the slit width being on a far larger scale than an
individual boundary layer's thickness. This work demonstrates that the recent
prevalent loss-free treatment of narrow slit cavities within acoustic
metamaterials is unrealistic.

PMID: 26252688  [PubMed]


53. Vet Rec. 2015 Aug 8;177(6):156. doi: 10.1136/vr.h4227.

Overwintering of the brown dog tick in residential properties in England--raising
awareness.

Hansford KM(1), Pietzsch ME(1), Cull B(1), Medlock JM(1), Wall R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Entomology & Zoonoses Ecology, Emergency Response Department - Science
& Technology, Public Health England, Porton Down SP4 0JG. (2)Veterinary
Parasitology & Ecology Group, Life Sciences Building, University of Bristol,
Bristol BS8 1UG.

PMID: 26251540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Virology. 2015 Nov;485:47-57. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2015.06.031. Epub 2015 Jul 23.

Differential effects of Sp cellular transcription factors on viral promoter
activation by varicella-zoster virus (VZV) IE62 protein.

Khalil MI(1), Ruyechan WT(2), Hay J(2), Arvin A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Microbiology & Immunology, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States; Department of Molecular Biology,
National Research Center EL-Buhouth St., Dokki, Cairo, Egypt. Electronic address:
mkhalil2@stanford.edu. (2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and the
Witebsky Center for Microbial Pathogenesis and Immunology, University at Buffalo,
Buffalo, NY, United States. (3)Departments of Pediatrics and Microbiology &
Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States.

The immediate early (IE) 62 protein is the major varicella-zoster virus (VZV)
regulatory factor. Analysis of the VZV genome revealed 40 predicted GC-rich boxes
within 36 promoters. We examined effects of ectopic expression of Sp1-Sp4 on
IE62- mediated transactivation of three viral promoters. Ectopic expression of
Sp3 and Sp4 enhanced IE62 activation of ORF3 and gI promoters while Sp3 reduced
IE62 activation of ORF28/29 promoter and VZV DNA replication. Sp2 reduced IE62
transactivation of gI while Sp1 had no significant influence on IE62 activation
with any of these viral promoters. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA)
confirmed binding of Sp1 and Sp3 but not Sp2 and Sp4 to the gI promoter. Sp1-4
bound to IE62 and amino acids 238-258 of IE62 were important for the interaction 
with Sp3 and Sp4 as well as Sp1. This work shows that Sp family members have
differential effects on IE62-mediated transactivation in a promoter-dependent
manner.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4619144 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26207799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Neurobiol Dis. 2015 Oct;82:332-41. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2015.07.002. Epub 2015 Jul 
15.

Chronic mild stress and antidepressant treatment alter 5-HT1A receptor expression
by modifying DNA methylation of a conserved Sp4 site.

Le François B(1), Soo J(1), Millar AM(1), Daigle M(1), Le Guisquet AM(2), Leman
S(2), Minier F(2), Belzung C(2), Albert PR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Hospital Research Institute (Neuroscience), University of Ottawa,
Ottawa, ON K1H 8M5, Canada; Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON K1H 8M5, Canada. (2)Inserm U 930, Université
François Rabelais, 37200 Tours, France. (3)Ottawa Hospital Research Institute
(Neuroscience), University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON K1H 8M5, Canada; Department of
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON K1H 8M5,
Canada. Electronic address: palbert@uottawa.ca.

The serotonin 1A receptor (5-HT1A), a critical regulator of the brain
serotonergic tone, is implicated in major depressive disorder (MDD) where it is
often found to be dys-regulated. However, the extent to which stress and
antidepressant treatment impact 5-HT1A expression in adults remains unclear. To
address this issue, we subjected adult male BALB/c mice to unpredictable chronic 
mild stress (UCMS) to induce a depression-like phenotype that was reversed by
chronic treatment with the antidepressant imipramine. In prefrontal cortex (PFC) 
and midbrain tissue, UCMS increased 5-HT1A RNA and protein levels, changes that
are expected to decrease the brain serotonergic activity. The stress-induced
increase in 5-HT1A expression was paralleled by a specific increase in DNA
methylation of the conserved -681 CpG promoter site, located within a Sp1-like
element. We show that the -681 CpG site is recognized and repressed by Sp4, the
predominant neuronal Sp1-like factor and that Sp4-induced repression is
attenuated by DNA methylation, despite a stress-induced increase in PFC Sp4
levels. These results indicate that adult life stress induces DNA methylation of 
a conserved promoter site, antagonizing Sp4 repression to increase 5-HT1A
expression. Chronic imipramine treatment fully reversed the UCMS-induced increase
in methylation of the -681 CpG site in the PFC but not midbrain of stressed
animals and also increased 5-HT1A expression in the PFC of control animals.
Incomplete reversal by imipramine of stress-induced changes in 5-HT1A methylation
and expression indicates a persistence of stress vulnerability, and that
sustained reversal of behavioral impairments may require additional pathways.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4640906
PMID: 26188176  [PubMed - in process]


56. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2015 Sep;407(24):7349-57. doi: 10.1007/s00216-015-8897-6. Epub
2015 Jul 19.

Label-free Fab and Fc affinity/avidity profiling of the antibody complex
half-life for polyclonal and monoclonal efficacy screening.

Read T(1), Olkhov RV(1), Williamson ED(2), Shaw AM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Biosciences, College of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Exeter,
Stocker Road, Exeter, EX4 4QD, UK. (2)Biomedical Sciences Department, Defence
Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ,
UK. (3)Biosciences, College of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of
Exeter, Stocker Road, Exeter, EX4 4QD, UK. andrew.m.shaw@exeter.ac.uk.

A unified approach to affinity screening for Fab and Fc interactions of an
antibody for its antigen and Fc<U+03B3>R receptor has been developed. An antigen array
is used for the Fab affinity and cross-reactivity screening and protein A/G proxy
is the Fc<U+03B3>R receptor. The affinities are derived using a simple 1:1 binding model
with a consistent error analysis. The association and dissociation kinetics are
measured over optimised times for accurate determination. The Fab/Fc affinities
are derived for ten antibodies: mAb-actin (mouse), pAb-BSA (sheep), pAb-collagen 
V (rabbit), pAb-CRP (goat), mAb-F1 (mouse), mAbs (mouse) 7.3, 12.3, 29.3, 36.3
and 46.3 raised against LcrV in Yersinia pestis. The rate of the dissociation of 
antigen-antibody complexes relates directly to their immunological function as
does the Fc-Fc<U+03B3>R complex and a new half-life plot has been defined with a Fab/Fc 
half-life range of 17-470 min. The upper half-life value points to surface
avidity. Two antibodies that are protective as an immunotherapy define a Fab
half-life >250 min and an Fc half-life >50 min as characteristics of ideal
interactions which can form the basis of an antibody screen for immunotherapy.

PMID: 26187320  [PubMed - in process]


57. Toxicon. 2015 Dec 1;107(Pt A):32-6. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2015.06.019. Epub 2015
Jun 27.

The thioredoxin reductase--Thioredoxin redox system cleaves the interchain
disulphide bond of botulinum neurotoxins on the cytosolic surface of synaptic
vesicles.

Pirazzini M(1), Tehran DA(2), Zanetti G(2), Lista F(3), Binz T(4), Shone CC(5),
Rossetto O(2), Montecucco C(6).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche, Università di Padova, Via U. Bassi 58/B,
35121 Padova, Italy. Electronic address: marcopiraz@gmail.com. (2)Dipartimento di
Scienze Biomediche, Università di Padova, Via U. Bassi 58/B, 35121 Padova, Italy.
(3)Histology and Molecular Biology Section, Army Medical and Veterinary Research 
Center, Via Santo Stefano Rotondo 4, 00184 Rome, Italy. (4)Institut fur
Biochemie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, 30623 Hannover, Germany. (5)Public
Health England, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 OJG, UK. (6)Dipartimento
di Scienze Biomediche, Università di Padova, Via U. Bassi 58/B, 35121 Padova,
Italy; Istituto CNR di Neuroscienze, Università di Padova, Via U. Bassi 58/B,
35121 Padova, Italy.

Botulinum neurotoxins (BoNTs) are Janus toxins, as they are at the same time the 
most deadly substances known and one of the safest drugs used in human therapy.
They specifically block neurotransmission at peripheral nerves through the
proteolysis of SNARE proteins, i.e. the essential proteins which are the core of 
the neuroexocytosis machinery. Even if BoNTs are traditionally known as seven
main serotypes, their actual number is much higher as each serotype exists in
many different subtypes, with individual biological properties and little
antigenic relations. Since BoNTs can be used as biological weapons, and the only 
currently available therapy is based on immunological approaches, the existence
of so many different subtypes is a major safety problem. Nevertheless, all BoNT
isoforms are structurally similar and intoxicate peripheral nerve endings via a
conserved mechanism. They consist of two chains linked by a unique disulphide
bond which must be reduced to enable their toxicity. We found that thioredoxin 1 
and its reductase compose the cell redox system responsible for this reduction,
and its inhibition via specific chemicals significantly reduces BoNTs activity,
in vitro as well as in vivo. Such molecules can be considered as lead compounds
for the development of pan-inhibitors.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26130523  [PubMed - in process]


58. Chin J Integr Med. 2015 Oct;21(10):743-50. doi: 10.1007/s11655-015-2175-5. Epub
2015 Jul 1.

Dalitong granule combined with electroacupuncture in the treatment of functional 
dyspepsia: A randomized controlled trial.

Zhang CX(1), Guo LK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Xinxiang
Medical University, Weihui, Henan Province, 453100, China. g75zh@aliyun.com.
(2)Department of Stomatology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Xinxiang Medical
University, Weihui, Henan Province, 453100, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore clinical short and long-term effect of combining dalitong
granule (DG) and electroacupuncture group (EA) in the treatment of functional
dyspepsia.
METHODS: Totally 640 patients with confirmed functional dyspepsia were randomly
divided into 4 groups using a randomized digital table: the DG group, the EA
group, the combined group and the control group, 160 cases in each group. The DG 
group was treated with 6 g DG 3 times daily; the EA group was treated with
puncture of points Zusanli (ST36), Zhongwan (CV12), Neiguan (PC6), Taichong (LR3)
and Gongsun (SP4) twice daily; the combined group with above-mentioned DG and EA;
and the control group with 5 mg mosapride 3 times, 20 mg pantoprazole and 25 mg
amitriptylines twice daily. The treatment course was 4 weeks for all groups. The 
symptom score, quality of life score by Short Form 36 Health Survey
Questionnaires (SF-36), plasma motilin by radioimmunoassay, electrogastrographic 
frequencies by electrogastrogram (EGG) and gastric emptying by B-sonography were 
examined, and adverse reactions were observed before, at the end of treatment and
60 weeks post-treatment.
RESULTS: In the DG group 1 case dropped out for not taking medicine strictly and 
1 case was lost to follow-up, while 1 case in the EA group and 2 cases in the
combined therapy group were lost to follow-up. Compared with pre-treatment,
quality of life score, plasma motilin, electrogastrographic frequencies and
gastric emptying were all increased significantly, while symptom score was
decreased significantly at the end of treatment in each group (P<0.01); in the
combined group quality of life score, plasma motilin, electrogastrographic
frequencies and gastric emptying were all significantly higher than those in the 
other groups, while symptom score was significantly lower than in the other
groups (P<0.05). Compared with at the end of treatment, these indices changed
insignificantly in the combined group and the EA group 60 weeks post-treatment
(P>0.05), but the 4 increased indices were all decreased significantly, and
symptom score was increased significantly in the DG and the control groups
(P>0.05). The short and long-term total effective rates in the combined group
were all significantly higher than those in the other treatment groups (P<0.05 or
P<0.01). No serious adverse reaction occurred in the four groups.
CONCLUSION: Combined treatment of DG and EA could increase both plasma motilin
and electrogastrographic frequencies, promote gastric emptying, alleviate the
symptom of dyspepsia so as to increase quality of life, with better safety and
long-term effect.

PMID: 26129900  [PubMed - in process]


59. Parasit Vectors. 2015 Jun 30;8:351. doi: 10.1186/s13071-015-0936-9.

Current status of invasive mosquito surveillance in the UK.

Vaux AG(1), Medlock JM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Entomology & Zoonoses Ecology group, Emergency Response Department,
Public Health England, Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JG, United Kingdom.
Alex.Vaux@phe.gov.uk. (2)Medical Entomology & Zoonoses Ecology group, Emergency
Response Department, Public Health England, Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JG,
United Kingdom. Jolyon.Medlock@phe.gov.uk.

BACKGROUND: Non-native invasive mosquitoes have for many years made incursions
into Europe, and are now established in many European countries. The continued
European importation of potential vectors and their expansion within Europe
increases their potential for importation and establishment in the UK. Coupled
with increasing numbers of returning dengue and chikungunya infected travellers, 
the potential exists for transmission of vector borne disease in new regions.
METHODS: To ensure a cost-effective risk assessment and preparedness strategy the
UK employs a multi-faceted approach to surveillance for non-native Aedes
mosquitoes, including passive and active surveillance strategies at a local,
regional, and national level. Passive surveillance, including a national mosquito
recording scheme and local authority nuisance biting reporting, are combined with
targeted active surveillance at seaports, airports, used tyre importers, and
motorway service stations.
RESULTS: There is no evidence to date that any invasive Aedes species (e.g.,
Aedes albopictus, Aedes japonicus, Aedes aegypti) occur in the UK despite sharing
many of the same routes that have been found to have facilitated their entry into
other countries.
CONCLUSIONS: This paper sets in context the UK approaches with other European
countries and those recommended by the ECDC. It also highlights future UK
strategies to enhance surveillance for non-native mosquitoes to help ensure that 
incursions can be managed, and these mosquitoes do not establish and public
health is protected. Focus will be given to increasing the number of submissions 
of mosquitoes to passive surveillance schemes and maintaining active surveillance
efforts at key routes of potential importation.

PMCID: PMC4491199
PMID: 26122427  [PubMed - in process]


60. Mol Biol Cell. 2015 Aug 15;26(16):2939-54. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E15-04-0247. Epub
2015 Jun 24.

Phosphorylation and SCF-mediated degradation regulate CREB-H transcription of
metabolic targets.

Barbosa S(1), Carreira S(1), Bailey D(2), Abaitua F(1), O'Hare P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Imperial College, London W2 1PG, United Kingdom.
(2)Health Protection Agency, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Medicine, Imperial College, London W2 1PG, United Kingdom
pohare@imperial.ac.uk.

CREB-H, an endoplasmic reticulum-anchored transcription factor, plays a key role 
in regulating secretion and in metabolic and inflammatory pathways, but how its
activity is modulated remains unclear. We examined processing of the nuclear
active form and identified a motif around S87-S90 with homology to DSG-type
phosphodegrons. We show that this region is subject to multiple phosphorylations,
which regulate CREB-H stability by targeting it to the SCF(Fbw1a) E3 ubiquitin
ligase. Data from phosphatase treatment, use of phosophospecific antibody, and
substitution of serine residues demonstrate phosphorylation of candidate serines 
in the region, with the core S87/S90 motif representing a critical determinant
promoting proteasome-mediated degradation. Candidate kinases CKII and GSK-3b
phosphorylate CREB-H in vitro with specificities for different serines. Prior
phosphorylation with GSK-3 at one or more of the adjacent serines substantially
increases S87/S90-dependent phosphorylation by CKII. In vivo expression of a
dominant-negative Cul1 enhances steady-state levels of CREB-H, an effect
augmented by Fbw1a. CREB-H directly interacts with Fbw1a in a
phosphorylation-dependent manner. Finally, mutations within the phosphodegron,
when incorporated into the full-length protein, result in increased levels of
constitutively cleaved nuclear protein and increased transcription and secretion 
of a key endogenous target gene, apolipoprotein A IV.

© 2015 Barbosa, Carreira, et al. This article is distributed by The American
Society for Cell Biology under license from the author(s). Two months after
publication it is available to the public under an
Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 3.0 Unported Creative Commons License
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).

PMCID: PMC4571331
PMID: 26108621  [PubMed - in process]


61. Nature. 2015 Aug 6;524(7563):97-101. doi: 10.1038/nature14594. Epub 2015 Jun 17.

Temporal and spatial analysis of the 2014-2015 Ebola virus outbreak in West
Africa.

Carroll MW, Matthews DA, Hiscox JA, Elmore MJ, Pollakis G, Rambaut A, Hewson R,
García-Dorival I, Bore JA, Koundouno R, Abdellati S, Afrough B, Aiyepada J,
Akhilomen P, Asogun D, Atkinson B, Badusche M, Bah A, Bate S, Baumann J, Becker
D, Becker-Ziaja B, Bocquin A, Borremans B, Bosworth A, Boettcher JP, Cannas A,
Carletti F, Castilletti C, Clark S, Colavita F, Diederich S, Donatus A, Duraffour
S, Ehichioya D, Ellerbrok H, Fernandez-Garcia MD, Fizet A, Fleischmann E,
Gryseels S, Hermelink A, Hinzmann J, Hopf-Guevara U, Ighodalo Y, Jameson L,
Kelterbaum A, Kis Z, Kloth S, Kohl C, Korva M, Kraus A, Kuisma E, Kurth A,
Liedigk B, Logue CH, Lüdtke A, Maes P, McCowen J, Mély S, Mertens M, Meschi S,
Meyer B, Michel J, Molkenthin P, Muñoz-Fontela C, Muth D, Newman EN, Ngabo D,
Oestereich L, Okosun J, Olokor T, Omiunu R, Omomoh E, Pallasch E, Pályi B,
Portmann J, Pottage T, Pratt C, Priesnitz S, Quartu S, Rappe J, Repits J, Richter
M, Rudolf M, Sachse A, Schmidt KM, Schudt G, Strecker T, Thom R, Thomas S, Tobin 
E, Tolley H, Trautner J, Vermoesen T, Vitoriano I, Wagner M, Wolff S, Yue C,
Capobianchi MR, Kretschmer B, Hall Y, Kenny JG, Rickett NY, Dudas G, Coltart CE, 
Kerber R, Steer D, Wright C, Senyah F, Keita S, Drury P, Diallo B, de Clerck H,
Van Herp M, Sprecher A, Traore A, Diakite M, Konde MK, Koivogui L, Magassouba N, 
Avšic-Županc T, Nitsche A, Strasser M, Ippolito G, Becker S, Stoecker K, Gabriel 
M, Raoul H, Di Caro A, Wölfel R, Formenty P, Günther S.

West Africa is currently witnessing the most extensive Ebola virus (EBOV)
outbreak so far recorded. Until now, there have been 27,013 reported cases and
11,134 deaths. The origin of the virus is thought to have been a zoonotic
transmission from a bat to a two-year-old boy in December 2013 (ref. 2). From
this index case the virus was spread by human-to-human contact throughout Guinea,
Sierra Leone and Liberia. However, the origin of the particular virus in each
country and time of transmission is not known and currently relies on
epidemiological analysis, which may be unreliable owing to the difficulties of
obtaining patient information. Here we trace the genetic evolution of EBOV in the
current outbreak that has resulted in multiple lineages. Deep sequencing of 179
patient samples processed by the European Mobile Laboratory, the first
diagnostics unit to be deployed to the epicentre of the outbreak in Guinea,
reveals an epidemiological and evolutionary history of the epidemic from March
2014 to January 2015. Analysis of EBOV genome evolution has also benefited from a
similar sequencing effort of patient samples from Sierra Leone. Our results
confirm that the EBOV from Guinea moved into Sierra Leone, most likely in April
or early May. The viruses of the Guinea/Sierra Leone lineage mixed around
June/July 2014. Viral sequences covering August, September and October 2014
indicate that this lineage evolved independently within Guinea. These data can be
used in conjunction with epidemiological information to test retrospectively the 
effectiveness of control measures, and provides an unprecedented window into the 
evolution of an ongoing viral haemorrhagic fever outbreak.

PMID: 26083749  [PubMed - in process]


62. R Soc Open Sci. 2015 Jan 28;2(1):140160. doi: 10.1098/rsos.140160. eCollection
2015.

Potency of irritation by benzylidenemalononitriles in humans correlates with
TRPA1 ion channel activation.

Lindsay CD(1), Green C(1), Bird M(1), Jones JT(1), Riches JR(1), McKee KK(1),
Sandford MS(1), Wakefield DA(1), Timperley CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl) , Porton Down, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK.

We show that the physiological activity of solid aerosolized
benzylidenemalononitriles (BMNs) including 'tear gas' (CS) in historic human
volunteer trials correlates with activation of the human transient receptor
potential ankyrin 1 ion channel (hTRPA1). This suggests that the irritation
caused by the most potent of these compounds results from activation of this
channel. We prepared 50 BMNs and measured their hTRPA1 agonist potencies. A
mechanism of action consistent with their physiological activity, involving their
dissolution in water on contaminated body surfaces, cell membrane penetration and
reversible thiolation by a cysteine residue of hTRPA1, supported by data from
nuclear magnetic resonance experiments with a model thiol, explains the
structure-activity relationships. The correlation provides evidence that hTRPA1
is a receptor for irritants on nociceptive neurons involved in pain perception;
thus, its activation in the eye, nose, mouth and skin would explain the symptoms 
of lachrymation, sneezing, coughing and stinging, respectively. The
structure-activity results and the use of the BMNs as pharmacological tools in
future by other researchers may contribute to a better understanding of the TRPA1
channel in humans (and other animals) and help facilitate the discovery of
treatments for human diseases involving this receptor.

PMCID: PMC4448789
PMID: 26064575  [PubMed]


63. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2015 Oct;25(10):1650-60. doi:
10.1016/j.euroneuro.2015.05.006. Epub 2015 May 21.

Transcription factor SP4 phosphorylation is altered in the postmortem cerebellum 
of bipolar disorder and schizophrenia subjects.

Pinacho R(1), Saia G(2), Meana JJ(3), Gill G(4), Ramos B(5).

Author information: 
(1)Unitat de recerca, Parc Sanitari Sant Joan de Déu, Fundació Sant Joan de Déu, 
Universitat de Barcelona, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Salud
Mental, CIBERSAM, Dr. Antoni Pujadas, 42, 08830 Sant Boi de Llobregat, Barcelona,
Spain. (2)Department of Developmental, Molecular, and Chemical Biology, Tufts
University School of Medicine, 136 Harrison Avenue, Boston, MA 02111, United
States; Cell, Molecular and Developmental Biology Program, Sackler School of
Biomedical Sciences, Tufts University School of Medicine, 136 Harrison Avenue,
Boston, MA 02111, United States. (3)Departamento de Farmacología, Universidad del
País Vasco/Euskal Herriko Unibertsitatea UPV/EHU, Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Red de Salud Mental, CIBERSAM, B Sarriena, s/n 48940 Leioa, Bizkaia,
Spain. (4)Department of Developmental, Molecular, and Chemical Biology, Tufts
University School of Medicine, 136 Harrison Avenue, Boston, MA 02111, United
States. Electronic address: Grace.Gill@tufts.edu. (5)Unitat de recerca, Parc
Sanitari Sant Joan de Déu, Fundació Sant Joan de Déu, Universitat de Barcelona,
Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Salud Mental, CIBERSAM, Dr. Antoni
Pujadas, 42, 08830 Sant Boi de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address:
bramos@fsjd.org.

Transcription factors play important roles in the control of neuronal function in
physiological and pathological conditions. We previously reported reduced levels 
of transcription factor SP4 protein, but not transcript, in the cerebellum in
bipolar disorder and associated with more severe negative symptoms in
schizophrenia. We have recently reported phosphorylation of Sp4 at S770, which is
regulated by membrane depolarization and NMDA receptor activity. The aim of this 
study was to investigate SP4 S770 phosphorylation in bipolar disorder and its
association with negative symptoms in schizophrenia, and to explore the potential
relationship between phosphorylation and protein abundance. Here we report a
significant increase in SP4 phosphorylation in the cerebellum, but not the
prefrontal cortex, of bipolar disorder subjects (n=10) (80% suicide) compared to 
matched controls (n=10). We found that SP4 phosphorylation inversely correlated
with SP4 levels independently of disease status in both areas of the human brain.
Moreover, SP4 phosphorylation in the cerebellum positively correlated with
negative symptoms in schizophrenia subjects (n=15). Further, we observed that a
phospho-mimetic mutation in truncated Sp4 was sufficient to significantly
decrease Sp4 steady-state levels, while a non-phosphorylatable mutant showed
increased stability in cultured rat cerebellar granule neurons. Our results
indicate that SP4 S770 phosphorylation is increased in the cerebellum in bipolar 
disorder subjects that committed suicide and in severe schizophrenia subjects,
and may be part of a degradation signal that controls Sp4 abundance in cerebellar
granule neurons. This opens the possibility that modulation of SP4
phosphorylation may contribute to the molecular pathophysiology of psychotic
disorders.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. and ECNP. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4600646 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26049820  [PubMed - in process]


64. ACS Synth Biol. 2015 Dec 18;4(12):1316-25. doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.5b00034. Epub
2015 Jul 1.

Polymerase Chain Reaction on a Viral Nanoparticle.

Carr-Smith J, Pacheco-Gómez R, Little HA, Hicks MR, Sandhu S, Steinke N, Smith
DJ, Rodger A(1), Goodchild SA(2), Lukaszewski RA(2), Tucker JH, Dafforn TR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Warwick , Coventry, Warwickshire CV4
7AL, United Kingdom. (2)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory , Porton Down, 
Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, United Kingdom.

The field of synthetic biology includes studies that aim to develop new materials
and devices from biomolecules. In recent years, much work has been carried out
using a range of biomolecular chassis including a-helical coiled coils, ß-sheet
amyloids and even viral particles. In this work, we show how hybrid
bionanoparticles can be produced from a viral M13 bacteriophage scaffold through 
conjugation with DNA primers that can template a polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
This unprecedented example of a PCR on a virus particle has been studied by flow 
aligned linear dichroism spectroscopy, which gives information on the structure
of the product as well as a new protototype methodology for DNA detection. We
propose that this demonstration of PCR on the surface of a bionanoparticle is a
useful addition to ways in which hybrid assemblies may be constructed using
synthetic biology.

PMID: 26046486  [PubMed - in process]


65. Pharm Res. 2015 Nov;32(11):3636-48. doi: 10.1007/s11095-015-1722-2. Epub 2015 Jun
4.

Structural Characterisation of Non-Deamidated Acidic Variants of Erwinia
chrysanthemi L-asparaginase Using Small-Angle X-ray Scattering and Ion-Mobility
Mass Spectrometry.

Gervais D(1), King D(2), Kanda P(2), Foote N(2), Elliott L(2), Brown P(2), Lee
NO(3), Thalassinos K(3), Pizzey C(4), Rambo R(4), Minshull TC(5), Dickman MJ(5), 
Smith S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Porton Biopharma Limited, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JG, UK.
dave.gervais@portonbiopharma.com. (2)Porton Biopharma Limited, Porton Down,
Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JG, UK. (3)Institute of Structural and Molecular
Biology, Division of Biosciences, Darwin Building Room 101A, University College
London, Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT, UK. (4)Diamond Light Source Ltd., Harwell
Science and Innovation Campus, Didcot, Oxfordshire, OX11 0DE, UK. (5)ChELSI
Institute, Dept of Chemical and Biological Engineering, University of Sheffield, 
Mappin Street, Sheffield, S1 3JD, UK.

PURPOSE: Erwinia chrysanthemi L-asparaginase (ErA) is an enzyme commonly used in 
the treatment regimen for Acute Lymphoblastic Leukaemia (ALL). Biopharmaceutical 
products such as ErA must be monitored for modifications such as deamidation,
typically using ion-exchange chromatography (IEX). Analysis of clinical-grade ErA
using native IEX resolves a number of enzymatically-active, acidic variants that 
were poorly characterised.
METHODS: ErA IEX variants were isolated and fully characterised using capillary
electrophoresis (cIEF), LC-MS and LC-MS/MS of proteolytic digests, and structural
techniques including circular dichroism, small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) and 
ion-mobility mass spectrometry (IM-MS).
RESULTS: LC-MS, MS/MS and cIEF demonstrated that all ErA isolates consist mainly 
of enzyme lacking primary-sequence modifications (such as deamidation). Both SAXS
and IM-MS revealed a different conformational state in the most prominent acidic 
IEX peak. However, SAXS data also suggested conformational differences between
the main peak and major acidic variant were minor, based on comparisons with
crystal structures.
CONCLUSIONS: IEX data for biopharmaceuticals such as ErA should be thoroughly
characterised, as the most common modifications, such as deamidation, may be
absent.

PMID: 26040662  [PubMed - in process]


66. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2015 Jun 2;18(11):pyv063. doi: 10.1093/ijnp/pyv063.

Restoration of Sp4 in Forebrain GABAergic Neurons Rescues Hypersensitivity to
Ketamine in Sp4 Hypomorphic Mice.

Higa KK(1), Ji B(1), Buell MR(1), Risbrough VB(1), Powell SB(1), Young JW(1),
Geyer MA(1), Zhou X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA (Ms
Higa, Drs Ji, Risbrough, Powell, Young, Geyer, and Zhou, and Ms Buell); Research 
Service, VA San Diego Healthcare System, La Jolla, CA (Drs Risbrough, Powell,
Young, Geyer, and Zhou, and Ms Buell); Neurosciences Graduate Program, University
of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA (Ms Higa). (2)Department of Psychiatry,
University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA (Ms Higa, Drs Ji, Risbrough,
Powell, Young, Geyer, and Zhou, and Ms Buell); Research Service, VA San Diego
Healthcare System, La Jolla, CA (Drs Risbrough, Powell, Young, Geyer, and Zhou,
and Ms Buell); Neurosciences Graduate Program, University of California San
Diego, La Jolla, CA (Ms Higa). xzhou@ucsd.edu.

BACKGROUND: Ketamine produces schizophrenia-like behavioral phenotypes in healthy
people. Prolonged ketamine effects and exacerbation of symptoms after the
administration of ketamine have been observed in patients with schizophrenia.
More recently, ketamine has been used as a potent antidepressant to treat
patients with major depression. The genes and neurons that regulate behavioral
responses to ketamine, however, remain poorly understood. Sp4 is a transcription 
factor for which gene expression is restricted to neuronal cells in the brain.
Our previous studies demonstrated that Sp4 hypomorphic mice display several
behavioral phenotypes relevant to psychiatric disorders, consistent with human
SP4 gene associations with schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and major depression.
Among those behavioral phenotypes, hypersensitivity to ketamine-induced
hyperlocomotion has been observed in Sp4 hypomorphic mice.
METHODS: In the present study, we used the Cre-LoxP system to restore Sp4 gene
expression, specifically in either forebrain excitatory or GABAergic inhibitory
neurons in Sp4 hypomorphic mice. Mouse behavioral phenotypes related to
psychiatric disorders were examined in these distinct rescue mice.
RESULTS: Restoration of Sp4 in forebrain excitatory neurons did not rescue
deficient sensorimotor gating nor ketamine-induced hyperlocomotion. Restoration
of Sp4 in forebrain GABAergic neurons, however, rescued ketamine-induced
hyperlocomotion, but did not rescue deficient sensorimotor gating.
CONCLUSIONS: Our studies suggest that the Sp4 gene in forebrain GABAergic neurons
regulates ketamine-induced hyperlocomotion.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of CINP.

PMCID: PMC4756721
PMID: 26037489  [PubMed - in process]


67. Anal Chem. 2015 Jul 7;87(13):6801-7. doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.5b00989. Epub 2015
Jun 9.

Detection of Waterborne Viruses Using High Affinity Molecularly Imprinted
Polymers.

Altintas Z(1), Gittens M(1), Guerreiro A(1), Thompson KA(2), Walker J(2),
Piletsky S(1), Tothill IE(1).

Author information: 
(1)†Biomedical Engineering, Cranfield University, Bedfordshire MK43 0AL, United
Kingdom. (2)‡Public Health England, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG, United
Kingdom.

Molecularly imprinted polymers (MIPs) are artificial receptor ligands which can
recognize and specifically bind to a target molecule. They are more resistant to 
chemical and biological damage and inactivation than antibodies. Therefore,
target specific-MIP nanoparticles are aimed to develop and implemented to
biosensors for the detection of biological toxic agents such as viruses,
bacteria, and fungi toxins that cause many diseases and death due to the
environmental contamination. For the first time, a molecularly imprinted polymer 
(MIP) targeting the bacteriophage MS2 as the template was investigated using a
novel solid-phase synthesis method to obtain the artificial affinity ligand for
the detection and removal of waterborne viruses through optical-based sensors. A 
high affinity between the artificial ligand and the target was found, and a
regenerative MIP-based virus detection assay was successfully developed using a
new surface plasmon resonance (SPR)-biosensor which provides an alternative
technology for the specific detection and removal of waterborne viruses that lead
to high disease and death rates all over the world.

PMID: 26008649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Anal Chem. 2015 Jun 2;87(11):5482-5. doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.5b01052. Epub 2015
May 20.

Determination of size- and number-based concentration of silica nanoparticles in 
a complex biological matrix by online techniques.

Bartczak D(1), Vincent P(2), Goenaga-Infante H(1).

Author information: 
(1)†LGC Limited, Queens Road, Teddington, Middlesex TW11 0LY, United Kingdom.
(2)‡NanoSight, a Malvern Instruments Limited, London Road, Amesbury, Wiltshire
SP4 7RT, United Kingdom.

We propose for the first time methodology for the determination of a number-based
concentration of silica (SiO2) nanoparticles (NP) in biological serum using
nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA) as the online detector for asymmetric flow
field-flow fractionation (AF4). The degree of selectivity offered by AF4 was
found necessary to determine reliably number-based concentration of the measured 
NP in the complex matrix with a relative measurement error of 5.1% (as relative
standard deviation, n = 3) and without chemical sample pretreatment. The
simultaneous online coupling to other size and concentration detectors, such as
multiangle light scattering (MALS) and ICPMS, for the measurement of the same NP 
suspension, was used to confirm the particle size determined with NTA and the
equivalent particle number determined by AF4/NTA, respectively. The size- and
number-based concentration data obtained by independent techniques were in a good
agreement. The developed methodology can easily be extended to other types of
particles or particle suspensions and other complex matrices provided that the
particle size is above the limit of detection for NTA.

PMID: 25970520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Pharmacol Ther. 2015 Aug;152:111-24. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2015.05.008. Epub 
2015 May 8.

Sp1 transcription factor: A long-standing target in cancer chemotherapy.

Vizcaíno C(1), Mansilla S(1), Portugal J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología Molecular de Barcelona, CSIC, Parc Científic de
Barcelona, E-08028 Barcelona, Spain. (2)Instituto de Biología Molecular de
Barcelona, CSIC, Parc Científic de Barcelona, E-08028 Barcelona, Spain.
Electronic address: jpmbmc@ibmb.csic.es.

Sp1 (specificity protein 1) is a well-known member of a family of transcription
factors that also includes Sp2, Sp3 and Sp4, which are implicated in an ample
variety of essential biological processes and have been proven important in cell 
growth, differentiation, apoptosis and carcinogenesis. Sp1 activates the
transcription of many cellular genes that contain putative CG-rich Sp-binding
sites in their promoters. Sp1 and Sp3 proteins bind to similar, if not the same, 
DNA tracts and compete for binding, thus they can enhance or repress gene
expression. Evidences exist that the Sp-family of proteins regulates the
expression of genes that play pivotal roles in cell proliferation and metastasis 
of various tumors. In patients with a variety of cancers, high levels of Sp1
protein are considered a negative prognostic factor. A plethora of compounds can 
interfere with the trans-activating activities of Sp1 and other Sp proteins on
gene expression. Several pathways are involved in the down-regulation of Sp
proteins by compounds with different mechanisms of action, which include not only
the direct interference with the binding of Sp proteins to their putative DNA
binding sites, but also promoting the degradation of Sp protein factors.
Down-regulation of Sp transcription factors and Sp1-regulated genes is
drug-dependent and it is determined by the cell context. The acknowledgment that 
several of those compounds are safe enough might accelerate their introduction
into clinical usage in patients with tumors that over-express Sp1.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25960131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 27;10(4):e0125115. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125115.
eCollection 2015.

Phosphorylation of transcription factor specificity protein 4 is increased in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells of first-episode psychosis.

Pinacho R(1), Saia G(2), Fusté M(1), Meléndez-Pérez I(1), Villalta-Gil V(1), Haro
JM(1), Gill G(3), Ramos B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unitat de recerca, Fundació Sant Joan de Déu, Parc Sanitari Sant Joan de Déu, 
Universitat de Barcelona, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Salud
Mental, CIBERSAM, Sant Boi de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain. (2)Department of
Developmental, Molecular, and Chemical Biology, Tufts University School of
Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America; Cell, Molecular and
Developmental Biology Program, Sackler School of Biomedical Sciences, Tufts
University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(3)Department of Developmental, Molecular, and Chemical Biology, Tufts University
School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Altered expression of transcription factor specificity protein 4
(SP4) has been found in the postmortem brain of patients with psychiatric
disorders including schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Reduced levels of SP4
protein have recently been reported in peripheral blood mononuclear cells in
first-episode psychosis. Also, SP4 levels are modulated by lithium treatment in
cultured neurons. Phosphorylation of SP4 at S770 is increased in the cerebellum
of bipolar disorder subjects and upon inhibition of NMDA receptor signaling in
cultured neurons. The aim of this study was to investigate whether SP4 S770
phosphorylation is increased in lymphocytes of first-episode psychosis patients
and the effect of lithium treatment on this phosphorylation.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study of S770 phosphorylation relative to total SP4
immunoreactivity using specific antibodies in peripheral blood mononuclear cells 
in first-episode psychosis patients (n = 14, treated with lithium or not) and
matched healthy controls (n = 14) by immunoblot was designed. We also determined 
the effects of the prescribed drugs lithium, olanzapine or valproic acid on SP4
phosphorylation in rat primary cultured cerebellar granule neurons.
RESULTS: We found that SP4 S770 phosphorylation was significantly increased in
lymphocytes in first-episode psychosis compared to controls and decreased in
patients treated with lithium compared to patients who did not receive lithium.
Moreover, incubation with lithium but not olanzapine or valproic acid reduced SP4
phosphorylation in rat cultured cerebellar granule neurons.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings presented here indicate that SP4 S770 phosphorylation
is increased in lymphocytes in first-episode psychosis which may be reduced by
lithium treatment in patients. Moreover, our study shows lithium treatment
prevents this phosphorylation in vitro in neurons. This pilot study suggests that
S770 SP4 phosphorylation could be a peripheral biomarker of psychosis, and may be
regulated by lithium treatment in first-episode psychosis.

PMCID: PMC4411105
PMID: 25915526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2015 Nov;40(12):2715-26. doi: 10.1038/npp.2015.120. Epub
2015 Apr 24.

GlyT-1 Inhibition Attenuates Attentional But Not Learning or Motivational
Deficits of the Sp4 Hypomorphic Mouse Model Relevant to Psychiatric Disorders.

Young JW(1,)(2), Kamenski ME(1), Higa KK(1), Light GA(1,)(2), Geyer MA(1,)(2),
Zhou X(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA,
USA. (2)Research Service, VA San Diego Healthcare System, San Diego, CA, USA.

Serious mental illness occurs in 25% of the general population, with many
disorders being neurodevelopmental, lifelong, and debilitating. The wide
variation and overlap in symptoms across disorders increases the difficulty of
research and treatment development. The NIMH Research Domain of Criteria
initiative aims to improve our understanding of the molecular and behavioral
consequences of specific neurodevelopmental mechanisms across disorders, enabling
targeted treatment development. The transcription factor Specificity Protein 4
(SP4) is important for neurodevelopment and is genetically associated with both
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Reduced Sp4 expression in mice (hypomorphic) 
reproduces several characteristics of psychiatric disorders. We further tested
the utility of Sp4 hypomorphic mice as a model organism relevant to psychiatric
disorders by assessing cognitive control plus effort and decision-making aspects 
of approach motivation using cross-species-relevant tests. Sp4 hypomorphic mice
exhibited impaired attention as measured by the 5-Choice Continuous Performance
Test, an effect that was attenuated by glycine type-1 transporter (GlyT-1)
inhibition. Hypomorphic mice also exhibited reduced motivation to work for a
reward and impaired probabilistic learning. These deficits may stem from affected
anticipatory reward, analogous to anhedonia in patients with schizophrenia and
other psychiatric disorders. Neither positive valence deficit was attenuated by
GlyT-1 treatment, suggesting that these and the attentional deficits stem from
different underlying mechanisms. Given the association of SP4 gene with
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, the present studies provide support that
personalized GlyT-1 inhibition may treat attentional deficits in neuropsychiatric
patients with low SP4 levels.

PMID: 25907107  [PubMed - in process]


72. Nat Commun. 2015 Apr 24;6:7021. doi: 10.1038/ncomms8021.

A magneto-electro-optical effect in a plasmonic nanowire material.

Valente J(1), Ou JY(1), Plum E(1), Youngs IJ(2), Zheludev NI(3).

Author information: 
(1)Optoelectronics Research Centre and Centre for Photonic Metamaterials,
University of Southampton, Highfield, Southampton SO17 1BJ, UK. (2)Physical
Sciences Department, DSTL, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK. (3)1] Optoelectronics Research 
Centre and Centre for Photonic Metamaterials, University of Southampton,
Highfield, Southampton SO17 1BJ, UK [2] The Photonics Institute and Centre for
Disruptive Photonic Technologies, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
637378, Singapore.

Electro- and magneto-optical phenomena play key roles in photonic technology
enabling light modulators, optical data storage, sensors and numerous
spectroscopic techniques. Optical effects, linear and quadratic in external
electric and magnetic field are widely known and comprehensively studied.
However, optical phenomena that depend on the simultaneous application of
external electric and magnetic fields in conventional media are barely detectable
and technologically insignificant. Here we report that a large reciprocal
magneto-electro-optical effect can be observed in metamaterials. In an artificial
chevron nanowire structure fabricated on an elastic nano-membrane, the Lorentz
force drives reversible transmission changes on application of a fraction of a
volt when the structure is placed in a fraction-of-tesla magnetic field. We show 
that magneto-electro-optical modulation can be driven to hundreds of thousands of
cycles per second promising applications in magneto-electro-optical modulators
and field sensors at nano-tesla levels.

PMCID: PMC4421854
PMID: 25906761  [PubMed]


73. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2015 Aug;70(8):2209-16. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkv097. Epub
2015 Apr 22.

Retention of virulence following adaptation to colistin in Acinetobacter
baumannii reflects the mechanism of resistance.

Wand ME(1), Bock LJ(2), Bonney LC(2), Sutton JM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Public Health England, Microbiology Services Division, Porton Down, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK matthew.wand@phe.gov.uk. (2)Public Health England,
Microbiology Services Division, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK.

OBJECTIVES: Colistin resistance in Acinetobacter baumannii has been associated
with loss of virulence and a negative impact on isolate selection. In this study,
exposure of clinical isolates to suboptimal concentrations of colistin was used
to explore the capacity to develop resistance by diverse mechanisms, and whether 
acquired resistance always reduces fitness and virulence.
METHODS: Twelve colistin-susceptible clinical A. baumannii isolates were exposed 
to a sub-MIC concentration of colistin over 6 weeks with weekly increases in
concentration. Stable resistance was then phenotypically investigated with
respect to antibiotic/biocide resistance, virulence in Galleria mellonella and
growth rate. Putative mechanisms of resistance were identified by targeted
sequencing of known resistance loci.
RESULTS: Eight A. baumannii isolates acquired resistance to colistin within 1
week with MICs ranging from 2 to >512 mg/L. By 6 weeks 11 isolates were resistant
to colistin; this was linked to the development of mutations in pmr or lpx genes.
Strains that developed mutations in lpxACD showed a loss of virulence and
increased susceptibility to several antibiotics/disinfectants tested. Two of the 
colistin-resistant strains with mutations in pmrB retained similar virulence
levels to their respective parental strains in G. mellonella.
CONCLUSIONS: Acquisition of colistin resistance does not always lead to a loss of
virulence, especially when this is linked to mutations in pmrB. This underlines
the importance of understanding the mechanism of colistin resistance as well as
the phenotype.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British 
Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25904728  [PubMed - in process]


74. Nat Mater. 2015 May;14(5):469-70. doi: 10.1038/nmat4272.

Metal-organic frameworks: Breaking bad chemicals down.

Rosseinsky MJ(1), Smith MW(2), Timperley CM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Liverpool, Crown Street, Liverpool L69 
7ZD, UK. (2)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl), Porton Down,
Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK.

Comment on
    Nat Mater. 2015 May;14(5):512-6.

PMID: 25899906  [PubMed]


75. Parasit Vectors. 2015 Mar 3;8:142. doi: 10.1186/s13071-015-0751-3.

Impacts of the creation, expansion and management of English wetlands on mosquito
presence and abundance - developing strategies for future disease mitigation.

Medlock JM(1), Vaux AG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Entomology group, Public Health England, Porton Down, Salisbury,
Wiltshire, SP4 0JG, UK. jolyon.medlock@phe.gov.uk. (2)Medical Entomology group,
Public Health England, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JG, UK.
alex.vaux@phe.gov.uk.

The incidence of mosquito-borne diseases is increasing in Europe, partly due to
the incursion of a number of invasive species known to be vectors of dengue and
chikungunya viruses, but also due to the involvement of native species in the
transmission of West Nile virus and malaria. For some of these pathogens, there
is a risk of the re-emergence of vector-borne diseases that were once widespread 
in Europe, but declined partly due to large-scale land-drainage projects. Some
mosquito species exploit container habitats as breeding sites in urban areas; an 
adaptation to human-made micro-habitats resulting from increased urbanisation.
However, many species thrive in natural wetland ecosystems. Owing to the impacts 
of climate change there is an urgent need for environmental adaptation, such as
the creation of new wetlands to mitigate coastal and inland flooding. In some
cases, these initiatives can be coupled with environmental change strategies to
protect a range of endangered flora and fauna species by enhancing and extending 
wetland landscapes, which may by driven by European legislation, particularly in 
urban areas. This paper reviews field studies conducted in England to assess the 
impact of newly created wetlands on mosquito colonisation in a) coastal, b) urban
and c) arable reversion habitats. It also considers the impact of wetland
management on mosquito populations and explores the implications of various water
and vegetation management options on the range of British mosquito species.
Understanding the impact of wetland creation and management strategies on
mosquito prevalence and the potential risk of increasing the levels of nuisance
or disease vector species will be crucial in informing health and well-being risk
assessments, guiding targeted control, and anticipating the social effects of
extreme weather and climate change. Although new wetlands will certainly extend
aquatic habitats for mosquitoes, not all species will become a major nuisance or 
a vector concern as a result. Understanding how the design and management of
wetlands might exacerbate mosquito densities is crucial if we are to manage
nuisance mosquitoes and control vector species in the event of a disease
outbreak. This entomological evidence-base will ensure that control strategies
achieve optimal efficacy at minimal cost.

PMCID: PMC4359530
PMID: 25889666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Parasit Vectors. 2015 Feb 10;8:91. doi: 10.1186/s13071-015-0705-9.

Enhanced West Nile virus surveillance in the North Kent marshes, UK.

Vaux AG(1), Gibson G(2), Hernandez-Triana LM(3), Cheke RA(4), McCracken F(5),
Jeffries CL(6,)(7), Horton DL(8,)(9), Springate S(10), Johnson N(11), Fooks
AR(12,)(13), Leach S(14), Medlock JM(15,)(16).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Entomology group, MRA, Emergency Response Department, Public Health
England, Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JG, UK. Alex.Vaux@phe.gov.uk. (2)Natural
Resources Institute, University of Greenwich at Medway Central Avenue, Chatham
Maritime, Kent, ME4 4TB, UK. G.Gibson@gre.ac.uk. (3)Animal and Plant Health
Agency, Wildlife Zoonoses and Vector-Borne Diseases Research Group, Woodham Lane,
Addlestone, Surrey, KT15 3NB, UK. Luis.Hernandez-Triana@apha.gsi.gov.uk.
(4)Natural Resources Institute, University of Greenwich at Medway Central Avenue,
Chatham Maritime, Kent, ME4 4TB, UK. R.A.Cheke@greenwich.ac.uk. (5)Animal and
Plant Health Agency, Wildlife Zoonoses and Vector-Borne Diseases Research Group, 
Woodham Lane, Addlestone, Surrey, KT15 3NB, UK. Fiona.McCracken@apha.gsi.gov.uk. 
(6)Animal and Plant Health Agency, Wildlife Zoonoses and Vector-Borne Diseases
Research Group, Woodham Lane, Addlestone, Surrey, KT15 3NB, UK.
Claire.Jeffries@lshtm.ac.uk. (7)Current address: Department of Disease Control,
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Keppel Street, London, WC1E 7HT, 
UK. Claire.Jeffries@lshtm.ac.uk. (8)Animal and Plant Health Agency, Wildlife
Zoonoses and Vector-Borne Diseases Research Group, Woodham Lane, Addlestone,
Surrey, KT15 3NB, UK. D.Horton@surrey.ac.uk. (9)School of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Surrey, Guildford, UK. D.Horton@surrey.ac.uk. (10)Natural Resources
Institute, University of Greenwich at Medway Central Avenue, Chatham Maritime,
Kent, ME4 4TB, UK. S.Springate@gre.ac.uk. (11)Animal and Plant Health Agency,
Wildlife Zoonoses and Vector-Borne Diseases Research Group, Woodham Lane,
Addlestone, Surrey, KT15 3NB, UK. Nick.Johnson@apha.gsi.gov.uk. (12)Animal and
Plant Health Agency, Wildlife Zoonoses and Vector-Borne Diseases Research Group, 
Woodham Lane, Addlestone, Surrey, KT15 3NB, UK. Tony.Fooks@apha.gsi.gov.uk.
(13)Institute of Infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool, Liverpool,
L69 7BE, UK. Tony.Fooks@apha.gsi.gov.uk. (14)Microbial Risk Assessment and
Behavioural Science, Emergency Response Department, Public Health England, Porton
Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JG, UK. Steve.Leach@phe.gov.uk. (15)Medical Entomology
group, MRA, Emergency Response Department, Public Health England, Porton Down,
Salisbury, SP4 0JG, UK. Jolyon.Medlock@phe.gov.uk. (16)NIHR Health Protections
Research Unit in Emerging and Zoonotic Infections, Porton Down, UK.
Jolyon.Medlock@phe.gov.uk.

BACKGROUND: As part of efforts to more fully understand the potential risks posed
by West Nile virus (WNV) and Usutu virus (USUV) in the UK, and following on from 
previous reports of a potential bridge vector Culex modestus for these viruses,
at wetland sites in North Kent, mosquito surveillance was undertaken more widely 
across the Isle of Sheppey, the Hoo Peninsula and the Kent mainland.
METHODS: Larval surveys were conducted and Mosquito Magnet® adult traps were used
to collect adult mosquitoes. Pools of female mosquitoes were tested for the
presence of WNV using real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. 
A subset of samples was tested for USUV.
RESULTS: Culex modestus was found in both the pre-imaginal and imago stage at all
five locations surveyed, accounting for 90% of adult mosquitoes collected. WNV or
USUV were not detected in any sample.
CONCLUSIONS: Although no mosquitoes have been shown to be virus positive, the
field survey data from this study demonstrated the dominance of an important
bridge vector species for WNV in this region. Its wide geographical distribution 
highlights the need to update risk assessments on WNV introduction, and to
maintain vigilance for WNV in the South East of England.

PMCID: PMC4342892
PMID: 25884920  [PubMed - in process]


77. Methods. 2015 Oct 1;87:64-74. doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2015.03.028. Epub 2015 Apr 3.

Isolation of syncytiotrophoblast microvesicles and exosomes and their
characterisation by multicolour flow cytometry and fluorescence Nanoparticle
Tracking Analysis.

Dragovic RA(1), Collett GP(2), Hole P(3), Ferguson DJ(4), Redman CW(5), Sargent
IL(6), Tannetta DS(7).

Author information: 
(1)Nuffield Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, University of Oxford, Womens 
Centre Level 3, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK. Electronic address: 
rebecca.dragovic@obs-gyn.ox.ac.uk. (2)Nuffield Department of Obstetrics &
Gynaecology, University of Oxford, Womens Centre Level 3, John Radcliffe
Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK. Electronic address: gavin.collett@obs-gyn.ox.ac.uk.
(3)Malvern Instruments, London Road, Minton Park, Amesbury SP4 7RT, UK.
Electronic address: Patrick.Hole@malvern.com. (4)Nuffield Department of Clinical 
Laboratory Science, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, OX3 9DU
Oxford, UK. Electronic address: david.ferguson@ndcls.ox.ac.uk. (5)Nuffield
Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, University of Oxford, Womens Centre Level
3, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK. Electronic address:
christopher.redman@obs-gyn.ox.ac.uk. (6)Nuffield Department of Obstetrics &
Gynaecology, University of Oxford, Womens Centre Level 3, John Radcliffe
Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK. Electronic address: ian.sargent@obs-gyn.ox.ac.uk.
(7)Nuffield Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, University of Oxford, Womens 
Centre Level 3, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK. Electronic address: 
dionne.tannetta@obs-gyn.ox.ac.uk.

The human placenta releases multiple types and sizes of syncytiotrophoblast (STB)
extracellular vesicles (EV) into the maternal circulation that exhibit diverse
biological activities. The placental perfusion technique enables isolation of
these STBEV, but conventional flow cytometry can only be used to phenotype EV
down to ~300 nm in size. Fluorescence Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (fl-NTA) has
the potential to phenotype EV down to ~50 nm, thereby improving current
characterisation techniques. The aims of this study were to prepare microvesicle 
and exosome enriched fractions from human placental perfusate (n=8) and improve
fl-NTA STBEV detection. Differential centrifugation and filtration effectively
removed contaminating red blood cells from fresh placental perfusates and
pelleted a STB microvesicle (STBMV) fraction (10,000×g pellet - 10KP; NTA modal
size 395±12 nm), enriched for the STB marker placental alkaline phosphatase
(PLAP) and a STB exosome (STBEX) fraction (150,000×g pellet - 150KP; NTA modal
size 147±6 nm), enriched for PLAP and exosome markers Alix and CD63. The PLAP
positivity of 'standard' 10KP and 150KP pools (four samples/pool), determined by 
immunobead depletion, was used to optimise fl-NTA camera settings. Individual
10KP and 150KP samples (n=8) were 54.5±5.7% (range 17.8-66.9%) and 30.6±5.6%
(range 3.3-51.7%) PLAP positive, respectively. We have developed a reliable
method for enriching STBMV and STBEX from placental perfusate. We also
standardised fl-NTA settings and improved measurement of PLAP positive EV in
STBMV. However, fl-NTA is not as sensitive as anti-PLAP Dynabead capture for
STBEX detection, possibly due to STBEX having lower surface expression of PLAP.
These important developments will facilitate more detailed studies of the role of
STBMV and STBEX in normal and pathological pregnancies.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4641874
PMID: 25843788  [PubMed - in process]


78. J Immunol Res. 2015;2015:537319. doi: 10.1155/2015/537319. Epub 2015 Mar 8.

Vaccines and therapies for biodefence agents.

Tree JA(1), Williamson ED(2), Rowland CA(2), Pitt LM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Microbiological Services, Public Health England (PHE), Porton Down, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP4 OJG, UK. (2)Biomedical Science Department, Defence Science and
Technology Laboratory (DSTL), Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 OJQ, UK.
(3)Virology Department, United States Army Medical Research Institute of
Infectious Diseases (USAMRIID), Fort Detrick, Frederick, MD 21703, USA.

PMCID: PMC4369933
PMID: 25839045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Immunol Res. 2015;2015:347903. doi: 10.1155/2015/347903. Epub 2015 Mar 1.

Effective binding of a phosphatidylserine-targeting antibody to Ebola virus
infected cells and purified virions.

Dowall SD(1), Graham VA(1), Corbin-Lickfett K(2), Empig C(2), Schlunegger K(2),
Bruce CB(1), Easterbrook L(1), Hewson R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Public Health England, Porton Down, Wiltshire, Salisbury SP4 0JG, UK.
(2)Peregrine Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Tustin, CA 92780, USA.

Ebola virus is responsible for causing severe hemorrhagic fevers, with case
fatality rates of up to 90%. Currently, no antiviral or vaccine is licensed
against Ebola virus. A phosphatidylserine-targeting antibody (PGN401,
bavituximab) has previously been shown to have broad-spectrum antiviral activity.
Here, we demonstrate that PGN401 specifically binds to Ebola virus and recognizes
infected cells. Our study provides the first evidence of
phosphatidylserine-targeting antibody reactivity against Ebola virus.

PMCID: PMC4359806
PMID: 25815346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 24;10(3):e0119383. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119383.
eCollection 2015.

Exome analysis reveals differentially mutated gene signatures of stage, grade and
subtype in breast cancers.

Li Y(1), Wang X(1), Vural S(1), Mishra NK(1), Cowan KH(2), Guda C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, United States of America. (2)Fred and Pamela
Buffett Cancer Center, Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, United States of
America; Eppley Institute for Cancer Research, Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha,
Nebraska, United States of America. (3)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and
Anatomy, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, United States of
America; Fred and Pamela Buffett Cancer Center, Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha,
Nebraska, United States of America; Eppley Institute for Cancer Research,
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, United States of America;
Bioinformatics and Systems Biology Core, University of Nebraska Medical Center,
Omaha, Nebraska, United States of America.

Breast cancers exhibit highly heterogeneous molecular profiles. Although gene
expression profiles have been used to predict the risks and prognostic outcomes
of breast cancers, the high variability of gene expression limits its clinical
application. In contrast, genetic mutation profiles would be more advantageous
than gene expression profiles because genetic mutations can be stably detected
and the mutational heterogeneity widely exists in breast cancer genomes. We
analyzed 98 breast cancer whole exome samples that were sorted into three
subtypes, two grades and two stages. The sum deleterious effect of all mutations 
in each gene was scored to identify differentially mutated genes (DMGs) for this 
case-control study. DMGs were corroborated using extensive published knowledge.
Functional consequences of deleterious SNVs on protein structure and function
were also investigated. Genes such as ERBB2, ESP8, PPP2R4, KIAA0922, SP4, CENPJ, 
PRCP and SELP that have been experimentally or clinically verified to be tightly 
associated with breast cancer prognosis are among the DMGs identified in this
study. We also identified some genes such as ARL6IP5, RAET1E, and ANO7 that could
be crucial for breast cancer development and prognosis. Further, SNVs such as
rs1058808, rs2480452, rs61751507, rs79167802, rs11540666, and rs2229437 that
potentially influence protein functions are observed at significantly different
frequencies in different comparison groups. Protein structure modeling revealed
that many non-synonymous SNVs have a deleterious effect on protein stability,
structure and function. Mutational profiling at gene- and SNV-level revealed
differential patterns within each breast cancer comparison group, and the gene
signatures correlate with expected prognostic characteristics of breast cancer
classes. Some of the genes and SNVs identified in this study show high promise
and are worthy of further investigation by experimental studies.

PMCID: PMC4372331
PMID: 25803781  [PubMed - in process]


81. Sci Rep. 2015 Mar 24;5:9449. doi: 10.1038/srep09449.

Structure and function of a Clostridium difficile sortase enzyme.

Chambers CJ(1), Roberts AK(2), Shone CC(2), Acharya KR(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Public Health England, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG, UK [2] Department of
Biology and Biochemistry, University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath BA2 7AY, UK.
(2)Public Health England, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG, UK. (3)Department of
Biology and Biochemistry, University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath BA2 7AY, UK.

Sortase enzymes are responsible for covalent anchoring of specific proteins to
the peptidoglycan of the cell wall of gram-positive bacteria. In some
gram-positive bacteria (e.g. Staphylococcus aureus), sortases have been found to 
be essential for pathogenesis and their inhibitors are under development as
potential novel therapeutics. Here we provide the first report on the structural 
characterisation of the C. difficile sortase. An active site mutant was
crystallised and its structure determined to 2.55 Å by X-ray diffraction to
provide structural insight into its catalytic mechanism. In order to elucidate
the role of the sortase in the cell wall biogenesis, a C. difficile sortase
knockout strain was constructed by intron mutagenesis. Characterisation of this
mutant led to the discovery that the putative adhesin CD0386 is anchored to the
peptidoglycan of C. difficile by the sortase SrtB and that an SPKTG peptide motif
is involved in the transpeptidation reaction with the C. difficile peptidoglycan.
In an animal model for C. difficile infection, the SrtB mutant caused disease at 
a similar rate of onset as the wild type strain. In conclusion, our detailed
study shows that the SrtB enzyme from C. difficile does not play an essential
role in pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4371152
PMID: 25801974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Acta Crystallogr F Struct Biol Commun. 2015 Mar;71(Pt 3):295-303. doi:
10.1107/S2053230X15001065. Epub 2015 Feb 19.

Cwp84, a Clostridium difficile cysteine protease, exhibits conformational
flexibility in the absence of its propeptide.

Bradshaw WJ(1), Roberts AK(2), Shone CC(2), Acharya KR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Bath, Claverton Down,
Bath BA2 7AY, England. (2)Public Health England, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG, 
England.

In recent decades, the global healthcare problems caused by Clostridium difficile
have increased at an alarming rate. A greater understanding of this
antibiotic-resistant bacterium, particularly with respect to how it interacts
with the host, is required for the development of novel strategies for fighting
C. difficile infections. The surface layer (S-layer) of C. difficile is likely to
be of significant importance to host-pathogen interactions. The mature S-layer is
formed by a proteinaceous array consisting of multiple copies of a
high-molecular-weight and a low-molecular-weight S-layer protein. These
components result from the cleavage of SlpA by Cwp84, a cysteine protease. The
structure of a truncated Cwp84 active-site mutant has recently been reported and 
the key features have been identified, providing the first structural insights
into the role of Cwp84 in the formation of the S-layer. Here, two structures of
Cwp84 after propeptide cleavage are presented and the three conformational
changes that are observed are discussed. These changes result in a
reconfiguration of the active site and exposure of the hydrophobic pocket.

PMCID: PMC4356305
PMID: 25760704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Travel Med Infect Dis. 2015 Mar-Apr;13(2):200-1. doi:
10.1016/j.tmaid.2015.01.002. Epub 2015 Feb 10.

Detection of Dermacentor marginatus and a possible Rickettsia slovaca case in the
United Kingdom - the risk of the visiting traveller.

Pietzsch ME(1), Hansford KM(2), Cull B(3), Jahfari S(4), Sprong H(5), Medlock
JM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Entomology & Zoonoses Ecology, Public Health England, MRA, Emergency
Response Dept, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG, UK. Electronic address:
Maaike.Pietzsch@phe.gov.uk. (2)Medical Entomology & Zoonoses Ecology, Public
Health England, MRA, Emergency Response Dept, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG, UK.
Electronic address: Kayleigh.Hansford@phe.gov.uk. (3)Medical Entomology &
Zoonoses Ecology, Public Health England, MRA, Emergency Response Dept, Porton
Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG, UK. Electronic address: Ben.Cull@phe.gov.uk. (4)National
Institute for Public Health and Environment (RIVM), Centre for Infectious Disease
Control, Laboratory for Zoonoses and Environmental Microbiology, Antonie van
Leeuwenhoeklaan 9, P.O. Box 1, 3720 BA Bilthoven, The Netherlands. Electronic
address: seta.jahfari@rivm.nl. (5)National Institute of Public Health and
Environment (RIVM), Laboratory for Zoonoses and Environmental Microbiology,
Antonie van Leeuwenhoeklaan 9, P.O. Box 1, 3720 BA Bilthoven, The Netherlands.
Electronic address: hein.sprong@rivm.nl. (6)Medical Entomology & Zoonoses
Ecology, Public Health England, MRA, Emergency Response Dept, Porton Down,
Salisbury SP4 0JG, UK. Electronic address: Jolyon.Medlock@phe.gov.uk.

PMID: 25702622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Vet Rec. 2015 Apr 4;176(14):359. doi: 10.1136/vr.102806. Epub 2015 Feb 4.

Should single layer centrifugation of dog semen be done before or after the semen
is cooled?

Gálvez MJ(1), Ortiz I(1), Hidalgo M(1), Morrell JM(2), Dorado J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Reproduction Group, Department of Animal Medicine and Surgery, Faculty 
of Veterinary Medicine, University of Cordoba, Córdoba 14071, Spain. (2)Division 
of Reproduction, Department of Clinical Sciences, Swedish University of
Agricultural Sciences, Box 7054, Uppsala SE-75007, Sweden.

The aim of this study was to assess the effectiveness of sperm selection by
single layer centrifugation (SLC) on canine sperm quality when SLC was performed 
before or after the cooling process, or when double SLC (before and after
cooling) was performed. Twenty ejaculates from four dogs were divided into four
aliquots as follows: unselected: no SLC was performed; SLC prior to cooling
(SLC-PC): sperm selection was carried out before cooling; SLC after cooling
(SLC-AC): sperm selection was performed after cooling; and double SLC: sperm
selection was carried out before and after cooling. Sperm motility (by
computer-assisted semen analysis), morphology (Diff-Quick staining), sperm
membrane integrity (Vital-Test kit) and acrosome integrity (double fluorescent
stain) were assessed in re-warmed semen samples. Four sperm subpopulations (sP)
were detected using a pattern analysis technique (sP1: highly active,
non-progressive; sP2: low velocity, highly progressive; sP3: less vigorous,
poorly progressive; sP4: highly progressive motility). A higher proportion of
sperm were classified as sP4 in SLC-AC samples. Most of the sperm parameters
assessed showed higher values in the SLC-AC group. We conclude that SLC-AC is the
best protocol to improve sperm quality in chilled canine semen in comparison to
the other procedures tested.

British Veterinary Association.

PMID: 25653394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Vet Rec. 2015 Jan 31;176(5):129-30. doi: 10.1136/vr.h496.

Brown dog tick infestation of a home in England.

Hansford KM(1), Pietzsch M(1), Cull B(1), Medlock JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Entomology and Zoonoses Ecology, Emergency Response Department, Public
Health England, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG.

PMID: 25634925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Hosp Infect. 2015 Apr;89(4):324-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jhin.2014.11.019. Epub 2014
Dec 30.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa in hospital water systems: biofilms, guidelines, and
practicalities.

Walker J(1), Moore G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Public Health England, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG, UK. Electronic address:
jimmy.walker@phe.gov.uk. (2)Public Health England, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4
0JG, UK.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa is one of many micro-organisms that can act as an
opportunistic pathogen and colonize and infect vulnerable patients. Hospital
water is a recognized source P. aeruginosa. Several outbreaks, including the
incidents involving babies in Northern Ireland in 2011/12, have been attributed
to contaminated water systems. As a direct result of the deaths of four neonates 
in Northern Ireland, guidance documents--addendums to Health Technical Memorandum
01-04 (Department of Health, England)--were produced to advise National Health
Service managers on how to deal with the presence of P. aeruginosa in augmented
care units. The guidance was based on current expert opinion and limited
scientific evidence. Public Health England has established a reproducible and
controllable water distribution test rig in a laboratory setting to further
understand the contamination of water systems by P. aeruginosa and to identify
vulnerable sites for microbial colonization. It is anticipated that these studies
will add to the evidence base and enable the guidance documents to be updated in 
due course.

Copyright © 2014 The Healthcare Infection Society. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 25623205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Biol Chem. 2015 Mar 13;290(11):6825-36. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.617258. Epub 2015
Jan 25.

Class I histone deacetylase-mediated repression of the proximal promoter of the
activity-regulated cytoskeleton-associated protein gene regulates its response to
brain-derived neurotrophic factor.

Fukuchi M(1), Nakashima F(1), Tabuchi A(1), Shimotori M(1), Tatsumi S(1), Okuno
H(2), Bito H(2), Tsuda M(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Medicine and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toyama, 2630 Sugitani, Toyama 930-0194,
Japan and. (2)the Department of Neurochemistry, Graduate School of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. (3)From the Department of 
Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Medicine and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
University of Toyama, 2630 Sugitani, Toyama 930-0194, Japan and
tsuda@pha.u-toyama.ac.jp.

We examined the transcriptional regulation of the activity-regulated
cytoskeleton-associated protein gene (Arc), focusing on BDNF-induced Arc
expression in cultured rat cortical cells. Although the synaptic
activity-responsive element (SARE), located -7 kbp upstream of the Arc
transcription start site, responded to NMDA, BDNF, or FGF2, the proximal region
of the promoter (Arc/-1679) was activated by BDNF or FGF2, but not by NMDA,
suggesting the presence of at least two distinct Arc promoter regions, distal and
proximal, that respond to extracellular stimuli. Specificity protein 4 (SP4) and 
early growth response 1 (EGR1) controlled Arc/-1679 transcriptional activity via 
the region encompassing -169 to -37 of the Arc promoter. We found that
trichostatin A (TSA), a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, significantly
enhanced the inductive effects of BDNF or FGF2, but not those of NMDA on Arc
expression. Inhibitors of class I/IIb HDACs, SAHA, and class I HDACs, MS-275, but
not of class II HDACs, MC1568, enhanced BDNF-induced Arc expression. The
enhancing effect of TSA was mediated by the region from -1027 to -1000 bp, to
which serum response factor (SRF) and HDAC1 bound. The binding of HDAC1 to this
region was reduced by TSA. Thus, Arc expression was suppressed by class I
HDAC-mediated mechanisms via chromatin modification of the proximal promoter
whereas the inhibition of HDAC allowed Arc expression to be markedly enhanced in 
response to BDNF or FGF2. These results contribute to our understanding of the
physiological role of Arc expression in neuronal functions such as memory
consolidation.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4358108
PMID: 25623071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Curr Colorectal Cancer Rep. 2013 Dec;9(4):350-357.

REACTIVE OXYGEN SPECIES AND COLORECTAL CANCER.

Sreevalsan S(1), Safe S(2).

Author information: 
(1)VMR 1197, Room 413, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, 77843
979-845-9182 ssreevalsan@cvm.tamu.edu. (2)VMR 1197, Room 410, Texas A&M
University, College Station, TX, 77843 979-845-5988.

Several agents used for treatment of colon and other cancers induce reactive
oxygen species (ROS) and this plays an important role in their anticancer
activities. In addition to the well-known proapoptotic effects of ROS inducers,
these compounds also decrease expression of specificity protein (Sp)
transcription factors Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 and several pro-oncogenic Spregulated
genes important for cancer cell proliferation, survival and metastasis. The
mechanism of these responses involve ROS-dependent downregulation of microRNA-27a
(miR-27a) or miR-20a (and paralogs) and induction of two Sp-repressors, ZBTB10
and ZBTB4 respectively. This pathway significantly contributes to the anticancer 
activity of ROS inducers and should be considered in development of drug
combinations for cancer chemotherapy.

PMCID: PMC4288935
PMID: 25584043  [PubMed]


89. Vaccine. 2015 Jan 29;33(5):621-7. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2014.12.025. Epub 2014
Dec 24.

Anti-group B Streptococcus antibody in infants born to mothers with human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection.

Le Doare K(1), Allen L(2), Kampmann B(3), Heath PT(4), Taylor S(2), Hesseling
AC(5), Gorringe A(2), Jones CE(6).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust/Imperial Centre for Global Health Research/Department of
Academic Paediatrics, Imperial College London, Norfolk Place, London W2 1NY, UK; 
Paediatric Infectious Diseases Research Group, St George's, University of London,
Cranmer Terrace, London SW17 0RE, UK. Electronic address:
k.mehring-le-doare@imperial.ac.uk. (2)Public Health England, Porton Down,
Salisbury SP4 0JG, UK. (3)Wellcome Trust/Imperial Centre for Global Health
Research/Department of Academic Paediatrics, Imperial College London, Norfolk
Place, London W2 1NY, UK; Medical Research Council, Atlantic Road, Fajara,
Gambia. (4)Paediatric Infectious Diseases Research Group, St George's, University
of London, Cranmer Terrace, London SW17 0RE, UK. (5)Desmond Tutu TB Center,
Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, Stellenbosch University, Cape Town,
South Africa. (6)Wellcome Trust/Imperial Centre for Global Health
Research/Department of Academic Paediatrics, Imperial College London, Norfolk
Place, London W2 1NY, UK; Paediatric Infectious Diseases Research Group, St
George's, University of London, Cranmer Terrace, London SW17 0RE, UK; Desmond
Tutu TB Center, Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, Stellenbosch
University, Cape Town, South Africa.

BACKGROUND: HIV-exposed uninfected infants have increased infection risk and
mortality compared to HIV-unexposed infants. HIV-exposed infants may be at
increased risk of invasive GBS disease due to reduced maternal antibody against
GBS.
METHODS: We quantified antibodies that bind to the surface of whole Group B
Streptococcus (GBS) of serotypes Ia, Ib, II, III and V using novel flow cytometry
assays in South African HIV-infected and non-infected mothers and their
uninfected infants. Antibody-mediated complement C3b/iC3b deposition onto GBS of 
these serotypes was also quantified by a novel flow cytometry assay.
RESULTS: Geometric mean concentration (GMC) of both surface-binding anti-GBS
antibody and antibody-mediated complement deposition onto GBS were reduced in
HIV-infected women (n=46) compared to HIV-uninfected women (n=58) for ST1a
(surface-binding: 19.3 vs 29.3; p=0.003; complement deposition: 2.9 vs 5.3 SU/mL;
p=0.003), STIb (24.9 vs 47.6; p=0.003; 2.6 vs 4.9 SU/mL; p=0.003), STII (19.8 vs 
50.0; p=0.001; 3.1 vs 6.2 SU/mL; p=0.001), STIII (27.8 vs 60.1; p=0.001; 2.8 vs
5.3 SU/mL; p=0.001) and STV (121.9 vs 185.6 SU/mL; p<0.001) and in their infants 
for STIa (complement deposition 9.4 vs 27.0 SU/mL; p=0.02), STIb (13.4 vs 24.5
SU/mL; p=0.02), STII (14.6 vs 42.7 SU/mL; p=0.03), STIII (26.6 vs 62.7 SU/mL;
p=0.03) and STV (90.4 vs 165.8 SU/mL; p=0.04). Median transplacental transfer of 
antibody from HIV-infected women to their infants was reduced compared to
HIV-uninfected women for GBS serotypes II (0.42 [IQR 0.22-0.59] vs 1.0 SU/mL
[0.42-1.66]; p<0.001), III (0.54 [0.31-1.03] vs 0.95 SU/mL [0.42-3.05], p=0.05)
and V (0.51 [0.28-0.79] vs 0.75 SU/mL [0.26-2.9], p=0.04). The differences
between infants remained significant at 16 weeks of age.
CONCLUSIONS: Maternal HIV infection was associated with lower anti-GBS surface
binding antibody concentration and antibody-mediated C3b/iC3b deposition onto GBS
bacteria of serotypes Ia, Ib, II, III and V. This may render these infants more
susceptible to early and late onset GBS disease.

Crown Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4315133
PMID: 25543061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2014 Dec 18;5(5):a018572. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a018572.

Animal models of tuberculosis: Guinea pigs.

Clark S(1), Hall Y(1), Williams A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Services, Public Health England, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG, 
United Kingdom.

The progression of the disease that follows infection of guinea pigs with
Mycobacterium tuberculosis displays many features of human tuberculosis (TB), and
the guinea pig model of TB has been used for more than 100 years as a research
tool to understand and describe disease mechanisms. Changes in the bacterial
burden and pathology following infection can be readily monitored and used to
evaluate the impact of TB interventions. Demonstration of the protective efficacy
of vaccines in the low-dose aerosol guinea pig model is an important component of
the preclinical data package for novel vaccines in development, and there is a
continual need to improve the model to facilitate progression of vaccines to the 
clinic. Development of better tools with which to dissect the immune responses of
guinea pigs is a focus of current research.

Copyright © 2015 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; all rights reserved.

PMID: 25524720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Neoplasia. 2014 Dec;16(12):1059-69. doi: 10.1016/j.neo.2014.09.011.

The transcriptional repressor ZBTB4 regulates EZH2 through a
MicroRNA-ZBTB4-specificity protein signaling axis.

Yang WS(1), Chadalapaka G(2), Cho SG(3), Lee SO(4), Jin UH(4), Jutooru I(2), Choi
K(5), Leung YK(1), Ho SM(1), Safe S(6), Kim K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, University of Cincinnati, College of
Medicine, 3223 Eden Ave., Cincinnati, OH 45267. (2)Department of Veterinary
Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University, 4466 Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX 77843. (3)Department of Preventive Medicine, College of
Korean Medicine, Kyung Hee University, 1 Hoegi, Dongdaemun-gu, Seoul 130-701,
Republic of Korea. (4)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health
Science Center, 2121 W. Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX 77030. (5)Division of
Experimental Biology and Cancer Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital medical
Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229. (6)Department of Veterinary Physiology and
Pharmacology, Texas A&M University, 4466 Texas A&M University, College Station,
TX 77843; Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health Science
Center, 2121 W. Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX 77030.

ZBTB4 is a transcriptional repressor and examination of publically-available
microarray data sets demonstrated an inverse relationship in the prognostic value
and expression of ZBTB4 and the histone methyltransferase EZH2 in tumors from
breast cancer patients. The possibility of functional interactions between EZH2
and ZBTB4 was investigated in breast cancer cells and the results showed that
EZH2 is directly suppressed by ZBTB4 which in turn is regulated (suppressed) by
miR-106b and other paralogues from the miR-17-92, miR-106b-25 and miR-106a-363
clusters that are highly expressed in breast and other tumors. ZBTB4 also acts a 
suppressor of specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4,
and RNA interference studies show that Sp proteins are required for EZH2
expression. The prediction analysis results from breast cancer patient array data
sets confirm an association of Sp1-dependent EZH2 gene signature with decreased
survival of breast cancer patients. Disruption of oncogenic miR-ZBTB4 signaling
axis by anticancer agent such as betulinic acid that induce down-regulation of Sp
proteins in breast cancer cells resulted in inhibition of tumor growth and
colonization of breast cancer cells in a mouse model. Thus, EZH2 is reciprocally 
regulated by a novel signaling network consisting of Sp proteins, oncogenic miRs 
and ZBTB4, and modulation of this gene network is a novel therapeutic approach
for treatment of breast cancer and possibly other cancers.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4309261
PMID: 25499219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Biosens Bioelectron. 2014 Oct 5;65C:47-53. doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2014.09.090. [Epub
ahead of print]

Kinetic epitope mapping of monoclonal antibodies raised against the Yersinia
pestis virulence factor LcrV.

Read T(1), Olkhov RV(1), Williamson ED(2), Shaw AM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Biosciences, College of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Exeter,
Stocker Road, Exeter EX4 4QD, UK. (2)Biomedical Sciences Department, Defence
Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wilts. SP4 0JQ, UK.
(3)Biosciences, College of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Exeter,
Stocker Road, Exeter EX4 4QD, UK. Electronic address: Andrew.m.shaw@exeter.ac.uk.

Five monoclonal antibodies, mAb7.3, mAb29.3, mAb46.3, mAb12.3 and mAb36.3, raised
to the LcrV virulence factor from Yersinia pestis were characterised for their
Fab affinity against the purified protein and their Fc affinity to Protein A/G as
a proxy for the Fc<U+03B3>R receptor. Kinetic measurements were performed label-free in 
a localised particle plasmon array reader. The Fc-ProteinA/G complex first-order 
half-life was determined for each antibody and fell in the range of 0.8-3.8h. The
Fab first-order half-lives had ranged from 3.4 to 9.2h although two antibodies,
mAb12.3 and mAb36.3, showed low affinity interactions. Competitive binding
studies of mixtures of the Fab-active antibodies were performed to measure the
relative binding efficiency of one antibody in the presence of the other. A
geometric relative positioning of the epitopes of mAb7.3, mAb29.3 and mAb46.3 was
determined based on the footprint locus of the antibody and the percentage of
competitive binding. The two known protective antibodies mAb7.3 and mAb29.3
showed greater interference, indicating epitopes close to one another compared to
the non-protective mAb46.3 antibody. The Fab-Fc complex half-life screen and
epitope mapping are potentially useful tools in the screening of therapeutic
antibodies or vaccine candidates.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 25461137  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


93. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2015 Jan;53(1):3-7. doi: 10.1016/j.bjoms.2014.04.017. 
Epub 2014 Oct 23.

Novel method for comparing coverage by future methods of ballistic facial
protection.

Breeze J(1), Allanson-Bailey LC(2), Hepper AE(2), Lewis EA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Academic Department of Military Surgery and Trauma, Royal Centre for Defence
Medicine, Birmingham Research Park, Birmingham, B15 2SQ; Injury modelling, Dstl
Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ. Electronic address:
johno.breeze@gmail.com. (2)Injury modelling, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury,
Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ. (3)Soldier System Programmes, Defence Equipment and Support, 
Ministry of Defence, Abbeywood, Bristol, BS34 8JH.

The wearing of eye protection by United Kingdom soldiers in Afghanistan has
reduced the morbidity caused by explosive fragments. However, the remaining face 
remains uncovered because there is a lack of evidence to substantiate the
procurement of methods to protect it. Using a new computerised tool we entered
details of the entry sites of surface wounds caused by explosive fragments in all
UK soldiers who were injured in the face between 1 January 2010 and 31 December
2011. We compared clinical and predicted immediate and long term outcomes (as
defined by the Abbreviated Injury Score (AIS) and the Functional Capacity Index
(pFCI), respectively). We also used the tool to predict how additional protection
in the form of a visor and mandible guard would affect outcomes. A soldier
wearing eye protection was 9 times (1.03/0.12) less likely to sustain an eye
injury than one without. However, 38% of soldiers in this series were not wearing
eye protection at the time of injury. There was no significant difference between
the AIS and pFCI scores predicted by the tool and those found clinically. There
is limited evidence to support the use of a mandible guard; its greatest asset is
better protection of the nose, but a visor would be expected to reduce long-term 
morbidity more than eye protection alone, and we recommend future trials to
assess its acceptability to users. We think that use of this novel tool can help 
in the selection of future methods of ballistic facial protection.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 25441496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 7;9(11):e109720. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0109720.
eCollection 2014.

Specific activation of dendritic cells enhances clearance of Bacillus anthracis
following infection.

Thompson IJ(1), Mann ER(2), Stokes MG(1), English NR(2), Knight SC(2), Williamson
D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory,
Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ, United Kingdom. (2)Antigen
Presentation Research Group, Imperial College London, Northwick Park and St.
Mark's Campus, Watford Road, Harrow, HA1 3UJ, United Kingdom.

Dendritic cells are potent activators of the immune system and have a key role in
linking innate and adaptive immune responses. In the current study we have used
ex vivo pulsed bone marrow dendritic cells (BMDC) in a novel adoptive transfer
strategy to protect against challenge with Bacillus anthracis, in a murine model.
Pre-pulsing murine BMDC with either recombinant Protective Antigen (PA) or CpG
significantly upregulated expression of the activation markers CD40, CD80, CD86
and MHC-II. Passive transfusion of mice with pulsed BMDC, concurrently with
active immunisation with rPA in alum, significantly enhanced (p<0.001)
PA-specific splenocyte responses seven days post-immunisation. Parallel studies
using ex vivo DCs expanded from human peripheral blood and activated under the
same conditions as the murine DC, demonstrated that human DCs had a PA
dose-related significant increase in the markers CD40, CD80 and CCR7 and that the
increases in CD40 and CD80 were maintained when the other activating components, 
CpG and HK B. anthracis were added to the rPA in culture. Mice vaccinated on a
single occasion intra-muscularly with rPA and alum and concurrently transfused
intra-dermally with pulsed BMDC, demonstrated 100% survival following lethal B.
anthracis challenge and had significantly enhanced (p<0.05) bacterial clearance
within 2 days, compared with mice vaccinated with rPA and alum alone.

PMCID: PMC4224377
PMID: 25380285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Biomicrofluidics. 2014 Aug 7;8(4):044115. doi: 10.1063/1.4892036. eCollection
2014.

Dielectrophoretic sample preparation for environmental monitoring of
microorganisms: Soil particle removal.

Fatoyinbo HO(1), McDonnell MC(2), Hughes MP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Biomedical Engineering, Department of Mechanical Engineering
Sciences, University of Surrey , Guildford, Surrey GU2 7XH, United Kingdom.
(2)DSTL Porton Down , Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, United Kingdom.

Detection of pathogens from environmental samples is often hampered by sensors
interacting with environmental particles such as soot, pollen, or environmental
dust such as soil or clay. These particles may be of similar size to the target
bacterium, preventing removal by filtration, but may non-specifically bind to
sensor surfaces, fouling them and causing artefactual results. In this paper, we 
report the selective manipulation of soil particles using an AC electrokinetic
microfluidic system. Four heterogeneous soil samples (smectic clay, kaolinitic
clay, peaty loam, and sandy loam) were characterised using dielectrophoresis to
identify the electrical difference to a target organism. A flow-cell device was
then constructed to evaluate dielectrophoretic separation of bacteria and clay in
a continous flow through mode. The average separation efficiency of the system
across all soil types was found to be 68.7% with a maximal separation efficiency 
for kaolinitic clay at 87.6%. This represents the first attempt to separate soil 
particles from bacteria using dielectrophoresis and indicate that the technique
shows significant promise; with appropriate system optimisation, we believe that 
this preliminary study represents an opportunity to develop a simple yet highly
effective sample processing system.

PMCID: PMC4189292
PMID: 25379100  [PubMed]


96. J Biol Chem. 2014 Dec 12;289(50):34743-67. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.576702. Epub
2014 Oct 23.

Histone hyperacetylation up-regulates protein kinase Cd in dopaminergic neurons
to induce cell death: relevance to epigenetic mechanisms of neurodegeneration in 
Parkinson disease.

Jin H(1), Kanthasamy A(1), Harischandra DS(1), Kondru N(1), Ghosh A(1), Panicker 
N(1), Anantharam V(1), Rana A(2), Kanthasamy AG(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biomedical Sciences, Iowa Center for Advanced
Neurotoxicology, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa 50011. (2)the Department of
Molecular Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Stritch School of Medicine, Loyola
University Chicago, Maywood, Illinois 60153, and the Hines Veterans Affairs
Medical Center, Hines, Illinois 60141. (3)From the Department of Biomedical
Sciences, Iowa Center for Advanced Neurotoxicology, Iowa State University, Ames, 
Iowa 50011, akanthas@iastate.edu.

The oxidative stress-sensitive protein kinase Cd (PKCd) has been implicated in
dopaminergic neuronal cell death. However, little is known about the epigenetic
mechanisms regulating PKCd expression in neurons. Here, we report a novel
mechanism by which the PKCd gene can be regulated by histone acetylation.
Treatment with histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor sodium butyrate (NaBu)
induced PKCd expression in cultured neurons, brain slices, and animal models.
Several other HDAC inhibitors also mimicked NaBu. The chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that hyperacetylation of histone H4 by NaBu
is associated with the PKCd promoter. Deletion analysis of the PKCd promoter
mapped the NaBu-responsive element to an 81-bp minimal promoter region. Detailed 
mutagenesis studies within this region revealed that four GC boxes conferred
hyperacetylation-induced PKCd promoter activation. Cotransfection experiments and
Sp inhibitor studies demonstrated that Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 regulated NaBu-induced
PKCd up-regulation. However, NaBu did not alter the DNA binding activities of Sp 
proteins or their expression. Interestingly, a one-hybrid analysis revealed that 
NaBu enhanced transcriptional activity of Sp1/Sp3. Overexpression of the
p300/cAMP-response element-binding protein-binding protein (CBP) potentiated the 
NaBu-mediated transactivation potential of Sp1/Sp3, but expressing several HDACs 
attenuated this effect, suggesting that p300/CBP and HDACs act as coactivators or
corepressors in histone acetylation-induced PKCd up-regulation. Finally, using
genetic and pharmacological approaches, we showed that NaBu up-regulation of PKCd
sensitizes neurons to cell death in a human dopaminergic cell model and brain
slice cultures. Together, these results indicate that histone acetylation
regulates PKCd expression to augment nigrostriatal dopaminergic cell death, which
could contribute to the progressive neuropathogenesis of Parkinson disease.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4263877
PMID: 25342743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Immunol Res. 2014;2014:237043. doi: 10.1155/2014/237043. Epub 2014 Sep 16.

The impact of "omic" and imaging technologies on assessing the host immune
response to biodefence agents.

Tree JA(1), Flick-Smith H(2), Elmore MJ(1), Rowland CA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biodefence and PreClinical Evaluation Group, Public Health England (PHE),
Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP5 3NU, UK. (2)Biomedical Sciences
Department, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl), Porton Down,
Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ, UK.

Understanding the interactions between host and pathogen is important for the
development and assessment of medical countermeasures to infectious agents,
including potential biodefence pathogens such as Bacillus anthracis, Ebola virus,
and Francisella tularensis. This review focuses on technological advances which
allow this interaction to be studied in much greater detail. Namely, the use of
"omic" technologies (next generation sequencing, DNA, and protein microarrays)
for dissecting the underlying host response to infection at the molecular level; 
optical imaging techniques (flow cytometry and fluorescence microscopy) for
assessing cellular responses to infection; and biophotonic imaging for
visualising the infectious disease process. All of these technologies hold great 
promise for important breakthroughs in the rational development of vaccines and
therapeutics for biodefence agents.

PMCID: PMC4182007
PMID: 25333059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Vet Rec. 2014 Oct 18;175(15):385-6. doi: 10.1136/vr.g6226.

Importation of R sanguineus into the UK via dogs: tickborne diseases.

Hansford KM(1), Pietzsch ME(1), Cull B(1), Medlock JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Entomology and Zoonoses Ecology, Health Protection and Medical
Directorate, Public Health England, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG.

PMID: 25324415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Microb Pathog. 2015 Jan;78:37-42. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2014.10.002. Epub 2014
Oct 2.

Delayed presence of alternatively activated macrophages during a Francisella
tularensis infection.

D'Elia RV(1), Laws TR(2), Núñez A(3), Taylor C(2), Clark GC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK. Electronic
address: rvdelia@dstl.gov.uk. (2)Biomedical Sciences, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury
SP4 0JQ, UK. (3)Pathology Department, Animal Health and Veterinary Laboratories
Agency - Weybridge, Woodham Lane, New Haw, Addlestone KT15 3NB, UK.

Francisella tularensis is an intracellular bacterium that has the ability to
multiply within the macrophage. The phenotype of a macrophage can determine
whether the infection is cleared or the host succumbs to disease. Previously
published data has suggested that F. tularensis LVS actively induces the
alternative phenotype as a survival mechanism. In these studies we demonstrate
that this is not the case for the more virulent strain of F. tularensis SCHU-S4. 
During an intranasal mouse model of infection, immuno-histochemistry identified
that iNOS positive ("classical") macrophages are present at 72 h post-infection
and remain high (supported by CCL-5 release) in numbers. In contrast,
arginase/FIZZ-1 positive ("alternative") cells appear later and in low numbers
during the development of the disease tularemia.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 25284816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Parasitology. 2015 Apr;142(4):527-33. doi: 10.1017/S003118201400153X. Epub 2014
Sep 30.

Analysis of genetic variability of Fasciola hepatica populations from different
geographical locations by ISSR-PCR.

Robles-Pérez D(1), García-García P(2), Martínez-Pérez JM(1), Rojo-Vázquez FA(1), 
Martínez-Valladares M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,University of León,Campus de Vegazana, 24071
León,Spain. (2)Faculty of Biological and Environmental Sciences,University of
León,Campus de Vegazana, 24071 León,Spain. (3)Instituto de Ganadería de Montaña
(CSIC-ULE),Finca Marzanas, 24346 Grulleros, León,Spain.

Inter-simple sequence repeats markers were used to determinate the genetic
variability of Fasciola hepatica populations recovered from sheep and cattle from
Spain (Sp1, Sp2, Sp3 and Sp4), UK (Eng), Ireland (Ir) and Mexico (Mex). Twenty
five primers were tested but only five produced 39 reproducible bands, being
71.79% polymorphic bands. This percentage ranged from 10.26% in Sp4 to 48.72% in 
Sp1, and per host between 28.21 and 48.72% in sheep and between 10.26 and 38.46% 
in cattle. This relatively low range of genetic diversity within populations,
with a mean of 34.40%, implies that a large proportion of variation resided among
populations. The population differentiation (Gst = 0.547) indicated that 54.7% of
variation is due to differences between populations and 45.3% due to differences 
within population. The Nei's distance ranged between 0.091 and 0.230 in sheep and
between 0.150 and 0.337 in cattle. The genetic relationships between populations 
and individuals were shown by a UPGMA dendrogram and a principal coordinate
analysis; both grouped all populations separately from Sp4, a population of from 
the Midwest of Spain with the lowest level of diversity. Small genetic distances 
were observed between Eng and Ir, on the one hand, and Sp1, Sp2, Sp3, from the
Northwest of Spain, together with Mex, on the other.

PMID: 25266441  [PubMed - in process]


101. Viruses. 2014 Sep 12;6(9):3425-7. doi: 10.3390/v6093425.

Reply to comment--Clement et al.: (Prevalence of antibodies against hantaviruses 
in serum and saliva of adults living or working on farms in Yorkshire, United
Kingdom).

Jameson LJ(1), Newton A(2), Coole L(3), Newman EN(4), Carroll MW(5), Beeching
NJ(6), Hewson R(7), Christley RM(8).

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Services, Public Health England, Porton Down, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, 
UK. lisa.jameson@phe.gov.uk. (2)Public Health England, Yorkshire and the Humber, 
York YO41 1LZ, UK. autilia.newton@phe.gov.uk. (3)Field Epidemiology Services,
Public Health England, Leeds LS2 7UE, UK. louise.coole@phe.gov.uk.
(4)Microbiology Services, Public Health England, Porton Down, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, 
UK. edmund.newman@phe.gov.uk. (5)Microbiology Services, Public Health England,
Porton Down, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK. miles.carroll@phe.gov.uk. (6)Clinical
Sciences, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool L3 5QA, UK.
beeching@liverpool.ac.uk. (7)Microbiology Services, Public Health England, Porton
Down, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK. roger.hewson@phe.gov.uk. (8)Institute of Infection
and Global Health, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 7BE, UK.
robc@liverpool.ac.uk.

Comment on
    Viruses. 2014 Feb;6(2):524-34.
    Viruses. 2014 Sep;6(9):3415-24.

PMCID: PMC4189029
PMID: 25256390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Dec;1843(12):3018-28. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2014.09.006. Epub 2014 Sep 22.

Nuclear respiratory factor 2 regulates the transcription of AMPA receptor subunit
GluA2 (Gria2).

Priya A(1), Johar K(1), Nair B(1), Wong-Riley MT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Road, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA. (2)Department of 
Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of Wisconsin, 8701
Watertown Plank Road, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA. Electronic address: mwr@mcw.edu.

Neuronal activity is highly dependent on energy metabolism. Nuclear respiratory
factor 2 (NRF-2) tightly couples neuronal activity and energy metabolism by
transcriptionally co-regulating all 13 subunits of an important energy-generating
enzyme, cytochrome c oxidase (COX), as well as critical subunits of excitatory
NMDA receptors. AMPA receptors are another major class of excitatory
glutamatergic receptors that mediate most of the fast excitatory synaptic
transmission in the brain. They are heterotetrameric proteins composed of various
combinations of GluA1-4 subunits, with GluA2 being the most common one. We have
previously shown that GluA2 (Gria2) is transcriptionally regulated by nuclear
respiratory factor 1 (NRF-1) and specificity protein 4 (Sp4), which also regulate
all subunits of COX. However, it was not known if NRF-2 also couples neuronal
activity and energy metabolism by regulating subunits of the AMPA receptors. By
means of multiple approaches, including electrophoretic mobility shift and
supershift assays, chromatin immunoprecipitation, promoter mutations, real-time
quantitative PCR, and western blot analysis, NRF-2 was found to functionally
regulate the expression of Gria2, but not of Gria1, Gria3, or Gria4 genes in
neurons. By regulating the GluA2 subunit of the AMPA receptor, NRF-2 couples
energy metabolism and neuronal activity at the transcriptional level through a
concurrent and parallel mechanism with NRF-1 and Sp4.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4198421
PMID: 25245478  [PubMed - in process]


103. Genome Res. 2015 Jan;25(1):129-41. doi: 10.1101/gr.177543.114. Epub 2014 Sep 18.

Burkholderia pseudomallei sequencing identifies genomic clades with distinct
recombination, accessory, and epigenetic profiles.

Nandi T(1), Holden MT, Didelot X(3), Mehershahi K(4), Boddey JA(5), Beacham I(5),
Peak I(5), Harting J(6), Baybayan P(6), Guo Y(6), Wang S(6), How LC(6), Sim B(1),
Essex-Lopresti A(7), Sarkar-Tyson M(7), Nelson M(7), Smither S(7), Ong C(8), Aw
LT(8), Hoon CH(1), Michell S(9), Studholme DJ(9), Titball R(10), Chen SL(11),
Parkhill J(2), Tan P(12).

Author information: 
(1)Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore, 138672, Republic of Singapore;
(2)The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, CB10 1SA, United Kingdom;
(3)Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, Imperial College London, W2
1PG, United Kingdom; (4)Department of Medicine, National University of Singapore,
Singapore, 119074 Republic of Singapore; (5)Institute for Glycomics, Griffith
University (Gold Coast Campus), Southport, Queensland, QLD 4222, Australia;
(6)Pacific Biosciences, Menlo Park, California 94025, USA; (7)Defence Science and
Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JQ, United Kingdom;
(8)Defense Medical and Environmental Research Institute, DSO National
Laboratories, Singapore, 117510, Republic of Singapore; (9)Biosciences,
University of Exeter, Exeter, EX4 4QD, United Kingdom; (10)Biosciences,
University of Exeter, Exeter, EX4 4QD, United Kingdom; Faculty of Infectious and 
Tropical Diseases, Department of Pathogen Molecular Biology, London School of
Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, WC1E 7HT, United Kingdom; (11)Genome Institute of 
Singapore, Singapore, 138672, Republic of Singapore; Department of Medicine,
National University of Singapore, Singapore, 119074 Republic of Singapore;
(12)Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore, 138672, Republic of Singapore;
Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School Singapore, Singapore, 169857, Republic of
Singapore; Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of
Singapore, 117599, Republic of Singapore tanbop@gis.a-star.edu.sg.

Erratum in
    Genome Res. 2015 Apr;25(4):608. Holden, Mathew T G [corrected to Holden, Matthew 
T G].

Burkholderia pseudomallei (Bp) is the causative agent of the infectious disease
melioidosis. To investigate population diversity, recombination, and horizontal
gene transfer in closely related Bp isolates, we performed whole-genome
sequencing (WGS) on 106 clinical, animal, and environmental strains from a
restricted Asian locale. Whole-genome phylogenies resolved multiple genomic
clades of Bp, largely congruent with multilocus sequence typing (MLST). We
discovered widespread recombination in the Bp core genome, involving hundreds of 
regions associated with multiple haplotypes. Highly recombinant regions exhibited
functional enrichments that may contribute to virulence. We observed
clade-specific patterns of recombination and accessory gene exchange, and provide
evidence that this is likely due to ongoing recombination between clade members. 
Reciprocally, interclade exchanges were rarely observed, suggesting mechanisms
restricting gene flow between clades. Interrogation of accessory elements
revealed that each clade harbored a distinct complement of
restriction-modification (RM) systems, predicted to cause clade-specific patterns
of DNA methylation. Using methylome sequencing, we confirmed that representative 
strains from separate clades indeed exhibit distinct methylation profiles.
Finally, using an E. coli system, we demonstrate that Bp RM systems can inhibit
uptake of non-self DNA. Our data suggest that RM systems borne on mobile
elements, besides preventing foreign DNA invasion, may also contribute to
limiting exchanges of genetic material between individuals of the same species.
Genomic clades may thus represent functional units of genetic isolation in Bp,
modulating intraspecies genetic diversity.

© 2015 Nandi et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4317168
PMID: 25236617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Microbiology. 2014 Dec;160(Pt 12):2710-7. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.080556-0. Epub 2014 
Sep 18.

The importance of the magnesium transporter MgtB for virulence of Yersinia
pseudotuberculosis and Yersinia pestis.

Ford DC(1), Joshua GW(2), Wren BW(2), Oyston PC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK. (2)Department of
Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine,
London WC1E 7HT, UK. (3)Biomedical Sciences, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ,
UK pcoyston@dstl.gov.uk.

Mg(2+) has been shown to be an important signal controlling gene regulation via
the PhoPQ two-component regulatory system for a range of Gram-negative bacteria, 
including Yersinia pestis and Yersinia pseudotuberculosis. The magnesium ion
transporter MgtB is part of the complex PhoPQ regulon, being upregulated in
response to low Mg(2+). Despite the presence of other Mg(2+) transport systems in
Yersinia, inactivation of mgtB had a significant effect on the ability of the
bacteria to scavenge this crucial ion. Whereas inactivation of PhoPQ is reported 
to adversely affect intracellular survival, we show that Y. pestis and Y.
pseudotuberculosis <U+0394>mgtB mutants survived equally as well as the respective
parent strain within macrophages, although they were more sensitive to killing in
the Galleria model of infection. Surprisingly, despite MgtB being only one member
of the Mg(2+) stimulon and PhoPQ controlling the expression levels of a range of 
genes including mgtB, the Yersinia <U+0394>mgtB mutants were more highly attenuated than
the equivalent Yersinia <U+0394>phoP mutants in mouse models of infection. MgtB may be a
suitable target for development of novel antimicrobials, and investigation of its
role may help elucidate the contribution of this component of the PhoPQ regulon
to pathogenesis.

© 2014 British Crown Copyright 2014/DSTL.

PMID: 25234474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Vet Rec. 2014 Sep 20;175(11):284-5. doi: 10.1136/vr.g5679.

Potential vector for West Nile virus prevalent in Kent.

Medlock JM(1), Vaux AG(1), Gibson G(2), Hawkes FM(2), Cheke RA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Entomology Group, Public Health England, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4
0JG. (2)Natural Resources Institute, University of Greenwich, Chatham, Kent ME4
4TB.

PMID: 25234459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Cell Rep. 2014 Sep 25;8(6):1870-8. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.08.017. Epub 2014
Sep 15.

Thioredoxin and its reductase are present on synaptic vesicles, and their
inhibition prevents the paralysis induced by botulinum neurotoxins.

Pirazzini M(1), Azarnia Tehran D(1), Zanetti G(1), Megighian A(1), Scorzeto M(1),
Fillo S(2), Shone CC(3), Binz T(4), Rossetto O(1), Lista F(2), Montecucco C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and National Research Council Institute of
Neuroscience, University of Padova, Via Ugo Bassi 58/B, 35121 Padova, Italy.
(2)Histology and Molecular Biology Section, Army Medical and Veterinary Research 
Center, Via Santo Stefano Rotondo 4, 00184 Rome, Italy. (3)Public Health England,
Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 OJG, UK. (4)Institut für Biochemie,
Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, 30623 Hannover, Germany. (5)Department of
Biomedical Sciences and National Research Council Institute of Neuroscience,
University of Padova, Via Ugo Bassi 58/B, 35121 Padova, Italy. Electronic
address: cesare.montecucco@gmail.com.

Botulinum neurotoxins consist of a metalloprotease linked via a conserved
interchain disulfide bond to a heavy chain responsible for neurospecific binding 
and translocation of the enzymatic domain in the nerve terminal cytosol. The
metalloprotease activity is enabled upon disulfide reduction and causes
neuroparalysis by cleaving the SNARE proteins. Here, we show that the thioredoxin
reductase-thioredoxin protein disulfide-reducing system is present on synaptic
vesicles and that it is functional and responsible for the reduction of the
interchain disulfide of botulinum neurotoxin serotypes A, C, and E. Specific
inhibitors of thioredoxin reductase or thioredoxin prevent intoxication of
cultured neurons in a dose-dependent manner and are also very effective
inhibitors of the paralysis of the neuromuscular junction. We found that this
group of inhibitors of botulinum neurotoxins is very effective in vivo. Most of
them are nontoxic and are good candidates as preventive and therapeutic drugs for
human botulism.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25220457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Appl Toxicol. 2015 May;35(5):543-50. doi: 10.1002/jat.3060. Epub 2014 Sep 12.

Development of haemostatic decontaminants for the treatment of wounds
contaminated with chemical warfare agents. 2: evaluation of in vitro topical
decontamination efficacy using undamaged skin.

Dalton CH(1), Hall CA, Lydon HL, Chipman JK, Graham JS, Jenner J, Chilcott RP.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JQ, UK; School of
Biosciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK.

The risk of penetrating, traumatic injury occurring in a chemically contaminated 
environment cannot be discounted. Should a traumatic injury be contaminated with 
a chemical warfare (CW) agent, it is likely that standard haemostatic treatment
options would be complicated by the need to decontaminate the wound milieu. Thus,
there is a need to develop haemostatic products that can simultaneously arrest
haemorrhage and decontaminate CW agents. The purpose of this study was to
evaluate a number of candidate haemostats for efficacy as skin decontaminants
against three CW agents (soman, VX and sulphur mustard) using an in vitro
diffusion cell containing undamaged pig skin. One haemostatic product
(WoundStat™) was shown to be as effective as the standard military decontaminants
Fuller's earth and M291 for the decontamination of all three CW agents. The most 
effective haemostatic agents were powder-based and use fluid absorption as a
mechanism of action to sequester CW agent (akin to the decontaminant Fuller's
earth). The envisaged use of haemostatic decontaminants would be to decontaminate
from within wounds and from damaged skin. Therefore, WoundStat™ should be subject
to further evaluation using an in vitro model of damaged skin.

Copyright © 2014 Crown copyright. Journal of Applied Toxicology © 2014 John Wiley
& Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 25219755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Psychiatr Res. 2014 Nov;58:189-96. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2014.08.006. Epub 
2014 Aug 19.

Increased SP4 and SP1 transcription factor expression in the postmortem
hippocampus of chronic schizophrenia.

Pinacho R(1), Valdizán EM(2), Pilar-Cuellar F(2), Prades R(3), Tarragó T(4), Haro
JM(1), Ferrer I(5), Ramos B(6).

Author information: 
(1)Unitat de recerca, Parc Sanitari Sant Joan de Déu, Fundació Sant Joan de Déu, 
Universitat de Barcelona, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Salud
Mental, CIBERSAM. Dr. Antoni Pujadas, 42, 08830 Sant Boi de Llobregat, Barcelona,
Spain. (2)Instituto de Biomedicina y Biotecnología de Cantabria
(CSIC-UC-SODERCAN), Departamento de Fisiología y Farmacología, Universidad de
Cantabria, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Salud Mental, CIBERSAM.
Avda. Cardenal Herrera Oria s/n, 39011, Santander, Spain. (3)Iproteos S.L.,
Baldiri I Reixac, 10, 08028 Barcelona, Spain. (4)Iproteos S.L., Baldiri I Reixac,
10, 08028 Barcelona, Spain; Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB
Barcelona), Baldiri I Reixac, 10, 08028 Barcelona, Spain. (5)Instituto de
Neuropatología, IDIBELL-Hospital Universitario de Bellvitge, Universitat de
Barcelona, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red para enfermedades
neurodegenerativas, CIBERNED. Feixa Llarga s/n, 08907 Hospitalet de LLobregat,
Barcelona, Spain. (6)Unitat de recerca, Parc Sanitari Sant Joan de Déu, Fundació 
Sant Joan de Déu, Universitat de Barcelona, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en 
Red de Salud Mental, CIBERSAM. Dr. Antoni Pujadas, 42, 08830 Sant Boi de
Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address: bramos@fsjd.org.

Altered levels of transcription factor specificity protein 4 (SP4) and 1 (SP1) in
the cerebellum, prefrontal cortex and/or lymphocytes have been reported in severe
psychiatric disorders, including early psychosis, bipolar disorder, and chronic
schizophrenia subjects who have undergone long-term antipsychotic treatments. SP4
transgenic mice show altered hippocampal-dependent psychotic-like behaviours and 
altered development of hippocampal dentate gyrus. Moreover, NMDAR activity
regulates SP4 function. The aim of this study was to investigate SP4 and SP1
expression levels in the hippocampus in schizophrenia, and the possible effect of
antipsychotics and NMDAR blockade on SP protein levels in rodent hippocampus. We 
analysed SP4 and SP1 expression levels in the postmortem hippocampus of chronic
schizophrenia (n = 14) and control (n = 11) subjects by immunoblot and
quantitative RT-PCR. We tested the effect of NMDAR blockade on SP factors in the 
hippocampus of mouse treated with an acute dose of MK801. We also investigated
the effect of subacute treatments with haloperidol and clozapine on SP protein
levels in the rat hippocampus. We report that SP4 protein and both SP4 and SP1
mRNA expression levels are significantly increased in the hippocampus in chronic 
schizophrenia. Likewise, acute treatment with MK801 increased both SP4 and SP1
protein levels in mouse hippocampus. In contrast, subacute treatment with
haloperidol and clozapine did not significantly alter SP protein levels in rat
hippocampus. These results suggest that SP4 and SP1 upregulation may be part of
the mechanisms deregulated downstream of glutamate signalling pathways in
schizophrenia and might be contributing to the hippocampal-dependent cognitive
deficits of the disorder.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25175639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Immunol Res. 2014;2014:913632. doi: 10.1155/2014/913632. Epub 2014 Jul 22.

Exploring the innate immunological response of an alternative nonhuman primate
model of infectious disease; the common marmoset.

Nelson M(1), Loveday M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Science Department, DSTL, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.

The common marmoset (Callithrix jacchus) is increasingly being utilised as a
nonhuman primate model for human disease, ranging from autoimmune to infectious
disease. In order to fully exploit these models, meaningful comparison to the
human host response is necessary. Commercially available reagents, primarily
targeted to human cells, were utilised to assess the phenotype and activation
status of key immune cell types and cytokines in naive and infected animals.
Single cell suspensions of blood, spleen, and lung were examined. Generally, the 
phenotype of cells was comparable between humans and marmosets, with
approximately 63% of all lymphocytes in the blood of marmosets being T cells, 25%
B-cells, and 12% NK cells. The percentage of neutrophils in marmoset blood were
more similar to human values than mouse values. Comparison of the activation
status of cells following experimental systemic or inhalational infection
exhibited different trends in different tissues, most obvious in cell types
active in the innate immune response. This work significantly enhances the
ability to understand the immune response in these animals and fortifies their
use as models of infectious disease.

PMCID: PMC4129158
PMID: 25170519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Immunol Res. 2014;2014:694717. doi: 10.1155/2014/694717. Epub 2014 Jul 21.

Control of intracellular Francisella tularensis by different cell types and the
role of nitric oxide.

Newstead SL(1), Gates AJ(1), Hartley MG(1), Rowland CA(1), Williamson ED(1),
Lukaszewski RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dstl, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.

Reactive nitrogen is critical for the clearance of Francisella tularensis
infections. Here we assess the role of nitric oxide in control of intracellular
infections in two murine macrophage cell lines of different provenance: the
alveolar macrophage cell line, MH-S, and the widely used peritoneal macrophage
cell line, J774A.1. Cells were infected with the highly virulent Schu S4 strain
or with the avirulent live vaccine strain (LVS) with and without stimuli.
Compared to MH-S cells, J774A.1 cells were unresponsive to stimulation and were
able to control the intracellular replication of LVS bacteria, but not of Schu
S4. In MH-S cells, Schu S4 demonstrated control over cellular NO production.
Despite this, MH-S cells stimulated with LPS or LPS and IFN-<U+03B3> were able to
control intracellular Schu S4 numbers. However, only stimulation with LPS induced
significant cellular NO production. Combined stimulation with LPS and IFN-<U+03B3>
produced a significant reduction in intracellular bacteria that occurred whether 
high levels of NO were produced or not, indicating that NO secretion is not the
only defensive cellular mechanism operating in virulent Francisella infections.
Understanding how F. tularensis interacts with host macrophages will help in the 
rational design of new and effective therapies.

PMCID: PMC4129157
PMID: 25170518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Biol Chem. 2014 Oct 3;289(40):27692-701. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.592576. Epub
2014 Aug 20.

Mechanism of metformin-dependent inhibition of mammalian target of rapamycin
(mTOR) and Ras activity in pancreatic cancer: role of specificity protein (Sp)
transcription factors.

Nair V(1), Sreevalsan S(1), Basha R(2), Abdelrahim M(2), Abudayyeh A(3),
Rodrigues Hoffman A(4), Safe S(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology and. (2)the
Cancer Research Institute, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center-Orlando, Orlando, Florida 
32806, the Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030. (3)the Department of
Emergency Medicine, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, and.
(4)Veterinary Pathobiology, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843.
(5)From the Departments of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology and the
Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health Sciences Center,
Houston, Texas 77030 ssafe@cvm.tamu.edu.

The antidiabetic drug metformin exhibits both chemopreventive and
chemotherapeutic activity for multiple cancers including pancreatic cancer;
however, the underlying mechanism of action of metformin is unclear. A recent
study showed that metformin down-regulated specificity protein (Sp) transcription
factors (TFs) Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 in pancreatic cancer cells and tumors, and this
was accompanied by down-regulation of several pro-oncogenic Sp-regulated genes.
Treatment with metformin or down-regulation of Sp TFs by RNAi also inhibits two
major pro-oncogenic pathways in pancreatic cancer cells, namely mammalian target 
of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling and epidermal growth factor (EGFR)-dependent
activation of Ras. Metformin and Sp knockdown by RNAi decreased expression of the
insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF-1R), resulting in inhibition of mTOR
signaling. Ras activity was also decreased by metformin and Sp knockdown of EGFR,
another Sp-regulated gene. Thus, the antineoplastic activities of metformin in
pancreatic cancer are due, in part, to down-regulation of Sp TFs and Sp-regulated
IGF-1R and EGFR, which in turn results in inhibition of mTOR and Ras signaling,
respectively.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4183806
PMID: 25143389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Anal Biochem. 2014 Nov 15;465:90-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ab.2014.08.004. Epub 2014 Aug 
14.

Capillary isoelectric focusing of a difficult-to-denature tetrameric enzyme using
alkylurea-urea mixtures.

Gervais D(1), King D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Services, Development & Production, Public Health England, Porton
Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK. Electronic address:
dave.gervais@phe.gov.uk. (2)Microbiology Services, Development & Production,
Public Health England, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK.

Capillary isoelectric focusing (cIEF) is normally run under denaturing conditions
using urea to expose any buried protein residues that may contribute to the
overall charge. However, urea does not completely denature some proteins, such as
the tetrameric enzyme Erwinia chrysanthemil-asparaginase (ErA), in which case
electrophoresis-compatible alternative denaturants are required. Here, we show
that alkylureas such as N-ethylurea provide increased denaturation during cIEF.
The cIEF analysis of ErA in 8 M urea alone resulted in a cluster of ill-resolved 
peaks with isoelectric points (pI values) in the range 7.4 to 8.5. A combination 
of 2.0 to 2.2 M N-ethylurea and 8M urea provided sufficient denaturation of ErA, 
resulting in a main peak with a pI of 7.35 and an acidic species minor peak at
7.0, both comparing well with predicted pI values based on the sum of protein
residue pKa values. Recombinant deamidated ErA mutants were also demonstrated to 
migrate to pI values consistent with predictions (pI 7.0 for one deamidation).
The quantitation of ErA acidic species in samples from full-scale manufacturing
(1.0-3.5% of total peak area) was found to be reproducible and linear. Use of
alkylureas as denaturing agents in capillary electrophoresis and cIEF should be
considered during biopharmaceutical assay development.

Crown Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25132564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2015 Jan;122(1):43-58. doi: 10.1007/s00702-014-1290-3. 
Epub 2014 Aug 17.

Genetics of psychotropic medication induced side effects in two independent
samples of bipolar patients.

Fabbri C(1), Souery D, Calati R, Crisafulli C, Chierchia A, Albani D, Forloni G, 
Chiesa A, Martines R, Sentissi O, Mendlewicz J, De Girolamo G, Serretti A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical and NeuroMotor Sciences, University of Bologna, Viale
Carlo Pepoli 5, 40123, Bologna, Italy.

The treatment of bipolar disorder (BD) usually requires combination therapies,
with the critical issue of the emergence of adverse drug reactions (ADRs) and the
possibility of low treatment adherence. Genetic polymorphisms are hypothesized to
modulate the pharmacodynamics of psychotropic drugs, representing potential
biological markers of ADRs. This study investigated genes involved in the
regulation of neuroplasticity (BDNF, ST8SIA2), second messenger cascades (GSK3B, 
MAPK1, and CREB1), circadian rhythms (RORA), transcription (SP4, ZNF804A), and
monoaminergic system (HTR2A and COMT) in the risk of neurological, psychic,
autonomic, and other ADRs. Two independent samples of BD patients
naturalistically treated were included (COPE-BD n = 147; STEP-BD n = 659). In the
COPE-BD 34 SNPs were genotyped, while in the STEP-BD polymorphisms in the
selected genes were extracted from the genome-wide dataset. Each ADRs group was
categorized as absent-mild or moderate-severe and logistic regression with
appropriate covariates was applied to identify possible risk genotypes/alleles.
58.5 and 93.5 % of patients were treated with mood stabilizers, 44.2 and 50.7 %
were treated with antipsychotics, and 69.4 and 46.1 % were treated with
antidepressants in the COPE-BD and STEP-BD, respectively. Our findings suggested 
that ST8SIA2 may be associated with psychic ADRs, as shown in the COPE-BD
(rs4777989 p = 0.0017) and STEP-BD (rs56027313, rs13379489 and rs10852173). A
cluster of RORA SNPs around rs2083074 showed an effect on psychic ADRs in the
STEP-BD. Trends supporting the association between HTR2A and autonomic ADRs were 
found in both samples. Confirmations are needed particularly for ST8SIA2 and RORA
since the few available data regarding their role in relation to psychotropic
ADRs.

PMID: 25129258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Br J Cancer. 2014 Sep 9;111(6):1021-46. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2014.166. Epub 2014 Aug 
12.

Guidelines for the use of cell lines in biomedical research.

Geraghty RJ(1), Capes-Davis A(2), Davis JM(3), Downward J(4), Freshney RI(5),
Knezevic I(6), Lovell-Badge R(7), Masters JR(8), Meredith J(9), Stacey GN(10),
Thraves P(11), Vias M(1); Cancer Research UK.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge, Li Ka Shing
Centre, Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK. (2)CellBank Australia, Children's
Medical Research Institute, Locked Bag 23, Wentworthville, New South Wales 2145, 
Australia. (3)School of Life and Medical Sciences, University of Hertfordshire,
College Lane, Hatfield, Hertfordshire AL10 9AB, UK. (4)Cancer Research UK, London
Research Institute, 44 Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A 3LY, UK. (5)Institute
for Cancer Sciences, University of Glasgow, 24 Greenwood Drive, Bearsden, Glasgow
G61 2HA, UK. (6)Department of Essential Medicines and Health Products, Quality,
Safety and Standards Team, World Health Organization, 20 Avenue Appia, 1211
Geneva 27, Switzerland. (7)MRC National Institute for Medical Research, The
Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK. (8)University College London, 67 Riding 
House Street, London W1W 7EJ, UK. (9)Cancer Research UK, Angel Building, 407 St
John Street, London EC1V 4AD, UK. (10)National Institute for Biological Standards
and Control, A Centre of the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency,
Blanche Lane, South Mimms, Herts EN6 3QG, UK. (11)Culture Collections, Public
Health England, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG, UK.

Comment in
    Br J Cancer. 2015 Jun 9;112(12):1976-7.

Cell-line misidentification and contamination with microorganisms, such as
mycoplasma, together with instability, both genetic and phenotypic, are among the
problems that continue to affect cell culture. Many of these problems are
avoidable with the necessary foresight, and these Guidelines have been prepared
to provide those new to the field and others engaged in teaching and instruction 
with the information necessary to increase their awareness of the problems and to
enable them to deal with them effectively. The Guidelines cover areas such as
development, acquisition, authentication, cryopreservation, transfer of cell
lines between laboratories, microbial contamination, characterisation,
instability and misidentification. Advice is also given on complying with current
legal and ethical requirements when deriving cell lines from human and animal
tissues, the selection and maintenance of equipment and how to deal with problems
that may arise.

PMCID: PMC4453835
PMID: 25117809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Proc Math Phys Eng Sci. 2014 Aug 8;470(2168):20140076.

Evidence of VX nerve agent use from contaminated white mustard plants.

Gravett MR(1), Hopkins FB(1), Self AJ(1), Webb AJ(1), Timperley CM(1), Baker
MJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Detection Department, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl), Porton
Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK. (2)Centre for Materials Science, Division
of Chemistry , University of Central Lancashire , J B Firth Building, Preston,
Lancashire PR1 2HE, UK.

The Chemical Weapons Convention prohibits the development, production,
acquisition, stockpiling, retention, transfer or use of chemical weapons by
Member States. Verification of compliance and investigations into allegations of 
use require accurate detection of chemical warfare agents (CWAs) and their
degradation products. Detection of CWAs such as organophosphorus nerve agents in 
the environment relies mainly upon the analysis of soil. We now present a method 
for the detection of the nerve agent VX and its hydrolysis products by gas
chromatography and liquid chromatography mass spectrometry of ethanol extracts of
contaminated white mustard plants (Sinapis alba) which retained the compounds of 
interest for up to 45 days. VX is hydrolysed by the plants to ethyl
methylphosphonic acid and then to methylphosphonic acid. The utility of white
mustard as a nerve agent detector and remediator of nerve agent-polluted sites is
discussed. The work described will help deter the employment of VX in conflict.

PMCID: PMC4075785
PMID: 25104906  [PubMed]


116. Expert Rev Vaccines. 2014 Oct;13(10):1205-14. doi: 10.1586/14760584.2014.930667. 
Epub 2014 Aug 8.

Bordetella pertussis fimbriae (Fim): relevance for vaccines.

Gorringe AR(1), Vaughan TE.

Author information: 
(1)Public Health England, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG, UK.

Bordetella pertussis produces two serologically distinct fimbriae, Fim2 and Fim3.
Expression of these antigens is governed by the BvgA/S system and by the length
of a poly(C) tract in the promoter of each gene. Fim2 and Fim3 are important
antigens for whole cell pertussis vaccines as clinical trials have shown an
association of anti-fimbriae antibody-mediated agglutination and protection. The 
current five component acellular pertussis vaccine contains co-purified Fim2/3
and provided good efficacy in clinical trials with the anti-Fim antibody response
correlating with protection when pre and post exposure antibody levels were
analysed. The predominant serotype of B. pertussis isolates has changed over time
in most countries but it is not understood whether this is vaccine-driven or
whether serotype is linked to the prevailing predominant genotype. Recent studies
have shown that both Fim2 and Fim3 are expressed during infection and that Fim2
is more immunogenic than Fim3 in the acellular vaccine.

PMID: 25102891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Immunol Res. 2014;2014:807564. doi: 10.1155/2014/807564. Epub 2014 Jul 6.

Efficacy of primate humoral passive transfer in a murine model of pneumonic
plague is mouse strain-dependent.

Graham VA(1), Hatch GJ(1), Bewley KR(1), Steeds K(1), Lansley A(1), Bate SR(1),
Funnell SG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Microbiological Services, Public Health England, Porton Down, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK.

New vaccines against biodefense-related and emerging pathogens are being prepared
for licensure using the US Federal Drug Administration's "Animal Rule." This
allows licensure of drugs and vaccines using protection data generated in animal 
models. A new acellular plague vaccine composed of two separate recombinant
proteins (rF1 and rV) has been developed and assessed for immunogenicity in
humans. Using serum obtained from human volunteers immunised with various doses
of this vaccine and from immunised cynomolgus macaques, we assessed the
pharmacokinetic properties of human and cynomolgus macaque IgG in BALB/c and the 
NIH Swiss derived Hsd:NIHS mice, respectively. Using human and cynomolgus macaque
serum with known ELISA antibody titres against both vaccine components, we have
shown that passive immunisation of human and nonhuman primate serum provides a
reproducible delay in median time to death in mice exposed to a lethal aerosol of
plague. In addition, we have shown that Hsd:NIHS mice are a better model for
humoral passive transfer studies than BALB/c mice.

PMCID: PMC4109106
PMID: 25097863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Nutr Metab (Lond). 2014 Jul 29;11:34. doi: 10.1186/1743-7075-11-34. eCollection
2014.

The intelligence paradox; will ET get the metabolic syndrome? Lessons from and
for Earth.

Nunn AV(1), Guy GW(2), Bell JD(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, University of Reading, Whiteknights, Reading, Berks RG6
6AP, UK. (2)GW pharmaceuticals, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK.
(3)Metabolic and Molecular Imaging Group, MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial 
College London, Hammersmith Hospital, London W12 0NN, UK.

Mankind is facing an unprecedented health challenge in the current pandemic of
obesity and diabetes. We propose that this is the inevitable (and predictable)
consequence of the evolution of intelligence, which itself could be an expression
of life being an information system driven by entropy. Because of its ability to 
make life more adaptable and robust, intelligence evolved as an efficient
adaptive response to the stresses arising from an ever-changing environment.
These adaptive responses are encapsulated by the epiphenomena of "hormesis", a
phenomenon we believe to be central to the evolution of intelligence and
essential for the maintenance of optimal physiological function and health. Thus,
as intelligence evolved, it would eventually reach a cognitive level with the
ability to control its environment through technology and have the ability remove
all stressors. In effect, it would act to remove the very hormetic factors that
had driven its evolution. Mankind may have reached this point, creating an
environmental utopia that has reduced the very stimuli necessary for optimal
health and the evolution of intelligence - "the intelligence paradox". One of the
hallmarks of this paradox is of course the rising incidence in obesity, diabetes 
and the metabolic syndrome. This leads to the conclusion that wherever life
evolves, here on earth or in another part of the galaxy, the "intelligence
paradox" would be the inevitable side-effect of the evolution of intelligence. ET
may not need to just "phone home" but may also need to "phone the local gym".
This suggests another possible reason to explain Fermi's paradox; Enrico Fermi,
the famous physicist, suggested in the 1950s that if extra-terrestrial
intelligence was so prevalent, which was a common belief at the time, then where 
was it? Our suggestion is that if advanced life has got going elsewhere in our
galaxy, it can't afford to explore the galaxy because it has to pay its
healthcare costs.

PMCID: PMC4118160
PMID: 25089149  [PubMed]


119. Dev Neurobiol. 2015 Jan;75(1):93-108. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22212. Epub 2014 Jul 22.

Transcription factor Sp4 regulates expression of nervous wreck 2 to control
NMDAR1 levels and dendrite patterning.

Sun X(1), Pinacho R, Saia G, Punko D, Meana JJ, Ramos B, Gill G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental, Molecular and Chemical Biology, Tufts University 
School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, 02111; Genetics Program, Sackler
School of Biomedical Sciences, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts, 02111.

Glutamatergic signaling through N-methyl-d-aspartate receptors (NMDARs) is
important for neuronal development and plasticity and is often dysregulated in
psychiatric disorders. Mice mutant for the transcription factor Sp4 have reduced 
levels of NMDAR subunit 1 (NR1) protein, but not mRNA, and exhibit behavioral and
memory deficits (Zhou et al., [2010] Human Molecular Genetics 19: 3797-3805). In 
developing cerebellar granule neurons (CGNs), Sp4 controls dendrite patterning
(Ramos et al., [2007] Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104: 9882-9887). Sp4 target genes
that regulate dendrite pruning or NR1 levels are not known. Here we report that
Sp4 activates transcription of Nervous Wreck 2 (Nwk2; also known as Fchsd1) and, 
further, that Nwk2, an F-BAR domain-containing protein, mediates Sp4-dependent
regulation of dendrite patterning and cell surface expression of NR1. Knockdown
of Nwk2 in CGNs increased primary dendrite number, phenocopying Sp4 knockdown,
and exogenous expression of Nwk2 in Sp4-depleted neurons rescued dendrite number.
We observed that acute Sp4 depletion reduced levels of surface, but not total,
NR1, and this was rescued by Nwk2 expression. Furthermore, expression of Nr1
suppressed the increase in dendrite number in Sp4- or Nwk2- depleted neurons. We 
previously reported that Sp4 protein levels were reduced in cerebellum of
subjects with bipolar disorder (BD) (Pinacho et al., [2011] Bipolar Disorders 13:
474-485). Here we report that Nwk2 mRNA and NR1 protein levels were also reduced 
in postmortem cerebellum of BD subjects. Our data suggest a role for
Sp4-regulated Nwk2 in NMDAR trafficking and identify a Sp4-Nwk2-NMDAR1 pathway
that regulates neuronal morphogenesis during development and may be disrupted in 
bipolar disorder.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4261064
PMID: 25045015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Invertebr Pathol. 2014 Sep;121:85-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jip.2014.07.001. Epub 2014 
Jul 15.

Expression of prtA from Photorhabdus luminescens in Bacillus thuringiensis
enhances mortality in lepidopteran larvae by sub-cutaneous but not oral
infection.

Bishop AH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Detection Department, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, 
Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK. Electronic address: AHBishop@dstl.gov.uk.

The prtA gene from Photorhabdus luminescens encodes the virulence factor Protease
A. When P. luminescens is injected into the hemocoel of insects by
entomopathogenic nematodes, PrtA is a key component of pathogenicity thought to
help degrade the immune system. The prtA gene was cloned and introduced on a
plasmid into Bacillus thuringiensis. PrtA was shown to be actively expressed in
vitro by cleavage of a specific Dabcyl-Edans heptapeptide substrate. There was no
difference in the speed or level of mortality when spores and d-endotoxins
crystals of the transformed strain were fed to larvae of Pieris brassicae, as
compared to the wild-type strain. When vegetative cells were injected into the
hemocoel of larvae of Galleriamellonella, however, there was a significant
increase in the rate and level of mortality over the wild type. The yield of B.
thuringiensis per cadaver was a hundred-fold greater in the PrtA-secreting
strain. The increased pathogenicity from intrahemocoelic infection may have been 
due to a greater ability to overcome the immune response of G. mellonella while
other factors such as resident gut bacteria may have negated this advantage after
oral dosage.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25036004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Microbiology. 2014 Sep;160(Pt 9):2030-44. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.079251-0. Epub 2014 
Jul 15.

Plasticity of fimbrial genotype and serotype within populations of Bordetella
pertussis: analysis by paired flow cytometry and genome sequencing.

Vaughan TE(1), Pratt CB(2), Sealey K(3), Preston A(4), Fry NK(5), Gorringe AR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Public Health England, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG, UK
thomas.vaughan@phe.gov.uk. (2)Public Health England, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4
0JG, UK. (3)Department of Biology & Biochemistry, University of Bath, Claverton
Down, Bath BA2 7AY, UK Respiratory and Vaccine Preventable Bacteria Reference
Unit, Public Health England - Microbiology Reference Services, Colindale, 61
Colindale Avenue, London NW9 5EQ, UK. (4)Department of Biology & Biochemistry,
University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath BA2 7AY, UK. (5)Respiratory and Vaccine 
Preventable Bacteria Reference Unit, Public Health England - Microbiology
Reference Services, Colindale, 61 Colindale Avenue, London NW9 5EQ, UK.

The fimbriae of Bordetella pertussis are required for colonization of the human
respiratory tract. Two serologically distinct fimbrial subunits, Fim2 and Fim3,
considered important vaccine components for many years, are included in the
Sanofi Pasteur 5-component acellular pertussis vaccine, and the World Health
Organization recommends the inclusion of strains expressing both fimbrial
serotypes in whole-cell pertussis vaccines. Each of the fimbrial major subunit
genes, fim2, fim3, and fimX, has a promoter poly(C) tract upstream of its -10
box. Such monotonic DNA elements are susceptible to changes in length via
slipped-strand mispairing in vitro and in vivo, which potentially causes on/off
switching of genes at every cell division. Here, we have described intra-culture 
variability in poly(C) tract lengths and the resulting fimbrial phenotypes in 22 
recent UK B. pertussis isolates. Owing to the highly plastic nature of fimbrial
promoters, we used the same cultures for both genome sequencing and flow
cytometry. Individual cultures of B. pertussis contained multiple fimbrial
serotypes and multiple different fimbrial promoter poly(C) tract lengths, which
supports earlier serological evidence that B. pertussis expresses both serotypes 
during infection.

© 2014 Crown copyright 2014. Reproduced with the permission of the controller of 
Her Majesty's Stationery Office/Queen's Printer for Scotland and Public Health
England.

PMID: 25028460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2014 Jul;70(Pt 7):1983-93. doi:
10.1107/S1399004714009997. Epub 2014 Jun 29.

The structure of the cysteine protease and lectin-like domains of Cwp84, a
surface layer-associated protein from Clostridium difficile.

Bradshaw WJ(1), Kirby JM(2), Thiyagarajan N(1), Chambers CJ(1), Davies AH(1),
Roberts AK(2), Shone CC(2), Acharya KR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Bath, Claverton Down,
Bath BA2 7AY, England. (2)Public Health England, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG, 
England.

Clostridium difficile is a major problem as an aetiological agent for
antibiotic-associated diarrhoea. The mechanism by which the bacterium colonizes
the gut during infection is poorly understood, but undoubtedly involves a myriad 
of components present on the bacterial surface. The mechanism of C. difficile
surface-layer (S-layer) biogenesis is also largely unknown but involves the
post-translational cleavage of a single polypeptide (surface-layer protein A;
SlpA) into low- and high-molecular-weight subunits by Cwp84, a surface-located
cysteine protease. Here, the first crystal structure of the surface protein Cwp84
is described at 1.4 Å resolution and the key structural components are
identified. The truncated Cwp84 active-site mutant (amino-acid residues 33-497;
C116A) exhibits three regions: a cleavable propeptide and a cysteine protease
domain which exhibits a cathepsin L-like fold followed by a newly identified
putative carbohydrate-binding domain with a bound calcium ion, which is referred 
to here as a lectin-like domain. This study thus provides the first structural
insights into Cwp84 and a strong base to elucidate its role in the C. difficile
S-layer maturation mechanism.

PMCID: PMC4089489
PMID: 25004975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2014 Aug;406(21):5121-35. doi: 10.1007/s00216-014-7963-9. Epub
2014 Jun 28.

Fate of the chemical warfare agent O-ethyl S-2-diisopropylaminoethyl
methylphosphonothiolate (VX) on soil following accelerant-based fire and liquid
decontamination.

Gravett MR(1), Hopkins FB, Self AJ, Webb AJ, Timperley CM, Riches JR.

Author information: 
(1)Detection Department, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl), G12,
Building 383B Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ, UK.

In the event of alleged use of organophosphorus nerve agents, all kinds of
environmental samples can be received for analysis. These might include
decontaminated and charred matter collected from the site of a suspected chemical
attack. In other scenarios, such matter might be sampled to confirm the site of a
chemical weapon test or clandestine laboratory decontaminated and burned to
prevent discovery. To provide an analytical capability for these contingencies,
we present a preliminary investigation of the effect of accelerant-based fire and
liquid decontamination on soil contaminated with the nerve agent O-ethyl
S-2-diisopropylaminoethyl methylphosphonothiolate (VX). The objectives were (a)
to determine if VX or its degradation products were detectable in soil after an
accelerant-based fire promoted by aviation fuel, including following
decontamination with Decontamination Solution 2 (DS2) or aqueous sodium
hypochlorite, (b) to develop analytical methods to support forensic analysis of
accelerant-soaked, decontaminated and charred soil and (c) to inform the design
of future experiments of this type to improve analytical fidelity. Our results
show for the first time that modern analytical techniques can be used to identify
residual VX and its degradation products in contaminated soil after an
accelerant-based fire and after chemical decontamination and then fire.
Comparison of the gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) profiles of VX and
its impurities/degradation products from contaminated burnt soil, and burnt soil 
spiked with VX, indicated that the fire resulted in the production of diethyl
methylphosphonate and O,S-diethyl methylphosphonothiolate (by an unknown
mechanism). Other products identified were indicative of chemical
decontamination, and some of these provided evidence of the decontaminant used,
for example, ethyl 2-methoxyethyl methylphosphonate and bis(2-methoxyethyl)
methylphosphonate following decontamination with DS2. Sample preparation
procedures and analytical methods suitable for investigating accelerant and
decontaminant-soaked soil samples are presented. VX and its degradation products 
and/or impurities were detected under all the conditions studied, demonstrating
that accelerant-based fire and liquid-based decontamination and then fire are
unlikely to prevent the retrieval of evidence of chemical warfare agent (CWA)
testing. This is the first published study of the effects of an accelerant-based 
fire on a CWA in environmental samples. The results will inform defence and
security-based organisations worldwide and support the verification activities of
the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), winner of the
2013 Nobel Peace Prize for its extensive efforts to eliminate chemical weapons.

PMID: 24972874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Immunol Res. 2014;2014:395302. doi: 10.1155/2014/395302. Epub 2014 May 7.

Approaches to modelling the human immune response in transition of candidates
from research to development.

Williamson D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (DSTL), Porton Down, Salisbury,
Wilts SP4 0JQ, UK.

This review considers the steps required to evaluate a candidate biodefense
vaccine or therapy as it emerges from the research phase, in order to transition 
it to development. The options for preclinical modelling of efficacy are
considered in the context of the FDA's Animal Rule.

PMCID: PMC4033477
PMID: 24949489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Injury. 2014 Aug;45(8):1171-8. doi: 10.1016/j.injury.2014.05.007. Epub 2014 May
17.

A pre-clinical evaluation of silver, iodine and Manuka honey based dressings in a
model of traumatic extremity wounds contaminated with Staphylococcus aureus.

Guthrie HC(1), Martin KR(2), Taylor C(2), Spear AM(2), Whiting R(2), Macildowie
S(2), Clasper JC(3), Watts SA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Building 245, Defence Science and Technology
Laboratory, Porton Down, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, United Kingdom; Academic Department
of Military Surgery and Trauma, Royal Centre for Defence Medicine, Birmingham
Research Park, Vincent Drive, Birmingham B15 2SQ, United Kingdom. Electronic
address: hugoguthrie@doctors.org.uk. (2)Biomedical Sciences Department, Building 
245, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ,
United Kingdom. (3)Academic Department of Military Surgery and Trauma, Royal
Centre for Defence Medicine, Birmingham Research Park, Vincent Drive, Birmingham 
B15 2SQ, United Kingdom. (4)Biomedical Sciences Department, Building 245, Defence
Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, United
Kingdom. Electronic address: sawatts1@dstl.gov.uk.

Prevention of extremity war wound infection remains a clinical challenge.
Staphylococcus aureus is the most common pathogen in delayed infection. We
hypothesised that choice of wound dressings may affect bacterial burden over 7
days reflecting the current practice of delayed primary closure of wounds within 
this timeframe. A randomised controlled trial of 3 commercially available
dressings (Inadine(®) (Johnson & Johnson, NJ, USA), Acticoat(®) (Smith & Nephew, 
Hull, UK), Activon Tulle (Advancis Medical, Nottingham, UK)) was conducted in a
rabbit model of contaminated forelimb muscle injury. A positive control group
treated with antibiotics was included. Groups were compared to a saline soaked
gauze control. The primary outcome was a statistically significant reduction (p <
0.05) in tissue S. aureus at 7 days post-injury. Secondary outcome measurements
included bacteraemias, observational data, whole blood determination, ELISA for
plasma biomarkers, PCR array analysis of wound healing gene expression and
muscle/lymph node histopathology. Antibiotic, Inadine and Acticoat groups had
statistically significant lower bacterial counts (mean 7.13 [95% CI
0.00-96.31]×10(2); 1.66 [0.94-2.58]×10(5); 8.86 [0.00-53.35]×10(4)cfu/g,
respectively) and Activon Tulle group had significantly higher counts (2.82
[0.98-5.61]×10(6)cfu/g) than saline soaked gauze control (7.58
[1.65-17.83]×10(5)cfu/g). There were no bacteraemias or significant differences
in observational data or whole blood determination. There were no significant
differences in muscle/loss or pathology and lymph node cross-sectional area or
morphology. There were some significant differences between treatment groups in
the plasma cytokines IL-4, TNFa and MCP-1 in comparison to the control. PCR array
data demonstrated more general changes in gene expression in the muscle tissue
from the Activon Tulle group than the Inadine or Acticoat dressings with a
limited number of genes showing significantly altered expression compared to
control. This study has demonstrated that both Acticoat(®) and Inadine(®)
dressings can reduce the bacteria burden in a heavily contaminated soft tissue
wound and so they may offer utility in the clinical setting particularly where
surgical treatment is delayed.

Crown Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24908627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Sci Signal. 2014 Jun 3;7(328):ra51. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2005242.

Store-operated calcium entry promotes the degradation of the transcription factor
Sp4 in resting neurons.

Lalonde J(1), Saia G(2), Gill G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental, Molecular & Chemical Biology, Tufts University
School of Medicine, 136 Harrison Avenue, Boston, MA 02111, USA.
lalonde@chgr.mgh.harvard.edu grace.gill@tufts.edu. (2)Department of
Developmental, Molecular & Chemical Biology, Tufts University School of Medicine,
136 Harrison Avenue, Boston, MA 02111, USA. Cell, Molecular & Developmental
Biology Program, Sackler School of Graduate Biomedical Sciences, Tufts University
School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02111, USA.

Calcium (Ca(2+)) signaling activated in response to membrane depolarization
regulates neuronal maturation, connectivity, and plasticity. Store-operated
Ca(2+) entry (SOCE) occurs in response to depletion of Ca(2+) from endoplasmic
reticulum (ER), mediates refilling of this Ca(2+) store, and supports Ca(2+)
signaling in nonexcitable cells. We report that maximal activation of SOCE
occurred in cerebellar granule neurons cultured under resting conditions and that
this Ca(2+) influx promoted the degradation of transcription factor Sp4, a
regulator of neuronal morphogenesis and function. Lowering the concentration of
extracellular potassium, a condition that reduces neuronal excitability,
stimulated depletion of intracellular Ca(2+) stores, resulted in the
relocalization of the ER Ca(2+) sensor STIM1 into punctate clusters consistent
with multimerization and accumulation at junctions between the ER and plasma
membrane, and induced a Ca(2+) influx with characteristics of SOCE. Compounds
that block SOCE prevented the ubiquitylation and degradation of Sp4 in neurons
exposed to a low concentration of extracellular potassium. Knockdown of STIM1
blocked degradation of Sp4, whereas expression of constitutively active STIM1
decreased Sp4 abundance under depolarizing conditions. Our findings indicated
that, in neurons, SOCE is induced by hyperpolarization, and suggested that this
Ca(2+) influx pathway is a distinct mechanism for regulating neuronal gene
expression.

Copyright © 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMCID: PMC4445882
PMID: 24894994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Immunol Res. 2014;2014:392170. doi: 10.1155/2014/392170. Epub 2014 May 7.

Protection against experimental melioidosis following immunisation with a
lipopolysaccharide-protein conjugate.

Scott AE(1), Ngugi SA(1), Laws TR(1), Corser D(2), Lonsdale CL(1), D'Elia RV(1), 
Titball RW(3), Williamson ED(1), Atkins TP(1), Prior JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.
(2)Fleet Bioprocessing Ltd., Pale Lane Farm, Hartley Wintney RG27 8DH, UK.
(3)College of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter EX4
4QD, UK.

Melioidosis is a severe infectious disease caused by Burkholderia pseudomallei.
It is refractory to antibiotic treatment and there is currently no licensed
vaccine. In this report we detail the construction and protective efficacy of a
polysaccharide-protein conjugate composed of B. pseudomallei lipopolysaccharide
and the Hc fragment of tetanus toxin. Immunisation of mice with the
lipopolysaccharide-conjugate led to significantly reduced bacterial burdens in
the spleen 48 hours after challenge and afforded significant protection against a
lethal challenge with B. pseudomallei. The conjugate generated significantly
higher levels of antigen-specific IgG1 and IgG2a than in
lipopolysaccharide-immunised mice. Immunisation with the conjugate also
demonstrated a bias towards Th1 type responses, evidenced by high levels of
IgG2a. In contrast, immunisation with unconjugated lipopolysaccharide evoked
almost no IgG2a demonstrating a bias towards Th2 type responses. This study
demonstrates the effectiveness of this approach in the development of an
efficacious and protective vaccine against melioidosis.

PMCID: PMC4033506
PMID: 24892035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Nat Mater. 2014 Aug;13(8):817-21. doi: 10.1038/nmat3993. Epub 2014 Jun 1.

Stretchable liquid-crystal blue-phase gels.

Castles F(1), Morris SM(2), Hung JM(3), Qasim MM(3), Wright AD(3), Nosheen S(3), 
Choi SS(3), Outram BI(4), Elston SJ(4), Burgess C(5), Hill L(5), Wilkinson TD(3),
Coles HJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Centre of Molecular Materials for Photonics and Electronics, Department of 
Engineering, University of Cambridge, 9 JJ Thomson Avenue Cambridge CB3 0FA, UK
[2] Department of Materials, University of Oxford, Parks Road Oxford OX1 3PH, UK.
(2)1] Centre of Molecular Materials for Photonics and Electronics, Department of 
Engineering, University of Cambridge, 9 JJ Thomson Avenue Cambridge CB3 0FA, UK
[2] Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, Parks Road Oxford
OX1 3PJ, UK. (3)Centre of Molecular Materials for Photonics and Electronics,
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, 9 JJ Thomson Avenue Cambridge
CB3 0FA, UK. (4)Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, Parks
Road Oxford OX1 3PJ, UK. (5)Defence Science & Technology Laboratory, Porton Down 
Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.

Liquid-crystalline polymers are materials of considerable scientific interest and
technological value. An important subset of these materials exhibit rubber-like
elasticity, combining the optical properties of liquid crystals with the
mechanical properties of rubber. Moreover, they exhibit behaviour not seen in
either type of material independently, and many of their properties depend
crucially on the particular mesophase employed. Such stretchable
liquid-crystalline polymers have previously been demonstrated in the nematic,
chiral-nematic, and smectic mesophases. Here, we report the fabrication of a
stretchable gel of blue phase I, which forms a self-assembled, three-dimensional 
photonic crystal that remains electro-optically switchable under a moderate
applied voltage, and whose optical properties can be manipulated by an applied
strain. We also find that, unlike its undistorted counterpart, a mechanically
deformed blue phase exhibits a Pockels electro-optic effect, which sets out new
theoretical challenges and possibilities for low-voltage electro-optic devices.

PMID: 24880732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Mol Biotechnol. 2014 Oct;56(10):865-77. doi: 10.1007/s12033-014-9766-9.

Recombinant deamidated mutants of Erwinia chrysanthemi L-asparaginase have
similar or increased activity compared to wild-type enzyme.

Gervais D(1), Foote N.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Services, Development & Production, Public Health England, Porton
Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JG, UK, dave.gervais@phe.gov.uk.

The enzyme Erwinia chrysanthemi L-asparaginase (ErA) is an important
biopharmaceutical product used in the treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukaemia.
Like all proteins, certain asparagine (Asn) residues of ErA are susceptible to
deamidation to aspartic acid (Asp), which may be a concern with respect to enzyme
activity and potentially to pharmaceutical efficacy. Recombinant ErA mutants
containing Asn to Asp changes were expressed, purified and characterised. Two
mutants with single deamidation sites (N41D and N281D) were found to have
approximately the same specific activity (1,062 and 924 U/mg, respectively) as
the wild-type (908 U/mg). However, a double mutant (N41D N281D) had an increased 
specific activity (1261 U/mg). The N41D mutation conferred a slight increase in
the catalytic constant (k cat 657 s(-1)) when compared to the WT (k cat
565 s(-1)), which was further increased in the double mutant, with a k cat of
798 s(-1). Structural analyses showed that the slight changes caused by point
mutation of Asn41 to Asp may have reduced the number of hydrogen bonds in this
a-helical part of the protein structure, resulting in subtle changes in enzyme
turnover, both structurally and catalytically. The increased a-helical content
observed with the N41D mutation by circular dichroism spectroscopy correlates
with the difference in k cat, but not K m. The N281D mutation resulted in a lower
glutaminase activity compared with WT and the N41D mutant, however the N281D
mutation also imparted less stability to the enzyme at elevated temperatures.
Taken as a whole, these data suggest that ErA deamidation at the Asn41 and Asn281
sites does not affect enzyme activity and should not be a concern during
processing, storage or clinical use. The production of recombinant deamidated
variants has proven an effective and powerful means of studying the effect of
these changes and may be a useful strategy for other biopharmaceutical products.

PMID: 24870616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. AAPS J. 2014 Jul;16(4):784-90. doi: 10.1208/s12248-014-9612-9. Epub 2014 May 23.

Measurement of subvisible particulates in lyophilised Erwinia chrysanthemi
L-asparaginase and relationship with clinical experience.

Gervais D(1), Corn T, Downer A, Smith S, Jennings A.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Services, Development and Production, Public Health England,
Porton Down, Wiltshire, Salisbury, SP4 0JG, UK, dave.gervais@phe.gov.uk.

In order to generate further characterisation data for the lyophilised product
Erwinia chrysanthemi L-asparaginase, reconstituted drug product (DP; marketed as 
Erwinase or Erwinaze) was analysed for subvisible (2-10 µm) particulate content
using both the light obscuration (LO) method and the newer flow-imaging
microscopy (FIM) technique. No correlation of subvisible particulate counts
exists between FIM and LO nor do the counts correlate with activity at both
release and on stability. The subvisible particulate content of lyophilised
Erwinia L-asparaginase appears to be consistent and stable over time and in line 
with other parenteral biopharmaceutical products. The majority (ca. 75%) of
subvisible particulates in L-asparaginase DP were at the low end of the
measurement range by FIM (2-4 µm). In this size range, FIM was unable to
definitively classify the particulates as either protein or non-protein. More
sensitive measurement techniques would be needed to classify the particulates in 
lyophilised L-asparaginase into type (protein and non-protein), so the LO
technique has been chosen for on-going DP analyses. E. chrysanthemi
L-asparaginase has a lower rate of hypersensitivity compared with native
Escherichia coli preparations, but a subset of patients develop hypersensitivity 
to the Erwinia enzyme. A DP lot that had subvisible particulate counts on the
upper end of the measurement range by both LO and FIM had the same incidence of
allergic hypersensitivity in clinical experience as lots at all levels of
observed subvisible particulate content, suggesting that the presence of
L-asparaginase subvisible particulates is not important with respect to allergic 
response.

PMCID: PMC4070265
PMID: 24854894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Microbes Infect. 2014 Sep;16(9):735-45. doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2014.04.001. Epub
2014 May 4.

The use of a three-dimensional cell culture model to investigate host-pathogen
interactions of Francisella tularensis in human lung epithelial cells.

David J(1), Sayer NM(2), Sarkar-Tyson M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, Dstl, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK.
Electronic address: jdavid@dstl.gov.uk. (2)Biomedical Sciences, Dstl, Porton
Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK. (3)Biomedical Sciences, Dstl, Porton
Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK; School of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, University of Western Australia, QEII Medical Centre, Monash Avenue,
Nedlands, WA 6009, USA.

Francisella tularensis inhalation results in bacterial interaction with numerous 
lung cell types, including those of the epithelium. This work investigates a
three-dimensional cell-culture system to characterise the epithelial response to 
F. tularensis. Immortalised human pneumocytes (A549s) grown in rotating-wall
vessel (RWV) bioreactors display an in vivo-like phenotype, which has been
confirmed to be driven by specific transcriptional events (8454 genes, p = 0.05).
These data support the RWV model as a more in vivo-like culture system to
investigate the lung epithelium, compared to monolayer counterparts. RWV-cultured
A549s were infected with F. tularensis SchuS4 and LVS and intracellular
replication mapped over 22 h compared to monolayer cells. The RWV-cultured A549s 
were more resistant to SchuS4 and LVS infection (p = 0.05). Transcriptomics
identified 2086 genes (p = 0.05) as candidates for host-pathogen interactions
which result in the observed increase in resistance of the RWV-cultured A549
cells. Gene and pathway analysis identified processes involved in MMP modulation,
endocytosis, mucin production and the complement pathway amongst others. The role
of these pathways during infection was further characterised using chemical
inhibitors. This work has revealed several new hypotheses worthy of further
testing in order to understand the epithelial host response to F. tularensis
infection.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

PMID: 24796635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2014 Jul;18(7):759-69. doi:
10.1517/14728222.2014.914173. Epub 2014 May 3.

Transcription factor Sp1, also known as specificity protein 1 as a therapeutic
target.

Safe S(1), Imanirad P, Sreevalsan S, Nair V, Jutooru I.

Author information: 
(1)Texas A&M University, Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology , 4466 TAMU,
College Station, TX 77843-4466 , USA ssafe@cvm.tamu.edu.

INTRODUCTION: Specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors (TFs) are members of
the Sp/Kruppel-like factor family, and Sp proteins play an important role in
embryonic and early postnatal development. Sp1 has been the most extensively
investigated member of this family, and expression of this protein decreases with
age, whereas Sp1 and other family members (Sp3 and Sp4) are highly expressed in
tumors and cancer cell lines.
AREA COVERED: The prognostic significance of Sp1 in cancer patients and the
functional pro-oncogenic activities of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 in cancer cell lines are 
summarized. Several different approaches have been used to target downregulation 
of Sp TFs and Sp-regulated genes, and this includes identification of different
structural classes of antineoplastic agents including NSAIDs, natural products
and their synthetic analogs and several well-characterized drugs including
arsenic trioxide, aspirin and metformin. The multiple pathways involved in
drug-induced Sp downregulation are also discussed.
EXPERT OPINION: The recognition by the scientific and clinical community that
experimental and clinically used antineoplastic agents downregulate Sp1, Sp3 and 
Sp4, and pro-oncogenic Sp-regulated genes will facilitate future clinical
applications for individual drug and drug combination therapies that take
advantage of their unusual effects.

PMID: 24793594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Jul;34(13):2382-95. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01602-13. Epub 2014 Apr 
14.

Mechanism of action of phenethylisothiocyanate and other reactive oxygen
species-inducing anticancer agents.

Jutooru I(1), Guthrie AS(2), Chadalapaka G(1), Pathi S(1), Kim K(3), Burghardt
R(4), Jin UH(5), Safe S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas, USA. (2)Department of Biochemistry & Biophysics, Texas
A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA. (3)Department of Environmental
Health, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA. (4)Department of
Veterinary Integrative Biosciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas,
USA. (5)Institute of Biosciences & Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center,
Houston, Texas, USA. (6)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology,
Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA Institute of Biosciences &
Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center, Houston, Texas, USA
ssafe@cvm.tamu.edu.

Reactive oxygen species (ROS)-inducing anticancer agents such as
phenethylisothiocyanate (PEITC) activate stress pathways for killing cancer
cells. Here we demonstrate that PEITC-induced ROS decreased expression of
microRNA 27a (miR-27a)/miR-20a:miR-17-5p and induced miR-regulated ZBTB10/ZBTB4
and ZBTB34 transcriptional repressors, which, in turn, downregulate specificity
protein (Sp) transcription factors (TFs) Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 in pancreatic cancer
cells. Decreased expression of miR-27a/miR-20a:miR-17-5p by PEITC-induced ROS is 
a key step in triggering the miR-ZBTB Sp cascade leading to downregulation of Sp 
TFs, and this is due to ROS-dependent epigenetic effects associated with
genome-wide shifts in repressor complexes, resulting in decreased expression of
Myc and the Myc-regulated miRs. Knockdown of Sp1 alone by RNA interference also
induced apoptosis and decreased pancreatic cancer cell growth and invasion,
indicating that downregulation of Sp transcription factors is an important common
mechanism of action for PEITC and other ROS-inducing anticancer agents.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4054319
PMID: 24732804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Gene. 2014 Jun 1;542(2):134-40. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.03.043. Epub 2014 Mar
25.

Sp1 transcriptionally regulates BRK1 expression in non-small cell lung cancer
cells.

Li M(1), Ling B(1), Xiao T(1), Tan J(1), An N(1), Han N(1), Guo S(1), Cheng S(1),
Zhang K(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Cancer Institute (Hospital),
Peking Union Medical College & Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing
100021, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Cancer Institute
(Hospital), Peking Union Medical College & Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences,
Beijing 100021, China. Electronic address: zhangkt@cicams.ac.cn.

Following a previous study reporting that BRK1 is upregulated in non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC), the present study sought to clarify the role of specificity 
protein 1 (Sp1) in the transcriptional regulation of the BRK1 gene. Therefore, a 
construct, named F8, consisting of the -1341 to -1 nt sequence upstream of the
start codon of the BRK1 gene inserted into pGL4.26 was made. A series of
truncated fragments was then constructed based on F8. Segment S831, which
contained the -84 to -1 nt region, displayed the highest transcriptional activity
in the A549, H1299 and H520 NSCLC cell lines. Bioinformatic analysis showed a
potential Sp1-binding element at -73 to -64 nt, and a mutation in this region
suppressed the transcriptional activity of S831. Then the RNAi assays of Sp1 and 
its coworkers Sp3 and Sp4 were performed, and suppression of Sp1 by siRNA
inhibited the mRNA expression of BRK1. Both an electrophoretic mobility shift
assay (EMSA) and a chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay demonstrated that
Sp1 bound to the promoter area of the BRK1 gene. Our data identified a functional
and positive Sp1 regulatory element from -73 to -64 nt in the BRK1 promoter,
which may likely explain the overexpression of BRK1 in NSCLC.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24680773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Microbiology. 2014 Jun;160(Pt 6):1175-81. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.077230-0. Epub 2014 
Mar 27.

Galleria mellonella as an alternative model of Coxiella burnetii infection.

Norville IH(1), Hartley MG(2), Martinez E(3), Cantet F(3), Bonazzi M(3), Atkins
TP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK 
ihnorville@dstl.gov.uk. (2)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton
Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK. (3)CNRS, UMR5236 CPBS, Montpellier 34293, France.
(4)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK 
College of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter EX4 4QD,
UK.

Coxiella burnetii is a Gram-negative intracellular bacterium and is the causative
agent of the zoonotic disease Q fever. Several rodent and non-human primate
models of virulent phase I C. burnetii [Nine Mile (NM)I] have been developed, and
have been used to determine the efficacy of antibiotics and vaccine candidates.
However, there are several advantages to using insect models to study
host-microbe interactions, such as reduced animal use, lowered cost and ease of
manipulation in high containment. In addition, many laboratories use the
avirulent phase II C. burnetii clone (NMII) to study cellular interactions and
identify novel virulence determinants using genetic manipulation. We report that 
larvae of the greater wax moth, Galleria mellonella, were susceptible to
infection with both C. burnetii NMI and NMII. Following subcutaneous infection,
we report that intracellular bacteria were present within haemocytes and that
larval death occurred in a dose-dependent manner. Additionally, we have used the 
model to characterize the role of the type 4 secretion system in C. burnetii NMII
and to determine antibiotic efficacy in a non-mammalian model of disease.

© 2014 British Crown Copyright 2014/dstl - published with the permission of the
Controller of Her Majesty's Stationery Office.

PMID: 24677067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J R Soc Interface. 2014 Jun 6;11(95):20140119. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2014.0119. Print
2014 Jun 6.

A dose and time response Markov model for the in-host dynamics of infection with 
intracellular bacteria following inhalation: with application to Francisella
tularensis.

Wood RM(1), Egan JR, Hall IM.

Author information: 
(1)Bioterrorism and Emerging Disease Analysis, Microbial Risk Assessment and
Behavioural Science, Public Health England, , Porton Down SP4 0JG, UK.

In a novel approach, the standard birth-death process is extended to incorporate 
a fundamental mechanism undergone by intracellular bacteria, phagocytosis. The
model accounts for stochastic interaction between bacteria and cells of the
immune system and heterogeneity in susceptibility to infection of individual
hosts within a population. Model output is the dose-response relation and the
dose-dependent distribution of time until response, where response is the onset
of symptoms. The model is thereafter parametrized with respect to the highly
virulent Schu S4 strain of Francisella tularensis, in the first such study to
consider a biologically plausible mathematical model for early human infection
with this bacterium. Results indicate a median infectious dose of about 23
organisms, which is higher than previously thought, and an average incubation
period of between 3 and 7 days depending on dose. The distribution of incubation 
periods is right-skewed up to about 100 organisms and symmetric for larger doses.
Moreover, there are some interesting parallels to the hypotheses of some of the
classical dose-response models, such as independent action (single-hit model) and
individual effective dose (probit model). The findings of this study support
experimental evidence and postulations from other investigations that response
is, in fact, influenced by both in-host and between-host variability.

PMCID: PMC4006251
PMID: 24671937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2014 Aug;406(21):5111-9. doi: 10.1007/s00216-014-7674-2. Epub 
2014 Mar 18.

Chemical analysis of bleach and hydroxide-based solutions after decontamination
of the chemical warfare agent O-ethyl S-2-diisopropylaminoethyl
methylphosphonothiolate (VX).

Hopkins FB(1), Gravett MR, Self AJ, Wang M, Chua HC, Lee HS, Jones JT, Timperley 
CM, Riches JR.

Author information: 
(1)Detection Department, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl), Porton
Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ, UK.

Erratum in
    Anal Bioanal Chem. 2014 Aug;406(21):5243. Hoe-Chee, C [corrected to Chua,
Hoe-Chee]; Sim, N Lee Hoi [corrected to Lee, H S Nancy].

Detailed chemical analysis of solutions used to decontaminate chemical warfare
agents can be used to support verification and forensic attribution.
Decontamination solutions are amongst the most difficult matrices for chemical
analysis because of their corrosive and potentially emulsion-based nature.
Consequently, there are relatively few publications that report their detailed
chemical analysis. This paper describes the application of modern analytical
techniques to the analysis of decontamination solutions following decontamination
of the chemical warfare agent O-ethyl S-2-diisopropylaminoethyl
methylphosphonothiolate (VX). We confirm the formation of
N,N-diisopropylformamide and N,N-diisopropylamine following decontamination of VX
with hypochlorite-based solution, whereas they were not detected in extracts of
hydroxide-based decontamination solutions by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy or gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. We report the electron
ionisation and chemical ionisation mass spectroscopic details, retention indices,
and NMR spectra of N,N-diisopropylformamide and N,N-diisopropylamine, as well as 
analytical methods suitable for their analysis and identification in solvent
extracts and decontamination residues.

PMID: 24633585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Vaccine. 2014 Apr 17;32(19):2231-40. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2014.01.077. Epub
2014 Mar 11.

Induction of protective immunity against H1N1 influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 with
spray-dried and electron-beam sterilised vaccines in non-human primates.

Scherließ R(1), Ajmera A(2), Dennis M(3), Carroll MW(4), Altrichter J(5), Silman 
NJ(3), Scholz M(6), Kemter K(5), Marriott AC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Kiel University, Department of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics, Grasweg 9a,
24118 Kiel, Germany,. Electronic address: rscherliess@pharmazie.uni-kiel.de.
(2)Kiel University, Department of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics, Grasweg 9a,
24118 Kiel, Germany. (3)Public Health England, Research Department, Porton Down, 
SP4 0JG, United Kingdom. (4)Public Health England, Research Department, Porton
Down, SP4 0JG, United Kingdom,. Electronic address: Miles.Carroll@phe.gov.uk.
(5)LEUKOCARE AG, Am Klopferspitz 19, 82152 Munich/Martinsried, Germany.
(6)LEUKOCARE AG, Am Klopferspitz 19, 82152 Munich/Martinsried, Germany,.
Electronic address: martin.scholz@leukocare.com.

Currently, the need for cooled storage and the impossibility of terminal
sterilisation are major drawbacks in vaccine manufacturing and distribution. To
overcome current restrictions a preclinical safety and efficacy study was
conducted to evaluate new influenza A vaccine formulations regarding thermal
resistance, resistance against irradiation-mediated damage and storage stability.
We evaluated the efficacy of novel antigen stabilizing and protecting solutions
(SPS) to protect influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 split virus antigen under experimental
conditions in vitro and in vivo. Original or SPS re-buffered vaccine (Pandemrix) 
was spray-dried and terminally sterilised by irradiation with 25 kGy (e-beam).
Antigen integrity was monitored by SDS-PAGE, dynamic light scattering, size
exclusion chromatography and functional haemagglutination assays. In vitro
screening experiments revealed a number of highly stable compositions containing 
glycyrrhizinic acid (GA) and/or chitosan. The most stable composition was
selected for storage tests and in vivo assessment of seroconversion in non-human 
primates (Macaca fascicularis) using a prime-boost strategy. Redispersed
formulations with original adjuvant were administered intramuscularly. Storage
data revealed high stability of protected vaccines at 4°C and 25°C, 60% relative 
humidity, for at least three months. Animals receiving original Pandemrix
exhibited expected levels of seroconversion after 21 days (prime) and 48 days
(boost) as assessed by haemagglutination inhibition and microneutralisation
assays. Animals vaccinated with spray-dried and irradiated Pandemrix failed to
exhibit seroconversion after 21 days whereas spray-dried and irradiated,
SPS-protected vaccines elicited similar seroconversion levels to those vaccinated
with original Pandemrix. Boost immunisation with SPS-protected vaccine resulted
in a strong increase in seroconversion but had only minor effects in animals
treated with non SPS-protected vaccine. In conclusion, utilising the SPS
formulation technology, spray-drying and terminal sterilisation of influenza
A(H1N1)pdm09 split virus vaccine is feasible. Findings indicate the potential
utility of such formulated vaccines e.g. for needle-free vaccination routes and
delivery to countries with uncertain cold chain facilities.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24631078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Front Immunol. 2014 Feb 14;5:19. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2014.00019. eCollection 2014.

From pre-DP, post-DP, SP4, and SP8 Thymocyte Cell Counts to a Dynamical Model of 
Cortical and Medullary Selection.

Sawicka M(1), Stritesky GL(2), Reynolds J(1), Abourashchi N(1), Lythe G(1),
Molina-París C(1), Hogquist KA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Mathematics, School of Mathematics, University of Leeds 
, Leeds , UK. (2)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Center for
Immunology, University of Minnesota , Minneapolis, MN , USA.

Cells of the mature aß T cell repertoire arise from the development in the thymus
of bone marrow precursors (thymocytes). aß T cell maturation is characterized by 
the expression of thousands of copies of identical aß T cell receptors and the
CD4 and/or CD8 co-receptors on the surface of thymocytes. The maturation stages
of a thymocyte are: (1) double negative (DN) (TCR(-), CD4(-) and CD8(-)), (2)
double positive (DP) (TCR(+), CD4(+) and CD8(+)), and (3) single positive (SP)
(TCR(+), CD4(+) or CD8(+)). Thymic antigen presenting cells provide the
appropriate micro-architecture for the maturation of thymocytes, which "sense"
the signaling environment via their randomly generated TCRs. Thymic development
is characterized by (i) an extremely low success rate, and (ii) the selection of 
a functional and self-tolerant T cell repertoire. In this paper, we combine
recent experimental data and mathematical modeling to study the selection events 
that take place in the thymus after the DN stage. The stable steady state of the 
model for the pre-DP, post-DP, and SP populations is identified with the
experimentally measured cell counts from 5.5- to 17-week-old mice. We make use of
residence times in the cortex and the medulla for the different populations, as
well as recently reported asymmetric death rates for CD4 and CD8 SP thymocytes.
We estimate that 65.8% of pre-DP thymocytes undergo death by neglect. In the
post-DP compartment, 91.7% undergo death by negative selection, 4.7% become CD4
SP, and 3.6% become CD8 SP. Death by negative selection in the medulla removes
8.6% of CD4 SP and 32.1% of CD8 SP thymocytes. Approximately 46.3% of CD4 SP and 
27% of CD8 SP thymocytes divide before dying or exiting the thymus.

PMCID: PMC3924582
PMID: 24592261  [PubMed]


140. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:951978. doi: 10.1155/2014/951978. Epub 2014 Jan 21.

Assessment of Mycobacterium bovis deleted in p27-p55 virulence operon as
candidate vaccine against tuberculosis in animal models.

Bianco MV(1), Clark S(2), Blanco FC(1), Garbaccio S(3), García E(1), Cataldi
AA(1), Williams A(2), Bigi F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biotecnología, CICVyA-INTA, N. Repetto and De los Reseros, 1686
Hurlingham, Argentina. (2)Public Health England, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG, 
UK. (3)Instituto de Patobiología, CICVyA-INTA, N. Repetto and De los Reseros,
1686 Hurlingham, Argentina.

A Mycobacterium bovis knockout in p27-p55 operon was tested as an
antituberculosis experimental vaccine in animal models. The mutant Mb<U+0394>p27-p55 was
significantly more attenuated in nude mice than its parental strain but more
virulent than BCG Pasteur. Challenge experiments in mice and guinea pigs using M.
bovis or M. tuberculosis strains showed similar protection conferred by
Mb<U+0394>p27-p55 mutant than BCG in terms of pathology and bacterial loads in spleen
but lower protection than BCG in lungs. When tested in cattle, Mb<U+0394>p27-p55 did not
induce IL-2 expression and induced a very low production of IFN<U+03B3>, suggesting that
the lack of P27/P55 reduces the capacity of M. bovis of triggering an adequate
Th1 response.

PMCID: PMC3918748
PMID: 24588000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Theriogenology. 2014 May;81(8):1067-72. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2014.01.033. Epub 2014 Jan 31.

Evaluation of sperm subpopulation structure in relation to in vitro sperm-oocyte 
interaction of frozen-thawed semen from Holstein bulls.

Ferraz MA(1), Morató R(2), Yeste M(3), Arcarons N(3), Pena AI(4), Tamargo C(5),
Hidalgo CO(5), Muiño R(4), Mogas T(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Farm Animal Health, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands. (2)Departament de Biologia, Facultat de
Ciències, Campus de Montilivi, Girona, Spain. (3)Departament de Medicina i
Cirurgia Animals, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Cerdanyola del Vallès,
Spain. (4)Departamento de Patologia Animal, Universidad de Santiago de
Compostela, Lugo, Spain. (5)Área de Selección y Reproducción Animal, Servicio
Regional de Investigación y Desarrollo Agroalimentario, Gijón, Spain.
(6)Departament de Medicina i Cirurgia Animals, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona,
Cerdanyola del Vallès, Spain. Electronic address: teresa.mogas@uab.cat.

The present study examined the relationship between the relative amount of high
motile sperm and sperm-oocyte interactions obtained from Holstein bull
ejaculates. Post-thaw sperm motility was analyzed using a computer-assisted sperm
analyzer system and evaluated to determine the sperm motility subpopulations.
Adhesion and penetration of zona pellucida (ZP) and pronucleus formation using
post-thawed samples (15 ejaculates form 5 different bulls) with different
percentages of sperm in the subpopulation with the fastest and most progressive
subpopulation (subpopulation 4 [SP4]) were analyzed. The correlation between the 
proportion of sperm in SP4 and the number of spermatozoa bound to the zona
pellucida (ZBA), the penetration rate, and the rate of pronucleus formation were 
calculated. A significant (P < 0.05) and positive correlation was found between
the number of spermatozoa bound to the zona pellucida, the penetration rate, and 
the rate of pronucleus formation with the proportion of sperm in SP4 (r = 0.79, r
= 0.66, and r = 0.63, respectively). Our results suggest that this specific high 
motile and progressive subpopulation is positively and significantly correlated
with the ability of a thawed bull semen sample to interact properly with the
oocyte and its extracellular vestments. These findings emphasize the relevance of
analyzing semen subpopulation composition to predict bull sperm fertilizing
ability and to select Holstein bulls for breeding purposes.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24581584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Jun;1843(6):1196-206. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2014.02.008. Epub 2014 Feb 24.

Specificity protein 4 (Sp4) regulates the transcription of AMPA receptor subunit 
GluA2 (Gria2).

Priya A(1), Johar K(1), Nair B(1), Wong-Riley MT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Road, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA. (2)Department of 
Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of Wisconsin, 8701
Watertown Plank Road, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA. Electronic address: mwr@mcw.edu.

The alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptors are
important glutamatergic receptors mediating fast excitatory synaptic transmission
in the brain. The regulation of the four subunits of AMPA receptors, GluA1-4, is 
poorly understood. Excitatory synaptic transmission is highly energy-demanding,
and this energy is derived mainly from the oxidative pathway. Recently, we found 
that specificity factor regulates all subunits of cytochrome c oxidase (COX), a
critical energy-generating enzyme. COX is also regulated by nuclear respiratory
factor 1 (NRF-1), which transcriptionally controls the Gria2 (GluA2) gene of AMPA
receptors. The goal of the present study was to test our hypothesis that
Sp-factors (Sp1, Sp3, and/or Sp4) also regulate AMPA subunit genes. If so, we
wish to determine if Sp-factors and NRF-1 function via a complementary,
concurrent and parallel, or a combination of complementary and
concurrent/parallel mechanism. By means of multiple approaches, including
electrophoretic mobility shift and supershift assays, chromatin
immunoprecipitation, promoter mutations, real-time quantitative PCR, and western 
blot analysis, we found that Sp4, but not Sp1 or Sp3, regulates the Gria2, but
not Gria1, 3, or 4, subunit gene of the AMPA receptor in a concurrent and
parallel manner with NRF-1. Thus, Sp4 and NRF-1 both mediate the tight coupling
between neuronal activity and energy metabolism at the transcriptional level.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4024218
PMID: 24576410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Proteomics. 2014 Apr 14;101:63-76. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2014.02.013. Epub 2014 
Feb 21.

Identification of vaccine antigens using integrated proteomic analyses of surface
immunogens from serogroup B Neisseria meningitidis.

Tsolakos N(1), Brookes C(2), Taylor S(2), Gorringe A(2), Tang CM(3), Feavers
IM(4), Wheeler JX(5).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Biological Standards and Control, Medicine and
Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency, Blanche Lane, South Mimms, Potters Bar,
Hertfordshire EN6 3QG, United Kingdom; Centre for Molecular Microbiology and
Infection, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Imperial
College London, London SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom. (2)Public Health England, Porton 
Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG, United Kingdom. (3)Centre for Molecular Microbiology and
Infection, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Imperial
College London, London SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom. (4)National Institute for
Biological Standards and Control, Medicine and Healthcare Products Regulatory
Agency, Blanche Lane, South Mimms, Potters Bar, Hertfordshire EN6 3QG, United
Kingdom. (5)National Institute for Biological Standards and Control, Medicine and
Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency, Blanche Lane, South Mimms, Potters Bar,
Hertfordshire EN6 3QG, United Kingdom. Electronic address: jun.wheeler@nibsc.org.

Meningococcal surface proteins capable of evoking a protective immune response
are candidates for inclusion in protein-based vaccines against serogroup B
Neisseria meningitidis (NmB). In this study, a 2-dimensional (2-D) gel-based
platform integrating surface and immune-proteomics was developed to characterize 
NmB surface protein antigens. The surface proteome was analyzed by differential
2-D gel electrophoresis following treatment of live bacteria with proteinase K.
Alongside, proteins recognized by immune sera from mice challenged with live
meningococci were detected using 2-D immunoblots. In combination, seventeen
proteins were identified including the well documented antigens PorA, OpcA and
factor H-binding protein, previously reported potential antigens and novel
potential immunogens. Results were validated for the macrophage infectivity
potentiator (MIP), a recently proposed NmB vaccine candidate. MIP-specific
antisera bound to meningococci in whole-cell ELISA and facilitated
opsonophagocytosis and deposition of complement factors on the surface of
meningococcal isolates of different serosubtypes. Cleavage by proteinase K was
confirmed in western blots and shown to occur in a fraction of the MIP expressed 
by meningococci suggesting transient or limited surface exposure. These
observations add knowledge for the development of a protein NmB vaccine. The
proteomic workflow presented here may be used for the discovery of vaccine
candidates against other pathogens.BIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE: This study presents
an integrated proteomic strategy to identify proteins from N. meningitidis with
desirable properties (i.e. surface exposure and immunogenicity) for inclusion in 
subunit vaccines against bacterial meningitis. The effectiveness of the method
was demonstrated by the identification of some of the major meningococcal vaccine
antigens. Information was also obtained about novel potential immunogens as well 
as the recently described potential antigen macrophage infectivity potentiator
which can be useful for its consideration as a vaccine candidate. Additionally,
the proteomic strategy presented in this study provides a generic 2-D gel-based
platform for the discovery of vaccine candidates against other bacterial
infections.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24561796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 18;9(2):e88561. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088561. eCollection
2014.

Genome-wide mapping of loci explaining variance in scrotal circumference in
Nellore cattle.

Utsunomiya YT(1), Carmo AS(1), Neves HH(2), Carvalheiro R(3), Matos MC(1),
Zavarez LB(1), Ito PK(4), Pérez O'Brien AM(5), Sölkner J(5), Porto-Neto LR(6),
Schenkel FS(7), McEwan J(8), Cole JB(9), da Silva MV(10), Van Tassell CP(11),
Sonstegard TS(11), Garcia JF(12).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Medicina Veterinária Preventiva e Reprodução Animal, Faculdade
de Ciências Agrárias e Veterinárias, UNESP - Univ Estadual Paulista, Jaboticabal,
São Paulo, Brazil. (2)Departamento de Zootecnia, UNESP - Univ Estadual Paulista, 
Jaboticabal, São Paulo, Brazil. (3)Departamento de Zootecnia, UNESP - Univ
Estadual Paulista, Jaboticabal, São Paulo, Brazil ; GenSys Consultores
Associados, Porto Alegre, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil. (4)Departamento de Apoio,
Saúde e Produção Animal, Faculdade de Medicina Veterinária de Araçatuba, UNESP - 
Univ Estadual Paulista, Araçatuba, São Paulo, Brazil. (5)Division of Livestock
Sciences, Department of Sustainable Agricultural Systems, BOKU - University of
Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Vienna, Austria. (6)CSIRO - Commonwealth
Scientific and Industrial Research Organization, Food Futures Flagship, Brisbane,
Queensland, Australia. (7)Centre for Genetic Improvement of Livestock, University
of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada. (8)Centre for Reproduction and Genomics,
AgResearch, Invermay, Mosgiel, Otago, New Zealand. (9)Animal Improvement Programs
Laboratory, ARS-USDA - Agricultural Research Service - United States Department
of Agriculture, Beltsville, Maryland, United States of America.
(10)Bioinformatics and Animal Genomics Laboratory, Embrapa Dairy Cattle, Juiz de 
Fora, Minas Gerais, Brazil. (11)Bovine Functional Genomics Laboratory, ARS-USDA -
Agricultural Research Service - United States Department of Agriculture,
Beltsville, Maryland, United States of America. (12)Departamento de Medicina
Veterinária Preventiva e Reprodução Animal, Faculdade de Ciências Agrárias e
Veterinárias, UNESP - Univ Estadual Paulista, Jaboticabal, São Paulo, Brazil ;
Departamento de Apoio, Saúde e Produção Animal, Faculdade de Medicina Veterinária
de Araçatuba, UNESP - Univ Estadual Paulista, Araçatuba, São Paulo, Brazil.

The reproductive performance of bulls has a high impact on the beef cattle
industry. Scrotal circumference (SC) is the most recorded reproductive trait in
beef herds, and is used as a major selection criterion to improve precocity and
fertility. The characterization of genomic regions affecting SC can contribute to
the identification of diagnostic markers for reproductive performance and uncover
molecular mechanisms underlying complex aspects of bovine reproductive biology.
In this paper, we report a genome-wide scan for chromosome segments explaining
differences in SC, using data of 861 Nellore bulls (Bos indicus) genotyped for
over 777,000 single nucleotide polymorphisms. Loci that excel from the genome
background were identified on chromosomes 4, 6, 7, 10, 14, 18 and 21. The
majority of these regions were previously found to be associated with
reproductive and body size traits in cattle. The signal on chromosome 14
replicates the pleiotropic quantitative trait locus encompassing PLAG1 that
affects male fertility in cattle and stature in several species. Based on
intensive literature mining, SP4, MAGEL2, SH3RF2, PDE5A and SNAI2 are proposed as
novel candidate genes for SC, as they affect growth and testicular size in other 
animal models. These findings contribute to linking reproductive phenotypes to
gene functions, and may offer new insights on the molecular biology of male
fertility.

PMCID: PMC3928245
PMID: 24558400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Environ Int. 2014 Nov;72:133-9. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2014.01.018. Epub 2014 Feb 
12.

Responding to biological incidents--what are the current issues in remediation of
the contaminated environment?

Pottage T(1), Goode E(2), Wyke S(3), Bennett AM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Public Health England, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK.
Electronic address: Thomas.pottage@phe.gov.uk. (2)Public Health England, Porton
Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK. (3)Centre for Radiation, Chemicals and
Environmental Hazards, Public Health England, Chilton OX11 0RQ, UK.

Since 2000 there have been a number of biological incidents resulting in
environmental contamination with Bacillus anthracis, the causative agent of
anthrax. These incidents include the US anthrax attacks in 2001, the US and UK
drumming incidents in 2006-2008 and more recently, anthrax contamination of
heroin in 2009/2010 and 2012/2013. Remediation techniques used to return
environments to normal have varied between incidents, with different
decontamination technologies being employed. Many factors need to be considered
before a remediation strategy or recovery option can be implemented, including;
cost, time (length of application), public perception of risk, and sampling
strategies (and results) to name a few. These incidents have demonstrated that
consolidated guidance for remediating biologically contaminated environments in
the aftermath of a biological incident was required. The UK Recovery Handbook for
Biological Incidents (UKRHBI) is a project led by Public Health England (PHE),
formerly the Health Protection Agency (HPA) to provide guidance and advice on how
to remediate the environment following a biological incident or outbreak of
infection, and is expected to be published in 2015.

Crown Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24530001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Microbiol Methods. 2014 May;100:1-7. doi: 10.1016/j.mimet.2014.01.017. Epub
2014 Feb 11.

Construction of an inducible system for the analysis of essential genes in
Yersinia pestis.

Ford DC(1), Ireland PM(2), Bullifent HL(2), Saint RJ(2), McAlister EV(2),
Sarkar-Tyson M(2), Oyston PC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire
SP4 0JQ, UK. Electronic address: dcford@dstl.gov.uk. (2)Defence Science and
Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK.

Yersinia pestis, a Gram negative bacterium, causes bubonic and pneumonic plague. 
Emerging antibiotic resistance in clinical isolates is driving a need to develop 
novel antibiotics to treat infection by this transmissible and highly virulent
pathogen. Proteins required for viability, so called essential genes, are
attractive potential therapeutic targets, however, confirmation of essentiality
is problematic. For the first time, we report the development of a system that
allows the rapid determination of Y. pestis gene essentiality through mutagenesis
and inducible expression of a plasmid borne copy of the target gene. Using this
approach, we have confirmed the uridine monophosphate kinase PyrH as an essential
protein in Y. pestis. This methodology and the tools we have developed will allow
the confirmation of other putative essential genes in this dangerous pathogen,
and facilitate the identification of novel targets for antimicrobial development.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 24524852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Travel Med Infect Dis. 2014 Mar-Apr;12(2):196-7. doi:
10.1016/j.tmaid.2014.01.002. Epub 2014 Jan 29.

Australian paralysis tick imported on a traveller returning to the UK.

Pietzsch M(1), Hansford K(2), Medlock J(3), Doggett SL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Entomology & Zoonoses Ecology, Public Health England, MRA, Emergency
Response Dept, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG, UK. Electronic address:
Maaike.Pietzsch@phe.gov.uk. (2)Medical Entomology & Zoonoses Ecology, Public
Health England, MRA, Emergency Response Dept, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG, UK.
Electronic address: Kayleigh.Hansford@phe.gov.uk. (3)Medical Entomology &
Zoonoses Ecology, Public Health England, MRA, Emergency Response Dept, Porton
Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG, UK. Electronic address: Jolyon.Medlock@phe.gov.uk.
(4)Department of Medical Entomology, Pathology West, ICPMR (Level 3), Westmead
Hospital, Locked Bag 9001, Westmead, NSW 2145, Australia. Electronic address:
Stephen.Doggett@health.nsw.gov.au.

PMID: 24517918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Spectrochim Acta A Mol Biomol Spectrosc. 2014 Apr 24;124:528-34. doi:
10.1016/j.saa.2014.01.048. Epub 2014 Jan 24.

Determination of chemical changes in Isatis indigotica seeds carried after
Chinese first spaceship with FTIR and 2D-IR correlation spectroscopy.

Chen X(1), Keong CY(2), Mei X(1), Lan J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicinal Plant Development, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 
& Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100193, PR China. (2)Phytochemistry Unit,
Herbal Medicine Research Centre, Institute for Medical Research, 50588 Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia. (3)Institute of Medicinal Plant Development, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100193, PR China.
Electronic address: lanjin60@163.com.

Spaceflight represents a complex environmental condition. Space mutagenesis
breeding has achieved and marked certain results over the years. This method was 
employed in our previous studies in order to obtain improved germplasm of Isatis 
indigotica. This study is to determine the chemical changes in I. indigotica
seeds carried after Chinese first spaceship (Shenzhou I). Fourier transform
infrared (FTIR), second derivative and two-dimensional infrared (2DIR)
correlation spectroscopy were used in analysis. Not much differences between the 
two spectra were found except the peaks in the range of 1500-1200 cm(-)(1) which 
was about 7 cm(-)(1) different and indicated the absorption could be initialed
from different bonds. SP4 showed different derivative compared with C4 in the
second derivative spectra of 1200-800 cm(-)(1). The stronger signal of 2DIR in
SP4 indicated the protein content of the seed was changed after spaceflight. It
is concluded that spaceflight provided an extreme condition that caused changes
of chemical properties in I. indigotica.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24508891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Viruses. 2014 Feb 5;6(2):524-34. doi: 10.3390/v6020524.

Prevalence of antibodies against hantaviruses in serum and saliva of adults
living or working on farms in Yorkshire, United Kingdom.

Jameson LJ(1), Newton A(2), Coole L(3), Newman EN(4), Carroll MW(5), Beeching
NJ(6), Hewson R(7), Christley RM(8).

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Services, Public Health England, Porton Down, Wiltshire, SP4 0JG,
UK. lisa.jameson@phe.gov.uk. (2)Public Health England, Yorkshire and the Humber, 
York, YO41 1LZ, UK. autilia.newton@phe.gov.uk. (3)Field Epidemiology Services,
Public Health England, Leeds, LS2 7UE, UK. louise.coole@phe.gov.uk.
(4)Microbiology Services, Public Health England, Porton Down, Wiltshire, SP4 0JG,
UK. edmund.newman@phe.gov.uk. (5)Microbiology Services, Public Health England,
Porton Down, Wiltshire, SP4 0JG, UK. miles.carroll@phe.gov.uk. (6)Clinical
Sciences, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, L3 5QA, UK.
beeching@liverpool.ac.uk. (7)Microbiology Services, Public Health England, Porton
Down, Wiltshire, SP4 0JG, UK. roger.hewson@phe.gov.uk. (8)Institute of Infection 
and Global Health, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L69 7BE, UK.
robc@liverpool.ac.uk.

Comment in
    Viruses. 2014 Sep;6(9):3425-7.
    Viruses. 2014 Sep;6(9):3415-24.

Hantaviruses are an established cause of haemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome
(HFRS) in Europe. Following a confirmed case of HFRS in the UK, in an individual 
residing on a farm in North Yorkshire and the Humber, a tidal estuary on the east
coast of Northern England, and the subsequent isolation of a Seoul hantavirus
from rats trapped on the patient's farm, it was considered appropriate to further
investigate the public health risk of this virus in the region. Of a total 119
individuals tested, nine (7.6%) were seropositive for hantavirus antibodies.
Seven of the seropositive samples showed a stronger reaction to Seoul and Hantaan
compared to other clinically relevant hantaviruses. Observation of rodents during
the day, in particular mice, was associated with a reduced risk of
seropositivity. In addition to one region known to be at risk following an acute 
case, five further potential risk areas have been identified. This study supports
recently published evidence that hantaviruses are likely to be of public health
interest in the region.

PMCID: PMC3939470
PMID: 24504130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Curr Microbiol. 2014 Jun;68(6):693-701. doi: 10.1007/s00284-014-0526-7. Epub 2014
Feb 2.

Identification of genes required for soil survival in Burkholderia thailandensis 
by transposon-directed insertion site sequencing.

Bishop AH(1), Rachwal PA.

Author information: 
(1)Detection Department, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, 
Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ, UK, AHBishop@dstl.gov.uk.

Transposon-directed insertion site sequencing was used to identify genes required
by Burkholderia thailandensis to survive in plant/soil microcosms. A total of
1,153 genetic loci fulfilled the criteria as being likely to encode survival
characteristics. Of these, 203 (17.6 %) were associated with uptake and transport
systems; 463 loci (40.1 %) coded for enzymatic properties, 99 of these (21.4 %)
had reduction/oxidation functions; 117 (10.1 %) were gene regulation or sensory
loci; 61 (5.3 %) encoded structural proteins found in the cell envelope or with
enzymatic activities related to it, distinct from these, 46 (4.0 %) were involved
in chemotaxis and flagellum, or pilus synthesis; 39 (3.4 %) were transposase
enzymes or were bacteriophage-derived; and 30 (2.6 %) were involved in the
production of antibiotics or siderophores. Two hundred and twenty genes (19.1 %) 
encoded hypothetical proteins or those of unknown function. Given the importance 
of motility and pilus formation in microcosm persistence the nature of the
colonization of the rhizosphere was examined by confocal microscopy. Wild type B.
thailandensis expressing red fluorescent protein was inoculated into microcosms. 
Even though the roots had been washed, the bacteria were still present but they
were motile with no attachment having taken place, perhaps being retained in a
biofilm.

PMID: 24488501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Neurochem. 2014 May;129(4):743-52. doi: 10.1111/jnc.12657. Epub 2014 Feb 12.

Phosphorylation of the transcription factor Sp4 is reduced by NMDA receptor
signaling.

Saia G(1), Lalonde J, Sun X, Ramos B, Gill G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental, Molecular, and Chemical Biology, Tufts University
School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA; the Cell, Molecular and
Developmental Biology Program, Sackler School of Biomedical Sciences, Tufts
University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

The regulation of transcription factor function in response to neuronal activity 
is important for development and function of the nervous system. The
transcription factor Sp4 regulates the developmental patterning of dendrites,
contributes to complex processes including learning and memory, and has been
linked to psychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia and bipolar disorder.
Despite its many roles in the nervous system, the molecular mechanisms regulating
Sp4 activity are poorly understood. Here, we report a site of phosphorylation on 
Sp4 at serine 770 that is decreased in response to membrane depolarization.
Inhibition of the voltage-dependent NMDA receptor increased Sp4 phosphorylation. 
Conversely, stimulation with NMDA reduced the levels of Sp4 phosphorylation, and 
this was dependent on the protein phosphatase 1/2A. A phosphomimetic substitution
at S770 impaired the Sp4-dependent maturation of cerebellar granule neuron
primary dendrites, whereas a non-phosphorylatable Sp4 mutant behaved like wild
type. These data reveal that transcription factor Sp4 is regulated by NMDA
receptor-dependent activation of a protein phosphatase 1/2A signaling pathway.
Our findings also suggest that the regulated control of Sp4 activity is an
important mechanism governing the developmental patterning of dendrites.

© 2014 International Society for Neurochemistry.

PMCID: PMC3999283
PMID: 24475768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Neurosci Lett. 2014 Aug 22;578:211-6. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2014.01.021. Epub
2014 Jan 25.

The anticancer antibiotic mithramycin-A inhibits TRPV1 expression in dorsal root 
ganglion neurons.

Zavala K(1), Lee J(1), Chong J(1), Sharma M(1), Eilers H(1), Schumacher MA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care, Division of Pain Medicine,
University of California, San Francisco 94143-0427, United States. (2)Department 
of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care, Division of Pain Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco 94143-0427, United States. Electronic address:
schumacm@anesthesia.ucsf.edu.

Comment in
    Neurosci Lett. 2014 Aug 22;578:209-10.

Activation of peripheral nociceptors by products of inflammation has been shown
to be dependent on specific sensory transducing elements such as the capsaicin
receptor, TRPV1. The development of high-affinity antagonists to TRPV1 as well as
to other receptors capable of detecting noxious stimuli has now become a major
focus in analgesic development. Another critical feature of nociception is the
relative abundance of a particular pain transducing receptor under normal or
pathophysiologic conditions. Increases in expression and/or changes in
distribution of nociceptive receptors such as TRPV1 have been correlated with
progression of tissue injury and persistence of pain behaviors. Although some
details are emerging as to what regulates nociceptor-specific gene expression,
compounds that could potentially be used to block or reverse over-expression of
nociceptive gene expression are essentially absent. In our efforts to better
understand the transcriptional regulation of TRPV1 in sensory neurons, we
identified an anticancer agent, mithramycin-A, that decreased TRPV1 expression in
primary rat dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons. Mithramycin-A dose-dependently
(10-50 nM) decreased endogenous TRPV1 mRNA content and appeared to decrease
TRPV1-like protein expression in DRG neurons. We also observed that mithramycin-A
directed a decrease in the number of capsaicin-responsive DRG neurons without a
significant change in the capsaicin-response magnitudes. Interestingly,
mithramycin-A also reduced the mRNA encoding Sp1 and Sp4 in DRG neurons,
transcription factors previously found to positively regulate TRPV1 expression in
sensory neurons. Taken together, we propose that mithramycin-A directs an
inhibitory effect on a subpopulation of capsaicin-responsive DRG neurons that
utilize Sp1-like factors for TRPV1 expression. Given the therapeutic correlate of
mithramycin-A effectiveness in the treatment of certain cancers, small molecule
transcriptional inhibitors such as mithramycin-A may serve as useful tools of
discovery in pain transduction and possibly future analgesic development.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 24468003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Antiviral Res. 2014 Apr;104:153-5. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2014.01.012. Epub
2014 Jan 24.

Post-exposure efficacy of oral T-705 (Favipiravir) against inhalational Ebola
virus infection in a mouse model.

Smither SJ(1), Eastaugh LS(2), Steward JA(2), Nelson M(2), Lenk RP(3), Lever
MS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory
(Dstl), Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK. Electronic address:
sjsmither@dstl.gov.uk. (2)Biomedical Sciences Department, Defence Science and
Technology Laboratory (Dstl), Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK.
(3)MediVector, Inc., Two International Place, 22nd Floor, Boston, MA 02110,
United States.

Filoviruses cause disease with high case fatality rates and are considered
biological threat agents. Licensed post-exposure therapies that can be
administered by the oral route are desired for safe and rapid distribution and
uptake in the event of exposure or outbreaks. Favipiravir or T-705 has broad
antiviral activity and has already undergone phase II and is undergoing phase III
clinical trials for influenza. Here we report the first use of T-705 against
Ebola virus. T-705 gave 100% protection against aerosol Ebola virus E718
infection; protection was shown in immune-deficient mice after 14 days of
twice-daily dosing. T-705 was also shown to inhibit Ebola virus infection in cell
culture. T-705 is likely to be licensed for use against influenza in the near
future and could also be used with a new indication for filovirus infection.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 24462697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Microb Pathog. 2014 Feb-Mar;67-68:55-8. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2014.01.001. Epub 
2014 Jan 23.

The serine protease inhibitor Ecotin is required for full virulence of
Burkholderia pseudomallei.

Ireland PM(1), Marshall L(2), Norville I(2), Sarkar-Tyson M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire
SP4 0JQ, UK. Electronic address: pmireland@dstl.gov.uk. (2)Defence Science and
Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK. (3)Defence 
Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK;
Pathology & Laboratory Medicine M504, University of Western Australia, 35
Stirling Hwy, Crawley, WA 6009, Australia.

Burkholderia pseudomallei is a Gram negative soil saprophyte that causes the
disease melioidosis where clinical symptoms can vary from localised infection to 
pneumonia and septic shock. Ecotin is a potent periplasmic serine protease
inhibitor first identified in Escherichia coli. Ecotin, although present in only 
a small subset of genera, can inhibit a broad range of serine proteases including
those typically associated with the innate immune system such as neutrophil
elastase and cathepsin G. An Ecotin orthologue identified in B. pseudomallei was 
recombinantly expressed and found to inhibit elastase. To study the role of
Ecotin in B. pseudomallei virulence an in-frame unmarked deletion mutant was
created. Infection of a murine macrophages-like cell line revealed Ecotin was
necessary for the early stages of colonisation allowing replication following
cell entry. Attenuation of the <U+0394>eco mutant strain in the murine model of
melioidosis further supported Ecotin as a virulence factor of B. pseudomallei.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 24462575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Virology. 2014 Mar;452-453:324-33. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2013.03.028. Epub 2014
Jan 24.

Vaccination with recombinant adenoviruses expressing Ebola virus glycoprotein
elicits protection in the interferon alpha/beta receptor knock-out mouse.

O'Brien LM(1), Stokes MG(2), Lonsdale SG(2), Maslowski DR(2), Smither SJ(2),
Lever MS(2), Laws TR(2), Perkins SD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory
(Dstl), Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, United Kingdom. Electronic
address: lmobrien@dstl.gov.uk. (2)Biomedical Sciences Department, Defence Science
and Technology Laboratory (Dstl), Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ,
United Kingdom.

The resistance of adult immunocompetent mice to infection with ebolaviruses has
led to the development of alternative small animal models that utilise
immunodeficient mice, for example the interferon a/ß receptor knock-out mouse
(IFNR(-/-)). IFNR(-/-) mice have been shown to be susceptible to infection with
ebolaviruses by multiple routes but it is not known if this murine model is
suitable for testing therapeutics that rely on the generation of an immune
response for efficacy. We have tested recombinant adenovirus vectors for their
ability to protect IFNR(-/-) mice from challenge with Ebola virus and have
analysed the humoral response generated after immunisation. The recombinant
vaccines elicited good levels of protection in the knock-out mouse and the
antibody response in IFNR(-/-) mice was similar to that observed in vaccinated
wild-type mice. These results indicate that the IFNR(-/-) mouse is a relevant
small animal model for studying ebolavirus-specific therapeutics.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24461913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Biomicrofluidics. 2013 Dec 23;7(6):64118. doi: 10.1063/1.4850796. eCollection
2013.

Life under flow: A novel microfluidic device for the assessment of anti-biofilm
technologies.

Salta M(1), Capretto L(2), Carugo D(2), Wharton JA(1), Stokes KR(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Advanced Tribology at Southampton (nCATS), Engineering
Sciences, University of Southampton, Southampton SO17 1BJ, United Kingdom.
(2)Bioengineering Sciences Group, Engineering Sciences, University of
Southampton, Southampton SO17 1BJ, United Kingdom. (3)National Centre for
Advanced Tribology at Southampton (nCATS), Engineering Sciences, University of
Southampton, Southampton SO17 1BJ, United Kingdom ; Physical Sciences Department,
Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl), Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ,
United Kingdom.

In the current study, we have developed and fabricated a novel lab-on-a-chip
device for the investigation of biofilm responses, such as attachment kinetics
and initial biofilm formation, to different hydrodynamic conditions. The
microfluidic flow channels are designed using computational fluid dynamic
simulations so as to have a pre-defined, homogeneous wall shear stress in the
channels, ranging from 0.03 to 4.30<U+2009>Pa, which are relevant to in-service
conditions on a ship hull, as well as other man-made marine platforms. Temporal
variations of biofilm formation in the microfluidic device were assessed using
time-lapse microscopy, nucleic acid staining, and confocal laser scanning
microscopy (CLSM). Differences in attachment kinetics were observed with
increasing shear stress, i.e., with increasing shear stress there appeared to be 
a delay in bacterial attachment, i.e., at 55, 120, 150, and 155<U+2009>min for 0.03,
0.60, 2.15, and 4.30<U+2009>Pa, respectively. CLSM confirmed marked variations in colony
architecture, i.e.,: (i) lower shear stresses resulted in biofilms with
distinctive morphologies mainly characterised by mushroom-like structures,
interstitial channels, and internal voids, and (ii) for the higher shear stresses
compact clusters with large interspaces between them were formed. The key
advantage of the developed microfluidic device is the combination of three
architectural features in one device, i.e., an open-system design, channel
replication, and multiple fully developed shear stresses.

PMCID: PMC3888455
PMID: 24454610  [PubMed]


157. Braz J Microbiol. 2015 Mar 4;45(4):1513-9. eCollection 2014.

Experimental infection of BHK21 and Vero cell lines with different Mycoplasma
spp.

Netto C(1), Soccol VT(2), Sepulveda LM(3), Timenetsky J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Mestrado em Biotecnologia Industrial Universidade Positivo CuritibaPR Brazil
Mestrado em Biotecnologia Industrial, Universidade Positivo, Curitiba, PR,
Brazil. ; Ourofino Saúde Animal Ribeirão PretoSP Brazil Ourofino Saúde Animal,
Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil. (2)Programa de Pós Graduação em Engenharia de
Bioprocessos e Biotecnologia Universidade Federal de Curitiba CuritibaPR Brazil
Programa de Pós Graduação em Engenharia de Bioprocessos e Biotecnologia,
Universidade Federal de Curitiba, Curitiba, PR, Brazil. (3)Ourofino Saúde Animal 
Ribeirão PretoSP Brazil Ourofino Saúde Animal, Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil.
(4)Departamento de Microbiologia Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Universidade de
São Paulo São PauloSP Brazil Departamento de Microbiologia, Instituto de Ciências
Biomédicas, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.

Mycoplasma spp, belongs to the class Mollicutes and is capable to produce
alterations in cellular cultures causing damages to the biotechnological
industry. Bioproducts generally require two essential inputs, bovine serum and
cells. The study herein aims to evaluate the mycoplasma concentrations that
affect the growing of BHK21 and Vero cells. The species used were: Mycoplasma
orale, M. salivarium, M. arginini and M. hyorhinis, cultivated in a SP4 media.
Two contamination tests were performed with BHK21 and Vero cells and one of them 
applied different concentrations of mycoplasma. In the first one, mycoplasma was 
applied at the day zero and, in the second one, the contamination was performed
after the monolayer establishment. The both cellular cultures presented
cytopathic effects with mycoplasma contamination, but the Vero cells suffered
more damages than the BHK21 ones. It was also observed that the severity of the
cytopathic effect depended on the mycoplasma specie, on the concentration and on 
the time of contact with the cellular culture, which evidences the importance of 
controlling the presence of mycoplasma in biotechnological industries.

PMCID: PMC4323330
PMID: 25763061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 18;8(12):e82673. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082673.
eCollection 2013.

Isolation and characterization of two novel bacteria Afipia cberi and
Mesorhizobium hominis from blood of a patient afflicted with fatal pulmonary
illness.

Lo SC(1), Li B(1), Hung GC(1), Lei H(1), Li T(1), Zhang J(1), Nagamine K(1), Tsai
S(1), Zucker MJ(2), Olesnicky L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Tissue Microbiology Laboratory, Division of Cellular and Gene Therapies,
Office of Cellular, Tissue and Gene Therapies, Center for Biologics Evaluation
and Research, Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of 
America. (2)Department of Medicine, Newark Beth Israel Medical Center, Newark,
New Jersey, United States of America. (3)Department of Pathology, Newark Beth
Israel Medical Center, Newark, New Jersey, United States of America.

We recently isolated and discovered new Bradyrhizobiaceae microbes from the
cryopreserved culture broth of blood samples from 3 patients with poorly defined 
illnesses using modified SP4 media and culture conditions coupled with genomic
sequencing. Using a similar protocol, we studied a previously cryopreserved
culture broth of blood sample from a patient who had succumbed to an acute onset 
of fulminant pulmonary illness. We report that two phases of microbial growth
were observed in the re-initiated culture. Biochemical and genomic
characterization revealed microbes isolated from the first phase of growth were
new Afipia species of Bradyrhizobiaceae, tentatively named A. cberi with a ~ 5 MB
chromosome that was different from those of all previously known Afipia microbes 
including the newly discovered A. septicemium. The microbes isolated from the
second phase of growth were prominent sugar assimilators, novel
Phyllobacteriaceae, phylogenetically most closely related to Mesorhizobium and
tentatively named M. hominis with a ~ 5.5 MB chromosome. All A. cberi isolates
carry a circular ~ 140 KB plasmid. Some M. hominis isolates possess a circular ~ 
412 KB plasmid that can be lost in prolonged culture or passage. No antibiotics
resistant genes could be identified in both of the A. cberi and M. hominis
plasmids. Antibiotic susceptibility studies using broth culture systems revealed 
isolates of A. cberi could be sensitive to some antibiotics, but all isolates of 
M. hominis were resistant to essentially all tested antibiotics. However, the
cell-free antibiotics susceptibility test results may not be applicable to
clinical treatment against the microbes that are known to be capable of
intracellular growth. It remains to be determined if the 2 previously unknown
Rhizobiales were indeed pathogenic and played a role in the pulmonary disease
process in this patient. Specific probes and methods will be developed to
re-examine the diseased lungs from patient's autopsy.

PMCID: PMC3867388
PMID: 24367538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Nanopart Res. 2013;15:2101. Epub 2013 Nov 19.

Interlaboratory comparison of size measurements on nanoparticles using
nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA).

Hole P(1), Sillence K(1), Hannell C(1), Maguire CM(2), Roesslein M(3), Suarez
G(4), Capracotta S(5), Magdolenova Z(6), Horev-Azaria L(7), Dybowska A(8), Cooke 
L(9), Haase A(10), Contal S(11), Manø S(6), Vennemann A(12), Sauvain JJ(4),
Staunton KC(2), Anguissola S(9), Luch A(10), Dusinska M(6), Korenstein R(7),
Gutleb AC(11), Wiemann M(12), Prina-Mello A(2), Riediker M(4), Wick P(3).

Author information: 
(1)NanoSight Ltd., Minton Park, London Road, Amesbury, Wiltshire, SP4 7RT UK.
(2)Trinity Centre for Health Sciences, Department of Clinical Medicine, Institute
of Molecular Medicine, St. James's Hospital, James Street, Dublin 8, Ireland.
(3)Laboratory for Materials - Biology Interactions, Swiss Federal Laboratories
for Materials Research and Testing (Empa), Lerchenfeldstrasse 5, 9014 St Gallen, 
Switzerland. (4)Institute for Work and Health, Rte. de la Corniche 2, 1066
Epalinges-Lausanne, Switzerland. (5)NanoSight USA, 1415 Washington Heights, Rm
6611, Ann Arbor, MI 48109 USA. (6)Health Effects Laboratory, Department of
Environmental Chemistry, Norwegian Institute for Air Research, Instituttveien 18,
P.O. Box 100, NO-2027 Kjeller, Norway. (7)Department of Physiology and
Pharmacology, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, 69978 Tel Aviv,
Israel. (8)Department of Earth Sciences, Natural History Museum, Cromwell Road,
London, SW7 5BD UK. (9)Centre for Bio-Nano Interactions (CBNI), University
College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland. (10)Experimental Research,
Department of Product Safety, Bundesinstitut fur Risikobewertung (BfR),
Max-Dohrn-Strasse 8-10, 10589 Berlin, Germany. (11)Département Environnement et
Agro-biotechnologies (EVA), Centre de Recherche Public Gabriel Lippmann, 41, rue 
du Brill, 4422 Belvaux, Luxembourg. (12)IBE R&D Institute for Lung Health gGmbH, 
Mendelstrasse 11, 48149 Münster, Germany.

One of the key challenges in the field of nanoparticle (NP) analysis is in
producing reliable and reproducible characterisation data for nanomaterials. This
study looks at the reproducibility using a relatively new, but rapidly adopted,
technique, Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA) on a range of particle sizes and 
materials in several different media. It describes the protocol development and
presents both the data and analysis of results obtained from 12 laboratories,
mostly based in Europe, who are primarily QualityNano members. QualityNano is an 
EU FP7 funded Research Infrastructure that integrates 28 European analytical and 
experimental facilities in nanotechnology, medicine and natural sciences with the
goal of developing and implementing best practice and quality in all aspects of
nanosafety assessment. This study looks at both the development of the protocol
and how this leads to highly reproducible results amongst participants. In this
study, the parameter being measured is the modal particle size.

PMCID: PMC3857864
PMID: 24348090  [PubMed]


160. Vaccine. 2014 Feb 3;32(6):700-5. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2013.11.099. Epub 2013
Dec 14.

Recombinant antigens based on toxins A and B of Clostridium difficile that evoke 
a potent toxin-neutralising immune response.

Maynard-Smith M(1), Ahern H(1), McGlashan J(1), Nugent P(1), Ling R(1), Denton
H(1), Coxon R(2), Landon J(2), Roberts A(1), Shone C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Public Health England, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK.
(2)MicroPharm Ltd, Station Road Industrial Estate, Newcastle Emlyn,
Carmarthenshire SA38 9BY, UK. (3)Public Health England, Porton Down, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK. Electronic address: cliff.shone@phe.gov.uk.

Infection with the bacterium Clostridium difficile causes symptoms ranging from
mild to severe diarrhoea with life-threatening complications and remains a
significant burden to healthcare systems throughout the developed world. Two
potent cytotoxins, TcdA and TcdB are the prime mediators of the syndrome and
rapid neutralisation of these would afford significant benefits in disease
management. In the present study, a broad range of non-toxic, recombinant
fragments derived from TcdA and TcdB were designed for soluble expression in E.
coli and assessed for their capacity to generate a potent toxin-neutralising
immune response as assessed by cell-based assays. Significant differences between
the efficacies of isolated TcdA and TcdB regions with respect to inducing a
neutralising immune response were observed. While the C-terminal repeat regions
played the principal role in generating neutralising antibodies to TcdA, in the
case of TcdB, the central region domains dominated the neutralising immune
response. For both TcdA and TcdB, fragments which comprised domains from both the
central and C-terminal repeat region of the toxins were found to induce the most 
potent neutralising immune responses. Generated antibodies neutralised toxins
produced by a range of C. difficile isolates including ribotype 027 and 078
strains. Passive immunisation of hamsters with a combination of antibodies to
TcdA and TcdB fragments afforded complete protection from severe CDI induced by a
challenge of bacterial spores. The results of the study are discussed with
respect to the development of a cost effective immunotherapeutic approach for the
management of C. difficile infection.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3969267
PMID: 24342251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Curr Microbiol. 2014 Apr;68(4):477-85. doi: 10.1007/s00284-013-0502-7. Epub 2013 
Dec 6.

Identification of genes required by Bacillus thuringiensis for survival in soil
by transposon-directed insertion site sequencing.

Bishop AH(1), Rachwal PA, Vaid A.

Author information: 
(1)Detection Department, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, 
Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ, UK, AHBishop@dstl.gov.uk.

Transposon-directed insertion site sequencing was used to identify genes required
by Bacillus thuringiensis to survive in non-axenic plant/soil microcosms. A total
of 516 genetic loci fulfilled the criteria as conferring survival
characteristics. Of these, 127 (24.6 %) were associated with uptake and transport
systems; 227 loci (44.0 %) coded for enzymatic properties; 49 (9.5 %) were gene
regulation or sensory loci; 40 (7.8 %) were structural proteins found in the cell
envelope or had enzymatic activities related to it and 24 (4.7 %) were involved
in the production of antibiotics or resistance to them. Eighty-three (16.1 %)
encoded hypothetical proteins or those of unknown function. The ability to form
spores was a key survival characteristic in the microcosms: bacteria, inoculated 
in either spore or vegetative form, were able to multiply and colonise the soil, 
whereas a sporulation-deficient mutant was not. The presence of grass seedlings
was critical to colonisation. Bacteria labelled with green fluorescent protein
were observed to adhere to plant roots. The sporulation-specific promoter of
spo0A, the key regulator of sporulation, was strongly activated in the
rhizosphere. In contrast, the vegetative-specific promoters of spo0A and PlcR, a 
pleiotropic regulator of genes with diverse activities, were only very weakly
activated.

PMID: 24310935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. RNA. 2014 Jan;20(1):61-75. doi: 10.1261/rna.038968.113. Epub 2013 Nov 18.

Synthetic pre-microRNAs reveal dual-strand activity of miR-34a on TNF-a.

Guennewig B, Roos M, Dogar AM, Gebert LF, Zagalak JA, Vongrad V, Metzner KJ, Hall
J.

Functional microRNAs (miRNAs) are produced from both arms of their precursors
(pre-miRNAs). Their abundances vary in context-dependent fashion
spatiotemporarily and there is mounting evidence of regulatory interplay between 
them. Here, we introduce chemically synthesized pre-miRNAs (syn-pre-miRNAs) as a 
general class of accessible, easily transfectable mimics of pre-miRNAs. These are
RNA hairpins, identical in sequence to natural pre-miRNAs. They differ from
commercially available miRNA mimics through their complete hairpin structure,
including any regulatory elements in their terminal-loop regions and their
potential to introduce both strands into RISC. They are distinguished from
transcribed pre-miRNAs by their terminal 5' hydroxyl groups and their precisely
defined terminal nucleotides. We demonstrate with several examples how they fully
recapitulate the properties of pre-miRNAs, including their processing by Dicer
into functionally active 5p; and 3p-derived mature miRNAs. We use syn-pre-miRNAs 
to show that miR-34a uses its 5p and 3p miRNAs in two pathways: apoptosis during 
TGF-ß signaling, where SIRT1 and SP4 are suppressed by miR-34a-5p and miR-34a-3p,
respectively; and the lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-activation of primary human
monocyte-derived macrophages, where TNF (TNFa) is suppressed by miR-34a-5p
indirectly and miR-34a-3p directly. Our results add to growing evidence that the 
use of both arms of a miRNA may be a widely used mechanism. We further suggest
that syn-pre-miRNAs are ideal and affordable tools to investigate these
mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3866645
PMID: 24249224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Eur J Neurosci. 2014 Feb;39(4):566-78. doi: 10.1111/ejn.12415. Epub 2013 Nov 12.

Regulation of Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase by neuron-specific transcription factor Sp4:
implication in the tight coupling of energy production, neuronal activity and
energy consumption in neurons.

Johar K(1), Priya A, Wong-Riley MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology, and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Road, Milwaukee, WI, 53226, USA.

A major source of energy demand in neurons is the Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase pump that
restores the ionic gradient across the plasma membrane subsequent to depolarizing
neuronal activity. The energy comes primarily from mitochondrial oxidative
metabolism, of which cytochrome c oxidase (COX) is a key enzyme. Recently, we
found that all 13 subunits of COX are regulated by specificity (Sp) factors, and 
that the neuron-specific Sp4, but not Sp1 or Sp3, regulates the expression of key
glutamatergic receptor subunits as well. The present study sought to test our
hypothesis that Sp4 also regulates Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase subunit genes in neurons. By
means of multiple approaches, including in silico analysis, electrophoretic
mobility shift and supershift assays, chromatin immunoprecipitation, promoter
mutational analysis, over-expression, and RNA interference studies, we found that
Sp4, with minor contributions from Sp1 and Sp3, functionally regulate the Atp1a1,
Atp1a3, and Atp1b1 subunit genes of Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase in neurons. Transcripts of 
all three genes were up-regulated by depolarizing KCl stimulation and
down-regulated by the impulse blocker tetrodotoxin (TTX), indicating that their
expression was activity-dependent. Silencing of Sp4 blocked the up-regulation of 
these genes induced by KCl, whereas over-expression of Sp4 rescued them from
TTX-induced suppression. The effect of silencing or over-expressing Sp4 on
primary neurons was much greater than those of Sp1 or Sp3. The binding sites of
Sp factors on these genes are conserved among mice, rats and humans. Thus, Sp4
plays an important role in the transcriptional coupling of energy generation and 
energy consumption in neurons.

© 2013 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4017901
PMID: 24219545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Anim Reprod Sci. 2013 Dec;143(1-4):64-71. doi: 10.1016/j.anireprosci.2013.10.003.
Epub 2013 Oct 21.

Relationship between conventional semen characteristics, sperm motility patterns 
and fertility of Andalusian donkeys (Equus asinus).

Dorado J(1), Acha D, Ortiz I, Gálvez MJ, Carrasco JJ, Díaz B, Gómez-Arrones V,
Calero-Carretero R, Hidalgo M.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Reproduction Group, Department of Medicine and Animal Surgery, Faculty 
of Veterinary Medicine, University of Cordoba, 14071 Córdoba, Spain. Electronic
address: jdorado@uco.es.

Sperm quality has an important role in determining fertility. The aims of this
study were to compare the conventional sperm parameters, plus the characteristics
of the motility patterns of the different sperm subpopulations, of donkey donors 
with different fertility level, and to determine their relationships to
fertility. Thirty ejaculates from 6 Andalusian donkeys were assessed for gel-free
volume, pH, sperm concentration, motility and morphology. The fertility of
donkeys was classified on the basis of pregnancy rates per cycle, where donkeys
with a per cycle pregnancy rate =60% were considered to be "fertile" (n=3) and
those with a per cycle pregnancy rate <40% were categorized to be "sub-fertile"
(n=3). Significant differences (P<0.001) between the "fertile" and the
"sub-fertile" group were found for total and progressive motility, and for
straight line velocity. Sperm variables associated (P<0.05) with an increase in
percent pregnant per cycle included total motility (r=0.37), progressive motility
(r=0.53), curvilinear velocity (r=0.44), straightness (r=0.39), beat cross
frequency (r=0.44), and gel-free volume (r=0.53). Four sperm subpopulations (sP) 
were identified in fresh semen: sP1 (slow and non-progressive spermatozoa, 20%), 
sP2 (moderately slow but progressive spermatozoa, 71.2%), sP3 (highly active but 
non-progressive spermatozoa, 2.9%), and sP4 (highly active and progressive
spermatozoa, 5.9%). The lowest percentage (3.1%; P<0.001) of sP4 spermatozoa was 
observed in the "sub-fertile" group. Three of the sperm subpopulations were
related (P<0.05) to fertility (sP2, r=0.54; sP3, r=0.45; sP4, r=0.56). In
conclusion, we were able to relate the fertility of donkeys with in vitro
measures of sperm motility using computer-assisted sperm analysis techniques.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24210876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2013 Dec;42(6):587-8. doi:
10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2013.09.001. Epub 2013 Oct 1.

CpG oligonucleotides protect against Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus
infection in a route-dependent manner.

Rees DG(1), Phillpotts RJ, Griffin KF, Lukaszewski RA, Laws TR, Atkins HS, Krieg 
AM, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory,
Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.

PMID: 24210643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Sci Total Environ. 2014 Feb 1;470-471:759-67. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.10.031. Epub 2013 Oct 31.

Differing community responses to similar public health threats: a
cross-disciplinary systematic literature review.

Greene G(1), Turley R(2), Mann M(2), Amlôt R(3), Page L(4), Palmer S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Primary Care and Public Health, Cardiff University, Cardiff CF14 
4YS, UK. (2)Support Unit for Research Evidence, Cardiff University, Cardiff CF14 
4YS, UK. (3)Emergency Response Department, Health Protection Agency, Building
H11, HPA, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG UK. (4)King's College London, Institute 
of Psychiatry, 3rd Floor, Weston Education Centre, 10 Cutcombe Road, London SE5
9RJ, UK.

BACKGROUND: The way in which different communities respond to similar threats to 
their health can vary, from outrage to indifference and public health agencies
are often taken by surprise leading to potential loss of public confidence. The
objective of this systematic literature review was to seek to better understand
the community-level drivers that might explain the variability in response.
METHODS: A vigorous systematic cross-disciplinary literature review was
undertaken searching thirteen bibliographic databases and a variety of grey
sources were screened. The social amplification of risk framework and the risk
perception management theoretical models were used to assess evidence and data
were synthesised by Narrative review.
FINDINGS: Sixteen studies meeting the agreed inclusion criteria described eleven 
different threats ranging from: infectious disease outbreaks to environmental
disasters to cancer clusters, affecting two or more communities were identified
from medical, psychological, social science and environmental science literature.
There was wide heterogeneity between the type and quality of the studies. There
was a general absence of theoretical underpinning community responses. Most
studies did not report sufficient data to allow an appropriate amount of
validity. Very low response rates in particular were common. Potential
explanatory drivers suggested included, prior experience and visibility of
threat, sociodemographic characteristics, volume and type of media coverage,
government reaction and availability of social support.
CONCLUSIONS: This review confirmed that there are significant differences.
Further work is needed to develop theoretical models that apply to the community 
level and do not assume that a community's response is simply the aggregate of
individual level responses.

© 2013.

PMID: 24184553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Oncol Rep. 2014 Jan;31(1):117-24. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2811. Epub 2013 Oct 24.

Combination of quercetin and hyperoside has anticancer effects on renal cancer
cells through inhibition of oncogenic microRNA-27a.

Li W(1), Liu M, Xu YF, Feng Y, Che JP, Wang GC, Zheng JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji University,
Shanghai 200072, P.R. China.

Quercetin and hyperoside (QH) in combination (1:1 ratio) have previously been
shown to inhibit the growth of human leukemia cells. Here, we investigated the
anticancer activity of the same mixture in 786-O renal cancer cells. QH decreased
the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) by up to 2.25-fold and increased 
the antioxidant capacity by up to 3-fold in 786-O cells (3.8-60 µg/ml), whereas
IC50 values for viability were 18.2, 18.7 and 11.8 µg/ml, respectively. QH also
induced caspase-3 cleavage (2-fold) and increased PARP cleavage. Specificity
protein (Sp) transcription factors are overexpressed in cancer cells and regulate
genes required for cell proliferation, survival and angiogenesis. QH treatment
decreased the expression of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 mRNA and this was accompanied by
decreased protein expression. Moreover, expression of the Sp-dependent
anti-apoptotic survival gene survivin was also significantly reduced, both at the
mRNA and protein levels. QH decreased microRNA-27a (miR-27a) and induced the zinc
finger protein ZBTB10, an Sp-repressor, suggesting that interactions between QH
and the miR-27a-ZBTB10 axis play a role in Sp downregulation. This was confirmed 
by transfection of cells with a specific mimic for miR-27a, which partially
reversed the effects of QH. These findings are consistent with previous studies
on botanical anticancer agents in colon cancer cells.

PMID: 24173369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 14;8(10):e76142. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076142.
eCollection 2013.

Isolation of novel Afipia septicemium and identification of previously unknown
bacteria Bradyrhizobium sp. OHSU_III from blood of patients with poorly defined
illnesses.

Lo SC(1), Hung GC, Li B, Lei H, Li T, Nagamine K, Zhang J, Tsai S, Bryant R.

Author information: 
(1)Tissue Microbiology Laboratory, Division of Cellular and Gene Therapies,
Office of Cellular, Tissue and Gene Therapies, Center for Biologics Evaluation
and Research, Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of 
America.

Cultures previously set up for isolation of mycoplasmal agents from blood of
patients with poorly-defined illnesses, although not yielding positive results,
were cryopreserved because of suspicion of having low numbers of unknown microbes
living in an inactive state in the broth. We re-initiated a set of 3 cultures for
analysis of the "uncultivable" or poorly-grown microbes using NGS technology.
Broth of cultures from 3 blood samples, submitted from OHSU between 2000 and
2004, were inoculated into culture flasks containing fresh modified SP4 medium
and kept at room temperature (RT), 30°C and 35°C. The cultures showing evidence
of microbial growth were expanded and subjected to DNA analysis by genomic
sequencing using Illumina MiSeq. Two of the 3 re-initiated blood cultures kept at
RT after 7-8 weeks showed evidence of microbial growth that gradually reached
into a cell density with detectable turbidity. The microbes in the broth when
streaked on SP4 agar plates produced microscopic colonies in ~ 2 weeks. Genomic
studies revealed that the microbes isolated from the 2 blood cultures were a
novel Afipia species, tentatively named Afipia septicemium. Microbes in the 3(rd)
culture (OHSU_III) kept at RT had a limited level of growth and could not reach a
plateau with high cell density. Genomic sequencing identified the microbe in the 
culture as a previously unknown species of Bradyrhizobium bacteria. This study
reports on the isolation of novel Afipia and Bradyrhizobium species. Isolation of
Bradyrhizobium species bacteria has never been reported in humans. The study also
reveals a previously unrecognized nature of hematogenous infections by the 2
unique groups of Bradyrhizobiaceae. Our studies show that improvement of culture 
system plus effective use of NGS technology can facilitate findings of infections
by unusual microbes in patients having poorly-defined, sometimes mysterious
illnesses.

PMCID: PMC3796525
PMID: 24155888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Drug Test Anal. 2014 Jan-Feb;6(1-2):31-8. doi: 10.1002/dta.1531. Epub 2013 Sep
30.

A review of the cultivation and processing of cannabis (Cannabis sativa L.) for
production of prescription medicines in the UK.

Potter DJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)GW Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Porton Down Science Park, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4
0JQ, UK.

The quality demands of the pharmaceutical industry require prescription medicines
to be consistent in their active ingredient content. Achieving this, using raw
cannabis as a feedstock, is especially challenging. The plant material is
extremely inhomogeneous, and the ratios of active ingredients are affected by a
range of factors. These include the genetics of the plant, the growing and
storage conditions, the state of maturity at harvest, and the methods used to
process and formulate the material. The reasons for this variability are
described, with particular emphasis on the botanical considerations. To produce
the complex botanical medicine Sativex®, which contains the cannabinoids
<U+0394>(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and cannabidiol (CBD) and a range of other
ingredients, GW Pharmaceuticals had to manage these variables. This medicine, for
the treatment of spasticity due to multiple sclerosis, is the first
cannabis-based medicine to be approved in the UK. The company's methodology for
producing this and other chemotypes is described.

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 24115748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Immunol Cell Biol. 2013 Nov-Dec;91(10):634-41. doi: 10.1038/icb.2013.57. Epub
2013 Oct 8.

Redox balance of mouse medullary CD4 single-positive thymocytes.

Jin R(1), Teng F, Xu X, Yao Y, Zhang S, Sun X, Zhang Y, Ge Q.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Medical Immunology, Department of Immunology, Ministry of
Health, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing, China.

After positive selection, the newly differentiated single-positive (SP)
thymocytes undergo negative selection to eliminate autoreactive T cells,
functional maturation to acquire immunocompetence and egress capability. To
investigate whether the intracellular reduction/oxidation (redox) balance has an 
important role on SP maturation, the levels of intracellular reactive oxygen
species (ROS) and the expression of proteins that regulate ROS were compared
among the four subsets of mouse TCRaß(+)CD4(+)CD8(-) thymocytes (SP1-SP4) that
represent sequential stages of SP differentiation program. A gradual increase of 
ROS and a gradual decrease of thioredoxin were revealed along the SP maturation
process. The high ROS level at the mature SP stage did not result from a specific
enrichment at this stage of natural regulatory T cells and SP thymocytes
undergoing negative selection (Helios positive). An increase of ROS in the most
mature SP4 cells resulted in enhanced cytokine production upon stimulation,
whereas an early increase of ROS in the immature SP1 thymocytes resulted in
enhanced apoptosis. Aire(-/-) mice that have defects in negative selection and a 
developmental blockage at the SP3-SP4 transition showed significantly less ROS in
SP3 thymocytes. Thymic epithelial cells that have been shown to promote SP
maturation in vitro also increased the ROS level of SP thymocytes. These results 
suggest that ROS may be involved in promoting the functional maturation of CD4(+)
SPs and thymic medullary microenvironment contributes to the pro-oxidant shift of
SP thymocytes.

PMID: 24100390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Virol Methods. 2014 Jan;195:170-3. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2013.09.006. Epub
2013 Oct 4.

Rapid molecular detection of Lujo virus RNA.

Atkinson B(1), Chamberlain J, Dowall SD, Cook N, Bruce C, Hewson R.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Services Division, Public Health England, Porton Down, Salisbury 
SP4 0JG, UK. Electronic address: barry.atkinson@phe.gov.uk.

Lujo virus is an emerging arenavirus circulating in Southern Africa. Although to 
date there has only been a single outbreak of the novel haemorrhagic disease
resulting from human infection with this virus, the case-fatality rate of exposed
individuals, including nosocomial transmission, was 80%. The ability to identify 
viral haemorrhagic fevers accurately, especially those capable of nosocomial
transmission, is of critical importance. Timely identification of these diseases 
allow medical professionals to isolate patients and implement barrier nursing
techniques in order to prevent onward transmission of the virus. While rapid
diagnostic methods are published for most viral haemorrhagic fevers, at present
there are no such virus specific protocols for Lujo haemorrhagic fever. This
report details the first set of diagnostic molecular assays designed to identify 
Lujo viral RNA rapidly, and demonstrates the potential functionality of these
assays for use in the clinical setting. Although these assays have been designed 
and validated against a solitary isolate of Lujo virus, this represents the
entirety of strains detected to date, and offer quick, cheap and easy methods for
use in diagnostic laboratories.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24096270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Chem Soc Rev. 2013 Dec 21;42(24):9251-67. doi: 10.1039/c3cs60230c. Epub 2013 Sep 
19.

Supramolecular chemistry and chemical warfare agents: from fundamentals of
recognition to catalysis and sensing.

Sambrook MR(1), Notman S.

Author information: 
(1)Detection Department, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JQ, UK.
msambrook@dstl.gov.uk.

Supramolecular chemistry presents many possible avenues for the mitigation of the
effects of chemical warfare agents (CWAs), including sensing, catalysis and
sequestration. To-date, efforts in this field both to study fundamental
interactions between CWAs and to design and exploit host systems remain sporadic.
In this tutorial review the non-covalent recognition of CWAs is considered from
first principles, including taking inspiration from enzymatic systems, and gaps
in fundamental knowledge are indicated. Examples of synthetic systems developed
for the recognition of CWAs are discussed with a focus on the supramolecular
complexation behaviour and non-covalent approaches rather than on the proposed
applications.

PMID: 24048279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Spectrochim Acta A Mol Biomol Spectrosc. 2014 Jan 3;117:541-7. doi:
10.1016/j.saa.2013.08.005. Epub 2013 Aug 9.

Synthesis and solvent-dependent photochromic reactions of porphyrin-spiropyran
hybrid compounds.

Hur DY(1), Park TJ, Shin EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Sunchon National University, Suncheon, Jeonnam
540-950, Republic of Korea.

Porphyrin(Por)-spiropyran(SP) hybrid compounds, including Por-SP dyad, Por-SP2
triad, and Por-SP4 pentad, were prepared and characterized by (1)H NMR, MALDI-TOF
MS and UV-Vis spectroscopies. Upon 350 nm UV irradiation of Por-SPn (n=1, 2, 4)
in dichloromethane, unusual red-shifted absorption spectra were observed with the
colour change from pink into green. Probably due to the protonation of core
nitrogens in porphyrin ring, their absorption maxima in dichloromethane were
shifted from 418 (Soret band), 515, 550, 590, 645 (four Q bands) nm into 450 and 
665 nm. Also, fluorescence maxima were also shifted from 650 and 715 nm to 692
nm. In the other hands, upon irradiation with 350nm UV light in THF, the colour
changed from pink into violet and absorption band at 590 nm increased and the
fluorescence spectra showed the decrease of 650 and 715 nm bands and increase of 
600-640 nm band, due to the normal ring-opening reaction of spiropyran moiety
into merocyanine. In the dark, original absorption and fluorescence spectra were 
recovered very slowly in dichloromethane, but quickly in THF. The reversible
photochromic reactions of Por-SPn (n=1, 2, 4) in dichloromethane and THF were
investigated by observing absorption and fluorescence spectral changes during UV 
irradiation or standing in the dark.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24036185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Neurochem. 2013 Nov;127(4):496-508. doi: 10.1111/jnc.12433. Epub 2013 Sep 30.

Neuron-specific specificity protein 4 bigenomically regulates the transcription
of all mitochondria- and nucleus-encoded cytochrome c oxidase subunit genes in
neurons.

Johar K(1), Priya A, Dhar S, Liu Q, Wong-Riley MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, USA.

Neurons are highly dependent on oxidative metabolism for their energy supply, and
cytochrome c oxidase (COX) is a key energy-generating enzyme in the mitochondria.
A unique feature of COX is that it is one of only four proteins in mammalian
cells that are bigenomically regulated. Of its thirteen subunits, three are
encoded in the mitochondrial genome and ten are nuclear-encoded on nine different
chromosomes. The mechanism of regulating this multisubunit, bigenomic enzyme
poses a distinct challenge. In recent years, we found that nuclear respiratory
factors 1 and 2 (NRF-1 and NRF-2) mediate such bigenomic coordination. The latest
candidate is the specificity factor (Sp) family of proteins. In N2a cells, we
found that Sp1 regulates all 13 COX subunits. However, we discovered recently
that in primary neurons, it is Sp4 and not Sp1 that regulates some of the key
glutamatergic receptor subunit genes. The question naturally arises as to the
role of Sp4 in regulating COX in primary neurons. The present study utilized
multiple approaches, including chromatin immunoprecipitation, promoter mutational
analysis, knockdown and over-expression of Sp4, as well as functional assays to
document that Sp4 indeed functionally regulate all 13 subunits of COX as well as 
mitochondrial transcription factors A and B. The present study discovered that
among the specificity family of transcription factors, it is the less known
neuron-specific Sp4 that regulates the expression of all 13 subunits of
mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase (COX) enzyme in primary neurons. Sp4 also
regulates the three mitochondrial transcription factors (TFAM, TFB1M, and TFB2M) 
and a COX assembly protein SURF-1 in primary neurons.

© 2013 International Society for Neurochemistry.

PMCID: PMC3820366
PMID: 24032355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Mol Cancer Ther. 2013 Nov;12(11):2483-93. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0486.
Epub 2013 Sep 12.

The cannabinoid WIN 55,212-2 decreases specificity protein transcription factors 
and the oncogenic cap protein eIF4E in colon cancer cells.

Sreevalsan S(1), Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Corresponding Author: Stephen Safe, Department of Veterinary Physiology and
Pharmacology, Texas A&M University, 4466 TAMU, College Station, TX 77843-4466.
ssafe@cvm.tamu.edu.

2,3-Dihydro-5-methyl-3-([morpholinyl]methyl)pyrollo(1,2,3-de)-1,4-benzoxazinyl]-[
1-naphthaleny]methanone [WIN 55,212-2, (WIN)] is a synthetic cannabinoid that
inhibits RKO, HT-29, and SW480 cell growth, induced apoptosis, and downregulated 
expression of survivin, cyclin D1, EGF receptor (EGFR), VEGF, and its receptor
(VEGFR1). WIN also decreased expression of specificity protein (Sp) transcription
factors Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4, and this is consistent with the observed
downregulation of the aforementioned Sp-regulated genes. In addition, we also
observed by RNA interference (RNAi) that the oncogenic cap protein eIF4E was an
Sp-regulated gene also downregulated by WIN in colon cancer cells. WIN-mediated
repression of Sp proteins was not affected by cannabinoid receptor antagonists or
by knockdown of the receptor but was attenuated by the phosphatase inhibitor
sodium orthovanadate or by knockdown of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A).
WIN-mediated repression of Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 was due to PP2A-dependent
downregulation of microRNA-27a (miR-27a) and induction of miR-27a-regulated
ZBTB10, which has previously been characterized as an "Sp repressor." The results
show that the anticancer activity of WIN is due, in part, to PP2A-dependent
disruption of miR-27a:ZBTB10 and ZBTB10-mediated repression of Sp transcription
factors and Sp-regulated genes, including eIF4E.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC4288937
PMID: 24030632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Drug Test Anal. 2014 Jan-Feb;6(1-2):24-30. doi: 10.1002/dta.1529. Epub 2013 Sep
4.

Therapeutic potential of cannabinoid medicines.

Robson PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cannabinoid Research Institute, GW Research Ltd, Porton Down Science Park,
Salisbury, SP4 0JQ, UK.

Cannabis was extensively used as a medicine throughout the developed world in the
nineteenth century but went into decline early in the twentieth century ahead of 
its emergence as the most widely used illicit recreational drug later that
century. Recent advances in cannabinoid pharmacology alongside the discovery of
the endocannabinoid system (ECS) have re-ignited interest in cannabis-based
medicines. The ECS has emerged as an important physiological system and plausible
target for new medicines. Its receptors and endogenous ligands play a vital
modulatory role in diverse functions including immune response, food intake,
cognition, emotion, perception, behavioural reinforcement, motor co-ordination,
body temperature, wake/sleep cycle, bone formation and resorption, and various
aspects of hormonal control. In disease it may act as part of the physiological
response or as a component of the underlying pathology. In the forefront of
clinical research are the cannabinoids delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and
cannabidiol, and their contrasting pharmacology will be briefly outlined. The
therapeutic potential and possible risks of drugs that inhibit the ECS will also 
be considered. This paper will then go on to review clinical research exploring
the potential of cannabinoid medicines in the following indications: symptomatic 
relief in multiple sclerosis, chronic neuropathic pain, intractable nausea and
vomiting, loss of appetite and weight in the context of cancer or AIDS,
psychosis, epilepsy, addiction, and metabolic disorders.

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 24006213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Med Microbiol. 2013 Dec;62(Pt 12):1790-8. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.063032-0. Epub
2013 Sep 2.

Complex interactions of Klebsiella pneumoniae with the host immune system in a
Galleria mellonella infection model.

Wand ME(1), McCowen JW, Nugent PG, Sutton JM.

Author information: 
(1)Public Health England, Microbiology Services Division, Porton Down, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK.

Worldwide, Klebsiella pneumoniae is an increasingly problematic opportunistic
pathogen, with the emergence of carbapenem-resistant isolates of special
importance. The mechanisms of virulence are poorly understood, and the current
study utilized the invertebrate model Galleria mellonella to investigate facets
of the virulence process. A range of UK clinical isolates and reference strains
was assessed in Galleria by measuring survival as an end point. The clinical
strains showed a range of virulence, with the majority of strains (68<U+200A>%) causing 
greater than 50<U+200A>% mortality at a challenge dose of 1×10(5) c.f.u. Three
additional intermediate read-outs were developed to allow the mechanisms of
virulence of Klebsiella to be dissected further. The release of lactate
dehydrogenase as a marker of cell damage was the best predictor of virulence.
Melanization as a marker of the insect innate immune system and ability to
proliferate within Galleria as a marker of immune evasion also broadly correlated
with survival but with some notable exceptions. No direct correlation was
observed between virulence and either K1 or other defined capsular types, the
carriage of defined virulence factors or particular functional phenotypes.
Overall, the study showed that Galleria can provide significant insights into the
mechanisms of virulence, and that this can be applied to the study of
opportunistic human pathogens.

PMID: 24000226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther. 2013 Aug;11(8):817-29. doi:
10.1586/14787210.2013.814432.

Prophylaxis and therapy of plague.

Oyston PC(1), Williamson ED.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ, UK.

Plague has been a scourge of mankind for centuries, and outbreaks continue to the
present day. The virulence mechanisms employed by the etiological agent Yersinia 
pestis are reviewed in the context of the available prophylactic and therapeutic 
strategies for plague. Although antibiotics are available, resistance is emerging
in this dangerous pathogen. Therapeutics used in the clinic are discussed and
innovative approaches to the design and development of new therapeutic compounds 
are reviewed. Currently there is no licensed vaccine available for prevention of 
plague in the USA or western Europe, although both live attenuated strains and
killed whole-cell extracts have been used historically. Live strains are still
approved for human use in some parts of the world, such as the former Soviet
Union, but poor safety profiles render them unacceptable to many countries. The
development of safe, effective next-generation vaccines, including the
recombinant subunit vaccine currently used in clinical trials is discussed.

PMID: 23977937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Psychiatr Res. 2013 Nov;47(11):1608-14. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2013.07.019. 
Epub 2013 Aug 12.

Reduced expression of SP1 and SP4 transcription factors in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells in first-episode psychosis.

Fusté M(1), Pinacho R, Meléndez-Pérez I, Villalmanzo N, Villalta-Gil V, Haro JM, 
Ramos B.

Author information: 
(1)Unitat de recerca, Parc Sanitari Sant Joan de Déu, Fundació Sant Joan de Déu, 
Universitat de Barcelona, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Salud
Mental, CIBERSAM, Dr. Antoni Pujadas, 42, 08830 Sant Boi de Llobregat, Barcelona,
Spain.

Alterations of transcription factor specificity protein 4 (SP4) and 1 (SP1) have 
been linked to different neuropsychiatric diseases. Reduced SP4 and SP1 protein
levels in the prefrontal cortex have been associated with bipolar disorder and
schizophrenia, respectively, suggesting that both factors could be involved in
the pathogenesis of disorders with psychotic features. The aim of this study was 
to investigate whether the reduction of SP1, SP4 and SP3 protein and mRNA
expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells in the early stages of psychosis
may act as a potential biomarker of these disorders. A cross-sectional study of
first-episode psychosis patients (n = 14) compared to gender- and age-matched
healthy controls (n = 14) was designed. Patients were recruited through the adult
mental health services of Parc Sanitari Sant Joan de Déu. Protein and gene
expression levels of SP1, SP4 and SP3 were assessed in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells of patients with first-episode psychosis and healthy control
subjects. We report that protein levels of SP1 and SP4, but not SP3, are
significantly reduced in patients compared to controls. In contrast, we did not
observe any differences in expression levels for SP1, SP4 or SP3 genes between
patient and control groups. In patients, SP4 protein levels were significantly
associated with SP1 protein levels. No association was found, however, between
protein and gene expression levels for each factor. Our study shows reduced SP1
and SP4 protein levels in first-episode psychosis in lymphocytes, suggesting that
these transcription factors are potential peripheral biomarkers of psychotic
spectrum disorders in the early stages.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23941741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 11;8(7):e67552. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067552. Print 2013.

Reconstruction of an integrated genome-scale co-expression network reveals key
modules involved in lung adenocarcinoma.

Bidkhori G(1), Narimani Z, Hosseini Ashtiani S, Moeini A, Nowzari-Dalini A,
Masoudi-Nejad A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Systems Biology and Bioinformatics (LBB), Institute of
Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran.

Our goal of this study was to reconstruct a "genome-scale co-expression network" 
and find important modules in lung adenocarcinoma so that we could identify the
genes involved in lung adenocarcinoma. We integrated gene mutation, GWAS, CGH,
array-CGH and SNP array data in order to identify important genes and loci in
genome-scale. Afterwards, on the basis of the identified genes a co-expression
network was reconstructed from the co-expression data. The reconstructed network 
was named "genome-scale co-expression network". As the next step, 23 key modules 
were disclosed through clustering. In this study a number of genes have been
identified for the first time to be implicated in lung adenocarcinoma by
analyzing the modules. The genes EGFR, PIK3CA, TAF15, XIAP, VAPB, Appl1, Rab5a,
ARF4, CLPTM1L, SP4, ZNF124, LPP, FOXP1, SOX18, MSX2, NFE2L2, SMARCC1, TRA2B,
CBX3, PRPF6, ATP6V1C1, MYBBP1A, MACF1, GRM2, TBXA2R, PRKAR2A, PTK2, PGF and MYO10
are among the genes that belong to modules 1 and 22. All these genes, being
implicated in at least one of the phenomena, namely cell survival, proliferation 
and metastasis, have an over-expression pattern similar to that of EGFR. In few
modules, the genes such as CCNA2 (Cyclin A2), CCNB2 (Cyclin B2), CDK1, CDK5,
CDC27, CDCA5, CDCA8, ASPM, BUB1, KIF15, KIF2C, NEK2, NUSAP1, PRC1, SMC4, SYCE2,
TFDP1, CDC42 and ARHGEF9 are present that play a crucial role in cell cycle
progression. In addition to the mentioned genes, there are some other genes (i.e.
DLGAP5, BIRC5, PSMD2, Src, TTK, SENP2, PSMD2, DOK2, FUS and etc.) in the modules.

PMCID: PMC3708931
PMID: 23874428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Dec;1833(12):2745-56. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.07.002. Epub 2013 Jul 18.

Specificity protein 4 functionally regulates the transcription of NMDA receptor
subunits GluN1, GluN2A, and GluN2B.

Priya A(1), Johar K, Wong-Riley MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Road, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.

N-Methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptors are major glutamatergic receptors involved 
in most excitatory neurotransmission in the brain. The transcriptional regulation
of NMDA receptors is not fully understood. Previously, we found that the GluN1
and GluN2B subunits of the NMDA receptor are regulated by nuclear respiratory
factors 1 and 2 (NRF-1 and NRF-2). NRF-1 and NRF-2 also regulate all 13 subunits 
of cytochrome c oxidase (COX), a critical energy-generating enzyme, thereby
coupling neuronal activity and energy metabolism at the transcriptional level.
Specificity protein (Sp) is a family of transcription factors that bind to
GC-rich regions, with Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 all binding to the same cis- motifs. Sp1 
and Sp3 are ubiquitously expressed, whereas Sp4 expression is restricted to
neurons and testicular cells. Recently, we found that the Sp1 factor regulates
all subunits of COX. The goal of the present study was to test our hypothesis
that the Sp factors also regulate specific subunits of NMDA receptors, and that
they function with NRF-1 and NRF-2 via one of three mechanisms: complementary,
concurrent and parallel, or a combination of complementary and
concurrent/parallel. By means of multiple approaches we found that Sp4
functionally regulated GluN1, GluN2A, and GluN2B, but not GluN2C. On the other
hand, Sp1 and Sp3 did not regulate these subunits as previously thought. Our data
suggest that Sp4 operates in a complementary and concurrent/parallel manner with 
NRF-1 and NRF-2 to mediate the tight coupling between energy metabolism and
neuronal activity at the molecular level.

© 2013.

PMCID: PMC3834217
PMID: 23871830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Environ Microbiol. 2013 Nov;15(11):2879-93. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.12186. Epub
2013 Jul 19.

Marine biofilms on artificial surfaces: structure and dynamics.

Salta M(1), Wharton JA(2), Blache Y(3), Stokes KR(2,)(4), Briand JF(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Advanced Tribology at Southampton, Engineering Sciences,
University of Southampton, Highfield, Southampton SO17 1BJ, UK.
M.Salta@soton.ac.uk (2)National Centre for Advanced Tribology at Southampton
(nCATS), Engineering Sciences, University of Southampton, Highfield, Southampton,
SO17 1BJ, UK. (3)MAPIEM, Biofouling et Substances Naturelles Marines, Universite 
du Sud Toulon-Var, La Valette-du-Var, France. (4)Physical Sciences Department,
DSTL, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ, UK.

The search for new antifouling (AF) coatings that are environmentally benign has 
led to renewed interest in the ways that micro-organisms colonize substrates in
the marine environment. This review covers recently published research on the
global species composition and dynamics of marine biofilms, consisting mainly of 
bacteria and diatoms found on man-made surfaces including AF coatings. Marine
biofilms directly interact with larger organisms (macrofoulers) during
colonization processes; hence, recent literature on understanding the basis of
the biofilm/macrofouling interactions is essential and will also be reviewed
here. Overall, differences have been identified in species composition between
biofilm and planktonic forms for both diatoms and bacteria at various exposure
sites. In most studies, the underlying biofilm was found to induce larval and
spore settlement of macrofoulers; however, issues such as reproducibility,
differences in exposure sites and biofilm composition (natural multispecies vs.
monospecific species) may influence the outcomes.

© 2013 Society for Applied Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23869714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Yi Chuan. 2013 Jul;35(7):903-12.

[Combining ability analysis for SP4 lines of maize from space flight].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang CB(1), Wu ZD, Xu DP, Liu HY, Rong TZ, Cao MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Sichuan Agricultural University, Wenjiang, China. zhang_caibo@126.com

Three maize (Zea mays L.) inbred lines 08-641, RP125, and 18-599 were carried
into cosmic space by recoverable satellite "Shijian 8". Some mutant lines were
selected from SP4 and combinations were made according to the NC II genetic
design. The materials were planted in Sichuan and Yunnan separately to analyze
combining ability based on the incomplete diallel cross design. The results
showed that space flight affected the combining ability of mutant lines, and the 
GCA value of mutant lines were different in two kinds of environmental condition.
The GCA of ear length, row per ear, kernel per row, and yield per plant for the
mutant line C03 showed substantial increase compared with the control 08-641; the
GCA of row per ear, kernel per row, and other yield component traits for the
mutant lines C01 and C04 were significantly higher than those of the control. The
SCA of yield and yield components for the combinations derived from the mutant
lines C06, R18, and S22 were higher than others. These results laid a material
foundation for maize breeding and provided some important references for
improving and utilizing the mutant lines.

PMID: 23853362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Curr Pharm Des. 2014;20(13):2194-204.

Cannabinoids and schizophrenia: therapeutic prospects.

Robson PJ, Guy GW, Di Marzo V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cannabinoid Research Institute, GW Pharmaceuticals plc, Porton Down Science
Park, Salisbury SP4 0JQ. pjr@gwpharm.com.

Approximately one third of patients diagnosed with schizophrenia do not achieve
adequate symptom control with standard antipsychotic drugs (APs). Some of these
may prove responsive to clozapine, but non-response to APs remains an important
clinical problem and cause of increased health care costs. In a significant
proportion of patients, schizophrenia is associated with natural and iatrogenic
metabolic abnormalities (obesity, dyslipidaemia, impaired glucose tolerance or
type 2 diabetes mellitus), hyperadrenalism and an exaggerated HPA response to
stress, and chronic systemic inflammation. The endocannabinoid system (ECS) in
the brain plays an important role in maintaining normal mental health. ECS
modulates emotion, reward processing, sleep regulation, aversive memory
extinction and HPA axis regulation. ECS overactivity contributes to visceral fat 
accumulation, insulin resistance and impaired energy expenditure. The cannabis
plant synthesises a large number of pharmacologically active compounds unique to 
it known as phytocannabinoids. In contrast to the euphoric and pro-psychotic
effects of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), certain non-intoxicating
phytocannabinoids have emerged in pre-clinical and clinical models as potential
APs. Since the likely mechanism of action does not rely upon dopamine D2 receptor
antagonism, synergistic combinations with existing APs are plausible. The
anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory effects of the non-intoxicating
phytocannabinoid cannabidiol (CBD) are well established and are summarised below.
Preliminary data reviewed in this paper suggest that CBD in combination with a
CB1 receptor neutral antagonist could not only augment the effects of standard
APs but also target the metabolic, inflammatory and stress-related components of 
the schizophrenia phenotype.

PMID: 23829368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 18;8(6):e66327. Print 2013.

Prolonged Ketamine Effects in Sp4 Hypomorphic Mice: Mimicking Phenotypes of
Schizophrenia.

Ji B(1), Wang X, Pinto-Duarte A, Kim M, Caldwell S, Young JW, Behrens MM,
Sejnowski TJ, Geyer MA, Zhou X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California San Diego, La Jolla,
California, United States of America.

It has been well established that schizophrenia patients display impaired NMDA
receptor (NMDAR) functions as well as exacerbation of symptoms in response to
NMDAR antagonists. Abnormal NMDAR signaling presumably contributes to cognitive
deficits which substantially contribute to functional disability in
schizophrenia. Establishing a mouse genetic model will help investigate molecular
mechanisms of hypoglutmatergic neurotransmission in schizophrenia. Here, we
examined the responses of Sp4 hypomorphic mice to NMDAR antagonists in
electroencephalography and various behavioral paradigms. Sp4 hypomorphic mice,
previously reported to have reduced NMDAR1 expression and LTP deficit in
hippocampal CA1, displayed increased sensitivity and prolonged responses to NMDAR
antagonists. Molecular studies demonstrated reduced expression of glutamic acid
decarboxylase 67 (GAD67) in both cortex and hippocampus, consistent with abnormal
gamma oscillations in Sp4 hypomorphic mice. On the other hand, human SP4 gene was
reported to be deleted in schizophrenia. Several human genetic studies suggested 
the association of SP4 gene with schizophrenia and other psychiatric disorders.
Therefore, elucidation of the Sp4 molecular pathway in Sp4 hypomorphic mice may
provide novel insights to our understanding of abnormal NMDAR signaling in
schizophrenia.

PMCID: PMC3688895
PMID: 23823008  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


186. Carcinogenesis. 2013 Dec;34(12):2870-9. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt231. Epub 2013 Jun
26.

Metformin inhibits pancreatic cancer cell and tumor growth and downregulates Sp
transcription factors.

Nair V(1), Pathi S, Jutooru I, Sreevalsan S, Basha R, Abdelrahim M, Samudio I,
Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX 77843, USA.

Metformin is a widely used antidiabetic drug, and epidemiology studies for
pancreatic and other cancers indicate that metformin exhibits both
chemopreventive and chemotherapeutic activities. Several metformin-induced
responses and genes are similar to those observed after knockdown of specificity 
protein (Sp) transcription factors Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 by RNA interference, and we
hypothesized that the mechanism of action of metformin in pancreatic cancer cells
was due, in part, to downregulation of Sp transcription factors. Treatment of
Panc1, L3.6pL and Panc28 pancreatic cancer cells with metformin downregulated
Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 proteins and several pro-oncogenic Sp-regulated genes including 
bcl-2, survivin, cyclin D1, vascular endothelial growth factor and its receptor, 
and fatty acid synthase. Metformin induced proteasome-dependent degradation of
Sps in L3.6pL and Panc28 cells, whereas in Panc1 cells metformin decreased
microRNA-27a and induced the Sp repressor, ZBTB10, and disruption of
miR-27a:ZBTB10 by metformin was phosphatase dependent. Metformin also inhibited
pancreatic tumor growth and downregulated Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 in tumors in an
orthotopic model where L3.6pL cells were injected directly into the pancreas. The
results demonstrate for the first time that the anticancer activities of
metformin are also due, in part, to downregulation of Sp transcription factors
and Sp-regulated genes.

PMCID: PMC3845888
PMID: 23803693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2013 Jun 24. [Epub ahead of print]

Targeting the "Rising DAMP" during a Francisella tularensis infection.

D'Elia RV(1), Laws TR, Carter A, Lukaszewski R, Clark GC.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JQ, UK.

Antibiotic efficacy is greatly enhanced the earlier it is administered following 
infection with a bacterial pathogen. However, in a clinical setting antibiotic
treatment usually commences following the onset of symptoms, which in some cases 
(e.g. Biothreat Agents) may be too late.In a BALB/c murine intra-nasal model of
infection for Francisella tularensis SCHU S4 (F. tularensis) infection, we
demonstrate during a time course that pro-inflammatory cytokines and the damage
associated molecular pattern, HMGB1, were not significantly elevated above naive 
levels in tissue or sera until 72h post-infection. HMGB1 was identified as a
potential therapeutic target that could extend the window of opportunity for the 
treatment of tularaemia with antibiotics.Antibodies to HMGB1 were administered in
conjunction with a delayed/sub-optimal levofloxacin treatment of F. tularensis.
We found in the intranasal model of infection that treatment with anti-HMGB1
antibody, when compared to an isotype IgY control antibody, conferred a
significant survival benefit and decreased bacterial loads in the spleen and
liver but not the lung (primary loci of infection) four days into infection. We
also observed an increase in the production of interferon-<U+03B3> in all tested
organs.This data demonstrates that treatment with anti-HMGB1 antibody is
beneficial in enhancing the effectiveness of current antibiotics in treating
tularemia. Strategies, of this type, involving antibiotics in combination with
immuno-modulatory drugs are likely to be essential for the development of a
post-exposure therapeutic for intracellular pathogens.

PMCID: PMC3754292
PMID: 23796927  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


188. Int J Infect Dis. 2013 Nov;17(11):e1031-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2013.04.008. Epub 
2013 Jun 12.

Identification and analysis of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus from human
sera in Tajikistan.

Atkinson B(1), Chamberlain J, Jameson LJ, Logue CH, Lewis J, Belobrova EA,
Valikhodzhaeva M, Mullojonova M, Tishkova FH, Hewson R.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Services Division, Health Protection Agency, Porton Down,
Salisbury, SP4 0JG, UK. Electronic address: barry.atkinson@phe.gov.uk.

BACKGROUND: Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) is a virulent tick-borne
disease reported in more than 30 countries across Europe, Africa, and Asia. The
disease is considered endemic in several Central Asian countries, including
Tajikistan; however reports of human cases from these regions rarely reach the
West.
METHODS: We analyzed all historical confirmed cases of CCHF in Tajikistan,
mapping these reports against geographic data to assess risk areas. In addition, 
comprehensive analysis was undertaken on the 2010 human CCHF cohort to
demonstrate effective methodologies for diagnosing this disease in-country.
RESULTS: These data show that CCHF is endemic in Tajikistan, and several large
clusters have been recorded. Endemic foci of disease are localized to the
southern region, with geographical factors such as altitude, monthly mean
temperature, and monthly mean precipitation levels limiting establishment of tick
vectors in other areas. Genomic analysis of viral RNA from a 2010 human case
revealed high nucleotide homology (99%) to a strain isolated in Tajikistan in
1990.
CONCLUSIONS: CCHF is an important vector-borne and nosocomial pathogen in
Tajikistan. The ability to rapidly detect cases using real-time RT-PCR shortly
after admission in the hospital setting allows prompt implementation of barrier
nursing techniques, therefore reducing onward transmission of the virus.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23764351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Springerplus. 2013 May 24;2(1):236. doi: 10.1186/2193-1801-2-236. Print 2013 Dec.

A Phase I, open-label, randomized, crossover study in three parallel groups to
evaluate the effect of Rifampicin, Ketoconazole, and Omeprazole on the
pharmacokinetics of THC/CBD oromucosal spray in healthy volunteers.

Stott C(1), White L, Wright S, Wilbraham D, Guy G.

Author information: 
(1)GW Pharma Ltd, Porton Down Science Park Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ UK.

ABSTRACT: This Phase I study aimed to assess the potential drug-drug interactions
(pharmacokinetic [PK] and safety profile) of <U+0394>9-tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC)/cannabidiol (CBD) oromucosal spray (Sativex (®), nabiximols) in combination
with cytochrome P450 (CYP450) inducer (rifampicin) or inhibitors (ketoconazole or
omeprazole). Thirty-six healthy male subjects were divided into three groups of
12, and then randomized to one of two treatment sequences per group. Subjects
received four sprays of THC/CBD (10.8/10 mg) alongside single doses of the CYP3A 
and 2C19 inducer rifampicin (600 mg), CYP3A inhibitor ketoconazole (400 mg) or
CYP2C19 inhibitor omeprazole (40 mg). Plasma samples were analyzed for CBD, THC
and its metabolite 11-hydroxy-THC (11-OH-THC). A single dose of four sprays of
THC/CBD spray (10.8/10 mg) following repeated doses of rifampicin (600 mg)
reduced the Cmax and AUC of all analytes. Cmax reduced from 2.94 to 1.88 ng/mL
(-36%), 1.03 to 0.50 ng/mL (-52%) and 3.38 to 0.45 ng/mL (-87%) for THC, CBD and 
11-OH-THC, respectively compared to single dose administration of THC/CBD spray
alone. Ketoconazole co-administration with THC/CBD spray had the opposite effect,
increasing the Cmax of the respective analytes from 2.65 to 3.36 ng/mL (+27%),
0.66 to 1.25 ng/mL (+89%) and 3.59 to 10.92 ng/mL (+204%). No significant
deviations in Cmax or AUC for any analyte were observed when THC/CBD spray was
co-administered with omeprazole. THC/CBD spray was well tolerated by the study
subjects both alone and in combination with rifampicin, ketoconazole and
omeprazole. Evaluation of the PKs of THC/CBD spray alone and in combination with 
CYP450 inhibitors/inducers suggests that all analytes are substrates for the
isoenzyme CYP3A4, but not CYP2C19. On the basis of our findings, there is likely 
to be little impact on other drugs metabolized by CYP enzymes on the PK
parameters of THC/CBD spray, but potential effects should be taken into
consideration when co-administering THC/CBD spray with compounds which share the 
CYP3A4 pathway such as rifampicin or ketoconazole.
TRIALS REGISTRATION: NCT01323465.

PMCID: PMC3671111
PMID: 23750331  [PubMed]


190. J Biochem. 2013 Aug;154(2):177-84. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvt042. Epub 2013 Jun 8.

Mutation in the a-subunit of F(1)F(O)-ATPase causes an increased motility
phenotype through the sodium-driven flagella of Vibrio.

Terashima H(1), Terauchi T, Ihara K, Nishioka N, Kojima S, Homma M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Nagoya University,
Chikusa-Ku, Nagoya 464-8602, Japan.

Bacterial flagellar motors exploit the electrochemical potential gradient of a
coupling ion as energy source and are composed of stator and rotor proteins.
Vibrio alginolyticus has a Na(+)-driven motor and its stator is composed of PomA 
and PomB. Recently, we isolated increased motility strains (sp1-sp4) from the
PomA-N194D/PomB-D24N mutant whose motility was quite weak. To detect the
responsible mutation, we have used a next-generation sequencer and determined the
entire genome sequences of the sp1 and sp2 strains. Candidate mutations were
identified in the gene encoding the a-subunit of F1Fo-ATPase (uncB). To confirm
this, we constructed a deletion strain, which gave the increased motility
phenotype. The amount of membrane-bound ATPase was reduced in the sp2 and <U+0394>uncB
mutants. From these results, we conclude that a mutation in the uncB gene causes 
the increased motility phenotype in V. alginolyticus. They confer faster motility
in low concentrations of sodium than in the parental strain and this phenotype is
suppressed in the presence of KCN. Those results may suggest that the proton
gradient generated by the respiratory chain is increased by the uncB mutation,
consequently the sodium motive force is increased and causes the increased
motility phenotype.

PMID: 23750030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Virol Methods. 2013 Nov;193(2):565-71. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2013.05.015.
Epub 2013 Jun 5.

Comparison of the plaque assay and 50% tissue culture infectious dose assay as
methods for measuring filovirus infectivity.

Smither SJ(1), Lear-Rooney C, Biggins J, Pettitt J, Lever MS, Olinger GG Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory
(DSTL), Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK. Electronic address:
sjsmither@dstl.gov.uk.

Two common methods of quantifying filovirus infectivity, a plaque assay and 50%
cell culture infectious dose (TCID50) endpoint dilution assay, were compared. The
two assays were performed side by side using the same virus stock sample to
determine the correlation between the results of the two assays. The TCID50 assay
appeared to be more sensitive but slightly more variable, and there was a tenfold
difference in the numerical results of these methods of enumeration. The
advantages and disadvantages of both assays are discussed. Both methods are
useful and practicable in filovirus research, and this comparison will be hugely 
beneficial to the filovirus research community as it seeks to become more united.
Further work in this area should be performed to ensure consistency in filovirus 
research.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 23748121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Microb Pathog. 2013 Oct;63:16-8. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2013.04.013. Epub 2013
May 22.

The ability of CpG oligonucleotides to protect mice against Francisella
tularensis live vaccine strain but not fully virulent F. tularensis subspecies
holarctica is reflected in cell-based assays.

Rees DG(1), Hartley MG, Green M, Lukaszewski RA, Griffin KF, Atkins HS, Lyons R, 
Krieg AM, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory,
Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, United Kingdom.

CpG DNA is a potent activator of the innate immune system. Here the protective
effects of CpG DNA are assessed against the facultative intracellular pathogen
Francisella tularensis. Dosing of mice with CpG DNA provided protection against
disease caused by F. tularensis subsp. holarctica live vaccine strain (LVS) but
did not protect against the fully virulent F. tularensis subsp holarctica strain 
HN63. Similarly, in vitro studies in J774A murine macrophage-like cells
demonstrated that stimulation with CpG DNA enables control of intracellular
replication of LVS but not HN63. These data confirm findings that CpG DNA may
have limited efficacy in providing protection against fully virulent strains of
F. tularensis and also suggest that in vitro assays may be useful for the
evaluation of novel treatments for virulent F. tularensis.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 23707360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Mol Carcinog. 2014 Feb;53 Suppl 1:E53-61. doi: 10.1002/mc.22010. Epub 2013 May
14.

Tolfenamic acid inhibits colon cancer cell and tumor growth and induces
degradation of specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors.

Pathi S(1), Li X, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas.

Tolfenamic acid (TA) is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) that
inhibits lung, esophageal, breast and pancreatic cancer cell and tumor growth,
and this study investigated the anticancer activity of TA in colon cancer. TA
inhibited growth and induced apoptosis in RKO, SW480, HT-29, and HCT-116 colon
cancer cells, and TA (50 mg/kg/d) also inhibited tumor growth in athymic nude
mice bearing RKO cells as xenografts. TA downregulated expression of Sp proteins 
(Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4) in colon cancer cells and this was accompanied by decreased
expression of several Sp-regulated growth promoting (cyclin D1, hepatocyte growth
factor receptor), angiogenic (vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and its
receptor 1), survival (survivin and bcl-2), and inflammatory (NF<U+03BA>Bp65/p50) gene
products. The mechanism of TA-mediated effects on Sp proteins was due to
activation of caspases. These results now extend the number of NSAIDs that may
have clinical potential for colon cancer chemotherapy and show that the
anticancer activity of TA is due, in part, to targeting Sp transcription factors.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23670891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Phys Chem Lett. 2013 May 2;4(9):1449-52. doi: 10.1021/jz4004813. Epub 2013 Apr 
15.

Reproducible Deep-UV SERRS on Aluminum Nanovoids.

Sigle DO(1), Perkins E(2), Baumberg JJ(1), Mahajan S(1).

Author information: 
(1)†Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB3 0HE, United
Kingdom. (2)‡Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, United Kingdom.

Surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) with deep-UV excitation is of particular
interest because a large variety of biomolecules such as amino acids exhibit
electronic transitions in the UV spectral range and resonant excitation
dramatically increases the cross section of the associated vibrational modes.
Despite its potential, UV-SERS is still little-explored. We present a novel
straightforward scalable route to fabricate aluminum nanovoids for reproducible
SERS in the deep-UV without the need of expensive lithographic techniques. We
adopt a modified template stripping method utilizing a soluble template and
self-assembled polymer spheres to create nanopatterned aluminum films. We observe
high surface enhancement of approximately 6 orders of magnitude, with excitation 
in the deep-UV (244 nm) on structures optimized for this wavelength. This work
thus enables sensitive detection of organics and biomolecules, normally
nonresonant at visible wavelengths, with deep-UV surface-enhanced resonant Raman 
scattering on reproducible and scalable substrates.

PMID: 26282297  [PubMed]


195. J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci. 2013 Jun 1;928:125-30. doi:
10.1016/j.jchromb.2013.03.029. Epub 2013 Mar 30.

The development of an analytical method for urinary metabolites of the riot
control agent 2-chlorobenzylidene malononitrile (CS).

Riches JR(1), Read RW, Black RM, Harrison JM, Shand DA, Tomsett EV, Newsome CR,
Bailey NC, Roughley N, Gravett MR, Stubbs SJ, McColm RR.

Author information: 
(1)Detection Department, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl), Porton
Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK. jriches@dstl.gov.uk

The analysis of biomedical samples such as urine and blood can provide evidence
of exposure to chemicals for a range of applications including occupational
exposure monitoring, detection of drugs of abuse, performance enhancement in
sport and investigations of poisoning and incapacitation. This paper reports the 
development of an analytical method for two suspected urinary metabolites of the 
riot control agent 2-chlorobenzylidene malononitrile (CS): 2-chlorohippuric acid 
and 2-chlorobenzyl-N-acetylcysteine. 2-Chlorohippuric acid was identified in all 
2h post-exposure samples from a set of urine samples taken from army recruits
exposed to low levels of thermally dispersed CS during training.
2-Chlorobenzyl-N-acetylcysteine, a metabolite known to be formed in the rat, was 
not identified in any of the samples. The lower limit of detection (LLOD) for
2-chlorohippuric acid and 2-chlorobenzyl-N-acetylcysteine was 1ng/ml and 0.5ng/ml
in pooled urine from the pre-exposed subjects. 2-Chlorohippuric acid was rapidly 
excreted but was detectable in the urine of 17 of the 19 subjects tested 20h
after exposure.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23624235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 19;8(4):e61579. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061579. Print 2013.

CADM1 is a key receptor mediating human mast cell adhesion to human lung
fibroblasts and airway smooth muscle cells.

Moiseeva EP(1), Roach KM, Leyland ML, Bradding P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Lung Health, Department of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation,
University of Leicester, Leicester, UK.

BACKGROUND: Mast cells (MCs) play a central role in the development of many
diseases including asthma and pulmonary fibrosis. Interactions of human lung mast
cells (HLMCs) with human airway smooth muscle cells (HASMCs) are partially
dependent on adhesion mediated by cell adhesion molecule-1 (CADM1), but the
adhesion mechanism through which HLMCs interact with human lung fibroblasts
(HLFs) is not known. CADM1 is expressed as several isoforms (SP4, SP1, SP6) in
HLMCs, with SP4 dominant. These isoforms differentially regulate HLMC homotypic
adhesion and survival.
OBJECTIVE: In this study we have investigated the role of CADM1 isoforms in the
adhesion of HLMCs and HMC-1 cells to primary HASMCs and HLFs.
METHODS: CADM1 overexpression or downregulation was achieved using adenoviral
delivery of CADM1 short hairpin RNAs or isoform-specific cDNAs respectively.
RESULTS: Downregulation of CADM1 attenuated both HLMC and HMC-1 adhesion to both 
primary HASMCs and HLFs. Overexpression of either SP1 or SP4 isoforms did not
alter MC adhesion to HASMCs, whereas overexpression of SP4, but not SP1,
significantly increased both HMC-1 cell and HLMC adhesion to HLFs. The expression
level of CADM1 SP4 strongly predicted the extent of MC adhesion; linear
regression indicated that CADM1 accounts for up to 67% and 32% of adhesion to
HLFs for HMC-1 cells and HLMCs, respectively. HLFs supported HLMC proliferation
and survival through a CADM1-dependent mechanism. With respect to CADM1
counter-receptor expression, HLFs expressed both CADM1 and nectin-3, whereas
HASMCs expressed only nectin-3.
CONCLUSION AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Collectively these data indicate that the
CADM1 SP4 isoform is a key receptor mediating human MC adhesion to HASMCs and
HLFs. The differential expression of CADM1 counter-receptors on HLFs compared to 
HASMCs may allow the specific targeting of either HLMC-HLF or HLMC-HASMC
interactions in the lung parenchyma and airways.

PMCID: PMC3631237
PMID: 23620770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Psychiatr Res. 2013 Jul;47(7):926-34. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2013.03.004.
Epub 2013 Mar 27.

Analysis of Sp transcription factors in the postmortem brain of chronic
schizophrenia: a pilot study of relationship to negative symptoms.

Pinacho R(1), Villalmanzo N, Roca M, Iniesta R, Monje A, Haro JM, Meana JJ,
Ferrer I, Gill G, Ramos B.

Author information: 
(1)Unitat de Recerca, Parc Sanitari Sant Joan de Déu, Fundació Sant Joan de Déu, 
Universitat de Barcelona, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Salud
Mental, CIBERSAM, Dr. Antoni Pujadas, 42, 08830 Sant Boi de Llobregat, Barcelona,
Spain.

Negative symptoms are the most resilient manifestations in schizophrenia. An
imbalance in dopamine and glutamate pathways has been proposed for the emergence 
of these symptoms. SP1, SP3 and SP4 transcription factors regulate genes in these
pathways, suggesting a possible involvement in negative symptoms. In this study, 
we characterized Sp factors in the brains of subjects with schizophrenia and
explored a possible association with negative symptoms. We also included analysis
of NR1, NR2A and DRD2 as Sp target genes. Postmortem cerebellum and prefrontal
cortex from an antemortem clinically well-characterized and controlled collection
of elderly subjects with chronic schizophrenia (n = 16) and control individuals
(n = 14) were examined. We used the Positive and Negative Syndrome and the
Clinical Global Impression Schizophrenia scales, quantitative PCR and immunoblot.
SP1 protein and mRNA were reduced in the prefrontal cortex in schizophrenia
whereas none of Sp factors were altered in the cerebellum. However, we found that
SP1, SP3 and SP4 protein levels inversely correlated with negative symptoms in
the cerebellum. Furthermore, NR2A and DRD2 mRNA levels correlated with negative
symptoms in the cerebellum. In the prefrontal cortex, SP1 mRNA and NR1 and DRD2
inversely correlated with these symptoms while Sp protein levels did not. This
pilot study not only reinforces the involvement of SP1 in schizophrenia, but also
suggests that reduced levels or function of SP1, SP4 and SP3 may participate in
negative symptoms, in part through the regulation of NMDA receptor subunits
and/or Dopamine D2 receptor, providing novel information about the complex
negative symptoms in this disorder.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23540600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Nutr Cancer. 2013;65(3):494-504. doi: 10.1080/01635581.2012.725194.

Resveratrol and quercetin in combination have anticancer activity in colon cancer
cells and repress oncogenic microRNA-27a.

Del Follo-Martinez A(1), Banerjee N, Li X, Safe S, Mertens-Talcott S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Science, Texas A&M University, College
Station, Texas 77843, USA.

Resveratrol and quercetin (RQ) in combination (1:1 ratio) previously inhibited
growth in human leukemia cells. This study investigated the anticancer activity
of the same mixture in HT-29 colon cancer cells. RQ decreased the generation of
reactive oxygen species (ROS) by up to 2.25-fold and increased the antioxidant
capacity by up to 3-fold in HT-29 cells (3.8-60 µg/mL), whereas IC50 values for
viability were 18.13, 18.73, and 11.85 µg/mL, respectively. RQ also induced
caspase-3-cleavage (2-fold) and increased PARP cleavage. Specificity protein (Sp)
transcription factors are overexpressed in colon and other cancers and regulate
genes required for cell proliferation survival and angiogenesis. RQ treatment
decreased the expression of Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 mRNA and this was accompanied by
decreased protein expression. Moreover, the Sp-dependent antiapoptotic survival
gene survivin was also significantly reduced, both at mRNA and protein levels. RQ
decreased microRNA-27a (miR-27a) and induced zinc finger protein ZBTB10, an
Sp-repressor, suggesting that interactions of RQ with the miR-27a-ZBTB10-axis
play a role in Sp downregulation. This was confirmed by transfection of cells
with the specific mimic for miR-27a, which partially reversed the effects of RQ. 
These findings are consistent with previous studies on botanical anticancer
agents in colon cancer cells.

PMID: 23530649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Exp Med. 2013 Apr 8;210(4):675-81. doi: 10.1084/jem.20122070. Epub 2013 Mar 25.

The thymic medulla is required for Foxp3+ regulatory but not conventional CD4+
thymocyte development.

Cowan JE(1), Parnell SM, Nakamura K, Caamano JH, Lane PJ, Jenkinson EJ, Jenkinson
WE, Anderson G.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Centre for Immune Regulation, Institute for
Biomedical Research, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, England, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2013 May;13(5):304.

A key role of the thymic medulla is to negatively select autoreactive CD4(+) and 
CD8(+) thymocytes, a process important for T cell tolerance induction. However,
the involvement of the thymic medulla in other aspects of aß T cell development, 
including the generation of Foxp3(+) natural regulatory T cells (nTreg cells) and
the continued maturation of positively selected conventional aß T cells, is
unclear. We show that newly generated conventional CD69(+)Qa2(-) CD4
single-positive thymocytes mature to the late CD69(-)Qa2(+) stage in the absence 
of RelB-dependent medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs). Furthermore, an
increasing ability to continue maturation extrathymically is observed within the 
CD69(+)CCR7(-/lo)CCR9(+) subset of conventional SP4 thymocytes, providing
evidence for an independence from medullary support by the earliest stages after 
positive selection. In contrast, Foxp3(+) nTreg cell development is medullary
dependent, with mTECs fostering the generation of Foxp3(-)CD25(+) nTreg cell
precursors at the CD69(+)CCR7(+)CCR9(-) stage. Our results demonstrate a
differential requirement for the thymic medulla in relation to CD4 conventional
and Foxp3(+) thymocyte lineages, in which an intact mTEC compartment is a
prerequisite for Foxp3(+) nTreg cell development through the generation of
Foxp3(-)CD25(+) nTreg cell precursors.

PMCID: PMC3620359
PMID: 23530124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2013 Jun;41(6):552-7. doi:
10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2013.02.007. Epub 2013 Mar 19.

Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (co-trimoxazole) prophylaxis is effective against
acute murine inhalational melioidosis and glanders.

Barnes KB(1), Steward J, Thwaite JE, Lever MS, Davies CH, Armstrong SJ, Laws TR, 
Roughley N, Harding SV, Atkins TP, Simpson AJ, Atkins HS.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory,
Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK.

Burkholderia pseudomallei is the causative agent of the disease melioidosis,
which is prevalent in tropical countries and is intractable to a number of
antibiotics. In this study, the antibiotic co-trimoxazole
(trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole) was assessed for the post-exposure prophylaxis of
experimental infection in mice with B. pseudomallei and its close phylogenetic
relative Burkholderia mallei, the causative agent of glanders. Co-trimoxazole was
effective against an inhalational infection with B. pseudomallei or B. mallei.
However, oral co-trimoxazole delivered twice daily did not eradicate infection
when administered from 6h post exposure for 14 days or 21 days, since infected
and antibiotic-treated mice succumbed to infection following relapse or
immunosuppression. These data highlight the utility of co-trimoxazole for
prophylaxis both of B. pseudomallei and B. mallei and the need for new approaches
for the treatment of persistent bacterial infection.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23517714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Peptides. 2013 May;43:96-101. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2013.02.024. Epub 2013 Mar 
14.

Assessment of antimicrobial peptide LL-37 as a post-exposure therapy to protect
against respiratory tularemia in mice.

Flick-Smith HC(1), Fox MA, Hamblin KA, Richards MI, Jenner DC, Laws TR, Phelps
AL, Taylor C, Harding SV, Ulaeto DO, Atkins HS.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory,
Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, United Kingdom. hcfsmith@dstl.gov.uk

Early activation of the innate immune response is important for protection
against infection with Francisella tularensis live vaccine strain (LVS) in mice. 
The human cathelicidin antimicrobial peptide LL-37 is known to have
immunomodulatory properties, and therefore exogenously administered LL-37 may be 
suitable as an early post-exposure therapy to protect against LVS infection.
LL-37 has been evaluated for immunostimulatory activity in uninfected mice and
for activity against LVS in macrophage assays and protective efficacy when
administered post-challenge in a mouse model of respiratory tularemia. Increased 
levels of pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-6, chemokines monocyte chemoattractant
protein 1 (MCP-1) and CXCL1 with increased neutrophil influx into the lungs were 
observed in uninfected mice after intranasal administration of LL-37. Following
LVS challenge, LL-37 administration resulted in increased IL-6, IL-12 p70, IFN<U+03B3>
and MCP-1 production, a slowing of LVS growth in the lung, and a significant
extension of mean time to death compared to control mice. However, protection was
transient, with the LL-37 treated mice eventually succumbing to infection. As
this short course of nasally delivered LL-37 was moderately effective at
overcoming the immunosuppressive effects of LVS infection this suggests that a
more sustained treatment regimen may be an effective therapy against this
pathogen.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23500517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Stat Med. 2013 Sep 10;32(20):3522-38. doi: 10.1002/sim.5765. Epub 2013 Mar 11.

A case-association cluster detection and visualisation tool with an application
to Legionnaires' disease.

Sansom P(1), Copley VR, Naik FC, Leach S, Hall IM.

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Risk Assessment, Emergency Response Department, Health Protection
Agency, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JG, U.K.

Statistical methods used in spatio-temporal surveillance of disease are able to
identify abnormal clusters of cases but typically do not provide a measure of the
degree of association between one case and another. Such a measure would
facilitate the assignment of cases to common groups and be useful in outbreak
investigations of diseases that potentially share the same source. This paper
presents a model-based approach, which on the basis of available location data,
provides a measure of the strength of association between cases in space and time
and which is used to designate and visualise the most likely groupings of cases. 
The method was developed as a prospective surveillance tool to signal potential
outbreaks, but it may also be used to explore groupings of cases in outbreak
investigations. We demonstrate the method by using a historical case series of
Legionnaires' disease amongst residents of England and Wales.

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3842591
PMID: 23483594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2013 Sep;57(9):1638-48. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201200609. Epub 2013
Mar 8.

The drug resistance suppression induced by curcuminoids in colon cancer SW-480
cells is mediated by reactive oxygen species-induced disruption of the
microRNA-27a-ZBTB10-Sp axis.

Noratto GD(1), Jutooru I, Safe S, Angel-Morales G, Mertens-Talcott SU.

Author information: 
(1)School of Food Science, Washington State University, WA, USA.
giuliana.noratto@wsu.edu

SCOPE: Mechanisms involving the curcuminoids effects in decreasing the
prooncogenic specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors, and Sp-regulated
genes in SW-480 colon cancer cells and how the multidrug resistance protein
(MDR1) inhibition is mediated by Sp suppression.
METHODS AND RESULTS: HT-29 and SW-480 colon cancer and normal CCD-18Co colon
fibroblast cells were treated with curcuminoids previously analyzed by HPLC. Gene
and protein expression regulation were assessed by RT-PCR, transfections with
expression constructs, and Western blots. Curcuminoids (2.5-10 µg/mL) suppressed 
preferentially the growth of SW-480 and HT-29 compared to CCD-18Co cells and
enhanced the anticancer activity of the chemotherapeutic drug 5-fluorouracil due 
to the suppression of MDR1. Additionally, Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 and Sp-regulated
genes were downregulated by curcuminoids in SW-480 and this was accompanied by
suppression of microRNA-27a (miR-27a) and induction of ZBTB10, an mRNA target of 
miR-27a and a transcriptional repressor of Sp expression. This mechanism was
mediated by the induction of ROS. RNA-interference and transfection with
ZBTB10-expression plasmid demonstrated that MDR1 was regulated by Sp1 and Sp3 and
the disruption of the miR-27a-ZBTB10-Sp axis.
CONCLUSION: Colon cancer treatment with curcuminoids will enhance the therapeutic
effects of drugs in patients who have developed drug resistance.

© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23471840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Cell Immunol. 2012 Dec;280(2):132-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cellimm.2012.12.002. Epub
2012 Dec 19.

An assessment of common marmoset (Callithrix jacchus) <U+03B3>9(+) T cells and their
response to phosphoantigen in vitro.

Rowland CA(1), Laws TR, Oyston PC.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.
carowland@dstl.gov.uk

<U+03B3>9d2 T cells are a primate-specific <U+03B3>d T cell subtype that expand and become
activated during infection, responding directly to phosphoantigens which are
by-products of essential metabolic pathways in both bacteria and mammals.
Analogues of natural phosphoantigens have been developed as potential
immunotherapeutics for treatment of tumours and infectious diseases. Several
non-human primate models have been used in preclinical studies, however, little
is known about marmoset <U+03B3>9d2 T cell responses. We identified <U+03B3>9(+) T cells in
various tissues in the marmoset and determined that these cells respond to
phosphoantigen in a similar manner to human <U+03B3>9d2 T cells in vitro. Both human
<U+03B3>9d2 T cells and marmoset <U+03B3>9(+) T cells were able to reduce growth of the
intracellular bacterium Burkholderia pseudomallei in vitro following expansion
with phosphoantigen. This suggests that the marmoset is an appropriate model for 
examining the immunotherapeutic potential of compounds which target <U+03B3>9d2 T cells.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23399838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Anim Reprod Sci. 2013 Feb;137(1-2):93-102. doi:
10.1016/j.anireprosci.2012.12.007. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

Identification of sperm head subpopulations with defined pleiomorphic
characteristics in ejaculates of captive Goeldi's monkeys (Callimico goeldii).

Valle RR(1), Arakaki PR, Carvalho FM, Muniz JA, Leal CL, García-Herreros M.

Author information: 
(1)ICS, Universidade Paulista, São Paulo, Brazil; FMVZ, Universidade de São
Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the incidence of pleiomorphisms and its
influence on the distribution of sperm morphometric subpopulations in ejaculates 
from the vulnerable Goeldi's monkey (Callimico goeldii) by using a combination of
computerized analysis system and Principal Component Analysis (PCA) methods. Each
sperm head was measured for four primary spermatozoal head dimensional parameters
(area [A (µm(2))], perimeter [P (µm)], length [L (µm)] and width [W (µm)]) and
three head shape derived parameters (ellipticity [(L/W)], elongation
[(L-W)/(L+W)] and rugosity [(4pA/P(2))]). Six separate subpopulations (SPs) were 
identified: SP1, constituted by very large, narrow and very elliptical
spermatozoa (A=16.85±1.56µm(2), W=2.75±0.42µm and ellipticity=2.16±0.24); SP2,
characterized by average sized, short, wide and round spermatozoa
(A=15.00±1.92µm(2), L=5.06±0.49µm, W=3.51±0.31µm and ellipticity=1.44±0.15); SP3,
represented by small, wide and slightly round spermatozoa (A=14.95±1.75µm(2),
W=3.47±0.29µm and ellipticity=1.48±0.14); SP4 included very small, short and very
round spermatozoa (A=14.15±2.38µm(2), L=4.90±0.57µm and elongation=0.18±0.05);
SP5 consisted of average sized and slightly elliptical spermatozoa
(A=15.14±1.72µm(2) and ellipticity=1.49±0.14); and SP6 included large and round
spermatozoa (A=16.30±1.62µm(2) and elongation=0.19±0.04). There were differences 
in the sperm subpopulation distribution (P<0.001) among the five donors analyzed.
In conclusion, the results of the current study confirmed that the use of
computer sperm analysis methods combined with PCA cluster analyses are useful
methods to identify, classify, and characterize different sperm head morphometric
subpopulations in neotropical primates. Broadening our knowledge of C. goeldii
sperm morphometric abnormalities as well as developing reliable techniques for
sperm evaluation may be essential for ex situ conservation of this threatened
species.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23294901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Open Biol. 2012 Dec 5;2(12):120142. doi: 10.1098/rsob.120142.

Structure and function of cytidine monophosphate kinase from Yersinia
pseudotuberculosis, essential for virulence but not for survival.

Walker NJ(1), Clark EA, Ford DC, Bullifent HL, McAlister EV, Duffield ML, Acharya
KR, Oyston PC.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down,
Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.

The need for new antibiotics has become pressing in light of the emergence of
antibiotic-resistant strains of human pathogens. Yersinia pestis, the causative
agent of plague, is a public health threat and also an agent of concern in
biodefence. It is a recently emerged clonal derivative of the enteric pathogen
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis. Previously, we developed a bioinformatic approach to
identify proteins that may be suitable targets for antimicrobial therapy and in
particular for the treatment of plague. One such target was cytidine
monophosphate (CMP) kinase, which is an essential gene in some organisms.
Previously, we had thought CMP kinase was essential for Y. pseudotuberculosis,
but by modification of the mutagenesis approach, we report here the production
and characterization of a <U+0394>cmk mutant. The isogenic mutant had a growth defect
relative to the parental strain, and was highly attenuated in mice. We have also 
elucidated the structure of the CMP kinase to 2.32 Å, and identified three key
residues in the active site that are essential for activity of the enzyme. These 
findings will have implications for the development of novel CMP kinase
inhibitors for therapeutic use.

PMCID: PMC3603445
PMID: 23271832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Sci Pharm. 2012 Dec;80(4):1061-80. doi: 10.3797/scipharm.1208-02. Epub 2012 Aug
31.

Transfersomes: a novel vesicular carrier for enhanced transdermal delivery of
sertraline: development, characterization, and performance evaluation.

Gupta A(1), Aggarwal G, Singla S, Arora R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics, Rayat Institute of Pharmacy, Railmajra, Ropar,
Punjab - 140104, India.

The aim of the present study was to investigate transfersomes as a transdermal
delivery system for the poorly soluble drug, sertraline, in order to overcome the
troubles associated with its oral delivery. Different transfersomal formulations 
were prepared with non-ionic surfactant (span 80), soya lecithin, and carbopol
940 by the rotary evaporation sonication method. The prepared formulations were
characterized for light microscopy, particle size analysis, drug entrapment,
turbidity, drug content, rheological studies, in vitro release, ex vivo
permeation, and stability studies. The optimized formulation was evaluated for in
vivo studies using the modified forced swim model test. FTIR studies showed
compatibility of the drug with excipients. The result revealed that sertraline in
all of the formulations was successfully entrapped with uniform drug content.
Transfersomal gel containing 1.6% of the drug and 20% of span 80 was concluded to
be the optimized formulation (EL-SP4), as it showed maximum drug entrapment
(90.4±0.15%) and cumulative percent drug release(73.8%). The ex vivo permeation
profile of EL-SP4 was compared with the transfersomal suspension, control gel,
and drug solution. The transfersomal gel showed a significantly higher (p<0.05)
cumulative amount of drug permeation and flux along with lower lag time than the 
drug solution and drug gel. It also owed to better applicability due to the
higher viscosity imparted by the gel rather than the transfersomal suspension,
and no skin irritation was observed. The modified forced swim test in mice
revealed that the transfersomal gel had better antidepressant activity as
compared to the control gel. Thus, the study substantiated that the transfersomal
gel can be used as a feasible alternative to the conventional formulations of
sertraline with advanced permeation characteristics for transdermal application.

PMCID: PMC3528046
PMID: 23264950  [PubMed]


208. Huan Jing Ke Xue. 2012 Sep;33(9):3014-23.

[Sediment and pore water nutrient characteristics in growing zones of
Alternanthera philoxeroides in the Shiwuli River, Chaohu Lake].

[Article in Chinese]

Li RZ(1), Li F, Zhou AJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Resources and Environmental Engineering, Hefei University of
Technology, Hefei 230009, China. Lrz1970@163.com

In order to investigate the nitrogen and phosphorus characteristics of sediments 
and pore water in growing zones of aquatic macrophytes (Alternanthera
philoxeroides), three classic representative sampling points in the planted
Alternanthera philoxeroides fields (i. e. SP1, SP2 and SP3) and one reference
site in the seldom vegetation (i. e. SP4) were chosen along the Shiwuli River,
pouring into Chaohu Lake. Fifteen sediment cores were collected and sliced
in-situ with a thickness of 2 cm, and a total of 80 samples were obtained. In the
laboratory, both the contents of TN, TP, NH4(+) -N, NO3(-) -N, Fe/Al-P, Ca-P,
organic matter in sediments and the concentrations of TN, TP, NH4(+) -N, NO3(-)
-N and PO4(3-) -P in pore water were measured. And then, the vertical
distribution profiles were illustrated and explored, and the correlations were
also analyzed for the growing zones of Alternanthera philoxeroides. Through the
comparison of profiles, it found that both nitrogen and phosphorus concentrations
in pore water showed a rough similarity for three vegetation fields. At the
surface sediment-overlying water interface, in general, there was a good
agreement on the source-sink relationship for nitrogen and phosphorus
corresponding to the SP1, SP2 and SP3. Study results showed that the vertical
distribution of NH4(+) -N and NO3(-) -N in pore water within the depth of 0-18 cm
could be characterized by using exponential functions such as Exp2PMod2 or Exp3P2
provided by OriginLab software, but PO4(3-) -P hardly ever did, implying that
PO4(3-)-P might have a weaker regularity in solute diffusion than that of NH4(+) 
-N and NO3(-) -N.

PMID: 23243853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2012 Oct 16;9(10):3685-710. doi:
10.3390/ijerph9103685.

Modelling mass casualty decontamination systems informed by field exercise data.

Egan JR(1), Amlôt R.

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Risk Assessment, Emergency Response Department, Health Protection
Agency, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK. joseph.egan@hpa.org.uk

In the event of a large-scale chemical release in the UK decontamination of
ambulant casualties would be undertaken by the Fire and Rescue Service (FRS). The
aim of this study was to track the movement of volunteer casualties at two mass
decontamination field exercises using passive Radio Frequency Identification tags
and detection mats that were placed at pre-defined locations. The exercise data
were then used to inform a computer model of the FRS component of the mass
decontamination process. Having removed all clothing and having showered, the
re-dressing (termed re-robing) of casualties was found to be a bottleneck in the 
mass decontamination process during both exercises. Computer simulations showed
that increasing the capacity of each lane of the re-robe section to accommodate
10 rather than five casualties would be optimal in general, but that a capacity
of 15 might be required to accommodate vulnerable individuals. If the duration of
the shower was decreased from three minutes to one minute then a per lane re-robe
capacity of 20 might be necessary to maximise the throughput of casualties. In
conclusion, one practical enhancement to the FRS response may be to provide at
least one additional re-robe section per mass decontamination unit.

PMCID: PMC3509475
PMID: 23202768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. BMC Cancer. 2012 Nov 30;12:564. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-564.

Curcumin and synthetic analogs induce reactive oxygen species and decreases
specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors by targeting microRNAs.

Gandhy SU(1), Kim K, Larsen L, Rosengren RJ, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)College of Medicine, Texas A&M Health Science Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

BACKGROUND: Curcumin inhibits growth of several cancer cell lines, and studies in
this laboratory in bladder and pancreatic cancer cells show that curcumin
downregulates specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 and
pro-oncogenic Sp-regulated genes. In this study, we investigated the anticancer
activity of curcumin and several synthetic cyclohexanone and piperidine analogs
in colon cancer cells.
METHODS: The effects of curcumin and synthetic analogs on colon cancer cell
proliferation and apoptosis were determined using standardized assays. The
changes in Sp proteins and Sp-regulated gene products were analysed by western
blots, and real time PCR was used to determine microRNA-27a (miR-27a), miR-20a,
miR-17-5p and ZBTB10 and ZBTB4 mRNA expression.
RESULTS: The IC50 (half-maximal) values for growth inhibition (24 hr) of colon
cancer cells by curcumin and synthetic cyclohexanone and piperidine analogs of
curcumin varied from 10 µM for curcumin to 0.7 µM for the most active synthetic
piperidine analog RL197, which was used along with curcumin as model agents in
this study. Curcumin and RL197 inhibited RKO and SW480 colon cancer cell growth
and induced apoptosis, and this was accompanied by downregulation of specificity 
protein (Sp) transcription factors Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 and Sp-regulated genes
including the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), hepatocyte growth factor
receptor (c-MET), survivin, bcl-2, cyclin D1 and NF<U+03BA>B (p65 and p50). Curcumin and
RL197 also induced reactive oxygen species (ROS), and cotreatment with the
antioxidant glutathione significantly attenuated curcumin- and RL197-induced
growth inhibition and downregulation of Sp1, Sp3, Sp4 and Sp-regulated genes. The
mechanism of curcumin-/RL197-induced repression of Sp transcription factors was
ROS-dependent and due to induction of the Sp repressors ZBTB10 and ZBTB4 and
downregulation of microRNAs (miR)-27a, miR-20a and miR-17-5p that regulate these 
repressors.
CONCLUSIONS: These results identify a new and highly potent curcumin derivative
and demonstrate that in cells where curcumin and RL197 induce ROS, an important
underlying mechanism of action involves perturbation of miR-ZBTB10/ZBTB4,
resulting in the induction of these repressors which downregulate Sp
transcription factors and Sp-regulated genes.

PMCID: PMC3522018
PMID: 23194063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Educ Prim Care. 2012 Sep;23(5):371.

Reflections of a hopeful trainer.

Davies S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Barcroft Medical Centre, Amesbury, Wilts SP4 7DL, UK. drsamdavies@gmail.com

PMID: 23182107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2013 May;69(5):1135-47. doi: 10.1007/s00228-012-1441-0.
Epub 2012 Nov 22.

A phase I study to assess the single and multiple dose pharmacokinetics of
THC/CBD oromucosal spray.

Stott CG(1), White L, Wright S, Wilbraham D, Guy GW.

Author information: 
(1)GW Pharma Ltd, Porton Down Science Park, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ, UK.
cgs@gwpharm.com

PURPOSE: A Phase I study to assess the single and multipledose pharmacokinetics
(PKs) and safety and tolerability of oromucosally administered
<U+0394>(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)/cannabidiol (CBD) spray, an endocannabinoid
system modulator, in healthy male subjects.
METHODS: Subjects received either single doses of THC/CBD spray as multiple
sprays [2 (5.4 mg THC and 5.0 mg CBD), 4 (10.8 mg THC and 10.0 mg CBD) or 8 (21.6
mg THC and 20.0 mg CBD) daily sprays] or multiple doses of THC/CBD spray (2, 4 or
8 sprays once daily) for nine consecutive days, following fasting for a minimum
of 10 h overnight prior to each dosing. Plasma samples were analyzed by gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry for CBD, THC, and its primary metabolite
11-hydroxy-THC, and various PK parameters were investigated.
RESULTS: <U+0394>(9)-Tetrahydrocannabinol and CBD were rapidly absorbed following
single-dose administration. With increasing single and multiple doses of THC/CBD 
spray, the mean peak plasma concentration (Cmax) increased for all analytes.
There was evidence of dose-proportionality in the single but not the multiple
dosing data sets. The bioavailability of THC was greater than CBD at single and
multiple doses, and there was no evidence of accumulation for any analyte with
multiple dosing. Inter-subject variability ranged from moderate to high for all
PK parameters in this study. The time to peak plasma concentration (Tmax) was
longest for all analytes in the eight spray group, but was similar in the two and
four spray groups. THC/CBD spray was well-tolerated in this study and no serious 
adverse events were reported.
CONCLUSIONS: The mean Cmax values (<12 ng/mL) recorded in this study were well
below those reported in patients who smoked/inhaled cannabis, which is reassuring
since elevated Cmax values are linked to significant psychoactivity. There was
also no evidence of accumulation on repeated dosing.

PMID: 23179176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e48208. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048208. Epub 2012 Oct 26.

Aspirin inhibits colon cancer cell and tumor growth and downregulates specificity
protein (Sp) transcription factors.

Pathi S(1), Jutooru I, Chadalapaka G, Nair V, Lee SO, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology & Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX, USA.

Acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin) is highly effective for treating colon cancer
patients postdiagnosis; however, the mechanisms of action of aspirin in colon
cancer are not well defined. Aspirin and its major metabolite sodium salicylate
induced apoptosis and decreased colon cancer cell growth and the sodium salt of
aspirin also inhibited tumor growth in an athymic nude mouse xenograft model.
Colon cancer cell growth inhibition was accompanied by downregulation of Sp1, Sp3
and Sp4 proteins and decreased expression of Sp-regulated gene products including
bcl-2, survivin, VEGF, VEGFR1, cyclin D1, c-MET and p65 (NF<U+03BA>B). Moreover, we also
showed by RNA interference that ß-catenin, an important target of aspirin in some
studies, is an Sp-regulated gene. Aspirin induced nuclear caspase-dependent
cleavage of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 proteins and this response was related to
sequestration of zinc ions since addition of zinc sulfate blocked
aspirin-mediated apoptosis and repression of Sp proteins. The results demonstrate
an important underlying mechanism of action of aspirin as an anticancer agent
and, based on the rapid metabolism of aspirin to salicylate in humans and the
high salicylate/aspirin ratios in serum, it is likely that the anticancer
activity of aspirin is also due to the salicylate metabolite.

PMCID: PMC3482208
PMID: 23110215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Immunol Lett. 2012 Dec 17;148(2):163-71. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2012.10.006. Epub
2012 Oct 17.

Qa-2 associated lipid rafts are indispensable in the final maturation of CD4<U+207A>CD8<U+207B>
thymocytes.

Li J(1), Li HD, Zhang Y, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular
Immunology, Key Laboratory of Educational Ministry, Tianjin Medical University,
22 Qixiangtai Road, Tianjin 300070, China.

Lipid rafts have been shown to play significant roles in thymocyte development.
However, the exact role of lipid rafts in single positive (SP) thymocyte
differentiation is poorly characterized. We previously defined a developmental
program (SP1<U+2192>SP4) for CD4SP thymocytes. In this study, we found that lipid raft
components were up-regulated during CD4SP maturation. Qa-2, a unique marker for
the most mature SP4 subset, was localized to lipid rafts and heterogeneously
expressed in SP4 cells. Functional assays showed that the proliferation capacity 
of SP4 cells correlated with the expression of Qa-2. Raft-disruption on both
CD4SP and epithelial cells by cholesterol extraction or cholesterol oxidation in 
a medullary thymic epithelial cell (mTEC)-supported co-culture system impaired
the transition from SP3 to SP4. This result was further confirmed in fetal thymic
organ culture system. Collectively, these studies suggest that raft-associated
signaling between mTECs and thymocytes drives the differentiation of CD4SP
thymocytes and lipid rafts are involved in the final maturation of SP4
thymocytes.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23085604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Mol Immunol. 2013 Apr;53(4):345-54. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2012.08.024. Epub 2012 
Oct 11.

CADM1 is expressed as multiple alternatively spliced functional and dysfunctional
isoforms in human mast cells.

Moiseeva EP(1), Leyland ML, Bradding P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Lung Health, Dept. of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation,
University of Leicester, Leicester, UK. em309@le.ac.uk

Cell adhesion molecule 1 (CADM1) is implicated in the pathogenesis of several
diseases and is responsible for adhesion and survival of mast cells (MCs).
Differential expression of CADM1 isoforms was found in different species. We
previously cloned SP4, SP1, SP6 and a dysfunctional isoform from human lung MCs
(HLMCs) and the MC line HMC-1. The aim of this study was to identify all isoforms
expressed in human MCs. The functional isoforms SP4, SP1, SP6 and SP3, with
alternative splicing between exons 7/11, were detected in human MCs by RT-PCR.
Two dysfunctional isoforms with alternative splicing of cryptic exons A and B
between exons 1/2, leading to premature termination of translation, were found in
~40% of MC specimens. Sequencing of genomic DNA showed that splicing of cryptic
exon B did not result from specific SNPs within this exon or its putative splice 
branch point. Highly glycosylated CADM1 (~105 kDa) was detected by western
blotting, but an extracellular domain (~95 kDa) was found only in the culture
medium from HLMCs, but not HMC-1 cells, indicating differential protein
expression. Transfection of SP1 and SP6, but not SP4, reduced adhesion of HMC-1
cells to human lung fibroblasts but not airway smooth muscle cells. Hence,
dysfunctional and functional CADM1 isoforms are found in human MCs. The longer
SP1 and SP6 were most evident in differentiated HLMCs and displayed differential 
adhesion compared to SP4. These multiple isoforms are likely to contribute to MC 
function in both health and disease.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3550521
PMID: 23063768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Trials. 2012 Oct 9;13:189. doi: 10.1186/1745-6215-13-189.

Assessment of blinding to treatment allocation in studies of a cannabis-based
medicine (Sativex®) in people with multiple sclerosis: a new approach.

Wright S(1), Duncombe P, Altman DG.

Author information: 
(1)GW Pharma, Ltd, Porton Down Science Park, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ, UK.
swright@gwpharm.com

BACKGROUND: Maintenance of the blind-to-treatment allocation is one of the most
important means of avoiding bias in randomised controlled clinical trials.
Commonly used methodologies to determine whether patients have become unblinded
to treatment allocation are imperfect. This may be of particular concern in
studies where outcomes are patient-reported, and with products which have a
characteristic adverse event profile. We report the results of an evidence-based 
statistical approach to exploring the possible impact of unblinding to a
cannabis-based medicine (Sativex®) in people with muscle spasticity due to
multiple sclerosis.
METHODS: All 666 patients included in three Phase III placebo-controlled studies 
were included in this analysis. The relationship between factors that might
permit patients to identify their treatment allocation and the effect of
treatment on the self-reported primary outcome measure was investigated using a
general linear model where the dependent variable was the change from baseline in
patient self-reported spasticity severity, and the various possible explanatory
factors were regarded as fixed factors in the model.
RESULTS: There was no significant relationship between the effect of Sativex® on 
spasticity and the prior use of cannabis or the incidence of 'typical' adverse
events. Nor was there any significant relationship between the prior use of
cannabis and the incidence of 'typical' adverse events, nor between prior use of 
cannabis and dose of Sativex®.
CONCLUSIONS: There is no evidence to suggest that there was widespread unblinding
to treatment allocation in these three studies. If any patients did become
unblinded, then there is no evidence that this led to bias in the assessment of
the treatment difference between Sativex® and Placebo for efficacy, adverse
events or study drug dosing. This methodology may be suitable for assessment of
the integrity of the blind in other randomized clinical trials.

PMCID: PMC3487910
PMID: 23046749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Toxicol In Vitro. 2013 Feb;27(1):79-83. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2012.09.015. Epub 2012
Oct 4.

The effects of sulfur mustard exposure and freezing on transdermal penetration of
tritiated water through ex vivo pig skin.

Payne OJ(1), Graham SJ, Dalton CH, Spencer PM, Mansson R, Jenner J, Azeke J,
Braue E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, 
Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ, UK. opayne@dstl.gov.uk

The percutaneous absorption of tritiated water ((3)H(2)O) through sulfur mustard 
(SM) exposed abdominal pig skin was measured using in vitro Franz-type static
diffusion cells. The barrier function to water permeation following exposure to
liquid SM for 8 min and excision 3h later did not change significantly. A small, 
but statistically significant difference (P<0.05) in steady state penetration
(Jss), permeability coefficient (Kp) and lag time (t(L)) of (3)H(2)O was observed
between fresh skin and skin stored frozen (-20 °C) for up to two weeks.
Steady-state penetration and Kp values were significantly higher (P < 0.05) in
skin stored frozen compared with fresh skin. Fresh naïve skin had an average Kp
of 1.65 × 10(-3) cm h(-1), whereas frozen naïve skin was 2.04 × 10(-3) cm h(-1). 
Fresh SM exposed skin had a mean Kp of 1.72 × 10(-3) cm h(-1), whereas frozen SM 
exposed skin was 2.31 × 10(-3) cm h(-1). Lag times were also shorter (P<0.05) in 
skin that had been stored frozen. Frozen, SM-exposed porcine abdominal skin may
be used for in vitro penetration studies, but effects of treatment and storage on
the barrier layer should be taken into account.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23041075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Genome Biol Evol. 2012;4(11):1102-17. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evs085.

SP transcription factor paralogs and DNA-binding sites coevolve and adaptively
converge in mammals and birds.

Yokoyama KD(1), Pollock DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado,
Denver School of Medicine, USA.

Functional modification of regulatory proteins can affect hundreds of genes
throughout the genome, and is therefore thought to be almost universally
deleterious. This belief, however, has recently been challenged. A potential
example comes from transcription factor SP1, for which statistical evidence
indicates that motif preferences were altered in eutherian mammals. Here, we set 
out to discover possible structural and theoretical explanations, evaluate the
role of selection in SP1 evolution, and discover effects on coregulatory
proteins. We show that SP1 motif preferences were convergently altered in birds
as well as mammals, inducing coevolutionary changes in over 800 regulatory
regions. Structural and phylogenic evidence implicates a single causative amino
acid replacement at the same SP1 position along both lineages. Furthermore,
paralogs SP3 and SP4, which coregulate SP1 target genes through competitive
binding to the same sites, have accumulated convergent replacements at the
homologous position multiple times during eutherian and bird evolution,
presumably to preserve competitive binding. To determine plausibility, we
developed and implemented a simple model of transcription factor and binding site
coevolution. This model predicts that, in contrast to prevailing beliefs, even
small selective benefits per locus can drive concurrent fixation of transcription
factor and binding site mutants under a broad range of conditions. Novel binding 
sites tend to arise de novo, rather than by mutation from ancestral sites, a
prediction substantiated by SP1-binding site alignments. Thus, multiple lines of 
evidence indicate that selection has driven convergent evolution of transcription
factors along with their binding sites and coregulatory proteins.

PMCID: PMC3514965
PMID: 23019068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Viruses. 2012 Aug;4(8):1305-17. Epub 2012 Aug 17.

A review of filovirus work and facilities at the Defence Science and Technology
Laboratory Porton Down.

Smither SJ(1), Lever MS.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory
(Dstl), Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK. sjsmither@dstl.gov.uk

Porton Down houses two separate sites capable of conducting high containment
research on ACDP (Advisory Committee on Dangerous Pathogens) Hazard Group 4
agents: the Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl) and the Health
Protection Agency (HPA), and filovirus research has been performed at Porton Down
since the first Marburg virus disease outbreak in 1967. All work is conducted
within primary containment either within cabinet lines (for in vitro work) or
large rigid half-suit isolators (for in vivo work). There are extensive
aerobiological facilities at high containment and the use of these facilities
will be reported. Research at Dstl is primarily focused on assessing and
quantifying the hazard, and testing the efficacy of medical countermeasures
against filoviruses. Fundamental research directed to the study and understanding
of the infectious and pathogenic nature of the filoviruses, particularly in
aerosols, will be reported.

PMCID: PMC3446764
PMID: 23012627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Viruses. 2012 Aug;4(8):1202-11. Epub 2012 Aug 7.

Evaluation of the operator protection factors offered by positive pressure air
suits against airborne microbiological challenge.

Steward JA(1), Lever MS.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl), Porton Down, Salisbury,
Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ, UK. jasteward@dstl.gov.uk

Laboratories throughout the world that perform work with Risk Group 4 Pathogens
generally adopt one of two approaches within BSL-4 environments: either the use
of positive pressure air-fed suits or using Class III microbiological safety
cabinets and isolators for animal work. Within the UK at present, all
laboratories working with Risk Group 4 agents adopt the use of Class III
microbiological safety cabinet lines and isolators. Operator protection factors
for the use of microbiological safety cabinets and isolators are available
however; there is limited published data on the operator protection factors
afforded by the use of positive pressure suits. This study evaluated the operator
protection factors provided by positive pressure air suits against a realistic
airborne microbiological challenge. The suits were tested, both intact and with
their integrity compromised, on an animated mannequin within a stainless steel
exposure chamber. The suits gave operator protection in all tests with an intact 
suit and with a cut in the leg. When compromised by a cut in the glove, a very
small ingress of the challenge was seen as far as the wrist. This is likely to be
due to the low airflow in the gloves of the suit. In all cases no microbiological
penetration of the respiratory tract was observed. These data provide evidence on
which to base safety protocols for use of positive pressure suits within high
containment laboratories.

PMCID: PMC3446757
PMID: 23012620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Anal Toxicol. 2012 Nov-Dec;36(9):647-56. doi: 10.1093/jat/bks078. Epub 2012 Sep
20.

Analysis of clothing and urine from Moscow theatre siege casualties reveals
carfentanil and remifentanil use.

Riches JR(1), Read RW, Black RM, Cooper NJ, Timperley CM.

Author information: 
(1)Detection Department, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory-Dstl, Porton
Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK.

On October 26, 2002, Russian Special Forces deployed a chemical aerosol against
Chechen terrorists to rescue hostages in the Dubrovka theatre. Its use confirmed 
Russian military interest in chemicals with effects on personnel and caused 125
deaths through a combination of the aerosol and inadequate medical care. This
study provides evidence from liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry
analysis of extracts of clothing from two British survivors, and urine from a
third survivor, that the aerosol comprised a mixture of two
anaesthetics--carfentanil and remifentanil--whose relative proportions this study
was unable to identify. Carfentanil and remifentanil were found on a shirt sample
and a metabolite called norcarfentanil was found in a urine sample. This
metabolite probably originated from carfentanil.

PMID: 23002178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Chem Biol Interact. 2013 Mar 25;203(1):160-6. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2012.08.018.
Epub 2012 Sep 5.

Human plasma-derived BuChE as a stoichiometric bioscavenger for treatment of
nerve agent poisoning.

Mumford H(1), Docx CJ, Price ME, Green AC, Tattersall JE, Armstrong SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4
0JQ, United Kingdom. hmumford@dstl.gov.uk

Potent organophosphorous (OP) agents, such as VX, are hazardous by absorption
through the skin and are resistant to conventional pharmacological antidotal
treatments. The residence time of a stoichiometric bioscavenger, human
butyrylcholinesterase (huBuChE), in the plasma more closely matches that of VX
than do the residence times of conventional therapy drugs (oxime,
anti-muscarinic, anticonvulsant). Intramuscular (i.m.) huBuChE afforded almost
complete protection when administered prior to the onset of observable
cholinergic signs of VX poisoning, but once signs of poisoning became evident the
efficacy of i.m. huBuChE decreased. A combination of nerve agent therapy drugs
(oxime, anti-muscarinic, anticonvulsant) with huBuChE (i.m.) protected 100% (8/8)
of guinea-pigs from a lethal dose of VX (0.74 mg/kg) to 48 h, even when
administered on signs of poisoning. Survival was presumed to be due to immediate 
alleviation of the cholinergic crisis by the conventional pharmacological
treatment drugs, in conjunction with bioscavenger that prevented further absorbed
agent reaching the AChE targets. Evidence to support this proposed mechanism of
action was obtained from PKPD experiments in which multiple blood samples and
microdialysate samples were collected from individual conscious ambulatory
animals. Plasma concentrations of intramuscularly-administered atropine, diazepam
and HI-6 reached a peak within 15 min and were eliminated rapidly within 4h.
Plasma concentrations of huBuChE administered by the i.m. route took
approximately 24h to reach a peak, but were well-maintained over the subsequent
7days. Thus, the pharmacological therapy rapidly treated the initial signs of
poisoning, whilst the bioscavenger provided prolonged protection by neutralising 
further nerve agent entering the bloodstream and preventing it from reaching the 
target organs.

Crown Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22981459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Nov;136(1):21-34. doi: 10.1007/s10549-012-2224-0.
Epub 2012 Sep 2.

Cytotoxicity of pomegranate polyphenolics in breast cancer cells in vitro and
vivo: potential role of miRNA-27a and miRNA-155 in cell survival and
inflammation.

Banerjee N(1), Talcott S, Safe S, Mertens-Talcott SU.

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Program of Toxicology, Texas A&M University, College
Station, TX 77843, USA.

Several studies have demonstrated that polyphenolics from pomegranate (Punica
granatum L.) are potent inhibitors of cancer cell proliferation and induce
apoptosis, cell cycle arrest, and also decrease inflammation in vitro and vivo.
There is growing evidence that botanicals exert their cytotoxic and
anti-inflammatory activities, at least in part, by decreasing specificity protein
(Sp) transcription factors. These are overexpressed in breast tumors and regulate
genes important for cancer cell survival and inflammation such as the p65 unit of
NF-<U+03BA>B. Moreover, previous studies have shown that Pg extracts decrease
inflammation in lung cancer cell lines by inhibiting
phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate (PI3K)-dependent phosphorylation of AKT 
in vitro and inhibiting the activation of NF-kB in vivo. The objective of this
study was to investigate the roles of miR-27a-ZBTB10-Sp and miR-155-SHIP-1-PI3K
on the anti-inflammatory and cytotoxic activity of pomegranate extract. Pg
extract (2.5-50 µg/ml) inhibited growth of BT-474 and MDA-MB-231 cells but not
the non-cancer MCF-10F and MCF-12F cells. Pg extract significantly decreased Sp1,
Sp3, and Sp4 as well as miR-27a in BT474 and MDA-MB-231 cells and increased
expression of the transcriptional repressor ZBTB10. A significant decrease in Sp 
proteins and Sp-regulated genes was also observed. Pg extract also induced SHIP-1
expression and this was accompanied by downregulation of miRNA-155 and inhibition
of PI3K-dependent phosphorylation of AKT. Similar results were observed in tumors
from nude mice bearing BT474 cells as xenografts and treated with Pg extract. The
effects of antagomirs and knockdown of SHIP-1 by RNA interference confirmed that 
the anti-inflammatory and cytotoxic effects of Pg extract were partly due to the 
disruption of both miR-27a-ZBTB10 and miR-155-SHIP-1. In summary, the anticancer 
activities of Pg extract in breast cancer cells were due in part to targeting
microRNAs155 and 27a. Both pathways play an important role in the
proliferative/inflammatory phenotype exhibited by these cell lines.

PMCID: PMC3488590
PMID: 22941571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Nanomedicine (Lond). 2012 Aug;7(8):1129-32. doi: 10.2217/nnm.12.43.

Company profile: NanoSight: delivering practical solutions for biological
nanotechnology.

Carr B(1), Warren J.

Author information: 
(1)NanoSight Limited, Minton Park, London Road, Amesbury, Wiltshire, SP4 7RT, UK.

PMID: 22931447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. ISRN Neurol. 2012;2012:802649. doi: 10.5402/2012/802649. Epub 2012 Aug 7.

Evaluation of the Effects of Sativex (THC BDS: CBD BDS) on Inhibition of
Spasticity in a Chronic Relapsing Experimental Allergic Autoimmune
Encephalomyelitis: A Model of Multiple Sclerosis.

Hilliard A(1), Stott C, Wright S, Guy G, Pryce G, Al-Izki S, Bolton C, Giovannoni
G.

Author information: 
(1)GW Pharmaceutical PLc, Porton Down Science Park, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK.

This study investigated the antispasticity potential of Sativex in mice. Chronic 
relapsing experimental allergic encephalomyelitis was induced in adult ABH mice
resulting in hind limb spasticity development. Vehicle, Sativex, and baclofen (as
a positive control) were injected intravenously and the "stiffness" of limbs
assessed by the resistance force against hind limb flexion. Vehicle alone caused 
no significant change in spasticity. Baclofen (5<U+2009>mg/kg) induced approximately a
40% peak reduction in spasticity. Sativex dose dependently reduced spasticity;
5<U+2009>mg/kg THC + 5<U+2009>mg/kg CBD induced approximately a 20% peak reduction; 10<U+2009>mg/kg
THC + 10<U+2009>mg/kg CBD produced approximately a 40% peak reduction in spasticity.
Sativex has the potential to reduce spasticity in an experimental mouse model of 
multiple sclerosis (MS). Baclofen reduced spasticity and served as a positive
control. Sativex (10<U+2009>mg/kg) was just as effective as baclofen, providing
supportive evidence for Sativex use in the treatment of spasticity in MS.

PMCID: PMC3423911
PMID: 22928118  [PubMed]


226. J Oral Implantol. 2012 Aug;38(4):377-90. doi: 10.1563/AAID-JOI-D-11-00212.

Implant-guided volumetric analysis of edentulous maxillary bone with cone-beam
computerized tomography scan. Maxillary sinus pneumatization classification.

Tolstunov L, Thai D, Arellano L.

The primary goal of this anatomic study was to measure the average bone volume of
the edentulous maxilla with a cone-beam computerized tomography (CBCT) scan and
to determine its suitability for implant treatment without additional bone
grafting. The secondary goal of the study was to estimate the degree of sinus
pneumatization (SP) in reviewed CBCT scans, assess the sinus-to-maxillary bone
interrelationship in edentulism, and attempt to classify maxillary sinuses based 
on the degree of their pneumatization. This retrospective radiographic
quantitative study consisted of the analysis of CBCT scans of 30 randomly
selected maxillary edentulous patients who presented in 2008-2010 to the
University of the Pacific, Arthur A. Dugoni School of Dentistry, for evaluation
and treatment of their edentulism. A volume of edentulous maxillary bone mesial
to the maxillary sinuses (intersinal region) that can be used for a full-arch
implant treatment was evaluated based on specifically selected and clinically
relevant measurement criteria. There were 30 CBCT scans of maxillary edentulous
patients reviewed (9 men, 21 women) with a mean age of 67.3 years (range, 41 to
92 years). The total mean maxillary bone volume (MMBV) suitable for implantation 
was 4<U+2009>408.1 mm(3) and ranged from 1489.7 to 7263.1 mm(3). The MMBV in the study
was higher than an assumed or hypothetical bone volume minimally suitable for
4-implant treatment as proposed by the authors for comparative purposes (3500
mm(3)). The degree of SP as seen on a CBCT scan (60 sinuses analyzed on panoramic
images of 30 CBCT scans) had the following results in the study: SP0 (clear: not 
interfering with implant treatment in cases of high/small sinus), 2 sinuses or
3.3%; SP1 (mild sinus enlargement), 29 sinuses or 48.3%; SP2 (moderate SP), 16
sinuses or 26.7%; SP3 (severe SP), 9 sinuses or 15.0%; and SP4 (extreme), 4
sinuses or 6.7%. Most analyzed maxillary sinuses (47 of 60, or 78.3%) were in the
clear, mild, or moderate categories of SP (SP0, SP1, and SP2), which have a
sufficient amount of maxillary bone beneath the maxillary sinuses to allow a
full-arch implant treatment. An inverse correlation between SP and MMBV was
observed. Although many other clinical criteria are important (bone quality,
alveolar crest anatomy, etc), the results of this CBCT radiographic study
indicate that in many maxillary edentulous cases, the existing bone quantity
(volume) can be sufficient for a full-arch maxillary implant treatment with at
least 4 implants without the additional trauma or expense of bone grafts and
sinus lifts. A variety of implant treatment options can be proposed based on
maxillary bone availability and bone-to-sinus interrelationship. It appears that 
with age and edentulism, the amount of available maxillary bone is steadily
decreasing.

PMID: 22913308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Bioprocess Biosyst Eng. 2013 Apr;36(4):453-60. doi: 10.1007/s00449-012-0802-5.
Epub 2012 Aug 21.

Validation of a 30-year-old process for the manufacture of L-asparaginase from
Erwinia chrysanthemi.

Gervais D(1), Allison N, Jennings A, Jones S, Marks T.

Author information: 
(1)Development and Production Department, Health Protection Agency, Microbiology 
Services, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK. dave.gervais@hpa.org.uk

A 30-year-old manufacturing process for the biologic product L-asparaginase from 
the plant pathogen Erwinia chrysanthemi was rigorously qualified and validated,
with a high level of agreement between validation data and the 6-year process
database. L-Asparaginase exists in its native state as a tetrameric protein and
is used as a chemotherapeutic agent in the treatment regimen for Acute
Lymphoblastic Leukaemia (ALL). The manufacturing process involves fermentation of
the production organism, extraction and purification of the L-asparaginase to
make drug substance (DS), and finally formulation and lyophilisation to generate 
drug product (DP). The extensive manufacturing experience with the product was
used to establish ranges for all process parameters and product quality
attributes. The product and in-process intermediates were rigorously
characterised, and new assays, such as size-exclusion and reversed-phase UPLC,
were developed, validated, and used to analyse several pre-validation batches.
Finally, three prospective process validation batches were manufactured and
product quality data generated using both the existing and the new analytical
methods. These data demonstrated the process to be robust, highly reproducible
and consistent, and the validation was successful, contributing to the granting
of an FDA product license in November, 2011.

PMID: 22907565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Med Microbiol. 2012 Nov;61(Pt 11):1546-55. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.049007-0. Epub
2012 Aug 16.

Evaluation of two multiplex real-time PCR screening capabilities for the
detection of Bacillus anthracis, Francisella tularensis and Yersinia pestis in
blood samples generated from murine infection models.

Weller SA(1), Cox V, Essex-Lopresti A, Hartley MG, Parsons TM, Rachwal PA,
Stapleton HL, Lukaszewski RA.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.
sweller@mail.dstl.gov.uk

Two multiplex PCR screening capabilities (TaqMan Array Cards and FilmArray) were 
evaluated for their ability to detect Bacillus anthracis, Francisella tularensis 
and Yersinia pestis in blood samples obtained from respective murine infection
models. Blood samples were obtained from infected mice at 24 h intervals after
exposure. Multiplex PCR results were compared with standard blood culture and
singleplex real-time PCR. Across all three models, 71 mice were tested in total, 
within which a subset of 43 samples was shown to contain an infecting agent by at
least one of the detection technologies. Within this subset of positive samples, 
for each model studied, the detection rates of each technology were compared. The
B. anthracis model blood culture (14 of 15 agent-containing samples tested) and
FilmArray PCR (12 of 15) were shown to have equivalent detection rates, which
were significantly higher (at the 95<U+200A>% confidence level) than singleplex (five of
14) or Array Card (two of 14) PCRs. The F. tularensis model blood culture (12 of 
12) was shown to have a significantly higher (at 95<U+200A>% confidence level) detection
rate than all PCR technologies, with FilmArray (seven of 11) and singleplex
(seven of 12) PCRs shown to have significantly higher (at 95<U+200A>% confidence level) 
detection rates than the Array Card PCR (two of 11). Within the Y. pestis model, 
there was no significant difference in detection rates between blood culture (10 
of 16), singleplex PCR (14 of 16), Array Card PCR (10 of 16) and FilmArray PCR
(10 of 13).

PMID: 22899777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Org Med Chem Lett. 2012 Aug 16;2(1):30. doi: 10.1186/2191-2858-2-30.

Chemical characterization, antioxidant and inhibitory effects of some marine
sponges against carbohydrate metabolizing enzymes.

Shaaban M(1), Abd-Alla HI, Hassan AZ, Aly HF, Ghani MA.

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry of Natural Compounds Department, Division of Pharmaceutical
Industries, National Research Centre, Dokki, Giza, 12622, Egypt.
mshaaba_99@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: More than 15,000 marine products have been described up to now;
Sponges are champion producers, concerning the diversity of products that have
been found. Most bioactive compounds from sponges were classified into
anti-inflammatory, antitumor, immuno- or neurosurpressive, antiviral,
antimalarial, antibiotic, or antifouling. Evaluation of in vitro inhibitory
effects of different extracts from four marine sponges versus some antioxidants
indices and carbohydrate hydrolyzing enzymes concerned with diabetes mellitus was
studied. The chemical characterizations for the extracts of the predominating
sponges; SP1 and SP3 were discussed.
METHODS: All chemicals served in the biological study were of analytical grade
and purchased from Sigma, Merck and Aldrich. All kits were the products of
Biosystems (Spain), Sigma Chemical Company (USA), Biodiagnostic (Egypt).
Carbohydrate metabolizing enzymes; Î±-amylase, Î±-glucosidase, and
Î²-galactosidase (EC3.2.1.1, EC3.2.1.20, and EC3.2.1.23, respectively) were
obtained from Sigma Chemical Company (USA).
RESULTS: Four marine sponges; Smenospongia (SP1), Callyspongia (SP2), Niphates
(SP3), and Stylissa (SP4), were collected from the Red Sea at Egyptian coasts,
and taxonomically characterized. The sponges' extracts exhibited diverse
inhibitory effects on oxidative stress indices and carbohydrate hydrolyzing
enzymes in linear relationships to some extent with concentration of inhibitors
(dose dependant). The extracts of sponges (3, 1, and 2) showed, respectively,
potent-reducing power. Purification and Chemical characterization of sponge 1
using NMR and mass spectroscopy, recognized the existence of di-isobutyl
phthalate (1), di-n-butyl phthalate (2), linoleic acid (3), ß-sitosterol (4), and
cholesterol (5). Sponge 3 produced bis-[2-ethyl]-hexyl-phthylester (6) and
triglyceride fatty acid ester (7).
CONCLUSION: Marine sponges are promising sources for delivering of bioactive
compounds. Four marine sponges, collected from Red Sea at Egyptian coasts, were
identified as Smenospongia (SP1), Callyspongia (SP2), Niphates (SP3), and
Stylissa (SP4). The results demonstrated that different sponges extracts
exhibited inhibitory effects on oxidative stress indices and carbohydrate
hydrolyzing enzymes in linear relationships to some extent with concentration of 
inhibitors (dose dependant). The extracts of sponges (3, 1, and 2) showed,
respectively, potent-reducing power. Chemical characterizations of sponges SP1
and SP3 were discussed. Based on this study, marine sponges are considered as
talented sources for production of diverse and multiple biologically active
compounds.

PMCID: PMC3524779
PMID: 22898269  [PubMed]


230. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e42124. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042124. Epub 2012 Jul 27.

DNA polymorphisms and biocontrol of Bacillus antagonistic to citrus bacterial
canker with indication of the interference of phyllosphere biofilms.

Huang TP(1), Tzeng DD, Wong AC, Chen CH, Lu KM, Lee YH, Huang WD, Hwang BF, Tzeng
KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, National Chung-Hsing University, Taichung,
Taiwan. tphuang@nchu.edu.tw

Citrus bacterial canker caused by Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. citri is a
devastating disease resulting in significant crop losses in various citrus
cultivars worldwide. A biocontrol agent has not been recommended for this
disease. To explore the potential of bacilli native to Taiwan to control this
disease, Bacillus species with a broad spectrum of antagonistic activity against 
various phytopathogens were isolated from plant potting mixes, organic compost
and the rhizosphere soil. Seven strains TKS1-1, OF3-16, SP4-17, HSP1, WG6-14,
TLB7-7, and WP8-12 showing superior antagonistic activity were chosen for
biopesticide development. The genetic identity based on 16S rDNA sequences
indicated that all seven native strains were close relatives of the B. subtilis
group and appeared to be discrete from the B. cereus group. DNA polymorphisms in 
strains WG6-14, SP4-17, TKS1-1, and WP8-12, as revealed by repetitive
sequence-based PCR with the BOXA1R primers were similar to each other, but
different from those of the respective Bacillus type strains. However, molecular 
typing of the strains using either tDNA-intergenic spacer regions or 16S-23S
intergenic transcribed spacer regions was unable to differentiate the strains at 
the species level. Strains TKS1-1 and WG6-14 attenuated symptom development of
citrus bacterial canker, which was found to be correlated with a reduction in
colonization and biofilm formation by X. axonopodis pv. citri on leaf surfaces.
The application of a Bacillus strain TKS1-1 endospore formulation to the leaf
surfaces of citrus reduced the incidence of citrus bacterial canker and could
prevent development of the disease.

PMCID: PMC3407170
PMID: 22848728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Int J Cancer. 2013 Feb 15;132(4):795-806. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27730. Epub 2012 Aug
3.

Inhibition of rhabdomyosarcoma cell and tumor growth by targeting specificity
protein (Sp) transcription factors.

Chadalapaka G(1), Jutooru I, Sreevalsan S, Pathi S, Kim K, Chen C, Crose L,
Linardic C, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX 77843-4466, USA.

Erratum in
    Int J Cancer. 2015 Sep 15;137(6):E9.

Specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 are highly
expressed in rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) cells. In tissue arrays of RMS tumor cores
from 71 patients, 80% of RMS patients expressed high levels of Sp1 protein,
whereas low expression of Sp1 was detected in normal muscle tissue. The
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) tolfenamic acid (TA) inhibited
growth and migration of RD and RH30 RMS cell lines and also inhibited tumor
growth in vivo using a mouse xenograft (RH30 cells) model. The effects of TA were
accompanied by downregulation of Sp1, Sp3, Sp4 and Sp-regulated genes in RMS
cells and tumors, and the role of Sp protein downregulation in mediating
inhibition of RD and RH30 cell growth and migration was confirmed by individual
and combined knockdown of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 proteins by RNA interference. TA
treatment and Sp knockdown in RD and RH30 cells also showed that four genes that 
are emerging as individual drug targets for treating RMS, namely c-MET,
insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGFR), PDGFRa and CXCR4, are also
Sp-regulated genes. These results suggest that NSAIDs such as TA may have
potential clinical efficacy in drug combinations for treating RMS patients.

Copyright © 2012 UICC.

PMCID: PMC3527649
PMID: 22815231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Mol Cancer Ther. 2012 Sep;11(9):1852-62. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-0181. Epub
2012 Jun 29.

Induction of the transcriptional repressor ZBTB4 in prostate cancer cells by
drug-induced targeting of microRNA-17-92/106b-25 clusters.

Kim K(1), Chadalapaka G, Pathi SS, Jin UH, Lee JS, Park YY, Cho SG,
Chintharlapalli S, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center, MD
Anderson Cancer Center, The University of Texas, Houston, USA.

Androgen-insensitive DU145 and PC3 human prostate cancer cells express high
levels of specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4, and
treatment of cells with methyl 2-cyano-3,11-dioxo-18ß-olean-1,12-dien-30-oate
(CDODA-Me) inhibited cell growth and downregulated Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 expression. 
CDODA-Me (15 mg/kg/d) was a potent inhibitor of tumor growth in a mouse xenograft
model (PC3 cells) and also decreased expression of Sp transcription factors in
tumors. CDODA-Me-mediated downregulation of Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 was due to
induction of the transcriptional repressor ZBTB4, which competitively binds and
displaces Sp transcription factors from GC-rich sites in Sp1-, Sp3-, Sp4-, and
Sp-regulated gene promoters. ZBTB4 levels are relatively low in DU145 and PC3
cells due to suppression by miR paralogs that are members of the miR-17-92
(miR-20a/17-5p) and miR-106b-25 (miR-106b/93) clusters. Examination of publically
available prostate cancer patient array data showed an inverse relationship
between ZBTB4 and miRs-20a/17-5p/106b/93 expression, and increased ZBTB4 in
patients with prostate cancer was a prognostic factor for increased survival.
CDODA-Me induces ZBTB4 in prostate cancer cells through disruption of miR-ZBTB4
interactions, and this results in downregulation of pro-oncogenic Sp
transcription factors and Sp-regulated genes.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3632183
PMID: 22752225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Analyst. 2012 Oct 7;137(19):4408-10. doi: 10.1039/c2an35681c.

Short-wave infrared excited spatially offset Raman spectroscopy (SORS) for
through-barrier detection.

Hopkins RJ(1), Pelfrey SH, Shand NC.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK. RJHopkins@dstl.gov.uk

Spatially offset Raman spectroscopy (SORS) using 1064 nm excitation is
demonstrated here to detect chemicals through a physical barrier such as a
container. This excitation wavelength overcomes the issue of fluorescence from
the target chemical, whilst retaining the benefits of the SORS technique for
through-barrier detection. These advantages have a wide range of applications in 
both civilian and military environments.

PMID: 22737684  [PubMed]


234. Curr Med Chem. 2012;19(22):3779-86.

Expression of specificity protein transcription factors in pancreatic cancer and 
their association in prognosis and therapy.

Sankpal UT(1), Maliakal P, Bose D, Kayaleh O, Buchholz D, Basha R.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research institute, MD Anderson Cancer Center Orlando, 6900 Lake Nona
Blvd, Orlando, FL 32827, USA.

Pancreatic cancer is an aggressive malignancy with poor prognosis. Pancreatic
adenocarcinoma is one of the leading causes of cancer-related deaths in the
United States. Due to the aggressive nature of this malignancy, there is a
serious concern for identifying effective targets, and adopting novel strategies 
for therapy. Members of the Specificity Protein (Sp) family of transcription
factors, Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 regulate the expression of a number of genes
associated with cancer cell proliferation, differentiation, and metastasis. Sp1
levels are upregulated in pancreatic cancer cell lines, and surgically resected
human pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Sp1 overexpression in tumor tissues is
associated with aggressive disease, poor prognosis and inversely correlated with 
survival. Sp1 is also known to affect angiogenesis by regulating the expression
of vascular endothelial growth factor and its receptors. Results from clinical
studies suggest Sp1 as new biomarker to identify aggressive pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma. The pharmacological inhibition of Sp1 using agents such as
celecoxib, mithramycin, curcumin, and tolfenamic acid has showed promising
results in pre-clinical studies and demonstrated Sp transcription factors as
potential targets for pancreatic cancer therapy. This review summarizes studies
showing the association of Sp proteins with this malignancy, with a special
emphasis on pre-clinical studies that tested strategies to target Sp
transcription factors for inhibiting human pancreatic cancer cell proliferation
and tumor growth in laboratory animals. The results showed remarkable efficacy
and suggest that such approaches have the potential for high success in
developing clinically relevant strategies for treating pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 22725697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Public Health. 2012 Aug;126(8):646-56. doi: 10.1016/j.puhe.2012.04.007. Epub 2012
Jun 19.

Evaluation of hygiene practices in catering premises at large-scale events in the
UK: identifying risks for the Olympics 2012.

Willis C(1), Elviss N, Aird H, Fenelon D, McLauchlin J.

Author information: 
(1)Health Protection Agency Microbiology Service Food Water and Environmental
Microbiology Laboratory (Porton), Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JG, UK.
caroline.willis@hpa.org.uk

OBJECTIVES: To investigate hygiene practices of caterers at large events in order
to: support the production of guidance on catering at such events; to compare
hygiene standards at weekends with other times in the week; and to learn lessons 
in preparation for the London Olympics in 2012.
STUDY DESIGN: UK-wide study of caterers at large events, including questionnaires
on hygiene procedures and microbiological examination of food, water and
environmental samples.
METHODS: In total, 1364 samples of food, water, surface swabs and cloths were
collected at 139 events, by local authority sampling officers, and transported to
laboratories for microbiological analysis.
RESULTS: Eight percent of food samples were of an unsatisfactory quality, and a
further 2% contained potentially hazardous levels of Bacillus spp. A
significantly higher proportion of unsatisfactory food samples were taken from
vendors without adequate food safety procedures in place. Fifty-two percent of
water samples, 38% of swabs and 71% of cloths were also unsatisfactory. The
majority of samples (57%) were collected on Saturdays, Sundays or bank holidays. 
Environmental swab results were significantly poorer at weekends compared with
other days of the week.
CONCLUSIONS: This study reinforces the fact that food hygiene is a continuing
cause for concern in mobile vendors, and indicates a need for an ongoing
programme of training and monitoring of caterers in preparation for the London
Olympics.

Copyright © 2012 The Royal Society for Public Health. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
All rights reserved.

PMID: 22717040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Alzheimers Dis. 2012;31(3):537-42. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2012-120379.

Genetics and expression analysis of the specificity protein 4 gene (SP4) in
patients with Alzheimer's disease and frontotemporal lobar degeneration.

Villa C(1), Ghezzi L, Fenoglio C, Clerici F, Marcone A, Benussi L, Ghidoni R,
Gallone S, Serpente M, Cantoni C, Ridolfi E, Bonsi R, Cerami C, Cappa S, Binetti 
G, Franceschi M, Rainero I, Mariani C, Bresolin N, Scarpini E, Galimberti D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, "Dino Ferrari" Center, University of
Milan, Fondazione Cà Granda, IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico, Milan, Italy.

Transcription factor Sp4 (Specificity protein 4) levels are increased in the
brain of patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD), and Sp4 colocalizes with
neurofibrillary tangles. Moreover, SP4 is a susceptibility gene for bipolar
disorder and schizophrenia, which share many clinical features with
frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD). The distribution of three tagging
single nucleotide polymorphisms(SNPs)-rs9639379, rs10272006, and rs6461569-has
been determined in a population of 352 patients diagnosed clinically with AD, 290
patients with FTLD, and 341 age-matched controls. Expression analysis of SP4 was 
performed in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). No significant
differences in either allelic or genotypic frequency of the three SNPs were found
(p > 0.05), even stratifying according to gender and to the apolipoprotein E
status. Significantly increased SP4 relative expression levels were observed in
PBMC from patients with AD as compared with controls (7.132 ± 1.301 versus 3.396 
± 0.829, p < 0.050) and a similar trend was shown in patients with FTLD compared 
with controls (6.525 ± 1.500 versus 3.396 ± 0.829, p = 0.073). According to these
results, SP4 gene does not act as a susceptibility factor either for AD or FTLD. 
However, Sp4 mRNA levels are upregulated in patients, possibly resulting in an
aberrant expression of downstream target genes involved in the pathogenesis of
both diseases.

PMID: 22614877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Anticancer Agents Med Chem. 2012 Dec;12(10):1211-20.

Unifying mechanisms of action of the anticancer activities of triterpenoids and
synthetic analogs.

Safe SH(1), Prather PL, Brents LK, Chadalapaka G, Jutooru I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
4466 TAMU, College Station, TX 77843-4466, USA. ssafe@cvm.tamu.edu

Triterpenoids such as betulinic acid (BA) and synthetic analogs of oleanolic acid
[2-cyano-3,12-dioxooleana-1,9-dien-28-oic acid (CDDO)] and glycyrrhetinic acid
[2-cyano-3,11-dioxo-18ß-oleana-1,12-dien-30-oc acid (CDODA)] are potent
anticancer agents that exhibit antiproliferative, antiangiogenic,
anti-inflammatory and pro-apoptotic activities. Although their effects on
multiple pathways have been reported, unifying mechanisms of action have not been
reported. Studies in this laboratory have now demonstrated that several
triterpenoids including BA and some derivatives, celastrol, methyl ursolate,
ß-boswellic acid derivatives, and the synthetic analogs CDDO, CDODA and their
esters decreased expression of specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors and
several pro-oncogenic Sp-regulated genes in multiple cancer cell lines. The
mechanisms of this response are both compound- and cell context-dependent and
include activation of both proteasome-dependent and -independent pathways.
Triterpenoid-mediated induction of reactive oxygen species (ROS) has now been
characterized as an important proteasome-independent pathway for downregulation
of Sp transcription factors. ROS decreases expression of microRNA-27a (miR-27a)
and miR-20a/miR-17-5p and this results in the induction of the transcriptional
"Sp-repressors" ZBTB10 and ZBTB4, respectively, which in turn downregulate Sp and
Sp-regulated genes. Triterpenoids also activate or deactive nuclear receptors and
G-protein coupled receptors, and these pathways contribute to their
antitumorigenic activity and may also play a role in targeting Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4
which are highly overexpressed in multiple cancers and appear to be important for
maintaining the cancer phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3532564
PMID: 22583404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Mol Cancer Ther. 2012 Jul;11(7):1421-31. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-0026. Epub
2012 May 2.

Betulinic acid targets YY1 and ErbB2 through cannabinoid receptor-dependent
disruption of microRNA-27a:ZBTB10 in breast cancer.

Liu X(1), Jutooru I, Lei P, Kim K, Lee SO, Brents LK, Prather PL, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College
Station, Texas 77843, USA.

Treatment of ErbB2-overexpressing BT474 and MDA-MB-453 breast cancer cells with 1
to 10 µmol/L betulinic acid inhibited cell growth, induced apoptosis,
downregulated specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4,
and decreased expression of ErbB2. Individual or combined knockdown of Sp1, Sp3, 
Sp4 by RNA interference also decreased expression of ErbB2 and this response was 
because of repression of YY1, an Sp-regulated gene. Betulinic acid-dependent
repression of Sp1, Sp3, Sp4, and Sp-regulated genes was due, in part, to
induction of the Sp repressor ZBTB10 and downregulation of microRNA-27a
(miR-27a), which constitutively inhibits ZBTB10 expression, and we show for the
first time that the effects of betulinic acid on the miR-27a:ZBTB10-Sp
transcription factor axis were cannabinoid 1 (CB1) and CB2 receptor-dependent,
thus identifying a new cellular target for this anticancer agent.

©2012 AACR.

PMID: 22553354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Chem Commun (Camb). 2012 Jun 7;48(45):5605-7. doi: 10.1039/c2cc31096a. Epub 2012 
May 1.

Hydrogen bond-mediated recognition of the chemical warfare agent soman (GD).

Sambrook MR(1), Hiscock JR, Cook A, Green AC, Holden I, Vincent JC, Gale PA.

Author information: 
(1)Detection Department, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JQ, UK.
m.sambrook@dstl.gov.uk

NMR titration studies in acetonitrile-d(3)/DMSO-d(6) mixtures demonstrate that
diindolylurea-based receptors can form complexes with the organophosphorus nerve 
agent soman in organic solution.

PMID: 22546851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35130. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035130. Epub 2012 Apr 19.

Modulation of the activity of Sp transcription factors by mithramycin analogues
as a new strategy for treatment of metastatic prostate cancer.

Malek A(1), Núñez LE, Magistri M, Brambilla L, Jovic S, Carbone GM, Morís F,
Catapano CV.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Oncology Research (IOR), Bellinzona, Switzerland.

Deregulated activity of transcription factors (TFs) of the Sp/KLF family, like
Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4, and consequent over-expression of Sp-regulated genes occur
frequently in human cancers. This provides the rationale for development of
inhibitors of Sp TFs as cancer therapeutics. Mithramycin A (MTM-A) is a natural
polyketide that binds GC-rich DNA sequences, inhibits activity of Sp TFs and
exhibits potent antitumor activity in experimental systems. However, clinical use
of MTM-A is limited by the severe toxicity of the compound. Here, we studied two 
MTM-A analogues, which had been generated by genetically engineering of the MTM-A
biosynthetic pathway, and evaluated their activity in human prostate cancer in
cell cultures and mouse models. The compounds, named MTM-SDK and MTM-SK, were
highly effective in vitro inhibiting proliferation of prostate cancer cells and
transcription of Sp-regulated genes by blocking binding of Sp proteins to the
gene promoters. When administered to mice, both compounds were well tolerated
with maximum tolerated doses of MTM-SDK and MTM-SK, respectively, 4- and 32- fold
higher than MTM-A. After systemic administration, both compounds were cleared
rapidly from the bloodstream but maintained plasma levels well above the active
concentrations required in vitro for inhibition of Sp TF activity and cell
proliferation. Consistently, MTM-SDK and MTM-SK inhibited transcription of
Sp-regulated genes in prostate tumor xenografts and exhibited potent antitumor
activity in subcutaneous and metastatic tumor xenograft models with no or minimal
toxicity. Taken together, these data indicate that MTM-SDK and MTM-SK possess
significantly improved pharmacological and toxicological properties compared to
MTM-A and represent promising drugs for treatment of advanced prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC3334962
PMID: 22545098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Med Microbiol. 2012 Jul;61(Pt 7):911-8. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.037960-0. Epub 2012 
Mar 22.

The natural history and incidence of Yersinia pestis and prospects for
vaccination.

Williamson ED(1), Oyston PC.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.
dewilliamson@dstl.gov.uk

Plague is an ancient, serious, infectious disease which is still endemic in
regions of the modern world and is a potential biothreat agent. This paper
discusses the natural history of the bacterium and its evolution into a
flea-vectored bacterium able to transmit bubonic plague. It reviews the incidence
of plague in the modern world and charts the history of vaccines which have been 
used to protect against the flea-vectored disease, which erupts as bubonic
plague. Current approaches to vaccine development to protect against pneumonic,
as well as bubonic, plague are also reviewed. The considerable challenges in
achieving a vaccine which is licensed for human use and which will
comprehensively protect against this serious human pathogen are assessed.

PMID: 22442294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2012 Aug;69(16):2751-64. doi: 10.1007/s00018-012-0948-y. Epub 
2012 Mar 22.

CADM1 isoforms differentially regulate human mast cell survival and homotypic
adhesion.

Moiseeva EP(1), Leyland ML, Bradding P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, Institute for Lung Health,
Clinical Sciences Wing, Glenfield Hospital, University of Leicester, Leicester
LE3 9QP, UK. em9@le.ac.uk

Cell adhesion molecule 1 (CADM1), expressed by human lung mast cells (HLMCs),
mediates their adhesion to airway smooth muscle (ASM), and contributes to
ASM-dependent HLMC proliferation and survival. CADM1 is expressed in
alternatively spliced isoforms, but those present in HLMCs and their function are
not known. We cloned three functional and one cryptic non-functional isoform with
alternative splicing between exons 7/11 and 1/2, respectively, from HLMCs and
human MC lines (HMC-1 and LAD2). Differentiated HLMCs and LAD2 cells expressed
the functional isoform SP4 containing exons 7/8/11 (~80% of clones), as well as
SP1 (exons 7/8/9/11) and a novel SP6 (exons 7/8/9/10/11). In contrast, immature
HMC-1 cells expressed only functional SP4. SP4 overexpression in HMC-1 cells and 
HLMCs augmented homotypic adhesion to a greater extent than SP1 in various
conditions. In contrast, CADM1 downregulation abolished homotypic adhesion,
indicating that CADM1 is the sole receptor mediating mast cell aggregation.
CADM1-mediated adhesion was enhanced by the presence of cell survival factors.
SP1 overexpression in HMC-1 cells compromised survival compared to SP4
overexpression or control. CADM1 downregulation resulted in reduced viability and
decreased expression of the pro-survival protein Mcl-1(L), but not Blc-2 or
Bcl-X(L), and increased caspase-3/7 activity in both HMC-1 cells and HLMCs. This 
coincided with decreased basal Kit levels in HLMCs. In summary, human MCs express
multiple CADM1 isoforms which exhibit differential regulation of survival and
homotypic adhesion. The most highly expressed SP4 isoform is likely to contribute
to MC aggregation and longevity in mastocytosis, and augment the pathophysiology 
of allergic diseases.

PMCID: PMC3400039
PMID: 22438059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Vaccine. 2012 May 2;30(21):3159-68. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.03.008. Epub 2012
Mar 15.

The expression of ferritin, lactoferrin, transferrin receptor and solute carrier 
family 11A1 in the host response to BCG-vaccination and Mycobacterium
tuberculosis challenge.

Thom RE(1), Elmore MJ, Williams A, Andrews SC, Drobniewski F, Marsh PD, Tree JA.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiological Services, HPA Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG, UK.
ruth.thom@hpa.org.uk

Iron is an essential cofactor for both mycobacterial growth during infection and 
for a successful protective immune response by the host. The immune response
partly depends on the regulation of iron by the host, including the tight control
of expression of the iron-storage protein, ferritin. BCG vaccination can protect 
against disease following Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection, but the
mechanisms of protection remain unclear. To further explore these mechanisms,
splenocytes from BCG-vaccinated guinea pigs were stimulated ex vivo with purified
protein derivative from M. tuberculosis and a significant down-regulation of
ferritin light- and heavy-chain was measured by reverse-transcription
quantitative-PCR (P=0.05 and =0.01, respectively). The mechanisms of this
down-regulation were shown to involve TNFa and nitric oxide. A more in depth
analysis of the mRNA expression profiles, including genes involved in iron
metabolism, was performed using a guinea pig specific immunological microarray
following ex vivo infection with M. tuberculosis of splenocytes from
BCG-vaccinated and naïve guinea pigs. M. tuberculosis infection induced a
pro-inflammatory response in splenocytes from both groups, resulting in
down-regulation of ferritin (P=0.05). In addition, lactoferrin (P=0.002),
transferrin receptor (P=0.05) and solute carrier family 11A1 (P=0.05), were only 
significantly down-regulated after infection of the splenocytes from
BCG-vaccinated animals. The results show that expression of iron-metabolism genes
is tightly regulated as part of the host response to M. tuberculosis infection
and that BCG-vaccination enhances the ability of the host to mount an
iron-restriction response which may in turn help to combat invasion by
mycobacteria.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22426328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Mol Carcinog. 2013 Aug;52(8):591-602. doi: 10.1002/mc.21893. Epub 2012 Mar 7.

Betulinic acid decreases ER-negative breast cancer cell growth in vitro and in
vivo: role of Sp transcription factors and microRNA-27a:ZBTB10.

Mertens-Talcott SU(1), Noratto GD, Li X, Angel-Morales G, Bertoldi MC, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Science, Texas A&M University, College
Station, Texas 77843, USA.

Betulinic acid (BA), a pentacyclic triterpenoid isolated from tree bark is
cytotoxic to cancer cells. There is evidence that specificity proteins (Sps),
such as Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4, are overexpressed in tumors and contribute to the
proliferative and angiogenic phenotype associated with cancer cells. The
objective of this study was to determine the efficacy of BA in decreasing the Sps
expression and underlying mechanisms. Results show that BA decreased
proliferation and induced apoptosis of estrogen-receptor-negative breast cancer
MDA-MB-231 cells. The BA-induced Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 downregulation was accompanied
by increased zinc finger ZBTB10 expression, a putative Sp-repressor and decreased
microRNA-27a levels, a microRNA involved in the regulation of ZBTB10. Similar
results were observed in MDA-MB-231 cells transfected with ZBTB10 expression
plasmid. BA induced cell cycle arrest in the G2/M phase and increased Myt-1 mRNA 
(a microRNA-27a target gene), which causes inhibition in G2/M by phosphorylation 
of cdc2. The effects of BA were reversed by transient transfection with a mimic
of microRNA-27a. In nude mice with xenografted MDA-MB-231 cells, tumor size and
weight were significantly decreased by BA treatment. In tumor tissue, ZBTB10 mRNA
was increased while mRNA and protein of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4, as well as mRNA of
vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR), survivin and microRNA-27a
were decreased by BA. In lungs of xenografted mice, human ß2-microglobulin mRNA
was decreased in BA-treated animals. These results show that the anticancer
effects of BA are at least in part based on interactions with the
microRNA-27a-ZBTB10-Sp-axis causing increased cell death.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3418350
PMID: 22407812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Microbes Infect. 2012 Jul;14(7-8):584-9. doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2012.02.001. Epub 
2012 Feb 11.

Peripheral human <U+03B3>d T cells control growth of both avirulent and highly virulent 
strains of Francisella tularensis in vitro.

Rowland CA(1), Hartley MG, Flick-Smith H, Laws TR, Eyles JE, Oyston PC.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Dept, Dstl, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.
carowland@dstl.gov.uk

In this paper we evaluate the role of human <U+03B3>d T cells in control of Francisella 
tularensis infection. Using an in vitro model of infection, a reduction in
bacterial numbers was detected in the presence of human <U+03B3>d T cells for both
attenuated LVS and virulent SCHU S4 strains of F. tularensis. Antibody
neutralisation of IFN-<U+03B3> caused an increase in survival of F. tularensis LVS
suggesting that <U+03B3>d T cell-mediated control of F. tularensis infection is
partially mediated by IFN-<U+03B3>.

Crown Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22370220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Theriogenology. 2012 May;77(8):1529-39. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2011.11.020. Epub 2012 Feb 25.

Morphometrically-distinct sperm subpopulations defined by a multistep statistical
procedure in ram ejaculates: intra- and interindividual variation.

Maroto-Morales A(1), Ramón M, García-Álvarez O, Soler AJ, Fernández-Santos MR,
Roldan ER, Gomendio M, Pérez-Guzmán MD, Garde JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biology of Reproduction Group, National Wildlife Research Institute (IREC)
UCLM-CSIC-JCCM, 02071 Albacete, Spain.

The existence of sperm subpopulations within the mammalian ejaculate has now been
widely recognized. However, to the best of our knowledge, no data exist regarding
the existence of sperm morphometric subpopulations within the ovine ejaculate.
Computer assisted sperm morphometry analysis (ASMA) data and clustering methods
were used in this study to identify sperm-head subpopulations in ram semen. Two
experiments were carried out. In Experiment 1, ejaculates from 226 mature rams of
the Manchega breed belonging to 36 different herds were used. A minimum of 100
sperm heads were analyzed from each male and eight morphometric characteristics
for each individual sperm were recorded. Subpopulation analysis was performed in 
sequential steps: variable group analysis and correlation analysis to select
which morphometric characteristics to use in cluster analyses; nonhierarchical
clustering analysis using sperm head length and p2a (also known as roundness)
shape factor as initial classificatory variables; and hierarchical clustering
analysis to obtain the final number of clusters. The clustering analyses, based
on 26,306 individual cells, revealed the existence of four sperm subpopulations
(SP1, SP2, SP3 and SP4) with different morphometric characteristics. Significant 
differences in the proportion of spermatozoa in the SP1 and SP3 were found
between rams belonging to different herds. In Experiment 2, the intra- and
intermale variability on the distribution of sperm subpopulations was assessed.
Three ejaculates from each of 21 rams were collected and the same multistep
clustering analysis was performed. For all subpopulations defined, the intermale 
variability resulted in high values, being the intramale variability much lower. 
This fact would allow the use of sperm head morphometry to characterize a male
and might provide valuable information to asses its fertility. In conclusion, our
results show that using computer assisted sperm morphometry analysis and
multivariate cluster analyses, four sperm subpopulations with different head
phenotype were identified in ram ejaculates.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22365694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J R Soc Med. 2012 Feb;105(2):66-73. doi: 10.1258/jrsm.2012.110249.

Behaviour and control of influenza in institutions and small societies.

Finnie TJ(1), Hall IM, Leach S.

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Risk Assessment, Emergency Response Department, Health Protection
Agency, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JG, UK. Thomas.Finnie@hpa.org.uk

Comment in
    J R Soc Med. 2012 Aug;105(8):324.

A literature review was undertaken to assess the impact of influenza in enclosed 
societies. The literature spanned 120 years and included both readily accessible 
material from online keyword searches, as well as more obscure paper documents
found through in-depth library research. Enclosed societies have been
predominantly found in some type of institution through this period although
noticeable similarities exist in communities isolated by distance and geography. 
We observe that no matter how isolated a community is, it is not necessarily
insulated from infection by influenza and that even where there are no
complicating factors, such as the age distribution or the presence of individuals
with greater susceptibility in the enclosed population, their organization tends 
to increase influenza transmission and the risk of secondary infection. The
collected accounts demonstrate important features of outbreaks in such societies 
and the necessity of considering them in pandemic planning: in particular, rapid 
intervention is essential for the control of influenza spread in such
circumstances. Recent experience has shown that administration of modern
antiviral drugs, such as neuraminidase inhibitors are effective at moderating
outbreaks of influenza, but only in combination with other methods of control. In
more remote communities where such drugs are not, or less, readily available, and
medical care is limited, such outbreaks can still pose particular difficulties.
In all cases delay in correct diagnosis, detection of an outbreak or the
implementation of control measures can result in the majority of the enclosed
population succumbing to the disease.

PMCID: PMC3284301
PMID: 22357982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2013 Jan;63(Pt 1):104-8. doi: 10.1099/ijs.0.036558-0. 
Epub 2012 Feb 17.

Natronococcus roseus sp. nov., a haloalkaliphilic archaeon from a hypersaline
lake.

Corral P(1), Gutiérrez MC, Castillo AM, Domínguez M, Lopalco P, Corcelli A,
Ventosa A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University
of Sevilla, 41012 Sevilla, Spain.

A novel halophilic archaeon, strain CG-1(T), belonging to the genus Natronococcus
was isolated from sediment of the soda lake Chagannor in Inner Mongolia, China.
The colonies of this strain were pink pigmented, the intensity of the colour
decreased when the cells grew at salt saturation levels. The cells were
non-motile cocci and strictly aerobic. Hypotonic treatment did not cause cell
lysis, even in distilled water. Strain CG-1(T) grew at 15-30.0 % (w/v) NaCl and
at 30-50 °C and pH 8.0-11.0, with optimal growth occurring at 25-30 % (w/v) NaCl,
37-45 °C and pH 9-9.5. MgCl(2) was not required for growth. Strain CG-1(T) was
most closely related to the type strains of Natronococcus amylolyticus Ah-36(T), 
Natronococcus jeotgali B1(T) and Natronococcus occultus SP4(T), with which it
shared 98.4 %, 96.2 and 95.7 % 16S rRNA gene sequence similarity, respectively.
The polar lipids consisted of C(20)C(20) and C(20)C(25) derivatives of
phosphatidylglycerol (PG), phosphatidylglycerol phosphate methyl ester (PGP-Me)
and minor phospholipid components. No glycolipids were detected. The DNA G+C
content of strain CG-1(T) was 62.1 mol%. DNA-DNA hybridization with N.
amylolyticus DSM 10524(T), phylogenetically the most closely related species, was
39 %; this value showed that strain CG-1(T) constituted a different genospecies. 
The comparison of 16S rRNA gene sequences, detailed phenotypic characterization, 
polar lipid profile and DNA-DNA hybridization studies revealed that strain
CG-1(T) belongs to the genus Natronococcus and constitutes a novel species for
which the name Natronococcus roseus sp. nov. is proposed. The type strain is
CG-1(T) (=CECT 7984(T)=IBRC-M 10656(T)=JCM 17958(T)).

PMID: 22345136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Virology. 2012 May 10;426(2):100-5. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2012.01.038. Epub 2012
Feb 15.

A humanised murine monoclonal antibody protects mice from Venezuelan equine
encephalitis virus, Everglades virus and Mucambo virus when administered up to 48
h after airborne challenge.

O'Brien LM(1), Goodchild SA, Phillpotts RJ, Perkins SD.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory,
Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ, UK. lmobrien@dstl.gov.uk

Currently there are no licensed antiviral treatments for the Alphaviruses
Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus (VEEV), Everglades virus and Mucambo virus. 
We previously developed a humanised version of the mouse monoclonal antibody
1A3B-7 (Hu1A3B-7) which exhibited a wide range of reactivity in vitro and was
able to protect mice from infection with VEEV. Continued work with the humanised 
antibody has now demonstrated that it has the potential to be a new human
therapeutic. Hu1A3B-7 successfully protected mice from infection with multiple
Alphaviruses. The effectiveness of the humanisation process was determined by
assessing proliferation responses in human T-cells to peptides derived from the
murine and humanised versions of the V(H) and V(L) domains. This analysis showed 
that the number of human T-cell epitopes within the humanised antibody had been
substantially reduced, indicating that Hu1A3B-7 may have reduced immunogenicity
in vivo.

Crown Copyright Â© 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22341308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Carcinogenesis. 2012 Apr;33(4):886-94. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs102. Epub 2012 Feb 
14.

Celastrol decreases specificity proteins (Sp) and fibroblast growth factor
receptor-3 (FGFR3) in bladder cancer cells.

Chadalapaka G(1), Jutooru I, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
4466 TAMU, Vet Res Bldg 410, College Station, TX 77843, USA.

Celastrol (CSL) is a naturally occurring triterpenoid acid that exhibits
anticancer activity, and in KU7 and 253JB-V bladder cells, CSL induced apoptosis,
inhibited growth, colony formation and migration and CSL decreased bladder tumor 
growth in vivo. CSL also decreased expression of specificity protein (Sp)
transcription factors Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 and several Sp-regulated genes/proteins
including vascular endothelial growth factor, survivin and cyclin D1 and
fibroblast growth factor receptor-3, a potential drug target for bladder cancer
therapy, has now been characterized as an Sp-regulated gene downregulated by CSL.
The mechanism of Sp downregulation by CSL was cell context-dependent due to
activation of proteosome-dependent (KU7) and -independent (253JB-V) pathways. In 
253JB-V cells, CSL induced reactive oxygen species (ROS) and inhibitors of ROS
blocked CSL-induced growth inhibition and repression of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4. This
response was due to induction of the Sp repressors ZBTB10 and ZBTB4 and
downregulation of miR-27a and miR-20a/17-5p, respectively, which regulate
expression of these transcriptional repressors. Thus, the anticancer activity of 
CSL in 253JB-V cells is due to induction of ROS and ROS-mediated induction of Sp 
repressors (ZBTB4/ZBTB10) through downregulation of miR-27a and miR-20a/17-5p.

PMCID: PMC3324448
PMID: 22334592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Med Microbiol. 2012 Jul;61(Pt 7):889-94. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.039180-0. Epub 2012
Feb 9.

The current challenges for vaccine development.

Oyston P(1), Robinson K.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.
pcoyston@dstl.gov.uk

Vaccine development has played a hugely important role in combating infectious
disease. Despite this success, there is still a great need for new vaccines and
these are emerging far more slowly than we would wish. Despite the massive
expansion in understanding of immune responses to infection, research is often
hindered by a lack of understanding of the immune responses required specifically
for protection, or by a lack of approved adjuvants and delivery systems to induce
the required responses. In addition, the financial commitment required to license
new vaccines is significant, and the more lucrative markets are often not those
with the greatest need. In this review, we discuss many of the hurdles that new
vaccines must overcome in order to reduce morbidity and mortality, and some of
the initiatives that are being attempted to supply new vaccines to those that
need them most.

PMID: 22322337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Ticks Tick Borne Dis. 2012 Apr;3(2):95-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ttbdis.2011.12.002. Epub
2012 Jan 18.

Importation of Hyalomma marginatum, vector of Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever
virus, into the United Kingdom by migratory birds.

Jameson LJ(1), Morgan PJ, Medlock JM, Watola G, Vaux AG.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Entomology & Zoonoses Ecology, Microbial Risk Assessment, Emergency
Response Dept., Health Protection Services, Health Protection Agency, Porton
Down, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK. Lisa.Jameson@hpa.org.uk

Hyalomma marginatum ticks are an important vector of Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic
fever virus which can result in a severe and potentially fatal disease in humans.
Given the continued emergence of clinical cases in Eurasia and focalised upsurges
of H. marginatum populations in Europe, it seemed prudent to assess the potential
of this vector species to be introduced into the United Kingdom. Immature forms
of H. marginatum are frequent ectoparasites of passerine birds many of which
migrate from Africa to the UK each spring. Incoming birds were inspected for
ticks during the spring migration in 2010 and 2011. A total of 68 ticks was
collected from 971 birds (29 bird species), 21% (14) of the ticks were identified
as H. marginatum. Oenanthe oenanthe (Northern wheatear) and Sylvia communis
(Whitethroat) were found to be infested by this tick in both years and with
multiple ticks. Single specimens were also removed from Acrocephalus
schoenobaenus (Sedge warbler) and Phoenicurus phoenicurus (Common redstart) in
2010. This study provides the first contemporary evidence for substantial
importation of this tick species into the UK.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22300969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Peptides. 2012 Feb;33(2):197-205. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2012.01.013. Epub 2012 
Jan 24.

Design and characterization of novel hybrid antimicrobial peptides based on
cecropin A, LL-37 and magainin II.

Fox MA(1), Thwaite JE, Ulaeto DO, Atkins TP, Atkins HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, 
Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK. mafox@dstl.gov.uk

Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are a naturally occurring component of the innate
immune response of many organisms and can have activity against both
Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacterial species. In order to optimize and
improve the direct antimicrobial effect of AMPs against a broad spectrum of
bacterial species, novel synthetic hybrids were rationally designed from cecropin
A, LL-37 and magainin II. AMPs were selected based on their a-helical secondary
structure and fragments of these were analyzed and combined in silico to
determine which hybrid peptides would form the best amphipathic cationic
a-helices. Four hybrid peptides were synthesized (CaLL, CaMA, LLaMA and MALL) and
evaluated for direct antimicrobial activity against a range of bacterial species 
(Bacillus anthracis, Burkholderia cepacia, Francisella tularensis LVS and
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis) alongside the original 'parent' AMPs. The hybrid
peptides showed greater antimicrobial effects than the parent AMPs (in one case a
parent is completely ineffective while a hybrid based on it removes all traces of
bacteria by 3h), although they also demonstrated higher hemolytic properties.
Modifications were then carried out to the most toxic hybrid AMP (CaLL) to
further improve the therapeutic index. Modifications made to the hybrid lowered
hemolytic activity and also lowered antimicrobial activity by various degrees.
Overall, this work highlights the potential for rational design and synthesis of 
improved AMPs that have the capability to be used therapeutically for treatment
of bacterial infections.

Crown Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22289499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2012 Dec;62(Pt 12):2903-9. doi:
10.1099/ijs.0.039453-0. Epub 2012 Jan 13.

Halomonas ramblicola sp. nov., a moderately halophilic bacterium from Rambla
Salada, a Mediterranean hypersaline rambla.

Luque R(1), Béjar V, Quesada E, Martínez-Checa F, Llamas I.

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Exopolysaccharide Research Group, Department of Microbiology,
Faculty of Pharmacy, Cartuja Campus, University of Granada, 18071 Granada, Spain.

A moderately halophilic bacterium (strain RS-16(T)) was isolated from saline soil
in Rambla Salada, a Mediterranean hypersaline rambla in Murcia, south-east Spain.
Cells of strain RS-16(T) were Gram-negative rods, oxidase-negative and motile by 
peritrichous flagella. Strain RS-16(T) required NaCl for growth, and grew between
1% and 30% (w/v) NaCl (optimum, 5-7.5%), at temperatures of between 4 °C and 41
°C (optimum, 32-37 °C), and at pH values of between 5 and 10 (optimum, pH 7).
Strain RS-16(T) was chemo-organotrophic and its metabolism was respiratory with
oxygen and nitrate as terminal electron acceptors. It produced acids from
d-glucose and myo-inositol, accumulated poly-ß-hydroxyalkanoate granules and
produced cream colonies on MY 7.5% (w/v). The DNA G+C content of strain RS-16(T) 
was 56.2 mol%. A comparison of 16S rRNA gene sequences confirmed the relationship
of strain RS-16(T) to species of the genus Halomonas. The most phylogenetically
related species was Halomonas cerina SP4(T) (97.4%16S rRNA gene sequence
similarity). In DNA-DNA hybridization assays strain RS-16(T) showed DNA-DNA
relatedness values of 62.7 ± 3.09%, 64.5 ± 1.97% and 64.7 ± 1.74% to Halomonas
cerina CECT 7282(T), Halomonas cerina CECT 7284 and Halomonas cerina CECT 7283,
respectively. The major fatty acids of strain RS-16(T) were C(18:1)<U+03C9>7c and
C(16:0), and the predominant respiratory lipoquinone was ubiquinone, with nine
isoprene units (Q-9). On the basis of these data, strain RS-16(T) is considered
to represent a novel species of the genus Halomonas, for which the name Halomonas
ramblicola sp. nov. is proposed. The type strain is RS-16(T) (<U+200A>= CECT 7896(T)<U+200A>=
LMG 26647(T)).

PMID: 22247215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis. 2012 Sep;12(9):786-93. doi: 10.1089/vbz.2011.0770.
Epub 2012 Jan 4.

Development of a real-time RT-PCR assay for the detection of Crimean-Congo
hemorrhagic fever virus.

Atkinson B(1), Chamberlain J, Logue CH, Cook N, Bruce C, Dowall SD, Hewson R.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Services Division, Health Protection Agency, Porton Down,
Salisbury, SP4 0JG, United Kingdom. barry.atkinson@hpa.org.uk

Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) is a virulent tick-borne disease with a
case fatality rate ranging from 10-50% for tick-borne transmission, and up to 80%
for nosocomial transmission. Human cases have been reported in over 30 countries 
across Europe, Asia, and Africa. It appears to be spreading to new areas with
several countries reporting their first human cases of CCHF disease within the
past 10 years. We report a novel real-time RT-PCR assay designed to amplify a
conserved region of the CCHF virus S segment. It is capable of detecting strains 
from all 7 groups of CCHF, including the AP92 strain that until recently
represented a lineage of strains that were not associated with human disease. The
limit of detection of the assay is 5 copies of target RNA, and the assay shows no
cross-reactivity with other viruses from within the same genus, or with viruses
causing similar human disease.

PMID: 22217175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Forensic Sci. 2012 May;57(3):618-22. doi: 10.1111/j.1556-4029.2011.02024.x.
Epub 2011 Dec 28.

The effect of electrical lighting power and irradiance on indoor-grown cannabis
potency and yield.

Potter DJ(1), Duncombe P.

Author information: 
(1)GW Pharmaceuticals Ltd., Porton Down Science Park, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4
0JQ, U.K. djp@g-pharm.com

The floral development and potencies [<U+0394>(9) -tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) contents] 
of cannabis plants were compared when grown indoors under high-pressure sodium
lamps consuming electrical power at three densities (270, 400, and 600 W/m(2)).
After a 3-week vegetative phase, plants were grown for 8 weeks, with lamps
maintaining an artificial day length of 12 h. Foliar and floral yields were
measured. Gas chromatography was used to measure the content of the psychoactive 
cannabinoid THC. Mean yields per unit of electrical power in each lighting regime
ranged from 0.9 to 1.6 g/W, the highest being achieved in the lowest irradiance
regime. The individual potencies of the separated leaf and flower materials were 
not affected by increasing irradiance. However, there was a corresponding
increase in the overall potency of the aerial plant tissue. This was because of
the plants in brighter conditions producing a higher proportion of floral
material.

© 2011 American Academy of Forensic Sciences.

PMID: 22211717  [PubMed]


257. Cells. 2012 Mar 13;1(1):5-14. doi: 10.3390/cells1010005.

ELISPOT Refinement Using Spot Morphology for Assessing Host Responses to
Tuberculosis.

Sibley LS(1), White AD(2), Marriott A(3), Dennis MJ(4), Williams A(5), Marsh
PD(6), Sharpe SA(7).

Author information: 
(1)Microbiological Services, Health Protection Agency Porton, Porton Down,
Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK. Laura.Sibley@hpa.org.uk. (2)Microbiological
Services, Health Protection Agency Porton, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 
0JG, UK. Andrew.White@hpa.org.uk. (3)Microbiological Services, Health Protection 
Agency Porton, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK.
alice.marriott@hpa.org.uk. (4)Microbiological Services, Health Protection Agency 
Porton, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK. mike.dennis@hpa.org.uk.
(5)Microbiological Services, Health Protection Agency Porton, Porton Down,
Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK. ann.rawkins@hpa.org.uk. (6)Microbiological
Services, Health Protection Agency Porton, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 
0JG, UK. phil.marsh@hpa.org.uk. (7)Microbiological Services, Health Protection
Agency Porton, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK.
Sally.Sharpe@hpa.org.uk.

Tuberculosis is a global health problem. The Mycobacterium bovis Bacille Calmette
Guerin (BCG) vaccine has variable efficacy (0-80%) so there is a drive to develop
novel vaccines. The cytokine, interferon gamma (IFN<U+03B3>), is an essential component 
of the protective response to M. tuberculosis (M. tb) infection and is also
produced in response to BCG vaccination. Induction of an IFN<U+03B3> response is used as
a biomarker of successful vaccination in the assessment of new tuberculosis (TB) 
vaccines. The IFN<U+03B3> ELISPOT assay provides an important tool for TB research. It
is used for both the diagnosis of infection (T.Spot assay), and for the
evaluation of the immunogenicity of new TB vaccine candidates in human clinical
trials, in the non-human primate (NHP) model of TB infection studies. The ELISPOT
assay captures IFN<U+03B3> produced by peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs)
following specific stimulation, onto a membrane so individual cells can be
enumerated and the frequency of responding cells determined. Hence spot forming
units (SFU) per 106 cells provide the traditional measure for ELISPOT assays. The
discriminatory power of SFU is limited. In some situations, the number of SFU in 
BCG vaccinated, and unvaccinated, subjects was found to be similar, although the 
spots were observed to be larger in vaccinated subjects. Spot size potentially
provides a measure of the quantity of cytokine produced by individual cells. The 
AID ELISPOT plate reader software used to determine frequency of spots also has
the capability to determine the size of each spot. Consideration of spot size in 
combination with spot forming units was investigated in our studies of BCG
immunogenicity. This additional readout was found to enhance the discriminatory
power of the ELISPOT assay, and provide more information on the immune response
to BCG vaccination and infection with M.tb.

PMCID: PMC3972643
PMID: 24710359  [PubMed]


258. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e28273. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028273. Epub 2011 Dec 14.

Toxicogenomic and phenotypic analyses of bisphenol-A early-life exposure toxicity
in zebrafish.

Lam SH(1), Hlaing MM, Zhang X, Yan C, Duan Z, Zhu L, Ung CY, Mathavan S, Ong CN, 
Gong Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore,
Singapore, Singapore. dbslsh@nus.edu.sg

Bisphenol-A is an important environmental contaminant due to the increased
early-life exposure that may pose significant health-risks to various organisms
including humans. This study aimed to use zebrafish as a toxicogenomic model to
capture transcriptomic and phenotypic changes for inference of signaling
pathways, biological processes, physiological systems and identify potential
biomarker genes that are affected by early-life exposure to bisphenol-A.
Phenotypic analysis using wild-type zebrafish larvae revealed BPA early-life
exposure toxicity caused cardiac edema, cranio-facial abnormality, failure of
swimbladder inflation and poor tactile response. Fluorescent imaging analysis
using three transgenic lines revealed suppressed neuron branching from the spinal
cord, abnormal development of neuromast cells, and suppressed vascularization in 
the abdominal region. Using knowledge-based data mining algorithms, transcriptome
analysis suggests that several signaling pathways involving ephrin receptor,
clathrin-mediated endocytosis, synaptic long-term potentiation, axonal guidance, 
vascular endothelial growth factor, integrin and tight junction were deregulated.
Physiological systems with related disorders associated with the nervous,
cardiovascular, skeletal-muscular, blood and reproductive systems were
implicated, hence corroborated with the phenotypic analysis. Further analysis
identified a common set of BPA-targeted genes and revealed a plausible mechanism 
involving disruption of endocrine-regulated genes and processes in known
susceptible tissue-organs. The expression of 28 genes were validated in a
separate experiment using quantitative real-time PCR and 6 genes, ncl1, apoeb,
mdm1, mycl1b, sp4, U1SNRNPBP homolog, were found to be sensitive and robust
biomarkers for BPA early-life exposure toxicity. The susceptibility of sp4 to BPA
perturbation suggests its role in altering brain development, function and
subsequently behavior observed in laboratory animals exposed to BPA during early 
life, which is a health-risk concern of early life exposure in humans. The
present study further established zebrafish as a model for toxicogenomic
inference of early-life chemical exposure toxicity.

PMCID: PMC3237442
PMID: 22194820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. J Med Microbiol. 2012 Apr;61(Pt 4):470-7. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.037523-0. Epub 2011 
Dec 22.

Acinetobacter baumannii virulence is enhanced in Galleria mellonella following
biofilm adaptation.

Wand ME(1), Bock LJ, Turton JF, Nugent PG, Sutton JM.

Author information: 
(1)Health Protection Agency, Microbiology Services Division, Porton Down,
Salisbury SP4 0JG, UK. matthew.wand@hpa.org.uk

The opportunistic nosocomial pathogen Acinetobacter baumannii is responsible for 
a growing number of infections; however, few of its potential virulence factors
have been identified, and how this organism causes infection remains largely
unknown. Bacterial biofilms are often an important component in infection and
persistence but there is no conclusive evidence to link biofilm formation with
virulence and severity of infection in Acinetobacter. To investigate this link,
several clinical isolates were assessed in biofilm culture models and were tested
for virulence in the insect model Galleria mellonella. In both systems, the
profiles showed significant differences between strains, but no correlation was
observed between virulence and the ability to form biofilms. In contrast, A.
baumannii cells from a biofilm produced higher mortality rates than an equivalent
number of planktonic cells. Relative to planktonic cells, A. baumannii biofilm
cultures also showed reduced sensitivity to antibiotics normally used in the
treatment of A. baumannii, especially colistin. This model, therefore, provides a
suitable system to investigate the link between biofilm growth and various
factors influencing virulence during A. baumannii infection.

PMID: 22194338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Toxins (Basel). 2011 Nov;3(11):1373-92. doi: 10.3390/toxins3111373. Epub 2011 Nov
4.

Understanding ricin from a defensive viewpoint.

Griffiths GD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down,
Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK. gdgriffiths@dstl.gov.uk

The toxin ricin has long been understood to have potential for criminal activity 
and there has been concern that it might be used as a mass-scale weapon on a
military basis for at least two decades. Currently, the focus has extended to
encompass terrorist activities using ricin to disrupt every day activities on a
smaller scale. Whichever scenario is considered, there are features in common
which need to be understood; these include the knowledge of the toxicity from
ricin poisoning by the likely routes, methods for the detection of ricin in
relevant materials and approaches to making an early diagnosis of ricin
poisoning, in order to take therapeutic steps to mitigate the toxicity. This
article will review the current situation regarding each of these stages in our
collective understanding of ricin and how to defend against its use by an
aggressor.

PMCID: PMC3237001
PMID: 22174975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Microbes Infect. 2012 Apr;14(4):369-79. doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2011.11.006. Epub
2011 Nov 26.

Gene expression following low dose inhalational Francisella tularensis (SchuS4)
exposure in Balb/c mice and the potential role of the epithelium and cell
adhesion.

David J(1), Gates AJ, Griffiths GD, Lukaszewski RA.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, Dstl, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK.
jdavid@dstl.gov.uk

Interactions between Francisella tularensis and the host are slowly being
elucidated. Microarray technology was used to further characterise the response
of Balb/c mice after inhalation of the virulent F. tularensis, SchuS4. The
validated array data revealed changes in expression of 476 genes across a 96 h
time course following infection (p = 0.05). These data confirm down-regulation of
the toll-like receptor pathway (TLR3, 4, 5, 7 and 8), and the induction of IFN-<U+03B3> 
inducible genes (T-cell specific GTPase, ß2 microglobulin and interleukin 21).
The overall response appears to be two staged with an initial up-regulation of
genes involved in apoptosis, TNFa production and antigen presentation. This is
followed by a large alteration of expression at 96 h as the host succumbs to
infection. A key regulatory time-point has been identified at 24 h post
challenge, where several transcriptional events may predicate the progression of 
infection; these include transcriptional regulators of inflammation and
proteolytic pathways. Pathway analysis indicates a novel role for cell-cell
adhesion and extracellular matrix modulation in infection. Transcripts
representing cellular junctions, focal adhesion and adherens junctions changed
following infection. Additionally, aspects of extracellular matrix remodelling
have been confirmed at the protein level, suggesting an important role of the
respiratory epithelium in host response to F. tularensis warranting further
study.

Crown Copyright Â© 2011. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22155623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Virol Methods. 2012 Feb;179(2):335-41. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2011.11.020.
Epub 2011 Dec 2.

Development of an indirect ELISA method for the parallel measurement of IgG and
IgM antibodies against Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever (CCHF) virus using
recombinant nucleoprotein as antigen.

Dowall SD(1), Richards KS, Graham VA, Chamberlain J, Hewson R.

Author information: 
(1)Health Protection Agency, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK.
stuart.dowall@hpa.org.uk

Recombinant nucleoprotein from Crimean-Congo Haemorrhagic Fever (CCHF) virus was 
successfully derived from a baculovirus expression system and purified for use in
a novel enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) diagnostic test. Comparable
tests were used for detection of IgG and IgM antibodies, thus allowing efficient 
detection of both antibodies in parallel. The major benefits of the assay also
included removing any requirement for polyclonal sera, thus eliminating variation
in preparations and allowing standardisation between laboratories. The assay was 
successfully tested using a panel of positive sera supplied from samples
identified as being positive in Turkey, Tajikistan and Kosovo and shown to be
sensitive and specific. It is envisaged that this simple diagnostic ELISA for
CCHF virus infection which removes the reliance on polyclonal antibody
preparations, will be accessible to a wider range of laboratories enabling them
to carry out routine diagnosis. This will improve the efficiency of diagnosis and
subsequent management of infected patients.

Crown Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22155577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Biosci Rep. 2012 Jun;32(3):281-97. doi: 10.1042/BSR20110045.

Promoter cloning and characterization of the human programmed cell death protein 
4 (pdcd4) gene: evidence for ZBP-89 and Sp-binding motifs as essential Pdcd4
regulators.

Leupold JH(1), Asangani IA, Mudduluru G, Allgayer H.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
MI, USA.

Pdcd4 (programmed cell death protein 4) is an important novel tumour suppressor
inhibiting transformation, translation, invasion and intravasation, and its
expression is down-regulated in several cancers. However, little is known about
the transcriptional regulation and the promoter of this important tumour
suppressor. So far the following is the first comprehensive study to describe the
regulation of Pdcd4 transcription by ZBP-89 (zinc-finger-binding protein 89),
besides characterizing the gene promoter. We identified the transcriptional start
sites of the human pdcd4 promoter, a functional CCAAT-box, and the basal promoter
region. Within this basal region, computer-based analysis revealed several
potential binding sites for ZBPs, especially for Sp (specificity protein) family 
members and ZBP-89. We identified four Sp1/Sp3/Sp4-binding elements to be
indispensable for basal promoter activity. However, overexpression of Sp1 and Sp3
was not sufficient to enhance Pdcd4 protein expression. Analysis in different
solid cancer cell lines showed a significant correlation between pdcd4 and zbp-89
mRNA amounts. In contrast with Sp transcription factors, overexpression of ZBP-89
led to an enhanced expression of Pdcd4 mRNA and protein. Additionally, specific
knockdown of ZBP-89 resulted in a decreased pdcd4 gene expression. Reporter gene 
analysis showed a significant up-regulation of basal promoter activity by
co-transfection with ZBP-89, which could be abolished by mithramycin treatment.
Predicted binding of ZBP-89 to the basal promoter was confirmed by EMSA
(electrophoretic mobility-shift assay) data and supershift analysis for ZBP-89.
Taken together, data for the first time implicate ZBP-89 as a regulator of Pdcd4 
by binding to the basal promoter either alone or by interacting with Sp family
members.

PMID: 22111549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Eur J Immunol. 2012 Feb;42(2):489-99. doi: 10.1002/eji.201141758. Epub 2011 Dec
16.

Role of Hedgehog signalling at the transition from double-positive to
single-positive thymocyte.

Furmanski AL(1), Saldana JI, Rowbotham NJ, Ross SE, Crompton T.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College London,
London, UK. a.furmanski@ucl.ac.uk

In the thymus, developing T cells receive signals that determine lineage choice, 
specificity, MHC restriction and tolerance to self-antigen. One way in which
thymocytes receive instruction is by secretion of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) from
thymic epithelial cells. We have previously shown that Hedgehog (Hh) signalling
in the thymus decreases the CD4:CD8 single-positive (SP) thymocyte ratio. Here,
we present data indicating that double-positive (DP) thymocytes are Hh-responsive
and that thymocyte-intrinsic Hh signalling plays a role in modulating the
production of CD4(+) (SP4), CD8(+) (SP8) and unconventional T-cell subsets.
Repression of physiological Hh signalling in thymocytes altered the proportions
of DP and SP4 cells. Thymocyte-intrinsic Hh-dependent transcription also
attenuated both the production of mature SP4 and SP8 cells, and the establishment
of peripheral T-cell compartments in TCR-transgenic mice. Additionally,
stimulation or withdrawal of Hh signals in the WT foetal thymus impaired or
enhanced upregulation of the CD4 lineage-specific transcription factor Gata3
respectively. These data together suggest that Hh signalling may play a role in
influencing the later stages of thymocyte development.

Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC3378705
PMID: 22101858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Gen Virol. 2012 Mar;93(Pt 3):560-4. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.038455-0. Epub 2011 Nov 
16.

Hazara virus infection is lethal for adult type I interferon receptor-knockout
mice and may act as a surrogate for infection with the human-pathogenic
Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus.

Dowall SD(1), Findlay-Wilson S, Rayner E, Pearson G, Pickersgill J, Rule A,
Merredew N, Smith H, Chamberlain J, Hewson R.

Author information: 
(1)Health Protection Agency, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK.
stuart.dowall@hpa.org.uk

Hazara virus (HAZV) is closely related to the Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever
virus (CCHFV). HAZV has not been reported to cause human disease; work with
infectious material can be carried out at containment level (CL)-2. By contrast, 
CCHFV causes a haemorrhagic fever in humans and requires CL-4 facilities. A
disease model of HAZV infection in mice deficient in the type I interferon
receptor is reported in this study. Dose-response effects were seen with higher
doses, resulting in a shorter time to death and earlier detection of viral loads 
in organs. The lowest dose of 10 p.f.u. was still lethal in over 50<U+200A>% of the
mice. Histopathological findings were identified in the liver, spleen and lymph
nodes, with changes similar to a recent mouse model of CCHFV infection. The
findings demonstrate that inoculation of mice with HAZV may act as a useful
surrogate model for the testing of antiviral agents against CCHFV.

PMID: 22090213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Neurochem. 2012 Jan;120(2):220-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2011.07577.x. Epub
2011 Nov 28.

Neuronal differentiation alters the ratio of Sp transcription factors recruited
to the CYP46A1 promoter.

Milagre I(1), Nunes MJ, Castro-Caldas M, Moutinho M, Gama MJ, Rodrigues E.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Medicines and Pharmaceutical Sciences (iMed.UL),
University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal.

CYP46A1 is a neuron-specific cytochrome P450 that plays a pivotal role in
maintaining cholesterol homeostasis in the CNS. However, the molecular mechanisms
underlying human CYP46A1 expression are still poorly understood, partly because
of the lack of a cellular model that expresses high levels of CYP46A1. Our
previous studies demonstrated that specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors
control CYP46A1 expression, and are probably responsible for cell-type
specificity. Herein, we have differentiated Ntera2/cloneD1 cells into
post-mitotic neurons and identified for the first time a human cell model that
expresses high levels of CYP46A1 mRNA. Our results show a decrease in Sp1 protein
levels, concomitant with the increase in CYP46A1 mRNA levels. This decrease was
correlated with changes in the ratio of Sp proteins associated to the CYP46A1
proximal promoter. To examine if the increase in (Sp3+Sp4)/Sp1 ratio was observed
in other Sp-regulated promoters, we have selected four genes--reelin, glutamate
receptor subunit zeta-1, glutamate receptor subunit epsilon-1 and µ-opioid
receptor--known to be expressed in the human brain and analyzed the Sp proteins
binding pattern to the promoter of these genes, in undifferentiated and
differentiated Ntera2/cloneD1. Our data indicate that the dissociation of Sp1
from promoter regions is a common feature amongst Sp-regulated genes that are
up-regulated after neuronal differentiation.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal of Neurochemistry © 2011 International Society for
Neurochemistry.

PMID: 22060190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Med Chem. 2011 Sep;7(5):518-25.

Targeting Sp1 transcription factors in prostate cancer therapy.

Sankpal UT(1), Goodison S, Abdelrahim M, Basha R.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, MD Anderson Cancer Center Orlando, Orlando, FL
32827, USA.

Transcription factors are proteins that regulate gene expression by binding to
specific DNA sequences within gene promoter regions. Specificity protein (Sp)
family transcription factors play a critical role in various cellular processes
and have been shown to be associated with tumorigenesis. The Sp family consists
of several members that contain a highly conserved DNA-binding domain composed of
three zinc fingers at the C-terminus and serine/threonine- and glutamine-rich
transactivation domains at the N-terminal. Sp1 is elevated in several cancers
including prostate and is associated with the prognosis of patients. Sp1, Sp3,
and Sp4 regulate a variety of cancer associated genes that are involved in cell
cycle, proliferation, cell differentiation, and apoptosis. Studies have shown
that in prostate cancer, Sp1 regulates important genes like androgen receptor,
TGF-ß, c-Met, fatty acid synthase, matrix metalloprotein (MT1-MMP), PSA, and
a-integrin. These results highlight the importance of Sp1 in prostate cancer and 
emphasize the potential therapeutic value of targeting Sp1. Several strategies,
including the use of natural and synthetic compounds, have been used to inhibit
Sp1 in prostate cancer. These include polyphenol quercetin, betulinic acid,
acetyl-11-keto-beta-boswellic acid, tea phenols, isothiocyanates,
thiazolidinediones, arsenic trioxide, and selenium. This review will describe the
association of Sp proteins in prostate cancer with a special emphasis on some of 
the agents tested to target Sp proteins for the treatment of this malignancy.

PMID: 22022994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e25567. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025567. Epub 2011 Oct 13.

The molecular signature underlying the thymic migration and maturation of TCRaß+ 
CD4+ CD8 thymocytes.

Teng F(1), Zhou Y, Jin R, Chen Y, Pei X, Liu Y, Dong J, Wang W, Pang X, Qian X,
Chen WF, Zhang Y, Ge Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing,
China.

BACKGROUND: After positive selection, the newly generated single positive (SP)
thymocytes migrate to the thymic medulla, where they undergo negative selection
to eliminate autoreactive T cells and functional maturation to acquire immune
competence and egress capability.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To elucidate the genetic program underlying this 
process, we analyzed changes in gene expression in four subsets of mouse
TCRaß(+)CD4(+)CD8(-) thymocytes (SP1 to SP4) representative of sequential stages 
in a previously defined differentiation program. A genetic signature of the
migration of thymocytes was thus revealed. CCR7 and PlexinD1 are believed to be
important for the medullary positioning of SP thymocytes. Intriguingly, their
expression remains at low levels in the newly generated thymocytes, suggesting
that the cortex-medulla migration may not occur until the SP2 stage. SP2 and SP3 
cells gradually up-regulate transcripts involved in T cell functions and the
Foxo1-KLF2-S1P(1) axis, but a number of immune function-associated genes are not 
highly expressed until cells reach the SP4 stage. Consistent with their critical 
role in thymic emigration, the expression of S1P(1) and CD62L are much enhanced
in SP4 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These results support at the molecular level that single positive
thymocytes undergo a differentiation program and further demonstrate that SP4 is 
the stage at which thymocytes acquire the immunocompetence and the capability of 
emigration from the thymus.

PMCID: PMC3192722
PMID: 22022412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Bipolar Disord. 2011 Aug-Sep;13(5-6):474-85. doi:
10.1111/j.1399-5618.2011.00941.x.

The transcription factor SP4 is reduced in postmortem cerebellum of bipolar
disorder subjects: control by depolarization and lithium.

Pinacho R(1), Villalmanzo N, Lalonde J, Haro JM, Meana JJ, Gill G, Ramos B.

Author information: 
(1)Parc Sanitari Sant Joan de Déu, Fundació Sant Joan de Déu, Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Salud Mental (CIBERSAM), Barcelona, Spain.

OBJECTIVES:   Regulation of gene expression is important for the development and 
function of the nervous system. However, the transcriptional programs altered in 
psychiatric diseases are not completely characterized. Human gene association
studies and analysis of mutant mice suggest that the transcription factor
specificity protein 4 (SP4) may be implicated in the pathophysiology of
psychiatric diseases. We hypothesized that SP4 levels may be altered in the brain
of bipolar disorder (BD) subjects and regulated by neuronal activity and drug
treatment.
METHODS:   We analyzed messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein levels of SP4 and SP1 in 
the postmortem prefrontal cortex and cerebellum of BD subjects (n = 10) and
controls (n = 10). We also examined regulation of SP4 mRNA and protein levels by 
neuronal activity and lithium in rat cerebellar granule neurons.
RESULTS:   We report a reduction of SP4 and SP1 proteins, but not mRNA levels, in
the cerebellum of BD subjects. SP4 protein and mRNA levels were also reduced in
the prefrontal cortex. Moreover, we found in rat cerebellar granule neurons that 
under non-depolarizing conditions SP4, but not SP1, was polyubiquitinated and
degraded by the proteasome while lithium stabilized SP4 protein.
CONCLUSIONS:   Our study provides the first evidence of altered SP4 protein in
the cerebellum and prefrontal cortex in BD subjects supporting a possible role of
transcription factor SP4 in the pathogenesis of the disease. In addition, our
finding that SP4 stability is regulated by depolarization and lithium provides a 
pathway through which neuronal activity and lithium could control gene expression
suggesting that normalization of SP4 levels could contribute to treatment of
affective disorders.

© 2011 John Wiley and Sons A/S.

PMCID: PMC3202296
PMID: 22017217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Adv Prev Med. 2012;2012:365980. doi: 10.1155/2012/365980. Epub 2011 Sep 29.

The role of immune correlates and surrogate markers in the development of
vaccines and immunotherapies for plague.

Williamson ED(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Defence Science & Technology Laboratory,
Porton Down, Salisbury Wilts SP4 0JQ, UK.

One of the difficulties in developing countermeasures to biothreat agents is the 
challenge inherent in demonstrating their efficacy in man. Since the first
publication of the Animal Rule by the FDA, there has been increased discussion of
potential correlates of protection in animal models and their use to establish
surrogate markers of efficacy in man. The latter need to be relatively easy to
measure in assays that are at least qualified, if not validated, in order to
derive a quantitative assessment of the clinical benefit conferred. The
demonstration of safety and clinical benefit is essential to achieve regulatory
approval for countermeasures for which clinical efficacy cannot be tested
directly, as is the case for example, for biodefence vaccines. Plague is an
ancient, serious infectious disease which is still endemic in regions of the
modern world and is a potential biothreat agent. This paper discusses potential
immune correlates of protection for plague, from which it may be possible to
derive surrogate markers of efficacy, in order to predict the clinical efficacy
of candidate prophylaxes and therapies.

PMCID: PMC3182760
PMID: 21991451  [PubMed]


271. Toxicol Sci. 2012 Jan;125(1):233-47. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfr261. Epub 2011 Oct
10.

PAH particles perturb prenatal processes and phenotypes: protection from deficits
in object discrimination afforded by dampening of brain oxidoreductase following 
in utero exposure to inhaled benzo(a)pyrene.

Li Z(1), Chadalapaka G, Ramesh A, Khoshbouei H, Maguire M, Safe S, Rhoades RE,
Clark R, Jules G, McCallister M, Aschner M, Hood DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Pharmacology, Center for Molecular and
Behavioral Neuroscience, Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee 37208,
USA.

The wild-type (WT) Cpr(lox/lox) (cytochrome P(450) oxidoreductase, Cpr) mouse is 
an ideal model to assess the contribution of P(450) enzymes to the metabolic
activation and disposition of environmental xenobiotics. In the present study, we
examined the effect of in utero exposure to benzo(a)pyrene [B(a)P] aerosol on Sp4
and N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)-dependent systems as well as a resulting
behavioral phenotype (object discrimination) in Cpr offspring. Results from in
utero exposure of WT Cpr(lox/lox) mice were compared with in utero exposed
brain-Cpr-null offspring mice. Null mice were used as they do not express brain
cytochrome P(450)1B1-associated NADPH oxidoreductase (CYP1B1-associated NADPH
oxidoreductase), thus reducing their capacity to produce neural B(a)P
metabolites. Subsequent to in utero (E14-E17) exposure to B(a)P (100 µg/m(3)),
Cpr(lox/lox) offspring exhibited: (1) elevated B(a)P metabolite and
F(2)-isoprostane neocortical tissue burdens, (2) elevated concentrations of
cortical glutamate, (3) premature developmental expression of Sp4, (4) decreased 
subunit ratios of NR2B:NR2A, and (5) deficits in a novelty discrimination
phenotype monitored to in utero exposed brain-Cpr-null offspring. Collectively,
these findings suggest that in situ generation of metabolites by
CYP1B1-associated NADPH oxidoreductase promotes negative effects on NMDA-mediated
signaling processes during the period when synapses are first forming as well as 
effects on a subsequent behavioral phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3243744
PMID: 21987461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Jan;1819(1):38-56. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2011.09.001. 
Epub 2011 Sep 18.

Functional characterization of the human translocator protein (18kDa) gene
promoter in human breast cancer cell lines.

Batarseh A(1), Barlow KD, Martinez-Arguelles DB, Papadopoulos V.

Author information: 
(1)The Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre and the
Department of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3G 1A4.
amani.batarseh@childrens.harvard.edu

The translocator protein (18kDa; TSPO) is a mitochondrial drug- and
cholesterol-binding protein that has been implicated in several processes,
including steroidogenesis, cell proliferation, and apoptosis. Expression of the
human TSPO gene is elevated in several cancers. To understand the molecular
mechanisms that regulate TSPO expression in human breast cancer cells, the TSPO
promoter was identified, cloned, and functionally characterized in poor-in-TSPO
hormone-dependent, non-aggressive MCF-7 cells and rich-in-TSPO
hormone-independent, aggressive, and metastatic MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells.
RNA ligase-mediated 5'-rapid amplification of cDNA ends analysis indicated
transcription initiated at multiple sites downstream of a GC-rich promoter that
lacks functional TATA and CCAAT boxes. Deletion analysis indicated that the
region from -121 to +66, which contains five putative regulatory sites known as
GC boxes, was sufficient to induce reporter activity up to 24-fold in MCF-7 and
nearly 120-fold in MDA-MB-231 cells. Electrophoretic mobility shift and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays indicated that Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 bind to these GC boxes
in vitro and to the endogenous TSPO promoter. Silencing of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 gene 
expression reduced TSPO levels. In addition, TSPO expression was epigenetically
regulated at one or more of the identified GC boxes. Disruption of the sequence
downstream of the main start site of TSPO differentially regulated TSPO promoter 
activity in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells, indicating that essential elements
contribute to its differential expression in these cells. Taken together, these
experiments constitute the first in-depth functional analysis of the human TSPO
gene promoter and its transcriptional regulation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3249510
PMID: 21958735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Nutr Cancer. 2011;63(7):1133-42. doi: 10.1080/01635581.2011.605984. Epub 2011 Sep
15.

Pharmacologic doses of ascorbic acid repress specificity protein (Sp)
transcription factors and Sp-regulated genes in colon cancer cells.

Pathi SS(1), Lei P, Sreevalsan S, Chadalapaka G, Jutooru I, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas 77843-4466, USA.

Ascorbic acid (vitamin C) inhibits cancer cell growth, and there is a controversy
regarding the cancer chemoprotective effects of pharmacologic doses of this
compound that exhibits prooxidant activity. We hypothesized that the anticancer
activity of pharmacologic doses of ascorbic acid (<5 mM) is due, in part, to
reactive oxygen species-dependent downregulation of specificity protein (Sp)
transcription factors Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 and Sp-regulated genes. In this study,
ascorbic acid (1-3 mM) decreased RKO and SW480 colon cancer cell proliferation
and induced apoptosis and necrosis, and this was accompanied by downregulation of
Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 proteins. In addition, ascorbic acid decreased expression of
several Sp-regulated genes that are involved in cancer cell proliferation
[hepatocyte growth factor receptor (c-Met), epidermal growth factor receptor and 
cyclin D1], survival (survivin and bcl-2), and angiogenesis [vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) and its receptors (VEGFR1 and VEGFR2)]. Other prooxidants
such as hydrogen peroxide exhibited similar activities in colon cancer cells, and
cotreatment with glutathione inhibited these responses. This study demonstrates
for the first time that the anticancer activities of ascorbic acid are due, in
part, to ROS-dependent repression of Sp transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC3359146
PMID: 21919647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. BMC Cancer. 2011 Aug 24;11:371. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-11-371.

Betulinic acid inhibits colon cancer cell and tumor growth and induces
proteasome-dependent and -independent downregulation of specificity proteins (Sp)
transcription factors.

Chintharlapalli S(1), Papineni S, Lei P, Pathi S, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology & Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX 77843, USA.

BACKGROUND: Betulinic acid (BA) inhibits growth of several cancer cell lines and 
tumors and the effects of BA have been attributed to its mitochondriotoxicity and
inhibition of multiple pro-oncogenic factors. Previous studies show that BA
induces proteasome-dependent degradation of specificity protein (Sp)
transcription factors Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 in prostate cancer cells and this study
focused on the mechanism of action of BA in colon cancer cells.
METHODS: The effects of BA on colon cancer cell proliferation and apoptosis and
tumor growth in vivo were determined using standardized assays. The effects of BA
on Sp proteins and Sp-regulated gene products were analyzed by western blots, and
real time PCR was used to determine microRNA-27a (miR-27a) and ZBTB10 mRNA
expression.
RESULTS: BA inhibited growth and induced apoptosis in RKO and SW480 colon cancer 
cells and inhibited tumor growth in athymic nude mice bearing RKO cells as
xenograft. BA also decreased expression of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 transcription factors
which are overexpressed in colon cancer cells and decreased levels of several
Sp-regulated genes including survivin, vascular endothelial growth factor, p65
sub-unit of NF<U+03BA>B, epidermal growth factor receptor, cyclin D1, and pituitary
tumor transforming gene-1. The mechanism of action of BA was dependent on cell
context, since BA induced proteasome-dependent and proteasome-independent
downregulation of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 in SW480 and RKO cells, respectively. In RKO
cells, the mechanism of BA-induced repression of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 was due to
induction of reactive oxygen species (ROS), ROS-mediated repression of
microRNA-27a, and induction of the Sp repressor gene ZBTB10.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the anticancer activity of BA in colon
cancer cells is due, in part, to downregulation of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 transcription
factors; however, the mechanism of this response is cell context-dependent.

PMCID: PMC3170653
PMID: 21864401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Infect Immun. 2011 Nov;79(11):4299-307. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00134-11. Epub 2011 Aug 
22.

A Burkholderia pseudomallei macrophage infectivity potentiator-like protein has
rapamycin-inhibitable peptidylprolyl isomerase activity and pleiotropic effects
on virulence.

Norville IH(1), Harmer NJ, Harding SV, Fischer G, Keith KE, Brown KA,
Sarkar-Tyson M, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down SP4 0JQ, UK.
ihnorville@dstl.gov.uk

Macrophage infectivity potentiators (Mips) are a group of virulence factors
encoded by pathogenic bacteria such as Legionella, Chlamydia, and Neisseria
species. Mips are part of the FK506-binding protein (FKBP) family, whose members 
typically exhibit peptidylprolyl cis-trans isomerase (PPIase) activity which is
inhibitable by the immunosuppressants FK506 and rapamycin. Here we describe the
identification and characterization of BPSS1823, a Mip-like protein in the
intracellular pathogen Burkholderia pseudomallei. Recombinant BPSS1823 protein
has rapamycin-inhibitable PPIase activity, indicating that it is a functional
FKBP. A mutant strain generated by deletion of BPSS1823 in B. pseudomallei
exhibited a reduced ability to survive within cells and significant attenuation
in vivo, suggesting that BPSS1823 is important for B. pseudomallei virulence. In 
addition, pleiotropic effects were observed with a reduction in virulence
mechanisms, including resistance to host killing mechanisms, swarming motility,
and protease production.

PMCID: PMC3257933
PMID: 21859853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Microb Pathog. 2011 Dec;51(6):471-5. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2011.07.002. Epub
2011 Jul 20.

Neutrophils are the predominant cell-type to associate with Burkholderia
pseudomallei in a BALB/c mouse model of respiratory melioidosis.

Laws TR(1), Smither SJ, Lukaszewski RA, Atkins HS.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory,
Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ, UK. trlaws@dstl.gov.uk

A variety of studies have implicated neutrophils and the rapid induction of
cytokine in the host response in melioidosis. Here a BALB/c mouse model of
infection with aerosolised Burkholderia pseudomallei K96243 has been used to
understand the immune response to infection in this model and verify other
infection models that show rapid growth of bacteria, colonisation of tissues and 
periphery, induction of cytokines and influx of neutrophils. Uniquely, this study
has also determined the association of B. pseudomallei to host cells in vivo
using flow cytometric techniques. Neutrophils were found to be the predominant
cell-type exhibiting B. pseudomallei antigens during infection and it is likely
that bacteria have been internalised. This data confirms that neutrophils are
likely to play an important and active role in fighting infection with
B. pseudomallei.

Crown Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier India Pvt Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21798336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2011 Oct;66(10):2323-9. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkr306. Epub
2011 Jul 25.

Efficacy of increasing dosages of clarithromycin for treatment of experimental
Mycoplasma pneumoniae pneumonia.

Tagliabue C(1), Techasaensiri C, Torres JP, Katz K, Meek C, Kannan TR, Coalson
JJ, Esposito S, Principi N, Leff R, Baseman JB, Hardy RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Maternal and Pediatric Sciences, Università degli Studi di
Milano, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: Mycoplasma pneumoniae respiratory infection is a common cause of
acute respiratory infection in children and adults. We evaluated the efficacy of 
increasing dosages of clarithromycin for the optimized therapy of M. pneumoniae
respiratory infection in a mouse model.
METHODS: BALB/c mice were intranasally inoculated once with M. pneumoniae or SP4 
broth (control). Groups of mice were treated with increasing dosages of
clarithromycin (10, 25 or 75 mg/kg/day) or placebo subcutaneously daily. Groups
of mice were evaluated after 1, 2, 3, 6 and 12 days of therapy. Outcome variables
included quantitative M. pneumoniae culture, histopathological score of the
lungs, bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) cytokine/chemokine/growth factor
concentrations and plethysmography after aerosolized methacholine to assess
airway hyperresponsiveness.
RESULTS: Elevated dosages of clarithromycin resulted in greater antimicrobial
efficacy with significantly reduced M. pneumoniae quantitative cultures
(P<U+200A><<U+200A>0.05), as well as greater improvement in markers of disease severity with
significantly reduced lung histopathology scores, BAL cytokine concentrations and
airway hyperresponsiveness (P<U+200A><<U+200A>0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Escalated dosing of clarithromycin resulted in significantly greater
therapeutic efficacy in the treatment of experimental M. pneumoniae respiratory
infection.

PMCID: PMC3172041
PMID: 21791441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Oncogene. 2012 Feb 23;31(8):1034-44. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.296. Epub 2011 Jul 18.

Identification of oncogenic microRNA-17-92/ZBTB4/specificity protein axis in
breast cancer.

Kim K(1), Chadalapaka G, Lee SO, Yamada D, Sastre-Garau X, Defossez PA, Park YY, 
Lee JS, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center,
Houston, TX 77843, USA.

The human POK family members are transcription factors with a POZ domain and
zinc-fingers that act primarily as transcriptional repressors. Several members of
this family are involved in oncogenesis and this prompted us to assess whether
expression levels of individual POK family members are associated with clinical
outcomes in cancer. We have observed that ZBTB4 (zinc-finger and BTB domain
containing 4) is downregulated in breast cancer patients, and that its expression
is significantly correlated with relapse-free survival. Further integrative
analysis of mRNA and microRNA (miR) expression data from the NCI-60 cell lines
revealed an inverse correlation between ZBTB4 and oncogenic miRs derived from the
miR-17-92 cluster and its paralogs. The experimental results using MDA-MB-231 and
MCF-7 human breast cancer cells confirm that miRNAs derived from these clusters, 
containing miR-17-5p, miR-20a, miR-106a, miR-106b and miR-93, negatively regulate
ZBTB4 expression. Overexpression of ZBTB4 or restoration of ZBTB4 by using an
antagomir inhibit growth and invasion of breast cancer cells, and this effect is 
due, in part, to ZBTB4-dependent repression of the specificity protein 1 (Sp1),
Sp3 and Sp4 genes, and subsequent downregulation of several Sp-dependent
oncogenes, in part, through competition between ZBTB4 and Sp transcription
factors for GC-rich promoter sequences. These results confirm that ZBTB4
functions as a novel tumor-suppressor gene with prognostic significance for
breast cancer survival, and the oncogenic miR-17-92/ZBTB4/Sp axis may be a
potential therapeutic target.

PMCID: PMC3288192
PMID: 21765466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Virol Methods. 2011 Oct;177(1):123-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2011.06.021. Epub
2011 Jul 5.

An alternative method of measuring aerosol survival using spiders' webs and its
use for the filoviruses.

Smither SJ(1), Piercy TJ, Eastaugh L, Steward JA, Lever MS.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Dstl, Porton Down, Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ, UK.
sjsmither@dstl.gov.uk

Understanding the ability to survive in an aerosol leads to better understanding 
of the hazard posed by pathogenic organisms and can inform decisions related to
the control and management of disease outbreaks. This basic survival information 
is sometimes lacking for high priority select agents such as the filoviruses
which cause severe disease with high case fatality rates and can be acquired
through the aerosol route. Microthreads in the form of spiders' webs were used to
capture aerosolised filoviruses, and the decay rates of Zaire ebolavirus and
Marburgvirus were determined. Results were compared to data obtained using a
Goldberg drum to measure survival as a dynamic aerosol. The two methods of
obtaining aerostability information are compared.

Crown Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21762730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Mol Immunol. 2011 Sep;48(15-16):2027-37. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2011.06.437. Epub 
2011 Jul 12.

Isolation and characterisation of Ebolavirus-specific recombinant antibody
fragments from murine and shark immune libraries.

Goodchild SA(1), Dooley H, Schoepp RJ, Flajnik M, Lonsdale SG.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.
sagoodchild@mail.dstl.gov.uk

Members of the genus Ebolavirus cause fulminating outbreaks of disease in human
and non-human primate populations with a mortality rate up to 90%. To facilitate 
rapid detection of these pathogens in clinical and environmental samples, robust 
reagents capable of providing sensitive and specific detection are required. In
this work recombinant antibody libraries were generated from murine (single chain
variable domain fragment; scFv) and nurse shark, Ginglymostoma cirratum (IgNAR V)
hosts immunised with Zaire ebolavirus. This provides the first recorded IgNAR V
response against a particulate antigen in the nurse shark. Both murine scFv and
shark IgNAR V libraries were panned by phage display technology to identify
useful antibodies for the generation of immunological detection reagents. Two
murine scFv were shown to have specificity to the Zaire ebolavirus viral matrix
protein VP40. Two isolated IgNAR V were shown to bind to the viral nucleoprotein 
(NP) and to capture viable Zaire ebolavirus with a high degree of sensitivity.
Assays developed with IgNAR V cross-reacted to Reston ebolavirus, Sudan
ebolavirus and Bundibugyo ebolavirus. Despite this broad reactivity, neither of
IgNAR V showed reactivity to Côte d'Ivoire ebolavirus. IgNAR V was substantially 
more resistant to irreversible thermal denaturation than murine scFv and
monoclonal IgG in a comparative test. The demonstrable robustness of the IgNAR V 
domains may offer enhanced utility as immunological detection reagents in
fieldable biosensor applications for use in tropical or subtropical countries
where outbreaks of Ebolavirus haemorrhagic fever occur.

Crown Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21752470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Future Microbiol. 2011 Jun;6(6):667-76. doi: 10.2217/fmb.11.50.

Antimicrobials for bacterial bioterrorism agents.

Sarkar-Tyson M(1), Atkins HS.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Defence Science & Technology Laboratory,
Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK.

The limitations of current antimicrobials for highly virulent pathogens
considered as potential bioterrorism agents drives the requirement for new
antimicrobials that are suitable for use in populations in the event of a
deliberate release. Strategies targeting bacterial virulence offer the potential 
for new countermeasures to combat bacterial bioterrorism agents, including those 
active against a broad spectrum of pathogens. Although early in the development
of antivirulence approaches, inhibitors of bacterial type III secretion systems
and cell division mechanisms show promise for the future.

© 2011 Future Medicine Ltd

PMID: 21707313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Microbiology. 2011 Sep;157(Pt 9):2629-38. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.049163-0. Epub 2011 
Jun 16.

A novel FK-506-binding-like protein that lacks peptidyl-prolyl isomerase activity
is involved in intracellular infection and in vivo virulence of Burkholderia
pseudomallei.

Norville IH(1), Breitbach K, Eske-Pogodda K, Harmer NJ, Sarkar-Tyson M, Titball
RW, Steinmetz I.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.

Burkholderia pseudomallei is a facultative intracellular bacterial pathogen
causing melioidosis, an often fatal infectious disease that is endemic in several
tropical and subtropical areas around the world. We previously described a Ptk2
cell-based plaque assay screening system of B. pseudomallei transposon mutants
that led to the identification of several novel virulence determinants. Using
this approach we identified a mutant with reduced plaque formation in which the
BPSL0918 gene was disrupted. BPSL0918 encodes a putative FK-506-binding protein
(FKBP) representing a family of proteins that typically possess peptidyl-prolyl
isomerase (PPIase) activity. A B. pseudomallei <U+0394>BPSL0918 mutant showed a severely
impaired ability to resist intracellular killing and to replicate within primary 
macrophages. Complementation of the mutant fully restored its ability to grow
intracellularly. Moreover, B. pseudomallei <U+0394>BPSL0918 was significantly attenuated
in a murine model of infection. Structural modelling confirmed a modified FKBP
fold of the BPSL0918-encoded protein but unlike virulence-associated FKBPs from
other pathogenic bacteria, recombinant BPSL0918 protein did not possess PPIase
activity in vitro. In accordance with this observation BPSL0918 exhibits several 
mutations in residues that have been proposed to mediate PPIase activity in other
FKBPs. To our knowledge this B. pseudomallei FKBP represents the first example of
this protein family which lacks PPIase activity but is important in intracellular
infection of a bacterial pathogen.

PMID: 21680634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Mol Pain. 2011 Jun 6;7:44. doi: 10.1186/1744-8069-7-44.

Transcription factors Sp1 and Sp4 regulate TRPV1 gene expression in rat sensory
neurons.

Chu C(1), Zavala K, Fahimi A, Lee J, Xue Q, Eilers H, Schumacher MA.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, San Francisco Department of Anesthesia and
Perioperative Care 513 Parnassus Ave, Rm, S436, University of California, San
Francisco 94143-0427, USA.

BACKGROUND: The capsaicin receptor, transient receptor potential vanilloid type
-1 (TRPV1) directs complex roles in signal transduction including the detection
of noxious stimuli arising from cellular injury and inflammation. Under
pathophysiologic conditions, TRPV1 mRNA and receptor protein expression are
elevated in dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons for weeks to months and is
associated with hyperalgesia. Building on our previous isolation of a promoter
system for the rat TRPV1 gene, we investigated the proximal TRPV1 P2-promoter by 
first identifying candidate Sp1-like transcription factors bound in vivo to the
P2-promoter using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay. We then performed
deletion analysis of GC-box binding sites, and quantified promoter activity under
conditions of Sp1 / Sp4 over-expression versus inhibition/knockdown. mRNA
encoding Sp1, Sp4 and TRPV1 were quantified by qRT-PCR under conditions of
Sp1/Sp4 over-expression or siRNA mediated knockdown in cultured DRG neurons.
RESULTS: Using ChIP analysis of DRG tissue, we demonstrated that Sp1 and Sp4 are 
bound to the candidate GC-box site region within the endogenous TRPV1
P2-promoter. Deletion of GC-box "a" or "a + b" within the P2- promoter resulted
in a complete loss of transcriptional activity indicating that GC-box "a" was the
critical site for promoter activation. Co-transfection of Sp1 increased
P2-promoter activity in cultured DRG neurons whereas mithramycin-a, an inhibitor 
of Sp1-like function, dose dependently blocked NGF and Sp1-dependent promoter
activity in PC12 cells. Co-transfection of siRNA directed against Sp1 or Sp4
decreased promoter activity in DRG neurons and NGF treated PC12 cells. Finally,
electroporation of Sp1 or Sp4 cDNA into cultures of DRG neurons directed an
increase in Sp1/Sp4 mRNA and importantly an increase in TRPV1 mRNA. Conversely,
combined si-RNA directed knockdown of Sp1/Sp4 resulted in a decrease in TRPV1
mRNA.
CONCLUSION: Based on these studies, we now propose a model of TRPV1 expression
that is dependent on Sp1-like transcription factors with Sp4 playing a
predominant role in activating TRPV1 RNA transcription in DRG neurons. Given that
increases of TRPV1 expression have been implicated in a wide range of
pathophysiologic states including persistent painful conditions, blockade of
Sp1-like transcription factors represents a novel direction in therapeutic
strategies.

PMCID: PMC3121596
PMID: 21645329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Hazard Mater. 2011 Aug 15;192(1):419-22. doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2011.04.107.
Epub 2011 May 11.

Analytical solutions for exposures and toxic loads in well-mixed shelters in
support of shelter-in-place assessments.

Parker ST(1), Coffey CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, United Kingdom.
stparker@dstl.gov.uk

Understanding the exposure and toxic load for the interior of buildings during
and following the passage of an external airborne hazard can be a critical piece 
of information in deciding the benefit from adopting a shelter-in-place strategy.
Whilst numerical methods allow the calculation of such parameters for the general
case, analytical solutions allow more rapid assessments to be made and highlight 
the key parameters more clearly. Analytical expressions are derived for the
exposure due to the acute inhalation of toxic chemicals and the associated toxic 
load as a function of time, external hazard duration and building air change rate
assuming a top-hat outdoor concentration profile and no indoor loss mechanism. It
is shown that the internal exposure tends to the external exposure at long times 
for any external concentration profile. Expressions are derived for toxic loads
with exponents n=m/2 where 2 = m = 7 is an integer to cover the range of typical 
values (1 = n = 3.5). At long times the ratio of internal to external toxic load 
for a top-hat outdoor concentration profile is shown to be a function of the
product of the air change rate and the duration of the external hazard.

Crown Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21632174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Vet Rec. 2011 Jun 4;168(22):590. doi: 10.1136/vr.d853. Epub 2011 May 27.

Mycotic keratoconjunctivitis in 12-day-old red-legged partridges (Alectoris
rufa).

Dalton JR(1), Ainsworth H.

Author information: 
(1)Dalton's Game Consultancy, Unit 1, The Boscombe Centre, Mills Way, Amesbury,
Wiltshire SP4 7RX. daltovet@gmail.com

PMID: 21622598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Bacteriol. 2011 Jul;193(14):3577-87. doi: 10.1128/JB.01385-10. Epub 2011 May
20.

Flagellar glycosylation in Burkholderia pseudomallei and Burkholderia
thailandensis.

Scott AE(1), Twine SM, Fulton KM, Titball RW, Essex-Lopresti AE, Atkins TP, Prior
JL.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ,
United Kingdom. aescott2@dstl.gov.uk

Glycosylation of proteins is known to impart novel physical properties and
biological roles to proteins from both eukaryotes and prokaryotes. In this study,
gel-based glycoproteomics were used to identify glycoproteins of the potential
biothreat agent Burkholderia pseudomallei and the closely related but
nonpathogenic B. thailandensis. Top-down and bottom-up mass spectrometry (MS)
analyses identified that the flagellin proteins of both species were
posttranslationally modified by novel glycans. Analysis of proteins from two
strains of each species demonstrated that B. pseudomallei flagellin proteins were
modified with a glycan with a mass of 291 Da, while B. thailandensis flagellin
protein was modified with related glycans with a mass of 300 or 342 Da.
Structural characterization of the B. thailandensis carbohydrate moiety suggests 
that it is an acetylated hexuronic acid. In addition, we have identified through 
mutagenesis a gene from the lipopolysaccharide (LPS) O-antigen biosynthetic
cluster which is involved in flagellar glycosylation, and inactivation of this
gene eliminates flagellar glycosylation and motility in B. pseudomallei. This is 
the first report to conclusively demonstrate the presence of a carbohydrate
covalently linked to a protein in B. pseudomallei and B. thailandensis, and it
suggests new avenues to explore in order to examine the marked differences in
virulence between these two species.

PMCID: PMC3133338
PMID: 21602339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Vaccine. 2011 Jun 24;29(29-30):4771-7. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.04.084. Epub
2011 May 12.

Recombinant (F1+V) vaccine protects cynomolgus macaques against pneumonic plague.

Williamson ED(1), Packer PJ, Waters EL, Simpson AJ, Dyer D, Hartings J, Twenhafel
N, Pitt ML.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl PortonDown, Salisbury, Wilts SP4 0JQ, UK. dewilliamson@dstl.gov.uk

Cynomolgus macaques, immunised at the 80 µg dose level with an rF1+rV vaccine
(two doses, three weeks apart), were fully protected against pneumonic plague
following inhalational exposure to a clinical isolate of Yersinia pestis (strain 
CO92) at week 8 of the schedule. At this time, all the immunised animals had
developed specific IgG titres to rF1 and rV with geometric mean titres of
96.83±20.93 µg/ml and 78.59±12.07 µg/ml, respectively, for the 40 µg dose group; 
by comparison, the 80 µg dose group had developed titres of 114.4±22.1 and
90.8±15.8 µg/ml to rF1 and rV, respectively, by week 8. For all the immunised
animals, sera drawn at week 8 competed with the neutralising and protective
Mab7.3 for binding to rV antigen in a competitive ELISA, indicating that a
functional antibody response to rV had been induced. All but one of the group
immunised at the lower 40 µg dose-level were protected against infection; the
single animal which succumbed had significantly reduced antibody responses to
both the rF1 and rV antigens. Although a functional titre to rV antigen was
detected for this animal, this was insufficient for protection, indicating that
there may have been a deficiency in the functional titre to rF1 and underlining
the need for immunity to both vaccine antigens to achieve protective efficacy
against plague. This candidate vaccine, which has been evaluated as safe and
immunogenic in clinical studies, has now been demonstrated to protect cynomolgus 
macaques, immunised in the clinical regimen, against pneumonic plague.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21570437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Expert Opin Drug Saf. 2011 Sep;10(5):675-85. doi: 10.1517/14740338.2011.575778.
Epub 2011 May 4.

Abuse potential and psychoactive effects of d-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and
cannabidiol oromucosal spray (Sativex), a new cannabinoid medicine.

Robson P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cannabinoid Research Institute, GW Pharma, Porton Down Science Park, Salisbury
SP4 0JQ, UK. pjr@gwpharm.com

INTRODUCTION: There is a growing consensus that cannabis dependence is a
substantial and underappreciated problem. The key component responsible for the
euphoric effects of cannabis and its dependence potential is
d-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). THC-containing cannabinoid medicines
theoretically pose a risk of abuse and dependence.
AREAS COVERED: In order to evaluate the potential of Sativex to cause
cannabis-like psychoactivity, abuse or dependence relevant data from all
published papers have been reviewed along with the integrated safety analysis for
Sativex use in multiple sclerosis (MS) patients on file at GW Pharmaceuticals.
EXPERT OPINION: In clinical trials, intoxication scores have been low and
euphoria reported by only 2.2% of patients. Tolerance has not occurred, abrupt
withdrawal has not resulted in a formal withdrawal syndrome, and no cases of
abuse or diversion have been reported to date. A formal abuse liability study of 
Sativex in experienced cannabis smokers showed some abuse potential in comparison
with placebo at higher doses, but scores were consistently lower than equivalent 
doses of THC. Evidence to date suggests that abuse or dependence on Sativex is
likely to occur in only a very small proportion of recipients.

PMID: 21542664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2011 Jul;38(1):60-4. doi:
10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2011.03.003. Epub 2011 May 6.

Post-exposure therapy of inhalational anthrax in the common marmoset.

Nelson M(1), Stagg AJ, Stevens DJ, Brown MA, Pearce PC, Simpson AJ, Lever MS.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl), Porton 
Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK. mnelson@dstl.gov.uk

The aim of this study was to compare the pharmacokinetics and efficacy of
ciprofloxacin as post-exposure therapy against inhalational anthrax in the common
marmoset (Callithrix jacchus) with other non-human primate models in order to
determine whether the marmoset is a suitable model to test post-exposure
therapies for anthrax. Pharmacokinetic (PK) and efficacy studies with
ciprofloxacin were performed in the marmoset. Ciprofloxacin plasma
pharmacokinetics were determined in six animals in separate single-dose and
multiple-dose studies and were analysed by high-performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC). A separate group of marmosets was exposed to ca. 100× the 50% lethal dose
(LD(50)) of Bacillus anthracis Ames strain by the airborne route. On Day 5 of a
twice-daily dosing regimen of 17.5 mg/kg, the ciprofloxacin half-life (t(1/2)),
maximum drug concentration (C(max)) and area under the concentration-time curve
(AUC) in marmoset plasma were 1.9 h, 2.1 µg/mL and 7.9 µg/mL/h, respectively.
Naïve untreated control animals succumbed to infection by Day 9. All animals
treated with ciprofloxacin, started on the day of exposure and continued for 10
days, remained healthy during the treatment period. Two antibiotic-treated
animals (33%) died after withdrawal of antibiotic therapy, attributed to the
germination of residual spores. In conclusion, in many respects the marmoset
appears to respond to B. anthracis in a similar way to the macaque, suggesting
that this small non-human primate is an acceptable, practical alternative model
for the evaluation of medical countermeasures against respiratory anthrax
infection.

Crown Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21530184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Gynecol Oncol. 2011 Jul;122(1):163-70. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2011.03.014. Epub
2011 Apr 15.

Tolfenamic acid inhibits ovarian cancer cell growth and decreases the expression 
of c-Met and survivin through suppressing specificity protein transcription
factors.

Basha R(1), Ingersoll SB, Sankpal UT, Ahmad S, Baker CH, Edwards JR, Holloway RW,
Kaja S, Abdelrahim M.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, MD Anderson Cancer Center Orlando, Orlando, FL
32827, USA. riyaz.basha@orlandohealth.com

OBJECTIVE: The aberrant expression of hepatocyte growth factor and its receptor
c-Met are associated with aggressive disease and poor prognosis in a variety of
human malignancies including ovarian cancer (OC). Specificity protein (Sp)
transcription factors have high relevance in the signaling cascade associated
with c-Met activation. Tolfenamic acid (TA), a NSAID, is known to induce the
degradation of Sp proteins, which have been negatively associated with survival
in some cancer patients. Our aim was to examine the anti-OC activity of TA using 
in vitro and in vivo models and asses the inhibitory effects of this novel
compound.
METHODS: We developed OC sub-cell lines (AF1-3) derived from the original SKOV3
that are more resistant to IFNa-2b and more tumorigenic in nude mice than the
original cells. We tested the anti-cancer activity of TA using ovarian cancer
cells, SKOV3-AF2 and ES-2. The cells were treated with DMSO (vehicle) or TA
(25/50/100 µM) and cell viability was measured at 24, 48, and 72 h. Cell lysates 
were prepared following 48 h treatment (50µM) and evaluated the expression of Sp 
proteins (Sp1/Sp3/Sp4), c-Met, survivin, Bcl2, and cleaved polyADP-ribose
polymerase (c-PARP) through Western blot analysis. Caspase-3 activity was
assessed with Caspase-Glo kit. Cell cycle distribution and apoptosis were
analyzed using BD FACSCalibur flow cytometer. For in vivo studies mice were
subcutaneously injected with ES-2 cells and treated with vehicle or TA (50
mg/kg/thrice weekly).
RESULTS: TA significantly inhibited the growth of SKOV3 (AF1-3) and ES-2 cells.
The expression of Sp proteins and c-Met was significantly decreased suggesting
that TA could be targeting c-Met through degradation of Sp proteins. TA greatly
increased the apoptotic fraction (Annexin V positive), c-PARP expression and
caspase-3 activity. TA significantly decreased Bcl2 expression and induced G0/G1 
cell cycle arrest. In vivo studies revealed that TA significantly inhibited tumor
weight and volume in mice. These results show that TA has a profound inhibitory
effect on tumor growth in mice, reduces OC cells proliferation, induces
apoptosis, cell cycle arrest and Sp proteins degradation. TA also inhabited the
expression of survivin that is associated with radiation resistance and suggests 
that apart from its tumor suppressant effects, TA can also enhance the tumor
response to radiotherapy.
CONCLUSIONS: These data clearly show that TA effectively inhibits OC cell growth 
in vitro and in vivo. This study represents potential role(s) of TA that
suppresses OC cell growth, and may enhance tumor response to radiotherapy, and
have implications in OC treatment.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21496890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. J Biosci Bioeng. 2011 Jul;112(1):102-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2011.03.009. Epub
2011 Apr 13.

Characterization and encapsulation efficiency of rhamnolipid vesicles with
cholesterol addition.

Pornsunthorntawee O(1), Chavadej S, Rujiravanit R.

Author information: 
(1)The Petroleum and Petrochemical College, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok
10330, Thailand.

The effect of cholesterol on the vesicle formation of a rhamnolipid biosurfactant
extracted from the liquid culture of Pseudomonas aeruginosa SP4 was investigated.
The rhamnolipid vesicles were prepared in a phosphate-buffer saline (PBS)
solution (pH 7.4) at a biosurfactant concentration of 2.6mM, or 6.5 times the
critical micelle concentration (CMC), with various amounts of cholesterol. The
biosurfactant solution was characterized using turbidity, zeta potential, and
dynamic light scattering (DLS) measurements. The morphology of the rhamnolipid
vesicles formed at different cholesterol concentrations was examined with the use
of transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The results showed that the
rhamnolipid biosurfactant formed spherical vesicles both in the absence and
presence of cholesterol, but the incorporation of the cholesterol into the
bilayer membrane reduced the vesicle size. Sudan III, a water-insoluble dye, was 
used as a model hydrophobic compound in the encapsulation experiment. The
encapsulation efficiency (E%) of the rhamnolipid vesicles was affected by the
cholesterol concentration and the initial Sudan III concentration. The maximum E%
of nearly 90% was achieved at the cholesterol concentration of 100µM and the
initial Sudan III concentration of 8.8µM.

Copyright © 2011 The Society for Biotechnology, Japan. Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 21489867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2011 Jun;77(11):3741-8. doi: 10.1128/AEM.02444-10. Epub
2011 Apr 1.

Influence of season and geography on Campylobacter jejuni and C. coli subtypes in
housed broiler flocks reared in Great Britain.

Jorgensen F(1), Ellis-Iversen J, Rushton S, Bull SA, Harris SA, Bryan SJ,
Gonzalez A, Humphrey TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Health Protection Agency, Microbiology Services, Food, Water & Environmental
Microbiology Network, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG, United Kingdom.
frieda.jorgensen@hpa.org.uk

Geographical and seasonal variation in the incidence and prevalence of
Campylobacter jejuni and C. coli in housed broiler flocks reared in Great Britain
in 2004 to 2006 was investigated in this study. Ceca (30) from 797 flocks, not
subject to prior partial depopulation and reared on 211 farms, were examined
individually for the presence of Campylobacter spp. The best-fitting climatic
factors explained approximately 46% of the prevalence of Campylobacter-colonized 
flocks at slaughter and consisted of a combination of temperature at slaughter,
number of sunshine hours in placement month, and millimeters of rainfall in
placement month. Positive flocks were more likely to be slaughtered between June 
and November than during the rest of the year and to be reared in northern Great 
Britain than in central or southern Great Britain. C. jejuni was identified in
approximately 90% of flocks, and C. coli was present in 10% of flocks. The most
common clonal complexes identified in 226 isolates typed by multilocus sequence
typing (MLST) were ST-45, ST-21, ST-574, ST-443, and ST-828. Flocks slaughtered
at the same time were more likely to have similar complexes, and ST-45 had a
seasonal pattern, with the highest prevalence in June, and was also more likely
to be present in flocks reared in northern Great Britain.

PMCID: PMC3127617
PMID: 21460110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Br Dent J. 2011 May 14;210(9):E14. doi: 10.1038/sj.bdj.2011.144.

A quantitative assessment of residual protein levels on dental instruments
reprocessed by manual, ultrasonic and automated cleaning methods.

Vassey M(1), Budge C, Poolman T, Jones P, Perrett D, Nayuni N, Bennett P, Groves 
P, Smith A, Fulford M, Marsh PD, Walker JT, Sutton JM, Raven ND.

Author information: 
(1)TB & Public Health Microbiology Programme, Centre for Emergency Preparedness
and Response, Health Protection Agency, Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JG.

Comment in
    Br Dent J. 2011 May 14;210(9):418-9.
    Br Dent J. 2011 Aug;211(4):152.

OBJECTIVE: To assess residual protein on dental instruments cleaned in general
dental practice by manual, manual plus ultrasonic and automated washer
disinfector (AWD) processes.
DESIGN AND SETTING: Instruments submitted by 30 dental surgeries in the South
West of England.
SUBJECTS (MATERIALS) AND METHODS: Instruments analysed were matrix bands,
associated retaining clips, diamond and stainless steel burs, extraction forceps 
and hand scalers. Each instrument was visually assessed under magnification for
residual debris. Residual protein was extracted by immersion in detergent and
sonication. A collection of used but uncleaned instruments of each type (n = 177)
was also analysed for adherent protein using ophthalaldehyde/N-acetylcysteine
reagent.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Residual protein levels allowed comparisons to be made on 
the effectiveness of different cleaning processes.
RESULTS: One thousand, three hundred and four instruments were analysed.
Observational data demonstrated several shortcomings in cleaning chemistries and 
operation of the AWD. For uncleaned instruments, median residual protein levels
ranged from 0.4 µg (stainless steel burs) to 462 µg (extraction forceps).
Following manual washing, median protein levels ranged from 0.3-78 µg; for manual
plus ultrasonic washing, levels ranged from 9-39 µg and AWD levels ranged from
0.3-27 µg. Manual washing combined with ultrasonic cleaning was significantly
less effective than the other two processes (p <0.008). AWDs reduced the
variability in the cleaning process. No correlation was found between visual
scoring and residual protein determination.
CONCLUSION(S): There was a wide variation in residual protein levels both within 
and between different methods and instruments and this underlines the complexity 
of this process.

PMID: 21372833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Microbes Infect. 2011 Jun;13(6):607-11. doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2011.02.004. Epub
2011 Feb 24.

Yersinia pseudotuberculosis is resistant to killing by human neutrophils.

Laws TR(1), Davey MS, Green C, Cooper IA, Titball RW, Lukaszewski RA.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 OJQ, UK.
trlaws@dstl.gov.uk

The interaction between human neutrophils and the Gram negative gastrointestinal 
pathogen Yersinia pseudotuberculosis was investigated in vitro. Despite the
wealth of data describing how Yersinia can affect the function of neutrophils,
there are no published studies describing if neutrophil cells can affect the
viability of Y. pseudotuberculosis. The wild-type IP32953 strain of Y.
pseudotuberculosis was found to be resistant to killing by human neutrophils.
Confocal examination and flow-cytometric analysis of this interaction revealed
that bacteria were taken up.

Crown Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21354325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Epidemics. 2010 Dec;2(4):189-94. doi: 10.1016/j.epidem.2010.06.001. Epub 2010 Jun
10.

Re-assessment of mitigation strategies for deliberate releases of anthrax using a
real-time outbreak characterization tool.

Egan JR(1), Legrand J, Hall IM, Cauchemez S, Ferguson NM, Leach S.

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Risk Assessment, Emergency Response Department, Health Protection
Agency, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JG, UK. joseph.egan@hpa.org.uk

Responding rapidly and appropriately to a covert anthrax release is an important 
public health challenge. A methodology to assist the geographical targeting of
such a response has recently been published; as have a number of independent
studies that investigate mitigation strategies. Here, we review and combine some 
of these published techniques to more realistically assess how key aspects of the
public health response might impact on the outcomes of a bioterrorist attack. We 
combine a within-host mathematical model with our spatial back-calculation method
to investigate the effects of a number of important response variables. These
include how previously reported levels of adherence with taking antibiotics might
affect the total outbreak size compared to assuming full adherence. Post-exposure
vaccination is also considered, both with and without the use of antibiotics.
Further, we investigate a range of delays (2, 4 and 8 days) before interventions 
are implemented, following the last day of symptomatic onset of some number of
observed initial cases (5, 10 and 15). Our analysis confirms that outbreak size
is minimised by implementing prophylactic treatment after having estimated the
exposed area based on 5 observed cases; however, imperfect (rather than full)
adherence with antibiotics results in approximately 15% additional cases.
Moreover, of those infected individuals who only partially adhere with a
prophylactic course of antibiotics, 86% remain disease free; a result that holds 
for scenarios in which infected individuals inhale much higher doses than
considered here. Increasing logistical delays have a particularly detrimental
effect on lives saved with an optimal strategy of early identification and
analysis. Our analysis shows that it is critical to have systems and processes in
place to rapidly identify, geospatially analyse and then swiftly respond to a
deliberate anthrax release.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21352789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Antiviral Res. 2011 Apr;90(1):1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2011.01.010. Epub
2011 Feb 15.

A humanised murine monoclonal antibody with broad serogroup specificity protects 
mice from challenge with Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus.

Goodchild SA(1), O'Brien LM, Steven J, Muller MR, Lanning OJ, Logue CH, D'Elia
RV, Phillpotts RJ, Perkins SD.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire
SP4 0JQ, UK. sagoodchild@dstl.gov.uk

In murine models of Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus (VEEV) infection, the
neutralising monoclonal antibody 1A3B-7 has been shown to be effective in passive
protection from challenge by the aerosol route with serogroups I, II and Mucambo 
virus (formally VEE complex subtype IIIA). This antibody is able to bind to all
serogroups of the VEEV complex when used in ELISA and therefore is an excellent
candidate for protein engineering in order to derive a humanised molecule
suitable for therapeutic use in humans. A Complementarity Determining Region
(CDR) grafting approach using human germline IgG frameworks was used to produce a
panel of humanised variants of 1A3B-7, from which a single candidate molecule
with retained binding specificity was identified. Evaluation of humanised 1A3B-7 
(Hu1A3B-7) in in vitro studies indicated that Hu1A3B-7 retained both broad
specificity and neutralising activity. Furthermore, in vivo experiments showed
that Hu1A3B-7 successfully protected mice against lethal subcutaneous and aerosol
challenges with VEEV strain TrD (serogroup I). Hu1A3B-7 is therefore a promising 
candidate for the future development of a broad-spectrum antiviral therapy to
treat VEEV disease in humans.

Crown Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21310183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Mol Carcinog. 2011 Sep;50(9):655-67. doi: 10.1002/mc.20738. Epub 2011 Jan 25.

Inhibition of pituitary tumor-transforming gene-1 in thyroid cancer cells by
drugs that decrease specificity proteins.

Chintharlapalli S(1), Papineni S, Lee SO, Lei P, Jin UH, Sherman SI, Santarpia L,
Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center,
Houston, USA.

Methyl 2-cyano-3,11-dioxo-18ß-olean-1,12-dien-30-oate (CDODA-Me) and the
corresponding 2-trifluoromethyl analog (CF(3)DODA-Me) are derived synthetically
from the triterpenoid glycyrrhetinic acid, a major component of licorice.
CDODA-Me and CF(3)DODA-Me inhibited growth of highly invasive ARO, DRO, K-18, and
HTh-74 thyroid cancer cells and this was due, in part, to decreased expression of
specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 that are
overexpressed in these cells. CDODA-Me and CF(3)DODA-Me also decreased expression
of Sp-dependent genes, such as survivin and vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF), and induced apoptosis. In addition, pituitary tumor-transforming gene-1
(PTTG-1) protein and mRNA levels were also decreased in thyroid cancer cells
treated with CDODA-Me or CF(3)DODA-Me and this was accompanied by decreased
expression of PTTG-1-dependent c-Myc and fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2)
genes. RNA interference studies against Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 proteins showed that in
thyroid cancer cells, PTTG-1 was an Sp-dependent gene. This study demonstrates
for the first time that drugs, such as CDODA-Me and CF(3)DODA-Me, that decrease
Sp protein expression also downregulate PTTG-1 in thyroid cancer cells and
therefore have potential for clinical treatment of thyroid cancer and other
endocrine neoplasias where PTTG-1 is a major pro-oncogenic factor.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3128656
PMID: 21268135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Invest New Drugs. 2012 Jun;30(3):853-61. doi: 10.1007/s10637-010-9622-0. Epub
2011 Jan 4.

Chemopreventive effects of tolfenamic acid against esophageal tumorigenesis in
rats.

Maliakal P(1), Abdelrahim M, Sankpal UT, Maliakal C, Baker CH, Safe S, Herrera
LJ, Abudayyeh A, Kaja S, Basha R.

Author information: 
(1)M. D. Anderson Cancer Center Orlando, Cancer Research Institute, Orlando, FL
32827, USA.

The primary objective of this study is to identify small molecules that target
critical transcription factors for potential application in the chemoprevention
of esophageal cancer. Specificity proteins (Sp) play a critical role in the
growth and metastasis of several malignancies including esophageal cancer.
Researchers at the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center Orlando Cancer Research Institute
have reported previously that tolfenamic acid (TA) inhibits cancer cell
proliferation and tumor growth through the degradation of Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4. We
evaluated the chemopreventive properties of TA against esophageal tumorigenesis
in N-nitrosomethylbenzylamine (NMBA)-induced murine tumor model. Fischer-344 rats
were treated with NMBA (0.5 mg/kg s.c. 3 times a week) for 5 weeks to initiate
the tumor formation, and then treated with 50 mg/kg TA from week 6 through
week 25. Tumor incidence, tumor multiplicity (number of papilloma per rat), and
tumor volume were evaluated after 25 weeks. All rats in the control group that
received only NMBA developed lesions (100% incidence), while the TA-treated group
showed significantly lower (33%) tumor incidence and tumor multiplicity.
Furthermore, the tumor volume was significantly diminished in the TA-treated
group when compared with the control group. Using small molecules such as TA to
target key transcription factors associated with tumorigenesis for the prevention
of esophageal malignancies is a new and promising strategy. Results of the
current study provide evidence that TA, when given orally after tumor initiation,
can significantly suppress tumorigenesis induced by carcinogenic nitrosamines in 
rats. These appealing results demonstrate that TA may potentially serve as an
effective chemopreventive agent in patient populations vulnerable to esophageal
cancer.

PMID: 21197621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Animals (Basel). 2011 Jun 21;1(2):242-55. doi: 10.3390/ani1020242.

Plague: Infections of Companion Animals and Opportunities for Intervention.

Oyston PC(1), Williamson D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ, UK.
pcoyston@dstl.gov.uk. (2)Biomedical Sciences, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury,
Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ, UK. dewilliamson@dstl.gov.uk.

Plague is a zoonotic disease, normally circulating in rodent populations,
transmitted to humans most commonly through the bite of an infected flea vector. 
Secondary infection of the lungs results in generation of infectious aerosols,
which pose a significant hazard to close contacts. In enzootic areas, plague
infections have been reported in owners and veterinarians who come into contact
with infected pets. Dogs are relatively resistant, but can import infected fleas 
into the home. Cats are acutely susceptible, and can present a direct hazard to
health. Reducing roaming and hunting behaviours, combined with flea control
measures go some way to reducing the risk to humans. Various vaccine formulations
have been developed which may be suitable to protect companion animals from
contracting plague, and thus preventing onward transmission to man. Since
transmission has resulted in a number of fatal cases of plague, the vaccination
of domestic animals such as cats would seem a low cost strategy for reducing the 
risk of infection by this serious disease in enzootic regions.

PMCID: PMC4513460
PMID: 26486314  [PubMed]


300. Mol Cancer Res. 2011 Feb;9(2):195-202. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-10-0363. Epub
2010 Dec 14.

GT-094, a NO-NSAID, inhibits colon cancer cell growth by activation of a reactive
oxygen species-microRNA-27a: ZBTB10-specificity protein pathway.

Pathi SS(1), Jutooru I, Chadalapaka G, Sreevalsan S, Anand S, Thatcher GR, Safe
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
4466 TAMU, Vet. Res. Bldg. 410, College Station, TX 77843, USA.

Ethyl 2-((2,3-bis(nitrooxy)propyl)disulfanyl)benzoate (GT-094) is a novel nitric 
oxide (NO) chimera containing an nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) and 
NO moieties and also a disulfide pharmacophore that in itself exhibits cancer
chemopreventive activity. In this study, the effects and mechanism of action of
GT-094 were investigated in RKO and SW480 colon cancer cells. GT-094 inhibited
cell proliferation and induced apoptosis in both cell lines and this was
accompanied by decreased mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) and induction of 
reactive oxygen species (ROS), and these responses were reversed after
cotreatment with the antioxidant glutathione. GT-094 also downregulated genes
associated with cell growth [cyclin D1, hepatocyte growth factor receptor
(c-Met), epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)], survival (bcl-2, survivin),
and angiogenesis [VEGF and its receptors (VEGFR1 and VEGFR2)]. Results of
previous RNA interference studies in this laboratory has shown that these genes
are regulated, in part, by specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors Sp1,
Sp3, and Sp4 that are overexpressed in colon and other cancer cell lines and not 
surprisingly, GT-094 also decreased Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 in colon cancer cells.
GT-094-mediated repression of Sp and Sp-regulated gene products was due to
downregulation of microRNA-27a (miR-27a) and induction of ZBTB10, an Sp repressor
that is regulated by miR-27a in colon cancer cells. Moreover, the effects of
GT-094 on Sp1, Sp3, Sp4, miR-27a, and ZBTB10 were also inhibited by glutathione
suggesting that the anticancer activity of GT-094 in colon cancer cells is due,
in part, to activation of an ROS-miR-27a:ZBTB10-Sp transcription factor pathway.

PMCID: PMC3069691
PMID: 21156786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Mol Cell Probes. 2010 Apr;24(2):72-6. doi: 10.1016/j.mcp.2009.10.004. Epub 2009
Oct 13.

Development of real-time PCR assays for the specific detection of Francisella
tularensis ssp. tularensis, holarctica and mediaasiatica.

Mitchell JL(1), Chatwell N, Christensen D, Diaper H, Minogue TD, Parsons TM,
Walker B, Weller SA.

Author information: 
(1)Detection Department, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, 
Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, United Kingdom. jan.mitchell@salisbury.nhs.uk
<jan.mitchell@salisbury.nhs.uk>

Real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays were developed to detect
Francisella tularensis (Ft), the causative agent of tularaemia in humans. Two
real-time PCRs (FTT0376 and FTT0523) were designed in genetic sequences
identified by the Insignia genome comparison tool (http://insignia.cbcb.umd.edu/)
as being unique to pathogenic subspecies of F. tularensis. Both PCRs identified
all pathogenic F. tularensis subspecies but did not cross react with avirulent
Francisella philomiragia or F. tularensis ssp. novicida or other environmental
bacteria. Limits of detection from DNA purified from pure culture (FTT0376
approximately 80 Ft genome equivalents (GEs) per PCR; FTT0523 approximately 20 Ft
GEs per PCR;) and DNA purified from spiked blood samples (4 x 10(4) to 4 x 10(3) 
cfu ml(-1), both assays) were determined.

PMID: 19833196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Biol Chem. 2009 Dec 11;284(50):34666-73. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.051177. Epub
2009 Oct 6.

Cwp84, a surface-associated cysteine protease, plays a role in the maturation of 
the surface layer of Clostridium difficile.

Kirby JM(1), Ahern H, Roberts AK, Kumar V, Freeman Z, Acharya KR, Shone CC.

Author information: 
(1)Research Department, Health Protection Agency, Porton Down, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK.

Clostridium difficile is a major and growing problem as a hospital-associated
infection that can cause severe, recurrent diarrhea. The mechanism by which the
bacterium colonizes the gut during infection is poorly understood but undoubtedly
involves protein components within the surface layer (S-layer), which play a role
in adhesion. In C. difficile, the S-layer is composed of two principal
components, the high and low molecular weight S-layer proteins, which are formed 
from the post-translational cleavage of a single precursor, SlpA. In the present 
study, we demonstrate that a recently characterized cysteine protease, Cwp84
plays a role in maturation of SlpA. Using a gene knock-out approach, we show that
inactivation of the Cwp84 gene in C. difficile 630DeltaErm results in a bacterial
phenotype in which only immature, single chain SlpA comprises the S-layer. The
Cwp84 knock-out mutants (CDDeltaCwp84) displayed significantly different colony
morphology compared with the wild-type strain and grew more slowly in liquid
medium. SlpA extracted from CDDeltaCwp84 was readily cleaved into its mature
subunits by trypsin treatment. Addition of trypsin to the growth medium also
cleaved SlpA on CDDeltaCwp84 and increased the growth rate of the bacterium in a 
dose-dependent manner. Using the hamster model for C. difficile infection,
CDDeltaCwp84 was found to be competent at causing disease with a similar
pathology to the wild-type strain. The data show that whereas Cwp84 plays a role 
in the cleavage of SlpA, it is not an essential virulence factor and that
bacteria expressing immature SlpA are able to cause disease.

PMCID: PMC2787329
PMID: 19808679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Expert Rev Vaccines. 2009 Oct;8(10):1329-31. doi: 10.1586/erv.09.101.

Phacilitate vaccine forum Barcelona 2009.

Silman NJ(1), Rivera LM, Wheat J.

Author information: 
(1)Research & Development, Health Protection Agency, Centre for Emergency
Preparedness & Response, Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JG, UK.
nigel.silman@hpa.org.uk

The Phacilitate Vaccine Forum comprised numerous plenary sessions and panel
discussions. The highlights of the meeting were the discussion of new adjuvant
technologies able to specifically target the immune system to drive the response 
down the required route. Also of topical interest was a session on the challenges
of the current influenza pandemic, and strategies for vaccination and control of 
the disease. Finally, the session covering vaccines for tropical and emerging
infectious diseases highlighted some of the niche vaccines that are being
developed, in particular those for dengue and West Nile viruses, which show great
promise. In addition to scientific promise, the value proposition for vaccine
development in a risk-averse economy was outlined, citing expected growth in the 
worldwide market of more than US$25 billion within 5 years. This proposition was 
supported by the overviews of disposable and 'flex factory' manufacturing
technologies, providing cost and time efficiencies in product development, which 
are especially critical for the emerging markets.

PMID: 19803754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Epigenetics. 2009 Oct 1;4(7):487-99. Epub 2009 Oct 21.

Dnmt3/transcription factor interactions as crucial players in targeted DNA
methylation.

Hervouet E(1), Vallette FM, Cartron PF.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U892, Equipe Apoptose et progression tumorale, Equipe labellisée Ligue 
Nationale Contre le Cancer, Nantes, France.

Epigenetic gene inactivation in mammalian cells involves many silencing
mechanisms. One of these mechanisms is the transcriptional repression by targeted
promoter hypermethylation. However, the molecular mechanisms involved in the
site-specific DNA (hyper)methylation are not fully elucidate. By using the
Dnmt3a/c-myc interaction as an example, we here showed that this interaction
promotes the site-specific methylation of CG dinucleotides localized in c-myc
boxes of promoter regions of CDKN2a, CCND1 and TIMP2 genes. Indeed, the
invalidation of c-myc reveals that c-myc allows the Dnmt3a recruitment on c-myc
box of c-myc-regulated genes. Acellular experiments corroborated and complemented
these results by revealing that the specificity of consensus sequence for DNA
methylation of Dnmt3a is increased in presence of c-myc. Indeed, our work
indicates that Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b have consensus sequences to methylate DNA
(T/A/C)(A/T)(T/G/A)CG(T/G/C)G(G/C/A) and (A/C)(C/G/A)(A/G)CGT(C/G)(A/G). Thus,
the low specificity of these sequences (consensual for 162 and 48 possibilities, 
respectively) does not support the idea of targeted DNA methylation. By
monitoring transcription factor arrays spotted with 103 transcription factors, we
next identified 42 transcription factors interacting with Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b (such
as CREB and FOS), 27 transcription factors interacting with Dnmt3a (such as
AP2alpha and p53), 10 transcription factors interacting with Dnmt3b (such as SP1 
and SP4) and 24 transcription factors devoid of direct interaction with Dnm3a and
Dnmt3b (such as C/EBPalpha and NFkappaB-p65). Thus, The description of direct
interaction between Dnmt3a and/or Dnmt3b and transcription factors provides
rational molecular explanation to the mechanisms of targeted DNA
(hyper)methylation, and to the mechanisms by which transcription factors repress 
genes expression.

PMID: 19786833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Vaccine. 2009 Nov 23;27(50):7073-9. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2009.09.061. Epub 2009
Sep 26.

N255 is a key residue for recognition by a monoclonal antibody which protects
against Yersinia pestis infection.

Hill J(1), Leary S, Smither S, Best A, Pettersson J, Forsberg A, Lingard B, Lipka
A, Brown KA, Williamson ED, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire
SP4 0JQ, UK.

Mab7.3 to Yersinia pestis LcrV antigen (LcrV(Ype)) protected J774A.1 macrophages 
in vitro from killing by a Yersinia pseudotuberculosis strain expressing
LcrV(Ype). Of 4 site-directed mutations in the coiled-coil region (148-169) and 7
mutations in the 225-255 sequence of LcrV(Ype), only the mutation of N255 to
D255, abrogated the binding of Mab7.3 and reduced its protective capacity against
plague. Since the Mab7.3 epitope in LcrV(Ype) (135-275) encompasses a region
(136-180) thought to be exposed on the injectisome, we suggest that Mab7.3
protects by binding to LcrV(Ype) and interfering with protein-protein
interactions necessary for type three secretion.

PMID: 19786138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Microbiology. 2009 Dec;155(Pt 12):4104-13. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.031021-0. Epub 2009
Sep 17.

RelA regulates virulence and intracellular survival of Francisella novicida.

Dean RE(1), Ireland PM, Jordan JE, Titball RW, Oyston PC.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK.
redean@dstl.gov.uk

Analysis of the genome of Francisella tularensis has revealed few regulatory
systems, and how the organism adapts to conditions in different niches is poorly 
understood. The stringent response is a global stress response mediated by
(p)ppGpp. The enzyme RelA has been shown to be involved in generation of this
signal molecule in a range of bacterial species. We investigated the effect of
inactivation of the relA gene in Francisella by generating a mutant in
Francisella novicida. Under amino acid starvation conditions, the relA mutant was
defective for (p)ppGpp production. Characterization showed the mutant to grow
similarly to the wild-type, except that it entered stationary phase later than
wild-type cultures, resulting in higher cell yields. The relA mutant showed
increased biofilm formation, which may be linked to the delay in entering
stationary phase, which in turn would result in higher cell numbers present in
the biofilm and reduced resistance to in vitro stress. The mutant was attenuated 
in the J774A macrophage cell line and was shown to be attenuated in the mouse
model of tularaemia, but was able to induce a protective immune response.
Therefore, (p)ppGpp appears to be an important intracellular signal, integral to 
the pathogenesis of F. novicida.

PMID: 19762448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Trends Microbiol. 2009 Sep;17(9):393-8. doi: 10.1016/j.tim.2009.06.005. Epub 2009
Aug 28.

Microbial TIR domains: not necessarily agents of subversion?

Spear AM(1), Loman NJ, Atkins HS, Pallen MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Defence, Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire 
SP4 0JQ, UK.

The Toll/interleukin-1 receptor (TIR) domain plays a crucial role in the
mammalian innate immune response. Recently, proteins containing TIR domains have 
been described in bacteria and it has been suggested that these bacterial
proteins are involved in subversion of the vertebrate immune system. Here we
describe the distribution of TIR-domain proteins among bacteria, fungi, archaea
and viruses and evaluate the subversion hypothesis in the light of our findings. 
We suggest that most TIR domains in bacteria have nothing to do with subverting
eukaryotic cells; instead, TIR domains function simply as general purpose
protein-protein interaction domains put to diverse uses.

PMID: 19716705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Bioresour Technol. 2010 Jan;101(1):324-30. doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2009.08.012.
Epub 2009 Aug 27.

Purification and concentration of a rhamnolipid biosurfactant produced by
Pseudomonas aeruginosa SP4 using foam fractionation.

Sarachat T(1), Pornsunthorntawee O, Chavadej S, Rujiravanit R.

Author information: 
(1)The Petroleum and Petrochemical College, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok
10330, Thailand.

Pseudomonasaeruginosa SP4 was cultivated to produce a rhamnolipid biosurfactant
from a nutrient broth with palm oil. The foam fractionation technique in batch
mode was used for the recovery of the excreted biosurfactant from the free-cell
culture medium. The effects of air flow rate, initial foam height, the pore size 
of the sintered glass disk, initial liquid volume, and operation time on the
process performance were studied. The results showed that the operating
conditions were optimized at an air flow rate of 30 ml/min, an initial foam
height of 60 cm, a pore size of the sintered glass disk in the range of 160-250
microm (No. 0), an initial liquid volume of 25 ml, and an operation time of 4 h, 
providing a biosurfactant recovery of 97% and an enrichment ratio of 4. The HPLC 
results also indicated that the rhamnolipid was concentrated by using the foam
fractionation technique.

PMID: 19716289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Mycorrhiza. 2009 Oct;19(8):571-84. doi: 10.1007/s00572-009-0272-z. Epub 2009 Aug 
25.

Morphological and molecular analyses in Scleroderma species associated with some 
Caesalpinioid legumes, Dipterocarpaceae and Phyllanthaceae trees in southern
Burkina Faso.

Sanon KB(1), Bâ AM, Delaruelle C, Duponnois R, Martin F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Microbiologie, Département Productions Forestières, Institut de
l'Environnement et de Recherches Agricoles, Ouagadougou 03, Burkina Faso.
sbkady@gmail.com

A combination of morphotypes, polymerase chain reaction/restriction fragment
length polymorphism (PCR/RFLP) analyses and internal transcribed spacer (ITS)
sequencing was used to investigate Scleroderma species that were collected from
woodlands in Burkina Faso. We harvested 52 specimens from 20 sites during rainy
seasons between 1997 and 2000. According to their morphological features, these
specimens were initially characterised, and we then identified six species of
Scleroderma. Two of the species were clearly determined as Scleroderma
dictyosporum Pat. and S. verrucosum Pers. The four remaining species were
characteristically described as (1) displaying big spores with spines up to 2
microm (Scleroderma sp1), (2) producing spores without ornamentation (Scleroderma
sp2), (3) spores with very small spines (Scleroderma sp3) and (4) with yellow
sporocarps and sub-spherical spores (Scleroderma sp4). The specimens were then
analysed using PCR/RFLP of the intergenic regions of rDNA, ITS and IGS1 and ITS
sequencing. The restriction fragments obtained with two endonucleases, HinfI and 
MboI on ITS and IGS1 regions, showed that some isolates of S. dictyosporum had
the same patterns as isolates and basidiocarps of Scleroderma sp4 (IR265, IR408, 
SP4-2903). Isolates of Scleroderma sp3 (IR252) had common restriction fragments
as isolates of S. verrucosum (IR500, IR600). Intraspecific differences were
observed in the two previously determined species, as well as in Scleroderma sp2.
The ITS sequencing and phylogenetic analyses showed that the ribotypes identified
by PCR/RFLP within these species might be phylogenetic species. Combining these
molecular results allowed regrouping the six morphological species in three sets 
of cryptic species: a first set with two species including S. dictyosporum Pat., 
a second set with four species, including both S. verrucosum Pers. and
Scleroderma sp1 and a third set with two species, including Scleroderma sp2.
These investigations and the combined morphological and molecular analyses used
to sort out species paved the way for identifying larger populations of
Scleroderma species in Burkina Faso and other tropical zones.

PMID: 19705166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2009 Nov;34(5):471-3. doi:
10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2009.06.018. Epub 2009 Aug 13.

Efficacy of moxifloxacin or gatifloxacin as prophylaxis against experimental
murine Brucella melitensis infection.

Atkins HS(1), Spencer S, Brew SD, Laws TR, Thirlwall RE, MacMillan AP, Brooks TJ,
Simpson AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, 
Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK. hsatkins@dstl.gov.uk

The prophylactic potential of moxifloxacin and gatifloxacin was assessed in
comparison with doxycycline, an established therapeutic antibiotic, to limit or
control infection by Brucella melitensis in an experimental mouse model,
determined by reduced bacterial burden in the spleen. Although moxifloxacin was
found to have a small protective effect when administered 6 h following
infection, neither moxifloxacin nor gatifloxacin showed significant efficacy in
vivo. In comparison, doxycycline provided significant protection when prophylaxis
was started at 6 h, 7 days or 14 days following infection. Overall, these results
confirm the utility of doxycycline in the prophylaxis of brucellosis and suggest 
that neither moxifloxacin nor gatifloxacin are likely to be valuable for
post-exposure prophylaxis of Brucella infection.

PMID: 19682862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Toxicology. 2009 Oct 1;264(1-2):119-30. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2009.08.003. Epub 2009
Aug 12.

Inflammatory gene expression in response to sub-lethal ricin exposure in Balb/c
mice.

David J(1), Wilkinson LJ, Griffiths GD.

Author information: 
(1)Immunotoxicology Group, Biology, Biomedical Sciences, Defence Science and
Technology Laboratory, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ, UK. jdavid@dstl.gov.uk

The toxin ricin has been shown to cause inflammatory lung damage, leading to
pulmonary oedema and, at higher doses, mortality. In order to understand the
genetic basis of this inflammatory cascade a custom microarray platform (1509
genes) directed towards immune and inflammatory markers was used to investigate
the temporal expression profiles of genes in a Balb/c mouse model of inhalational
ricin exposure. To facilitate examination of those genes involved in both
inflammatory cascades and wound repair the dose which was investigated was
sub-lethal across a 96-h time course. Histopathology of the lung was mapped
across the time course and genetic responses considered in the context of overall
lung pathology. Six hundred and eighty-five genes were found to be statistically 
significantly different compared to controls, across the time course and these
genes have been investigated in the context of their biological function in ricin
poisoning. As well as confirming key inflammatory markers associated with ricin
intoxication (TNFalpha and IL1beta) several pathways that are altered in
expression were identified following pulmonary exposure to ricin. These genes
included those involved in cytokine-cytokine signalling cascades (IL1, IL1r,
IL1r2, Ccl 4, 6, 10), focal adhesion (Fn1, ICAM1) and tissue remodelling (VEGF,
Pim1). Furthermore, the observed alteration in expression of matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their inhibitors (TIMPs) indicates a key role in
membrane integrity and cellular adhesion in ricin poisoning. Data captured using 
this transcriptomic approach could be used to develop a specific approach to the 
treatment of inhalational ricin exposure. This work was conducted as part of a
wider programme of work to compare a number of militarily relevant lung damaging 
agents, with a view to establishing a rational basis for the identification of
more generic medical countermeasures.

Crown Copyright 2009 Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd

PMID: 19682533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Kardiologiia. 2009;49(7-8):46-9.

[Association of Sp4 gene polymorphism with pathological tortuosity of internal
carotid arteries].

[Article in Russian]

Voevoda MI, Kulikov IV, Maksimov VN, Smirnova IuV.

Aim of the study was identification of genes and their polymorphisms associated
with pathological tortuosity (PT) of internal carotid arteries (ICA) for
elucidation of etiological causes of this anomaly taking into consideration its
high prevalence and clinical significance. We invited for examination 61 families
of children with previously diagnosed PT ICA and used color Doppler duplex
scanning of brachiocephalic zone in examination of close relatives of a proband. 
Samples of venous blood were taken from a family member in whom PT ICA had been
detected and the affected child. The group of patients for genotyping comprised
100 individuals with PT ICA. Control group (n=245) was formed from DNA bank on
the basis of population approach. The following genetic methods of diagnosis were
applied: clinico-genealogical, allele specific polymerase chain reaction, search 
in available data bases of PT ICA candidate genes and their polymorphisms.
According to data of genealogy analysis in most cases inheritance of pathological
sign of tortuous ICA was autosomal dominant (37.7%) or autosomal-recessive
(39.3%). Association of A80807T polymorphism of the transcriptional factor Sp4
gene with PT ICA was established. Probability of PT ICA in A80807/A80807
homozygotes was 1.64 times higher than in carriers of 2 other genotypes
(A80807/T80807 and T80807/T80807).

PMID: 19656107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. World J Surg. 2009 Oct;33(10):2194-202. doi: 10.1007/s00268-009-0105-4.

Development of a large animal model for investigating resuscitation after blast
and hemorrhage.

Garner JP(1), Watts S, Parry C, Bird J, Kirkman E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Dstl, Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JQ, UK.

BACKGROUND: Blast injuries are an increasing problem owing to the widespread
terrorist threat, but hemorrhage remains the second leading cause of civilian
trauma death. Against this background, increasing numbers of prehospital and
military trauma organizations are advocating a hypotensive approach to
resuscitation of the hypovolemic casualty, deliberately aiming not to achieve a
normal blood pressure so as not to disturb any newly formed blood clots at the
site of a vascular injury.
METHODS: There are no data available to guide clinicians as to how best to
resuscitate the blast-injured casualty who has also suffered a hemorrhagic
injury. A large-scale program was initiated to examine this question and to offer
clinical guidance on the optimal resuscitation strategy in such circumstances in 
terms of volume, type of fluid, speed of resuscitation, and appropriate
endpoints. Before such experiments could be undertaken, a novel large animal
model of blast and hemorrhage had to be devised and validated. This study
outlines the derivation of such a large animal model utilizing terminally
anesthetized Large White pigs exposed to a standardized primary blast wave
followed by a controlled hemorrhage of 30% of the total blood volume.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: The preliminary results confirm the reliability and
reproducibility of this model.

PMID: 19653034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Virol J. 2009 Jul 31;6:118. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-6-118.

Improved efficacy of a gene optimised adenovirus-based vaccine for venezuelan
equine encephalitis virus.

Williams AJ(1), O'Brien LM, Phillpotts RJ, Perkins SD.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory,
Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 OJQ, UK. ajwilliams@dstl.gov.uk

BACKGROUND: Optimisation of genes has been shown to be beneficial for expression 
of proteins in a range of applications. Optimisation has increased protein
expression levels through improved codon usage of the genes and an increase in
levels of messenger RNA. We have applied this to an adenovirus (ad)-based vaccine
encoding structural proteins (E3-E2-6K) of Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus
(VEEV).
RESULTS: Following administration of this vaccine to Balb/c mice, an
approximately ten-fold increase in antibody response was elicited and increased
protective efficacy compared to an ad-based vaccine containing non-optimised
genes was observed after challenge.
CONCLUSION: This study, in which the utility of optimising genes encoding the
structural proteins of VEEV is demonstrated for the first time, informs us that
including optimised genes in gene-based vaccines for VEEV is essential to obtain 
maximum immunogenicity and protective efficacy.

PMCID: PMC2732613
PMID: 19646224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Int J Cancer. 2010 Jan 15;126(2):416-25. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24761.

Sp1 coordinately regulates de novo lipogenesis and proliferation in cancer cells.

Lu S(1), Archer MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of Toronto, ON, Canada.

Cancers express high levels of fatty acid synthase (FAS) from which they derive
fatty acids for membrane biosynthesis to sustain cell proliferation. How cancer
cells coordinate de novo lipogenesis and proliferation has not been investigated.
Transcription factors Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 are overexpressed in a variety of cancers 
and regulate gene expression by interacting with GC-rich Sp1 binding sites. Genes
encoding FAS and cell cycle proteins such as CDC25A contain Sp1 binding sites in 
their promoters. We demonstrate by RNA interference that Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 all
play a role in regulating CDC25A expression and proliferation in human breast
cancer cells. Only Sp1, however, also regulates FAS. Furthermore, mithramycin,
which blocks Sp1 binding sites, decreased proliferation, inhibited CDC25A and FAS
expression and reduced binding of Sp1 to the promoters of these genes as assessed
by ChIP assays. Conversely, 17beta-estradiol (E(2)) increased proliferation and
CDC25A and FAS expression along with increased binding of Sp1 to the promoters of
the 2 genes. In addition, we showed that the expression of sterol regulatory
element-binding protein-1c (SREBP-1c), the only transcription factor that has
been shown to regulate genes of lipogenic enzymes in cancer cells, is also
regulated by Sp1. Finally, we demonstrated that Sp1 plays a role in sustaining
proliferation and FAS expression in colon as well as prostate cancer cells.
Overall, these observations suggest that Sp1 coordinately regulates de novo
lipogenesis and proliferation in cancer cells.

PMID: 19621387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Mol Cancer Res. 2009 Jul;7(7):1169-78. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-08-0473. Epub
2009 Jul 7.

p21 expression is induced by activation of nuclear nerve growth factor-induced
Balpha (Nur77) in pancreatic cancer cells.

Lee SO(1), Chintharlapalli S, Liu S, Papineni S, Cho SD, Yoon K, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M University Health Science
Center, Houston, Texas, USA.

1,1-Bis(3'-indolyl)-1-(p-anisyl)methane (DIM-C-pPhOCH3) activates the orphan
receptor nerve growth factor-induced Balpha (Nur77) in cancer cells, and in this 
study, DIM-C-pPhOCH3 decreased Panc1 pancreatic cancer cell survival and arrested
cells in G0-G1. These responses were accompanied by induction of the
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 in pancreatic cancer cells. Mechanistic
studies showed that induction of p21 mRNA and protein by DIM-C-pPhOCH3 was Nur77 
dependent but did not depend on Krüppel-like factor 4, which was also induced by 
DIM-C-pPhOCH3. Activation of p21 promoter constructs by DIM-C-pPhOCH3 required
the GC-rich proximal region of the promoter, and results of RNA interference
studies showed that Nur77-dependent activation of the p21 promoter involved
interactions with Sp1 and Sp4 but not Sp3. Interactions of Nur77 with the p21
promoter in Panc1 cells treated with DIM-C-pPhOCH3 were also confirmed in
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. These data show that activation of nuclear 
Nur77 results in a novel pathway for induction of p21, which is independent of
Nur77 response elements but dependent on Sp proteins bound to the GC-rich
proximal region of the p21 promoter.

PMCID: PMC2739813
PMID: 19584258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Int J Cancer. 2009 Oct 15;125(8):1965-74. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24530.

Oncogenic microRNA-27a is a target for anticancer agent methyl
2-cyano-3,11-dioxo-18beta-olean-1,12-dien-30-oate in colon cancer cells.

Chintharlapalli S(1), Papineni S, Abdelrahim M, Abudayyeh A, Jutooru I,
Chadalapaka G, Wu F, Mertens-Talcott S, Vanderlaag K, Cho SD, Smith R 3rd, Safe
S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M University Health Science
Center, Houston, TX 77843-4466, USA.

Methyl 2-cyano-3,11-dioxo-18beta-olean-1,12-dien-30-oate (CDODA-Me) is a
synthetic derivative of glycyrrhetinic acid, a triterpenoid phytochemical found
in licorice extracts. CDODA-Me inhibited growth of RKO and SW480 colon cancer
cells and this was accompanied by decreased expression of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4
protein and mRNA and several Sp-dependent genes including survivin, vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and VEGF receptor 1 (VEGFR1 or Flt-1). CDODA-Me
also induced apoptosis, arrested RKO and SW480 cells at G(2)/M, and inhibited
tumor growth in athymic nude mice bearing RKO cells as xenografts. CDODA-Me
decreased expression of microRNA-27a (miR-27a), and this was accompanied by
increased expression of 2 miR-27a-regulated mRNAs, namely ZBTB10 (an Sp
repressor) and Myt-1 which catalyzes phosphorylation of cdc2 to inhibit
progression of cells through G(2)/M. Both CDODA-Me and antisense miR-27a induced 
comparable responses in RKO and SW480 cells, suggesting that the potent
anticarcinogenic activity of CDODA-Me is due to repression of oncogenic miR-27a.

PMCID: PMC2766353
PMID: 19582879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. J Immunol Methods. 2009 Aug 31;348(1-2):30-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2009.06.007.
Epub 2009 Jun 26.

Multiplex cytokine profiling with highly pathogenic material: use of formalin
solution in luminex analysis.

Dowall SD(1), Graham VA, Tipton TR, Hewson R.

Author information: 
(1)Health Protection Agency, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JG, UK.
stuart.dowall@hpa.org.uk

Work with highly pathogenic material mandates the use of biological containment
facilities, involving microbiological safety cabinets and specialist laboratory
engineering structures typified by containment level 3 (CL3) and CL4
laboratories. Consequences of working in high containment are the practical
difficulties associated with containing specialist assays and equipment often
essential for experimental analyses. In an era of increased interest in
biodefence pathogens and emerging diseases, immunological analysis has developed 
rapidly alongside traditional techniques in virology and molecular biology. For
example, in order to maximise the use of small sample volumes, multiplexing has
become a more popular and widespread approach to quantify multiple analytes
simultaneously, such as cytokines and chemokines. The luminex microsphere system 
allows for the detection of many cytokines and chemokines in a single sample, but
the detection method of using aligned lasers and fluidics means that samples
often have to be analysed in low containment facilities. In order to perform
cytokine analysis in materials from high containment (CL3 and CL4 laboratories), 
we have developed an appropriate inactivation methodology after staining steps,
which although results in a reduction of median fluorescent intensity, produces
statistically comparable outcomes when judged against non-inactivated samples.
This methodology thus extends the use of luminex technology for material that
contains highly pathogenic biological agents.

PMID: 19560467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2009 Oct;42(2):152-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2009.06.008. Epub
2009 Jun 22.

Sp4-dependent repression of neurotrophin-3 limits dendritic branching.

Ramos B(1), Valín A, Sun X, Gill G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cellular Biology, Tufts University School of
Medicine, 136 Harrison Ave., Boston, MA 02111, USA.

Regulation of neuronal gene expression is critical to establish functional
connections in the mammalian nervous system. The transcription factor Sp4
regulates dendritic patterning during cerebellar granule neuron development by
limiting branching and promoting activity-dependent pruning. Here, we investigate
neurotrophin-3 (NT3) as a target gene important for Sp4-dependent dendritic
morphogenesis. We found that Sp4 overexpression reduced NT3 promoter activity
whereas knockdown of Sp4 increased NT3 promoter activity and mRNA. Moreover, Sp4 
bound to the NT3 promoter in vivo, supporting a direct role for Sp4 as a
repressor of NT3 expression. Addition of exogenous NT3 promoted dendritic
branching in cerebellar granule neurons. Furthermore, sequestering NT3 blocked
the continued addition of dendritic branches observed upon Sp4 knockdown, but had
no effect on dendrite pruning. These findings demonstrate that, during cerebellar
granule neuron development, Sp4-dependent repression of neurotrophin-3 is
required to limit dendritic branching and thereby promote acquisition of the
mature dendritic pattern.

PMCID: PMC2727929
PMID: 19555762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. J Med Microbiol. 2009 Aug;58(Pt 8):977-87. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.011122-0. Epub 2009
Jun 15.

Novel peptide therapeutics for treatment of infections.

Oyston PC(1), Fox MA, Richards SJ, Clark GC.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK.
pcoyston@dstl.gov.uk

As antibiotic resistance increases worldwide, there is an increasing pressure to 
develop novel classes of antimicrobial compounds to fight infectious disease.
Peptide therapeutics represent a novel class of therapeutic agents. Some, such as
cationic antimicrobial peptides and peptidoglycan recognition proteins, have been
identified from studies of innate immune effector mechanisms, while others are
completely novel compounds generated in biological systems. Currently, only
selected cationic antimicrobial peptides have been licensed, and only for topical
applications. However, research using new approaches to identify novel
antimicrobial peptide therapeutics, and new approaches to delivery and improving 
stability, will result in an increased range of peptide therapeutics available in
the clinic for broader applications.

PMID: 19528155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. J Med Microbiol. 2009 Jul;58(Pt 7):923-9. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.008128-0. Epub 2009 
Jun 5.

The cationic peptide magainin II is antimicrobial for Burkholderia
cepacia-complex strains.

Thwaite JE(1), Humphrey S, Fox MA, Savage VL, Laws TR, Ulaeto DO, Titball RW,
Atkins HS.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.

This study was undertaken to determine the antibacterial activity of eight
cationic antimicrobial peptides towards strains of genomovars I-V of the
Burkholderia cepacia complex (Bcc) in time-kill assays. All but one of the
peptides failed to show activity against the panel of test strains. The exception
was magainin II, a 23 aa peptide isolated from the epidermis of the African
clawed frog, Xenopus laevis, which exhibited significant bactericidal activity
for Bcc genomovars most frequently associated with lung infection of patients
with cystic fibrosis. In vitro studies indicated that magainin II protected a
human bronchial epithelial cell line (BEAS-2B) from killing by Bcc and suggest
that this peptide may have therapeutic potential against these organisms.

PMID: 19502364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2009 Nov;34(5):474-6. doi:
10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2009.04.006. Epub 2009 Jun 4.

Efficacy of ciprofloxacin versus doxycycline as prophylaxis against experimental 
murine Brucella melitensis infection.

Atkins HS(1), Spencer S, Brew SD, Jenner DC, Russell P, MacMillan AP, Eley SM,
Simpson AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, 
Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK. hsatkins@dstl.gov.uk

The prophylactic potential of ciprofloxacin was assessed in comparison with
doxycycline, an established therapeutic antibiotic, to limit or control infection
by Brucella melitensis in an experimental mouse model. Ciprofloxacin treatment
reduced bacterial loads in the spleens of challenged mice when administered prior
to or at the same time as the bacterial challenge. In comparison, doxycycline
provided much greater reductions in bacterial counts, even when treatment was
initiated after infection. Doxycycline was able to protect against B. melitensis 
when administered for 5 days from 24 h after infection and for at least 28 days
after cessation of the antibiotic. Overall, these results confirm that
ciprofloxacin is less effective than doxycycline but suggest that it may have
some utility in providing protection against low-level infections. Combination
studies are indicated.

PMID: 19500948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Vaccine. 2009 Jul 16;27(33):4447-51. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2009.05.040. Epub
2009 May 31.

Protective efficacy of heat-inactivated B. thailandensis, B. mallei or B.
pseudomallei against experimental melioidosis and glanders.

Sarkar-Tyson M(1), Smither SJ, Harding SV, Atkins TP, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, 
SP4 OJQ, UK. mstyson@dstl.gov.uk

Burkholderia pseudomallei and Burkholderia mallei are gram-negative bacilli that 
are the causative agents of melioidosis and glanders, respectively. Both humans
and animals are susceptible to both diseases. There is currently no vaccine
available for the prevention of disease. We report the protective efficacy of
heat-inactivated Burkholderia thailandensis, B. mallei or B. pseudomallei cells
as vaccines against murine melioidosis and glanders. Immunisation with
heat-inactivated B. pseudomallei cells provided the highest levels of protection 
against either melioidosis or glanders. These studies indicate the longer term
potential for heat-inactivated bacteria to be developed as vaccines against
melioidosis and glanders.

PMID: 19490962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Gene. 2009 Aug 15;443(1-2):55-63. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2009.05.003. Epub 2009 May 
18.

Regulation of RASSF1A in nasopharyngeal cells and its response to UV irradiation.

Lee VH(1), Chow BK, Lo KW, Chow LS, Man C, Tsao SW, Lee LT.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road,
Hong Kong, China.

RASSF1A, which is frequently found inactivated in human cancers, is revealed as a
tumor suppressor gene in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). Using RASSF1A-expressing
(NP69 and HK-1) and non-RASSF1A-expressing (C666-1) cell models, the
transcriptional regulation of RASSF1A was studied. By deletion analysis of 3.1 kb
of 5' flanking region, the core promoter of RASSF1A was identified in the region 
between -431 and -1 upstream of the translation start site. Sequence analysis of 
this core promoter revealed several putative transcription factor binding sties. 
Using NP69 cells and by block replacement mutagenesis, the presence of three
functional GC-boxes were identified, to which by competitive and supershift
electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA), the in vitro bindings of Sp1 and
Sp3 were suggested. The in vivo functions of Sp-proteins in regulating RASSF1A
gene were then investigated by overexpression studies; among the tested
Sp-proteins, Sp1 or Sp3, but not Sp4, was able to augment promoter activities.
More interestingly, co-expression of Sp1 and Sp3 could synergistically enhance
RASSF1A promoter function. UV irradiation induces oxidation stresses and hence is
routinely used to investigate expressions of oncogenes and tumor suppressors. In 
this report, upon UV irradiation, the RASSF1A promoter activity and endogenous
transcript levels were found to be reduced. By chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) and EMSA, we demonstrated that the binding of Sp1 and Sp3 onto -431 to
-202 were significantly reduced after UV irradiation. This UV-mediated effect on 
RASSF1A promoter, as shown by specific inhibitors that interrupt cellular
pathways, is MEK1-, but not JNK-dependent. In summary, our data provided a simple
model to explain the potential development of NPC, via silencing of the tumor
suppressor RASSF1A by reduced bindings of activators Sp1 and Sp3 onto the
GC-boxes in the core promoter of the gene.

PMID: 19450668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. J Neuroinflammation. 2009 May 18;6:16. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-6-16.

Unique aspects of transcriptional regulation in neurons--nuances in NFkappaB and 
Sp1-related factors.

Mao XR(1), Moerman-Herzog AM, Chen Y, Barger SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St
Louis, MO 63110, USA. maox@morpheus.wustl.edu

The unique physiology and function of neurons create differences in their
cellular physiology, including their regulation of gene expression. We began
several years ago exploring the relationships between the NFkappaB transcription 
factor, neuronal survival, and glutamate receptor activation in telencephalic
neurons. These studies led us to conclude that this population of cells is nearly
incapable of activating the NFkappaB that is nonetheless expressed at reasonable 
levels. A subset of the kappaB cis elements are instead bound by members of the
Sp1 family in neurons. Also surprising was our discovery that Sp1 itself,
typically described as ubiquitous, is severely restricted in expression within
forebrain neurons; Sp4 seems to be substituted during neuronal differentiation.
These findings and their implications for neuronal differentiation--as well as
potential dedifferentiation during degenerative processes--are discussed here.

PMCID: PMC2693111
PMID: 19450264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2009 May 9;7:41. doi: 10.1186/1477-7827-7-41.

Mechanisms of matrix metalloproteinase-2 (mmp-2) transcriptional repression by
progesterone in jar choriocarcinoma cells.

Goldman S(1), Lovett DH, Shalev E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Research in Reproductive Sciences, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, HaEmek Medical Centre, Afula, Israel. goldman_s@clalit.org.il

BACKGROUND: Although the MMP-2 promoter lacks a canonical progesterone response
element (PRE), the hormone inhibits MMP-2 expression and is part of treatment
protocols in gynecological invasive pathologies, including endometriosis and
endometrial hyperplasia. This study aimed to explore the mechanism by which
progesterone inhibits MMP-2 expression.
METHODS: The effect of progesterone on MMP-2 expression in the JAR human
choriocarcinoma cell line was analyzed by gelatin zymography. MMP-2 transcript
expression was studied using Northern blot and semi-quantitative RT-PCR. Rat
promoter deletion analysis, electrophoretic mobility shift and chromatin
immuno-precipitation assays were performed in order to locate the DNA binding
site and the transcription factors involved in MMP-2 regulation.
RESULTS: Progesterone significantly decreased secretion of pro-MMP-2 and MMP-2
transcript expression level in a dose-dependent manner. Progesterone (1 microM)
significantly decreased both human and rat MMP-2 promoter activity (80.1% +/- 0.3
and 81.3% +/- 0.23, respectively). Progesterone acts through the SP1 family
transcription factors-binding site, located between -1433 and -1342 bp region
from the transcriptional start site of the rat MMP-2 promoter, which are present 
in the orthologous human MMP-2 promoter. Progesterone receptor (PR), SP2, SP3 and
SP4 proteins are constitutively bound to this consensus sequence.
CONCLUSION: Progesterone reduces PR and SP4 binding to the MMP-2 promoter,
thereby suppressing transcription. Progesterone also promotes SP4 degradation.
These novel mechanisms of MMP-2 regulation by progesterone provide the biological
rationale for the use of progesterone in clinical settings associated with
increased MMP-2 expression.

PMCID: PMC2687445
PMID: 19426551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. J Appl Microbiol. 2009 Oct;107(4):1384-91. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2672.2009.04325.x.
Epub 2009 Apr 22.

An assay for botulinum toxin types A, B and F that requires both functional
binding and catalytic activities within the neurotoxin.

Evans ER(1), Skipper PJ, Shone CC.

Author information: 
(1)Health Protection Agency, Centre for Emergency Preparedness & Response, Porton
Down, Salisbury, Wilts SP4 0JG, UK. liz.evans@hpa.org.uk

AIM: To develop a novel assay technique for the botulinum neurotoxin family
(BoNTs) which is dependent on both the endopeptidase and receptor-binding
activities of the BoNTs and which is insensitive to antigenic variation with the 
toxin family.
METHODS AND RESULTS: An endopeptidase activity, receptor-binding assay (EARB
assay) has been developed which captures biologically active toxin from media
using brain synaptosomes. After capture, the bound toxin can be incubated with
its substrate, and cleavage detected using serotype-specific antibodies raised
against the cleaved product of each toxin serotype. The EARB assay was assessed
using a range of BoNT serotypes and subtypes. For BoNT/A, detection limits for
subtypes A(1), A(2) and A(3) were 0.5, 3 and 10 MLD(50) ml(-1), respectively. The
limit of detection for BoNT/B(1) was 5 MLD(50) ml(-1) and a novel antibody-based 
endopeptidase assay for BoNT/F detected toxin at 0.5 MLD(50) ml(-1). All these
BoNTs can be captured from media containing up to 10% serum without loss of
sensitivity. BoNT/A(1) could also be detected in dilutions of a lactose-
containing formulation similar to that used for clinical preparations of the
toxin. Different serotypes were found to possess different optimal cleavage pHs
(pH 6.5 for A(1), pH 7.4 for B(1)).
CONCLUSIONS: The EARB assay has been shown to be able to detect a broad range of 
BoNT serotypes and subtypes from various media.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: The EARB assay system described is the
first convenient in vitro assay system described which is requires multiple
functional biological activities with the BoNTs. The assay will have applications
in instances where it is essential or desirable to distinguish biologically
active from inactive neurotoxin.

PMID: 19426271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Carcinogenesis. 2009 Jul;30(7):1193-201. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgp092. Epub 2009
Apr 30.

Tolfenamic acid inhibits esophageal cancer through repression of specificity
proteins and c-Met.

Papineni S(1), Chintharlapalli S, Abdelrahim M, Lee SO, Burghardt R, Abudayyeh A,
Baker C, Herrera L, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX 77843-4466, USA.

The non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug tolfenamic acid (TA) inhibits
proliferation of SEG-1 and BIC-1 esophageal cancer cells with half-maximal growth
inhibitory concentration values of 36 and 48 muM, respectively. TA also increased
Annexin V staining in both cell lines, indicative of proapoptotic activity.
Treatment of SEG-1 and BIC-1 cells with TA for up to 72 h decreased expression of
specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 and this was
accompanied by decreased expression of the well-characterized Sp-regulated genes 
cyclin D1, vascular endothelial growth factor and survivin. TA also decreased
hepatocyte growth factor receptor, (c-Met), a receptor tyrosine kinase that is
overexpressed in esophageal cancer cells and tumors and is an important drug
target. Knockdown of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 by RNA interference in SEG-1 and BIC-1
cells also decreased c-Met expression, demonstrating that c-Met is an
Sp-regulated gene in esophageal cancer cells. Sp1 was overexpressed in esophageal
cancer cells and tumors and increased Sp1 staining was observed in esophageal
tumors from patients. TA (20 mg/kg/day) also decreased tumor growth and weight in
athymic nude mice bearing SEG-1 cells as xenografts and this was accompanied by
increased apoptosis and decreased Sp1 and c-Met staining in tumors from treated
mice. Thus, TA-dependent downregulation of Sp transcription factors and c-Met
defines a novel chemotherapeutic approach for treatment of esophageal cancer.

PMCID: PMC2704282
PMID: 19406933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. PLoS One. 2009;4(4):e5196. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005196. Epub 2009 Apr 9.

Transcription factor SP4 is a susceptibility gene for bipolar disorder.

Zhou X(1), Tang W, Greenwood TA, Guo S, He L, Geyer MA, Kelsoe JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California San Diego, La Jolla,
California, United States of America.

The Sp4 transcription factor plays a critical role for both development and
function of mouse hippocampus. Reduced expression of the mouse Sp4 gene results
in a variety of behavioral abnormalities relevant to human psychiatric disorders.
The human SP4 gene is therefore examined for its association with both bipolar
disorder and schizophrenia in European Caucasian and Chinese populations
respectively. Out of ten SNPs selected from human SP4 genomic locus, four
displayed significant association with bipolar disorder in European Caucasian
families (rs12668354, p = 0.022; rs12673091, p = 0.0005; rs3735440, p = 0.019;
rs11974306, p = 0.018). To replicate the genetic association, the same set of
SNPs was examined in a Chinese bipolar case control sample. Four SNPs displayed
significant association (rs40245, p = 0.009; rs12673091, p = 0.002; rs1018954, p 
= 0.001; rs3735440, p = 0.029), and two of them (rs12673091, rs3735440) were
shared with positive SNPs from European Caucasian families. Considering the
genetic overlap between bipolar disorder and schizophrenia, we extended our
studies in Chinese trios families for schizophrenia. The SNP7 (rs12673091, p =
0.012) also displayed a significant association. The SNP7 (rs12673091) was
therefore significantly associated in all three samples, and shared the same
susceptibility allele (A) across all three samples. On the other hand, we found a
gene dosage effect for mouse Sp4 gene in the modulation of sensorimotor gating, a
putative endophenotype for both schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. The deficient
sensorimotor gating in Sp4 hypomorphic mice was partially reversed by the
administration of dopamine D2 antagonist or mood stabilizers. Both human genetic 
and mouse pharmacogenetic studies support Sp4 gene as a susceptibility gene for
bipolar disorder or schizophrenia. The studies on the role of Sp4 gene in
hippocampal development may provide novel insights for the contribution of
hippocampal abnormalities in these psychiatric disorders.

PMCID: PMC2674320
PMID: 19401786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Colloids Surf B Biointerfaces. 2009 Aug 1;72(1):6-15. doi:
10.1016/j.colsurfb.2009.03.006. Epub 2009 Mar 24.

Solution properties and vesicle formation of rhamnolipid biosurfactants produced 
by Pseudomonas aeruginosa SP4.

Pornsunthorntawee O(1), Chavadej S, Rujiravanit R.

Author information: 
(1)The Petroleum and Petrochemical College, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok,
Thailand.

A biosurfactant produced by Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain SP4 was previously
reported as a mixture of 11 types of rhamnolipid compounds. Among them, the major
component in the biosurfactant was characterized as
l-rhamnosyl-3-hydroxydecanoyl-3-hydroxydecanoate, or monorhamnolipid
(Rha-C(10)-C(10)). In this present study, solution properties of the
biosurfactant were investigated in a phosphate-buffer saline (PBS) solution (pH
7.4) by using surface tension, turbidity, electrical conductivity, and dynamic
light scattering (DLS) measurements. It was found that spherical biosurfactant
vesicles of various sizes (ranging from 50 to larger than 250 nm) were
spontaneously formed at a biosurfactant concentration greater than its critical
micelle concentration (CMC), which was 200mg/l. The encapsulation efficiency (E%)
of the biosurfactant vesicles was preliminarily studied by using Sudan III, a
water-insoluble dye, as a model hydrophobic substance. The obtained results
showed that the vesicle formed in the PBS solution at a biosurfactant
concentration of 1280 mg/l could entrap about 10% of the initial hydrophobic dye 
concentration. The effects of salt and alcohol on the vesicle formation of the
biosurfactant and its encapsulation efficiency were also observed by using sodium
chloride (NaCl) and ethanol (C(2)H(5)OH), respectively. In the presence of either
NaCl or C(2)H(5)OH, the vesicle size was reduced from larger than 250 nm to
50-250 nm. The encapsulation efficiency of the biosurfactant vesicle was slightly
influenced by the addition of NaCl, but was significantly increased, up to nearly
30%, in the presence of C(2)H(5)OH.

PMID: 19380215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Vaccine. 2009 May 11;27(21):2775-80. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2009.03.011. Epub
2009 Mar 13.

Small protective fragments of the Yersinia pestis V antigen.

Vernazza C(1), Lingard B, Flick-Smith HC, Baillie LW, Hill J, Atkins HS.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, 
SP4 0JQ, UK. clvernazza@dstl.gov.uk

Yersinia pestis is the causative agent of plague. Naturally occurring cases of
the disease and the potential use of Y. pestis as a bioweapon fuel the need for
efficacious vaccines. The most recent plague vaccine is a killed whole cell
preparation that is expensive to manufacture and its side effects are common. The
protective antigens F1 and V have been identified and are currently being
developed as a combined subunit vaccine. Protective epitopes of the V antigen
have previously been shown to reside in the central part of the protein. In order
to identify the minimum protective fragment of the V antigen that can provide
protection against plague, the structures of several small fragments of the
antigen were modelled in silico and recombinant proteins were produced. These
fragments were probed for the retention of a protective epitope using a
protective monoclonal antibody and protection against Y. pestis in mice was
determined. The smallest protective fragment of V antigen identified comprised
amino acids 135-262. Finally the ability of this fragment to confer protection
when given in the context of a DNA vaccine was confirmed.

PMID: 19366573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed). 2009 Jan 1;14:3688-711.

Seizure activity post organophosphate exposure.

Tattersall J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4
0JQ, UK. JTattersall@dstl.gov.uk

Electrographic seizures are a feature of organophosphate anticholinesterase
intoxication. Clinical studies of pesticide poisonings suggest that seizures are 
more common in children than in adults. Since flaccid paralysis, a characteristic
sign of organophosphate poisoning, can mask convulsions, the most reliable
indicator of seizures is the electroencephalogram, but this has not been widely
used in clinical studies. Seizures can rapidly progress to status epilepticus,
contributing to mortality and, in survivors, to neuronal damage and neurological 
impairment. Anticonvulsant drugs can significantly reduce the lethal and toxic
effects of these compounds. A benzodiazepine, usually diazepam, is the treatment 
currently indicated for control of seizures. Animal studies have indicated that
the early phase of seizure activity (0-5 min after seizure onset) is purely
cholinergic, predominantly involving muscarinic mechanisms. Seizure activity
subsequently progresses through mixed cholinergic and noncholinergic modulation
(5-40 min) into a final noncholinergic phase. Neuropathology caused by seizures
is most likely associated with glutamatergic excitotoxicity. Future prospects for
improved treatments include new benzodiazepines, glutamate receptor antagonists, 
antimuscarinics with additional antiglutamatergic activity and adenosine receptor
antagonists.

PMID: 19273303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. J Gen Virol. 2009 Apr;90(Pt 4):874-82. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.006833-0. Epub 2009 Mar
4.

Alpha interferon as an adenovirus-vectored vaccine adjuvant and antiviral in
Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus infection.

O'Brien L(1), Perkins S, Williams A, Eastaugh L, Phelps A, Wu J, Phillpotts R.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory,
Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK. lmobrien@dstl.gov.uk

There are no widely available vaccines or antiviral drugs capable of protecting
against infection with Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus (VEEV), although an
adenovirus vector expressing VEEV structural proteins protects mice from
challenge with VEEV and is potentially a vaccine suitable for human use. This
work examines whether alpha interferon (IFN-alpha) could act as an adjuvant for
the adenovirus-based vaccine. IFN-alpha was either expressed by a plasmid linked 
to the adenovirus vaccine or encoded by a separate adenovirus vector administered
as a mixture with the vaccine. In contrast to previous reports with other
vaccines, the presence of IFN-alpha reduced the antibody response to VEEV. When
IFN-alpha was encoded by adenovirus, the lack of a VEEV-specific response was
accompanied by an increase in the immune response to the adenovirus vector.
IFN-alpha also plays a direct role in defence against virus infection, inducing
the expression of a large number of antiviral proteins. Adenovirus-delivered
IFN-alpha protected mice from VEEV disease when administered 24 h prior to
challenge, but not when administered 6 h post-challenge, suggesting that up to 24
h is required for the development of the IFN-mediated antiviral response.

PMID: 19264673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. J Chromatogr A. 2009 Apr 10;1216(15):3360-5. doi: 10.1016/j.chroma.2009.01.083.
Epub 2009 Jan 31.

Enantioseparation of beta-substituted tryptophan analogues with modified
cyclodextrins by capillary zone electrophoresis.

Ilisz I(1), Fodor G, Berkecz R, Iványi R, Szente L, Péter A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Inorganic and Analytical Chemistry, University of Szeged,
Szeged, Hungary.

Direct capillary zone electrophoretic methods were developed for the separation
of the enantiomers of unnatural beta-substituted tryptophan analogues such as
erythro- and threo-beta-methyl-, beta-2-propyl-, beta-3-pentyl-, beta-phenyl- and
beta-2,5-dimethoxyphenyltryptophan. Cyclodextrins (CDs) were chosen as chiral
selectors because of their favorable properties (stability, commercial
availability, low cost, UV transparency, inertness, etc.). Capillary zone
electrophoresis was carried out using sulfopropylated-alpha-CD (SP2-alpha-CD),
sulfopropylated-beta-CD (SP2-beta-CD) both with a degree of substitution of
2moles/mole cyclodextrin, and sulfopropylated-beta-CD (SP4-beta-CD) with a degree
of substitution of 4moles/mole beta-cyclodextrin. With this technique all
compounds investigated are baseline resolved using different background
electrolytes and chiral additives. The elution sequence was determined in all
cases.

PMID: 19215927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Clin Dermatol. 2009 Mar-Apr;27(2):148-58. doi:
10.1016/j.clindermatol.2008.01.007.

The internal and external use of medicinal plants.

Dweck AC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dweck Data, Ford, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 6DF, UK. dweckdata@aol.com

The term "cosmeceutical" is not defined in terms of the law. A review of some of 
the more commonly used dietary supplements and their chemistry and topical use
confirms that there is merit in using these plants both internally and
externally. The role of flavonoids, isoflavones, phytosterol, and plant
hormone-related chemicals are examined for their physiological effect.

PMID: 19167996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Methods Mol Biol. 2009;465:153-71. doi: 10.1007/978-1-59745-207-6_10.

Continuous culture of mycobacteria.

Bacon J(1), Hatch KA.

Author information: 
(1)TB Research, Health Protection Agency, CEPR, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 OJG,
UK. Joanna.bacon@hpa.org.uk

Batch cultures have predominately been used for the study of physiology and gene 
expression in mycobacteria. This chapter describes the assembly of chemostats and
the methodology that is being used for growing Mycobacterium tuberculosis in
continuous culture, which provides the greatest control over experimental
conditions. It is difficult to determine the underlying genetic changes that
enable M. tuberculosis to adapt to the host environment, but in vitro experiments
aid the interpretation of gene expression profiles of the bacillus in vivo.
Selecting relevant host conditions for study presents a major challenge. Oxygen
availability has been identified as an important environmental stimulus and is a 
simple parameter to adjust and monitor. Described here are continuous culture
methods to determine the response of M. tuberculosis to low oxygen environments.

PMID: 20560079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Beijing Da Xue Xue Bao. 2008 Dec 18;40(6):557-61.

[Cloning deletion of mouse medullary CD4SP thymocyte subgroups induced by
superantigen staphylococcal enterotoxin B].

[Article in Chinese]

Li J(1), Zhou YB, Zhang Y, Zhang J, Chen WF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Peking University School of Basic Medical Sciences, 
Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the clonal deletion of medullary CD4SP thymocyte
subgroups induced by superantigen SEB, and to understand the stage specificity of
thymic negative selection based on the developmental pathway of medullary CD4SP
thymocytes we established previously.
METHODS: SEB was intravenously injected into C57BL/6 mice, and then the
expression of surface molecules and apoptosis of thymocytes were detected by
FACS. The reduction of each subgroup of medullary CD4SP thymocytes was analyzed
by FACS assay and cell counting.
RESULTS: The percentage of apoptotic CD4SP thymocytes significantly increased
after the intravenous injection of SEB. The cell number of CD4SP decreased about 
43.8%. Among TCR Vbeta8(+)CD4SP thymocytes, the percentage of
6C10(+)CD69(+)Qa-2(-)thymocytes(SP1) was reduced by two thirds and the percentage
of Qa-2(+) thymocytes(SP4) was comparatively increased, while the cell numbers of
SP1 to SP3 decreased over 80% and that of SP4 decreased about 50%.
CONCLUSION: Thymic negative selection occurs during the stage of SP and goes
through the whole developmental progress from SP1 to SP4.The thymocytes in the
stage of SP1 to SP3 are more sensitive to apoptosis than those in the stage of
SP4.

PMID: 19088822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. World J Gastroenterol. 2008 Nov 14;14(42):6496-502.

Effects of electroacupuncture on cardiac and gastric activities in acute
myocardial ischemia rats.

Wang SB(1), Chen SP, Gao YH, Luo MF, Liu JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Institute of Acu-moxibustion, China Academy of
Chinese Medical Sciences, 16 Nanxiaojie, Dongzhimennei, Beijing 100700, China.

AIM: To observe the effect of electroacupuncture (EA) of "Neiguan" (PC6) and
"Gongsun" (SP4) on pathological changes of the heart and stomach in rats with
acute myocardial ischemia (AMI), and to explore its underlying mechanism.
METHODS: Fifty Wistar rats were randomized into control, model, PC6, SP4 and PC6 
+ SP4 groups (n = 8 each group). An AMI model was established by occlusion of the
descending anterior branch (DAB) of the left coronary artery. ECG-ST of
cervico-thoracic lead and electrogastrogram (EGG) were recorded. EA was applied
to PC6, SP4 and PC6 + SP4 groups, respectively. At the end of experiments, the
rats were transcardically perfused with 4% paraformaldehyde, and the heart base
myocardium, gastric antrum and duodenum tissues were sampled, sectioned and
stained with a reduced form of nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide phosphate
(NADPH)-diaphorase histochemical method for displaying nitric oxide synthase
(NOS) activity.
RESULTS: After AMI, ECG-ST values elevated. After EA, the elevated ECG-ST values 
at 20 min in PC6 group, at 30 min in PC6 + SP4 and SP4 groups had no significant 
differences in comparison with their respective basal values before AMI.
Following AMI, the amplitude and frequency of slow waves of EGG decreased
remarkably (P < 0.05). At 30 min after EA, the mean amplitude and frequency of
slow waves of EGG in the three EA groups had no marked differences compared with 
their individual basal levels and those in the control group. After AMI, the mean
integral grey values of NOS-positive product in myocardium, gastric antrum and
duodenum tissues in the model group increased remarkably in comparison with the
control group, while those in three EA groups were lower than those in the model 
group. No significant differences were found in ECG-ST and EGG improvement among 
the three EA groups. However, EA of PC6 had a better effect on ECG-ST and EA of
PC4 had a better effect on EGG, respectively.
CONCLUSION: EA of PC6, SP4 and PC6 + SP4 can significantly promote the recovery
of cardiac and gastric electrical activities after AMI, and up-regulate NOS
expression in myocardium, gastric antrum and duodenum tissues.

PMCID: PMC2773335
PMID: 19030201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Org Biomol Chem. 2008 Nov 21;6(22):4167-75. doi: 10.1039/b810108f. Epub 2008 Sep 
22.

Conformational preferences and basicities of monofluorinated cyclopropyl amines
in comparison to cyclopropylamine and 2-fluoroethylamine.

Hyla-Kryspin I(1), Grimme S, Hruschka S, Haufe G.

Author information: 
(1)Organisch-Chemisches Institut der Universität Münster, Corrensstr. 40,
D-48149, Münster, Germany. ihk@uni-muenster.de

Fluorine substituents in organic molecules do dramatically influence the
electronic structure of neighbouring functional groups and the conformation of
molecules. Hence the presence of fluorine in a compound changes its chemical
reactivity and biological activity. On the basis of MP2 and SCS-MP2 calculations,
we discuss the conformational preferences and basicity of the diastereoisomeric
2-fluorocyclopropylamines (cis-2 and trans-2) in comparison to those of
cyclopropylamine (1) and 2-fluoroethylamine (3). 1 and 2 are viewed as model
compounds for the antidepressant drug tranylcypromine
(trans-2-phenylcyclopropylamine, 1a) and its fluorinated derivatives 2. The
potential energy profile for the rotation of the amino group in cis-2 differs
from that of trans-2 and 1 which have very similar rotational curves. For 2 the
global minimum conformer is trans-2a and the lowest energy cis-conformer 2c is
less stable by 2.57 kcal mol(-1). The calculated enthalpy differences between the
conformers gauche-1b and s-trans-1a (2.0 kcal mol(-1)) as well as between
gauche-3b and gauche-4a (0.2 kcal mol(-1)) agree well with the available
experimental data of 2.0 kcal mol(-1) and 0.1 +/- 0.3 kcal mol(-1), respectively.
The calculated gas phase proton affinities (PA) of 1 (217.6 kcal mol(-1)), cis-2c
(215.6 kcal mol(-1)), and trans-2a (209.3 kcal mol(-1)) follow the trends of the 
pKa values measured in solution for the diastereomeric 2-phenylcyclopropylamines 
1a and 1b and their fluorinated derivatives cis-2 and trans-2. It is shown that
the conformational preferences and basicity of the investigated molecules are due
to stereoelectronic effects from hyperconjugative interactions which lead to
different local charge distributions and different hybridization of the nitrogen 
lone-pair. The basicity of gauche-3a (PA = 215.3 kcal mol(-1)) and anti-3b (PA = 
210.1 kcal mol(-1)) is controlled by the charge of the nitrogen atom, while that 
of cis-2c and trans-2a is overlap controlled as a result of different
hybridization of the nitrogen lone-pair [sp4.34 (cis-2c), sp4.07 (trans-2a)].

PMID: 18972047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. J Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Jan;42(1):19-33. doi: 10.1677/JME-08-0088. Epub 2008 Oct
24.

Role of SP transcription factors in hormone-dependent modulation of genes in
MCF-7 breast cancer cells: microarray and RNA interference studies.

Wu F(1), Ivanov I, Xu R, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College
Station, Texas 77843, USA.

17beta-estradiol (E(2)) binds estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) in MCF-7 cells and
increases cell proliferation and survival through induction or repression of
multiple genes. ESR1 interactions with DNA-bound specificity protein (SP)
transcription factors is a nonclassical genomic estrogenic pathway and the role
of SP transcription factors in mediating hormone-dependent activation or
repression of genes in MCF-7 cells was investigated by microarrays and RNA
interference. MCF-7 cells were transfected with a nonspecific oligonucleotide or 
a cocktail of small inhibitory RNAs (iSP), which knockdown SP1, SP3, and SP4
proteins, and treated with dimethylsulfoxide or 10 nM E(2) for 6 h. E(2) induced 
62 and repressed 134 genes and the induction or repression was reversed in
approximately 62% of the genes in cells transfected with iSP (ESR1/SP dependent),
whereas hormonal activation or repression of the remaining genes was unaffected
by iSP (SP independent). Analysis of the ESR1/SP-dependent and SP-independent
genes showed minimal overlap with respect to the GO terms (functional processes) 
in genes induced or repressed, suggesting that the different genomic pathways may
contribute independently to the hormone-induced phenotype in MCF-7 cells.

PMCID: PMC2642616
PMID: 18952783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Microbes Infect. 2008 Nov-Dec;10(14-15):1577-81. doi:
10.1016/j.micinf.2008.09.004. Epub 2008 Sep 23.

Immunogenicity of orally-delivered lipid-formulated BCG vaccines and protection
against Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection.

Vipond J(1), Cross ML, Lambeth MR, Clark S, Aldwell FE, Williams A.

Author information: 
(1)Health Protection Agency, Centre for Emergency Preparedness and Response,
Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG, United Kingdom. julia.vipond@hpa.org.uk

Lipid formulations containing BCG strains Danish 1331 or Moreau (Rio de Janeiro) 
were trialled as oral vaccines in rodent models. In mice, oral-delivery of either
strain resulted in BCG colonisation of the alimentary tract lymphatics and
induction of gamma-interferon responses. In guinea pigs, both strains provided
pulmonary protection against Mycobacterium tuberculosis aerosol challenge, as
shown by significantly reduced bacterial loads and lung:body weight ratios.
Lipid-formulated BCG provided superior protection against M. tuberculosis over
unformulated orally-delivered BCG (Moreau), and equivalent protection to
sub-cutaneous BCG (Danish) immunisation. Oral-delivery of lipid-formulated BCG
may offer a practical alternative to parenteral-route BCG vaccination.

PMID: 18848638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Braz J Biol. 2008 Aug;68(3):519-28.

Patterns of prey selection of Trypoxylon (Trypargilum) lactitarse Saussure
(Hymenoptera: Crabronidae) in southern Brazil.

Buschini ML(1), Borba NA, Brescovit AD.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biologia, Universidade Estadual do Centro Oeste, Guarapuava,
PR, Brazil. isatunes@yahoo.com.br

This study was carried out in the Parque Municipal das Araucárias, in the
municipality of Guarapuava, southern Brazil. A total of 449 T. lactitarse nests
were collected using trap-nests of different diameters. Fifty three species of
spiders belonging to 7 families were captured by T. lactitarse. Araneidae was the
most captured family and has been strongly represented by the genus Eustala.
Through Bray-Curtis's coefficient and the unweighted pair group method average
(UPGMA), the spiders species can be divided into 3 groups: the smaller group
includes the most abundant species (Eustala sp1, Eustala sp2, Acacesia
villalobosi, Alpaida sp1 and Araneus corporosus), the second group includes
species with intermediate abundance (Wagneriana iguape, Araneus omnicolor,
Eustala sp4, Alpaida grayi, Eustala sp3, Larinia t-notata, Mangora sp1 and
Wagneriana iguape), and the third and largest group includes the least abundant
species (Aysha gr. brevimana 1, Eustala sp5, Wagneriana eupalaestra, Alpaida
scriba, Alpaida veniliae, Araneus aff. omnicolor, Araneus sicki, Eustala sp8,
Mangora sp2, Mangora sp3, Wagneriana juquia, Alpaida sp2, Araneus blumenau,
Eustala sp6, Eustala sp7 and Ocrepeira galianoae). Of 2,029 identified spiders,
1,171 were captured in the Araucaria forest, 612 in grassland areas and 246 in
the swamp. Grassland and swamp areas evidenced greater similarity between them
than to the Araucaria Forest, regarding presence-absence of spider species in T. 
lactitarse's diet, as well as regarding species abundance in these habitats. The 
juvenile number (56%) was significantly higher than the female (38%) and male
(6%) percentages.

PMID: 18833472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. J Med Microbiol. 2008 Oct;57(Pt 10):1183-92. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.2008/001826-0.

An intracellularly inducible gene involved in virulence and polyphosphate
production in Francisella.

Richards MI(1), Michell SL, Oyston PC.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK.

Francisella tularensis is an intracellular pathogen capable of multiplying to
high levels in macrophages. By protein analysis, only a few proteins have been
shown previously to be expressed at high levels in macrophages relative to
bacteria grown in culture media. To identify additional genes that show increased
expression during intracellular growth, we developed a plasmid for use in
Francisella based on the induction of expression of green fluorescent protein.
Clones of F. tularensis subsp. novicida were identified that were fluorescent
only intracellularly and not when grown in vitro. Sequencing identified a range
of genes comprising some such as dnaK that are already known to be expressed
intracellularly and some novel targets. One of these newly identified regulated
genes, FTN1472/FTT1564, was selected for further study. Isogenic mutants were
generated in F. tularensis subsp. novicida and subsp. tularensis by allelic
replacement. Inactivation of the gene resulted in abolition of polyphosphate
production by F. novicida, strongly supporting the bioinformatic analysis, which 
had suggested that the gene may encode a polyphosphate kinase. The mutants
exhibited defects for intracellular growth in macrophages and were attenuated in 
mice, indicating a key role for the putative polyphosphate kinase in the
virulence of Francisella.

PMID: 18809544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Vaccine. 2008 Oct 29;26(46):5791-7. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2008.08.028. Epub 2008
Sep 26.

Assessment of different formulations of oral Mycobacterium bovis Bacille
Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccine in rodent models for immunogenicity and protection 
against aerosol challenge with M. bovis.

Clark S(1), Cross ML, Smith A, Court P, Vipond J, Nadian A, Hewinson RG,
Batchelor HK, Perrie Y, Williams A, Aldwell FE, Chambers MA.

Author information: 
(1)Health Protection Agency, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG, United Kingdom.

Bovine tuberculosis (bTB) caused by infection with Mycobacterium bovis is causing
considerable economic loss to farmers and Government in the United Kingdom as its
incidence is increasing. Efforts to control bTB in the UK are hampered by the
infection in Eurasian badgers (Meles meles) that represent a wildlife reservoir
and source of recurrent M. bovis exposure to cattle. Vaccination of badgers with 
the human TB vaccine, M. bovis Bacille Calmette-Guérin (BCG), in oral bait
represents a possible disease control tool and holds the best prospect for
reaching badger populations over a wide geographical area. Using mouse and guinea
pig models, we evaluated the immunogenicity and protective efficacy,
respectively, of candidate badger oral vaccines based on formulation of BCG in
lipid matrix, alginate beads, or a novel microcapsular hybrid of both lipid and
alginate. Two different oral doses of BCG were evaluated in each formulation for 
their protective efficacy in guinea pigs, while a single dose was evaluated in
mice. In mice, significant immune responses (based on lymphocyte proliferation
and expression of IFN-gamma) were only seen with the lipid matrix and the lipid
in alginate microcapsular formulation, corresponding to the isolation of viable
BCG from alimentary tract lymph nodes. In guinea pigs, only BCG formulated in
lipid matrix conferred protection to the spleen and lungs following aerosol route
challenge with M. bovis. Protection was seen with delivery doses in the range
10(6)-10(7) CFU, although this was more consistent in the spleen at the higher
dose. No protection in terms of organ CFU was seen with BCG administered in
alginate beads or in lipid in alginate microcapsules, although 10(7) in the
latter formulation conferred protection in terms of increasing body weight after 
challenge and a smaller lung to body weight ratio at necropsy. These results
highlight the potential for lipid, rather than alginate, -based vaccine
formulations as suitable delivery vehicles for an oral BCG vaccine in badgers.

PMID: 18789366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Onderstepoort J Vet Res. 2008 Jun;75(2):95-102.

Naturally acquired antibodies to Bacillus anthracis protective antigen in
vultures of southern Africa.

Turnbull PC(1), Diekmann M, Kilian JW, Versfeld W, De Vos V, Arntzen L, Wolter K,
Bartels P, Kotze A.

Author information: 
(1)Arjemptur Technology Ltd, Bldg 227, Science Park, Down, SP4 0JQ, United
Kingdom. peterturnbull@tesco.net

Sera from 19 wild caught vultures in northern Namibia and 15 (12 wild caught and 
three captive bred but with minimal histories) in North West Province, South
Africa, were examined by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for
antibodies to the Bacillus anthracis toxin protective antigen (PA). As assessed
from the baseline established with a control group of ten captive reared vultures
with well-documented histories, elevated titres were found in 12 of the 19 (63%) 
wild caught Namibian birds as compared with none of the 15 South African ones.
There was a highly significant difference between the Namibian group as a whole
and the other groups (P < 0.001) and no significant difference between the South 
African and control groups (P > 0.05). Numbers in the Namibian group were too
small to determine any significances in species-, sex- or age-related differences
within the raw data showing elevated titres in four out of six Cape Vultures,
Gyps coprotheres, six out of ten White-backed Vultures, Gyps africanus, and one
out of three Lappet-faced Vultures, Aegypius tracheliotus, or in five of six
males versus three of seven females, and ten of 15 adults versus one of four
juveniles. The results are in line with the available data on the incidence of
anthrax in northern Namibia and South Africa and the likely contact of the
vultures tested with anthrax carcasses. It is not known whether elevated titre
indicates infection per se in vultures or absorption of incompletely digested
epitopes of the toxin or both. The results are discussed in relation to distances
travelled by vultures as determined by new tracking techniques, how serology can 
reveal anthrax activity in an area and the issue of the role of vultures in
transmission of anthrax.

PMID: 18788202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. J Mol Endocrinol. 2008 Nov;41(5):263-75. doi: 10.1677/JME-08-0103. Epub 2008 Sep 
4.

Non-classical genomic estrogen receptor (ER)/specificity protein and
ER/activating protein-1 signaling pathways.

Safe S(1), Kim K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas 77843-4466, USA. ssafe@cvm.tamu.edu

Erratum in
    J Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Apr;42(4):359. Kim, Kyoungkim [corrected to Kim,
Kyounghyun].

17beta-estradiol binds to the estrogen receptor (ER) to activate gene expression 
or repression and this involves both genomic (nuclear) and non-genomic
(extranuclear) pathways. Genomic pathways include the classical interactions of
ligand-bound ER dimers with estrogen-responsive elements in target gene
promoters. ER-dependent activation of gene expression also involves DNA-bound ER 
that subsequently interacts with other DNA-bound transcriptions factors and
direct ER-transcription factor (protein-protein) interactions where ER does not
bind promoter DNA. Ligand-induced activation of ER/specificity protein (Sp) and
ER/activating protein-1 [(AP-1); consisting of jun/fos] complexes are important
pathways for modulating expression of a large number of genes. This review
summarizes some of the characteristics of ER/Sp- and ER/AP-1-mediated
transactivation, which are dependent on ligand structure, cell context,
ER-subtype (ERalpha and ERbeta), and Sp protein (SP1, SP3, and SP4) and
demonstrates that this non-classical genomic pathway is also functional in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2582054
PMID: 18772268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Bioresour Technol. 2009 Jan;100(2):812-8. doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2008.06.034.
Epub 2008 Jul 30.

Biosurfactant production by Pseudomonas aeruginosa SP4 using sequencing batch
reactors: effects of oil loading rate and cycle time.

Pornsunthorntawee O(1), Maksung S, Huayyai O, Rujiravanit R, Chavadej S.

Author information: 
(1)The Petroleum and Petrochemical College, Chulalongkorn University, Soi
Chulalongkorn 12, Phayathai road, Pathumwan, Bangkok 10330, Thailand.

In this present study, sequencing batch reactors (SBRs) were used for
biosurfactant production from Pseudomonasaeruginosa SP4, which was isolated from 
petroleum-contaminated soil in Thailand. Two identical lab-scale aerobic SBR
units were operated at a constant temperature of 37 degrees C, and a mineral
medium (MM) with palm oil was used as the culture medium. The effects of oil
loading rate (OLR) and cycle time on the biosurfactant production were studied.
The results indicated that the optimum conditions for the biosurfactant
production were at an OLR of 2 kg/m(3)days and a cycle time of 2 days/cycle,
which provided a surface tension reduction of 59%, a chemical oxygen demand (COD)
removal of 90%, and an oil removal of 97%. Under the optimum conditions, it was
found that the biosurfactant production was maximized at an aeration time of 40
h. These preliminary results suggest that the SBR can potentially be adapted for 
biosurfactant production, and perhaps further developed, potentially for
large-scale biosurfactant production.

PMID: 18672362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Comp Funct Genomics. 2002;3(4):345-7. doi: 10.1002/cfg.184.

In vitro gene expression dissected: chemostat surgery for mycobacterium
tuberculosis.

James BW(1), Bacon J, Hampshire T, Morley K, Marsh PD.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Applied Microbiology and Research, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG,
UK.

A unique approach, combining defined and reproducible in vitro models with DNA
microarrays, has been developed to study environmental modulation of
mycobacterial gene expression. The gene expression profiles of samples of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, from independent chemostat cultures grown under
defined and reproducible conditions, were found to be highly correlated. This
approach is now being used to study the effect of relevant stimuli, such as
limited oxygen availability, on mycobacterial gene expression. A modification of 
the chemostat culture system, enabling large-volume controlled batch culture, has
been developed to study starvation survival. Cultures of M. tuberculosis have
been maintained under nutrient-starved conditions for extended periods, with
10(6) - 10(7) bacilli surviving in a culturable state after 100 days. The design 
of the culture system has made it possible to control the environment and collect
multiple time-course samples to study patterns of gene expression. These studies 
demonstrate that it is possible to perform long-term studies and obtain
reproducible expression data using controlled and defined in vitro models.

PMCID: PMC2448431
PMID: 18629267  [PubMed]


409. Comp Funct Genomics. 2003;4(5):468-78. doi: 10.1002/cfg.319.

Analysis of known bacterial protein vaccine antigens reveals biased physical
properties and amino acid composition.

Mayers C(1), Duffield M, Rowe S, Miller J, Lingard B, Hayward S, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, United Kingdom.

Many vaccines have been developed from live attenuated forms of bacterial
pathogens or from killed bacterial cells. However, an increased awareness of the 
potential for transient side-effects following vaccination has prompted an
increased emphasis on the use of sub-unit vaccines, rather than those based on
whole bacterial cells. The identification of vaccine sub-units is often a lengthy
process and bioinformatics approaches have recently been used to identify
candidate protein vaccine antigens. Such methods ultimately offer the promise of 
a more rapid advance towards preclinical studies with vaccines. We have compared 
the properties of known bacterial vaccine antigens against randomly selected
proteins and identified differences in the make-up of these two groups. A
computer algorithm that exploits these differences allows the identification of
potential vaccine antigen candidates from pathogenic bacteria on the basis of
their amino acid composition, a property inherently associated with sub-cellular 
location.

PMCID: PMC2447292
PMID: 18629010  [PubMed]


410. J Med Microbiol. 2008 Aug;57(Pt 8):921-30. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.2008/000653-0.

Francisella tularensis: unravelling the secrets of an intracellular pathogen.

Oyston PC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, DSTL Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK.
pcoyston@dstl.gov.uk

Francisella tularensis has been recognized as the causative agent of tularaemia
for almost a century. Since its discovery in 1911, it has been shown to infect a 
wide range of hosts, including humans. As early as the 1920s it was suggested to 
be an intracellular pathogen, but it has proven to be an enigmatic organism,
whose interaction with the host has been difficult to elucidate, and we still
have a very limited understanding of the molecular mechanisms of virulence.
However, the recent availability of genome sequence data and molecular tools has 
allowed us to start to understand the molecular basis of F. tularensis
pathogenicity, and will facilitate the development of a vaccine to protect
against infection.

PMID: 18628490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Cancer Res. 2008 Jul 1;68(13):5345-54. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6805.

Curcumin decreases specificity protein expression in bladder cancer cells.

Chadalapaka G(1), Jutooru I, Chintharlapalli S, Papineni S, Smith R 3rd, Li X,
Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas 77843-4466, USA.

Curcumin is the active component of tumeric, and this polyphenolic compound has
been extensively investigated as an anticancer drug that modulates multiple
pathways and genes. In this study, 10 to 25 micromol/L curcumin inhibited 253JB-V
and KU7 bladder cancer cell growth, and this was accompanied by induction of
apoptosis and decreased expression of the proapoptotic protein survivin and the
angiogenic proteins vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and VEGF receptor 1
(VEGFR1). Because expression of survivin, VEGF, and VEGFR1 are dependent on
specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors, we also investigated the effects 
of curcumin on Sp protein expression as an underlying mechanism for the apoptotic
and antiangiogenic activity of this compound. The results show that curcumin
induced proteasome-dependent down-regulation of Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 in 253JB-V and 
KU7 cells. Moreover, using RNA interference with small inhibitory RNAs for Sp1,
Sp3, and Sp4, we observed that curcumin-dependent inhibition of nuclear factor
kappaB (NF-kappaB)-dependent genes, such as bcl-2, survivin, and cyclin D1, was
also due, in part, to loss of Sp proteins. Curcumin also decreased bladder tumor 
growth in athymic nude mice bearing KU7 cells as xenografts and this was
accompanied by decreased Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 protein levels in tumors. These
results show for the first time that one of the underlying mechanisms of action
of curcumin as a cancer chemotherapeutic agent is due, in part, to decreased
expression of Sp transcription factors in bladder cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC2587449
PMID: 18593936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Vet Parasitol. 2008 Aug 17;155(3-4):328-32. doi: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2008.05.006.
Epub 2008 May 10.

Preliminary evaluation of exotic tick species and exotic pathogens imported on
migratory birds into the British Isles.

Pietzsch ME(1), Mitchell R, Jameson LJ, Morgan C, Medlock JM, Collins D,
Chamberlain JC, Gould EA, Hewson R, Taylor MA, Leach S.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Entomology & Zoonoses Ecology Group, Microbial Risk Assessment, Health
Protection Agency, Centre for Emergency Preparedness & Response, Porton Down,
Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, United Kingdom.

Field studies were carried out to determine whether ticks are being imported into
the British Isles on migratory birds. During spring and autumn migration 2004,
ticks were collected from ringed birds at 11 bird observatories and 3 inland
Riparia riparia colonies. A total of 38 ticks of 4 species (Ixodes ricinus, I.
frontalis, I. lividus, I. arboricola) were collected from 12 species of bird.
Ticks were tested for viruses in the Flavivirus and Nairovirus genera, with no
positives found. This data demonstrates that ticks are being imported into the
British Isles on migratory birds with future work recommended to determine the
quantity of ticks imported and to detect low prevalence pathogens.

PMID: 18585865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Infect Immun. 2008 Aug;76(8):3771-6. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00052-08. Epub 2008 Jun 2.

Oral vaccination of guinea pigs with a Mycobacterium bovis bacillus
Calmette-Guerin vaccine in a lipid matrix protects against aerosol infection with
virulent M. bovis.

Clark S(1), Cross ML, Nadian A, Vipond J, Court P, Williams A, Hewinson RG,
Aldwell FE, Chambers MA.

Author information: 
(1)Health Protection Agency, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG, United Kingdom.

Increased incidence of bovine tuberculosis (TB) in the United Kingdom caused by
infection with Mycobacterium bovis is a cause of considerable economic loss to
farmers and the government. The Eurasian badger (Meles meles) represents a
wildlife source of recurrent M. bovis infections of cattle in the United Kingdom,
and its vaccination against TB with M. bovis bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) is an
attractive disease control option. Delivery of BCG in oral bait holds the best
prospect for vaccinating badgers over a wide geographical area. Using a guinea
pig pulmonary challenge model, we evaluated the protective efficacy of candidate 
badger oral vaccines, based on broth-grown or ball-milled BCG, delivered either
as aqueous suspensions or formulated in two lipids with differing fatty acid
profiles (one being animal derived and the other being vegetable derived).
Protection was determined in terms of increasing body weight after aerosol
challenge with virulent M. bovis, reduced dissemination of M. bovis to the
spleen, and, in the case of one oral formulation, restricted growth of M. bovis
in the lungs. Only oral BCG formulated in lipid gave significant protection.
These data point to the potential of the BCG-lipid formulation for further
development as a tool for controlling tuberculosis in badgers.

PMCID: PMC2493221
PMID: 18519560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci. 2008 Nov 1;875(1):273-9. doi:
10.1016/j.jchromb.2008.05.020.

Enantioseparation of beta-methyl-substituted amino acids with cyclodextrins by
capillary zone electrophoresis.

Ilisz I(1), Fodor G, Iványi R, Szente L, Tóth G, Péter A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Inorganic and Analytical Chemistry, University of Szeged, H-6720
Szeged, Dóm tér 7, Hungary.

Direct capillary zone electrophoretic methods were developed for the separation
of the enantiomers of unnatural beta-methyl-amino acids such as erythro- and
threo-beta-methylphenylalanine, beta-methyltyrosine, beta-methyltryptophan and
beta-methyl-1,2,3,4-tetrahydroisoquinoline-3-carboxylic acid. Capillary zone
electrophoresis was carried out using sulfopropylated-alpha-CD (SP2-alpha-CD),
sulfopropylated-beta-CD (SP2-beta-CD) both with a degree of substitution of 2
moles/mole cyclodextrin, and sulfopropylated-beta-CD (SP4-beta-CD) with a degree 
of substitution of 4moles/mole beta-cyclodextrin. The effects of selector and
buffer concentrations, electrolyte pH and applied voltage were studied on the
separation efficiency. Varying the electrophoretic conditions with application of
20 kV, hydrodynamic injection, unmodified silica capillary, three different
buffers (borate, phosphate and acetate) and modified cyclodextrins as chiral
selectors all compounds investigated are nearly baseline resolved. The elution
sequence was determined in most cases.

PMID: 18514044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Int J Cosmet Sci. 2000 Aug;22(4):239-46. doi: 10.1046/j.1467-2494.2000.00015.x.

The Society of Cosmetic Scientists 1999 Spring Symposium. Cosmeceuticals - one
small step or a giant leap? Proving benefits for botanical products.

Dweck AC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dweck Data, 8 Merrifield Road, Ford, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 6DF, U.K.

This paper examines the various methods that are available to the scientist
working with natural materials to substantiate their efficacy. The methods
discussed are: literature surveys, clinical trials, instrumental measurement,
products with Pharmaceutical Licenses, comparison with other plants containing
same active chemicals, and comparison of benefits with related members of the
same family. Examples are given using the Compositae family as a primary model,
other examples are given quoting the Labiatae, and Solanaceae families.

PMID: 18503410  [PubMed]


416. Int J Cosmet Sci. 2002 Oct;24(5):287-302. doi: 10.1046/j.1467-2494.2002.00148.x.

Natural ingredients for colouring and styling.

Dweck AC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dweck Data, Ford, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 6DF, UK. dweckdata@aol.com

This paper examines some of the existing methods for colouring the hair and skin 
using natural material (such as henna) and proposes a parallel technology that
exists in the dyeing of wool and fabrics to extend the colour range. Many of the 
listed plants and their derivatives are not found in Annex IV of the Cosmetic
Directive and may not be used as colours; however, they do have other properties 
which may justify their inclusion into a product, for example, as astringent or
anti-inflammatory agents. The paper concludes with some reported antigreying and 
hair styling preparations cited in the literature.

PMID: 18498522  [PubMed]


417. Int J Cosmet Sci. 2002 Dec;24(6):341-8. doi: 10.1046/j.1467-2494.2002.00160.x.

Tamanu (Calophyllum inophyllum) - the African, Asian, Polynesian and Pacific
Panacea.

Dweck AC(1), Meadows T.

Author information: 
(1)Dweck Data, 8 Merrifield Road, Ford, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 6DF, UK.

Tamanu or Calophyllum inophyllum has been used traditionally as a local medicine 
for many different purposes. The oil has been proven to be vulnerary and
cicatrising in its effects. The chemicals responsible for this action are
calophyllolide and inophyllum in addition to other complex polyphenols.

PMID: 18494888  [PubMed]


418. IDrugs. 1998 Aug;1(4):471-5.

Pseudostat Cortecs Ltd.

Jones T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Head of Formulation, Centre for Applied Microbiology and Research,
Experimental Vaccines Section, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JG, UK.
taff.jones@camr.org.uk

Cortecs is developing Pseudostat, an oral vaccine derived from Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, for the potential treatment and prophylaxis of lung infection with P 
aeruginosa and Haemophilus influenza, common in respiratory disorders such as
cystic fibrosis, bronchitis and bronchiectasis. It is expected that a phase III
trial will commence this year, and that a European registration submission will
be made by the end of the year [262793]. In January 1998, Cortecs confirmed that 
phase III trials for Pseudostat for bronchitis are being prepared [276928]. Two
Pseudostat phase II clinical trials commenced in July 1996 against chronic
bronchitis [214837]. Results of the first trial were announced in August 1997. A 
total of 91 patients received Pseudostat or placebo. Five months following the
completion of immunization, the number of acute infective episodes in the placebo
group was about 10-fold higher than the treated group [258965]. The second study 
involved a total of 80 patients with chronic bronchitis, as defined by Medical
Research Council criteria, but no history of consistent P aeruginosa in their
sputum. The patients were followed for up to seven months after the first tablet,
and efficacy outcome measures were as for the first study. Initial analysis was
encouraging: after the treatment course the Pseudostat group took up no hospital 
days, compared to 48 days for the placebo group. Pseudostat also reduced episodes
of acute infection by 90% [262793]. In July 1996, a phase II clinical trial
commenced in Australia with Pseudostat in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). The
trial involved approximately 40 patients. In August 1996, the company initiated
phase II trials in patients with CF in the UK [223065]. Cortecs was scheduled to 
begin European phase II trials for CF in the third quarter of 1997. For the US,
trials for CF are planned in 1998 [259009]. An open phase I/II study has been
completed in nine patients, with bronchiectasis, who after oral vaccination,
twice daily for three days, starting on days 0, 28 and 56, exhibited a specific
immune response. Additionally, there was a several-fold reduction in the white
blood cell content of the sputum (white blood cells in sputum reflect the
severity of infection). However, the white blood cell content of the patients'
sputum rose again following 28 days of discontinued treatment [207633]. Phase I
trials with an oral formulation were completed in healthy volunteers at the
Australian Institute of Mucosal Immunology (AIMI). No adverse or toxic effects
associated with Pseudostat were observed [170099].

PMID: 18465580  [PubMed]


419. IDrugs. 1998 May;1(1):103-8.

Mucosal immunity elicited by DNA vaccines.

Jones T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Vaccines, Centre for Applied Microbiology & Research, Porton
Down, Salisbury, Wilts, SP4 0JG, UK. taff.jones@camr.org.uk

The induction of mucosal immunity could improve vaccine prophylaxis by preventing
pathogens from colonizing their host. As a consequence, the delivery of vaccines 
to mucosal surfaces has become a crucial issue. DNA vaccines, administered by
intra-muscular injection or by particle bombardment of the epidermis, have
revolutionized vaccine research in the last few years, but these routes of
delivery are unlikely to elicit mucosal immunity efficiently. This article
reviews the progress being made towards meeting the vital challenge of
efficiently eliciting mucosal immunity through the appropriate delivery of DNA
vaccines.

PMID: 18465514  [PubMed]


420. J Neurochem. 2008 Jul;106(2):835-49. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2008.05442.x. Epub 
2008 Apr 28.

Transcriptional regulation of the human CYP46A1 brain-specific expression by Sp
transcription factors.

Milagre I(1), Nunes MJ, Gama MJ, Silva RF, Pascussi JM, Lechner MC, Rodrigues E.

Author information: 
(1)iMed - Institute for Medicines and Research in Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal.

Erratum in
    J Neurochem. 2008 Nov;107(4):1168.

Brain defective cholesterol homeostasis has been associated with neurologic
diseases, such as Alzheimer's and Huntington's disease. The elimination of
cholesterol from the brain involves its conversion into 24(S)-hydroxycholesterol 
by CYP46A1, and the efflux of this oxysterol across the blood-brain barrier.
Herein, we identified the regulatory elements and factors involved the human
CYP46A1 expression. Functional 5'deletion analysis mapped a region spanning from 
nucleotides -236/-64 that is indispensable for basal expression of this TATA-less
gene. Treatment of SH-SY5Y cells with mithramycin A resulted in a significant
reduction of promoter activity, suggesting a role of Sp family of transcription
factors in CYP46A1 regulation. Combination of Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 over-expression
studies in Drosophila SL-2 cells, and systematic promoter mutagenesis identified 
Sp3 and Sp4 binding to four GC-boxes as required and sufficient for high levels
of promoter activity. Moreover, Sp3 and Sp4 were demonstrated to be the major
components of the protein-DNA complexes observed in primary rat cortical
extracts. Our results suggest that the cell-type specific expression of Sp
transcription factors - substitution of Sp1 by Sp4 in neurons - is responsible
for the basal expression of the CYP46A1 gene. This study delineates for the first
time the mechanisms underlying the human CYP46A1 transcription and thereby
elucidates potential pathways underlying cholesterol homeostasis in the brain.

PMID: 18445135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Cerebellum. 2008;7(2):179-83. doi: 10.1007/s12311-008-0014-3.

Slowly progressive spinocerebellar ataxia with extrapyramidal signs and mild
cognitive impairment (SCA21).

Delplanque J(1), Devos D, Vuillaume I, De Becdelievre A, Vangelder E, Maurage CA,
Dujardin K, Destée A, Sablonnière B.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U837, Jean-Pierre Aubert Research Center, Lille, France.

Spinocerebellar ataxia 21 is a slowly progressive and mild ataxia associated with
extrapyramidal signs. Affected subjects exhibit a moderate gait and limb ataxia
variably associated with akinesia, tremor, rigidity, hyporeflexia, and mild
cognitive impairment. The responsible gene has been assigned to a 19 Mbases
interval on chromosome 7p in a single French family. No evidence of significant
linkage to this locus was found in 21 other families obtained from the EUROSCA
consortium. The locus interval contains several candidate genes that could be
responsible for the disease. Direct sequencing of NDUFA4, PHF14, KIAA0960, ARLA4,
ETV1, DGKB, HDAC9, FERD3L, ITGB8, and SP4 genes were performed, but all the
direct mutation analyses were negative excluding pathogenic mutations associated 
with the disease. Therefore, the gene responsible for SCA21 remains to be
identified.

PMID: 18418688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Med Entomol. 2008 Mar;45(2):314-25.

Investigation of ecological and environmental determinants for the presence of
questing Ixodes ricinus (Acari: Ixodidae) on Gower, South Wales.

Medlock JM(1), Pietzsch ME, Rice NV, Jones L, Kerrod E, Avenell D, Los S,
Ratcliffe N, Leach S, Butt T.

Author information: 
(1)Health Protection Agency, Centre for Emergency Preparedness & Response, Porton
Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, United Kingdom. jolyon.medlock@hpa.org.uk

The spatial heterogeneity of questing Ixodes ricinus (L.) (Acari: Ixodidae)
within endemic areas in Great Britain is well established. Their presence is
acutely responsive to blood host availability and their ability to maintain water
balance, which are in turn governed by a variety of ecological and environmental 
factors. This article details the findings of a 3-yr study on the Gower
peninsula, south Wales, which investigated the contribution of such factors (both
ground- and geographic information systems [GIS] -derived) for predicting the
presence of questing I. ricinus (Q(P)), at a local scale. Statistically
significant univariate associations were found between Q(P) and calcareous/
neutral grassland and heathland habitats, particularly those grazed by livestock,
and various factors that intuitively promote tick survival. For example,
topographical features, such as certain aspects, that reduce exposure to cold
northerly winds and the hot midday sun, favored Q(P). Similarly, positive
associations were found with substrata composed of less permeable soil types and 
less permeable superficial/bedrock geologies that promote a moist microhabitat
and reduce the likelihood of desiccation. Q(P) was also higher in areas of high
soil moisture. This study highlighted a number of GIS-derived data sets that
could be applied in the development of local and national predictive maps for I. 
ricinus in Great Britain. An understanding of the influence of these factors on
questing I. ricinus can aid targeted tick control programs and help to educate
the public, and those occupationally exposed, in understanding likely I. ricinus 
prolific areas within an I. ricinus endemic region.

PMID: 18402148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2008 May;110(1-2):104-15. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2008.02.008. Epub 2008 Feb 23.

Ligand structure-dependent activation of estrogen receptor alpha/Sp by estrogens 
and xenoestrogens.

Wu F(1), Khan S, Wu Q, Barhoumi R, Burghardt R, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College
Station, TX 77843, United States.

This study investigated the effects of E2, diethylstilbestrol (DES),
antiestrogens, the phytoestrogen resveratrol, and the xenoestrogens octylphenol
(OP), nonylphenol (NP), endosulfan, kepone, 2,3,4,5-tetrachlorobiphenyl-4-ol
(HO-PCB-Cl(4)), bisphenol-A (BPA), and
2,2-bis-(p-hydroxyphenyl)-1,1,1-trichloroethane (HPTE) on induction of luciferase
activity in breast cancer cells transfected with a construct (pSp1(3)) containing
three tandem GC-rich Sp binding sites linked to luciferase and wild-type or
variant ERalpha. The results showed that induction of luciferase activity was
highly structure-dependent in both MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells. Moreover, RNA
interference assays using small inhibitory RNAs for Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 also
demonstrated structure-dependent differences in activation of ERalpha/Sp1,
ERalpha/Sp3 and ERalpha/Sp4. These results demonstrate for the first time that
various structural classes of ER ligands differentially activate wild-type and
variant ERalpha/Sp-dependent transactivation, selectively use different Sp
proteins, and exhibit selective ER modulator (SERM)-like activity.

PMCID: PMC2519242
PMID: 18400491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. J Immunol Methods. 2008 May 20;334(1-2):1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2007.12.022.
Epub 2008 Feb 29.

Real time detection of anthrax spores using highly specific anti-EA1 recombinant 
antibodies produced by competitive panning.

Love TE(1), Redmond C, Mayers CN.

Author information: 
(1)Detection Department, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 OJQ, United 
Kingdom. telove@dstl.gov.uk

We describe a targeted approach for the production of biological recognition
elements capable of fast, specific detection of anthrax spores on biosensor
surfaces. The aim was to produce single chain antibodies (scFvs) to EA1, a
Bacillus anthracis S-layer protein that is also present, although not identical, 
in related to Bacillus species. The aim of the work was to produce antibodies
that would detect B. anthracis EA1 protein and intact spores with a high degree
of specificity, but would not detect other Bacillus species. Existing monoclonal 
antibodies were evaluated and found to recognise B. anthracis EA1 and S-layer
proteins from other closely related Bacillus species. Recombinant anti-EA1 scFvs 
were isolated from B. anthracis immune library that contained antibody genes
raised against B. anthracis spores and purified exosporium. Two approaches for
scFv selection were used; standard (non-competitive) panning, and competitive
panning. The non-competitive biopanning strategy isolated scFvs that recognised
EA1 from B. anthracis, but also cross-reacted with other Bacillus species. In
contrast, the competitive panning approach used S-layer proteins from other
Bacillus species to generate scFvs that were highly specific to B. anthracis EA1 
and demonstrated apparent nanomolar binding affinities. Specific, real time
detection of B. anthracis spores was demonstrated with these scFvs using an
evanescent wave biosensor, the Resonant Mirror. The approach described can be
used to generate specific antibodies to any desired target where homologous
proteins also exist in closely related species, and demonstrates clear advantages
to using recombinant technology to produce biological recognition elements for
detection of biological threat agents.

PMID: 18395220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Breast Cancer Res. 2008;10(2):R29. doi: 10.1186/bcr1987. Epub 2008 Mar 31.

Involvement of a specificity proteins-binding element in regulation of basal and 
estrogen-induced transcription activity of the BRCA1 gene.

Hockings JK(1), Degner SC, Morgan SS, Kemp MQ, Romagnolo DF.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Interdisciplinary Graduate Program, Department of Nutritional
Sciences, The University of Arizona, E 4th Street, Tucson, Arizona 85721-0038,
USA.

INTRODUCTION: Increased estrogen level has been regarded to be a risk factor for 
breast cancer. However, estrogen has also been shown to induce the expression of 
the tumor suppressor gene, BRCA1. Upregulation of BRCA1 is thought to be a
feedback mechanism for controlling DNA repair in proliferating cells. Estrogens
enhance transcription of target genes by stimulating the association of the
estrogen receptor (ER) and related coactivators to estrogen response elements or 
to transcription complexes formed at activator protein (AP)-1 or specificity
protein (Sp)-binding sites. Interestingly, the BRCA1 gene lacks a consensus
estrogen response element. We previously reported that estrogen stimulated BRCA1 
transcription through the recruitment of a p300/ER-alpha complex to an AP-1 site 
harbored in the proximal BRCA1 promoter. The purpose of the study was to analyze 
the contribution of cis-acting sites flanking the AP-1 element to basal and
estrogen-dependent regulation of BRCA1 transcription.
METHODS: Using transfection studies with wild-type and mutated BRCA1 promoter
constructs, electromobility binding and shift assays, and DNA-protein interaction
and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, we investigated the role of Sp-binding 
sites and cAMP response element (CRE)-binding sites harbored in the proximal
BRCA1 promoter.
RESULTS: We report that in the BRCA1 promoter the AP-1 site is flanked upstream
by an element (5'-GGGGCGGAA-3') that recruits Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 factors, and
downstream by a half CRE-binding motif (5'-CGTAA-3') that binds CRE-binding
protein. In ER-alpha-positive MCF-7 cells and ER-alpha-negative Hela cells
expressing exogenous ER-alpha, mutation of the Sp-binding site interfered with
basal and estrogen-induced BRCA1 transcription. Conversely, mutation of the
CRE-binding element reduced basal BRCA1 promoter activity but did not prevent
estrogen activation. In combination with the AP-1/CRE sites, the Sp-binding
domain enhanced the recruitment of nuclear proteins to the BRCA1 promoter.
Finally, we report that the MEK1 (mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase-1)
inhibitor PD98059 attenuated the recruitment of Sp1 and phosphorylated ER-alpha, 
respectively, to the Sp and AP-1 binding element.
CONCLUSION: These cumulative findings suggest that the proximal BRCA1 promoter
segment comprises cis-acting elements that are targeted by Sp-binding and
CRE-binding proteins that contribute to regulation of BRCA1 transcription.

PMCID: PMC2397528
PMID: 18377656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Biol Psychiatry. 2008 Jul 15;64(2):104-10. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2007.12.017.
Epub 2008 Mar 21.

Promoter variant in the GRK3 gene associated with bipolar disorder alters gene
expression.

Zhou X(1), Barrett TB, Kelsoe JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, CA 92093, USA.

BACKGROUND: We have previously reported a single nucleotide polymorphism (P-5,
G-384A) in the proximal promoter of the gene for G protein receptor kinase 3
(GRK3) that was associated with bipolar disorder in two independent samples. In
this study, we examined whether the G-384A variant has a functional effect on
GRK3 transcription.
METHODS: Electrophoretic mobility shift assays were conducted using nuclear
extracts from both Hela cells and adult mouse cortex. Transcriptional function
was also examined using a dual luciferase reporter system transfected into in
vitro human neuroblastoma cells and cultured mouse cortical neurons.
RESULTS: The G-384A variant abolished or reduced the formation of DNA-protein
complexes using nuclear extract from both HeLa cells and adult mouse cortical
neuron cells. However, gene expression was significantly enhanced by G-384A in
both in vitro human neuroblastoma cells and cultured mouse cortical neurons.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that the G-384A SNP in the promoter of human GRK3
gene represents an important functional variant. The G-384A variant may alter
binding of Sp1/Sp4 transcription factors resulting in an increase in gene
transcription and an increase in vulnerability to bipolar disorder.

PMID: 18359007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Acupunct Med. 2008 Mar;26(1):51-6.

Possible effects of acupuncture on atrial fibrillation and post-herpetic
neuralgia--a case report.

Valaskatgis P(1), Macklin EA, Schachter SC, Wayne PM.

Author information: 
(1)New England School of Acupuncture, Newton, MA, USA. peterval@comcast.net

A 72 year old female with a main complaint of severe post-herpetic neuralgia and 
a secondary complaint of atrial fibrillation (AF) received two series of
acupuncture treatments totalling 20 treatments over a four month period. Her
standard medical treatment remained unchanged. The primary focus of the
acupuncture was pain relief; however, two acupuncture points (PC6, SP4) were
included in both treatment series because of possible effects on both costal or
chest pain and cardiac arrhythmias, according to Traditional Chinese Medicine
(TCM) teaching and limited research. As recorded by her pacemaker, estimated
weekly episodes of AF in the patient decreased significantly, and percentage time
in AF decreased with borderline statistical significance, from the pretreatment
estimates during the second series of treatments (weekly AF episode estimates:
pretreatment=71.4; second series=16.5, difference estimates=-54.9, 95% CI -6.5 to
-103.3, P=0.02; percentage time in AF estimates: pretreatment=30.6; 2 second
series=18.0, difference estimates=-12.6, 95% CI 0.9 to -26.0, P=0.08). The pain
levels were also significantly reduced following the acupuncture treatment series
by more than 67%. Further studies are warranted to further explore these
observations of a possible effect of acupuncture on both atrial fibrillation and 
post-herpetic neuralgia.

PMID: 18356799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Vet Rec. 2008 Feb 23;162(8):245-7.

Water quality testing in a pheasant release pen.

Dalton JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dalton's Game Consultancy, Amesbury, Wiltshire SP4 7RX, UK.

PMID: 18296667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. J Anal Toxicol. 2008 Jan-Feb;32(1):2-9.

An overview of biological markers of exposure to chemical warfare agents.

Black RM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JQ,
United Kingdom. rmblack@dstl.gov.uk

An overview is given of biological markers of exposure to chemical warfare
agents. Metabolites, protein, and/or DNA adducts have been identified for most
nerve agents and vesicants and validated in experimental animals or in a small
number of human exposures. For several agents, metabolites derived from
hydrolysis are unsatisfactory biomarkers of exposure because of background levels
in the human population. These are assumed to result from environmental exposure 
to commercial products that contain these hydrolysis products or chemicals that
are metabolized to them. In these cases, metabolites derived from glutathione
pathways, or covalent adducts with proteins or DNA, provide more definitive
biomarkers. Biomarkers for cyanide and phosgene are unsatisfactory as indicators 
of chemical warfare exposure because of other sources of these chemicals or their
metabolites.

PMID: 18269786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. J Immunol. 2008 Feb 15;180(4):2256-63.

Characterization of the in vivo dynamics of medullary CD4+CD8- thymocyte
development.

Jin R(1), Wang W, Yao JY, Zhou YB, Qian XP, Zhang J, Zhang Y, Chen WF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Peking University Health Science Center, 38 Xue Yuan
Road, Beijing, China.

Our previous studies have defined a differentiation program followed by the newly
generated single-positive (SP) thymocytes before their emigration to the
periphery. In the present study, we further characterize the development of CD4SP
cells in the thymic medulla using mainly intrathymic adoptive transfer assays. By
analyzing the differentiation kinetics of the donor cells, which were shown to
home correctly to the medullary region following adoptive transfer, we
established the precursor-progeny relationship among the four subsets of CD4SP
thymocytes (SP1-SP4) and demonstrated that the progression from SP1 to SP4 was
unidirectional and largely synchronized. Notably, while the phenotypic maturation
from SP1 to SP4 was achieved in 2-3 days, a small fraction of donor cells could
be retained in the thymus for a longer period, during which they further matured 
in function. BrdU incorporation indicated that cell expansion occurred at
multiple stages except SP1. Nevertheless, CFSE labeling revealed that only a
limited number of cells actually divided during their stay in the medulla. As to 
the thymic emigration, there was a clear bias toward cells with increasing
maturity, but no distinction was found between dividing and nondividing
thymocytes. Collectively, these data not only provide solid evidence for a highly
ordered differentiation program for CD4SP thymocytes, but they also illustrate
several important features associated with the developmental process.

PMID: 18250433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Virol J. 2008 Jan 15;5:8. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-5-8.

Sargassum fusiforme fraction is a potent and specific inhibitor of HIV-1 fusion
and reverse transcriptase.

Paskaleva EE(1), Lin X, Duus K, McSharry JJ, Veille JC, Thornber C, Liu Y, Lee
DY, Canki M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunology and Microbial Disease, Albany Medical College, Albany,
NY, USA. paskale@mail.amc.edu

Sargassum fusiforme (Harvey) Setchell has been shown to be a highly effective
inhibitor of HIV-1 infection. To identify its mechanism of action, we performed
bioactivity-guided fractionation on Sargassum fusiforme mixture. Here, we report 
isolation of a bioactive fraction SP4-2 (S. fusiforme), which at 8 mug/ml
inhibited HIV-1 infection by 86.9%, with IC50 value of 3.7 mug. That represents
230-fold enhancement of antiretroviral potency as compared to the whole extract. 
Inhibition was mediated against both CXCR4 (X4) and CCR5 (R5) tropic HIV-1.
Specifically, 10 mug/ml SP4-2 blocked HIV-1 fusion and entry by 53%. This effect 
was reversed by interaction of SP4-2 with sCD4, suggesting that S. fusiforme
inhibits HIV-1 infection by blocking CD4 receptor, which also explained observed 
inhibition of both X4 and R5-tropic HIV-1. SP4-2 also inhibited HIV-1 replication
after virus entry, by directly inhibiting HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (RT) in a
dose dependent manner by up to 79%. We conclude that the SP4-2 fraction contains 
at least two distinct and biologically active molecules, one that inhibits HIV-1 
fusion by interacting with CD4 receptor, and another that directly inhibits HIV-1
RT. We propose that S. fusiforme is a lead candidate for anti-HIV-1 drug
development.

PMCID: PMC2267448
PMID: 18197976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Mol Cancer Res. 2008 Jan;6(1):110-8. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-07-0140. Epub
2008 Jan 9.

Visible light modulates the expression of cancer-retina antigens.

Bazhin AV(1), Schadendorf D, Owen RW, Zernii EY, Philippov PP, Eichmüller SB.

Author information: 
(1)Skin Cancer Unit, German Cancer Research Center, Im Neuenheimer Feld 580,
Heidelberg, Germany. a.bazhin@dkfz.de

Proteins involved in the visual signaling cascade show light-dependent expression
levels in photoreceptor cells. Recently, these proteins have been described to be
expressed in neuroectodermal tumors and to function as cancer-retina antigens.
Here, we show that light can down-regulate gene expression of rhodopsin,
transducin, and cyclic guanosine 3',5'-monophosphate phosphodiesterase 6 (PDE6)
and up-regulate guanylyl cyclase 1, recoverin, and arrestin in human melanoma
cells in vitro, comparable to physiologic changes earlier observed in
photoreceptor cells. Similar modulation can be detected at the protein level in
melanoma cells except for no changes in PDE6 protein levels. Two regulatory
pathways have been identified: Sp1/Sp3/Sp4 proteins for rhodopsin and PDE6, and
mitogen-activated protein kinases for recoverin and arrestin. The visual cascade 
and retinoic acid as its derivate do not play any role in this process. Putative 
explanations for light-dependent modulation of cancer-retina antigen expression
in melanoma cells are discussed.

PMID: 18184973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Toxicol Mech Methods. 2008;18(4):355-62. doi: 10.1080/15376510701623383.

Preliminary studies of sulphur mustard-induced lung injury in the terminally
anesthetized pig: exposure system and methodology.

Fairhall SJ(1), Brown RF, Jugg BJ, Smith AJ, Mann TM, Jenner J, Sciuto AM.

Author information: 
(1)Defense Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl), Porton Down, SP4 0JQ, UK.

ABSTRACT Although normally regarded as a vesicant, inhalation of sulphur mustard 
(HD) vapor can cause life-threatening lung injury for which there is no specific 
treatment. Novel therapies for HD-induced lung injury are best investigated in an
in vivo model that allows monitoring of a range of physiological variables. HD
vapor was generated using two customized thermostatically controlled glass flasks
in parallel. The vapor was passed into a carrier flow of air (81 L. min(-1)) and 
down a length of glass exposure tube (1.75 m). A pig was connected to the
midpoint of the exposure tube via a polytetrafluoroethylene-lined endotracheal
tube, Fleisch pneumotachograph, and sample port. HD vapor concentrations
(40-122.8 mg. m(-3)) up-and downstream of the point of exposure were obtained by 
sampling onto Porapak absorption tubes with subsequent analysis by gas
chromatography-flame photometric detection. Real-time estimates of vapor
concentration were determined using a photo-ionization detector. Lung function
indices (respiratory volumes, lung compliance, and airway resistance) were
measured online throughout. Trial runs with methylsalicylate (MS) and animal
exposures with HD demonstrated that the exposure system rapidly reached the
desired concentration within 1 min and maintained stable output throughout
exposure, and that the MS/HD concentration decayed rapidly to zero when switched 
off. A system is described that allows reproducible exposure of HD vapor to the
lung of anesthetized white pigs. The system has proved to be robust and reliable 
and will be a valuable tool in assessing potential future therapies against
HD-induced lung injury in the pig. Crown Copyright (c) 2007 Dstl.

PMID: 20020902  [PubMed]


434. Toxicol Mech Methods. 2008;18(4):313-21. doi: 10.1080/15376510701884944.

VX Penetration Following Percutaneous Poisoning: A Dermal Microdialysis Study in 
the Guinea Pig.

Wetherell JR(1), Armstrong SJ, Read RW, Clough GF.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Dstl, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4
0JQ, U.K.

ABSTRACT VX, a potent organophosphorus compound, acts primarily by irreversibly
inhibiting acetylcholinesterase resulting in an accumulation of acetylcholine,
which produces the characteristic signs of nerve agent poisoning. VX is a
low-volatility agent, and therefore the most likely route of absorption into the 
body is via the skin. This study demonstrates for the first time that it is
possible to follow the time course of percutaneous VX penetration using the
technique of dermal microdialysis and that VX is absorbed through the skin of the
anesthetized guinea pig in a concentration-dependent manner. A linear
microdialysis probe (5-kDa cut-off) was implanted in the dermis of the back of
the guinea pig and perfused (5 muL/min) with physiological Ringer's solution. VX 
(296 or 592 mug/kg) was applied (33 muL/kg) over the site of the microdialysis
probe and dialysate samples collected for up to 6 h. The VX dialysate
concentration was measured by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry
(LC-MS-MS). Quantitation was performed over the range 0.1 to 100 ng/mL and the
calibration was linear. VX was detected within 15 min, reaching a peak at 30 min 
following both VX doses. After this time the VX concentration decreased. There
was a clear dose-dependent recovery of VX in the dialysate and the total amount
recovered was statistically significant between the two doses. This study has
clearly shown that microdialysis can be used to follow the time course of the
percutaneous absorption of VX in the anesthetized guinea pig and will be used in 
future studies to develop improved medical countermeasures. Crown Copyright (c)
2007 Dstl.

PMID: 20020896  [PubMed]


435. J Appl Toxicol. 2008 Jul;28(5):665-73.

The use of doxycycline as a protectant against sulphur mustard in HaCaT cells.

Lindsay CD(1), Gentilhomme E, Mathieu JD.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory,
Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK. cdlindsay@dstl.gov.uk

As part of an ongoing programme on medical countermeasures against the chemical
warfare agent sulphur mustard (HD) and set against the background of the
involvement of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) in the pathology of HD-induced
vesication processes, the potentially beneficial effects of doxycycline on cell
attachment was determined in confluent HaCaT cell cultures exposed to HD.
Doxycycline was found to inhibit to a significant extent the tendency of
HD-exposed cells to detach from the growth substrate, however, analysis of the
metabolic activity of the adherent cells indicated that doxycycline treatment did
not maintain cell viability. It was confirmed that apoptosis was the predominant 
mode of HD-induced cell death. The results suggested that doxycycline and other
MMP inhibitors may have a role to play in therapeutic intervention against HD
exposure, but only as part of a combination therapy. The specific value of
protease inhibitors in this capacity remains to be determined.

2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd

PMID: 18069744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Phys Med Biol. 2007 Dec 21;52(24):7193-209. Epub 2007 Nov 23.

Electromagnetic modelling of current flow in the heart from TASER devices and the
risk of cardiac dysrhythmias.

Holden SJ(1), Sheridan RD, Coffey TJ, Scaramuzza RA, Diamantopoulos P.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire
SP4 0JQ, UK. sjholden@dstl.gov.uk

Increasing use by law enforcement agencies of the M26 and X26 TASER electrical
incapacitation devices has raised concerns about the arrhythmogenic potential of 
these weapons. Using a numerical phantom constructed from medical images of the
human body in which the material properties of the tissues are represented,
computational electromagnetic modelling has been used to predict the currents
arising at the heart following injection of M26 and X26 waveforms at the anterior
surface of the chest (with one TASER 'barb' directly overlying the ventricles).
The modelling indicated that the peak absolute current densities at the
ventricles were 0.66 and 0.11 mA mm(-2) for the M26 and X26 waveforms,
respectively. When applied during the vulnerable period to the ventricular
epicardial surface of guinea-pig isolated hearts, the M26 and X26 waveforms
induced ectopic beats, but only at current densities greater than 60-fold those
predicted by the modelling. When applied to the ventricles in trains designed to 
mimic the discharge patterns of the TASER devices, neither waveform induced
ventricular fibrillation at peak currents >70-fold (for the M26 waveform) and
>240-fold (for the X26) higher than the modelled current densities. This study
provides evidence for a lack of arrhythmogenic action of the M26 and X26 TASER
devices.

PMID: 18065834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. J Appl Toxicol. 2008 Jul;28(5):694-702.

A novel approach to assessing percutaneous VX poisoning in the conscious
guinea-pig.

Mumford H(1), Price ME, Wetherell JR.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4
0JQ, UK. hmumford@dstl.gov.uk

Nerve agents like VX (S-2-diisopropylaminoethyl-O-ethyl-methylphosphonothiolate) 
are potent irreversible acetylcholinesterase (AChE) inhibitors. Following
percutaneous nerve agent exposure there is a slower rate of absorption, later
onset and longer duration of signs of poisoning. Relatively little is known about
the physiological effects of percutaneously applied nerve agent in
unanaesthetised laboratory animals. Heart rate (ECG), brain electrical activity
(EEG), body temperature, locomotor activity and clinical signs were monitored
following percutaneous application of VX to conscious guinea-pigs.A fall in heart
rate (bradycardia) preceded incapacitation following the highest VX dose, and
occurred in the absence of incapacitation at the lower doses. Following the
highest dose of VX (0.592 mg kg(-1)) three out of four animals died within 24 h. 
The lower two doses of VX (0.296 and 0.148 mg kg(-1)), produced extended periods 
of bradycardia in the absence of observable signs of poisoning. Bradycardia
preceded, or occurred in the absence of, a temperature decrease; seizure-like EEG
changes were not observed at any of the VX doses tested. Acetylcholinesterase
activity was significantly inhibited in the blood and most brain areas at 48 h.
There were significant dose-related decreases in body weight at 24 and 48 h
following VX. This preliminary study suggests that decreased heart rate may be an
early sign of the toxic effects of VX, whereas temperature and observable
clinical signs are not good early indicators of percutaneous VX poisoning in this
animal model. Future studies will use this model to assess the benefit of
administering medical countermeasures in response to a defined decrease in heart 
rate.

Crown Copyright

PMID: 18059069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2007 Dec;57(Pt 12):2940-5.

Howardella ureilytica gen. nov., sp. nov., a Gram-positive, coccoid-shaped
bacterium from a sheep rumen.

Cook AR(1), Riley PW, Murdoch H, Evans PN, McDonald IR.

Author information: 
(1)Health Protection Agency, Centre for Emergency Preparedness and Response,
Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG, UK.

An unidentified obligately anaerobic, fastidious, Gram-positive, non-motile,
non-spore-forming, non-fermentative coccoid-shaped bacterium (designated strain
GPC 589(T)) was isolated from the rumen fluid of a sheep. The major fatty acid
constituents (>5 %) were C(16 : 0) (29.2 %), C(18 : 0) (40.7 %) and an
unidentified compound (19.7 %) with an equivalent chain-length of 13.523. The G+C
content of the DNA was 34 mol%. The organism was strongly ureolytic and generated
ATP through the hydrolysis of urea. Comparative 16S rRNA gene sequence analysis
demonstrated that strain GPC 589(T) was far removed, phylogenetically, from the
ruminococci and related Gram-positive anaerobic cocci but exhibited a
phylogenetic association with Clostridium rRNA cluster XIVa [as defined by
Collins, M. D., Lawson, P. A., Willems, A., Cordoba, J. J., Fernandez-Garayzabal,
J., Garcia, P., Cai, J., Hippe, H. & Farrow, J. A. E. (1994). Int J Syst
Bacteriol 44, 812-826]. Sequence divergence values of 12.5 % or more were
observed between strain GPC 589(T) and all other recognized species within this
and related rRNA clostridial clusters. Phylogenetic analysis showed that strain
GPC 589(T) represents a new genus within cluster XIVa. On the basis of both
phylogenetic and phenotypic evidence, it is proposed that strain GPC 589(T)
should be classified as representing a new genus and novel species, Howardella
ureilytica gen. nov., sp. nov. The type strain is strain GPC 589(T) (=DSM
15118(T)=JCM 13267(T)).

PMID: 18048754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Infect Immun. 2008 Feb;76(2):732-8. Epub 2007 Nov 26.

Intranasal interleukin-12 therapy inhibits Mycoplasma pneumoniae clearance and
sustains airway obstruction in murine pneumonia.

Salvatore CM(1), Fonseca-Aten M, Katz-Gaynor K, Gomez AM, Hardy RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Pediatric Infectious Diseases, University 
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9063, USA.

Mycoplasma pneumoniae is a leading cause of pneumonia and is associated with
asthma. Evidence links M. pneumoniae respiratory disease severity with
interleukin-12 (IL-12) concentrations in respiratory secretions. We evaluated the
effects of IL-12 therapy on microbiologic, inflammatory, and pulmonary function
indices of M. pneumoniae pneumonia in mice. BALB/c mice were inoculated with M.
pneumoniae or SP4 broth. Mice were treated with intranasal IL-12 or placebo daily
for 8 days, starting on day 1 after inoculation. Mice were evaluated at baseline 
and on days 1, 3, 6, and 8 after therapy. Outcome variables included quantitative
bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) M. pneumoniae culture, lung histopathologic score
(HPS), BAL cytokine concentrations determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (tumor necrosis factor alpha [TNF-alpha], gamma interferon [IFN-gamma],
IL-1b, IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-10, IL-12, and granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor), and plethysmography, both before and after
methacholine treatment. M. pneumoniae-infected mice treated with IL-12 (MpIL12
mice) were found to have significantly higher BAL M. pneumoniae concentrations
than those of M. pneumoniae-infected mice treated with placebo (MpP mice) (P <
0.001). MpIL12 mice had higher BAL concentrations of IL-12, IFN-gamma, TNF-alpha,
and IL-6, with differences in IL-12 and IFN-gamma concentrations reaching
statistical significance (P < 0.001). Airway obstruction was statistically
elevated in MpIL12 mice compared to that in MpP mice (P = 0.048), while airway
hyperreactivity was also elevated in MpIL12 mice but did not reach statistical
significance (P = 0.081). Lung parenchymal pneumonia subscores were significantly
higher in MpIL12 mice (P < 0.001), but no difference was found for overall HPS,
even though a strong trend was noticed (P = 0.051). Treatment of experimental M. 
pneumoniae pneumonia with intranasal IL-12 was associated with more severe
pulmonary disease and less rapid microbiologic and histological resolution.

PMCID: PMC2223484
PMID: 18039833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Cancer Res. 2007 Nov 15;67(22):11001-11.

The oncogenic microRNA-27a targets genes that regulate specificity protein
transcription factors and the G2-M checkpoint in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells.

Mertens-Talcott SU(1), Chintharlapalli S, Li X, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas 77843-4466, USA.

There is evidence that specificity proteins (Sp), such as Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4, are 
overexpressed in tumors and contribute to the proliferative and angiogenic
phenotype associated with cancer cells. Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 are expressed in a
panel of estrogen receptor (ER)-positive and ER-negative breast cancer cell
lines, and we hypothesized that regulation of their expression may be due to
microRNA-27a (miR-27a), which is also expressed in these cell lines and has been 
reported to regulate the zinc finger ZBTB10 gene, a putative Sp repressor.
Transfection of ER-negative MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells with antisense miR-27a
(as-miR-27a) resulted in increased expression of ZBTB10 mRNA and decreased
expression of Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 at the mRNA and protein levels and also decreased
activity in cells transfected with constructs containing Sp1 and Sp3 promoter
inserts. In addition, these responses were accompanied by decreased expression of
Sp-dependent survival and angiogenic genes, including survivin, vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and VEGF receptor 1 (VEGFR1). Moreover, similar
results were observed in MDA-MB-231 cells transfected with ZBTB10 expression
plasmid. Both as-miR-27a and ZBTB10 overexpression decreased the percentage of
MDA-MB-231 cells in S phase of the cell cycle; however, ZBTB10 increased the
percentage of cells in G(0)-G(1), whereas as-miR-27a increased the percentage in 
G(2)-M. This latter response was associated with induction of Myt-1 (another
miR-27a target gene), which inhibits G(2)-M through enhanced phosphorylation and 
inactivation of cdc2. Thus, the oncogenic activity of miR-27a in MDA-MB-231 cells
is due, in part, to suppression of ZBTB10 and Myt-1.

PMID: 18006846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Nov 13;104(46):18175-80. Epub 2007 Nov 5.

Developmental pathway of CD4+CD8- medullary thymocytes during mouse ontogeny and 
its defect in Aire-/- mice.

Li J(1), Li Y, Yao JY, Jin R, Zhu MZ, Qian XP, Zhang J, Fu YX, Wu L, Zhang Y,
Chen WF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Peking University Health Science Center, 38 Xue Yuan
Road, Beijing 100083, China.

The newly generated single-positive (SP) thymocytes undergo further maturation in
the thymic medulla before their emigration to the periphery. The present study
was undertaken to validate a developmental program we proposed for CD4SP
medullary thymocytes and to explore the mechanisms regulating this process.
During mouse ontogeny, the emergence of different subsets of CD4SP thymocytes
followed a strict temporal order from SP1 to SP4. Parallel to the transition in
surface phenotype, a steady increase in function was observed. As further
evidence, purified SP1 cells were able to sequentially give rise to SP2, SP3, and
SP4 cells in intrathymic adoptive transfer and in culture. Notably, the
development of CD4SP cells in the medulla seemed to be critically dependent on a 
functionally intact medullary epithelial cell compartment because Relb and Aire
deficiency were found to cause severe blockage at the transition from SP3 to SP4.
Taken together, this work establishes an ontogenetically and functionally
relevant maturation program for CD4SP thymocytes. Precise dissection of this
program should facilitate further inquiry into the molecular mechanisms governing
normal thymocyte development and its disturbance in pathological conditions.

PMCID: PMC2084316
PMID: 17984055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Br Dent J. 2007 Oct 13;203(7):395-401.

Cleanability of dental instruments--implications of residual protein and risks
from Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.

Walker JT(1), Dickinson J, Sutton JM, Raven ND, Marsh PD.

Author information: 
(1)HPA Centre for Emergency Preparedness and Response, Porton Down, Salisbury,
SP4 0JG. jimmy.walker@hpa.org.uk

Comment in
    Br Dent J. 2007 Dec 22;203(12):669.

Cleaning of dental instruments is the first line of control in reducing the
adherent bioburden. The threat of vCJD and the difficulty in removing prion
protein has provided a new challenge for cleaning surgical and dental
instruments. Prion proteins are also more resistant to many disinfection and
sterilisation techniques. A number of different methods are currently available
in primary care for cleaning instruments including manual washing, ultrasonic
cleaners and washer disinfectors. Manual cleaning of dental instruments is
time-consuming, introduces operator error and the risk of puncture wounds, is not
reproducible and does not completely remove debris from instruments. Ultrasonic
baths are significantly more effective than hand cleaning alone and are currently
used by the majority of dental surgeries (often as an adjunct to manual
cleaning). Automated washer-disinfectors appear to provide a validated, reliable 
and reproducible procedure for disinfection and sterilisation of dental
instruments to ensure both the safety of patients and dental staff. Dental
instruments that are difficult to clean are frequently contaminated with tissue
debris after routine reprocessing and cannot be excluded as a potential
transmission risk for infectious agents, including prions. The transmission of
vCJD via dentistry is considered to be low risk, however, the Department of
Health (DoH) has recently advised dentists to ensure that endodontic reamers and 
files are treated as single-use as a precautionary basis in order to further
reduce any risk of vCJD transmission.

PMID: 17934424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Neurodegener Dis. 2007;4(6):413-23. Epub 2007 Oct 9.

Sp3 and sp4 transcription factor levels are increased in brains of patients with 
Alzheimer's disease.

Boutillier S(1), Lannes B, Buée L, Delacourte A, Rouaux C, Mohr M, Bellocq JP,
Sellal F, Larmet Y, Boutillier AL, Loeffler JP.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U692, Laboratoire de Signalisations Moléculaires et
Neurodégénérescence, Strasbourg, France.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by extracellular Abeta
peptide deposition originating from amyloid precursor protein cleavage and
intracellular neurofibrillary tangles resulting from pathological tau protein
aggregation. These processes are accompanied by dramatic neuronal losses, further
leading to different cognitive impairments. Neuronal death signalings involve
gene expression modifications that rely on transcription factor alterations.
Herein, we investigated the fate of the Sp family of transcription factors in
postmortem brains from patients with AD disease and in different contexts of
neuronal death.
METHODS/RESULTS: By immunohistochemistry we found that the Sp3 and Sp4 levels
were dramatically increased and associated with neurofibrillary tangles and
pathological tau presence in neurons from the CA1 region of the hippocampus, as
well as the entorhinal cortex of AD patient brains. The Sp transcription factor
expression levels were further analyzed in cortical neurons in which death is
induced by amyloid precursor protein signaling targeting. While the Sp1 levels
remained constant, the Sp4 levels were slightly upregulated in response to the
death signal. The Sp3 isoforms were rather degraded. Interestingly, when
overexpressed by transfection experiments, the three Sp family members induced
neuronal apoptosis, Sp3 and Sp4 being the most potent proapoptotic factors over
Sp1.
CONCLUSION: Our data evidence Sp3 and Sp4 as new hallmarks of AD in postmortem
human brains and further point out that Sp proteins are potential triggers of
neuronal death signaling cascades.

Copyright (c) 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 17934324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. J Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Oct;39(4):289-304.

Role of specificity protein transcription factors in estrogen-induced gene
expression in MCF-7 breast cancer cells.

Khan S(1), Wu F, Liu S, Wu Q, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A & M University, 
College Station, Texas 77843-4466, USA.

Deletion analysis of several 17beta-estradiol (E(2))-responsive genes have
identified GC-rich sites that are associated with hormone-induced transactivation
in MCF-7 breast cancer cells. However, the role of individual specificity
proteins (Sps) in mediating hormone-induced gene expression has not been
unequivocally determined. In transient transfection studies using E(2)-responsive
GC-rich promoters from the E(2)F1, carbamoylphosphate synthetase/aspartate
transcarbamylase/dihydroorotase (CAD), and retinoic acid receptor alpha (RAR
alpha) genes, RNA interference using small inhibitory RNAs for Sp1 (iSp1), Sp3
(iSp3), and Sp4 (iSp4) decreased both basal and E(2)-induced transactivation. The
contributions of individual Sp proteins to basal and E(2)-induced activity were
promoter dependent. iSp1, iSp3, and iSp4 also significantly inhibited hormonal
induction of E(2)F1, CAD, and RAR alpha mRNA levels; however, the enhanced
inhibitory effects of the latter two small inhibitory RNAs suggest that Sp3 and
Sp4 play a major role in estrogen receptor alpha/Sp-mediated gene expression in
MCF-7 cells.

PMID: 17909268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2007 Dec;77(3):589-95. Epub 2007 Sep 27.

Differential expression of cellulases and xylanases by Cellulomonas flavigena
grown on different carbon sources.

Sánchez-Herrera LM(1), Ramos-Valdivia AC, de la Torre M, Salgado LM, Ponce-Noyola
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Bioengineering, CINVESTAV-IPN, Av. IPN 2508,
San Pedro Zacatenco, 07300, DF, México.

The diversity of cellulases and xylanases secreted by Cellulomonas flavigena
cultured on sugar cane bagasse, Solka-floc, xylan, or glucose was explored by
two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. C. flavigena produced the largest variety of
cellulases and xylanases on sugar cane bagasse. Multiple extracellular proteins
were expressed with these growth substrates, and a limited set of them coincided 
in all substrates. Thirteen proteins with carboxymethyl cellulase or xylanase
activity were liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry sequenced. Proteins SP4 and
SP18 were identified as products of celA and celB genes, respectively, while SP20
and SP33 were isoforms of the bifunctional cellulase/xylanase Cxo recently
sequenced and characterized in C. flavigena. The rest of the detected proteins
were unknown enzymes with either carboxymethyl cellulase or xylanase activities. 
All proteins aligned with glycosyl hydrolases listed in National Center for
Biotechnology Information database, mainly with cellulase and xylanase enzymes.
One of these unknown enzymes, protein SP6, was cross-induced by sugar cane
bagasse, Solka-floc, and xylan. The differences in the expression maps of the
presently induced cultures revealed that C. flavigena produces and secretes
multiple enzymes to use a wide range of lignocellulosic substrates as carbon
sources. The expression of these proteins depends on the nature of the cellulosic
substrate.

PMID: 17899068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Endocr Metab Immune Disord Drug Targets. 2007 Sep;7(3):177-86.

Therapeutic use of molecules that mimic pathogen danger signals.

Eyles JE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JQ,
UK. jeeyles@dstl.gov.uk

Major advances in our understanding of how the mammalian immune system recognises
pathogens have evolved from initial observations of fruit-fly developmental
mutants. Through this work it has been established that vertebrates possess a
specialised 'early warning system' in the form of a panel of detectors to rapidly
sense and trigger responses to the presence of microbial invaders through
detection of so called pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs). This
discovery has led to the search for new agonists and antagonists that can be
used, therapeutically, for rational manipulation of the immune response. These
efforts have already yielded several exciting new strategies to treat autoimmune,
atopic, malignant and infectious disease. This review article provides an
overview of the potential impact of these drugs on human medicine.

PMID: 17897044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. J R Army Med Corps. 2007 Jun;153(2):119-23.

Primary blast injuries to the eye: a review of the evidence.

Abbotts R(1), Harrison SE, Cooper GL.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton,
Salisbury, SP4 0JQ.

Comment in
    J R Army Med Corps. 2008 Mar;154(1):76.
    J R Army Med Corps. 2009 Mar;155(1):70.

OBJECTIVES: Eye injuries are relatively common following detonations. The
majority of these are caused by secondary fragments. Primary blast injury to the 
eye (from the air-blast alone) has been described historically, but the
differentiation of air-blast and fragment aetiologies in the reports is not
clear. The aim of this review is to consider the evidence in the literature for
true primary blast injury to the eye.
METHODS: A literature review using Medline, Pub-med and Web of Knowledge
databases.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, there is little conclusive evidence that primary ocular
blast injury occurs in survivors of explosions. However, some case reports do
surmise its occurrence and it cannot be unequivocally ruled out. If it does
occur, it is more likely to be at high overpressures that will produce
life-threatening injuries. The development of enhanced blast weapons may result
in an increased incidence. At present however, the most severe and damaging
threat to the eyes from blast remains the impact of fragments and debris.

PMID: 17896542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. J Med Microbiol. 2007 Oct;56(Pt 10):1268-76.

A 55 kDa hypothetical membrane protein is an iron-regulated virulence factor of
Francisella tularensis subsp. novicida U112.

Milne TS(1), Michell SL, Diaper H, Wikström P, Svensson K, Oyston PC, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.
TSMILNE@dstl.gov.uk

Iron is an important nutritional requirement for bacteria due to its conserved
role in many essential metabolic processes. As a consequence of the lack of
freely available iron in the mammalian host, bacteria upregulate a range of
virulence factors during infection. Transcriptional analysis of Francisella
tularensis subsp. novicida U112 grown in iron-deficient medium identified 21
genes upregulated in response to this condition, four of which were attributed to
a siderophore operon. In addition, a novel iron-regulated gene, FTT0025, was
identified which is part of this operon and encodes a 55 kDa hypothetical
membrane protein. When grown on chrome azurol S agar, the F. tularensis subsp.
novicida U112deltaFTT0025 mutant produced an increased reaction zone compared
with the wild-type, suggesting that siderophore production was unaffected but
that the bacteria may have a deficiency in their ability to re-sequester this
iron-binding molecule. Furthermore, the deltaFTT0025 mutant was attenuated in a
BALB/c mouse model of infection relative to wild-type F. tularensis subsp.
novicida U112.

PMID: 17893160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. World J Gastroenterol. 2007 Oct 28;13(40):5360-6.

Holistic acupuncture approach to idiopathic refractory nausea, abdominal pain and
bloating.

Ouyang A(1), Xu L.

Author information: 
(1)H045, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, The Milton S. Hershey
Medical Center, 500 University Drive, Hershey, PA 17033, United States.
aouyang@psu.edu

AIM: To evaluate the effectiveness of a holistic acupuncture approach on nausea, 
pain, bloating and electrogastrogram (EGG) parameters in patients with
intractable symptoms.
METHODS: Twelve patients with no or mild nausea (those without nausea had
bloating or pain) and 10 with a history of moderate to severe nausea were
referred for acupuncture. All underwent an EGG and were treated at acupuncture
points PC6, SP4 and DU20. Visual analog scales (VAS) assessing severity of
nausea, pain and bloating were obtained before and after acupuncture treatment.
Nineteen patients received three and three patients received two treatments.
RESULTS: VAS scores for nausea reflected the clinical assessment and differed
significantly between mild and moderate/severe nausea groups. Acupuncture
significantly improved severity of nausea in both groups with improved
pre-treatment nausea between the first and third treatments in the
moderate/severe nausea group. Pain scores improved with acupuncture in the mild
nausea group only and bloating improved only with the first treatment in this
group. Patients with bloating with VAS scores greater than 35 pre-treatment
improved with acupuncture and over all VAS scores for pain improved with
treatment. Acupuncture increased the power in the 2.7 to 3.5 cpm range in the
EGG.
CONCLUSION: In this uncontrolled clinical study, a holistic acupuncture approach 
significantly improved nausea in patients with refractory symptoms and increased 
the power in the 2.7-3.5 cpm component of the electrogastrogram. Bloating and
pain VAS scores improved acutely with treatment. This study suggests that
acupuncture may be effective in this refractory group of patients and further
study using appropriate controls is warranted.

PMCID: PMC4171327
PMID: 17879407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Vaccine. 2007 Oct 16;25(42):7301-6. Epub 2007 Aug 31.

Concomitant administration of Yersinia pestis specific monoclonal antibodies with
plague vaccine has a detrimental effect on vaccine mediated immunity.

Eyles JE(1), Butcher WA, Titball RW, Hill J.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Dstl, Porton Down, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK.
jeeyles@dstl.gov.uk

Antibodies can be used to confer rapid immunity against infectious agents for
short periods of time. By comparison, vaccine induced immunity is more
protective, but takes a relatively long time to develop. Concomitant
administration of antibody and vaccine by different routes was evaluated as a
means of providing both rapid and long-term protection against plague. BALB/c
mice were treated intraperitoneally with monoclonal antibodies, with
specificities for Yersinia pestis LcrV and F1 antigens. A cohort of these mice
was simultaneously vaccinated with rF1 and rLcrV by the intramuscular route.
Antibody co-administration with vaccine reduced the level of vaccine mediated
protection afforded against a high level Y. pestis challenge. Conversely,
antibody-mediated protection was unaffected by vaccine co-administration and
lasted for at least 8 weeks post administration. We also evaluated the effect of 
administering vaccine intradermally and antibody intratracheally and observed
that, irrespective of administration route, concomitant administration of
antibody reduced the effectiveness of vaccine mediated immunity. The results of
passive transfer experiments supported the thesis that the development of
protective antibody responses following vaccination is impaired by the presence
of circulating monoclonal antibodies with specificities for important B-cell
epitopes in the vaccine. We also noted that intradermal injection of LcrV antigen
and cholera toxin adjuvant afforded good levels of protection against systemic
and aerosol challenge with Y. pestis: intradermal injection might therefore be
considered as a potential minimally invasive method of plague vaccine
administration. These data have implications for the design of therapeutic
strategies against plague infection.

PMID: 17869388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Oct 26;362(3):695-9. Epub 2007 Aug 17.

A role for His155 in binding of human prion peptide144-167 to immobilised prion
protein.

Hesp JR(1), Raven ND, Sutton JM.

Author information: 
(1)Health Protection Agency, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK.
richard.hesp@hpa.org.uk

The interactions and conformational changes that lead to the conversion of the
normal prion protein (PrP(c)) to its pathogenic form, PrP(sc), are still being
elucidated. Using Surface Plasma Resonance (SPR), we provide evidence that a
synthetic peptide (PrP(144-167)) corresponding to residues comprising the alpha
helix 1-beta strand 2 domain of PrP(c) is able to interact and bind to
immobilised recombinant human PrP (rHuPrP) in a dose-dependent manner. The
interaction is pH dependent with an increase in binding observed as the pH is
lowered, particularly between pH 6.5 and pH 5.5 suggesting a specific role for
His(155) in the interaction, confirmed by covalent modification of this residue
in the peptide with diethylpyrocarbonate (DEPC). Circular dichroism analysis of
PrP(144-167) revealed no secondary structure motifs across the pH range
investigated. Possible pH related structural changes of immobilised rHuPrP are
also discussed with regard to the increased affinity for PrP(144-167).

PMID: 17761148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. J Hosp Infect. 2007 Jun;65 Suppl 2:43-9.

Hospital and community acquired infection and the built environment--design and
testing of infection control rooms.

Walker JT(1), Hoffman P, Bennett AM, Vos MC, Thomas M, Tomlinson N.

Author information: 
(1)Health Protection Agency, Centre for Emergency Response and Preparedness,
Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JG, UK. jimmy.walker@hpa.org.uk

Negative-pressure isolation rooms are required to house patients infected with
agents transmissible by the aerosol route in order to minimise exposure of
healthcare workers and other patients. Housing patients in a separate room
provides a barrier which minimises any physical contact with other patients. An
isolation room held at negative pressure to reduce aerosol escape and a high
air-change rate to allow rapid removal of aerosols can eliminate transmission of 
infectious aerosols to those outside the room. However, badly designed and/or
incorrectly operating isolation rooms have been shown to place healthcare workers
and other patients at risk from airborne diseases such as tuberculosis. Few
standards are available for the design of isolation rooms and no pressure
differential or air-change rates are specified. Techniques such as aerosol
particle tracer sampling and computational fluid dynamics can be applied to study
the performance of negative-pressure rooms and to assess how design variables can
affect their performance. This should allow cost-effective designs for isolation 
rooms to be developed. Healthcare staff should be trained to understand how these
rooms operate and there should be systems in place to ensure they are functioning
correctly.

PMID: 17540241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2007 Sep;18(10):1060-6. Epub 2007 Jul 30.

A novel early onset lethal form of catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular
tachycardia maps to chromosome 7p14-p22.

Bhuiyan ZA(1), Hamdan MA, Shamsi ET, Postma AV, Mannens MM, Wilde AA, Al-Gazali
L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Centre, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Z.A.Bhuiyan@amc.uva.nl

INTRODUCTION: Previously, autosomal dominant catecholaminergic polymorphic
ventricular tachycardia (CPVT [1]) was mapped to chromosome 1q42-43 with
identification of pathogenic mutations in RYR2. Autosomal recessive CPVT (2) was 
mapped to chromosome 1p13-21, leading to the identification of mutations in
CASQ2. In this study, we aimed to elucidate clinical phenotypes of a new variant 
of CPVT (3) in an inbred Arab family and also delineate the chromosomal location 
of the gene causing CPVT (3).
METHODS AND RESULTS: In a highly inbred family, clinical symptoms of CPVT
appeared early in childhood (7-12 years) and in three of the four cases, the
first appearance of symptoms turned into a fatal outcome. Parents of the affected
children were first-degree cousins and without any symptoms. Segregation analysis
suggested an autosomal recessive inheritance. A genome-wide search using
polymorphic DNA markers mapped the disease locus to a 25-Mb interval on
chromosome 7p14-p22. A maximal multipoint LOD score of 3.17 was obtained at
marker D7S493. Sequencing of putative candidate genes, SP4, NPY, FKBP9, FKBP14,
PDE1C, and TBX20, in and around this locus, did not reveal any mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified a novel highly malignant autosomal recessive form
of CPVT and mapped this disorder to a 25-Mb interval on chromosome 7p14-p22.

PMID: 17666061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2008 May;109(2):325-35. Epub 2007 Jul 26.

CCND1 amplification and cyclin D1 expression in breast cancer and their relation 
with proteomic subgroups and patient outcome.

Elsheikh S(1), Green AR, Aleskandarany MA, Grainge M, Paish CE, Lambros MB,
Reis-Filho JS, Ellis IO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, School of Molecular Medical Sciences, Nottingham
City Hospital NHS Trust, University of Nottingham and University Hospitals NHS
Trust, Nottingham, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Despite strong evidence regarding the role of CCND1 amplification
and protein overexpression in breast carcinoma, the associations between CCND1
amplification/cyclin D1 overexpression and clinicopathological variables and
clinical outcome remain controversial.
AIMS OF THE STUDY: (1) to correlate cyclin D1 expression with gene amplification;
(2) to analyse the correlations between CCND1 amplification and overexpression
with clinicopathological features and patients' outcome in invasive breast
cancer; (3) to define the prevalence and clinical significance of cyclin D1
overexpression and CCND1 amplification in ER positive breast carcinomas (4) to
define the prevalence of cyclin D1 overexpression and CCND1 amplification in
breast cancers with basal-like immunophenotype.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: CCND1 amplification and protein expression were assessed
on a tissue microarray containing 880 unselected invasive breast cancer cases, by
means of chromogenic in situ hybridisation using the Spotlight CCND1
amplification probe and immunohistochemistry, using the rabbit monoclonal
antibody SP4.
RESULTS: A total of 59/613 tumours (9.6%) showed CCND1 amplification and 224/514 
(43.6%) showed strong cyclin D1 expression. A strong positive correlation between
CCND1 amplification and higher levels of cyclin D1 expression was found (P <
0.001). Basal-like cancers showed infrequent CCND1 amplification and cyclin D1
overexpression (P < 0.001). Both CCND1 amplification and cyclin D1 expression
were associated with positive ER status. CCND1 gene amplification was an
independent prognostic factor for patients with ER positive breast cancer.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate a strong correlation between CCND1
amplification and its protein expression in breast cancer. However, protein
expression is more pervasive than gene amplification and associated with ER
expression.

PMID: 17653856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. J Med Microbiol. 2007 Aug;56(Pt 8):1005-10.

Polysaccharides and virulence of Burkholderia pseudomallei.

Sarkar-Tyson M(1), Thwaite JE, Harding SV, Smither SJ, Oyston PC, Atkins TP,
Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.
mstyson@dstl.gov.uk

Burkholderia pseudomallei is the causative agent of melioidosis, an infectious
disease of humans and animals. Gene clusters which encode capsular polysaccharide
(type I O-PS) and LPS (type II O-PS), both of which play roles in virulence, have
previously been identified. Here, the identification of two further putative
clusters, type III O-PS and type IV O-PS, is reported. Mice challenged with type 
III O-PS or type IV O-PS mutants showed increased mean times to death (7.8 and
11.6 days) compared to those challenged with wild-type B. pseudomallei (3 days). 
To investigate the possible roles of polysaccharides in protection, mice were
immunized with killed cells of wild-type B. pseudomallei or killed cells of B.
pseudomallei with mutations in the O antigen, capsular polysaccharide, type III
O-PS or type IV O-PS gene clusters. Immunization with all polysaccharide mutant
strains resulted in delayed time to death compared to the naïve controls,
following challenge with wild-type B. pseudomallei strain K96243. However,
immunization with killed polysaccharide mutant strains conferred different
degrees of protection, demonstrating the immunological importance of the
polysaccharide clusters on the surface of B. pseudomallei.

PMID: 17644705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. J Clin Virol. 2007 Aug;39(4):271-5. Epub 2007 Jul 12.

Molecular diagnosis and analysis of Chikungunya virus.

Edwards CJ(1), Welch SR, Chamberlain J, Hewson R, Tolley H, Cane PA, Lloyd G.

Author information: 
(1)Novel and Dangerous Pathogens Department, Centre for Emergency Preparedness
and Response, Health Protection Agency, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4
0JG, United Kingdom. carolyn.edwards@hpa.org.uk

BACKGROUND: In March 2005 a Chikungunya fever outbreak began on the islands of
the Indian Ocean. The number of cases of this disease dramatically rose amongst
these islands before affecting over a million people in India. Travellers to
these regions have returned to the UK with the disease leading to a greater than 
15-fold increase in the annual number of Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) sero-positive 
samples in 2006.
OBJECTIVES: A real-time RT-PCR test was developed for CHIKV and designed to
detect currently circulating strains of virus as well as other genotypes. Its
sensitivity was compared with an existing standard RT-PCR assay and a previously 
published real-time assay.
STUDY DESIGN: A real-time RT-PCR assay was optimised and evaluated using a panel 
of 55 clinical serum samples and a synthetic RNA transcript as a positive
control. Nucleotide sequencing of part of the E1 gene of CHIKV was used to
investigate the relatedness of the samples.
RESULTS: The real-time RT-PCR was 10-fold more sensitive than a conventional
block-based RT-PCR and could detect as low as 20 copies of RNA transcript. The
assay also had 10-fold improved sensitivity in detecting the outbreak strain of
virus when compared to another published TaqMan assay. Analysis of sequences from
patients that had travelled to India, Mauritius or the Seychelles showed high
similarity with published sequences from the Indian Ocean island of Réunion.
CONCLUSIONS: A sensitive and rapid real-time RT-PCR assay has been developed for 
CHIKV and tested against current isolates.

PMID: 17627877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Microb Pathog. 2007 Oct;43(4):161-5. Epub 2007 May 18.

Analysis of protection afforded by a Clostridium perfringens alpha-toxoid against
heterologous clostridial phospholipases C.

Neeson BN(1), Clark GC, Atkins HS, Lingard B, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.
bnneeson@dstl.gov.uk

The major virulence determinant in clostridial myonecrosis caused by Clostridium 
perfringens is a phospholipase C (PLC), the alpha-toxin. Previously, mice have
been protected against challenge with heterologous alpha-toxin or Clostridium
perfringens spores by immunisation with the C-domain (known as Cpa(247-370) or
alpha-toxoid) of the alpha-toxin. In this study, we have determined the ability
of the alpha-toxoid to protect against the lethal effects of a divergent C.
perfringens alpha-toxin and against the PLCs of C. absonum or C. bifermentans,
species which have been isolated from cases of clostridial myonecrosis.
Protection against the C. perfringens alpha-toxin variant, the C. absonum
alpha-toxin or the C. bifermentans PLC was elicited by immunisation with the
alpha-toxoid in vivo.

PMID: 17604945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Eur J Immunol. 2007 Jul;37(7):1938-53.

Transcriptional regulation of MICA and MICB: a novel polymorphism in MICB
promoter alters transcriptional regulation by Sp1.

Rodríguez-Rodero S(1), González S, Rodrigo L, Fernández-Morera JL, Martínez-Borra
J, López-Vázquez A, López-Larrea C.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Histocompatibilidad y Transplantes, Hospital Universitario Central
de Asturias Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain.

MHC class I-related genes A/B (MICA/B) are ligands of the NKG2D receptor
expressed on T and NK cells. Their expression is highly restricted in normal
tissues, but is up-regulated in tumoral and infected cells. We show that the
minimal promoter of both genes contains a CCAAT box, which binds to NF-Y, and a
GC box, which binds to Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4. We also demonstrate that MICB promoter
is polymorphic, showing three single nucleotide polymorphisms (C>G at +16, -341, 
-408) and a deletion of two base pairs at -66 (AG>--) that is located close to
the CCAAT box (-70) and the GC box (-86). Transcriptional activity associated
with MICB promoter variants carrying this deletion, present in the 45.3% of
Spanish population, showed a remarkable decrease (18-fold, p <0.01). By
functional analysis, we show that the deletion plays a critical role in MICB
promoter activity by diminishing Sp1 transcriptional activation. These important 
variations in MICB expression among normal individuals could imply a significant 
difference in the natural immune response against infections or tumor
transformation, and might thereby contribute to an increased aberrant immune
response against self cells, providing the molecular basis for the associations
of the MICB gene to different autoimmune diseases.

PMID: 17557375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Bioresour Technol. 2008 Apr;99(6):1589-95. Epub 2007 May 30.

Structural and physicochemical characterization of crude biosurfactant produced
by Pseudomonas aeruginosa SP4 isolated from petroleum-contaminated soil.

Pornsunthorntawee O(1), Wongpanit P, Chavadej S, Abe M, Rujiravanit R.

Author information: 
(1)The Petroleum and Petrochemical College, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok,
Thailand.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain SP4, isolated from petroleum-contaminated soil in
Thailand, was used to produce a biosurfactant from a nutrient broth with palm oil
as the carbon source. The key components of the crude biosurfactant were
fractionated by using HPLC-ELSD technique. With the use of ATR-FTIR spectroscopy,
in combination with (1)H NMR and MS analyses, chemical structures of the
fractionated components of the crude biosurfactant were identified as rhamnolipid
species. When compared to synthetic surfactants, including Pluronic F-68, which
is a triblock nonionic surfactant containing poly(ethylene oxide) and
poly(propylene oxide), and sodium dodecyl sulfate, the crude biosurfactant showed
comparable physicochemical properties, in terms of the surface activities. The
crude biosurfactant reduced the surface tension of pure water to 29.0 mN/m with a
critical micelle concentration of approximately 200 mg/l, and it exhibited good
thermal and pH stability. The crude biosurfactant also formed stable water-in-oil
microemulsions with crude oil and various types of vegetable oils, but not with
short-chain hydrocarbons.

PMID: 17540558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jun 5;104(23):9882-7. Epub 2007 May 29.

Transcription factor Sp4 regulates dendritic patterning during cerebellar
maturation.

Ramos B(1), Gaudillière B, Bonni A, Gill G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Integration of inputs by a neuron depends on dendritic arborization patterns. In 
mammals, the genetic programs that regulate dynamic remodeling of dendrites
during development and in response to activity are incompletely understood. Here 
we report that knockdown of the transcription factor Sp4 led to an increased
number of highly branched dendrites during maturation of cerebellar granule
neurons in dissociated cultures and in cerebellar cortex. Time-course analysis
revealed that depletion of Sp4 led to persistent generation of dendritic branches
and a failure in resorption of transient dendrites. Depolarization induced a
reduction in the number of dendrites, and knockdown of Sp4 blocked
depolarization-induced remodeling. Furthermore, overexpression of Sp4 wild type, 
but not a mutant lacking the DNA-binding domain, was sufficient to promote
dendritic pruning in nondepolarizing conditions. These findings indicate that the
transcription factor Sp4 controls dendritic patterning during cerebellar
development by limiting branch formation and promoting activity-dependent
pruning.

PMCID: PMC1887555
PMID: 17535924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Proteins. 2007 Aug 15;68(3):636-45.

Fold recognition by concurrent use of solvent accessibility and residue depth.

Liu S(1), Zhang C, Liang S, Zhou Y.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute Center for Single Molecule Biophysics,
Department of Physiology and Biophysics, State University of New York at Buffalo,
Buffalo, New York 14214, USA.

Recognizing the structural similarity without significant sequence identity
(called fold recognition) is the key for bridging the gap between the number of
known protein sequences and the number of structures solved. Previously, we
developed a fold-recognition method called SP(3) which combines sequence-derived 
sequence profiles, secondary-structure profiles and residue-depth dependent,
structure-derived sequence profiles. The use of residue-depth-dependent profiles 
makes SP(3) one of the best automatic predictors in CASP 6. Because residue depth
(RD) and solvent accessible surface area (solvent accessibility) are
complementary in describing the exposure of a residue to solvent, we test whether
or not incorporation of solvent-accessibility profiles into SP(3) could further
increase the accuracy of fold recognition. The resulting method, called SP(4),
was tested in SALIGN benchmark for alignment accuracy and Lindahl, LiveBench 8
and CASP7 blind prediction for fold recognition sensitivity and model-structure
accuracy. For remote homologs, SP(4) is found to consistently improve over SP(3) 
in the accuracy of sequence alignment and predicted structural models as well as 
in the sensitivity of fold recognition. Our result suggests that RD and solvent
accessibility can be used concurrently for improving the accuracy and sensitivity
of fold recognition. The SP(4) server and its local usage package are available
on http://sparks.informatics.iupui.edu/SP4.

PMID: 17510969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Curr Mol Med. 2007 May;7(3):277-86.

Transcriptional responses of Mycobacterium tuberculosis exposed to adverse
conditions in vitro.

Bacon J(1), Marsh PD.

Author information: 
(1)TB Research, CEPR, Health Protection Agency, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG,
UK. Joanna.bacon@hpa.org.uk

Mycobacterium tuberculosis encounters a range of stimuli in the host.
Understanding the environmental cues that initiate the transcriptional response
of M. tuberculosis, which enable the bacterium to replicate and/or survive in the
host, will provide markers that are specific to different stages of disease,
further refining the search for improved treatments and vaccines. Studying M.
tuberculosis gene expression in vivo is technically challenging and more amenable
in vitro experiments are being used to aid interpretation and to dissect the
signals that are responsible for controlling subsets of genes. Key parameters
that affect the growth of a pathogen in the host include nutrient status,
environmental pH, oxygen availability, and host defences. Studying gene
expression, pathogenicity, and physiology of M. tuberculosis that has been
exposed to these relevant host conditions in vitro will further increase our
understanding of the virulence factors that M. tuberculosis requires to establish
disease. Complementary information obtained by metabolic flux analysis,
proteomics, and regulatory networks analysis will enable a clearer picture of how
transcriptional responses translate to changes in the metabolome and physiology
of the organism.

PMID: 17504112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Microbiology. 2007 May;153(Pt 5):1435-44.

Lipid composition and transcriptional response of Mycobacterium tuberculosis
grown under iron-limitation in continuous culture: identification of a novel wax 
ester.

Bacon J(1), Dover LG, Hatch KA, Zhang Y, Gomes JM, Kendall S, Wernisch L, Stoker 
NG, Butcher PD, Besra GS, Marsh PD.

Author information: 
(1)TB Research group, Health Protection Agency, Centre for Emergency Preparedness
and Response, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK.
Joanna.bacon@hpa.org.uk

The low level of available iron in vivo is a major obstacle for microbial
pathogens and is a stimulus for the expression of virulence genes. In this study,
Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv was grown aerobically in the presence of limited
iron availability in chemostat culture to determine the physiological response of
the organism to iron-limitation. A previously unidentified wax ester accumulated 
under iron-limited growth, and changes in the abundance of triacylglycerol and
menaquinone were also observed between iron-replete and iron-limited chemostat
cultures. DNA microarray analysis revealed differential expression of genes
involved in glycerolipid metabolism and isoprenoid quinone biosynthesis,
providing some insight into the underlying genetic changes that correlate with
cell-wall lipid profiles of M. tuberculosis growing in an iron-limited
environment.

PMCID: PMC3123377
PMID: 17464057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. J Androl. 2007 Sep-Oct;28(5):689-97. Epub 2007 Apr 25.

Cryosurvival and in vitro fertilizing capacity postthaw is improved when boar
spermatozoa are frozen in the presence of seminal plasma from good freezer boars.

Hernández M(1), Roca J, Calvete JJ, Sanz L, Muiño-Blanco T, Cebrián-Pérez JA,
Vázquez JM, Martínez EA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Medicina y Cirugía Animal, Facultad de Veterinaria,
Universidad de Murcia, Campus de Espinardo, 30071 Murcia, Spain.

The study evaluated the protective effect of seminal plasma (SP) added to
freezing extender against cryopreservation injuries to boar spermatozoa. Pooled
sperm-rich fractions collected from 9 fertile boars were frozen in 0.5-mL straws 
after being extended in a conventional freezing extender either alone or
supplemented with 5% of SPs (SP1-SP4) collected from the sperm-rich fractions
(diluted 1:1, vol/vol, in Beltsville Thawing Solution extender) from 4 boars
(1-4) with known sperm cryosurvival (poor, moderate, and good sperm freezers).
Cryopreservation injuries were assessed in terms of postthaw sperm motility
(assessed by computer-assisted sperm analysis), viability (plasma membrane and
acrosome integrity assessed simultaneously by flow cytometry), membrane lipid
peroxidation (malondialdehyde [MDA] production), and the ability of thawed
spermatozoa to fertilize in vitro-matured homologous oocytes. The addition of SP 
from good sperm freezers (SP3 and SP4) improved (P < .01) the motility and
viability of thawed spermatozoa without any influence on MDA production.
Moreover, SP from good sperm freezers also increased (P < .05) the percentage of 
penetrated (SP3) and polyspermic oocytes (SP4) with respect to the control.
Neither the total amount of SP proteins, protein profiles, nor antioxidant
capacity of the different SPs were related to the various
cryosurvival/fertilizing capacities of the processed spermatozoa.

PMID: 17460094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Mil Med. 2007 Mar;172(3):295-300.

Protective ventilation strategies in the management of phosgene-induced acute
lung injury.

Parkhouse DA(1), Brown RF, Jugg BJ, Harban FM, Platt J, Kenward CE, Jenner J,
Rice P, Smith AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory,
Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 OJQ, UK.

Phosgene is a chemical widely used in the plastics industry and has been used in 
warfare. It produces a life-threatening pulmonary edema within hours of exposure,
to which no specific antidote exists. This study aims to examine the
pathophysiological changes seen with low tidal volume ventilation (protective
ventilation (PV)) strategies compared to conventional ventilation (CV), in a
model of phosgene-induced acute lung injury. Anesthetized pigs were instrumented 
and exposed to phosgene (concentration x time (Ct), 2,350 mg x min x m(-3)) and
then ventilated with intermittent positive pressure ventilation (tidal volume
(TV) = 10 ml x kg(-1); positive end expiratory pressure, 3 cm H2O; frequency, 20 
breaths x min(-1); fractional concentration of inspired oxygen, 0.24), monitored 
for 6 hours after exposure, and then randomized into treatment groups: CV, PV (A)
or (B) (TV, 8 or 6 ml x kg(-1); positive end expiratory pressure, 8 cm H2O;
frequency, 20 or 25 breaths x min(-1); fractional concentration of inspired
oxygen, 0.4). Pathophysiological parameters were measured for up to 24 hours. The
results show that PV resulted in improved oxygenation, decreased shunt fraction, 
and mortality, with all animals surviving to 24 hours compared to only three of
the CV animals. Microscopy confirmed reduced hemorrhage, neutrophilic
infiltration, and intra-alveolar edema.

PMID: 17436775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2007 Jun;1105:98-121. Epub 2007 Apr 13.

Francisella tularensis genomics and proteomics.

Titball RW(1), Petrosino JF.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JQ,
UK. rwtitball@dstl.gov.uk

The availability of the genome sequences of different strains of Francisella
tularensis is having a major impact on a wide range of research projects, from
understanding the biology of this organism to devising vaccines and diagnostics. 
Comparative genomics and molecular typing methods suggest that the four different
subspecies of F. tularensis are genetically distinct groups. Although there is a 
high degree of nucleotide identity between strains, there are numerous DNA
rearrangements. IS elements appear to have played a major role in these
chromosomal rearrangements. The different subspecies of F. tularensis appear to
have evolved by vertical descent from a common ancestor, probably F. tularensis
subspecies novicida. Comparative genomic and proteomic studies have revealed
possible reasons for the different virulence of different strains and a range of 
candidate virulence genes have been identified including those located on the
Francisella pathogenicity island. Proteomic studies have identified proteins
which are produced at elevated levels in vivo, and proteins which are recognized 
by immune or convalescent sera. These proteins might be exploited as components
of vaccines or diagnostic systems.

PMID: 17435122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2007 Jun;1105:405-17. Epub 2007 Apr 7.

Biosafety and selectable markers.

Titball RW(1), Sjostedt A, Pavelka MS Jr, Nano FE.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JQ,
United Kingdom. rwtitball@dstl.gov.uk

Francisella tularensis (F. tularensis) is one of the most infectious pathogens
known. Although the disease caused by this bacterium is rarely fatal with
appropriate antibiotic therapy, it is often severely debilitating. Laboratory
work with F. tularensis poses a significant hazard, and it is essential that
appropriate laboratory facilities, trained personnel, and suitable working
practices are in place in any organization working with this pathogen. Work with 
human virulent strains should be carried out at containment level 3. Vaccines
play an important potential role in the protection of individuals working with F.
tularensis, but the live vaccine strain (LVS) vaccine is not currently licensed
for use in humans. Because antibiotic therapy is central to the treatment of
human tularemia, antibiotic resistance markers for use in genetic manipulation
studies should be carefully selected.

PMID: 17416926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Cancer Res. 2007 Apr 1;67(7):3286-94.

Regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-1 expression by
specificity proteins 1, 3, and 4 in pancreatic cancer cells.

Abdelrahim M(1), Baker CH, Abbruzzese JL, Sheikh-Hamad D, Liu S, Cho SD, Yoon K, 
Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M University Health Science
Center, Houston, Texas, USA.

Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-1 (VEGFR1) is expressed in cancer
cell lines and tumors and, in pancreatic and colon cancer cells, activation of
VEGFR1 is linked to increased tumor migration and invasiveness. Tolfenamic acid, 
a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug, decreases Sp protein expression in Panc-1 
and L3.6pl pancreatic cancer cells, and this was accompanied by decreased VEGFR1 
protein and mRNA and decreased luciferase activity on cells transfected with
constructs (pVEGFR1) containing VEGFR1 promoter inserts. Comparable results were 
obtained in pancreatic cancer cells transfected with small inhibitory RNAs for
Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 and all three proteins bound to GC-rich elements in the VEGFR1 
promoter. These results show that VEGFR1 is regulated by Sp proteins and that
treatment with tolfenamic acid decreases expression of this critical angiogenic
factor. Moreover, in vitro studies in Panc-1 cells show that activation of VEGFR1
by VEGFB to increase mitogen-activated protein kinase 1/2 phosphorylation and
cell migration on collagen-coated plates is also inhibited by tolfenamic acid.
Thus, targeted degradation of Sp proteins is highly effective for inhibiting
VEGFR1 and associated angiogenic responses in pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 17409437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Cancer Res. 2007 Mar 15;67(6):2816-23.

Betulinic acid inhibits prostate cancer growth through inhibition of specificity 
protein transcription factors.

Chintharlapalli S(1), Papineni S, Ramaiah SK, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M University Health Science
Center, Houston, Texas 77843-4466, USA.

Betulinic acid is a pentacyclic triterpene natural product initially identified
as a melanoma-specific cytotoxic agent that exhibits low toxicity in animal
models. Subsequent studies show that betulinic acid induces apoptosis and
antiangiogenic responses in tumors derived from multiple tissues; however, the
underlying mechanism of action is unknown. Using LNCaP prostate cancer cells as a
model, we now show that betulinic acid decreases expression of vascular
endothelial growth (VEGF) and the antiapoptotic protein survivin. The mechanism
of these betulinic acid-induced antiangiogenic and proapoptotic responses in both
LNCaP cells and in tumors is due to activation of selective proteasome-dependent 
degradation of the transcription factors specificity protein 1 (Sp1), Sp3, and
Sp4, which regulate VEGF and survivin expression. Thus, betulinic acid acts as a 
novel anticancer agent through targeted degradation of Sp proteins that are
highly overexpressed in tumors.

PMID: 17363604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Mol Vis. 2007 Feb 28;13:287-92.

Association of the Asn306Ser variant of the SP4 transcription factor and an
intronic variant in the beta-subunit of transducin with digenic disease.

Gao YQ(1), Danciger M, Ozgul RK, Gribanova Y, Jacobson S, Farber DB.

Author information: 
(1)Jules Stein Eye Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los
Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

PURPOSE: SP4 is a transcription factor abundantly expressed in retina that binds 
to the GC promoter region of photoreceptor signal transduction genes. We have
previously shown that SP4 may be involved in the transcriptional activation of
these genes alone or together with other transcription factors such as SP1,
neural retina leucine zipper protein (NRL), and cone-rod homeobox gene (CRX).
Since mutations in NRL and CRX are involved in inherited retinal degenerations,
SP4 was considered a good candidate for mutation screening in patients with this 
type of diseases. The purpose of this work, therefore, was to investigate
possible mutations in SP4 in a cohort of patients affected with different forms
of retinal degenerations.
METHODS: 270 unrelated probands with various forms of retinal degeneration
including autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa (RP),
autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive cone-rod dystrophy (CRD), and Leber's 
congenital amaurosis (LCA), were screened for mutations in the SP4 gene. Single
strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis was performed on the six SP4
gene exons including flanking regions followed by direct sequencing of SSCP
variants.
RESULTS: Nine different sequence variants were found in 29 patients, four in
introns and five in exons. Many of the probands were previously screened for
mutations in the genes encoding the alpha-, beta- and gamma-subunits of
rod-specific cGMP phosphodiesterase (PDE6A, PDE6B, PDE6G), the beta-subunit of
rod-specific transducin (GNB1), and peripherin/rds (RDS). One group of seven
probands of Hispanic background that included five with arRP, one with RP of
unknown inheritance (isolate) and 1 with arCRD carried an Asn306Ser mutation in
SP4. Of the seven, the isolate case was homozygous and the other 6 heterozygous
for the variant. Two arRP and the arCRD probands carried an additional intronic
GNB1 variant. DNA from the family members of the arCRD proband could not be
obtained, but for the other two families, all affected members and none of the
unaffected carried both the SP4 Asn306Ser allele and the GNB1 intronic variant.
CONCLUSIONS: If mutations in SP4 do cause retinal degenerative disease, their
frequency would be low. While digenic disease with the SP4 Asn306Ser and the GNB1
intronic variant alleles has not been established, neither has it been ruled out.
This leaves open the possibility of a cooperative involvement of SP4 and GNB1 in 
the normal function of the retina.

PMCID: PMC2633482
PMID: 17356515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Arch Toxicol. 2007 Sep;81(9):627-39. Epub 2007 Mar 8.

Phosphylated tyrosine in albumin as a biomarker of exposure to organophosphorus
nerve agents.

Williams NH(1), Harrison JM, Read RW, Black RM.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, 
SP4 0JQ, UK.

The organophosphorus nerve agents sarin, soman, cyclosarin and tabun phosphylate 
a tyrosine residue on albumin in human blood. These adducts may offer relatively 
long-lived biological markers of nerve agent exposure that do not 'age' rapidly, 
and which are not degraded by therapy with oximes. Sensitive methods for the
detection of these adducts have been developed using liquid chromatography-tandem
mass spectrometry. Adducts of all four nerve agents were detected in the blood of
exposed guinea pigs being used in studies to improve medical countermeasures. The
tyrosine adducts with soman and tabun were detected in guinea pigs receiving
therapy 7 days following subcutaneous administration of five times the LD(50)
dose of the respective nerve agent. VX also forms a tyrosine adduct in human
blood in vitro but only at high concentrations.

PMID: 17345062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. J Neurochem. 2007 Mar;100(5):1300-14.

Glutamate receptor activation evokes calpain-mediated degradation of Sp3 and Sp4,
the prominent Sp-family transcription factors in neurons.

Mao X(1), Yang SH, Simpkins JW, Barger SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little 
Rock, Arkansas, USA.

Sp-family transcription factors (Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4) contain a zinc-finger domain
that binds to DNA sequences rich in G-C/T. As assayed by RT-PCR analysis of mRNA,
western-blot analysis, immunofluorescence, and antibody-dependent "supershift" of
DNA-binding assays, the prominent Sp-family factors in cerebral neurons were
identified as Sp3 and Sp4. By contrast, glial cells were found to express Sp1 and
Sp3. We previously showed that the pattern of G-C/T binding activity of Sp-family
factors is rapidly and specifically altered by the calcium influx accompanying
activation of glutamate receptors. Here, we demonstrate that Sp-factor activity
is also lost after a cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury in vivo. Consistent
with its calcium-dependent nature, we found that glutamate's effect on Sp-family 
factors could be blocked by inhibitors of calpains, neutral cysteine proteases
activated by calcium. Purified calpain I cleaved Sp3 and Sp4 into products that
retained G-C/T-binding activity, consistent with species observed in
glutamate-treated neurons. These data provide details of an impact of
glutamate-receptor activation on molecular events connected to gene expression.

PMCID: PMC1949346
PMID: 17316402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Vaccine. 2007 Mar 30;25(14):2664-72. Epub 2006 Dec 26.

The identification of surface proteins of Burkholderia pseudomallei.

Harding SV(1), Sarkar-Tyson M, Smither SJ, Atkins TP, Oyston PC, Brown KA, Liu Y,
Wait R, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK. svharding@dstl.gov.uk

Burkholderia pseudomallei, the causative agent of the disease melioidosis is a
human pathogen endemic in Northern Australia and South-East Asia. At present
there is no available vaccine or effective treatment for this disease. Surface
proteins play crucial roles in the host-pathogen interaction and have been
exploited as vaccine candidates and diagnostic targets. Therefore, we wished to
identify immunogenic surface proteins of B. pseudomallei. To this end we used two
proteomic-based approaches in parallel: a biotinylation approach for the
detection of surface located proteins identified 35 proteins, while screening
with human sera identified 12 immunogenic proteins. Nine of these proteins were
identified by both methods indicating that they may be both surface located and
immunogenic: these proteins will be evaluated further as vaccine candidates and
diagnostic targets.

PMID: 17289218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Vaccine. 2007 Mar 1;25(11):2011-8. Epub 2006 Dec 8.

A Francisella tularensis subspecies novicida purF mutant, but not a purA mutant, 
induces protective immunity to tularemia in mice.

Quarry JE(1), Isherwood KE, Michell SL, Diaper H, Titball RW, Oyston PC.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire
SP4 OJQ, UK.

Francisella tularensis subspecies novicida mutants have been made with deletions 
introduced into the purA or purF genes. These mutants demonstrated the expected
growth requirement for purines and complementation with the wild type genes
restored the ability to grow on purine deficient media. The mutants were at least
10,000-fold attenuated by the ip challenge route in Balb/C mice and defective for
survival in J774A.1 mouse macrophages. Immunisation with the purA mutant did not 
provide protection against a subsequent challenge with 100 median lethal doses of
F. tularensis subspecies novicida. Immunisation of mice with the purF mutant
provided protection against a subsequent challenge with F. tularensis subspecies 
novicida but not against a subspecies tularensis challenge. These findings
suggest that purine auxotrophs of F. tularensis should be further evaluated as
live attenuated vaccines against tularemia, but that differential effects are
seen depending on which step in the biosynthetic pathway is inactivated.

PMID: 17241711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Mar;21(3):635-50. Epub 2006 Dec 27.

R5020 and RU486 act as progesterone receptor agonists to enhance
Sp1/Sp4-dependent gene transcription by an indirect mechanism.

Shatnawi A(1), Tran T, Ratnam M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cancer Biology, Medical University of Ohio at
Toledo, 3035 Arlington Avenue, Toledo, Ohio 43614, USA.

It has been suggested that ligand-dependent gene activation by the progesterone
receptor (PR) can result from recruitment of PR by the promoter bound Sp1. A
detailed investigation of the Sp1-dependent agonistic activity of RU486 and R5020
on the folate receptor (FR) type alpha, p27, thymidine kinase 1 and p21 genes
reveals a different mechanism. The FR-alpha P4 promoter and the endogenous
FR-alpha gene were up-regulated by the PR agonist R5020 through either PR-A or
PR-B. The classical antagonist RU486 also activated the promoter but only through
PR-B. The most proximal (essential) G/C-rich (Sp1 binding) element and the
initiator region constituted the minimal promoter responsive to PR regulation;
substitution with a stronger cluster of G/C-rich elements enhanced the magnitude 
of the PR response. In contrast, substitution of the G/C-rich element with a TATA
box resulted in the loss of regulation by PR. Overexpression of Sp1 and Sp4 but
not Sp3 enhanced activation of the FR-alpha promoter by PR, knocking down Sp1
decreased the activation in a manner that was reversed by ectopic Sp1 or Sp4. The
ligand-dependent action of PR on the promoter was delayed compared with its
activation of a classical glucocorticoid response element-driven promoter and
activation of both the promoter and the endogenous FR-alpha gene by PR required
new protein synthesis. Activation by PR paralleled RNA polymerase II recruitment 
but was not accompanied by either association of PR or a change in the
association of Sp1 with the endogenous FR-alpha P4 promoter. Similar observations
were made for PR regulation of the genes encoding p27, thymidine kinase 1, and
p21. The results contradict the current view of Sp1-dependent gene regulation by 
PR and point to the existence of one or more PR target genes whose promoter and
cell context(s) must thus be key determinants of the agonistic activity of RU486 
on a large group of important Sp1-dependent downstream target genes.

PMID: 17192405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Toxicol In Vitro. 2007 Apr;21(3):509-20. Epub 2006 Nov 6.

Down-regulation of gene transcripts associated with ricin tolerance in human RPMI
2650 cells.

Wilkinson LJ(1), Duffield ML, Titball RW, Lindsay CD.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4
0JQ, UK.

The present study sought to determine if novel therapeutic approaches against
ricin intoxication could be identified from human respiratory tract cells
selected for increased resistance to this toxin. Initial studies indicated that
the RPMI 2650 line was an appropriate model, owing to its sensitivity to ricin.
Tolerant cultures were developed by exposing cells to a graded series of ricin
concentrations from 6 to 192 pM. This resulted in the generation of cultures
whose LC(50) values were increased by up to 4-fold following exposure to up to 96
pM ricin and by up to 6-fold following exposure to up to 192 pM ricin, compared
to control cultures. DNA microarrays were employed to determine the gene
transcript expression profile of cultures with increased resistance to ricin to
investigate which gene products mediate ricin resistance. Transcripts (10) were
identified that were greater than 2-fold down-regulated in the cells tolerant to 
96 pM ricin, whereas 48 transcripts were seen to be down-regulated in cultures
tolerant to 192 pM ricin. Gene transcripts (5) were up-regulated 2-fold or more
in the 192 pM tolerant cultures in comparison to unexposed cells. The results
indicate that ricin tolerance is the product of complex changes in gene
expression profiles, most of which were found to involve down-regulation of
transcript expression. It may be possible to modulate the gene expression
profiles associated with ricin tolerance for potential therapeutic purposes using
drugs and antisense technologies.

PMID: 17166693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Antiviral Res. 2007 Jul;75(1):20-9. Epub 2006 Dec 4.

Inhibition of multiple strains of Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus by a pool 
of four short interfering RNAs.

O'Brien L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory,
Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK. lmobrien@dstl.gov.uk

RNA interference, mediated by short interfering RNAs (siRNAs), has been shown to 
have activity against a wide range of viruses and is a promising new antiviral
therapy. Using multiple siRNAs that target conserved areas of the genome allows
for increased chances of antiviral activity against different viral strains and
also helps to prevent the emergence of escape mutants. In this study, four siRNAs
were designed to target areas of conserved sequence between divergent strains of 
Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus (VEEV). A pool of these siRNAs inhibited the
replication of all six strains of VEEV tested. A single nucleotide mismatch at
the extreme 3' end of one of the siRNA sense strands did not affect antiviral
activity but other mutations were not tolerated. Two strains of VEEV were tested 
for their abilities to overcome the inhibitory effects of RNA interference
following 10 consecutive incubations in the presence of siRNAs. One strain
remained susceptible throughout the course of the experiment but the other strain
became resistant to the activity of siRNAs. Sequence analysis of the siRNA target
sites in this strain showed that no mutations had been generated, indicating that
the virus may had become resistant in some other manner. In the absence of
effective antiviral drugs and vaccines to combat VEEV infection, these siRNAs
offer a potential new therapeutic approach but, as with all antimicrobial agents,
caution needs to be exercised with respect to the generation of resistance.

PMID: 17157930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Infect Immun. 2007 Apr;75(4):1827-34. Epub 2006 Dec 4.

Oral administration of a Salmonella enterica-based vaccine expressing Bacillus
anthracis protective antigen confers protection against aerosolized B. anthracis.

Stokes MG(1), Titball RW, Neeson BN, Galen JE, Walker NJ, Stagg AJ, Jenner DC,
Thwaite JE, Nataro JP, Baillie LW, Atkins HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, 
Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, United Kingdom.

Bacillus anthracis is the causative agent of anthrax, a disease that affects
wildlife, livestock, and humans. Protection against anthrax is primarily afforded
by immunity to the B. anthracis protective antigen (PA), particularly PA domains 
4 and 1. To further the development of an orally delivered human vaccine for mass
vaccination against anthrax, we produced Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium 
expressing full-length PA, PA domains 1 and 4, or PA domain 4 using
codon-optimized PA DNA fused to the S. enterica serovar Typhi ClyA and under the 
control of the ompC promoter. Oral immunization of A/J mice with Salmonella
expressing full-length PA protected five of six mice against a challenge with
10(5) CFU of aerosolized B. anthracis STI spores, whereas Salmonella expressing
PA domains 1 and 4 provided only 25% protection (two of eight mice), and
Salmonella expressing PA domain 4 or a Salmonella-only control afforded no
measurable protection. However, a purified recombinant fusion protein of domains 
1 and 4 provided 100% protection, and purified recombinant 4 provided protection 
in three of eight immunized mice. Thus, we demonstrate for the first time the
efficacy of an oral S. enterica-based vaccine against aerosolized B. anthracis
spores.

PMCID: PMC1865694
PMID: 17145938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Microb Pathog. 2007 Jan;42(1):11-21. Epub 2006 Nov 14.

Immunogenicity of the rF1+rV vaccine for plague with identification of potential 
immune correlates.

Williamson ED(1), Flick-Smith HC, Waters E, Miller J, Hodgson I, Le Butt CS, Hill
J.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wilts UK
SP4 0JQ, UK. dewilliamson@dstl.gov.uk

The rF1+rV candidate sub-unit vaccine for plague, formulated by adsorption to
alhydrogel, has been demonstrated to be immunogenic in the cynomolgus macaque in 
a clinically relevant dose-range (5-40 microg of each sub-unit) and regimen.
Following two doses of vaccine, a specific IgG titre developed in a dose-related 
manner with predominance of the IgG1/IgG2 isotypes. Groups of macaques receiving 
only a single dose of vaccine at the 40 microg dose-level had a significantly
reduced peak IgG response and faster decline to baseline. Serum collected at week
5 from 19 immunised animals competed with and displaced murine Mab7.3 from
binding to the V antigen in vitro. By week 53 of the schedule, although absolute 
IgG titres had declined, 17/19 macaque sera tested contained competing antibody, 
indicating the durability of a functional immune response to rF1+rV in this
species. Thirteen of these week 53 sera were passively transferred into groups of
naive mice, and all conferred full or partial protection against subsequent
challenge of the mice with plague. Generally, those sera which were most
competitive with Mab 7.3 for binding to V antigen were fully protective by
passive transfer, although one week-53 serum sample was fully protective by
passive transfer but not active by competitive ELISA. The early development of
protective immunity in macaques was also indicated from the protection conferred 
on naive mice by the passive transfer of immune macaque serum collected at 2-10
weeks of the immunisation schedule. Serum samples from representative macaques
within this time period also inhibited the Yersinia-mediated cytotoxicity of J774
macrophages in a qualitative in vitro assay of type three secretion.

PMID: 17107769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Biomed Microdevices. 2007 Feb;9(1):51-60.

A biocompatible microdevice for core body temperature monitoring in the early
diagnosis of infectious disease.

Williamson ED(1), Savage VL, Lingard B, Russell P, Scott EA.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury, Wilts, UK, SP4 0JQ. dewillliamson@dstl.gov.uk

The early diagnosis of microbial infection is critical to the clinical
instigation of effective post-exposure prophylaxis or therapy. However, diagnosis
of infection is often attempted only when there are overt clinical signs, and for
some of the serious human pathogens, this may jeopardize the efficacy of therapy.
We have used a miniaturised sealed, implantable transponder incorporating a
calibrated temperature sensor with an external receiver system, to monitor core
body temperature (Tc) remotely. We have observed early changes in the diurnal
rhythm of Tc, after infection of mice with bacterial pathogens. Changes in Tc
preceded overt clinical signs by 3-10 h following challenge with Yersinia pestis,
which causes acute infection, In contrast, changes in Tc were detected 11 days
before clinical signs in mice exposed to Burkholderia pseudomallei, which causes 
a chronic syndrome. Significantly, mice pre-vaccinated against Y.pestis infection
showed only slight and transient disruption to the diurnal rhythm for Tc, in the 
absence of clinical signs, when challenged with 10(6) median lethal doses of
Y.pestis. This remote monitoring technology could be used to monitor changes in
more than one physiological parameter and extrapolation of these data to the
clinic would define the available therapeutic window in which diagnosis and
post-exposure prophylaxis could be instigated, after a suspected exposure.

PMID: 17106641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Infect Immun. 2007 Feb;75(2):604-12. Epub 2006 Nov 13.

TccP2 of O157:H7 and non-O157 enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli (EHEC):
challenging the dogma of EHEC-induced actin polymerization.

Ogura Y(1), Ooka T, Whale A, Garmendia J, Beutin L, Tennant S, Krause G, Morabito
S, Chinen I, Tobe T, Abe H, Tozzoli R, Caprioli A, Rivas M, Robins-Browne R,
Hayashi T, Frankel G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Flowers Building, Imperial College
London, London SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom.

Enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli (EHEC) O157:H7 and enteropathogenic E. coli
(EPEC) trigger actin polymerization at the site of bacterial adhesion by inducing
different signaling pathways. Actin assembly by EPEC requires tyrosine
phosphorylation of Tir, which subsequently binds the host adaptor protein Nck. In
contrast, Tir(EHEC O157) is not tyrosine phosphorylated and instead of Nck
utilizes the bacterially encoded Tir-cytoskeleton coupling protein
(TccP)/EspF(U), which mimics the function of Nck. tccP is carried on prophage
CP-933U/Sp14 (TccP). Typical isolates of EHEC O157:H7 harbor a pseudo-tccP gene
that is carried on prophage CP-933 M/Sp4 (tccP2). Here we report that atypical,
beta-glucuronidase-positive and sorbitol-fermenting, strains of EHEC O157 harbor 
intact tccP and tccP2 genes, both of which are secreted by the LEE-encoded type
III secretion system. Non-O157 EHEC strains, including O26, O103, O111, and O145,
are typically tccP negative and translocate a Tir protein that encompasses an Nck
binding site. Unexpectedly, we found that most clinical non-O157 EHEC isolates
carry a functional tccP2 gene that encodes a secreted protein that can complement
an EHEC O157:H7 DeltatccP mutant. Using discriminatory, allele-specific PCR, we
have demonstrated that over 90% of tccP2-positive non-O157 EHEC strains contain a
Tir protein that can be tyrosine phosphorylated. These results suggest that the
TccP pathway can be used by both O157 and non-O157 EHEC and that non-O157 EHEC
can also trigger actin polymerization via the Nck pathway.

PMCID: PMC1828498
PMID: 17101643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Vaccine. 2007 Jan 22;25(6):1142-8. Epub 2006 Oct 2.

Kinetics of the immune response to the (F1+V) vaccine in models of bubonic and
pneumonic plague.

Williamson ED(1), Stagg AJ, Eley SM, Taylor R, Green M, Jones SM, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury, Wilts SP4 0JQ, UK. dewilliamson@dstl.gov.uk

Protection against aerosol challenge with > 300 MLD of Yersinia pestis was
observed 7 days after a single immunisation of mice with the F1+V vaccine. At day
60, mice were protected against injected challenge (10(7)MLD) in a vaccine
dose-related manner. Recall responses to rV in splenocytes ex vivo at day 98
correlated significantly (p<0.001) with the immunising dose-level of V antigen;
no memory response or anti-V serum IgG was detected in killed whole cell vaccine 
(KWCV) recipients. This may explain the susceptibility of KWCV recipients to
aerosol challenge and the enhanced protection conferred by the F1+V sub-unit
vaccine, particularly since the anti-F1 responses induced by either vaccine were 
similarly IgG1-polarised.

PMID: 17101198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Infect Immun. 2007 Jan;75(1):371-8. Epub 2006 Oct 30.

The immunologically distinct O antigens from Francisella tularensis subspecies
tularensis and Francisella novicida are both virulence determinants and
protective antigens.

Thomas RM(1), Titball RW, Oyston PC, Griffin K, Waters E, Hitchen PG, Michell SL,
Grice ID, Wilson JC, Prior JL.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, 
SP4 0JQ, United Kingdom. RMTHOMAS@dstl.gov.uk

We have determined the sequence of the gene cluster encoding the O antigen in
Francisella novicida and compared it to the previously reported O-antigen cluster
in Francisella tularensis subsp. tularensis. Immunization with purified
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) from F. tularensis subsp. tularensis or F. novicida
protected against challenge with Francisella tularensis subsp. holarctica and F. 
novicida, respectively. The LPS from F. tularensis subsp. tularensis did not
confer protection against challenge with F. novicida, and the LPS from F.
novicida did not confer protection against challenge with F. tularensis subsp.
holarctica. Allelic replacement mutants of F. tularensis subsp. tularensis or F. 
novicida which failed to produce O antigen were attenuated, but exposure to these
mutants did not induce a protective immune response. The O antigen of F.
tularensis subsp. tularensis appeared to be important for intracellular survival 
whereas the O antigen of F. novicida appeared to be critical for serum resistance
and less important for intracellular survival.

PMCID: PMC1828428
PMID: 17074846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Neurochem. 2007 Jan;100(2):520-31. Epub 2006 Oct 24.

Regulation of neurotrophin-3 gene transcription by Sp3 and Sp4 in neurons.

Ishimaru N(1), Tabuchi A, Hara D, Hayashi H, Sugimoto T, Yasuhara M, Shiota J,
Tsuda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Medicine, University of
Toyama, Sugitani, Japan.

Neurotrophin-3 (NT-3), a neurotrophin member, plays crucial roles in neuronal
development, function and plasticity. Previous studies have demonstrated that
NT-3 gene transcription is driven by alternative promoters A and B, located
upstream of exons 1A (EIA) and 1B (EIB), respectively. However, the transcription
factors and DNA elements that drive NT-3 gene transcription remain to be
identified. Here, we analysed the promoter region of the NT-3 gene and found that
an NT-3 transcript containing EIB is predominantly expressed in cortical neurons 
which preferentially utilize promoter B, and two tandemly repeated GC-boxes,
located between -100 and -60 base pairs within promoter B, are required for the
transcription. Electrophoretic mobility shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays revealed that both specificity protein (Sp)3 and Sp4 were able to bind to 
the Sp1 binding sequences within the GC boxes. Expression of dominant-negative
Sp3 and Sp4 small interfering RNA in cortical neurons reduced the activity of the
NT-3 gene promoter. Over-expression of Sp1 family members, especially Sp4,
resulted in an increase of the NT-3 gene promoter. These findings indicate that
the NT-3 gene is a target gene for Sp4 that is abundantly expressed in the brain.

PMID: 17059557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2006 Oct;26(10):748-59.

Attenuation of cytokine responsiveness during T cell development and
differentiation.

Marino JH(1), Van De Wiele CJ, Everhart JM, Masengale R, Naukam RJ, Schniederjan 
MJ, Vo S, Teague TK.

Author information: 
(1)University of Oklahoma College of Medicine, Department of Surgery, Tulsa, OK
74135, USA.

Cytokines play critical roles during T cell development; however, it is unclear
to what extent development is altered by the high levels of cytokines produced
during immune responses. A potential mechanism to shield developing cells from
cytokine influence is attenuation of cytokine signaling. Using intracellular
staining and flow cytometry to detect cytokine-induced Stat phosphorylation, we
analyzed the cytokine responsiveness of developmentally defined mouse T cells. We
assessed CD4(-)CD8(-) (DN), CD4(+)CD8(+) (DP), CD4(+)CD8(-) (SP4), and
CD4(-)CD8(+) (SP8) in the thymus, and CD4(+)CD44(lo) (naive), CD4(+)CD44(hi)
(memory), CD8(+)CD44(lo) (naive), and CD8(+)CD44(hi) (memory) in the periphery
for responsiveness to interleukin-2 (IL-2), IL-4, IL-6, IL-7, IL- 10, IL-15,
interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha), and IFN-gamma. SP thymocytes responded to a wider
range of cytokines than did the less mature DN and DP subpopulations. DP
thymocytes were nonresponsive to all cytokines tested except for modest responses
to IL-4 and IFN-alpha. Peripheral naive and memory T cells also displayed
differential cytokine sensitivity. Memory T cells were less responsive to the
proinflammatory cytokines IL-6 and IFN-gamma when compared with naive T cells,
and the memory CD4(+) subset was less responsive to IL-4. In summary, developing 
thymocytes and memory T cells appear to be resistant to the influences of
numerous cytokines produced during immune responses.

PMID: 17032169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. J Biol Chem. 2006 Nov 24;281(47):35863-72. Epub 2006 Oct 5.

Differential transcriptional control of the superoxide dismutase-2 kappaB element
in neurons and astrocytes.

Mao X(1), Moerman-Herzog AM, Wang W, Barger SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little 
Rock, Arkansas 72205, USA.

In addition to their conventional G-C/T target sequences, Sp1 family
transcription factors (Sp-factors) can interact with a subset of the target
sequences for NFkappaB. Due to the low level of bona fide NFkappaB activity in
most resting cells, this interaction between Sp-factors and kappaB-sites could
play important roles in cell function. Here we used mutagenesis of a canonical
kappaB element from the immunoglobulin and HIV promoters to identify the GC-rich 
sequences at each end required for Sp-factor targeting. Through screening of
multiple kappaB elements, a sequence element located in the second intron of
superoxide dismutase-2 (SOD2) was identified as a good candidate for both
NFkappaB and Sp-factor binding. In neurons, the prominent proteins interacting
with this site were Sp3 and Sp4, whereas Sp1, Sp3, and NFkappaB were associated
with this site in astroglia. The neuronal Sp-factors repressed transcriptional
activity through this kappaB-site. In contrast, astroglial Sp-factors activated
promoter activity through the same element. NFkappaB contributed to control of
the SOD2 kappaB element only in astrocytes. These findings imply that cell-type
specificity of transcription in the central nervous system, particularly with
regard to kappaB elements, may include two unique aspects of neurons: 1) a
recalcitrant NFkappaB and 2) the substitution of Sp4 for Sp1.

PMCID: PMC2063448
PMID: 17023425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. J Plast Reconstr Aesthet Surg. 2006;59(10):1087-93. Epub 2006 Jul 7.

The treatment of sulphur mustard burns with laser debridement.

Evison D(1), Brown RF, Rice P.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4
0JQ, United Kingdom.

The chemical warfare agent, sulphur mustard (SM), is a potent blistering agent in
man. Skin exposure can produce partial-thickness burns which take up to three
months to heal. The aim of this study was to investigate the use of early laser
ablation as a means of accelerating this exceptionally slow rate of healing. Four
circular partial-thickness SM burns were induced on the dorsum of nine large
white pigs (under general anaesthesia). At 72 h post-exposure, three burns per
animal were ablated with a single pass of an UltraPulse 5000C CO(2) laser, at a
fluence of 5-6 J cm(-2). All the burns were dressed with silver sulphadiazine and
a semi-occlusive dressing. At one, two and three weeks post-surgery three animals
were culled and all lesions excised for histological analysis. Burn depth was
confirmed and measurements of the radii of regenerative epithelium were performed
allowing the area of the zone of re-epithelialisation in each lesion to be
calculated. Laser-treated lesions showed a significant increase (350%) in healing
rates compared to controls (p<0.005). At two weeks, the laser-treated sites were 
95% healed in comparison with control sites (28% healed). These data suggest that
laser ablation may be effective in the treatment of partial-thickness SM-induced 
skin injury.

PMID: 16996434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Toxicology. 2007 Apr 20;233(1-3):120-7. Epub 2006 Aug 12.

Development of next generation medical countermeasures to nerve agent poisoning.

Wetherell J(1), Price M, Mumford H, Armstrong S, Scott L.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Dstl, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, United
Kingdom. jrwetherell@dstl.gov.uk

Medical countermeasures provide a key role in the UK integrated approach to
chemical defence and are aimed at preventing or mitigating the effects of
exposure to nerve agents. It is UK policy that medical countermeasures will be
licensed products. Demonstration of efficacy relies on extrapolation of
animal-derived data to man which means that species selection is extremely
important. For the foreseeable future it is likely that a combination of
pretreatment and therapy will be required to provide protection against nerve
agent poisoning. There is a longer-term aspiration to develop a post
poisoning-therapy which would reduce the reliance on pretreatment, prevent or
mitigate the effects of exposure to all nerve agents and decrease the requirement
for three autoinjectors. Immediate therapy comprising physostigmine (0.2mg/kg),
hyoscine hydrobromide (4mg/kg) and HI-6 (93.6mg/kg) protected all animals against
the lethal effects of a supralethal dose of GD, when given 1min after nerve agent
poisoning in the absence of any pretreatment. In contrast when hyoscine
hydrobromide was replaced with hyoscine methyl nitrate most of the animals died
within 24h, whereas when an equal mixture of hyoscine hydrobromide and hyoscine
methyl nitrate was used all the animals survived. None of these animals had an
intussusception. It would not be possible to deliver these doses of HI-6 to a
human from a single autoinjector device. Recent studies have shown that a lower
dose of HI-6 (7mg/kg) which can be delivered via an autoinjector, in combination 
with physostigmine and hyoscine hydrobromide provides good protection against the
lethal effects of a supralethal dose of GD. A number of animals died between 6
and 24h and had an intussusception. The surviving animals did not begin to regain
weight until 48h after poisoning. In contrast when a mixture of hyoscine
hydrobromide and hyoscine methyl nitrate was used, one animal died within 15min, 
the other animals all survived, regained weight from 24h and did not have an
intussusception. These studies will now be extended to include other agents and
will be taken forward to studies in non-human primates where the incidence of
intussusception will be closely monitored.

PMID: 16979808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci. 2007 Jan 1;845(1):114-20. Epub
2006 Sep 11.

Analysis of the sulphur mustard metabolites thiodiglycol and thiodiglycol
sulphoxide in urine using isotope-dilution gas chromatography-ion trap tandem
mass spectrometry.

Riches J(1), Read RW, Black RM.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire
SP4 0JQ, UK. jriches@dstl.gov.uk

A sensitive method has been developed for the trace analysis of the sulphur
mustard metabolite thiodiglycol (TDG) in urine, and its oxidation product
thiodiglycol sulphoxide (TDGO) after reduction to thiodiglycol. Thiodiglycol was 
extracted from urine by solid phase extraction onto a polymeric cartridge and,
after isolation, converted to its bis-heptafluorobutyryl derivative with
heptafluorobutyryl imidazole. An ion trap mass spectrometer in selected reaction 
monitoring mode detected spiked concentrations down to 0.2 ng/ml with a signal to
noise ratio>3:1. Urine, from human volunteers with no known exposure to sulphur
mustard, contained detectable but very low concentrations (<0.2 ng/ml) of
thiodiglycol, consistent with previous observations using different
methodologies. Combined concentrations of thiodiglycol and thiodiglycol
sulphoxide were determined after reduction of the latter with titanium
trichloride. In this case higher background levels (up to 3 ng/ml) were observed,
consistent with the sulphoxide being the major excretion product of the two
metabolites. The method was applied to urine samples, stored frozen for 13 years,
from two casualties of accidental mustard poisoning. Levels of thiodiglycol were 
1 and 3 ng/ml, which increased to 78 and 104 ng/ml after treatment of the urine
with titanium trichloride.

PMID: 16965944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Vaccine. 2007 Jan 2;25(1):34-42. Epub 2006 Aug 1.

Comparative efficacy of modified vaccinia Ankara (MVA) as a potential replacement
smallpox vaccine.

Phelps AL(1), Gates AJ, Hillier M, Eastaugh L, Ulaeto DO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.

International concern over the potential consequences of a Bioterrorist or
Biowarfare associated release of variola virus have prompted renewed interest in 
the vaccines for smallpox. The traditional live, replicating vaccine strains are 
subject to novel safety concerns associated with historical production methods in
domesticated ruminants and the additional hazards that vaccinia virus poses for
people with immune system abnormalities or a history of eczematous skin
conditions. In this study we have examined the longevity and efficacy of immunity
induced by a non-replicating smallpox vaccine candidate, modified vaccinia Ankara
(MVA) in a murine model using intranasal and aerosol routes of infection.
Two-step vaccinations of MVA followed by traditional Lister vaccine are compared 
with either Lister alone or MVA alone, and the longevity of the protection
induced by MVA is assessed. MVA is found to be broadly similar to Lister.
Although protection is shown to decay with time, when administered at a standard 
human dose the longevity of protection induced by MVA is comparable to that
induced by Lister.

PMID: 16950548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. BMC Oral Health. 2006 Jun 15;6 Suppl 1:S14.

Dental plaque as a biofilm and a microbial community - implications for health
and disease.

Marsh PD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Emergency Preparedness & Response, Salisbury SP4 0JG, and Division 
of Oral Biology, Leeds Dental Institute, Leeds LS2 9LU, UK. phil.marsh@hpa.org.uk

Dental plaque is a structurally- and functionally-organized biofilm. Plaque forms
in an ordered way and has a diverse microbial composition that, in health,
remains relatively stable over time (microbial homeostasis). The predominant
species from diseased sites are different from those found in healthy sites,
although the putative pathogens can often be detected in low numbers at normal
sites. In dental caries, there is a shift toward community dominance by
acidogenic and acid-tolerating species such as mutans streptococci and
lactobacilli, although other species with relevant traits may be involved.
Strategies to control caries could include inhibition of biofilm development
(e.g. prevention of attachment of cariogenic bacteria, manipulation of cell
signaling mechanisms, delivery of effective antimicrobials, etc.), or enhancement
of the host defenses. Additionally, these more conventional approaches could be
augmented by interference with the factors that enable the cariogenic bacteria to
escape from the normal homeostatic mechanisms that restrict their growth in
plaque and out compete the organisms associated with health. Evidence suggests
that regular conditions of low pH in plaque select for mutans streptococci and
lactobacilli. Therefore, the suppression of sugar catabolism and acid production 
by the use of metabolic inhibitors and non-fermentable artificial sweeteners in
snacks, or the stimulation of saliva flow, could assist in the maintenance of
homeostasis in plaque. Arguments will be presented that an appreciation of
ecological principles will enable a more holistic approach to be taken in caries 
control.

PMCID: PMC2147593
PMID: 16934115  [PubMed]


492. Infect Immun. 2006 Sep;74(9):5333-40.

Critical role of type 1 cytokines in controlling initial infection with
Burkholderia mallei.

Rowland CA(1), Lertmemongkolchai G, Bancroft A, Haque A, Lever MS, Griffin KF,
Jackson MC, Nelson M, O'Garra A, Grencis R, Bancroft GJ, Lukaszewski RA.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, Dstl, Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JQ, United Kingdom.
carowland@dstl.gov.uk

Burkholderia mallei is a gram-negative bacterium which causes the potentially
fatal disease glanders in humans; however, there is little information concerning
cell-mediated immunity to this pathogen. The role of gamma interferon (IFN-gamma)
during B. mallei infection was investigated using a disease model in which
infected BALB/c mice normally die between 40 and 60 days postinfection. IFN-gamma
knockout mice infected with B. mallei died within 2 to 3 days after infection,
and there was uncontrolled bacterial replication in several organs, demonstrating
the essential role of IFN-gamma in the innate immune response to this pathogen.
Increased levels of IFN-gamma, interleukin-6 (IL-6), and monocyte chemoattractant
protein 1 were detected in the sera of immunocompetent mice in response to
infection, and splenic mRNA expression of IFN-gamma, IL-6, IL-12p35, and IL-27
was elevated 24 h postinfection. The effects of IL-18, IL-27, and IL-12 on
stimulation of the rapid IFN-gamma production were investigated in vitro by
analyzing IFN-gamma production in the presence of heat-killed B. mallei. IL-12
was essential for IFN-gamma production in vitro; IL-18 was also involved in
induction of IFN-gamma, but IL-27 was not required for IFN-gamma production in
response to heat-killed B. mallei. The main cellular sources of IFN-gamma were
identified in vitro as NK cells, CD8+ T cells, and TCRgammadelta T cells. Our
data show that B. mallei is susceptible to cell-mediated immune responses which
promote expression of type 1 cytokines. This suggests that development of
effective vaccines against glanders should target the production of IFN-gamma.

PMCID: PMC1594859
PMID: 16926428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Toxicol In Vitro. 2006 Dec;20(8):1532-6. Epub 2006 Jul 8.

Absorption of the nerve agent VX (O-ethyl-S-[2(di-isopropylamino)ethyl] methyl
phosphonothioate) through pig, human and guinea pig skin in vitro.

Dalton CH(1), Hattersley IJ, Rutter SJ, Chilcott RP.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl Biomedical Sciences, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK.
chdalton@dstl.gov.uk

The physico-chemical properties of VX make the skin the most likely route of
absorption into the human body. The development of effective medical
countermeasures against such percutaneous threat agents relies on the use of
appropriate animal models, as the inherent toxicity of nerve agents precludes the
use of human volunteers. Previous studies have characterised the mechanism of
nerve agent toxicity in rodent models, however, it is generally accepted that one
of the most appropriate animal models for human skin absorption is the domestic
pig. The purpose of the present study was to measure and compare the skin
absorption kinetics of VX in vitro using pig, human and guinea pig skin to
highlight any potential species differences in skin permeability. When undiluted 
VX was applied directly to the skin, the permeability of guinea pig skin was
approximately 7-fold greater than human skin. There was no significant difference
in the permeability of pig and human skin. When VX diluted with isopropyl alcohol
was applied to the skin, the permeability of guinea pig skin was approximately
4-fold greater than human skin. There was no significant difference in the
permeability of pig and human skin. From this data it may be inferred that
dermatomed, abdominal pig skin is an appropriate model for the human skin
absorption of VX.

PMID: 16904285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Genes Brain Behav. 2007 Apr;6(3):269-76. Epub 2006 Aug 7.

Impaired postnatal development of hippocampal dentate gyrus in Sp4 null mutant
mice.

Zhou X(1), Qyang Y, Kelsoe JR, Masliah E, Geyer MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA 
92093-0804, USA. xzhou@ucsd.edu

Sp4, a member of the Sp1 family of transcription factors, is expressed
restrictively in the developing nervous system and abundantly in the hippocampus.
Previously, we demonstrated that hypomorphic Sp4 mice display hippocampal
vacuolization and concomitant deficits in memory and sensorimotor gating. Here,
we report further analyses of Sp4 functions during postnatal development of the
dentate gyrus in Sp4 null mutant mice. A reduced cell proliferation restrictively
in hippocampus, but not cerebellum, was observed in the first week of postnatal
development of Sp4 null mutant mice. The dendritic growth and arborization of
dentate granule cells was decreased in hippocampal cultures in vitro from mutant 
neonatal mice. The adult Sp4 null mutant mice displayed decreased dentate granule
cell density with reduced width of both dentate gyrus and the molecular layer.
The abnormality of the molecular layer was indicated by a reduced level of
synaptophysin expression in the mutant mice. The Sp4 transcription factor
therefore appears to predominantly regulate the development of dentate granule
cells.

PMID: 16899055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Anaerobe. 1999 Apr;5(2):51-64.

The Clostridium perfringens alpha-toxin.

Titball RW(1), Naylor CE, Basak AK.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Evaluation and Research Agency, CBD Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire,
SP4 OJQ, UK. rtiteall@dera.gov.uk

The gene encoding the alpha-(cpa) is present in all strains of Clostridium
perfringens, and the purified alpha-toxin has been shown to be a zinc-containing 
phospholipase C enzyme, which is preferentially active towards
phosphatidylcholine and sphingomyelin. The alpha-toxin is haemolytic as a result 
if its ability to hydrolyse cell membrane phospholipids and this activity
distinguishes it from many other related zinc-metallophospholipases C. Recent
studies have shown that the alpha-toxin is the major virulence determinant in
cases of gas gangrene, and the toxin might play a role in several other diseases 
of animals and man as diverse as necrotic enteritis in chickens and Crohn's
disease in man. In gas gangrene the toxin appears to have three major roles in
the pathogenesis of disease. First, it is able to cause mistrafficking of
neutrophils, such that they do not enter infected tissues. Second, the toxin is
able to cause vasoconstriction and platelet aggregation which might reduce the
blood supply to infected tissues. Finally, the toxin is able to detrimentally
modulate host cell metabolism by activating the arachidonic acid cascade and
protein kinase C. The molecular structure of the alpha-toxin reveals a two domain
protein. The amino-terminal domain contains the phospholipase C active site which
contains zinc ions. The carboxyterminal domain is a paralogue of lipid binding
domains found in eukaryotes and appears to bind phospholipids in a
calcium-dependent manner. Immunisation with the non-toxic carboxyterminal domain 
induces protection against the alpha-toxin and gas gangrene and this polypeptide 
might be exploited as a vaccine. Other workers have exploited the entire toxin as
the basis of an anti-tumour system.

PMID: 16887662  [PubMed]


496. J Microbiol Methods. 2007 Jan;68(1):26-31. Epub 2006 Jul 18.

Identification of outer membrane proteins of Yersinia pestis through
biotinylation.

Smither SJ(1), Hill J, van Baar BL, Hulst AG, de Jong AL, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl, Porton Down, Room 201/Bldg 7a, Salisbury, WILTS, SP4 OJQ, UK.
sjsmither@dstl.gov.uk

The outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria contains proteins that might be good
targets for vaccines, antimicrobials or detection systems. The identification of 
surface located proteins using traditional methods is often difficult. Yersinia
pestis, the causative agent of plague, was labelled with biotin. Tagged proteins 
were visualised through streptavidin probing of Western blots. Seven biotinylated
proteins of Y. pestis were identified including two porins and the putative
virulence factor catalase peroxidase.

PMID: 16857281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2006 Jun;84(2):282-93. Epub 2006 Jul 7.

Multiple vaccine and pyridostigmine interactions: effects on EEG and sleep in the
common marmoset.

Williams KE(1), Mann TM, Chamberlain S, Smith A, Wilson S, Griffiths GD, Bowditch
AP, Scott EA, Pearce PC.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl Biomedical Sciences Department, Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JQ, UK.
KEWILLIAMS@dstl.gov.uk

Following active service during the 1990/1991 Gulf conflict, a number of UK and
US veterans presented with a diverse range of symptoms, collectively known as
Gulf Veterans' Illnesses (GVI). The administration of vaccines and/or the
pretreatment against possible nerve agent poisoning, pyridostigmine bromide (PB),
given to Armed Forces personnel during the Gulf conflict has been implicated as a
possible factor in the aetiology of these illnesses. The possibility that
long-term health effects may result from the administration of these vaccines
(anthrax, pertussis, plague, yellow fever, polio, typhoid, tetanus, hepatitis B, 
meningococcal meningitis and cholera) and/or PB, have been investigated using a
non-human primate model, the common marmoset. This paper reports the results from
two aspects of the study, brain electrical activity (EEG, collected during
performance of a touchscreen mediated discrimination task) and sleep. There were 
no marked long-term changes in EEG or sleep patterns that could be attributed to 
vaccines and/or PB administration. The changes that were detected were
predominantly time related and independent of treatment. Where statistical
differences were detected between treatments, the magnitudes of the difference
were relatively minor and therefore not regarded as having long term biological
significance.

PMID: 16828151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2006 Jun;84(2):207-18. Epub 2006 Jun 27.

Multiple vaccine and pyridostigmine interactions: effects on cognition, muscle
function and health outcomes in marmosets.

Stevens D(1), Scott EA, Bowditch AP, Griffiths GD, Pearce PC.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl Biomedical Sciences, Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JQ, UK.
DSTEVENS@dstl.gov.uk

Following active service during the 1990/1991 Gulf Conflict, a number of UK and
US veterans presented with a diverse range of symptoms, collectively known as
Gulf Veterans Illnesses (GVI). The administration of vaccines and/or the
pretreatment against possible nerve agent poisoning, pyridostigmine bromide (PB),
given to armed forces personnel during the Gulf Conflict has been implicated as a
possible factor in the aetiology of these illnesses. The possibility that
long-term health effects may result from the administration of these vaccines
(anthrax, pertussis, plague, yellow fever, polio, typhoid, tetanus, hepatitis B, 
meningococcal meningitis and cholera) and/or PB, have been investigated using a
non-human primate model, the common marmoset. This paper reports the results from
three aspects of the study, cognitive behaviour (performance of a touchscreen
mediated discrimination task), muscle function (performance of a simple strength 
test) and general health. There were no marked long-term changes in cognition,
muscle function or health that could be attributed to vaccines and/or PB
administration. Statistical differences related to treatments were only observed 
in two aspects of cognition and one of clinical chemistry. These changes were
transient in nature and their magnitude were minor and, in consequence, was not
regarded as having long-term biological significance.

PMID: 16806443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. J Anal Toxicol. 2006 Apr;30(3):165-70.

Closed cup vapor systems in percutaneous exposure studies: what is the dose?

Dalton CH(1), Maidment MP, Jenner J, Chilcott RP.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl Biomedical Sciences, CBD Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ,
United Kingdom. chdalton@dstl.gov.uk

Percutaneous vapor dosing studies have generally used saturated vapor
concentration (SVC) measurements to estimate the exposure dose (Ct) of vapor
produced from a volatile liquid within a closed system. The purpose of this study
was to clarify whether the assumption was valid when translated to a biological
system (pig skin) using sulfur mustard (SM) as a model skin penetrant. Three
systems were evaluated, two containing skin and a control system (without skin). 
At set time points, samples from the headspace of each dosing system were
extracted using a gas-tight syringe and analyzed by gas chromatography in
conjunction with a flame-ionization detector. This demonstrated the rapid
achievement of a constant vapor concentration within the biological and control
systems and enabled a comparison with previously determined SVCs attained under
ideal conditions. All three systems attained a constant vapor concentration
within 2 min of exposure to SM. The control system reached an equilibrium vapor
concentration of 1179 +/- 164 mg/m3, a value not significantly different from
that derived from the SVC (1363 mg/m3). Because of absorption in the skin
systems, SM vapor concentrations were significantly lower than that derived from 
the SVC and were dependent on the skin surface area within the dosing chamber
(592 +/- 246 mg/m3 for a surface area of 10.15 cm2 and 740 +/- 224 mg/m3 for a
surface area of 2.54 cm2). The assumption that SVC gives an acceptable measure of
the Ct was shown to be valid by comparison with sulfur mustard recovered from the
skin.

PMID: 16803650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2006 Jul;50(7):2316-22.

Proteolytic degradation of human antimicrobial peptide LL-37 by Bacillus
anthracis may contribute to virulence.

Thwaite JE(1), Hibbs S, Titball RW, Atkins TP.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, United
Kingdom. jethwaite@dstl.gov.uk

In this paper we report on the susceptibilities of a range of Bacillus species to
the human antimicrobial peptide LL-37. B. subtilis showed a low level of
resistance to killing by LL-37 (50% growth-inhibitory concentration [GI50], 1
microg/ml). B. cereus and B. thuringiensis showed intermediate levels of
resistance to killing (GI50s, 33 microg/ml and 37 microg/ml, respectively). B.
anthracis showed the highest level of resistance (GI50s, 40 to 66 microg/ml). The
degradation of LL-37 by B. anthracis culture supernatant was blocked by the
metalloprotease inhibitors EDTA and 1,10-phenanthroline, and the gene encoding
the protease responsible for LL-37 degradation was not plasmid borne. Our
findings suggest that alongside the classical plasmid-based virulence
determinants, extracellular metalloproteases of B. anthracis may play a role in
survival in the host.

PMCID: PMC1489764
PMID: 16801407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2006 Jun 21;98(12):855-68.

Tolfenamic acid and pancreatic cancer growth, angiogenesis, and Sp protein
degradation.

Abdelrahim M(1), Baker CH, Abbruzzese JL, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Health Science Center, Texas A&M
University, Houston, TX 77843-4466, USA.

BACKGROUND: Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 are transcription factors that regulate cell
proliferation and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression and are
overexpressed in many cancer cell lines. For some cancers, Sp1 overexpression is 
associated with poor survival. Cyclooxygenase inhibitors decrease Sp1 expression 
in cancer cells, and therefore different structural classes of nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) were screened for their ability to decrease
levels of Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 and to decrease pancreatic tumor growth and
metastasis in an in vivo model.
METHODS: Levels of Sp1, Sp3, Sp4, and VEGF proteins in pancreatic cancer cell
lines were assessed by immunoblot analysis. mRNA was assessed by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Panc-1 pancreatic cancer cells
transfected with VEGF promoter constructs were used to assess VEGF promoter
activation. Pancreatic tumor weight and size and liver metastasis were assessed
in an orthotopic mouse model of pancreatic cancer (groups of 10 mice). Protein
expression in tumors was assessed immunohistochemically.
RESULTS: Tolfenamic acid and structurally related biaryl derivatives induced
degradation of Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 in pancreatic cancer cells. Tolfenamic acid also
inhibited VEGF mRNA and protein expression in pancreatic cancer cells; this
inhibition was associated with the decreased Sp-dependent activation of the VEGF 
promoter. In the mouse model for pancreatic cancer, treatment with tolfenamic
acid (50 mg/kg of body weight), compared with control treatment, statistically
significantly decreased tumor growth and weight (P = .005), liver metastasis (P =
.027), and levels of Sp3 and VEGF (P = .009) and Sp1 and Sp4 (P = .006) proteins 
in tumors. For example, tumors from mice treated with tolfenamic acid (50 mg/kg) 
had statistically significantly lower VEGF levels (45%, 95% confidence interval =
39% to 51%; P = .009) than tumors from control mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Tolfenamic acid is a new antipancreatic cancer NSAID that activates 
degradation of transcription factors Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4; reduces VEGF expression; 
and decreases tumor growth and metastasis.

PMID: 16788159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Vaccine. 2006 Sep 11;24(37-39):6340-50. Epub 2006 Jun 5.

Selection of novel TB vaccine candidates and their evaluation as DNA vaccines
against aerosol challenge.

Vipond J(1), Vipond R, Allen-Vercoe E, Clark SO, Hatch GJ, Gooch KE, Bacon J,
Hampshire T, Shuttleworth H, Minton NP, Blake K, Williams A, Marsh PD.

Author information: 
(1)Health Protection Agency, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG, UK.
julia.vipond@hpa.org.uk <julia.vipond@hpa.org.uk>

Putative TB vaccine candidates were selected from lists of genes induced in
response to in vivo-like stimuli, such as low oxygen and carbon starvation or
growth in macrophages, and tested as plasmid DNA vaccines for their ability to
protect against Mycobacterium tuberculosis challenge in a guinea pig aerosol
infection model. This vaccination method was chosen as it induces the Th1
cell-mediated immune response required against intracellular pathogens such as M.
tuberculosis. Protection was assessed in the guinea pig model in terms of
mycobacteria present in the lungs at 30 days post-challenge. Protection achieved 
by the novel candidates was compared to BCG (positive control) and saline
(negative control). Four vaccines encoding for proteins such as PE and PPE
proteins, a zinc metalloprotease and an acyltransferase, gave a level of
protection that was statistically better than saline in the lungs. These findings
have enabled us to focus on a sub-set of vaccine candidates for further
evaluation using additional vaccination strategies.

PMID: 16781800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 2006 Jun;373(3):230-6. Epub 2006 May 3.

The presence of atropinesterase activity in animal plasma.

Harrison PK(1), Tattersall JE, Gosden E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Dstl, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire,
SP4 0JQ, UK. pkharrison@dstl.gov.uk

The enzyme atropinesterase (EC 3.1.1.10) causes the rapid hydrolysis of tropane
alkaloids such as atropine and scopolamine. This enzyme is known to occur in a
certain proportion of rabbits and some plants, although its presence in other
animal species remains controversial. The potential presence in some animals but 
not others of an enzyme which can rapidly hydrolyse compounds such as atropine is
a potential unwanted experimental variable in many experiments. Because of the
uncertainty surrounding the enzyme and the paucity of data, it was decided to
examine whether we could detect and characterise atropinesterase activity in the 
plasma of dogs, goats, guinea-pigs, humans, pigs, rabbits and rhesus by
separating and quantitating the substrate (atropine) and one of the products
(tropic acid) by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). It was found that
plasma from some but not all rabbits possessed a capacity to breakdown large
quantities of atropine; an effect that was apparently enantiomer-specific. Plasma
from other rabbits, and plasma from all other species investigated, proved
capable of hydrolysing atropine at a rate exceeding that of non-specific
breakdown. It remains to be determined whether this effect is due to a low
expression of atropinesterase or an alternative hydrolysing enzyme.

PMID: 16736160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Vaccine. 2006 Jun 19;24(25):5277-93. Epub 2006 Mar 23.

Proteomic analysis of Neisseria lactamica and N eisseria meningitidis outer
membrane vesicle vaccine antigens.

Vaughan TE(1), Skipp PJ, O'Connor CD, Hudson MJ, Vipond R, Elmore MJ, Gorringe
AR.

Author information: 
(1)Health Protection Agency, Centre for Emergency Preparedness and Response,
Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG, UK. thomas.vaughan@hpa.org.uk

Vaccines to prevent meningococcal disease have been developed from the outer
membrane vesicles (OMVs) of Neisseria meningitidis and the related commensal
organism Neisseria lactamica. In addition to lipopolysaccharide and the major
porins, these vaccines contain a large number of proteins that are incompletely
characterised. Here we describe comparative proteomic analyses of the N.
lactamica OMV vaccine and OMVs from a serogroup B strain of N. meningitidis.
Tandem mass-spectrometry data for trypsinised N. lactamica OMV vaccine were
matched to an incompletely assembled genome sequence from the same strain to give
65 robust protein identifications and a further 122 single- or two-peptide
matches. Fifty-seven N. meningitidis K454 proteins were identified robustly (and 
a further 68 from single- or two-peptide matches) by inference from the N.
meningitidis MC58 genome. The results suggest that OMVs have a hitherto
unappreciated complexity and pinpoint novel candidate antigens for further
characterisation.

PMID: 16682101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Microb Pathog. 2006 Jun;40(6):293-7. Epub 2006 May 6.

The pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa negatively affects the attraction response of
the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans to bacteria.

Laws TR(1), Atkins HS, Atkins TP, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire
SP4 OJQ, UK. trlaws@dstl.gov.uk

The nematode Caenorhabditis elegans has previously been used to identify
virulence mechanisms of bacteria and to characterise host responses to infection.
In this study, we have developed an assay to measure C. elegans attraction to
bacterial food sources. C. elegans becomes less attracted to the bacterial
pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain PA14 over time, but this response is not
seen with P. aeruginosa strains PAK1 or PA01. P. aeruginosa strain PA14 cells
that had been killed by UV light, or which had been exposed to chloramphenicol,
did not mediate this effect. We therefore propose that C. elegans reacts to a
factor produced by P. aeruginosa strain PA14.

PMID: 16678995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Jun 23;345(1):292-301. Epub 2006 May 2.

Regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 expression in
pancreatic cancer cells by Sp proteins.

Higgins KJ(1), Abdelrahim M, Liu S, Yoon K, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College
Station, TX, USA.

Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 (VEGFR2/KDR) is an important
mediator of angiogenesis, and VEGFR2 mRNA is expressed in several pancreatic
cancer cell lines. Deletion analysis of the VEGFR2 promoter in Panc-1, AsPC-1,
and MiaPaCa-2 pancreatic cancer cells shows that the proximal region of the
promoter is primarily responsible for VEGFR2 expression, and two GC-rich sites at
-58 and -44 are critical elements in all three cell lines. Panc-1, AsPC-1, and
MiaPaCa-2 cells also express Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 proteins which bind to the GC-rich
region of the VEGFR2 promoter in electrophoretic mobility shift and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays. RNA interference with small inhibitory RNAs for Sp1, 
Sp3, and Sp4 decreases VEGFR2 mRNA and reporter gene activity in transfection
assays, confirming that VEGFR2 expression in pancreatic cancer cells is regulated
by Sp proteins. These results suggest that VEGFR2 cannot only be targeted by
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors but also by drugs that downregulate Sp
proteins or block Sp-dependent transactivation.

PMID: 16678129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Toxicology. 2006 Jun 1;223(1-2):61-70. Epub 2006 Mar 28.

Retrospective identification of ricin in animal tissues following administration 
by pulmonary and oral routes.

Cook DL(1), David J, Griffiths GD.

Author information: 
(1)Immunotoxicology Group, Biology, Biomedical Sciences, Dstl, Porton Down,
Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK.

A previously characterised amplified ELISA for ricin (sensitivity limit
approximately 200 pgmL(-1)) has been employed to quantify ricin following a novel
recovery method from selected tissues. Tissue samples from rats dosed by
pulmonary instillation or orally with ricin were homogenised and treated with an 
elution buffer to extract ricin. This is the first time that ex vivo recovery of 
ricin post exposure following pulmonary or oral challenge has been achieved using
clinically acceptable sampling methods, with promise in terms of diagnosis for
the timely implementation of therapy. The toxin was detected and quantified using
the ELISA in conjunction with pure ricin standards. Extracts from tissues
sampled, including lung, blood, liver and spleen tested positive for ricin with
maximum yield in lung associated fractions for pulmonary dosing and liver tissue 
for oral administration. This indicates the potential of lavage and blood
sampling for timely diagnosis of ricin poisoning by pulmonary and oral routes,
respectively. Time course analysis at 24 and 48 h also indicated the progression 
of ricin from surfaces of the lung into the lung tissue. Inter-subject variation 
was observed in the case of oral dosing, with data for ricin-treated and vehicle 
control tissues not statistically different in all samples. In addition the oral 
toxicity of the crude ricin administered was found to be higher than expected in 
the rat, based upon published information and an unpublished in house murine
study.

PMID: 16650517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Mod Pathol. 2006 Jul;19(7):999-1009. Epub 2006 Apr 28.

Cyclin D1 protein overexpression and CCND1 amplification in breast carcinomas: an
immunohistochemical and chromogenic in situ hybridisation analysis.

Reis-Filho JS(1), Savage K, Lambros MB, James M, Steele D, Jones RL, Dowsett M.

Author information: 
(1)The Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre, Institute of Cancer Research, 
London, UK. Jorge.Reis-Filho@icr.ac.uk

Conflicting results on the prevalence of cyclin D1 ovexpression and its
correlation with CCND1 amplification and outcome of breast cancer patients have
been reported. Owing to limited sensitivity and specificity of most antibodies
against cyclin D1, evaluation of cyclin D1 immunoexpression is reported to be
problematic. The aims of this study were to assess the prevalence of cyclin D1
expression in breast carcinomas using the SP4 rabbit monoclonal antibody; to
correlate cyclin D1 expression with amplification, assessed using chromogenic in 
situ hybridisation (CISH); and to analyse the relationship between CCND1
amplification and overexpression with clinicopathological parameters and outcome 
in a tissue microarray containing replicate tumour samples from 245 breast cancer
patients. Immunohistochemistry for cyclin D1 was performed using the SP4 and the 
results were scored according to the Allred scoring system. CISH was carried out 
using the Zymed CCND1 SpotLight probe. CISH signals were counted in 60
morphologically unequivocal neoplastic cells. Amplification was defined as >5
signals per nucleus in more than 50% of cancer cells, or when large gene copy
clusters were seen. Strong cyclin D1 expression and CCND1 amplification were
found in 67.4 and 14.5% of the cases, respectively. A strong correlation between 
cyclin D1 overexpression and CCND1 amplification was demonstrated (P<0.0001).
Cyclin D1 expression showed a positive correlation with hormone receptor
expression (both ER and PgR, P<0.0001). An inverse correlation was observed
between an immunohistochemical panel of 'basal-like' markers and both cyclin D1
overexpression (P<0.0001) and CCND1 amplification (P<0.0001). On univariate
analysis cyclin D1 expression showed a correlation with longer overall survival
(OS). Neither cyclin D1 nor CCND1 were independent prognostic factors for
disease-free survival or OS. The results of this study confirm the association
between cyclin D1 overexpression and positivity for hormone receptors and the
lack of CCND1 amplification in basal-like breast carcinomas.

PMID: 16648863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Infect Immun. 2006 May;74(5):3068-70.

Administration of antibody to the lung protects mice against pneumonic plague.

Hill J(1), Eyles JE, Elvin SJ, Healey GD, Lukaszewski RA, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Wiltshire SP4 OJQ,
United Kingdom. jhill@dstl.gov.uk

Intratracheal delivery of aerosolized monoclonal antibodies with specificity for 
Yersinia pestis LcrV and F1 antigens protected mice in a model of pneumonic
plague. These data support the utility of inhaled antibodies as a fast-acting
postexposure treatment for plague.

PMCID: PMC1459704
PMID: 16622253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2006 May;27(5):439-43. Epub 2006 Apr 18.

Treatment of murine pneumonic Francisella tularensis infection with gatifloxacin,
moxifloxacin or ciprofloxacin.

Steward J(1), Piercy T, Lever MS, Simpson AJ, Brooks TJ.

Author information: 
(1)DSTL Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 OJQ, UK. jasteward@dstl.gov.uk

The efficacies of gatifloxacin and moxifloxacin were assessed in a BALB/c mouse
model of pneumonic tularemia and compared with the efficacy of ciprofloxacin. The
rate of relapse following dexamethasone treatment was also investigated. Mice
were given 100 mg/kg of the antibiotic by oral administration twice daily for 14 
days following an aerosol challenge. All three fluoroquinolones prevented disease
during the treatment period, but significant failure rates occurred after the
cessation of therapy. Both gatifloxacin and moxifloxacin were more effective than
ciprofloxacin at reducing late mortality. Fluoroquinolones may therefore be
considered useful candidates for the treatment of pneumonic tularemia.

PMID: 16621457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Virus Res. 2006 Sep;120(1-2):107-12. Epub 2006 Apr 18.

Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus complex-specific monoclonal antibody
provides broad protection, in murine models, against airborne challenge with
viruses from serogroups I, II and III.

Phillpotts RJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, Dstl, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.
bjphillpotts@dstl.gov.uk

The alphavirus Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus (VEEV) is highly infectious
by the airborne route. It is a hazard to laboratory workers, has been developed
as a biological weapon and is a potential bioterrorist agent. A suitable vaccine 
appears in an advanced stage of development but there remains a need for
antiviral drugs, effective in prophylaxis of disease prior to or a short time
after exposure to airborne virus. Using a murine model to study monoclonal
antibody (MAB) a VEEV complex-specific, glycoprotein E2-binding MAB was
identified, able to protect against disease induced by exposure to aerosolised
VEEV from serogroups I, II and IIIA (mouse-virulent strains). There was no
synergy in protection between anti-E1 and anti-E2 MAB. Assays of MAB virus
neutralising activity in a homologous (mouse fibroblast) cell line suggested that
neutralisation played a significant role in protection in addition to the
previously reported mechanism of Fc receptor-binding [Mathews et al., 1985. J.
Virol. 55, 594-600]. Development of an analogous human MAB with identical VEEV
epitope specificity may be informed and monitored by reference to these
properties.

PMID: 16621103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Endocrinology. 2006 Jul;147(7):3285-95. Epub 2006 Mar 30.

Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 expression is induced by
17beta-estradiol in ZR-75 breast cancer cells by estrogen receptor alpha/Sp
proteins.

Higgins KJ(1), Liu S, Abdelrahim M, Yoon K, Vanderlaag K, Porter W, Metz RP, Safe
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Texas A&M University, College Station, 77843-4466,
USA.

Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 kinase insert domain receptor
(VEGFR2/KDR) is critical for angiogenesis, and VEGFR2 mRNA and protein are
expressed in ZR-75 breast cancer cells and induced by 17beta-estradiol (E2).
Deletion analysis of the VEGFR2 promoter indicates that the proximal GC-rich
region is required for both basal and hormone-induced transactivation, and
mutation of one or both of the GC-rich motifs at -58 and -44 results in loss of
transactivation. Electrophoretic mobility shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays show that Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 proteins bind the GC-rich region of the VEGFR2
promoter. Results of the chromatin immunoprecipitation assay also demonstrate
that ERalpha is constitutively bound to the VEGFR2 promoter and that these
interactions are not enhanced after treatment with E2, whereas ERalpha binding to
the region of the pS2 promoter containing an estrogen-responsive element is
enhanced by E2. RNA interference studies show that hormone-induced activation of 
the VEGFR2 promoter constructs requires Sp3 and Sp4 but not Sp1, demonstrating
that hormonal activation of VEGFR2 involves a nonclassical mechanism in which
ERalpha/Sp3 and ERalpha/Sp4 complexes activate GC-rich sites where Sp proteins
but not ERalpha bind DNA. These results show for the first time that Sp3 and Sp4 
cooperatively interact with ERalpha to activate VEGFR2 and are in contrast to
previous results showing that several hormone-responsive genes are activated by
ERalpha/Sp1 in breast cancer cell lines.

PMID: 16574784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Biomaterials. 2006 Jul;27(20):3825-35. Epub 2006 Mar 27.

Effects of hyaluronan and SPARC on fibroproliferative events assessed in an in
vitro bladder acellular matrix model.

Brown AL(1), Ringuette MJ, Prestwich GD, Bagli DJ, Woodhouse KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry, Institute for
Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto, 200 College
Street, Toronto, Ont., Canada M5S 3E5.

Bladder acellular matrix (BAM) is a promising candidate for urinary biomaterials 
development. In the current work we have modified the BAM construct to include
two biologically active components; hyaluronan (HA) and a peptide (SP4.2) derived
from secreted protein, acidic, rich in cysteine (SPARC), a matricellular
glycoprotein. In order to assess the potential of an HA/SP4.2 modified BAM to
influence cellular functions associated with bladder healing, experiments were
conducted to evaluate the individual and combined effects of these molecules on
in vitro fibroproliferative endpoints within a co-culture model. Thiol-modified
HA (246 kDa, 15 mg/ml)+/-SP4.2 (200 microm) was incorporated and cross-linked
into BAM disks through disulfide bond formation. The following scaffolds
compositions were then evaluated in a bladder smooth muscle cell (SMC)-urothelial
(UEC) cell co-culture model: BAM unmodified; BAM+HA, BAM+SP4.2 (media addition); 
BAM+HA+SP4.2 (media addition); BAM+HA+SP4.2 (matrix incorporated). At 3, 7 and 14
days post-seeding, SMC-mediated matrix contraction and gelatinolytic activity
were evaluated. HA-modified BAM exhibited a significantly higher degree of
contraction and gelatinase activity compared to unmodified BAM. In contrast,
addition of SP4.2 to BAM produced a negligible effect on contraction, while
significantly reducing gelatinase activity. Matrices containing both molecules
displayed significant increases in contraction, while gelatinase activity was
dependent upon the method of peptide delivery. These results demonstrate that
both HA and SP4.2 have significant, yet distinct effects on the contractile and
proteolytic activity of bladder SMCs and suggest that a modified BAM may be
capable of modulating processes associated with post-surgical graft contracture
and scar formation.

PMID: 16564084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Exp Appl Acarol. 2006;38(1):59-65.

Importation of exotic ticks into the United Kingdom via the international trade
in reptiles.

Pietzsch M(1), Quest R, Hillyard PD, Medlock JM, Leach S.

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Risk Assessment, Centre for Emergency Preparedness and Response,
Health Protection Agency, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JG, UK.
maaike.pietzsch@hpa.org.uk

Due to the increased trade in exotic reptiles, many of which are infested with
ticks of various genera, there is an increased risk of exotic ticks and pathogens
being introduced and potentially becoming established in new geographical areas. 
Despite the number and variety of tick species collected from reptiles, their
role in the maintenance of pathogens and transmission to humans has not been
fully investigated for all species. The potential public health risks to the
United Kingdom have been examined through a preliminary study involving the
collection and identification of exotic tick species imported via the reptile
trade. Reptiles imported into Heathrow Airport, London (July 2003-October 2004)
were carefully examined for ectoparasites. Five species of tick were collected:
Aponomma exornatum, Ap. latum, Amblyomma rotundatum, Am. dissimile and Am.
nuttalli. This is the first report of Am. dissimile identified from an
interception at Heathrow airport. The potential for establishment of exotic ticks
in the UK and the public health risks are discussed.

PMID: 16550335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Vaccine. 2006 May 15;24(20):4433-9. Epub 2005 Dec 21.

Protection against bubonic and pneumonic plague with a single dose
microencapsulated sub-unit vaccine.

Elvin SJ(1), Eyles JE, Howard KA, Ravichandran E, Somavarappu S, Alpar HO,
Williamson ED.

Author information: 
(1)DSTL, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK. SJElvin@dstl.gov.uk

Protection against virulent plague challenge by the parenteral and aerosol routes
was afforded by a single administration of microencapsulated Caf1 and LcrV
antigens from Yersinia pestis in BALB/c mice. Recombinant Caf1 and LcrV were
individually encapsulated in polymeric microspheres, to the surface of which
additional antigen was adsorbed. The microspheres containing either Caf1 or LcrV 
were blended and used to immunise mice on a single occasion, by either the
intra-nasal or intra-muscular route. Both routes of immunisation induced systemic
and local immune responses, with high levels of serum IgG being developed in
response to both vaccine antigens. In Elispot assays, secretion of cytokines by
spleen and draining lymph node cells was demonstrated, revealing activation of
both Th1 and Th2 associated cytokines; and spleen cells from animals immunised by
either route were found to proliferate in vitro in response to both vaccine
antigens. Virulent challenge experiments demonstrated that non-invasive
immunisation by intra-nasal instillation can provide strong systemic and local
immune responses and protect against high level challenge. Microencapsulation of 
these vaccine antigens has the added advantage that controlled release of the
antigens occurs in vivo, so that protective immunity can be induced after only a 
single immunising dose.

PMID: 16546306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Adv Appl Microbiol. 2005;58C:185-226.

Engineering Antibodies for Biosensor Technologies.

Goodchild S(1), Love T, Hopkins N, Mayers C.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl, Detection Department, Porton Down Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 OJQ, United
Kingdom.

PMID: 16543034  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


17. Vaccine. 2006 Apr 24;24(17):3440-5. Epub 2006 Feb 21.

Boosting with an adenovirus-based vaccine improves protective efficacy against
Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus following DNA vaccination.

Perkins SD(1), O'Brien LM, Phillpotts RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory,
Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 OJQ, UK. sdperkins@dstl.gov.uk

There is a requirement for a vaccine that protects against the alphavirus,
Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus (VEEV). Previous work has shown that DNA
vaccines encoding structural proteins of VEEV can elicit immune responses and
protection against VEEV though this protection is incomplete against airborne
VEEV. In this study, we demonstrate that particle-mediated epidermal delivery of 
a DNA vaccine encoding the E2 glycoprotein of VEEV can be boosted with a
mucosally-delivered Ad-based vaccine encoding the same E2 glycoprotein. This
results in an improved Th2-type IgG response, an increase in neutralising
antibody and a significant increase in protection against airborne VEEV. This
indicates that prime-boost may be a suitable immunisation regimen for providing
protection against airborne VEEV.

PMID: 16527377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Adv Appl Microbiol. 2006;58:185-226.

Engineering antibodies for biosensor technologies.

Goodchild S(1), Love T, Hopkins N, Mayers C.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl, Detection Department, Porton Down Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 OJQ, United
Kingdom.

PMID: 16509447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Res Microbiol. 2006 Jul-Aug;157(6):593-604. Epub 2006 Feb 8.

The identification and evaluation of ATP binding cassette systems in the
intracellular bacterium Francisella tularensis.

Atkins HS(1), Dassa E, Walker NJ, Griffin KF, Harland DN, Taylor RR, Duffield ML,
Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JQ,
UK.

Francisella tularensis is a facultative intracellular bacterium responsible for
the disease tularemia. Analysis of the fully sequenced genome of the virulent F. 
tularensis strain SCHU S4 has led to the identification of twenty ATP binding
cassette (ABC) systems, of which five appear to be non-functional. The fifteen
complete systems comprise three importers, five exporters, four systems involved 
in non-transport processes, and three systems of unknown or ill-defined function.
The number and classification of the ABC systems in F. tularensis is similar to
that observed in other intracellular bacteria, indicating that some of these
systems may be important for the intracellular lifestyle of these organisms.
Among the ABC systems identified in the genome are systems that may be involved
in the virulence of F. tularensis SCHU S4. Six ABC system proteins were evaluated
as candidate vaccine antigens against tularemia, although none provided
significant protection against F. tularensis. However, a greater understanding of
these systems may lead to the development of countermeasures against F.
tularensis.

PMID: 16503121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Infect Immun. 2006 Mar;74(3):1706-11.

Protection against heterologous Burkholderia pseudomallei strains by dendritic
cell immunization.

Elvin SJ(1), Healey GD, Westwood A, Knight SC, Eyles JE, Williamson ED.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, United Kingdom.
SJElvin@dstl.gov.uk

Burkholderia pseudomallei, the causative agent of melioidosis, is a gram-negative
bacterium which can cause either chronic infections or acute lethal sepsis in
infected individuals. The disease is endemic in Southeast Asia and northern
Australia, but little is known about the mechanisms of protective immunity to the
bacterium. In this study, we have developed a procedure to utilize dendritic
cells in combination with CpG oligodeoxynucleotides as a vaccine delivery vector 
to induce protective immune responses to various strains of B. pseudomallei. Our 
results show that strong cell-mediated immune responses were generated, while
antibody responses, although low, were detectable. Upon virulent challenge with
B. pseudomallei strain K96243, NCTC 4845, or 576, animals immunized with
dendritic cells that were pulsed with heat-killed K96243 and matured in the
presence of CpG 1826 showed significant levels of protection. These results show 
that a vaccine strategy that actively targets dendritic cells can evoke
protective immune responses.

PMCID: PMC1418668
PMID: 16495542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Neurotoxicology. 2006 Jul;27(4):485-91. Epub 2006 Feb 20.

A novel approach for medical countermeasures to nerve agent poisoning in the
guinea-pig.

Wetherell J(1), Price M, Mumford H.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4
0JQ, UK. jwetherell@dstl.gov.uk

This study forms part of a larger programme of work aimed at developing improved 
medical countermeasures for nerve agent poisoning with less reliance on
pretreatment. Therapy with N(6)-cyclopentyladenosine (CPA), physostigmine,
hyoscine and HI-6 protected guinea-pigs against the incapacitating and lethal
effects of a supralethal challenge of soman (135 microg/kg) when given 1 min
after poisoning. CPA, however has well-recognised side effects that are likely to
preclude it being licensed for use in humans so further refinements were made to 
the doses of the other therapy components to improve efficacy in the absence of
CPA. An immediate therapy comprising physostigmine (0.2 mg/kg), hyoscine (4
mg/kg) and HI-6 (93.6 mg/kg), when given 1 min after nerve agent, provided good
protection against the lethal effects of GA, GB, GD, GF and VX poisoning and
reduced the duration of the signs of incapacitation and hypothermia. In the case 
of GA and GB poisoning some animals exhibited a short period of substantial
incapacitation. Most animals continued to gain weight over the following 6 days
without the need for further medical intervention. In the case of GA poisoning
further medical intervention would be needed to ensure the longer term survival
of all animals and it is likely that in the battlefield situation further medical
treatment would be available within 2-4 h. The drug combination described in this
paper protects against supralethal doses of a range of nerve agents, with minimal
incapacitation in the absence of any pretreatment. Further modification and
refinement of this therapy is required for human use and it may provide a way
forward for development of medical countermeasures for the treatment of
organophosphate poisoning in the wider community should there be a need.

PMID: 16488015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Med Microbiol. 2006 Mar;55(Pt 3):309-15.

Attachment of Yersinia pestis to human respiratory cell lines is inhibited by
certain oligosaccharides.

Thomas R(1), Brooks T.

Author information: 
(1)Defence, Science & Technology Laboratories, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ,
UK. rjthomas@dstl.gov.uk

Pneumonic plague is an aggressive disease that is clinically difficult to treat. 
Inhibition of attachment using oligosaccharide receptor mimics may provide an
alternative to antibiotics. The virulent Yersinia pestis strain GB was
demonstrated to attach to the murine monocyte cell line (J774A.1) and a range of 
human respiratory epithelial cell lines: nasal (RPMI-2650), bronchial (BEAS2-B)
and alveolar (A549). Attachment was greatest to the A549 and BEAS2-B cell lines. 
Pre-treatment of the cell lines with tunicamycin reduced attachment by 55-65 %,
indicating the importance of cell-surface carbohydrates in adhesion. The cell
lines displayed differences in the oligosaccharides that inhibited attachment.
p-Nitrophenol was the best inhibitor for each cell line. Disaccharides such as
GalNAcbeta1-3Gal and GalNAcbeta1-4Gal were also good inhibitors, particularly for
the RPMI-2650 cell line. This demonstrates the potential of oligosaccharides as
potential anti-adhesion therapeutics.

PMID: 16476795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Mol Biol Cell. 2006 Apr;17(4):1711-22. Epub 2006 Feb 8.

Sp2 localizes to subnuclear foci associated with the nuclear matrix.

Moorefield KS(1), Yin H, Nichols TD, Cathcart C, Simmons SO, Horowitz JM.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Genomic Sciences, Center for Comparative Medicine and
Translational Research, College of Veterinary Medicine, North Carolina State
University, Raleigh, NC 27606, USA.

We have reported that extracts prepared from many human and mouse cell lines show
little or no Sp2 DNA-binding activity and that Sp2 has little or no capacity to
stimulate transcription of promoters that are activated by Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4.
Using an array of chimeric Sp1/Sp2 proteins we showed further that Sp2
DNA-binding activity and trans-activation are each negatively regulated in
mammalian cells. As part of an ongoing effort to study Sp2 function and
regulation we characterized its subcellular localization in comparison with other
Sp-family members in fixed and live cells. We report that 1) Sp2 localizes
largely within subnuclear foci associated with the nuclear matrix, and 2) these
foci are distinct from promyelocytic oncogenic domains and appear to be stable
during an 18-h time course of observation. Deletion analyses identified a 37
amino acid sequence spanning the first zinc-"finger" that is sufficient to direct
nuclear matrix association, and this region also encodes a bipartite nuclear
localization sequence. A second nuclear matrix targeting sequence is encoded
within the Sp2 trans-activation domain. We conclude that Sp2 preferentially
associates with the nuclear matrix and speculate that this subcellular
localization plays an important role in the regulation of Sp2 function.

PMCID: PMC1415311
PMID: 16467376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Vaccine. 2006 Apr 5;24(15):2710-7. Epub 2006 Jan 9.

Recombinant Salmonella vaccines for biodefence.

Atkins HS(1), Morton M, Griffin KF, Stokes MG, Nataro JP, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.
hsatkins@dstl.gov.uk

There is a requirement for vaccines to protect against pathogens that may be
misused for bioterrorism or biowarfare purposes. In particular, biodefence
vaccines are required that may be used for safe and easy immunisation of
populations and that can rapidly induce mucosal immunity to provide protection at
the lung surface against a range of airborne agents. To address this need,
recombinant Salmonella vaccines are being developed. In this review, the
technologies used, considerations needed, progress made, and future prospects for
developing multivalent Salmonella-based vaccines for biodefence are discussed.

PMID: 16434131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Dev Biol. 2006 Mar 15;291(2):208-17. Epub 2006 Jan 20.

Distinct roles of HF-1b/Sp4 in ventricular and neural crest cells lineages affect
cardiac conduction system development.

St Amand TR(1), Lu JT, Zamora M, Gu Y, Stricker J, Hoshijima M, Epstein JA, Ross 
JJ Jr, Ruiz-Lozano P, Chien KR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, CA 92092, USA.

The heterogeneous cell types of the cardiac conduction system are responsible for
coordinating and maintaining rhythmic contractions of the heart. While it has
been shown that the cells of the conduction system are derived from myocytes,
additional cell types, including neural crest cells, may play a role in the
development and maturation of these specialized cell lineages. Previous work has 
shown that the expression of the hf-1b gene is required for specification of the 
cardiac conduction system. Using Cre-Lox technology, we conditionally mutated the
hf-1b gene in the ventricular and the neural crest cell lineages. Cx40
immunohistochemistry on HF-1b tissue-restricted knockouts revealed a requirement 
for HF-1b in the cardiomyogenic lineage. Electrophysiological studies identified 
a second requirement for HF-1b in the neural crest-derived cells. Absence of
HF-1b in the neural crest led to atrial and atrioventricular dysfunction
resulting from deficiencies in the neurotrophin receptor trkC. Therefore, in this
study, we document that a single transcription factor, HF-1b, acts through two
separate cell types to direct distinct functions of the cardiac conduction
system.

PMID: 16430881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Infect Immun. 2006 Feb;74(2):1436-41.

Development of a guinea pig immune response-related microarray and its use to
define the host response following Mycobacterium bovis BCG vaccination.

Tree JA(1), Elmore MJ, Javed S, Williams A, Marsh PD.

Author information: 
(1)Health Protection Agency, Centre for Emergency Preparedness and Response,
Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, United Kingdom. julia.tree@hpa.org.uk

Immune responses in the guinea pig model are understudied because of a lack of
commercial reagents. We have developed a custom-made guinea pig oligonucleotide
microarray (81 spots) and have examined the gene expression profile of
splenocytes restimulated in vitro from Mycobacterium bovis BCG-vaccinated and
naive animals. Eleven genes were significantly (P < 0.05) up-regulated following 
vaccination, indicating a Th1-type response. These results show that microarrays 
can be used to more fully define immune profiles of guinea pigs.

PMCID: PMC1360318
PMID: 16428800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2005 Dec 20;1731(3):215-24. Epub 2005 Nov 4.

Regulatory elements of microfibril-associated glycoprotein-1 gene expression in
muscle cells.

Segade F(1), Mecham RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA. fsegade@wfubmc.edu

The Mfap2 gene encodes the microfibril-associated glycoprotein-1 (MAGP1), an
extracellular matrix protein of microfibrillar structures. The gene is
transcribed from a major transcription start site embedded in a CpG island.
Mapping of transcriptionally active regions in the 5' flanking sequence
identified a region, located between nucleotides -339 and -109 as the Mfap2 basal
promoter. Site-directed and random mutagenesis demonstrated that a KLF sequence
motif at -256/-270, an E-box at -222/-229, and a GC-box at -117/-125, are
critical for the promoter function. Using electrophoresis mobility shift assays, 
we find that the KLF motif mediates the binding of GKLF/KLF4, whereas the E-box
is a target for both Upstream Stimulatory Factors 1 and 2, and the GC box at
-117/-125 forms complexes with Sp1 and Sp3, but not with Sp4 or AP2alpha. A
sequence element spanning position -150 may represent the binding motif of an
uncharacterized transcription factor. The basal transcriptional regulation of
Mfap2 in muscle cells is discussed.

PMID: 16321658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Chromatogr A. 2005 Dec 9;1098(1-2):156-65. Epub 2005 Oct 5.

Analysis of chemical warfare agents III. Use of bis-nucleophiles in the trace
level determination of phosgene and perfluoroisobutylene.

Muir B(1), Cooper DB, Carrick WA, Timperley CM, Slater BJ, Quick S.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire
SP4 0JQ, UK. bmuir@dstl.gov.uk

The reactivity of phosgene and perfluoroisobutylene (PFIB) towards
1,2-bis-nucleophiles was exploited to allow determination of these gases in air
samples. 2-Aminothiophenol (ATP), 3,4-dimercaptotoluene (DMT) and
2-hydroxymethylpiperidine (HMP) were evaluated as bis-nucleophiles capable of
forming thermally-stable derivatives with phosgene and PFIB when loaded with
triethylamine onto Tenax TA. Experimental design was used to optimise thermal
desorption conditions. Detection limits in the low ngm(-3) range were observed
for the five derivatives investigated. This work represents the most sensitive
analytical method for trace level quantitation of phosgene and PFIB published to 
date.

PMID: 16314173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Gen Virol. 2005 Dec;86(Pt 12):3337-41.

Co-evolutionary patterns of variation in small and large RNA segments of
Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus.

Chamberlain J(1), Cook N, Lloyd G, Mioulet V, Tolley H, Hewson R.

Author information: 
(1)Novel and Dangerous Pathogens, Virology, Centre for Emergency Preparedness and
Response, Health Protection Agency--Porton Down, Salisbury, Wilts SP4 0JG, UK.

The genus Nairovirus of the family Bunyaviridae includes the Crimean-Congo
haemorrhagic fever (CCHF) species group. The species is predominated by the
hazard-group 4 pathogens, from which the name and majority of strain entries are 
derived. Additionally, the species embraces hazard-group 2 viruses that are
classified as members by antigenic cross-reactivity. CCHF viruses have a
tripartite RNA genome consisting of large (L), medium (M) and small (S) segments.
Here, the sequence characterization of previously undescribed L and S segments
from novel strains originating in the Middle East and Africa is reported. Further
scrutiny of this data with phylogenetic tools, in the context of other publicly
available sequence information, reveals analogous grouping patterns between the L
and S segments. These groups correlate with the geographical distribution of
strain isolation and indicate that the L and S segments of CCHF viruses have
evolved together.

PMID: 16298979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2005 Dec;13(4):318-22.

SP4, a novel anti-cyclin D1 rabbit monoclonal antibody, is a highly sensitive
probe for identifying mantle cell lymphomas bearing the t(11;14)(q13;q32)
translocation.

Pruneri G(1), Valentini S, Bertolini F, Del Curto B, Maiorano E, Viale G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, European Institute of Oncology,
Milan, Italy.

Immunohistochemistry is the most widely used approach in the diagnosis of mantle 
cell lymphoma (MCL). However, its reliability may be hampered by several
technical reasons, necessitating the use of alternative techniques such as the
identification of the t(11;14)(q13;q32) translocation to characterize such
lesions. The authors compared two monoclonal antibodies (DCS-6 and SP4) for
assessing cyclin D1 immunoreactivity in a series of 22 MCLs. Their results
documented that SP4, a novel rabbit monoclonal antibody, is more effective than
the mouse monoclonal antibody DCS-6, one of the most commonly used reagents in
daily practice. Although DCS-6 and SP4 were capable of identifying cyclin D1
immunoreactivity in 95.4% and 100% of the cases analyzed, respectively, the
prevalence of cyclin D1 immunoreactive neoplastic cells was significantly (P <
0.0001) higher with SP4 (86.6 +/- 13.1%) than with DCS-6 (39.8 +/- 32%).
Moreover, the staining intensity was faint in 16 (76.2%) cases and moderate to
strong in 5 (23.8%) cases immunostained with DCS- 6, while all the cases showed a
moderate to strong immunoreactivity with SP4 (P < 0.0001). According to an
arbitrary score based on the percentage of immunoreactive neoplastic cells and
staining intensity, only 10 (45.4%) cases were considered high cyclin D1
expressors after staining with DCS-6, whereas all the cases were high expressors 
with SP4 (P < 0.0001). These data provide evidence that the SP4 monoclonal
antibody may be a fast, easy-to-interpret, and reliable surrogate for the
detection of the (11;14) translocation by molecular techniques.

PMID: 16280660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Vaccine. 2006 Mar 10;24(11):1736-43. Epub 2005 Oct 24.

Immunological responses after immunisation of mice with microparticles containing
antigen and single stranded RNA (polyuridylic acid).

Westwood A(1), Elvin SJ, Healey GD, Williamson ED, Eyles JE.

Author information: 
(1)Building 7A, DSTL, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.

Certain toll-like receptor (TLR) agonists, e.g. CpG DNA, can be used as potent
vaccine 'adjuvants'. It is known that some sequences of single stranded (ss) RNA 
stimulate proinflammatory and antiviral responses following interaction with TLR 
7 and 8. We have encapsulated ovalbumin (OVA) in the presence and absence of
polyuridylic acid (poly-U) inside polylactide microparticles. In comparison to
microparticles containing only OVA, bulk cultures of bone marrow-derived
plasmacytoid and myeloid dendritic cells produced more (P<0.05) IL-12 and
interferon (IFN)-alpha when stimulated with microparticles containing OVA and
poly-U. Subcutaneous injection of comicroencapsulated OVA and poly-U resulted in 
statistically elevated levels of serum anti-OVA IgG1 (P<0.05 versus naïve mice). 
Conversely, anti-OVA IgG1 levels in C57 BL6 mice immunised with OVA loaded
microparticles (without RNA) were statistically indifferent to naïve animals.
Furthermore, injection of coencapsulated OVA and poly-U resulted in (P<0.05)
greater numbers of OVA specific IFN-gamma secreting T-cells as compared with mice
injected with OVA loaded microparticles. A similar trend was seen in mice
immunised with OVA loaded microparticles decorated with CpG or solutions of
admixed OVA and CpG (P<0.05). These data demonstrate, for the first time, that
appropriately formulated ssRNA can act as a potent adjuvant and modulator of
adaptive immunological responses.

PMID: 16278038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2005 Dec;18(6):537-42.

Stability of transmitted drug-resistant HIV-1 species.

Cane PA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Infection, Health Protection Agency, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4
0JG, UK. pat.cane@hpa.org.uk

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The proportion of patients showing primary infection with
HIV-1 that are already resistant to antiviral drugs has been steadily increasing.
Such resistance is known to compromise therapy response. Most patients, however, 
are not diagnosed during their incident infection and, until recently, it was not
known for how long resistant virus can be detected following infection. This
article reviews reports on the stability of transmitted resistance in the absence
of therapy.
RECENT FINDINGS: It has now been shown that many resistance-associated mutations 
can persist for a considerable time following transmission in the absence of
treatment and that such resistance can be further transmitted.
SUMMARY: Since transmitted resistance can be detected years after infection, it
is now worthwhile carrying out resistance tests on newly diagnosed patients in
which it is known that the level of transmitted resistance in the population
warrants such testing.

PMID: 16258329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Infect Immun. 2005 Nov;73(11):7142-50.

Pathogenesis of Yersinia pestis infection in BALB/c mice: effects on host
macrophages and neutrophils.

Lukaszewski RA(1), Kenny DJ, Taylor R, Rees DG, Hartley MG, Oyston PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4
0JQ, United Kingdom.

The pathogenesis of infection with Yersinia pestis, the causative agent of
plague, was examined following subcutaneous infection of BALB/c mice with a fully
virulent strain expressing green fluorescent protein. Plate culturing, flow
cytometry, and laser confocal microscopy of spleen homogenates throughout
infection revealed three discernible stages of infection. The early phase was
characterized by the presence of a small number of intracellular bacteria mostly 
within CD11b+ macrophages and Ly-6G+ neutrophils. These bacteria were not viable,
as determined by plate culturing of spleen homogenates, until day 2
postinfection. Between days 2 and 4 postinfection, a plateau phase was observed, 
with bacterial burdens of 10(3) to 10(4) CFU per spleen. Flow cytometric analysis
revealed that there was even distribution of Y. pestis within both CD11b+
macrophage and Ly-6G+ neutrophil populations on day 2 postinfection. However,
from day 3 postinfection onward, intracellular bacteria were observed exclusively
within splenic CD11b+ macrophages. The late phase of infection, between days 4
and 5 postinfection, was characterized by a rapid increase in bacterial numbers, 
as well as escape of bacteria into the extracellular compartment. Annexin V
staining of spleens indicated that a large proportion of splenic neutrophils
underwent rapid apoptosis on days 1 and 2 postinfection. Fewer macrophages
underwent apoptosis during the same period. Our data suggest that during the
early stages of Y. pestis infection, splenic neutrophils are responsible for
limiting the growth of Y. pestis and that splenic macrophages provide safe
intracellular shelters within which Y. pestis is able to grow and escape during
the later stages of infection. This macrophage compliance can be overcome in
vitro by stimulation with a combination of gamma interferon and tumor necrosis
factor alpha.

PMCID: PMC1273833
PMID: 16239508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2005 Dec;56(6):1069-73. Epub 2005 Oct 13.

In vivo efficacy of fluoroquinolones against systemic tularaemia infection in
mice.

Piercy T(1), Steward J, Lever MS, Brooks TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 OJQ, UK.
tjpiercy@dstl.gov.uk

OBJECTIVES: The in vivo efficacy of ciprofloxacin, gatifloxacin and moxifloxacin 
were assessed in an experimental Francisella tularensis Schu S4 infection in the 
BALB/c mouse model.
METHODS: Mice were given 100 mg/kg of antibiotic by oral administration twice
daily commencing at 6, 24 or 48 h post-exposure and continued for 14 days
post-exposure. All mice were challenged subcutaneously with 1 x 10(6) cfu F.
tularensis Schu S4 and observed for a period of 56 days.
RESULTS: Treatment initiated 6 h post-exposure resulted in 94, 100 and 100%
survival for ciprofloxacin, gatifloxacin and moxifloxacin, respectively. When
treatment was delayed until 24 h post-exposure the survival rates were
ciprofloxacin 67%, gatifloxacin 96% and moxifloxacin 100%. Treatment initiated at
48 h post-exposure resulted in a significant reduction in the survival rate of
the ciprofloxacin-treated mice, with 0% survival compared with 84 and 62% for
gatifloxacin and moxifloxacin, respectively. Non-treated infected control mice
died within 96 h post-exposure. Dexamethasone given at day 42 for 7 days to
suppress the animals' immune system caused relapse in all of the treatment
groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Both gatifloxacin and moxifloxacin were more effective at preventing
mortality than ciprofloxacin and could be considered as alternative antibiotics
in the treatment of systemic F. tularensis infection.

PMID: 16223941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Eur J Cancer. 2005 Nov;41(16):2438-48. Epub 2005 Oct 4.

Sp transcription factor family and its role in cancer.

Safe S(1), Abdelrahim M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A and M University System
Health Science Center, 2121 W. Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX 77030-3303, USA.
ssafe@cvm.tamu.edu

Specificity protein 1 (Sp1) and other Sp and Krüppel-like factor (KLF) proteins
are members of a family of transcription factors which bind GC/GT-rich promoter
elements through three C(2)H(2)-type zinc fingers that are present at their
C-terminal domains. Sp1-Sp4 proteins regulate expression of multiple genes in
normal tissues and tumours. There is growing evidence that some Sp proteins play 
a critical role in the growth and metastasis of many tumour types by regulating
expression of cell cycle genes and vascular endothelial growth factor. Sp/KLF
proteins are also potential targets for cancer chemotherapy.

PMID: 16209919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Med Hypotheses. 2006;66(2):234-46. Epub 2005 Oct 4.

A tale of two cannabinoids: the therapeutic rationale for combining
tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol.

Russo E(1), Guy GW.

Author information: 
(1)GW Pharmaceuticals, Porton Down Science Park, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ,
UK. erusso@gwpharm.com

This study examines the current knowledge of physiological and clinical effects
of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and cannabidiol (CBD) and presents a rationale for 
their combination in pharmaceutical preparations. Cannabinoid and vanilloid
receptor effects as well as non-receptor mechanisms are explored, such as the
capability of THC and CBD to act as anti-inflammatory substances independent of
cyclo-oxygenase (COX) inhibition. CBD is demonstrated to antagonise some
undesirable effects of THC including intoxication, sedation and tachycardia,
while contributing analgesic, anti-emetic, and anti-carcinogenic properties in
its own right. In modern clinical trials, this has permitted the administration
of higher doses of THC, providing evidence for clinical efficacy and safety for
cannabis based extracts in treatment of spasticity, central pain and lower
urinary tract symptoms in multiple sclerosis, as well as sleep disturbances,
peripheral neuropathic pain, brachial plexus avulsion symptoms, rheumatoid
arthritis and intractable cancer pain. Prospects for future application of whole 
cannabis extracts in neuroprotection, drug dependency, and neoplastic disorders
are further examined. The hypothesis that the combination of THC and CBD
increases clinical efficacy while reducing adverse events is supported.

PMID: 16209908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Am J Clin Pathol. 2005 Nov;124(5):782-9.

Antibody selection in immunohistochemical detection of cyclin D1 in mantle cell
lymphoma.

Torlakovic E(1), Nielsen S, Vyberg M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Royal University Hospital, College of Medicine,
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Canada.

An assessment in Nordic immunohistochemical Quality Control (NordiQC) revealed
that only 23% participant laboratories performed optimal staining for detection
of cyclin D1 (CyD1) in mantle cell lymphoma (MCL). False-negative results were
secondary to suboptimal protocols. We compared the 5 anti-CyD1 antibodies
(monoclonal SP4, P2D11F11, and DCS-6 and polyclonal CP236 and 06-137) used in the
Scandinavian laboratories. Evaluated were 31 MCLs, 16 other malignant lymphomas, 
and 19 samples of normal tissues. Sensitivity was as follows: CP236, 100%; SP4,
95%; P2D11F11, 90%; DCS-6, 84%; and 06-137, 53%. SP4 produced the strongest
staining. Correlation of CyD1 with the proliferative index was best with
polyclonal antibodies CP236 and 06-137. The use of heat-induced epitope retrieval
in an alkaline buffer such as 1/10 mmol/L of Tris-EDTA buffer, pH 9, seemed
mandatory. For the optimal detection of CyD1 expression, both SP4 and CP236
antibodies should be available in the laboratory.

PMID: 16203276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Microbiology. 2005 Sep;151(Pt 9):2821-8.

Gas gangrene: an open and closed case.

Titball RW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.
rtitball@dstl.gov.uk

PMID: 16151195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Mol Cell Probes. 2005 Oct;19(5):349-57.

Development of a multi-pathogen oligonucleotide microarray for detection of
Bacillus anthracis.

Burton JE(1), Oshota OJ, North E, Hudson MJ, Polyanskaya N, Brehm J, Lloyd G,
Silman NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Emergency Preparedness and Response, Health Protection Agency,
Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK.

An oligonucleotide microarray system has been specifically designed to detect and
differentiate Bacillus anthracis from other bacterial species present in clinical
samples. The pilot-scale microarray initially incorporated probes to detect six
common species of bacteria, which were fully evaluated. The microarray comprised 
long oligonucleotides (50--70-mer) designed to hybridise with the variable
regions of the 16S rRNA genes. Probes which hybridised to virulence genes were
also incorporated; for B. anthracis, these initially included the pag, lef, cap
and vrrA (for partial genotyping) genes. Hybridisation conditions were initially 
optimised to be run using 5 x SSC, 0.1% SDS, 50 degrees C for 16 h. The detection
limits of the microarray were determined under these conditions by titration of
chromosomal DNA and unlabelled amplicons followed by hybridisation to determine
the levels of sensitivity that could be obtained with the microarray. Two
different amplification methodologies were also compared-specific-primer based
PCR and random PCR (with the labelling stage incorporated). Higher sensitivity
was obtained using specific PCR primers, however, since one of the desired
outcomes of a microarray-based detection system was the high discrimination that 
it offered, random amplification and labelling was used as the amplification
method of choice. The length of hybridisation was investigated using a
time-course, and 1--2h was found to give optimal and higher signals than 16 h
incubation. These results indicate that microarray technology can be employed in 
a diagnostic environment and moreover, results may be obtained in a similar
time-scale to a standard PCR reaction, but with the advantage that no a priori
knowledge of the infectious agent is required for detection.

PMID: 16144753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Med Vet Entomol. 2005 Sep;19(3):306-14.

Distribution of Ixodes ricinus in the British Isles: investigation of historical 
records.

Pietzsch ME(1), Medlock JM, Jones L, Avenell D, Abbott J, Harding P, Leach S.

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Risk Assessment, Health Protection Agency, Centre for Emergency
Preparedness & Response, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, U.K.
maaike.pietzsch@hps.org.uk

Ixodes ricinus Linnaeus (Acari: Ixodidae) is the most abundant and widely
distributed tick in the British Isles, and is a vector for a number of bacterial,
viral and protozoal pathogens of both medical and veterinary importance. This
report provides an update to the historical distribution data of I. ricinus,
published by the Biological Records Centre (BRC), Monks Wood in The Provisional
Atlas of the Ticks (Ixodidae) of the British Isles by K. P. Martyn (1988), and is
supplemented with additional BRC records since 1988, additional data from
published scientific literature and unpublished field studies, and enhanced with 
spatial and temporal information on tick stages collected and their host
associations. Records have been mapped at 10 km resolution and enhanced to 5 km, 
1 km and 0.1 km. Differentiation between records representing one-off collections
from those representing populations of I. ricinus has been achieved through the
classification of the records into either reported or established populations.
Detailed seasonality and host associations of records are investigated,
highlighting the value in obtaining additional detailed contemporary data to aid 
risk assessments and research within this field.

PMID: 16134979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. IDrugs. 1999 Nov;2(11):1136-8.

Virology--11th international congress. 9-13 August 1999, Sydney, Australia.

Fooks A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Division, Centre for Applied Microbiology and Research, Porton Down, 
Salisbury, SP4 0JG, UK. anthony.fooks@camr.org.uk

The main theme of this conference was understanding the complex biology of
viruses in order to design appropriate vaccines for human use. The use of both
plant and animal viruses as vectors for delivery vehicles was widely discussed.
These engineered viruses could be delivered in oral formulations or, in the case 
of plant viruses, grown in the plant host and used as edible vaccines. New
technologies for producing highly attenuated vaccines through the use of
'molecular clone technologies' were shown to be highly efficacious in animal
models. While new vaccine candidates are being generated against many established
viral diseases, there remains a threat from HIV, virulent strains of influenza
and newly emerging viruses for which no vaccines are currently available.
Emerging viruses, such as the Hendra-like virus called Nipah, which emerged in
pig herds in Malaysia and Singapore in 1998, has posed a severe economic threat
to the region. The subsequent spread of Nipah virus to humans and the threat of
epidemic spread was evidence that virologists should not become complacent.

PMID: 16113984  [PubMed]


42. Infect Immun. 2005 Sep;73(9):5978-87.

Immunogenicity of recombinant protective antigen and efficacy against aerosol
challenge with anthrax.

Williamson ED(1), Hodgson I, Walker NJ, Topping AW, Duchars MG, Mott JM, Estep J,
Lebutt C, Flick-Smith HC, Jones HE, Li H, Quinn CP.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory Porton Down, Salisbury, Wilts. SP4
0JQ, United Kingdom. dewilliamson@dstl.gov.uk

Immunization with a recombinant form of the protective antigen (rPA) from
Bacillus anthracis has been carried out with rhesus macaques. Rhesus macaques
immunized with 25 mug or more of B. subtilis-expressed rPA bound to alhydrogel
had a significantly increased immunoglobulin G (IgG) response to rPA compared
with macaques receiving the existing licensed vaccine from the United Kingdom
(anthrax vaccine precipitated [AVP]), although the isotype profile was unchanged,
with bias towards the IgG1 and IgG2 subclasses. Immune macaque sera from all
immunized groups contained toxin-neutralizing antibody and recognized all the
domains of PA. While the recognition of the N terminus of PA (domains 1 to 3) was
predominant in macaques immunized with the existing vaccines (AVP and the U.S.
vaccine anthrax vaccine adsorbed), macaques immunized with rPA recognized the N- 
and C-terminal domains of PA. Antiserum derived from immunized macaques protected
macrophages in vitro against the cytotoxic effects of lethal toxin. Passive
transfer of IgG purified from immune macaque serum into naive A/J mice conferred 
protection against challenge with B. anthracis in a dose-related manner. The
protection conferred by passive transfer of 500 mug macaque IgG correlated
significantly (P = 0.003; r = 0.4) with the titers of neutralizing antibody in
donor macaques. Subsequently, a separate group of rhesus macaques immunized with 
50 mug of Escherichia coli-derived rPA adsorbed to alhydrogel was fully protected
against a target dose of 200 50% lethal doses of aerosolized B. anthracis. These 
data provide some preliminary evidence for the existence of immune correlates of 
protection against anthrax infection in rhesus macaques immunized with rPA.

PMCID: PMC1231098
PMID: 16113318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Infect Immun. 2005 Sep;73(9):5945-51.

Humoral and cell-mediated adaptive immune responses are required for protection
against Burkholderia pseudomallei challenge and bacterial clearance
postinfection.

Healey GD(1), Elvin SJ, Morton M, Williamson ED.

Author information: 
(1)Host-Pathogen Analysis, Bldg. 7A, Rm. 201, DSTL, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4
0JQ, United Kingdom. gdhealey@dstl.gov.uk

Burkholderia pseudomallei, the causative agent of melioidosis, is a gram-negative
bacillus endemic to areas of southeast Asia and northern Australia. Presently,
there is no licensed vaccine for B. pseudomallei and the organism is refractive
to antibiotic therapy. The bacterium is known to survive and multiply inside both
phagocytic and nonphagocytic host cells and may be able to spread directly from
cell to cell. Current vaccine delivery systems are unlikely to induce the correct
immune effectors to stimulate a protective response to the organism. In this
study, we have developed a procedure to utilize dendritic cells as a vaccine
delivery vector to induce cell-mediated immune responses to B. pseudomallei.
Dendritic cells were produced by culturing murine bone marrow progenitor cells in
medium containing granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor and tumor
necrosis factor alpha. Purified dendritic cells were pulsed with heat-killed
whole-cell B. pseudomallei and used to immunize syngeneic mice. Strong cellular
immune responses were elicited by this immunization method, although antibody
responses were low. Booster immunizations of either a second dose of dendritic
cells or heat-killed B. pseudomallei were administered to increase the immune
response. Immunized animals were challenged with fully virulent B. pseudomallei, 
and protection was demonstrated in those with strong humoral and cell-mediated
immunity. These results indicate the importance of both cell-mediated and humoral
immune mechanisms in protection against intracellular pathogens.

PMCID: PMC1231116
PMID: 16113315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Toxicon. 2005 Sep 15;46(4):446-53.

Analysis of the substrate recognition domain determinants of botulinum type B
toxin using phage display.

Evans ER(1), Sutton JM, Gravett A, Shone CC.

Author information: 
(1)Health Protection Agency, Centre for Emergency Preparedness and Response,
Porton Down, Salisbury, Wilts. SP4 0JG, UK. liz.evans@hpa.org.uk

The botulinum neurotoxin endopeptidases appear to recognise their intracellular
protein substrates via two distinct sites: the cleavage site sequence and a
'recognition site' motif. In the present study phage display has been employed to
generate a library of vesicle-associated membrane protein (VAMP2) variants in
which the toxin recognition motif (part of the SNARE motif ELDDRADA) has been
modified. VAMP (1-94) was displayed on the surface of M13 bacteriophage and this 
fragment was recognised and cleaved by botulinum neurotoxin type B (BoNT/B). A
phage-displayed library was constructed in which six residues of the recognition 
domain (VAMP residues 63-68; wild-type sequence LDDRAD) were randomised, and a
selection method established for identifying cleaved VAMP variants. Sequence
analysis of 24 clones revealed that 5 contained two acidic residues although none
corresponded to the native sequence. Cleavage was reduced compared to wild-type
VAMP, and cleavage of mutants containing no acidic residues was also observed.
The data are discussed in relation to the substrate recognition mechanism of
BoNT/B.

PMID: 16112699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Eur J Pharmacol. 2005 Aug 22;518(2-3):123-32.

Effects of anticonvulsants on soman-induced epileptiform activity in the
guinea-pig in vitro hippocampus.

Harrison PK(1), Sheridan RD, Green AC, Tattersall JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Dstl, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4
0JQ, UK. pkharrison@dstl.gov.uk

Seizures arising from acetylcholinesterase inhibition are a feature of
organophosphate anticholinesterase intoxication. Although benzodiazepines are
effective against these seizures, alternative anticonvulsant drugs may possess
greater efficacy and fewer side-effects. We have investigated in the guinea-pig
hippocampal slice preparation the ability of a series of anticonvulsants to
suppress epileptiform bursting induced by the irreversible organophosphate
anticholinesterase, soman (100 nM). Carbamazepine (300 microM), phenytoin (100
microM), topiramate (100-300 microM) and retigabine (1-30 microM) reduced the
frequency of bursting but only carbamazepine and phenytoin induced a concurrent
reduction in burst duration. Felbamate (100-500 microM) and clomethiazole
(100-300 microM) had no effect on burst frequency but decreased burst duration.
Clozapine (3-30 microM) reduced the frequency but did not influence burst
duration. Levetiracetam (100-300 microM) and gabapentin (100-300 microM) were
without effect. These data suggest that several compounds, in particular
clomethiazole, clozapine, felbamate, topiramate and retigabine, merit further
evaluation as possible treatments for organophosphate poisoning.

PMID: 16054127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2005 Sep 1;250(1):77-83.

The nematode Panagrellus redivivus is susceptible to killing by human pathogens
at 37 degrees C.

Laws TR(1), Smith SA, Smith MP, Harding SV, Atkins TP, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Biomedical Sciences, Porton Down,
Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 OJQ, UK. trlaws@dstl.gov.uk

Caenorhabditis elegans has been used as a host for the study of bacteria that
cause disease in mammals. However, a significant limitation of the model is that 
C. elegans is not viable at 37 degrees C. We report that the gonochoristic
nematode Panagrellus redivivus survives at 37 degrees C and maintains its life
cycle at temperatures up to and including 31.5 degrees C. The C. elegans
pathogens Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Salmonella enterica, Staphylococcus aureus, but
not Yersinia pseudotuberculosis, reduced P. redivivus lifespan. Of four strains
of Burkholderia multivorans tested, one reduced P. redivivus lifespan at both
temperatures, one was avirulent at both temperatures and two strains reduced P.
redivivus lifespan only at 37 degrees C. The mechanism by which one of these
strains killed P. redivivus at 37 degrees C, but not at 25 degrees C, was
investigated further. Killing required viable bacteria, did not involve bacterial
invasion of tissues, is unlikely to be due to a diffusible, bacterial toxin and
was not associated with increased numbers of live bacteria within the intestine
of the worm. We believe B. multivorans may kill P. redivivus by a
temperature-regulated mechanism similar to B. pseudomallei killing of C. elegans.

PMID: 16040202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Expert Rev Vaccines. 2005 Jun;4(3):373-9.

Can Neisseria lactamica antigens provide an effective vaccine to prevent
meningococcal disease?

Gorringe AR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Emergency Preparedness and Response, Health Protection Agency,
Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JG, UK. andrew.gorringe@hpa.org.uk

Neisseria lactamica is a commensal organism that is closely related to Neisseria 
meningitidis, the causative agent of meningococcal disease. N. lactamica has many
antigens in common with N. meningitidis, but it lacks a polysaccharide capsule
and the serosubtyping antigen PorA. Carriage studies have demonstrated that N.
lactamica is carried in the nasopharynx of young children at a time when
meningococcal carriage is rare. However, natural immunity to meningococcal
disease develops during this period and carriage of commensal Neisseria is
implicated in the development of this immunity. Recent studies have characterized
the antigens which may be responsible for inducing a crossreactive antibody
response and have demonstrated that N. lactamica-based vaccines can protect in
experimental models of meningococcal disease. The potential for these vaccines to
be effective in preventing meningococcal disease is discussed.

PMID: 16026250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 1999 Feb;8(2):161-72.

Targeting enzymes to cancers--new developments.

Bagshawe KD(1), Burke PJ, Knox RJ, Melton RG, Sharma SK.

Author information: 
(1)Enzacta Ltd, Building 115, Porton Science Park, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ,
UK.

Two methods of using tumour located enzymes have been described. These are
antibody directed enzyme prodrug therapy (ADEPT) and macromolecule directed
enzyme prodrug therapy (MDEPT), where the tumour located enzyme converts a
non-toxic prodrug into a cytotoxic drug at tumour sites. The alternative use of
tumour located enzymes is to inactivate rescue agents that protect cells from
antimetabolite action, and is described as 'Antimetabolite with inactivation of
rescue agent at cancer sites' (AMIRACS). The leakiness of tumour blood vessels
and poor lymphatic drainage allows enzymes to be targeted to many cancers by
attachment to polymeric macromolecules (MDEPT), as well as to antibodies and
antibody fragments (ADEPT). To avoid systemic toxicity, enzyme activity in blood 
and normal tissues must be very low before giving a prodrug or rescue agent.
Antibodies directed against the enzyme component of macromolecular conjugates
have proved to be very efficient at clearing normal tissues. Human enzymes which 
are over expressed by cancer cells can be exploited particularly if they require 
co-factors or co-substrates, either in situ or targeted to extracellular sites.
Bacterial enzymes have advantages in specificity but require some form of
immunological control in view of their immunogenicity. Prodrugs which generate
drugs with very short half lives are desirable, and have been developed,
including one which has a differential toxicity between prodrug and the active
drug of 1000 to 10,000 fold. The range of antimetabolites available for AMIRACS
was initially restricted to inhibitors of dihydrofolate reductase but has been
greatly extended by the introduction of inhibitors of other enzymes. The
limitations of these systems are discussed.

PMID: 15992070  [PubMed]


49. J Chromatogr A. 2005 May 27;1076(1-2):1-6.

Optimisation of solvent desorption conditions for chemical warfare agent and
simulant compounds from Porapak Q using experimental design. Part 2: Extraction
of sulphur mustard from steel and glass Porapak tubes.

Muir B(1), McDonald G, Cooper DB, Moran MC.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.
bmuir@dstl.gov.uk

The vesicant chemical warfare (CW) agent sulphur mustard remains a hazard to
personnel involved in demilitarisation activities. Sampling tubes containing
Porapak Q are used to measure personal exposure to sulphur mustard vapour.
Presented here is an evaluation of the solvent desorption parameters employed to 
remove sulphur mustard from steel and glass tubes containing Porapak Q.
Statistical experimental design was used to elucidate the influence of solvent
type, tube type, solvent volume and sonication time on sulphur mustard recovery. 
The order of increasing recovery was established as iso-octane < hexane =
isopropyl alcohol. The same degree of sulphur mustard is recovered on both steel 
and glass tubes using hexane or isopropyl alcohol, with hexane exhibiting
quantitative recovery. The sorbent mass (50 mg) should be increased when using
steel tubes as breakthrough has been demonstrated. Given the inert nature of
hexane towards sulphur mustard, its favourable chromatographic properties for
splitless injection, and its greater recoveries, this solvent should be used for 
elution of Porapak Q tubes for quantitative analysis of sulphur mustard.

PMID: 15974063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Aug 1;14(15):2167-80. Epub 2005 Jun 22.

Expression of an LMNA-N195K variant of A-type lamins results in cardiac
conduction defects and death in mice.

Mounkes LC(1), Kozlov SV, Rottman JN, Stewart CL.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Institute, Cancer and Developmental Biology Laboratory,
Frederick, PO Box B, Building 539, Room 121A, MD 21702, USA .

The nuclear lamina is an approximately 10 nm thick proteinaceous layer underlying
the inner nuclear membrane. The A-type lamins, nuclear intermediate filament
proteins encoded by the LMNA gene, are basic components of the nuclear lamina.
Mutations in LMNA are associated with the laminopathies, congenital diseases
affecting tissue regeneration and homeostasis. One of these laminopathies
associated with missense mutations in LMNA is dilated cardiomyopathy with
conduction system disease (DCM-CD1). To understand how the laminopathies arise
from different mutations in a single gene, we derived a mouse line by homologous 
recombination expressing the Lmna-N195K variant of the A-type lamins with an
asparagine-to-lysine substitution at amino acid 195, which causes DCM in humans. 
This mouse line shows characteristics consistent with DCM-CD1. Continuous
electrocardiographic monitoring of cardiac activity demonstrated that
LmnaN195K/N195K mice die at an early age due to arrhythmia. By immunofluorescence
and western analysis, the transcription factor Hf1b/Sp4 and the gap junction
proteins connexin 40 and connexin 43 were misexpressed and/or mislocalized in
LmnaN195K/N195K hearts. Desmin staining revealed a loss of organization at
sarcomeres and intercalated disks. Mutations within the LMNA gene may therefore
cause cardiomyopathy by disrupting the internal organization of the cardiomyocyte
and/or altering the expression of transcription factors essential to normal
cardiac development, aging or function.

PMID: 15972724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Radiol Prot. 2005 Jun;25(2):127-40. Epub 2005 Jun 7.

A review of the potential for radium from luminising activities to migrate in the
environment.

Baker AC(1), Toque C.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl Environmental Sciences, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK.
acbaker@dstl.gov.uk

Comment in
    J Radiol Prot. 2005 Jun;25(2):125-6.

During the first half of the twentieth century, radium, mixed with other
components, was used to luminise many items, including watches, clocks, dials and
meters. On many sites, and in particular MoD sites, luminised instruments and
paint were disposed of by burning and burial. This paper presents a review of the
potential for radium from such sites to migrate in the environment. The most
likely mechanisms of migration of radium from former luminising sites in the UK
are surface-water erosion and transport, and the action of animals and people.
Plant uptake or rainsplash followed by cropping of the plants is another possible
mechanism, but the extent of impact is uncertain. The migration of significant
quantities of radium through soils or rocks, or due to landsliding or wind
transport, is considered to be of minimal importance to most UK sites. A low pH, 
high salinity (in particular of group II metals) or reducing groundwater would
need to be present for migration through soils/rocks to occur and such conditions
are unlikely to be present in most shallow aquifer systems in the UK. To reduce
the potential for migration to occur it is recommended that luminising wastes at 
ground surface are removed or covered, that controls are put in place to limit
animal activity and that human entry to former luminising sites is restricted.

PMID: 15942056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Microbiology. 2005 Jun;151(Pt 6):1919-26.

Oral immunization with a dam mutant of Yersinia pseudotuberculosis protects
against plague.

Taylor VL(1), Titball RW, Oyston PC.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire
SP4 0JQ, UK.

Inactivation of the gene encoding DNA adenine methylase (dam) has been shown to
attenuate some pathogens such as Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium and is a
lethal mutation in others such as Yersinia pseudotuberculosis strain YPIII. In
this study the dam methylase gene in Yersinia pseudotuberculosis strain IP32953
was inactivated. Unlike the wild-type, DNA isolated from the mutant could be
digested with MboI, which is consistent with an altered pattern of DNA
methylation. The mutant was sensitive to bile salts but not to 2-aminopurine. The
effect of dam inactivation on gene expression was examined using a DNA
microarray. In BALB/c mice inoculated orally or intravenously with the dam
mutant, the median lethal dose (MLD) was at least 10(6)-fold higher than the MLD 
of the wild-type. BALB/c mice inoculated with the mutant were protected against a
subcutaneous challenge with 100 MLDs of Yersinia pestis strain GB and an
intravenous challenge with 300 MLDs of Y. pseudotuberculosis IP32953.

PMID: 15941999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2005 Jun 17;57(9):1343-61. Epub 2005 Apr 13.

DNA vaccines for biodefence.

Garmory HS(1), Perkins SD, Phillpotts RJ, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, 
Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JQ, UK. hsgarmory@dstl.gov.uk

The advantages associated with DNA vaccines include the speed with which they may
be constructed and produced at large-scale, the ability to produce a broad
spectrum of immune responses, and the ability for delivery using non-invasive
means. In addition, DNA vaccines may be manipulated to express multiple antigens 
and may be tailored for the induction of appropriate immune responses. These
advantages make DNA vaccination a promising approach for the development of
vaccines for biodefence. In this review, the potential of DNA vaccines for
biodefence is discussed.

PMID: 15935877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek. 2005 May;87(4):277-81.

Tularemia vaccine: past, present and future.

Oyston PC(1), Quarry JE.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratories, Porton Down, Salisbury,
Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ. pcoyston@dstl.gov.uk

Francisella tularensis is a Gram negative intracellular pathogen that causes the 
highly debilitating or fatal disease tularemia. F. tularensis can infect a wide
range of animals and can be transmitted to humans in a variety of ways, the most 
common being by the bite of an infected insect or arthropod vector. The
attenuated F. tularensis live vaccine strain (LVS) has been used previously under
investigational new drug status to vaccinate at-risk individuals. However the
history of the strain and lack of knowledge regarding the basis of attenuation
has so far prevented its licensing. Therefore the focus of current research is on
producing a new vaccine against tularemia that would be suitable for licensing.

PMID: 15928980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Infect Immun. 2005 Jun;73(6):3598-608.

Human immune response to a plague vaccine comprising recombinant F1 and V
antigens.

Williamson ED(1), Flick-Smith HC, Lebutt C, Rowland CA, Jones SM, Waters EL,
Gwyther RJ, Miller J, Packer PJ, Irving M.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, United Kingdom.
dwilliamson@dstl.gov.uk

The human immune response to a new recombinant plague vaccine, comprising
recombinant F1 (rF1) and rV antigens, has been assessed during a phase 1 safety
and immunogenicity trial in healthy volunteers. All the subjects produced
specific immunoglobulin G (IgG) in serum after the priming dose, which peaked in 
value after the booster dose (day 21), with the exception of one individual in
the lowest dose level group, who responded to rF1 only. Three subjects, found to 
have an anti-rV titer at screening, were excluded from the overall analysis.
Human antibody functionality has been assessed by quantification of antibody
competing for binding to rV in vitro and also by the transfer of protective
immunity in human serum into the naive mouse. Human and macaque IgG competed for 
binding to rV in vitro with a mouse monoclonal antibody, previously shown to
protect mice against challenge with plague, suggesting that this protective
B-cell epitope on rV is conserved between these three species. Total IgG to rV in
individuals and the titer of IgG competing for binding to rV correlated
significantly at days 21 (r = 0.72; P < 0.001) and 28 (r = 0.82; P < 0.001).
Passive transfer of protective immunity into mice also correlated significantly
with total IgG titer to rF1 plus rV at days 21 (r(2) = 98.6%; P < 0.001) and 28
(r(2) = 76.8%; P < 0.03). However, no significant vaccination-related change in
activation of peripheral blood mononuclear cells was detected at any time.
Potential serological immune correlates of protection have been investigated, but
no trends specific to vaccination could be detected in cellular markers.

PMCID: PMC1111881
PMID: 15908389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Cardiovasc Res. 2005 Aug 15;67(3):548-60.

Knockout of the neural and heart expressed gene HF-1b results in apical deficits 
of ventricular structure and activation.

Hewett KW(1), Norman LW, Sedmera D, Barker RJ, Justus C, Zhang J, Kubalak SW,
Gourdie RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Cardiovascular Developmental Biology
Center, Medical University of South Carolina, 171 Ashley Avenue, Charleston, SC
29425, United States.

OBJECTIVE: Knockout of the neural and cardiac expressed transcription factor
HF-1b causes electrophysiological abnormalities including fatal ventricular
arrhythmias that occur with increasing frequency around the 4th week of postnatal
life. This study addresses factors that may contribute to conduction disturbance 
in the ventricle of the HF-1b knockout mouse. Disruptions to gap junctional
connexin40 (Cx40) have been reported in distal (i.e., apically located), but not 
proximal His-Purkinje conduction tissues of the HF-1b knockout mouse. This
abnormality in myocardial Cx40 led us to address whether 4-week-old HF-1b
knockout postnates display other disruptions to ventricular structure and
function.
METHODS: Western blotting and immunoconfocal quantification of Cx43 and coronary 
arteriole density and function were undertaken in the ventricle. Electrical
activation was described by optical mapping.
RESULTS: Western blotting and immunoconfocal microscopy indicated that overall
levels of Cx43 (p<0.001) and percent of Cx43 localized in intercalated disks
(p<0.001) were significantly decreased in the ventricular myocardium of knockouts
relative to wildtype littermate controls. Analysis of the reduction in Cx43 level
by basal and apical territories revealed that the decrease was most pronounced in
the lower, apical half of the ventricle of knockouts relative to controls
(p<0.001). Myocyte size also showed a significant decrease in the knockout, that 
was more marked within the apical half of the ventricle (p<0.05). Optical
recordings of ventricular activation indicated apically localized sectors of
slowed conduction in knockout ventricles not occurring in controls that could be 
correlated directly to tissues showing reduced Cx43. These discrete sectors of
abnormal conduction in the knockout heart were resolved following point
stimulation of the ventricular epicardium and thus were not explained by
dysfunction of the His-Purkinje system. To further probe base-to-apex
abnormalities in the HF-1b knockout ventricle, we analyzed coronary arterial
structure and function. These analyses indicated that relative to controls, the
apical ventricular territory of the HF-1b knockout had reductions in the density 
of small resistance vessels (p<0.01) and deficits in arterial function as assayed
by bead perfusion (p<0.01).
CONCLUSION: The HF-1b knockout ventricle displays abnormalities in Cx43 level,
myocyte size, activation spread and coronary arterial structure and function.
These abnormalities tend to be more pronounced in the apical territory of the
ventricle and seem likely to be factors contributing to the pathological
disturbance of cardiac conduction that characterizes the heart of the HF-1b
knockout mouse.

PMCID: PMC3096008
PMID: 15907824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Lab Anim. 2005 Apr;39(2):169-77.

A novel method for activity monitoring in small non-human primates.

Mann TM(1), Williams KE, Pearce PC, Scott EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Dstl Porton Down, Porton, Salisbury SP4
0JQ, UK. tmann@dstl.gov.uk

Patterns of spontaneous activity are valuable reflections of well-being in
animals and humans and, because of this, investigations have frequently
incorporated some form of activity monitoring into their studies. It is widely
believed that activity monitoring, alongside assessments of general behaviour,
should be included in initial CNS safety pharmacology screening. As the number of
marmoset studies having actimetry as their focus, or as an adjunct, is
increasing, we wished to evaluate an alternative approach to those commonly used.
The method is based on miniaturized accelerometer technologies, currently used
for human activity monitoring.Actiwatch-Minis were used to monitor the activity
of two groups of differently housed marmosets for 14 consecutive days. Group A
consisted of four mixed-sex pairs of animals and group B comprised eight
group-housed males. Activity profiles were generated for weekday and weekend
periods. The devices captured quantifiable data which showed differences in total
activity between the two differently housed groups and revealed intragroup
variations in the temporal spread of activity between weekdays and weekends. The 
Actiwatch-Mini has been shown to generate retrospective, data-logged activity
counts recorded from multiple animals in a single arena by means of non-invasive 
monitoring.

PMID: 15901360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Lab Anim. 2005 Apr;39(2):162-8.

A simple method for assessing muscle function in common marmosets.

Stevens DJ(1), Hornby RJ, Cook DL, Griffiths GD, Scott EA, Pearce PC.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.
DSTEVENS@dstl.gov.uk

A novel method of assessing muscle function in the common marmoset was developed 
as part of a multidisciplinary long-term study. The method involved home cage
presentation of a weight-pulling task. Over a 4-5 month period, 38 of 42 animals 
were successfully trained to displace weights of up to 920 g (mean 612+/-20 g).
Performance, following initial training, was stable and independent of gender or 
body weight.

PMID: 15901359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Vaccine. 2005 May 31;23(29):3857-63. Epub 2005 Mar 17.

Activation of dendritic cells by microparticles containing Bacillus anthracis
protective antigen.

Westwood A(1), Healey GD, Williamson ED, Eyles JE.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, Dstl, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.

We have carried out an in vitro investigation into the mechanism by which
microencapsulation enhances the immunogenicity of recombinant protective antigen 
(rPA) from Bacillus anthracis. Murine bone marrow derived dendritic cells (DC)
were cocultured with soluble and microencapsulated rPA and the activation status 
of the cells monitored using FACS. As compared with soluble rPA, it was found
that coculture of DC with rPA-loaded microparticles stimulated higher levels of
MHC II, CD54, CD80 and CD86 expression (p<0.05). To investigate the longevity of 
antigen presentation, splenocytes from naïve mice were pulsed overnight with
(3)H-thymidine following 1, 3 or 6 days coculture with DC transiently exposed to 
soluble or microencapsulated rPA. Splenocyte proliferation was more pronounced,
and continued for a more protracted period, if the 'feeder' cells were exposed to
microencapsulated antigen as compared with soluble antigen or 'empty'
microspheres. To this end, our findings indicate that microsphere uptake
increases the surface expression of MHC and co-stimulatory molecules on DC and
can facilitate prolonged presentation of antigen to T-cells, possibly by acting
as an intracellular depot.

PMID: 15893625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Mol Pharmacol. 2005 Aug;68(2):317-29. Epub 2005 May 9.

Cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors decrease vascular endothelial growth factor
expression in colon cancer cells by enhanced degradation of Sp1 and Sp4 proteins.

Abdelrahim M(1), Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
4466 TAMU, Vet. Res. Bldg. 409, College Station, TX 77843-4466.
ssafe@cvm.tamu.edu.

Cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) inhibitors, such as celecoxib (Cel), nimesulfide (NM),
and NS-398 [NS; N-[2-(cyclohexyloxy)-4-nitrophenyl]methanesulfonamide] and other 
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs inhibit colon cancer growth and
angiogenesis; however, the mechanism of this response is not well defined.
Treatment of SW-480 colon cancer cells with Cel, NS, or NM decreased vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) mRNA and immunoreactive protein expression. This
was also accompanied by decreased transactivation in cells transfected with
constructs containing VEGF gene promoter inserts. Deletion analysis of the VEGF
promoter indicated that decreased VEGF expression by COX-2 inhibitors was
associated with the proximal -131 to -47 GC-rich region of the VEGF promoter that
binds Sp proteins. Treatment of SW-480 cells with Cel, NM, and NS also decreased 
Sp1 and Sp4 protein expression but not that of Sp2 or Sp3. Similar results were
observed in RKO, HT-29, and DLD colon cancer cells demonstrating comparable
responses in COX-2-expressing and -nonexpressing colon cancer cell lines. COX-2
inhibitors do not affect Sp1 or Sp4 mRNA levels in SW-480 cells; however,
decreased expression of both proteins was accompanied by increased protein
ubiquitination and inhibited by the proteasome inhibitor gliotoxin. These results
suggest that the antiangiogenic activity of COX-2 inhibitors in colon cancer
cells is linked to activation of proteasome-dependent degradation of Sp1 and Sp4 
proteins.

PMID: 15883203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Arch Virol. 2005 Sep;150(9):1813-31. Epub 2005 May 2.

Identification of previously unknown antigenic epitopes on the S and N proteins
of avian infectious bronchitis virus.

Ignjatovic J(1), Sapats S.

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO Livestock Industries, Australian Animal Health Laboratory, Geelong,
Vic., Australia. Jagoda.Ignjatovic@csiro.au

This paper describes mapping of antigenic and host-protective epitopes of
infectious bronchitis virus proteins by assessing the ability of defined peptide 
regions within the S1, S2 and N proteins to elicit humoral, cell-mediated and
protective immune responses. Peptides corresponding to six regions in the S1
(Sp1-Sp6), one in the S2 (Sp7) and four in the N protein (Np1-Np4) were
synthesized and coupled to either diphtheria toxoid (dt) or biotin (bt).
Bt-peptides were used to assess if selected regions were antigenic and contained 
B- or T-cell epitopes and dt-peptides if regions induced an antibody response and
protection against virulent challenge. All S1 and S2 peptides were antigenic,
being recognised by IBV immune sera and also induced an antibody response
following inoculation into chicks. Three S1-and one S2-bt peptides also induced a
delayed type hypersensitivity response indicating the presence of T-cell
epitopes. The S2 peptide Sp7 (amino acid position 566-584) previously identified 
as an immundominant region, was the most antigenic of all peptides used in this
study. Two S1 (Sp4 and Sp6) and one S2 peptide (Sp7), protected kidney tissue
against virulent challenge. From four N peptides located in the amino-terminal
part of the N protein, only one, Np2 (amino acid position 72-86), was antigenic
and also induced a delayed type hypersensitivity response. None of the N peptides
induced protection against virulent challenge. The results suggest that the S1
glycoprotein carries additional antigenic regions to those previously identified 
and that two regions located in the S1 and one in the S2 at amino acid positions 
294-316 (Sp4), 532-537 (Sp6) and 566-584 (Sp7) may have a role in protection.

PMID: 15868095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Control Release. 2005 May 5;104(1):67-77.

Mucosal delivery of microparticle encapsulated ESAT-6 induces robust
cell-mediated responses in the lung milieu.

Carpenter ZK(1), Williamson ED, Eyles JE.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, Dstl, Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JQ, UK.

ESAT-6 from Mycobacterium tuberculosis is an important T-cell antigen for
cell-mediated immunity in the early phase of tuberculosis infection. Since the
lung is the organ in which infection is initiated, immune responses in the lung
play a significant role in restricting the initial infection with M.
tuberculosis. The aim of the present study was to assess whether efficient
cell-mediated immune responses in the lung and draining mediastinal lymph nodes
could be stimulated by pulmonary administration of ESAT-6 encapsulated in
poly(lactide) (PLA) microspheres. BALB/c mice were immunised intranasally on days
1, 28 and 56 with 2 microg microencapsulated ESAT-6. Cellular responses in the
lungs, spleen and mediastinal lymph nodes (MLN) were characterised using ELISPOT 
and proliferation assays. Fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS) was used to 
assess the expression of CD44 on CD4+ and CD8+ cells derived from the MLN of
immunised animals. For comparison, groups of mice were immunised intranasally
with soluble 'free' ESAT-6 or intramuscularly with ESAT-6 in Alhydrogel.
Intranasal instillation of microencapsulated ESAT-6 induced greatest numbers of
ESAT-6 specific IFN-gamma and IL-4 secreting cells in the lung and MLN (P<0.05). 
Similarly, ESAT-6 specific recall responses were strongest following intranasal
immunisation of mice with microsphere encapsulated antigen (P<0.05). FACS
demonstrated a higher proportion of T cells expressing CD44 in the MLN from mice 
immunised intranasally with microencapsulated ESAT-6. These data support the
notion that the immune system is compartmentalised and responses are often
strongest in compartments proximal to the site of vaccine application.
Furthermore, our data indicate that, for efficient activation of cell-mediated
responses, antigens must be presented to the immune system in an appropriate
formulation.

PMID: 15866335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Vaccine. 2005 May 20;23(27):3500-7.

Comparative efficacy of replicating smallpox vaccine strains in a murine
challenge model.

Phelps A(1), Gates AJ, Hillier M, Eastaugh L, Ulaeto DO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.

There is currently considerable concern about the vulnerability of human
populations to biowarfare or bioterrorist attacks with variola virus (VARV).
Traditional smallpox vaccines were manufactured using the lymph of ruminants
infected with the vaccinia virus (VACV). However, these production methods do not
meet current standards for vaccines, especially since the emergence of
transmissable spongiform encephalopathies in domesticated ruminants. This study
has examined the protective efficacy of the Lister (Elstree) vaccine strain from 
various sources in a murine lethal challenge model. Considerable variation in
efficacy is observed between the Lister material obtained from the American Type 
Culture Collection (ATCC) and the same strain obtained from vaccine stockpiles. A
new, tissue-culture derived Lister vaccine is assessed against a bench-mark of
multiple lots from a historical stockpile of the traditional vaccine. Apparent
qualitative differences are observed between historical and new vaccines.
Statistically significant differences are observed between different batches of
the traditional vaccine, and the efficacy of the tissue-culture produced vaccine 
falls within this range.

PMID: 15855008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Tuberculosis (Edinb). 2005 May;85(3):177-84. Epub 2004 Dec 25.

An assay to compare the infectivity of Mycobacterium tuberculosis isolates based 
on aerosol infection of guinea pigs and assessment of bacteriology.

Williams A(1), James BW, Bacon J, Hatch KA, Hatch GJ, Hall GA, Marsh PD.

Author information: 
(1)Health Protection Agency Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK.
ann.williams@camr.org.uk

The aim of this study was to establish an assay to compare Mycobacterium
tuberculosis strains, and cells grown under different growth conditions, in terms
of their ability to cause a lung infection and disseminate to the spleen. M.
tuberculosis strains H37Rv, Erdman, South Indian (TMC120, SI) and H37Rv cells
grown aerobically or under low oxygen/iron limitation in a chemostat were assayed
for infectivity. Groups of 8 animals were challenged with 3 different doses of
each strain. Lung and spleen bacteriology was assessed at 16 days post-infection 
for all strains. Bacteriology and lung pathology at day 56 was studied for H37Rv,
Erdman and SI. Strains H37Rv and Erdman had a statistically significantly higher 
pathogenic potential than SI and this was confirmed by analysis of lung pathology
performed at 8 weeks post-infection, although the Erdman strain caused more
extensive caseation without calcification and little encapsulation. The model
could discriminate between cells grown under different growth conditions;
low-oxygen/iron-limited cells had a significantly higher infectivity than those
grown aerobically. This study presents a quick and reliable method for comparing 
with statistical confidence, the pathogenic potential of M. tuberculosis strains 
and the impact of in vitro growth conditions on the infectivity of M.
tuberculosis in vivo.

PMID: 15850755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Genet Vaccines Ther. 2005 Apr 20;3(1):3.

Evaluation of the VP22 protein for enhancement of a DNA vaccine against anthrax.

Perkins SD(1), Flick-Smith HC, Garmory HS, Essex-Lopresti AE, Stevenson FK,
Phillpotts RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory,
Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 OJQ, UK. sdperkins@dstl.gov.uk.

BACKGROUND: Previously, antigens expressed from DNA vaccines have been fused to
the VP22 protein from Herpes Simplex Virus type I in order to improve efficacy.
However, the immune enhancing mechanism of VP22 is poorly understood and initial 
suggestions that VP22 can mediate intercellular spread have been questioned.
Despite this, fusion of VP22 to antigens expressed from DNA vaccines has improved
immune responses, particularly to non-secreted antigens. METHODS: In this study, 
we fused the gene for the VP22 protein to the gene for Protective Antigen (PA)
from Bacillus anthracis, the causative agent of anthrax. Protective immunity
against infection with B. anthracis is almost entirely based on a response to PA 
and we have generated two constructs, where VP22 is fused to either the N- or the
C-terminus of the 63 kDa protease-cleaved fragment of PA (PA63). RESULTS:
Following gene gun immunisation of A/J mice with these constructs, we observed no
improvement in the anti-PA antibody response generated. Following an
intraperitoneal challenge with 70 50% lethal doses of B. anthracis strain STI
spores, no difference in protection was evident in groups immunised with the DNA 
vaccine expressing PA63 and the DNA vaccines expressing fusion proteins of PA63
with VP22. CONCLUSION: VP22 fusion does not improve the protection of A/J mice
against live spore challenge following immunisation of DNA vaccines expressing
PA63.

PMCID: PMC1087864
PMID: 15842732  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


66. Drug Discov Today. 2005 Apr 15;10(8):563-9.

A new wrinkle on pain relief: re-engineering clostridial neurotoxins for
analgesics.

Foster KA(1).

Author information: 
(1)HPA Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JG, UK. keith.foster@hpa.org.uk

Botulinum neurotoxins are used to treat of a range of chronic neuromuscular
conditions and, increasingly, conditions involving non-neuromuscular
transmission, both cholinergic and non-cholinergic, including chronic pain.
However, their clinical use is limited by the potential for adverse effects
related to the neuromuscular activity, which results from the selectivity of the 
toxin for the neuromuscular junction. The elucidation of the structure of the
botulinum toxin molecule and its relationship to neurotoxin function has enabled 
the design of novel molecules incorporating selected aspects of toxin function.
This review considers the suitability of engineered neurotoxins as the basis for 
novel therapeutic proteins and the opportunity of developing analgesics based on 
these neurotoxins.

PMID: 15837599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Chromatogr A. 2005 Mar 18;1068(2):315-26.

Analysis of chemical warfare agents. II. Use of thiols and statistical
experimental design for the trace level determination of vesicant compounds in
air samples.

Muir B(1), Quick S, Slater BJ, Cooper DB, Moran MC, Timperley CM, Carrick WA,
Burnell CK.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Building 383b, Porton Down,
Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK. bmuir@dstl.gov.uk

Thermal desorption with gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (TD-GC-MS) remains
the technique of choice for analysis of trace concentrations of analytes in air
samples. This paper describes the development and application of a method for
analysing the vesicant compounds sulfur mustard and Lewisites I-III.
3,4-Dimercaptotoluene and butanethiol were used to spike sorbent tubes and
vesicant vapours sampled; Lewisite I and II reacted with the thiols while sulfur 
mustard and Lewisite III did not. Statistical experimental design was used to
optimise thermal desorption parameters and the optimum method used to determine
vesicant compounds in headspace samples taken from a decontamination trial.
3,4-Dimercaptotoluene reacted with Lewisites I and II to give a common derivative
with a limit of detection (LOD) of 260 microg m(-3), while the butanethiol gave
distinct derivatives with limits of detection around 30 microg m(-3).

PMID: 15830938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Neurochem. 2005 Apr;93(2):339-50.

Retinoic acid activates human secretin gene expression by Sp proteins and nuclear
factor I in neuronal SH-SY5Y cells.

Lee LT(1), Tan-Un KC, Lin MC, Chow BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

Secretin is a neuropeptide that is expressed in distinct central neurones. As
there is no information on how the secretin gene is regulated in neuronal cells, 
a well established neuronal differentiation cell model, SH-SY5Y, was used to
study transcriptional regulation of the human secretin gene. High secretin
transcript and peptide levels were found in this cell, and secretin gene
expression and promoter activity were up-regulated upon all-trans retinoic acid
(RA) treatment. Within the promoter, a functional GC-box 1 (-131 from ATG,
relative to the ATG initiation codon) was found to be regulated by a
brain-specific Sp protein, Sp4, and ubiquitous factors Sp1 and Sp3. The human
secretin gene in SH-SY5Y cells is controlled by the (Sp1 + Sp4)/Sp3 ratio and the
RA-induced activation is a partial result of a decrease in Sp3 levels. In
addition to the GC-box 1, an N1 motif in close proximity was also responsible for
RA-induced secretin gene activation. Competitive gel mobility shift and
southwestern blot studies revealed binding of Nuclear Factor I (NFI) with the N1 
motif. Overexpression of NFI-C increased promoter activity upon RA treatment.
Consistent with this observation, NFI-C transcript levels were augmented after RA
treatment. We conclude that RA induction of the secretin gene in neuronal cells
is regulated by the combined actions of reducing Sp3 and increasing NFI-C
expression.

PMID: 15816857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Res Microbiol. 2005 Apr;156(3):434-42. Epub 2005 Jan 12.

An association between ATP binding cassette systems, genome sizes and lifestyles 
of bacteria.

Harland DN(1), Garmory HS, Brown KA, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JQ,
UK. dnharland@dstl.gov.uk

Comparative bioinformatic analyses of ATP binding cassette (ABC) systems encoded 
in bacterial genomes have been undertaken in order to examine whether the range
and distribution of these systems correlates with niches occupied by different
organisms. In general, bacteria with larger genomes were found to encode more ABC
systems than those with smaller genomes. Environmental bacteria, generally
containing the largest genomes, showed the greatest number and diversity of ABC
systems. Extracellular bacteria have larger genomes and show higher relative
numbers of ABC transporters in comparison to intracellular bacteria. Similar
results were obtained when comparing bacteria with different respiratory
requirements since aerobic bacteria have larger genomes and also display greater 
numbers of ABC systems than anaerobes. These results suggest that the number of
ABC systems encoded in bacterial genomes correlates with genome size and also
with the physiological niche in which bacteria live. Furthermore, the
distribution of the ABC systems into families indicates that the process of
reductive evolution is responsible for retaining particular types of ABC systems 
as bacteria adapt to particular niches.

PMID: 15808948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek. 2005 Apr;87(3):171-7.

The many and varied niches occupied by Yersinia pestis as an arthropod-vectored
zoonotic pathogen.

Oyston PC(1), Isherwood KE.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ, UK.
pcoyston@dstl.gov.uk

Yersinia pestis, the causative agent of bubonic and pneumonic plague, has a
complex lifestyle, cycling between both arthropod and mammalian hosts. This
pathogen has previously been shown to survive intracellularly within macrophages 
and to be capable of biofilm formation within the flea, suggesting the
development of a range of strategies to ensure survival throughout its life
cycle, including expression of virulence factors and tight regulation of its
genes.

PMID: 15803382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Eur J Pharmacol. 2005 Mar 28;511(2-3):99-107.

Effects of seven drugs of abuse on action potential repolarisation in sheep
cardiac Purkinje fibres.

Sheridan RD(1), Turner SR, Cooper GJ, Tattersall JE.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down,
Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK. rdsheridan@dstl.gov.uk

Seven drugs of abuse have been examined for effects on the action potential in
sheep isolated cardiac Purkinje fibres. Phencyclidine (5 microM) induced a
significant increase (30.7%) in action potential duration at 90% repolarisation
(APD(90)). Similarly, 10 microM 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA,
'Ecstasy') induced a significant increase in APD(90) of 12.1%. Although
Delta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol (0.1 microM) induced a small, but statistically
significant, 4.8% increase in APD(90), no effects were observed at 0.01 or 1
microM. Cocaethylene (10 microM) induced a significant shortening of APD(90)
(-23.8%). Cocaine (up to 1 microM), (+)-methamphetamine ('Speed'; up to 5
microM), and the heroin metabolite, morphine (up to 5 microM), had no
statistically significant effects. The possible significance of these findings is
discussed in the context of other recognised cardiac effects of the tested drugs.

PMID: 15792777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005 Jun;90(6):3479-90. Epub 2005 Mar 22.

Regulation of expression of the chorionic gonadotropin/luteinizing hormone
receptor gene in the human myometrium: involvement of specificity protein-1
(Sp1), Sp3, Sp4, Sp-like proteins, and histone deacetylases.

Phillips RJ(1), Tyson-Capper Née Pollard AJ, Bailey J, Robson SC, Europe-Finner
GN.

Author information: 
(1)School of Surgical and Reproductive Sciences (Obstetrics and Gynecology),
University of Newcastle upon Tyne, 3rd Floor, William Leech Building, Faculty of 
Medical Sciences, Framlington Place, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, United Kingdom.

At present there is little information on the regulatory processes by which the
chorionic gonadotropin (CG)/LH receptor gene is regulated in the human myometrium
during pregnancy and labor. Employing human primary myometrial cell cultures in
conjunction with DNA affinity purification assays/Western analysis, DNA binding
studies, CG/LH promoter luciferase reporter gene deletion constructs in
transfection assays, and measurement of endogenous mRNA levels in vivo by duplex 
RT-PCR, we have determined the role that the major transcriptional regulatory
sequences from the +1 ATG codon to -2678 bp play in modulating expression of the 
CG/LH receptor gene in the myometrium. We report that the distal -180 to -2678 bp
region of the promoter, although capable of binding members of the Jun family via
the multiple activator protein-1 sites within this region, has no significant
role in regulating the expression of the CG/LH receptor gene in myometrial cells.
In contrast, the two specificity protein-1 to -4 (Sp1-4) GC boxes within the +1
to -180 bp proximal promoter are central to expression of the gene in the
myometrium. However, not only are Sp1/Sp3 proteins involved in this process, but 
Sp4 and a novel Sp-like factor(s) also have an intimate part in transcriptional
regulation of the gene. It would appear that Sp1/Sp3/Sp4 and Sp-like proteins are
involved in recruiting histone deacetylase complexes to the proximal promoter,
preventing chromatin remodeling resulting in transcriptional repression of the
gene. Our data suggest that administration of the histone deacetylase inhibitor
trichostatin A to human myometrial cells in vitro and in vivo substantially
removes this silencing effect on expression of the gene and may implicate the use
of this and similar agents in increasing myometrial CG/LH receptor levels and
subsequent maintenance of uterine relaxation during fetal maturation.

PMID: 15788387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 27;280(21):20642-50. Epub 2005 Mar 21.

Sp4 is expressed in retinal neurons, activates transcription of
photoreceptor-specific genes, and synergizes with Crx.

Lerner LE(1), Peng GH, Gribanova YE, Chen S, Farber DB.

Author information: 
(1)Jules Stein Eye Institute, UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California
90095, USA. leonid.lerner@uphs.upenn.edu

To investigate the molecular mechanisms of photoreceptor-specific gene
transcription, we examined the role of the neuronal-enriched Sp4 nuclear protein 
in transcription from the rod-specific beta-PDE and rod opsin gene promoters and 
compared it to the ubiquitous members of the Sp family, Sp1 and Sp3. Sp4
activates both the rod opsin and beta-PDE promoters, whereas Sp1 activates only
the rod opsin promoter and Sp3 activates neither promoter. Interestingly, Sp1 and
Sp3 competitively repress Sp4-mediated activation of the beta-PDE promoter. In
addition, Sp4, Sp1, and Sp3 each show functional synergy with the
photoreceptor-enriched Crx transcriptional regulator on the rod opsin promoter
but not the beta-PDE promoter, although Sp4-mediated activation was the most
significant. Sp4, Sp1, and Sp3 bind Crx in co-immunoprecipitation experiments,
and their zinc finger domains as well as the Crx homedomain are necessary and
sufficient for these interactions. Chromatin immunoprecipitation showed that the 
rod opsin and beta-PDE promoters are targets of both Sp4 and Crx, which further
supports Sp4-Crx interactions in vivo in the context of retinal chromatin
environment. In situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry demonstrated that Sp4
is abundantly expressed in various neurons of all retinal layers, and thus
co-localizes or overlaps with multiple retina-restricted and -enriched genes, its
putative targets. Our results indicate that photoreceptor-specific gene
transcription is controlled by the combinatorial action of Sp4 and Crx. The other
Sp family members may be involved in photoreceptor-specific transcription
directly or through their competition with Sp4. These data suggest the potential 
importance of Sp4 in retinal neurobiology and pathology.

PMID: 15781457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 22;280(16):16508-13. Epub 2005 Mar 8.

Induction of endoplasmic reticulum-induced stress genes in Panc-1 pancreatic
cancer cells is dependent on Sp proteins.

Abdelrahim M(1), Liu S, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A and M University System
Health, Science Center, Houston, Texas 77030-3303, USA.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress plays a critical role in multiple diseases, and
pharmacologically active drugs can induce cell death through ER stress pathways. 
Stress-induced genes are activated through assembly of transcription factors on
ER stress response elements (ERSEs) in target gene promoters. Gel mobility shift 
and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays have confirmed interactions of NF-Y and 
YY1 with the distal motifs of the tripartite ERSE from the glucose-related
protein 78 (GRP78) gene promoter. The GC-rich nonanucleotide (N(9)) sequence,
which forms the ER stress response binding factor (ERSF) complex binds TFII-I and
ATF6; however, we have now shown that in Panc-1 pancreatic cancer cells, this
complex also binds Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 proteins. Sp proteins are constitutively
bound to the ERSE; however, activation of GRP78 protein (or reporter gene) by
thapsigargin or tunicamycin is inhibited after cotransfection with small
inhibitory RNAs for Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4. This study demonstrates that Sp
transcription factors are important for stress-induced responses through their
binding to ERSEs.

PMID: 15760841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Vaccine. 2005 Mar 18;23(17-18):2210-3.

The development of a meningococcal disease vaccine based on Neisseria lactamica
outer membrane vesicles.

Gorringe A(1), Halliwell D, Matheson M, Reddin K, Finney M, Hudson M.

Author information: 
(1)Health Protection Agency, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG, UK.
andrew.gorringe@hpa.org.uk

Serogroup B meningococcal disease remains a serious problem in many countries and
no effective vaccine is currently available. Immunological and epidemiological
evidence suggests that carriage of commensal Neisseria species is involved in the
development of natural immunity against meningococcal disease. Neisseria
lactamica has many surface structures in common with Neisseria meningitidis and
may be the most important of these species. We have produced extensive
pre-clinical data, which indicate that N. lactamica outer membrane vesicles
(OMVs) may provide a vaccine effective against diverse disease-causing
meningococcal strains. Immunisation with N. lactamica OMVs protected against
lethal challenge with diverse meningococcal isolates in a mouse intraperitoneal
challenge model of meningococcal disease and we are developing this vaccine for
use in a phase I safety and immunogenicity study in adult volunteers. We have
shown that OMVs produced from bacteria grown under iron-limited or iron-rich
conditions provide equivalent protection in the mouse infection model and thus
OMVs produced from iron-rich will be used. Sterile filtration of N. lactamica
OMVs has proved difficult but this has been improved by resuspending the vesicles
in a buffer, which increases their surface zeta potential. The vaccine is
currently being manufactured and validated ELISA protocols have been developed
for the analysis of serological responses.

PMID: 15755597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Emerg Infect Dis. 2005 Feb;11(2):291-7.

Surveillance and control measures during smallpox outbreaks.

Kerrod E(1), Geddes AM, Regan M, Leach S.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Emergency Preparedness and Response, Health Protection Agency,
Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JG, UK. emma.kerrod@hpa.org.uk

We reviewed historical data from 2 smallpox outbreaks in Liverpool and Edinburgh 
during the early and middle years of the 20th century to assess their
contribution to developing modern strategies for response to a deliberate release
of smallpox virus. Reports contemporaneous to these outbreaks provide detail on
the effectiveness of public health interventions. In both outbreaks, extensive
contact tracing, quarantine, and staged vaccination campaigns were initiated, and
the outbreaks were controlled within 15 months and 3 months, respectively. In
Edinburgh, the number of fatalities associated with vaccination exceeded the
number of deaths from the disease. In Liverpool, ambulatory, vaccine-modified
cases and misdiagnosis as chickenpox resulted in problems with outbreak control. 
The relatively slow spread of smallpox, as exemplified by the report from
Liverpool, allowed for effective implementation of targeted intervention methods.
Targeted surveillance and containment interventions have been successful in the
past and should be explored as alternatives to mass vaccination.

PMCID: PMC3320452
PMID: 15752449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Appl Toxicol. 2005 Mar-Apr;25(2):115-28.

Effect of sulphur mustard on human skin cell lines with differential agent
sensitivity.

Simpson R(1), Lindsay CD.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4
0JQ, UK.

The ability of sulphur mustard (HD) to induce DNA damage places limits on the
efficacy of approaches aimed at protecting human cells from the cytotoxic effects
of HD using a variety of protective agents such as thiol-containing esters and
protease inhibitors. In the present study, potential alternative strategies were 
investigated by examining the differential effects of HD on G361, SVK14, HaCaT
and NCTC 2544 human skin cells. The G361 cell line was more resistant to the
cytotoxic effects of HD than the NCTC, HaCaT and SVK14 cell lines at HD doses of 
>3 and <100 microM HD as determined by the MTT assay. At 72 h after exposure to
60 microM HD there was up to an 8.8-fold difference (P < 0.0001) between G361 and
SVK14 cell culture viability. Buthionine sulphoximine (BSO) pretreatment
increased the sensitivity of all four cell lines to HD. A substantial proportion 
of the resistance of G361 cells to HD was attributable to BSO-mediated effects on
antioxidant-mediated metabolism, although G361 cultures still retained a high
degree of viability at 30 microM HD following BSO pretreatment. Cell cycle
analysis confirmed that SVK14 cells were relatively more sensitive to HD, as
shown by the 2.1-fold reduction (P < 0.0001) in the percentage of cells in G0/G1 
phase 24 h after HD exposure compared with control cultures. This compared well
with a 1.2-fold increase (P < 0.05) in the percentage of G361 cells in G0/G1
phase following HD exposure, suggesting the existence of a more efficient G0/G1
checkpoint control mechanism in this cell line. Manipulation of the cell cycle
using various modulating agents did not increase the resistance of cell lines to 
the cytotoxic effects of HD.

Crown copyright 2005

PMID: 15747377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J R Soc Med. 2005 Mar;98(3):114-5.

Nicotinic antagonists in the treatment of nerve agent intoxication.

Sheridan RD(1), Smith AP, Turner SR, Tattersall JE.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.
RDSheridan@dstl.gov.uk

Comment in
    J R Soc Med. 2005 Jul;98(7):336.

PMCID: PMC1079412
PMID: 15738554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Vaccine. 2005 Mar 14;23(16):1931-40.

VP22 enhances antibody responses from DNA vaccines but not by intercellular
spread.

Perkins SD(1), Hartley MG, Lukaszewski RA, Phillpotts RJ, Stevenson FK, Bennett
AM.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory,
Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 OJQ, UK. sdperkins@dstl.gov.uk

In some species DNA vaccines elicit potent humoral and cellular immune responses.
However, their performance in humans and non-human primates is less impressive.
There are suggestions in the literature that an increase in the intercellular
distribution of protein expressed from a DNA vaccine may enhance immunogenicity. 
We incorporated the Herpes Simplex Virus type 1 (HSV) VP22 gene, which encodes a 
protein that has been described as promoting intercellular spread, into a DNA
vector in which it was fused to enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP).
Following transfection of the plasmid DNA into mammalian cells, distribution of
the fusion protein VP22-EGFP was not increased compared to EGFP alone.
Furthermore, we found no evidence to suggest that VP22 was capable of mediating
intercellular spread. However, when these constructs were used as DNA vaccines to
immunise mice, antibody levels specific to EGFP were significantly enhanced when 
EGFP was fused to VP22. These data suggest that amplification of the immune
response may occur via mechanisms other than VP22-mediated intercellular spread
of antigen.

PMID: 15734065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2005 Apr;55(4):523-7. Epub 2005 Feb 24.

Comparison of gatifloxacin, moxifloxacin and ciprofloxacin for treatment of
experimental Burkholderia pseudomallei infection.

Steward J(1), Piercy T, Lever MS, Nelson M, Simpson AJ, Brooks TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 OJQ, UK.
jasteward@dstl.gov.uk

OBJECTIVES: To compare the efficacy of moxifloxacin, gatifloxacin and
ciprofloxacin for the post-exposure prophylaxis and treatment of experimental
Burkholderia pseudomallei infection. The presence of persistent infection in
treated animals and the rate of relapse following dexamethasone treatment were
also investigated.
METHODS: BALB/c mice were inoculated subcutaneously with 1.75 x 10(6) cfu of B.
pseudomallei strain 576. Gatifloxacin, moxifloxacin and ciprofloxacin (100 mg/kg)
were given orally at 12 hourly intervals for 14 days starting at 6 h, 7 days or
12 days post-challenge. Control mice did not receive antibiotic therapy.
RESULTS: No regimen gave 100% protection. Prophylaxis was most effective when
started 6 h post-challenge, with survival rates at 42 days for ciprofloxacin,
gatifloxacin and moxifloxacin being 58%, 75% and 75%, respectively. For treatment
started at day 7 post-challenge, survival rates were 17%, 11% and 44%,
respectively. When antibiotic treatment was delayed until day 12 post-challenge, 
survival rates fell to 21%, 17% and 28%, respectively. Following dexamethasone
treatment of survivors at 42 days post-challenge, relapses occurred in all
treatment groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Fluoroquinolones do not provide good post-exposure protection
against infection with B. pseudomallei. The newer agents moxifloxacin and
gatifloxacin are not significantly better than ciprofloxacin for this purpose.

PMID: 15731198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Protein Expr Purif. 2005 Mar;40(1):31-41.

Preparation of specifically activatable endopeptidase derivatives of Clostridium 
botulinum toxins type A, B, and C and their applications.

Sutton JM(1), Wayne J, Scott-Tucker A, O'Brien SM, Marks PM, Alexander FC, Shone 
CC, Chaddock JA.

Author information: 
(1)Health Protection Agency, Centre for Applied Microbiology and Research, Porton
Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK.

Clostridium botulinum neurotoxins are potently toxic proteins of 150 kDa with
specific endopeptidase activity for SNARE proteins involved in vesicle docking
and release. Following treatment with trypsin, a fragment of botulinum neurotoxin
serotype A that lacks the C-terminal domain responsible for neuronal cell
binding, but retains full catalytic activity, can be obtained. Known as the LH(N)
fragment, we report the development of a recombinant expression and purification 
scheme for the isolation of comparable fragments of neurotoxin serotypes B and C.
Expressed as maltose-binding protein fusions, both have specific proteolytic
sites present between the fusion tag and the light chain to facilitate removal of
the fusion, and between the light chain endopeptidase and the H(N) translocation 
domains to facilitate activation of the single polypeptide. We have also used
this approach to prepare a new variant of LH(N)/A with a specific activation site
that avoids the need to use trypsin. All three LH(N)s are enzymatically active
and are of low toxicity. The production of specifically activatable LH(N)/A,
LH(N)/B, and LH(N)/C extends the opportunities for exploitation of neurotoxin
fragments. The potential utility of these fragments is discussed.

PMID: 15721769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Antiviral Res. 2005 Feb;65(2):87-95.

CpG-DNA protects against a lethal orthopoxvirus infection in a murine model.

Rees DG(1), Gates AJ, Green M, Eastaugh L, Lukaszewski RA, Griffin KF, Krieg AM, 
Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (DSTL), Porton Down, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK. crees1@dstl.gov.uk

CpG-DNA has been described as a potent activator of the innate immune system,
with potential to protect against infection caused by a range of pathogens in a
non-specific manner. Here two classes of CpG-DNA (CpG-A and CpG-B) have been
investigated for their abilities to protect mice from infection with an
orthopoxvirus (vaccinia virus). Dosing with either CpG-A or B by the
intraperitonal or intranasal route protected mice against a subsequent intranasal
challenge with vaccinia virus. To our knowledge, this is the first time
CpG-mediated protection has been demonstrated at the lung surface. The level of
protection was greater when CpG-DNA was administered intranasally demonstrating a
clear relationship between the route of CpG dosing and infection route. Treatment
with CpG-B reduced viral titer in the lung by 10,000-fold at day 3
post-infection. The CC chemokines RANTES and MIP-1beta were elevated in the
broncho-alveolar lavage from animals treated intranasally with CpG-B compared to 
untreated and intraperitoneally dosed controls, and it is possible that these
chemokines play a role in the clearance of intranasally delivered vaccinia virus.

PMID: 15708635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol. 2005 Mar 1;43(3):425-30.

Protective efficacy of a recombinant plague vaccine when co-administered with
another sub-unit or live attenuated vaccine.

Griffin K(1), Bedford R, Townson K, Phillpotts R, Funnell S, Morton M, Williamson
D, Titball R.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratories, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire
SP4 0JQ, UK. kfgriffin@dstl.gov.uk

Vaccines against bioterrorism agents offer the prospect of providing high levels 
of protection against airborne pathogens. However, the diversity of the
bioterrorism threat means that it may be necessary to use several vaccines
simultaneously. In this study we have investigated whether there are changes to
the protective immune response to a recombinant sub-unit plague vaccine when it
is co-administered with other sub-unit or live attenuated vaccines. Our results
indicate that the co-administration of these vaccines did not influence the
protection afforded by the plague vaccine. However, the co-administration of the 
plague sub-unit vaccine with a live vaccine resulted in markedly increased levels
of IgG2a subclass antibodies, and markedly reduced levels of IgG1 subclass
antibodies, to the plague sub-unit vaccine. This finding might have implications 
when considering the co-administration of other vaccine combinations.

PMID: 15708318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Am J Manag Care. 2005 Jan;11 Spec No:SP4-5.

Why worry about restricting access to medicines in Medicaid?

Burroughs VJ.

PMID: 15700903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Vaccine. 2005 Feb 18;23(13):1615-23.

Intranasal immunisation with defective adenovirus serotype 5 expressing the
Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus E2 glycoprotein protects against airborne
challenge with virulent virus.

Phillpotts RJ(1), O'brien L, Appleton RE, Carr S, Bennett A.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, Dstl, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.
bjphillpotts@dstl.gov.uk

There is no vaccine licensed for human use to protect laboratory or field workers
against infection with Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus (VEEV). Infection of 
these groups is most likely to occur via the airborne route and there is evidence
to suggest that protection against airborne infection may require high antibody
levels and the presence of antibody on the mucosal surface of the respiratory
tract. Recombinant defective type 5 adenoviruses, expressing the E3E26K
structural genes of VEEV were examined for their ability to protect mice against 
airborne challenge with virulent virus. After intranasal administration, good
protection was achieved against the homologous serogroup 1A/B challenge virus
(strain Trinidad donkey). There was less protection against enzootic serogroup II
and III viruses, indicating that inclusion of more than one E3E26K sequence in a 
putative vaccine may be necessary. These studies confirm the potential of
recombinant adenoviruses as vaccine vectors for VEEV and will inform the
development of a live replicating adenovirus-based VEEV vaccine, deliverable by a
mucosal route and suitable for use in humans.

PMID: 15694514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Tuberculosis (Edinb). 2005 Jan-Mar;85(1-2):29-38. Epub 2005 Jan 20.

Evaluation of vaccines in the EU TB Vaccine Cluster using a guinea pig aerosol
infection model of tuberculosis.

Williams A(1), Hatch GJ, Clark SO, Gooch KE, Hatch KA, Hall GA, Huygen K,
Ottenhoff TH, Franken KL, Andersen P, Doherty TM, Kaufmann SH, Grode L, Seiler P,
Martin C, Gicquel B, Cole ST, Brodin P, Pym AS, Dalemans W, Cohen J, Lobet Y,
Goonetilleke N, McShane H, Hill A, Parish T, Smith D, Stoker NG, Lowrie DB,
Källenius G, Svenson S, Pawlowski A, Blake K, Marsh PD.

Author information: 
(1)Health Protection Agency, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 OJG, UK.
ann.williams@camr.org.uk

The TB Vaccine Cluster project funded by the EU Fifth Framework programme aims to
provide novel vaccines against tuberculosis that are suitable for evaluation in
humans. This paper describes the studies of the protective efficacy of vaccines
in a guinea pig aerosol-infection model of primary tuberculosis. The objective
was to conduct comparative evaluations of vaccines that had previously
demonstrated efficacy in other animal models. Groups of 6 guinea pigs were
immunized with vaccines provided by the relevant EU Vaccine Cluster partners.
Survival over 17 or 26 weeks was used as the principal measure of vaccine
efficacy following aerosol challenge with H37Rv. Counts of mycobacteria in lungs 
and spleens, and histopathological changes in the lungs, were also used to
provide evidence of protection. A total of 24 vaccines were evaluated in 4
experiments each of a different design. A heterologous prime-boost strategy of
DNA and MVA, each expressing Ag85A and a fusion protein of ESAT-6 and Ag85B in
adjuvant, protected the guinea pigs to the same extent as BCG. Genetically
modified BCG vaccines and boosted BCG strategies also protected guinea pigs to
the same extent as BCG but not statistically significantly better. A relatively
high aerosol-challenge dose and evaluation over a protracted time post-challenge 
allowed superior protection over BCG to be demonstrated by BCG boosted with MVA
and fowl pox vectors expressing Ag85A.

PMID: 15687025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Int Immunopharmacol. 2005 Mar;5(3):525-40.

A T-cell-dependent humoral immune response is preserved during the administration
of the nerve agent pre-treatment pyridostigmine bromide in a murine model.

Griffiths GD(1), Telford G, Hooi DS, Cook DL, Wilkinson LJ, Green CA, Pritchard
DI.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down,
Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK. gdgriffiths@dstl.gov.uk

Immune regulation, either via the autonomic nervous system or by a proposed
"non-neuronal" cholinergic system, suggests that the immune system may be
susceptible to perturbation by compounds affecting cholinergic function. Here,
the current UK and US nerve agent pre-treatment, pyridostigmine bromide (PB) and 
the related anti-acetylcholinesterase (AChE) compounds physostigmine (PHY) and
BW284c51 were tested for their ability to affect mouse splenocyte function in
vitro. In addition, PB, at a dose equivalent to that received during
pre-treatment for nerve agent poisoning, was tested for its effect on a
T-cell-dependent humoral response to antigen in vivo in the mouse. None of the
anti-AChEs tested affected concanavalin A (Con A)-, anti-CD3- or
lipopolysaccharide LPS-driven splenocyte proliferation, in vitro, at
concentrations expected to give effective nerve agent pre-treatment. However,
higher concentrations (>100 microM) particularly of PHY caused some inhibition of
the proliferative responses. In vivo, PB or saline was administered via 28-day
mini-osmotic pumps to give a 25-40% inhibition of whole blood AChE in the
PB-treated animals. During PB or saline administration, primary and secondary
doses (i.p.) of sheep red blood cells (SRBC) were given and the humoral response 
determined by monitoring anti-SRBC IgM and IgG levels. Splenocytes isolated from 
the experimental animals were also examined for their proliferative and cytokine 
responses to stimulation. No remarkable effects of PB were seen during the period
of AChE inhibition on the humoral immune response. However, a modest elevation in
IL-2 and IFN(gamma) in Con A-stimulated lymphocytes was seen in PB-treated
animals following pump removal. Overall these data suggest that, in vivo, the
SRBC stimulated T-cell-dependent immune response is unaffected by the
administration of PB at pre-treatment doses.

PMID: 15683849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Pharm Sci. 2005 Mar;94(3):632-8.

Inter- and intralaboratory variation of in vitro diffusion cell measurements: an 
international multicenter study using quasi-standardized methods and materials.

Chilcott RP(1), Barai N, Beezer AE, Brain SI, Brown MB, Bunge AL, Burgess SE,
Cross S, Dalton CH, Dias M, Farinha A, Finnin BC, Gallagher SJ, Green DM, Gunt H,
Gwyther RL, Heard CM, Jarvis CA, Kamiyama F, Kasting GB, Ley EE, Lim ST,
McNaughton GS, Morris A, Nazemi MH, Pellett MA, Du Plessis J, Quan YS, Raghavan
SL, Roberts M, Romonchuk W, Roper CS, Schenk D, Simonsen L, Simpson A, Traversa
BD, Trottet L, Watkinson A, Wilkinson SC, Williams FM, Yamamoto A, Hadgraft J.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl Biomedical Sciences, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ, United
Kingdom. rchilcott@dstl.gov.uk

In vitro measurements of skin absorption are an increasingly important aspect of 
regulatory studies, product support claims, and formulation screening. However,
such measurements are significantly affected by skin variability. The purpose of 
this study was to determine inter- and intralaboratory variation in diffusion
cell measurements caused by factors other than skin. This was attained through
the use of an artificial (silicone rubber) rate-limiting membrane and the
provision of materials including a standard penetrant, methyl paraben (MP), and a
minimally prescriptive protocol to each of the 18 participating laboratories.
"Standardized" calculations of MP flux were determined from the data submitted by
each laboratory by applying a predefined mathematical model. This was deemed
necessary to eliminate any interlaboratory variation caused by different methods 
of flux calculations. Average fluxes of MP calculated and reported by each
laboratory (60 +/- 27 microg cm(-2) h(-1), n = 25, range 27-101) were in
agreement with the standardized calculations of MP flux (60 +/- 21 microg cm(-2) 
h(-1), range 19-120). The coefficient of variation between laboratories was
approximately 35% and was manifest as a fourfold difference between the lowest
and highest average flux values and a sixfold difference between the lowest and
highest individual flux values. Intralaboratory variation was lower, averaging
10% for five individuals using the same equipment within a single laboratory.
Further studies should be performed to clarify the exact components responsible
for nonskin-related variability in diffusion cell measurements. It is clear that 
further developments of in vitro methodologies for measuring skin absorption are 
required.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc. and the American Pharmacists Association.

PMID: 15666298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Infect Immun. 2005 Feb;73(2):1260-4.

A type IV pilin, PilA, Contributes To Adherence of Burkholderia pseudomallei and 
virulence in vivo.

Essex-Lopresti AE(1), Boddey JA, Thomas R, Smith MP, Hartley MG, Atkins T, Brown 
NF, Tsang CH, Peak IR, Hill J, Beacham IR, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, United Kingdom.
aeelopresti@dstl.gov.uk

The Burkholderia pseudomallei K96243 genome contains multiple type IV
pilin-associated loci, including one encoding a putative pilus structural protein
(pilA). A pilA deletion mutant has reduced adherence to human epithelial cells
and is less virulent in the nematode model of virulence and the murine model of
melioidosis, suggesting a role for type IV pili in B. pseudomallei virulence.

PMCID: PMC547011
PMID: 15664977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci. 2005 Feb 25;816(1-2):251-8.

The trace analysis of alkyl alkylphosphonic acids in urine using gas
chromatography-ion trap negative ion tandem mass spectrometry.

Riches J(1), Morton I, Read RW, Black RM.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 OJQ, UK.
jriches@dstl.gov.uk

A sensitive method has been developed for the trace analysis of alkyl
alkylphosphonic acids, metabolites of nerve agents, in urine using a benchtop ion
trap mass spectrometer. The acids were isolated from urine by simple solid phase 
extraction and converted to their pentafluorobenzyl esters. An ion trap mass
spectrometer in selected reaction monitoring mode provided limits of detection of
0.1 ng/ml for isopropyl, isobutyl, pinacolyl and cyclohexyl methylphosphonic
acids and for ethyl ethylphosphonic acid. The detection limit for ethyl
methylphosphonic acid was higher (0.5 ng/ml) due to a lower recovery.

PMID: 15664357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Microb Pathog. 2005 Jan;38(1):33-40. Epub 2004 Dec 19.

Mouse model characterisation for anthrax vaccine development: comparison of one
inbred and one outbred mouse strain.

Flick-Smith HC(1), Waters EL, Walker NJ, Miller J, Stagg AJ, Green M, Williamson 
ED.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.
hcfsmith@dstl.gov.uk <hcfsmith@dstl.gov.uk>

In order to evaluate the immunogenicity and protective efficacy of anthrax
vaccine candidates a suitable small animal model is required. The inbred A/J
strain of mouse has been selected as a potential model, and its immune response
to immunisation with recombinant protective antigen (rPA) vaccine characterised, 
by assessment of rPA specific antibody production, and protection against
injected challenge, with the unencapsulated STI strain of Bacillus anthracis.
Studies were conducted to determine the time required post immunisation to
develop a protective immune response, to define the minimum protective dose of
vaccine required and to assess the long-term immune response to immunisation.
From the results of these studies it was possible to establish that the A/J mouse
is a consistent and robust small animal model for rPA vaccine testing. A
comparison of the immune response to rPA vaccine immunisation in the Turner
Outbred (TO) mouse strain was also conducted. Both inbred and outbred mouse
strains displayed a predominantly Th2 biased immune response and showed a
comparable antibody response to rPA immunisation. An assessment of protection in 
the TO mouse against aerosol challenge with the fully virulent strain of B.
anthracis, Ames, was also made.

PMID: 15652293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Contemp Top Lab Anim Sci. 2004 Nov;43(6):32-4.

Fostering an infant rhesus monkey on to a non-lactating female in a group-housed 
breeding colony.

Watts SA(1), Veall D.

Author information: 
(1)Defense Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, 
SP4 0JQ, United Kingdom.

The reported case describes how an orphaned infant rhesus macaque (Macaca
mulatta) was adopted by a non-lactating female animal from the same breeding
group. Experience at our institution over the last 27 years has indicated that
fostering infant rhesus macaques on to other females is unsuccessful. However,
the described infant was held and carried by another female in his breeding group
when his mother was sick. After the death of his natural mother, fostering on to 
a lactating female was attempted but failed, and he was returned to his breeding 
group and was adopted by the non-lactating female. The infant was hand-fed by
animal care staff, and the feeding regimen is described. The fostering was
successful, and the infant has had access to a mother figure and peers, although 
extensive contact with humans initially was necessary for feeding. This contact
did not, however, appear to be detrimental to the mother-infant and peer-infant
bond, as the infant did not preferentially seek human contact over monkey
contact, and he was at no point rejected by mother or group. The disruption
caused by removal and replacement of the infant did not cause agitation or
increased fighting within the group. We anticipate that the contact with a
matriarchal figure in a primate breeding group will minimize the psychological
disturbances frequently found with hand-reared macaques.

PMID: 15636553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Thromb Haemost. 2004 Dec;2(12):2231-40.

Probing platelet factor 4 alpha-granule targeting.

Briquet-Laugier V(1), Lavenu-Bombled C, Schmitt A, Leboeuf M, Uzan G,
Dubart-Kupperschmitt A, Rosa JP.

Author information: 
(1)U348 INSERM, IFR6-Circulation, Hôpital Lariboisière, Paris, France.

The storage mechanism of endogenous secretory proteins in megakaryocyte
alpha-granules is poorly understood. We have elected to study the granule storage
of platelet factor 4 (PF4), a well-known platelet alpha-granule protein. The
reporter protein green fluorescent protein (GFP), PF4, or PF4 fused to GFP
(PF4-GFP), were transfected in the well-characterized mouse pituitary AtT20 cell 
line, and in the megakaryocytic leukemic DAMI cell line. These proteins were also
transduced using a lentiviral vector, in human CD34+ cells differentiated into
megakaryocytes in vitro. Intracellular localization of expressed proteins, and
colocalization studies were achieved by laser scanning confocal microscopy and
immuno-electronmicroscopy. In preliminary experiments, GFP, a non-secretory
protein (no signal peptide), localized in the cytoplasm, while PF4-GFP
colocalized with adrenocorticotropin hormone (ACTH)-containing granules in AtT20 
cells. In the megakaryocytic DAMI cell line and in human megakaryocytes
differentiated in vitro, PF4-GFP localized in alpha-granules along with the alpha
granular protein von Willebrand factor (VWF). The signal peptide of PF4 was not
sufficient to specify alpha-granule storage of PF4, since when PF4 signal peptide
was fused to GFP (SP4-GFP), GFP was not stored into granules in spite of its
efficient translocation to the ER-Golgi constitutive secretory pathway. We
conclude that the PF4 storage pathway in alpha-granules is not a default pathway,
but rather a regular granule storage pathway probably requiring specific sorting 
mechanisms. In addition PF4-GFP appears as an appropriate probe with which to
analyze alpha-granule biogenesis and its alterations in the congenital defect
gray platelet syndrome.

PMID: 15613031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Med Microbiol. 2004 Dec;53(Pt 12):1177-82.

Evaluation of lipopolysaccharide and capsular polysaccharide as subunit vaccines 
against experimental melioidosis.

Nelson M(1), Prior JL, Lever MS, Jones HE, Atkins TP, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.
mnelson@dstl.gov.uk

Burkholderia pseudomallei is the causative agent of melioidosis, which is a major
cause of morbidity and mortality in endemic regions. Currently there is no human 
vaccine against melioidosis. In this study, LPS or capsular polysaccharide was
used to immunize BALB/c mice. The different polysaccharide antigens induced
antibody responses. Mice vaccinated with LPS developed predominantly IgM and IgG3
responses. Contrastingly, mice vaccinated with capsular polysaccharide developed 
a predominantly IgG2b response. After immunization, mice were challenged by the
intra-peritoneal route and an increased mean time to death was observed compared 
with unvaccinated controls. Immunization with LPS provided an optimal protective 
response. Mice challenged by the aerosol route showed a small increase in the
mean time to death compared with the unvaccinated controls. The passive transfer 
of antigen from immunized into naive mice provided protection against a
subsequent challenge. This study is the first time antigens protective by active 
immunization have been identified and suggests that polysaccharides have
potential as vaccine candidates against melioidosis.

PMID: 15585494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Dec;24(24):10777-91.

Sp3 proteins negatively regulate beta myosin heavy chain gene expression during
skeletal muscle inactivity.

Tsika G(1), Ji J, Tsika R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, University of
Missouri-Columbia, Biochemistry E102 Vet Med Bldg., 1600 Rollins Road, Columbia, 
MO 65211, USA. tsikar@missouri.edu

In adult skeletal muscle, beta myosin heavy chain (betaMyHC) gene expression is
primarily restricted to slow type I fibers; however, its expression is
down-regulated in response to muscle inactivity. Little is known about the
signaling pathways and transcription factors that mediate this important
functional response. This study demonstrates that increased binding of Sp3 to
GC-rich elements in the betaMyHC promoter is a critical event in down-regulation 
of betaMyHC gene expression under non-weight-bearing conditions. Conversely,
binding of Sp3 to these elements decreased while Sp1 binding increased with
nuclear extracts from plantaris muscle exposed to mechanical overload, a stimulus
that increases betaMyHC gene expression. In addition, these experiments revealed 
the existence of an Sp4-DNA binding complex when using adult skeletal muscle
nuclear extract was used but not when nuclear extracts from cultured myotubes
were used. Sp3 proteins are competitive inhibitors of Sp1-mediated betaMyHC
reporter gene transactivation in both Drosophila SL-2 and mouse C2C12 myotubes.
Sp4 is a weak activator of betaMyHC gene expression in SL-2 cells, which lack
endogenous Sp1 activity, but does not activate betaMyHC gene expression in C2C12 
myotubes, which have high levels of Sp1. These results suggest that competitive
binding of Sp family proteins regulate betaMyHC gene transcription in response to
altered neuromuscular activity.

PMCID: PMC533985
PMID: 15572681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Surgeon. 2004 Apr;2(2):70-8.

Tissue engineering in surgery.

Garner JP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ.

Comment in
    Surgeon. 2004 Oct;2(5):302; author reply 303.

The demands for repair and renewal of worn out or injured human tissue continue
to increase and it is now apparent that this demand cannot be met from human
donors. A partial solution may be found in living related and trans-species
transplantation but these approaches invoke the problems of disease transfer and 
ethical dilemmas. Tissue engineering is a new technology that seeks to meet these
increasing demands by utilising novel cell culture methods in vitro to provide
tissue replacements in vivo. This article reviews the current state of tissue
engineering and its potential for use in surgery.

PMID: 15568431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Mol Psychiatry. 2005 Apr;10(4):393-406.

Reduced expression of the Sp4 gene in mice causes deficits in sensorimotor gating
and memory associated with hippocampal vacuolization.

Zhou X(1), Long JM, Geyer MA, Masliah E, Kelsoe JR, Wynshaw-Boris A, Chien KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of
California at San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

HF-1B/SP4:, a member of the Sp1 family of transcription factors, is expressed
restrictively in the developing nervous system and most abundantly in adult
hippocampus in mice. Here, we report the generation of hypomorphic Sp4 allele
mice, in which the Sp4 deficiency can be rescued by the expression of Cre
recombinase. Vacuolization was detected in the hippocampal gray matter of the
mutant Sp4-deficient mice. Expression analysis of Sp4 mutant hippocampi revealed 
an age-dependent decrease in neurotrophin-3 expression in the dentate granule
cells. Hypomorphic Sp4 mutant mice displayed robust deficits in both sensorimotor
gating and contextual memory. The restoration of Sp4 expression, via a
Cre-dependent rescue strategy, completely rescued all the observed molecular,
histological and behavioral abnormalities. Our studies thus reveal a novel Sp4
pathway that is essential for hippocampal integrity and modulates behavioral
processes relevant to psychiatric disorders.

PMID: 15558077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Infect Immun. 2004 Dec;72(12):6757-63.

ATP-binding cassette transporters are targets for the development of
antibacterial vaccines and therapies.

Garmory HS(1), Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, 
Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, United Kingdom. hsgarmory@dstl.gov.uk

PMCID: PMC529116
PMID: 15557595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2004 Dec;24(6):609-12.

Efficacy of the latest fluoroquinolones against experimental Yersinia pestis.

Steward J(1), Lever MS, Russell P, Beedham RJ, Stagg AJ, Taylor RR, Brooks TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl Porton Down, Biomedical Sciences, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 OJQ, UK.
jasteward@dstl.gov.uk

The efficacies of prophylactic and therapeutic gatifloxacin and moxifloxacin were
assessed in a BALB/c mouse model of systemic and pneumonic plague and compared
with ciprofloxacin. Mice were given 100 mg/kg of the antibiotic by oral
administration twice daily for 7 days starting 1h prior to infection or following
infection. All antibiotics offered full protection for up to 6h following
systemic challenge, and for up to 30 h following an aerosol challenge. The
efficacy of each of the antibiotics decreased when antibiotics were started 18 h 
following systemic challenge and 48 h following aerosol challenge.
Fluoroquinolones may therefore be considered useful candidates for the treatment 
of bubonic and pneumonic plague.

PMID: 15555886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2004 Dec;2(12):967-78.

Tularaemia: bioterrorism defence renews interest in Francisella tularensis.

Oyston PC(1), Sjostedt A, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ, UK. PCOYSTON@dstl.gov.uk

Francisella tularensis is a highly infectious aerosolizable intracellular
pathogen that is capable of causing a debilitating or fatal disease with doses as
low as 25 colony-forming units. There is no licensed vaccine available. Since the
1950s there has been concern that F. tularensis could be used as a biological
threat agent, and it has received renewed attention recently owing to concerns
about bioterrorism. The International Conference on Tularaemia in 2003 attracted 
more than 200 delegates, twice the number of participants as previous meetings.
This is a reflection of the increased funding of research on this pathogen,
particularly in the United States.

PMID: 15550942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. BMC Genomics. 2004 Nov 8;5:86.

Genomic structure and cloning of two transcript isoforms of human Sp8.

Milona MA(1), Gough JE, Edgar AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Erasmus Medical 
Center Rotterdam, PO Box 1738, 3000 DR Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
m.mylona@erasmusmc.nl <m.mylona@erasmusmc.nl>

BACKGROUND: The Specificity proteins (Sp) are a family of transcription factors
that have three highly conserved zinc-fingers located towards the
carboxy-terminal that bind GC-boxes and assist in the initiation of gene
transcription. Human Sp1-7 genes have been characterized. Recently, the phenotype
of Sp8 null mice has been described, being tailless and having severe truncation 
of both fore and hind limbs. They also have malformed brains with defective
closure of the anterior and posterior neuropore during brain development.
RESULTS: The human Sp8 gene is a three-exon gene that maps to 7p21.3, close to
the related Sp4 gene. From an osteosarcoma cell line we cloned two transcript
variants that use two different first exons and have a common second exon. One
clone encodes a 508-residue protein, Sp8L (isoform 1) and the other a shorter
490-residue protein, Sp8S (isoform 2). These two isoforms are conserved being
found also in mice and zebrafish. Analysis of the Sp8L protein sequence reveals
an amino-terminal hydrophobic Sp-motif that is disrupted in Sp8S, a buttonhead
box and three C2H2 zinc-fingers. Sp8 mRNA expression was detected in a wide range
of tissues at a low level, with the highest levels being found in brain.
Treatment of the murine pluripotent cell line C3H10T1/2 with 100 ng/mL BMP-2
induced Sp8 mRNA after 24 hours.
CONCLUSIONS: There is conservation of the two Sp8 protein isoforms between
primates, rodents and fish, suggesting that the isoforms have differing roles in 
gene regulation. Sp8 may play a role in chondrogenic/osteoblastic differentiation
in addition to its role in brain and limb development.

PMCID: PMC534095
PMID: 15533246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2004 Nov;13(11):1437-43.

The analgesic potential of clostridial neurotoxin derivatives.

Foster KA(1).

Author information: 
(1)HPA Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JG, UK. keith.foster@hpa.org.uk

Botulinum neurotoxins are the most potent acute lethal toxins known, and yet for 
the last two decades they, and in particular serotype A, have found increasing
use in the clinical treatment of diseases or conditions involving neuromuscular
or autonomic neuronal transmission. The neurotoxins work by inhibiting the
release of acetylcholine from peripheral cholinergic nerve terminals. More
recently, the effects on non-cholinergic pathways have been identified, and this 
has led to an increase in the diseases and syndromes for which botulinum
neurotoxins have been found to have clinical utility. In particular, botulinum
neurotoxins have been demonstrated to potentially benefit a range of chronic pain
syndromes. With the description in the last decade of the biochemical basis of
neurotoxin action and the tertiary structure of the toxin molecule, the
possibility of designing novel agents utilising selected aspects of toxin
function has arisen. This possibility has been pursued in the context of pain
relief with the description of a novel hybrid protein derived from botulinum
neurotoxin type A, LH(N)/A-ECL, able to selectively target nociceptive afferent
neurons and inhibit the release of neurotransmitters involved in pain
transmission. This novel derivative of botulinum neurotoxin type A demonstrates
prolonged analgesic activity in vivo. This review will consider the evidence for 
the analgesic properties of the botulinum neurotoxins and their suitability as
the basis for novel therapeutic proteins. The general concept of deriving novel
therapeutic molecules from the neurotoxins will also be considered.

PMID: 15500391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Vaccine. 2004 Oct 22;22(31-32):4365-73.

Immunisation against plague by transcutaneous and intradermal application of
subunit antigens.

Eyles JE(1), Elvin SJ, Westwood A, Lebutt CS, Alpar HO, Somavarapu S, Williamson 
ED.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, Dstl, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK.
jeeyles@dstl.gov.uk

We have investigated immunological responses in BALB/c mice following
transcutaneous (TC) delivery of fraction 1 (F1) and V subunits from Yersinia
pestis in conjunction with an enterotoxin-derived adjuvant (cholera toxin, CT).
It was found that two or more TC applications of F1 and V subunits (admixed with 
cholera toxin) served to elicit significant levels of anti-F1 and V antibodies in
the serum of immunised mice. IL-6 secretion from cultured splenocytes derived
from immunised mice indicated that a single TC application of F1 and V subunits
(admixed with cholera toxin) conferred a cell-mediated response. As compared with
intranasal or direct intradermal injection of F1 and V, the numbers of
F1/V-specific antibody-forming cells in the spleens of animals immunised by TC
application of F1 and V (admixed with CT) was relatively low. It was noted that
TC application of F1 and V admixed with CT was very effective for priming
responses that were boosted by intranasal or intradermal routes. Similarly, it
was found that TC application of F1 and V admixed with CT could be used to
efficiently boost pre-existing responses engendered by intradermal injection or
intranasal instillation of F1 and V. In order to assess if TC application of F1
and V admixed with CT could protect experimental animals from plague, immunised
mice were injected with a virulent strain of Y. pestis. It was found that two TC 
applications of F1 and V admixed with CT conferred only limited protection
against 10(2) MLDs. However, three TC applications of F1 and V admixed with CT
conferred solid protection against 10(2) MLDs. Hence we have shown, for the first
time, that TC application of F1 and V admixed with CT can protect animals against
challenge with a virulent strain of plague causing bacteria. These data suggest
that transcutaneous immunisation may be a simple and non-invasive method for
immunising individuals against plague.

PMID: 15474730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Microb Pathog. 2004 Oct;37(4):177-84.

Stat 4 but not Stat 6 mediated immune mechanisms are essential in protection
against plague.

Elvin SJ(1), Williamson ED.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratories, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ,
UK. sjelvin@dstl.gov.uk

The Caf1 and LcrV sub-unit vaccine for plague has been shown to be highly
protective against challenge with virulent Yersinia pestis in a mouse model.
Production of large amounts of IgG1 in response to the vaccine correlates with
protection against aerosol and parenteral infection. In this study the effect of 
genetic mutation in the immune system on protection was addressed. Stat 6(-/-)
mice which are unable to utilise the type 2 cytokines IL-4 and IL-13 and so
should have reduced IgG1 responses were utilised in order to determine whether an
immune system biased towards the type 1 axis could mount an effective response to
the vaccine. Conversely in the Stat 4(-/-) mouse model, IL-12 and
interferon-gamma-mediated immune mechanisms are inactive and the immune response 
should be biased towards the type 2 axis. Serum antibody responses to vaccination
in both the knockout strains and their wild type controls revealed little
difference in levels of IgG and isotype profiles. Elispot analysis of cytokine
production at the single cell level did however reveal a functional defect in the
Stat 4(-/-) mice which had low levels of IFN-gamma producing cells. Following
virulent challenge, the Stat 6(-/-) mice showed high levels of protection, while 
the Stat 4(-/-) mice were poorly protected, indicating a fundamental defect in
their immune systems which could not be overcome even by the passive transfer of 
CD4(+) cells from immunised BALB/c donors. It appears therefore that type 1
immune mechanisms, activated following Stat 4 phosphorylation, are essential in
protection against plague.

PMID: 15458778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Gen Virol. 2004 Oct;85(Pt 10):3059-70.

Evidence of segment reassortment in Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever virus.

Hewson R(1), Gmyl A, Gmyl L, Smirnova SE, Karganova G, Jamil B, Hasan R,
Chamberlain J, Clegg C.

Author information: 
(1)Public Health Affairs, Centre for Applied Microbiology and Research, Health
Protection Agency, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG, UK. roger.hewson@hpa.org.uk

The complete nucleotide sequences of the small (S) and medium (M) segments of
three independent strains of Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever (CCHF) virus
isolated in Uzbekistan, Iraq and Pakistan have been determined. Partial S and M
segment sequences from two additional strains and partial large segment sequences
from five strains of CCHF virus have also been obtained. These data have been
compiled and compared with published full-length and partial sequences of other
CCHF virus strains. Analysis of virus strains for which complete and partial S
and M segment sequences are available reveals that the phylogenetic grouping of
some strains differ between these two segments. Data provided in this report
suggest that this discrepancy is not the result of recombination, but rather the 
consequence of reassortment events that have occurred in some virus lineages.
Although described in other genera of the Bunyaviridae family, this is the first 
report of segment reassortment occurring in the Nairovirus genus.

PMID: 15448369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Planta Med. 2004 Sep;70(9):813-7.

Antiherpetic activities of sulfated polysaccharides from green algae.

Lee JB(1), Hayashi K, Maeda M, Hayashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Toyama Medical and Pharmaceutical
University, 2630 Sugitani, Toyama 930-0194, Japan.

In order to evaluate the potency of novel antiviral drugs, 11 natural sulfated
polysaccharides (SPs) from 10 green algae ( Enteromorpha compressa, Monostroma
nitidum, Caulerpa brachypus, C. okamurai, C. scapelliformis, Chaetomorpha crassa,
C. spiralis, Codium adhaerens, C. fragille, and C. latum) and 4 synthetic
sulfated xylans (SXs) prepared from the beta-(1,3)-xylan of C. brachypus, were
assayed for anti-Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) activity. Except for one
from E. compressa, all SPs showed potent anti-HSV-1 activities with 50 %
inhibitory concentrations (IC (50)) of 0.38 - 8.5 microg/mL, while having low
cytotoxicities with 50 % inhibitory concentrations of >2900 microg/mL. Anti-HSV-1
activities of SXs were dependent on their degrees of sulfation. To delineate the 
drug-sensitive phase, 4 polysaccharides, which showed potent anti-HSV-1
activities, were applied to time-of-addition experiments. Among the
polysaccharides tested, 3 polysaccharides (SX4, SP4 from C. brachypus, and SP11
from C. latum) showed strong anti-HSV-1 activities with IC (50) of 6.0, 7.5, and 
6.9 microg/mL, respectively, even when added to the medium 8 h post-infection.
These experiments demonstrated that some sulfated polysaccharides not only
inhibited the early stages of HSV-1 replication, such as virus binding to and
penetration into host cells, but also interfered with late steps of virus
replication. These results revealed that some sulfated polysaccharides from green
algae should be promising candidates of antiviral agents which might act on
different stages in the virus replication cycle.

PMID: 15386190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Cancer Res. 2004 Sep 15;64(18):6740-9.

Role of Sp proteins in regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor
expression and proliferation of pancreatic cancer cells.

Abdelrahim M(1), Smith R 3rd, Burghardt R, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology,Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas 77843-66, USA.

Sp proteins play an important role in angiogenesis and growth of cancer cells,
and specificity protein 1 (Sp1) has been linked to vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) expression in pancreatic cancer cells. RNA interference was used to
investigate the role of Sp family proteins on regulation of VEGF expression and
proliferation of Panc-1 pancreatic cancer cells. Using a series of constructs
containing VEGF promoter inserts, it was initially shown that Sp1 and Sp3 were
required for transactivation, and this was primarily dependent on proximal
GC-rich motifs. We also showed that Sp4 was expressed in Panc-1 cells, and RNA
interference assays suggested that Sp4 cooperatively interacted with Sp1 and Sp3 
to activate VEGF promoter constructs in these cells. However, the relative
contributions of Sp proteins to VEGF expression were variable among different
pancreatic cancer cell lines. Small inhibitory RNAs for Sp3, but not Sp1 or Sp4, 
inhibited phosphorylation of retinoblastoma protein, blocked G0/G1-->S-phase
progression, and up-regulated p27 protein/promoter activity of Panc-1 cells;
similar results were observed in other pancreatic cancer cells, suggesting that
Sp3-dependent growth of pancreatic cancer cells is caused by inhibition of p27
expression.

PMID: 15374992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Vaccine. 2004 Sep 28;22(29-30):3942-6.

Efficacy of DNA vaccines expressing the type F botulinum toxin Hc fragment using 
different promoters.

Jathoul AP(1), Holley JL, Garmory HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, 
Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.

DNA vaccines which expressed the Hc fragment of the Clostridium botulinum type F 
neurotoxin (BoNT/F Hc) fused to a signal peptide downstream of four different
eukaryotic promoters were prepared. Subsequently, the immunogenicity of the DNA
vaccines and protection afforded in mice against challenge with 10(4) MLD of type
F botulinum toxin was evaluated. The DNA vaccine containing the human ubiquitin
gene (UbC) promoter induced the highest BoNT/F Hc-specific antibody concentration
following two intramuscular immunisations and afforded 90% protection against
challenge. The results from this study indicate that the selection of promoter
used in DNA vaccination studies may be of importance in designing optimised
vaccines.

PMID: 15364442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Biomacromolecules. 2004 Sep-Oct;5(5):1687-97.

Biodegradation of aliphatic homopolyesters and aliphatic-aromatic copolyesters by
anaerobic microorganisms.

Abou-Zeid DM(1), Müller RJ, Deckwer WD.

Author information: 
(1)Gesellschaft für Biotechnologische Forschung mbH, Mascheroder Weg, D 38124
Braunschweig, Germany.

The anaerobic degradability of natural and synthetic polyesters is investigated
applying microbial consortia (3 sludges, 1 sediment) as well as individual
strains isolated for this purpose. In contrast to aerobic conditions, the natural
homopolyester polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) degrades faster than the copolyester
poly(hydroxybutyrate-co-hydroxyvalerate) (PHBV). For the synthetic polyester
poly(epsilon-caroplacton) (PCL), microbial degradation in the absence of oxygen
could be clearly demonstrated; however, the degradation rate is significantly
lower than for PHB and PHBV. Other synthetic polyesters such as poly(trimethylene
adipate) (SP3/6), poly(tetramethylene adipate) (SP4/6), and aliphatic-aromatic
copolyesters from 1,4-butanediol, terephthalic acid, and adipic acid
(BTA-copolymers) exhibit only very low anaerobic microbial susceptibility. A
copolyester with high amount of terephthalic acid (BTA 40:60) resisted the
anaerobic breakdown even under thermophilic conditions and/or when blended with
starch. For the synthetic polymers, a number of individual anaerobic strain could
be isolated which are able to depolymerize the polymers and selected strains
where identified as new species of the genus Clostridium or Propionispora. Their 
distinguished degradation patterns point to the involvement of different
degrading enzymes which are specialized to depolymerize either the natural
polyhydroxyalkanoates (e.g., PHB), the synthetic polyester PCL, or other
synthetic aliphatic polyesters such as SP3/6. It can be supposed that these
enzymes exhibit comparable characteristics as those described to be responsible
for aerobic polyester degradation (lipases, cutinases, and PHB-depolymerases).

PMID: 15360276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Endocrinology. 2004 Dec;145(12):5774-85. Epub 2004 Sep 2.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma-dependent activation of p21 in
Panc-28 pancreatic cancer cells involves Sp1 and Sp4 proteins.

Hong J(1), Samudio I, Liu S, Abdelrahim M, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M University Health Science
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

1,1-Bis(3'-indolyl)-1-(p-trifluoromethylphenyl)methane (DIM-C-pPhCF3) and
troglitazone activate peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
(PPARgamma) in Panc-28 pancreatic cancer cells and also inhibit cell
proliferation. DIM-C-pPhCF3 was more active than troglitazone and was used as a
model to investigate the mechanism of PPARgamma-dependent inhibition of Panc-28
cell growth. DIM-C-pPhCF3 significantly inhibited G0/G1-->S phase progression, as
determined by FACS analysis, and this was associated with decreased
retinoblastoma protein phosphorylation and increased p21 protein and mRNA
expression, but no change in p27 or cyclin D1. PPARgamma antagonists blocked
DIM-C-pPhCF3-induced growth inhibition and induction of p21 protein, and similar 
inhibitory effects were observed in Panc-28 cells transfected with a construct
(pWWP) containing a -2325 to +8 p21 promoter insert. Deletion analysis of the p21
promoter indicated that PPARgamma-dependent activation of p21 promoter constructs
by DIM-C-pPhCF3 required GC-rich sites 3 and 4 in the proximal region (-124 to
-60) of the p21 promoter. The results of RNA interference and protein
expression/DNA binding assays suggest that DIM-C-pPhCF3 induced p21 expression
through a novel mechanism that involves PPARgamma interactions with both Sp1 and 
Sp4 proteins bound to the proximal GC-rich region of the p21 promoter.

PMID: 15345676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2004 Sep 1;238(1):49-55.

The interaction of Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAK with human and animal respiratory
tract cell lines.

Hambrook J(1), Titball R, Lindsay C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury, Wilts SP4 0JQ,
UK.

A major virulence factor of a common human pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa, was
investigated to determine if it dominated attachment interactions in a variety of
in vitro cell culture systems. It was found that Type-IV pilus-type mechanisms,
which mediated the attachment of P. aeruginosa to three human respiratory tract
cell lines (A549, BEAS-2B and RPMI 2650) also mediated attachment to two
respiratory tract cell lines from mouse (C57) and rat (L-2) to a similar degree. 
Significant differences were found in the number of P. aeruginosa associated with
the human, rat and mouse cell lines. Additionally, differences were also found
between A547, C57 and L-2 cells with respect to the moieties that P. aeruginosa
interacted with at the level of the cell surface, suggesting that asialo-GM1
ligands were not the only structure that this bacterium could interact with in
order to associate with host cells.

PMID: 15336402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Med Microbiol. 2004 Sep;53(Pt 9):833-40.

Common oligosaccharide moieties inhibit the adherence of typical and atypical
respiratory pathogens.

Thomas R(1), Brooks T.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science & Technology Laboratories (Dstl), Biomedical Sciences, Porton 
Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK. rjthomas@dstl.gov.uk

Intervention in bacterial adhesion to host cells is a novel method of overcoming 
current problems associated with antibiotic resistance. Antibiotic-resistant
strains of bacteria that cause respiratory tract infections are a problem in
hospitals and could be used in bioterrorist attacks. A range of bacterial species
was demonstrated to attach to an alveolar epithelial (A549) cell line. In all
cases, cell surface oligosaccharides were important in attachment, demonstrated
by reduced adhesion when A549 cells were pre-treated with tunicamycin. Bacillus
anthracis and Yersinia pestis displayed a restricted tropism for oligosaccharides
compared to the environmental, opportunistic pathogens, Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
Burkholderia cenocepacia, Burkholderia pseudomallei and Legionella pneumophila.
The compound with the greatest anti-adhesion activity was p-nitrophenol. Other
generic attachment inhibitors included the polymeric saccharides (dextran and
heparin), GalNAcbeta1-4Gal, GalNAcbeta1-3Gal, Galbeta1-4GlcNAc and
Galbeta1-3GlcNAc. Burkholderia pseudomallei attachment was particularly
susceptible to oligosaccharide inhibition. Combinations of such compounds may
serve as a novel generic therapeutics for respiratory tract infections.

PMID: 15314189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Vaccine. 2004 Sep 3;22(25-26):3358-66.

Differential efficacy of vaccinia virus envelope proteins administered by DNA
immunisation in protection of BALB/c mice from a lethal intranasal poxvirus
challenge.

Pulford DJ(1), Gates A, Bridge SH, Robinson JH, Ulaeto D.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK.
davidpulford@hotmail.com

DNA vaccines might offer an alternative to the live smallpox vaccine in providing
protective efficacy in an orthopoxvirus (OPV) lethal respiratory challenge model.
BALB/c mice were immunised with DNA vaccines coding for 10 different single
vaccinia virus (VACV) membrane proteins. After an intranasal challenge with the
VACV IHD strain, three gene candidates B5R, A33R and A27L produced > or =66%
survival. The B5R DNA vaccine consistently produced 100% protection and exhibited
greatest efficacy after three 50 microg intramuscular doses in this model.
Sero-conversion to these vaccines was often inconsistent, implying that antibody 
itself was not a correlate of protection. The B5R DNA vaccine induced a strong
and consistent gamma interferon (IFNgamma) response in BALB/c mice given a single
DNA vaccine dose. Strong IFNgamma responses were also measured in pTB5R immunised
C57BL6 mice deficient for MHC class I molecules, suggesting that the memory
response was mediated by a CD4+ T cell population.

PMID: 15308360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Vaccine. 2004 Sep 3;22(25-26):3340-7.

Vaccine-induced protection against anthrax in cheetah (Acinonyx jubatus) and
black rhinoceros (Diceros bicornis).

Turnbull PC(1), Tindall BW, Coetzee JD, Conradie CM, Bull RL, Lindeque PM,
Huebschle OJ.

Author information: 
(1)Arjemptur Technology, Science Park, Dstl, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK. 
peterturnbull@tesco.net

Institution of a policy of vaccination in endangered species with a vaccine not
previously administered to it cannot be undertaken lightly. This applies even
more in the case of cheetah (Acinonyx jubatus) with their unusually monomorphic
gene pool and the potential restrictions this places on their immune responses.
However, the recently observed mortalities from anthrax in these animals in the
Etosha National Park, Namibia, made it imperative to evaluate vaccination. Black 
rhinoceros (Diceros bicornis), another endangered species in the park, have been 
vaccinated for over three decades but the effectiveness of this has never been
evaluated. Passive protection tests in A/J mice using sera from 12 cheetahs
together with enzyme immunoassay indicated that cheetah are able to mount
seemingly normal primary and secondary humoral immune responses to the Sterne
34F2 live spore livestock vaccine. Overall protection rates in mice injected with
the sera rose and fell in concert with rises and declines in antibody titres,
although fine analysis showed that the correlation between titre and protection
was complex. Once a high level of protection (96% of mice 1 month after a second 
booster in the cheetahs) had been achieved, the duration of substantial
protection appeared good (60% of the mice 5 months after the second booster).
Protection conferred on mice by sera from three of four vaccinated rhino was
almost complete, but, obscurely, none of the mice receiving serum from the fourth
rhino were protected. Sera from three park lions with naturally acquired high
antibody titres, included as controls, also conferred high levels of protection. 
For the purposes of wildlife management, the conclusions were that vaccination of
cheetah with the standard animal anthrax vaccine causes no observable ill effect 
in the animals and does appear to confer protective immunity. At least one
well-separated booster does appear to be desirable. Vaccination of rhino also
appears to be justified from the limited data obtained.

PMID: 15308358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Gen Virol. 2004 Sep;85(Pt 9):2591-602.

Macaques infected long-term with attenuated simian immunodeficiency virus
(SIVmac) remain resistant to wild-type challenge, despite declining cytotoxic T
lymphocyte responses to an immunodominant epitope.

Sharpe SA(1), Cope A, Dowall S, Berry N, Ham C, Heeney JL, Hopkins D, Easterbrook
L, Dennis M, Almond N, Cranage M.

Author information: 
(1)Health Protection Agency, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG, UK.
sally.sharpe@hpa.org.uk

To further investigate mechanisms of protective immunity that are induced by
live, attenuated simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV), three macaques were
infected with SIVmacGX2, a nef-disrupted molecular clone. In two of these
animals, which expressed the MamuA*01 major histocompatibility complex class I
allele, loss of functional activity against an SIV-Gag-encoded immunodominant
cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) epitope was observed following prolonged infection. 
Nonetheless, all three animals were resistant to challenge with an uncloned pool 
of wild-type SIVmac, whereas four naïve controls became infected. Tetramer
staining revealed the rapid generation of CD8+ T-cell responses against gag- and 
tat-encoded immunodominant epitopes in MamuA*01+ challenge controls. The dynamics
of these T-cell responses to the wild-type virus were similar to those observed
following primary infection of the vaccine group with attenuated virus. In
contrast, neither tetramer staining nor gamma interferon ELISpot assay revealed
an immediate, systemic, anamnestic response in the wild-type-challenged,
attenuated SIV-infected animals. Functional CTL capacity had not been lost in
this group, as lytic activity was still evident 17 weeks after challenge. Both
attenuated and wild-type viruses induced a disseminated CD8+ T-cell response,
which was of a higher magnitude in lymphoid tissues than in the periphery. These 
results suggest that, at least as measured in the periphery, protection against
wild-type infection that is induced by live, attenuated SIV is not dependent on a
rechallenge-driven expansion of immunodominant epitope-specific CD8+ T cells and,
therefore, pre-existing activity may be sufficient to prevent superinfection.

PMID: 15302953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Curr Med Chem. 2004 Aug;11(15):1995-2005.

Regulation of MAO-A and MAO-B gene expression.

Shih JC(1), Chen K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Toxicology, Pharmaceutical Science
Center, University of Southern California, 1985 Zonal Ave. Los Angeles,
California 90033, USA. jcshih@usc.edu

MAO A and B genes are made of 15 exons with identical exon-intron organization.
They are located on X-chromosome organized in opposite direction, tail to tail
with 24 kb apart. Both promoters are GC-rich and regulated by transcription
factor Sp1. However, they have distinctly different features. MAO B gene, but not
MAO A gene, has TATA box. MAO B promoter contains two clusters of overlapping Sp1
sites, the CACCC repressor element. Transcription factors Sp1 and Sp4 can
activate MAO B promoter activity through the proximal cluster of Sp1 sites and
its activation can be repressed by the over-expression of Sp3 and a related
family member, BTEB2. Decreased methylation and transcription repressor Sp3
upregulate human MAO B, but not MAO A, gene expression during Caco-2
differentiation. MAO B, but not MAO A gene, could be activated by PMA (phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate) by protein kinase C, MAPkinase signal transduction
pathway involves cJun and Egr-1. The differences in MAO A and B gene regulation
may explain the different tissue-specific expression and functions of these two
important isoenzymes.

Copyright 2004 Bentham Science Publishers Ltd.

PMID: 15279563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Nature. 2004 Jul 22;430(6998):417.

Evolutionary genetics: Ambiguous role of CCR5 in Y. pestis infection.

Elvin SJ(1), Williamson ED, Scott JC, Smith JN, Pérez De Lema G, Chilla S,
Clapham P, Pfeffer K, Schlöndorff D, Luckow B.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratories, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ,
UK.

Comment on
    Nature. 2004 Feb 12;427(6975):606.

Mecsas and colleagues suggest that a deficiency in the chemokine receptor CCR5 in
humans is unlikely to confer protection against plague, based on their study of
Yersinia pestis infection in Ccr5-deficient mice. They were testing the
hypothesis that a mutation in the CCR5 gene, frequently found in Caucasians, may 
have been selected for in the past because it provided protection against
(bubonic) plague; the mutation, called CCR5Delta32, is characterized by a
32-base-pair deletion. We have also tested this hypothesis by using Y. pestis
infection in mice and, in addition, we have done phagocytosis experiments with
macrophages from wild-type and Ccr5-deficient mice. Although, like Mecsas et al.,
we did not see any difference in the survival of the two groups of mice, we did
find that there was a significantly reduced uptake of Y. pestis by Ccr5-deficient
macrophages in vitro. Our results indicate that the role of Ccr5 in Y. pestis
infection may therefore be more complex than previously thought.

PMID: 15272490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Biol Chem. 2004 Sep 24;279(39):40451-61. Epub 2004 Jul 20.

Transcriptional regulation of the mouse gene encoding the alpha-4 subunit of the 
GABAA receptor.

Ma L(1), Song L, Radoi GE, Harrison NL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Weill Medical College, Cornell University, New
York, New York 10021, USA.

The gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptors (GABAA-Rs) mediate fast inhibitory
synaptic transmission in the brain. The alpha4 subunit of the GABAA-R confers
distinct pharmacological properties on the receptor and its expression pattern
exhibits plasticity in response to physiological and pharmacological stimuli,
including withdrawal from progesterone and alcohol. We have analyzed the promoter
region of the mouse GABRA4 gene that encodes the alpha4 subunit and found that
the promoter has multiple transcriptional initiation sites and lacks a TATA box. 
The minimal promoter for GABRA4 spans the region between -444 to -19 bp relative 
to the coding ATG and shows high activity in cultured mouse cortical neurons.
Both Sp3 and Sp4 transcription factors can interact with the two Sp1 binding
sites within the minimal promoter and are critical for maximal activity of the
promoter in neurons.

Copyright 2004 American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMID: 15265862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Chromatogr A. 2004 Jun 18;1040(1):83-95.

Identification of iso- and n-propylphosphonates using liquid
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry and gas chromatography-Fourier transform 
infrared spectroscopy.

Cooper DB(1), Read RW, Timperley CM, Williams NH, Black RM.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire
SP4 0JQ, UK.

Organophosphorus nerve agents and their precursors, specifically listed in the
schedules of chemicals in the Annex to the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC),
include analogues with C1-C3 alkyl groups on phosphorus. The Organisation for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) requires designated laboratories to
unequivocally identify isomeric propyl groups bonded to phosphorus in analytes
that may be present in samples submitted for analysis. Homologous series of
isomeric pairs of dialkyl iso- and n-propylphosphonates, alkyl iso- and
n-propylphosphonochloridates, and alkyl iso- and n-propylphosphonofluoridates,
have been analysed by liquid chromatography-ion trap tandem mass spectrometry
and/or by gas chromatography-Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. The results
show that P-propyl isomers can be reliably differentiated by collision induced
dissociation (CID) of selected fragment ions and by their infrared P=O stretching
and C-H deformation frequencies.

PMID: 15248428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2004 Jul;70(7):3960-7.

Disruption of a gene predicted to encode a solute binding protein of an ABC
transporter reduces transmission of Spiroplasma citri by the leafhopper
Circulifer haematoceps.

Boutareaud A(1), Danet JL, Garnier M, Saillard C.

Author information: 
(1)UMR Génomique Développement et Pouvoir Pathogène, INRA et Université Victor
Ségalen, 33883 Villenave d'Ornon cedex, France.

Spiroplasma citri is transmitted from plant to plant by phloem-feeding
leafhoppers. In an attempt to identify mechanisms involved in transmission,
mutants of S. citri affected in their transmission must be available. For this
purpose, transposon (Tn4001) mutagenesis was used to produce mutants which have
been screened for their ability to be transmitted by the leafhopper vector
Circulifer haematoceps to periwinkle plants. With one mutant (G76) which
multiplied in leafhoppers as efficiently as S. citri wild-type (wt) strain GII-3,
the plants showed symptoms 4 to 5 weeks later than those infected with wt GII-3. 
Thirty to fifty percent of plants exposed to leafhoppers injected with G76
remained symptomless, whereas for wt GII-3, all plants exposed to the
transmission showed severe symptoms. This suggests that the mutant G76 was
injected into plants by the leafhoppers less efficiently than wt GII-3. To check 
this possibility, the number of spiroplasma cells injected by a leafhopper
through a Parafilm membrane into SP4 medium was determined. Thirty times less
mutant G76 than wt GII-3 was transmitted through the membrane. These results
suggest that mutant G76 was affected either in its capacity to penetrate the
salivary glands and/or to multiply within them. In mutant G76, transposon Tn4001 
was shown to be inserted into a gene encoding a putative lipoprotein (Sc76) In
the ABCdb database Sc76 protein was noted as a solute binding protein of an ABC
transporter of the family S1_b. Functional complementation of the G76 mutant with
the Sc76 gene restored the wild phenotype, showing that Sc76 protein is involved 
in S. citri transmission by the leafhopper vector C. haematoceps.

PMCID: PMC444794
PMID: 15240270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Anal Toxicol. 2004 Jul-Aug;28(5):352-6.

Analysis of the sulfur mustard metabolite
1,1'-sulfonylbis[2-S-(N-acetylcysteinyl)ethane] in urine by negative ion
electrospray liquid chromatography- tandem mass spectrometry.

Read RW(1), Black RM.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JQ,
United Kingdom.

A method is described for the analysis of the sulfur mustard metabolite
1,1'-sulfonylbis[2-S-(N-acetylcysteinyl)ethane] in human urine. The analyte was
concentrated from urine on a polymeric SPE cartridge and analyzed by liquid
chromatography-negative ion electrospray tandem mass spectrometry in the selected
reaction monitoring mode. The limit of detection was 0.5-1 ng/mL. The metabolite 
was detected at concentrations close to the detection limit in samples of urine
from two casualties accidentally exposed to sulfur mustard from a First World War
munition.

PMID: 15239855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Anal Toxicol. 2004 Jul-Aug;28(5):346-51.

Analysis of beta-lyase metabolites of sulfur mustard in urine by electrospray
liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry.

Read RW(1), Black RM.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JQ,
United Kingdom.

A method is described for the analysis of b-lyase metabolites of sulfur mustard, 
1-methylsulfinyl-2- [2-(methylthio)ethylsulfonyl]ethane and 1,1'-sulfonylbis
[2-(methylsulfinyl)ethane], in human urine. The analytes were concentrated from
urine on an ENV+ solid-phase extraction cartridge and analyzed by liquid
chromatography-positive ion electrospray-tandem mass spectrometry in the selected
reaction monitoring mode. Quantitation was performed against deuterated internal 
standards. Limits of detection were 0.1-0.5 ng/mL. The metabolites were detected 
in samples of urine from human casualties of sulfur mustard poisoning. The method
provides a simpler alternative to gas chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry
analysis, avoiding the need for reduction to less polar analytes.

PMID: 15239854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Chromatogr A. 2004 Jun 4;1038(1-2):183-7.

Optimisation of solvent desorption conditions for chemical warfare agent and
simulant compounds from Porapak Q using experimental design. I. Methyl salicylate
and di(propylene glycol) monomethyl ether.

Muir B(1), Duffy HB, Moran MC.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Building 383b, Porton Down,
Salisbury SP4 OJQ, England, UK. bmuir@dstl.gov.uk

Factorial design (FD) was applied in order to develop an optimised method for the
detection of chemical warfare (CW) agent simulant compounds on Porapak Q.
Application of FD allowed study of the adsorption/desorption mechanism of
analytes. Di(propylene glycol) monomethyl ether (DPM) and methyl salicylate (MS) 
were selected for study as both compounds are employed in agent simulation trials
but are currently analysed by different methods. An analytical method for
simultaneous determination of both compounds was developed using solvent
desorption. The optimised method identified non-polar interactions as the primary
adsorption/desorption mechanism. Steel tubes were shown to be more suited for
sampling of simulants, due to lower variability in recovery compared to glass
tubes. Atmospheric detection limits for both simulants were estimated to be 0.2
mg m(-3) allowing the trace analysis of these compounds by gas chromatography
with flame ionisation detection (GC-FID).

PMID: 15233533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Infect Immun. 2004 Jul;72(7):4109-13.

Protection afforded by heat shock protein 60 from Francisella tularensis is due
to copurified lipopolysaccharide.

Hartley MG(1), Green M, Choules G, Rogers D, Rees DG, Newstead S, Sjostedt A,
Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Bldg. 245, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, 
Wilts SP4 0NS, United Kingdom. mghartley@dstl.gov.uk

Heat shock proteins (Hsps) have attracted significant attention as protective
antigens against a range of diseases caused by bacterial pathogens. However, more
recently there have been suggestions that the protective response is due to the
presence of peptide components other than Hsps. We have shown that mice that had 
been immunized with purified heat shock protein 60 (Hsp60) isolated from
Francisella tularensis were protected against a subsequent challenge with some
strains of the bacterium. However, this protection appeared to be due to trace
amounts of lipopolysaccharide, which were too low to be detected by using the
Limulus amoebocyte lysate assay. This finding raises the possibility that the
protection afforded by other bacterial Hsp60 proteins may be due to trace
quantities of polysaccharide antigens carried by and acting in conjunction with
the Hsps.

PMCID: PMC427437
PMID: 15213156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Tuberculosis (Edinb). 2004;84(3-4):205-17.

The influence of reduced oxygen availability on pathogenicity and gene expression
in Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Bacon J(1), James BW, Wernisch L, Williams A, Morley KA, Hatch GJ, Mangan JA,
Hinds J, Stoker NG, Butcher PD, Marsh PD.

Author information: 
(1)TB Research Group, Health Protection Agency, Porton Down, CAMR, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK. joanna.bacon@hpa.org.uk

We investigated how Mycobacterium tuberculosis responded to a reduced oxygen
tension in terms of its pathogenicity and gene expression by growing cells under 
either aerobic or low-oxygen conditions in chemostat culture. The chemostat
enabled us to control and vary the oxygen tension independently of other
environmental parameters, so that true cause-and-effect relationships of reduced 
oxygen availability could be established. Cells grown under low oxygen were more 
pathogenic for guinea pigs than those grown aerobically. The effect of reduced
oxygen on global gene expression was determined using DNA microarray. Spearman
rank correlation confirmed that microarray expression profiles were highly
reproducible between repeat cultures. Using microarray analysis we have
identified genes that respond to a low-oxygen environment without the influence
of other parameters such as nutrient depletion. Some of these genes appear to be 
involved in the biosynthesis of cell wall precursors and their induction may have
contributed to increased infectivity in the guinea pig. This study has shown that
a combination of chemostat culture and microarray presents a biologically robust 
and statistically reliable experimental approach for studying the effect of
relevant and specific environmental stimuli on mycobacterial virulence and gene
expression.

PMID: 15207490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Vaccine. 2004 Jun 23;22(19):2438-43.

An assessment of different DNA delivery systems for protection against
respiratory syncytial virus infection in the murine model: gene-gun delivery
induces IgG in the lung.

Tree JA(1), Bembridge G, Hou S, Taylor G, Fashola-Stone E, Melero J, Cranage MP.

Author information: 
(1)Health Protection Agency, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK.

Immunization with plasmid DNA (pDNA) has the potential to overcome the
difficulties of neonatal vaccination that may be required for protection against 
infection with respiratory syncytial virus (RSV); however, little is known about 
optimal delivery modalities. In this pilot study we compared mucosal delivery of 
pDNA encoding RSV F protein encapsulated in poly(DL-lactide-co-glycolide) with
delivery of pDNA by gene-gun for the induction of immunity in mice. Intra-gastric
or intra-nasal immunization with various doses of microparticles induced weak low
levels of RSV-specific serum antibodies in a proportion of mice; in contrast,
gene-gun vaccination led to protective immunity associated with a humoral
response. Interestingly, RSV-specific antibody was detected in lung fragment
cultures following intradermal vaccination with the gene-gun.

PMID: 15193407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Vaccine. 2004 Jun 30;22(20):2524-32.

A Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi vaccine expressing Yersinia pestis F1 antigen
on its surface provides protection against plague in mice.

Morton M(1), Garmory HS, Perkins SD, O'Dowd AM, Griffin KF, Turner AK, Bennett
AM, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Dstl Chemical and Biological Sciences,
Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.

A recombinant strain of attenuated Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi
surface-expressing Yersinia pestis F1 antigen was generated by transforming
strain BRD1116 (aroA aroC htrA) with plasmid pAH34L encoding the Y. pestis caf
operon. BRD1116/pAH34L was stable in vitro and in vivo. An immunisation regimen
of two intranasal doses of 1 x 10(8) cfu of BRD1116/pAH34L given intranasally to 
mice 7 days apart induced the strongest immune response compared to other
regimens and protected 13 out of 20 mice from lethal challenge with Y. pestis.
Intranasal immunisation of mice constitutes a model for oral immunisation with
Salmonella vaccines in humans. Thus, the results demonstrate that attenuated
strains of S. enterica serovar Typhi which express Y. pestis F1 antigen may be
developed to provide an oral vaccine against plague suitable for use in humans.

PMID: 15193377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Immunol Methods. 2004 May;288(1-2):55-60.

Novel application of an in vitro technique to the detection and quantification of
botulinum neurotoxin antibodies.

Hall YH(1), Chaddock JA, Moulsdale HJ, Kirby ER, Alexander FC, Marks JD, Foster
KA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Applied Microbiology and Research, Health Protection Agency Porton 
Down, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK.

Detection of Clostridium botulinum neurotoxin (BoNT) neutralising antibodies is
currently achieved using the mouse lethality assay (MLA). This technique has
provided the majority of the data for vaccine development and, with the
increasing use of BoNT as a therapeutic agent, the MLA is the assay of choice to 
evaluate 'non-responder' antisera. However, the MLA is semi-quantitative and has 
an animal consumption rate that raises ethical concerns. The development of an
alternative is therefore desirable. Here, we describe an in vitro neuronal
release assay that may represent such an alternative in terms of both its
sensitivity and ability to produce quantitative data. Initially recognised in the
course of assessing a novel vaccine candidate, the suitability of this assay has 
been further explored using an International standard. The results support the
conclusion that the detection of neutralising antibodies in human sera should be 
attempted using this method.

Copyright 2004 Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 15183085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Bacteriol. 2004 Jun;186(12):3922-7.

Spreading factors of Mycoplasma alligatoris, a flesh-eating mycoplasma.

Brown DR(1), Zacher LA, Farmerie WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611-0880, USA. brownd@mail.vetmed.ufl.edu

Mycoplasma alligatoris causes lethal invasive disease of alligators and caimans. 
A homolog of the nagH gene, encoding a hyaluronidase secreted by Clostridium
perfringens, and a C. perfringens hyaluronidase nagI or nagK pseudogene were
discovered in the M. alligatoris genome. The nagH gene was detected by PCR in the
closest relative of M. alligatoris, Mycoplasma crocodyli, but not in 40 other
species representing the Mycoplasma hominis, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, and
Spiroplasma phylogenetic clusters. The hyaluronidase activity in the cellular
fraction of M. alligatoris and M. crocodyli SP4 broth cultures was equivalent to 
10(-16) U of Streptomyces hyalurolyticus hyaluronidase CFU(-1). Negligible
activity was present in the cell-free supernatant fraction. No chondroitinase
activity was detected. There is also a novel homolog of the nanI gene, which
encodes a sialidase secreted by C. perfringens, in the M. alligatoris genome. The
signature YRIP and SXDXGXTW motifs and catalytic residues of the clostridial
sialidase are conserved in the mycoplasmal gene, but the leader sequence
necessary for its secretion by C. perfringens is absent. The gene was not
detected by PCR in any other mycoplasma. Potent cell-associated sialidase
activity was present in M. alligatoris colonies on agar but not in the cell-free 
supernatants of broth cultures or in M. crocodyli. The presence of hyaluronidase 
and sialidase in M. alligatoris is consistent with the rapid invasiveness and
necrotizing effects of this organism, and the lack of sialidase in M. crocodyli
is consistent with its comparatively attenuated virulence. This genetic and
biochemical evidence suggests that the spreading factors hyaluronidase and
sialidase, a combination unprecedented in mycoplasmas, are the basis of the
virulence of M. alligatoris.

PMCID: PMC419932
PMID: 15175306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Expert Opin Biol Ther. 2004 Jun;4(6):965-73.

Yersinia pestis (plague) vaccines.

Titball RW(1), Williamson ED.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ, UK. rtitball@dstl.gov.uk

Live attenuated and killed whole cell vaccines against disease caused by Yersinia
pestis have been available since the early part of the last century. Although
these vaccines indicate the feasibility of protecting against disease, they have 
a number of shortcomings. The live attenuated vaccine is highly reactogenic and
is not licensed for use in humans. The killed whole cell vaccine, also
reactogenic, provides poor protection against pneumonic plague and immunisation
requires multiple doses of the vaccine. Against this background, a range of
candidate vaccines, including rationally attenuated mutants, subunit vaccines and
naked DNA vaccines have been described. Of these, an injected subunit vaccine is 
likely to offer the best near-term solution to the provision of a vaccine that
protects against both bubonic and pneumonic plague.

PMID: 15174978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Am J Surg Pathol. 2004 Jun;28(6):801-7.

Consistent immunostaining for cyclin D1 can be achieved on a routine basis using 
a newly available rabbit monoclonal antibody.

Cheuk W(1), Wong KO, Wong CS, Chan JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Kowloon, Hong Kong, SAR
China. cheuk_wah@hotmail.com

Rabbit monoclonal antibody (MAb), which has become available only recently,
theoretically combines the advantage of the high affinity attributable to its
rabbit origin and the high specificity due to its monoclonal nature. Since
immunohistochemical demonstration of cyclin D1 is notoriously difficult, this
study aims to assess whether a newly available rabbit MAb against cyclin D1 (SP4)
can improve the consistency of immunostaining, especially for the diagnosis of
mantle cell lymphoma (MCL). A total of 150 cases of lymphoproliferative lesions, 
including 30 cases of MCL, histologic mimickers of MCL, and various types of
lymphomas and leukemias, were studied. Immunostaining was performed on
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sections using a labeled
streptavidin-biotin peroxidase system in an automated immunostainer. All cases of
MCL expressed cyclin D1, with a higher median staining score (8 out of a maximum 
of 12) compared with mouse MAb DCS-6 (score 4). In addition, 2 of 15 cases of
B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL), 3 of 12 cases of multiple myeloma,
and 2 of 5 cases of hairy cell leukemia were also positive. Comparable staining
results could also be achieved by an optimized manual staining protocol. This
study thus confirms the superior performance of the rabbit MAb SP4, which should 
permit consistent immunostaining for cyclin D1 to be readily achieved. The value 
of cyclin D1 immunohistochemistry in the differential diagnosis of MCL from other
low-grade B-cell lymphomas is also affirmed, but with the caveat that rare cases 
of B-CLL can also be cyclin D1 positive.

PMID: 15166673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2004 Jul;54(1):95-9. Epub 2004 May 26.

Post-exposure prophylaxis of systemic anthrax in mice and treatment with
fluoroquinolones.

Steward J(1), Lever MS, Simpson AJ, Sefton AM, Brooks TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 OJQ, UK.
jasteward@dstl.gov.uk

OBJECTIVES: To compare the fluoroquinolones gatifloxacin and moxifloxacin with
ciprofloxacin for post-exposure prophylaxis of systemic anthrax in a BALB/c mouse
model.
METHODS: Treated mice and controls were inoculated subcutaneously with 5 x 10(4) 
spores/mouse of Bacillus anthracis Ames strain and observed for 37 days after
challenge. Treated mice were given 100 mg/kg of antibiotic orally twice daily for
14 days, starting at various times post-challenge.
RESULTS: Treatment starting 6 h post-challenge resulted in survival rates of 90%,
15% and 40% for gatifloxacin, moxifloxacin and ciprofloxacin, respectively.
Treatment commencing 24 h post-challenge resulted in survival rates of 65%, 10%
and 5%, respectively. Treatment starting more than 24 h after exposure had little
effect on survival.
CONCLUSIONS: Gatifloxacin appeared to be more effective than moxifloxacin or
ciprofloxacin, at similar doses, for early post-exposure treatment of murine
systemic anthrax. However, these results might be due to differences in potency
or pharmacokinetic properties.

PMID: 15163650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Vaccine. 2004 Feb 25;22(8):947-57.

Protection against plague afforded by immunisation with DNA vaccines optimised
for expression of the Yersinia pestis V antigen.

Garmory HS(1), Freeman D, Brown KA, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl Chemical and Biological Sciences, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.
hsgarmory@dstl.gov.uk

DNA vaccine vectors were produced which were optimised for expression of the
Yersinia pestis V antigen in the BALB/c mouse model. Six different eukaryotic
promoters were compared, resulting in the selection of the CMV promoter with an
additional translational enhancer downstream. Surprisingly, alteration of the
codon usage of the lcrV gene encoding V antigen for expression in murine cells
was not found to improve the antibody responses generated against V antigen. The 
DNA vaccine was subsequently evaluated in its delivery via intramuscular
injection compared to gene-gun administration. Gene-gun delivery was found to
induce significantly higher V antigen-specific antibody responses and also
afforded the highest level of protection against Y. pestis challenge. In
addition, the protection achieved could be increased by using a 'prime and boost'
strategy, administering the DNA vaccine followed by recombinant V antigen. These 
results show promise for a DNA vaccine against plague.

PMID: 15161071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2004 May 15;234(2):281-7.

Age influences resistance of Caenorhabditis elegans to killing by pathogenic
bacteria.

Laws TR(1), Harding SV, Smith MP, Atkins TP, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire
SP4 OJQ, UK. trlaws@dstl.gov.uk

Caenorhabditis elegans has previously been proposed as an alternative host for
models of infectious disease caused by human pathogens. When exposed to some
human pathogenic bacteria, the life span of nematodes is significantly reduced.
We have shown that mutations in the age-1, and/or age-2 genes of C. elegans, that
normally enhance life expectancy, can also increase resistance to killing by the 
bacterial pathogens Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Salmonella enterica var. Typhimurium,
Burkholderia cepacia or Yersinia pseudotuberculosis. We also found that the rate 
at which wild-type C. elegans was killed by the bacterial pathogens tested
increased as nematodes aged. In the case of P. aeruginosa infection, the
difference in life span of wild type and age-1 mutants of C. elegans was not due 
to differences in the level of bacterial colonisation of the gut.

Copyright 2004 Federation of European Microbiological Societies

PMID: 15135534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 May 14;317(4):1165-70.

Proteolytic inactivation of the bovine spongiform encephalopathy agent.

McLeod AH(1), Murdoch H, Dickinson J, Dennis MJ, Hall GA, Buswell CM, Carr J,
Taylor DM, Sutton JM, Raven ND.

Author information: 
(1)Health Protection Agency, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK.

Erratum in
    Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Sep 3;321(4):1069.

Thermostable proteases have been investigated for their ability to provide a
novel biological solution to decontamination of prion agents responsible for
transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs). Proteases were identified that 
digested total mouse brain homogenate (MBH) protein from uninfected mice. These
proteases were then evaluated for digestion of BSE (301V) infectious MBH over a
range of pH and temperatures, screened for loss of anti-prion antibody 6H4
immunoreactivity and protease-treated infectious MBH assessed in mouse bioassay
using VM mice. Despite a number of proteases eliminating all 6H4-immunoreactive
material, only the subtilisin-enzyme Properase showed a significant extension in 
incubation period in mouse bioassays following a 30-min incubation at 60 degrees 
C and pH 12. These results demonstrate the potential of the method to provide a
practical solution to the problems of TSE contamination of surgical instruments
and highlight the inadequacy of using Western blot for assessment of
decontamination/inactivation of TSE agents.

PMID: 15094392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Virus Res. 2004 Jun 15;102(2):185-9.

Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever virus: sequence analysis of the small RNA
segments from a collection of viruses world wide.

Hewson R(1), Chamberlain J, Mioulet V, Lloyd G, Jamil B, Hasan R, Gmyl A, Gmyl L,
Smirnova SE, Lukashev A, Karganova G, Clegg C.

Author information: 
(1)Special Pathogens, Health Protection Agency Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 OJG,
Wilts, UK. roger.hewson@hpa.org.uk

Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFv) is a member of the genus
Nairovirus in the family Bunyaviridae. It possesses a tripartite, single stranded
RNA genome of negative polarity consisting of large (L), medium (M) and small (S)
segments. CCHF virus is enzootic in life stock and wild animals in many parts of 
the Middle East, Asia and Africa and is also recognised in Southeast Europe.
Severe disease, manifest as haemorrhagic fever and high mortality rates (up to
50%), is only recognised in humans. We have determined the complete sequence of
the small genomic RNA segment from several strains of CCHF virus from outbreaks
in Pakistan 2000, Baghdad 1976 and Uzbekistan 1967. Phylogenetic analysis of
three datasets of sequences from the small genomic RNA segment available from a
range of strains indicates that they can be divided into seven subtypes.
Superimposed on this pattern are links between distant geographic locations,
pointing to the existence of a global reservoir of CCHFv. In some cases these
links may originate from trade in livestock, and long-distance carriage of virus 
or infected ticks during bird migration.

PMID: 15084400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Clin Lab Immunol. 2003;52:23-40.

Antibodies to Acinetobacter bacteria and bovine brain peptides, measured in
bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) in an attempt to develop an ante-mortem
test.

Wilson C(1), Hughes LE, Rashid T, Ebringer A, Bansal S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Health and Life Sciences, King's College London, London, UK.

Bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) is a neurological disease of cattle.
Antibody responses to Acinetobacter radioresistens and six other bacteria, as
well as to bovine myelin basic protein and bovine neurofilaments were measured in
128 BSE positive animals, 63 BSE negative animals and 64 healthy control animals.
Animals positive for BSE had the highest levels of antibodies to Acinetobacter
radioresistens (p < 0.0001) and also autoantibodies to bovine myelin basic
protein (p < 0.0001) and bovine neurofilaments (p < 0.0001). In an endeavour to
develop an antemortem test for BSE, 12 different strains of Acinetobacter were
further tested in a MAN (myelin-Acinetobacter-neurofilament) assay involving 28
BSE positive and 18 BSE negative animals and defined bovine brain peptides. Five 
out of the 12 Acinetobacter bacteria tested [Acinetobacter (sp3), A. haemolyticus
(sp4), A. johnsonii (sp7), A. lwoffii (sp8) and Acinetobacter (sp9)] gave 100%
sensitivity and 100% specificity for detecting BSE. The highest anti-bacterial
antibody level compared to controls was obtained with A. johnsonii. Further field
studies are required to determine the validity of the MAN assay in detecting
animals affected with BSE.

PMID: 15079887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Brain Res Brain Res Rev. 2004 Apr;45(1):18-29.

Phylogenomic and chemotaxonomic analysis of the endocannabinoid system.

McPartland JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)GW Pharmaceuticals Ltd., Porton Down Science Park, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4
0JQ, UK. jmcpartland@unitec.ac.nz

The endocannabinoid system consists of two cannabinoid (CB) receptors, seven
ligands, and ligand-catabolizing enzymes such as fatty acid amid hydrolase (FAAH)
and monoglyceride lipase (MGL). The system's phylogenetic distribution is poorly 
known. The ligands cannot be molecularly investigated because they are not
polypeptides and their specific synthetic enzymes have not been identified, so no
sequences are available. Ligand phylogenetics can be inferred, nonetheless, by
their presence in a range of extant organisms. Thus a meta-analysis of ligand
extraction studies was performed (chemotaxonomy), and compared to a molecular
search for homologs of CB receptors, vanilloid receptors (VR1), FAAH, and MGL in 
the genomes of sequenced organisms (phylogenomics). Putative homologs underwent
functional mapping to ascertain the presence of critical amino acid motifs known 
to impart protein functionality. From an evolutionary perspective it appears that
(1) endocannabinoid ligands evolved before CB receptors; (2) the ligands evolved 
independently multiple times; (3) CB receptors evolved prior to the
metazoan-bilaterian divergence (ie, between extant Hydra and leech), but were
secondarily lost in the Ecdysozoa; (4) VR1 may predate CB receptors but its
affinity for endocannabinoids is a recent acquisition, appearing after the lower 
vertebrate-mammal divergence; (5) MGL may be as old as the ligands, whereas FAAH 
evolved recently, after the appearance of vertebrates. FAAH's emergence
correlates with VR1's newly-found affinity for anandamide; this overlap in
evolutionary time is recapitulated by complementary distribution patterns of
FAAH, VR1, and anandamide in the brain. Linking FAAH, VR1, and anandamide implies
a coupling among the remaining "older" parts of the endocannabinoid system, MGL, 
CB receptors, and 2-AG.

PMID: 15063097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2004 Aug;310(2):678-86. Epub 2004 Mar 18.

A guinea pig hippocampal slice model of organophosphate-induced seizure activity.

Harrison PK(1), Sheridan RD, Green AC, Scott IR, Tattersall JE.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, DSTL, Bldg. 04, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4
0JQ, UK. pkharrison@dstl.gov.uk

Extracellular recording techniques have been used in the guinea pig hippocampal
slice preparation to investigate the electrophysiological actions of the
organophosphate (OP) anticholinesterase soman. When applied at a concentration of
100 nM, soman induced epileptiform activity in the CA1 region in approximately
75% of slices. This effect was mimicked by the anticholinesterases paraoxon (1
and 3 microM), physostigmine (30 microM), and neostigmine (30 microM), thus
providing indirect evidence that the epileptiform response was mediated by
elevated acetylcholine levels. Soman-induced bursting was inhibited by the
muscarinic receptor antagonists atropine (concentrations tested, 0.1-10 microM), 
telenzepine (0.03-3 microM), AF-DX116 [11-(2-[(diethylamino)methyl]-1-piperidinyl
acetyl)-5,11-dihydro-6H-pyrido 92.b-b) (1,4)-benzodiazepin-6-one] (0.3-300
microM), and biperiden (0.1-10 microM) and by the benzodiazepine anticonvulsants 
diazepam (3-30 microM) and midazolam (3-30 microM), but it was not inhibited by
the nicotinic antagonists mecamylamine (30 microM) and methyllycaconitine (300
nM). In contrast to soman-induced epileptiform activity, bursting induced by the 
K(+) channel blocker 4-aminopyridine (30 microM), the adenosine A1 receptor
antagonist 8-cyclopentyl-1,3-dipropylxanthine (30 nM) or perfusion with low
Mg(2+) buffer was insensitive to atropine (10 microM). The ability of muscarinic 
antagonists and benzodiazepines to inhibit soman-induced epileptiform activity is
in accordance with the in vivo pharmacology of soman-induced seizures and
suggests that the guinea pig hippocampal slice preparation may provide a useful
tool for the evaluation of novel anticonvulsant therapies for the treatment of
seizures related to OP poisoning.

PMID: 15031302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Virol Methods. 2004 Apr;117(1):81-90.

Amplification refractory mutation system PCR assays for the detection of variola 
and Orthopoxvirus.

Pulford D(1), Meyer H, Brightwell G, Damon I, Kline R, Ulaeto D.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, DSTL Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK.
davidpulford@hotmail.com

PCR assays that can identify the presence of variola virus (VARV) sequences in an
unknown DNA sample were developed using principles established for the
amplification refractory mutation system (ARMS). The assay's specificity utilised
unique single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) identified among Orthopoxvirus (OPV)
orthologs of the vaccinia virus Copenhagen strain A13L and A36R genes. When a
variola virus specific primer was used with a consensus primer in an ARMS assay
with different Orthopoxvirus genomes, a PCR product was only amplified from
variola virus DNA. Incorporating a second consensus primer into the assay
produced a multiplex PCR that provided Orthopoxvirus generic and variola-specific
products with variola virus DNA. We tested two single nucleotide polymorphisms
with a panel of 43 variola virus strains, collected over 40 years from countries 
across the world, and have shown that they provide reliable markers for variola
virus identification. The variola virus specific primers did not produce
amplicons with either assay format when tested with 50 other Orthopoxvirus DNA
samples. Our analysis shows that these two polymorphisms were conserved in
variola virus genomes and provide a reliable signature of Orthopoxvirus species
identification.

PMID: 15019263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J R Army Med Corps. 2003 Dec;149(4):248-54.

Varicose veins--an old dog and some new tricks.

Garner JP(1), Gerrard DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury, Wilts, SP4 0JQ. jeffgarner4@hotmail.com

There are many new methods to treat varicose veins being tried and tested around 
the world, many using patented techniques. They would appear to demonstrate many 
of the features a military surgeon might deem beneficial for treating a service
population, a rapid return to duties amongst them. There are some significant
drawbacks. All of these modalities need to offer long-term evidence of efficacy
to demonstrate advantage over current standard. The endovenous therapies utilise 
expensive equipment that limit their introduction and provide a potential for
novel complications as well as novel therapy. Modified sclerotherapy as described
here has many advantages; it is incredibly cheap, minimally invasive and easily
repeatable--in fact planned re-intervention is used in some protocols. Until
long-term results are available, it would seem premature to recommend any of
these new treatments for use in service personnel with primary varicose veins.
Military vascular surgeons will await these results with interest, as the service
population would have much to gain from a modality that reliably treats the veins
and ensures a swift return to service.

PMID: 15015794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Neurosci Lett. 2004 Mar 11;357(3):183-6.

Periodic orbit analysis reveals subtle effects of atropine on epileptiform
activity in the guinea-pig hippocampal slice.

Harrison PK(1), Tattersall JE, Clement RA.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.
pkharrison@dstl.gov.uk

Epileptiform activity is a state often induced in vitro in order to study
seizures and antiepileptic/anticonvulsant drugs. Traditional methods of
evaluating drug effects have commonly relied upon measuring changes in the
frequency and duration of such events. We have used a recently developed
mathematical technique based on periodic orbit analysis to investigate the effect
of atropine (a muscarinic antagonist) on epileptiform activity induced by soman
(an irreversible acetylcholinesterase inhibitor), 4-aminopyridine (a K+ channel
blocker) and 8-cyclopentyl-1,3-dipropylxanthine (an adenosine A1 receptor
antagonist) in the guinea-pig hippocampal slice. This technique showed that
significant changes in periodic orbits can occur without an accompanying change
in burst rate. These results suggest that periodic orbit analysis may be useful
in detecting and predicting novel actions of anticonvulsant drugs.

PMID: 15003280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Chromatogr A. 2004 Mar 5;1028(2):313-20.

Analysis of chemical warfare agents. I. Use of aliphatic thiols in the trace
level determination of Lewisite compounds in complex matrices.

Muir B(1), Slater BJ, Cooper DB, Timperley CM.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Building 383b, Porton Down,
Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK. bmuir@dstl.gov.uk

A series of normal aliphatic thiols have been used to derivatise the chemical
warfare agents Lewisites I and II (LI and LII) in hydrocarbon matrices. Varying
the chain length of the thiol allowed adjustment of derivative tR by 5.9 min for 
Lewisite I and 5.3 min for Lewisite II. Linear regression analysis of the chain
length of the thiol derivatives of the Lewisite species, and that of a series of 
normal alkanes against tR, allowed regression models to be developed for each set
of compounds. Application of the models allowed thiol reagents to be chosen to
give derivatives of Lewisites I and II that eluted before and after the major
hydrocarbon contaminant. Limits of detection were comparable for all thiol
derivatives analysed by GC-MS in the selection ion monitoring mode (all below 1
microg ml(-1)). The robustness of this approach was illustrated by successful
identification of Lewisite I in samples from the Sixth Proficiency Test
(organised by the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, OPCW) in 
a matrix of 1 mg ml(-1) diesel oil.

PMID: 14989485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Microbiology. 2004 Feb;150(Pt 2):355-63.

Identification of proteins in the exosporium of Bacillus anthracis.

Redmond C(1), Baillie LW, Hibbs S, Moir AJ, Moir A.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4
0JQ, UK. credmond@dstl.gov.uk

Spores of Bacillus anthracis, the causative agent of anthrax, possess an
exosporium. As the outer surface layer of these mature spores, the exosporium
represents the primary contact surface between the spore and environment/host and
is a site of spore antigens. The exosporium was isolated from the endospores of
the B. anthracis wild-type Ames strain, from a derivative of the Ames strain
cured of plasmid pXO2(-), and from a previously isolated pXO1(-), pXO2(-) doubly 
cured strain, B. anthracis UM23Cl2. The protein profiles of SDS-PAGE-separated
exosporium extracts were similar for all three. This suggests that avirulent
variants lacking either or both plasmids are realistic models for studying the
exosporium from spores of B. anthracis. A number of loosely adsorbed proteins
were identified from amino acid sequences determined by either nanospray-MS/MS or
N-terminal sequencing. Salt and detergent washing of the exosporium fragments
removed these and revealed proteins that are likely to represent
structural/integral exosporium proteins. Seven proteins were identified in washed
exosporium: alanine racemase, inosine hydrolase, ExsF, CotY, ExsY, CotB and a
novel protein, named ExsK. CotY, ExsY and CotB are homologues of Bacillus
subtilis outer spore coat proteins, but ExsF and ExsK are specific to B.
anthracis and other members of the Bacillus cereus group.

PMID: 14766913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Appl Toxicol. 2004 Jan-Feb;24(1):37-46.

Examination of changes in connective tissue macromolecular components of large
white pig skin following application of Lewisite vapour.

Lindsay CD(1), Hambrook JL, Brown RF, Platt JC, Knight R, Rice P.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury, Wilts SP4 0JQ,
UK. clindsay@dstl.gov.uk

The aim of this study was to provide information about the degradative processes 
that occur in major connective tissue components in skin following exposure of
large white pigs to Lewisite vapour. Of particular interest were alterations in
glycoproteins, which are known to mediate dermo-epidermal attachment (laminin and
type IV collagen) and the main collagen found in the dermis (type III collagen). 
The immunostaining of transfer blots from skin extracts run on sodium dodecyl
sulphate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis gels revealed no evidence of
cross-linking of laminin or of type III or IV collagen. However, there was
evidence of a very considerable degradation of laminin and, to a lesser extent,
of type IV collagen. Type III collagen did not appear to be degraded in skin
exposed to Lewisite. These degradative processes appeared to be more severe than 
found in previous studies in Yucatan mini-pigs percutaneously exposed to sulphur 
mustard, in which only laminin was found to undergo partial cleavage rather than 
wholesale degradation. The results suggest that damage to macromolecular
components in the sub-epidermal basement membrane in skin which mediate
dermo-epidermal separation processes may be a common feature in the mechanism of 
action of vesicating agents such as Lewisite and sulphur mustard. It is of
interest that the damage to laminin in this study appeared to be more severe than
that previously found for sulphur mustard. This suggests that skin can suffer
substantial damage yet, in the case of Lewisite exposure, recover relatively
quickly. However, Lewisite is not an alkylating agent. Sulphur mustard, in
contrast, generates characteristically slow healing lesions, most probably
because of its ability to alkylate cell types that normally would be involved in 
skin regenerative processes.

Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 14745845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Int Dent J. 2003 Dec;53(6 Suppl 1):371-8.

Antimicrobial effects of a novel Triclosan/zinc citrate dentifrice against mixed 
culture oral biofilms.

Finney M(1), Walker JT, Marsh PD, Brading MG.

Author information: 
(1)Health Protection Agency, Porton Down, Centre for Applied Microbiology &
Research, Salisbury SP4 0JG, UK. michelle.finney@hpa.org.uk

AIM: To compare the antimicrobial efficacy in vitro of a new fluoride system
containing 0.3% Triclosan and 2.0% zinc citrate with a standard fluoride
toothpaste against bacteria commonly isolated from dental plaque.
METHOD: Mature biofilms of fixed depth containing ten oral bacterial species were
developed in a model system and then exposed to the formulations both in situ and
ex situ.
RESULTS: The standard fluoride toothpaste had limited activity against the Gram
positive species following 1 and 5 minutes ex situ exposure (p = 0.004 and p =
0.02, respectively) but none against the Gram negative species; also, no overall 
effect following repeated pulsing in situ was observed. In contrast, viable
counts of Gram positive and Gram negative species were markedly reduced following
ex situ exposure for 1 and 5 minutes to the new formulation (Gram positive: p =
0.0007 and p = 0.04; Gram negative: p = 0.04 and p = 0.00001, respectively).
Counts of Gram positive bacteria were reduced by 99.9% over a 4-day in situ
pulsing period, while no Gram negative species were recoverable from the biofilm 
by day 4.
CONCLUSION: The new toothpaste formulation had a broad spectrum of antimicrobial 
activity against biofilm consortia containing bacteria associated with both
dental caries and periodontal diseases.

PMID: 14725381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Int Med Res. 2003 Nov-Dec;31(6):552-6.

Acupressure versus oxybutinin in the treatment of enuresis.

Yuksek MS(1), Erdem AF, Atalay C, Demirel A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anaesthesiology and Reanimation, School of Medicine, Atatürk
University, Erzurum, Turkey. yuksek@hotmail.com

We aimed to assess the efficacy of acupressure for treating nocturnal enuresis,
compared with oxybutinin. Acupressure was administered to 12 patients by their
parents, who had been taught the technique. Pressure was applied at acupuncture
points Gv4, Gv15, Gv20, B23, B28, B32, H7, H9, St36, Sp4, Sp6, Sp12, Ren2, Ren3, 
Ren6, K3 and K5. Twelve control patients received 0.4 mg/kg oxybutinin. Parents
were asked to record incidences of bed-wetting and patients and/or parents
completed a questionnaire 15 days and 1, 3 and 6 months after the start of
treatment. Complete and partial responses after 6 months of treatment were seen
in 83.3% and 16.7%, respectively, of patients treated with acupressure, and in
58.3% and 33.3%, respectively, of children who received oxybutinin. In
conclusion, nocturnal enuresis can be partially treated by oxybutinin but
acupressure could be an alternative non-drug therapy. Acupressure has the
advantages of being non-invasive, painless and cost-effective.

PMID: 14708420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Hum Exp Toxicol. 2003 Nov;22(11):593-605.

The development of tolerance to Clostridium perfringens type D epsilon-toxin in
MDCK and G-402 cells.

Beal DR(1), Titball RW, Lindsay CD.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Dstl, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4
0JQ, UK.

The epithelial Madin Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cell line, Caucasian renal
leiomyoblastoma (G-402) cells, human small airways epithelial (HSAE) cells, human
bronchial epithelial (HBE) cells and human renal proximal tubule (HRPT)
epithelial cells were examined for sensitivity to Clostridium perfringens biotype
D epsilon-toxin. MDCK and G-402 cells were confirmed as being the only
established cell lines that are sensitive to the toxin. HSAE, HBE and HRPT
epithelial cells were only found to be sensitive to the toxin at concentrations
of > 1 mg/ mL. Cultures of MDCK and G-402 cells, with increased resistance
(tolerance) to the cytotoxic effects of epsilon-toxin, were developed by exposing
these cultures to progressively higher concentrations of toxin. The greatest
relative increase in tolerance to epsilon-toxin was developed in MDCK cells, in
which the LC50 in control cultures was 2 microg/mL as determined by the MTS/PMS
assay system; after selection for tolerance, this was raised to 100 microg/mL.
This represents a 50-fold increase in tolerance as measured by this index. Using 
G-402 cells, it was possible to increase the LC50 by twofold from 290 to 590
microg/mL. Subsequent 2-D electrophoresis of membrane preparations from tolerant 
and control MDCK cells revealed that the expression of a discrete group of
proteins found in control cells with a range of molecular weights from 32-36 kDa,
all with acidic isoelectric points (IEPs), were either not expressed in
epsilon-toxin tolerant cells or had undergone a shift in IEP to a more alkaline
pH in tolerant cells. This suggests that epsilon-toxin lethality in MDCK cells
may be mediated by membrane-located proteins. Their absence or alteration in
toxin-resistant cells would, at least partly, explain the failure of most cell
lines to demonstrate sensitivity to this toxin, despite being derived from
tissues that are damaged by epsilon-toxin. This approach may have utility in the 
study of other toxin-cell interactions and could be used in the development of
novel medical countermeasures by identifying cellular targets which mediate toxin
lethality.

PMID: 14686482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2003 Dec 5;229(1):103-10.

Gene transfer into Clostridium difficile CD630 and characterisation of its
methylase genes.

Herbert M(1), O'Keeffe TA, Purdy D, Elmore M, Minton NP.

Author information: 
(1)Health Protection Agency, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK.

Ignorance of pathogenesis in Clostridium difficile may be attributable to a lack 
of effective genetic tools. We have now shown that oriT-based shuttle vectors may
be conjugated from Escherichia coli donors to the C. difficile strain CD630, at
frequencies of around 10(-6) transconjugants per donor cell. Transfer is
unaffected by either sequences present on the vector or its methylation status.
Whilst the genome of this strain carries five methylase genes, there is no in
silico or experimental evidence for cognate restriction enzymes. It would seem
that the identified methylases do not participate in restriction-modification,
and must, therefore, fulfil another role. A similar situation most likely applies
to other clostridia.

PMID: 14659549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Genet Vaccines Ther. 2003 Sep 16;1(1):2.

DNA vaccines: improving expression of antigens.

Garmory HS(1), Brown KA, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl Chemical and Biological Sciences, Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JQ, UK.
hsgarmory@dstl.gov.uk

DNA vaccination is a relatively recent development in vaccine methodology. It is 
now possible to undertake a rational step-by-step approach to DNA vaccine design.
Strategies may include the incorporation of immunostimulatory sequences in the
backbone of the plasmid, co-expression of stimulatory molecules, utilisation of
localisation/secretory signals, and utilisation of the appropriate delivery
system, for example. However, another important consideration is the utilisation 
of methods designed to optimise transgene expression. In this review we discuss
the importance of regulatory elements, kozak sequences and codon optimisation in 
transgene expression.

PMCID: PMC244903
PMID: 14606963  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


151. Endocrinology. 2004 Feb;145(2):901-12. Epub 2003 Oct 23.

Transcriptional regulation of P450scc gene expression in the embryonic rodent
nervous system.

Hammer F(1), Compagnone NA, Vigne JL, Bair SR, Mellon SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, University of
California-San Francisco, 513 Parnassus Avenue, Box 0556, San Francisco, CA
94143-0556, USA.

Steroid hormones are synthesized in adrenals, gonads, placenta, and the central
and peripheral nervous systems (neurosteroids). Neurosteroidogenesis, like
conventional steroidogenesis, begins with the conversion of cholesterol to
pregnenolone, catalyzed by mitochondrial P450 side-chain cleavage enzyme
(P450scc). Transcription of the P450scc gene in the adrenals and gonads requires 
steroidogenic factor-1, which is not expressed in the nervous system cells that
express P450scc. A crucial transcriptional regulatory region of the rat P450scc
gene is at -130/-94. We have purified two nuclear proteins (70 and 86 kDa) from
rat glial C6 cells that specifically bind to the -130/-94 region of the rat
P450scc promoter and identified them as the DNA-binding subunits of autoimmune
antigen Ku. Ku colocalized with P450scc in several regions of the nervous system,
but its overexpression in C6 cells did not augment transcription from a -130/-94 
Luciferase construct. Members of the Sp family of transcription factors also bind
to the same DNA sequence as Ku. Sp4 and Sp2 colocalize with P450scc in the
nervous system early in development, whereas Sp1 and Sp4 colocalize later in
development. Sp1 robustly increased transcription from this element in
Sp-deficient Drosophila SL2 cells, and Ku synergistically enhanced this
Sp1-stimulated transcription. Thus, members of the Sp transcription family play a
role in activating P450scc gene transcription in the nervous system, and Ku may
further augment this activation.

PMID: 14576192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Med Microbiol. 2003 Oct;52(Pt 10):845-51.

Characterization of the O antigen gene cluster and structural analysis of the O
antigen of Francisella tularensis subsp. tularensis.

Prior JL(1), Prior RG, Hitchen PG, Diaper H, Griffin KF, Morris HR, Dell A,
Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK. JLPRIOR@dstl.gov.uk

A gene cluster encoding enzymes involved in LPS O antigen biosynthesis was
identified from the partial genome sequence of Francisella tularensis subsp.
tularensis Schu S4. All of the genes within the cluster were assigned putative
functions based on sequence similarity with genes from O antigen biosynthetic
clusters from other bacteria. Ten pairs of overlapping primers were designed to
amplify the O antigen biosynthetic cluster by PCR from nine strains of F.
tularensis. Although the gene cluster was present in all strains, there was a
size difference in one of the PCR products between subsp. tularensis strains and 
subsp. holarctica strains. LPS was purified from F. tularensis subsp. tularensis 
Schu S4 and the O antigen was shown by mass spectrometry to have a structure
similar to that of F. tularensis subsp. holarctica strain 15. When LPS from F.
tularensis subsp. tularensis Schu S4 was used to immunize mice that were then
challenged with F. tularensis subsp. tularensis Schu S4, an extended time to
death was observed.

PMID: 12972577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Novartis Found Symp. 2003;250:260-70; discussion 271-5, 276-9.

Defects in cardiac conduction system lineages and malignant arrhythmias:
developmental pathways and disease.

St Amand TR(1), Lu JT, Chien KR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of California San Diego, 0613-C,
9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

To unravel the complex disease phenotype of heart failure, we are utilizing an
integrative approach employing genomics, physiology, and mouse genetics to
identify nodal pathways for specific physiological end points such as myocyte
stretch activation responses, contractility and electrical conduction. A new
class of genetic pathways for cardiac sudden death and associated arrhythmias has
been based on transcription factors that control conduction system lineages,
including HF1b/SP4 and NKX2.5. Previous studies have established that HF1b plays 
a critical role in conduction system lineage formation and the loss of HF1b leads
to a confused electrophysiological identity in Purkinje and ventricular cell
lineages, resulting in cardiac sudden death and marked tachy and brady
arrhythmias. Utilizing Hf1b and Nkx2.5 floxed alleles, we now have identified the
primary pathways which link these transcription factors with cardiac
arrythmogenesis. Mice which harbour a neural crest restricted knockout of HF1b
display marked arrhythmogenesis and conduction system defects, implicating neural
crest cues in conduction system development and disease. Mice which harbour a
ventricular-restricted knockout of Nkx2.5 display completely normal conduction at
birth, but a hypoplastic atrioventricular (AV) node. During maturation,
progressive complete heart block ensues, associated with a selective dropout of
distal AV nodal cell lineages at the boundaries of the penetrating His bundle.
Single cell analyses examining individual nodal cells within AV node of
ventricular restricted Nkx2.5 knockout mice clearly document a cell autonomous
requirement for NKX2.5 within AV nodal lineages per se.
Micro-electrophysiological AV nodal mapping indicates a selective conduction
defect at the boundary of the distal AV node and His bundle. HF1b and NKX2.5
reflect new cardiac cell non-autonomous and autonomous pathways for conduction
system lineage defects and associated cardiac arrythmogenesis.

PMID: 12956335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Virology. 2003 Aug 15;313(1):13-21.

Mucosal immunization with PLGA-microencapsulated DNA primes a SIV-specific CTL
response revealed by boosting with cognate recombinant modified vaccinia virus
Ankara.

Sharpe S(1), Hanke T, Tinsley-Bown A, Dennis M, Dowall S, McMichael A, Cranage M.

Author information: 
(1)Health Protection Agency, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JG, UK.
sally.sharpe@hpa.org.uk

Systemically administered DNA encoding a recombinant human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) derived immunogen effectively primes a cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL)
response in macaques. In this further pilot study we have evaluated mucosal
delivery of DNA as an alternative priming strategy. Plasmid DNA, pTH.HW, encoding
a multi-CTL epitope gene, was incorporated into poly(D,L-lactic-co-glycolic acid)
microparticles of less than 10 microm in diameter. Five intrarectal immunizations
failed to stimulate a circulating vaccine-specific CTL response in 2 Mamu-A*01(+)
rhesus macaques. However, 1 week after intradermal immunization with a cognate
modified vaccinia virus Ankara vaccine MVA.HW, CTL responses were detected in
both animals that persisted until analysis postmortem, 12 weeks after the final
boost. In contrast, a weaker and less durable response was seen in an animal
vaccinated with the MVA construct alone. Analysis of lymphoid tissues revealed a 
disseminated CTL response in peripheral and regional lymph nodes but not the
spleen of both mucosally primed animals.

PMID: 12951017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J R Army Med Corps. 2003 Jun;149(2):110-20.

Hypertonic saline dextran--the fluid of choice in the resuscitation of
haemorrhagic shock?

Sapsford W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton,
Salisbury Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ.

PMID: 12929518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Vaccine. 2003 Sep 8;21(25-26):3912-8.

Protective efficacy of a fully recombinant plague vaccine in the guinea pig.

Jones SM(1), Griffin KF, Hodgson I, Williamson ED.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire
SP4 0JQ, UK.

A fully recombinant sub-unit vaccine comprising the protein antigens rF1 + rV has
been demonstrated to protect immunised guinea pigs against exposure to 10(5)
colony-forming units (CFU) of virulent Yersinia pestis. Additionally, IgG
purified from rF1 + rV-immunised guinea pig serum, protected the mouse by passive
immunisation against challenge with Y. pestis whereas IgG purified from the serum
of guinea pigs immunised with a licensed killed whole cell (KWC) vaccine for
plague, protected less well. Guinea pigs immunised with the licensed killed whole
cell vaccine developed an IgG titre for fraction 1 (F1) but not for V antigen.
The differential in protection conferred on the mouse by passive immunisation
with guinea pig IgG, was abrogated by the use of IgG purified from guinea pigs
immunised with killed whole cell vaccine supplemented with V antigen. These
findings indicate that the reduced efficacy of the licensed killed whole cell
vaccine formulation previously observed in the mouse can be attributed to lack of
the V antigen. Cross-protection of the mouse with guinea pig IgG suggests that
the recognition of neutralising epitopes in the F1 and V proteins is conserved
between these two species.

PMID: 12922126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Gene. 2003 Jul 17;312:297-303.

Functional mapping of cannabinoid receptor homologs in mammals, other
vertebrates, and invertebrates.

McPartland JM(1), Glass M.

Author information: 
(1)GW Pharmaceuticals, Porton Down Science Park, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ,
UK. jmcpartland@unitec.ac.nz

Over the past decade, several putative homologs of cannabinoid receptors (CBRs)
have been identified by homology screening. Homology screening utilizes sequence 
alignment search engines to recognize homologs. We investigated these putative
CBR homologs further by 'functional mapping' of their deduced amino acid
sequences. The entire pharmacophore of a CBR has not yet been elucidated, but
point-mutation studies have identified over 20 amino acid residues that impart
CBR specificity for ligand recognition and/or signal transduction. Twenty
point-mutation studies were used to construct a CBR functionality matrix. Sixteen
putative CBR homologs were then mapped over the matrix. Several putative homologs
did not hold up to this analysis: human GPR3, GPR6, GPR12, and Caenorhabditis
elegans C02H7.2 expressed a series of crippling substitutions in the matrix,
strongly suggesting they do not encode functional CBRs. Mapping the contested
leech (Hirudo medicinalis) CBR sequence suggests that it encodes a functional
CB1; it expresses fewer substitutions than the sea squirt (Ciona intestinalis)
CB1 sequence. Mapping a putative CB2 ortholog in the puffer fish (Fugu rubripes
T012234) suggests it may encode a CBR other than CB2. These findings are
consistent with the lack of experimental data proving these putative CBRs have
affinity for cannabinoid ligands. Matrix analysis also reveals that SR144528, a
'CB2-specific' synthetic antagonist, has affinity for non-mammalian CB1
receptors, and that L3.45 appears to be CB2-specific, its cognate in CB1
receptors is F3.45. In conclusion, functional mapping, utilizing point-mutation
studies, may improve the specificity of homology screening performed by sequence 
alignment search engines.

PMID: 12909367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Protein Expr Purif. 2003 Aug;30(2):283-92.

Isolation of the gene and large-scale expression and purification of recombinant 
Erythrina cristagalli lectin.

Stancombe PR(1), Alexander FC, Ling R, Matheson MA, Shone CC, Chaddock JA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Applied Microbiology and Research, Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JG 
Wiltshire, UK. patrick.stancombe@camr.org.uk

Using polymerase chain reaction, the coding sequence for Erythrina cristagalli
lectin (ECL) has been cloned and expressed in Escherichia coli. The amplified DNA
sequence of ECL is highly homologous to that previously reported for Erythrina
corallodendron lectin (ECorL), confirming the absence of introns in the ECL gene.
The polypeptide sequences of ECL and ECorL have been compared and five amino
acids have been identified that differentiate the two proteins. Recombinant E.
cristagalli lectin (recECL) was expressed in E. coli from a genomic clone
encoding the mature E. cristagalli lectin gene. Constitutive expression localised
recombinant protein in inclusion bodies, which were solubilised, and recECL,
subsequently refolded and purified by lactose affinity chromatography.
Significant advantages were observed for purification from inclusion bodies
rather than from a clone optimised to express soluble protein. A large-scale
purification scheme has been developed that can prepare functional recECL from
inclusion bodies with a yield of 870 mg/l culture. By the range of
characterisation methods employed in this study, it has been demonstrated that
recECL is functionally equivalent to native ECL obtained from the E. cristagalli 
plant. In addition, characterisation of the binding of radiolabelled recECL to
cultured dorsal root ganglia demonstrated that recECL binds to a single pool of
receptors.

PMID: 12880778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Zhonghua Shi Yan He Lin Chuang Bing Du Xue Za Zhi. 2003 Mar;17(1):10-4.

[Genetic characterization of the non-structural protein NSP4 from epidemic
strains of human rotavirus in China].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang DY(1), Wang JW, Xu SS, Wen LY, Mao YR, Yu XP, Hung T.

Author information: 
(1)Medical School of Shandong University, Jinan 250012, China.

BACKGROUND: To clarify the features of gene variation among epidemic strains of
human rotavirus NSP4 in China.
METHODS: SP4 genes from 27 epidemic strains of human rotavirus isolated in
different area of China in recent years were amplified with RT-PCR, the resulted 
cDNAs were cloned and sequenced. The sequences of full length cDNAs were compared
with 10 rotavirus NSP4 sequences available in the GenBank using the Clustal x 1.8
TreeView32 and DNA Star softwares. The G serotype of VP7 was analysed by PCR.
RESULTS: The homology of the amino acid among the 27 rotavirus strains isolated
in China was 81.7%-99.4%. Based on the variation of amino acid sequence, the
virus strains can be divided into two groups, represented by Wa and KUN with the 
homology of 92.0%-99.4% and 92.0%-98.9% within each group, respectively. The
diversity between the two groups were 16.6%-21.0%. The Wa group could further be 
separated into three subgroups, according to the diversity between those strains 
and the characterization in the highly variable domain. The association between
VP7 serotype and NSP4 genotype was not strong.
CONCLUSIONS: The NSP4 gene of human rotavirus epidemic strains in China can be
divided into Wa and KUN two groups, Wa group is the main group and contains three
subgroups possessing characteristic amino acid sites. Samples isolated in the
same year but not in the same area shared higher homology.

PMID: 12870009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Expert Opin Biol Ther. 2003 Jul;3(4):645-53.

A vaccine for tularaemia.

Titball RW(1), Oyston PC.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology, DSTL Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ, UK.
rtitball@dstl.gov.uk

Francisella tularensis is an intracellular pathogen with a very low infectious
dose for humans. Several forms of tularaemia occur, which range from a severely
debilitating to a fatal disease. Diagnosis is difficult due to the generalised,
nonspecific nature of symptoms and the difficulty in culturing the slow-growing
and nutritionally fastidious pathogen. A live attenuated vaccine strain (LVS) has
been used in humans as an investigational new drug and does appear to induce a
protective response. However, the licensing of this vaccine has not yet been
possible. For this reason, modern molecular biology approaches are being used in 
an attempt to devise replacement vaccines which may be more easily licensed. The 
approaches which are currently being considered include the production of subunit
vaccines and the development of defined isogenic attenuated mutant strains of F. 
tularensis.

PMID: 12831369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Infect Immun. 2003 Jul;71(7):3831-6.

Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium expressing a chromosomally integrated
copy of the Bacillus anthracis protective antigen gene protects mice against an
anthrax spore challenge.

Garmory HS(1), Titball RW, Griffin KF, Hahn U, Böhm R, Beyer W.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, United Kingdom. 
hsgarmony@dstl.gov.uk

Protective immunity against infection with Bacillus anthracis is almost entirely 
based on a response to the protective antigen (PA), the binding moiety for the
two other toxin components. We cloned the PA gene into an auxotrophic mutant of
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium as a fusion with the signal sequence of
the hemolysin (Hly) A gene of Escherichia coli to allow the export of PA via the 
Hly export system. To stabilize the export cassette, it was also integrated into 
the chromosome of the live Salmonella carrier. When S. enterica serovar
Typhimurium with the chromosomally integrated PA gene was given intravenously to 
A/J mice, they developed high levels of antibody to PA. These mice were protected
against intraperitoneal challenge with 100 or 1,000 50% lethal doses of B.
anthracis strain STI. This work contributes to the development of a
Salmonella-based orally delivered anthrax vaccine.

PMCID: PMC162028
PMID: 12819066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Eur J Pharmacol. 2003 Jun 20;471(2):97-104.

Partial adenosine A(1) receptor agonists inhibit sarin-induced epileptiform
activity in the hippocampal slice.

Harrison PK(1), Bueters TJ, Ijzerman AP, van Helden HP, Tattersall JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Dstl Chemical and Biological Sciences,
Wiltshire, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK. pkharrison@dstl.gov.uk

Organophosphate poisoning can result in seizures and subsequent neuropathology.
One possible therapeutic approach would be to employ adenosine A(1) receptor
agonists, which have already been shown to have protective effects against
organophosphate poisoning. Using an in vitro model of organophosphate-induced
seizures, we have investigated the ability of several adenosine A(1) receptor
agonists to inhibit epileptiform activity induced by the organophosphate sarin,
in the CA1 stratum pyramidale of the guinea pig hippocampal slice. Application of
the adenosine A(1) receptor agonist N(6)-cyclopentyladenosine (CPA) or the
partial adenosine A(1) receptor agonists 2-deoxy-N(6)-cyclopentyladenosine
(2-deoxy-CPA) and 8-butylamino-N(6)-cyclopentyladenosine (8-butylamino-CPA)
abolished epileptiform activity in a concentration-related manner. The rank order
of potency was CPA (IC(50) 4-5 nM) >2-deoxy-CPA (IC(50) 113-119
nM)=8-butylamino-CPA (IC(50) 90-115 nM). These data suggest that partial
adenosine A(1) receptor agonists, which have fewer cardiovascular effects, should
be further evaluated in vivo as potential treatments for organophosphate
poisoning.

PMID: 12818696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Gen Virol. 2003 Jul;84(Pt 7):1671-6.

Infection of macaques with simian immunodeficiency virus induces a
species-specific antibody response to major histocompatibility complex class I
and class II molecules.

Polyanskaya N(1), Sharpe SA, Cook N, Leech S, Cranage MP.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Applied Microbiology and Research, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG, 
UK.

Envelopes of retroviruses, including human immunodeficiency virus and simian
immunodeficiency virus (SIV), contain host cell proteins that potentially
represent novel targets for vaccine development. We show here that sera from
rhesus macaques recognized simian major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
molecules in response to infection with SIV. Antibodies from these animals did
not cross-react with human MHC antigens on mitogen-activated peripheral blood
mononuclear cells. The development of antibodies to MHC class I alpha-chain did
not correlate with anti-SIV envelope antibody responses, suggesting that these
antibodies did not arise through molecular mimicry. In contrast to the
species-specific response in infected animals, sera from animals vaccinated with 
inactivated human cell-grown SIV reacted to both human and rhesus MHC class I and
class II molecules.

PMID: 12810860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Vaccine. 2003 Jul 4;21(23):3110-7.

DNA vaccination protects against botulinum neurotoxin type F.

Bennett AM(1), Perkins SD, Holley JL.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, CBD Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4
0JQ, Wiltshire, UK.

A DNA vaccine was constructed which expressed the binding domain of Clostridium
botulinum neurotoxin serotype F fused to a signal peptide. Three intra-muscular
doses fully protected Balb/c mice against 10(4) MLD of serotype F toxin. Priming 
of the immune response by DNA vaccination followed by a single booster with type 
F binding domain protein resulted in high levels of antibody against the binding 
domain. This study demonstrates the utility of DNA vaccination for protection
against botulinum neurotoxin type F and indicates that a prime-boost regimen
could be an efficient method of generating antibody for passive immune therapy in
cases of botulism involving serotype F toxin.

PMID: 12804837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Vaccine. 2003 Jun 20;21(21-22):3051-7.

Oral immunisation with live aroA attenuated Salmonella enterica serovar
Typhimurium expressing the Yersinia pestis V antigen protects mice against
plague.

Garmory HS(1), Griffin KF, Brown KA, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl Chemical and Biological Sciences, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.
hsgarmory@dstl.gov.uk

Bubonic and pneumonic plague are caused by the bacterium Yersinia pestis. The V
antigen of Y. pestis is a protective antigen against plague. In this study, an
aroA attenuated strain of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium (SL3261) has
been used to deliver the Y. pestis V antigen as a candidate oral plague vaccine. 
SL3261 was transformed with the expression plasmid pTrc-LcrV, containing the lcrV
gene encoding V antigen. Immunoblot analysis showed V antigen expression in
SL3261 in vitro and intragastric immunisation of mice with the recombinant
Salmonella resulted in the induction of V antigen-specific serum antibody
responses and afforded protection against Y. pestis challenge. However, the
antibody responses induced by the recombinant Salmonella did not correlate with
the protection afforded, indicating that immune responses other than antibody may
play a role in the protection afforded against plague by this candidate vaccine.

PMID: 12798649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2003 Jun;69(6):3327-32.

Microbiological evaluation of a range of disinfectant products to control
mixed-species biofilm contamination in a laboratory model of a dental unit water 
system.

Walker JT(1), Bradshaw DJ, Fulford MR, Marsh PD.

Author information: 
(1)Health Protection Agency, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG, United Kingdom.
jimmy.walker@hpa.org.uk

Dental unit water system (DUWS) tubing harbors complex multispecies biofilms that
are responsible for high microbial levels at the distal outlet. The aim of this
study was to use an established biofilm laboratory model to simulate biofouling
of DUWS to evaluate practical, cost-effective, and evidence-based methods of
microbial decontamination. Reproducible biofilms were developed in the model over
14 days; decontamination was assessed using total viable counts (TVC) and
microscopic-image analysis techniques to view the inner surface of tubing.
Flushing did not reduce the biofilm coverage or TVC. Combizyme and ozone did not 
completely eliminate the viable bacteria (70 and 65% reduction in biofilm TVC,
respectively), nor did they remove the biofilm (45 and 57% reduction in biofilm
coverage, respectively). Chlorhexidine and Bio2000 (active agent: ethanol and
chlorhexidine), Tegodor and Gigasept Rapid (aldehyde based), and Grotanol
(hydroxide based) completely eliminated the TVC but did not completely remove
biofilm (31, 53 33, 34, and 64.9% reduction of biofilm coverage, respectively).
Other products including Grotanol Flussig (phenol based), Betadine
(povidone-iodine based), Alpron (chlorite based), and the hydroxide-containing
products Sporklenz, Sterilex Ultra, Dialox, Sterilox, Sanosil, Oxigenal, and
Grotanat Bohrerbad resulted in a 100% reduction in the biofilm TVC and a >95%
reduction in biofilm coverage. The study demonstrated that while many
disinfectants achieve a sufficient reduction in TVC they may not necessarily
remove unwanted biofilm from the tubing surfaces as tested in this
laboratory-controlled biofilm model.

PMCID: PMC161510
PMID: 12788733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Hum Exp Toxicol. 2003 May;22(5):255-61.

Clinical manifestations of VX poisoning following percutaneous exposure in the
domestic white pig.

Chilcott RP(1), Dalton CH, Hill I, Davidson CM, Blohm KL, Hamilton MG.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl Biomedical Sciences, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ, UK.
rchilcott@mail.dstl.gov.uk

Nerve agents are a class of organophosphorus chemicals that inhibit certain
cholinesterase enzymes (ChE). If untreated, percutaneous exposure to nerve
agents, such as VX (O-ethyl-S-[2(diisopropylamino)ethyl] methylphosphonothioate) 
can cause paralysis, apnoea and death. Much of the information concerning the
percutaneous absorption and subsequent toxicity of nerve agents has been obtained
using various rodent models. However, the most relevant 'skin model' is arguably 
the pig. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to examine the clinical
manifestations of VX intoxication in the domestic white pig following a 2 LD50
(120 microg/kg) percutaneous challenge. There was a consistent onset of signs
(where present) in each animal: mastication was followed by miosis, salivation,
fasciculations and apnoea. Whilst ChE activity did not correlate with the onset
of signs, there was a qualitative relationship in that mastication preceded
substantial ChE inhibition, miosis lagged behind the linear decrease in
acetylcholinesterase (AChE) activity and fasciculations and apnoea occurred after
maximum ChE inhibition had been attained (5-10% of normal). These observations
may be of use for the triage of patients exposed to VX. In comparison with
similar studies with GD, VX did not affect glucose utilization. However, VX was
similar to GD in that it caused a mild hyperkalaemia and hyperphosphataemia,
although the significance of this observation was not clear. There was
substantial lateral diffusion of the initial droplet of VX over the application
site, indicating that, when decontaminating exposed skin, attention should also
be directed to areas peripheral to the original site of exposure.

PMID: 12774888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Neuropharmacology. 2003 Jun;44(8):1089-99.

Regulation of contextual fear conditioning by baseline and inducible
septo-hippocampal cyclin-dependent kinase 5.

Fischer A(1), Sananbenesi F, Schrick C, Spiess J, Radulovic J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neuroendocrinology, Max Planck Institute for
Experimental Medicine, Hermann-Rein-Str. 3, 37075, Goettingen, Germany.
fischer@mail.em.mpg.de

In this work, we confirm the novel role of cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk) 5 in
associative learning by demonstrating that injection of the Cdk5 inhibitor
butyrolactone I into the lateral septum or hippocampus profoundly impaired
context-dependent fear conditioning of C57BL/6J mice. However, unlike the
inducible up-regulation of Cdk5 and its regulator p35 observed in Balb/c mice,
high baseline levels, which were not affected by fear conditioning, were found in
C57BL/6J mice. Surprisingly, microinjections of butyrolactone I into the lateral 
septum or hippocampus significantly decreased baseline Cdk5 activity within the
entire septo-hippocampal circuitry, suggesting a functional link between septal
and hippocampal Cdk5 activity. Significantly higher levels of the transcription
factor Sp4 in the septo-hippocampal system of C57BL/6J mice may account for the
high baseline Cdk5/p35 production. On the other hand, the stronger cFos
production observed in the lateral septum of fear conditioned Balb/c mice may be 
responsible, at least in part, for the inducible up-regulation of Cdk5 in this
strain. These results suggest that the role of Cdk5 in memory consolidation is
strain independent and functionally related to the septo-hippocampal circuitry.
However, the molecular regulation of baseline and inducible Cdk5 protein might be
different among individual mouse strains and possibly other species.

PMID: 12763101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2003;529:397-406.

Second and third generation plague vaccines.

Titball RW(1), Williamson ED.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire
SP4 0JQ, UK.

PMID: 12756798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jul 18;278(29):26423-34. Epub 2003 May 13.

Functional analysis of the rat N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor 2A promoter:
multiple transcription starts points, positive regulation by Sp factors, and
translational regulation.

Liu A(1), Zhuang Z, Hoffman PW, Bai G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral & Craniofacial Biological Sciences, University of Maryland 
Dental School and Program in Neuroscience, University of Maryland, Baltimore,
Maryland 21201, USA.

N-Methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor subunit 2A (NR2A) is an important modulatory
component of the NMDA subtype of glutamate receptors. To investigate the
transcription mechanism of the NR2A gene, we cloned the 5'-flanking sequence from
a rat genomic library. RNA mapping with rat brain RNA revealed two sets of major 
and several minor transcription start points in a single exon of 1140 bp.
Reporter gene and mutation studies indicated that core promoter activity resided 
in exon 1, whereas the 5'-flanking sequence up to 1.5 kb showed no significant
impact on promoter activity. Fragments containing minor transcription start
points were able to drive a reporter gene in transfected cells and produce
nascent RNAs in an in vitro transcription system. All fragments tested showed
more promoter activity in dissociated neurons of the rat embryonic cerebrocortex 
and cell lines expressing NR2A mRNA than that in glial cultures and non-neuronal 
cells. Within exon 1 there are three GC-box elements that displayed distinct
binding affinity to both Sp1- and Sp4-like factors. Overexpression of Sp1 or Sp4,
but not Sp3, significantly increased the activity of the promoter containing
these elements. Inclusion of exon 2 and 3 sequences, which contain five short
open-reading frames, attenuated promoter-driven reporter activity more than
3-fold but attenuated the level of reporter mRNA less than 1.4-fold. Our results 
suggest that the core promoter of the rat NR2A gene requires exon 1, that Sp
factors positively regulate this core promoter, and that a post-transcriptional
mechanism may negatively regulate expression of the gene.

PMID: 12746457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J R Army Med Corps. 2003 Mar;149(1):5-14.

Penetrating brain injury in military conflict: does it merit more research?

Sapsford W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton,
Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ.

PMID: 12743920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Med Microbiol. 2003 Apr;52(Pt 4):289-94.

Expression of heterologous O-antigen in Yersinia pestis KIM does not affect
virulence by the intravenous route.

Oyston PC(1), Prior JL, Kiljunen S, Skurnik M, Hill J, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology, DSTL, CBS Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK.
pcoyston@dstl.gov.uk

All strains of Yersinia pestis examined have been found to lack an O-antigen. In 
other members of the Enterobacteriaceae, the rough phenotype often results in
attenuation. However, Y. pestis is the aetiological agent of bubonic plague. In
evolving from the ancestral enteropathogenic Yersinia pseudotuberculosis, and
with the development of an arthropod-vectored systemic pathogenesis, smooth LPS
production is not necessary for Y. pestis virulence and the metabolic burden has 
been alleviated by inactivation of the O-antigen biosynthetic operon. To
investigate this, Y. pestis strain KIM D27 was transformed with a plasmid
carrying the operon encoding the O-antigen of Yersinia enterocolitica O : 3.
Expression of the O-antigen could be detected in silver-stained gels. The
receptor for bacteriophage phiYeO3-12 has been shown to be O-antigen, and
infection by this bacteriophage results in lysis of Y. enterocolitica O : 3.
Expression of the O-antigen in Y. pestis conferred sensitivity to lysis by
phiYeO3-12. The O-antigen-expressing clone was shown to be as virulent in mice by
the intravenous route of challenge as the rough wild-type. Assays showed no
alteration in the ability of Y. pestis to resist lysis by cationic antimicrobial 
peptides, serum or polymyxin.

PMID: 12676866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Zhonghua Shi Yan He Lin Chuang Bing Du Xue Za Zhi. 2002 Sep;16(3):288-91.

[Establishment of a double-antigen sandwich ELISA for detecting total antibodies 
to human immunodeficiency virus type 1/2].

[Article in Chinese]

He H(1), Mao P, Hou J, Hong S, Zhu L, Hu Y, Bai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, The 302nd Hospital of PLA, Beijing 100039, China.

OBJECTIVE: To describe and evaluate a double-antigen sandwich ELISA for detecting
human immunodeficiency virus type 1/2 (HIV-1/2) specific antibodies.
METHODS: The peptides gp41.1(sp1), gp41.2(sp2), gp120(sp3) and p24(sp4) of HIV-1 
and gp36(sp5) of HIV-2 were artificially synthesized. Then sp1, sp3, sp4 and sp5 
were used as coating antigens; sp1, sp2, sp4 and sp5 labeled with HRP were used
as conjugates in this sandwich ELISA.
RESULTS: The specificity and sensitivity of the assay were both 100% in detecting
anti-HIV of 40 control sera of the second generation panel, higher than indirect 
ELISA (specificity 90% and sensitivity, 65%, respectively). All of 210 sera from 
individuals with other diseases were negative for anti-HIV. The consistency rate 
was 100% when our sandwich ELISA and Abbott HIVAB were used to detect anti-HIV in
90 healthy blood donors and 88 HIV infected individuals.
CONCLUSIONS: The results showed that this sandwich ELISA for detection of
anti-HIV is specific, sensitive and convenient, and it is suitable for screening 
blood donors and detecting HIV infection.

PMID: 12665944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Infect Immun. 2003 Apr;71(4):2234-8.

Synergistic protection of mice against plague with monoclonal antibodies specific
for the F1 and V antigens of Yersinia pestis.

Hill J(1), Copse C, Leary S, Stagg AJ, Williamson ED, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Wiltshire SP4 OJQ,
United Kingdom. jhill@dstl.gov.uk

Monoclonal antibodies specific for Yersinia pestis V antigen and F1 antigen,
administered singly or in combination, protected mice in models of bubonic and
pneumonic plague. Antibodies showed synergy when administered prophylactically
and as a therapy 48 h postinfection. Monoclonal antibodies therefore have
potential as a treatment for plague.

PMCID: PMC152045
PMID: 12654847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Trends Microbiol. 2003 Mar;11(3):118-23.

Will the enigma of Francisella tularensis virulence soon be solved?

Titball RW(1), Johansson A, Forsman M.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, UK SP4 0JQ.

Francisella tularensis is one of the most infectious bacterial pathogens known
and is the causative agent of the zoonotic disease tularemia. In spite of the
importance of this pathogen little is known about its virulence mechanisms.
However, it is clear that the bacterium is an intracellular pathogen, replicating
mainly in macrophages, with replication in amoebae also having been reported. The
genome sequence of a high virulence strain of F. tularensis is close to
completion and when available, will stimulate further research into virulence
mechanisms.

PMID: 12648943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2003 Jan;23(1):47-50.

Antibody and interleukin-12 treatment in murine models of encephalitogenic
flavivirus (St. Louis encephalitis, tick-borne encephalitis) and alphavirus
(Venezuelan equine encephalitis) infection.

Phillpotts RJ(1), Jones LD, Lukaszewski RA, Lawrie C, Brooks TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl Porton Down, Wiltshire SP4 OJQ, England. bjphillpotts@dstl.gov.uk

Early and sustained treatment with interleukin-12 (IL-12) ameliorated disease in 
a mouse model of infection with the encephalitogenic flavivirus, St. Louis
encephalitis virus (SLEV, Japanese encephalitis serogroup). However, this effect 
was not reproduced in murine infections with either the flavivirus tick-bore
encephalitis virus (TBEV) or the alphavirus Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus 
(VEEV). IL-12 exacerbated TBEV disease when used in conjunction with monoclonal
antibody (mAb), suggesting an enhancement of immunopathology, and was without
clinical effects in VEEV infection. These data confirm the need to fully
understand the pathogenesis of viral infection before cytokine intervention may
be employed as a broad-spectrum antiviral therapy.

PMID: 12639298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Microb Pathog. 2003 Mar;34(3):115-9.

Construction and evaluation of a eukaryotic expression plasmid for stable
delivery using attenuated Salmonella.

Garmory HS(1), Titball RW, Brown KA, Bennett AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Dstl Chemical and Biological Sciences,
Porton Down, SP4 0JQ, Salisbury, UK. hsgarmory@dstl.gov.uk

An approach to enhancing the stability of eukaryotic expression plasmids for
delivery using attenuated Salmonella has been evaluated. The expression apparatus
and beta-galactosidase gene from the expression plasmid, pCMVbeta, was cloned
into the low copy number plasmid pLG339. The resulting construct, pLGbetaGAL, was
shown to have a lower copy number than pCMVbeta in Salmonella enterica var
Typhimurium aroA strain SL7207. Furthermore, beta-galactosidase-specific antibody
was induced in mice following intramuscular inoculation with pLGbetaGAL as naked 
DNA. Following oral administration of mice with SL7207/pCMVbeta, recombinants
could not be detected in tissues 3 days after inoculation. In comparison,
SL7207/pLGbetaGAL recombinant bacteria could be detected in the Peyer's patches
and spleens indicating that the Salmonella strain was stable. However, both
SL7207/pCMVbeta and SL7207/pLGbetaGAL failed to induce
beta-galactosidase-specific IgG in vivo. The mechanism by which attenuated
Salmonella are able to release heterologous DNA for antigen processing and
presentation is not yet understood. These results suggest that the mechanism
needs to be further elucidated in order to rationally improve the system.

PMID: 12631472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Telemed J E Health. 2002 Winter;8(4):411-8.

Teleconsultation practice guidelines: report from G8 Global Health Applications
Subproject 4.

Nerlich M(1), Balas EA, Schall T, Stieglitz SP, Filzmaier R, Asbach P, Dierks C, 
Lacroix A, Watanabe M, Sanders JH, Doarn CR, Merrell RC; G8 Global Health
Applications Subproject 4.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Trauma Surgery, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.
michael.nerlich@klinik.uni-regensburg.de

This report presents a series of recommendations derived from deliberations of
the G8 countries Subproject 4 Group (SP4 Group) of the Global Health Care
Applications Project entitled, A Teleconsultation Practice Guideline. The
recommendations provide an initial step toward developing a general guideline
platform for the practice of telemedicine/teleconsultation.

PMID: 12626110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Microbiology. 2003 Feb;149(Pt 2):279-94.

Are dental diseases examples of ecological catastrophes?

Marsh PD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Division, Centre for Applied Microbiology and Research, Salisbury SP4
0JG, UK. phil.marsh@camr.org.uk

Dental diseases are among the most prevalent and costly diseases affecting
industrialized societies, and yet are highly preventable. The microflora of
dental plaque biofilms from diseased sites is distinct from that found in health,
although the putative pathogens can often be detected in low numbers at normal
sites. In dental caries, there is a shift towards community dominance by
acidogenic and acid-tolerant Gram-positive bacteria (e.g. mutans streptococci and
lactobacilli) at the expense of the acid-sensitive species associated with sound 
enamel. In contrast, the numbers and proportions of obligately anaerobic
bacteria, including Gram-negative proteolytic species, increase in periodontal
diseases. Modelling studies using defined consortia of oral bacteria grown in
planktonic and biofilm systems have been undertaken to identify environmental
factors responsible for driving these deleterious shifts in the plaque
microflora. Repeated conditions of low pH (rather than sugar availability per se)
selected for mutans streptococci and lactobacilli, while the introduction of
novel host proteins and glycoproteins (as occurs during the inflammatory response
to plaque), and the concomitant rise in local pH, enriched for Gram-negative
anaerobic and asaccharolytic species. These studies emphasized (a). significant
properties of dental plaque as both a biofilm and a microbial community, and (b).
the dynamic relationship existing between the environment and the composition of 
the oral microflora. This research resulted in a novel hypothesis (the
'ecological plaque hypothesis') to better describe the relationship between
plaque bacteria and the host in health and disease. Implicit in this hypothesis
is the concept that disease can be prevented not only by directly inhibiting the 
putative pathogens, but also by interfering with the environmental factors
driving the selection and enrichment of these bacteria. Thus, a more holistic
approach can be taken in disease control and management strategies.

PMID: 12624191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Gene. 2003 Feb 27;305(2):205-15.

The Xenopus B2 factor involved in TFIIIA gene regulation is closely related to
Sp1 and interacts in a complex with USF.

Penberthy WT(1), Griffin D, Hall RK, Taylor WL.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA
90095-1606, USA. wtpenber@ucla.edu

In the Xenopus laevis oocyte there is a million fold more transcription factor
IIIA (TFIIIA) and its corresponding mRNA than in a somatic cell. These high
levels of TFIIIA gene expression are achieved primarily by transcriptional
regulation. The TATA box along with three positive cis-elements in the control
region of the TFIIIA gene located at positions -269 to -264 (E1), -235 to -220
(E2), and -669 to -636 (E3) are required for this high level of expression in
oocytes. The proteins that bind E1 and E3 of the TFIIIA gene have been identified
as Xenopus USF (Xl-USF) and B3 (homolog of Vg1 RBP/VERA). In this study the B2
protein was found to bind E2 in a zinc-dependent fashion and anti-human Sp1 (but 
not Sp2, Sp3, nor Sp4) supershifted the B2:element 2 complex. The E2 binding
protein was purified by DNA affinity chromatography. Based on supershift
analysis, molecular weight estimation experiments, and purified human Sp1 DNA
binding affinity tests the data strongly support the idea that the B2 protein is 
the Xenopus ortholog of Sp1, but not Sp2, Sp3, nor Sp4. Xl-USF binds to element 1
of the TFIIIA gene which is immediately adjacent to element 2.
Coimmunoprecipitation experiments using crude whole oocyte extracts revealed that
Xenopus Sp1 and USF or closely related factors are present together in a
high-affinity complex. This structure contributes positively to the initiation of
TFIIIA gene transcription in Xenopus oocytes.

PMID: 12609741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Trends Microbiol. 2002 Dec;10(12):550-1.

Yersinia: an update.

Oyston PC(1), Isherwood KE.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, UK SP4 0JQ. PCOYSTON@dstl.gov.uk

The 8th International Symposium on Yersinia was held in Turku, Finland, 4-8
September 2002.

PMID: 12564986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Feb 1;31(3):1097-107.

Reciprocal regulation of expression of the human adenosine 5'-triphosphate
binding cassette, sub-family A, transporter 2 (ABCA2) promoter by the early
growth response-1 (EGR-1) and Sp-family transcription factors.

Davis W Jr(1), Chen ZJ, Ile KE, Tew KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA 19111,
USA.

The human ABCA2 transporter gene encodes a member of a large family of
ATP-binding proteins that transport a variety of macromolecules across biological
membranes. We have performed luciferase reporter gene assays with promoter
constructs comprising the 5'-flanking region to identify cis-regulatory DNA
elements and have mapped the minimal promoter region to 321 bp upstream of the
translation start site. We have discovered a functional role for two GC-boxes
located in the proximal promoter of the ABCA2 gene that contain overlapping sites
for the EGR-1 and Sp1 transcription factors. We observed that oligonucleotides
containing overlapping EGR-1/Sp1 sites bind the Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 transcription
factors. When BE(2)-M17 cells were treated with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate, 
we observed inducible expression and binding of the EGR-1 transcription factor to
the two GC-boxes. Transfection of Sp1, Sp3 or Sp4 expression constructs into
Drosophila S2 induced a dose-dependent increase in transcriptional activation of 
the ABCA2 promoter, but transfection of EGR-1 alone failed to activate
transcription. When increasing amounts of EGR-1 were transfected into the
BE(2)-M17 neuroblastoma cells we observed a dose-dependent decrease in expression
of the ABCA2 promoter, although expression of the endogenous ABCA2 gene increased
following transfection of EGR-1.

PMCID: PMC149212
PMID: 12560508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Biochem Soc Trans. 2003 Feb;31(Pt 1):104-7.

Yersinia pestis and plague.

Titball RW(1), Hill J, Lawton DG, Brown KA.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire
SP4 0JQ, UK. ritball@dstl.gov.uk

Yersinia pestis is the aetiological agent of plague, a disease of humans that has
potentially devastating consequences. Evidence indicates that Y. pestis evolved
from Yersinia pseudotuberculosis, an enteric pathogen that normally causes a
relatively mild disease. Although Y. pestis is considered to be an obligate
pathogen, the lifestyle of this organism is surprisingly complex. The bacteria
are normally transmitted to humans from a flea vector, and Y. pestis has a number
of mechanisms which allow survival in the flea. Initially, the bacteria have an
intracellular lifestyle in the mammalian host, surviving in macrophages. Later,
the bacteria adopt an extracellular lifestyle. These different interactions with 
different host cell types are regulated by a number of systems, which are not
well characterized. The availability of the genome sequence for this pathogen
should now allow a systematic dissection of these regulatory systems.

PMID: 12546664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Clin Microbiol. 2003 Jan;41(1):50-7.

Discrimination of human pathogenic subspecies of Francisella tularensis by using 
restriction fragment length polymorphism.

Thomas R(1), Johansson A, Neeson B, Isherwood K, Sjöstedt A, Ellis J, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, CBS Porton Down, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, United Kingdom. RMTHOMAS@dstl.gov.uk

We describe the use of two insertion sequence elements (ISFtu1 and ISFtu2) in
Francisella tularensis to type strains by restriction fragment length
polymorphism (RFLP). The RFLP profiles of 17 epidemiologically unrelated isolates
were determined and compared. Our results showed that RFLP profiles can be used
to assign F. tularensis strains into five main groups corresponding to strains of
F. tularensis subsp. tularensis, F. tularensis strain ATCC 6223, strains of F.
tularensis subsp. holarctica, strains of F. tularensis subsp. holarctica from
Japan, and F. tularensis subsp. mediaasiatica. The results confirm the genetic
identities of these subspecies and also support the suggestion that strains of F.
tularensis subsp. holarctica from Japan should be considered members of a
separate biovar. These findings should support future studies to determine the
genetic differences between strains of F. tularensis at the whole-genome level.

PMCID: PMC149632
PMID: 12517824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Control Release. 2003 Jan 9;86(1):25-32.

Stimulation of spleen cells in vitro by nanospheric particles containing antigen.

Eyles JE(1), Bramwell VW, Singh J, Williamson ED, Alpar HO.

Author information: 
(1)DSTL, Porton Down, SP4 0JQ, Salisbury, UK.

Activation of cells, in primary culture, by nanospheres containing antigen has
been investigated. Single cell suspensions of spleen cells from primed and nai;ve
animals were cocultured with escalating quantities of soluble tetanus toxoid (TT)
or TT encapsulated within nanospheres fabricated from poly(lactide-co-glycolide) 
(PLGA). Concomitantly, spleen cells were also cultured in the presence of 'empty'
PLGA nanospheres that contained no TT. Nanospheres loaded with antigen were found
to elicit increased proliferation of splenocytes from preimmunised mice in
comparison to free antigen during coculture at equivalent doses of immunogen (at 
low and intermediate doses). Interestingly, cellular proliferation was abolished 
if B-cells were removed from the splenocyte cultures. Production of IFN-gamma and
IL-6 was increased, for formulated as compared to free antigen, in microcultures 
from both nai;ve and pre-immunised animals. Secretion of IFN-gamma or IL-6 was
not observed when primed or nai;ve spleen cells were stimulated with 'empty'
polymeric spheres. Some unspecific cytotoxicity was detected if cells were
cocultured with high concentrations of PLGA particles, although toxic effects
were not seen at concentrations where maximum levels of cytokine secretion and
cellular proliferation were recorded. These cell culture data indicate that, at
least in this in vitro model, nanoparticulate TT is able to elicit cytokine
production that is probably consistent with increased stimulation. This mechanism
is likely to be distinct from non-specific effects caused by components of the
delivery vehicle itself.

PMID: 12490370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J R Army Med Corps. 2002 Sep;148(3):248-54.

Aeromedical evacuation following abdominal surgery.

Sapsford W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl), Porton, Salisbury, SP4 0JQ.

PMID: 12469425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Med Microbiol. 2002 Dec;51(12):1055-62.

Passive protection against Burkholderia pseudomallei infection in mice by
monoclonal antibodies against capsular polysaccharide, lipopolysaccharide or
proteins.

Jones SM(1), Ellis JF, Russell P, Griffin KF, Oyston PC.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology, Dstl, CBS Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK.

Burkholderia pseudomallei, the aetiological agent of melioidosis, is endemic in
south-east Asia and northern Australia, where it is an important cause of human
disease. There is no vaccine available and antibiotic therapy is associated with 
high relapse rates. A panel of seven monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) that recognise 
capsular polysaccharide, lipopolysaccharide or proteins was produced and their
ability to protect mice passively against experimental melioidosis was evaluated.
The MAbs were capable of protecting mice against intra-peritoneal challenge with 
10(4) cfu/250 MLD of a virulent strain of B. pseudomallei (NCTC 4845), when
pooled, and four of the MAbs were individually protective. However, at a higher
B. pseudomallei challenge level of 10(6) cfu none of the MAbs afforded protection
and only the anti-exopolysaccharide MAbs produced a significantly delayed time to
death.

PMID: 12466403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Exp Physiol. 2002 Nov;87(6):683-9.

The effects of primary thoracic blast injury and morphine on the response to
haemorrhage in the anaesthetised rat.

Sawdon M(1), Ohnishi M, Watkins PE, Kirkman E.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, DSTL, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.

Primary thoracic blast injury causes a triad of bradycardia, hypotension and
apnoea mediated in part via a vagal reflex. Blast casualties may also suffer
blood loss, and the response to progressive simple haemorrhage is biphasic: an
initial tachycardia followed by a vagally mediated reflex bradycardia which can
be attenuated by micro opioid agonists. The aims of this study were to determine 
the effects of thoracic blast injury on the response to subsequent haemorrhage,
and the effects of morphine, administered after blast, on the response to blood
loss. Male Wistar rats, terminally anaesthetised with alphadolone-alphaxolone
(19-21 mg x kg(-1) h(-1) I.V.), were allocated randomly to one of three groups:
Group I, sham blast; Group II, thoracic blast; Group III, thoracic blast plus
morphine (0.5 mg x kg(-1) I.V. given 5 min after blast). Blast (Groups II and
III) resulted in significant (P < 0.05, ANOVA) bradycardia, hypotension and
apnoea. Sham blast (Group I) had no effect. Ten minutes later, haemorrhage (40 % 
of the estimated total blood volume (BV)) in Group I produced a biphasic response
comprising a tachycardia followed by a peak bradycardia after the loss of 33 %
BV. Arterial blood pressure did not fall significantly until the loss of 13.3 %
BV. In Group II the haemorrhage-induced tachycardia was absent and the
bradycardia was augmented: peak bradycardia was seen after the loss of 23 % BV.
Mean arterial blood pressure (MBP) began to fall as soon as haemorrhage commenced
and was significant after the loss of 10 % BV. Morphine (Group III) prevented the
haemorrhage-induced bradycardia and delayed the significant fall in MBP until the
loss of 30 % BV. It is concluded that the response to thoracic blast injury
augments the depressor response to haemorrhage while morphine attenuates this
response.

PMID: 12447448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Microbiology. 2002 Nov;148(Pt 11):3521-30.

The mcrA gene as an alternative to 16S rRNA in the phylogenetic analysis of
methanogen populations in landfill.

Luton PE(1), Wayne JM, Sharp RJ, Riley PW.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Applied Microbiology and Research, Porton Down, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK.

Inferred amino acid sequences of the methyl coenzyme-M reductase (mcrA) gene from
five different methanogen species were aligned and two regions with a high degree
of homology flanking a more variable region were identified. Analysis of the DNA 
sequences from the conserved regions yielded two degenerate sequences from which 
a forward primer, a 32-mer, and a reverse primer, a 23-mer, could be derived for 
use in the specific PCR-based detection of methanogens. The primers were
successfully evaluated against 23 species of methanogen representing all five
recognized orders of this group of Archaea, generating a PCR product between 464 
and 491 bp. Comparisons between the mcrA and 16S small subunit rRNA gene
sequences using PHYLIP demonstrated that the tree topologies were strikingly
similar. Methods were developed to enable the analysis of methanogen populations 
in landfill using the mcrA gene as the target. Two landfill sites were examined
and 63 clones from a site in Mucking, Essex, and 102 from a site in Odcombe,
Somerset, were analysed. Analysis revealed a far greater diversity in the
methanogen population within landfill material than has been seen previously.

PMID: 12427943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. FEMS Microbiol Rev. 2002 Nov;26(4):339-53.

Salmonella vaccines for use in humans: present and future perspectives.

Garmory HS(1), Brown KA, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Dstl Chemical and Biological Sciences,
Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK. hsgarmory@dstl.gov.uk

In recent years there has been significant progress in the development of
attenuated Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi strains as candidate typhoid fever
vaccines. In clinical trials these vaccines have been shown to be well tolerated 
and immunogenic. For example, the attenuated S. enterica var. Typhi strains CVD
908-htrA (aroC aroD htrA), Ty800 (phoP phoQ) and chi4073 (cya crp cdt) are all
promising candidate typhoid vaccines. In addition, clinical trials have
demonstrated that S. enterica var. Typhi vaccines expressing heterologous
antigens, such as the tetanus toxin fragment C, can induce immunity to the
expressed antigens in human volunteers. In many cases, the problems associated
with expression of antigens in Salmonella have been successfully addressed and
the future of Salmonella vaccine development is very promising.

PMID: 12413664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Vaccine. 2002 Nov 1;20(31-32):3650-7.

Protection against plague following immunisation with microencapsulated V antigen
is reduced by co-encapsulation with IFN-gamma or IL-4, but not IL-6.

Griffin KF(1), Eyles JE, Spiers ID, Alpar HO, Williamson ED.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl Biomedical Sciences, Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JQ, Wiltshire, UK.
kgriffin@dstl.gov.uk

We have investigated intranasal delivery of novel vaccines for plague, based on
poly-L-lactide (PLLA) microencapsulated recombinant V antigen (rV) of Yersinia
pestis. Microspheres containing rV alone or co-encapsulated with the cytokines
IFN-gamma, IL-4 or IL-6 were administered in a two-dose regimen and antibody
responses and protective efficacy were monitored. All treatment groups stimulated
high rV-specific antibody titres in serum, predominantly of the IgG1 isotype,
which were maintained over several months. There was evidence of both IgG and IgA
responses in lung samples from all groups. Formulations based on rV antigen alone
or rV co-encapsulated with IL-6 provided complete protection against systemic
challenge with Y. pestis strain GB; however protective efficacy was impaired by
co-encapsulating either IFN-gamma or IL-4 with rV.

PMID: 12399192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Gene. 2002 Aug 21;296(1-2):221-34.

Sp/Krüppel-like transcription factors are essential for the expression of
mitochondrial glycerol phosphate dehydrogenase promoter B.

Hasan NM(1), MacDonald MJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Children's Diabetes Center, The University of Wisconsin, Room 3550 Medical
Science Center, 1300 University Avenue, Madison 53706, USA.
nmhasan@facstaff.wisc.edu

The human mitochondrial glycerol phosphate dehydrogenase (hmGPD) is abundant in
the normal pancreatic insulin cell and its level is lowered to 50% by high
glucose and diabetes. Using Drosophila and INS-1 cells, we have analysed the
hmGPD gene promoter B to characterize cis-elements and trans-acting factors that 
affect its regulation. We identified ten efficient Sp/Krüppel-like
transcription-factor-binding sites in the promoter sequence. These sites include 
four GC-boxes (CCCGCCC at -227, -68, -46 and GGGCGAG at -382), three GT-boxes
(CCCCACCC at -350, CCCACACCC at -257, and CACCCGCCC at -48), and three
CT/GA-boxes (TCCCTCCC at -262, GGGAGGGAG at -129, and GGGAGGAGGA at -107).
Transfection of Drosophila SL2 cells, which lack Sp/Krüppel-like factors, with
constructs encoding either Sp1, Sp3, Sp4 or erythroid Krüppel-like factor (EKLF) 
specifically activates the hmGPD promoter B up to 50-fold. Promoter activation
requires the Sp1 activation and the DNA binding domains. Co-transfected EKLF was 
synergistic with either Sp1 or Sp3. On the other hand, the basic Krüppel-like
factor (BKLF) inhibited Sp1-and EKLF-mediated promoter activation. Similarly,
constructs encoding either GA-binding protein (GABP) or PU.1 inhibited
Sp1-mediated promoter activation. Oligonucleotide 'decoys' with potential
transcription factor binding sites decreased promoter activity in both INS-1 and 
Drosophila cells. Significant loss of Sp- and EKLF-mediated activation was
observed with some internal as well as sequential 5' deletions of the promoter
DNA. The level of Sp1 protein was reduced by 50% in INS-1 cells chronically
exposed to a high concentration of glucose. The results demonstrate that
Sp/Krüppel-like factors are essential for mGPD gene expression.

PMID: 12383520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2002 Oct;15(4):631-46.

Tularemia.

Ellis J(1), Oyston PC, Green M, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, CBS Porton Down, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, United Kingdom.

Francisella tularensis is the etiological agent of tularemia, a serious and
occasionally fatal disease of humans and animals. In humans, ulceroglandular
tularemia is the most common form of the disease and is usually a consequence of 
a bite from an arthropod vector which has previously fed on an infected animal.
The pneumonic form of the disease occurs rarely but is the likely form of the
disease should this bacterium be used as a bioterrorism agent. The diagnosis of
disease is not straightforward. F. tularensis is difficult to culture, and the
handling of this bacterium poses a significant risk of infection to laboratory
personnel. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay- and PCR-based methods have been
used to detect bacteria in clinical samples, but these methods have not been
adequately evaluated for the diagnosis of pneumonic tularemia. Little is known
about the virulence mechanisms of F. tularensis, though there is a large body of 
evidence indicating that it is an intracellular pathogen, surviving mainly in
macrophages. An unlicensed live attenuated vaccine is available, which does
appear to offer protection against ulceroglandular and pneumonic tularemia.
Although an improved vaccine against tularemia is highly desirable, attempts to
devise such a vaccine have been limited by the inability to construct defined
allelic replacement mutants and by the lack of information on the mechanisms of
virulence of F. tularensis. In the absence of a licensed vaccine, aminoglycoside 
antibiotics play a key role in the prevention and treatment of tularemia.

PMCID: PMC126859
PMID: 12364373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Zoolog Sci. 2002 Sep;19(9):1033-7.

Serum progesterone changes in luteal cyclicity and duration of estrous cycle in
Formosan sika deer (Cervus nippon taiouanus) hinds.

Liu BT(1), Cheng SP, Huang MC, Yu JY.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Physiology Laboratory, Department of Animal Science, National
Chung-Hsing University, Taichung, Taiwan, ROC.

A study was conducted to investigate the serum progesterone (SP(4)) profiles and 
duration of estrous cycles in the farmed Formosan sika deer (FSD; Cervus nippon
taiouanus) during the major breeding season. Five parous, open and non-milking
hinds were allotted to collect peripheral blood samples twice weekly for P(4)
measurement by radioimmunoassay beginning at the initiation of the rutting season
indicated by rutting behaviors of the sexually mature stags. The hinds were
polyestrous as proved by cyclic changes of SP4 levels. After the presumptive
estrus shown by the lowest concentration of SP(4) (0.20+/-0.01 ng/ml), this
ovarian hormone markedly elevated on day 7 of the cycle (1.67+/-0.11 ng/ml),
reached plateau (3.15+/-0.16 ng/ml, P<0.01) during days 11 to 18, and then
declined to the basal levels in the subsequent estrus. It is concluded that mean 
duration of the estrous cycle in FSD during the major rutting season is 19.3 days
with a range of 17 to 21 days, and that the patterns of circulating progesterone 
profiles during the estrous cycles of the FSD are similar to those of other deer 
species so far investigated.

PMID: 12362057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Mol Cell Probes. 2002 Aug;16(4):251-6.

Monoclonal antibodies against Yersinia pestis lipopolysaccharide detect bacteria 
cultured at 28 degrees C or 37 degrees C.

Prior JL(1), Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl Chemical and Biological Sciences, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 
0JQ, UK. JLPrior@dstl.gov.uk

Four monoclonal antibodies were generated against Yersinia pestis
lipopolysaccharide by immunising mice with a cell surface preparation from Y.
pestis strain 1255. In an ELISA the monoclonal antibodies reacted with live whole
cells of Y. pestis strain GB cultured at 28 degrees C or 37 degrees C. The lowest
detection threshold for Y. pestis strain GB cultured at 28 degrees C was 4 x
10(5) cfu ml(-1) and for bacteria cultured at 37 degrees C was 1 x 10(4) cfu
ml(-1). The monoclonal antibodies did not cross react with other pathogenic
Yersinia in an ELISA, but showed some cross reactivity in an immuno-blot. The
monoclonal antibodies could be used for the detection of Y. pestis cultured at
different temperatures and with varying plasmid profiles as the
lipopolysaccharide molecule is not temperature regulated and the genes encoding
its biosynthesis are located on the bacterial chromosome.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd.

PMID: 12270265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 22;277(47):44911-9. Epub 2002 Sep 18.

Neuronal kappa B-binding factors consist of Sp1-related proteins. Functional
implications for autoregulation of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor-1 expression.

Mao X(1), Moerman AM, Barger SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of Arkansas for Medical
Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas 72205, USA.

Neurons contain a protein factor capable of binding DNA elements normally bound
by the transcription factor NF-kappaB. However, several lines of evidence suggest
that this neuronal kappaB-binding factor (NKBF) is not bona fide NF-kappaB. We
have identified NKBF from cultures of neocortical neurons as a complex containing
proteins related to Sp1. This complex was bound by antibodies to Sp1, Sp3, and
Sp4 and was competed from binding to an NF-kappaB element by an oligonucleotide
containing an Sp1-binding site. This Sp1 oligonucleotide detected an abundant
factor in neuronal nuclei that migrated in electrophoretic mobility shift assays 
at a position consistent with NKBF. Expression of transfected Sp1 stimulated
transcription in a manner dependent upon a kappaB cis-element. Similar to our
previous reports for NKBF (Mao, X., Moerman, A. M., Lucas, M. M., and Barger, S. 
W. (1999) J. Neurochem. 73, 1851-1858 and Moerman, A. M., Mao, X., Lucas, M. M., 
and Barger, S. W. (1999) Mol. Brain Res. 67, 303-315), the activity of the
Sp1-related factor was reduced by activation of ionotropic glutamate receptors,
consistent with proteolytic degradation of all three Sp1-related factors.
Expression of the N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor-1 (NR1) subunit of glutamate
receptors correlated with the activity of the Sp1-related factor, specifically
through an Sp1 element in the NR1 promoter. These data provide the first evidence
that Sp1 or related family members are responsible for kappaB-binding activity
and are involved in a negative feedback for NR1 in central nervous system
neurons.

PMID: 12244044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Vaccine. 2002 Sep 10;20(27-28):3239-43.

The effect of recombinant plasmids on in vivo colonisation of Salmonella enterica
serovar Typhimurium strains is not reflected by in vitro cellular invasion
assays.

Garmory HS(1), Griffin KF, Leary SE, Perkins SD, Brown KA, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl Chemical and Biological Sciences, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.
hsgarmory@dstl.gov.uk

Attenuated strains of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium are used as
carriers of heterologous antigens as candidate oral vaccines and, more recently, 
as carriers of DNA vaccines. In this study, recombinant Salmonella strains that
were altered in their ability to colonise murine tissues in vivo when compared to
parent strains were not, however, equally altered in their ability to invade
murine cells in vitro. These results suggest that in vitro invasion studies may
not be a representative model for colonisation of tissues in vivo, and that in
vitro studies should ideally be used in conjunction with in vivo studies for the 
assessment of potential Salmonella vaccines.

PMID: 12213392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Appl Toxicol. 2002 Jul-Aug;22(4):263-9.

Pathophysiological responses following phosgene exposure in the anaesthetized
pig.

Brown RF(1), Jugg BJ, Harban FM, Ashley Z, Kenward CE, Platt J, Hill A, Rice P,
Watkins PE.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory,
Chemical and Biological Sciences, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JQ, UK.

This study aimed to develop a reproducible model of phosgene-induced lung injury 
in the pig to facilitate the future development of therapeutic strategies. Ten
female young adult large white pigs were used. Following induction of anaesthesia
using a halothane/oxygen/nitrous oxide mixture, arterial and venous catheters
were inserted together with a pulmonary artery thermodilution catheter, and a
suprapubic urinary catheter by laparotomy. Anaesthesia was maintained throughout 
the experiment by intravenous infusion of ketamine, midazolam and alfentanil. On 
completion of surgery the animals were allowed to equilibrate for 1 h and then
were divided into two groups. Group 1 (n = 5) was exposed to phosgene for 10 min 
(mean Ct = 2443 +/- 35 mg min m(-3)) while spontaneously breathing, whereas
control animals (Group 2 n = 5) were exposed to air. At 30 min post-exposure,
anaesthesia was deepened in order to allow the initiation of intermittent
positive pressure ventilation and the animals were monitored for up to 24 h.
Cardiovascular and respiratory parameters were monitored every 30 min and blood
samples were taken for arterial and mixed venous blood gas analysis and clinical 
chemistry. A detailed post-mortem and histopathology was carried out on all
animals following death or euthanasia at the end of the 24-h monitoring period.
Control animals (Group 2) all survived until the end of the 24-h monitoring
period with normal pathophysiological parameters. Histopathology showed only
minimal passive congestion of the lung. Following exposure to phosgene (Group 1) 
there was one survivor to 24 h, with the remainder dying between 16.5 and 23 h
(mean = 20 h). Histopathology from these animals showed areas of widespread
pulmonary oedema, petechial haemorrhage and bronchial epithelial necrosis. There 
was also a significant increase in lung wet weight/body weight ratio (P < 0.001).
During and immediately following exposure, a transient decrease in oxygen
saturation and stroke volume index was observed. From 6 h there were significant 
decreases in arterial pH (P < 0.01), P(a)O(2) (P < 0.01) and lung compliance (P <
0.01), whereas oxygen delivery and consumption was reduced from 15 h onwards in
phosgene-exposed animals. Mean pulmonary artery pressure of phosgene-exposed
animals was increased from 15 h post-exposure, with periods of increased
pulmonary vascular resistance index being recorded from 9 h onwards. We have
developed a reproducible model of phosgene-induced lung injury in the
anaesthetized pig. We have followed changes in cardiovascular and pulmonary
dynamics for up to 24 h after exposure in order to demonstrate evidence of
primary acute lung injury from 16 h post-exposure. Histopathology showed evidence
of widespread damage to the lung and there was also a significant increase in
lung wet weight/body weight ratio (P < 0.001).

Copyright Crown copyright 2002. Reproduced with the permission of Her Majesty's
Stationery Office. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 12210544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Infect Immun. 2002 Sep;70(9):5290-4.

A mutant of Burkholderia pseudomallei, auxotrophic in the branched chain amino
acid biosynthetic pathway, is attenuated and protective in a murine model of
melioidosis.

Atkins T(1), Prior RG, Mack K, Russell P, Nelson M, Oyston PC, Dougan G, Titball 
RW.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 OJQ,
United Kingdom. TPATKINS@dstl.gov.uk

Using a transposon mutagenesis approach, we have identified a mutant of
Burkholderia pseudomallei that is auxotrophic for branched chain amino acids. The
transposon was shown to have interrupted the ilvI gene encoding the large subunit
of the acetolactate synthase enzyme. Compared to the wild type, this mutant was
significantly attenuated in a murine model of disease. Mice inoculated
intraperitoneally with the auxotrophic mutant, 35 days prior to challenge, were
protected against a challenge dose of 6,000 median lethal doses of wild-type B.
pseudomallei.

PMCID: PMC128252
PMID: 12183585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Gene. 2002 Jun 26;293(1-2):97-105.

Widespread occurrence of serpin genes with multiple reactive centre-containing
exon cassettes in insects and nematodes.

Krüger O(1), Ladewig J, Köster K, Ragg H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Technology, University of Bielefeld,
D-33501 Bielefeld, Germany.

By applying homology-search and text-mining programs we have found that the
Drosophila serine protease inhibitor (serpin) gene sp4 harbours four reactive
centre-coding exons. The mutually exclusive use of these cassettes in combination
with alternatively selectable exons at the 5'-end or in the 3'-untranslated
region of the gene allows generation of more than ten different transcripts, all 
of which are expressed in Drosophila embryos. These transcripts may code for
eight different Sp4 protein isoforms with different biological functions, which -
dependent on the splice pattern - either may be secreted, reside in the
endoplasmic reticulum, or may be located in the cytoplasm. An examination
revealed the presence of two serpin genes, each coding for two or three likely
alternative reactive centre exon cassettes, respectively, also in the
Caenorhabditis elegans genome. The occurrence of such serpin genes in some groups
of metazoa reflects a parsimonious way to enlarge the adaptive ability of these
organisms to cope with a plethora of different serine and cysteine proteases.

PMID: 12137947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Protein Expr Purif. 2002 Jul;25(2):219-28.

Expression and purification of catalytically active, non-toxic endopeptidase
derivatives of Clostridium botulinum toxin type A.

Chaddock JA(1), Herbert MH, Ling RJ, Alexander FC, Fooks SJ, Revell DF, Quinn CP,
Shone CC, Foster KA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Applied Microbiology and Research, Porton Down, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK. john.chaddock@camr.org.uk

Clostridium botulinum neurotoxin type A is a potently toxic protein of 150 kDa
with specific endopeptidase activity for the SNARE protein SNAP-25. Proteolytic
cleavage of BoNT/A with trypsin leads to removal of the C-terminal domain
responsible for neuronal cell binding. Removal of this domain result in a
catalytically active, non-cell-binding derivative termed LH(N)/A. We have
developed a purification scheme to prepare LH(N)/A essentially free of
contaminating BoNT/A. LH(N)/A prepared by this scheme retains full enzymatic
activity, is stable in solution, and is of low toxicity as demonstrated in a
mouse toxicity assay. In addition, LH(N)/A has minimal effect on release of
neurotransmitter from a primary cell culture model. Both the mouse bioassay and
in vitro release assay suggest BoNT/A is present at less than 1 in 10(6)
molecules of LH(N)/A. This represents a significant improvement on previously
reported figures for LH(N)/A, and also the light chain domain, previously
purified from BoNT/A. To complement the preparation of LH(N)/A from holotoxin,
DNA encoding LH(N)/A has been introduced into Escherichia coli to facilitate
expression of recombinant product. Expression and purification parameters have
been developed to enable isolation of soluble, stable endopeptidase with a
toxicity profile enhanced on that of LH(N)/A purified from BoNT/A. The
recombinant-derived material has been used to prepare antisera that neutralise a 
BoNT/A challenge. The production of essentially BoNT/A-free LH(N)/A by two
different methods and the possibilities for exploitation are discussed.

PMID: 12135553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Vaccine. 2002 Jul 26;20(23-24):2933-41.

Co-immunisation with a plasmid DNA cocktail primes mice against anthrax and
plague.

Williamson ED(1), Bennett AM, Perkins SD, Beedham RJ, Miller J, Baillie LW.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire
SP4 OJQ, UK. dewilliamson@dstl.gov.uk

The protective antigen (PA) of Bacillus anthracis and the V antigen of Yersinia
pestis are potent immunogens and candidate vaccine sub-units. When plasmid DNA
encoding either PA or V antigen was used to immunise the Balb/c mouse, a low
serum IgG titre was detected (log (10)1.0 or less) which was slightly increased
by boosting with plasmid DNA. However, when mice immunised with plasmid DNA were 
later boosted with the respective recombinant protein, a significant increase in 
titre (up to 100-fold) was observed. Mice primed with a combination of each
plasmid and boosted with a combination of the recombinant proteins, were fully
protected (6/6) against challenge with Y. pestis. This compared favourably with
mice primed only with plasmid DNA encoding the V antigen and boosted with rV,
which were partially protected (3/6) against homologous challenge or with mice
primed and boosted with plasmid DNA encoding the V antigen which were poorly
protected (1/6). Combined immunisation with the two plasmid DNA constructs
followed by boosting with a combination of the encoded recombinant proteins
enhanced the protective immune response to Y. pestis compared with priming only
with plasmid DNA encoding the V antigen and boosting with rV. This enhancement
may be due to the effect of CpG motifs known to be present in the plasmid DNA
construct encoding PA.

PMID: 12126905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 20;277(38):34846-52. Epub 2002 Jul 8.

Inhibition of release of neurotransmitters from rat dorsal root ganglia by a
novel conjugate of a Clostridium botulinum toxin A endopeptidase fragment and
Erythrina cristagalli lectin.

Duggan MJ(1), Quinn CP, Chaddock JA, Purkiss JR, Alexander FC, Doward S, Fooks
SJ, Friis LM, Hall YH, Kirby ER, Leeds N, Moulsdale HJ, Dickenson A, Green GM,
Rahman W, Suzuki R, Shone CC, Foster KA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Applied Microbiology and Research, Porton Down, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP4 0JG, United Kingdom.

Clostridial neurotoxins potently and specifically inhibit neurotransmitter
release in defined cell types. Here we report that a catalytically active
derivative (termed LH(N)/A) of the type A neurotoxin from Clostridium botulinum
has been coupled to a lectin obtained from Erythrina cristagalli to form a novel 
conjugate. This conjugate exhibits an in vitro selectivity for nociceptive
afferents compared with the anatomically adjacent spinal neurons, as assessed
using in vitro primary neuronal culture systems to measure inhibition of release 
of neurotransmitters. Chemical conjugates prepared between E. cristagalli lectin 
and either natively sourced LH(N)/A or recombinant LH(N)/A purified from
Escherichia coli are assessed, and equivalence of the recombinant material are
demonstrated. Furthermore, the dependence of inhibition of neurotransmitter
release on the cleavage of SNAP-25 is demonstrated through the use of an
endopeptidase-deficient LH(N)/A conjugate variant. The duration of action of
inhibition of neurotransmitter released by the conjugate in vitro is assessed and
is comparable with that observed with Clostridium botulinum neurotoxin. Finally, 
in vivo electrophysiology shows that these in vitro actions have biological
relevance in that sensory transmission from nociceptive afferents through the
spinal cord is significantly attenuated. These data demonstrate that the potent
endopeptidase activity of clostridial neurotoxins can be selectively retargeted
to cells of interest and that inhibition of release of neurotransmitters from a
neuronal population of therapeutic relevance to the treatment of pain can be
achieved.

PMID: 12105193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Trop Med Int Health. 2002 Jul;7(7):584-91.

Pharmacokinetics of sequential and simultaneous treatment with the combination
chloroquine and sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine in acute uncomplicated Plasmodium
falciparum malaria in the Philippines.

Bustos DG(1), Lazaro JE, Gay F, Pottier A, Laracas CJ, Traore B, Diquet B.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Tropical Medicine, Department of Health, Alabang,
Muntinlupa City, Philippines. dbustos@ritm.gov.ph

The efficacy and kinetics of the combination chloroquine plus
sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (CQ + SP), given sequentially and simultaneously, were 
investigated in 32 patients with acute uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum
malaria in Palawan Island, the Philippines. Group 1 with 11 patients received
oral CQ 25 mg/kg bw over 3 days followed by a single dose of SP (three tablets
250 mg S + 25 mg P) on Day 4 (CQ0 + SP4). Group 2 with 21 patients received a
loading dose of CQ 10 mg/kg plus a single dose of SP three tablets on Day 0, and 
doses of CQ on Days 1 and 2 (CQ0 + SP0). Patients were followed-up for 28 days
until after the clinical and parasitological remission of the disease. Serum
samples for CQ, des-ethylchloroquine (DCQ), S and P levels were assayed by
high-pressure liquid chromatography with UV and spectrofluorometric detection
(HPLC-SF) to determine effective therapeutic concentrations achieved. Parasite
and fever clearance times (PCT and FCT) in Group 1 were 48 and 33.5 h,
respectively, and 39 and 24 h in Group 2. The parasite elimination half-life
(pt1/2) in the CQ + SP0 group was 2.5 h, significantly shorter than the CQ + SP4 
group of 5.7 h (P=0.006). Late-treatment failures (R I) were observed in 2/11
patients in Group 1 and in 2/21 patients in Group 2. Serum CQ and DCQ
concentrations were effectively adequate. Group 1 pharmacokinetic parameters
showed a median maximum concentration (Cmax), area under the curve (AUC) and
elimination half-life (t1/2) of 285 ng/ml, 2299 day ng/ml and 5.7 days for CQ,
and 89 ng/ml 1845 day ng/ml and 7.3 days for DCQ, respectively. SP was not
assayed in Group 1 because of very limited time points. In Group 2, the median
Cmax, AUC and t1/2 for CQ and DCQ were at 283 ng/ml 1980 day ng/ml and 5.9 days
for CQ and 220 ng/ml, 2680 day ng/ml and 8.5 days for DCQ, respectively. For S
and P, the median Cmax, AUC and t1/2 were at 169 microg/ml, 2758 day ng/ml and
10.9 days for sulfadoxine, and 591 ng/ml, 3029 day ng/ml and 2.9 days for
pyrimethamine, respectively. Both regimens were well tolerated with a minimum of 
side-effects, mainly nausea and vomiting. The combination CQ + SP administered
simultaneously on Day 0 is more efficacious than when administered sequentially. 
In the absence of an alternative treatment for acute uncomplicated malaria, this 
combination is well tolerated, and has an advantage over CQ or SP monotherapy,
especially in countries where one drug is still highly effective.

PMID: 12100441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Injury. 2002 Jun;33(5):435-8.

The role of laser Doppler flowmetry in assessing the viability of bone fragments 
in an open fracture.

Hinsley DE(1), Hobbs CM, Watkins PE.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, CBD Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 OJQ, UK.

The management of open fractures requires excision of all devitalised tissues,
both bony and soft tissue, and failure to do so is likely to increase the risk of
infection. This study evaluated the applicability of laser Doppler flowmetry for 
the objective evaluation of fracture fragment viability in an experimental open
ballistic fracture over a period of 12 h. The results indicate that this
technique could not be used to distinguish between vascularised and
non-vascularised fragments at any time, and did not aid the surgeon in their
decision making at the time of wound excision. Subjective evaluation, based upon 
the degree of soft tissue attachment of fragments, was a far better indicator of 
fragment vascularity, although it had a relatively low specificity. There remains
the need for education and training for trauma surgeons in the evaluation of
fragment viability to ensure adequate wound excision as part of fracture
management.

PMID: 12095725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Infect Immun. 2002 Jul;70(7):3621-6.

Neisseria lactamica protects against experimental meningococcal infection.

Oliver KJ(1), Reddin KM, Bracegirdle P, Hudson MJ, Borrow R, Feavers IM, Robinson
A, Cartwright K, Gorringe AR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Applied Microbiology and Research, Salisbury SP4 0JG, United
Kingdom.

Immunological and epidemiological evidence suggests that the development of
natural immunity to meningococcal disease results from colonization of the
nasopharynx by commensal Neisseria spp., particularly with N. lactamica. We
report here that immunization with N. lactamica killed whole cells, outer
membrane vesicles, or outer membrane protein (OMP) pools and protected mice
against lethal challenge by a number of diverse serogroup B and C meningococcal
isolates in a model of bacteremic infection. Sera raised to N. lactamica killed
whole cells, OMPs, or protein pools were found to cross-react with meningococcal 
isolates of a diverse range of genotypes and phenotypes. The results confirm the 
potential of N. lactamica to form the basis of a vaccine against meningococcal
disease.

PMCID: PMC128090
PMID: 12065503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Folia Microbiol (Praha). 2002;47(2):145-51.

Viability and formation of conjugated dienes in plasma membrane lipids of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Schizosaccharomyces pombe, Rhodotorula glutinis and
Candida albicans exposed to hydrophilic, amphiphilic and hydrophobic
pro-oxidants.

Krasowska A(1), Chmielewska L, Gapa D, Prescha A, Váchová L, Sigler K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology, Wroclaw University, 51 148 Wroclaw, Poland.

Effects of four lipid peroxidation-inducing pro-oxidants--amphiphilic tert-butyl 
hydroperoxide (TBHP), hydrophobic 1,1'-azobis(4-cyclohexanecarbonitrile) (ACHN), 
hydrophilic FeII and 2,2'-azobis(2-amidinopropane)dihydrochloride (AAPH)--on cell
growth and on generation of peroxidation products in isolated plasma membrane
lipids were determined in four yeast species (S. cerevisiae, S. pombe, R.
glutinis and C. albicans) differing in their plasma membrane lipid composition.
TBHP and ACHN inhibited cell growth most strongly, FeII and AAPH exerted
inhibitory action for about 2 h, with subsequent cell growth resumption. S.
cerevisiae strain SP4 was doped during growth with unsaturated linoleic (18:2)
and linolenic (18:3) acids to change its resistance to lipid peroxidation. Its
plasma membranes then contained some 30% of these acids as compared with some
1.3% of 18:2 acid found in undoped S. cerevisiae, while the content of (16:1) and
(18:1) acids was lower than in undoped S. cerevisiae. The presence of linoleic
and linolenic acids in S. cerevisiae cells lowered cell survival and increased
the sensitivity to pro-oxidants. Peroxidation-generated conjugated dienes (CD)
were measured in pure TBHP- and ACHN-exposed fatty acids used as standards. The
CD level depended on the extent of unsaturation and the pro-oxidant used. The
TBHP-induced CD production in a mixture of oleic acid and its ester was somewhat 
lower than in free acid and ester alone. In lipids isolated from the yeast plasma
membranes, the CD production was time-dependent and decreased after a 5-15-min
pro-oxidant exposure. ACHN was less active than TBHP. The most oxidizable were
lipids from S. cerevisiae plasma membranes doped with linoleic and linolenic
acids and from C. albicans with indigenous linolenic acid.

PMID: 12058392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2002 May 7;210(2):181-5.

A liquid-based method for the assessment of bacterial pathogenicity using the
nematode Caenorhabditis elegans.

Smith MP(1), Laws TR, Atkins TP, Oyston PC, de Pomerai DI, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl, Chemical and Biological Sciences, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 OJQ, UK.
mpsmith1@dstl.gov.uk

Caenorhabditis elegans has previously been used as an alternative to mammalian
models of infection with bacterial pathogens. We have developed a liquid-based
assay to measure the effect of bacteria on the feeding ability of C. elegans.
Using this assay we have shown that Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain PA14,
Burkholderia pseudomallei and Yersinia pestis were able to inhibit feeding of C. 
elegans strain N2. An increase in sensitivity of the assay was achieved by using 
C. elegans mutant phm-2, in place of the wild-type strain. Using this assay,P.
aeruginosa PA01 inhibited the feeding of C. elegans mutant phm-2. Such
liquid-based feeding assays are ideally suited to the high-throughput screening
of mutants of bacterial pathogens.

PMID: 12044672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Space Med Med Eng (Beijing). 1999 Oct;12(5):346-50.

[Studies on hereditary variations of millet seed after high altitude balloon
flight].

[Article in Chinese]

Li JG(1), Jiang GY, Wang PS, Zhang J, Jiang XC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, CAS, Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVE: To select high yield, high protein and fatty acid millet.
METHOD: Air-dried seeds of millet were carried by high altitude balloon (HAB) for
8 h. Botany characteristics of these seeds were analyzed and studied after
recovery.
RESULT: Germinating potential rose 21.1%, germinating percentage reduced 5.2% as 
compared with the control; plant height was 6.8 cm lower than that of the control
in SP1; while flag-leaf area and spike weight were 25% and 15.9% higher than
those of the control respectively. Large-spike strains were stable in SP3
pregeny. In SP3(-2), the contents of seed protein and fatty acid were more than
those of control; in SP3(-5), the average spike length was 5.8 cm, and the
content of Fe element in seed was 61.5 mg/kg more than these of control; in SP4
superspike strains, spike character, chlorophyll content and photosynthetic rate 
were significantly higher than the control during growing phase and growing
anaphase, photosynthetic rate in flag-leaf was over 27.9% higher than those in
the control.
CONCLUSION: New strains with high protein and fatty acid and high yield could be 
selected by HAB. The characteristics of these variations in the new strain is
hereditable.

PMID: 12022179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2002;262:1-24.

Molecular phylogeny of the arenaviruses.

Clegg JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Applied Microbiology and Research, Porton Down, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK.

PMID: 11987802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 19;277(29):25877-83. Epub 2002 Apr 9.

The rod cGMP-phosphodiesterase beta-subunit promoter is a specific target for Sp4
and is not activated by other Sp proteins or CRX.

Lerner LE(1), Gribanova YE, Whitaker L, Knox BE, Farber DB.

Author information: 
(1)Jules Stein Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, UCLA School of
Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.

The beta-subunit of cGMP-phosphodiesterase (beta-PDE) is a key protein in
phototransduction expressed exclusively in rod photoreceptors. It is necessary
for visual function and for structural integrity of the retina. beta-PDE promoter
deletions showed that the -45/-23 region containing a consensus Crx-response
element (CRE) was necessary for low level transcriptional activity. Overexpressed
Crx modestly transactivated this promoter in 293 human embryonic kidney cells;
however, mutation of CRE had no significant effect on transcription either in
transfected Y79 retinoblastoma cells or Xenopus embryonic heads. Thus, Crx is
unlikely to be a critical beta-PDE transcriptional regulator in vivo.
Interestingly, although the beta/GC element (-59/-49) binds multiple Sp
transcription factors in vitro, only Sp4, but not Sp1 or Sp3, significantly
enhanced beta-PDE promoter activity. Thus, the Sp4-mediated differential
activation of the beta-PDE transcription defines the first specific Sp4 target
gene reported to date and implies the importance of Sp4 for retinal function.
Further extensive mutagenesis of the beta-PDE upstream sequences showed no
additional regulatory elements. Although this promoter lacks a canonical TATA box
or Inr element, it has the (T/A)-rich beta/TA sequence located within the -45/-23
region. We found that it binds purified TBP and TFIIB in gel mobility shift
assays with cooperative enhancement of binding affinity.

PMID: 11943774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Appl Toxicol. 2001 Dec;21 Suppl 1:S83-6.

An improved brain slice model of nerve agent-induced seizure activity.

Wood SJ(1), Tattersall JE.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, CBD Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ,
UK.

A brain slice model was developed to investigate the mechanisms of seizure
activity induced by soman and the effectiveness of potential anticonvulsant
drugs. Unlike previously reported slice studies with nerve agents, this model
contains the entorhinal cortex as well as the hippocampus. This allows the study 
of the spread of seizure discharges within the limbic system and the development 
of prolonged, sustained discharges that are rarely seen in the simple hippocampal
slice preparation. Soman (1 microM) induced a second population spike in the
evoked field potential in the CA1 or CA3 region within 15-20 min. In almost all
the slices tested, this developed into spontaneous seizure activity within 30-40 
min. As well as interictal bursts, many slices also showed longer periods of
high-frequency bursting analogous to ictal seizure activity that originated in
the entorhinal cortex. This activity appeared similar to that induced by the
muscarinic agonist pilocarpine. Both the second population spike and the
spontaneous discharges could be blocked by diazepam and by AMPA/kainate
antagonists, but not by the NMDA antagonists AP5 and MK-801. This study confirms 
that the combined hippocampal-entorhinal cortex slice preparation is a suitable
model for investigating the origin and propagation of nerve-agent-induced
seizures within the limbic system.

Copyright 2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 11920926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Infect Immun. 2002 Apr;70(4):2022-8.

Mucosal or parenteral administration of microsphere-associated Bacillus anthracis
protective antigen protects against anthrax infection in mice.

Flick-Smith HC(1), Eyles JE, Hebdon R, Waters EL, Beedham RJ, Stagg TJ, Miller J,
Alpar HO, Baillie LW, Williamson ED.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl, Chemical and Biological Sciences, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4
0JQ, United Kingdom. HCFSmith@dstl.gov.uk

Existing licensed anthrax vaccines are administered parenterally and require
multiple doses to induce protective immunity. This requires trained personnel and
is not the optimum route for stimulating a mucosal immune response.
Microencapsulation of vaccine antigens offers a number of advantages over
traditional vaccine formulations, including stability without refrigeration and
the potential for utilizing less invasive routes of administration. Recombinant
protective antigen (rPA), the dominant antigen for protection against anthrax
infection, was encapsulated in poly-L-lactide 100-kDa microspheres.
Alternatively, rPA was loosely attached to the surfaces of microspheres by
lyophilization. All of the microspheric formulations were administered to A/J
mice with a two-dose schedule by either the intramuscular route, the intranasal
route, or a combination of these two routes, and immunogenicity and protective
efficacy were assessed. An intramuscular priming immunization followed by either 
an intramuscular or intranasal boost gave optimum anti-rPA immunoglobulin G
titers. Despite differences in rPA-specific antibody titers, all immunized mice
survived an injected challenge consisting of 10(3) median lethal doses of
Bacillus anthracis STI spores. Immunization with microencapsulated and
microsphere-associated formulations of rPA also protected against aerosol
challenge with 30 median lethal doses of STI spores. These results show that rPA 
can be encapsulated and surface bound to polymeric microspheres without impairing
its immunogenicity and also that mucosal or parenteral administration of
microspheric formulations of rPA efficiently protects mice against both injected 
and aerosol challenges with B. anthracis spores. Microspheric formulations of rPA
could represent the next generation of anthrax vaccines, which could require
fewer doses because they are more potent, are less reactogenic than currently
available human anthrax vaccines, and could be self-administered without
injection.

PMCID: PMC127835
PMID: 11895967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Injury. 2002 Mar;33(2):157-60.

Contamination of ballistic fractures: an in vitro model.

Clasper JC(1), Hill PF, Watkins PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, DERA Porton Down, Salisbury, Wilts SP4 OJQ,
UK.

This study allowed the development of an in vitro model of a high-energy
ballistic fracture. Direct fractures are more heavily contaminated than indirect 
fractures, and the spread of contamination is more extensive than examination of 
the wounds, particularly the entry wounds, would suggest. The major spread of
contamination is along tissue planes, and we would recommend that these are
thoroughly lavaged in the management of the fracture. The fracture site is
heavily contaminated, with endosteal spread in direct fractures. However, there
appears to be relatively little bony contamination beyond the fracture site.

PMID: 11890918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Virology. 2002 Feb 15;293(2):210-6.

Single oral immunization with replication deficient recombinant adenovirus
elicits long-lived transgene-specific cellular and humoral immune responses.

Sharpe S(1), Fooks A, Lee J, Hayes K, Clegg C, Cranage M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Applied Microbiology and Research, Salisbury SP4 0JG, United
Kingdom. sally.sharpe@camr.org.uk

Oral-gastric delivery of vaccines is a preferred route of immunization and is
particularly relevant to the development of vaccine-vector systems. We have
investigated the ability of a replication deficient (E1-deleted) adenovirus
construct (RAd68), which efficiently expresses the measles virus nucleocapsid (N)
protein under the control of the strong HCMV IE promoter, to elicit antibody and 
cytotoxic T cell (CTL) responses in mice following intragastric administration.
Measles virus N protein-specific CTL memory and serum antibody responses were
analyzed in a total of 140 mice at time points 2-51 weeks after immunization
either with a single dose of 10(8) pfu RAd68 or with a fivefold higher dose. Of
the 20 animals analyzed in the first 4-week period following low-dose
immunization, 6 mounted low-level splenic CTL responses while 13 animals had CTL 
in the mesenteric lymph nodes. Splenic CTL responses were largely undetectable at
later times. Only 23% of low-dose-immunized mice made serum antibody responses
and these were generally of low magnitude and frequently of short duration. In
contrast, the majority of animals immunized orally with 5 x 10(8) pfu RAd68
mounted splenic CTL responses (70%) and/or antibody responses (89%). Notably,
these responses were stronger and of greater duration than those seen following
immunization at the lower dose. Gut mucosal immunization with replication
deficient adenoviruses is a promising approach, not only for the development of
complementary measles vaccine strategies which may be required for measles virus 
eradication, but also generally for vaccination against other infections.

PMID: 11886240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Poult Sci. 2002 Jan;81(1):30-3.

Fatty acid composition and egg components of specialty eggs.

Cherian G(1), Holsonbake TB, Goeger MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Oregon State University, Corvallis 97331-6702, 
USA. Gita.Cherian@orst.edu

Egg components, total fat, and fatty acid content of specialty eggs were
compared. One dozen eggs were collected and analyzed from each of five different 
brands from hens fed a diet free of animal fat (SP1), certified organic
free-range brown eggs (SP2), uncaged unmedicated brown eggs (SP3), cage-free
vegetarian diet brown eggs (SP4), or naturally nested uncaged (SP5). Regular
white-shelled eggs were the control. A significant (P < 0.05) difference was
observed in the egg components and fatty acid content in different brands. The
percentage of yolk was lower (P < 0.05) in SP2 and SP4 with a concomitant
increase (P < 0.05) in the percentage of white. The percentage of shell was lower
(P < 0.05) in SP4 and SP5. The total edible portion was greater in SP4 and SP5.
The yolk:white ratio was greater (P < 0.05) in SP3. The total lipid content was
lower in SP4 eggs. The content of palmitic (C16:0), stearic (C18:0), and total
saturated fatty acids were lower (P < 0.05) in SP1. No difference was observed in
the content of palmitoleic (C16:1), oleic (C18:1), or total monounsaturated fatty
acids. The content of n-3 fatty acids in SP2, SP4, and SP5 were similar to
control eggs. The ratio of total n-6:n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids ranged from 
39.2 for SP5 to 11.5 for SP1 (P < 0.05). No difference was observed in the total 
polyunsaturated fatty acid content of eggs (P > 0.05).

PMID: 11885896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. DNA Cell Biol. 2001 Dec;20(12):781-9.

In vivo roles of RORalpha and Sp4 in the regulation of murine prosaposin gene.

Jin P(1), Sun Y, Grabowski GA.

Author information: 
(1)The Division of Human Genetics, Children's Hospital Research Foundation at
Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45529-3039, USA.

Prosaposin has a central role in intracellular glycosphingolipid catabolism and
also has extracellular functions. This locus is regulated temporally and
spatially. The highest mRNA expression occurs in the central nervous system (CNS)
and reproductive system. In vitro, the CNS-expressed proteins Sp4 and RORalpha
bind to Sp1 and RORE sites within a 310-bp fragment directly upstream of the
transcription start site. These transcription factors exhibit negative
cooperativity in vitro for prosaposin expression. Mice deficient in RORalpha and 
Sp4 (Staggerer [Sg(-/-)] and Sp4 knockout [Sp4 KO], respectively) containing
selected prosaposin promoter deletion transgenes were used in comparative
expression studies to evaluate this negative cooperativity in vivo. Constructs
containing the RORE or Sp1/U cluster alone were independently stimulatory.
Deletion of the Sp1/U site led to a decrease in reporter activity only in the
cerebellum of Sg(-/-) mice. The deletion of RORE and Sp1/U sites did alter the
increase of reporter activity in the brain and eye, but not in the spinal cord,
of Sg(-/-) mice. These results indicate that Sp4 and RORalpha play minor and
major roles, respectively, in regional expression of the prosaposin locus in the 
brain, whereas expression in the spinal cord is independent of RORalpha.

PMID: 11879571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Mol Biol Evol. 2002 Mar;19(3):216-22.

Evolution of Sp transcription factors.

Kolell KJ(1), Crawford DL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, School of Biological Science, 
University of Missouri-Kansas City.

The Sp family of transcription factors binds GC-rich DNA sequences. The
ubiquitously expressed Sp1 and Sp3 have been well characterized in mammals.
Presented here is the characterization of the only Sp protein expressed in the
liver or heart tissue of the teleost fish Fundulus heteroclitus. This protein,
fSp3, is most similar to and homologous with mammalian Sp3 proteins. The
evolution of the Sp transcription family is described, with Sp1 and Sp3
representing the most recent duplication of the Sp family. Sp4 appears to be the 
most ancestral member. Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 form a monophyletic group without Sp2.
Sp2 is the least similar of the Sp family and is more similar to the non-Sp
transcription factors. These results suggest that Sp2 should not be considered a 
member of the Sp family. Only two domains (zinc fingers and B domain) share
similarity outside the Sp family. The zinc fingers are homologous to other
GC-binding domains, yet the B domain is homologous to protein-protein interacting
domains in the CCAAT-binding/NF-Y transcription factor families. These results
suggest that these different domains have different evolutionary histories.

PMID: 11861880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Vaccine. 2002 Feb 22;20(11-12):1497-504.

Monoclonal antibody protects mice against infection and disease when given either
before or up to 24 h after airborne challenge with virulent Venezuelan equine
encephalitis virus.

Phillpotts RJ(1), Jones LD, Howard SC.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl, Medical Sciences Department, Porton Down, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK.

Airborne infection with Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus (VEEV) is a
significant hazard for laboratory workers, who may not be immunised against VEEV 
infection as there is no vaccine currently available suitable for human use. We
describe a potential alternative strategy that could protect workers exposed to
VEEV or similar viruses. VEEV-specific murine monoclonal antibodies (MAB), given 
by intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection to mice as a single dose of 100 microg, have 
a half-life of 6-10 days in serum and spread by transudation to respiratory
secretions. Administration of MAB (approximately 4 mg/kg) to mice 24h before
challenge with approximately 100LD50 of virulent VEEV protected up to 100%
animals. The same dose of MAB delivered up to 24h after challenge protected
approximately 50%. Two MAB that were synergistic in vitro in plaque reduction
neutralisation tests were not synergistic in vivo in protection assays. An
examination of virus multiplication, in the blood and internal organs (brain,
spleen, lung) of MAB-treated mice infected by the airborne route with VEEV,
suggested that therapeutic activity depended both upon the prevention of virus
infection of the brain, and the rapid clearance of virus from the periphery.
Antiviral therapy with VEEV-specific human or "humanised" MAB, providing that
they are administered early, may offer an alternative means of specific medical
intervention for those with a known exposure to VEEV.

PMID: 11858855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Infect Immun. 2002 Mar;70(3):1653-6.

A recombinant carboxy-terminal domain of the protective antigen of Bacillus
anthracis protects mice against anthrax infection.

Flick-Smith HC(1), Walker NJ, Gibson P, Bullifent H, Hayward S, Miller J, Titball
RW, Williamson ED.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl, Chemical and Biological Sciences, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 
0JQ, United Kingdom.

The immunogenicity and protective efficacy of overlapping regions of the
protective antigen (PA) polypeptide, cloned and expressed as glutathione
S-transferase fusion proteins, have been assessed. Results show that protection
can be attributed to individual domains and imply that it is domain 4 which
contains the dominant protective epitopes of PA.

PMCID: PMC127760
PMID: 11854261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. BMJ. 2002 Feb 9;324(7333):332-5.

Chemical weapons.

Evison D(1), Hinsley D, Rice P.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratories, Porton Down, Salisbury,
Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ.

PMCID: PMC1122267
PMID: 11834561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Burns. 2002 Feb;28(1):19-25.

The treatment of Lewisite burns with laser debridement---'lasablation'.

Lam DG(1), Rice P, Brown RF.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Dstl Chemical and Biological Sciences, Porton 
Down, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, Salisbury, UK.

Lewisite (dichloro (2-chlorovinyl) arsine) was first synthesised in 1918 and its 
potential for use in military confrontations as a vesicant agent has been widely 
recognised. These agents cause blistering skin reactions with resultant full
thickness burns. Effective treatments to date have been delayed by the lack of
suitable animal models. Porcine skin has recently been used successfully to model
the development and natural history of these burn injuries. A large white pig
model (n=6) was employed to investigate the effectiveness of CO(2) and Erbium-YAG
lasers (EYL) in laser dermabrasion of established Lewisite burns. Burns underwent
treatment at 4 days post-exposure and were assessed at 1, 2 and 3 weeks,
thereafter, for the rate of epithelial healing. The re-epithelialisation rates in
the laser dermabraded groups were accelerated by a factor of four compared to
untreated controls by the first week (analysis of vartiance, ANOVA, P=0.006 for
pulsed CO(2) and P=0.011 for Erbium-YAG). Ablation of the burn eschar was thought
to accelerate the rate of healing by causing partial debridement. This method has
been termed 'lasablation' and represents a significant advance in the clinical
management of this type of injury.

PMID: 11834325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Biochem J. 2002 Feb 15;362(Pt 1):41-50.

Structural and functional characterization of the human and mouse fibulin-1 gene 
promoters: role of Sp1 and Sp3.

Castoldi M(1), Chu ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, Thomas Jefferson University, 
233 South 10th Street, Philadelphia, PA 19107, U.S.A.

Fibulin-1 is a multifunctional extracellular protein involved in diverse
biological processes including cardiovascular development, haemostasis and
cancer. To investigate the transcriptional regulation of the gene encoding
fibulin-1 we cloned and analysed about 4.0 kb of the 5'-flanking regions of both 
the human and mouse fibulin-1 genes. The human and mouse fibulin-1 promoters
share little sequence similarity except for a short region of approx. 150-170 bp 
immediately upstream of the translation start site. The conserved region contains
a TATA-like sequence (ATAATT) and multiple consensus binding sites for Sp1 and
activator protein 2 (AP-2). That the short conserved region in each gene confers 
basal promoter activity is demonstrated by transient transfections of promoter
deletion constructs for both the human and mouse genes into cells that express
fibulin-1 constitutively. Co-transfections of promoter constructs with expression
plasmids for Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 into Drosophila SL2 cells indicate that Sp1 and Sp3
are essential for transcriptional activation and that these two factors act
synergistically. Electrophoretic mobility-shift assays show that Sp1 and Sp3, but
not AP-2, bind to the basal promoter of the human fibulin-1 gene. The results
demonstrate the functional importance of Sp1 and Sp3 in regulating the expression
of the fibulin-1 gene.

PMCID: PMC1222358
PMID: 11829738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Microbiology. 2002 Jan;148(Pt 1):297-306.

Bacillus amyloliquefaciens orthologue of Bacillus subtilis ywrO encodes a
nitroreductase enzyme which activates the prodrug CB 1954.

Anlezark GM(1), Vaughan T, Fashola-Stone E, Michael NP, Murdoch H, Sims MA,
Stubbs S, Wigley S, Minton NP.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Applied Microbiology and Research, Porton Down, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK. gill.anlezark@camr.org.uk

A nitroreductase with distinct properties that can activate the prodrug
5-aziridinyl-2,4-dinitrobenzamide (CB 1954) was isolated from Bacillus
amyloliquefaciens. The encoding gene was identified as a homologue of the ywrO of
Bacillus subtilis, and was obtained as a PCR product by reverse genetics, cloned 
and the entire nucleotide sequence determined. The gene was found to reside
between homologues of the B. subtilis alsD and yswB genes; however, the ywrO and 
yswB genes of B. amyloliquefaciens were not separated by a fourth gene, ywsA. The
B. amyloliquefaciens ywrO gene was overexpressed, the recombinant protein
purified and its properties were compared with those of two CB 1954-activating
enzymes, Escherichia coli B nitroreductase (NTR) and Walker DT-diaphorase (DTD). 
In common with these enzymes menadione was an electron acceptor (K(m) 3 microM)
and activity with this substrate was inhibited by the presence of dicoumarol
(K(i) 1.0 microM). In contrast, YwrO showed a marked preference for NADPH as a
cofactor (K(m) 40 microM) and therefore could not be classified as a DTD (EC
1.6.99.2). The flavin FMN was an acceptor with high affinity. B.
amyloliquefaciens YwrO was shown to be a flavoprotein with a monomeric molecular 
mass of 21.5 kDa by calculation and SDS-PAGE. The cytotoxic 4-hydroxylamine
derivative was the single CB 1954 reduction product, but B. amyloliquefaciens
YwrO was inactive with the bischloroethyl analogue of CB 1954, SN 23862. In both 
of these properties B. amyloliquefaciens YwrO more closely resembles DTD than
NTR. Its K(m) for CB 1954 was lower than that of NTR (617 microM compared to 862 
microM). Enhanced in vitro cytotoxicity of CB 1954 was demonstrated on incubation
of V79 cells with prodrug, NADPH and B. amyloliquefaciens YwrO. The work has led 
to the identification of a previously unknown nitroreductase, B.
amyloliquefaciens YwrO, with distinct properties which will aid the rational
selection of appropriate genes for applications in directed enzyme prodrug
therapy (DEPT).

PMID: 11782522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Appl Toxicol. 2001 Nov-Dec;21(6):435-40.

Kojic acid reduces the cytotoxic effects of sulfur mustard on cultures containing
human melanoma cells in vitro.

Smith CN(1), Lindsay CD.

Author information: 
(1)DSTL Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 OJQ, UK.

In vivo experiments have shown that melanocytes are more sensitive than
keratinocytes to the cytotoxic effects of sulfur mustard when it is applied
topically to pig skin.1 It has been hypothesized that this is caused by the
uncoupling of the melanogenic pathway by depletion of cellular glutathione,
resulting in the uncontrolled production of cytotoxic quinone free-radical
species by tyrosinase.2. In the present study, the feasibility of blocking the
melanogenic pathway as a means of reducing the cytotoxicity of sulfur mustard was
evaluated using kojic acid. Kojic acid is a topically applied depigmenting agent 
that exerts its effect by acting as a slow-binding, competitive inhibitor of
tyrosinase.3 Preincubation of G361 pigmented melanoma cells and mixed cultures of
G361 cells and SVK keratinocytes with 2.5 mM kojic acid resulted in significant
increases in the viability of these cultures as determined by neutral red (NR)
and gentian violet (GV) dye binding assays for up to 48 h following exposure to
50 microM sulfur mustard. The highest levels of protection were seen in the G361 
cultures, with a 26.8% increase in culture viability (NR assay) compared with the
sulfur-mustard-only controls at 24 h. Preincubation of SVK cells alone with kojic
acid resulted in lower increases in viability (2.5% at 24 h by the NR assay).
Inhibition of the melanogenic pathway reduces the sensitivity of cultures
containing pigment cells to sulfur mustard.

PMID: 11746188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Nature. 2001 Dec 13;414(6865):748-51.

Transmission potential of smallpox in contemporary populations.

Gani R(1), Leach S.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Applied Microbiology and Research, Porton, Down, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK.

Erratum in
    Nature 2002 Feb 28;415(6875):1056.

Despite eradication, smallpox still presents a risk to public health whilst
laboratory stocks of virus remain. One factor crucial to any assessment of this
risk is R0, the average number of secondary cases infected by each primary case. 
However, recently applied estimates have varied too widely (R0 from 1.5 to >20)
to be of practical use, and often appear to disregard contingent factors such as 
socio-economic conditions and herd immunity. Here we use epidemic modelling to
show a more consistent derivation of R0. In isolated pre-twentieth century
populations with negligible herd immunity, the numbers of cases initially rose
exponentially, with an R0 between 3.5 and 6. Before outbreak controls were
applied, smallpox also demonstrated similar levels of transmission in 30 sporadic
outbreaks in twentieth century Europe, taking into account pre-existing
vaccination levels (about 50%) and the role of hospitals in doubling early
transmission. Should smallpox recur, such estimates of transmission potential (R0
from 3.5 to 6) predict a reasonably rapid epidemic rise before the implementation
of public health interventions, because little residual herd immunity exists now 
that vaccination has ceased.

PMID: 11742399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Biol Chem. 2002 Feb 8;277(6):4455-64. Epub 2001 Nov 27.

GC box-binding transcription factors control the neuronal specific transcription 
of the cyclin-dependent kinase 5 regulator p35.

Ross S(1), Tienhaara A, Lee MS, Tsai LH, Gill G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (cdk5)/p35 kinase activity is highest in post-mitotic
neurons of the central nervous system and is critical for development and
function of the brain. The neuronal specific activity of the cdk5/p35 kinase is
achieved through the regulated expression of p35 mRNA. We have identified a small
200-bp fragment of the p35 promoter that is sufficient for high levels of
neuronal specific expression. Mutational analysis of this TATA-less promoter has 
identified a 17-bp GC-rich element, present twice, that is both required for
promoter activity and sufficient for neuronal specific transcription. A GC box
within the 17-bp element is critical for both promoter activity and protein-DNA
complex formation. The related transcription factors Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 constitute
most of the GC box DNA binding activity in neurons. We have found that both the
relative contribution of the Sp family proteins to GC box binding and the
transcriptional activity of these proteins is regulated during neuronal
differentiation. Thus, our data show that the GC box-binding Sp proteins
contribute to the regulation of p35 expression in neurons, suggesting changes in 
the Sp transcription factors level and activity may contribute to cell
type-specific expression of many genes in the central nervous system.

PMID: 11724806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Immunol Methods. 2001 Dec 1;258(1-2):137-40.

Analysis of SIV-specific CTL in the rhesus macaque model of AIDS: the use of
simian fibroblasts as an alternative source of target cells for chromium release 
assays.

Sharpe S(1), Beer B, Hall G, Dennis M, Norley S, Cranage M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Applied Microbiology and Research, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, Salisbury,
UK. sally.sharpe@camr.org.uk

The simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) model of AIDS is widely used for the
development of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) vaccine strategies,
particularly for the analysis of correlates of protective immunity. As it is not 
always possible to establish autologous B-lymphoblastoid cell lines (B-LCL) for
use as targets in the analysis of cytotoxic T cell (CTL) activity, we have
compared B-LCL with primary simian skin cells. Using a well-defined SIV
gag-encoded CTL epitope restricted by Mamu A*01 major histocompatibility complex 
(MHC) class I, we have shown that peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from 
vaccinated and infected macaques can kill MHC class I-matched skin fibroblasts
presenting the cognate epitope but that skin fibroblasts are a less sensitive
target than B-LCL for the detection of CTL.

PMID: 11684130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol. 2001 Aug;31(2):153-62.

Bordetella pertussis fimbriae are effective carrier proteins in Neisseria
meningitidis serogroup C conjugate vaccines.

Reddin KM(1), Crowley-Luke A, Clark SO, Vincent PJ, Gorringe AR, Hudson MJ,
Robinson A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Applied Microbiology and Research, Salisbury SP4 0JG, Wiltshire,
UK. karen.reddin@camr.org.uk

Serogroup C meningococcal conjugate vaccines generally use diphtheria or tetanus 
toxoids as the protein carriers. The use of alternative carrier proteins may
allow multivalent conjugate vaccines to be formulated into a single injection and
circumvent potential problems of immune suppression in primed individuals.
Bordetella pertussis fimbriae were assessed as carrier proteins for Neisseria
meningitidis serogroup C polysaccharide. Fimbriae were conjugated to the
polysaccharide using modifications of published methods and characterised by size
exclusion chromatography; co-elution of protein and polysaccharide moieties
confirmed conjugation. The conjugates elicited boostable IgG responses to
fimbriae and serogroup C polysaccharide in mice, and IgG:IgM ratios indicated
that the responses were thymus-dependent. High bactericidal antibody titres
against a serogroup C strain of N. meningitidis were also observed. In a mouse
infection model, the conjugate vaccine protected against lethal infection with N.
meningitidis. Therefore, B. pertussis fimbriae are effective carrier proteins for
meningococcal serogroup C polysaccharide and could produce a vaccine to protect
against meningococcal disease and to augment protection against pertussis.

PMID: 11549423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Space Med Med Eng (Beijing). 1998 Feb;11(1):21-5.

[A study on the induction of mutation of paddy rice under space conditions].

[Article in Chinese]

Li Y(1), Jiang X, Li J, Qiu H, Li G, Xie J.

Author information: 
(1)Agricultural Science Research Institute of Fuzhon Prefexture Jiangxi Province,
Linchuan, China.

Rice seeds were carried into space by the recoverable satellite. After recovery
the seeds were sowed on the earth so as to observe the character performance and 
genetic variation of their later generations. The preliminary results showed that
the main characters of the SP1 generation didn't show significant difference from
the control. Among the individual plants of the SP2 generation strong
broad-spectrum segregation appeared in the 9 main agronomic characters. Mutation 
frequency is 4.66%. The individual plants of the SP3 generation were obviously
correlated with the SP4 generation in the average character values of the 5 main 
characters. Stable plant strains were obtained in the SP4 generation. The SP5 and
SP6 generations were put into control and polt tests. As a conclusion, it may be 
considered that certain variations of rice seeds induced by the space conditions 
are heritable to the offsprings, therefore, it can be used as a new method for
mutagenic seed breeding.

PMID: 11541262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Vaccine. 2001 Sep 14;19(32):4732-42.

Microsphere translocation and immunopotentiation in systemic tissues following
intranasal administration.

Eyles JE(1), Bramwell VW, Williamson ED, Alpar HO.

Author information: 
(1)DERA (Chemical and Biological Defence Sector), Porton Down, Wiltshire SP4 OJQ,
Salisbury, UK.

With a view to developing improved mucosal immunisation strategies, we have
quantitatively investigated the uptake of fluorescent polystyrene carboxylate
microspheres (1.1 microm diameter), using histology and fluorescence-activated
cell sorting, following intranasal delivery to BALB/c mice. To qualify these
biodistribution data, antigen specific memory and effector responses in the
spleens of mice immunised nasally with Yersinia pestis V antigen loaded
poly(lactide) (PLA) microspheres (1.5 microm diameter) were assessed at 4, 7 and 
11 days. Irrespective of administration vehicle volume (10 or 50 microl),
appreciable numbers of fluorescent microspheres were detected within nasal
associated lymphoid tissues (NALT) and draining cervical lymph nodes. Nasal
administration of the particles suspended in 50 microl volumes of
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) served to deposit the fluorescent microspheres
throughout the respiratory tract (P<0.05). In these animals, appreciable particle
uptake into the mediastinal lymph node was noted (P<0.05). Also, spleens removed 
from mice 10 days after fluorescent particle application contained significantly 
more microspheres if the suspension had been nasally instilled using a 50 microl 
volume (P<0.05). Appreciable memory (and effector from day 7) responses were
detected in mediastinal lymph nodes removed from mice immunised nasally with 50
microl volumes of microparticulated or soluble V antigen. Immunological responses
in splenic tissue removed 7 days after intranasal immunisation corroborated the
thesis that the spleen can act as an inductive site following bronchopulmonary
deposition of particulated antigen: upon exposure to V in vitro, splenic T-cells 
from mice nasally immunised with 50 microl volumes of microspheres incorporated
statistically greater (P<0.05) quantities of [3H]thymidine into newly synthesised
DNA than did T-cells from cohorts nasally immunised with 50 microl volumes of V
in solution. Similarly, significant numbers of anti-V IgG secreting cells were
only detected in spleens from mice immunised intramuscularly or nasally with
microparticles. These immunological and biodistribution data support the tenet
that, following an appropriate method of mucosal delivery, microparticles can
translocate to tissues in the systemic compartment of the immune system and
thence provoke immunological reactions therein.

PMID: 11535324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Genes Cells. 2001 Aug;6(8):689-97.

Complex phenotype of mice homozygous for a null mutation in the Sp4 transcription
factor gene.

Göllner H(1), Bouwman P, Mangold M, Karis A, Braun H, Rohner I, Del Rey A,
Besedovsky HO, Meinhardt A, van den Broek M, Cutforth T, Grosveld F, Philipsen S,
Suske G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Philipps-Universität
Marburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Sp4 is a zinc finger transcription factor which is closely related to
Sp1 and Sp3. All three proteins recognize the same DNA elements and can act as
transcriptional activators through glutamine-rich activation domains. Unlike Sp1 
and Sp3, which are ubiquitous proteins, Sp4 is highly abundant in the central
nervous system, but also detectable in many other tissues.
RESULTS: We have disrupted the mouse Sp4 gene by a targeted deletion of the exons
encoding the N-terminal activation domains. Sp4 knockout mice show a complete
absence of Sp4 expression. They develop until birth without obvious
abnormalities. After birth, two-thirds die within 4 weeks. Surviving mice are
growth retarded. Male Sp4null mice do not breed. The cause for the breeding
defect remains obscure since they show complete spermatogenesis. In addition,
pheromone receptor genes in the vomeronasal organ appear unaffected. Female
Sp4null mice have a smaller thymus, spleen and uterus. In addition, they exhibit 
a pronounced delay in sexual maturation.
CONCLUSIONS: The phenotype of the Sp4null mice differs significantly from those
described for Sp1-/- and Sp3-/- mice. Thus, the structural similarities, the
common recognition motif and the overlapping expression pattern of these three
transcription factors do not reflect similar physiological functions.

PMID: 11532028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Brain Res. 2001 Jun 15;904(1):43-53.

Effects of low intensity radiofrequency electromagnetic fields on electrical
activity in rat hippocampal slices.

Tattersall JE(1), Scott IR, Wood SJ, Nettell JJ, Bevir MK, Wang Z, Somasiri NP,
Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, CBD Porton Down, SP4 0JQ, Salisbury, UK.
jtattersall@dera.gov.uk

Slices of rat hippocampus were exposed to 700 MHz continuous wave radiofrequency 
(RF) fields (25.2-71.0 V m(-1), 5-15 min exposure) in a stripline waveguide. At
low field intensities, the predominant effect on the electrically evoked field
potential in CA1 was a potentiation of the amplitude of the population spike by
up to 20%, but higher intensity fields could produce either increases or
decreases of up to 120 and 80%, respectively, in the amplitude of the population 
spike. To eliminate the possibility of RF-induced artefacts due to the metal
stimulating electrode, the effect of RF exposure on spontaneous epileptiform
activity induced in CA3 by 4-aminopyridine (50-100 microM) was investigated.
Exposure to RF fields (50.0 V m(-1)) reduced or abolished epileptiform bursting
in 36% of slices tested. The maximum field intensity used in these experiments,
71.0 V m(-1), was calculated to produce a specific absorption rate (SAR) of
between 0.0016 and 0.0044 W kg(-1) in the slices. Measurements with a Luxtron
fibreoptic probe confirmed that there was no detectable temperature change (+/-
0.1 degrees C) during a 15 min exposure to this field intensity. Furthermore,
imposed temperature changes of up to 1 degrees C failed to mimic the effects of
RF exposure. These results suggest that low-intensity RF fields can modulate the 
excitability of hippocampal tissue in vitro in the absence of gross thermal
effects. The changes in excitability may be consistent with reported behavioural 
effects of RF fields.

PMID: 11516410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Gen Virol. 2001 Sep;82(Pt 9):2215-23.

Induction of simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV)-specific CTL in rhesus macaques 
by vaccination with modified vaccinia virus Ankara expressing SIV transgenes:
influence of pre-existing anti-vector immunity.

Sharpe S(1), Polyanskaya N, Dennis M, Sutter G, Hanke T, Erfle V, Hirsch V,
Cranage M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Applied Microbiology and Research (CAMR), Salisbury SP4 0JG, UK.
sally.sharpe@camr.org.uk

A major aim in AIDS vaccine development is the definition of strategies to
stimulate strong and durable cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) responses. Here we
report that simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV)-specific CTL developed in 4/4
macaques following a single intramuscular injection of modified vaccinia virus
Ankara (MVA) constructs expressing both structural and regulatory/accessory genes
of SIV. In two animals Nef-specific responses persisted, but other responses
diminished and new responses were not revealed, following further vaccination.
Vaccination of another two macaques, expressing Mamu A*01 MHC class I, with MVA
constructs containing nef and gag-pol under the control of the moderate strength 
natural vaccinia virus early/late promoter P7.5, again induced an early
Nef-specific response, whereas responses to Gag remained undetectable.
Anti-vector immunity induced by this immunization was shown to prevent the
efficient stimulation of CTL directed to the cognate Gag epitope, p11C C-M,
following vaccination with another MVA construct expressing SIV Gag-Pol under a
strong synthetic vaccinia virus-specific promoter. In contrast, vaccination of a 
previously unexposed animal resulted in a SIV-specific CTL response widely
disseminated in lymphoid tissues including lymph nodes associated with the rectal
and genital routes of SIV entry. Thus, despite the highly attenuated nature of
MVA, repeated immunization may elicit sufficient anti-vector immunity to limit
the effectiveness of later vaccination.

PMID: 11514732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Vaccine. 2001 Aug 14;19(31):4465-72.

Role of antibody to lipopolysaccharide in protection against low- and
high-virulence strains of Francisella tularensis.

Fulop M(1), Mastroeni P, Green M, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Evaluation and Research Agency, CBD, Porton Down, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ,
Salisbury, UK.

Mice immunised with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) from Francisella tularensis were
protected against challenge with the live vaccine strain (LVS). However, when
similarly immunised mice were challenged using the fully virulent F. tularensis
strain Schu4, only an increase in the time to death was observed. Passive
transfer of serum from LPS-immunised mice to naive mice afforded protection
against F. tularensis LVS. LPS-immunised mice depleted of either CD4+ or CD8+
T-cells survived a F. tularensis LVS challenge although the rate of clearance of 
bacteria from the spleen was significantly reduced in the CD8+ depleted group.
LPS-immunised mice boosted with F. tularensis LVS were re-challenged with F.
tularensis Schu4. This cohort was significantly protected (LD(50) increased from 
<1 to >1000 CFU). However, passive transfer of serum did not confer protection
and mice depleted of CD4+ or CD8+ T-cells did not survive.

PMID: 11483272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Vaccine. 2001 Aug 14;19(31):4409-16.

Passive transfer of protection against Bacillus anthracis infection in a murine
model.

Beedham RJ(1), Turnbull PC, Williamson ED.

Author information: 
(1)Pathobiology, CBD, DERA Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JQ, Wiltshire, UK.

Passive transfer of lymphocytes and sera from mice immunised using two different 
formulations containing recombinant protective antigen (rPA) have been used to
further elucidate the mechanism of protection against Bacillus anthracis
infection. The results demonstrated that an antibody response maybe important in 
protection against B. anthracis infection, under the conditions tested. The
results provide further data for the development of an improved anthrax vaccine.

PMID: 11483266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Appl Toxicol. 2001 Jul-Aug;21(4):279-83.

In vitro skin absorption and decontamination of sulphur mustard: comparison of
human and pig-ear skin.

Chilcott RP(1), Jenner J, Hotchkiss SA, Rice P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, CBD Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4
0JQ, UK.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the use of an in vitro skin diffusion cell 
system as a model for assessing decontaminants against the chemical warfare agent
sulphur mustard (SM). The in vitro absorption rates of SM through heat-separated 
human (157 +/- 66 microg cm(-2) h(-1)) and pig-ear (411 +/- 175 microg cm(-2)
h(-1)) epidermal membranes were in agreement with previous in vivo studies that
quoted skin absorption rates of 150 and 366 microg cm(-2) h(-1), respectively.
Decontaminants (fuller's earth, Ambergard and BDH spillage granules) were ranked 
in order of effectiveness by measuring the skin absorption rates and the
percentage of applied dose of SM that penetrated human and pig-ear epidermal
membranes. The effectiveness of fuller's earth measured in this in vitro study
using human epidermal membranes was in agreement with a previous in vivo human
volunteer study. Similarly, the effectiveness of fuller's earth and Ambergard
measured in vitro with pig-ear epidermal membranes was in agreement with a
previous in vivo study conducted on rats. However, there was complete disparity
in the ranking of decontaminants between human and pig-ear epidermal membranes
measured in vitro. Thus, although pig-ear skin may be a relatively good model for
predicting the human skin absorption of SM, it is a poor model for testing
decontamination systems. The results of this study further validate the use of
Franz-type glass diffusion cells containing human epidermal membranes as a model 
for predicting in vivo human skin absorption.

Copyright 2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 11481660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Vaccine. 2001 Jul 20;19(30):4175-84.

Vaccination against bubonic and pneumonic plague.

Titball RW(1), Williamson ED.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Evaluation and Research Agency, CBD Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JQ,
Wilts, UK. rtitball@dera.gov.uk

Yersinia pestis is the etiological agent of bubonic and pneumonic plague,
diseases which have caused over 200 milllion human deaths in the past. Plague
still occurs throughout the world today, though for reasons that are not fully
understood pandemics of disease do not develop from these outbreaks. Antibiotic
treatment of bubonic plague is usually effective, but pneumonic plague is
difficult to treat and even with antibiotic therapy death often results. A killed
whole cell plague vaccine has been used in the past, but recent studies in
animals have shown that this vaccine offers poor protection against pneumonic
disease. A live attenuated vaccine is also available. Whilst this vaccine is
effective, it retains some virulence and in most countries it is not considered
to be suitable for use in humans. We review here work to develop improved
sub-unit and live attenuated vaccines against plague. A sub-unit vaccine based on
the F1- and V-antigens is highly effective against both bubonic and pneumonic
plague, when tested in animal models of disease. This vaccine has been used to
explore the utility of different intranasal and oral delivery systems, based on
the microencapsulation or Salmonella delivery of sub-units.

PMID: 11457543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. J Comp Neurol. 2001 Aug 6;436(4):423-9.

Cannabinoid receptors are absent in insects.

McPartland J(1), Di Marzo V, De Petrocellis L, Mercer A, Glass M.

Author information: 
(1)GW Pharmaceuticals, Ltd., Porton Down Science Park, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4
0JQ, United Kingdom. jmcpartland@unitec.ac.nz

The endocannabinoid system exerts an important neuromodulatory role in mammals.
Knockout mice lacking cannabinoid (CB) receptors exhibit significant morbidity.
The endocannabinoid system also appears to be phylogenetically ancient--it occurs
in mammals, birds, amphibians, fish, sea urchins, leeches, mussels, and even the 
most primitive animal with a nerve network, the Hydra. The presence of CB
receptors, however, has not been examined in terrestrial invertebrates (or any
member of the Ecdysozoa). Surprisingly, we found no specific binding of the
synthetic CB ligands [(3)H]CP55,940 and [(3)H]SR141716A in a panel of insects:
Apis mellifera, Drosophila melanogaster, Gerris marginatus, Spodoptera
frugiperda, and Zophobas atratus. A lack of functional CB receptors was confirmed
by the inability of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and HU210 to activate G-proteins
in insect tissues, utilizing a guanosine-5'-O-(3-[(35)]thio)-triphosphate (GTP
gamma S) assay. No orthologs of human CB receptors were located in the Drosophila
genome, nor did we find orthologs of fatty acid amide hydrolase. This loss of CB 
receptors appears to be unique in the field of comparative neurobiology. No other
known mammalian neuroreceptor is understood to be missing in insects. We
hypothesized that CB receptors were lost in insects because of a dearth of
ligands; endogenous CB ligands are metabolites of arachidonic acid, and insects
produce little or no arachidonic acid or endocannabinoid ligands, such as
anandamide.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11447587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. J Biol Chem. 2001 Sep 14;276(37):34999-5007. Epub 2001 Jul 3.

Nrl and Sp nuclear proteins mediate transcription of rod-specific
cGMP-phosphodiesterase beta-subunit gene: involvement of multiple response
elements.

Lerner LE(1), Gribanova YE, Ji M, Knox BE, Farber DB.

Author information: 
(1)Jules Stein Eye Institute and the Department of Ophthalmology, School of
Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California 90095,
USA.

cGMP-phosphodiesterase (PDE) is the key effector in rod photoreceptor signal
transduction. Mutations in the gene encoding its catalytic beta-subunit
(beta-PDE) cause retinal degenerations leading to blindness. We report that the
short -93 to +53 sequence in the upstream region of this gene is sufficient for
beta-PDE transcription in both Y79 human retinoblastoma cells and Xenopus embryo 
heads maintained ex vivo. This sequence also functions as a minimal rod-specific 
promoter in transgenic Xenopus tadpoles. The Nrl transcription factor binds in
vitro to the betaAp1/NRE regulatory element located within this region and
transactivates it when overexpressed in nonretinal 293 embryonic kidney cells. We
also found a G/C-rich activator element, beta/GC, important for promoter activity
in Y79 retinoblastoma cells and Xenopus embryos. Both the ubiquitous Sp1 and the 
central nervous system-specific Sp4 transcription factors are expressed in retina
and interact with this element in vitro. Electrophoretic mobilities of
beta/GC-Y79 nuclear protein complexes are altered by antibodies against Sp1 and
Sp4. Thus, our results implicate Nrl, Sp1, and Sp4 in transcriptional regulation 
of the rod-specific minimal beta-PDE promoter. We also conclude that Xenopus
laevis is an efficient system for analyzing the human beta-PDE promoter and may
be used to study other human retinal genes ex vivo and in vivo.

PMID: 11438531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jul 2;274(27):19422-8.

Role of Sp1 in cAMP-dependent transcriptional regulation of the bovine CYP11A
gene.

Ahlgren R(1), Suske G, Waterman MR, Lund J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Bergen, N-5009 Bergen,
Norway.

The pituitary peptide hormone ACTH regulates transcription of the cholesterol
side chain cleavage cytochrome P450 (CYP11A) gene via cAMP and activation of
cAMP-dependent protein kinase. A G-rich sequence element conferring
cAMP-dependent regulation has been found to reside within region -118 to -100 of 
the bovine CYP11A promoter. Previous studies have suggested that it binds a
protein antigenically related to the transcription factor Sp1. We now report that
the -118/-100 element binds both Sp1 and Sp3, members of the Sp family of
transcription factors. We have made use of Drosophila SL2 cells, which lack
endogenous Sp factors, to dissect the possible functional roles of Sp1, Sp3, and 
Sp4. All factors stimulated the activity of cotransfected reporter constructs in 
which the promoter of the bovine CYP11A gene regulates luciferase expression. Sp3
did not repress Sp1-dependent activation, as has previously been shown for other 
G-rich promoters. Mutation of the -118/-100 element of CYP11A abolished
Sp1-mediated activation of a CYP11A reporter gene in SL2 cells as well as cAMP
responsiveness in human H295R cells. Furthermore, cotransfection of SL2 cells
with the catalytic subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinase together with Sp1 and
a CYP11A reporter construct enhanced Sp1-dependent activation of the reporter
4.2-fold, demonstrating that Sp1 confers cAMP responsiveness in these cells.
Thus, we show that introduction of Sp1 alone in an Sp-negative cell such as SL2
is sufficient to achieve the cAMP-dependent regulation observed using the
-118/-100 element of CYP11A in adrenocortical cells.

PMID: 10383457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Infect Immun. 1999 Jul;67(7):3297-301.

Differences in the carboxy-terminal (Putative phospholipid binding) domains of
Clostridium perfringens and Clostridium bifermentans phospholipases C influence
the hemolytic and lethal properties of these enzymes.

Jepson M(1), Howells A, Bullifent HL, Bolgiano B, Crane D, Miller J, Holley J,
Jayasekera P, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Evaluation and Research Agency, CBD Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire 
SP4 0JQ, United Kingdom.

The phospholipases C of C. perfringens (alpha-toxin) and C. bifermentans (Cbp)
show >50% amino acid homology but differ in their hemolytic and toxic properties.
We report here the purification and characterisation of alpha-toxin and Cbp. The 
phospholipase C activity of alpha-toxin and Cbp was similar when tested with
phosphatidylcholine in egg yolk or in liposomes. However, the hemolytic activity 
of alpha-toxin was more than 100-fold that of Cbp. To investigate whether
differences in the carboxy-terminal domains of these proteins were responsible
for differences in the hemolytic and toxic properties, a hybrid protein
(NbiCalpha) was constructed comprising the N domain of Cbp and the C domain of
alpha-toxin. The hemolytic activity of NbiCalpha was 10-fold that of Cbp, and the
hybrid enzyme was toxic. These results confirm that the C-terminal domain of
these proteins confers different properties on the enzymatically active
N-terminal domain of these proteins.

PMCID: PMC116509
PMID: 10377104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. J Theor Biol. 1999 Jun 21;198(4):497-505.

A dynamic model of the meningococcal transferrin receptor.

Boulton IC(1), Gorringe AR, Shergill JK, Joannou CL, Evans RW.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Applied Microbiology and Research, Salisbury, SP4 0JG, UK.
icboulto@hsc.vcu.edu

Iron is an essential nutrient for all organisms and consequently, the ability to 
bind transferrin and sequester iron from his source constitutes a distinct
advantage to a blood-borne bacterial pathogen. Levels of free iron are strictly
limited in human serum, largely through the action of the iron-binding protein
transferrin. The acquisition of trasferrin-iron is coincident with pathogenicity 
among Neisseria species and a limited number of other pathogens of human and
veterinary significance. In Neisseria meningitidis, transferrin binding relies on
two co-expressed, outer membrane proteins distinct in aspects of both structure
and function. These proteins are independently and simultaneously capable of
binding human transferrin and both are required for the optimal uptake of iron
from this source. It has been established that transferrin-binding proteins
(designated TbpA and TbpB) form a discrete, specific complex which may be
composed of a transmembrane species (composed of the TbpA dimer) associated with 
a single surface-exposed lipoprotein (TbpB). This more exposed protein is capable
of selectively binding iron-saturated transferrin and the receptor complex has
ligand-binding properties which are distinct from either of its components.
Previous in vivo analyses of N. gonorrhoeae, which utilizes a closely related
transferrin-iron uptake system, indicated that this receptor exists in several
conformations influenced in part by the presence (or absence) of transferrin.
Here we propose a dynamic model of the meningococcal transferrin receptor which
is fully consistent with the current data concerning this subject. We suggest
that TbpB serves as the initial binding site for iron-saturated transferrin and
brings this ligand close to the associated transmembrane dimer, enabling
additional binding events and orientating transferrin over the dual TbpA pores.
The antagonistic association of these receptor proteins with a single ligand
molecule may also induce conformational change in transferrin, thereby favouring 
the release of iron. As, in vivo, transferrin may have iron in one or both lobes,
this dynamic molecular arrangement would enable iron uptake from either
iron-binding site. In addition, the predicted molecular dimensions of the
putative TbpA dimer and hTf are fully consistent with these proposals. Given the 
diverse data used in the formulation of this model and the consistent
characteristics of transferrin binding among several significant Gram-negative
pathogens, we speculate that such receptor-ligand interactions may be, at least
in part, conserved between species. Consequently, this model may be applicable to
bacteria other than N. meningitidis.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10373350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. J Clin Microbiol. 1999 Jul;37(7):2262-9.

Upper respiratory tract disease in the gopher tortoise is caused by Mycoplasma
agassizii.

Brown MB(1), McLaughlin GS, Klein PA, Crenshaw BC, Schumacher IM, Brown DR,
Jacobson ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology and Division of Comparative Medicine, College of
Veterinary Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32611-0880, USA.
mbbrown@nersp.nerdc.ufl.edu

Upper respiratory tract disease (URTD) has been observed in a number of tortoise 
species, including the desert tortoise (Gopherus agassizii) and the gopher
tortoise (Gopherus polyphemus). Clinical signs of URTD in gopher tortoises are
similar to those in desert tortoises and include serous, mucoid, or purulent
discharge from the nares, excessive tearing to purulent ocular discharge,
conjunctivitis, and edema of the eyelids and ocular glands. The objectives of the
present study were to determine if Mycoplasma agassizii was an etiologic agent of
URTD in the gopher tortoise and to determine the clinical course of the
experimental infection in a dose-response infection study. Tortoises were
inoculated intranasally with 0.5 ml (0.25 ml/nostril) of either sterile SP4 broth
(control group; n = 10) or 10(8) color-changing units (CCU) (total dose) of M.
agassizii 723 (experimental infection group; n = 9). M. agassizii caused clinical
signs compatible with those observed in tortoises with natural infections.
Clinical signs of URTD were evident in seven of nine experimentally infected
tortoises by 4 weeks postinfection (p.i.) and in eight of nine experimentally
infected tortoises by 8 weeks p.i. In the dose-response experiments, tortoises
were inoculated intranasally with a low (10(1) CCU; n = 6), medium (10(3) CCU; n 
= 6), or high (10(5) CCU; n = 5) dose of M. agassizii 723 or with sterile SP4
broth (n = 10). At all time points p.i. in both experiments, M. agassizii could
be isolated from the nares of at least 50% of the tortoises. All of the
experimentally infected tortoises seroconverted, and levels of antibody were
statistically higher in infected animals than in control animals for all time
points of >4 weeks p.i. (P < 0.0001). Control tortoises in both experiments did
not show clinical signs, did not seroconvert, and did not have detectable M.
agassizii by either culture or PCR at any point in the study. Histological
lesions were compatible with those observed in tortoises with natural infections.
The numbers of M. agassizii 723 did not influence the clinical expression of URTD
or the antibody response, suggesting that the strain chosen for these studies was
highly virulent. On the basis of the results of the transmission studies, we
conclude that M. agassizii is an etiologic agent of URTD in the gopher tortoise.

PMCID: PMC85132
PMID: 10364595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1999 Jun;65(6):2540-6.

Generation of a superoxide dismutase (SOD)-deficient mutant of Campylobacter
coli: evidence for the significance of SOD in Campylobacter survival and
colonization.

Purdy D(1), Cawthraw S, Dickinson JH, Newell DG, Park SF.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Applied Microbiology Research, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG,
United Kingdom.

The microaerophilic nature of Campylobacter species implies an inherent
sensitivity towards oxygen and its reduction products, particularly the
superoxide anion. The deleterious effects of exposure to superoxide radicals are 
counteracted by the activity of superoxide dismutase (SOD). We have shown
previously that Campylobacter coli possesses an iron cofactored SOD. The sodB
gene of C. coli UA585 was insertionally inactivated by the site-specific
insertion of a tetO cassette. Organisms harboring the inactivated gene failed to 
produce a biologically functional form of the enzyme. While the ability of this
mutant to grow in aerobic conditions was unchanged relative to the parental
strain, its survival was severely compromised when nongrowing cells were exposed 
to air. Accordingly, the SOD-deficient mutant was unable to survive for prolonged
periods in model foods. Furthermore, inactivation of the sodB gene decreased the 
colonization potential in an experimental infection of 1-day-old chicks. In
contrast, strain CK100, which is deficient in catalase activity, showed the same 
survival and colonization characteristics as the parental strain. These results
indicate that SOD, but not catalase, is an important determinant in the ability
of C. coli to survive aerobically and for optimal colonization within the chicken
gut.

PMCID: PMC91375
PMID: 10347040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Microb Pathog. 1999 Mar;26(3):159-69.

Yersinia outer proteins (YOPS) E, K and N are antigenic but non-protective
compared to V antigen, in a murine model of bubonic plague.

Leary SE(1), Griffin KF, Galyov EE, Hewer J, Williamson ED, Holmström A, Forsberg
A, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, Defence Evaluation and Research Agency, Porton
Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ, U.K.

The pathogenic Yersiniae produce a range of virulence proteins, encoded by a 70
kb plasmid, which are essential for infection, and also form part of a
contact-dependent virulence mechanism. One of these proteins, V antigen, has been
shown to confer a high level of protection against parenteral infection with Y.
pestis in murine models, and is considered to be a protective antigen. In this
study, the protective efficacy of V antigen has been compared in the same model
with that of other proteins (YopE, YopK and YopN), which are part of the
contact-dependent virulence mechanism. Mice immunised with two intraperitoneal
doses of V antigen or each of the Yops, administered with either Alhydrogel or
interleukin-12, produced high antigen-specific serum IgG titres. As shown in
previous studies, V+Alhydrogel was fully protective, and 5/5 mice survived a
subcutaneous challenge with 90 or 9x10(3) LD50's of Y. pestis GB. In addition,
these preliminary studies also showed that V+IL-12 was partially protective: 4/5 
or 3/5 mice survived a challenge with 90 or 9x10(3) LD50's, respectively. In
contrast, none of the mice immunised with the Yops survived the challenges, and
there was no significant delay in the mean time to death compared to mice
receiving a control protein. These results show that using two different vaccine 
regimens, Yops E, K and N, failed to elicit protective immune responses in a
murine model of plague, whereas under the same conditions, V antigen was fully or
partially protective.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10089156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 1998 Dec;16(3):747-55.

NMR and molecular dynamics studies of tachykinins: conformation of substance P
fragment 4-11.

Coutinho E(1), Kamath S, Saran A, Srivastava S.

Author information: 
(1)Bombay College of Pharmacy, Kalina, Mumbai, India.

The conformation of the C-terminal octapeptide fragment of Substance P (SP4-11,
Pro-Gln-Gln-Phe-Phe-Gly-Leu-Met-NH2) has been investigated by 2D-NMR and MD
methods. The octapeptide exists in a blend of conformations. The molecule seems
to shuttle between conformations with gamma-bends either at Phe5 or Gly6 or Gln3 
or Leu7 and between a nearly extended structure.

PMID: 10052630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1999 Feb;65(2):822-7.

Poly-3-hydroxybutyrate in Legionella pneumophila, an energy source for survival
in low-nutrient environments.

James BW(1), Mauchline WS, Dennis PJ, Keevil CW, Wait R.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Applied Microbiology and Research, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG,
United Kingdom. brian.james@CAMR.org.UK

Chloroform-soluble material was extracted from two strains of L. pneumophila
serogroup 1 following growth in continuous culture. The purified material was
identified as poly-3-hydroxybutyrate (PHB) by nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy and by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. PHB yields of up to 16%
of cell dry weight were extracted from culture samples. The PHB was located in
electron-dense intracellular inclusions, which fluoresced bright yellow when
stained with the lipophilic dye Nile red. A Nile red spectrofluorometric assay
provided a more accurate and reliable determination of the PHB content. PHB
accumulation increased threefold during iron-limited culture and was inversely
related to the concentration of iron metabolized. Chemostat-grown cells survived 
in a culturable state for at least 600 days when incubated at 24 degreesC in a
low-nutrient tap water environment. Nile red spectrofluorometry and flow
cytometry demonstrated that PHB reserves were utilized during starvation. PHB
utilization, as revealed by the decline in mean cellular fluorescence and cell
complexity, correlated with loss of culturability. Fluorescence microscopy
provided visual evidence of PHB utilization, with a marked reduction in the
number of Nile red-stained granules during starvation. Heat shock treatment
failed to resuscitate nonculturable cells. This study demonstrates that L.
pneumophila accumulates significant intracellular reserves of PHB, which promote 
its long-term survival under conditions of starvation.

PMCID: PMC91101
PMID: 9925622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Jan 27;254(3):542-7.

A PEA3 site flanked by SP1, SP4, and GATA sites positively regulates the
differentiation-dependent expression of Brachyury in embryonal carcinoma P19
cells.

Yamaguchi H(1), Tanaka K, Kitagawa Y, Miki K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan.

The promoter sequence of Brachyury was analyzed in mouse embryonal carcinoma P19 
cells. The sequence up to -267 bp relative to the transcription start site was
sufficient to enhance reporter gene expression depending on the mesodermal
differentiation of P19 cells. Footprint analysis by nuclear extract showed
binding of a GATA protein and SP4 and mutation of their sites reduced reporter
gene expression. Gel-retardation assay in the presence of a series of
double-stranded DNA fragments as the competitors showed SP1 and Est sites
additionally. Deletion of either sites reduced the reporter gene expression,
showing that they are cooperative. Depletion of PEA3 (a transcription factor of
the Est family) with a specific antibody diminished the retarded bands only for
the nuclear extract from differentiated P19 cells. Thus, the PEA3 site supported 
by SP1, SP4, and GATA sites positively regulates the differentiation-dependent
expression of Brachyury in P19 cells.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 9920775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jan 1;274(1):20-8.

Sp3 and Sp4 can repress transcription by competing with Sp1 for the core
cis-elements on the human ADH5/FDH minimal promoter.

Kwon HS(1), Kim MS, Edenberg HJ, Hur MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute of Genetic
Sciences, Yonsei University School of Medicine, 134, ShinChon-Dong,
SeoDaeMoon-Ku, Seoul, Korea 120-752.

The human alcohol dehydrogenase 5 gene (also known as the formaldehyde
dehydrogenase gene, ADH5/FDH) has a GC-rich promoter with many sites at which
transcription factors bind. A minimal promoter extending from -34 base pairs (bp)
to +61 bp directs high levels of transcription in several different cells,
consistent with the ubiquitous expression of the gene. Nearly the entire minimal 
promoter can be bound by Sp1. We analyzed the transcriptional regulation of
ADH5/FDH by members of the Sp1 multigene family. Two core cis-elements (-22 bp to
+22 bp) had the highest affinity for Sp1. Mutagenesis revealed that these
cis-elements are critical for transcriptional activation. The zinc-finger domains
of Sp3 and Sp4 also bind selectively to the core cis-elements. In Drosophila SL2 
cells, which lack endogenous Sp1, the minimal promoter cannot drive
transcription. Introduction of Sp1 activated transcription over 50-fold,
suggesting that Sp1 is critical in the initiation of transcription. Neither Sp3
nor Sp4 was able to activate transcription in those cells, and transcriptional
activation by Sp1 was repressed by Sp3 or Sp4. These data suggest that Sp3 and
Sp4 can repress transcription by competing with Sp1 for binding to the core
cis-elements. The content of Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 in different cells may be critical
factors regulating transcription of the ADH5/FDH gene.

PMID: 9867805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Mol Cell Probes. 1998 Dec;12(6):367-77.

Development of internal controls for PCR detection of Bacillus anthracis.

Brightwell G(1), Pearce M, Leslie D.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, CBD Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ, UK.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Probes 1999 Apr;13(2):167.

This work describes the development and evaluation of a multiplex polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) for the detection of Bacillus anthracis strains harbouring
plasmid pX02. The multiplex also incorporated an internal control (IC) to avoid
false negative reactions. Internal controls consisted of plasmids containing
modified PCR target sequences, corresponding to the capC and BA813 genes of B.
anthracis, which were then co-amplified with the original target sequences using 
the same set of amplimers. The initial IC construct comprised of an internally
deleted form of the genomic target sequence cloned into pUC19. A series of nested
DNA fragments corresponding to the 23S rRNA sequences of Bacillus cereus were
then subcloned into the point of deletion, producing a number of IC constructs
with similar sequences but increasing product size on PCR amplification. Neither 
the presence of IC DNA template or IC PCR product size affected the specificity
or non-specific cross-reactivity of the original PCR assay. The concentration of 
IC was critical, too much IC DNA template would out compete the genomic DNA
template, thus giving a false negative result. However, when the concentration of
IC was optimal assay sensitivity was not compromised.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press

PMID: 9843654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. DNA Cell Biol. 1998 Sep;17(9):811-22.

Regulation of mouse Ah receptor (Ahr) gene basal expression by members of the Sp 
family of transcription factors.

Fitzgerald CT(1), Nebert DW, Puga A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Environmental Genetics and Department of Environmental Health,
University of Cincinnati Medical Center, OH 45267-0925, USA.

The aromatic hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a ligand-activated transcription
factor that regulates the expression of several drug-metabolizing enzymes and has
been implicated in immunosuppression, teratogenesis, cell-specific hyperplasia,
and certain types of malignancies and toxicities. The mouse Ahr gene 5' proximal 
promoter region, which contains four potential Sp1 motifs, is required for
efficient basal expression. Using a fragment spanning the region from nt -174 to 
+70 of the Ahr promoter, we found that four regions corresponding to four Sp1
sites were protected from DNase I digestion using nuclear extracts from MLE-12
(lung), F9 (embryonal carcinoma), Hepa-1 (hepatoma), and 41-5a (epidermal) cells.
The Hepa-1 and F9 cell lines were shown by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction and Western blot to contain mRNA and protein for Sp1 and Sp3, but not
Sp2 and Sp4. In electrophoretic mobility shift assays using oligonucleotide
probes corresponding to the four Ahr Sp1 sites, nuclear extracts from Hepa-1 and 
F9 cells formed complexes that were determined immunologically to contain both
Sp1 and Sp3 protein. The two Ahr proximal Sp1 sites (A and B) were shown to bind 
both Sp1 and Sp3 proteins, whereas the more distal sites (C and D) bound only
Sp1. Competition gel shift experiments showed that sites A and B had 10-fold
higher affinity for Sp factors than did sites C and D. To determine the
transactivation potential of each of the four Ahr Sp1 sites, we fused the Ahr
promoter to a luciferase (LUC) reporter gene and transfected the construct into
the Drosophila cell line Schneider-2, which contains no Sp1 or Sp1-like factors. 
Cotransfection of this construct with expression plasmids for each of the Sp
factors revealed that Sp3 was approximately 1.6-fold more efficient than Sp1 in
Ahr transactivation. Mutation of the four Sp1 sites individually and in
combination demonstrated that each site contributes to the overall level of
expression of the reporter gene and that interactions between these sites play a 
minor role in regulation of the Ahr-LUC construct. These results suggest that
basal Ahr expression may be regulated by the expression and distribution of
Sp1-like factors.

PMID: 9778040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Infect Immun. 1998 Oct;66(10):4729-32.

Role of Fusobacterium nucleatum and coaggregation in anaerobe survival in
planktonic and biofilm oral microbial communities during aeration.

Bradshaw DJ(1), Marsh PD, Watson GK, Allison C.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Applied Microbiology & Research, Salisbury SP4 0JG, United Kingdom.
david.bradshaw@camr.org.uk

Coaggregation is a well-characterized phenomenon by which specific pairs of oral 
bacteria interact physically. The aim of this study was to examine the patterns
of coaggregation between obligately anaerobic and oxygen-tolerant species that
coexist in a model oral microbial community. Obligate anaerobes other than
Fusobacterium nucleatum coaggregated only poorly with oxygen-tolerant species. In
contrast, F. nucleatum was able to coaggregate not only with both oxygen-tolerant
and other obligately anaerobic species but also with otherwise-noncoaggregating
obligate anaerobe-oxygen-tolerant species pairs. The effects of the presence or
absence of F. nucleatum on anaerobe survival in both the biofilm and planktonic
phases of a complex community of oral bacteria grown in an aerated (gas phase,
200 ml of 5% CO2 in air x min-1) chemostat system were then investigated. In the 
presence of F. nucleatum, anaerobes persisted in high numbers (>10(7) x ml-1 in
the planktonic phase and >10(7) x cm-2 in 4-day biofilms). In an equivalent
culture in the absence of F. nucleatum, the numbers of black-pigmented anaerobes 
(Porphyromonas gingivalis and Prevotella nigrescens) were significantly reduced
(P </= 0.001) in both the planktonic phase and in 4-day biofilms, while the
numbers of facultatively anaerobic bacteria increased in these communities.
Coaggregation-mediated interactions between F. nucleatum and other species
facilitated the survival of obligate anaerobes in aerated environments.

PMCID: PMC108582
PMID: 9746571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1998;81(3-4):273-4.

Assignment1 of Sp genes to rat chromosome bands 7q36 (Sp1), 10q31-->q32.1 (Sp2), 
3q24-->q31 (Sp3) and 6q33 (Sp4) and of the SP2 gene to human chromosome bands
17q21.3-->q22 by in situ hybridization.

Scohy S(1), Van Vooren P, Szpirer C, Szpirer J.

Author information: 
(1)Université Libre de Bruxelles, Département de Biologie Moléculaire,
Rhode-Saint-Genèse, Belgium. ssohy@dbm.ulb.ac.be

PMID: 9730617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Infect Immun. 1998 Sep;66(9):4545-8.

The pH 6 antigen of Yersinia pestis binds to beta1-linked galactosyl residues in 
glycosphingolipids.

Payne D(1), Tatham D, Williamson ED, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Defence Evaluation and Research Agency, CBD Porton Down, Porton Down,
Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 OJQ, United Kingdom.

The Yersinia pestis pH 6 antigen was expressed by, and purified from, Escherichia
coli containing cloned psa genes. By an enzyme-linked immunosorbence-based assay,
purified pH 6 antigen bound to gangliotetraosylceramide (GM1A),
gangliotriaosylceramide (GM2A), and lactosylceramide (LC) (designations follow
the nomenclature of L. Svennerholm [J. Neurochem. 10:613-623, 1963]). Binding to 
GM1A, GM2A, and LC was saturable, with 50% maximal binding occurring at 498 +/-
4, 390, and 196 +/- 3 nM, respectively. Thin-layer chromatography (TLC) overlay
binding confirmed that purified pH 6 antigen bound to GM1A, GM2A, and LC and also
revealed binding to hydroxylated galactosylceramide. Intact E. coli cells which
expressed the pH 6 antigen had a specificity similar to that of purified pH 6 in 
the TLC overlay assay except that nonhydroxylated galactosylceramide was also
bound. The binding patterns observed indicate that the presence of beta1-linked
galactosyl residues in glycosphingolipids is the minimum determinant required for
binding of the pH 6 antigen.

PMCID: PMC108555
PMID: 9712817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Biochem J. 1998 Aug 1;333 ( Pt 3):511-7.

Different Sp1 family members differentially affect transcription from the human
elongation factor 1 A-1 gene promoter.

Nielsen SJ(1), Praestegaard M, Jorgensen HF, Clark BF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostructural Chemistry, Institute of Molecular and Structural
Biology, University of Aarhus, Gustav Wieds Vej 10C, Forskerparken, Arhus,
Denmark.

The GC box is an important transcriptional regulatory element present in the
promoters of many mammalian genes. In the present study we examine the effect of 
known GC-box-binding proteins on the promoter of the human elongation factor 1
A-1 (hEF1A-1) gene in human HeLa cells and Drosophila SL2 cells. In HeLa cells
co-transfection with the GC-box-binding protein BTEB resulted in a 4-10-fold
increase in hEF1A-1 promoter activity. This stimulation was dependent on a single
GC box located between positions -69 and -50 of the promoter. Little or no effect
was observed of other GC-box-binding proteins including Sp1, Sp3, Sp4 and BTEB2. 
In SL2 cells stimulation by Sp1 and Sp3 through the single GC box of the proximal
promoter led to 13-fold and 21-fold increases respectively in promoter activity. 
Inclusion of further upstream sequences resulted in high levels of expression
when Sp1 or Sp3 was co-transfected with the reporter plasmid. In this setting Sp1
stimulated transcription by 750-fold, whereas Sp3 was even more potent, yielding 
a 1150-fold stimulation. Mobility-shift assays performed with the
promoter-proximal GC box demonstrated the binding of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 to this
sequence. To our knowledge, the present study represents the first comparison of 
all known GC-box-binding proteins on a natural promoter.

PMCID: PMC1219611
PMID: 9677307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 1998 Jun;24(2):183-98.

DNA-protein interactions in the proximal zeta-globin promoter: identification of 
novel CCACCC- and CCAAT-binding proteins.

Sabath DE(1), Koehler KM, Yang WQ, Phan V, Wilson J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Washington School of
Medicine, Seattle 98195, USA. dsabath@u.washington.edu

The human zeta-globin gene is expressed in a tissue- and developmental-specific
pattern, with expression confined to primitive erythroid cells of the embryonic
yolk sac blood islands. Transgenic mouse studies have shown that the proximal
zeta-globin promoter contains sequences that contribute to the stage-specificity 
of expression, but no systematic functional studies of the cis elements in the
proximal zeta-globin promoter have been reported. In this paper, we show that a
number of conserved sequence elements in the zeta-globin promoter are important
for promoter activity in transiently transfected K562 erythroleukemia cells,
which constitutively express zeta-globin. These include a GATA site at -105, a
CCACC site at -93, a CCAAT box at -65, and a TATA box at -29. A highly conserved 
CCTCC sequence at -78 is not important for zeta-globin promoter activity in this 
system. Mutations at these sites do not result in increased promoter activity in 
OCIM1 cells, an erythroid line that does not express zeta-globin, suggesting none
of these sites is a developmental silencer. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays
show that K562 and OCIM1 nuclear extracts contain DNA-binding activities that
interact with the -105 GATA, -65 CCAAT, and -29 TATA sites. In addition K562
cells, but not OCIM1 cells, have an activity that binds the -93 CCACC site.
GATA-1 interacts with the GATA site. The K562 CCACC-binding protein is distinct
from Sp1, Sp2, Sp3, Sp4, EKLF, and BKLF. A specific -65 CCAAT-binding activity is
present in K562 and OCIM1 nuclear extracts that is distinct from other
CCAAT-binding proteins including CBF/NF-Y, C/EBP, NF-1, and CP2. Thus, we have
identified two novel factors that may contribute to the tissue or developmental
stage-specific expression of zeta-globin.

PMID: 9642099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Jun;18(6):3212-22.

Inhibition of cyclin D1 kinase activity is associated with E2F-mediated
inhibition of cyclin D1 promoter activity through E2F and Sp1.

Watanabe G(1), Albanese C, Lee RJ, Reutens A, Vairo G, Henglein B, Pestell RG.

Author information: 
(1)Albert Einstein Cancer Center, Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College
of Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

Coordinated interactions between cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks), their target
"pocket proteins" (the retinoblastoma protein [pRB], p107, and p130), the pocket 
protein binding E2F-DP complexes, and the Cdk inhibitors regulate orderly cell
cycle progression. The cyclin D1 gene encodes a regulatory subunit of the Cdk
holoenzymes, which phosphorylate the tumor suppressor pRB, leading to the release
of free E2F-1. Overexpression of E2F-1 can induce apoptosis and may either
promote or inhibit cellular proliferation, depending upon the cell type. In these
studies overexpression of E2F-1 inhibited cyclin D1-dependent kinase activity,
cyclin D1 protein levels, and promoter activity. The DNA binding domain, the pRB 
pocket binding region, and the amino-terminal Sp1 binding domain of E2F-1 were
required for full repression of cyclin D1. Overexpression of pRB activated the
cyclin D1 promoter, and a dominant interfering pRB mutant was defective in cyclin
D1 promoter activation. Two regions of the cyclin D1 promoter were required for
full E2F-1-dependent repression. The region proximal to the transcription
initiation site at -127 bound Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4, and the distal region at -143
bound E2F-4-DP-1-p107. In contrast with E2F-1, E2F-4 induced cyclin D1 promoter
activity. Differential regulation of the cyclin D1 promoter by E2F-1 and E2F-4
suggests that E2Fs may serve distinguishable functions during cell cycle
progression. Inhibition of cyclin D1 abundance by E2F-1 may contribute to an
autoregulatory feedback loop to reduce pRB phosphorylation and E2F-1 levels in
the cell.

PMCID: PMC108903
PMID: 9584162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. J Biol Chem. 1998 May 22;273(21):13208-16.

Role of Sp proteins and RORalpha in transcription regulation of murine
prosaposin.

Jin P(1), Sun Y, Grabowski GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Children's Hospital Research Foundation,
Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

Prosaposin is the precursor of four low molecular weight sphingolipid-activating 
proteins (SAPs) or saposins. These four proteins function as intracellular
activators of several lysosomal enzymes involved in the degradation of
glycosphingolipids, and prosaposin itself has neurite outgrowth effects.
Expression of prosaposin is regulated in a temporal and spatial manner with
expression in specific brain neurons and visceral cell types. Here a major
regulatory fragment was characterized within 310 bp 5' to the transcription start
site. Using electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) and DNA footprinting,
members of the Sp family (Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4), the orphan nuclear receptor
(RORalpha), and an unknown transcription factor (U; TGGGGGAG) were shown to bind 
to this region. To evaluate the role of such transcription factor binding sites
for this locus, a series of mutant constructs was generated within this region,
and their function was evaluated in cultured NS20Y neuroblastoma cells. A 3' Sp1 
site, a 5' Sp1/U cluster and the RORalpha binding sites were functional. The data
are consistent with a model in which the factors that bind to the Sp1/U cluster
and RORE site interact negatively to diminish promoter activity to a background
level that is determined primarily by the 3' Sp1 site. These interactions depend 
on the tissue-specific repertoire of transcription factors leading to
differential expression of this locus.

PMID: 9582364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Neuroimmunol. 1998 Mar 1;82(2):126-32.

Substance P C-terminal octapeptide analogues augment tumor necrosis factor-alpha 
release by human blood monocytes and macrophages.

Ho WZ(1), Stavropoulos G, Lai JP, Hu BF, Magafa V, Anagnostides S, Douglas SD.

Author information: 
(1)Joseph Stokes Jr. Research Institute at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania Medical School, PA 19104,
USA.

We have investigated the effects of the substance P C-terminal octapeptide
analogues [Pro4, Glu (OBzl)11] SP4-11, [Hyp4, Glu(OBzl)11] SP4-11, [cHyp4,
Glu(OBzl)11] SP4-11 and [kPro4, Glu(OBzl)11] SP4-11 on the constitutive and/or
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced expression of tumor necrosis factor (TNF-alpha) 
in both freshly isolated human blood monocytes (FIBM) and monocyte-derived
macrophages (MDM). The cells were treated with substance P and the substance P
analogues at various concentrations (10-14 to 10-6 M) in the presence or absence 
of LPS and culture supernatants were analyzed for TNF-alpha as measured by an
enzyme immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Monocytes and macrophages treated with the
substance P analogues alone increased TNF-alpha secretion at a magnitude similar 
to the effect of entire undecapeptide substance P. The stimulatory effects of the
substance P analogues on TNF-alpha secretion are inhibited by substance P
antagonists, spantide ([D-Arg-1-D-Trp-7-D-Trp-9-Leu-11]-SP) and CP-96,345 (a
nonpeptide antagonist of the substance P receptor), indicating that these effects
are specific and substance P receptor-mediated. Treatment of monocytes and
macrophages with the substance P analogues in combination with LPS, however,
showed no synergistic interaction in upregulation of TNF-alpha. These data
indicate that the biological effect of substance P on TNF-alpha production by
human monocytes and macrophages depends mainly on the sequence of the C-terminal 
region of the molecule.

PMID: 9585808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Biochem J. 1998 Apr 1;331 ( Pt 1):61-8.

Characterization of human involucrin promoter distal regulatory region
transcriptional activator elements-a role for Sp1 and AP1 binding sites.

Banks EB(1), Crish JF, Welter JF, Eckert RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Case Western Reserve University
School of Medicine, 2109 Adelbert Road, Cleveland, OH 44106-4970, USA.

Human involucrin (hINV) is an important precursor of the keratinocyte cornified
envelope that is specifically expressed in the suprabasal layers of stratifying
epithelia. Previous truncation and mutagenesis experiments have shown that an
activator protein 1 (Ap1) site, AP1-5, located 2100bp upstream of the
transcription start site, is required for optimal promoter activity. These
previous studies suggest that AP1-5 is part of a distal regulatory region
spanning nucleotides -2473 to -2088. In the present report, we study the distal
regulatory region (DRR), which surrounds AP1-5. Our studies show that this region
contains weak and strong activator elements spanning nucleotides -2473/-2216 and 
-2140/-2088, respectively. The strong activator element contains AP1-5 and an
adjacent specificity protein 1 (Sp1) site. The AP1-5 site is absolutely required 
for DRR activity, as its mutation reduces transcription to basal levels.
Mutagenesis studies of the AP1-5 and Sp1 sites in the presence or absence of the 
weak activator element indicate that the Sp1 site and the weak activator element 
synergistically activate the AP1-5 site-dependent transcription. The cooperation 
between the Sp1 and AP1-5 sites is also observed in the context of the
full-length promoter. Gel mobility shift and supershift studies show that Sp1,
but not Sp2, Sp3 or Sp4 binds to the Sp1 site. When the Sp1 site is mutated or
the distance between the AP1-5 and Sp1 site is increased, the binding of AP1
factors to AP1-5 is markedly reduced. Surprisingly, gel shift studies suggest
that activation does not require the formation of a stable AP1/Sp1/DNA ternary
complex. These studies suggest that the AP1-5 site is absolutely required for
transcriptional activation, that the weak activator element and Sp1 sites serve
to enhance this activation, and that the Sp1 site is required for optimal AP1
factor binding at the AP1-5 site.

PMCID: PMC1219321
PMID: 9512462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 1997 Dec;29(12):1313-23.

Transcriptional regulation by the Sp family proteins.

Lania L(1), Majello B, De Luca P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Molecular and General Biology, University of Naples,
Federico II, Italy.

Sp1 is one of the very first cellular transcription factors to be identified and 
cloned in virtue of its binding to a G-rich motif in the SV40 early promoter. Sp1
protein binds to the G-rich sequences present in a variety of cellular and viral 
promoters and stimulates their transcriptional activity. Recently, a number of
other GC and/or GT box-binding factors homologous to Sp1 have been isolated,
namely Sp2, Sp3 and Sp4, and the two more distantly related factors, BTEB and
BTEB2. The discovery of this family highlights a previously unknown level of
complexity of transcriptional regulation of promoters containing GC and/or GT box
motifs. This review focuses primarily on strategies aimed to elucidate the
transcription properties of the Sp1-like factors and discusses the experimental
problems inherent in the attempt to define their respective functions.

PMID: 9570130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Virol. 1998 May;72(5):3635-45.

Cellular transcription factors enhance herpes simplex virus type 1 oriS-dependent
DNA replication.

Nguyen-Huynh AT(1), Schaffer PA.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Department of Microbiology and Molecular
Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) origin of DNA replication, oriS, contains
three binding sites for the viral origin binding protein (OBP) flanked by
transcriptional regulatory elements of the immediate-early genes encoding ICP4
and ICP22/47. To assess the role of flanking sequences in oriS function, plasmids
containing oriS and either wild-type or mutant flanking sequences were tested in 
transient DNA replication assays. Although the ICP4 and ICP22/47 regulatory
regions were shown to enhance oriS function, most individual elements in these
regions, including the VP16-responsive TAATGARAT elements, were found to be
dispensable for oriS function. In contrast, two oriS core-adjacent regulatory
(Oscar) elements, OscarL and OscarR, at the base of the oriS palindrome were
shown to enhance oriS function significantly and additively. Specifically,
mutational disruption of either element reduced oriS-dependent DNA replication by
60 to 70%, and disruption of both elements reduced replication by 90%. The
properties of protein-DNA complexes formed in gel mobility shift assays using
uninfected and HSV-1-infected Vero cell nuclear extracts demonstrated that both
OscarL and OscarR are binding sites for cellular proteins. Whereas OscarR does
not correspond to the consensus binding site of any known transcription factor,
OscarL contains a consensus binding site for the transcription factor Sp1. Gel
mobility shift and supershift experiments using antibodies directed against
members of the Sp1 family of transcription factors demonstrated the presence of
Sp1 and Sp3, but not Sp2 or Sp4, in the protein-DNA complexes formed at OscarL.
The abilities of OscarL and OscarR to bind their respective cellular proteins
correlated directly with the efficiency of oriS-dependent DNA replication.
Cooperative interactions between the Oscar-binding factors and proteins binding
to adjacent OBP binding sites were not observed. Notably, Oscar element mutations
that impaired oriS-dependent DNA replication had no detectable effect on either
basal or induced levels of transcription from the ICP4 and ICP22/47 promoters, as
determined by RNase protection assays. The Oscar elements thus appear to provide 
binding sites for cellular proteins that facilitate oriS-dependent DNA
replication but have no effect on transcription of oriS-flanking genes.

PMCID: PMC109584
PMID: 9557644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Am J Pathol. 1997 Dec;151(6):1663-72.

Sp1-mediated transactivation of LamC1 promoter and coordinated expression of
laminin-gamma1 and Sp1 in human hepatocellular carcinomas.

Liétard J(1), Musso O, Théret N, L'Helgoualc'h A, Campion JP, Yamada Y, Clément
B.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U 456, Detoxication and Tissue Repair Unit, Rennes I University,
France.

The laminin-gamma1 chain is present in most basement membranes and is involved in
various physiological and pathological processes, including carcinogenesis in the
liver. We have investigated the role of the transcription factor Sp1 in the
activation of the LamC1 gene, which encodes laminin-gamma1, both in hepatocytes
and in human hepatocellular carcinomas. DNAse I hypersensitive sites were mapped 
in the murine LamC1 promoter using early hepatocyte primary cultures in which
LamC1 becomes activated. Three hypersensitive sites were found in enhancer-like
elements that contain GC-rich regions. Gel-shift analyses showed that specific
complexes were resolved using GC-containing oligonucleotides and Faza 567
hepatoma cells, which constitutively express laminin-gamma1 at a high level.
Increased GC-binding activity was observed using nuclear extracts from early
hepatocyte cultures versus normal liver. Sp1 overexpression in normal hepatocytes
transfected with an Sp1 expression vector induced a marked increased of
laminin-gamma1 mRNA content and co-transfection of promoter fragments in
Drosophila melanogaster SL2 cells demonstrated that Sp1 transactivates LamC1. In 
human hepatocellular carcinomas, Sp1 and laminin-gamma1 mRNA were simultaneously 
expressed at high levels, and gel-shift experiments demonstrated a higher
GC-binding activity to Sp1 compared with control livers. In situ hybridization
indicated that cells exhibiting a high content of laminin-gamma1 mRNA were also
strongly positive for Sp1 mRNA, including both cancer cells at the invasion front
and stromal cells. These results show that Sp1 is involved in the activation of
LamC1 that occurs in human hepatocellular carcinomas.

PMCID: PMC1858367
PMID: 9403717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1997 Oct 1;346(1):142-50.

Two Sp sites are important cis elements regulating the upstream promoter region
of the gene for rat type I hexokinase.

Liu W(1), Wilson JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Michigan State University, East Lansing
48824-1319, USA.

Multiple transcriptional start sites have been identified for the gene encoding
the rat Type I isozyme of hexokinase (White, J.A., Liu, W., and Wilson, J. E.,
Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 335, 161-172, 1996); these are clustered at positions
approximately -460, -300, and -100 relative to the translational start codon
(ATG, with A being +1). PC12 cells and H9c2 cells were transfected with
luciferase reporter constructs containing genomic sequence between positions
-3366 and -171. Marked (85%) decrease in promoter activity was associated with
deletion of sequence between -742 and -516. In DNase I footprinting experiments, 
two regions, called P1 (-552 to -529) and P2 (-480 to -458) boxes, were protected
by proteins present in nuclear extracts from PC12 cells. Mutation or deletion of 
the P2 box had no effect on promoter activity; protection in this region, which
includes the most upstream cluster of transcriptional start sites, is attributed 
to binding of RNA polymerase II or associated factors. In contrast, mutations or 
deletions in the P1 box had markedly detrimental effects on promoter activity and
on binding of proteins in PC12 cell nuclear extracts. Maintenance of a consensus 
Sp1 binding site centrally located in the P1 box was critical for both promoter
activity and binding. A second Sp1 site (-570), just upstream from the P1 box,
was also shown to be functionally important but no protection of this region was 
detected in footprinting experiments, presumably reflecting lower affinity at
this site under the conditions used. Supershift experiments demonstrated the
involvement of Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 in formation of complexes with the P1 box region
and implicate these transcription factors in regulating promoter activity
associated with this region. Another series of reporter constructs, including
sequence between -171 and -1, permitted detection of an additional promoter
activity downstream from -364. While not yet extensively characterized, it is
already evident that the cis elements influencing the downstream promoter
activity are distinct from the Sp factors determined to be important in
expression from the upstream promoter region.

PMID: 9328294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. J Biol Chem. 1997 Oct 10;272(41):25976-82.

Sp1 and Sp3 regulate expression of the neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor 
beta4 subunit gene.

Bigger CB(1), Melnikova IN, Gardner PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Biotechnology, University of
Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, Texas 78245-3207, USA.

Neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors play important roles in signal
transduction within the nervous system. The receptors exist in a variety of
functionally distinct subtypes that are determined by their subunit structures.
The subunits are encoded by 11 genes, alpha2-alpha9 and beta2-beta4. Three of the
genes, alpha3, alpha5, and beta4, are tightly clustered, and their encoded
proteins make up the predominant receptor subtype in the peripheral nervous
system. The tight linkage of the genes suggests there may be a common regulatory 
mechanism underlying their expression. However, although their expression
patterns significantly overlap, they are not identical, indicating that
independent regulatory mechanisms must also exist. Our studies have focused upon 
the gene encoding the beta4 subunit for which we have identified several
transcriptional regulatory elements. One of these elements, E2, specifically
interacts with the general transcription factor Sp1. Here we show that another
member of the Sp family of factors, Sp3, can specifically interact with E2
whereas two other members, Sp2 and Sp4, cannot. Co-transfection experiments
indicate that Sp3 can transactivate a beta4 promoter/reporter gene construct and,
furthermore, that Sp1 and Sp3 can transactivate the beta4 reporter construct
synergistically. The transactivation is dependent upon an intact E2 and may
involve direct interactions between Sp1 and Sp3.

PMID: 9325332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Biol Reprod. 1997 Oct;57(4):707-14.

Cell-type expression, immunolocalization, and deoxyribonucleic acid-binding
activity of basic transcription element binding transcription factor, an
Sp-related family member, in porcine endometrium of pregnancy.

Wang Y(1), Michel FJ, Wing A, Simmen FA, Simmen RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, University of Florida, Gainesville 32611-0910,
USA.

Basic transcription element binding (BTEB) protein is a newly identified member
of the C2H2 zinc finger family that also includes the transcription factors, Sp1,
Sp2, Sp3, and Sp4. This family of proteins binds GC-rich motifs widely
distributed in gene promoters, resulting in distinct activation or repression of 
transcriptional activities. Whereas Sp proteins are ubiquitously expressed,
expression of BTEB appears more limited and has not been documented in the female
reproductive tract of any mammalian species. This study was designed to identify 
and characterize the cellular distribution of BTEB in the porcine endometrium and
placenta at known stages of pregnancy. Northern analysis of uterine endometrium
detected BTEB mRNA that corresponds in size (5 kilobases) to that of the major
BTEB transcript in rat brain. The steady-state levels of BTEB mRNA were higher (p
< 0.05) in endometrium than placenta at corresponding days of pregnancy, although
for each tissue, the levels did not change with pregnancy stage (p > 0.05).
Luminal epithelial (LE), glandular epithelial (GE), and stromal (ST) cells
isolated from pregnancy endometrium expressed the BTEB gene, but mRNA abundance
varied with cell type (LE, GE > ST). Western blot analysis using an antiserum
generated against the N-terminal region of a porcine BTEB fusion protein produced
in Escherichia coli revealed the presence of BTEB protein only in endometrium,
not in placenta. Immunohistochemical studies localized BTEB predominantly to the 
nuclei of endometrial GE and LE cells. Consistent with the presence of functional
BTEB protein, binding to a double-stranded oligonucleotide containing multiple GC
motifs was demonstrated in nuclear extracts prepared from endometrium and from
endometrial LE and GE, but not ST, cells by electrophoretic mobility shift assay.
These results demonstrate the preferential endometrial cell-type expression of
BTEB and suggest its regulatory role in pregnancy-associated endometrial
epithelial gene expression.

PMID: 9314570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Toxicol In Vitro. 1997 Oct;11(5):557-67.

New cell substrates for in vitro evaluation of microcystin hepato-cytotoxicity.

Battle T(1), Touchard C, Moulsdale HJ, Dowsett B, Stacey GN.

Author information: 
(1)CAMR, Porton-Down Salisbury SP4 OJG, Wiltshire, UK.

Algal toxins, as Microcystins released in water supplies, may represent a serious
health hazard. The behaviour of primary hepatocytes was compared with that of
immortalized liver cells, with the intention of providing a new test on
Microcystin cellular toxicity. Immortalized liver cells were obtained by
transfection with SV40 Large T antigen-bearing plasmids. Primary hepatocytes were
used as a reference. Microcystin-LR at 10(-6), 10(-7)and 10(-9)m was added to
hepatocytes maintained in suspension or cultured as three-dimensional
hepatospheroids for 20 and 90 min at 37 degrees C. Toxic effects were monitored
by cytoskeletal disruption ('blebs') using both light and scanning electron
microscopy (SEM), lactate dehydrogenase release (LDH) and trypan blue dye
exclusion test. Microcystin-LR at all doses induced bleb formation and a loss of 
microvilli in both primary hepatocytes and immortalized cell suspensions in
comparison with controls. A high level of blebbed cells was detected in the
absence of increased LDH release. The blebbing phenomenon was readily detectable 
by light microscopy but its morpho-complexity was unmasked by SEM, with early
toxic events being indentified as loss of microvilli prior to bleb formation.
Cells of primary hepatospheroids appeared to be less tightly attached to each
other and more likely to bleb than immortalized ones. These immortalized cells
could limit the use of primary cells and increase the reproducibility of the
assay.

PMID: 20654352  [PubMed]


329. Microb Pathog. 1997 Sep;23(3):167-79.

Expression of an F1/V fusion protein in attenuated Salmonella typhimurium and
protection of mice against plague.

Leary SE(1), Griffin KF, Garmory HS, Williamson ED, Titball RW.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Countermeasures Department, CBD, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire,
SP4 0JQ, U.K.

A novel approach to making fusions of F1 and V antigens, which may be
incorporated into a live recombinant vaccine for plague, was developed. The
nucleotide sequences encoding Yersinia pestis V antigen (lcrV) and the mature
form of F1 antigen (caf1) were amplified by PCR with primers which included
tails. At the 3' end of caf1 and the 5' end of lcrV, the tails encoded one of
three six- or eight-amino acid linkers or their complementary sequences. The DNA 
overlap in each linker region was used to prime a second PCR to generate three
F1/V fusions, which were cloned into pUC18. The resulting plasmids expressed
fusion proteins consisting of F1 and V antigens, separated by the linkers
Gly-Ser-Ile-Glu-Gly-Arg, Ser-Ala-Pro-Gly-Thr-Pro or
Ser-Ala-Pro-Gly-Thr-Pro-Ser-Arg. As shown by Western blotting of bacterial cell
lysates with anti-V and anti-F1 sera, the level of expression and degree of
degradation of the three fusion proteins was similar. To investigate the
immunogenicity of F1/V, one of the plasmids, placFV6 which encoded the
Gly-Ser-Ile-Glu-Gly-Arg linker, was electroporated into the attenuated Salmonella
typhimurium strain SL3261 (aroA). Mice receiving two intravenous doses of 5 x
10(6) cfu SL3261/placFV6 developed serum anti-V and anti-F1 IgG titres, with
similar IgG1:IgG2a isotype ratios, and T cell responses specific for V and F1
antigens. Six weeks after vaccination, mice were challenged subcutaneously with
7.4 x 10(2) or 7.4 x 10(4) LD50s of Y. pestis strain GB, and a significant degree
of protection was demonstrated. These results demonstrate the potential of
co-expressing Y. pestis antigens as fusion proteins to develop a live recombinant
vaccine against plague.

PMID: 9281474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1997 Jun;54(6):559-66.

Increased concentrations of presynaptic proteins in the cingulate cortex of
subjects with schizophrenia.

Gabriel SM(1), Haroutunian V, Powchik P, Honer WG, Davidson M, Davies P, Davis
KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.

Erratum in
    Arch Gen Psychiatry 1997 Oct;54(10):912.

BACKGROUND: Cytoarchitectural and neurochemical studies demonstrate
disorganization in the cerebral cortex in schizophrenia, which perhaps underlies 
the severe behavioral disturbances of the disease. This neuronal disarray should 
be accompanied by synaptic abnormalities. As such, presynaptic proteins have
proved valuable indexes of synaptic density and their concentrations have
correlated markedly with synaptic loss. Our study sought to determine whether
abnormalities exist in the concentrations of presynaptic proteins in the
postmortem cerebral cortex of subjects with schizophrenia.
METHODS: Presynaptic protein immunoreactivities were assessed in 4 different
cerebrocortical regions derived from 16 elderly controls, 19 elderly subjects
with schizophrenia, and 24 subjects with Alzheimer's disease. Tissues were
assayed with the monoclonal antibodies EP10 and SP4, which recognize
synaptophysin, and the monoclonal antibodies SP6 and SP14, which detect syntaxin 
and synaptosomal-associated protein-25-kd immunoreactivities, respectively.
RESULTS: In subjects with schizophrenia relative to controls, presynaptic
proteins were increased in the cingulate cortex, but were unchanged in the
temporal, frontal, and parietal cortices. In contrast, when cases with
Alzheimer's disease were compared with controls, presynaptic proteins were
decreased in the frontal, temporal, and parietal samples.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings reveal changes in the synaptic organization of the
cingulate cortex in schizophrenia relative to other areas examined. These changes
are distinct from the deficits in presynaptic proteins observed in Alzheimer's
disease.

PMID: 9193197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Cytometry. 1997 May 1;28(1):90-5.

In vitro detection of Mycoplasma fermentans binding to B-lymphocytes in fresh
peripheral blood using flow cytometry.

Cheek RF(1), Olszak I, Madoff S, Preffer FI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston 02114, USA.

Previous reports have shown, using fluorescent probes conjugated to the organism,
that Mycoplasma fermentans fuses with about 12% of peripheral blood lymphocytes. 
However, no lymphocyte subset was specified. To elucidate the specific subset of 
lymphocytes involved, we developed a three-color flow cytometric assay to detect 
M. fermentans binding to fresh peripheral blood cells. In our assay, two strains 
of M. fermentans were grown in SP4 glucose broth, mixed with fresh whole blood
samples (n > 20), and incubated at 37 degrees C. The blood samples were then
stained with a polyclonal antibody to M. fermentans, a monoclonal antibody to
B-lymphocytes (CD19), and a monoclonal antibody to T-lymphocytes (CD3). Using
three-color flow cytometry, we obtained data confirming binding of M. fermentans 
to 10%-15% of peripheral blood lymphocytes with minimal granulocyte or monocyte
staining detected. Flow cytometric analysis showed that early binding appears
predominantly directed towards B-lymphocytes (86.7 +/- 9.0%), and that this
binding could not be blocked by antibodies directed towards common B lymphocyte
cell surface antigens. M. fermentans binding to B-lymphocytes occurred within 5
min of in vitro inoculation, reached a maximum within 30-60 min (94-97%), and
thereafter plateaued. The binding was concentration dependent over a three log
dilution using 10(3) color changing units as standard. Binding to T-lymphocytes
was minimal (<5% positive). B lineage tumor cells or peripheral blood B cells
obtained from HIV infected individuals demonstrated reduced binding of M.
fermentans. This assay provides a good method to study the cellular interactions 
of mycoplasma and may help to elucidate pathogenic mechanisms of mycoplasma
infections.

PMID: 9136760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Neuroscience. 1997 May;78(1):99-110.

Cingulate cortex synaptic terminal proteins and neural cell adhesion molecule in 
schizophrenia.

Honer WG(1), Falkai P, Young C, Wang T, Xie J, Bonner J, Hu L, Boulianne GL, Luo 
Z, Trimble WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

The neuronal organization and patterns of afferent innervation are abnormal in
the cingulate cortex in schizophrenia, and associated changes in synaptic
terminals could be present. A panel of monoclonal antibodies was defined with
biochemical and fusion protein studies as detecting syntaxin (antibody SP6),
synaptophysin (antibody SP4) and synaptosomal-associated protein-25 (antibody
SP12). These antibodies and a polyclonal antibody reactive with neural cell
adhesion molecule were used to investigate the cingulate cortex in schizophrenia.
Immunocytochemistry indicated that syntaxin immunoreactivity had a considerably
wider distribution than synaptophysin. Overall, multivariate analysis indicated
increased synaptic terminal protein immunoreactivity in schizophrenia compared to
controls (P=0.004). Controlled for age and post mortem interval, syntaxin
immunoreactivity was significantly elevated in schizophrenia (P=0.004), and
neural cell adhesion molecule immunoreactivity was also elevated (P=0.05). The
neural cell adhesion molecule to synaptophysin ratio was increased (P=0.005),
possibly indicating the presence of less mature synapses in schizophrenia.
Elevated syntaxin immunoreactivity is consistent with increased glutamatergic
afferents to the cingulate cortex in schizophrenia, and combined with the neural 
cell adhesion molecule to synaptophysin ratio results suggests that synaptic
function in this region in schizophrenia may be abnormal.

PMID: 9135092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Curr Microbiol. 1997 Apr;34(4):238-43.

A study of iron acquisition mechanisms of Legionella pneumophila grown in
chemostat culture.

James BW(1), Mauchline WS, Dennis PJ, Keevil CW.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Applied Microbiology & Research, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire 
SP4 0JG, UK.

We recently demonstrated that the virulence of a clinical isolate of Legionella
pneumophila is significantly attenuated when cultured in an iron-limited
environment. In this study the influence of iron limitation on the expression of 
enzyme activities and iron-transport mechanisms was investigated. Expression of
the important pathogenicity factor, the zinc metalloprotease, was reduced
fivefold in response to iron limitation. Ferric citrate reductase activity was
demonstrated in both iron-limited and replete cell fractions. Activity was
located principally in the cytoplasm and periplasm, and was not enhanced by iron 
restriction. Optimum activity was observed with NADPH as reductant. Siderophores 
were not elaborated under these culture conditions. Iron-loaded transferrin
enhanced the growth of steady-state, iron-limited cultures, demonstrating that
transferrin represents a potentially important iron source for L. pneumophila in 
vivo. Although cell surface transferrin receptors were not detected, in vitro
experiments demonstrated digestion of transferrin by the zinc metalloprotease
activity of culture supernatants.

PMID: 9058545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. J Med Entomol. 1997 Mar;34(2):238-41.

Three spiroplasmas isolated from Haematopota sp. (Diptera:Tabanidae) in France.

Vazeille-Falcoz M(1), Hélias C, Le Goff F, Rodhain F, Chastel C.

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Systèmes Vectoriels, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

On August 1991, three spiroplasmas (Tab 2A, Tab 2B and Tab 4C) were isolated from
Haematopota sp. flies collected from Indre-et-Loire, France. Isolations were made
at 28 degrees C in MD1 medium from ground individual flies, but not from external
washings. All isolates adapted well to SP4 medium at 30 and 37 degrees C and were
triple cloned before serological identification. Using the cross deformation
test, the 3 isolates were compared with 42 known spiroplasmas isolated from
diseased plants, flowers, various insects and ticks belonging to 25 serological
groups. Each isolate cross-reacted with others and exhibited weak 1-way reactions
with TABS-2 or PLHS-1, two spiroplasmas isolated in the United States from
respectively Tabanus abactor Philip and Panorpa helena L, a scorpion-fly. These
results suggest that Tab 2A, Tab 2B and Tab 4C together with TABS-2 and PLHS-1
may represent, members of a new serological supergroup.

PMID: 9103769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Mol Reprod Dev. 1997 Mar;46(3):243-51.

Primary structures of sperm-specific basic nuclear proteins and gene expression
in Japanese newt, Cynops pyrrhogaster.

Yoshinobu K(1), Kondo T, Takai M, Katagiri C, Tou H, Abe SI, Takamune K.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Technology Center, Kumamoto University, Japan.

Electrophoretic analyses of acid extracts from mature sperm of newt, Cynops
pyrrhogaster, on acid/urea/Triton X-100 polyacrylamide gel showed the exclusive
occurrence of sperm-specific nuclear basic proteins (SBPs), which moved faster
than somatic histones on the gel. These SBPs were eluted separately by reversed
phase-high-performance liquid chromatography as two large peaks and a few small
peaks. Of these, only the small peaks disappeared with treatment of the acid
extracts with alkaline phosphatase before they were injected into the column, so 
that there were only two distinct components: NP1 and NP2. Determination of amino
acid sequences by the Edman method as well as by sequencing of cDNA for both
components indicated that each protein consisted of 43 (NP1) or 48 (NP2) amino
acid residues, rich in arginine residues (53.5% in NP1; 47.9% in NP2), forming
the clusters. They had molecular masses of 5,386 Da (NP1) and 5,748 Da (NP2),
respectively. Northern blot analysis using cDNAs as probes indicated that mRNAs
for both NP1 and NP2 occurred not in primary spermatocytes but in round
spermatids. In situ hybridization analyses using antisense RNA for NP1 as a probe
clearly showed the first appearance of NP1 mRNA at the late stage of round
spermatid.

PMID: 9041126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 1997 Feb;29(2):515-25.

A novel A/T-rich element mediates ANF gene expression during cardiac myocyte
hypertrophy.

Harris AN(1), Ruiz-Lozano P, Chen YF, Sionit P, Yu YT, Lilly B, Olson EN, Chien
KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, School of
Medicine, La Jolla 92093, USA.

The induction of the atrial natriuretic factor (ANF) gene during alpha
1-adrenergic stimulation of neonatal rat ventricular myocytes has served as a
model for gene expression during cardiac muscle cell hypertrophy. This study
describes and identifies a single regulatory element that mediates expression of 
the ANF gene. Deletional mutations were generated in a 639-bp fragment of the ANF
promoter that confers alpha 1-adrenergic inducibility to a luciferase reporter
gene in transient transfection assays in ventricular myocytes. The results of gel
mobility shift and diethylpyrocarbonate (DEPC) interference studies with nuclear 
cardiac cell extracts identified the nucleotide contract points for a novel
A/T-rich element (ANF-AT) at positions -582/-575 that partially mediates alpha
1-adrenergic inducibility. Mutations in the ANF-AT element reduced
alpha-adrenergic inducibility of an ANF-TK-luciferase fusion gene in cardiac
cells by 35% but had no effect on expression in other muscle and non-muscle cells
tested. Gel mobility supershift assays with antibodies directed against the MEF-2
protein, the homeobox protein MHox, or the zinc finger protein HF-1b, document
that these factors are not major components of the endogenous ANF-AT binding
activity in cardiac muscle cells. The current study provides evidence for a role 
for a novel A/T-rich element in the regulation of ANF gene expression in cardiac 
ventricular myocytes.

PMID: 9140811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Yao Xue Xue Bao. 1997;32(3):161-5.

[The synergistic effect of tetrandrine and rotundine on the action potential of
rabbit sinus node dominant pacemaker cell and calcium currents of ventricular
myocytes from guinea-pig].

[Article in Chinese]

Yan S(1), Yao WX, Xia GJ, Tong QS, Jiang MX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Tongji Medical University, Wuhan 430030.

Standard microelectrode technique and the whole-cell clamp technique were used to
investigate the effects of tetrandrine and rotundine on the action potential of
rabbit sinus node dominant pacemaker cell and calcium currents of ventricular
myocytes from guinea-pig. The results indicate that: tetrandrine 1-200 mumol.L-1 
and rotundine 3-300 mumol.L-1 decreased the action potential amplitude(APA), the 
maximal upstroke velocity (Vmax), spontaneous depolarizing velocity of phase
4(SP4) and prolonged the sinus circle length(SCL) in a dose-dependent manner.
Tetrandrine 0.1 mumol.L-1 in combination with rotundine 0.3 mumol.L-1 was shown
to effectively reduce the ICa of ventricular myotytes from guinea-pig, the rate
of inhibition is 19.6%. The results suggest that the two drugs have a good
synergistic effect on inhibiting calcium current. These results might also put
forward a valuable theoretic base for using the two drugs together in treating
patients.

PMID: 11327013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Autoimmunity. 1997;26(1):23-31.

Primary biliary cirrhosis an epithelitis: evidence of abnormal salivary gland
immunohistochemistry.

Tsuneyama K(1), Van De Water J, Yamazaki K, Suzuki K, Sato S, Takeda Y, Ruebner
B, Yost BA, Nakanuma Y, Coppel RL, Gershwin ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kanazawa University School of Medicine, Japan.

Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) is an autoimmune liver disease of unknown
etiology. Nearly 93% of patients with PBC exhibit evidence of focal
sialoadenitis. In an earlier study, we reported evidence of aberrant expression
of PDC-E2, or a mimeotope, in the salivary glands of patients with PBC that had
Sjogren's syndrome. At the time of the previous study, data was not yet available
regarding patients with PBC without sicca complaints. Therefore, to investigate
the extent of salivary gland involvement in PBC, we collected lip biopsy sections
from 9 PBC patients diagnosed as PBC by liver biopsy, without clinical or
histologic features of Sjogren's syndrome and 9 PBC patients with established
Sjogren's syndrome. Using immunohistochemical staining with both a murine
monoclonal antibody. C355.1, and a human combinatorial antibody, SP4, we examined
the ducts of these salivary glands for the presence of the characteristic
aberrant staining pattern found in patients with PBC. We report that 6/9 PBC
patients fulfilling established Sjogren's syndrome criteria and 6/9 PBC patients 
lacking features of Sjogren's syndrome showed intense staining of the ductal
epithelial cells of the salivary gland. These data suggest that the PBC-specific 
antigen recognized by C355.1 and SP4 in bile duct epithelial cells is expressed
aberrantly in the salivary gland in 66% of patients with PBC, independent of
Sjogren's syndrome. This finding suggests a common disease process in these two
tissues. Further, expression of this molecule may be an early marker of salivary 
gland involvement in patients with PBC.

PMID: 9556352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. J Autoimmun. 1996 Dec;9(6):785-93.

Inhibition of PDC-E2 human combinatorial autoantibodies by peptide mimotopes.

Leung PS(1), Cha S, Joplin RE, Galperin C, Van de Water J, Ansari AA, Coppel RL, 
Schatz PJ, Cwirla S, Fabris LE, Neuberger JM, Gershwin ME.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Clinical Immunology, University of
California Davis, School of Medicine 95616, USA.

Immunohistochemical studies have shown that a unique immunoreactive molecule is
present near the apical region of human biliary epithelial (BE) cells in patients
with primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC). This can be visualized by confocal
microscopy in PBC livers using a number of unique monoclonal antibodies to the E2
component of pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC-E2), the autoantigen most
commonly recognized by antimitochondrial antibodies (AMA). One such antibody, the
murine mAb C355.1 was used to identify peptide mimotopes of PDC-E2 by screening a
random dodecapeptide phage library ON 159.2 to identify the possible biochemical 
nature of this apical staining molecule. Out of 36 independent clones, 29 showed 
a common sequence and seven other sequences were singly represented. Three common
amino acid motifs (SYP, TYVS and VRH) were found among these eight sequences.
Similar to C355.1, the human combinatorial antibodies derived from a patient with
PBC, SP1 and SP4, recognize the inner lipoyl domain of PDC-E2. However, when
these antibodies are used to stain PBC BE cells, SP4 stains the apical region of 
PBC BE cells with high intensity whereas SP1 produces only cytoplasmic staining. 
Competitive inhibition of immunohistochemical staining using PDC-E2 specific
human combinatorial antibodies SP1 and SP4 was performed using five of the above 
dodecapeptides. Interestingly, the peptides selected with C355.1 differentially
inhibited the binding of SP1 and SP4 to PBC BE cells. Finally, rabbit sera raised
against one such peptide (WMSYPDRTLRTS) stained BE cells from patients with PBC
with a higher intensity than controls. Comparable data was obtained with
immunoelectronmicroscopy. These data suggest that a molecular mimic of PDC-E2 is 
present at the external aspect of PBC BE cells.

PMID: 9115581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. EMBO J. 1996 Oct 15;15(20):5659-67.

An inhibitor domain in Sp3 regulates its glutamine-rich activation domains.

Dennig J(1), Beato M, Suske G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Germany.

Sp3 is a ubiquitously expressed human transcription factor closely related to Sp1
and Sp4. All three proteins contain a highly conserved DNA binding domain and two
glutamine-rich regions, suggesting that they possess similar activation
functions. In our previous experiments, however, Sp3 failed to activate
transcription. Instead, it repressed Sp1-mediated transcriptional activation,
suggesting that it is an inhibitory member of this family of regulatory factors. 
Here we show that Sp3 can also act as a positive regulator of transcription. The 
glutamine-rich domains on their own have a strong activation function and
interact with the TATA box binding protein (TBP)-associated factor dTAFII110.
However, in full-length Sp3 as well as in Gal4-Sp3 fusion proteins, both
activation domains are silenced by an inhibitory domain located between the
second glutamine-rich region and the DNA binding domain. The inhibitory domain
completely suppressed transcriptional activation when fused to a heterologous
glutamine-rich domain but only moderately suppressed transcription when linked to
an acidic activation domain. Site-directed mutagenesis identified a stretch of
highly charged amino acid residues essential for inhibitor function. Substitution
of the amino acid triplet KEE by alanine residues within this region changed the 
almost transcriptionally inactive Sp3 into a strong activator. Our results
suggest that the transcriptional activity of Sp3 might be regulated in vivo by
relief of inhibition.

PMCID: PMC452310
PMID: 8896459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Am J Ther. 1996 Oct;3(10):673-80.

Biodistribution and autoradiographic localization of I-125--labeled synthetic
Peptide in aortic atherosclerosis in cholesterol-fed rabbits.

Lu P(1), Zanzonico P, Lister-James J, Goldfine SM, Herrold E, Lees RS, Lees AM,
Dean RT, Moyer BR, Borer JS.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine and Radiology, The New York Hospital-Cornell Medical
Center, New York, NY, USA.

I-125 labeled SP4 is a synthetic oligopeptide derived from apolipoprotein B of
low-density lipoprotein that has been shown to localized in atherosclerotic
plaques in experimental animals. However, its biodistribution and mechanism of
localization need to be further elucidated. Twenty-four cholesterol-fed (CF) and 
20 normal (NL) New Zealand White rabbits were injected with I-125-SP4 and killed 
15 to 30 min (6 NL; 6 CF) or 2 h (14 NL; 18 CF) later. We obtained aortic
autoradiograms and activity concentrations (% injected dose/gm) in aortic
segments and other tissues. The uptake of I-125-SP4 was higher in CF than in NL
rabbits in all aortic segments (p < 0.05). I-125-SP4 was cleared rapidly in both 
CF and NL rabbits with 60 to 70% of the injected dose cleared from the blood by 1
h. No statistically significant differences in radiotracer biodistribution were
observed between NL and CF rabbits although activity tended to be higher in the
liver, gallbladder, and intestine in NL rabbits and in the kidney and spleen in
CF rabbits. Silver grains were distributed mainly on foam cells of the fatty
streaks in aortic microautoradiograms from two additional rabbits that had been
injected with I-125-SP4. There were 23,518 plus minus 15,878 (SD) grains/mm(2) in
fatty plaques but only 14,669 plus minus 11,035 grains/mm(2) in media muscle (p <
0.0001 [9 sections, 17 areas evaluated] in an atherosclerotic animal) in injected
animals and 13,439 plus minus 5,565 grains/mm(2) in media muscle (two sections,
four areas) in the normal control animals (NS versus media of atherosclerotic
animal). I-125-SP4 specifically localizes in aortic atherosclerotic plaques in CF
rabbits. There is no significant difference in tissue distribution between normal
and CF rabbits except in the aorta. Preliminarily, it appears that the site of
tracer uptake is on foam cells and this suggests the possibility of relative
specificity for fatty plaque.

PMID: 11862222  [PubMed]


342. Arch Microbiol. 1996 Oct;166(4):252-9.

Metabolic characterisation of a novel vanillylmandelate-degrading bacterium.

Turner JE(1), Allison N, Fewson CA.

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Antigens Department, Centre for Applied Microbiology & Research,
Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 OJG, UK.

A newly isolated gram-negative bacterium, possibly Brevundimonas diminuta,
utilised D,L-vanillylmandelate (D,L-VMA) as a sole carbon and energy source. The 
organism converted D,L-VMA to vanillylglyoxylate using a soluble NAD-dependent
dehydrogenase specific for D-VMA and a dye-linked, membrane-associated L-VMA
dehydrogenase. Vanillylglyoxylate was further metabolised by decarboxylation,
dehydrogenation and demethylation to protocatechuate. A 4,5-dioxygenase cleaved
protocatechuate to 2-hydroxy-4-carboxymuconic semialdehyde. Partially purified
d-VMA dehydrogenase exhibited optimal activity at 30 degrees C and pH 9.5 and had
an apparent Km for D-VMA of 470 microM. Although induced by several substituted
mandelates, the enzyme had a narrow substrate specificity range with virtually no
activity towards D-mandelate. Such properties render the enzyme of potential use 
in both diagnostic and biosynthetic applications.

PMID: 8824148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Int J Oncol. 1996 Sep;9(3):567-70.

Antibody-directed enzyme prodrug therapy (ADEPT).

Retta B(1), Burke P, Photiou A, Melton R, Enoamooquaye E.

Author information: 
(1)CHARING CROSS HOSP,DEPT MED ONCOL,CANC RES CAMPAIGN LABS,LONDON W6
8RF,ENGLAND. CHARING CROSS HOSP,DEPT MED ONCOL,CATHERINE GRIFFITHS CANC RES
LAB,MELANOMA UNIT,LONDON W6 8RF,ENGLAND. PUBL HLTH LAB SERV,CTR APPL MICROBIOL & 
RES,SALISBURY SP4 0JG,WILTS,ENGLAND.

A conjugate of the bacterial enzyme carboxypeptidase G2 and the F(ab)(2) fragment
of the anti-CEA monoclonal antibody A5B7 was directed in vitro at the human colon
tumour cell line LS174T and the human non-small cell lung line COR-L23. Indirect 
immunofluorescence microscopy was used to show that the conjugate bound to LS174T
cells but not to COR-L23. The cytotoxicity generated by addition of a phenol
mustard prodrug to each cell line after pre-incubation with conjugate was found
to be significantly greater for LS174T cells (IC50=0.24 mu M) than COR-L23 cells 
(IC50=108 mu M). However, for a 1:1 mixture of these cells an IC50, of 3.4 mu M
was obtained. These data show that phenol mustard released by a localised
conjugate can exert a bystander effect on neighbouring cells to which the
conjugate does not bind.

PMID: 21541553  [PubMed]


344. Dev Biol. 1996 Jun 15;176(2):284-99.

Sp4, a member of the Sp1-family of zinc finger transcription factors, is required
for normal murine growth, viability, and male fertility.

Supp DM(1), Witte DP, Branford WW, Smith EP, Potter SS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology,Children's Hospital Research Foundation,
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Ohio 45229, USA.

We report the cloning, characterization, and targeting of an Sp1-related zinc
finger transcription factor gene from the distal arm of mouse chromosome 12. This
gene, previously identified in rats and humans and designated sp4, is homologous 
to the Drosophila buttonhead (btd) gene, which is expressed in the head region of
developing flies. Similarly, in situ hybridizations show that sp4 is highly
expressed in mouse embryos in the developing central nervous system (CNS).
Expression of sp4 is seen as early as Day 9 of development, where transcripts are
abundant in the posterior neuropore. Expression in later embryos is detected
throughout the CNS as well as in other structures, including the nasal mucosa,
the vomeronasal organ, the epithelium of the lung and intestinal tract, the
testes, and the developing teeth. Northern blot analysis showed sp4 expression in
the adult brain and other tissues. Gene targeting by homologous recombination was
used to determine the role of sp4 during mouse development. Two-thirds of
homozygous mutants die within the first few days after birth and those that
survive are smaller than their wild-type littermates. While fertility of the
female mutants appears normal, homozygous mutant males do not breed, despite
having histologically intact testes containing mature sperm. sp4/sp4 mutant males
fail to copulate, indicating that this gene is required for normal male
reproductive behavior.

PMID: 8660867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Mol Endocrinol. 1996 Jun;10(6):613-21.

Distal Sp3 binding sites in the hIGBP-1 gene promoter suppress transcriptional
repression in decidualized human endometrial stromal cells: identification of a
novel Sp3 form in decidual cells.

Gao J(1), Tseng L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Medicine, State
University of New York at Stony Brook 11794, USA.

The purpose of this study was to identify the nuclear components that account for
a dramatic transcriptional induction of the human insulin-like growth factor
binding protein-1 (IGFBP-1) gene in decidualized human endometrial stromal cells.
The study focused on the functional analysis and binding characteristics of the
two distal promoter regions, 132 bp -2.732 to -2.6 kb [C/al/Xbal, (CX) fragment] 
and 30 bp [-2830 to -2800 bp, Hincll/ Sphl [HS] fragment]. In the primary culture
of endometrial stromal cells, we have examined the three cis-elements, I, II and 
III, in the 58-bp BsaHl/ Rsal (BR) fragment (a promoter fragment that resides in 
CX) previously identified in HEC-1B cells. When pBRPL (BR 5'-linked to -2600 to
+68 bp IGFBP-1 promoter/chloramphenicol acetyl transferase gene) was transfected 
into cells, only cis-element II (-2660 to -2638 bp) mediated the activation,
whereas I and III (-2675 to -2666 bp and -2637 to -2628 bp) were inactive in both
unstimulated and hormone-stimulated endometrial stromal cells. Promoter activity 
derived from pCXPL was repressed in unstimulated cells. During decidualization of
endometrial stromal cells, the repression was gradually diminished, which was
mediated by cis-element I and III. The binding pattern of the BR fragment
analyzed by electrophoretic mobility shift assay using nuclear extracts of
decidual tissue or cells showed three major specific binding complexes, C1, C2,
and C3, which were abolished by a complementary oligonucleotide of the
Sp1-binding motif dose-dependently. Only two complexes, C2 and C3, were formed by
nuclear extracts of unstimulated stromal cells. A binding study with mutated BR
fragment showed that the binding sites of C1, C2, and C3 resided at cis-elements 
I and III. The Sp3 antibody abolished complexes C1, C2, and C3. The Sp1 and Sp4
antibodies, however, had little effect. The other distal promoter region, 30-bp
HS fragment, which contains a core sequence homologous to the Sp1-binding motif, 
formed a complex with mobility similar to C1. It is transcriptionally active only
in decidualized stromal cells. The binding protein of this complex recognized the
Sp3 antibody. Immunoblot analysis of the nuclear extracts of stromal and decidual
cells showed that Sp3 antibody identified 120-, 82-, and 80-kDa Sp3 proteins. An 
additional 28-kDa Sp3 protein was present only in the extract of decidual cells. 
These findings suggest that decidual Sp3 protein may be responsible, at least in 
part, for the transcriptional regulation in decidualized endometrial stromal
cells.

PMID: 8776721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Development. 1996 Jun;122(6):1799-809.

An HF-1a/HF-1b/MEF-2 combinatorial element confers cardiac ventricular
specificity and established an anterior-posterior gradient of expression.

Ross RS(1), Navankasattusas S, Harvey RP, Chien KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Center for Molecular Genetics, University of
California, San Diego, School of Medicine, La Jolla 92093, USA.

The molecular determinants that direct gene expression to the ventricles of the
heart are for the most part unknown. Additionally, little data is available on
how the anterior/posterior axis of the heart tube is determined and whether the
left and right atrial and ventricular chambers are assigned as part of this
process. Utilizing myosin light chain-2 ventricular promoter/beta-galactosidase
reporter transgenes, we have determined the minimal cis-acting sequences required
for ventricular-specific gene expression. In multiple independent transgenic
mouse lines, we found that both a 250 base pair myosin light chain-2 ventricular 
promoter fragment, as well as a dimerized 28 bp sub-element (HF-1) containing
binding sites for HF1a and HF1b/MEF2 factors, directed ventricular-specific
reporter expression from as early as the endogenous gene, at day 7.5-8.0 post
coitum. While the endogenous gene is expressed uniformly throughout both
ventricles, the transgenes were expressed in a right ventricular/conotruncal
dominant fashion, suggesting that they contain only a subset of the elements
which respond to positional information in the developing heart tube. Expression 
of the transgene was cell autonomous and its temporospatial characteristics not
affected by mouse strain/methylation state of the genome. To determine whether
ventricular-specific expression of the transgene was dependent upon regulatory
genes required for correct ventricular differentiation, the 250 base pair
transgene was bred into both retinoid X receptoralpha and Nkx2-5 null
backgrounds. The transgene was expressed in both mutant backgrounds, despite the 
absence of endogenous myosin light chain-2 ventricular transcript in Nkx2-5 null 
embryos. Ventricular specification, as judged by transgene expression, appeared
to occur normally in both mutants. Thus, the HF-1 element, directs
chamber-specific transcription of a transgene reporter independently of retinoid 
X receptoralpha and Nkx2-5, and defines a minimal combinatorial pathway for
ventricular chamber gene expression. The patterned expression of this transgene
may provide a model system in which to investigate the cues that dictate
anterior-posterior (right ventricle/left ventricle) gradients during mammalian
heart development.

PMID: 8674419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Cytotechnology. 1996 Jan;20(1-3):299-304. doi: 10.1007/BF00350409.

Safety aspects of insect cell culture.

Stacey G(1), Possee R.

Author information: 
(1)European Collection of Animal Cell Cultures (ECACC), Centre for Applied
Microbiology and Research, Porton Down, SP4 OJG, Wiltshire, UK.

CONCLUSIONS: The hazards posed to the environment by the accidental release of
baculovirus expression vectors can be put into perspective by the results
obtained from experiments in which AcNPV was released deliberately into the field
(Bishop et al., 1992). Polyhedrin positive viruses will persist in soil and on
leaf surfaces for periods comprising weeks and months. However, polyhedrin
negative viruses (similar to those used as expression vectors) do not survive in 
similar situations. In consequence, accidental release of baculovirus expression 
vectors poses negligible hazard. The risk of such a release will largely depend
on the skill of the operators. This does not take into account the hazard posed
by the recombinant product which is being made by the virus-infected insect cell.
Synthesis of a mammalian-specific toxin, of course, would require particularly
careful manipulation of the virus-infected cell culture.The fact that insect cell
lines represent an undefined risk, in terms of carriage of adventitious agents
means that their containment should be maintained at a minimum of the European
containment level 2. Where the tissue of origin has a high risk of infection with
human pathogens or where cells may have been used in a virus culture laboratory
then appropriate testing is advisable. Careful risk assessment respecting the
scale of work and whole procedures (in addition to individual assessment of
agents and reagents) will ensure safe working conditions for laboratory staff. If
applied properly safety procedures will also succeed in encouraging clean,
efficient and well documented work procedures which are synonymous with the
economical use of time and resources and good science.

PMID: 22358493  [PubMed]


348. Arch Insect Biochem Physiol. 1996;32(3-4):439-47.

Cloning of a putative juvenile hormone-responsive storage protein gene from the
tobacco budworm, Heliothis virescens.

Thompson DM(1), Anspaugh DD, Gahan LJ, Heckel DG, Roe RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh 27695-7647,
USA.

A cDNA clone with 78% amino acid identity to a basic juvenile hormone
(JH)-suppressible hemolymph protein from the cabbage looper, Trichoplusia ni, was
isolated from the tobacco budworm, Heliothis virescens. This clone was obtained
upon screening a cDNA library derived from larval fat body of a pesticide
resistant strain of H. virescens with a cDNA probe for Drosophila melanogaster
glutathione S-transferase. By comparison with other insect storage proteins, this
clone was predicted to be part of an approximately 2,300 nucleotide (nt) cDNA, of
which 691 nt were isolated and sequenced. The partial cDNA clone hybridizes to a 
RNA of approximately 2,370 nt in H. virescens. Treatment with a juvenoid
(2-[1-methyl-2-(4-phenoxyphenoxy)ethoxy] pyridine; pyriproxifen) leads to a
decrease in RNA levels of this putative hemolymph storage protein in early fifth 
stadium larvae of H. virescens, prior to commitment. In contrast, treatment in
late fifth stadium (after commitment to pupal development) leads to an increase
in the RNA level of this JH-responsive gene. This is the first report of both
induction and suppression of storage protein RNA levels in the same stadium. We
have given this gene the designation Hv-SP4 (H. virescens, storage protein 4;
accession no. U48594). Genetic segregation analysis of restriction fragment
length polymorphisms (RFLPs) defined by Hv-SP4 has shown that it is the product
of a single-copy, Mendelian, autosomal gene.

PMID: 8756305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Int J Syst Bacteriol. 1996 Jan;46(1):112-5.

Serological and molecular characterization of Mesoplasma seiffertii strains
isolated from hematophagous dipterans in France.

Gros O(1), Saillard C, Helias C, Le Goff F, Marjolet M, Bové JM, Chastel C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire des Virus, Faculté de Médecine, Brest, France.

Three strains of nonhelical mollicutes previously isolated in France from two
different mosquitoes and one tabanid fly were designated strains Ar 2328
(isolated from Aedes detritus), Ar 2392 (isolated from Aedes caspius), and CP 13 
(isolated from Chrysops pictus). All of these strains exhibited properties of the
genus Mesoplasma, a recently described genus of non-sterol-requiring mollicutes
isolated from plants and insects. The results of metabolism inhibition and growth
inhibition tests revealed that these strains and Mesoplasma entomophilum TAC or
Mesoplasma florum L1 were not serologically related, but all three dipteran
strains reacted strongly with Mesoplasma seiffertii F7T (T = type strain)
antibodies. Using metabolism inhibition and growth inhibition tests, we found
that the dipteran strains were related to each other and to strain F7T but were
not identical. We also found that they were able to multiply and persist in the
central nervous systems of suckling mice inoculated intracerebrally, a property
that makes their use as biological control agents for pest dipterans inadvisable.
Scanning electron microscopy revealed marked differences in the morphologies of
the colonies of the different strains on SP4 solid medium. The levels of DNA-DNA 
homology for strains Ar 2328, Ar 2392, CP 13, and F7T were more than 70%,
indicating that these strains are closely related members of the same species, M.
seiffertii. In addition, one-dimensional sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis revealed that each strain produced about 40 protein bands.
This technique also revealed differences between strains. Using the coefficient
of Smeath-Jacquart, we constructed a dendrogram that allowed us to estimate of
the levels of relatedness of these four strains. The results which we obtained
were confirmed by two-dimensional protein electrophoresis results.

PMID: 8573485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1995 Dec 14;1245(3):430-8.

Structure of genes for sperm-specific nuclear basic protein (SP4) in Xenopus
laevis.

Mita K(1), Ariyoshi N, Abé S, Takamune K, Katagiri C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo, Japan.

Nuclear basic proteins in sperm of Xenopus laevis consist of 6 sperm-specific
proteins (SPs1-6) in addition to somatic core histones. Using a cDNA for SP4 as a
probe, we cloned genomic DNA containing SP4 genes from a genomic library
constructed from recombinant lambda bacteriophage containing 12.0 kbp-EcoRI
digests of J-strain X. laevis liver DNA. Construction of restriction maps based
on Southern blot analysis revealed the existence of a total of five SP4 genes
which are arranged in a tandemly repeated array forming a cluster of simple
multigenes per haploid genome, over a range of 18 kbp. Among these genes, the one
located at the most upstream position differed from others in possessing a single
base substitution which gave rise to a replacement of one out of 78 amino acid
residues. The DNA containing the second to the fourth SP4 genes, arranged at
about 3 kbp intervals each, was totally sequenced for 10,165 bp. Each gene was
found to contain one intron, typical TATA and CCAAT boxes in the 5'-flanking
region, and a polyadenylation signal in the 3'-flanking region. Comparative
sequence analyses revealed three regions of extensive homology within the
upstream non-coding region among three genes, suggesting a possible relevance to 
their expression at a particular phase of spermatogenesis and/or in testis.

PMID: 8541323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Lab Anim Sci. 1995 Dec;45(6):631-4.

Isolation of mycoplasmas from prairie voles (Microtus ochrogaster).

Dillehay DL(1), Sander M, Talkington DF, Thacker WL, Brown DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Emory University, School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA
30322, USA.

A new species of mycoplasmas was isolated from the lungs and nasopharyngeal
washings of prairie voles (Microtus ochrogaster). Clinical signs of disease and
microscopic lesions were not observed at the time of this isolation. The organism
was cultured in SP4 medium; it grew aerobically, anaerobically, and in 5% CO2 in 
5 to 7 days, and fermented glucose. Transmission electron microscopy revealed the
organism to lack a cell wall and to have typical mycoplasmal ultrastructural
morphology. The complete nucleotide sequence of the 16S rRNA gene from an isolate
was determined by amplification with polymerase chain reaction and by sequencing 
with the dideoxynucleotide chain termination method. The sequence did not match
any known sequences in the GenBank of the National Institutes of Health. The 16S 
rRNA sequence of the organism, Mycoplasma volis (proposed species novum), is
unique and most closely resembles that of M. muris and M. iowae. Because this
vole colony will be housed in rooms with other rodents, pathogenicity studies of 
this new species of mycoplasmas in mice and rats are underway.

PMID: 8746521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. J Biol Chem. 1995 Oct 20;270(42):24989-94.

Functional analyses of the transcription factor Sp4 reveal properties distinct
from Sp1 and Sp3.

Hagen G(1), Dennig J, Preiss A, Beato M, Suske G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Phillips-Universität
Marburg, Germany.

Sp4 is a human sequence-specific DNA binding protein with structural features
similar to those described for the transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3. These three
proteins contain two glutamine-rich regions and a highly conserved DNA binding
domain composed of three zinc fingers. Consistently, Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 do have
the same DNA binding specificities. In this report, we have embarked on a
detailed analysis of the transcriptional properties of Sp4 in direct comparison
to Sp1 and Sp3. Cotransfection experiments into Drosophila SL2 cells lacking
endogenous Sp factors demonstrate that Sp4 is an activator protein like Sp1.
However, in contrast to Sp1, Sp4 is not able to act synergistically through
adjacent binding sites. The transactivation function of Sp4 resides, like that of
Sp1, in the N-terminal glutamine-rich region. Sp4 can function as a target for
the Sp1 activation domains in a superactivation assay, suggesting that the
activation domains of Sp1 and Sp4 are functionally related. Furthermore, we show 
that Sp4-mediated transcriptional activation can be repressed by Sp3. Taken
together, our results demonstrate that the transcription factor Sp4 exhibits
specific functional properties distinct from Sp1 and Sp3.

PMID: 7559627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1995 Sep 14;214(2):622-6.

The occurrence of a gene-encoded variant of nuclear basic protein (SP4) in sperm 
of Xenopus laevis.

Takamune K(1), Teshima K, Abe SI, Katagiri C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Faculty of Science, Kumamoto University,
Japan.

In our recent analyses [1] of five tandemly arranged genes encoding a major
sperm-specific basic nuclear protein (SP4) of Xenopus laevis, we found a gene
containing a single base substitution which will give rise to the replacement of 
the 69th residue among the 78 amino acids of SP4. In this study, the polypeptide 
from sperm nuclei which were separated by reversed-phase HPLC as a distinct
entity from SP4 were collected for their peptide mapping with V8 protease and
partial amino acid sequence analyses. It resulted that a polypeptide exhibiting
an amino acid replacement at exactly the same position as predicted from a single
base substitution of SP4 occurs in approximately one-fourth of the amount of SP4.
This finding suggests that the relative amount of SP4 and its variant directly
depends on the relative number of genes of SP4 and its variant.

PMID: 7677774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Nihon Yakurigaku Zasshi. 1995 Sep;106(3):193-204.

[Discovery and pharmacological properties of selective neurokinin-receptor
antagonists, FK224 and FK888].

[Article in Japanese]

Fujii T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Fujisawa Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Osaka, Japan.

In order to create a new drug for the treatment of respiratory diseases, such as 
asthma and chronic bronchitis, having a novel therapeutic mechanism, we have been
trying to develop new compounds with neurokinin (NK)-receptor antagonistic
effects. We used [3H]-substance P binding to guinea pig lung membrane for the
first screening system and successfully discovered FK224 from a fermentation
product and FK888 from chemical design studies using an octapeptide antagonist
(D-Pro4,D-Trp7,9,10) SP4-11 as the parent compound. FK224 and FK888 showed
different selectivities against the NK-receptor subtypes (NK1, NK2, NK3); FK888
was a highly potent NK1-selective antagonist, and FK224 was a NK1 + NK2 dual
receptor antagonist. Neither compound had any activity on the NK3 receptor. In
the in vivo experiments, FK224 and FK888 significantly inhibited the constriction
and plasma extravasation in the airway induced by agonist injection. These
compounds also showed inhibitory effects on the airway response induced by
capsaicin and antidromic stimulation of vagus nerves. Furthermore, FK224 and
FK888 were effective on the mucus secretion in the airway and the cough reflex
induced by citric acid challenge. There were some differences in the effects of
FK224 and FK888 in the in vivo experiments, and it was suggested that the NK1
receptor and NK2 receptor were mainly involved in neurogenic inflammation and
airway constriction, respectively. FK224 and FK888 are now undergoing clinical
studies to test the effectiveness of a NK antagonist in human respiratory
diseases.

PMID: 8529964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Neuropeptides. 1995 Jul;29(1):53-8.

Evidence that endogenous substance-P (SP) is involved in the maintenance of the
growth and steroidogenic capacity of rat adrenal zona glomerulosa.

Mazzocchi G(1), Macchi C, Malendowicz LK, Nussdorfer GG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of Padua, Italy.

A 7-day intraperitoneal infusion with the specific SP antagonist magnitude of
D-Pro4,D-Trp7,9-SP4-11 (SP-A; 0.3 nmol.kg-1.min-1) significantly lowered plasma
aldosterone (ALDO) concentration and caused atrophy of adrenal zona glomerulosa
(ZG) and its parenchymal cells. Dispersed ZG cells from SP-A-infused rats
displayed a marked decrease in both their basal and maximally agonist-stimulated 
ALDO production. The simultaneous infusion of rats with SP (0.03 nmol.kg-1.min-1)
completely annulled all these effects of SP-A. The plasma levels of ACTH and
corticosterone, and the morphology of adrenal zona fasciculata were not affected 
by SP-A or SP-A plus SP infusion. These findings suggest that endogenous SP is
specifically involved in the positive control of growth and secretion of the rat 
ZG.

PMID: 7566513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Toxicol In Vitro. 1995 Jun;9(3):213-8.

Examination of toxicity of Clostridium perfringens -toxin in the MDCK cell line.

Lindsay CD(1), Hambrook JL, Upshall DG.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical and Biological Defence Establishment, Porton Down, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, UK.

The epithelial Madin Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cell line was examined as a model
to study the toxicity of Clostridium perfringens -toxin. The MDCK cell line was
used because it is a monolayer cell line sensitive to -toxin. Using the neutral
red (NR) retention assay (an indicator of lysosomal integrity), the concentration
of toxin causing death in 50% of the cell population (LC(50)) was 900 pM,
although this was found to vary between production batches. -Toxin was found to
act rapidly but with a lag phase of 1 hr (NR assay). Pulsing the cultures with
toxin (up to 4800 pM) indicated that the duration of exposure required to exert
an effect was potentially very short (2.5 min). Increasing the duration of
exposure beyond 3 hr did not decrease cell viability any further. Experiments
with protease inhibitors failed to inactivate the toxin.
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) was found to potentiate the lethality of
the toxin by 90% This may be due to non-specific chaotropic effects such as
membrane destabilization. By exposing cultures of MDCK cells to -toxin for a
second time, resistance to the effects of the toxin was increased by 43%. The
factor(s) controlling resistance to the toxin may have a heritable component.

PMID: 20650081  [PubMed]


357. Toxicon. 1995 May;33(5):615-26.

Fractionation of Bothrops pirajai snake venom: isolation and characterization of 
piratoxin-I, a new myotoxic protein.

Mancuso LC(1), Correa MM, Vieira CA, Cunha OA, Lachat JJ, de Araujo HS, Ownby CL,
Giglio JR.

Author information: 
(1)Departmento de Bioquímica, Faculdade de Medicina de Riberão Preto,
Universidade de São Paulo, Brazil.

Whole desiccated venom of Bothrops pirajai was fractionated on a gel filtration
(Sephadex G-75) column. Phospholipase A2, arginine esterase and clotting activity
profiles of the six fractions (SI to SVI) obtained were determined. Fraction SIV 
from the gel filtration column was subjected to chromatography on SP-Sephadex
C-25. It was resolved into five subfractions (SIV-SP1, to SIV-SP5). Fractions
SIV-SP1, SIV-SP2 and SIV-SP3 showed phospholipase A2 activity but, among these
fractions, only SIV-SP3 was homogeneous. Induction of myonecrosis by SIV-SP3,
SIV-SP4 and SIV-SP5 was demonstrated by their ability to release serum creatine
kinase, and for SIV-SP5, to induce histological alterations in the injected mouse
muscle. Chemical characterization by determination of mol. wts, isoelectric
focusing and direct manual sequencing of the N-terminal region was performed for 
SIV-SP3, SIV-SP4 and SIV-SP5. When compared with bothropstoxin-I, the myotoxin
SIV-SP5 showed the same total number of amino acid residues (121) and constant
molar ratio for all but three amino acids. We have named this toxin piratoxin-I
(PrTX-I).

PMID: 7660366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Genomics. 1995 Apr 10;26(3):631-3.

Human Sp4 transcription factor gene (SP4) maps to chromosome 7p15.

Kalff-Suske M(1), Kunz J, Grzeschik KH, Suske G.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinisches Zentrum für Humangenetik, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Germany.

PMID: 7607696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Am J Physiol. 1994 Dec;267(6 Pt 1):L807-14.

Expression of substance P and its precursor forms in vagal, tracheal, and lung
tissues of the guinea pig.

Kream RM(1), Marchand JE, O'Connor ST, Bloomquist EI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts.

Steady-state levels of the prototypic tachykinin neuropeptide substance P (SP)
and its major precursor form substance P-glycine (SP-G) were detected and
authenticated in guinea pig vagal and respiratory tissues by radioimmunoassay
(RIA), combined high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)/RIA analyses, and
immunohistochemistry. Four antisera were employed: anti-SP that recognizes the
amidated COOH-terminal of SP and is specific for the mature peptide, anti-SP4-10 
that recognizes the midportion 4-10 amino acid sequence of SP and is highly
specific for both mature SP and extended precursor forms of SP, anti-SP-G that is
highly specific for the unamidated COOH-terminal of SP-G, and affinity-purified
anti-SP-G-K that is capable of detecting SP-G and minor forms of SP precursor in 
immunohistochemical analyses. In all examined areas, the content of substance
P4-10-like immunoreactivity (SP4-10-LI) quantified by RIA with the use of
anti-SP4-10 was greater than that quantified by RIA with the use of anti-SP
serum, thereby providing biochemical evidence of steady-state expression of
extended precursor forms of SP. Immunohistochemical analyses demonstrated labeled
axonal profiles indicating the presence of immunoreactive SP as well as
immunoreactive forms of SP precursor within lung hilum and in small fibers in the
parenchyma, with no evidence of labeled neuronal cell bodies in these same areas.

PMID: 7528984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Nov 25;22(23):4914-21.

Different members of the Sp1 multigene family exert opposite transcriptional
regulation of the long terminal repeat of HIV-1.

Majello B(1), De Luca P, Hagen G, Suske G, Lania L.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Genetica, Biologia Generale e Molecolare, Università Federico 
II, Naples, Italy.

Recently, a family of transcription factors structurally related to Sp1 has been 
described; thus, more than one activator may bind to the GC boxes present in a
number of viral and cellular promoters. We have compared the transactivation
potentials of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 proteins on the human immunodeficiency virus type 
1 (HIV-1) promoter. The long terminal repeat (LTR) of HIV-1 contains three
binding sites for the transcription factor Sp1 (GC boxes) which are involved in
both basal and Tat-mediated transcriptional activation. Moreover, a cooperative
interaction between NF-kappa B and Sp1 is required for HIV enhancer activation.
We now demonstrate that Sp4 is an activator, while the Sp3 protein represses
basal expression of HIV promoter. Remarkably, we found that over-expression of
the transcription factor Sp3 was able to suppress Tat-mediated transactivation.
These inhibitory effects of Sp3 correlate with its DNA binding activity,
suggesting that Sp3 inhibition involves competition with Sp1 for occupancy of the
GC boxes. Next, we have analyzed the role of different Sp1-related proteins in
the stimulation of HIV-1 promoter in response to mitogens. We found that the
binding of NF-kappa B is not by itself sufficient to induce HIV gene expression. 
Instead, an interaction between NF-kappa B and the trans-acting domain (A domain)
of Sp1 bound to an adjacent site must occur. We found that the cooperative
interaction between NF-kappa B and Sp1 is highly specific, since neither Sp3 nor 
Sp4 is capable of cooperating with NF-kappa B.

PMCID: PMC523756
PMID: 7800480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1994 Nov;60(11):4167-71.

Formaldehyde Solution Effectively Inactivates Spores of Bacillus anthracis on the
Scottish Island of Gruinard.

Manchee RJ(1), Broster MG, Stagg AJ, Hibbs SE.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical and Biological Defence Establishment, Porton Down, Salisbury, SP4
OJQ, United Kingdom.

Gruinard Island was heavily contaminated with the spores of virulent Bacillus
anthracis during biological weapons trials in World War II. However, an extensive
survey in 1979 showed that most of the island was not contaminated. In the early 
1980s, a more intensive survey revealed that the contamination was largely
confined to the top 8 cm of the soil in a 2.6-ha area of the 211-ha island.
Small-scale tests showed that the spores could be inactivated by drenching the
soil with fluid biocides. A solution of 5% formaldehyde in seawater applied by
surface spray to each square meter of ground was shown to be the most effective
treatment and was utilized for large-scale decontamination of the affected areas.
Following this treatment, extensive sampling revealed that most of the spores of 
B. anthracis had been inactivated. Isolated pockets of surviving spores were
treated further. A flock of sheep was then allowed to graze over the entire
island for 5 months; none contracted anthrax.

PMCID: PMC201953
PMID: 16349444  [PubMed]


362. Hepatology. 1994 Oct;20(4 Pt 1):893-8.

Human combinatorial autoantibodies and mouse monoclonal antibodies to PDC-E2
produce abnormal apical staining of salivary glands in patients with coexistent
primary biliary cirrhosis and Sjögren's syndrome.

Tsuneyama K(1), Van de Water J, Nakanuma Y, Cha S, Ansari A, Coppel R, Gershwin
ME.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Clinical Immunology, University of
California--Davis 95616.

An increase in the incidence of Sjögren's syndrome in patients with primary
biliary cirrhosis has been noted. Indeed, primary biliary cirrhosis has been
described as a ductal disease with involvement not only of the biliary tract but 
of epithelial ductal cells in other organs. We have previously reported the
development of a panel of mouse monoclonal antibodies directed at PDC-E2, the
major autoantigen of primary biliary cirrhosis. One such antibody, C355.1, but
none of the other monoclonal antibodies, reacted not only with mitochondria but
also with the apical region of biliary epithelium of patients with primary
biliary cirrhosis but not in similar specimens from patients with other liver
disease or normal human liver. In addition, we have reported the development of
human combinatorial antibodies specific for PDC-E2; these reagents also reacted
uniquely with the biliary epithelium of patients with primary biliary cirrhosis. 
In this paper, we have performed a similar study and have compared the staining
of monoclonal antibody C355.1 and a human combinatorial antibody, SP4, with
control monoclonal antibodies with respect to their reactivity of salivary glands
in 9 patients with primary biliary cirrhosis associated with Sjögren's syndrome, 
11 patients with Sjögren's syndrome alone and 7 control patients. Interestingly, 
the apical region of the salivary gland epithelial cells of approximately 50% of 
patients with coexisting primary biliary cirrhosis and Sjögren's syndrome had a
staining pattern similar to that seen in primary biliary cirrhosis biliary
epithelium. In contrast, we did not observe this reactivity in any patient with
Sjögren's syndrome alone or in any control patient.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250
WORDS)

PMID: 7927231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. EMBO J. 1994 Aug 15;13(16):3843-51.

Sp1-mediated transcriptional activation is repressed by Sp3.

Hagen G(1), Müller S, Beato M, Suske G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Philipps-Universität
Marburg, Germany.

Sp1, Sp3 (SPR-2) and Sp4 (SPR-1) are human sequence-specific DNA binding proteins
with very similar structural features. In this report, we have analyzed Sp3 in
direct comparison with Sp1. We have raised antibodies against both Sp1 and Sp3,
and show that Sp3 protein, like Sp1, is expressed in various cell lines.
Co-transfection experiments in different mammalian cell lines reveal that in
contrast to Sp1 and Sp4, Sp3 is not able to activate several Sp1 responsive
promoters. In addition, Sp3 also fails to activate reporter constructs in
Drosophila SL2 cells lacking endogenous Sp factors. Instead, we find that Sp3
represses Sp1-mediated activation in a linear dose-dependent manner. A mutant of 
Sp3 lacking the DNA binding domain does not affect activation by Sp1, suggesting 
that the inhibition is most likely due to the competition with Sp1 for their
common binding sites. To determine if any structurally similar domain of Sp3 is
able to replace partially homologous domains of Sp1, we have generated chimeric
proteins and tested their activation characteristics in gene transfer
experiments. It appears that neither the glutamine-rich domains A and B nor the D
domain of Sp1 can be replaced by the homologous regions of Sp3. Our results
suggest that Sp3 is an inhibitory member of the Sp family.

PMCID: PMC395297
PMID: 8070411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Zhongguo Yao Li Xue Bao. 1994 Jul;15(4):341-3.

Electrophysiologic effects of total flavones of Hippophae rhamnoides L on guinea 
pig papillary muscles and cultured rat myocardial cells.

Wu J(1), Yu XJ, Ma X, Li XG, Liu D.

Author information: 
(1)Electrophysiology Laboratory, Xi-an Medical University, China.

The effects of total flavones of Hippophae rhamnoides L (TFH) were evaluated
using conventional microelectrode technic. After administration of TFH 100-200
mg.L-1, the action potential duration of 50% repolarization (APD50) was shortened
both in cultured rat myocardial cells and in guinea pig papillary muscles. The
slope of phase 4 of depolarization (SP4) in cultured rat myocardial cells was
decreased and the contractile force (CF) in guinea pig papillary muscles was
weakened. Arrhythmias evoked by strophantin G in guinea pig papillary muscles
were suppressed by TFH 100 mg.L-1. These findings suggested that the influence of
TFH on myocardial cells may be resulted mainly from its inhibition of Ca2+ influx
and its interference with intracellular Ca2+ reservoir.

PMID: 7801778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1994 Jul;92(4):303-15.

SEP topographies elicited by innocuous and noxious sural nerve stimulation. II.
Effects of stimulus intensity on topographic pattern and amplitude.

Dowman R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY 13699-5825.

The effects of innocuous and noxious sural nerve stimulation on the SEP scalp
topography were examined in 15 human subjects. This analysis focused on the 6
stable periods (i.e., consecutive time points where the topography did not
change) that were identified in the companion paper (Dowman 1994). Stable period 
1 (SP1: 58-90 msec post stimulus), SP4 (178-222 msec) and SP5 (223-277 msec)
showed amplitude-stimulus intensity relationships that are similar to those of
neurons involved in the sensory-discriminative aspects of innocuous
somatosensation. The SP1 topographic pattern showed little or no change across
the innocuous and noxious stimulus levels, which together with the amplitude data
suggests that SP1 is largely generated by neurons involved in innocuous
somatosensation. The SP4 topographic pattern did not change appreciably across
the innocuous and noxious stimulus levels, but its amplitude decreased with
increasing noxious stimulation. These data suggest that SP4 is generated by
neurons involved in innocuous somatosensation and that noxious inputs inhibit
these cells. There were differences in the SP5 topographic patterns evoked at the
innocuous and the noxious stimulus levels, which suggest SP5 also receives a
contribution from neurons involved in noxious somatosensation. SP3 (135-157 msec)
and SP6 (282-339 msec) are probably generated by neurons involved in noxious
somatosensation. The topographic patterns of both were different at innocuous and
noxious levels. SP3's amplitude-stimulus intensity function suggests that it is
generated by neurons that respond to noxious inputs in a non-graded fashion. The 
amplitude and offset latency of SP6 increased with increasing noxious
stimulation, which suggests that SP6 is generated by neurons that respond to
noxious inputs in a graded fashion.

PMID: 7517852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1994 Jul;92(4):291-302.

SEP topographies elicited by innocuous and noxious sural nerve stimulation. I.
Identification of stable periods and individual differences.

Dowman R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY 13699-5825.

Scalp potential topographies evoked by innocuous and noxious sural nerve
stimulation were obtained from 15 human subjects. The SEP scalp topography could 
be separated into 6 different stable periods (SP), that is, consecutive time
points where there were no major changes in the topographic pattern. SP1
(occurring 58-90 msec post stimulus) was characterized by a contralateral frontal
positivity and a central negativity oriented ipsilateral to the evoking stimulus;
SP2 (92-120 msec) by a bilateral frontal positivity and a symmetrical central
negativity; SP3 (135-158 msec) by a widespread negativity with a minimum at the
contralateral temporo-frontal region; and SP4 (178-222 msec), SP5 (223-277 msec) 
and SP6 (282-339 msec) by a widespread positivity with a maximum located along
the centro-parietal midline. SP4, SP5, and SP6 could be distinguished by changes 
in the orientation of the isovoltage contour lines and/or by changes in the
location of the maximum. The stable periods had similar onset and offset
latencies and the same major features across subjects. However, the topographic
patterns were not identical across subjects. These individual differences are
likely due to the expected variability in the orientation of the equivalent
regional dipole sources generating these potentials.

PMID: 7517851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1994 Jun;60(6):1842-51.

Influence of Plumbing Materials on Biofilm Formation and Growth of Legionella
pneumophila in Potable Water Systems.

Rogers J(1), Dowsett AB, Dennis PJ, Lee JV, Keevil CW.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Division, Public Health Laboratory Service, Centre for Applied
Microbiology and Research, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, United
Kingdom.

A two-stage chemostat model of a plumbing system was developed, with tap water as
the sole nutrient source. The model system was populated with a naturally
occurring inoculum derived from an outbreak of Legionnaires' disease and
containing Legionella pneumophila along with associated bacteria and protozoa.
The model system was used to develop biofilms on the surfaces of a range of eight
plumbing materials under controlled, reproducible conditions. The materials
varied in their abilities to support biofilm development and the growth of L.
pneumophila. Elastomeric surfaces had the most abundant biofilms supporting the
highest numbers of L. pneumophila CFU; this was attributed to the leaching of
nutrients for bacterial growth from the materials. No direct relationship existed
between total biofouling and the numbers of L. pneumophila CFU.

PMCID: PMC201571
PMID: 16349278  [PubMed]


368. J Invest Dermatol. 1994 May;102(5):803-6.

Complement peptides C3a- and C5a-induced mediator release from dissociated human 
skin mast cells.

el-Lati SG(1), Dahinden CA, Church MK.

Author information: 
(1)Southampton General Hospital, England, U.K.

The complement peptides C3a and C5a have been shown previously to release
histamine from human basophils but not human lung mast cells. As skin mast cells 
differ from those of the lung in both immunocytochemical and functional
properties, we examined the ability of these anaphylatoxins to release preformed 
and newly generated mediators from human dispersed skin mast cells. In
concentration-response studies, both C3a and C5a released histamine in a
concentration related manner with C5a being 40-50 times more potent. However, the
extent of histamine, 15-20%, was considerably less than that released from
basophils. This was not due to catabolism of the peptides by mast cell proteases,
mast cell supernatants that contained C5a being effective in releasing basophil
histamine. Removal of the C-terminal arginine from C3a and C5a abolished their
activity on skin mast cells. In time-course studies, histamine release induced by
C3a and C5a was complete within 15 seconds. Complement-induced histamine release 
is a non-cytotoxic process as evidenced by 2-deoxy-D-glucose and antimycin A,
inhibitors of glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation, respectively. In contrast
to IgE-dependent stimulation, anaphylatoxin-induced histamine release from human 
skin mast cells is independent of extracellular calcium. Both C3a and C5a at
concentrations that induced 10-16% net histamine release caused a negligible
release of the newly generated mediator, PGD2. The results suggest that C3a and
C5a stimulate human skin mast cells in a manner similar to substance P and
related basic secretagogues. However, the activation site for C3a and C5a appears
to be different to that for substance P as the substance P antagonist (D-Pro4,
D-Trp7,9,10) SP4-11 inhibited histamine release stimulated by substance P but not
that induced by C3a and C5a.

PMID: 7513741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Mol Reprod Dev. 1994 Apr;37(4):363-9.

cDNA cloning and expression of Xenopus sperm-specific basic nuclear protein 5
(SP5) gene.

Ariyoshi N(1), Hiyoshi H, Katagiri C, Abé SI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Faculty of Science, Kumamoto University,
Japan.

As part of our continuing program to understand the molecular mechanisms
controlling the synthesis of sperm-specific nuclear proteins (SPs1-6) during
spermatogenesis in Xenopus, we report here on the isolation of a cDNA clone for
SP5, the partial sequencing of the amino acids in the SPs, and the expression of 
the mRNA for SP5. A cDNA clone (pXSP633) was isolated from a cDNA library,
previously prepared from poly (A)+ mRNA obtained from Xenopus round spermatids.
Determination of the amino acid sequence of the N-terminal regions of all the
SPs(1-6) suggested that pXSP633 encodes SP5, whereas SPs3, 4, and 6 are derived
from a second mRNA species, and SPs1 and 2 from a third mRNA species. Thus it
seems likely that the six SPs are derived from three different mRNA species.
Northern blot analyses of RNA, extracted from primary spermatocytes and round
spermatids, was performed with oligonucleotide probes specific for SPs4 and 5
mRNAs. The results showed that whereas both SPs4 and 5 mRNAs are expressed in
primary spermatocytes, the amount of SP5 mRNA is only about one-fifth of that of 
SP4 mRNA. However, both mRNA species undergo a similar size change in the length 
of their poly (A) tracts during spermatogenesis: the size of the mRNA in cultured
round spermatids on day 0 was longer than that in primary spermatocytes, but the 
size of the mRNA in round spermatids on day 6 was shorter than that in round
spermatids on day 0.

PMID: 8011321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Int J Pept Protein Res. 1994 Apr;43(4):344-50.

Analogues of the C-terminal fragments of neurokinins with modifications at their 
C-terminal methionyl residue. Structure-activity studies.

Antoniou M(1), Poulos C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Patras, Greece.

Analogues of SP4-11 have been synthesized in which the methionyl residue is
replaced successively by the Glu(OCH2CH3), Glu(OBzl), Hse(CH3) and Glu(CONHCH3)
residues, and analogues of NKA4-10 and NKB4-10 have been prepared in which the
methionyl residue is replaced by the Hse(Bzl) and Hse(CH3) residues,
respectively. The SP4-11 analogues were tested in three in vitro preparations
representative of NK-1, NK-2 and NK-3 receptor types. Substitution of the SCH3
group of the Met11 side chain by the groups COOCH2CH3 and COOBzl has little
affect on the agonist activity in NK-1 preparations, while in NK-2 the
corresponding analogues are more potent than the parent octapeptide; that
substituted with COOBzl being 8.2 times more potent than SP4-11. In NK-3
preparations all analogues are weak agonists. The selectivity of all the
analogues is reduced compared with the corresponding hexapeptide analogues. The
SP4-11 analogues, along with those of NKA4-10 and NKB4-10, were tested for their 
binding ability in the three receptor subtypes above. The SP4-11 analogues show
reduced affinity for NK-1 receptors, while the NKA4-10 and NKB4-10 analogues have
almost the same affinities as NKA and NKB for NK-2 and NK-3 receptors,
respectively. The effect of the lipophilicity of the Met11 side chain, especially
when a phenyl group is present in the side chain, at the NK-2 receptor is
discussed.

PMID: 7519179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Neuropeptides. 1993 Nov;25(5):315-23.

Differential effects of selective neurokinin agonists on phasic and tonic
activity in rat ileal longitudinal muscle.

Willis S(1), Allescher HD, Schusdziarra V, Regoli D, Drapeau G, Classen M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, Technical University of Munich, Germany.

To test the hypothesis that different neurokinin receptors might be involved in
the generation of either phasic or tonic muscular activity, selective ligands for
the 6 neurokinin-1-receptor, [Sar9, Met(O2)]-SP, the neurokinin-2-receptor,
[Nle10]-NKA4-10, and the neurokinin-3 receptor, [beta Asp4,MePhe7]-NKB4-10, were 
used to evaluate the excitatory effects of these agonists in the longitudinal rat
ileal muscle in vitro. The excitatory effect was analyzed as total response (area
under the curve) and as tonic or phasic (area under or within the peaks)
activity. Substance P (SP, relative amount of phasic activity in comparison to
total activity: 3 x 10(-8) M 87%, 3 x 10(-6) M 30%) and the neurokinin-2-receptor
selective agonist [Nle10]-NKA4-10 (N-NKA: 3 x 10(-8) M 67%, 3 x 10(-6) M 59%)
caused both tonic and phasic responses, with the percentage of phasic responses
decreasing at higher concentrations. The neurokinin-1-receptor selective agonist 
[beta Ala4, Sar9, Met(O2)]-SP4-11 caused a predominantly tonic response with only
a small phasic component (10(-8) M 27.1% 10(-6) M 13.8%). The selective
neurokinin-3 receptor agonist [beta Asp4, MePhe7]-NKB4-10 caused a predominantly 
phasic motor response (SM-SP: 3 x 10(-8) M 98%, 3 x 10(-6) M 87%). Tetrodotoxin
(TTX 10(-6) M), omega-conotoxin (CTX 10(-7) M) and atropine (10(-6) M) had no
significant influence on the contractile responses to all four peptides,
indicating a direct action on the smooth muscle cell.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250
WORDS)

PMID: 8115033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. J Clin Microbiol. 1993 Sep;31(9):2343-9.

Immune response to synthetic peptides of hepatitis delta antigen.

Poisson F(1), Baillou F, Dubois F, Janvier B, Roingeard P, Goudeau A.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Microbiologie Médicale et Moléculaire, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique, Tours, France.

Hepatitis delta antigen (HDAg) is the only viral protein known to be expressed
during hepatitis delta virus (HDV) infection. Detection of antibody to HDAg
(anti-HD) is the usual method for diagnosis of HDV infection since viremia lasts 
only a few weeks. In an effort to identify the major epitopes recognized by
humans during natural infection, four oligopeptides including residues 2 to 17
(SP1), 155 to 172 (SP2), 168 to 182 (SP3), and 189 to 211 (SP4) of the HDAg
molecule were synthesized and probed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay with a 
panel of 80 serum specimens from 45 patients suffering from either HDV-hepatitis 
B virus coinfections (n = 17) or HDV superinfections (n = 28). Sera from infected
patients recognized these relatively short peptides. Peptide SP2 was the most
antigenic; 71% of serum specimens reacted. Antibody to SP2 was also the commonest
in sera taken early in the course of the disease. Peptide SP2 corresponds to one 
of the two regions which is highly conserved between different isolates. Among
the 63 serum specimens which scored anti-HD positive by a commercial assay, all
but 3 reacted to at least one of the peptides (95% agreement). Peptide assays
appeared to be significantly more sensitive than the commercial assay with native
HDAg early in the course of HDV infection since 14 of 17 (82%) serum specimens
which scored anti-HD negative in the commercial assay reacted to one or more
peptides. All serum specimens giving one or more positive results with the
various peptides were confirmed as being HDV positive by an inhibition assay with
free peptide in solution. The immune response to HDAg peptides vared greatly
between individuals. No specific reactivity profile could be assigned to those
with either HDV-hepatitis B virus coinfections or HDV superinfections. Overall,
HDAg peptides appeared to be convenient reagents in addition to native antigen
for the development of new and improved diagnostic tests for HDV infection.

PMCID: PMC265758
PMID: 8408553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Exp Physiol. 1993 Sep;78(5):625-37.

Sympathetic innervation and beta-adrenoceptor profile of blood vessels in the
posterior region of the rabbit knee joint.

Najafipour H(1), Ferrell WR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, University of Glasgow.

Experiments were performed to investigate the presence and nature of
beta-adrenoceptors in blood vessels supplying the posterior capsule of the rabbit
knee joint. Electrical stimulation of the posterior articular nerve (PAN) and
close intra-arterial injection of adrenaline produced vasoconstriction which
reversed to vasodilatation with administration of the alpha-adrenoceptor
antagonist phenoxybenzamine. In almost all animals close intra-arterial injection
of the beta-adrenoceptor agonist isoprenaline resulted in vasodilatation.
Injection of the more selective beta-agonists dobutamine, salbutamol and
terbutaline also produced vasodilatation with a rank potency order of
isoprenaline > dobutamine > salbutamol > or = terbutaline. The beta-adrenoceptor 
antagonist propranolol abolished the dilator responses to adrenaline and
isoprenaline, and significantly reduced the dilator responses to PAN stimulation 
in phenoxybenzamine-treated animals. Nerve-mediated vasodilatation was also
reduced by the substance P antagonist D-Pro4 D-Trp7,9,10 SP4-11, suggesting that 
substance P contributes to this dilatation. Dobutamine, a selective beta
1-agonist, produced vasodilatation which was abolished by administration of the
selective beta 1-antagonist atenolol. Isoprenaline-induced vasodilatation was
substantially reduced by atenolol. The dilator response to isoprenaline appeared 
to be unaffected by the selective beta 2-antagonist ICI118551, but the weak
dilator responses to the selective beta 2-agonists salbutamol and terbutaline
were significantly reduced by this antagonist. The results of this study suggest 
that beta-adrenoceptors appear to be involved in the sympathetic regulation of
rabbit knee joint blood flow, and that this is predominantly mediated via beta
1-adrenoceptors.

PMID: 7694600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. J Immunol. 1993 Sep 1;151(5):2484-96.

Stimulation of IL-2 production in murine lymphocytes by substance P and related
tachykinins.

Rameshwar P(1), Gascon P, Ganea D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Rutgers University, Newark, NJ 07102.

Substance P (SP), a tachykinin neuropeptide, has been previously reported to
stimulate IL-2 production in murine T cell lines activated with phorbol esters.
Here we extend these observations by establishing the stimulatory effect of SP
and related tachykinins on IL-2 production by normal murine lymphocytes and on
purified CD4+ T cells. SP proved to be the most efficient IL-2 inducer, exerting 
its maximal effect at concentrations that were 4 to 5 orders of magnitude lower
than the optimal stimulatory concentrations of physalaemin, NKA, or NKB. SP
stimulated IL-2 production in a dose-dependent manner, with an optimal
concentration range of 10(-10) to 10(-14) M, comparable with physiologic
concentrations of SP found in blood and other organs. The effect of SP was
carried by the carboxyl-terminal part of the molecule (SP4-11). The specificity
of SP activity was confirmed by the inhibitory effect of spantide, a tachykinin
antagonist, and of CP-96,345, a nonpeptide antagonist specific for NK-1-type
receptors. In unfractionated spleen cell cultures SP induced de novo IL-2 protein
synthesis. SP could induce IL-2 production either directly, or in combination
with Con A or anti-CD3 antibody treatments. The effect of SP in conjunction with 
Con A was synergistic, whereas the effect in conjunction with anti-CD3 antibodies
was additive, suggesting different molecular mechanisms for these stimulatory
factors. In the absence of additional costimuli the effect of SP in
unfractionated spleen cell cultures was partially mediated through the induction 
of IL-1, and both SP and IL-1 were required for IL-2 induction in purified CD4+ T
cells. In contrast to its stimulatory effect on the generation of IL-2, SP did
not induce IFN-gamma production in murine spleen cells. The stimulatory effect of
SP on IL-2 production suggests that some of the already described
immunostimulatory activities of SP could be mediated through the up-regulation of
IL-2 production in normal lymphocytes.

PMID: 7689609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Jul;13(7):4432-44.

A novel, tissue-restricted zinc finger protein (HF-1b) binds to the cardiac
regulatory element (HF-1b/MEF-2) in the rat myosin light-chain 2 gene.

Zhu H(1), Nguyen VT, Brown AB, Pourhosseini A, Garcia AV, van Bilsen M, Chien KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, School of
Medicine, La Jolla 92093.

The AT-rich element MEF-2 plays an important role in the maintenance of the
muscle-specific expression of a number of cardiac and skeletal muscle genes. In
the MLC-2 gene, an AT-rich element (HF-1b) which contains a consensus MEF-2 site 
is required for cardiac tissue-specific expression. The present study reports the
isolation and characterization of a cDNA which encodes a novel C2H2 zinc finger
(HF-1b) that binds in a sequence-specific manner to the HF-1b/MEF-2 site in the
MLC-2 promoter. A number of independent criteria suggest that this HF-1b zinc
finger protein is a component of the endogenous HF-1b/MEF-2 binding activity in
cardiac muscle cells and that it can serve as a transcriptional activator of the 
MLC-2 promoter in transient assays. These studies suggest that, in addition to
the previously reported RSRF proteins, structurally divergent transcriptional
factors can bind to MEF-2-like sites in muscle promoters. These results
underscore the complexity of the regulation of the muscle gene program via these 
AT-rich elements in cardiac and skeletal muscle.

PMCID: PMC360013
PMID: 8321243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. J Immunol. 1993 Feb 1;150(3):880-7.

Lack of promiscuity in autoantigen-specific H and L chain combinations as
revealed by human H and L chain "roulette".

Portolano S(1), Chazenbalk GD, Hutchison JS, McLachlan SM, Rapoport B.

Author information: 
(1)Thyroid Molecular Biology Unit, Veterans' Administration Medical Center, San
Francisco, CA 94121.

Individual H or L chains from a human autoantibody were used to search for other 
L or H chains that could form antigen-binding fragments, Fab, with the same
specificity. The parent Fab (SP1.2) exhibits high affinity binding for thyroid
peroxidase (TPO), a 107-kDa protein that is the major autoantigen in human
autoimmune thyroiditis. This autoantibody "roulette," performed by using Ig H and
L chain gene libraries expressed in bacteria, increased the frequency of
TPO-binding clones in the new libraries. However, the frequency was still much
lower than would be the case if promiscuous combinations with a variety of H or L
chains were compatible with specific Ag binding. Nucleotide sequence analysis of 
the H and L chains of the new TPO-binding clones revealed even more restriction. 
Thus, with the SP1.2 H chain, all 11 new Fab utilized L chains from the same V
kappa 1 family germline gene as SP1.2 itself. Similarly, five of six H chains
"captured" by the SP1.2 L chain were very closely related to the SP1.2 H chain.
However, one totally different H chain was isolated: SP4.6 has a VH region that
differs substantially from that of SP1.2. SP4.6 also has a distinct D region,
uses a different JH, and, unlike SP1.2, which is an IgG1, belongs to subclass
IgG4. The affinities for TPO of SP4.6 (with the different H chain) and SP1.20
(which had the least mutated L chain germline gene) were similar to that of SP1.2
(approximately 10(-10) M). As expected, the SP1.2 and SP1.20 Fab, which have the 
same H chain and closely related L chains, bound to the same domain on TPO.
However, a similar domain on TPO was recognized by both SP4.6 and SP1.2, despite 
the fact that their V, D, and J regions are quite different. This observation
raises the possibility that the L chain is critical in defining epitope
specificity, even in the presence of completely different D regions and
nonidentical VH regions.

PMID: 8423344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Psychopharmacol. 1993 Jan;7(2):190-4. doi: 10.1177/026988119300700207.

Amphetamine-evoked dopamine release from guinea-pig striatum is potentiated by
environmental stress, a need for habituation with microdialysis equipment.

Fosbraey P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biology Division, Chemical and Biological Defence Establishment, Porton Down, 
Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 OJQ, UK.

The microdialysis technique has been successfully applied to a study of
amphetamine-evoked dopamine release in the striatum of conscious, freely-moving
guinea-pigs. Basal levels of dopamine in guinea-pig striatal dialysates were
comparable with published data from studies in rats. There were marked
differences in the relative proportions of the two main dopamine metabolites in
the guinea-pig compared to those reported previously in the rat, suggesting
differences in the fate of dopamine between the species. Amphetamine caused an
increase in dopamine and a decrease in dopamine metabolites in striatal
dialysates. The increase in dopamine levels correlated with the increased
incidence of head tics. Both the changes in dopamine levels and the incidence of 
head tics were less in animals which previously had been habituated with the
experimental apparatus. Dopamine metabolite changes were unaffected by
habituation, suggesting that the metabolites derive, at least in part, from
sources other than released dopamine. These observations suggest that stress
produced by a novel environment potentiate the response, both neurochemical and
behavioural, to amphetamine. Care should be taken in the design of experiments to
minimize stress factors.

PMID: 22290666  [PubMed]


378. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 Nov 11;20(21):5519-25.

Cloning by recognition site screening of two novel GT box binding proteins: a
family of Sp1 related genes.

Hagen G(1), Müller S, Beato M, Suske G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Philipps-Universität
Marburg, Germany.

Previous analyses of the uteroglobin gene promoter revealed a GT1 box which is
also found in the SV40 enhancer. The GT1 element in the context of the
uteroglobin promoter is active in Ishikawa cells, a human endometrial cell line, 
but not in HeLa cells. Here we report the cloning by recognition site screening
of two factors (SPR-1 and SPR-2) which bind to this GT1 motif. SPR-1 and SPR-2
are homologues of the transcription factor Sp1. All three proteins are closely
related members of a gene family encoding proteins with very similar structural
features. Like Sp1, SPR-1 and SPR-2 contain glutamine and serine/threonine rich
amino acid stretches. Most significantly, the DNA binding domains of all three
proteins are highly conserved and they recognize GT as well as GC boxes
identically. SPR-2 mRNA is expressed ubiquitously, whereas SPR-1 transcripts are 
abundant in the brain but barely detectable in other organs. The possible
function of these factors for the activity of the uteroglobin promoter is
discussed.

PMCID: PMC334381
PMID: 1454515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Br J Pharmacol. 1992 Nov;107(3):785-9.

Pharmacological profile of a high affinity dipeptide NK1 receptor antagonist,
FK888.

Fujii T(1), Murai M, Morimoto H, Maeda Y, Yamaoka M, Hagiwara D, Miyake H, Ikari 
N, Matsuo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Fujisawa Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd, Osaka, Japan.

1. In our search for compounds that inhibit the binding of [3H]-substance P (SP) 
to guinea-pig lung membranes, the dipeptide SP antagonist, FK888, was developed
by chemical modification of the parent compound, (D-Pro4, D-Trp7,9,10,
Phe11)SP4-11. 2. In a [3H]-SP binding assay using guinea-pig lung membranes and
rat brain cortical synaptic membranes, FK888 displaced [3H]-SP binding with a Ki 
value of 0.69 +/- 0.13 nM and 0.45 +/- 0.17 microM, respectively, in a
competitive manner. 3. FK888 inhibited the contraction of guinea-pig isolated
ileum induced by SP in the presence of atropine and indomethacin (a NK1 receptor 
bioassay) with a pA2 value of 9.29 (8.60-9.98). 4. FK888 inhibited contractions
of rat vas deferens by NKA (a NK2 receptor bioassay) and of rat portal vein by
NKB (a NK3 receptor bioassay) at concentrations at least 10,000 times greater
than that required to inhibit contractions of guinea-pig ileum. 5. FK888 also
inhibited SP-induced airway oedema in guinea-pig after both intravenous and oral 
administration. 6. These data demonstrate that FK888 is a potent and selective
NK1 antagonist which is active both in vitro and in vivo.

PMCID: PMC1907758
PMID: 1282073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. J Clin Invest. 1992 Sep;90(3):720-6.

Recognition by recombinant autoimmune thyroid disease-derived Fab fragments of a 
dominant conformational epitope on human thyroid peroxidase.

Portolano S(1), Chazenbalk GD, Seto P, Hutchison JS, Rapoport B, McLachlan SM.

Author information: 
(1)Thyroid Molecular Biology Unit, Veterans' Administration Medical Center, San
Francisco, California 94121.

To characterize the nature of thyroid peroxidase (TPO) autoantibodies present in 
the sera of patients with autoimmune thyroid disease, we cloned three IgG1/kappa 
Fab fragments which bind 125I-TPO. This was accomplished by the molecular cloning
and expression in bacteria of IgG gene fragments from B cells infiltrating the
thyroid of a patient with Graves' disease. The three Fab fragments (SP2, SP4, and
SP5) are coded for by a common heavy chain (VH1, D, JH3) and three related, but
different, light chains (VK1, JK2). The SP Fab fragments bind specifically to TPO
with high affinities (6 x 10(-11)-2 x 10(-10) M) comparable to those of serum TPO
autoantibodies. TPO autoantibodies represented by the SP Fab fragments are
present in all 11 patients studied, constitute a high proportion (36-72%) of
serum TPO autoantibodies in individual patients and interact with a
conformational epitope on TPO.

PMCID: PMC329922
PMID: 1381722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. J Biol Chem. 1992 Aug 15;267(23):16237-43.

G protein antagonists. A novel hydrophobic peptide competes with receptor for G
protein binding.

Mukai H(1), Munekata E, Higashijima T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas, Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas 75235-9041.

A substance P (SP) analog, [D-Pro4,D-Trp7,9,10] SP4-11, is known to inhibit the
actions of various structurally unrelated messenger molecules as well as SP. Our 
studies on the effects of this peptide on the regulation of purified G proteins
by receptor showed that at least some of the biological effects of the peptide
can be explained by the ability of the peptide to block the activation of G
proteins by receptors. Here we report that a novel truncated SP-related peptide, 
pGlu-Gln-D-Trp-Phe-D-Trp-D-Trp-Met-NH2, inhibited the activation of G(i) or G(o) 
by M2 muscarinic cholinergic receptor (M2 mAChR) or of Gs by beta-adrenergic
receptor in the reconstituted phospholipid vesicles, assayed by receptor-promoted
GTP hydrolysis. The inhibition by the peptide was apparently reversible and
competitive with respect to receptor binding to G proteins; the inhibition could 
be overcome by increasing the concentration of receptor in the vesicles and was
not altered by changes in the concentration of G protein. The competing effects
of the peptide were used to analyze the effect of agonist on receptor-G protein
interaction. The concentration change of muscarinic agonist did not alter the
inhibitory effects of the peptide on M2 mAChR-promoted GTPase by G(o), which is
consistent with the idea that agonist increases the regulatory efficiency of the 
receptor but does not alter its affinity for G proteins. This new group of
compounds (G protein antagonists) is a promising tool to study receptor-G protein
interaction quantitatively.

PMID: 1379592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Zhongguo Yao Li Xue Bao. 1992 Jul;13(4):338-40.

Electrophysiological effects of cimetidine on rabbit myocardium.

Zhang Y(1), Gang JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Xinjiang Medical College, Urümqi, China.

Effects of cimetidine (Cim) were studied electrophysiologically on fast action
potential (AP) in rabbit papillary muscle and slow AP in pacemaker cell of rabbit
sinoatrial node (SAN) as well as on atrioventricular (A-V) conduction in
anesthetized rabbit. Cim (0.01, 0.1, 1, and 2 mmol.L-1) induced prolongations of 
AP duration (APD) and effective refractory period (ERP), slowing down of the
maximal rate of rise of phase 0 (Vmax) and of the slope of phase 4 depolarization
(SP4), and a decrease of AP amplitude (APA) in concentration-dependent manners.
Cim (100 mg.kg-1 iv) prolonged the A-V conduction. The results suggest that Cim, 
like quinidine, shows a membrane stabilizing effect, which may be the
electrophysiological basis of the anti-arrhythmic effect of Cim.

PMID: 1456055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Clin Chem. 1992 May;38(5):658-62.

International Federation of Clinical Chemistry standardization project for
measurements of apolipoproteins A-I and B. II. Evaluation and selection of
candidate reference materials.

Albers JJ(1), Marcovina SM, Kennedy H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle 98103.

The first phase of an international collaborative study for standardization of
test systems for measuring apolipoprotein (apo) A-I and apo B demonstrated that
uniformity of apo A-I and apo B measurements can be achieved if suitable common
reference materials are used to calibrate the different systems. The objective of
the second phase was to evaluate the linearity and parallelism or proportionality
of the candidate reference materials selected in phase one and to determine
whether any of them could be proposed as international reference materials. We
evaluated the proposed reference materials with 37 test systems for apo A-I and
38 for apo B, involving 23 manufacturers and five research laboratories. Two
lyophilized preparations were proposed for apo A-I, SP1 from Behringwerke AG and 
SP2 from Daiichi Pure Chemicals Co., and two liquid preparations were proposed
for apo B, SP3 from Behringwerke AG and SP4 from Reagents Applications. The
linearity of the candidate reference materials was compared with the linearity of
a frozen serum pool or interim serum reference material distributed to all the
participants and with that of a fresh serum pool prepared by each participant.
SP1 and SP3 exhibited linearity and parallelism similar to that of the fresh
frozen serum pool and had among-laboratory CVs less than or similar to those
obtained on normolipidemic serum samples (approximately 6% for apo A-I and
approximately 7% for apo B).

PMID: 1582016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Arerugi. 1992 Feb;41(2 Pt 1):119-24.

[The potencies of substance P, substance P fragments, and compound 48/80 for
granulocyte infiltration in mouse skin].

[Article in Japanese]

Tomoe S(1), Iwamoto I, Yoshida S, Tomioka H.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Chiba University School of Medicine.

To determine whether the N-terminal or C-terminal peptide of substance P (SP)
induces granulocyte infiltration in mouse skin, we examined the potencies of SP, 
the N-terminal peptides SP1-4 and SP1-9, the C-terminal peptides SP4-11 and
SP6-11, and a mast cell degranulating agent compound 48/80 in inducing
granulocyte (neutrophil and eosinophil) infiltration in the skin of BALB/c mice. 
The subcutaneous administration of SP (10(-7)-10(-5) M) caused granulocyte
infiltration in mouse skin in a concentration-dependent fashion 6 h after the
injection. SP1-9 (10(-5)-10(-4) M) also caused granulocyte infiltration in the
skin which was associated with mast cell degranulation. However, SP1-4, SP4-11
and SP6-11 (up to 10(-4) M) induced neither granulocyte infiltration nor mast
cell degranulation. In addition, compound 48/80 (0.5-50 micrograms/ml) also
induced granulocyte infiltration of mouse skin with a concentration-dependent
increase in mast cell degranulation. These results indicate that SP induces
granulocyte infiltration of mouse skin through mast cell degranulation induced by
the N-terminal peptide.

PMID: 1373599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Biotechnol Bioeng. 1991 Nov;38(9):1050-8.

Expression of recombinant protein A from the lac promoter in Escherichia coli
JM83 is not subject to catabolite repression when grown under specific conditions
of continuous culture.

Warnes A(1), Stephenson JR, Fooks AR, Melling J, Brown MR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biologics, CAMR, Portion Down, Salisbury, SP4 0JG, United Kingdom.

Although widely used in experimental and industrial situations, genetically
engineered plasmids containing the lac promoter from Escherichia coli are subject
to catabolite repression when grown in glucose-containing media. Several methods 
of overcoming this problem have been investigated by studying the expression of
the protein A gene from Staphylococcus aureus under the control of the
Escherichia coli lac promoter. When glycerol is used as a sole carbon source, the
plasmid is unstable and is rapidly lost from the culture. When the bacteria are
grown in chemostats under glucose limitation, the plasmid is maintained, even at 
high dilution rates, and the expression of protein A is similar to that observed 
when glycerol was used. The balance between metabolic load and protein A
expression seems to be maintained by reducing the gene dose to a tolerable level.
Depending on the metabolic conditions prevailing in the culture, this is
achieved, either by reducing the copy number of the plasmid or in extreme cases
by removing the plasmid altogether.

PMID: 18600870  [PubMed]


386. Biotechnol Bioeng. 1991 Oct 20;38(8):929-40.

Application of photon correlation spectroscopy as a technique for detecting
culture contamination.

Jepras RI(1), Perkins EA, Rarity J, Carr RJ, Clarke DJ, Atkinson T.

Author information: 
(1)Sensor Group, Division of Biotechnology, PHLS Centre for Applied Microbiology 
and Research, Porton Down, Wilshire SP4 0JG, UK.

The application of photon correlation spectroscopy (PCS) to detect culture
contamination in chemostats was studied. It was found that the presence of a
given particle size in a population of particles of a different size could be
detected, but this ability was strongly dependent on particles of a different
size could be detected, but this ability was strongly dependent on particle size 
difference and was most sensitive when contaminants are larger than the host. The
inherent polydisparity of actively growing and dividing microbial cells negates
any advantage in the use of multi-angle PCS to detect contaminants.

PMID: 18600849  [PubMed]


387. Avian Dis. 1991 Jul-Sep;35(3):591-8.

Comparison of a modified Edward-type medium and a modified SP4-type medium for
primary isolation of Mycoplasma gallisepticum (MG) from chickens vaccinated with 
the F strain of MG.

Fritz BA(1), Thomas CB, Van Ess P, Yuill TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Science, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Wisconsin, Madison 53706.

The efficacy of two media, an Edward-type medium (EPJ) and a modified SP4-type
medium (SP4-PS), were compared for primary isolation of Mycoplasma gallisepticum 
(MG) from commercial layer chickens (n = 58) vaccinated with the live F strain of
MG. Three groups of chickens that differed in the interval after vaccinal
exposure to the F strain (32, 41, and 102 weeks) were studied at necropsy.
Mycoplasma isolation was attempted from the trachea, sinus, and cloaca using
lavage and swab techniques but was successful only from the trachea and sinus. MG
was isolated from 39 (8.4%) of 463 culture attempts from 58 tracheal inocula and 
58 sinus inocula. Isolation of MG was successful more frequently using EPJ medium
than SP4-PS medium, and isolation occurred more often from the sinus than from
the trachea. Of the 58 chickens studied, 19 (33%) were shown by culture to be
infected with MG. Isolation was successful only from 32- and 41-week
post-vaccination exposure groups. However, all chickens studied were
serologically positive for MG antibody by rapid-plate agglutination and
hemagglutination-inhibition assays.

PMID: 1953581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Exp Cell Res. 1991 May;194(1):95-9.

Isolation of cDNA for a Xenopus sperm-specific basic nuclear protein (SP4) and
evidence for expression of SP4 mRNA in primary spermatocytes.

Hiyoshi H(1), Uno S, Yokota T, Katagiri C, Nishida H, Takai M, Agata K, Eguchi G,
Abé S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Faculty of Science, Kumamoto University,
Japan.

A cDNA library was prepared in lambda gt 11 from poly(A)+ mRNA isolated from a
pure population of Xenopus round spermatids and screened with an antibody against
SP3-5 (sperm-specific proteins) of Xenopus sperm. Positive clones were sequenced 
and an arginine-rich clone, designated pXSP531, was obtained. The 473-nucleotide 
sequence of pXSP531 contained an open reading frame of 237 nucleotides which was 
preceded by a 5' untranslated region of 67 nucleotides. The 3' untranslated
region contained 149 nucleotides, including a consensus polyadenylation signal
(AAATAAAA). Twenty nucleotides of a poly(A) tail was contained in the pXSP531.
SP3-5 were separated from each other by reverse-phase chromatography and
sequenced. The amino acid sequence of the peptide fragments which were obtained
by digestion of SP4 with V8 protease and separated by reverse-phase
chromatography was identical to the sequence of the N-terminal 43 and C-terminal 
15 amino acids deduced from the nucleotide sequence of pXSP531. This result
demonstrates that pXSP531 encodes SP4. Northern hybridization of RNA extracted
from primary spermatocytes and round spermatids on Days 0 and 6 with SP4 cDNA
probe (pXSP531) showed that SP4 mRNA is present both in primary spermatocytes and
in round spermatids as is protamine mRNA in the rainbow trout. The size of the
SP4 mRNA in round spermatids on Day 0 was longer by 60 nucleotides compared to
that in primary spermatocytes and that in spermatids on Day 6 was shorter by 30
nucleotides compared to that on Day 0. These size differences were due to
differences in the length of the poly(A) tracts because digestion of poly(A) with
ribonuclease H resulted in the shortening of mRNA to the same size for three
stages.

PMID: 2015853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 1991 Mar;343(3):283-8.

Tachykinin antagonists inhibit the morphine withdrawal response in guinea-pigs.

Johnston PA(1), Chahl LA.

Author information: 
(1)Neuropharmacology Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of Newcastle,
N.S.W., Australia.

This study was an investigation of the effects of the tachykinin antagonists,
spantide and (D-Pro4, D-Trp7,9,10)substance P 4-11, injected
intracerebroventricularly (ICV), on the locomotor and behavioural responses of
guinea-pigs to substance P (SP) injected ICV and to naloxone-induced morphine
withdrawal. SP, 50 nmol, produced increased locomotor activity and behaviour that
mimicked the response induced by injection of naloxone hydrochloride, 15 mg/kg,
in guinea-pigs treated 2 h previously with morphine sulphate, 15 mg/kg. Spantide 
or (D-Pro4, D-Trp7,9,10)SP4-11, 10 nmol, reduced the locomotor and behavioural
responses to SP and to morphine withdrawal. The results support the suggestion
that SP or a related tachykinin might be a mediator of the opioid withdrawal
response in the central nervous system as has been proposed for the enteric
nervous system.

PMID: 1714041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Neurochem Int. 1991;18(2):265-73.

Effect of acute physostigmine-hyoscine pretreatment on the neurochemical changes 
produced by soman in the guinea-pig.

Fosbraey P(1), Wetherell JR, French MC.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Division, Chemical Defence Establishment, Porton Down, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP4 0JQ, U.K.

The protective effects of two dose regimes of the organophosphate pretreatment
combination, physostigmine and hyoscine, were assessed on the central
neurochemical changes produced following soman intoxication. The lower dose
combination (physostigmine 20 ?g/kg, hyoscine 10 ?g/kg, s.c.) inhibited brain
regional acetylcholinesterase (AChE) by between 13.5 and 37.6% in all regions
except the striatum, where there was no statistically significant inhibition.
This low dose pretreatment failed to protect a measureable proportion of brain
AChE from soman and did not prevent the neurotransmitter changes produced by
soman. Signs of intoxication were indistinguishable from those seen with soman
alone, however more animals survived longer than 24 h. The higher dose
combination (physostigmine 196 ?g/kg and hyoscine 113 ?g/kg s.c.) inhibited brain
regional AChE by between 56.8 and 67.3%, but had significant effects alone on the
levels of ACh and NA. The high dose pretreatment effectively protected 20-30% of 
the enzyme following soman challenge. This protected enzyme became available as
the physostigmine was eliminated from the body after 60-120 min. Animals
exhibited mild signs of poisoning, such as hyperactivity and chewing, during the 
first 30-60 min, after which they recovered. Transmitter changes following soman 
were completely prevented with high dose pretreatment. Both dose levels of
pretreatment decreased lethality but only the high dose, which protected a
measurable amount of AChE and prevented neurotransmitter changes, decreased
incapacitation.

PMID: 20504702  [PubMed]


391. Exp Parasitol. 1991 Jan;72(1):54-62.

Trypanosoma cruzi: cellular and antibody response against the parasite in mice
immunized with a 19-amino acid synthetic peptide.

Búa J(1), Bontempi EJ, Levin M, Orn A, Velasco D, Moreno M, Levi-Yeyati P,
Engstrom A, Segura EL, Ruiz AM.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Nacional de Diagnóstico e Investigación de la Enfermedad de Chagas
Dr. Mario Fatala Chaben, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Several monoclonal antibodies were prepared against the flagellar fraction of
Trypanosoma cruzi epimastigotes (Tulahuén strain, stock Tul 2). One of them,
FCH-F8-4, has previously shown biologic activity against the parasite
(complement-mediated lysis and neutralization of the trypomastigote infectivity).
Immunopurified antigens using this monoclonal antibody elicited a protective
immune response in mice. Two recombinant cDNA clones were detected with this
anti-flagellar fraction monoclonal antibody on a lambda gt11 expression library
prepared from T. cruzi epimastigote mRNA. The insert of one of these cDNA clones,
lambda(FCH-F8-4)1 (150 bp) coded for a 19-amino acid peptide
(PAFLGCSSRFSGSFSGVEP). This insert hybridized with a 5.0-kb mRNA from
epimastigotes. The beta-galactosidase fusion protein was produced in lysogenic
bacteria. The monoclonal antibody recognized the epitope present in the fusion
protein after western blotting of the crude lysate. A synthetic peptide (SP4)
containing the complete sequence of lambda(FCH-F8-4)1 was constructed on solid
phase. This peptide was able to inhibit the ELISA reactivity (in a range from 13 
to 52%) of flagellar fraction immunized mouse sera and when administered (coupled
to KLH or alone) to BALB/c mice with Bordetella pertussis as adjuvant, it induced
a humoral and cellular immune response which was detected by ELISA,
immunofluorescence, blotting, and DTH reactions against T. cruzi antigens. The
immune response obtained indicates that this synthetic peptide resembles the
parasite antigen conformation and could be useful for diagnosis purposes or be
able to elicit immunoprotection against T. cruzi infection.

PMID: 1993465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Physiol. 1990 Nov;430:77-86.

Alterations in cat knee joint blood flow induced by electrical stimulation of
articular afferents and efferents.

Khoshbaten A(1), Ferrell WR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, University of Glasgow.

1. Experiments were performed in cats anaesthetized with pentobarbitone. Laser
Doppler flowmetry was used to assess the responses of knee joint blood vessels to
nerve stimulation under control conditions and in the presence of different
adrenoceptor antagonists in order to establish the nature of neurotransmitters
released from articular nerve fibres. 2. The posterior articular nerve (PAN)
supplying the knee was stimulated at different intensities, and
frequency-response curves were obtained. In fourteen animals electrical
stimulation of PAN produced an initial vasoconstriction during stimulation which 
in eight of these was followed by a prolonged dilatation on cessation of
stimulation. The constrictor response was increased as a function of frequency
but was little altered with increasing intensity beyond a threshold level. 3. The
constrictor response to electrical stimulation of PAN was markedly reduced by the
alpha-adrenergic antagonist phentolamine (10(-5) M, the alpha 1-blocker prazosin 
(10(-5) M), and guanethidine (10(-5) M) which inhibits the release of
noradrenaline, ATP, and neuropeptide Y from sympathetic nerve endings. 4. The
constrictor response to PAN stimulation was unaffected by the alpha 2-blocker
rauwolscine and the P2-purinoceptor desensitizer alpha,beta-methylene ATP. 5. The
dilator response was due to activation of afferent fibres as it could also be
produced by direct electrical stimulation of the L7 dorsal roots. 6. The dilator 
response to stimulation of PAN or the L7 dorsal root was reduced by prior
intra-articular injection of 100 micrograms of the substance P antagonist
D-Pro4-D-Trp7,9,10-SP4-11. 7. These results suggest that the vasoconstrictor
response to electrical stimulation of PAN is most likely to be mediated via
noradrenaline acting mainly upon alpha 1-adrenoceptors. As the dilator response
to articular nerve stimulation is reduced by a substance P antagonist, the
mediator inducing this response may be substance P or a related neurokinin.

PMCID: PMC1181728
PMID: 1707971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Agents Actions. 1990 Nov;31(3-4):298-307.

Mediators of substance P-induced inflammation in the rat knee joint.

Lam FY(1), Ferrell WR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, University of Glasgow, Scotland, UK.

Substance P (SP) injected into the synovial cavity of the rat knee resulted in an
inflammatory response as measured by plasma protein extravasation into the joint 
capsule. This response was dose dependent over the range of approximately 4
microM to approximately 200 microM. Part of this inflammatory response was
mediated via mast cells as pre-treatment of the animals with a mast cell
degranulator (compound 48/80) resulted in a 66% reduction of the response. A
direct effect of SP on the vascular receptors may also contribute to the
inflammatory response as pre-treatment with the substance P antagonist (SPA)
D-Pro4 D-Trp7,9,10 SP4-11 also reduces the inflammatory response. Intra-articular
injections of the H1 blocker diphenhydramine or the H2 blocker cimetidine
significantly blocked the SP-induced inflammatory response. The
5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) antagonist methysergide proved to be even more potent 
in blocking the SP-induced inflammatory response. No synergistic inhibition was
observed with combinations of the different antagonists. Intra-articular
injections of 5-HT elicited a much more pronounced inflammatory response than
that produced by a 10-fold higher concentration of histamine. The results suggest
that SP produces increased vascular permeability partly via direct actions on the
blood vessels and partly via mast cells. The inflammatory response occurring via 
mast cells appears to be mediated by histamine and to a greater extent by 5-HT.

PMID: 1707585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Neuropeptides. 1990 Jun;16(2):103-7.

Differential effects of two C-terminal peptides of substance P on human
neutrophils.

Iwamoto I(1), Yamazaki H, Nakagawa N, Kimura A, Tomioka H, Yoshida S.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Chiba University School of Medicine,
Japan.

To determine the mechanism by which substance P (SP) activates human neutrophils,
we examined the potencies of SP, the C-terminal peptides SP4-11 and SP6-11, and
the N-terminal peptides SP1-9 and SP1-4 for inducing the increase in cytosolic
free Ca2+ concentration ([Ca2+]i), superoxide (O2-) generation, and chemotaxis in
human blood neutrophils. SP and the C-terminal peptides SP4-11 and SP6-11 and
SP6-11 (10(-6)-10(-4) M) induced the increase in ([Ca2+]i, O2- generation, and
chemotaxis of the neutrophils dose--dependently, whereas the N-terminal peptides 
SP1-9 and SP1-4 (up to 10(-4) M) were inactive in inducing these responses.
Furthermore, the potencies of the two C-terminal peptides SP4-11 and SP6-11 were 
not parallel in these three responses. SP6-11 was 7.7-fold more potent in
increasing [Ca2+]i than SP4-11, whereas SP4-11 was 16.6-fold more potent in
inducing O2-generation than SP6-11. SP6-11 was also 2.1-fold more potent in
inducing chemotaxis than SP4-11. Thus, we conclude that the C-terminal peptides
of SP induce differential activations of human neutrophils.

PMID: 1701227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Mol Biol (Mosk). 1990 Mar-Apr;24(2):334-45.

[The effect of spermine on acid-base equilibrium in DNA molecule].

[Article in Russian]

Slonitskii SV, Kuptsov VIu.

The influence of spermine (Sp) on the acid-induced predenaturational and
denaturational transitions in the DNA molecule structure has been studied by
means of circular dichroism, spectrophotometric and viscometric titration at
supporting electrolyte concentration 10 mM NaCl. The data available indicate that
at [N]/[P] less than or equal to 0.60 (here [N] and [P] are molar concentrations 
of Sp nitrogen and DNA phosphours, respectively) the cooperative structural
B----B(+)----S transitions are accompanied by the DNA double-helice winding. No
competition for proton acceptor sites in the DNA molecule between H+ and Sp4+
cations has been observed when binding to neutral macromolecule. At 0.60 less
than or equal to [N]/[P] less than or equal to 0.75 the displacement of the
B----B(+)----S transitions midpoints to acidic pH region has been established.
This is accompanied by DNA condensation and the appearance of differential
scattering of circularly polarized light. The calculations carried out in the
framework of the two-variable Manning theory have shown that the acid-induced
reduction of the effective polyion charge density facilitates the Sp-induced DNA 
condensation. It has been shown that the acid-base equilibrium in the DNA
molecule is determined by local [H+] in the 2-3 A hydrated monolayer of the
macromolecule. An adequate estimation of [H+] can be obtained on the basis of the
Poisson-Boltzman approach. The data obtained are consistent with recently
proposed hypothesis of polyelectrolyte invariance of the acid-base equilibrium in
the DNA molecule.

PMID: 2362585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1989 Sep-Oct;74(5):367-77.

Early scalp responses evoked by stimulation of the supraorbital nerve in man.

Leandri M(1), Parodi CI, Favale E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Genoa, Italy.

In 25 healthy volunteers the supraorbital nerve was stimulated and evoked
potentials were recorded. Leads were placed on the scalp and along the
ipsilateral eyebrow-mastoid line and were either referred to a non-cephalic
reference (on the neck, or Cv7) or linked to form bipolar derivations. As
template wave form was chosen the one obtained from derivation Cz-Cv7, which had 
an initial triphasic component with negative (SW1a), positive (SW1b), negative
(SW1c) polarity (mean latencies 0.63, 0.95 and 1.43 msec), followed by 2 negative
waves (SW2 and SW3, mean latencies of 2.20 and 2.89 msec). A final positive wave 
could be observed in most cases (SP4, mean latency of 4.08 msec). The records
collected from the various derivations showed that each component (SW1, SW2, SW3 
and SP4) had a different behaviour, thus suggesting separate origins. SW1 would
originate from a volley travelling from the point of stimulation towards the
mastoid, probably across the ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve. The
subsequent components would be generated by deeply situated structures: double
pulse stimulation suggests that SW1, SW2 and SW3 are generated before the first
synapse, whereas SP4 is a postsynaptic event. A strong similarity exists between 
the components evoked by stimulation of the supraorbital and the infraorbital
nerves. Local anaesthetic block of the frontal nerve on the stimulated side and
monitoring of the EMG activity of m. orbicularis oculi and m. frontalis ruled out
any muscle contamination of the responses described in this paper.

PMID: 2476295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Cytotechnology. 1989 Aug;2(3):161-2. doi: 10.1007/BF00133240.

Bovine spongiform encephalopathy - a hazard to cell culture and biologically
based medicines.

Phillpotts RJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biologics, PHLS CAMR, Porton Down, SP4 OJG, Salisbury, Wiltshire, 
United Kingdom.

PMID: 22358729  [PubMed]


398. Rev Med Panama. 1989 May;14(2):99-103.

[The first isolation of Mycoplasma pneumoniae in Panama].

[Article in Spanish]

de Moreno NO, Moreno JL, Zelante F.

Mycoplasma pneumoniae was isolated for first time in Panama and identified from a
nine years old girl with pneumonia. SP4 medium was used to isolate the bacteria. 
Confirmatory serological results were obtained by indirect immunofluorescence and
were also suggested by the presence of cryoagglutinins in the sera of this
patient. DNA hybridization tests (Gen--Probe) were carried out.

PMID: 2503860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Yao Xue Xue Bao. 1989 Jan;24(1):63-6.

[Effects of dicarboxyethenylgermanium sesquioxide on electrical and mechanical
activity in isolated guinea pig and rabbit heart].

[Article in Chinese]

Ma FJ, Zhao GS, Li XG.

The effects of dicarboxyethenylgermanium sesquioxide (DCG) on electrical and
mechanical activity in isolated guinea pig papillary muscles and rabbit sinus
node were studied by intracellular capillary glass electrode. The effects of DCG 
on slow action potential and contractile force (Fc) of preparations in which the 
fast Na+ channels were inactive by partial depolarization by increasing the
concentration of K+ 25.4 mmol/L were observed. DCG (0.5 mol/L) increased Vmax and
APA of fast action potential of guinea pig papillary muscles, but its Fc
decreased from 105 +/- 12% of control to 80 +/- 16%. DCG prolonged the
spontaneous cycle length (SCL) and APD90 of rabbit sinus node, but the slope of
phase 4(SP4) was lowered. The functional refractory period (FRP) of rabbit left
atria was determined by the paired stimulus method. In experiments involving one 
drug, the drug was added until equilibrium had been reached. It has been
demonstrated by experiments that the administration of DCG resulted in an
increase of atrial FRP. These findings suggest that the Ca2+ inward currents and 
the K+ outward current may be inhibited by DCG.

PMID: 2801126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Neoplasma. 1989;36(1):3-9.

Enhanced take of spontaneous murine tumors in mice treated with inhibitors of
macrophage and/or NK cell function.

Minarovits J(1), Karczag E, Földes I.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiological Research Group, National Institute of Hygiene, Budapest,
Hungary.

Both macrophages and NK cells have been suggested to play a role in recognizing
and eliminating early, in situ neoplasms. Therefore we studied the effect of
inhibitors of macrophage and/or NK cell function on the take of transplantable
spontaneous murine tumors in syngeneic mice. The treatment of animals with trypan
blue, a selective inhibitor of macrophage function, decreased considerably the
period of latency of BSP3 adenocarcinoma; however, it did not increase the take
of SP4, SP82 and SP84 adenocarcinomas. The treatment of recipients with neutral
red, a selective inhibitor of NK cell function, enhanced the take of SP4
adenocarcinoma. The treatment of mice with agents depressing both macrophage and 
NK cell function (silica or carrageenan) decreased the both macrophage and NK
cell function (silica or carrageenan) decreased the period of latency and/or
increased the take of SP4, SP82 and SP84 adenocarcinomas. Carrageenan or a
combined treatment with both trypan blue and neutral red also enhanced the take
of BaF1, a benzo(a)pyrene-induced fibrosarcoma. We concluded that both
macrophages and NK cells may function as effector cells of an antitumoral
surveillance system.

PMID: 2704423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Acta Microbiol Hung. 1989;36(1):33-9.

Characterization of activated peritoneal cells inhibiting the take of
transplantable murine tumours.

Minárovits J(1), Karczag E, Földes I.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Hygiene, Microbiological Research Group, Budapest,
Hungary.

We studied the properties of activated peritoneal cells (PC) inhibiting the take 
of SP4 spontaneous adenocarcinoma and Lewis lung carcinoma in syngeneic mice.
Treatment of the poly I:C activated PC from Balb/c mice suppressing the take of
SP4 tumour with anti-asialo GM1 antibody and complement before transfer did not
affect their tumour-inhibitory potential. PC from Balb/c nude mice treated with
poly I:C also inhibited the take of SP4 tumour. Spleen cells from untreated or
poly I:C treated Balb/c and Balb/c nude mice, however, did not inhibit the take
of SP4 adenocarcinoma. Treatment of peritoneal cells activated by a combination
of poly I:C, indomethacin and Syncumar (referred to as "combined treatment") with
anti-asialo GM1 antibody and complement could not, or could only partly abolish
their tumour-inhibitory potential. The cells mediating the suppression of the
take of Lewis lung tumour proved to be Thy-1,2+/-, Lyt-1-, Lyt 2.2- cells. We
conclude that the activated peritoneal cells inhibiting the take of SP4
adenocarcinoma and Lewis lung tumour are different from NK cells, NC cells and
LAK cells and represent a distinct antitumoural effector cell population.

PMID: 2603645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Acta Microbiol Hung. 1989;36(1):25-31.

Comparison of the effects of peritoneal and spleen cells of syngeneic or
allogeneic origin on the take of transplantable murine tumours.

Karczag E(1), Minárovits J, Földes I.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiological Research Group of the National Institute of Hygiene, Budapest,
Hungary.

We compared the effects of various potential effector cells of syngeneic or
allogeneic origin on the take of a spontaneous adenocarcinoma (SP4) and Lewis
lung (LL) carcinoma. As reported earlier, syngeneic resident (non-activated)
peritoneal cells (PC) did not inhibit the take of these tumours. On the contrary,
transfer of resident PC from allogeneic donors suppressed the tumour take.
Syngeneic and allogeneic PC activated by poly I:C or by a combination of
indomethacin, poly I:C and Syncumar ("combined treatment") inhibited the tumour
take to a similar extent. Syngeneic spleen cells (from untreated mice or from
donors underwent "combined treatment") did not inhibit the take of Lewis lung
tumour. Transfer of activated allogeneic spleen cells resulted in a stronger
inhibition of tumour take than the transfer of resident allogeneic spleen cells.

PMID: 2603643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Virchows Arch B Cell Pathol Incl Mol Pathol. 1989;57(1):11-8.

The use of electron microscopy and immunocytochemistry to characterise
spontaneously-arising, transplantable rat tumors.

Kamel HM(1), Willmott N, McNicol AM, Toner PG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Queen's University of Belfast, N. Ireland.

When examined by light microscopy, transplanted animal tumors frequently bear
little resemblance to the original neoplasm. If such tumors are to be used as
models of human cancer they should be characterised as regards extant rather than
historical features. Consequently, we have examined, by electron microscopy and
immunocytochemistry, five spontaneously arising tumors transplantable in the
WAB/Not rat that are currently diagnosed on the basis of historical features
only. A typical sarcoma was used for comparison. Of four spontaneously arising
tumors previously classified as carcinoma, Sp4 possessed epithelial features on
both ultrastructural and immunocytochemical analysis, Sp107 on ultrastructural
analysis only and Sp15 and Sp22 by neither technique. Expression of vimentin was 
most marked with Sp15 and Sp107. The putative sarcoma, Sp24, showed clear
evidence of epithelial differentiation but no evidence of vimentin expression.
This study (a) records the phenotypic drift of experimental tumors on
transplantation (most clearly with Sp107) and the co-expression of cytokeratins
and vimentin in putative carcinomas, (b) confirms the inadequacy of routine
histology for accurate characterisation of such tumors and (c) details techniques
for a more thorough assessment of state of differentiation that should guide the 
choice of experimental model.

PMID: 2567546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Medicina (B Aires). 1989;49(3):203-9.

[Molecular and immunologic bases for the development of a vaccine against Chagas 
disease].

[Article in Spanish]

Segura EL, Cardoni RL, Búa J, Rottenberg ME, Bontempi EJ, Esteva MI, Carlomagno
MA, De Titto EH, Ruiz AM.

Subcellular fractions of T. cruzi epimastigotes (Epi) were studied for their
capability to induce protective or aggressive effects in animals. The flagellar
fraction (F) showed the best immunoprotective properties without tissular
aggression. Monoclonal antibodies were raised against F. Two of them, FCH-F8-1
and 4, were able to neutralize the infectivity of bloodstream forms, to mediate
lysis by complement of cell culture derived[trypomastigotes (Tripo) and to
recognize the surface of Tripo and Epi. FCH-F8-1 reacted with a 85 kDa protein
from Tripo (assayed by immunoprecipitation) and with peptides of 43 kDa on Epi
and Tripo (tested by immunoblotting). FCH-F8-4 recognized several proteins
ranging from 50 to 150 kDa on Epi and two molecules of 15 and 48 kDa on Tripo.
Mice immunized with antigens purified by affinity chromatography by using
FCH-F8-4 were protected against the infection. Several recombinant clones were
detected on a cDNA lambda gt11 expression library constructed from T. cruzi Epi
(Tulahuén strain): three with FCH-F8-4 and two with FCH-F8-1. One clone
recognized by each monoclonal antibody was studied gamma (FCH-F8-1) 1 and gamma
(FCH-F8-4) 1. Both inserts were of 150 base pairs each; they detected a 3.5 and
5.0 kilobases Epi mRNA, respectively. Both inserts were sequenced, and the amino 
acid sequences were inferred. gamma (FCH-F8-4) 1 codified for a 19 aa peptide,
PAFLGCSSRFSGSFSGVEP, and gamma (FCH-F8-1) 1 for a 29 aa peptide
EFLERGRISCORHSYTSYTSCSDEHNVTPFC. The whole 19 aa peptide was synthesized. This
peptide (SP4) inhibited the ELISA reactivity against the parasite of chronically 
infected and F immunized mouse sera.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 2518642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Cytotechnology. 1988 Nov;1(4):355-8. doi: 10.1007/BF00365081.

The use of ciprofloxacin for the elimination of mycoplasma from naturally
infected cell lines.

Mowles JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)European Collection of Animal Cell Cultures, Biologics Division, Public Health
Laboratory Service, Porton Down, SP4 0JG, Salisbury, Wiltshire, United Kingdom.

The fluoroquinolone antibiotic Ciprofloxacin, has been used to eliminate
mycoplasma from 26 naturally infected cell lines with no evidence of remergence
of infection and with no treatment failures.

PMID: 22359171  [PubMed]


406. Cytotechnology. 1988 Nov;1(4):339-46. doi: 10.1007/BF00365079.

Fixed bed porous glass sphere (porosphere) bioreactors for animal cells.

Looby D(1), Griffiths JB.

Author information: 
(1)Biologics Division, PHLS CAMR, Porton Down, SP4 0JG, Salisbury, Wiltshire,
United Kingdom.

Process intensity of fixed bed glass sphere culture systems is increased
considerably by replacing solid glass spheres with open pore glass spheres. This 
technique demonstrates the possibility of having a system capable of both
volumetric and cell density scale up and being suitable for substrate attached
and suspension cells. The yields achieved for a number of attached cell lines
(approximately 10(7)/ml) demonstrate an increase approaching one order of
magnitude over solid glass spheres (approximately 10(6)/ml). Also suspension
cells were successfully entrapped in the open pore structure with similar yields.

PMID: 22359169  [PubMed]


407. Br J Pharmacol. 1988 Sep;95(1):121-30.

Characterization of neuropeptide-induced histamine release from human dispersed
skin mast cells.

Lowman MA(1), Benyon RC, Church MK.

Author information: 
(1)Immunopharmacology Group, Southampton General Hospital.

1. Human skin mast cells, unlike other human mast cells so far studied, released 
histamine in a concentration-related manner in response to substance P,
vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) and somatostatin (1 microM to 30 microM). In 
contrast, eledoisin, physalaemin, neurokinin A, neurokinin B, calcitonin
gene-related peptide (CGRP), neurotensin, bradykinin and Lys-bradykinin induced
negligible histamine release. 2. The low histamine releasing activity of
physalaemin, eledoisin, neurokinin A and neurokinin B relative to substance P
suggests that the human skin mast cell activation site is distinct from the
tachykinin NK-1, NK-2 or NK-3 receptors described in smooth muscle. 3. The
relative potencies of substance P and its fragments SP2-11, SP3-11, SP4-11 and
SP1-4 in releasing histamine from human skin mast cells suggests that both the
basic N-terminal amino acids and the lipophilic C-terminal portion of substance P
are essential for activity. 4. Peptide-induced histamine release, like that
induced by compound 48/80, morphine and poly-L-lysine, is rapid, reaching
completion in 10-20 s, is largely independent of extracellular calcium but
requires intact glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation. 5. The substance P
analogue, [D-Pro4,D-Trp7,9,10] SP4-11 (SPA), not only reduced substance P-induced
histamine release in a concentration-related manner but also inhibited that
induced by VIP, somatostatin, compound 48/80, poly-L-lysine and morphine but not 
anti-IgE. 6. The similar characteristics of histamine release induced by
substance P, VIP, somatostatin, compound 48/80, poly-L-lysine and morphine
suggest that they share a common pathway of activation-secretion coupling
distinct from that of IgE-dependent activation. Furthermore, the ability of human
skin mast cells to respond to basic non-immunological stimuli including
neuropeptides may reflect a specialised function for these cells.

PMCID: PMC1854121
PMID: 2464382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1988 Aug;54(8):2049-53.

Properties of Thermus ruber Strains Isolated from Icelandic Hot Springs and
DNA:DNA Homology of Thermus ruber and Thermus aquaticus.

Sharp RJ(1), Williams RA.

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Technology Laboratory, PHLS Centre for Applied Microbiology and
Research, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 OJG, and Biochemistry Department, London
Hospital Medical College, London E1 2AD, United Kingdom.

Seventeen pink-pigmented strains of the genus Thermus were isolated from samples 
collected from thermal areas of Iceland. The strains were examined by using
phenotypic characterization and DNA:DNA homology and were compared with
recognized strains. Visually, the strains could be divided into three groups
based on their pigmentation; however, spectroscopic studies of the pigments
indicated little difference among them. Most strains required a vitamin
supplement for growth and used fructose, maltose, mannose, or sucrose as the sole
carbon source. In the presence of nitrate, two strains were able to grow under
anaerobic conditions. The optimum growth temperature was 60 degrees C; growth did
not occur at 30 or 70 degrees C.

PMCID: PMC202800
PMID: 16347714  [PubMed]


409. Anal Biochem. 1988 May 15;171(1):207-12.

Purification of a hydrophobic surfactant peptide using high-performance liquid
chromatography.

Arjomaa P(1), Hallman M.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, University of Helsinki, Finland.

A 4- to 6-kDa hydrophobic peptide (SP4-6) was purified from human pulmonary
surfactant. Sep Pak Florisil cartridges removed most of the lipids and the 18-kDa
peptide. Analytical wide-pore reversed-phase HPLC column separated a single
peptide that contained no detectable lipids (less than 1 nmol/2.5 micrograms
protein). N-terminal analysis indicated that this peptide was pure, but the
N-terminal amino acid was blocked. The peptide was capable of restoring the in
vitro surface properties of synthetic phospholipids, which is characteristic of
native lung surfactant.

PMID: 3407916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 1988 Feb;5(4):839-57.

Comparative study of the condensation of chicken erythrocyte and calf thymus
chromatins by di- and multivalent cations.

Marquet R(1), Colson P, Matton AM, Houssier C, Thiry M, Goessens G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Chimie Macromoléculaire et Chimie Physique, Université de
Liège, Belgium.

Erratum in
    J Biomol Struct Dyn 1988 Jun;5(6):1295-6.

The condensation of chicken erythrocyte (CE) and calf thymus (CT) chromatins upon
addition of di- and multivalent cations has been studied using turbidity,
precipitation and electric dichroism measurements. For all the cations
investigated (Mg2+, Tb3+, Co(NH3)6(3+), spermidine Spd2+ and spermine Sp4+)
condensation of CE chromatin occurred before the onset of aggregation, while
aggregation of CT chromatin started before condensation with all cations except
Mg2+ and Tb3+. Precipitation of CE chromatin required lower di- and multivalent
cations concentrations than CT chromatin. The electric dichroism data for both
chromatins, at low ionic strength in the absence of di- or multivalent cations,
indicated that the nucleoprotein molecules were not totally decondensed but that 
a "precondensed" state was already present. A positive electric dichroism was
observed for the most condensed chromatin fibers, in agreement with the
"cross-linker" models. Tb3+ led to less compact condensed particles as judged
from the electric dichroism observations, but electron microscopy revealed that
"30 nm fibers" were formed. Very little aggregation was produced by Tb3+. On the 
contrary, spermine produced very large networks of condensed molecules, but large
spheroidal particles were also observed. The condensation of CE chromatin
happened without changes of solution conductivity upon cation salt addition,
regardless of the condensing cation, indicating a cooperative uptake of the ions 
during this process.

PMID: 3271492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1987 Oct;243(1):317-21.

Histamine release induced by Arg-Pro-Lys-Pro(CH2)11CH3 from rat peritoneal mast
cells.

Repke H(1), Piotrowski W, Bienert M, Foreman JC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Drug Research, Academy of Sciences of the G.D.R., Berlin.

The substance Arg-Pro-Lys-Pro-(CH2)11CH3 [SP1-4C12] was synthesized by forming a 
peptide bond between Arg-Pro-Lys-Pro, the N-terminal sequence of substance P and 
dodecylamine. The aim was to examine the roles of the N- and C-terminal sequences
of substance P in stimulating histamine release from mast cells of the rat
peritoneal cavity. SP1-4 C12 induces concentration-dependent histamine release in
the range 8 to 200 nM. SP1-4C12 was 50 times more potent than substance P and 300
times more potent than dodecylamine. Unlike dodecylamine itself, SP1-4C12 induced
noncytolytic histamine release which was inhibited by benzalkonium chloride and
by the substance P antagonist [D-Pro4,D-Trp7,9,10]SP4-11. Histamine release
induced by SP1-4C12 was inhibited at temperatures below 16 degrees C and did not 
require the presence of extracellular calcium ions. It is suggested that
substance P and some other basic histamine liberators initiate histamine
secretion by a mechanism that involves the insertion of a hydrophobic region into
the membrane lipid which is necessary to present positively charged moieties to a
receptor site involved in activating the secretory mechanism.

PMID: 2444699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Isr J Med Sci. 1987 Jun;23(6):729-31.

Spiroplasma citri detection by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), culture
and dot hybridization.

Bove JM(1), Vignault JC, Saillard C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire, Institut Nationale de la
Recherche Agronomique, Pont de la Maye, France.

We have used ELISA and culture of spiroplasmas in SP4 or M1A medium to detect
Spiroplasma citri in citrus trees, periwinkles (Catharantus roseus) and
leafhoppers in Iraq and Syria. On the basis of hundreds of analyses, we have
found that the sensitivity of ELISA and culture are of the same order of
magnitude. With citrus, both tests are able to detect S. citri in 95% of
symptomatic nursery or field trees. The tests are not sensitive enough to
reliably detect S. citri in symptomless trees. Therefore, a DNA hybridization
technique was developed. The radioactive DNA probe was prepared either with total
S. citri DNA or with the cloned DNA fragment carrying the spiralin gene of S.
citri. Used in dot hybridization, the probe was able to detect concentrations of 
S. citri one 100th the size of those revealed by ELISA.

PMID: 3667239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Isr J Med Sci. 1987 Jun;23(6):696-8.

Further characterization of an unusual plant Mollicutes species of uncertain
taxonomic status.

Saillard C(1), Vignault JC, Bonnet F, Rose DL, Tully JG, Carle P, Bove JM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire, Institut Nationale de la
Recherche Agronomique, Pont de la Maye, France.

PPAV is a type of Mollicutes that was isolated in SP4 medium from seeds of apples
affected by proliferation, a disease in which mycoplasma-like organisms (MLOs)
are involved. However, PPAV is probably not the etiological MLO agent for at
least two reasons: 1) optimal temperature growth is 43 C, and 2) in spite of
numerous isolation attempts over several years, no second PPAV culture could be
obtained. PPAV is surrounded by a single cytoplasmic membrane and forms typical
fried egg-shaped colonies on solid medium. The organism grows in simplified
mycoplasma media, such as BSR. In growth inhibition, it shows no serological
relationships with any other mycoplasmas or acholeplasmas, including those
cultured from the surfaces of plants. The absence of relatedness of PPAV to other
Mollicutes was confirmed by DNA hybridization studies. The genome of PPAV is
close to 10(9) daltons and contains 25.2 mol % G + C. Its genome size is similar 
to that of Acholeplasma spp. and Spiroplasma spp. It has, however, a clearcut
sterol requirement and therefore cannot be an acholeplasma. Neither is it a
spiroplasma since, though filamentous in BSR medium, it has never shown signs of 
helicity. Hence, PPAV is a taxonomical paradox.

PMID: 3312108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Agents Actions. 1987 Apr;20(3-4):178-80.

Action of the SP2-11 and SP3-11 fragments of substance P on rat peritoneal mast
cells.

Piotrowski W, Mead M, Foreman JC.

The ability of the SP fragments SP2-11 and SP3-11 to release histamine from rat
peritoneal mast cells has been compared with that of the whole peptide. SP1-11
was found to be about 3.4 times more active than SP2-11 and about 10.4 times more
active than SP3-11. The substance P antagonist [D-Pro4, D-Trp7,9,10] SP4-11 was
equally effective at antagonizing the histamine releasing action of SP1-11,
SP2-11 and SP3-11. Benzalkonium chloride was found to be a competitive antagonist
of SP and SP3-11: the dissociation constants for the benzalkonium
chloride-receptor interaction being about the same when either SP1-11 or SP3-11
was used as the agonist.

PMID: 2440265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Acta Microbiol Hung. 1987;34(3-4):197-205.

Effect of poly I:C-activated peritoneal cells on the take of transplantable
murine tumours.

Minárovits J(1), Karczag E, Földes I.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiological Research Group, National Institute of Hygiene, Budapest,
Hungary.

The effect of syngeneic mouse peritoneal cells (PC) on the growth of four
different transplantable tumours was studied in adoptive transfer experiments
(Winn's test). PC from unstimulated mice did not influence the growth of a
benzpyrene induced fibrosarcoma (BaF1) and a methylcholantrene induced
mastocytoma (P815), but significantly enhanced the growth of a spontaneous
adenocarcinoma (Sp4) and Lewis lung carcinoma (LL). PC induced by a single
injection of thioglycollate did not influence, whereas PC elicited by proteose
peptone markedly enhanced the growth of BaF1 fibrosarcoma. The enhancing effect
of peptone induced PC was diminished by a single intraperitoneal dose (100
micrograms/mouse) of polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (poly I:C) given after
peptone injection. Transferring PC obtained after a single injection of poly I:C 
(100 micrograms intraperitoneally) resulted in retardation of growth of BaF1
fibrosarcoma and Sp4 adenocarcinoma or in a marked decrease in their take
depending on the PC/tumour cell ratio. The effector cells involved in the
protective effect proved to be different, using these two tumour models. Lewis
lung carcinoma and P815 mastocytoma proved to be insensitive to poly
I:C-stimulated PC.

PMID: 3129897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. J Immunol. 1986 Dec 15;137(12):3826-31.

Induction of experimental allergic neuritis in the BN rat: P2 protein-specific T 
cells overcome resistance to actively induced disease.

Linington C, Mann A, Izumo S, Uyemura K, Suzuki M, Meyermann R, Wekerle H.

T lymphocyte lines specific for the peripheral nerve myelin protein P2 were
selected from the lymph nodes of Brown Norway (BN) rats immunized with bovine P2 
protein in complete Freund's adjuvant. These T cells expressed the W3/25+,
OX8-phenotype and responded specifically to bovine P2 protein, but not to PPD or 
bovine basic protein, in T cell proliferation assays. When injected i.v. into
syngeneic recipients, BN P2-specific T cell lines induced both clinical and
histologic signs of experimental allergic neuritis (EAN), overcoming the
resistance of this rat strain to actively induced EAN. Although the
histopathology of the disease was indistinguishable from that seen in T
cell-mediated EAN in the Lewis rat, disease onset was considerably later, 7 to 8 
days after cell transfer, as opposed to 4 days in Lewis. This lag phase between
inoculation and disease onset could not be further reduced even by raising the
cell dose to 50 X 10(6) cells/host. The fine specificity of the T cell response
to P2 differs between Lewis- and BN-derived T cell lines. At least one
neuritogenic epitope for each strain was present in the cyanogen bromide-derived 
peptide CB2 (residues 21-113), as shown by the ability of CB2-specific T cell
lines derived from each strain to transfer EAN to the appropriate host strain.
However, neuritogenic BN T lines fail to mount a response to the sequence 53-78
(SP4), which encompasses an epitope that is neuritogenic for Lewis rats. These
results demonstrate that the resistance of BN rats to actively induced EAN is not
due to the lack of appropriate P2-specific autoreactive T cell clones in the
normal T repertoire. Furthermore, the results suggest that two distinct epitopes 
of P2 are responsible for EAN in Lewis and BN rats.

PMID: 2431045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. J Clin Pathol. 1986 Oct;39(10):1130-4.

Antibody response to anaerobic coccoid rods in Crohn's disease.

Bull K, Matthews N, Rhodes J.

The IgG and IgM specific antibodies against a panel of 23 anaerobic gut bacteria 
were examined in Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, and healthy controls. Four 
of the organisms, Bifidobacterium bifidum, Coprococcus comes (ME46), Coprococcus 
comes (Sp4), and Eubacterium limosum gave abnormal antibody titres in Crohn's
disease compared with those of controls. In Crohn's disease specific IgG
antibodies to three of the organisms were low and the IgM antibodies were higher 
than those of controls. IgM antibodies were also raised in ulcerative colitis.
Antigenic cross reactivity could be shown between some of these organisms. The
possible clinical importance of these abnormal antibody responses to specific
organisms is unexplained.

PMCID: PMC500236
PMID: 3782488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Biotechnol Bioeng. 1986 Aug;28(8):1241-9.

Determination of reactor biomass by acoustic resonance densitometry.

Blake-Coleman BC(1), Clarke DJ, Calder MR, Moody SC.

Author information: 
(1)Biosensor Group, Microbial Technology Laboratory, Centre for Applied
Microbiology and Research, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, England SP4 OJG.

Acoustic resonance densitometry (ARD) is reported as a method suitable not only
for precise investigations into changes of specific gravity in bioreactor media
but also as a technique able to provide an accurate wide range and direct
determination of cellular mass in fermentation processes. It is further shown
that this method can replace present optical procedures, minimizing dilution
errors and operator involvement and is suitable for development as an on-line
biomass monitoring system.

PMID: 18555452  [PubMed]


419. Pathol Biol (Paris). 1986 May;34(5):360-3.

[Sensitivity to various antibiotics of spiroplasmas isolated from mosquitoes in
France].

[Article in French]

Abalain-Colloc ML, Le Goff F, Abalain JH, Chastel C.

Spiroplasmas are helical mycoplasmas that play a significant role in plant
diseases. They are also found in arthropods that are likely to bite humans, such 
as ticks and mosquitoes. These arthropods can act as vectors and therefore may be
of epidemiologic significance. Furthermore, mainly on the grounds of morphologic 
evidence, spiroplasmas have been incriminated in the genesis of human
Creutzfeld-Jacob disease. We recovered six strains of Spiroplasma sp. from 1927
female mosquitoes. In vitro susceptibility of each strain to the following
antibiotics was studied: tetracycline, oxytetracycline, doxycycline,
erythromycin, chloramphenicol, rifampin, kanamycin, gentamicin and pefloxacin.
Minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs) were determined by dilution in liquid
SP4 medium using microtiter plates. Plates were incubated for 24 to 48 hours at
30 degrees C. The inoculum contained approximately 5 X 10(5) CFU/ml. Each of the 
six strains was found to be highly susceptible to tetracycline, oxytetracycline, 
doxycycline, erythromycin, chloramphenicol and pefloxacin (MICs less than or
equal to 0.16 microgram/ml, 0.63 microgram/ml, 0.08 microgram/ml, 0.16
microgram/ml and 0.32 microgram/ml respectively). On the opposite, the strains
exhibited resistance to rifampin and variable degrees of susceptibility to
kanamycin (12.5 micrograms/ml less than MIC less than 50 micrograms/ml) and
gentamicin (3.12 micrograms/ml less than MIC less than 50 micrograms/ml). From
our results, spiroplasmas seem to have more or less the same susceptibility to
antibiotics as mycoplasmas.

PMID: 2877430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Peptides. 1986 May-Jun;7(3):419-23.

Antinociceptive and Met-enkephalin releasing effects of tachykinins and substance
P fragments.

Naranjo JR, Arnedo A, De Felipe MC, Del Rio J.

Substance P (SP), physalaemin, SP4-11, SP5-11 and the SP5-11 analog DiMe-C7
induce an antinociceptive effect in rats after intraventricular administration.
Other tachykinins and the N-terminal fragments of SP are inactive. All
antinociceptive peptides increase the Met-enkephalin efflux from slices of rat
periaqueductal gray matter and their antinociceptive potency is correlated with
their capacity to release Met-enkephalin. The results, discussed in the light of 
current theories on different tachykinin receptors, suggest that the SP-P
receptor subtype may be involved in the control of noxious stimulation elicited
by SP at supraspinal levels.

PMID: 2430264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 1986 Feb;3(4):795-803.

The conformational analysis of substance P analogs using high-field NMR
techniques.

Kawaki H(1), Otter A, Beierbeck H, Kotovych G, Stewart JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.

High-field nuclear magnetic resonance measurements were carried out on substance 
P fragments SP4-11' [pGlu5]-SP5-11 and [pGlu6]SP6-11 both at 400 and at 500 MHz. 
A spectral simulation was carried out on two of these peptides and the coupling
constants were interpreted in terms of the conformations. The JNH-CHa coupling
constants are all approximately 8 Hz, with the exception of glycine, indicating
no preferred conformation for the backbone. For the amino acids other than p-Glu,
a comparison of the coupling constant data suggests the same relative rotamer
populations for the side chains. Proton longitudinal relaxation time data were
measured for all three peptides and support the above conclusions.

PMID: 2482046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Monogr Atheroscler. 1986;14:83-90.

The CNR program of preventive medicine--SP4 Objective 44. Non-invasive techniques
for the evaluation of atherosclerotic plaque progression or regression.

Lenzi S, Bucci A, Crepaldi G, Mancini M, Menotti A, Paoletti R, Spagnoli LG,
Ventura A, Weber G.

PMID: 3526133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Endocr Res. 1986;12(3):293-304.

Studies on high-affinity [3H]substance P binding sites in bovine pineal gland.

Govitrapong P, Ebadi M.

The presence of substance P in numerous mammalian pineal glands prompted us to
search for its binding sites in the bovine pineal gland. The binding assays to
pineal membrane were carried out in polypropylene microcentrifuge tubes in a
final volume of 500 microliters of 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.4) containing
aliquots of 200-500 micrograms protein, 0.02% BSA, 6 micrograms/ml chymostatin, 4
micrograms/ml leupeptin, 40 micrograms/ml bacitracin, 5 mM MnCl2, and 50
microliters of [3H]substance P (3H-SP, 45.7 Ci/mmol to yield a final
concentration of 0.02-20 nM) to start the reactions, which were incubated for 20 
min at 20 degrees C. The reactions were terminated by centrifugation in a Fisher 
Microcentrifuge Model 235A for 30 seconds at 13,000 X g, and the pellets were
washed twice with 1 ml of ice-cold 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer containing 0.02% BSA, 6 
micrograms/ml chymostatin, 4 micrograms/ml leupeptin, 40 micrograms/ml
bacitracin, 5 mM MnCl2, 120 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, and 1 mM CaCl2. The
bottoms of the tubes were cut, the membrane pellets were dissolved in 5 ml of
Triton X-100/toluene fluor (1:3) scintillation fluid, and the radioactivity was
counted. The specific [3H]-substance P binding at 1-2 nM was 40-50% of the total 
binding, and the non-specific binding was assessed by using 2 microM of
unlabelled substance P. These studies identified in bovine pineal gland a high
affinity receptor site for [3H]SP with a KD value of 0.43 nM and a Bmax value of 
71.14 fmol/mg protein. The relative affinity of various substance P analogues or 
fragments was: substance P greater than physalaemin greater than SP2-11 greater
than SP3-11 greater than SP4-11 greater than SP6-11 greater than substance K =
eledoisin greater than kassinin greater than SP7-11 greater than SP free acid.
Substance P did not alter the basal or the norepinephrine-induced stimulation of 
the activity of serotonin N-acetyltransferase in rat pineal gland in culture.

PMID: 2430788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Br J Dermatol. 1986 Jan;114(1):37-46.

Some effects of calcitonin gene-related peptide in human skin and on histamine
release.

Piotrowski W, Foreman JC.

Calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) produced a dose-related wheal and flare
reaction in human skin at doses of 12.5 to 50 pmol. The flare response but not
the wheal response to CGRP and substance P were inhibited by prior treatment of
the subject with oral chlorpheniramine, 16 mg. CGRP, but not substance P, was
potent in producing a delayed erythema and surrounding pallor in human skin,
which peaked at 1 h and persisted for more than 3 h after injection, when wheal
and flare responses had subsided. The delayed response was accompanied by
infiltration of polymorphonuclear leukocytes. The delayed erythema and pallor
produced in response to CGRP were not inhibited by oral chlorpheniramine, or by
4% prilocaine injected locally. CGRP released histamine from rat peritoneal mast 
cells over the concentration range 2.5-10 microM. CGRP was about fourfold less
potent than substance P in releasing histamine. The substance P analogue,
[D-Pro4, D-Trp7,9,10]SP4-11 10 microM, and benzalkonium chloride 10 microM
inhibited histamine release from rat mast cells stimulated by either CGRP or
substance P.

PMID: 2417614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther. 1985 Dec;278(2):193-206.

Contraction of guinea-pig lung parenchymal strips by substance P and related
peptides.

Foreman JC, Shelly R, Webber SE.

A dose-response relationship for substance P and contraction of the lung
parenchyma strip of the guinea-pig could only be obtained in the presence of a
mixture of bacitracin, 1,4 dithio-L-threitol and ethylenediamine tetracetic acid,
all at 100 microM, or in the presence of captopril, 1.8 mM. Substance P (50 nM)
caused no contraction by itself but produced a shift to the left of the
dose-response curve for histamine with a mean dose-ratio of 1.4 +/- 0.2 (S.E. of 
mean). The peptides physalaemin, eledoisin and kassinin were all approximately
equipotent with substance P on the lung strip, in the presence of peptides
inhibitors. [D-Pro4, D-Trp7,9,10]-SP4-11, produced dose-related inhibition of the
contraction induced by substance P. Substance P activity in guinea-pig lung
declined exponentially with a half-time of 2.3 min: bacitracin, dithiothreitol
and EDTA (all 100 microM) increased this to 7.2 min and captopril (1.8 mM) to 5.1
min.

PMID: 2420297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 1985 Dec;331(4):364-8.

On the actions of substance P, somatostatin, and vasoactive intestinal
polypeptide on rat peritoneal mast cells and in human skin.

Piotrowski W, Foreman JC.

Substance P (SP), somatostatin (Som), and vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP)
induced a concentration-dependent release of histamine from isolated rat
peritoneal mast cells. The release of histamine induced by these neuropeptides
was inhibited by preincubation of the cells with the SP analogue
[D-Pro4,D-Trp7,9,10]-SP4-11 (SP-A) (10 microM), and also by benzalkonium chloride
(10 microM). In addition, SP-A inhibited histamine release induced by compound
48/80, whilst that induced by goat anti-(rat-IgE) was unaffected. In human skin, 
intradermal injection of SP, Som, or VIP produced flare and wheal responses. The 
flares to all three peptides were inhibited by preinjection of the skin with SP-A
(25 pmol), whilst the wheal responses were unaffected. It is concluded that the
receptors mediating histamine release and the flare response are similar, and
that SP, Som, and VIP are acting at a similar receptor to produce these effects. 
It is probable that this receptor is also the site of action of compound 48/80.

PMID: 2419771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1985 Nov;50(5):1325-7.

Incidence of Plasmids in Thermus spp. Isolated in Yellowstone National Park.

Munster MJ(1), Munster AP, Sharp RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Technology Laboratory, Public Health Laboratory Service Centre for
Applied Microbiology and Research, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 OJG,
United Kingdom.

Forty-eight strains of Thermus spp. were isolated from thermal sites in
Yellowstone National Park, Wyo., and 62.5% showed evidence of plasmid DNA.
Attempts to assign function to the plasmid DNA were unsuccessful, and the
presence of plasmid DNA could not be correlated with antibiotic or heavy metal
resistance. A number of these cryptic plasmids are now being investigated for
their potential as vectors for molecular cloning in Thermus spp.

PMCID: PMC238751
PMID: 16346935  [PubMed]


428. Brain Res. 1985 May 13;334(1):105-16.

Substance P mechanisms of the spinal cord related to vasomotor tone in the
spontaneously hypertensive rat.

Takano Y, Sawyer WB, Loewy AD.

This report deals with substance P (SP) mechanisms involved in regulation of
vasomotor tone at the spinal cord levels in normotensive Wistar-Kyoto (WKY) and
spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR). Our results indicate the following. (1)
Intrathecal injections of the SP antagonist, D-Pro,D-Trp-SP cause dose-dependent 
decreases in mean arterial pressure and heart rate in Sprague-Dawley rats, WKYs
and SHRs; the maximal blood pressure decreases are equal to those seen after
cervical spinal cord transection. (2) Intrathecal injections of this antagonist
into the L1 spinal level in WKYs or SHRs that had previously had their C8 spinal 
cords transected caused a rise in blood pressure and heart rate, suggesting that 
intrinsic spinal SP mechanisms are probably not involved in vasomotor tone. (3)
The intermediolateral cell column region (IML) of 16-week-old WKYs and SHRs has a
single high affinity and saturable binding component with approximately the same 
dissociation constant (Kd = 1.21 nM for WKYs; Kd = 1.25 nM for SHRs); the SHRs
showed a higher number of sites (Bmax = 24.5 fmol/mg protein) than WKY rats (Bmax
= 19.9 fmol/mg protein). The Kd and Bmax obtained from IML sections from
4-week-old WKYs and SHRs exhibit no differences, although their binding values
with 2 nM [3H]SP are higher than those obtained from the 16-week-old animals. (4)
D-Pro4,D-Trp7,9-SP4-11 has the same relatively low (micromolar range) potency for
displacing [3H]SP binding in the IML of WKYs and SHRs. (5) SHRs (16 weeks old)
contain 20% more SP immunoreactivity in the IML than WKY rats (834 +/- 36 pg/mg
protein vs 694 +/- 50 pg/mg protein); 4-week-old rats do not show such
differences. The potential significance of these results is discussed in relation
to the control of vasomotor tone.

PMID: 2581666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 1985 Mar;329(1):36-41.

Study of the contractile effect of 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) in the isolated
longitudinal muscle strip from guinea-pig ileum. Evidence for two distinct
release mechanisms.

Buchheit KH, Engel G, Mutschler E, Richardson B.

The contractile effect of 5-HT in the isolated longitudinal ileal muscle of adult
guinea-pigs was studied over a large concentration range. 5-HT produced a
biphasic concentration-response curve indicative of an interaction with at least 
two independent populations of receptors. The concentrations which elicited
half-maximal effects for the first and the second phases of the
concentration-response curve were estimated as 1.5 +/- 1.2 X 10(-8) mol/l and 1.3
+/- 0.4 X 10(-6) mol/l respectively. The maximal response produced by the
interaction of 5-HT with the high affinity receptor (i.e. first phase) was
calculated as 27 +/- 9.3% of the total response. The biphasic
concentration-response was not influenced by methysergide (10(-6) mol/l). The
effect of low concentrations of 5-HT (less than 3 X 10(-7) mol/l) was antagonised
by atropine (10(-7) mol/l), tetrodotoxin (TTX) (10(-6) mol/l), morphine (10(-5)
mol/l), the substance P antagonist, D-Pro4,D-Trp7,9-SP4-11 (3 X 10(-5) mol/l) and
capsaicin (10(-5) mol/l). Physostigmine (10(-7) mol/l) augmented the effect. The 
response to high concentrations of 5-HT (3 X 10(-7)-3 X 10(-6) mol/l) was
antagonised by ICS 205-930 and D-Pro4,D-Trp7,9-SP4-11 in a competitive manner and
was inhibited by TTX, morphine and capsaicin in an insurmountable way. The effect
of very high concentrations of 5-HT (greater than 10(-5) mol/l) could be
partially antagonised by methysergide (10(-7) mol/l) in the presence of ICS
205-930 (10(-7) mol/l) and totally by a combination of methysergide and
TTX.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 2582276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1984 Nov;48(5):1020-5.

Degradation of 4-Chlorobenzoic Acid by Arthrobacter sp.

Marks TS(1), Smith AR, Quirk AV.

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Technology Laboratory, PHLS Centre for Applied Microbiology and
Research, Porton Down, Wiltshire SP4 OJG, and School of Biological Sciences and
Environmental Health, Thames Polytechnic, London SE18 6PF, United Kingdom.

A mixed population, enriched and established in a defined medium, from a sewage
sludge inoculum was capable of complete mineralization of 4-chlorobenzoate. An
organism, identified as Arthrobacter sp., was isolated from the consortium and
shown to be capable of utilizing 4-chlorobenzoate as the sole carbon and energy
source in pure culture. This organism (strain TM-1), dehalogenated
4-chlorobenzoate as the initial step in the degradative pathway. The product,
4-hydroxybenzoate, was further metabolized via protocatechuate. The ability of
strain TM-1 to degrade 4-chlorobenzoate in liquid medium at 25 degrees C was
improved by the use of continuous culture and repeated sequential subculturing.
Other chlorinated benzoates and the parent compound benzoate did not support
growth of strain TM-1. An active cell extract was prepared and shown to
dehalogenate 4-chloro-, 4-fluoro-, and 4-bromobenzoate. Dehalogenase activity had
an optimum pH of 6.8 and an optimum temperature of 20 degrees C and was inhibited
by dissolved oxygen and stimulated by manganese (Mn). Strain improvement resulted
in an increase in the specific activity of the cell extract from 0.09 to 0.85
nmol of 4-hydroxybenzoate per min per mg of protein and a decrease in the
doubling time of the organism from 50 to 1.6 h.

PMCID: PMC241668
PMID: 16346660  [PubMed]


431. Peptides. 1984 Jul-Aug;5(4):769-76.

Hydrolysis of substance p and neurotensin by converting enzyme and neutral
endopeptidase.

Skidgel RA, Engelbrecht S, Johnson AR, Erdös EG.

Angiotensin I converting enzyme (ACE) and neutral endopeptidase ("enkephalinase";
NEP), were purified to homogeneity from human kidney. NEP cleaved substance P
(SP) at Gln6-Phe7,-Phe8, and Gly9-Leu10 and neurotensin (NT) at Pro10-Tyr11 and
Tyr11-Ile12. NEP hydrolyzed 0.1 mM SP, NT and their C-terminal fragments at the
following rates (mumol/min/mg): SP1-11 = 7.8, SP4-11 = 11.7, SP5-11 = 15.4,
SP6-11 = 15.6, SP8-11 = 6.7, NT1-13 = 2.9, and NT8-13 = 4.0. Purified ACE rapidly
inactivated SP as measured in bioassay. HPLC analysis showed that ACE cleaved SP 
at Phe8-Gly9 and Gly9-Leu10 to release C-terminal tri- and dipeptide (ratio =
4:1). The hydrolysis was Cl- dependent and inhibited by captopril. ACE released
mainly C-terminal tripeptide from SP methyl ester, but only dipeptide from SP
free acid. Modification of arginine residues in ACE with cyclohexanedione or
butanedione similarly inhibited hydrolysis of SP, bradykinin and Bz-Gly-Phe-Arg
(80-93%) indicating an active site arginine is required for hydrolysis of SP. ACE
hydrolyzed NT at Tyr11-Ile12 to release Ile12-Leu13. SP, NT and their derivatives
(0.1 mM) were cleaved by ACE at the following rates (mumol/min/mg): SP1-11 = 1.2,
SP methyl ester = 0.7, SP free acid = 8.5, SP4-11 = 2.4, SP5-11 = 0.9, SP6-11 =
1.4, SP8-11 = 0, NT1-13 = 0.2, and NT8-13 = 1.3. Peptide substrates were used as 
inhibitors of ACE (substrate = FA-Phe-Gly-Gly) and NEP (substrate =
Leu5-enkephalin).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 6208535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Lab Invest. 1984 Jun;50(6):653-8.

Correlation of lung macrophage age and surface antigen in the hamster.

Harbison ML, Godleski JJ, Mortara M, Brain JD.

A monoclonal antibody specific for a surface antigen found on hamster lung
macrophages has been produced. Macrophages obtained from LSH Syrian golden
hamsters by pulmonary lavage have varying amounts of this antigen on their
surface. We compared the age of alveolar macrophages (using 3H-thymidine) with
the amount of surface antigen. Lung macrophages were obtained by repeated saline 
lavage at 1, 3, 5, and 10 days after 3H-thymidine injection. Monoclonal antibody 
was then reacted with these cells followed by fluorescein
isothiocyanate-conjugated protein A. Cell size and fluorescence were analyzed by 
flow cytometry. A wide range of fluorescent intensity was observed; the cells
were sorted into four subpopulations (SPs). SP1 had the lowest fluorescence per
cell, and SP4 had the highest. The sorted cells were placed on glass slides, and 
autoradiographs were made. The percentage of labeled macrophages in each SP was
determined. At 1 day after thymidine injection, cells with a paucity of antigen
(SP1) were the most highly labeled; 12.5% of SP1 macrophages were labeled, but
only 1.4 and 1.1% of SP3 and SP4 were labeled, respectively. The labeling was
relatively even in all four SPs at 3 days, but at 5 days the labeling of cells in
SP2 and SP3 was highest. By day 10, labeled macrophages had large amounts of
surface antigen and were in SP3 and SP4. These findings suggest that pulmonary
macrophages that have recently synthesized DNA lack surface antigen. As time
passes, cells mature and more antigen is acquired. The amount of surface antigen 
reflects cell age and provides a useful tool to isolate and study macrophage SPs.

PMID: 6727298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Br J Pharmacol. 1984 Jun;82(2):441-51.

A study of [D-Pro2, D-Phe7, D-Trp9]-substance P and [D-Trp7,9]-substance P as
tachykinin partial agonists in the rat colon.

Bailey SJ, Jordan CC.

Two substance P (SP) analogues, [D-Pro2, D-Phe7, D-Trp9]-SP (DPDPDT) and
[D-Trp7,9]-SP (DT79), previously described as tachykinin antagonists, have been
shown to contract the rat colon muscularis mucosae preparation. The maximum
response exhibited by these analogues was about 30% that of the SP maximum,
suggesting that they were acting as partial agonists relative to SP. The
responses to DPDPDT were unaffected by pretreatment with mepyramine, methysergide
or [Sar1, Ile5, Ala8]-angiotensin II, which abolished the responses to histamine,
5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) and angiotensin II, respectively. Methysergide also
did not affect the responses to DT79; the other antagonists were not tested
against this analogue. Indomethacin and cimetidine also had no inhibitory effect.
Atropine (2 microM) was present in all experiments to prevent indirect muscarinic
effects. Phenoxybenzamine did not affect the dose-response curves to SP,
eledoisin-related peptide (ERP), kassinin, eledoisin or physalaemin, nor did it
affect the responses to individual doses of DPDPDT or DT79. However, in the
absence of atropine, it shifted the carbachol dose-response curve markedly to the
right, and reduced its maximum. The tachykinin antagonist [D-Pro4,
D-Trp7,9,10]-SP4-11 reduced the responses to individual matched doses of DPDPDT, 
DT79 and SP to the same degree, whilst leaving responses to 5-HT or angiotensin
II unaffected. This suggested that DPDPDT and DT79 were acting at the same
receptor as SP. The inhibitory effects of DPDPDT on responses to SP, ERP and
kassinin, and that of DT79 on responses to SP, were analysed. All four
combinations yielded data compatible with an interaction at only one receptor,
although DPDPDT appeared slightly more potent at inhibiting responses to
kassinin. The results are discussed in the light of the proposed existence of
multiple tachykinin receptor subtypes. The possible influence of differential
metabolism of tachykinin analogues is also considered.

PMCID: PMC1987043
PMID: 6203595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Agents Actions. 1984 Apr;14(3-4):420-4.

The substance P receptor on rat mast cells and in human skin.

Piotrowski W, Devoy MA, Jordan CC, Foreman JC.

(D-Pro4 D- Trp7 ,9,10)SP4-11 (SPA) has been shown to be a competitive antagonist 
of the histamine releasing action of substance P in rat peritoneal mast cells.
Antagonist activity of SPA is expressed in the concentration range 1 to 10
microM, but at higher concentrations SPA releases histamine. SPA inhibits the
flare response induced by substance P in human skin but is without effect on the 
wheal response. Up to 12.5 pmol SPA produces neither wheal nor flare response by 
itself. The structurally related peptide, kassinin , does not cause histamine
release from rat mast cells at concentrations up to 10 microM whereas the methyl 
ester of substance P was found to 1.6 times more active than substance P in this 
respect. The findings are discussed in terms of the classification of substance P
receptors and the mechanism of wheal and flare in human skin.

PMID: 6203362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Neurochem Int. 1984;6(4):453-7.

Effects of dose and time after administration of
4-isopropyl-2,6,7-trioxa-1-phosphabicyclo (2,2,2)octane-1-oxide (IPTBO) on cyclic
nucleotide concentrations in mouse cerebellum.

Blenkinsop IS(1), Coult DB, Davies WE, Howells DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Defence Establishment, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JQ,
England.

The concentrations of cyclic AMP and cyclic GMP in the mouse cerebellum after
intracerebroventricular administration of a range of doses of IPTBO have been
studied with particular interest in the temporal changes after injection. A non
typical dose relationship was observed. After the lowest and non-convulsive dose 
used (0.06 ?g/animal) cyclic AMP levels decreased and cyclic GMP levels increased
within 1 min, but after higher doses cyclic AMP and cyclic GMP levels were both
raised. At three different convulsive doses of IPTBO there were increased levels 
of cyclic AMP with time which were more apparent in convulsing animals. Raised
levels of cyclic GMP however, were not so influenced by convulsions. The results 
suggest that (1) the immediate decrease in cyclic AMP and the immediate increase 
in cyclic GMP may play a part in the mechanism of action of IPTBO-possibly by
triggering convulsions and (2) there is an increase in cyclic AMP in response to,
or because of, the convulsions. It is concluded that time after treatment and
time into convulsions are critical when studying cyclic nucleotide changes,
particularly for cyclic AMP and that such factors may explain conflicting
observations with respect to this nucleotide.

PMID: 20488068  [PubMed]


436. J Steroid Biochem. 1984 Jan;20(1):487-90.

Radioimmunoassay of plasma and salivary progesterone during the menstrual cycle.

Cedard L, Janssens Y, Tanguy G, Zorn JR.

We have developed specific and sensitive radioimmunoassays for progesterone in
saliva (SP4) easily applicable in routine practice to assess ovarian function.
One of them uses [3H]progesterone, the other 3-CMO-[125I]histamine as tracer. The
reliability criteria of both techniques have been controlled and the results
obtained with the two methods in 50 saliva samples are correlated well. Our
clinical study has been chiefly done with [3H]progesterone. In the present study 
we reported the values obtained daily during the greatest part of the menstrual
cycle in 14 normal cases and they are in agreement with previous reports. The use
of [125I]tracer, by increasing the sensitivity of the RIA and shortening the
duration of the assay, improves the use of SP4 as a practical non-invasive
sampling alternative for many clinical situations involving evaluation of the
ovarian function.

PMID: 6708530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Neurosci Lett. 1983 Jun 30;37(3):279-83.

Neural actions of several substance P antagonists in the rat spinal cord.

Stoppini L, Baertschi AJ, Mathison R, Barja F.

Four substance P (SP) antagonists were tested on anaesthetized rats, by injecting
8 microgram amounts into the spinal cord (T8-T9), and by observing their effects 
on the hypothalamo-neurohypophysial responses to a presumably painful stimulus,
the superfusion of the hepatic portal vein with 1 microM bradykinin. Only two
antagonists, the new D-Pro4,D-Trp7,9,10,Val8-SP4-11 and D-Pro4,D-Trp7,9,10-SP4-11
were capable of inhibiting the responses by 50-60%, the former compound having 3 
times less agonistic activity. The results suggest that substitution of the
aromatic phenylalanine by the non-polar valine in position 8 may significantly
improve the overall characteristics of neurally active SP antagonists.

PMID: 6193460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Biotechnol Bioeng. 1983 Apr;25(4):1083-93.

The effect of carbon dioxide on the production of an extracellular nuclease of
Staphylococcus aureus.

Quirk AV(1), Plank RW.

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Technology Laboratory, PHLS Centre for Applied Microbiology and
Research, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wilts SP4 OJG, England.

The production of the extracellular nuclease secreted by Staphylococcus aureus
(Foggi strain) was studied in a fermentor in an attempt to improve yield and
allow large-scale production of the enzyme. In shake flask cultures, 600 units/mL
of the enzyme were produced routinely. However, only 450 units/mL of the enzyme
at best were obtained in a small-scale fermentor (3 L). The supplementation of
the air supply to the fermentor with carbon dioxide [20% (v/v)] increased levels 
of enzyme in the culture medium to 770 units/mL. Subsequently, this result was
reproduced in larger fermentors (10 and 150 L). The possible mechanisms of the
effect of carbon dioxide upon the growth of Staphylococcus aureus (Foggi) and the
production of the enzyme are discussed.

PMID: 18548721  [PubMed]


439. Biochem Pharmacol. 1983 Mar 15;32(6):1097-100.

Action of substance P on the working rat heart.

Kulakowski EC, Lampson WG, Schaffer SW, Lovenberg W.

The effect of substance P (SP) on the cardiodynamics of the isolated working rat 
heart perparation was examined. The peptide over the concentration range of
10(-8) to 10(-6) M was found to have no influence on aortic pressure, cardiac
output, or cardiac work. However, a 10-15% reduction in coronary flow was
observed at 1 x 10(-6) M substance P. Octapeptide substance P (SP4-11) exhibited 
a similar vasoconstrictive action. The IC50 of SP4-11 was 2 x 10(-13) M compared 
to an IC50 of 3.5 x 10(-8) M for substance P. Perfusion of the heart in the
presence of bacitracin (1 x 10(-4) M), a protease inhibitor, prevented the
reduction in coronary flow observed in the presence of substance P. By contrast, 
the reduction in coronary flow produced by octapeptide substance P was not
altered by the presence of bacitracin. Thus, it appears that a C-terminal
fragment such as SP4-11 may be responsible for the observed decrease in coronary 
flow.

PMID: 6188469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. J Physiol. 1983 Feb;335:449-65.

Structure-activity relationships for some substance P-related peptides that cause
wheal and flare reactions in human skin.

Foreman JC, Jordan CC, Oehme P, Renner H.

Substance P (6.25-25 p-mole) produced dose-dependent flare and wheal responses
when injected intradermally into the volar surface of the human forearm. The
maximum flare response was obtained within the first 3 min of injection and
declined thereafter. The wheal response reached a maximum after 12 min following 
the injection. Only those peptides having one or more basic residues in the
N-terminal region were effective in producing a flare reaction. Eledoisin-related
peptide and SP1-9 were 17 and 7 times less active than substance P respectively, 
whilst [D-pro2, D-phe7, D-trp9]SP1-11 was twice as active. The N-terminal
tetrapeptide, SP1-4 and eledoisin were inactive in the dose range tested.
Wheal-producing activity was not dependent on the presence of basic residues and 
the rank order of relative potencies was: physalaemin (2.0): [D-pro2, D-phe7,
D-trp9]SP1-11 (1.1): SP1-11 (1.0): SP4-11 (0.4): SP1-9 (0.15): eledoisin-related 
peptide (0.08): eledoisin (0.06). The N-terminal tetrapeptide failed to produce a
wheal response in the dose range tested. Substance P was approximately
equi-active with poly-L-arginine in the production of wheal and flare and both of
these agents were about 10 times more potent than histamine. Adenosine
triphosphate (25-400 n-mole) produced dose-dependent wheal and flare responses
and was 10,000 times less potent than substance P. Pre-treatment of the subjects 
with the H1 histamine antagonist, chlorpheniramine, (20 mg I.V.) reduced the
wheal and flare responses to substance P. Local anaesthetic injection into the
skin reduced the spread of the flare response but did not affect the development 
of the wheal response. Pre-treatment of the skin with capsaicin reduced the flare
but not the wheal response to intradermal injection of histamine. The results are
discussed in relation to the mechanism of the 'axon reflex' vasodilatation in
skin. This is thought to involve mast cells in addition to substance P-containing
primary afferent neurones.

PMCID: PMC1197362
PMID: 6192237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Br J Pharmacol. 1982 Nov;77(3):531-9.

Interaction of neurotensin with the substance P receptor mediating histamine
release from rat mast cells and the flare in human skin.

Foreman JC, Jordan CC, Piotrowski W.

1 Substance P induced histamine release from rat peritoneal mast cells in a
dose-dependent manner over the concentration range 1 to 10 microM. 2 At
concentrations in the range 2.5 to 1 0 microM, neurotensin produced only about 5%
release of histamine, which was substantially less than the maximum effect
obtained with substance P. 3 Neurotensin, 2.5 to 10 microM produced graded
inhibition of histamine release induced by substance P. The inhibitory effect of 
neurotensin was not seen when histamine release was induced by an
antigen-antibody effect of neurotensin was not seen when histamine release was
induced by an antigen-antibody reaction or by the ionophore, A 23187. Some
evidence was obtained to suggest that compound 48/80 may interact with the same
receptor as substance P and neurotensin. 4 [D-Arg8]neurotensin,
[D-Arg9]neurotensin, xenopsin and the C-terminal octapeptide of substance P
(SP4-11) all inhibited histamine release by substance P, but physalaemin did not.
5 Neurotensin inhibited the wheal and flare reactions induced by substance P in
human skin. 6 [D-Trp7,9]substance P released histamine from rat mast cells and
was about 12 times more potent than substance P itself. [D-Trp7,9]SP1-11 also
produced wheal and flare responses in human skin, being 1.8 times more potent
than substance P in the production of flare.

PMCID: PMC2044613
PMID: 6182939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. J Anim Sci. 1982 Sep;55(3):627-37.

Ovarian function during the estrous cycle of the cow: ovarian blood flow and
progesterone release rate.

Wise TH, Caton D, Thatcher WW, Barron DH, Fields MJ.

To study the function of the corpus luteum (CL) through its major secretory
product, progesterone (P4), catheters were inserted into the carotid artery (via 
the facial artery) and the ovarian vein (n = 12), and electromagnetic flow
transducers were placed around the ovarian artery in cycling Angus and Hereford
cows (n = 6). Blood samples were taken four times daily (at 0600, 1200, 1800 and 
2400 h) and ovarian blood flow (OBF) was monitored for 60 min immediately after
each blood sampling. After chromatography, P4 was measured by radioimmunoassay.
The P4 concentrations in the ovarian vein (OP4) were correlated with day of the
estrous cycle (r = .25; P less than .05) and were higher during the morning hours
(P less than .05). Arterial progesterone (SP4) was correlated to OP4 (r = .24; P 
less than .05) and day of the cycle (r = .35; P less than .05). The OBF changed
among days (P less than .05). The highest rates were noted during luteal
maturation (23 ml/min; SE = .09) and the lowest were noted with the demise of the
CL (SP4 less than 1 ng/ml) and approach of estrus (8 ml/min; SE = .07). The OBF
was correlated with SP4 (r = .24; P less than .05), although no within-day trends
were noted. Exogenous estrone (6 mg) administered via jugular vein decreased OBF 
within 30 to 45 min, but similar injections of P4 (up to 100 mg) had no effect.
Progesterone release (P4R) from the ovary [(OP4 - SP4) x OBF] was higher in the
morning hours (P less than .05). The P4 concentration (OP4, SP4) and release
(P4R) exhibited wide variations among and within days. The changes in OP4 and P4R
were both good indicators of CL development, maturation and regression, as
associated with SP4 changes. Oxygen (O2) and carbon dioxide (CO2) concentrations 
monitored in the carotid artery and ovarian vein indicated that the ovary with
the CL was not limited in O2 availability or CO2 removal during periods of low
blood flow or high secretion of P4.

PMID: 6813305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1982 Feb;43(2):412-7.

Isolation of acholeplasmas and a mycoplasma from vegetables.

Somerson NL, Kocka JP, Rose D, Del Giudice RA.

The isolation of Mollicutes from food has not been reported. To isolate
Mollicutes in the presence of high levels of unwanted bacteria, we first
incubated fresh vegetables in liquid culture media containing lysozyme,
ampicillin, and thallous acetate. Culture fluids were than separated from the
vegetable samples, subjected to one freeze-thaw cycle, and passed through a
filter of 0.4-micron porosity. Filtered samples were cultured in SP4 medium and
in a conventional medium containing horse serum. With this procedure 21
acholeplasma isolations representing three species were obtained from endive,
broccoli, and kale. Of 35 food samples tested, 11 were positive for
acholeplasmas; acholeplasmas isolated from 6 of these samples were recovered only
in SP4 medium. In seven single vegetable samples, two or more Acholeplasma spp.
were isolated. A. laidlawii was isolated from all three vegetables and A.
axanthum was found in broccoli and kale. Four isolates were serologically
identified as A. oculi. Mycoplasma verecundum was the only Mycoplasma species
recovered. Several isolates could not be typed serologically, as they reacted
with antisera to both A. morum and A. hippikon. these isolates may include new
Acholeplasma spp.

PMCID: PMC241840
PMID: 7036899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1981 Apr 15;139(8):910-4.

Pregnancy-associated plasma protein A: circulating levels during normal
pregnancy.

Folkersen J, Grudzinskas JG, Hindersson P, Teisner B, Westergaard JG.

The development of specific and sensitive electroimmunoassays for a recently
identified high molecular weight alpha-2 mobile pregnancy-specific protein
(pregnancy-associated plasma protein A, PAPP-A or SP4) is described. These assays
have permitted the detection of circulating levels of PAPP-A (10 microgram/L) as 
early as the fifth week of pregnancy. In all 18 subjects studied, the levels of
PAPP-A rose from first detection in the first trimester until delivery at term.
The development of these assays now permit the evaluation of PAPP-A measurement
as a diagnostic test of early pregnancy and as an index of fetal well-being
throughout gestation.

PMID: 6164292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1981;75(1):79-83.

Effects of acute administration of cyclazocine on the metabolism of biogenic
amines in different regions of rat brain.

Gavend MM, Serre F, Gavend MR, Ragoucy C, Caron P.

The effects of cyclazocine on the metabolism of dopamine (DA), noradrenaline (NA)
and 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) in regions of rat brain were studied by measuring 
changes in the levels of the monoamines and their major metabolites. Doses
ranging from 4-32 mg/kg were tested. Rats were sacrificed 1 or 2 h after
administration of the drug, according to the experiment. Administration of
cyclazocine significantly decreased DA concentration and increased the levels of 
DOPAC and HVA in striatum. Cyclazocine decreased the levels of NA, and markedly
increased the levels of MHPG-SP4 and 5-HIAA in cortex, hypothalamus, midbrain and
pons-medulla, while little change in 5-HT concentration, except a decrease after 
the highest dose, was observed. These changes in the metabolism of the monoamines
differed in their amplitude and temporal nature. The possible roles of
dopaminergic, noradrenergic and serotoninergic neurons in different brain regions
are discussed in relation to modifications of locomotor activity and the
induction of bizarre behavior resulting from cyclazocine administration in rats. 
These investigations may add to the understanding of the mechanism of
psychotomimetic effects produced in man by this drug.

PMID: 6171003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Acta Pathol Microbiol Scand A. 1981 Jan;89(1):65-6.

Placenta-associated plasma protein-A (PAPP-A, SP4) in trophoblastic tumours.

Wahlström T, Teisner B, Lee JN, Grudzinskas JG, Seppälä M, Folkersen J.

The immunoperoxidase technique was used to study the occurrence of
placenta-associated plasma protein A (PAPP-A, SP4) in formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded tissue specimens from 15 hydatidiform moles, 6 invasive moles
and 7 choriocarcinomas. PAPP-A was found in the syncytiotrophoblast of all
hydatidiform moles, in 5 of the 6 invasive moles and in 6 of the 7
choriocarcinomata. No clinical difference was observed between PAPP-A positive
and negative cases of invasive disease.

PMID: 6164245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Int J Cancer. 1980 Sep 15;26(3):325-30.

Monoclonal antibody against a naturally occurring rat mammary carcinoma.

Gunn B, Embleton MJ, Middle JG, Baldwin RW.

Inbred rats were hyper-immunised against a syngeneic transplanted mammary
carcinoma, Sp4, which originally arose spontaneously in a breeding female. Spleen
cells from Sp4-immune rats were fused with P3-NSI-Ag4 mouse myeloma cells, and
supernatants from the hybrid progeny were screened for antibody reacting with Sp4
cells using an isotopic antiglobulin assay. One hybrid culture was reactive with 
Sp4 cells but not against other target cells, and this hybrid was cloned in soft 
agar. Many Sp4-positive clones were isolated and one (Sp4/A4) was chosen for
detailed study. Clone Sp4/A4 was positive only with Sp4 cells and failed to react
with cells of other tumours or normal tissues. It contained much higher titres of
antibody than detected in immune sera, and it is suggested that this approach
offers a practical method for producing highly active tumour-specific antibodies.

PMID: 7287210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Br J Exp Pathol. 1979 Oct;60(5):499-506.

Comparative studies of the metastatic potential of three transplantable rat
mammary carcinomas of spontaneous origin.

Willmott N, Austin EB, Baldwin RW.

The metastatic potential of 3 spontaneously arising mammary carcinomas (Sp4, Sp15
and Sp22) has been examined when transplanted in the form of a viable cell
suspension into the tissue of origin. Primary tumours were excised at different
times after implantation and it was found that the metastatic potential of the
immunogenic tumour Sp4 was directly correlated with the size of the primary
tumour when excised. By contrast, the incidence of metastases from the
non-immunogenic tumours Sp15 and Sp22 was similar irrespective of the size of the
primary tumour on excision. The pattern of metastasis also differed between the
tumours, although here there was no relation to immunogenicity. Thus, resection
en bloc of large primary Sp4 or Sp15 tumours plus regional lymph nodes could be
completely curative, signifying initial spread of tumours via the lymphatics and 
only subsequently via the blood stream. On the other hand, resection en bloc of
primary Sp22 tumours plus regional lymph nodes at a similar stage of primary
tumour development was never curative, signifying early spread via the blood
stream. Other studies showed that the metastatic potential of mammary carcinoma
Sp4 was an innate characteristic of the tumour and not related to the tissue of
implantation since in addition to metastasizing from the mammary pad it
metastasized when implanted either s.c. or intradermally in a region devoid of
mammary tissue. Furthermore, a rat sarcoma Mc7 showed a negligible tendency to
metastasize when implanted either in the mammary pad or in the s.c. tissue, where
it had been induced with methylcholanthrene.

PMCID: PMC2041488
PMID: 518819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Int J Cancer. 1979 Sep 15;24(3):323-8.

C. parvum treatment of transplanted rat tumours of spontaneous origin.

Willmott N, Pimm MV, Baldwin RW.

C. parvum (Wellcome CN6134) has been examined for suppression of a range of
transplanted rat tumours of spontaneous origin. With five tumours (three mammary 
carcinomas and two fibrosarcomas) growth of comparatively high cell inocula (with
respect to the minimum for growth in control rats) was suppressed by admixture
with the vaccine. Equivalent dry weights of Glaxo, Pasteur or Connaught BCGs were
relatively ineffective. Intralesional injection of C. parvum into three three
established tumours (two mammary carcinomas and one fibrosarcoma) retarded
development of only one, the mmamary carcinoma Sp4. With three mammary carcinomas
and one fibrosarcoma, active specific immune stimulation with vaccines of viable 
or irradiated cells admixed with C. parvum was again consistently effective only 
with carcinoma Sp4, and this tumour was also susceptible to intradermal but not
intravenous treatment with C. parvum alone.

PMID: 385514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Int J Cancer. 1978 Oct 15;22(4):426-32.

BCG treatment of transplanted rat tumours of spontaneous origin.

Pimm MV, Cook AJ, Hopper DG, Dickinson AM, Baldwin RW.

Six transplanted rat tumours (three mammary carcinomas and three fibrosarcomas), 
all of spontaneous origin and of limited immunogenicity, have been examined for
susceptibility to immunotherapy with BCG (Glaxo). Growth of limited numbers of
cells from five tumours was suppressed when cells were injected subcutaneously in
admixture with BCG organisms. There was no clear correlation between the
immunogenicity of tumour lines and their susceptibility to regionally applied
BCG. Active specific immunotherapy, using vaccines of viable or
radiation-attenuated tumour cells in admixture with BCG, was reproducibly
successful with only one tumour, the mammary carcinoma Sp4, this being the most
immunogenic of the tumours examined. These studies indicate that naturally
arising tumours are less susceptible to BCG-mediated suppression than
carcinogen-induced tumours widely used for experimental immunotherapy, but
indicate that local application of BCG may give the best therapeutic response.

PMID: 700898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. J Biol Chem. 1978 Oct 10;253(19):7047-50.

The ribosomal protein L24 of Escherichia coli is an assembly protein.

Spillmann S, Nierhaus KH.

Incubation of 50 S subunits with 4.2 M LiCl leads to 4.2c cores and the
complementary split protein fraction SP4.2, the latter containing quantitatively 
L24. L24 was removed from the split fraction by means of CM-cellulose
chromatography. Partial and total reconstitution experiments performed with this 
protein preparation in the absence and presence of L24 demonstrate the crucial
role of L24 in the early stage of assembly. However, this protein is dispensable 
for the subsequent steps of the in vitro assembly. 50 S subunits lacking L24 are 
fully active in the translation of artificial (poly(U)) and natural (R17 RNA)
mRNA, indicating that L24 is not involved in any function of protein synthesis of
the mature ribosome. It is therefore a mere assembly protein.

PMID: 357435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Br J Cancer. 1976 Jun;33(6):577-83.

Tumour rejection in rats sensitized to embryonic tissue. I. Rejection of tumour
cells implanted s.c. and detection of cytotoxic lymphoid cells.

Shah LP, Rees RC, Baldwin RW.

Wistar rats were sensitized to rat embryonic tissue by immunization with
irradiated (5000 rad) rat embryo cells (2 X 10(6) s.c. + 1 X 10(6) i.p.) derived 
from embryos aged 14-15 days, or by implantation of irradiated (5000 rad) tissue 
grafts from these embryos. Three to five immunizations were given at weekly
intervals, and the rats were then challenged subcutaneously 7-10 days after the
final inoculum with minimal tumour-producing tumour cell doses. Immunization with
irradiated rat embryo cells failed to influence the growth and development of
tumour cells prepared from hepatoma D23 and D30, sarcoma Mc57, mammary carcinoma 
AAF57 or cells prepared from spontaneously arising mammary carcinomata Sp4 and
Sp15. Using adoptive transfer techniques, lymphoid cells from embryo-sensitized
rats, when used in a 3000 : 1 ratio (lymphoid cells : tumour cells), were shown
effectively to retard the growth of hepatoma D23 in 3 out of 7 experiments
performed. Similar adoptive transfer procedures proved ineffective in preventing 
the growth of mammary carcinoma AAF57. Using in vitro cytotoxicity tests, lymph
node cells and spleen cells from embryo-immunized rats were shown to be cytotoxic
for several rat tumour cell targets : hepatoma D23 (7/10 tests), sarcoma Mc7
(8/12 tests), mammary carcinoma AAF57 (2/2 tests) and Sp4 (3/4 tests), and for
14-15-day-old rat embryo cells (5/10 tests). In comparative tests lymphoid cells 
were relatively non-cytotoxic for 20-day-old rat embryo cells (1/6 tests) or
cells prepared from adult rat lung or kidney (1/10 tests). The role of embryonic 
antigen(s) in tumour rejection is discussed.

PMCID: PMC2025108
PMID: 181040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Arch Virol. 1976;52(1-2):47-58.

Studies on a measles virus variant inducing persistent infections in cultured
cells.I. Isolation and characterization of plaque purified virus clones.

Chiarini A, Sinatra A, Ammatuna P, Di Stefano R.

Attempts were made to characterized by a plaque assay two variants of the
Edmonston strain of measles virus and to obtain plaque purified virus
populations. The UP non-cytocidal variant, in all the examined cell systems,
mainly produced small but also large plaques; the DP cytocidal variant always
large plaques. Three clones, UP-SP4, UP-LP4 and DP-LP4, were derived by plaque
purfication respectively of the UP small plaque, UP large plaque and DP large
plaque forming particles. The virus populations of the clones could be
distinguished by some other biological and physical characters: cytopathic effect
in roller tube cultures, growth potential in HeLa cells, thermal stability at 45 
degrees C, stability of the properties during serial passages at different input 
multiplicity. The hypothesis was supported that the typical properties of the UP 
and DP variants are host-independent and genetically controlled viral markers.

PMID: 826238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


