
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Mar 29;113(13):3545-50. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1519994113. Epub 2016 Mar 11.

Sp5 and Sp8 recruit ß-catenin and Tcf1-Lef1 to select enhancers to activate Wnt
target gene transcription.

Kennedy MW(1), Chalamalasetty RB(1), Thomas S(1), Garriock RJ(1), Jailwala P(2), 
Yamaguchi TP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Developmental Biology Laboratory, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute-Frederick, National Institutes of Health, Frederick,
MD; (2)Center for Cancer Research Collaborative Bioinformatics Resource, Leidos
Biomedical Research, Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research,
Frederick, MD 21702. (3)Cancer and Developmental Biology Laboratory, Center for
Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute-Frederick, National Institutes of
Health, Frederick, MD; yamagute@mail.nih.gov.

The ancient, highly conserved, Wnt signaling pathway regulates cell fate in all
metazoans. We have previously shown that combined null mutations of the
specificity protein (Sp) 1/Klf-like zinc-finger transcription
factorsSp5andSp8(i.e.,Sp5/8) result in an embryonic phenotype identical to that
observed when core components of the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway are mutated; however, 
their role in Wnt signal transduction is unknown. Here, we show in mouse embryos 
and differentiating embryonic stem cells that Sp5/8 are gene-specific
transcriptional coactivators in the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway. Sp5/8 bind directly to
GC boxes in Wnt target gene enhancers and to adjacent, or distally positioned,
chromatin-bound T-cell factor (Tcf) 1/lymphoid enhancer factor (Lef) 1 to
facilitate recruitment of ß-catenin to target gene enhancers. BecauseSp5is itself
directly activated by Wnt signals, we propose that Sp5 is a Wnt/ß-catenin
pathway-specific transcripton factor that functions in a feed-forward loop to
robustly activate select Wnt target genes.

PMID: 26969725  [PubMed - in process]


2. Genet Sel Evol. 2016 Feb 16;48(1):14. doi: 10.1186/s12711-016-0190-4.

A multi-trait meta-analysis with imputed sequence variants reveals twelve QTL for
mammary gland morphology in Fleckvieh cattle.

Pausch H(1), Emmerling R(2), Schwarzenbacher H(3), Fries R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl fuer Tierzucht, Technische Universitaet Muenchen, 85354, Freising,
Germany. hubert.pausch@tierzucht.tum.de. (2)Institut fuer Tierzucht, Bayerische
Landesanstalt fuer Landwirtschaft, 85586, Poing, Germany.
reiner.emmerling@lfl.bayern.de. (3)ZuchtData EDV Dienstleistungen GmbH, 1200,
Vienna, Austria. schwarzenbacher@zuchtdata.at. (4)Lehrstuhl fuer Tierzucht,
Technische Universitaet Muenchen, 85354, Freising, Germany. ruedi.fries@tum.de.

BACKGROUND: The availability of whole-genome sequence data from key ancestors in 
bovine populations provides an exhaustive catalogue of polymorphic sites that
segregate within and across cattle breeds. Sequence variants identified from the 
sequenced genome of key ancestors can be imputed into animals that have been
genotyped using medium- and high-density genotyping arrays. Association analysis 
with imputed sequences, particularly when applied to multiple traits
simultaneously, is a very powerful approach to detect candidate causal variants
that underlie complex phenotypes.
RESULTS: We used whole-genome sequence data from 157 key ancestors of the German 
Fleckvieh cattle population to impute 20,561,798 sequence variants into 10,363
animals that had (partly imputed) genotypes based on 634,109 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs). Rare variants were more frequent among the sequence-derived
than the array-derived genotypes. Association studies with imputed sequence
variants were performed using seven correlated udder conformation traits as
response variables. The calculation of an approximate multi-trait test statistic 
enabled us to detect 12 quantitative trait loci (QTL) (P < 2.97 × 10(-9)) that
affect different morphological features of the mammary gland. Among the tested
variants, the most significant associations were found for imputed sequence
variants at 11 QTL, whereas the top association signal was observed for an
array-derived variant at a QTL on bovine chromosome 14. Seven QTL were associated
with multiple phenotypes. Most QTL were located in non-coding regions of the
genome but in close proximity of candidate genes that could be involved in
mammary gland morphology (SP5, GC, NPFFR2, CRIM1, RXFP2, TBX5, RBM19 and ADAM12).
CONCLUSIONS: Using imputed sequence variants in association analyses allows the
detection of QTL at maximum resolution. Multi-trait approaches can reveal QTL
that are not detected in single-trait association studies. Most QTL for udder
conformation traits were located in non-coding regions of the genome, which
suggests that mutations in regulatory sequences are the major determinants of
variation in mammary gland morphology in cattle.

PMCID: PMC4756527
PMID: 26883850  [PubMed - in process]


3. J Cell Sci. 2016 Jan 15;129(2):269-76. doi: 10.1242/jcs.177675. Epub 2015 Nov 23.

Wnt/ß-catenin and LIF-Stat3 signaling pathways converge on Sp5 to promote mouse
embryonic stem cell self-renewal.

Ye S(1), Zhang D(2), Cheng F(2), Wilson D(3), Mackay J(3), He K(2), Ban Q(2), Lv 
F(2), Huang S(2), Liu D(4), Ying QL(5).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Stem Cell and Translational Medicine, School of Life Sciences,
Anhui University, Hefei 230601, People's Republic of China Eli and Edythe Broad
Center for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research at USC, Department of
Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University 
of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. (2)Center for Stem Cell and
Translational Medicine, School of Life Sciences, Anhui University, Hefei 230601, 
People's Republic of China. (3)Eli and Edythe Broad Center for Regenerative
Medicine and Stem Cell Research at USC, Department of Stem Cell Biology and
Regenerative Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. (4)Center for Stem Cell and Translational
Medicine, School of Life Sciences, Anhui University, Hefei 230601, People's
Republic of China seansean2015@ahu.edu.cn qying@med.usc.edu. (5)Eli and Edythe
Broad Center for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research at USC, Department 
of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Keck School of Medicine,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA
seansean2015@ahu.edu.cn qying@med.usc.edu.

Activation of leukemia inhibitor factor (LIF)-Stat3 or Wnt/ß-catenin signaling
promotes mouse embryonic stem cell (mESC) self-renewal. A myriad of downstream
targets have been identified in the individual signal pathways, but their common 
targets remain largely elusive. In this study, we found that the LIF-Stat3 and
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathways converge on Sp5 to promote mESC self-renewal.
Forced Sp5 expression can reproduce partial effects of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling
but mimics most features of LIF-Stat3 signaling to maintain undifferentiated
mESCs. Moreover, Sp5 is able to convert mouse epiblast stem cells into a naïve
pluripotent state. Thus, Sp5 is an important component of the regulatory network 
governing mESC naïve pluripotency.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4732286
PMID: 26598557  [PubMed - in process]


4. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2015 Oct 26;7(1):67. doi: 10.1186/s13195-015-0153-y.

The need for thorough phase II studies in medicines development for Alzheimer's
disease.

Gray JA(1), Fleet D(2), Winblad B(3).

Author information: 
(1), Neuroglobe Ltd, Baarerstrasse 135, 6301, Zug, Switzerland.
j.gray@graybook.net. (2), Datamagik Ltd, Laburnum House, East Grimstead,
Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP5 3RT, UK. (3)Karolinska Institutet, Department NVS,
Center for Alzheimer Research, Division for Neurogeriatrics, Novum plan 5, 14157,
Huddinge, Sweden.

An important factor in the universal failure in phase III trials in mild to
moderate Alzheimer's disease in the past decade is the lack of phase II clinical 
data prior to entering phase III, with common reliance on biomarker results
alone. Conduction of two learn-confirm cycles according to the Sheiner model
would allow go/no-go decision making to include reliable clinical efficacy data
prior to conducting phase III and would likely bring the rate of late stage
failure more into line with that of other neurological indications. In studies in
earlier disease stages, combined phase IIB/III adaptive approaches merit
consideration in view of the long timelines of each study, though advantages and 
disadvantages of this approach versus the classical development pathway still
need careful assessment.

PMCID: PMC4620743
PMID: 26503107  [PubMed - in process]


5. J Neurophysiol. 2015 Dec;114(6):3064-75. doi: 10.1152/jn.00319.2015. Epub 2015
Aug 19.

Bimodal stimulus timing-dependent plasticity in primary auditory cortex is
altered after noise exposure with and without tinnitus.

Basura GJ(1), Koehler SD(2), Shore SE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery, Kresge Hearing Research
Institute, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan; gbasura@umich.edu.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Michigan; and. (3)Department of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery, Kresge
Hearing Research Institute, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan;
Department of Biomedical Engineering, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Michigan; and Molecular and Integrative Physiology, The University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Michigan.

Central auditory circuits are influenced by the somatosensory system, a
relationship that may underlie tinnitus generation. In the guinea pig dorsal
cochlear nucleus (DCN), pairing spinal trigeminal nucleus (Sp5) stimulation with 
tones at specific intervals and orders facilitated or suppressed subsequent
tone-evoked neural responses, reflecting spike timing-dependent plasticity
(STDP). Furthermore, after noise-induced tinnitus, bimodal responses in DCN were 
shifted from Hebbian to anti-Hebbian timing rules with less discrete temporal
windows, suggesting a role for bimodal plasticity in tinnitus. Here, we aimed to 
determine if multisensory STDP principles like those in DCN also exist in primary
auditory cortex (A1), and whether they change following noise-induced tinnitus.
Tone-evoked and spontaneous neural responses were recorded before and 15 min
after bimodal stimulation in which the intervals and orders of
auditory-somatosensory stimuli were randomized. Tone-evoked and spontaneous
firing rates were influenced by the interval and order of the bimodal stimuli,
and in sham-controls Hebbian-like timing rules predominated as was seen in DCN.
In noise-exposed animals with and without tinnitus, timing rules shifted away
from those found in sham-controls to more anti-Hebbian rules. Only those animals 
with evidence of tinnitus showed increased spontaneous firing rates, a purported 
neurophysiological correlate of tinnitus in A1. Together, these findings suggest 
that bimodal plasticity is also evident in A1 following noise damage and may have
implications for tinnitus generation and therapeutic intervention across the
central auditory circuit.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4686295 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26289461  [PubMed - in process]


6. Ann Oncol. 2015 Oct;26(10):2097-101. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdv316. Epub 2015 Jul
27.

Comparison of two different S-1 plus cisplatin dosing schedules as first-line
chemotherapy for metastatic and/or recurrent gastric cancer: a multicenter,
randomized phase III trial (SOS).

Ryu MH(1), Baba E(2), Lee KH(3), Park YI(4), Boku N(5), Hyodo I(6), Nam BH(7),
Esaki T(8), Yoo C(1), Ryoo BY(1), Song EK(9), Cho SH(10), Kang WK(11), Yang
SH(12), Zang DY(13), Shin DB(14), Park SR(1), Shinozaki K(15), Takano T(16), Kang
YK(17); SOS study investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Comprehensive Clinical Oncology, Faculty
of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. (3)Department of
Hemato-oncology, Yeungnam University Hospital, Daegu. (4)Center for Gastric
Cancer, Research Institute and Hospital, National Cancer Center, Goyang,
Gyeonggi, Korea. (5)Department of Clinical Oncology, St Marianna University
School of Medicine, Kawasaki. (6)Division of Gastroenterology, University of
Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan. (7)Biometric Research Branch, National Cancer Center,
Goyang, Gyeonggi, Korea. (8)Department of Gastrointestinal and Medical Oncology, 
National Kyushu Cancer Center, Fukuoka, Japan. (9)Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Chonbuk National University
Medical School, Jeonju. (10)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Chonnam National
University Hwasun Hospital, Gwangju. (11)Division of Hematology-Oncology,
Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School
Medicine, Seoul. (12)Department of Internal Medicine, Korea Cancer Center
Hospital, Seoul. (13)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Hallym University Medical Center, Hallym University College of
Medicine, Anyang. (14)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Gachon University Gil Hospital, Incheon, Korea. (15)Division of
Clinical Oncology, Hiroshima Prefectural Hospital, Hiroshima. (16)Department of
Medical Oncology, Toranomon Hospital, Minato-ku, Japan. (17)Department of
Oncology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea ykkang@amc.seoul.kr.

BACKGROUND: Five-weekly S-1 plus cisplatin (SP5) is one of the standard
first-line regimens for advanced gastric cancer (GC), proven in a Japanese phase 
III study. To enhance the dose intensity of cisplatin, 3-weekly S-1 plus
cisplatin (SP3) was developed.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This multicenter, randomized, open-label, phase III study
evaluated whether SP3 (S-1 80 mg/m(2)/day on days 1-14 and cisplatin 60 mg/m(2)
on day 1) was noninferior/superior to SP5 (S-1 80-120 mg/day on days 1-21 and
cisplatin 60 mg/m(2) on day 1 or 8) in terms of progression-free survival (PFS). 
Chemotherapy-naive patients with metastatic, recurrent gastric or
gastroesophageal junction adenocarcinoma were randomized 1 : 1 to receive either 
SP3 or SP5. The trial is registered at ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT00915382).
RESULTS: Between February 2009 and January 2012, 625 patients were randomized at 
42 sites in Korea and Japan. With a median follow-up duration of 32.4 months
(range, 13.3-48.6 months) in surviving patients, SP3 was not only noninferior but
also superior to SP5 in terms of PFS [median 5.5 versus 4.9 months; hazard ratio 
(HR) = 0.82; 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.68-0.99; P = 0.0418 for superiority).
There was no difference in overall survival (OS) between the groups (median 14.1 
versus 13.9 months; HR = 0.99; 95% CI 0.81-1.21; P = 0.9068). In patients with
measurable disease, the response rates were 60% in the SP3 arm and 50% in the SP5
arm (P = 0.065). Both regimens were generally well tolerated, but grade 3 or
higher anemia (19% versus 9%) and neutropenia (39% versus 9%) were more frequent 
in SP3.
CONCLUSIONS: SP3 is superior to SP5 in terms of PFS. However, since the
improvement in PFS was only slight and there was no difference in OS, both SP3
and SP5 can be recommended as first-line treatments for patients with advanced
GC.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26216386  [PubMed - in process]


7. Wei Sheng Wu Xue Bao. 2015 Apr 4;55(4):476-83.

[Detection of CRISPR and its relationship to drug resistance in Shigella].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang L, Wang Y, Duan G, Xue Z, Guo X, Wang P, Xi Y, Yang H.

OBJECTIVE: To detect clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats
(CRISPR) in Shigella, and to analyze its relationship to drug resistance.
METHODS: Four pairs of primers were used for the detection of convincing CRISPR
structures CRISPR-S2 and CRISPR-S4, questionable CRISPR structures CRISPR-S1 and 
CRISPR-S3 in 60 Shigella strains. All primers were designed using sequences in
CRISPR database. CRISPR Finder was used to analyze CRISPR and susceptibilities of
Shigella strains were tested by agar diffusion method. Furthermore, we analyzed
the relationship between drug resistance and CRISPR-S4.
RESULTS: The positive rate of convincing CRISPR structures was 95%. The four
CRISPR loci formed 12 spectral patterns (A-L), all of which contained convincing 
CRISPR structures except type K. We found one new repeat and 12 new spacers. The 
multi-drug resistance rate was 53. 33% . We found no significant difference
between CRISPR-S4 and drug resistant. However, the repeat sequence of CRISPR-S4
in multi- or TE-resistance strains was mainly R4.1 with AC deletions in the 3'
end, and the spacer sequences of CRISPR-S4 in multi-drug resistance strains were 
mainly Sp5.1, Sp6.1 and Sp7.
CONCLUSION: CRISPR was common in Shigella. Variations df repeat sequences and
diversities of spacer sequences might be related to drug resistance in Shigella.

PMID: 26211322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Gene. 2015 Nov 15;573(1):91-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.07.031. Epub 2015 Jul 14.

C2H2 zinc finger proteins of the SP/KLF, Wilms tumor, EGR, Huckebein, and
Klumpfuss families in metazoans and beyond.

Pei J(1), Grishin NV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX, USA. Electronic address: jpei@chop.swmed.edu. (2)Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX, USA; Department of Biophysics and Department of Biochemistry,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.

Specificity proteins (SPs) and Krüppel-Like Factors (KLFs) are C2H2-type zinc
finger transcription factors that play essential roles in differentiation,
development, proliferation and cell death. SP/KLF proteins, similarly to Wilms
tumor protein 1 (WT1), Early Growth Response (EGR), Huckebein, and Klumpfuss,
prefer to bind GC-rich sequences such as GC-box and CACCC-box (GT-box). We
searched various genomes and transcriptomes of metazoans and single-cell
holozoans for members of these families. Seven groups of KLFs (KLFA-G) and three 
groups of SPs (SPA-C) were identified in the three lineages of Bilateria
(Deuterostomia, Ecdysozoa, and Lophotrochozoa). The last ancestor of jawed
vertebrates was inferred to have at least 18 KLFs (group A: KLF1/2/4/17, group B:
KLF3/8/12; group C: KLF5/5l; group D: KLF6/7; group E: KLF9/13/16; group F:
KLF10/KLF11; group G: KLF15/15l) and 10 SPs (group A: SP1/2/3/4; group B: SP5/5l;
group C: SP6/7/8/9), since they were found in both cartilaginous and boned
fishes. Placental mammals have added KLF14 (group E) and KLF18 (group A), and
lost KLF5l (KLF5-like) and KLF15l (KLF15-like). Multiple KLF members were found
in basal metazoans (Ctenophora, Porifera, Placozoa, and Cnidaria). Ctenophora has
the least number of KLFs and no SPs, which could be attributed to its proposed
sister group relationship to other metazoans or gene loss. While SP, EGR and
Klumpfuss were only detected in metazoans, KLF, WT1, and Huckebein are present in
nonmetazoan holozoans. Of the seven metazoan KLF groups, only KLFG, represented
by KLF15 in human, was found in nonmetazoans. In addition, two nonmetazoan groups
of KLFs are present in Choanoflagellatea and Filasterea. WT1 could be
evolutionarily the earliest among these GC/GT-box-binding families due to its
sole presence in Ichthyosporea.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26187067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Malar J. 2015 Jul 15;14:272. doi: 10.1186/s12936-015-0794-0.

Treatment policy change to dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine contributes to the
reduction of adverse maternal and pregnancy outcomes.

Poespoprodjo JR(1,)(2,)(3), Fobia W(4), Kenangalem E(5,)(6), Lampah DA(7),
Sugiarto P(8), Tjitra E(9), Anstey NM(10,)(11), Price RN(12,)(13).

Author information: 
(1)Mimika District Health Authority, District Government Building, Jl.
Cendrawasih, Timika, 99910, Papua, Indonesia. didot2266@yahoo.com. (2)Timika
Malaria Research Programme, Papuan Health and Community Development Foundation,
Jl. SP2-SP5, RSMM Area, Timika, 99910, Papua, Indonesia. didot2266@yahoo.com.
(3)Department of Child Health, Faculty of Medicine, University Gadjah Mada, Jl.
Kesehatan no 1, Sekip, Yogyakarta, 55284, Indonesia. didot2266@yahoo.com.
(4)Timika Malaria Research Programme, Papuan Health and Community Development
Foundation, Jl. SP2-SP5, RSMM Area, Timika, 99910, Papua, Indonesia.
timikaresearchfacility@gmail.com. (5)Mimika District Health Authority, District
Government Building, Jl. Cendrawasih, Timika, 99910, Papua, Indonesia.
ennykenangalem@yahoo.com. (6)Timika Malaria Research Programme, Papuan Health and
Community Development Foundation, Jl. SP2-SP5, RSMM Area, Timika, 99910, Papua,
Indonesia. ennykenangalem@yahoo.com. (7)Timika Malaria Research Programme, Papuan
Health and Community Development Foundation, Jl. SP2-SP5, RSMM Area, Timika,
99910, Papua, Indonesia. aditimika@yahoo.com. (8)Mitra Masyarakat Hospital, Jl.
SP2-SP5-Charitas, Timika, 99910, Indonesia. sugiartopaulus@gmail.com. (9)National
Institute of Health Research and Development, Ministry of Health, Jl. Percetakan 
Negara, Jakarta, 10560, Indonesia. emil@litbang.depkes.go.id. (10)Global and
Tropical Health Division, Menzies School of Health Research, Charles Darwin
University, Darwin, PO Box 41096, Casuarina, NT, 0811, Australia.
nicholas.anstey@menzies.edu.au. (11)Division of Medicine, Royal Darwin Hospital, 
Darwin, NT, 0810, Australia. nicholas.anstey@menzies.edu.au. (12)Global and
Tropical Health Division, Menzies School of Health Research, Charles Darwin
University, Darwin, PO Box 41096, Casuarina, NT, 0811, Australia.
rprice@menzies.edu.au. (13)Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, Centre for
Tropical Medicine and Global Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX37LJ, UK.
rprice@menzies.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: In Papua, Indonesia, maternal malaria is prevalent, multidrug
resistant and associated with adverse outcomes for mother and baby. In March
2006, anti-malarial policy was revised for the second and third trimester of
pregnancy to dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine (DHP) for all species of malaria.
This study presents the temporal analysis of adverse outcomes in pregnancy and
early life following this policy change.
METHODS: From April 2004 to May 2010, a standardized questionnaire was used to
collect information from all pregnant women admitted to the maternity ward. A
physical examination was performed on all live birth newborns. The relative risks
(RR) and the associated population attributable risks (PAR) of adverse outcomes
in women with a history of malaria treatment to the risk in those without a
history of malaria during the current pregnancy were examined to evaluate the
temporal trends before and after DHP deployment.
RESULTS: Of 6,556 women enrolled with known pregnancy outcome, 1,018 (16%)
reported prior anti-malarial treatment during their pregnancy. The proportion of 
women with malaria reporting treatment with DHP rose from 0% in 2004 to 64%
(121/189) in 2010. In those with history of malaria during pregnancy, the
increasing use of DHP was associated with a 54% fall in the proportion of
maternal malaria at delivery and a 98% decrease in congenital malaria (from 7.1% 
prior to 0.1% after policy change). Overall policy change to more effective
treatment was associated with an absolute 2% reduction of maternal severe anaemia
and absolute 4.5% decrease in low birth weight babies.
CONCLUSIONS: Introduction of highly effective treatment in pregnancy was
associated with a reduction of maternal malaria at delivery and improved neonatal
outcomes. Ensuring universal access to arteminisin combination therapy (ACT) in
pregnancy in an area of multidrug resistance has potential to impact
significantly on maternal and infant health.

PMCID: PMC4501192
PMID: 26169783  [PubMed - in process]


10. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 18;10(6):e0130822. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130822.
eCollection 2015.

Distribution of Fos-Like Immunoreactivity, Catecholaminergic and Serotoninergic
Neurons Activated by the Laryngeal Chemoreflex in the Medulla Oblongata of Rats.

Wang X(1), Guo R(2), Zhao W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University,
Jinan, China; Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Remodeling and Function Research, 
Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan, China. (2)Institute of Clinical
Pharmacology, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan, China.

The laryngeal chemoreflex (LCR) induces apnea, glottis closure, bradycardia and
hypertension in young and maturing mammals. We examined the distribution of
medullary nuclei that are activated by the LCR and used immunofluorescent
detection of Fos protein as a cellular marker for neuronal activation to
establish that the medullary catecholaminergic and serotoninergic neurons
participate in the modulation of the LCR. The LCR was elicited by the infusion of
KCl-HCl solution into the laryngeal lumen of adult rats in the experimental
group, whereas the control group received the same surgery but no infusion. In
comparison, the number of regions of Fos-like immunoreactivity (FLI) that were
activated by the LCR significantly increased in the nucleus of the solitary tract
(NTS), the vestibular nuclear complex (VNC), the loose formation of the nucleus
ambiguus (AmbL), the rostral ventral respiratory group (RVRG), the ventrolateral 
reticular complex (VLR), the pre-Bötzinger complex (PrBöt), the Bötzinger complex
(Böt), the spinal trigeminal nucleus (SP5), and the raphe obscurus nucleus (ROb) 
bilaterally from the medulla oblongata. Furthermore, 12.71% of neurons with FLI
in the dorsolateral part of the nucleus of the solitary tract (SolDL) showed
tyrosine hydroxylase-immunoreactivity (TH-ir, catecholaminergic), and 70.87% of
neurons with FLI in the ROb were serotoninergic. Our data demonstrated the
distribution of medullary nuclei that were activated by the LCR, and further
demonstrated that catecholaminergic neurons of the SolDL and serotoninergic
neurons of the ROb were activated by the LCR, indicating the potential central
pathway of the LCR.

PMCID: PMC4473071
PMID: 26087133  [PubMed - in process]


11. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2016 Jan;41(2):477-86. doi: 10.1038/npp.2015.169. Epub
2015 Jun 12.

Schizophrenia-Like Phenotype Inherited by the F2 Generation of a Gestational
Disruption Model of Schizophrenia.

Perez SM(1), Aguilar DD(1), Neary JL(2), Carless MA(2), Giuffrida A(1), Lodge
DJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Center for Biomedical Neuroscience, University of 
Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, USA. (2)Department
of Genetics, Texas Biomedical Research Institute, San Antonio, TX, USA.

Both environmental and genetic factors contribute to schizophrenia; however, the 
exact etiology of this disorder is not known. Animal models are utilized to
better understand the mechanisms associated with neuropsychiatric diseases,
including schizophrenia. One of these involves gestational administration of
methylazoxymethanol acetate (MAM) to induce a developmental disruption, which in 
turn produces a schizophrenia-like phenotype in post-pubertal rats. The
mechanisms by which MAM produces this phenotype are not clear; however, we now
demonstrate that MAM induces differential DNA methylation, which may be
heritable. Here we demonstrate that a subset of both second (F2) and third (F3)
filial generations of MAM-treated rats displays a schizophrenia-like phenotype
and hypermethylation of the transcription factor, Sp5. Specifically, ventral
tegmental area of dopamine neuron activity was examined using electrophysiology
as a correlate for the dopamine hyperfunction thought to underlie psychosis in
patients. Interestingly, only a subset of F2 and F3 MAM rats exhibited increases 
in dopamine neuron population activity, indicating that this may be a unique
model with a susceptibility to develop a schizophrenia-like phenotype. An
increase in dopamine system function in rodent models has been previously
associated with decreases in hippocampal GABAergic transmission. In line with
these observations, we found a significant correlation between hippocampal
parvalbumin expression and dopamine neuron activity in F2 rats. These data
therefore provide evidence that offspring born from MAM-treated rats possess a
susceptibility to develop aspects of a schizophrenia-like phenotype and may
provide a useful tool to investigate gene-environment interactions.

PMID: 26068729  [PubMed - in process]


12. Bioconjug Chem. 2015 Aug 19;26(8):1494-503. doi: 10.1021/acs.bioconjchem.5b00137.
Epub 2015 Jun 23.

D-SP5 Peptide-Modified Highly Branched Polyethylenimine for Gene Therapy of
Gastric Adenocarcinoma.

Li X(1), Xie Z(1), Xie C(1), Lu W(1), Gao C(2), Ren H(2), Ying M(1), Wei X(1),
Gao J(1), Su B(1), Ren Y(1), Liu M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Smart Drug Delivery (Fudan University), Ministry of
Education, Department of Pharmaceutics, School of Pharmacy, Fudan University, 826
Zhangheng Road, Shanghai 201203, PR China. (2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head 
and Neck Surgery, Eye and ENT Hospital, Fudan University, 83 Fenyang Road,
Shanghai 200030, PR China.

Peptide-mediated targeting of tumors has become an effective strategy for cancer 
therapy. Retro-inverso peptides resist protease degradation and maintain their
bioactivity. We used the retro-inverso peptide D(PRPSPKMGVSVS) (D-SP5) as a
targeting ligand to develop gene therapy for gastric adenocarcinoma. D-SP5 has a 
higher affinity for human gastric adenocarcinoma (SGC7901) cells compared with
that of its parental peptide, L(SVSVGMKPSPRP) (L-SP5). Polyethylenimine
(PEI)/pDNA, polyethylene glycol (mPEG)-PEI/pDNA and D-SP5-PEG-PEI/pDNA were
prepared for further study. Quantitative luciferase assays showed the
transfection efficiency of D-SP5-PEG-PEI/pGL(4.2) was larger compared with that
of mPEG-PEI/pGL(4.2). Flow cytometry assays revealed that the apoptosis rates of 
SGC7901 cells treated with D-SP5-PEG-PEI/pTRAIL were larger than mPEG-PEI/pTRAIL.
Western blot assays indicated that the expression of tumor necrosis
factor-related apoptosis inducing ligand (TRAIL) protein in SGC7901 cells treated
with D-SP5-PEG-PEI/pTRAIL was higher compared with that in cells treated with
mPEG-PEI/pTRAIL. In vivo pharmacodynamics study revealed that
D-SP5-PEG-PEI/pTRAIL could inhibit the growth of gastric adenocarcinoma SGC7901
xenografts in nude mice. Our results demonstrate that D-SP5-PEG-PEI is a safe and
efficient gene delivery vector with potential applications in antitumor gene
therapy.

PMID: 26052814  [PubMed - in process]


13. Neoplasma. 2015;62(4):531-40. doi: 10.4149/neo_2015_064.

A recombined fusion protein SP5.2/tTF induce thrombosis in tumor blood vessel.

Lv S, Ye M, Wang X, Li Z, Chen X, Dou X, Dai Y, Zeng F, Luo L, Wang C, Li K, Luo 
X, Yan J, Li X.

Tumor vascular targeting is one of the most promising strategies in tumor
therapy. Here we used E.coli to express a recombinant SP5.2/tTF fusion protein,
which, as a tumor vascular targeting agent, consists of SP5.2 (a peptide
selectively binding and targeting VEGFR-1 on tumor endothelial cells) and
truncated tissue factor (tTF)and aimed to explore its anti-tumor activities.The
SP5.2/tTF expression construct was synthesized by polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
and recombined into plasmid pET22b(+). The fusion gene was verified by
restriction mapping and sequencing. SP5.2/tTF was expressed in E. coli and then
purified on a nickel-affinity chromatography column. The purified product was
detected by SDS-PAGE. The pro-coagulant activity and binding of SP5.2/tTF to
human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) were monitored by FX activation
analysis and fluorescent scanning confocal microscopy, respectively. The effect
of SP5.2/tTF on tumor growth was analyzed in BALB/c mice bearing sarcoma 180
(S180) tumor. The tissue localization of SP5.2/tTF and its effect on tumor vessel
thrombosis were observed by in vivo fluorescence imaging and histological
studies, respectively. The fusion gene was successfully cloned into pET22b(+).
SP5.2/tTF was abundantly expressed in bacterial cells and efficiently purified by
nickel-affinity chromatography. Functional studies showed that the protein
retained both the coagulation activity of tTF and the binding capacity of SP5.2
to HUVECs. In tumor xenograft studies, SP5.2/tTF selectively targeted the tumor, 
induced thrombosis, and led to retardation and even regression of tumor growth
(growth inhibition ratio = 70%, P< 0.05). The recombinant fusion protein
SP5.2/tTF inhibited tumor growth by selectively inducing thrombosis in tumor
blood vessels.

PMID: 25997964  [PubMed - in process]


14. Oncogene. 2016 Feb 11;35(6):702-14. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.117. Epub 2015 Apr 20.

Androgen signaling is a confounding factor for ß-catenin-mediated prostate
tumorigenesis.

Lee SH(1), Luong R(2), Johnson DT(1), Cunha GR(3), Rivina L(1), Gonzalgo ML(1),
Sun Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA,
USA. (2)Department of Comparative Medicine, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA. (3)Department of Urology, School of Medicine,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Emerging evidence has demonstrated the critical roles for both androgen and Wnt
pathways in prostate tumorigenesis. A recent integrative genomic analysis of
human prostate cancers (PCas) has revealed a unique enrichment of androgen and
Wnt signaling in early-onset PCas, implying their clinical significance in the
disease. Additionally, interaction between the androgen receptor (AR) and
ß-catenin has long been detected in PCa cells. However, the consequence of this
interaction in prostate tumorigenesis is still unknown. Because mutations in
adenomatous polyposis coli, ß-catenin and other components of the destruction
complex are generally rare in PCas, other mechanisms of aberrant Wnt signaling
activation have been speculated. To address these critical questions, we
developed Ctnnb1(L(ex3)/+)/R26hAR(L/+):PB-Cre4 mice, in which transgenic AR and
stabilized ß-catenin are co-expressed in prostatic epithelial cells. We observed 
accelerated tumor development, aggressive tumor invasion and a decreased survival
rate in Ctnnb1(L(ex3)/+)/R26hAR(L/+):PB-Cre4 compound mice compared with
age-matched Ctnnb1(L(ex3)/+):PB-Cre4 littermate controls, which only have
stabilized ß-catenin expression in the prostate. Castration of the above
transgenic mice resulted in significant tumor regression, implying an essential
role of androgen signaling in tumor growth and maintenance. Implantation of the
prostatic epithelial cells isolated from the transgenic mice regenerated prostate
intraepithelial neoplasias and prostatic adenocarcinoma lesions. Microarray
analyses of transcriptional profiles showed more robust enrichment of known
tumor- and metastasis-promoting genes: Spp1, Egr1, c-Myc, Sp5, and Sp6 genes, in 
samples isolated from Ctnnb1(L(ex3)/+)/R26hAR(L/+):PB-Cre4 compound mice than
those from Ctnnb1(L(ex3)/+):PB-Cre4 and R26hAR(L/+):PB-Cre4 littermate controls. 
Together, these data demonstrate a confounding role of androgen signaling in
ß-catenin-initiated oncogenic transformation in prostate tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC4615253 [Available on 2016-08-11]
PMID: 25893287  [PubMed - in process]


15. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Dec 1;7(12):8899-904. eCollection 2014.

Diagnostic implications of Ki-67 expression in adipocytes and lipoblasts: an
immunohistochemical study.

Wang HJ(1), Li CY(2), Wang YK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yexian First People's Hospital Yexian 467200, Henan, 
China. (2)Department of Pathology, 152 Hospital of PLA Room 42, Jianshe Road,
Pingdingshan 467000, Henan, China. (3)Department of Pathology, 150 Hospital of
PLA Luoyang 471031, Henan, China.

Ki-67 expression is an important tool for distinguishing between malignant and
benign tumors. It usually shows the nuclear staining. However, the cell membrane 
staining of MIB-1, which is one of the clones of Ki-67, in the hyalinizing
trabecular adenoma of the thyroid gland and other tumors had also been reported. 
In our practice, we found that the 7B11 antibody could be immunoreactived with
the adipose tissues inside or around tumors in the membrane. Thus, in this study,
we determined if Ki-67 expression would be useful in recognizing the lipoblasts
and adipocytes. The five clones of the Ki-67 antibody, namely, 7B11, K-2, SP5,
MIB-1, and SP6 were selected. The adipocytes showed strong 7B11 staining in the
cell membrane. The brown fat cells were strongly immunoreactive with 7B11 in the 
arachnoid layer of the cytoplasm. The adipocytes and brown fat cells showed
positive, albeit weaker K-2 staining in the cell membrane and cytoplasm,
respectively, compared to 7B11. The adipose tissues and brown fat cells were
non-reactive to clones SP5, MIB-1, and SP6. All adipocytes in the lipomas,
angiolipomas, uterine lipoleiomyomas, and angioleiomyolipomas showed diffusedly
positive 7B11 and K-2 staining in the cell membrane, with stronger
immunoreactivity to 7B11 compared with K-2. All hibernomas showed diffusedly
cytoplasmic arachnoid staining of 7B11, but only focal to K-2. The lipoblasts in 
adipocytic tumors also showed positive 7B11 and K-2 staining; however, nearly all
of the vacuolated lipoblasts showed strong 7B11 staining, only focal vacuolated
lipoblasts in the adipocytic tumors were immunoreactive to K-2 positivity. All
other components of the adipocytic tumors were non-reactive to 7B11, K-2, SP5,
MIB-1, and SP6 in the cell membrane and cytoplasm. Our results showed that the
7B11 could well help to identify the lipoblasts, which would be useful to
diagnose the malignant adipocytic tumors.

PMCID: PMC4313985
PMID: 25674262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Infect Genet Evol. 2015 Jan;29:42-7. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2014.10.019. Epub 2014
Nov 4.

A novel transducible chimeric phage from Escherichia coli O157:H7 Sakai strain
encoding Stx1 production.

Sváb D(1), Bálint B(2), Maróti G(3), Tóth I(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Veterinary Medical Research, Centre for Agricultural Research,
Hungarian Academy of Sciences, H-1143, Hungária krt. 21, Budapest, Hungary.
(2)Seqomics Biotechnology Ltd., H-6782, Vállalkozók útja 7, Mórahalom, Hungary.
(3)Institute of Biochemistry, Biological Research Centre, Hungarian Academy of
Sciences, H-6726, Temesvári krt. 62, Szeged, Hungary. (4)Institute for Veterinary
Medical Research, Centre for Agricultural Research, Hungarian Academy of
Sciences, H-1143, Hungária krt. 21, Budapest, Hungary. Electronic address:
tothi@vmri.hu.

Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli (STEC), and especially enterohaemorrhagic 
E. coli (EHEC) are important, highly virulent zoonotic and food-borne pathogens. 
The genes encoding their key virulence factors, the Shiga toxins, are distributed
by converting bacteriophages, the Stx phages. In this study we isolated a new
type of inducible Stx phage carrying the stx1 gene cluster from the prototypic
EHEC O157:H7 Sakai strain. The phage showed Podoviridae morphology, and was
capable of converting the E. coli K-12 MG1655 strain to Shiga toxin-producing
phenotype. The majority of the phage genes originate from the stx2-encoding Sakai
prophage Sp5, with major rearrangements in its genome. Beside certain minor
recombinations, the genomic region originally containing the stx2 genes in Sp5
was replaced by a region containing six open reading frames from prophage Sp15
including stx1 genes. The rearranged genome, together with the carriage of stx1
genes, the morphology and the capability of lysogenic conversion represent a new 
type of recombinant Stx1 converting phage from the Sakai strain.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25445656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Hypertension. 2015 Jan;65(1):200-10. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.114.04498. Epub
2014 Nov 10.

Genome-wide identification of long noncoding RNAs in rat models of cardiovascular
and renal disease.

Gopalakrishnan K(1), Kumarasamy S(1), Mell B(1), Joe B(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Program in Physiological Genomics, Center for Hypertension and
Personalized Medicine, Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of
Toledo College of Medicine and Life Sciences, OH. (2)From the Program in
Physiological Genomics, Center for Hypertension and Personalized Medicine,
Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Toledo College of
Medicine and Life Sciences, OH. bina.joe@utoledo.edu.

Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) are an emerging class of genomic regulatory
molecules reported in various species. In the rat, which is one of the major
mammalian model organisms, discovery of lncRNAs on a genome-wide scale is
lagging. Renal lncRNA sequencing and lncRNA transcriptome analysis were conducted
in 3 rat strains that are widely used in cardiovascular and renal research: the
Dahl salt-sensitive rat, the spontaneously hypertensive rat, and the Dahl
salt-resistant rat. Through the RNA sequencing approach, 3273 transcripts were
identified as rat lncRNAs. A majority of lncRNAs were without predicted target
genes. Differential expression of 273 and 749 lncRNAs was detected between Dahl
salt-sensitive versus Dahl salt-resistant and Dahl salt-sensitive versus
spontaneously hypertensive rat comparisons, respectively. To couple the observed 
differential expression of lncRNAs with the status of mRNAs, an mRNA
transcriptome analysis was conducted. Several cis mRNA genes were coregulated
with lncRNAs. Of these, the protein expression status of 4 target genes, Asb3,
Chac2, Pex11b, and Sp5, were differentially expressed between the relevant strain
comparisons, thereby suggesting that the differentially expressed lncRNAs
associated with these genes are candidate genetic determinants of blood pressure.
This study serves as a first-generation catalog of rat lncRNAs and illustrates
the prioritization of lncRNAs as candidates for complex polygenic traits.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4349433
PMID: 25385761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Immunol Res. 2014;2014:237043. doi: 10.1155/2014/237043. Epub 2014 Sep 16.

The impact of "omic" and imaging technologies on assessing the host immune
response to biodefence agents.

Tree JA(1), Flick-Smith H(2), Elmore MJ(1), Rowland CA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biodefence and PreClinical Evaluation Group, Public Health England (PHE),
Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP5 3NU, UK. (2)Biomedical Sciences
Department, Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl), Porton Down,
Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP4 0JQ, UK.

Understanding the interactions between host and pathogen is important for the
development and assessment of medical countermeasures to infectious agents,
including potential biodefence pathogens such as Bacillus anthracis, Ebola virus,
and Francisella tularensis. This review focuses on technological advances which
allow this interaction to be studied in much greater detail. Namely, the use of
"omic" technologies (next generation sequencing, DNA, and protein microarrays)
for dissecting the underlying host response to infection at the molecular level; 
optical imaging techniques (flow cytometry and fluorescence microscopy) for
assessing cellular responses to infection; and biophotonic imaging for
visualising the infectious disease process. All of these technologies hold great 
promise for important breakthroughs in the rational development of vaccines and
therapeutics for biodefence agents.

PMCID: PMC4182007
PMID: 25333059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Reprod Domest Anim. 2014 Dec;49(6):989-94. doi: 10.1111/rda.12419. Epub 2014 Sep 
25.

Effect of post-thaw addition of seminal plasma on motility, viability and
chromatin integrity of cryopreserved donkey jack (Equus asinus) spermatozoa.

Sabatini C(1), Mari G, Mislei B, Love C, Panzani D, Camillo F, Rota A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Sciences, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.

Pregnancy rates in donkeys after artificial insemination with cryopreserved semen
are still low, compared to the horse species. Addition of autologous seminal
plasma to frozen-thawed semen appeared to improve pregnancy rates. The aims of
this study were to evaluate (1) sperm motility and plasma membrane integrity
after thawing (T0) and after one and 2 h (T1 and T2) of post-thaw incubation in
either 0% (SP0) or 70% (SP70) autologous seminal plasma and (2) sperm motility,
plasma membrane integrity and DNA quality (%COMP-at) after thawing (T0) and after
2 and 4 h (T2 and T4) of post-thaw incubation in either 0% (SP0), 5% (SP5) or 20%
(SP20) homologous seminal plasma. In experiment 1, seminal plasma decreased total
and progressive sperm motility and plasma membrane intact spermatozoa immediately
after dilution and at all following time points (p < 0.05). In experiment 2,
total and progressive motility did not differ between treatments immediately
after dilution and between SP0 and SP5 at T2, while they were lower in both SP5
and SP20 than in SP0 at T4. Plasma membrane intact sperm cells did not differ
between SP0 and SP5 and were lower in SP20 at all time points. DNA quality was
not affected by treatment immediately after dilution and was significantly worse 
for SP20 after 4 h of incubation (p < 0.05). The post-thaw addition of seminal
plasma at the tested concentrations did not improve donkey frozen semen
characteristics in vitro over time.

© 2014 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

PMID: 25256158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Vet Rec. 2015 Jan 3;176(1):19. doi: 10.1136/vr.102509. Epub 2014 Aug 14.

The effect of the laryngeal tie-forward procedure and soft palate cautery on
nasopharyngeal diameter in horses.

Offord S(1), Tulloch LK(2), Franklin SH(3), Tremaine WH(1), Woodford NS(4), Allen
KJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Veterinary Science, University of Bristol, Langford, Bristol, BS40
5DU, UK. (2)Royal Veterinary College, London, UK. (3)School of Animal and
Veterinary Sciences, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia. (4)Endell
Veterinary Group, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP5 3DG, UK. (5)Equine Sports Medicine
Centre, School of Veterinary Science, University of Bristol, Langford,
Bristol BS40 5DU, UK.

The laryngeal tie-forward (LTF) procedure has been shown to move the larynx
rostrally and dorsally whilst repositioning the basihyoid bone caudally and
dorsally. Other studies have shown that the position of the hyoid bones
influences the size of the nasopharynx. The effect of the LTF procedure on the
size of the nasopharynx is unknown. It was hypothesised that the LTF procedure
would result in a decrease in dorsoventral nasopharyngeal diameter. Twenty-five
thoroughbred horses which underwent LTF with or without soft palate cautery
(LTF±SPC) for treatment of dorsal displacement of the soft palate were included
in this study. Preoperative and postoperative lateral radiographs were used to
determine changes in laryngohyoid position and nasopharyngeal diameter. The
LTF±SPC procedure resulted in a significant reduction (14-17 per cent) in
dorsoventral nasopharyngeal diameter (P<0.001). The LTF procedure decreases
nasopharyngeal diameter. The impact on upper respiratory tract function during
exercise remains unclear.

British Veterinary Association.

PMID: 25124885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Electrophoresis. 2014 Oct;35(19):2807-18. doi: 10.1002/elps.201400169. Epub 2014 
Aug 14.

A chiral separation strategy for acidic drugs in capillary electrochromatography 
using both chlorinated and nonchlorinated polysaccharide-based selectors.

Albals D(1), Hendrickx A, Clincke L, Chankvetadze B, Heyden YV, Mangelings D.

Author information: 
(1)Analytical Chemistry and Pharmaceutical Technology, Center for Pharmaceutical 
Research, Vrije Universiteit Brussel-VUB, Brussels, Belgium.

A generic chiral separation strategy for the analysis of acidic compounds in CEC 
is proposed in completion of an earlier defined strategy for nonacidic compounds.
The screening step of this strategy uses a 45 mM ammonium formate (pH 2.9)/ACN
(35/65, v/v) mobile phase, a temperature of 25°C, and an applied voltage of 15
kV. To update the screening step, eight chiral stationary phases, which all
possessed chlorinated and nonchlorinated polysaccharide-based chiral selectors,
were evaluated using the earlier defined screening conditions. A combination of
the two types of polysaccharide-based chiral phases proved to have the highest
cumulative success rate. In the updated screening step, amylose
tris(3,5-dimethylphenylcarbamate) (ADH), cellulose tris(4-methylbenzoate) (OJH), 
cellulose tris(3,5-dichlorophenylcarbamate) (SP5), and cellulose
tris(3,5-dimethylphenylcarbamate) (ODRH) were included as selectors and their
preferred screening sequence was determined as ADH > OJH > SP5 > ODRH. New
optimization steps were also defined for SP5 by investigating the influences of
different parameters on the separation outcome using an experimental design
approach. After application of the updated strategy, 15 of 17 acidic
pharmaceuticals were separated under screening conditions, of which 9 were
baseline resolved. When the optimization steps were applied, another three
compounds were baseline separated, while the total number of separations was
increased by one, which brings the total number of separations to 16 of 17 with
12 baseline separated compounds. This reflects the successful performance of the 
updated strategy on acidic compounds.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24981586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Neurosci Lett. 2014 Jun 6;570:92-6. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2014.04.017. Epub 2014 
Apr 24.

Optical survey of initial expression of synaptic function in the embryonic chick 
trigeminal sensory nucleus.

Momose-Sato Y(1), Sato K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health and Nutrition, Kanto Gakuin University, College of Human 
and Environmental Studies, Yokohama 236-8503, Japan. Electronic address:
katsu-satoh@komajo.ac.jp. (2)Department of Health and Nutrition Sciences,
Komazawa Women's University Faculty of Human Health, Tokyo 206-8511, Japan.

We examined the initial expression of synaptic function in the embryonic chick
trigeminal nucleus using voltage-sensitive dye recording. Brainstem preparations 
with three trigeminal nerve afferents, the ophthalmic nerve (N.V1), maxillary
nerve (N.V2) and mandibular nerve (N.V3), were dissected from 5.5- to 6.5-day-old
chick embryos. In our previous study [Sato et al., 1999], we detected slow
signals corresponding to glutamatergic excitatory postsynaptic potentials and
identified the principal sensory nucleus of the trigeminal nerve (Pr5), spinal
sensory nucleus of the trigeminal nerve (Sp5) and trigeminal motor nucleus. In
this study, we examined the effects of removing Mg(2+) from the physiological
solution, which enhanced N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor function in the sensory
nuclei. In 6.5-day-old (St 29) embryos, the slow signal was observed in Pr5 and
Sp5 only when N.V1 was stimulated, whereas it appeared in Mg(2+)-free solution
with every nerve stimulation. In 6-day-old (St 28) embryos, the slow signal was
observed in Sp5 with N.V1 stimulation, and the appearance of synaptic function in
Mg(2+)-free solution varied, depending on the nerves and preparations used. In
5.5-day-old (St 27) embryos, synaptic function was not detected even when
external Mg(2+) was removed. These results indicate that the initial expression
of synaptic function in the trigeminal system occurs earlier than previously
considered, and that the developmental organization of synaptic function differs 
among the three trigeminal nerves and between the two sensory nuclei.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24769319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Nat Neurosci. 2014 Apr;17(4):506-12. doi: 10.1038/nn.3676. Epub 2014 Mar 9.

Parallel states of pathological Wnt signaling in neonatal brain injury and colon 
cancer.

Fancy SP(1), Harrington EP(2), Baranzini SE(3), Silbereis JC(4), Shiow LR(4),
Yuen TJ(4), Huang EJ(5), Lomvardas S(6), Rowitch DH(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco (UCSF),
San Francisco, California, USA. [2] Department of Neurology, UCSF, San Francisco,
California, USA. [3] Eli and Edythe Broad Institute for Stem Cell Research and
Regeneration Medicine and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, UCSF, San Francisco,
California, USA. [4]. (2)1] Department of Pediatrics, University of California,
San Francisco (UCSF), San Francisco, California, USA. [2] Eli and Edythe Broad
Institute for Stem Cell Research and Regeneration Medicine and Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, UCSF, San Francisco, California, USA. [3] Medical Scientist
Training Program, UCSF, San Francisco, California, USA. [4]. (3)Department of
Neurology, UCSF, San Francisco, California, USA. (4)1] Department of Pediatrics, 
University of California, San Francisco (UCSF), San Francisco, California, USA.
[2] Eli and Edythe Broad Institute for Stem Cell Research and Regeneration
Medicine and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, UCSF, San Francisco, California,
USA. (5)Department of Pathology, UCSF, San Francisco, California, USA.
(6)Department of Anatomy, UCSF, San Francisco, California, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Neurosci. 2014 Dec;17(12):1841.

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2014 Apr;17(4):483-5.

In colon cancer, mutation of the Wnt repressor APC (encoding adenomatous
polyposis coli) leads to a state of aberrant and unrestricted high-activity
signaling. However, the relevance of high Wnt tone in non-genetic human disease
is unknown. Here we demonstrate that distinct functional states of Wnt activity
determine oligodendrocyte precursor cell (OPC) differentiation and myelination.
Mouse OPCs with genetic Wnt dysregulation (high tone) express multiple genes in
common with colon cancer, including Lef1, Sp5, Ets2, Rnf43 and Dusp4.
Surprisingly, we found that OPCs in lesions of hypoxic human neonatal white
matter injury upregulated markers of high Wnt activity and lacked expression of
APC. We also found that lack of Wnt repressor tone promoted permanent white
matter injury after mild hypoxic insult. These findings suggest a state of
pathological high-activity Wnt signaling in human disease tissues that lack
predisposing genetic mutation.

PMCID: PMC3975168
PMID: 24609463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Mol Cancer Ther. 2014 Apr;13(4):812-22. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0625. Epub 
2014 Feb 19.

Monensin inhibits canonical Wnt signaling in human colorectal cancer cells and
suppresses tumor growth in multiple intestinal neoplasia mice.

Tumova L(1), Pombinho AR, Vojtechova M, Stancikova J, Gradl D, Krausova M,
Sloncova E, Horazna M, Kriz V, Machonova O, Jindrich J, Zdrahal Z, Bartunek P,
Korinek V.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Department of Cell and Developmental Biology,
CZ-OPENSCREEN, Institute of Molecular Genetics AS CR; Department of Organic
Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Charles University in Prague, Prague; and Central 
European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic; and
Zoologisches Institut II, Universität Karlsruhe, Karlsruhe, Germany.

The Wnt signaling pathway is required during embryonic development and for the
maintenance of homeostasis in adult tissues. However, aberrant activation of the 
pathway is implicated in a number of human disorders, including cancer of the
gastrointestinal tract, breast, liver, melanoma, and hematologic malignancies. In
this study, we identified monensin, a polyether ionophore antibiotic, as a potent
inhibitor of Wnt signaling. The inhibitory effect of monensin on the
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling cascade was observed in mammalian cells stimulated with
Wnt ligands, glycogen synthase kinase-3 inhibitors, and in cells transfected with
ß-catenin expression constructs. Furthermore, monensin suppressed the
Wnt-dependent tail fin regeneration in zebrafish and Wnt- or ß-catenin-induced
formation of secondary body axis in Xenopus embryos. In Wnt3a-activated HEK293
cells, monensin blocked the phoshorylation of Wnt coreceptor low-density
lipoprotein receptor related protein 6 and promoted its degradation. In human
colorectal carcinoma cells displaying deregulated Wnt signaling, monensin reduced
the intracellular levels of ß-catenin. The reduction attenuated the expression of
Wnt signaling target genes such as cyclin D1 and SP5 and decreased the cell
proliferation rate. In multiple intestinal neoplasia (Min) mice, daily
administration of monensin suppressed progression of the intestinal tumors
without any sign of toxicity on normal mucosa. Our data suggest monensin as a
prospective anticancer drug for therapy of neoplasia with deregulated Wnt
signaling.

PMID: 24552772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 24;9(1):e87018. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087018. eCollection
2014.

Transcriptional profiling of Wnt3a mutants identifies Sp transcription factors as
essential effectors of the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway in neuromesodermal stem cells.

Dunty WC Jr(1), Kennedy MW(1), Chalamalasetty RB(1), Campbell K(2), Yamaguchi
TP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Developmental Biology Laboratory, Center for Cancer Research,
NCI-Frederick, NIH, Frederick, Maryland, United States of America. (2)Division of
Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati,
Ohio, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(4):e95947.

Neuromesodermal (NM) stem cells reside in the primitive streak (PS) of
gastrulating vertebrate embryos and generate precursors of the spinal cord and
musculoskeletal system. Although Wnt3a/ß-catenin signaling is crucial for NM stem
cell maintenance and differentiation, few key transcriptional effectors have been
identified. Through a concerted transcriptional profiling and genetic approach we
have determined that two Zn(2+)-finger transcription factors, Sp5 and Sp8, are
regulated by Wnt3a in the PS, and are essential for neural and musculoskeletal
patterning. These results identify Sp5 and Sp8 as pivotal downstream effectors of
Wnt3a, and suggest that they are essential for the self-renewal and
differentiation of NM stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3901714
PMID: 24475213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 27;8(12):e83239. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083239.
eCollection 2013.

Peptide-mediated liposomal Doxorubicin enhances drug delivery efficiency and
therapeutic efficacy in animal models.

Chang DK(1), Li PC(1), Lu RM(1), Jane WN(2), Wu HC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular and Organismic Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Plant and Microbial Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

Lung cancer ranks among the most common malignancies, and is the leading cause of
cancer-related mortality worldwide. Chemotherapy for lung cancer can be made more
specific to tumor cells, and less toxic to normal tissues, through the use of
ligand-mediated drug delivery systems. In this study, we investigated the
targeting mechanism of the ligand-mediated drug delivery system using a peptide, 
SP5-2, which specifically binds to non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells.
Conjugation of SP5-2 to liposomes enhanced the amount of drug delivered directly 
into NSCLC cells, through receptor-mediated endocytosis. Functional SP5-2
improved the therapeutic index of Lipo-Dox by enhancing therapeutic efficacy,
reducing side effects, and increasing the survival rate of tumor-bearing mice in 
syngenic, metastatic and orthotopic animal models. Accumulation of
SP5-2-conjugated liposomal doxorubicin (SP5-2-LD) in tumor tissues was 11.2-fold 
higher than that of free doxorubicin, and the area under the concentration-time
curve (AUC0-72 hours) was increased 159.2-fold. Furthermore, the experiment of
bioavailability was assessed to confirm that SP5-2 elevates the uptake of the
liposomal drugs by the tumor cells in vivo. In conclusion, the use of
SP5-2-conjugated liposomes enhances pharmacokinetic properties, improves efficacy
and safety profiles, and allows for controlled biodistribution and drug release.

PMCID: PMC3873925
PMID: 24386166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Biomed Chromatogr. 2014 Jan;28(1):182-91. doi: 10.1002/bmc.3072. Epub 2013 Oct
29.

Three versus five micrometer chlorinated polysaccharide-based packings in chiral 
capillary electrochromatography: performance evaluation.

Hendrickx A(1), De Klerck K, Mangelings D, Clincke L, Heyden YV.

Author information: 
(1)Analytical Chemistry and Pharmaceutical Technology, Center for Pharmaceutical 
Research, Vrije Universiteit Brussel-VUB, Laarbeeklaan 103, 1090, Brussels,
Belgium.

In this study, a test set of 44 nonacidic compounds was analyzed on four 3 µm
chlorinated polysaccharide-based chiral stationary phases with cellulose tris
(3-chloro-4-methylphenylcarbamate) (Lux Cellulose-2®; LC2), amylose tris
(5-chloro-2-methylphenylcarbamate) (Lux Amylose-2®, LA2), cellulose tris
(4-chloro-3-methylphenylcarbamate) (Lux Cellulose-4®; LC4) and cellulose tris
(3,5-dichlorophenylcarbamate) (Sepapak-5®, Sp5) as selectors. The analysis times,
retention factors, efficiencies and enantioselectivities were compared with the
results obtained on their 5 µm analogs. All 3 µm packings, except for LA2,
individually separated more compounds than their 5 µm analogs. When the
cumulative success rates on the 3 and 5 µm packings were considered, it was
observed that they were similar for both particle sizes; the combination of three
or four 5 µm columns separated one compound more from the considered test set
than that of the same number of 3 µm columns. Furthermore, it was observed that
the 3 and 5 µm packings showed some complementarity. Only four compounds were not
separated on any of the columns, while the use of only either the 3 or 5 µm
columns resulted in 10 and nine not-separated compounds, respectively. The
analyses on 5 µm LC2 and Sp5 were faster than on their 3 µm analogs. For LC4 the 
3 µm packing showed the shortest analysis times and diverse analysis times for
both particle sizes were obtained on LA2. Furthermore, three out of four 3 µm
packings, that is, LC2, LC4, and Sp5, were found to be more efficient than their 
5 µm analogs.

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 24338867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Environ Radioact. 2014 Feb;128:97-105. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvrad.2013.01.001. Epub
2013 Dec 5.

The corrosion of depleted uranium in terrestrial and marine environments.

Toque C(1), Milodowski AE(2), Baker AC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, MBG23, Institute of Naval Medicine,
Crescent Road, Alverstoke, Gosport, Hampshire PO12 2DL, UK. (2)British Geological
Survey, British Geological Survey, Kingsley Dunham Centre, Keyworth, Nottingham
NG12 5GG, United Kingdom. (3)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, i-SAT F, 
102, Building 5, DSTL Porton Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP5 OJQ, UK. Electronic
address: acbaker@dstl.gov.uk.

Depleted Uranium alloyed with titanium is used in armour penetrating munitions
that have been fired in a number of conflict zones and testing ranges including
the UK ranges at Kirkcudbright and Eskmeals. The study presented here evaluates
the corrosion of DU alloy cylinders in soil on these two UK ranges and in the
adjacent marine environment of the Solway Firth. The estimated mean initial
corrosion rates and times for complete corrosion range from 0.13 to
1.9 g cm(-2) y(-1) and 2.5-48 years respectively depending on the particular
physical and geochemical environment. The marine environment at the experimental 
site was very turbulent. This may have caused the scouring of corrosion products 
and given rise to a different geochemical environment from that which could be
easily duplicated in laboratory experiments. The rate of mass loss was found to
vary through time in one soil environment and this is hypothesised to be due to
pitting increasing the surface area, followed by a build up of corrosion products
inhibiting further corrosion. This indicates that early time measurements of mass
loss or corrosion rate may be poor indicators of late time corrosion behaviour,
potentially giving rise to incorrect estimates of time to complete corrosion. The
DU alloy placed in apparently the same geochemical environment, for the same
period of time, can experience very different amounts of corrosion and mass loss,
indicating that even small variations in the corrosion environment can have a
significant effect. These effects are more significant than other experimental
errors and variations in initial surface area.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 24315120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Brain Res. 2014 Jan 13;1542:85-92. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2013.10.031. Epub 2013
Oct 24.

Prolyl carboxypeptidase mRNA expression in the mouse brain.

Jeong JK(1), Diano S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Integrative Cell Signaling and Neurobiology of Metabolism, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA; Department of Ob/Gyn &
Reproductive Sciences, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(2)Program in Integrative Cell Signaling and Neurobiology of Metabolism, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA; Department of Ob/Gyn &
Reproductive Sciences, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA;
Department of Neurobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT,
USA; Section of Comparative Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT, USA. Electronic address: sabrina.diano@yale.edu.

Prolyl carboxypeptidase (PRCP), a serine protease, is widely expressed in the
body including liver, lung, kidney and brain, with a variety of known substrates 
such as plasma prekallikrein, bradykinin, angiotensins II and III, and a-MSH,
suggesting its role in the processing of tissue-specific substrates. In the
brain, PRCP has been shown to inactivate hypothalamic a-MSH, thus modulating
melanocortin signaling in the control of energy metabolism. While its expression 
pattern has been reported in the hypothalamus, little is known on the
distribution of PRCP throughout the mouse brain. This study was undertaken to
determine PRCP expression in the mouse brain. Radioactive in situ hybridization
was performed to determine endogenous PRCP mRNA expression. In addition, using a 
gene-trap mouse model for PRCP deletion, X-gal staining was performed to further 
determine PRCP distribution. Results from both approaches showed that PRCP gene
is broadly expressed in the brain.

© 2013 Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC3893042
PMID: 24161824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Dev Dyn. 2013 Dec;242(12):1382-94. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24034. Epub 2013 Sep 30.

Role of Sp5 as an essential early regulator of neural crest specification in
xenopus.

Park DS(1), Seo JH, Hong M, Bang W, Han JK, Choi SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Ulsan, College of Medicine,
Seoul, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: The neural crest (NC) is a multipotent embryonic cell population,
which is induced by an integration of secreted signals including BMP, Wnt, and
FGF and, subsequently, NC cell fates are specified by a regulatory network of
specific transcription factors. This study was undertaken to identify a role of
Sp5 transcription factor in vertebrates.
RESULTS: Xenopus Sp5 is expressed in the prospective neural crest regions from
gastrulation through the tadpole stages in early development. Knockdown of Sp5
caused severe defects in craniofacial cartilage, pigmentation, and dorsal fin.
Gain- and loss-of-function of Sp5 led to up- and down-regulation of the
expression of NC markers in the neural fold, respectively. In contrast, Sp5 had
no effect on neural induction and patterning. Sp5 regulated the expression of
neural plate border (NPB) specifiers, Msx1 and Pax3, and these regulatory factors
recovered the expression of NC marker in the Sp5-deficient embryos. Depletion of 
Sp5 impaired NC induction by Wnt/ß-catenin or FGF signal, whereas its
co-expression rescued NC markers in embryos in which either signal was blocked.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that Sp5 functions as a critical early factor 
in the genetic cascade to regulate NC induction downstream of Wnt and FGF
pathways.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24038420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Gen Virol. 2013 Nov;94(Pt 11):2569-76. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.053991-0. Epub 2013
Aug 23.

Characterization and genomic analysis of two Staphylococcus aureus bacteriophages
isolated from poultry/livestock farms.

Yoon H(1), Yun J, Lim JA, Roh E, Jung KS, Chang Y, Ryu S, Heu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Technology and Services, College of Health Industry, Eulji 
university, Seongnam 461-713, Korea.

Staphylococcus aureus is one of the most important pathogens, causing various
diseases in humans and animals. As methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) has
become increasingly prevalent, controlling this pathogen with standard antibiotic
treatment has become challenging. Bacteriophages (phages) have attracted interest
as alternative antibacterial agents to control MRSA. In this study, we isolated
six S. aureus phages from soils of poultry/livestock farms. Based on the results 
of host range determination with 150 S. aureus strains and restriction enzyme
treatment of phage DNA, two phages, designated SP5 and SP6, were selected for
further characterization and genome sequencing. Both SP5 and SP6 were classified 
as members of the family Siphoviridae. The genome of SP5 comprises 43 305 bp and 
contains 63 ORFs, while the SP6 genome comprises 42 902 bp and contains 61 ORFs. 
Although they have different host spectra, the phage genomes exhibit high
nucleotide similarity to each other. Adsorption assay results suggested that the 
host range determinants of the two phages are involved in both adsorption and
infection. Comparative genomic analyses of the two phages provided evidence that 
the lysogenic/lytic control module and tail proteins may be important for host
specificity.

PMCID: PMC3809110
PMID: 23973965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Rev Sci Instrum. 2013 Jun;84(6):063702. doi: 10.1063/1.4810015.

Development of a confocal rheometer for soft and biological materials.

Dutta SK(1), Mbi A, Arevalo RC, Blair DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics and Institute for Soft Matter Synthesis and Metrology,
Georgetown University, Washington, DC 20057, USA.

We discuss the design and operation of a confocal rheometer, formed by
integrating an Anton Paar MCR301 stress-controlled rheometer with a Leica SP5
laser scanning confocal microscope. Combining two commercial instruments results 
in a system which is straightforward to assemble that preserves the performance
of each component with virtually no impact on the precision of either device. The
instruments are configured so that the microscope can acquire time-resolved,
three-dimensional volumes of a sample whose bulk viscoelastic properties are
being measured simultaneously. We describe several aspects of the design and, to 
demonstrate the system's capabilities, present the results of a few common
measurements in the study of soft materials.

PMID: 23822347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Methods Enzymol. 2013;526:45-59. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-405883-5.00003-X.

Visualization of intracellular hydrogen peroxide with HyPer, a genetically
encoded fluorescent probe.

Mishina NM(1), Markvicheva KN, Bilan DS, Matlashov ME, Shirmanova MV, Liebl D,
Schultz C, Lukyanov S, Belousov VV.

Author information: 
(1)Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, RAS, Moscow, Russia.

The fluorescent sensor HyPer allows monitoring of intracellular H2O2 levels with 
a high degree of sensitivity and specificity. Here, we provide a detailed
protocol of ratiometric imaging of H2O2 produced by cells during phagocytosis,
including instructions for experiments on different commercial confocal systems, 
namely, Leica SP2, Leica SP5, and Carl Zeiss LSM, as well as wide-field Leica
6000 microscope. The general experimental scheme is easily adaptable for imaging 
H2O2 production by various cell types under a variety of conditions.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23791093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Am J Manag Care. 2013 Jan-Feb;19(1 Spec No):SP5-9.

Lessons from an oncology medical home collaborative.

Fox J(1).

Author information: 
(1)AVP Medical Affairs, Priority Health, 1231 E Beltline NE, MS 1255, Grand
Rapids, MI 49525, USA. john.fox@priorityhealth.com

The Oncology Medical Home program demonstrates an effective working model for
restructuring cancer payments and care. It complements and in fact takes oncology
pathways programs to a new level through creation of practice-specific preferred 
regimens. It eliminates practices' financial dependence on drug margins and
reduces the current misalignment between cancer payments and cancer outcomes by
taking a patient-centric approach. Further, it enhances practice payments for
cognitive services provided by the oncology team and rewards teams for improving 
patient care and reducing avoidable ED visits and inpatient care. Provider-payer 
partnerships are necessary to evaluate experimental payment models that create
greater provider accountability for Triple Aim outcomes of patient experience,
individual and population health outcomes, and per capita cost.

PMID: 23461474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Neuropeptides. 2013 Aug;47(4):261-71. doi: 10.1016/j.npep.2013.02.001. Epub 2013 
Mar 13.

Targeted liquid chromatography quadrupole ion trap mass spectrometry analysis of 
tachykinin related peptides reveals significant expression differences in a rat
model of neuropathic pain.

Pailleux F(1), Vachon P, Lemoine J, Beaudry F.

Author information: 
(1)Groupe de Recherche en Pharmacologie Animal du Québec-GREPAQ, Département de
Biomédecine Vétérinaire, Faculté de Médecine Vétérinaire, Université de Montréal,
St-Hyacinthe, Québec, Canada.

Animal models are widely used to perform basic scientific research in pain. The
rodent chronic constriction injury (CCI) model is widely used to study
neuropathic pain. Animals were tested prior and after CCI surgery using
behavioral tests (von Frey filaments and Hargreaves test) to evaluate pain. The
brain and the lumbar enlargement of the spinal cord were collected from
neuropathic and normal animals. Tachykinin related peptides were analyzed by high
performance liquid chromatography quadrupole ion trap mass spectrometry. Our
results reveal that the ß-tachykinin58<U+208B>71, SP and SP3<U+208B>11 up-regulation are
closely related to pain behavior. The spinal ß-tachykinin58<U+208B>71, SP and SP3<U+208B>11
concentrations were significantly up-regulated in neuropathic animals compared
with normal animals (p<0.001; p<0.001 and p<0.05, respectively). In contrast, the
spinal SP55<U+208B>11 concentration in neuropathic animals revealed a significant
down-regulation compared with normal animals (p<0.05). The brain
ß-tachykinin58<U+208B>71 and SP concentrations were significantly up-regulated (p<0.05
and p<0.001, respectively). Interestingly, no significant concentration
differences were observed in the spinal cord and brain for NKA,
ß-tachykinin58<U+208B>71, SP1<U+208B>7 and SP6<U+208B>11 (p>0.05). The ß-tachykinin58<U+208B>71, SP and
C-terminal SP metabolites could potentially serve as biomarkers in early drug
discovery.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23490005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Biomaterials. 2013 May;34(16):3925-37. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.02.017.
Epub 2013 Mar 5.

The use of nanoparticulate delivery systems in metronomic chemotherapy.

Yu DH(1), Ban FQ, Zhao M, Lu Q, Lovell JF, Bai F, Wang C, Guan YY, Luan X, Liu
YR, Fang C, Chen HZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Institute of Medical Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University School of Medicine, 280 South Chongqing Road, Shanghai 200025, China.

Metronomic chemotherapy aiming at inhibiting tumor angiogenesis with conventional
chemotherapeutics is a promising strategy for antiangiogenic cancer therapy.
However, current metronomic chemotherapy mainly focuses on free small-molecule
drugs, without any effort to achieve tumor-specific biodistribution, which may
lead to long-term toxicity concerns. Metronomic chemotherapy using
nanoparticulate drug delivery system (DDS) offers significant upside to reduce
off-target side effects, decrease accumulated dose, and enhance the efficacy of
tumor vessel targeting without compromising antitumor efficacy; but there has
been a lack of thorough experimental data describing the targeted metronomic
chemotherapy. Here, we develop a new nanoparticulate DDS, SP5.2 peptide
conjugated, Flt-1 (VEGFR-1) targeted nanoparticles for docetaxel (SP5.2-DTX-NP), 
as a model for the investigation of targeted metronomic chemotherapy with respect
to both antitumor efficacy and toxicity. The results demonstrate that metronomic 
SP5.2-DTX-NP exerts antitumor activity mainly through the antiangiogenic effect
of docetaxel, which is specifically delivered into the tumor vascular endothelial
cells through the nanoparticle internalization mediated by the interaction of
SP5.2 and over-expressed Flt-1 receptors on tumor vessels. Moreover, the
antitumor efficacy of targeted metronomic chemotherapy is better than that of the
treatment with the DDS given in the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) regimen, which
is shown in significantly prolonged mice survival and minimal drug-associated
toxicity (bone marrow suppression, hematological toxicity, and mucosal injury of 
small intestine). The present research reveals and highlights the significance of
targeted metronomic therapy with nanoparticulate DDS in antiangiogenic cancer
therapy.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23465835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53470. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053470. Epub 2013 Jan 8.

Ingress of Salmonella enterica Typhimurium into tomato leaves through hydathodes.

Gu G(1), Cevallos-Cevallos JM, van Bruggen AH.

Author information: 
(1)Emerging Pathogens Institute and Department of Plant Pathology, University of 
Florida, Gainesville, Florida, United States of America. ggu@ufl.edu

Internal contamination of Salmonella in plants is attracting increasing attention
for food safety reasons. In this study, three different tomato cultivars "Florida
Lanai", "Crown Jewel", "Ailsa Craig" and the transgenic line Sp5 of "Ailsa Craig"
were inoculated with 1 µl GFP-labeled Salmonella Typhimurium through guttation
droplets at concentrations of 10(9) or 10(7) CFU/ml. Survival of Salmonella on/in
tomato leaves was detected by both direct plating and enrichment methods.
Salmonella cells survived best on/in the inoculated leaves of cultivar "Ailsa
Craig" and decreased fastest on/in "Florida Lanai" leaves. Increased guttation in
the abscisic acid over-expressing Sp5 plants may have facilitated the entrance of
Salmonella into leaves and the colonization on the surface of tomato leaves.
Internalization of Salmonella Typhimurium in tomato leaves through guttation drop
inoculation was confirmed by confocal laser microscopy. For the first time,
convincing evidence is presented that S. enterica can enter tomato leaves through
hydathodes and move into the vascular system, which may result in the internal
translocation of the bacteria inside plants.

PMCID: PMC3540056
PMID: 23320087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Anim Reprod Sci. 2013 Feb;137(1-2):93-102. doi:
10.1016/j.anireprosci.2012.12.007. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

Identification of sperm head subpopulations with defined pleiomorphic
characteristics in ejaculates of captive Goeldi's monkeys (Callimico goeldii).

Valle RR(1), Arakaki PR, Carvalho FM, Muniz JA, Leal CL, García-Herreros M.

Author information: 
(1)ICS, Universidade Paulista, São Paulo, Brazil; FMVZ, Universidade de São
Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the incidence of pleiomorphisms and its
influence on the distribution of sperm morphometric subpopulations in ejaculates 
from the vulnerable Goeldi's monkey (Callimico goeldii) by using a combination of
computerized analysis system and Principal Component Analysis (PCA) methods. Each
sperm head was measured for four primary spermatozoal head dimensional parameters
(area [A (µm(2))], perimeter [P (µm)], length [L (µm)] and width [W (µm)]) and
three head shape derived parameters (ellipticity [(L/W)], elongation
[(L-W)/(L+W)] and rugosity [(4pA/P(2))]). Six separate subpopulations (SPs) were 
identified: SP1, constituted by very large, narrow and very elliptical
spermatozoa (A=16.85±1.56µm(2), W=2.75±0.42µm and ellipticity=2.16±0.24); SP2,
characterized by average sized, short, wide and round spermatozoa
(A=15.00±1.92µm(2), L=5.06±0.49µm, W=3.51±0.31µm and ellipticity=1.44±0.15); SP3,
represented by small, wide and slightly round spermatozoa (A=14.95±1.75µm(2),
W=3.47±0.29µm and ellipticity=1.48±0.14); SP4 included very small, short and very
round spermatozoa (A=14.15±2.38µm(2), L=4.90±0.57µm and elongation=0.18±0.05);
SP5 consisted of average sized and slightly elliptical spermatozoa
(A=15.14±1.72µm(2) and ellipticity=1.49±0.14); and SP6 included large and round
spermatozoa (A=16.30±1.62µm(2) and elongation=0.19±0.04). There were differences 
in the sperm subpopulation distribution (P<0.001) among the five donors analyzed.
In conclusion, the results of the current study confirmed that the use of
computer sperm analysis methods combined with PCA cluster analyses are useful
methods to identify, classify, and characterize different sperm head morphometric
subpopulations in neotropical primates. Broadening our knowledge of C. goeldii
sperm morphometric abnormalities as well as developing reliable techniques for
sperm evaluation may be essential for ex situ conservation of this threatened
species.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23294901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Bioconjug Chem. 2013 Jan 16;24(1):133-43. doi: 10.1021/bc300537z. Epub 2013 Jan
2.

Potent retro-inverso D-peptide for simultaneous targeting of angiogenic blood
vasculature and tumor cells.

Li Y(1), Lei Y, Wagner E, Xie C, Lu W, Zhu J, Shen J, Wang J, Liu M.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Smart Drug Delivery, Ministry of Education and PLA,
Department of Pharmaceutics, School of Pharmacy, Fudan University, 826 Zhangheng 
Road, Shanghai 201203, PR China.

The application of tumor targeting ligands for the treatment of cancer holds the 
promise of enhanced efficacy and reduced toxicity. L-SP5 ((L)(SVSVGMKPSPRP)) is a
peptide that recognizes tumor neovasculature but not normal blood vessels (Lee et
al., Cancer Res.2007, 67, 10958-65). The current report presents the design and
application of D-SP5 ((D)(PRPSPKMGVSVS)), a novel retro-inverso analogue of
L-SP5. Peptides D-SP5 and parental L-SP5 are shown to compete for the same target
sites of a yet unknown cellular target and possess a dual-targeting bioactivity
for both activated endothelial cells (HUVEC) and several tumor cell lines.
Cellular uptake experiments showed superior in vitro targeting abilities of D-SP5
compared with L-SP5, such as enhanced internalization into stimulated HUVEC or
KB, U87, and SGC tumor cells. A radioligand receptor binding assay revealed a
higher cell affinity of D-SP5 in all tested cell lines, with K(d) values for
D-SP5 about 2-fold lower than for L-SP5. An up to 3-fold higher maximum binding
capacity (B(max)) to cells of D-SP5 was noted. Fluorescein-labeled D-SP5 upon
intravenous administration displayed strong association with tumor endothelium.
D-SP5-conjugated PEG-DSPE micelles displayed enhanced tumor homing (evidenced by 
near-infrared in vivo imaging). When loaded with doxorubicin, D-SP5 micelles
could markedly suppress tumor growth with higher efficacy than L-SP5 micelles
both in vitro and in vivo in KB tumor xenografts. In summary, the data
demonstrate that D-SP5 displays higher binding affinities toward tumor
endothelium as well as tumor cells and enhanced tumor targeting capability in
vitro and in vivo.

PMID: 23241015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Neurol Res. 2012 Dec;34(10):998-1006. doi: 10.1179/1743132812Y.0000000113.

Preventive effects of AdR-siPTEN through the regulation of NMDA receptor NR2B
subunit in trigeminal ganglia of migraine rats.

Qin G(1), Fan X, Chen L, Shen C, Gui B, Tan G, Zhou J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory Research Center, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing, China.

OBJECTIVE: Migraine is a refractory disease that is due to neuronal
hyperexcitability, and has high incidence, mortality, and disability rates. The
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor 2B (NR2B) subunit has been found to play an
important role in the pathogenesis of migraine. There is evidence suggesting that
a tumor suppressor phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) can confer a
neuroprotective effect on cerebral ischemic injury by regulating NR2B levels.
However, the role of PTEN in migraines is still unclear. This study aimed to
define whether PTEN is involved in the pathogenesis of migraine through
modulating NR2B, nitric oxide synthase (NOS), and nitric oxide (NO) in the
trigeminal ganglia of rats with glyceryl trinitrate-induced migraine.
METHODS: Adenovirus-expressing siPTEN or RFP was independently injected into the 
Sp5 (spinal trigeminal nucleus) of rats suffering from migraines. Seven days
later, tactile sensory testing was performed to detect the tactile threshold.
Immunofluorescence assay, western blot assay, RT-PCR, and biochemical examination
were done to measure PTEN, NR2B, NOS, and NO levels in the trigeminal ganglia of 
migraine rats.
RESULTS: NR2B, NOS, and NO levels significantly (P<0.05) decreased in the
trigeminal ganglia of migraine-affected rats pretreated with
adenovirus-expressing siPTEN.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that PTEN in trigeminal ganglia is implicated
in the pathogenesis of migraine, and PTEN may be a novel and promising candidate 
for future treatment and/or prevention of migraine via regulating NR2B and
decreasing NO production in trigeminal ganglia.

PMID: 23146303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Neurosci. 2012 Nov 7;32(45):15791-801. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2598-12.2012.

Somatosensory projections to cochlear nucleus are upregulated after unilateral
deafness.

Zeng C(1), Yang Z, Shreve L, Bledsoe S, Shore S.

Author information: 
(1)Kresge Hearing Research Institute, Department of Otolaryngology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0506, USA.

The cochlear nucleus (CN) receives innervation from auditory and somatosensory
structures, which can be identified using vesicular glutamate transporters,
VGLUT1 and VGLUT2. VGLUT1 is highly expressed in the magnocellular ventral CN
(VCN), which receives auditory nerve inputs. VGLUT2 is predominantly expressed in
the granule cell domain (GCD), which receives nonauditory inputs from
somatosensory nuclei, including spinal trigeminal nucleus (Sp5) and cuneate
nucleus (Cu). Two weeks after unilateral deafening VGLUT1 is significantly
decreased in ipsilateral VCN while VGLUT2 is significantly increased in the
ipsilateral GCD (Zeng et al., 2009), putatively reflecting decreased inputs from 
auditory nerve and increased inputs from nonauditory structures in guinea pigs.
Here, we wished to determine whether the upregulation of VGLUT2 represents
increases in the number of somatosensory projections to the CN that are
maintained for longer periods of time. Thus, we examined concurrent changes in
VGLUT levels and somatosensory projections in the CN using immunohistochemistry
combined with anterograde tract tracing three and six weeks following unilateral 
deafening. The data reveal that unilateral deafness leads to increased numbers of
VGLUT2-colabeled Sp5 and Cu projections to the ventral and dorsal CN. These
findings suggest that Sp5 and Cu play significant and unique roles in cross-modal
compensation and that, unlike after shorter term deafness, neurons in the
magnocellular regions also participate in the compensation. The enhanced
glutamatergic somatosensory projections to the CN may play a role in neural
spontaneous hyperactivity associated with tinnitus.

PMCID: PMC3501653
PMID: 23136418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Brain Res. 2012 Nov 16;1485:95-107. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2012.08.037. Epub
2012 Aug 24.

Multi-sensory integration in brainstem and auditory cortex.

Basura GJ(1), Koehler SD, Shore SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery, Kresge Hearing Research
Inst., The University of Michigan, 1100W Medical Center Drive, Ann Arbor, MI
48109, USA. gbasura@umich.edu

Tinnitus is the perception of sound in the absence of a physical sound stimulus. 
It is thought to arise from aberrant neural activity within central auditory
pathways that may be influenced by multiple brain centers, including the
somatosensory system. Auditory-somatosensory (bimodal) integration occurs in the 
dorsal cochlear nucleus (DCN), where electrical activation of somatosensory
regions alters pyramidal cell spike timing and rates of sound stimuli. Moreover, 
in conditions of tinnitus, bimodal integration in DCN is enhanced, producing
greater spontaneous and sound-driven neural activity, which are neural correlates
of tinnitus. In primary auditory cortex (A1), a similar auditory-somatosensory
integration has been described in the normal system (Lakatos et al., 2007), where
sub-threshold multisensory modulation may be a direct reflection of subcortical
multisensory responses (Tyll et al., 2011). The present work utilized
simultaneous recordings from both DCN and A1 to directly compare bimodal
integration across these separate brain stations of the intact auditory pathway. 
Four-shank, 32-channel electrodes were placed in DCN and A1 to simultaneously
record tone-evoked unit activity in the presence and absence of spinal trigeminal
nucleus (Sp5) electrical activation. Bimodal stimulation led to long-lasting
facilitation or suppression of single and multi-unit responses to subsequent
sound in both DCN and A1. Immediate (bimodal response) and long-lasting (bimodal 
plasticity) effects of Sp5-tone stimulation were facilitation or suppression of
tone-evoked firing rates in DCN and A1 at all Sp5-tone pairing intervals (10, 20,
and 40 ms), and greater suppression at 20 ms pairing-intervals for single unit
responses. Understanding the complex relationships between DCN and A1 bimodal
processing in the normal animal provides the basis for studying its disruption in
hearing loss and tinnitus models. This article is part of a Special Issue
entitled: Tinnitus Neuroscience.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC3489970
PMID: 22995545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Planta Med. 2012 Oct;78(15):1690-7. doi: 10.1055/s-0032-1315213. Epub 2012 Aug
17.

Pentacyclic ingamine alkaloids, a new antiplasmodial pharmacophore from the
marine sponge Petrosid Ng5 Sp5.

Ilias M(1), Ibrahim MA, Khan SI, Jacob MR, Tekwani BL, Walker LA, Samoylenko V.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Natural Products Research, School of Pharmacy, Research
Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of Mississippi, University, 
MS, USA. milias@olemiss.edu

Two new pentacyclic ingamine alkaloids, namely 22(S)-hydroxyingamine A (2) and
dihydroingenamine D (3), together with the known ingamine A (1), have been
isolated from marine sponge Petrosid Ng5 Sp5 (family Petrosiidae) obtained from
the open repository of the National Cancer Institute, USA. The structures of
compounds 1-3 were determined using 1D and 2D<U+2009>NMR, and HRESIMS techniques. The
absolute configuration of both the C9 and C22 of 2 was determined as (S) using a 
modified Mosher esterification method. Compounds 1 and 3 showed strong
antiplasmodial activity against chloroquine-sensitive (D6) and -resistant (W2)
strains of Plasmodium falciparum with IC50 values of 90 and 78<U+2009>ng/mL and 72 and
57<U+2009>ng/mL, respectively, while 2 was found to be less active (IC50 values of 200
and 140<U+2009>ng/mL, respectively). Compounds 1-3 were found to be devoid of in vitro
cytotoxicity against human solid tumor cells of breast (BT-549), ovary (SK-OV-3),
and epidermoid (KB) carcinomas and skin melanoma (SK-MEL), as well as against
noncancerous monkey kidney fibroblasts (VERO) and pig kidney epithelial
(LLC-PK11) cells, up to a maximum concentration of 10<U+2009>µg/mL. Compounds 1-3 also
displayed weak antimicrobial and moderate antileishmanial activities against
Leishmania donovani promastigotes. These polycyclic ingamine alkaloids represent 
the first example of antiplasmodial leads without a ß-carboline ring, which is
known to be responsible for the cytotoxicity of the well-known manzamine class of
marine alkaloids related to 1-3.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 22903383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Mycobiology. 2012 Mar;40(1):27-34. doi: 10.5941/MYCO.2012.40.1.027. Epub 2012 Mar
31.

Antimicrobial and synergistic effects of silver nanoparticles synthesized using
soil fungi of high altitudes of eastern himalaya.

Devi LS(1), Joshi SR.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Laboratory, Department of Biotechnology and Bioinformatics,
North-Eastern Hill University, Shillong 793022, Meghalaya, India.

Fifty three fungi isolated from soils of different microhabitats of eastern
Himalayan range (3,400~3,600 msl) were screened for mycosynthesis of silver
nanaoparticles (AgNPs) and their efficacy as antimicrobials were assessed in
combination with commonly used antibiotics. Three isolates Aspergillus terreus
SP5, Paecilomyces lilacinus SF1 and Fusarium sp. MP5 identified based on
morphological and 18S rRNA gene sequences were found to synthesize AgNPs. These
nanoparticles were characterized by visual observation followed by UV-visible
spectrophotometric analysis. The AgNPs synthesized by Aspergillus terreus SP5,
Paecilomyces lilacinus SF1 and Fusarium sp. MP5 showed absorbance maxima at 412, 
419, and 421 nm respectively in the visible region. Transmission electron
microscopy micrograph showed formation of spherical AgNPs of 5~50 nm size. The
antimicrobial activity of the mycosynthesized nanoparticles were investigated
alone and in combination with commonly used antibiotics for analysis of growth
inhibition zone against test organisms, namely, Staphylococcus aureus MTCC96,
Streptococcus pyogenes MTCC1925, Salmonella enterica MTCC735 and Enterococcus
faecalis MTCC2729. The mycosynthesized nanoparticles showed potent antibacterial 
activity and interestingly their syngergistic effect with erythromycin,
methicillin, chloramphenicol and ciprofloxacin was significantly higher as
compared to inhibitions by AgNPs alone. The present study indicates that silver
nanoparticles synthesized using soil borne indigenous fungus of high altitudes
show considerable antimicrobial activity, deserving further investigation for
potential applications.

PMCID: PMC3385152
PMID: 22783131  [PubMed]


45. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Sep;32(18):3648-62. doi: 10.1128/MCB.06769-11. Epub 2012 Jul 
9.

A WNT/p21 circuit directed by the C-clamp, a sequence-specific DNA binding domain
in TCFs.

Hoverter NP(1), Ting JH, Sundaresh S, Baldi P, Waterman ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of California,
Irvine, Irvine, California, USA.

The lymphoid enhancer factor 1/T cell factor (LEF/TCF) family of transcription
factors are downstream effectors of the WNT signaling pathway, which drives colon
tumorigenesis. LEF/TCFs have a DNA sequence-specific high-mobility group (HMG)
box that binds Wnt response elements (WREs). The "E tail" isoforms of TCFs are
alternatively spliced to include a second DNA binding domain called the C-clamp. 
We show that induction of a dominant negative C-clamp version of TCF1 (dnTCF1E)
induces p21 expression and a stall in the growth of DLD1 colon cancer cells.
Induction of a C-clamp mutant did not efficiently induce p21, nor did it stall
cell growth. Microarray analysis revealed that induction of p21 by wild-type
dnTCF1E (dnTCF1E(WT)) correlated with a decrease in expression of multiple p21
suppressors that act at multiple levels from transcription (SP5, YAP1, and
RUNX1), RNA stability (MSI2), and protein stability (CUL4A). We show that the
C-clamp is a sequence-specific DNA binding domain that can make contacts with
5'-RCCG-3' elements upstream or downstream of WREs. The C-clamp-RCCG interaction 
was critical for TCF1E-mediated transcriptional control of p21-connected target
gene promoters. Our results indicate that a rapid-response WNT/p21 circuit is
driven by C-clamp target gene selection.

PMCID: PMC3430198
PMID: 22778133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Br J Dermatol. 2012 Aug;167(2):348-58. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2012.10987.x.
Epub 2012 Jul 5.

Expression of the T-cell regulatory marker FOXP3 in primary cutaneous large
B-cell lymphoma tumour cells.

Felcht M(1), Heck M, Weiss C, Becker JC, Dippel E, Müller CS, Nashan D, Sachse
MM, Nicolay JP, Booken N, Goerdt S, Klemke CD.

Author information: 
(1)Working Group of Cutaneous Lymphomas of the Arbeitsgemeinschaft für
Dermatologische Forschung (ADF), Germany.

BACKGROUND: Primary cutaneous B-cell lymphomas (PCBCL) are subdivided into the
aggressive form, primary cutaneous diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, leg type
(PCLBCL, LT) and two subtypes of indolent behaviour (primary cutaneous follicle
centre lymphoma and primary cutaneous marginal zone B-cell lymphoma). The
difference in clinical behaviour can be explained by the tumour cell itself, or
the lymphoma microenvironment including the antitumour immune response.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate the presence of regulatory T cells (Treg),
CD4+CD25+FOXP3+, in the microenvironment of PCBCL in correlation with clinical
outcome.
METHODS: Tumour specimens of 55 consecutive cases of PCBCL were blinded and
analysed for FOXP3, CD4 and CD25 expression by immunohistochemistry. Confocal
images were taken with a Leica SP5. Statistical analyses were performed to
determine significance. The test was considered significant when P<0.05.
RESULTS: The CD4 and FOXP3 expression as well as the CD4/FOXP3 ratio were
significantly increased in PCBCL of indolent behaviour in contrast to PCLBCL, LT 
(P=0.0002 for CD4, P<0.0001 for FOXP3 and P=0.0345 for FOXP3/CD4 ratio). CD25
expression did not differ in the three groups (P=0.9414). Within the group of
patients with PCLBCL, LT we identified a subgroup with FOXP3+ tumour cells as
demonstrated by CD20/FOXP3 double stainings. Patients with FOXP3+ PCLBCL, LT
tumour cells showed a better prognosis on Kaplan-Meier analysis.
CONCLUSION: High numbers of Treg in the lymphoma microenvironment correlate with 
a better prognosis in PCBCL. In PCLBCL, LT the presence of FOXP3+ tumour cells is
beneficial for prognosis suggesting that FOXP3 expression of PCLBCL, LT tumour
cells might serve as a tumour suppressor.

© 2012 The Authors. BJD © 2012 British Association of Dermatologists.

PMID: 22512270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Int J Pharm. 2012 Apr 15;426(1-2):248-55. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2012.01.043.
Epub 2012 Jan 30.

Novel superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles for tumor embolization
application: preparation, characterization and double targeting.

Chen X(1), Lv H, Ye M, Wang S, Ni E, Zeng F, Cao C, Luo F, Yan J.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Center, Medical College, Xiamen University, 422 Siming South
Road, Xiamen, Fujian 361005, China.

The goal of this study was to develop novel embolic nanoparticles for targeted
tumor therapy with dual targeting: magnetic field-guided and peptide-directed
targeting. The embolic nanoparticles SP5.2/tTF-OCMCs-SPIO-NPs were prepared by
surface-modifying of superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIO-NPs) with
o-carboxymethylchitosans (OCMCs) and SP5.2/tTF (SP5.2: a peptide binding to
VEGFR-1; tTF: truncated tissue factor) to improve their stability and to target
over-expressing VEGFR-1 cells. The physicochemical characterization results
showed that the OCMCs-SPIO-NPs have a spherical or ellipsoidal morphology with an
average diameter of 10-20 nm. And they possess magnetism with a saturation
magnetization of 66.1 emu/g, negligible coercivity and remanence at room
temperature. In addition, the confocal microscopy, Prussian blue staining and FX 
activation analysis respectively demonstrated the peptide-directed targeting,
magnetic field-guided targeted and blood coagulation activity of the
SP5.2/tTF-OCMCs-SPIO-NPs. These properties separately belong to SP5.2, Fe(3)O(4) 
and tTF moieties of the SP5.2/tTF-OCMCs-SPIO-NPs. Thus these
SP5.2/tTF-OCMCs-SPIO-NPs with double-targeting function should have a potential
application in embolization therapy of tumor blood vessels.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22310463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Am J Manag Care. 2012 Feb;18(1 Spec No.):SP5.

Trying something new: episode payments for cancer therapy.

Newcomer LN.

PMID: 22468864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Dairy Sci. 2012 Feb;95(2):508-20. doi: 10.3168/jds.2011-4150.

Manufacture of Fior di Latte cheese by incorporation of probiotic lactobacilli.

Minervini F(1), Siragusa S, Faccia M, Dal Bello F, Gobbetti M, De Angelis M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biologia e Chimica Agro-Forestale ed Ambientale, University of
Bari, Aldo Moro, 70126, Italy.

This work aimed to select heat-resistant probiotic lactobacilli to be added to
Fior di Latte (high-moisture cow milk Mozzarella) cheese. First, 18 probiotic
strains belonging to Lactobacillus casei, Lactobacillus delbrueckii ssp.
bulgaricus, Lactobacillus paracasei, Lactobacillus plantarum, Lactobacillus
rhamnosus, and Lactobacillus reuteri were screened. Resistance to heating (65 or 
55°C for 10 min) varied markedly between strains. Adaptation at 42°C for 10 min
increased the heat resistance at 55°C for 10 min of all probiotic lactobacilli.
Heat-adapted L. delbrueckii ssp. bulgaricus SP5 (decimal reduction time at 55°C
of 227.4 min) and L. paracasei BGP1 (decimal reduction time at 55°C of 40.8 min) 
showed the highest survival under heat conditions that mimicked the stretching of
the curd and were used for the manufacture of Fior di Latte cheese. Two
technology options were chosen: chemical (addition of lactic acid to milk) or
biological (Streptococcus thermophilus as starter culture) acidification with or 
without addition of probiotics. As determined by random amplified polymorphic
DNA-PCR and 16S rRNA gene analyses, the cell density of L. delbrueckii ssp.
bulgaricus SP5 and L. paracasei BGP1 in chemically or biologically acidified Fior
di Latte cheese was approximately 8.0 log(10)cfu/g. Microbiological,
compositional, biochemical, and sensory analyses (panel test by 30 untrained
judges) showed that the use of L. delbrueckii ssp. bulgaricus SP5 and L.
paracasei BGP1 enhanced flavor formation and shelf-life of Fior di Latte cheeses.

Copyright © 2012 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 22281315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Plasmid. 2012 May;67(3):227-35. doi: 10.1016/j.plasmid.2011.12.001. Epub 2011 Dec
13.

A sensitive and simple plaque formation method for the Stx2 phage of Escherichia 
coli O157:H7, which does not form plaques in the standard plating procedure.

Islam MR(1), Ogura Y, Asadulghani M, Ooka T, Murase K, Gotoh Y, Hayashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Microbiology, Department of Infectious Diseases, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Miyazaki, Miyazaki, Japan. rakib@med.miyazaki-u.ac.jp

Bacteriophages are fascinating genetic elements that play key roles in the
evolution and diversification of bacterial genomes. Shiga toxin (Stx)-transducing
phages are important genetic elements that disseminate the stx genes among
enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli (EHEC). They are generally regarded as
lambda-like phages, but their biological and genetic properties have not been
fully elucidated. This is partly due to a serious obstacle in obtaining visible
plaques. Here, we describe a modified double agar overlay method that allows us
to easily detect and accurately enumerate plaques of Sp5, the Stx2 phage of the
EHEC O157 Sakai strain, which otherwise does not produce plaques in the standard 
plating procedure. In the modified method, the top agar was supplemented with
mitomycin C (MMC) and Ca(2+) (or Mg(2+)). MMC appears to prevent the
lysogenization of Sp5 and/or compel Sp5 to follow the lytic cycle by inducing the
SOS response in the host cells. The divalent cations significantly improve phage 
adsorption to the host cells and thus yield a synergistic effect in combination
with MMC. We further applied this method to a receptor analysis of Sp5 and
obtained findings that suggest that the YaeT (BamA) protein serves as the
receptor of Sp5. This method would be a very useful tool in studies of Stx2
phages and studies of other phages from various bacteria, in which researchers
often encounter problems with plaque formation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22186359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Neurosci Lett. 2011 Nov 14;505(2):176-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2011.10.015. Epub 
2011 Oct 13.

Rats subjected to chronic-intermittent hypoxia have increased density of
noradrenergic terminals in the trigeminal sensory and motor nuclei.

Mody P(1), Rukhadze I, Kubin L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6046, USA.

Rodents subjected to chronic intermittent hypoxia (CIH) are used to investigate
the mechanisms underlying the consequences of the obstructive sleep apnea (OSA)
syndrome. Following CIH, rats have an increased density of noradrenergic
terminals in the hypoglossal motor nucleus which innervates lingual muscles that 
protect the upper airway from collapse in OSA patients. Here, we investigated
whether such an increase also occurs in other brainstem nuclei. Six pairs of male
Sprague-Dawley rats were exposed to CIH or sham treatment for 10h/day for 35
days, with O(2) level oscillating between 24% and 7% every 3min. Brainstem
sections were immunohistochemically processed for dopamine-ß-hydroxylase, a
marker for norepinephrine. Noradrenergic terminal varicosities were counted in
the center of the trigeminal motor nucleus (Mo5) and the interpolar part of the
spinal trigeminal sensory nucleus (Sp5). In the Mo5, noradrenergic varicosities
tended to be 9% more numerous in CIH- than sham-treated rats, and in the Sp5 they
were 18% more numerous in CIH rats (184±9 vs. 156±8 per 100×100µm counting box;
p=0.03, n=18 section pairs).These data suggest that CIH elicits sprouting of
noradrenergic terminals in multiple motor and sensory regions of the lower
brainstem. This may alter motor and cardiorespiratory outputs and the
transmission of cardiorespiratory and motor reflexes in CIH rats and, by
implication, in OSA patients.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3220619
PMID: 22015761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Tsitologiia. 2011;53(7):555-63.

[Analysis of glycogen structure in rat hepatocytes using cytochemical and FRET
methods].

[Article in Russian]

Bezborodkina NN, Shtein GI, Sivova EV, Chestnova AIu, Kudriavtsev BN.

Using cytochemical and FRET (Forster, Resonance Energy Transfer) methods, the
glycogen structure in rat hepatocytes was investigated during fasting and at
different time intervals after per os glucose administration to animals.
Hepatocytes on slides were stained with fluorescent PAS-reaction. Staining the
slides with ethidium bromide-SO2 (EtBr-SO2) for 40 min revealed a labile glycogen
fraction (LE), and the subsequent staining the same samples with auramine-SO2
(Au-SO2) for 50 min showed a stable glycogen fraction (SF) in the cells. The
total glycogen content (LF and SF) in the hepatocytes at different stages of
refeeding was determined by means of cytofluorimetry, and then efficiency of FRET
was measured in the same cells. Registration of FRET in several areas of the
cells was carried out on a laser scanning confocal microscope Leica TCS SP5 with 
application of FRET AB (Acceptor Photobleaching) procedure. In this procedure,
auramine served as a donor (D) and ethidium bromide was an acceptor (A). It was
shown that the efficiency of FRET varied from 10 to 14 % during refeeding, while 
the glycogen structure had a marked influence on the value of this parameter.
FRET efficiency was shown to correlate with the ratio A/D in the cells of hungry 
rats and at the early stages after glucose administration to animals, which
reflected the degree of filling of the external tiers of glycogen molecules of
glucose residues. At later stages, this correlation was either less pronounced or
absent. It was found that the FRET efficiency can vary by 3-4 times at the same
value of A/D. Since the probability of energy transfer from D to A is
proportional to 1/R6, where R is a distance between D and A, such variations of
the FRET efficiency indicate that the glycogen molecules possess a labile
structure in which the chain of glucose residues can deviate from its axis by a
distance of about half their diameter.

PMID: 21938927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Conserv Dent. 2011 Apr;14(2):164-8. doi: 10.4103/0972-0707.82624.

Comparing microleakage and layering methods of silorane-based resin composite in 
class V cavities using confocal microscopy: An in vitro study.

Usha H(1), Kumari A, Mehta D, Kaiwar A, Jain N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Conservative Dentistry and Endodontics, V. S. Dental College and
Hospital, VV Puram, Bangalore - 560 004, India.

AIMS: This in vitro study compared the effects of different layering techniques
on the microleakage of silorane-based resin composite using confocal laser
scanning microscope.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Forty caries free premolars extracted for orthodontic
reasons were used. A class V cavity was prepared on the buccal surface in each of
the premolars, with the gingival margin of the cavity being 1 mm above
cementoenamel junction. The cavities were restored with a silorane-based resin
composite (Filtek() P90 Silorane Low Shrink Restorative, 3M ESPE) using two
different layering techniques - split incremental and oblique layering technique.
All samples were subjected to 1000 thermal cycles of 5°C/55°C in water with a 30 
second dwell time, and after the procedure, the teeth were immersed in 0.6%
aqueous rhodamine dye for 48 hours. Sectioned samples were examined under a
Confocal Fluorescence Imaging Microscope (Leica TCS-SP5, DM6000-CFS) at 10×
magnification, and microleakage scores were analyzed statistically using paired
"t" test and Mann-Whitney test. Width of interface between the tooth surface and 
resin composite was measured using a digital scale (Snagit digital scale).
RESULTS: Microleakage was seen along the entire perimeter of restoration
irrespective of the layering technique used. The microleakage score was same in
both the groups. Statistical analysis of width of interface showed significant
difference between the two layering techniques. The width was significantly less 
in split incremental technique, indicating less polymerization shrinkage.
CONCLUSIONS: This in vitro study showed that the silorane-based resin composite
shows microleakage irrespective of the layering technique used for class V
cavities. However, this problem can be minimized significantly by using split
incremental technique for restoration of class V lesions.

PMCID: PMC3146110
PMID: 21814359  [PubMed]


54. Coll Antropol. 2011 Jun;35(2):335-9.

Impact of body composition on performance in fitness tests among personnel of the
Croatian navy.

Sporis G(1), Jukic I, Bok D, Vuleta D Jr, Harasin D.

Author information: 
(1)University of Zagreb, Faculty of Kinesiology, Sports Diagnostic Center,
Zagreb, Croatia. gsporis@kif.hr

The purpose of this study was to determine the impact of body weight on fitness
tests among the personnel of the Croatian navy. Forty two naval personnel (age 27
+/- 4.1 years; body mass 86.2 +/- 4.9 kg; height 184.6 +/- 7.4 cm; body fat
percentage 17.3 +/- 5.2) participated in this study. In order to evaluate the
fitness of the naval servicemen, we applied a testing procedure that included
measurements of 7 fitness tests and 15 body anthropometric tests. A negative
correlation was found between the body fat percentage and all the analyzed sprint
tests and three anaerobic power tests (r), SP5 (r = -0.42), SP10 (r = -0.51),
SP20 (r = -0.53), SJ (r = -0.45), CM (r = -0.57), SLJ (r = -0.67). Also a
negative correlation was found between the body fat percentage and VO2(max) (r = 
-0.44). A positive correlation was found between the sprint test and the power
performance test and thigh and calf girth. Spiriting ability is influenced by the
strength of a person. This is one of the reasons why we found a positive
correlation between the sprint test (SP5, SP10 and SP20) and thigh and calf
girth. In this study we found a negative correlation between body fat percentages
and all the sprint tests and three anaerobic power tests and VO2(max). The
ectomorph somatotypes have positive correlations with all variables. The
mesomorph somatotypes have the greatest positive correlations with all variables.
The endomorph somatotypes have negative correlations with all variables.
According to the body composition of Croatian naval servicemen we can conclude
that they need a sufficient level of strength and endurance for everyday tasks.
The effectiveness of a weight-management program is determined by the success of 
the participants in losing the necessary amount of weight and being able to
maintain that weight loss. This requires long-term tracking of these individuals 
in a naval environment.

PMID: 21755699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Arch Microbiol. 2011 Dec;193(12):867-82. doi: 10.1007/s00203-011-0720-y. Epub
2011 Jun 23.

Analysis of the surface proteins of Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans strain SP5/1
and the new, pyrite-oxidizing Acidithiobacillus isolate HV2/2, and their possible
involvement in pyrite oxidation.

Klingl A(1), Moissl-Eichinger C, Wanner G, Zweck J, Huber H, Thomm M, Rachel R.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Electron Microscopy at the Institute for Anatomy, University of
Regensburg, Universitätsstr. 31, 93053, Regensburg, Germany.

Two strains of rod-shaped, pyrite-oxidizing acidithiobacilli, their cell envelope
structure and their interaction with pyrite were investigated in this study.
Cells of both strains, Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans strain SP5/1 and the
moderately thermophilic Acidithiobacillus sp. strain HV2/2, were similar in size,
with slight variations in length and diameter. Two kinds of cell appendages were 
observed: flagella and pili. Besides a typical Gram-negative cell architecture
with inner and outer membrane, enclosing a periplasm, both strains were covered
by a hitherto undescribed, regularly arranged 2-D protein crystal with
p2-symmetry. In A. ferrooxidans, this protein forms a stripe-like structure on
the surface. A similar surface pattern with almost identical lattice vectors was 
also seen on the cells of strain HV2/2. For the surface layer of both bacteria, a
direct contact to pyrite crystals was observed in ultrathin sections, indicating 
that the S-layer is involved in maintaining this contact site. Observations on an
S-layer-deficient strain show, however, that cell adhesion does not strictly
depend on the presence of the S-layer and that this surface protein has an
influence on cell shape. Furthermore, the presented data suggest the ability of
the S-layer protein to complex Fe3+ ions, suggesting a role in the physiology of 
the microorganisms.

PMID: 21698546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Sex Dev. 2011;5(3):124-30. doi: 10.1159/000327709. Epub 2011 May 24.

Expression and functional analysis of Dkk1 during early gonadal development.

Combes AN(1), Bowles J, Feng CW, Chiu HS, Khoo PL, Jackson A, Little MH, Tam PP, 
Koopman P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics and Development, Institute for Molecular
Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Qld., Australia.

WNT signalling plays a central role in mammalian sex determination by promoting
ovarian development and repressing aspects of testis development in the early
gonad. Dickkopf homolog 1 (DKK1) is a WNT signalling antagonist that plays
critical roles in multiple developmental systems by modulating WNT activity.
Here, we examined the role of DKK1 in mouse sex determination and early gonadal
development. Dkk1 mRNA was upregulated sex-specifically during testis
differentiation, suggesting that DKK1 could repress WNT signalling in the
developing testis. However, we observed overtly normal testis development in
Dkk1-null XY gonads, and found no significant upregulation of Axin2 or Sp5 that
would indicate increased canonical WNT signalling. Nor did we find significant
differences in expression of key markers of testis and ovarian development. We
propose that DKK1 may play a protective role that is not unmasked by
loss-of-function in the absence of other stressors.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC3121542
PMID: 21654186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Neurophysiol. 2011 Jun;105(6):3067-79. doi: 10.1152/jn.00822.2010. Epub 2011
Apr 6.

Altered responses of MeCP2-deficient mouse brain stem to severe hypoxia.

Kron M(1), Zimmermann JL, Dutschmann M, Funke F, Müller M.

Author information: 
(1)Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft Research Center for Molecular Physiology of
the Brain, Zentrum für Physiologie und Pathophysiologie, Abteilung Neuro- und
Sinnesphysiologie, Georg-August-Universität Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.

Rett syndrome (RTT) patients suffer from respiratory arrhythmias with frequent
apneas causing intermittent hypoxia. In a RTT mouse model (methyl-CpG-binding
protein 2-deficient mice; Mecp2(-/y)) we recently discovered an enhanced
hippocampal susceptibility to hypoxia and hypoxia-induced spreading depression
(HSD). In the present study we investigated whether this also applies to infant
Mecp2(-/y) brain stem, which could become life-threatening due to failure of
cardiorespiratory control. HSD most reliably occurred in the nucleus of the
solitary tract (NTS) and the spinal trigeminal nucleus (Sp5). HSD susceptibility 
of the Mecp2(-/y) NTS and Sp5 was increased on 8 mM K(+)-mediated conditioning.
5-HT(1A) receptor stimulation with 8-hydroxy-2-(di-propylamino)tetralin
(8-OH-DPAT) postponed HSD by up to 40%, mediating genotype-independent
protection. The deleterious impact of HSD on in vitro respiration became obvious 
in rhythmically active slices, where HSD propagation into the pre-Bötzinger
complex (pre-BötC) immediately arrested the respiratory rhythm. Compared with
wild-type, the Mecp2(-/y) pre-BötC was invaded less frequently by HSD, but if so,
HSD occurred earlier. On reoxygenation, in vitro rhythms reappeared with
increased frequency, which was less pronounced in Mecp2(-/y) slices. 8-OH-DPAT
increased respiratory frequency but failed to postpone HSD in the pre-BötC.
Repetitive hypoxia facilitated posthypoxic recovery only if HSD occurred. In 57% 
of Mecp2(-/y) slices, however, HSD spared the pre-BötC. Although this
occasionally promoted residual hypoxic respiratory activity ("gasping"), it also 
prolonged the posthypoxic recovery, and thus the absence of central inspiratory
drive, which in vivo would lengthen respiratory arrest. In view of the breathing 
disorders in RTTs, the increased hypoxia susceptibility of MeCP2-deficient brain 
stem potentially contributes to life-threatening disturbances of
cardiorespiratory control.

PMID: 21471397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Cancer Res. 2011 Jan 1;71(1):197-205. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1282.

Novel synthetic antagonists of canonical Wnt signaling inhibit colorectal cancer 
cell growth.

Waaler J(1), Machon O, von Kries JP, Wilson SR, Lundenes E, Wedlich D, Gradl D,
Paulsen JE, Machonova O, Dembinski JL, Dinh H, Krauss S.

Author information: 
(1)Section for Cellular and Genetic Therapy, Institute of Microbiology, Oslo
University Hospital, and Norwegian Center for Stem Cell Research,
Forskningsparken, Oslo, Norway. jo.waaler@rr-research.no

Canonical Wnt signaling is deregulated in several types of human cancer where it 
plays a central role in tumor cell growth and progression. Here we report the
identification of 2 new small molecules that specifically inhibit canonical Wnt
pathway at the level of the destruction complex. Specificity was verified in
various cellular reporter systems, a Xenopus double-axis formation assay and a
gene expression profile analysis. In human colorectal cancer (CRC) cells, the new
compounds JW67 and JW74 rapidly reduced active ß-catenin with a subsequent
downregulation of Wnt target genes, including AXIN2, SP5, and NKD1. Notably,
AXIN2 protein levels were strongly increased after compound exposure. Long-term
treatment with JW74 inhibited the growth of tumor cells in both a mouse xenograft
model of CRC and in Apc(Min) mice (multiple intestinal neoplasia, Min). Our
findings rationalize further preclinical and clinical evaluation of these new
compounds as novel modalities for cancer treatment.

© 2011 AACR.

PMID: 21199802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Eur J Neurosci. 2011 Feb;33(3):409-20. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2010.07547.x.
Epub 2010 Dec 29.

Somatosensory inputs modify auditory spike timing in dorsal cochlear nucleus
principal cells.

Koehler SD(1), Pradhan S, Manis PB, Shore SE.

Author information: 
(1)Kresge Hearing Research Institute, Department of Otolaryngology, University of
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

In addition to auditory inputs, dorsal cochlear nucleus (DCN) pyramidal cells in 
the guinea pig receive and respond to somatosensory inputs and perform
multisensory integration. DCN pyramidal cells respond to sounds with
characteristic spike-timing patterns that are partially controlled by rapidly
inactivating potassium conductances. Deactivating these conductances can modify
both spike rate and spike timing of responses to sound. Somatosensory pathways
are known to modify response rates to subsequent acoustic stimuli, but their
effect on spike timing is unknown. Here, we demonstrate that preceding tonal
stimulation with spinal trigeminal nucleus (Sp5) stimulation significantly alters
the first spike latency, the first interspike interval and the average discharge 
regularity of firing evoked by the tone. These effects occur whether the neuron
is excited or inhibited by Sp5 stimulation alone. Our results demonstrate that
multisensory integration in DCN alters spike-timing representations of acoustic
stimuli in pyramidal cells. These changes likely occur through synaptic
modulation of intrinsic excitability or synaptic inhibition.

© 2010 The Authors. European Journal of Neuroscience © 2010 Federation of
European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3059071
PMID: 21198989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Biochem J. 2011 Apr 15;435(2):529-37. doi: 10.1042/BJ20100773.

A functional family-wide screening of SP/KLF proteins identifies a subset of
suppressors of KRAS-mediated cell growth.

Fernandez-Zapico ME(1), Lomberk GA, Tsuji S, DeMars CJ, Bardsley MR, Lin YH,
Almada LL, Han JJ, Mukhopadhyay D, Ordog T, Buttar NS, Urrutia R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 
Rochester, MN 55901, USA.

SP/KLF (Specificity protein/Krüppel-like factor) transcription factors comprise
an emerging group of proteins that may behave as tumour suppressors.
Incidentally, many cancers that display alterations in certain KLF proteins are
also associated with a high incidence of KRAS (V-Ki-ras2 Kirsten rat sarcoma
viral oncogene homologue) mutations. Therefore in the present paper we
investigate whether SP/KLF proteins suppress KRAS-mediated cell growth, and more 
importantly, the potential mechanisms underlying these effects. Using a
comprehensive family-wide screening of the 24 SP/KLF members, we discovered that 
SP5, SP8, KLF2, KLF3, KLF4, KLF11, KLF13, KLF14, KLF15 and KLF16 inhibit cellular
growth and suppress transformation mediated by oncogenic KRAS. Each protein in
this subset of SP/KLF members individually inhibits BrdU (5-bromo-2-deoxyuridine)
incorporation in KRAS oncogenic-mutant cancer cells. SP5, KLF3, KLF11, KLF13,
KLF14 and KLF16 also increase apoptosis in these cells. Using KLF11 as a
representative model for mechanistic studies, we demonstrate that this protein
inhibits the ability of cancer cells to form both colonies in soft agar and
tumour growth in vivo. Molecular studies demonstrate that these effects of KLF11 
are mediated, at least in part, through silencing cyclin A via binding to its
promoter and leading to cell-cycle arrest in S-phase. Interestingly, similar to
KLF11, KLF14 and KLF16 mechanistically share the ability to modulate the
expression of cyclin A. Collectively, the present study stringently defines a
distinct subset of SP/KLF proteins that impairs KRAS-mediated cell growth, and
that mechanistically some members of this subset accomplish this, at least in
part, through regulation of the cyclin A promoter.

PMCID: PMC3130109
PMID: 21171965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Neuroscience. 2011 Mar 10;176:142-51. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2010.12.010.
Epub 2010 Dec 15.

Cuneate and spinal trigeminal nucleus projections to the cochlear nucleus are
differentially associated with vesicular glutamate transporter-2.

Zeng C(1), Shroff H, Shore SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Kresge Hearing Research Institute, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

There are distinct distributions and associations with vesicular glutamate
transporters (VGLUTs) for auditory nerve and specific somatosensory projections
in the cochlear nucleus (CN). Auditory nerve fibers project primarily to the
magnocellular areas of the ventral cochlear nucleus and deepest layer of the
dorsal cochlear nucleus and predominantly colabel with VGLUT1; whereas the spinal
trigeminal nucleus (Sp5) projections terminate primarily in the granule cell
domains (GCD) of CN and predominantly colabel with VGLUT2. Here, we demonstrate
that the terminals of another somatosensory pathway, originating in the cuneate
nucleus (Cu), also colabel with VGLUT2. Cu projections in cochlear nucleus
exhibited a bilateral distribution pattern with ipsilateral dominance, with 30%
of these classified as putative mossy fibers (MFs) and 70% as small boutons
(SBs). Cu anterograde endings had a more prominent distribution in the GCD than
Sp5, with a higher percentage of MF terminals throughout the CN and higher MF/SB 
ratio in GCD. 56% of Cu endings and only 25% of Sp5 endings colabeled with
VGLUT2. In both cases these were mostly MFs with only 43% of Cu SBs and 18% of
Sp5 SBs colabeled with VGLUT2. The few Cu and Sp5 terminals that colabeled with
VGLUT1 (11% vs. 1%), were evenly distributed between MFs and SBs. The high number
of VGLUT2-positive Cu MFs predominantly located in the GCD, may reflect a
faster-acting pathway that activates primarily dorsal cochlear nucleus cells via 
granule cell axons. In contrast, the higher percentage of Sp5-labeled SB
terminals and a greater number of projections outside the GCD suggest a
slower-acting pathway that activates both dorsal and ventral cochlear nucleus
principal cells. Both projections, with their associations to VGLUT2 likely play 
a role in the enhancement of VGLUT2 after unilateral deafness [Zeng C,
Nannapaneni N, Zhou J, Hughes LF, Shore S (2009) J Neurosci 29:4210-4217] that
may be associated with tinnitus.

Copyright © 2011 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3040248
PMID: 21167260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Anticancer Drugs. 2011 Mar;22(3):213-22. doi: 10.1097/CAD.0b013e3283401f4d.

Synergistic tumor growth-inhibitory effect of the prostate-specific
antigen-activated fusion peptide BSD352 for prostate cancer therapy.

Li B(1), Zhang LJ, Zhang ZL, Long M, Ren JH, Lin F, Wang X, Wei JX, Dong K, Zhang
HZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Tangdu Hospital, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, China.

Prostate-specific antigen (PSA), a serine protease, is a promising target for the
development of prodrugs in prostate cancer treatment. In this study, we designed 
a novel fusion peptide, BSD352, containing three functional domains: a protein
transduction domain from HIV transactivating regulatory protein (TAT) followed by
the BH3 domain of the p53 upregulated modulator of apoptosis (TAT-BH3), an
anti-vascular endothelial growth factor peptide (SP5.2), and an anti-basic
fibroblast growth factor peptide (DG2). These different domains in BSD352 were
linked together by a linker sequence corresponding to a PSA hydrolytic substrate 
peptide. The BSD352 fusion peptide could be selectively cleaved by PSA in
PSA-producing LNCaP prostate cancer cells. Furthermore, the BSD352 fusion peptide
was efficiently transduced into tumor cells both in vitro and in vivo, and the
BH3 domain was found to induce tumor cell apoptosis by elevating the expression
of Bax, cytochrome C release, and caspase-9 cleavage. Moreover, the SP5.2 and DG2
domains in the BSD352 fusion peptide also exhibited in-vitro endothelial cell
growth inhibition and in-vivo antiangiogenic activities. Direct injection of
BSD352 into an established LNCaP xenograft tumor in mice inhibited tumor growth, 
whereas a synergistic effect was observed with the combined use of wild-type BH3,
SP5.2, and DG2 functional domains. These results suggest that BSD352 could be
beneficial for the treatment of accessible prostate tumors and may provide a
complementary strategy for prostate cancer therapy.

PMID: 21150773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Stem Cells Dev. 2011 Apr;20(4):621-33. doi: 10.1089/scd.2010.0209. Epub 2011 Jan 
8.

Dual roles of Oct4 in the maintenance of mouse P19 embryonal carcinoma cells: as 
negative regulator of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling and competence provider for
Brachyury induction.

Marikawa Y(1), Tamashiro DA, Fujita TC, Alarcon VB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Biochemistry, and Physiology, Institute for Biogenesis 
Research, University of Hawaii John A. Burns School of Medicine, Honolulu, HI
96813, USA. marikawa@hawaii.edu

Transcription factor Oct4 is expressed in pluripotent cell lineages during mouse 
development, namely, in inner cell mass (ICM), primitive ectoderm, and primordial
germ cells. Functional studies have revealed that Oct4 is essential for the
maintenance of pluripotency in inner cell mass and for the survival of primordial
germ cells. However, the function of Oct4 in the primitive ectoderm has not been 
fully explored. In this study, we investigated the role of Oct4 in mouse P19
embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells, which exhibit molecular and developmental
properties similar to the primitive ectoderm, as an in vitro model. Knockdown of 
Oct4 in P19 EC cells upregulated several early mesoderm-specific genes, such as
Wnt3, Sp5, and Fgf8, by activating Wnt/ß-catenin signaling. Overexpression of
Oct4 was sufficient to suppress Wnt/ß-catenin signaling through its action as a
transcriptional activator. However, Brachyury, a key regulator of early mesoderm 
development and a known direct target of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, was unable to
be upregulated in the absence of Oct4, even with additional activation of
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling. Microarray analysis revealed that Oct4 positively
regulated the expression of Tdgf1, a critical component of Nodal signaling, which
was required for the upregulation of Brachyury in response to Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling in P19 EC cells. We propose a model that Oct4 maintains pluripotency of
P19 EC cells through 2 counteracting actions: one is to suppress
mesoderm-inducing Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, and the other is to provide competence
to Brachyury gene to respond to Wnt/ß-catenin signaling.

PMCID: PMC3112048
PMID: 21083502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Water Sci Technol. 2010;62(7):1526-35. doi: 10.2166/wst.2010.936.

Electro-coagulation treatment efficiency of graphite, iron and aluminum
electrodes using alum and wood ash electrolytes on a Kraft pulp and paper mill
effluent.

Orori OB(1), Etiégni L, Senelwa K, Mwamburi MM, Balozi KB, Barisa GK, Omutange
ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forestry and Wood Science, Moi University, Eldoret 30100, Kenya.
benorori@yahoo.com

Specific power consumption and reduction of BOD, COD, TS, pH, and chemical
elements were used to determine the treatment efficiency of Fe, graphite and Al
electrodes with alum and wood ash as supporting electrolytes on the effluent from
a Kraft pulp and paper mill in Kenya. Five sampling points were selected along
mill's effluent treatment system: primary settling tank (SP1), first aerated
lagoon (SP2), second aerated lagoon (SP3), stabilization pond (SP4), and at
discharge point (SP5). Operating costs were also compared between treatments.
Graphite electrodes combined with alum showed the lowest power consumption (0.5
to 3.9 mWh/m³), followed by Al and Fe. All the electrodes reduced color from a
maximum of 3,200°H to the minimum local standard of 15°H. However Al electrode
with alum was the most effective method for BOD and COD reduction by over 60% and
58.8% respectively and generated less sludge at all sampling points. The cost of 
treatment was lowest with graphite electrode (US$0.006 to 0.0008 per m³ of
effluent), but highest with Al electrodes combined with wood ash (US$31.74 to
8.34 per m³). Further study is required for the effectiveness of increasing the
concentration of wood ash leachate at higher concentration and current density.

PMID: 20935369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Biol Chem. 2010 Dec 10;285(50):39339-47. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.147587. Epub
2010 Oct 6.

Structure-based catalytic optimization of a type III Rubisco from a
hyperthermophile.

Nishitani Y(1), Yoshida S, Fujihashi M, Kitagawa K, Doi T, Atomi H, Imanaka T,
Miki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University,
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan.

The Calvin-Benson-Bassham cycle is responsible for carbon dioxide fixation in all
plants, algae, and cyanobacteria. The enzyme that catalyzes the carbon
dioxide-fixing reaction is ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase
(Rubisco). Rubisco from a hyperthermophilic archaeon Thermococcus kodakarensis
(Tk-Rubisco) belongs to the type III group, and shows high activity at high
temperatures. We have previously found that replacement of the entire a-helix 6
of Tk-Rubisco with the corresponding region of the spinach enzyme (SP6 mutant)
results in an improvement of catalytic performance at mesophilic temperatures,
both in vivo and in vitro, whereas the former and latter half-replacements of the
a-helix 6 (SP4 and SP5 mutants) do not yield such improvement. We report here the
crystal structures of the wild-type Tk-Rubisco and the mutants SP4 and SP6, and
discuss the relationships between their structures and enzymatic activities. A
comparison among these structures shows the movement and the increase of
temperature factors of a-helix 6 induced by four essential factors. We thus
supposed that an increase in the flexibility of the a-helix 6 and loop 6 regions 
was important to increase the catalytic activity of Tk-Rubisco at ambient
temperatures. Based on this structural information, we constructed a new mutant, 
SP5-V330T, which was designed to have significantly greater flexibility in the
above region, and it proved to exhibit the highest activity among all mutants
examined to date. The thermostability of the SP5-V330T mutant was lower than that
of wild-type Tk-Rubisco, providing further support on the relationship between
flexibility and activity at ambient temperatures.

PMCID: PMC2998091
PMID: 20926376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Zhonghua Nan Ke Xue. 2010 May;16(5):445-9.

[Construction of eukaryotic vector of small hairpin interfering RNA against
NYD-SP5].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang FF(1), Pan BC, Zheng ZH, Yan W.

Author information: 
(1)Assisted Reproduction Center, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Shengfing Hospital, China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110004, China.

OBJECTIVE: NYD-SP5 is a newly cloned gene highly expressed in human testes, which
consists of 3 598 nucleotides including a 1 027-amino acid open reading frame. It
is a human-mouse homologous gene. The domain analysis indicated that the NYD-SP5 
protein is a transmembrane protein. This study aimed to design and establish
recombinant plasmids of small hairpin interfering RNA (shRNA) against NYD-SP5,
and to pave the way for the analysis of the function of NYD-SP5 in the testis
using the transgenic mouse model.
METHODS: Four sequences of oligonucleotides with the small hairpin structure were
designed based on the NYD-SP5 mRNA sequence. Recombinant plasmids were
constructed by cloning these oligonucleotides into pGPU6/GFP/Neo vectors.
Interfering plasmids against GAPDH were established as positive controls and
those targeting non-specific genes used as negative controls. The positive
constructs were verified by enzyme digestion and sequencing.
RESULTS: Plasmid screening and sequencing showed the sequences of the recombinant
plasmids to be the same as the shRNA transcribed sequences, which indicated the
successful establishment of the recombinant vectors.
CONCLUSION: The shRNA expression vector targeting NYD-SP5 could be established
successfully.

PMID: 20684327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Auton Neurosci. 2010 Dec 8;158(1-2):71-8. doi: 10.1016/j.autneu.2010.06.013. Epub
2010 Jul 15.

Change in central kinin B2 receptor density after exercise training in rats.

Caetano AL(1), Viel TA, Bittencourt MF, Araujo MS, De Angelis K, Buck HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Sciences, Faculdade de Ciências Médicas da Santa
Casa de São Paulo, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil.

Cardiovascular responses elicited by the stimulation of kinin B2 receptors in the
IV cerebral ventricle, paratrigeminal nucleus or in the thoracic spinal cord are 
similar to those observed during an exercise bout. Considering that the
kalikrein-kinin system (KKS) could act on the cardiovascular modulation during
behavioral responses as physical exercise or stress, this study evaluated the
central B2 receptor densities of Wistar (W) and spontaneously hypertensive rats
(SHR) after chronic moderate exercise. Animals were exercise-trained for ten
weeks on a treadmill. Afterwards, systolic blood pressure decreased in both
trained strains. Animals were killed and the medulla and spinal cord extracted
for B2 receptor autoradiography. Trained animals were compared to their sedentary
controls. Sedentary groups showed specific binding sites for Hoe-140 (fmol/mg of 
tissue) in laminas 1 and 2 of the spinal cord, nucleus of the solitary tract
(NTS), area postrema (AP), spinal trigeminal tract (sp5) and paratrigeminal
nucleus (Pa5). In trained W a significant increase (p<0.05) in specific binding
was observed in the Pa5 (31.3%) and NTS (28.2%). Trained SHR showed a significant
decrease in receptor density in lamina 2 (21.9%) of the thoracic spinal cord and 
an increase in specific binding in Pa5 (36.1%). We suggest that in the medulla,
chronic exercise could hyper stimulate the KKS enhancing their efficiency through
the increase of B2 receptor density, involving this receptor in central
cardiovascular control during exercise or stress. In the lamina 2, B2 receptor
might be involved in the exercise-induced hypotension.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20637711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Nutr Sci Vitaminol (Tokyo). 2010;56(1):34-40.

Spirulina prevents atherosclerosis by reducing hypercholesterolemia in rabbits
fed a high-cholesterol diet.

Cheong SH(1), Kim MY, Sok DE, Hwang SY, Kim JH, Kim HR, Lee JH, Kim YB, Kim MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food and Nutrition, Chungnam National University, Daejeon, South
Korea.

The anti-atherogenic effects of spirulina (Spirulina platensis) were investigated
in the New Zealand White (NZW) rabbit model. The animal had hypercholesterolemia 
induced by being fed a high cholesterol diet (HCD) containing 0.5% cholesterol
for 4 wk, and then fed a HCD supplemented with 1 or 5% spirulina (SP1 or SP5) for
an additional 8 wk. Spirulina supplementation lowered intimal surface of the
aorta by 32.2 to 48.3%, compared to HCD. Serum triglyceride (TG) and total
cholesterol (TC) significantly were reduced in SP groups. After 8 wk, serum low
density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) remarkably decreased by 26.4% in SP1 and 
41.2% in SP5, compared to HCD. On the other hand, high density lipoprotein
cholesterol (HDL-C) was markedly increased in SP1 and SP5 compared with that in
the HCD group from 2 to 8 wk. These results suggest that spirulina intake can
cause the reduction of hypercholesterolemic atherosclerosis, associated with a
decrease in levels of serum TC, TG and LDL-C, and an elevation of HDL-C level.
Spirulina may, therefore, be beneficial in preventing atherosclerosis and
reducing risk factors for cardiovascular diseases.

PMID: 20354344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. BMC Evol Biol. 2010 Mar 30;10:88. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-10-88.

A clustered set of three Sp-family genes is ancestral in the Metazoa: evidence
from sequence analysis, protein domain structure, developmental expression
patterns and chromosomal location.

Schaeper ND(1), Prpic NM, Wimmer EA.

Author information: 
(1)Georg-August-Universität, Johann-Friedrich-Blumenbach-Institut für Zoologie
und Anthropologie, Abteilung Entwicklungsbiologie, GZMB, Ernst-Caspari-Haus,
Justus-von-Liebig-Weg 11, 37077 Göttingen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The Sp-family of transcription factors are evolutionarily conserved
zinc finger proteins present in many animal species. The orthology of the Sp
genes in different animals is unclear and their evolutionary history is therefore
controversially discussed. This is especially the case for the Sp gene buttonhead
(btd) which plays a key role in head development in Drosophila melanogaster, and 
has been proposed to have originated by a recent gene duplication. The purpose of
the presented study was to trace orthologs of btd in other insects and
reconstruct the evolutionary history of the Sp genes within the metazoa.
RESULTS: We isolated Sp genes from representatives of a holometabolous insect
(Tribolium castaneum), a hemimetabolous insect (Oncopeltus fasciatus),
primitively wingless hexapods (Folsomia candida and Thermobia domestica), and an 
amphipod crustacean (Parhyale hawaienis). We supplemented this data set with data
from fully sequenced animal genomes. We performed phylogenetic sequence analysis 
with the result that all Sp factors fall into three monophyletic clades. These
clades are also supported by protein domain structure, gene expression, and
chromosomal location. We show that clear orthologs of the D. melanogaster btd
gene are present even in the basal insects, and that the Sp5-related genes in the
genome sequence of several deuterostomes and the basal metazoans Trichoplax
adhaerens and Nematostella vectensis are also orthologs of btd.
CONCLUSIONS: All available data provide strong evidence for an ancestral cluster 
of three Sp-family genes as well as synteny of this Sp cluster and the Hox
cluster. The ancestral Sp gene cluster already contained a Sp5/btd ortholog,
which strongly suggests that btd is not the result of a recent gene duplication, 
but directly traces back to an ancestral gene already present in the metazoan
ancestor.

PMCID: PMC3087555
PMID: 20353601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Med Food. 2010 Apr;13(2):420-6. doi: 10.1089/jmf.2009.1215.

Spirulina improves antioxidant status by reducing oxidative stress in rabbits fed
a high-cholesterol diet.

Kim MY(1), Cheong SH, Lee JH, Kim MJ, Sok DE, Kim MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food and Nutrition, Chungnam National University, Daejeon,
Republic of Korea.

The beneficial effect of Spirulina (Spirulina platensis) on tissue lipid
peroxidation and oxidative DNA damage was tested in the hypercholesterolemic New 
Zealand White rabbit model. After hypercholesterolemia was induced by feeding a
high cholesterol (0.5%) diet (HCD) for 4 weeks, then HCD supplemented with 1% or 
5% Spirulina (SP1 or SP5, respectively) was provided for an additional 8 weeks.
Spirulina supplementation significantly reduced the increased lipid peroxidation 
level in HCD-fed rabbits, and levels recovered to control values. Oxidative
stress biomarkers such as glutathione, glutathione peroxidase, glutathione
reductase, and glutathione S-transferase were significantly improved in the liver
and red blood cells of rabbits fed SP1. Furthermore, SP5 induced antioxidant
enzyme activity by 3.1-fold for glutathione, 2.5-fold for glutathione peroxidase,
2.7-fold for glutathione reductase, and 2.3-fold for glutathione S-transferase in
liver, compared to the HCD group. DNA damage in lymphocytes was significantly
reduced in both the SP1 and SP5 groups, based on the comet assay. Findings from
the present study suggest that dietary supplementation with Spirulina may be
useful to protect the cells from lipid peroxidation and oxidative DNA damage.

PMID: 20210608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Nanobiotechnology. 2010 Feb 4;8(1):2. doi: 10.1186/1477-3155-8-2.

Optical characterization of colloidal CdSe quantum dots in endothelial progenitor
cells.

Molnár M(1), Fu Y, Friberg P, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Theoretical Chemistry, School of Biotechnology, Royal Institute 
of Technology, S-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden. fu@kth.se.

We have quantitatively analyzed the confocal spectra of colloidal quantum dots
(QDs) in rat endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) by using Leica TCS SP5 Confocal 
Microscopy System. Comparison of the confocal spectra of QDs located inside and
outside EPCs revealed that the interaction between the QDs and EPCs effectively
reduces the radius of the exciton confinement inside the QDs so that the
excitonic energy increases and the QD fluorescence peak blueshifts. Furthermore, 
the EPC environment surrounding the QDs shields the QDs so that the excitation of
the QDs inside the cells is relatively weak, whereas the QDs outside the cells
can be highly excited. At high excitations, the occupation of the ground
excitonic state in the QD outside the cells becomes saturated and high-energy
states excited, resulting in a large relaxation energy and a broad fluorescence
peak. This permits, in concept, to use QD biomarkers to monitor EPCs by
characterizing QD fluorescence spectra.

PMCID: PMC2827388
PMID: 20205887  [PubMed]


72. Mar Biol. 2010;157(8):1665-1678. Epub 2010 Apr 20.

Diversity of free-living marine nematodes (Enoplida) from Baja California
assessed by integrative taxonomy.

Pereira TJ(1), Fonseca G(2), Mundo-Ocampo M(3), Guilherme BC(4), Rocha-Olivares
A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Oceanography, Centro de Investigación Científica y de
Educación Superior de Ensenada, Carretera Ensenada-Tijuana 3918, Apdo. Postal
2732, CP 22860 Ensenada, Baja California Mexico ; Department of Nematology,
University of California, Riverside, CA 92521 USA. (2)Centro de Biologia Marinha 
da Universidade de São Paulo, Rod. Manoel Hipolito do Rego km 131.5, São
Sebastião, 11600-000 Brazil. (3)Department of Nematology, University of
California, Riverside, CA 92521 USA. (4)Centro de Educação e Saúde, CES,
Universidade Federal de Campina Grande, Av. Olho D'Água da Bica s/n, Cuité, PB
Brazil. (5)Department of Biological Oceanography, Centro de Investigación
Científica y de Educación Superior de Ensenada, Carretera Ensenada-Tijuana 3918, 
Apdo. Postal 2732, CP 22860 Ensenada, Baja California Mexico.

We used morphological and molecular approaches to evaluate the diversity of
free-living marine nematodes (order Enoplida) at four coastal sites in the Gulf
of California and three on the Pacific coast of Baja California, Mexico. We
identified 22 morphological species belonging to six families, of which
Thoracostomopsidae and Oncholaimidae were the most diverse. The genus
Mesacanthion (Thoracostomopsidae) was the most widespread and diverse. Five
allopatric species, genetically and morphologically differentiated, were found in
two localities in the Gulf of California (M. sp1 and M. sp2) and three in the
Pacific coast (M. sp3, M. sp4 and M. sp5). Overall, we produced 19 and 20
sequences for the 18S and 28S genes, respectively. Neither gene displayed
intraspecific polymorphisms, which allowed us to establish that some
morphological variation was likely either ontogenetic or due to phenotypic
plasticity. Although 18S and 28S phylogenies were topologically congruent
(incongruence length difference test, P > 0.05), divergences between species were
much higher in the 28S gene. Moreover, this gene possessed a stronger
phylogenetic signal to resolve relationships involving Rhabdodemania and
Bathylaimus. On the other hand, the close relationship of Pareurystomina
(Enchilidiidae) with oncholaimids warrants further study. The 28S sequences (D2D3
domain) may be better suited for DNA barcoding of marine nematodes than those
from the 18S rDNA, particularly for differentiating closely related or cryptic
species. Finally, our results underline the relevance of adopting an integrative 
approach encompassing morphological and molecular analyses to improve the
assessment of marine nematode diversity and advance their taxonomy.

PMCID: PMC3873033
PMID: 24391248  [PubMed]


73. J Biomed Opt. 2009 Sep-Oct;14(5):054009. doi: 10.1117/1.3227036.

Characterization of an orange acceptor fluorescent protein for sensitized
spectral fluorescence resonance energy transfer microscopy using a white-light
laser.

Sun Y(1), Booker CF, Kumari S, Day RN, Davidson M, Periasamy A.

Author information: 
(1)University of Virginia, Department of Biology, W. M. Keck Center for Cellular 
Imaging, McCormick Road, Charlottesville, Virginia 22904, USA.

Orange fluorescent proteins (FPs) are attractive candidates as Forster resonance 
energy transfer (FRET) partners, bridging the gap between green and red/far-red
FPs, but they pose significant challenges using common fixed laser wavelengths.
We investigated monomeric Kusabira orange 2 (mKO2) FP as a FRET acceptor for
monomeric teal FP (mTFP) as donor on a FRET standard construct using a
fixed-distance amino acid linker, expressed in live cells. We quantified the
apparent FRET efficiency (E%) of this construct, using sensitized spectral FRET
microscopy on the Leica TCS SP5 X imaging system equipped with a white-light
laser that allows choosing any excitation wavelength from 470 to 670 nm in 1-nm
increments. The E% obtained in sensitized spectral FRET microscopy was then
confirmed with fluorescence lifetime measurements. Our results demonstrate that
mKO2 and mTFP are good FRET partners given proper imaging setups. mTFP was
optimally excited by the Argon 458 laser line, and the 540-nm wavelength
excitation for mKO2 was chosen from the white-light laser. The white-light laser 
generally extends the usage of orange and red/far-red FPs in sensitized FRET
microscopy assays by tailoring excitation and emission precisely to the needs of 
the FRET pair.

PMCID: PMC2774974
PMID: 19895111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2009;124(3-4):351-9. doi: 10.1159/000218138. Epub 2009 Jun 
25.

A technical note on quantum dots for multi-color fluorescence in situ
hybridization.

Müller S(1), Cremer M, Neusser M, Grasser F, Cremer T.

Author information: 
(1)Department Biology II, Human Genetics, Ludwig-Maximilians University, Munich, 
Germany. s.mueller@lrz.uni-muenchen.de

Quantum dots (Qdots) are semiconductor nanocrystals, which are photo-stable, show
bright fluorescence with narrow, symmetric emission spectra and are available in 
multiple resolvable colors. We established a FISH protocol for the simultaneous
visualization of up to 6 different DNA probes differentially labeled with Qdots
and with conventional organic fluorochromes. Using a Leica SP5 laser scanning
confocal microscope for image capture, we tested various combinations of
hapten-labeled probes detected with streptavidin-Qdot525, sheep
anti-digoxigenin-Qdot605, rat anti-dinitrophenyl-Qdot655 and goat
anti-mouse-Qdot655, respectively, together with FITC-dUTP-, Cy3-dUTP- and Texas
Red-dUTP-labeled probes. We further demonstrate that Qdots are suitable for
imaging of FISH probes using 4Pi microscopy, which promises to push the
resolution limits of light microscopy to 100 nanometers or less when applying a
deconvolution algorithm, but requires the use of highly photo-stable fluors.

(c) 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19556786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Vestn Oftalmol. 2009 Mar-Apr;125(2):3-7.

[Morphological features of regenerative-reparative processes in the cornea
exposed to synthetic analogues of endogenous peptide fragments of protein S100b
in an experiment].

[Article in Russian]

Olinevich VB, Ziangirova GG, Mamikonian VR, Gruden' MA, Sherstnev VV.

The effects of two 5-membered (SP5, SP6) endogenous synthetic peptide fragments
of protein S100b on the course of regenerative-reparative processes in the
corneas of Wistar rats were morphologically studied after making a graduated
injury. Conjunctival or endonasal injection of the peptides was made at two
concentrations of 10(-6) and 10(-8) M. The study peptides were found to have a
modulating effect on regenerative-reparative processes regardless of the route of
administration and to induce accelerated and qualitative corneal wound healing as
compared with the controls. The specific feature of SP5 was the formation of a
fibroblastic membrane. When SP5 was injected at a concentration of 10(-6) M, the 
membrane was more pronounced and occupied the whole area of keratectomy whereas
when this peptide was administered at a concentration of 10(-8) M, its formation 
was observed in the deep and middle corneal layers. The most marked effect of SP6
revealed during the study was the formation of newly-formed vessels over the
entire wound surface independently of the concentration of the injected
substance. Of the two study peptide fragments, SP5 is, in the authors' opinion,
promising for clinical application. Significant keratocytic proliferation noted
in the use of SP5 at a concentration of 10(-6) M may be used to accelerate
scarring when the sclera and cutaneous covering are damaged. The effects detected
with administration of SP6 at two concentrations were regarded as negative as
they did not answer the purpose set during the study performed.

PMID: 19517821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Pathol. 2009 Jun;218(2):201-9. doi: 10.1002/path.2524.

Gene expression profiling provides insights into the pathways involved in solid
pseudopapillary neoplasm of the pancreas.

Cavard C(1), Audebourg A, Letourneur F, Audard V, Beuvon F, Cagnard N, Radenen B,
Varlet P, Vacher-Lavenu MC, Perret C, Terris B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin, Université Paris Descartes, CNRS (UMR 8104), Paris, France.

Solid-pseudopapillary neoplasms (SPNs) are rare human pancreatic neoplasms
usually associated with a good prognosis. In contrast to other pancreatic
tumours, aberrant activation of the Wnt-beta-catenin pathway appears to be a
constant feature in SPN. Aside from activation of the Wnt-beta-catenin pathway,
little is known about biological pathways deregulated in SPN. We carried out
transcriptome profiling of SPN to gain insights into the pathogenesis of these
tumours. As expected, the over-expression of AXIN2, TBX3, SP5 and NOTUM
demonstrated activation of the beta-catenin pathway. Members of the Notch pathway
(HEY1, HEY2, NOTCH2) were also up-regulated, relative to their expression in
ductal adenocarcinomas (DAC) or pancreatic endocrine tumours (PET). Other genes, 
such as EDN3, HAND2, netrin-G2 and the receptor netrin-G1 ligand, involved in
neural crest differentiation, were also identified as altered. Increased levels
of SOX10 and TuJ-1 proteins were also indicative of neural-like differentiation. 
In conclusion, SPN display a complex expression profile, distinct from that
observed in PET and DAC and involving both the beta-catenin and Notch pathways,
together with expression of neural differentiation markers.

PMID: 19235837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Am J Manag Care. 2008 Nov;14(11 Suppl):SP5-13.

Primary care physicians' views of Medicare Part D.

Epstein AJ(1), Rathore SS, Alexander GC, Ketcham JD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health, Yale University, 60 College St, Rm 301, New Haven, CT
06520-8034, USA. andrew.epstein@yale.edu

OBJECTIVE: To examine physicians' attitudes about the impact of Medicare Part D
and how it varied among seniors, particularly Medicare-Medicaid dual-eligible
enrollees.
STUDY DESIGN: Web-based survey of primary care physicians in North Carolina
(generous Medicaid formulary) and Florida, Massachusetts, and Texas (restrictive 
Medicaid formularies).
METHODS: Of 5141 eligible primary care physicians, 716 (14%) responded between
November 2007 and March 2008. We examined Part D's effects on access overall and 
for selected populations. We used descriptive and regression analyses to assess
physicians' views about Part D's effects on dual-eligible enrollees and how those
views differed between North Carolina and the other states. All analyses were
weighted for nonresponse.
RESULTS: More respondents had a favorable (48%) than an unfavorable (37%) view of
Part D overall, and 55% reported Part D improved access to prescription drugs in 
general. However, 44% reported access declined for individuals with prior drug
coverage, and 64% reported Part D formularies were insufficient for their
patients' needs. Nearly half (49%) reported dual-eligible enrollees' access was
worse under Part D in 2007 relative to Medicaid before 2006; 63% reported higher 
administrative burden. Physicians reported Part D lowered dual-eligible
enrollees' access and increased providers' burden more in North Carolina than in 
the 3 restrictive Medicaid states.
CONCLUSION: Primary care physicians held generally positive but widely varying
views of Part D. Respondents expressed concerns about access to prescription
drugs under Part D, particularly for dual-eligible enrollees. Improving the
transparency and generosity of Part D formulary coverage may improve access.

PMID: 18991482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Braz J Biol. 2008 Aug;68(3):519-28.

Patterns of prey selection of Trypoxylon (Trypargilum) lactitarse Saussure
(Hymenoptera: Crabronidae) in southern Brazil.

Buschini ML(1), Borba NA, Brescovit AD.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biologia, Universidade Estadual do Centro Oeste, Guarapuava,
PR, Brazil. isatunes@yahoo.com.br

This study was carried out in the Parque Municipal das Araucárias, in the
municipality of Guarapuava, southern Brazil. A total of 449 T. lactitarse nests
were collected using trap-nests of different diameters. Fifty three species of
spiders belonging to 7 families were captured by T. lactitarse. Araneidae was the
most captured family and has been strongly represented by the genus Eustala.
Through Bray-Curtis's coefficient and the unweighted pair group method average
(UPGMA), the spiders species can be divided into 3 groups: the smaller group
includes the most abundant species (Eustala sp1, Eustala sp2, Acacesia
villalobosi, Alpaida sp1 and Araneus corporosus), the second group includes
species with intermediate abundance (Wagneriana iguape, Araneus omnicolor,
Eustala sp4, Alpaida grayi, Eustala sp3, Larinia t-notata, Mangora sp1 and
Wagneriana iguape), and the third and largest group includes the least abundant
species (Aysha gr. brevimana 1, Eustala sp5, Wagneriana eupalaestra, Alpaida
scriba, Alpaida veniliae, Araneus aff. omnicolor, Araneus sicki, Eustala sp8,
Mangora sp2, Mangora sp3, Wagneriana juquia, Alpaida sp2, Araneus blumenau,
Eustala sp6, Eustala sp7 and Ocrepeira galianoae). Of 2,029 identified spiders,
1,171 were captured in the Araucaria forest, 612 in grassland areas and 246 in
the swamp. Grassland and swamp areas evidenced greater similarity between them
than to the Araucaria Forest, regarding presence-absence of spider species in T. 
lactitarse's diet, as well as regarding species abundance in these habitats. The 
juvenile number (56%) was significantly higher than the female (38%) and male
(6%) percentages.

PMID: 18833472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. PLoS One. 2008 Jun 4;3(6):e2325. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002325.

SP5: improving protein fold recognition by using torsion angle profiles and
profile-based gap penalty model.

Zhang W(1), Liu S, Zhou Y.

Author information: 
(1)Indiana University School of Informatics and Center for Computational Biology 
and Bioinformatics, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indiana
University-Purdue University Indianapolis, Indianapolis, Indiana, United States
of America.

How to recognize the structural fold of a protein is one of the challenges in
protein structure prediction. We have developed a series of single
(non-consensus) methods (SPARKS, SP(2), SP(3), SP(4)) that are based on weighted 
matching of two to four sequence and structure-based profiles. There is a robust 
improvement of the accuracy and sensitivity of fold recognition as the number of 
matching profiles increases. Here, we introduce a new profile-profile comparison 
term based on real-value dihedral torsion angles. Together with updated
real-value solvent accessibility profile and a new variable gap-penalty model
based on fractional power of insertion/deletion profiles, the new method (SP(5)) 
leads to a robust improvement over previous SP method. There is a 2% absolute
increase (5% relative improvement) in alignment accuracy over SP(4) based on two 
independent benchmarks. Moreover, SP(5) makes 7% absolute increase (22% relative 
improvement) in success rate of recognizing correct structural folds, and 32%
relative improvement in model accuracy of models within the same fold in Lindahl 
benchmark. In addition, modeling accuracy of top-1 ranked models is improved by
12% over SP(4) for the difficult targets in CASP 7 test set. These results
highlight the importance of harnessing predicted structural properties in
challenging remote-homolog recognition. The SP(5) server is available at
http://sparks.informatics.iupui.edu.

PMCID: PMC2391293
PMID: 18523556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Development. 2008 Jun;135(12):2161-72. doi: 10.1242/dev.017459. Epub 2008 May 14.

Activation of beta-catenin signaling programs embryonic epidermis to hair
follicle fate.

Zhang Y(1), Andl T, Yang SH, Teta M, Liu F, Seykora JT, Tobias JW, Piccolo S,
Schmidt-Ullrich R, Nagy A, Taketo MM, Dlugosz AA, Millar SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

beta-Catenin signaling is required for hair follicle development, but it is
unknown whether its activation is sufficient to globally program embryonic
epidermis to hair follicle fate. To address this, we mutated endogenous
epithelial beta-catenin to a dominant-active form in vivo. Hair follicle placodes
were expanded and induced prematurely in activated beta-catenin mutant embryos,
but failed to invaginate or form multilayered structures. Eventually, the entire 
epidermis adopted hair follicle fate, broadly expressing hair shaft keratins in
place of epidermal stratification proteins. Mutant embryonic skin was
precociously innervated, and displayed prenatal pigmentation, a phenomenon never 
observed in wild-type controls. Thus, beta-catenin signaling programs the
epidermis towards placode and hair shaft fate at the expense of epidermal
differentiation, and activates signals directing pigmentation and innervation. In
transcript profiling experiments, we identified elevated expression of Sp5, a
direct beta-catenin target and transcriptional repressor. We show that Sp5
normally localizes to hair follicle placodes and can suppress epidermal
differentiation gene expression. We identified the pigmentation regulators Foxn1,
Adamts20 and Kitl, and the neural guidance genes Sema4c, Sema3c, Unc5b and Unc5c,
as potential mediators of the effects of beta-catenin signaling on pigmentation
and innervation. Our data provide evidence for a new paradigm in which, in
addition to promoting hair follicle placode and hair shaft fate, beta-catenin
signaling actively suppresses epidermal differentiation and directs pigmentation 
and nerve fiber growth. Controlled downregulation of beta-catenin signaling is
required for normal placode patterning within embryonic ectoderm, hair follicle
downgrowth, and adoption of the full range of follicular fates.

PMCID: PMC2516408
PMID: 18480165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Biol Pharm Bull. 2008 Apr;31(4):714-8.

Characterization of meFucoidan as a selective inhibitor for secretory
phospholipase A2-IIA and the phosphorylation of meFucoidan-binding proteins by
A-kinase in vitro.

Maruyama H(1), Suzuki K, Miyai S, Ohtsuki K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kitasato
University, 1-15-1 Kitasato, Sagamihara, Kanagawa 228-8555, Japan.
maruyama@ahs.kitasato-u.ac.jp

The direct interaction of Mekabu fucoidan (meFucoidan) with four functional basic
proteins (sPLA2-IIA, bFGF, histone H2B and HBV core protein) and three synthetic 
FGF-BP peptides (sp5, GE13 and RS6) was characterized in vitro. It was found that
(i) meFucoidan inhibited dose-dependently the activity of sPLA2-IIA, but not
pPLA2, through its direct binding to the enzyme; (ii) sPLA2-IIA activity was
sensitive to meFucoidan rather than heparin, but significantly stimulated by
sulfatide; (iii) the A-kinase-mediated phosphorylation of these basic proteins,
except sPLA2-IIA, and synthetic peptides, containing potent phosphorylation sites
for A-kinase, was inhibited dose-dependently by meFucoidan; and (iv) two
consensus meFucoidan-binding motifs (B-B-B-B-X and B-X-B-B-X; B, basic amino
acid) in these basic proteins and synthetic peptides could be overlapping to the 
potent phosphorylation site (B-B-X-S/T) for the kinase in vitro. These results
presented here suggest that meFucoidan functions as a selective inhibitor for
sPLA2-IIA and the A-kinase-mediated phosphorylation of cellular
meFucoidan-binding functional basic proteins in vitro.

PMID: 18379068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Cancer Res. 2007 Nov 15;67(22):10958-65.

Peptide-mediated targeting to tumor blood vessels of lung cancer for drug
delivery.

Lee TY(1), Lin CT, Kuo SY, Chang DK, Wu HC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan.

Antiangiogenesis therapies for the treatment of cancers hold the promise of high 
efficacy and low toxicity. In vivo phage display was used to identify peptides
specifically targeting tumor blood vessels. The peptide SP5-52 recognized tumor
neovasculature but not normal blood vessels in severe combined immunodeficiency
mice bearing human tumors. Synthetic peptide was shown to inhibit the binding of 
PC5-52 phage particles to the tumor mass in the competitive inhibition assay.
Several selected phage clones displayed the consensus motif,
proline-serine-proline, and this motif was crucial for peptide binding to the
tumor neovasculature. SP5-52 peptides also bound vascular endothelial growth
factor-stimulated human umbilical vein endothelial cells and blood vessels of
human lung cancer surgical specimens. Furthermore, this targeting phage was shown
to home to tumor tissues from eight different types of human tumor xenografts
following in vivo phage display experiments. An SP5-52 peptide-linked liposome
carrying doxorubicin enhanced the therapeutic efficacy of the drug, markedly
decreased tumor blood vessels, and resulted in higher survival rates of human
lung and oral cancer-bearing xenograft mice. The current study indicates that
ligand-targeted therapy offers improved therapeutic effects over conventional
anticancer drug therapy, and that the peptide SP5-52 specifically targets tumor
neovasculature and is a good candidate for targeted drug delivery to solid
tumors.

PMID: 18006841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Brain Res. 2007 Dec 12;1184:121-31. Epub 2007 Sep 29.

Pathways involved in somatosensory electrical modulation of dorsal cochlear
nucleus activity.

Zhang J(1), Guan Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Wayne State University
School of Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA. jinzhang@med.wayne.edu

Our recent study has shown that somatosensory electrical stimulation may be
useful to modulate sound-induced hyperactivity in the dorsal cochlear nucleus
(DCN), a neural correlate of certain forms of tinnitus. Somatosensory electrical 
stimulation induced both suppressive and excitatory effects on neural activity in
the DCN of both control and tone-exposed animals. However, it is unclear what
neural pathways underlie the somatosensory electrical stimulation-induced effects
on DCN activity. To address this issue, we conducted c-fos immunocytochemistry
using hamsters and mapped neural activation in both auditory and non-auditory
structures following transcutaneous electrical stimulation of the basal part of
the pinna. We also conducted tracing experiments to investigate the anatomical
relations between the DCN and structures that showed a significant increase in
the number of Fos-positive neurons as a result of electrical stimulation.
Electrical stimulation of the pinna induced significant increases in the number
of Fos-positive neurons in the DCN, spinal trigeminal nucleus (Sp5), dorsal raphe
nucleus (DR) and locus coeruleus (LC). Results of tracing experiments indicate
that the DCN received inputs from the Sp5, DR and LC. The above results suggest
that modulation of DCN activity through somatosensory electrical stimulation may 
involve both direct pathways via the Sp5 and indirect pathways via the DR and LC.
Therefore, relieving tinnitus through somatosensory electrical stimulation may
require manipulations of both auditory and non-auditory functions.

PMID: 17964553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Aug;1770(8):1219-29. Epub 2007 May 22.

Biochemical characterization of a N-terminal fragment (p5) cleaved from
fibroblast growth factor-binding protein (FGF-BP) in bovine milk in vitro.

Ohtsuki K(1), Hirayama K, Kawakami F, Kato T, Kawakami H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetical Biochemistry and Signal Biology, Graduate School of
Medical Sciences, Kitasato University, Sagamihara 228-8555, Japan.
ken@kitasato-u.ac.jp

By means of successive gel filtration on a Superdex 30 pg column and Mono S
column chromatography, a 5-kDa polypeptide (p5) was highly purified from the low 
molecular weight (LMW) fraction separated from the partially purified lactoferrin
(bLF) fraction of bovine milk, and biochemically characterized as a phosphate
acceptor for two protein kinases [cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) and casein 
kinase 1delta (CK1delta)] in vitro. Purified p5 was identified as a fragment
(N-terminal positions 24-51, 28 amino acid residues) cleaved from fibroblast
growth factor-binding protein (FGF-BP, p37). Both purified p5 and synthetic p5
(sp5) were effectively phosphorylated by PKA, and also phosphorylated by CK1delta
in the presence of two sulfated lipids [sulfatide or cholesterol-3-sulfate
(CH-3S), SCS] in vitro. A novel phosphorylation site (RNRRGS) for CK1delta and a 
potent SCS-binding site (RNRR) on p5 were identified. The PKA-mediated
phosphorylation of p5 was highly stimulated when incubated with either acidic FGF
(aFGF) or bLF in vitro, but this phosphorylation was more sensitive to SCS than
H-89 (a specific PKA inhibitor). Immunoprecipitate experiments revealed p5, but
not the phosphorylated p5, to be directly bound to aFGF in vitro. These results
show that (i) p5 has a high binding affinity with aFGF as well as bLF; (ii) the
binding of SCS to p5 results in the selective inhibition of its phosphorylation
by PKA; and (iii) SCS functions as an effective stimulator for the
phosphorylation of p5 by CK1delta in vitro. In addition, p5 may play an important
physiological role as a trafficking factor for the physiological interaction
between aFGF group including endothelial cell growth factors and their binding
proteins in vivo.

PMID: 17560725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Neural Dev. 2007 May 17;2:10.

Sp8 exhibits reciprocal induction with Fgf8 but has an opposing effect on
anterior-posterior cortical area patterning.

Sahara S(1), Kawakami Y, Izpisua Belmonte JC, O'Leary DD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, The Salk Institute, N. Torrey Pines Road,
La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. sahara@salk.edu

Telencephalic patterning centers, defined by the discrete expression domains of
distinct morphogens, Fgfs in the commissural plate (CoP), Wnts and Bmps in the
cortical hem, and a ventral domain of Sonic hedgehog (Shh), are postulated to
establish during development the initial patterning of the telencepahlon,
including the neocortex. We show that the expression patterns of Sp5, Sp8, and
Sp9, members of the Sp8-like family that are homologues of Drosophila buttonhead,
correlate during early embryonic development with these three telencephalic
patterning centers. To study potential functional relationships, we focused on
Sp8, because it is transiently expressed in the CoP coincident with the
expression of Fgf8, a morphogen implicated in area patterning of the neocortex.
We also show that Sp8 is expressed in cortical progenitors in a high to low
anterior-medial to posterior-lateral gradient across the ventricular zone. We
used in utero electroporation of full-length and chimeric expression constructs
to perform gain-of-function and loss-of-function studies of interactions between 
Sp8 and Fgf8 and their roles in cortical area patterning. We show that Fgf8 and
Sp8 exhibit reciprocal induction in vivo in the embryonic telencephalon. Sp8 also
induces downstream targets of Fgf8, including ETS transcription factors. In vitro
assays show that Sp8 binds Fgf8 regulatory elements and is a direct
transcriptional activator of Fgf8. We also show that Sp8 induction of Fgf8 is
repressed by Emx2 in vitro, suggesting a mechanism to limit Fgf8 expression to
the CoP. In vivo expression of a dominant negative Sp8 in the CoP indicates that 
Sp8 maintains expression of Fgf8 and also its effect on area patterning. Ectopic 
expression of Sp8 in anterior or posterior cortical poles induces significant
anterior or posterior shifts in area patterning, respectively, paralleled by
changes in expression of gene markers of positional identity. These effects of
Sp8 on area patterning oppose those induced by ectopic expression of Fgf8,
suggesting that in parallel to regulating Fgf8 expression, Sp8 also activates a
distinct signaling pathway for cortical area patterning. In summary, Sp8 and Fgf8
robustly induce one another, and may act to balance the anterior-posterior area
patterning of the cortex.

PMCID: PMC1890288
PMID: 17509151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Development. 2007 Apr;134(8):1499-508. Epub 2007 Mar 14.

Lack of the murine homeobox gene Hesx1 leads to a posterior transformation of the
anterior forebrain.

Andoniadou CL(1), Signore M, Sajedi E, Gaston-Massuet C, Kelberman D, Burns AJ,
Itasaki N, Dattani M, Martinez-Barbera JP.

Author information: 
(1)Neural Development Unit, UCL-Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford Street,
WC1N 1EH, London, UK.

The homeobox gene Hesx1 is an essential repressor that is required within the
anterior neural plate for normal forebrain development in mouse and humans.
Combining genetic cell labelling and marker analyses, we demonstrate that the
absence of Hesx1 leads to a posterior transformation of the anterior forebrain
(AFB) during mouse development. Our data suggest that the mechanism underlying
this transformation is the ectopic activation of Wnt/beta-catenin signalling
within the Hesx1 expression domain in the AFB. When ectopically expressed in the 
developing mouse embryo, Hesx1 alone cannot alter the normal fate of posterior
neural tissue. However, conditional expression of Hesx1 within the AFB can rescue
the forebrain defects observed in the Hesx1 mutants. The results presented here
provide new insights into the function of Hesx1 in forebrain formation.

PMCID: PMC2233881
PMID: 17360769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Plant Physiol. 2007 Apr;143(4):1905-17. Epub 2007 Feb 2.

Overproduction of abscisic acid in tomato increases transpiration efficiency and 
root hydraulic conductivity and influences leaf expansion.

Thompson AJ(1), Andrews J, Mulholland BJ, McKee JM, Hilton HW, Horridge JS,
Farquhar GD, Smeeton RC, Smillie IR, Black CR, Taylor IB.

Author information: 
(1)Warwick HRI, Wellesbourne, University of Warwick, Warwickshire CV35 9EF,
United Kingdom. a.j.thompson@warwick.ac.uk

Overexpression of genes that respond to drought stress is a seemingly attractive 
approach for improving drought resistance in crops. However, the consequences for
both water-use efficiency and productivity must be considered if agronomic
utility is sought. Here, we characterize two tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) lines 
(sp12 and sp5) that overexpress a gene encoding 9-cis-epoxycarotenoid
dioxygenase, the enzyme that catalyzes a key rate-limiting step in abscisic acid 
(ABA) biosynthesis. Both lines contained more ABA than the wild type, with sp5
accumulating more than sp12. Both had higher transpiration efficiency because of 
their lower stomatal conductance, as demonstrated by increases in delta(13)C and 
delta(18)O, and also by gravimetric and gas-exchange methods. They also had
greater root hydraulic conductivity. Under well-watered glasshouse conditions,
mature sp5 plants were found to have a shoot biomass equal to the wild type
despite their lower assimilation rate per unit leaf area. These plants also had
longer petioles, larger leaf area, increased specific leaf area, and reduced leaf
epinasty. When exposed to root-zone water deficits, line sp12 showed an increase 
in xylem ABA concentration and a reduction in stomatal conductance to the same
final levels as the wild type, but from a different basal level. Indeed, the main
difference between the high ABA plants and the wild type was their performance
under well-watered conditions: the former conserved soil water by limiting
maximum stomatal conductance per unit leaf area, but also, at least in the case
of sp5, developed a canopy more suited to light interception, maximizing
assimilation per plant, possibly due to improved turgor or suppression of
epinasty.

PMCID: PMC1851808
PMID: 17277097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Am J Manag Care. 2006 Dec;12 Spec no.:SP5-SP10.

Value-based insurance design: aligning incentives to bridge the divide between
quality improvement and cost containment.

Fendrick AM(1), Chernew ME.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Internal Medicine and Health Management and Policy, Center for 
Value Based Insurance Design, University of Michigan, 300 N Ingalls Bldg, Rm
7E06, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0429, USA. amfen@umich.edu

Rising costs and suboptimal clinical quality have spawned efforts to redesign
healthcare benefit packages. Momentum has gathered behind 2 trends; the first,
represented by disease management initiatives and pay-for-performance programs,
focuses on the quality of care, and uses tools to manage patient health. The
second trend, represented by increased patient cost sharing and consumer-driven
health plans, focuses on the cost of care and uses financial incentives to alter 
patient and provider behavior. These 2 trends create a conflict for the patient
in that disease management programs--designed to improve patient
self-management--aim to enhance compliance with specific clinical interventions, 
while rising copayments create financial barriers that discourage the use of
these recommended services. When patients are required to pay more for their
healthcare, they buy less, even if the intervention is potentially lifesaving.
Thus, the challenge for purchasers is to devise benefit packages that incorporate
a range of features that complement each other in the effective and efficient
delivery of care while explicitly avoiding the unwanted negative clinical effects
associated with increased cost sharing.

PMID: 17173492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Comp Neurol. 2007 Feb 1;500(4):777-87.

Vessicular glutamate transporters 1 and 2 are differentially associated with
auditory nerve and spinal trigeminal inputs to the cochlear nucleus.

Zhou J(1), Nannapaneni N, Shore S.

Author information: 
(1)Kresge Hearing Research Institute, Department of Otolaryngology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0506, USA.

Projections of glutamatergic somatosensory and auditory fibers to the cochlear
nucleus (CN) are mostly nonoverlapping: projections from the spinal trigeminal
nucleus (Sp5) terminate primarily in the granule cell domains (GCD) of CN,
whereas type I auditory nerve fibers (ANFs) project to the magnocellular areas of
the VCN (VCNm) and deep layers of Dorsal CN (DCN). Vesicular glutamate
transporters (VGLUTs), which selectively package glutamate into synaptic
vesicles, have different isoforms associated with distinct subtypes of excitatory
glutamatergic neurons. Here we examined the distributions of VGLUT1 and VGLU2
expression in the CN and their colocalization with Sp5 and ANF terminals
following injections of anterograde tracers into Sp5 and the cochlea in the
guinea pig. The CN regions that showed the most intense expression of VGLUT1 and 
VGLUT2 were largely nonoverlapping and were consistent with ANF and Sp5
projections, respectively: VGLUT1 was highly expressed in VCNm and the molecular 
layer of the DCN, whereas VGLUT2 was expressed predominantly in the GCD. Half
(47% +/- 3%) of the Sp5 mossy fiber endings colabeled with VGLUT2, but few (2.5% 
+/- 1%) colabeled with VGLUT1. In contrast, ANFs colabeled predominantly with
VGLUT1. The pathway-specific expression of VGLUT isoforms in the CN may be
associated with the intrinsic synaptic properties that are unique to each sensory
pathway.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17154258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Acta Otolaryngol. 2006 Dec;126(12):1334-8.

Role of the trigeminal nerve in regrowth of hypoglossal motoneurons after
hypoglossal-facial anastomosis.

Mameli O(1), Pellitteri R, Russo A, Stanzani S, Caria MA, De Riu PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Human Physiology Division, University of
Sassari, Sassari, Italy. fisiou@uniss.it

Conclusion. Functional recovery of facial muscles following hypoglossal-facial
anastomosis (HFA) may be dependent not only on sensory information, relayed via
the trigeminal nuclei to the hypoglossal nucleus, but also on extratrigeminal
fibers, originating from the hypoglossal nucleus that travel in the infraorbital 
nerve (ION). This fact helps to explain the ability of hypoglossal neurons, after
HFA, to induce contractions of muscles originally innervated from other nervous
structures. Objective. The aim of the study was to better understand the role of 
the trigeminal nerve in reinnervation of facial muscles by hypoglossal
motoneurons following HFA. Materials and methods. Central afferences of the ION
were analyzed in rats by labeling the exposed nerve with horseradish peroxidase
(HRP), whereas central organization of the efferent projections to the vibrissal 
area was analyzed by labeling the whisker pad muscles of the rat with a 5%
solution of 1,1'-dioctadecyl-3,3,3',3'-tetramethylindocarbocyanine perchlorate
(Dil) in N,N-dimethylformamide. Results. The results show that extratrigeminal
fibers, originating in the hypoglossal nucleus, travel along the ION. Retrograde 
tracing applied to ION or injected into the whisker pad showed labeled neurons in
the Pr5 nucleus and all Sp5 trigeminal subnuclei. Small labeled neurons (10-15
microm diameter; 10-12 neurons per section), were also found in the hypoglossal
nucleus.

PMID: 17101597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Stapp Car Crash J. 2005 Nov;49:v-xvi.

In search of head injury criteria.

McElhaney JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Engineering and Surgery, Duke University, Durham, NC.

In this lecture, I have tried to describe the evolution of the concept of a Head 
Injury Criterion-HIC-and the role of Federal funding agencies in the quest for a 
scientifically based theory of head injury. Various injury statistics are
presented and the role of the Injury in America study in the founding of the
Center for Injury Prevention and Control is discussed. The theory of finite
element modeling and several head injury finite element models are summarized. A 
brief description of the new European Union (EU) Advanced Protective Systems
Initiative SP5 Head Injury is provided.

PMID: 17096265  [PubMed]


92. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jan 12;282(2):1225-37. Epub 2006 Nov 6.

Wnt-mediated down-regulation of Sp1 target genes by a transcriptional repressor
Sp5.

Fujimura N(1), Vacik T, Machon O, Vlcek C, Scalabrin S, Speth M, Diep D, Krauss
S, Kozmik Z.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic,
Videnska 1083, 142 20 Prague 4, Czech Republic.

Wnt/beta-catenin signaling regulates many processes during vertebrate
development. To study transcriptional targets of canonical Wnt signaling, we used
the conditional Cre/loxP system in mouse to ectopically activate beta-catenin
during central nervous system development. We show that the activation of
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in the embryonic mouse telencephalon results in the
up-regulation of Sp5 gene, which encodes a member of the Sp1 transcription factor
family. A proximal promoter of Sp5 gene is highly evolutionarily conserved and
contains five TCF/LEF binding sites that mediate direct regulation of Sp5
expression by canonical Wnt signaling. We provide evidence that Sp5 works as a
transcriptional repressor and has three independent repressor domains, called R1,
R2, and R3, respectively. Furthermore, we show that the repression activity of R1
domain is mediated through direct interaction with a transcriptional corepressor 
mSin3a. Finally, our data strongly suggest that Sp5 has the same DNA binding
specificity as Sp1 and represses Sp1 target genes such as p21. We conclude that
Sp5 transcription factor mediates the downstream responses to Wnt/beta-catenin
signaling by directly repressing Sp1 target genes.

PMID: 17090534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Biochem Biophys Methods. 2006 Nov 30;69(1-2):89-99. Epub 2006 Mar 9.

New model substrates for enzymes hydrolysing polyethyleneterephthalate and
polyamide fibres.

Heumann S(1), Eberl A, Pobeheim H, Liebminger S, Fischer-Colbrie G, Almansa E,
Cavaco-Paulo A, Gübitz GM.

Author information: 
(1)Research Centre Applied Biocatalysis, Petersgasse 14, A-8010 Graz, Austria.

Recently the potential of enzymes for surface hydrophilisation and/or
functionalisation of polyethyleneterephthalate (PET) and polyamide (PA) has been 
discovered. However, there was no correlation between enzyme class/activity (e.g.
esterase, lipase, cutinase) and surface hydrolysis of these polymers and
consequently no simple assay to estimate this capability. Enzymes active on the
model substrates bis (benzoyloxyethyl) terephthalate and adipic acid
bishexyl-amide, were also capable of increasing the hydrophilicity of PET and PA.
When dosed at the identical activity on 4-nitrophenyl butyrate, only enzymes from
Thermobifida fusca, Aspergillus sp., Beauveria sp. and commercial enzymes
(TEXAZYME PES sp5 and Lipase PS) increased the hydrophilicity of PET fibres while
other esterases and lipases did not show any effect. Activity on PET correlated
with the activity on the model substrate. Hydrophilicity of fibres was greatly
improved based on increases in rising height of up to 4.3 cm and the relative
decrease of water absorption time between control and sample of the water was up 
to 76%. Similarly, enzymes increasing the hydrophilicity of PA fibres such as
from Nocardia sp., Beauveria sp. and F. solani hydrolysed the model substrate;
however, there was no common enzyme activity (e.g. protease, esterase, amidase)
which could be attributed to all these enzymes.

PMID: 16624419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Cancer Res. 2006 Feb 15;66(4):1964-73.

Dominant-stable beta-catenin expression causes cell fate alterations and Wnt
signaling antagonist expression in a murine granulosa cell tumor model.

Boerboom D(1), White LD, Dalle S, Courty J, Richards JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Wnt/beta-catenin signaling is normally involved in embryonic development and
tissue homeostasis, and its misregulation leads to several forms of cancer. We
have reported that misregulated Wnt/beta-catenin signaling occurs in ovarian
granulosa cell tumors (GCT) and have created the Catnb(flox(ex3)/+);Amhr2(cre/+) 
mouse model, which expresses a dominant-stable mutant of beta-catenin in
granulosa cells and develops late-onset GCT. To study the mechanisms leading to
GCT development, gene expression analysis was done using microarrays comparing
Catnb(flox(ex3)/+);Amhr2(cre/+) ovaries bearing pretumoral lesions with control
ovaries. Overexpressed genes identified in Catnb(flox(ex3)/+);Amhr2(cre/+)
ovaries included the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling antagonists Wif1, Nkd1, Dkk4, and
Axin2, consistent with the induction of negative feedback loops that counteract
uncontrolled Wnt/beta-catenin signaling. Expression of the antagonists was
localized to cells forming the pretumoral lesions but not to normal granulosa
cells. Microarray analyses also revealed the ectopic expression of bone markers, 
including Ibsp, Cdkn1c, Bmp4, and Tnfrsf11b, as well as neuronal/neurosecretory
cell markers, such as Cck, Amph, Pitx1, and Sp5. Increased expression of the gene
encoding the cytokine pleiotrophin was also found in
Catnb(flox(ex3)/+);Amhr2(cre/+) ovaries and GCT but was not associated with
increased serum pleiotrophin levels. In situ hybridization analyses using GCT
from Catnb(flox(ex3)/+);Amhr2(cre/+) mice revealed that Wnt/beta-catenin
antagonists and neuronal markers localized to a particular cell population,
whereas the bone markers localized to a distinct cell type associated with areas 
of osseous metaplasia. Together, these results suggest that misregulated
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling alters the fate of granulosa cells and that the GCT
that arise in Catnb(flox(ex3)/+);Amhr2(cre/+) mice result from the clonal
expansion of metaplastic cells.

PMID: 16488995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Rev Med Brux. 2005;26 Spec no:Sp5-8.

[Hemophilia A in Belgium in the past 40 years].

[Article in French]

Fondu P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Professeur honoraire, ULB.

PMID: 16454226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Comp Neurol. 2006 Mar 1;495(1):100-12.

Convergence of spinal trigeminal and cochlear nucleus projections in the inferior
colliculus of the guinea pig.

Zhou J(1), Shore S.

Author information: 
(1)Kresge Hearing Research Institute, Department of Otolaryngology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0506, USA.

In addition to ascending auditory inputs, the external cortex of the inferior
colliculus (ICX) receives prominent somatosensory inputs. To elucidate the extent
of interaction between auditory and somatosensory representations at the level of
IC, we explored the dual projections from the cochlear nucleus (CN) and the
spinal trigeminal nucleus (Sp5) to the inferior colliculus (IC) in the guinea
pig, using both retrograde and anterograde tracing techniques. Injections of
retrograde tracers into ICX resulted in cell-labeling primarily in the
contralateral DCN and pars interpolaris and caudalis of Sp5. Labeled cells in DCN
were either fusiform or multipolar cells, whereas those in Sp5 varied in size and
shape. Injections of anterograde tracers into either CN or Sp5 resulted in
terminal labeling in ICX primarily on the contralateral side. Most projection
fibers from Sp5 terminated in a laminar pattern from ventromedial to dorsolateral
within the ventrolateral ICX, the ventral border of IC, and the ventromedial edge
of IC (collectively termed "the ventrolateral border region of IC," ICXV). Less
dense anterograde labeling was observed in lateral and rostral ICX. Injecting
different tracers into both Sp5 and CN confirmed the overlapping areas of
convergent projections from Sp5 and CN in IC: The most intense dual labeling was 
seen in the ICXV, and less intense dual labeling was also observed in the rostral
part of ICX. This convergence of projection fibers from CN and Sp5 provides an
anatomical substrate for multimodal integration in the IC.

J. Comp. Neurol. 495:100-112, 2006. (c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16432905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Scand J Immunol. 2006 Jan;63(1):42-9.

Stress and substance P but not the substance P-metabolite SP5-11 trigger murine
abortion by augmenting TNF-alpha levels at the feto-maternal interface.

Fest S(1), Zenclussen AC, Joachim R, Hagen E, Demuth HU, Hoffmann T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Pediatrics, Charité, Humboldt-University,
Biomedizinisches Forschungszentrum, Berlin, Germany. stefan.fest@charite.de

In a well-established murine abortion model, stress is thought to trigger fetal
rejection by inducing a proinflammatory immune response via substance P (SP),
being tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha-producing CD8+ T cells involved.
Interestingly, the SP metabolite SP5-11 also binds to SP receptors and mediates
SP-like effects on immune cells at sites of inflammation. No data were available 
regarding the effects of SP5-11 on pregnancy outcome in the CBA/J x DBA/2J
abortion-prone combination. We investigated the influence of SP5-11 in contrast
to stress or SP on the abortion rate and the cytokine production by lymphocytes
as well as on the levels of CD8+ T cells. Stress and SP boosted the abortion rate
and increased the percentage of type 1 [TNF-alpha, interferon-gamma, interleukin 
(IL)-12] and type 2 (IL-4 and IL-10) cytokine-producing lymphocytes in blood and 
decidua, predominantly CD8+ T cells. Interestingly, SP5-11 did not significantly 
affect the abortion rate or cytokine production in the decidua, while increasing 
the Th1 and Th2 cytokine production systemically. Our data suggest that stress
and SP induce abortion by augmenting the local levels of TNF-alpha, which seems
therefore to be a potent trigger of miscarriage. On the contrary, the SP
metabolite SP5-11 only affects the systemic cytokine production without boosting 
the abortion rate in this experimental model.

PMID: 16398700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Rev Med Brux. 2006;27 Spec No:Sp5-6.

[The University Hospital of Children Queen Fabiola is twenty years old!].

[Article in French]

Casimir G.

HUDERF is the only pediatric hospital autonomous in Belgium because the other
academic pediatric departments are included in general hospitals. However, the
model of the children hospital is the most common, both in the industrial nations
and in the undeveloped countries and evolves in hospital "mother-child" for the
optimaisation of cares in infants that often begin from before the birth, for
example in the case of predictable genetic diseases. The children's first
hospitals date of more than 150 years ago as that of London for example. Huderf
considerably developed in 20 years: it is the topic of this article. Its future
is shared with the academic Hospital today and St-Pierre Hospital through the
Iris-ULB convention.

PMID: 21818884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Feb 17;340(3):758-66. Epub 2005 Dec 20.

Elevated expression and potential roles of human Sp5, a member of Sp
transcription factor family, in human cancers.

Chen Y(1), Guo Y, Ge X, Itoh H, Watanabe A, Fujiwara T, Kodama T, Aburatani H.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Science Division, Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, 
The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

In this report, we describe the expression and function of human Sp5, a member of
the Sp family of zinc finger transcription factors. Like other family members,
the Sp5 protein contains a Cys2His2 zinc finger DNA binding domain at the
C-terminus. Our experiments employing Gal4-Sp5 fusion proteins reveal multiple
transcriptional domains, including a N-terminal activity domain, an intrinsic
repressive element, and a C-terminal synergistic domain. Elevated expression of
Sp5 was noted in several human tumors including hepatocellular carcinoma, gastric
cancer, and colon cancer. To study the effects of the Sp5 protein on growth
properties of human cancer cells and facilitate the identification of its
downstream genes, we combined an inducible gene expression system with microarray
analysis to screen for its transcriptional targets. Transfer of Sp5 into MCF-7
cells that expressed no detectable endogenous Sp5 protein elicited significant
growth promotion activity. Several of the constitutively deregulated genes have
been associated with tumorigenesis (CDC25C, CEACAM6, TMPRSS2, XBP1, MYBL1, ABHD2,
and CXCL12) and Wnt/beta-Catenin signaling pathways (BAMBI, SIX1, IGFBP5, AES,
and p21WAF1). This information could be utilized for further mechanistic research
and for devising optimized therapeutic strategies against human cancers.

PMID: 16380080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Int J Oncol. 2005 Dec;27(6):1483-7.

Identification of SP5 as a downstream gene of the beta-catenin/Tcf pathway and
its enhanced expression in human colon cancer.

Takahashi M(1), Nakamura Y, Obama K, Furukawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Minato-ku, Tokyo,
Japan.

Mutations in APC, CTNNB1, AXIN1 or AXIN2 cause impairment in the beta-catenin
degradation pathway and result in accumulation of beta-catenin in a wide range of
human cancers. Accumulated beta-catenin then associates with Tcf/LEF
transcription factors and transactivates their target genes. To uncover in detail
the role of accumulated beta-catenin in colorectal carcinogenesis, we searched
for genes involved in the beta-catenin/Tcf signaling pathway by cDNA microarray. 
We identified and characterized a human gene, SP5, that was down-regulated after 
depletion of beta-catenin by transduction of wild-type APC into SW480 cells. SP5 
is a member of the Sp transcription factor family, which binds to the GC box or
closely related sequences in promoters of many genes and control their
expression. Reporter assays and an electromobility-shift assay revealed a DNA
fragment between -285 and -279 in the 5' flanking region of this gene to be a
target of the beta-catenin/Tcf4 complex. Our results indicate that SP5 is a novel
direct down-stream target in the Wnt signaling pathway.

PMID: 16273202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Asian J Androl. 2005 Jun;7(2):127-37.

Identification of a novel testis-specific gene and its potential roles in testis 
development/spermatogenesis.

Yin LL(1), Li JM, Zhou ZM, Sha JH.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laborary of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, Hanzhong
Road, Nanjing 210029, China.

AIM: To identify and characterize a novel gene with potential roles in testis
development and spermatogenesis.
METHODS: A cDNA microarray was constructed from a human testis large insert cDNA 
library and hybridized with probes of human or mouse adult and fetal testes.
Differentially expressed genes were isolated and sequenced. RT-PCR was used to
test the tissue distribution of the genes of interest and in situ hybridization
was performed to localize the gene expression in the mouse testis. A range of
bioinformatical programs including Gene Runner, SMART, NCBI Blast and Emboss
CpGPlot were used to characterize the new gene's feature.
RESULTS: A novel testis-specific gene, NYD-SP5, was differentially expressed in
fetal and adult testes. The deduced protein structure of NYD-SP5 was found to
contain an IQ motif (a short calmodulin-binding motif containing conserved Ile
and Gln residues), a Carbamate kinase-like domain, a Zn-dependent exopeptidase
domain and a lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) C-terminal-like domain. RT-PCR analysis 
revealed that NYD-SP5 was predominantly expressed in the testis but not in other 
15 tissues examined. In situ hybridization and RT-PCR examinations revealed that 
the expression of NYD-SP5 was confined in the male germ cell but not present in
the somatic cell in the testes.
CONCLUSION: NYD-SP5 is a newly found testis-specific gene with potential roles in
testis development and spermatogenesis through a calmodulin-activated enzyme.

PMID: 15897968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Curr Biol. 2005 Mar 29;15(6):489-500.

The Sp1-related transcription factors sp5 and sp5-like act downstream of
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in mesoderm and neuroectoderm patterning.

Weidinger G(1), Thorpe CJ, Wuennenberg-Stapleton K, Ngai J, Moon RT.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Pharmacology and Center for
Developmental Biology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Box 357370,
Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.

BACKGROUND: Wnt/beta-catenin signaling regulates many processes during vertebrate
development, including patterning of the mesoderm along the dorso-ventral axis
and patterning of the neuroectoderm along the anterior-posterior axis during
gastrulation. However, relatively little is known about Wnt target genes
mediating these effects.
RESULTS: Using zebrafish DNA microarrays, we have identified several new targets 
of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling, including sp5-like (sp5l, previously called spr2),
a zinc-finger transcription factor of the Sp1 family. sp5-like is a direct target
of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling and acts together with its paralog sp5 (previously 
called bts1) downstream of wnt8 in patterning of the mesoderm and neuroectoderm
because (1) overexpression of sp5-like, like overexpression of wnt8,
posteriorizes the neuroectoderm, (2) sp5-like morpholino-mediated knockdown, like
wnt8 knockdown, causes anteriorization of the hindbrain, (3) combined knockdown
of sp5 and sp5-like, like loss of wnt8, causes expansion of dorsal mesoderm, (4) 
sp5-like knockdown reduces the defects in mesoderm and neuroectoderm patterning
caused by wnt8 overexpression, and (5) inhibition of sp5-like enhances the
effects of hypomorphic loss of wnt8. Importantly, (6) overexpression of sp5-like 
is able to partially restore normal hindbrain patterning in wnt8 morphants.
CONCLUSIONS: sp5-like is a direct target of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling during
gastrulation and, together with sp5, acts as a required mediator of the
activities of wnt8 in patterning the mesoderm and neuroectoderm. We conclude that
sp5 transcription factors mediate the downstream responses to Wnt/beta-catenin
signaling in several developmental processes in zebrafish.

PMID: 15797017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Biopolymers. 2005 May;78(1):35-45.

Comparative study of SP[6-11] and its analogs using simulated annealing.

Bogár F(1), Leitgeb B, Paragi G, Orosz A, Penke B.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Chemistry Research Group of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences,
University of Szeged, Dóm tér 8, H-6720 Szeged, Hungary.

In this study we compared the steric structures of the bioactive part of
substance P (SP[6-11]) and its analogs (NY3460 and pHOPA-SP5). The molecular
dynamics-simulated annealing method was used to explore the conformational space,
and the structural differences and similarities of these molecules were
identified. For the three peptides, the conformational distributions were
represented in Ramachandran density plots. The occurring secondary structural
elements of the investigated molecules were identified, namely alpha-Helix, type 
III beta-Turn, gamma-Turn, and inverse gamma-Turn. For SP[6-11] and its two
analogs, different intramolecular interactions (H-bonds between the main-chain
atoms, aromatic-aromatic interactions, and amino-aromatic interactions) that can 
stabilize the various conformations of the three peptides were investigated.
Detailed examination of these intramolecular interactions revealed that H-bonds
between the main-chain atoms are relevant in the determination and stabilization 
of the conformer structures of the peptides, while the aromatic-aromatic
interactions do not play an important stabilizing role. Furthermore, in the
conformers of NY3460 and pHOPA-SP5, different types of amino-aromatic
interactions were identified that contribute to the formation of the various
structures of these peptides. For all three molecules, the orientations of the
side chains were investigated and the rotamer populations were determined.

PMID: 15786438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Development. 2005 Apr;132(8):1763-72. Epub 2005 Mar 16.

Wnt/beta-catenin regulation of the Sp1-related transcription factor sp5l promotes
tail development in zebrafish.

Thorpe CJ(1), Weidinger G, Moon RT.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Pharmacology and Center for
Developmental Biology, Box 357750, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

Tail formation in vertebrates involves the specification of a population of
multipotent precursors, the tailbud, which will give rise to all of the posterior
structures of the embryo. Wnts are signaling proteins that are candidates for
promoting tail outgrowth in zebrafish, although which Wnts are involved, what
genes they regulate, and whether Wnts are required for initiation or maintenance 
steps in tail formation has not been resolved. We show here that both wnt3a and
wnt8 are expressed in the zebrafish tailbud and that simultaneous inhibition of
both wnt3a and wnt8 using morpholino oligonucleotides can completely block tail
formation. In embryos injected with wnt3a and wnt8 morpholinos, expression of
genes in undifferentiated presomitic mesoderm is initiated, but not maintained.
To identify genes that might function downstream of Wnts in tail formation, a DNA
microarray screen was conducted, revealing that sp5l, a member of the Sp1 family 
of zinc-finger transcription factors, is activated by Wnt signaling. Moreover, we
show that sp5l expression in the developing tail is dependent on both wnt3a and
wnt8 function. Supporting a role for sp5l in tail formation, we find that
inhibition of sp5l strongly enhances the effects of wnt3a inhibition, and
overexpression of sp5l RNA is able to completely restore normal tail development 
in wnt3a morphants. These data place sp5l downstream of wnt3a and wnt8 in a
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway that controls tail development in zebrafish.

PMID: 15772132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Surg Res. 2005 Mar;124(1):9-13.

Ornithine breath test as a method to evaluate functional liver volume.

Aoki M(1), Ishii Y, Asai S, Ishikawa K, Takayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division 3, Nihon University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: The purpose of this study was to investigate whether the functional
liver volume can be measured from changes in expiratory 13CO2 levels after
intravenous administration of L-[1, 2-13C] ornithine, using a rat model of
hepatectomy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Under pentobarbital anesthesia, 30%, 70%, or 90%
hepatectomy was performed. In the control group, simple laparotomy was performed.
Then, 20 mg/kg L-[1, 2-13C] ornithine was administered to rats via the femoral
vein. A breath test was conducted 20 min after laparotomy. We examined the
correlation of the sum of 13CO2 output (S) or a single point of 13CO2 level (SP) 
with liver weight/body weight (LW/BW) (%) every 15 min.
RESULTS: In all of the groups, the ornithine breath test (OBT) graph reached a
plateau level at about 6 min. The correlation coefficient between S15 and LW/BW
was highest 0.952 (P <0.0001). The correlation coefficient between SP14 and LW/BW
was highest, 0.944 (P <0.0001). The severity of hepatic injury could be
evaluated, with significant differences in S5-15 and SP5-15 in all comparisons
between groups.
CONCLUSION: In the breath test with intravenously administered L-[1, 2-13C]
ornithine, functional liver volume could be evaluated accurately in a short
period.

PMID: 15734473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2005 Jan 5;133(1):12-8.

Differential functional expression of cation-Cl- cotransporter mRNAs (KCC1, KCC2,
and NKCC1) in rat trigeminal nervous system.

Toyoda H(1), Yamada J, Ueno S, Okabe A, Kato H, Sato K, Hashimoto K, Fukuda A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu, 
Shizuoka 431-3192, Japan.

GABA is the main inhibitory neurotransmitter in the adult brain, which causes Cl-
influx into the cell via GABAA receptors. The direction of Cl- inflow is
dependent on the Cl- gradient across the membrane. Cation-Cl- cotransporters have
been considered to play pivotal roles in controlling intracellular Cl-
concentration ([Cl-]i) of neurons; hence, they modulate the GABAergic function.
To elucidate how these cotransporters are distributed in the trigeminal nuclei,
we investigated the expressions of K+-Cl- cotransporters (KCC1 and KCC2) and
Na+-K+-2Cl- cotransporter (NKCC1) mRNAs by using in situ hybridization
histochemistry. KCC2 mRNA was expressed in the motor trigeminal nucleus (Mo5),
the principal trigeminal nucleus (Pr5), and the spinal trigeminal nucleus (Sp5), 
but not in the trigeminal ganglion (TG) and the mesencephalic trigeminal nucleus 
(Me5). On the other hand, KCC1 and NKCC1 mRNAs were expressed in all the
trigeminal nuclei. The resting [Cl-]i of Me5 neurons was significantly higher
than that of Mo5 neurons. Thus, in primary sensory neurons such as the TG and the
Me5, [Cl-]i would be higher than those in the other trigeminal nuclei because of 
the lack of KCC2 mRNA expression. Since Me5 neurons, but not Mo5 neurons,
responded to GABA by depolarization, GABA would have differential physiological
functions among trigeminal nuclei and TG.

PMID: 15661361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Evol Dev. 2005 Jan-Feb;7(1):3-17.

Comprehensive survey of carapacial ridge-specific genes in turtle implies
co-option of some regulatory genes in carapace evolution.

Kuraku S(1), Usuda R, Kuratani S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Evolutionary Morphology, Center for Developmental Biology
(CDB), RIKEN, Kobe 650-0047, Japan.

The turtle shell is an evolutionary novelty in which the developmental pattern of
the ribs is radically modified. In contrast to those of other amniotes, turtle
ribs grow laterally into the dorsal dermis to form a carapace. The lateral margin
of carapacial primordium is called the carapacial ridge (CR), and is thought to
play an essential role in carapace patterning. To reveal the developmental
mechanisms underlying this structure, we systematically screened for genes
expressed specifically in the CR of the Chinese soft-shelled turtle, Pelodiscus
sinensis, using microbead-based differential cDNA analysis and real-time reverse 
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. We identified orthologs of Sp5, cellular
retinoic acid-binding protein-I (CRABP-I), adenomatous polyposis coli
down-regulated 1 (APCDD1), and lymphoid enhancer-binding factor-1 (LEF-1).
Although these genes are conserved throughout the major vertebrate lineages,
comparison of their expression patterns with those in chicken and mouse indicated
that these genes have acquired de novo expression in the CR in the turtle
lineage. In association with the expression of LEF-1, the nuclear localization of
beta-catenin protein was detected in the CR ectoderm, suggesting that the
canonical Wnt signaling triggers carapace development. These findings indicate
that the acquisition of the turtle shell did not involve the creation of novel
genes, but was based on the co-option of pre-existing genes.

PMID: 15642085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Am J Manag Care. 2004 Sep;10 Spec No:SP5-11.

Healthcare disparities and models for change.

Baquet CR(1), Carter-Pokras O, Bengen-Seltzer B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. cbaquet@schmed01.ab.umd.edu

With Healthy People 2010 making the goal of eliminating health disparities a
national priority, policymakers, researchers, medical centers, managed care
organizations (MCOs), and advocacy organizations have been called on to move
beyond the historic documentation of health disparities and proceed with an
agenda to translate policy recommendations into practice. Working models that
have successfully reduced health disparities in managed care settings were
presented at the National Managed Health Care Congress Inaugural Forum on
Reducing Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Health Care on March 10-11, 2003, in
Washington, DC. These models are being used by federal, state, and municipal
governments, as well as private, commercial, and Medicaid MCOs. Successful models
and programs at all levels reduce health disparities by forming partnerships
based on common goals to provide care, to educate, and to rebuild healthcare
systems. Municipal models work in collaboration with state and federal agencies
to integrate patient care with technology. Several basic elements of MCOs help to
reduce disparities through emphasis on preventive care, community and member
health education, case management and disease management tracking, centralized
data collection, and use of sophisticated technology to analyze data and
coordinate services. At the community level, there are leveraged funds from the
Health Resources and Services Administration's Bureau of Primary Health Care.
Well-designed models provide seamless monitoring of patient care and outcomes by 
integrating human and information system resources.

PMID: 15481431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Immunogenetics. 2004 May;56(2):89-106. Epub 2004 Apr 16.

Two cDNAs from the purple sea urchin, Strongylocentrotus purpuratus, encoding
mosaic proteins with domains found in factor H, factor I, and complement
components C6 and C7.

Multerer KA(1), Smith LC.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Genetics, The Institute of Biomedical Sciences, George
Washington University, Washington, DC 20052, USA.

The vertebrate complement system is composed of about 30 serum and cell surface
proteins that make up three activation pathways, a lytic pathway, and a set of
proteins that regulate complement. Regulatory proteins are required for host
protection against autologous complement attack and to control the amplification 
feedback loop of the alternative pathway. Purple sea urchin, Strongylocentrotus
purpuratus, homologues of complement C3 (SpC3) and factor B (SpBf) have been
identified, suggesting the presence of an alternative complement pathway. This
implies that echinoderms require a complement regulatory system for the same
reasons that it is required in higher vertebrates. Two cDNAs, Sp5 and Sp5013,
have been characterized from coelomocytes and the deduced structures of the
encoded mosaic proteins, SpCRL ( S. p urpuratus complement related protein, long 
form) and SpCRS ( short form), have domains that are also found in regulatory
proteins such as factor H and factor I and the terminal pathway components C6 and
C7. These domains include multiple short consensus repeats, a fucolectin domain, 
Ser/Thr/Pro-rich regions, a Cys-rich region, and a factor I-membrane attack
complex domain. The genes are constitutively expressed in all tissues of the sea 
urchin and are not induced in response to immune challenge. Multiple bands of
varying intensity on both genome blots and RNA blots suggest that Sp5 and Sp5013 
are members of a small gene family and that they might undergo alternative
splicing. Based on the domains present in SpCRL and SpCRS, they might be either
examples of complement regulatory proteins or members of the terminal pathway of 
complement.

PMID: 15088130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Gene. 2003 Dec 4;321:73-81.

Genome-wide analysis of redox-regulated genes in a dinoflagellate.

Okamoto OK(1), Hastings JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, 16 Divinity 
Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138-2020, USA.

In this study, the effects of 1 mM sodium nitrite, a reactive nitrogen species
(RNS) generator, and 0.5 mM paraquat, which produces reactive oxygen species
(ROS), on gene expression in the marine dinoflagellate species Pyrocystis lunula 
were investigated using microarrays containing 3500 complementary DNAs (cDNAs). A
total of 246 differentially expressed genes were identified under these
treatments: 204 genes were specifically regulated in response to nitrite and 37
genes specifically to paraquat. Only six genes showed a dependence on both
nitrite and paraquat, indicating that the two agents act predominantly via
distinct pathways. Although many of these redox-regulated genes encode proteins
from a diverse range of functional categories, the majority of them (68%)
represent novel sequences. Temporary abnormal spherical cells occurred in
nitrite-treated cultures, but not in those exposed to paraquat, suggesting that
this response involves a specific pathway triggered by RNS. The genes involved
include one that encodes a transcription factor unique to dinoflagellates (HPl), 
and genes encoding proteins similar to those regulating developmental processes
in plants and animals such as NYD-SP5, shaggy and calcium-dependent kinases, the 
COP9 signalosome complex, ubiquitin-related proteases and a metacaspase.

PMID: 14636994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 21;278(47):46681-91. Epub 2003 Sep 2.

A vascular endothelial growth factor high affinity receptor 1-specific peptide
with antiangiogenic activity identified using a phage display peptide library.

El-Mousawi M(1), Tchistiakova L, Yurchenko L, Pietrzynski G, Moreno M,
Stanimirovic D, Ahmad D, Alakhov V.

Author information: 
(1)Supratek Pharma Inc., 215 Bouchard Street, Dorval, Quebec H9S 1A9, Canada.

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is known to play a predominant role in 
tumor angiogenesis and metastasis formation that is mediated by its interactions 
with two tyrosine kinase receptors, VEGFRI (Flt-1) and VEGFRII (KDR). Inhibition 
of VEGF-dependent events in tumor tissues is known to enhance apoptosis and to
suppress tumor growth. A novel peptide, SP5.2, which selectively binds Flt-1 and 
inhibits a broad range of VEGF-mediated events, was identified using a
phage-display library screening. The fluorescein-labeled SP5.2 specifically bound
to VEGF-stimulated primary human cerebral endothelial cells (HCECs), whereas
non-stimulated HCECs, as well as human neuroblastoma cells (ShyY) did not show
any interaction with the peptide. SP5.2 prevented proliferation of cultured
primary human umbilical vein endothelial cells induced by recombinant human
VEGF165 with an IC50 of 5 microm. SP5.2 was also shown to antagonize VEGF- and
PLGF-induced, but not basic fibroblast growth factor-induced proliferation of
HCECs. In contrast to "scrambled" peptide, SP5.2 was also found to selectively
inhibit VEGF-stimulated migration of HCECs. The in vitro analysis of
antiangiogenic activity of SP5.2 using a capillary-like tube formation assay
showed that VEGF-induced angiogenesis of HCECs grown on Matrigel was completely
inhibited in the presence of 10 microm SP5.2. Further studies demonstrated that
SP5.2 prevented VEGF-induced permeability increase in HCECs monolayers. To
explore whether SP5.2 can be used as a targeting agent, chemical and recombinant 
conjugates of SP5.2 with reporter proteins (peroxidase and beta-galactosidase)
were produced. The resulting products showed significant increases (200-fold for 
SP5.2-beta-gal and 400-fold for SP5.2-peroxidase) in binding affinity to
recombinant Flt-1 compared with the original synthetic SP5.2, suggesting that
conjugate with therapeutic activity in nanomolar range could potentially be
developed based on SP5.2 structure.

PMID: 12954624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Zhonghua Shi Yan He Lin Chuang Bing Du Xue Za Zhi. 2002 Sep;16(3):288-91.

[Establishment of a double-antigen sandwich ELISA for detecting total antibodies 
to human immunodeficiency virus type 1/2].

[Article in Chinese]

He H(1), Mao P, Hou J, Hong S, Zhu L, Hu Y, Bai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, The 302nd Hospital of PLA, Beijing 100039, China.

OBJECTIVE: To describe and evaluate a double-antigen sandwich ELISA for detecting
human immunodeficiency virus type 1/2 (HIV-1/2) specific antibodies.
METHODS: The peptides gp41.1(sp1), gp41.2(sp2), gp120(sp3) and p24(sp4) of HIV-1 
and gp36(sp5) of HIV-2 were artificially synthesized. Then sp1, sp3, sp4 and sp5 
were used as coating antigens; sp1, sp2, sp4 and sp5 labeled with HRP were used
as conjugates in this sandwich ELISA.
RESULTS: The specificity and sensitivity of the assay were both 100% in detecting
anti-HIV of 40 control sera of the second generation panel, higher than indirect 
ELISA (specificity 90% and sensitivity, 65%, respectively). All of 210 sera from 
individuals with other diseases were negative for anti-HIV. The consistency rate 
was 100% when our sandwich ELISA and Abbott HIVAB were used to detect anti-HIV in
90 healthy blood donors and 88 HIV infected individuals.
CONCLUSIONS: The results showed that this sandwich ELISA for detection of
anti-HIV is specific, sensitive and convenient, and it is suitable for screening 
blood donors and detecting HIV infection.

PMID: 12665944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Gen Virol. 2002 Jul;83(Pt 7):1771-5.

Substitution of a single amino acid in the 2b protein of Pea early-browning virus
affects nematode transmission.

Vellios E(1), Brown DJ, MacFarlane SA.

Author information: 
(1)Scottish Crop Research Institute, Invergowrie, Dundee DD2 5DA, UK.

The 2b protein of Pea early-browning virus (PEBV) is required for transmission of
the virus by nematodes. Comparison of the 2b proteins of highly transmissible
(TpA56) and poorly transmissible (SP5) isolates of PEBV identified two amino acid
substitutions (G90S and G177R) that might be responsible for the poor
transmission of isolate SP5. Hybrid viruses were created in which the TpA56 2b
protein carried SP5-specific substitutions at residue 90 or 177, and in which the
SP5 2b protein carried TpA56-specific substitutions at these positions.
Transmission tests showed that the G177R substitution is sufficient to prevent
nematode transmission of the virus. Examination of the 2b proteins from PEBV and 
other tobraviruses predicted the presence of a coiled-coil domain in the central 
region of the protein. This structural element is important for the association
of interacting proteins and, thus, might mediate interaction of the 2b protein
with the virus coat protein or with the vector nematode.

PMID: 12075098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Mech Dev. 2002 Jul;115(1-2):117-22.

XSPR-1 and XSPR-2, novel Sp1 related zinc finger containing genes, are
dynamically expressed during Xenopus embryogenesis.

Ossipova O(1), Stick R, Pieler T.

Author information: 
(1)Georg-August-Universität Göttingen, Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular
Cell Biology, Humboldtallee 23, D-37073 Göttingen, Germany.
olga_ossipova@dfci.harvard.edu

Proteins related to the human transcription factor Sp1 are characterized by the
presence of a highly conserved zinc finger domain consisting of three C2H2 type
zinc fingers. Here we describe two Xenopus laevis cDNAs, which encode novel
Sp1-related C2H2 type zinc finger transcription factors named XSPR-1 and XSPR-2. 
Structurally, XSPR-1 and XSPR-2 are closely related to the murine Sp5, which
interacts genetically with Brachyury (Dev. Biol. 227 (2000) 358). XSPR-1 and
XSPR-2 are expressed in broad and dynamic patterns during early development.
Starting at gastrulation, XSPR-1 transcripts are restricted to the non-involuting
marginal zone, and, at later stages, to the neuroectoderm, forebrain, otic
vesicles and the midbrain/hindbrain boundary. In contrast, XSPR-2 expression is
found predominantly within the presumptive mesoderm during gastrulation. At
tailbud and tadpole stages, XSPR-2 is expressed exclusively in the tip of the
tail.

PMID: 12049774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. FASEB J. 2002 Jul;16(9):1132-4. Epub 2002 May 21.

Loss of dipeptidylpeptidase IV activity in chronic rhinosinusitis contributes to 
the neurogenic inflammation induced by substance P in the nasal mucosa.

Grouzmann E(1), Monod M, Landis B, Wilk S, Brakch N, Nicoucar K, Giger R, Malis
D, Szalay-Quinodoz I, Cavadas C, Morel DR, Lacroix JS.

Author information: 
(1)Division d'Hypertension, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, 1011
Lausanne, Switzerland. Eric.Grouzmann@chuv.hospvd.ch

In this study, we have found that dipeptidylpeptidase IV (DPPIV) plays in vivo an
active role in the modulation of the inflammatory response of chronic
rhinosinusitis. Human nasal mucosa expresses DPPIV-like immunoreactivity in
submucosal seromucus glands, leukocytes, and endothelial cells of blood vessels. 
DPPIV enzymatic activity in nasal tissue biopsies taken from patients suffering
from chronic rhinosinusitis was correlated inversely with the density of
inflammatory cells in the nasal mucosa, and the DPPIV activity rose when chronic 
rhinosinusitis was treated. By using a pig animal model, we have shown that the
intranasal administration of recombinant DPPIV decreased the vasodilatation
induced by exogenous substance P (SP), a proinflammatory peptide released by
sensory nerves. In contrast, an inhibitor of DPPIV enhanced the vasodilatatory
effect at low doses of SP. SP5-11 was 100- to 1000-fold less potent than SP as a 
vasodilator of the nasal mucosa. The vasodilatatory effect of SP was abolished by
a NK1 receptor antagonist. In conclusion, these results suggest a new
pathophysiological pathway for rhinitis based on clinical observations in humans,
indicating the involvement of an enzyme to modulate non-adrenergic and
non-cholinergic substrate that occurred during nasal dysfunctions.

PMID: 12039843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Poult Sci. 2002 Jan;81(1):30-3.

Fatty acid composition and egg components of specialty eggs.

Cherian G(1), Holsonbake TB, Goeger MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Oregon State University, Corvallis 97331-6702, 
USA. Gita.Cherian@orst.edu

Egg components, total fat, and fatty acid content of specialty eggs were
compared. One dozen eggs were collected and analyzed from each of five different 
brands from hens fed a diet free of animal fat (SP1), certified organic
free-range brown eggs (SP2), uncaged unmedicated brown eggs (SP3), cage-free
vegetarian diet brown eggs (SP4), or naturally nested uncaged (SP5). Regular
white-shelled eggs were the control. A significant (P < 0.05) difference was
observed in the egg components and fatty acid content in different brands. The
percentage of yolk was lower (P < 0.05) in SP2 and SP4 with a concomitant
increase (P < 0.05) in the percentage of white. The percentage of shell was lower
(P < 0.05) in SP4 and SP5. The total edible portion was greater in SP4 and SP5.
The yolk:white ratio was greater (P < 0.05) in SP3. The total lipid content was
lower in SP4 eggs. The content of palmitic (C16:0), stearic (C18:0), and total
saturated fatty acids were lower (P < 0.05) in SP1. No difference was observed in
the content of palmitoleic (C16:1), oleic (C18:1), or total monounsaturated fatty
acids. The content of n-3 fatty acids in SP2, SP4, and SP5 were similar to
control eggs. The ratio of total n-6:n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids ranged from 
39.2 for SP5 to 11.5 for SP1 (P < 0.05). No difference was observed in the total 
polyunsaturated fatty acid content of eggs (P > 0.05).

PMID: 11885896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Development. 2001 Oct;128(20):4021-34.

The zebrafish buttonhead-like factor Bts1 is an early regulator of pax2.1
expression during mid-hindbrain development.

Tallafuss A(1), Wilm TP, Crozatier M, Pfeffer P, Wassef M, Bally-Cuif L.

Author information: 
(1)Zebrafish Neurogenetics Junior Research Group, Institute of Virology,
Technical University-Munich, Trogerstrasse 4b, 81675 Munich, Germany.

Little is known about the factors that control the specification of the
mid-hindbrain domain (MHD) within the vertebrate embryonic neural plate. Because 
the head-trunk junction of the Drosophila embryo and the MHD have patterning
similarities, we have searched for vertebrate genes related to the Drosophila
head gap gene buttonhead (btd), which in the fly specifies the head-trunk
junction. We report here the identification of a zebrafish gene which, like btd, 
encodes a zinc-finger transcriptional activator of the Sp-1 family (hence its
name, bts1 for btd/Sp-related-1) and shows a restricted expression in the head.
During zebrafish gastrulation, bts1 is transcribed in the posterior epiblast
including the presumptive MHD, and precedes in this area the expression of other 
MHD markers such as her5, pax2.1 and wnt1. Ectopic expression of bts1 combined to
knock-down experiments demonstrate that Bts1 is both necessary and sufficient for
the induction of pax2.1 within the anterior neural plate, but is not involved in 
regulating her5, wnt1 or fgf8 expression. Our results confirm that early MHD
development involves several genetic cascades that independently lead to the
induction of MHD markers, and identify Bts1 as a crucial upstream component of
the pathway selectively leading to pax2.1 induction. In addition, they imply that
flies and vertebrates, to control the development of a boundary embryonic region,
have probably co-opted a similar strategy: the restriction to this territory of
the expression of a Btd/Sp-like factor.

PMID: 11641225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Am J Manag Care. 2001 Sep 25;7 Spec No:SP5-16.

Evaluation and treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis.

Wang CY(1), Bruder JM, Rubin CD.

Author information: 
(1)Geriatrics Section, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas,
75390-8889, USA. chia-ying.wang@utsouthwestern.edu

Osteoporosis is a prevalent condition among elderly women and is associated with 
an increased risk for fractures. With the burgeoning size of the elderly
population, a practitioner is likely to face many questions regarding the
evaluation and management of postmenopausal osteoporosis. This review discusses
and compares available therapies. All women should have adequate calcium and
vitamin D intake. Women diagnosed as having osteoporosis should be evaluated for 
secondary causes of osteoporosis and risk factors for falls. For women with
postmenopausal osteoporosis, therapy with hormone replacement, bisphosphonates
(alendronate sodium or risedronate sodium), raloxifene hydrochloride, or
calcitonin should be considered. The results of ongoing studies will help refine 
the strategies used for management of postmenopausal osteoporosis.

PMID: 11599675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Space Med Med Eng (Beijing). 1998 Feb;11(1):21-5.

[A study on the induction of mutation of paddy rice under space conditions].

[Article in Chinese]

Li Y(1), Jiang X, Li J, Qiu H, Li G, Xie J.

Author information: 
(1)Agricultural Science Research Institute of Fuzhon Prefexture Jiangxi Province,
Linchuan, China.

Rice seeds were carried into space by the recoverable satellite. After recovery
the seeds were sowed on the earth so as to observe the character performance and 
genetic variation of their later generations. The preliminary results showed that
the main characters of the SP1 generation didn't show significant difference from
the control. Among the individual plants of the SP2 generation strong
broad-spectrum segregation appeared in the 9 main agronomic characters. Mutation 
frequency is 4.66%. The individual plants of the SP3 generation were obviously
correlated with the SP4 generation in the average character values of the 5 main 
characters. Stable plant strains were obtained in the SP4 generation. The SP5 and
SP6 generations were put into control and polt tests. As a conclusion, it may be 
considered that certain variations of rice seeds induced by the space conditions 
are heritable to the offsprings, therefore, it can be used as a new method for
mutagenic seed breeding.

PMID: 11541262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Brain Res. 2001 Jun 15;904(1):54-66.

Chorda tympani nerve stimulation evokes Fos expression in regionally limited
neuron populations within the gustatory nucleus of the solitary tract.

Harrison TA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, and the Cardiovascular Research
Institute, James H. Quillen College of Medicine, East Tennessee State University,
Johnson City, TN 37614, USA. defoe@etsu.edu

The distribution of neurons in the rostral nucleus of the solitary tract (rNST)
that respond to gustatory input from the anterior tongue was visualized by Fos
protein immunohistochemistry following electrical stimulation of the chorda
tympani (CT) nerve in rats. Maps of Fos-immunoreactive (Fos-ir) neurons were
compared with the distribution of CT afferent terminal fields labeled by
transganglionic transport of rhodamine-dextran in a separate group of animals.
The primary concentration of Fos-ir neurons localized in register with the major 
terminal fields of CT afferent fibers, in the central third of the rostral 1.0 mm
of the NST ipsilateral to the stimulated nerve. A similar correspondence in
location and degree of labeling of Fos-ir neurons and afferent terminals was
observed in the ipsilateral dorsal spinal trigeminal complex (Sp5) pars caudalis,
near the obex, and the Sp5 pars oralis near the rostral pole of the rNST. Thus,
the magnitude of Fos upregulation in brainstem targets of the CT nerve having
chemosensory or nociceptive function, was proportional to the relative density of
the CT afferent input. This correspondence, and the absence of labeling in
neurons known to be one additional synapse away from the afferent input within
gustatory or oral reflex pathways, suggests that the cell map obtained represents
mainly neurons that are directly activated via primary afferent synapses from CT 
fibers. The availability of a method to histochemically identify a population of 
putative second-order taste neurons will facilitate analysis of the
cellular/molecular properties of these neurons and of synaptic circuitry in the
rNST.

PMID: 11516411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Mech Dev. 2001 Mar;101(1-2):175-9.

The novel transcription factor gene Sp5 exhibits a dynamic and highly restricted 
expression pattern during mouse embryogenesis.

Treichel D(1), Becker MB, Gruss P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Max Planck Institute of Biophysical
Chemistry, Am Fassberg 11, 37077, Göttingen, Germany.

We describe the sequence and expression pattern of Sp5, a novel member of the
vertebrate Sp1 transcription factor gene family which consists of at least five
members. This gene family is characterized by a highly conserved domain which is 
formed by three Zn fingers, which bind to the GC box or the GT/CACC box in the
promoter of many genes. These boxes are important cis-acting elements required
for the expression of the respective genes. In vitro experiments indicate that
the Sp1 transcription factors act by influencing the methylation state of the
DNA, or by direct interactions with other promoter specific transcription
factors. Despite intensive research, the results from in vivo experiments,
including targeted gene inactivation, have been difficult to explain. This may be
due to possible redundancies and interferences with other transcription factors
of this gene family. Here, we report the isolation of the mouse Sp5 gene, a novel
Sp1 homolog. Its sequence indicates that Sp5 is a possible link between Sp1 and
the closely related BTEB/KLF gene family. We provide detailed information of its 
highly dynamic expression pattern during mouse embryogenesis in the developing
brain, the spinal cord, the trigeminal ganglia, the somites and additional sites 
outside the nervous system starting from embryonic day 7.25 (E7.25) up to E10.5.

PMID: 11231070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Comp Neurol. 2000 May 1;420(2):233-43.

Thalamic projections from the whisker-sensitive regions of the spinal trigeminal 
complex in the rat.

Veinante P(1), Jacquin MF, Deschênes M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche Université Laval-Robert Giffard, Hôpital Robert Giffard,
Québec G1J 2G3, Canada.

This study investigated the axonal projections of whisker-sensitive cells of the 
spinal trigeminal subnuclei (SP5) in rat oral, interpolar, and caudal divisions
(SP5o, SP5i, and SP5c, respectively). The labeling of small groups of
trigeminothalamic axons with biotinylated dextran amine disclosed the following
classes of axons. 1) Few SP5o cells project to the thalamus: They innervate the
caudal part of the posterior group (Po) and the region intercalated between the
anterior pretectal and the medial geniculate nuclei. These fibers also branch
profusely in the tectum. 2) Two types of ascending fibers arise from SP5i: Type I
fibers are thick and distribute to the Po and to other regions of the midbrain,
i.e., the prerubral field, the deep layers of the superior colliculus, the
anterior pretectal nucleus, and the ventral part of the zona incerta. Type II
fibers are thin; branch sparsely in the tectum; and form small-sized, bushy
arbors in the ventral posterior medial nucleus (VPM). Accordingly, a statistical 
analysis of the distribution of antidromic invasion latencies of 96 SP5i cells to
thalamic stimulation disclosed two populations of neurons: fast-conducting cells,
which invaded at a mean latency of 1.23 +/- 0. 62 msec, and slow-conducting
cells, which invaded at a mean latency of 2.97 +/- 0.62 msec. 3) The rostral part
of SP5c contains cells with thalamic projections similar to that of type II SP5i 
neurons, whereas the caudal part did not label thalamic fibers in this study. A
comparison of SP5i projections and PR5 projections in the VPM revealed that the
former are restricted to ventral-lateral tier of the nucleus, whereas the latter 
terminate principally in the upper two tiers of the VPM. These results suggest a 
functional compartmentation of thalamic barreloids that is defined by the
topographic distribution of PR5 and type II SP5i afferents.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10753309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Br J Plast Surg. 2000 Dec;53(8):714.

Book reviews

Cadier M(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Old Farmhouse, Standlynch, Nr Downton, Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP5 3QR, UK.

PMID: 11090338  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


124. Dev Biol. 2000 Nov 15;227(2):358-72.

Sp5, a new member of the Sp1 family, is dynamically expressed during development 
and genetically interacts with Brachyury.

Harrison SM(1), Houzelstein D, Dunwoodie SL, Beddington RS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Mammalian Development, The National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London, NW7 1AA, United Kingdom.

We describe the identification, biochemical characterisation, and mutation of a
novel mouse gene: Sp5. Sp5 encodes a protein having a C-terminal C(2)H(2) zinc
finger domain closely related to that of the transcription factor Sp1. In vitro, 
DNA binding studies show that it binds to the GC box, a DNA motif present in the 
promoter of a very large number of genes, including Brachyury, and recognised by 
members of the Sp1 family. However, outside of its DNA binding domain, Sp5 has
little homology with any other member of the Sp1 family. In contrast to the
ubiquitous expression of Sp1, Sp5 exhibits a remarkably dynamic pattern of
expression throughout early development. This is suggestive of a role in numerous
tissue patterning events, including gastrulation and axial elongation;
differentiation and patterning of the neural tube, pharyngeal region, and
somites; and formation of skeletal muscle in the body and limbs. Mice homozygous 
for a targeted mutation in Sp5 show no overt phenotype. However, the enhancement 
of the T/+ phenotype in compound mutant mice (Sp5(lacZ)/Sp5(lacZ), T/+) indicates
a genetic interaction between Sp5 and Brachyury. These observations are
consistent with a role for Sp5 in the coordination of changes in transcription
required to generate pattern in the developing embryo.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11071760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2000;35(2):114-22.

Arsenic[III] and heavy metal ions induce intrachromosomal homologous
recombination in the hprt gene of V79 Chinese hamster cells.

Helleday T(1), Nilsson R, Jenssen D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic and Cellular Toxicology, Wallenberg Laboratory,
Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden. helleday@genetics.su.se

In the present study the carcinogenic metal ions Cd[II], Co[II], Cr[VI], Ni[II], 
and Pb[II], as well as As[III], were examined for their ability to induce
intrachromosomal homologous and nonhomologous recombination in the hprt gene of
two V79 Chinese hamster cell lines, SPD8 and Sp5, respectively. With the
exception of Pb[II], all of these ions enhanced homologous recombination, the
order of potency being Cr>Cd>As>Co>Ni. In contrast, Cr[VI] was the only ion to
enhance recombination of the nonhomologous type. In order to obtain additional
information on the mechanism of recombination in the SPD8 cell line, individual
clones exhibiting metal-induced recombination were isolated, and the sequence of 
their hprt gene determined. These findings confirmed that all recombinogenic
events in this cell line were of the homologous type, involving predominantly a
chromatid exchange mechanism. The mechanisms underlying the recombination induced
by these ions are discussed in relationship to their genotoxicity, as well as to 
DNA repair and replication. Induced recombination may constitute a novel
mechanism for induction of neoplastic disease.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10712745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Eur J Med Res. 1999 Dec 16;4(12):533-6.

The G8-global healthcare applications project (GHAP) - recommendations for the
way into the information society

Dietzel G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bundesministerium fur Gesundheit, Am Propsthof 78 a, D-53108 Bonn, Germany.
dietzel@bmg.bund.de.

The Global Healthcare Applications Project has sought to demonstrate the
potential of telematics in the field of medicine and healthcare and to promote
joint approaches to issues such as the setting of standards. This has been done
through 10 sub-projects covering a range of applications and issues: 1. Towards a
global public health information network - Coordinator: Germany (Ulrich Laaser,
ulaaser@mail.uni-bielefeld.de; URL: http://health.ibs.uni-bielefeld.
de/i-jphe/database/documents/abstract/laaser-g7.htm(C45-60_laaser-g7. pdf) 2.
Improving prevention, early detection, diagnosis and treatment of cancer. -
Coordinator: France (Gerard Brugal, gerard. brugal@imag.fr; URL:
http://pathconsult.imag.fr/G7/G7_index.html) 3. Improving prevention, diagnosis
and treatment of major cardiovascular diseases. - Coordinator: Italy (Attilio
Maseri, amaseri@rm.unicatt.it; URL: http://www.g7cardio.org) 4. International
concerted action for collaboration in telemedicine. - Coordinator: Canada (Andre 
Lacroix, lacroixa@ere.umontreal.ca; URL: http:// www.g7sp4.org) 5. Enabling
mechanisms for a global healthcare network, including Internet connectivity. -
Coordinator: UK (Ray Rogers, r.rogers@mcmail.com; URL: http://www.ehto.be/sp5) 6.
International harmonisation of the use of data cards in healthcare: Internet
Connectivity Coordinator: USA (Elliot R. Siegel, siegel@nlm.nih.gov; URL:
http://www.nlm.nih.gov/) - Smart Cards and information exchange security in
health care Joint Coordinators: France, European Commission, Italy and Germany
(Jacques Sauret, jacques.sauret@sante.gouv.fr and G8-HC@sesam-vitale.fr; URL:
http:/www.sesam-vitale.fr/Projects/Netlink-G7-En/) 7. Evidence and effectiveness.
- Coordinator: Canada (Andrew Penn, andrew. penn@ualberta.ca; URL:
http://www.medlib.com/spi/web.htm) 8. Multilingual anatomical digital database. -
Coordinator: USA (Michael J. Ackermann; URL: http://www.nlm.nih.gov) 9. Medical
image reference centre. - Coordinator: Japan (Eturo Kashiwagi,EK-WEY@mhw. go.jp; 
URL: http://www.medirec.ncc.go.jp) 10. Special Interactive TV and Multimedia
Programmes for Professionals and Public in Dentistry and International Online
Academy for Dentistry and Oral Medicine. - Coordinator: Germany (Alexander
Ammann, ammann@quinline.com; URL: http://quinline.globaldent.com) - Further
information: http://www. bmgesundheit.de

PMID: 10611059  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


127. Hum Gene Ther. 1999 Dec 10;10(18):3031-44.

Delivery and expression of fluid shear stress-inducible promoters to the vessel
wall: applications for cardiovascular gene therapy.

Houston P(1), White BP, Campbell CJ, Braddock M.

Author information: 
(1)Endothelial Cell Gene Expression Group, Vascular Diseases Unit, Glaxo Wellcome
Medicines Research Centre, Stevenage, Herts, England.

In atherosclerosis, endothelial cells at sites of stenosis experience elevated
levels of shear stress. We have constructed a series of shear stress-inducible
transcription units (SITUs) expressing the luciferase reporter gene and
determined their activation by fluid shear stress in transfected endothelial
cells. Chimeric promoters were constructed that comprised basal transcription
factor-binding sites coupled to a shear stress response element (SSRE). We have
used consensus binding sites for transcription factors NF-kappaB, Ap1, Sp1, Oct1,
and Egr-1/Sp1 in either the presence or absence of the previously defined
"GAGACC" SSRE. The response of the promoters to shear stress was determined after
transfection into human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). After
transient transfection into HUVECs, fluid shear stress activated the promoters by
between two- and eightfold. The most responsive SITUs comprised an overlapping
Sp1/Egr-1-binding site linked to a TATA box with (SP5) or without (SP7) the
GAGACC SSRE. Instillation of SP5 DNA in vivo into the left carotid artery of
rabbit and subsequent generation of a stenosis using a mechanical wire occluder
caused a 10-fold upregulation of luciferase reporter gene expression at the site 
of vessel occlusion. These vectors show promise for therapeutic gene expression
at sites of occlusive vascular disease.

PMID: 10609662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Mutat Res. 1999 Feb 19;439(2):137-47.

Brominated flame retardants induce intragenic recombination in mammalian cells.

Helleday T(1), Tuominen KL, Bergman A, Jenssen D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic and Cellular Toxicology, Wallenberg Laboratory,
Stockholm University, S-106 91, Stockholm, Sweden. thomas.helleday@genetics.su.se

In the present study we have examined the effects of brominated flame retardants 
(BFR) and several other environmental contaminants in two in vitro assays for
intragenic recombination at an endogenous locus in mammalian cells. A total ten
compounds were investigated, i. e., two technical PCB mixtures (Aroclor 1221 and 
Aroclor 1254), DDT, PCP, tetrabromobisphenol A (TBBPA), 4,4'-bischlorophenyl
sulfone (BCPS), hexabromocyclododecane (HBCD) and the three different
polybrominated diphenylethers (PBDEs): 2-bromodiphenylether (MBDE),
3,4-dibromodiphenylether (DBDE) and 2,4,2', 4'-tetrabromodiphenylether (TBDE). In
the SPD8 assay system statistically significant increases in recombination
frequency were observed with Aroclor 1221, BCPS, DBDE, DDT, HBCD, MBDE and TBDE. 
In the Sp5 assay system, only DBDE, HBCD and MBDE caused statistically
significant increases in recombination frequency. In conclusion, our findings
indicate that the modern additives to plastic, i.e., HBCD and PBDEs, as well as
the plastic monomer BCPS may have the same effect to human health as DDT and
PCBs, in terms of inducing genetic recombination, which is known to provoke a
number of diseases, including cancer.

Copyright 1999 Elsevier Science B.V.

PMID: 10023042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Am J Otol. 1997 Nov;18(6 Suppl):S35-6.

Results from a pilot study using the nucleus CI24M/SP5 cochlear implant system.

Lai WK(1), Dillier N, Laszig R, Fisch U.

Author information: 
(1)ENT Department, University Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland.

OBJECTIVE: To conduct a pilot study in adults with the Nucleus CI24M/SP5 cochlear
implant system.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Eight postlingually deafened adults who had received little
or no benefit from conventional hearing aids, equipped with the Nucleus CI24M/SP5
cochlear implant system.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate that most of the subjects were able
to perform well in speech recognition tests. The test performances appeared to be
strongly affected by the duration of deafness. The speech processor's four
user-selectable program memories have been extremely useful for the subjects to
evaluate variations to the speech coding strategies in ordinary surroundings
outside of the laboratory. The telemetry functions of the new implant provide a
set of useful clinical and research tools for gathering greater insights into the
in-situ operation of the implant.

PMID: 9391588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1997 Sep;282(3):1547-56.

Substance P receptors in brain stem respiratory centers of the rat: regulation of
NK1 receptors by hypoxia.

Mazzone SB(1), Hinrichsen CF, Geraghty DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, University of Tasmania at Launceston,
Australia.

Substance P (SP) is a key neurotransmitter involved in the brain stem integration
of carotid body chemoreceptor reflexes. In this study, the characteristics and
location of SP receptors in the rat brain stem and their regulation by hypoxia
were investigated using homogenate radioligand binding and quantitative
autoradiography. Specific binding of [125I] Bolton-Hunter SP (BHSP) to brain stem
homogenates was saturable (approximately 0.3 nM) and to a single class of
high-affinity sites (K(d), 0.16 nM; maximum density of binding sites, 0.43
fmol/mg wet weight tissue). The order of potency of agonists for inhibition of
BHSP binding was SP > [Sar9Met(O2)11]SP >> neurokinin A > septide > neurokinin B 
>> [Nle10]-neurokinin A(4-10) = senktide, and for nonpeptide antagonists, RP
67580 > CP-96,345 >> RP 68651 = CP-96,344, consistent with binding to NK1
receptors. The effect of single and multiple, 5-min bouts of hypoxia (8.5%
O2/91.5% N2) on BHSP binding was investigated using quantitative autoradiography.
Binding sites were localized to the lateral, medial and commissural nucleus of
the solitary tract (NTS), the hypoglossal nucleus, central gray and the spinal
trigeminal tract and nucleus (Sp5 and nSp5, respectively). Five min after a
single bout of hypoxia, the density of BHSP binding sites had decreased
significantly (P < .05) in the medial NTS (-33%) and lateral NTS (-24%) when
compared to normoxic controls. However, the normal receptor complement was
restored within 60 min of the hypoxic challenge. In the Sp5, a significant
decrease (P < .05) in binding was observed 5 min after hypoxia which was still
apparent after 60 min. In contrast, the density of BHSP binding sites in the
hypoglossal nucleus decreased slowly and was significantly lower (P < .05) than
normoxic controls 60 min after hypoxia. Five min after repetitive hypoxia (3 x 5 
min bouts), BHSP binding in the NTS was reduced by more than 40%. Studies in
homogenates showed that the affinity of SP for BHSP binding sites was not
affected by repetitive hypoxia (K(d)s, normoxic, 0.27 nM; hypoxic, 0.24 nM).
These data suggest that afferent input from carotid body chemoreceptors may
dynamically regulate NK1 receptors in several brain stem nuclei that are
intimately involved in stimulating ventilation during hypoxia, and that the
time-course of receptor turnover may differ from region to region in the brain
stem. The temporary loss of NK1 receptors in the NTS may partly explain why
adequate ventilation is often not maintained during hypoxia.

PMID: 9316871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Am J Physiol. 1997 May;272(5 Pt 1):G987-93.

Substance P in the dorsal vagal complex inhibits medullary TRH-induced gastric
acid secretion in rats.

Yang H(1), Taché Y.

Author information: 
(1)CURE: Digestive Diseases Research Center, Department of Veterans Affairs
Medical Center West Los Angeles, California, USA.

Neurons that contain substance P (SP) and thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) in 
medullary midline raphe nuclei project to the dorsal vagal complex (DVC). The
modulatory role of SP on basal gastric acid secretion (GAS) and TRH on
DVC-induced stimulation of GAS was studied in urethan-anesthetized rats. The
stable SP agonist, DiMe-C7 ([pGlu5, MePhe8, MeGly9]SP5-11, 50 and 100 pmol),
injected unilaterally into the DVC reduced the GAS response (47 +/- 12 mumol/60
min) to coinjected TRH analog, RX 77368 (25 pmol), by 53% and 85%, respectively, 
whereas DiMe-C7 (100 pmol) alone had no effect on basal and
pentagastrin-stimulated GAS. DiMe-C7 (100 pmol/site) inhibited the GAS response
to kainic acid injected into the raphe pallidus (Rpa) when it was injected
bilaterally into the DVC but not the hypoglossal nuclei. The SP
nourokinin-1-receptor antagonist, CP-96,345, injected bilaterally into the DVC (1
nmol/ site) increased basal GAS (33 +/- 8 mumol/90 min) and potentiated the GAS
response to kainic acid injected into the Rpa by 40%. These results suggest that 
SP acts on neurokinin-1 receptors in the DVC to reduce medullary TRH-induced
stimulation of GAS in rats.

PMID: 9176205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Neuroimmunol. 1996 Dec;71(1-2):73-80.

Substance P augments interleukin-10 and tumor necrosis factor-alpha release by
human cord blood monocytes and macrophages.

Ho WZ(1), Kaufman D, Uvaydova M, Douglas SD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunologic and Infectious Diseases, Joseph Stokes Jr. Research
Institute, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, PA, USA.

We have investigated the effects of SP on the constitutive and/or
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced expression of interleukin-10 (IL-10) and tumor
necrosis factor (TNF-alpha) in both freshly isolated cord blood monocytes (FICBM)
and cord blood monocyte-derived macrophages (CBMDM). The cells were treated with 
SP at various concentrations (10(-14) to 10(-6) M) in the presence or absence of 
LPS and culture supernatants were analyzed for IL-10 and TNF-alpha as measured by
an enzyme immunosorbent assay (ELISA). FICBM and CBMDM treated with SP alone
increased TNF-alpha secretion. The stimulatory effects of SP on TNF-alpha
secretion are inhibited by a anti-SP polyclonal antibody and SP antagonists,
spantide ([D-Arg-1-D-Trp-7-D-Trp-9-Leu-11]-SP) and CP-96,345 (a nonpeptide
antagonist of the SP receptor). Although the treatment with SP alone did not
enhance IL-10 secretion by both freshly isolated and cultured cord monocytes,
treatment with SP in combination with LPS leads to a synergistic interaction in
upregulation of IL-10 secretion. Fragments of SP (SP1-4 and SP5-11) in the
presence or absence of LPS show little effects on IL-10 secretion by FICBM. SP
reverses the inhibitory effect of IFN-gamma on LPS-induced IL-10 secretion by
FICBM. In addition, the two SP antagonists and the anti-SP polyclonal antibody
blocked the SP effect on IL-10 secretion by FICBM, indicating that these effects 
are specific and SP receptor mediated. Thus, SP is likely to play an important
role in certain inflammatory conditions in the immune and nervous systems.

PMID: 8982105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Somat Cell Mol Genet. 1996 May;22(3):201-10.

Characterization of mutants involving partial exon duplications in the hprt gene 
of Chinese hamster V79 cells.

Darè E(1), Zhang LH, Jenssen D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
eda@flax.gen.ks.se

Sequencing of hprt cDNA revealed that three spontaneous mutants in V79 Chinese
hamster cells exhibit tandem duplications of exon(s), i.e., either exons 2 and 3 
or exon 7. Sequences of different sizes (4.5-8 Kb) were found to be duplicated
and inserted in tandem into the hprt gene. These mutants demonstrated spontaneous
reversion frequencies which were about 40-fold higher than those observed with
other types of spontaneous mutants, but on the same order of magnitude as
spontaneous reversions in Sp5, a mutant with a duplication insertion involving
exon 2 in this gene. These data suggest that all of the duplications found have
the same genetic instability, regardless of the type, size or position of the
duplicated fragment. The coding sequence of the hprt cDNA and the restriction
pattern of the revertants were virtually identical to the wild-type, indicating
restoration of a functional hprt gene by precise deletion of the duplicated
fragment.

PMID: 8914605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Invertebr Pathol. 1996 May;67(3):236-52.

Analysis and Modeling of Time-Dose-Mortality of Melanoplus sanguinipes, Locusta
migratoria migratorioides, and Schistocerca gregaria (Orthoptera: Acrididae) from
Beauveria, Metarhizium, and Paecilomyces Isolates from Madagascar

Nowierski RM(1), Zeng Z, Jaronski S, Delgado F, Swearingen W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Montana State University, Bozeman, Montana, 59717

A complementary log-log (CLL) model was used to model time-dose-mortality
relationships from bioassay tests of 26 fungal isolates mostly from Madagascar,
Africa, against three acridid species, all referred to here as "grasshoppers."
The fungal pathogens included 15 isolates of Beauveria bassiana, 9 isolates of
Metarhizium flavoviridae, and 2 isolates of Paecilomyces spp. Grasshopper species
tested included Melanoplus sanguinipes, Locusta migratoria migratorioides, and
Schistocerca gregaria. The scaled deviance, mean deviance, Pearson X2 statistic, 
Hosmer-Lemeshow (H-L) C statistic, and three-dimensional time-dose-mortality
graphs were used to assess extra-binomial variation, data points that were
potential outliers, conformance of the scaled deviance statistic and Pearson's X2
statistic to a chi2 distribution, and the fit of the CLL model. The H-L C
statistic also was found to be useful in showing the goodness of fit of the CLL
model for the fungal isolates prior to modeling the extra-binomial variation.
After the extra-binomial variation was modeled using Williams' method, the slope 
from maximum likelihood estimation, modified log(LD50) estimates (which were
corrected for background mortality using the CLL model), a dynamic ranking of the
log(LD50) values over time, and a three-dimensional plot of time, dose, and
mortality of the three grasshopper species were used to evaluate the
effectiveness of the fungal isolates. In general, the CLL model provided a rather
poor fit of the fungal isolates which had a large number of replicate trials in
the bioassay tests (i.e., a large sample size) due to extra-binomial variation.
The CLL model provided an excellent fit of the time-dose-mortality relationships 
of such isolates after the extra-binomial variation was modeled and included in
the CLL model. Metarhizium isolates MFV and SP5 were found to be the most
virulent isolates tested against M. sanguinipes, followed by Metarhizium
isolates: SP8, SP7, SP9, SP6, and SP1, and Beauveria isolate S33B. Metarhizium
isolates SP3, SP5, SP6, and SP9, and Beauveria isolates SP11, SP12, SP13, and
SP16 showed higher levels of virulence against L. migratoria migratorioides over 
more of the time periods tested than the other pathogen isolates examined.
Metarhizium isolates SP9 and SP5 were the most effective isolates tested against 
S. gregaria. In general, the Metarhizium isolates were more virulent against the 
grasshoppers than the Beauveria isolates, which were more virulent than the
Paecilomyces isolates. The CLL model was found to be very useful in describing
grasshopper mortality as a function of time and dose. This approach combined with
model and fungal isolate assessment statistics will be helpful for determining
which pathogen isolates have the greatest potential for controlling grasshoppers 
and other pests in the future.

PMID: 8812605  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


135. J Pineal Res. 1995 Nov;19(4):173-7.

Melatonin receptors in the rat brain and pituitary.

Williams LM(1), Hannah LT, Hastings MH, Maywood ES.

Author information: 
(1)Rowett Research Institute, Bucksburn, Aberdeen, United Kingdom.

2-(125I)iodomelatonin binding has been mapped and characterized in the brain and 
pituitary of the male laboratory rat using quantitative in vitro autoradiography.
Specific binding was defined as that completely displaced in the presence of 1
microM melatonin. In the brain high levels of binding were localized over the
suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), the area postrema (AP), and the spinal tract of
the trigeminal nerve (Sp5). Lower densities of binding were found over the medial
preoptic area (MPA), the septohypothalamic nuclei (SHy), the anterior
hypothalamic area (AHA), the nuclei of the lateral olfactory tract (LOT), the
paraventricular (PV), anteroventral (AV) and intermediodorsal (IMD) nuclei of the
thalamus, the medial region of the lateral habenular (Lhb), the nuclei of the
stria medullaris (SM), the basolateral (BL) and medial (ME) amygdaloid nuclei,
the ventromedial nuclei (VMH), the arcuate nuclei (Arc), the subiculum of the
hippocampus (S) and the lateral mammillary nuclei (LM). High levels of binding
were also present over the pars tuberalis of the pituitary (PT) and the anterior 
and posterior cerebral arteries (CA). In both neuronal and non-neuronal areas,
specific binding was time dependent and partially reversible in the presence of 1
microM melatonin. Binding was also saturable and of high affinity with
dissociation constants (Kd) in the low picomolar range and was significantly
inhibited in the presence of 10(-4)M guanosine 5'-0-(3-thiotriphosphate) (GTP
gamma S) and 150 mM NaCl in all regions examined, indicating the presence of high
affinity G-protein coupled melatonin receptors.

PMID: 8789248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1995 Sep 14;214(2):622-6.

The occurrence of a gene-encoded variant of nuclear basic protein (SP4) in sperm 
of Xenopus laevis.

Takamune K(1), Teshima K, Abe SI, Katagiri C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Faculty of Science, Kumamoto University,
Japan.

In our recent analyses [1] of five tandemly arranged genes encoding a major
sperm-specific basic nuclear protein (SP4) of Xenopus laevis, we found a gene
containing a single base substitution which will give rise to the replacement of 
the 69th residue among the 78 amino acids of SP4. In this study, the polypeptide 
from sperm nuclei which were separated by reversed-phase HPLC as a distinct
entity from SP4 were collected for their peptide mapping with V8 protease and
partial amino acid sequence analyses. It resulted that a polypeptide exhibiting
an amino acid replacement at exactly the same position as predicted from a single
base substitution of SP4 occurs in approximately one-fourth of the amount of SP4.
This finding suggests that the relative amount of SP4 and its variant directly
depends on the relative number of genes of SP4 and its variant.

PMID: 7677774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Gen Virol. 1995 May;76 ( Pt 5):1299-304.

Sequence comparison of RNA2 of nematode-transmissible and
nematode-non-transmissible isolates of pea early-browning virus suggests that the
gene encoding the 29 kDa protein may be involved in nematode transmission.

MacFarlane SA(1), Brown DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Department, Scottish Crop Research Institute, Invergowrie, Dundee,
UK.

A cDNA clone containing the complete coding region of RNA2 of the newly described
TPA56 isolate of pea early-browning virus (English serotype, PEBV-E) has been
obtained. A plasmid (pFLA56) containing this clone together with the 5' and 3'
non-coding regions of PEBV isolate SP5 (the type isolate of PEBV-E) and flanked
by the CaMV 35S promoter and NOS terminator is infectious when co-inoculated onto
plants with pCaN1, an infectious clone of PEBV SP5 RNA1. Virus containing RNA2
derived from the cDNA clone of the TPA56 isolate is transmitted by Trichodorus
primitivus nematodes, whereas virus containing RNA2 from a clone of the SP5
isolate is not transmitted. Sequencing revealed 11 differences out of 3374
nucleotides between the transmissible TPA56 and non-transmissible SP5 clones.
However, only three of the base changes affected the amino acid sequences of
virus gene products. A single, conservative amino acid change was present in the 
virus coat protein. Two non-conservative changes occurred in the protein of
molecular mass 29.6 kDa expressed from an open reading frame located down-stream 
of the coat protein gene, suggesting that it has a function in nematode
transmission and that changes in this protein prevent vector transmission of the 
SP5 isolate of PEBV.

PMID: 7730817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Toxicon. 1995 May;33(5):615-26.

Fractionation of Bothrops pirajai snake venom: isolation and characterization of 
piratoxin-I, a new myotoxic protein.

Mancuso LC(1), Correa MM, Vieira CA, Cunha OA, Lachat JJ, de Araujo HS, Ownby CL,
Giglio JR.

Author information: 
(1)Departmento de Bioquímica, Faculdade de Medicina de Riberão Preto,
Universidade de São Paulo, Brazil.

Whole desiccated venom of Bothrops pirajai was fractionated on a gel filtration
(Sephadex G-75) column. Phospholipase A2, arginine esterase and clotting activity
profiles of the six fractions (SI to SVI) obtained were determined. Fraction SIV 
from the gel filtration column was subjected to chromatography on SP-Sephadex
C-25. It was resolved into five subfractions (SIV-SP1, to SIV-SP5). Fractions
SIV-SP1, SIV-SP2 and SIV-SP3 showed phospholipase A2 activity but, among these
fractions, only SIV-SP3 was homogeneous. Induction of myonecrosis by SIV-SP3,
SIV-SP4 and SIV-SP5 was demonstrated by their ability to release serum creatine
kinase, and for SIV-SP5, to induce histological alterations in the injected mouse
muscle. Chemical characterization by determination of mol. wts, isoelectric
focusing and direct manual sequencing of the N-terminal region was performed for 
SIV-SP3, SIV-SP4 and SIV-SP5. When compared with bothropstoxin-I, the myotoxin
SIV-SP5 showed the same total number of amino acid residues (121) and constant
molar ratio for all but three amino acids. We have named this toxin piratoxin-I
(PrTX-I).

PMID: 7660366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Genomics. 1994 Dec;24(3):597-600.

Mapping of the pulmonary surfactant SP5 (SFTP2) locus to 8p21 and
characterization of a microsatellite repeat marker that shows frequent loss of
heterozygosity in human carcinomas.

Wood S(1), Yaremko ML, Schertzer M, Kelemen PR, Minna J, Westbrook CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
Canada.

We have identified 4 cosmids at the SFTP2 locus by cDNA hybridization. SFTP2 was 
mapped using a polymorphic CA repeat and localized to 8p21 by FISH. Allele loss
in carcinomas was detected using this PCR marker. Among 11 lung and colon tumors,
6 of 9 informative cases exhibited allelic loss.

PMID: 7713515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Trauma. 1994 Nov;37(5):728-36.

Minimizing admission laboratory testing in trauma patients: use of a
microanalyzer.

Frankel HL(1), Rozycki GS, Ochsner MG, McCabe JE, Harviel JD, Jeng JC, Champion
HR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Washington Hospital Center, Washington, DC.

OBJECTIVE: Routine admission laboratory test protocols in injured patients are
costly and involve excessive phlebotomy and turnaround time. The purpose of this 
prospective study was to evaluate the utility of (1) a microanalyzer, NOVA-SP5
(which provides rapid results on minimal blood volume), and (2) each component of
our standard laboratory test battery.
METHODS: Laboratory test results for 200 consecutive injured patients admitted to
a level I trauma center were evaluated by paired sample analysis. Our standard
battery [60 mL: ($348): type and screen, complete blood count, PT/PTT,
electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, glucose, calcium, amylase, ethanol level, and
arterial blood gas] run "stat" in the central laboratory was compared to the
microanalyzer profile [< 1 mL: ($182): hemoglobin, hematocrit, electrolytes,
glucose, Ca2+, and arterial blood gas] run by the trauma team in the
resuscitation area. Patient data and laboratory turnaround time (from time of
admission to time results obtained) were recorded. Data were analyzed by linear
regression.
RESULTS: Components of the paired samples correlated well (r2 0.78 to 0.99).
Turnaround times were 64 (+/- 3) and 6 (+/- 1) minutes for standard analysis and 
microanalysis, respectively. Only two of the 26 patients requiring emergent
surgical procedures had standard results available preoperatively. These patients
had twice as many laboratory abnormalities as the remainder. Minimal diagnosis or
intervention resulted from those values exclusive to standard analysis (white
blood count, amylase, ethanol level, BUN, creatinine, platelet count, PT, and
PTT). Six of ten abnormal BUN or creatinine results normalized, including two
values in patients who received contrast for portable intravenous pyelography,
and in all patients without a history of hypertension or diabetes. Platelet count
and PT/PTT were normal in 85% of non-head-injured patients, compared with 58% of 
those with GCS score < or = 8.
CONCLUSIONS: Microanalysis is accurate, expedient, conserves blood, and is
sufficient for evaluation of most trauma patients. Those with hypertension,
diabetes, or severe head trauma may require additional testing. Routine use of
this technique could reduce cost substantially ($16,000/100 patients). The role
of microanalysis in follow-up laboratory evaluation of injured patients remains
to be elucidated.

PMID: 7966469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Carcinogenesis. 1994 Oct;15(10):2303-10.

Studies on intrachromosomal recombination in SP5/V79 Chinese hamster cells upon
exposure to different agents related to carcinogenesis.

Zhang LH(1), Jenssen D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic and Cellular Toxicology, Wallenberg Laboratory,
Stockholm University, Sweden.

In the present study 34 agents, related to carcinogenesis in different ways, were
investigated with respect to their recombinogenic activity in mammalian cells.
The induction of intrachromosomal recombination was studied using the spontaneous
mutant clone SP5 derived from V79 Chinese hamster cells, which exhibits a
duplication of exon 2 and its flanking regions in the hprt gene, which was found 
to be inserted between the two EcoR1 sites of intron 1. Earlier studies on the
removal of this insertion fragment in the SP5 clone indicated that such loss
involved intrachromosomal recombination and was detectable by using a reversion
mutation assay. The categories of agents investigated here included
monofunctional alkylating agents, polyaromatic hydrocarbons giving rise to bulky 
adducts, chlorinated compounds giving small cyclic adducts, intercalating agents,
DNA cross-linkers, UV and ionizing radiation, inhibitors of DNA synthesis and
topoisomerases, DNA bases and base analogues, radical formers and tumour
promotors. Statistically significant enhancements in the frequency of reversion
in SP5 cells were observed after treatment with aflatoxin B1, 9-aminoacridine,
benzo[a]-pyrene-7,8-dihydrodiol, benzo[a]pyrene-7,8-diol-9,10-epoxide,
camptothecin, dimethylbenzanthracene, dimethyl-nitrosamine, ethidium bromide,
ethylmethanesulfonate, N-ethyl-N'-nitrosourea, fluorodeoxyuridine, ICR 191,
N-methyl-N'-nitrosoguanidine, mitomycin C and UV irradiation. Only slight
inducing effects were indicated in the case of methylmethanesulfonate,
N-methyl-N'-nitrosourea and gamma irradiation, although not statistically
significant. Negative results were found after treatment with 3-amino-benzamide, 
5-azacytidine, bleomycin, 5-bromodeoxyuridine, 1,2-dichloroethane, ethylene
oxide, etoposide, formaldehyde, hydrogen peroxide, methotrexate, propylene oxide,
quercitin, sodium azide, 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate, thymidine and a
complex mixture consisting of a cigarette smoke condensate. Our results on
chemically or physically induced recombinogenic effects in the endogenous SP5
hprt gene are in agreement with data obtained in non-endogenous gene systems
based on transgenic cell lines containing integrates of tandem mutated tk or
hygromycin resistance genes, but not completely consistent with findings on
integrates based on the neo genes. This suggests that many factors influence the 
recombination process, including a difference in the mechanisms underlying inter-
and intrachromosomal recombination. Consequently, the endogenous SP5/V79 system
is suggested to be more representative than integrated systems for investigating 
induction of recombination, as well as for mechanistic studies of recombination
at the molecular level, e.g. intrachromosomal recombination.

PMID: 7955071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1994 Jul;92(4):303-15.

SEP topographies elicited by innocuous and noxious sural nerve stimulation. II.
Effects of stimulus intensity on topographic pattern and amplitude.

Dowman R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY 13699-5825.

The effects of innocuous and noxious sural nerve stimulation on the SEP scalp
topography were examined in 15 human subjects. This analysis focused on the 6
stable periods (i.e., consecutive time points where the topography did not
change) that were identified in the companion paper (Dowman 1994). Stable period 
1 (SP1: 58-90 msec post stimulus), SP4 (178-222 msec) and SP5 (223-277 msec)
showed amplitude-stimulus intensity relationships that are similar to those of
neurons involved in the sensory-discriminative aspects of innocuous
somatosensation. The SP1 topographic pattern showed little or no change across
the innocuous and noxious stimulus levels, which together with the amplitude data
suggests that SP1 is largely generated by neurons involved in innocuous
somatosensation. The SP4 topographic pattern did not change appreciably across
the innocuous and noxious stimulus levels, but its amplitude decreased with
increasing noxious stimulation. These data suggest that SP4 is generated by
neurons involved in innocuous somatosensation and that noxious inputs inhibit
these cells. There were differences in the SP5 topographic patterns evoked at the
innocuous and the noxious stimulus levels, which suggest SP5 also receives a
contribution from neurons involved in noxious somatosensation. SP3 (135-157 msec)
and SP6 (282-339 msec) are probably generated by neurons involved in noxious
somatosensation. The topographic patterns of both were different at innocuous and
noxious levels. SP3's amplitude-stimulus intensity function suggests that it is
generated by neurons that respond to noxious inputs in a non-graded fashion. The 
amplitude and offset latency of SP6 increased with increasing noxious
stimulation, which suggests that SP6 is generated by neurons that respond to
noxious inputs in a graded fashion.

PMID: 7517852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1994 Jul;92(4):291-302.

SEP topographies elicited by innocuous and noxious sural nerve stimulation. I.
Identification of stable periods and individual differences.

Dowman R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY 13699-5825.

Scalp potential topographies evoked by innocuous and noxious sural nerve
stimulation were obtained from 15 human subjects. The SEP scalp topography could 
be separated into 6 different stable periods (SP), that is, consecutive time
points where there were no major changes in the topographic pattern. SP1
(occurring 58-90 msec post stimulus) was characterized by a contralateral frontal
positivity and a central negativity oriented ipsilateral to the evoking stimulus;
SP2 (92-120 msec) by a bilateral frontal positivity and a symmetrical central
negativity; SP3 (135-158 msec) by a widespread negativity with a minimum at the
contralateral temporo-frontal region; and SP4 (178-222 msec), SP5 (223-277 msec) 
and SP6 (282-339 msec) by a widespread positivity with a maximum located along
the centro-parietal midline. SP4, SP5, and SP6 could be distinguished by changes 
in the orientation of the isovoltage contour lines and/or by changes in the
location of the maximum. The stable periods had similar onset and offset
latencies and the same major features across subjects. However, the topographic
patterns were not identical across subjects. These individual differences are
likely due to the expected variability in the orientation of the equivalent
regional dipole sources generating these potentials.

PMID: 7517851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Mol Reprod Dev. 1994 Apr;37(4):363-9.

cDNA cloning and expression of Xenopus sperm-specific basic nuclear protein 5
(SP5) gene.

Ariyoshi N(1), Hiyoshi H, Katagiri C, Abé SI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Faculty of Science, Kumamoto University,
Japan.

As part of our continuing program to understand the molecular mechanisms
controlling the synthesis of sperm-specific nuclear proteins (SPs1-6) during
spermatogenesis in Xenopus, we report here on the isolation of a cDNA clone for
SP5, the partial sequencing of the amino acids in the SPs, and the expression of 
the mRNA for SP5. A cDNA clone (pXSP633) was isolated from a cDNA library,
previously prepared from poly (A)+ mRNA obtained from Xenopus round spermatids.
Determination of the amino acid sequence of the N-terminal regions of all the
SPs(1-6) suggested that pXSP633 encodes SP5, whereas SPs3, 4, and 6 are derived
from a second mRNA species, and SPs1 and 2 from a third mRNA species. Thus it
seems likely that the six SPs are derived from three different mRNA species.
Northern blot analyses of RNA, extracted from primary spermatocytes and round
spermatids, was performed with oligonucleotide probes specific for SPs4 and 5
mRNAs. The results showed that whereas both SPs4 and 5 mRNAs are expressed in
primary spermatocytes, the amount of SP5 mRNA is only about one-fifth of that of 
SP4 mRNA. However, both mRNA species undergo a similar size change in the length 
of their poly (A) tracts during spermatogenesis: the size of the mRNA in cultured
round spermatids on day 0 was longer than that in primary spermatocytes, but the 
size of the mRNA in round spermatids on day 6 was shorter than that in round
spermatids on day 0.

PMID: 8011321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Ann Ital Chir. 1994 Mar-Apr;65(2):249-52.

[Evaluation of experimental data obtained using new-generation CO2 laser in
surgery].

[Article in Italian]

Morrone G(1), Guzzardella GA, Fini M, Martini L, Bacchini P, Bertoni F, Giardino 
R.

Author information: 
(1)Servizio di Chirurgia Sperimentale, Istituti Ortopedici Rizzoli, Bologna.

In order to study the interaction between the laser and biological tissues, we
realized an experimental "in vivo" model using 12 Wistar male adult rats (mean
b.w. 300 gr.). On the animals, during general anesthesia and after an accurate
shearing of the back, we performed a cutaneous lozenge in order to value the
characteristics and the possibilities of a last generation laser. It concerns of 
a CO2 laser (EASY LASER SP5, CLASS IV F.D.A.) with the possibility of employing
of different variables. During this study were evaluated the most interesting
variables: frequency, power and duty cycle. Among the variables we identified the
frequency of the application range of the superpulse effect and the selective
photothermolysis. The histological and morphological studies performed on the
cutaneous specimens after laser treatment, showed that the correct application of
this kind of laser can be an effective help for the surgeon during clinical
practice.

PMID: 7978770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Arch Virol Suppl. 1994;9:245-51.

Sequences at the ends of RNA-2 of I6, a recombinant tobravirus.

Robinson DJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Scottish Crop Research Institute, Invergowrie, Dundee, U.K.

Tobravirus isolate I6 is an anomalous strain of tobacco rattle virus (TRV), which
has biological properties typical of TRV, but which is serologically related to
pea early-browning virus (PEBV). Its RNA-2 species is a natural recombinant
molecule which contains internal sequences, including the particle protein gene, 
resembling those of PEBV, but with some TRV-like sequences at each end.
Sequencing of RNA-2 of isolate I6 showed that, at the 3' end, it is almost
identical to RNA-2 of PEBV strain SP5, and TRV-like sequences are limited to the 
25 residues that are common to both viruses. However, unlike PEBV RNA-2, I6 RNA-2
can be replicated by TRV RNA-1-coded enzymes. Thus, specific recognition of RNA-2
by TRV replicase seems not to involve sequences at the 3' end. About 275 residues
at the 5' end of I6 RNA-2 are similar to those in RNA-2 of TRV strain TCM, and
are jointed to the PEBV-SP5-like subgenomic promoter and coding sequences by
about 100 residues of uncertain origin. These results support the idea that I6
RNA-2 originated by recombination between TRV and PEBV RNA-2 molecules, although 
the exact position of the junction and therefore the mechanism involved are
unclear.

PMID: 8032256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Blood Press Suppl. 1994;5:21-6.

Quantitative localization of angiotensin II receptor subtypes in spontaneously
hypertensive rats.

Song K(1), Kurobe Y, Kanehara H, Okunishi H, Wada T, Inada Y, Nishikawa K,
Miyazaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Osaka Medical College, Japan.

Angiotensin II (Ang II) receptors were labelled by in vitro autoradiography using
125I-[Sar1,Ile8]Ang II as a ligand in the kidney, adrenal gland, thoracic aorta, 
and hindbrain of adult spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR) and normotensive
Wistar-Kyoto rats (WKY). Ang II receptors were differentiated into subtypes by
susceptibility to subtype 1 (AT1) and subtype 2 (AT2) antagonists. In both rat
strains, the adrenal cortex contained predominantly AT1 receptors, while AT2
receptors predominated in the adrenal medulla. The kidney contained exclusively
AT1 receptors in glomeruli, proximal tubules, and the outer medulla. AT1
receptors were predominant in the thoracic aorta. The nucleus of the solitary
tract (NTS), dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus (DM10), area postrema, and spinal 
trigeminal nucleus (Sp5) contained exclusively AT1 receptors, whereas the nucleus
of the inferior olive contained AT2 receptors predominantly. Significant
differences in receptor density were observed between SHR and WKY. The adrenal
cortex, renal outer medulla, NTS, DM10, and Sp5 displayed higher AT1 receptor
density in SHR than in WKY. These results indicate that expression of AT1
receptors is regulated differently in important targets of Ang II in SHR, and
suggest that altered regulation of AT1 receptor expression may be relevant to the
pathogenesis of hypertension in SHR.

PMID: 7889197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1993 Oct;267(1):95-101.

Pharmacological examination of receptors mediating contractile responses to
tachykinins in airways isolated from human, guinea pig and hamster.

Ellis JL(1), Undem BJ, Kays JS, Ghanekar SV, Barthlow HG, Buckner CK.

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins Asthma and Allergy Center, Baltimore, Maryland.

The abilities of agonists selective for neurokinin (NK)-1
(Ac-[Arg6,Sar9,Met(O2)11]-SP6-11, ASMSP), NK-2 ([beta-Ala8]-NKA4-10) and NK-3
([Asp5,6,MePhe8]-SP5-11, senktide analog) receptors to contract human bronchus
and guinea pig and hamster trachea were studied. The antagonism of these
responses by selective antagonists was also examined. In the human bronchus and
hamster trachea, [beta-Ala8]-NKA4-10 was the most potent agonist, whereas ASMSP
and senktide analog failed to elicit contractions greater than 50% of the maximum
response even at concentrations reaching 1 to 3 x 10(-4) M. By contrast, both
ASMSP and [beta-Ala8]-NKA4-10 were potent contractile agonists in guinea pig
trachea. In all tissues, the selective NK-1 receptor antagonist
(2S,3S)-cis-2-(diphenylmethyl)-N-[(2-methoxyphenyl)-methyl]-1-a zab icyclo-
[2.2.2]octan-3-amine (CP 96,345) was without effect on contractile responses to
[beta-Ala8]-NKA4-10. Blockade by CP 96,345 of responses to ASMSP was, however,
observed in the guinea pig trachea, but not in human bronchus or hamster trachea.
Responses to ASMSP in human bronchus and hamster trachea were inhibited by NK-2
antagonists, whereas these compounds had little effect on responses to ASMSP in
guinea pig trachea. In all tissue types, responses to senktide analog were
inhibited by NK-2 antagonists.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 8229792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Acta Virol. 1993 Apr-Jun;37(2-3):181-3.

Experiments on an early protection against foot-and-mouth disease virus.

Liebermann HT(1), Thalmann G, Bartels T, Nöckler A.

Author information: 
(1)KAI e.v./Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie, E.-M.-Arndt-Universität,
Greifswald, Germany.

The influence of the peptide diacetylsplenopentin (SP5) on an early protection of
guinea pigs against foot-and-mouth disease (FMD) was investigated. 80% protection
was achieved if SP5 was applied in a dose of 2 mg one day before challenge with
FMD virus (FMDV) type O1 Lausanne strain. In comparison with this a conventional 
commercial adsorbate vaccine protected guinea pigs about 7 days after
vaccination. An earlier protection can be obtained in general by vaccination with
a higher content of the immunogen. A tenfold increase of the 146 S particle dose 
in a conventional oil adjuvanted FMDV vaccine protected pigs about 2 days earlier
as observed after inoculating a "normal" vaccine (about 11 days).

PMID: 8105663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1993 Apr;265(1):159-65.

Modulation of kainic acid-induced activity in the mouse spinal cord by the amino 
terminus of substance P: sensitivity to opioid antagonists.

Larson AA(1), Sun X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, University of Minnesota, Saint Paul.

Behavioral sensitization to kainic acid (KA) in the mouse spinal cord appears to 
be mediated by the amino (N) terminus of substance P (SP), as potentiation of KA 
is sensitive to capsaicin, mimicked by SP1-7 but not SP5-11, and blocked by SP1-7
antagonists but not by neurokinin antagonists. As naloxone inhibits some effects 
of SP1-7, this study examines the role of opioid receptors in the mediation of
KA-induced sensitization by the N terminus of SP. All drugs were injected i.t.
Behavioral sensitization to repeated injections of KA was inhibited by a large (1
micrograms) dose of naloxone. Pretreatment with either naloxonazine or
beta-funaltrexamine, mu-selective opioid antagonists, naltrindole, a
delta-selective opioid antagonist, or nor-binaltorphimine, a kappa-selective
antagonist, failed to alter the development of sensitization to KA, indicating
that this phenomenon is not due to mu, delta, or kappa opioid receptors. The
ability of 22.5 pmol of SP1-7 to enhance subsequent KA responses was blocked when
coadministered with 0.1 micrograms of naloxone. When administered with KA,
naloxone not only failed to reverse the potentiative effect of SP1-7, but further
enhanced responses to KA for 2 hr after SP1-7. In contrast to pretreatment with
SP1-7, coadministration of KA with SP1-7 inhibited the intensity of behaviors.
The inhibitory effect of SP1-7 on responses to a single injection of KA was
prevented by pretreatment with naltrindole, whereas pretreatment with
beta-funaltrexamine blocked the inhibitory effect of SP1-7 on response to KA in a
KA-sensitized animal.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7682611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Brain Res. 1992 Oct 2;592(1-2):181-6.

The C-terminal fragment of substance P enhances dopamine release in nucleus
accumbens but not in neostriatum in freely moving rats.

Boix F(1), Huston JP, Schwarting RK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiological Psychology I, University of Düsseldorf, Germany.

The in vivo microdialysis technique was used to study the effects of carboxyl or 
amino terminal sequences of substance P on the extracellular concentrations of
dopamine, its metabolites dihydroxyphenylacetic acid and homovanillic acid, as
well as on 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid, in neostriatum and nucleus accumbens of
freely moving rats. The i.p. administration of 37 nmol/kg of the substance P
C-terminal heptapeptide analog [pGlu5, MePhe8, Sar9]SP5-11 (DiMe-C7) caused an
increase in extracellular dopamine concentrations in nucleus accumbens but not in
neostriatum. The administration of the equimolar dose of the heptapeptide
N-terminal fragment substance P 1-7 (SP1-7) did not have an effect in either
structure. No changes were observed in the extracellular concentrations of the
metabolites after the administration of either substance. These results are
discussed with respect to the reinforcing effects of substance P and its
C-terminal sequence, which may be mediated via dopamine release in the nucleus
accumbens.

PMID: 1280516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Clin Invest. 1992 Sep;90(3):720-6.

Recognition by recombinant autoimmune thyroid disease-derived Fab fragments of a 
dominant conformational epitope on human thyroid peroxidase.

Portolano S(1), Chazenbalk GD, Seto P, Hutchison JS, Rapoport B, McLachlan SM.

Author information: 
(1)Thyroid Molecular Biology Unit, Veterans' Administration Medical Center, San
Francisco, California 94121.

To characterize the nature of thyroid peroxidase (TPO) autoantibodies present in 
the sera of patients with autoimmune thyroid disease, we cloned three IgG1/kappa 
Fab fragments which bind 125I-TPO. This was accomplished by the molecular cloning
and expression in bacteria of IgG gene fragments from B cells infiltrating the
thyroid of a patient with Graves' disease. The three Fab fragments (SP2, SP4, and
SP5) are coded for by a common heavy chain (VH1, D, JH3) and three related, but
different, light chains (VK1, JK2). The SP Fab fragments bind specifically to TPO
with high affinities (6 x 10(-11)-2 x 10(-10) M) comparable to those of serum TPO
autoantibodies. TPO autoantibodies represented by the SP Fab fragments are
present in all 11 patients studied, constitute a high proportion (36-72%) of
serum TPO autoantibodies in individual patients and interact with a
conformational epitope on TPO.

PMCID: PMC329922
PMID: 1381722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Carcinogenesis. 1992 Apr;13(4):609-15.

Reversion of the hprt mutant clone SP5 by intrachromosomal recombination.

Zhang LH(1), Jenssen D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic and Cellular Toxicology, Wallenberg Laboratory,
Stockholm University, Sweden.

The spontaneous hprt mutant clone SP5, derived from V79 Chinese hamster cells,
was shown to exhibit a duplication of approximately 2 kb, including exon 2 and
its flanking intron sequences, inserted into the intron 1 sequence of the hprt
gene. The most striking feature of SP5 is that this clone is quite unstable,
demonstrating an extremely high spontaneous reversion frequency. Molecular
analysis of 25 independent revertant clones of SP5 indicated that they arose
after precise deletion of the duplicated fragment in the hprt gene. Reversion of 
SP5 could be induced by agents which damage DNA by different mechanisms, but
there was no correlation with induction of the forward mutations. Based on these 
results, we suggest that intrachromosomal recombination must be responsible for
the spontaneous reversion of SP5. Genetic recombination in somatic cells has been
suggested to be involved in the multistep process of carcinogenesis. Since the
ability to induce intrachromosomal recombination in yeast has been shown to be
highly correlated with non-mutagenic as well as mutagenic carcinogens, it is of
great interest to investigate similar systems in mammalian cells. The SP5 cell
line may be unique for such a purpose, since this mutant clone contains an
endogenic marker for studying the process of intrachromosomal recombination.

PMID: 1576714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Int Fed Clin Chem. 1991 Sep;3(4):160-72.

New whole blood methods and instruments: glucose measurement and test menus for
critical care.

Kost GJ(1), Wiese DA, Bowen TP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, University of California, Davis 95616.

A glucose oxidase-H 2O 2 substrate-selective electrode (SSE) along with eight
other electrodes allows the Stat Profile 5 (SP5) to measure glucose,
electrolytes, blood gases, pH, and hematocrit simultaneously in whole blood. For 
heparinized blood gas syringe samples (n=178), orthogonal (Deming) regression
showed y=0.43 + 1.00x (mmol/L), where y is whole blood glucose, and x is plasma
glucose measured with the Ektachem 400 glucose oxidase slide method. For
heparinized plasma (n=197), y=0.25 + 1.02x. Least squares linear regression
showed y=0.25 + 1.00x (s yxx=0.49) for whole blood versus plasma, y = 0.30 +
1.01x (s yxx=0.49) for plasma versus plasma, and r=0.994 for both cases. Whole
blood and plasma glucose in the same samples measured by SSE differed by less
than 1%. The SP5 combines the largest number of whole blood tests currently
available in a rapid response instrument well-suited for care of the critically
ill patient.

PMID: 10149818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Int J Pept Protein Res. 1991 Mar;37(3):180-4.

Synthesis and biological activity of substance P C-terminal hexapeptide and
heptapeptide analogues.

Stavropoulos G(1), Karagiannis K, Cordopatis P, Halle D, Gilon C, Bar-Akiva G,
Selinger Z, Chorev M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Patras, Greece.

The analogues [Glu(OBzl)11]SP6-11 and [Glu(OBzl)11]SP5-11 of the C-terminal
hexapeptide and heptapeptide of Substance P have been synthesized by conventional
solution methods. In each analogue the SCH3 group of Met11 is replaced by the
COOCH2C6H5 group. The in vitro activity of both analogues has been determined on 
three biological preparations: guinea pig ileum (GPI), rat vas deferens (RVD),
and rat portal vein (RPV). The selectivity for the different receptors has been
studied by utilizing atropine-treated guinea pig ileum (GPI + At). The results
showed that both analogues are mainly active on GPI through the NK-1 receptor and
that both analogues are equipotent to Substance P.

PMID: 1714423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Exp Clin Endocrinol. 1990 Dec;96(3):307-13.

Splenopentin (DAc-SP5)--influence on engraftment and graft-vs-host reaction after
non-H-2 bone marrow transplantation in mice.

Eckert R(1), Maciejewski J, Weber H, Volk HD, Diezel W, Forner K, von Baehr R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Immunology, Medical School, Charité, Humboldt
University, Berlin, GDR.

The influence of DAc-SP5 on engraftment and graft-vs-host reaction (GVHR) was
studied in different non-H-2 strain combinations. The engraftment was more or
less enhanced in every case, whereas the situation in the GVHR was completely
different. In one case splenopentin did not influence the course of the GVHR so
much, in a second case the symptoms of the GVHR were completely abolished, and in
a third case the GVHR was dramatically enhanced up to a great mortality.
Therefore, before application of DAc-SP5 to the bone marrow transplantation in
humans in order to improve the engraftment, parameters have to be found which
allow an exact prediction about the influence of splenopentin on the GVHR in each
single case.

PMID: 2083570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Neuropeptides. 1990 Dec;17(4):205-11.

Evidence for dose-dependent positively and negatively reinforcing effects of the 
substance P C-terminal analog DIME-C7.

Hasenöhrl RU(1), Gerhardt P, Huston JP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiological Psychology I, University of Düsseldorf, FRG.

Possible positive reinforcing and aversive effects of intraperitoneally (ip)
administered substance P (SP) and its C-terminal heptapeptide analog [pGlu5,
MePhe8, Sar9]-SP5-11 (DIME-C7) were investigated in rats. The 'conditioned corral
preference and avoidance procedure' was used for assessing positive and negative 
reinforcement. Behavioural testing was conducted in a circular open field
consisting of four uniform quadrants equally preferred by the rats prior to drug 
treatment. On 3 consecutive days, rats received an ip injection of either SP (37 
nmol/kg), DIME-C7 (3.7, 7.4, 37, 185 nmol/kg) or vehicle (0.01 M acetic acid in
saline) and were placed immediately into their assigned treatment corral. During 
the test for conditioned corral preference and avoidance, when provided a choice 
between the four quadrants, rats treated with SP and with the equimolar dose of
DIME-C7 (37 nmol/kg) spent significant more time in the drug-paired corral,
indicative of positive reinforcing effects. The doses of 3.7 and 7.4 nmol/kg
DIME-C7 did not influence the preference behaviour. The high dose of 185 nmol/kg 
DIME-C7 led to a significant decrease in time spent in the previously drug-paired
corral, suggestive of aversive effects of the treatment. Gross locomotor activity
was not influenced by either treatment. These results are discussed in the
framework of a structure/activity relationship for the reinforcing properties of 
peripheraly applied SP.

PMID: 1709480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Nucleic Acids Res. 1990 Aug 11;18(15):4507-12.

The complete nucleotide sequence of PEBV RNA2 reveals the presence of a novel
open reading frame and provides insights into the structure of tobraviral
subgenomic promoters.

Goulden MG(1), Lomonossoff GP, Davies JW, Wood KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virus Research, John Innes Institute for Plant Science Research,
Norwich, UK.

The 3374 nucleotide sequence of RNA2 from the British PEBV strain SP5 has been
determined. The RNA includes three open reading frames flanked by 5' and 3'
noncoding regions of 509 and 480 nucleotides. The open reading frames specify
coat protein, a 29.6K product homologous to the 29.1K product of TRV(TCM) RNA2
and a 23K product not homologous to any previously described protein. The
homology demonstrated between the coat proteins of PRV, TRV and PEBV indicates a 
common evolutionary origin for these proteins. Upstream of each ORF are located
sequences homologous to those with which subgenomic RNAs of other tobraviruses
start. Subgenomic RNAs for the expression of the three ORFs may start at these
points. On all five tobraviral RNA2 molecules sequenced to date, these sequences 
were found upstream of the coat protein ORF in association with a
strongly-conserved potential secondary structural element. Similar potential
structures were identified upstream of other tobraviral ORFs. These structures
may contribute to the activity of the tobraviral subgenomic promoter.

PMCID: PMC331271
PMID: 2388830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Plant Mol Biol. 1989 Dec;13(6):735-7.

Analysis of RNA2 of pea early browning virus strain SP5.

Petersen SG(1), Lehmbeck J, Borkhardt B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Royal Danish Veterinary and Agricultural University,
Frederiksberg C, Denmark.

PMID: 2491690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Brain Res. 1989 Oct 23;500(1-2):256-62.

Sequence of events in substance P-mediated plasma extravasation in rat skin.

Khalil Z(1), Helme RD.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Institute of Gerontology and Geriatric Medicine, Mount Royal
Hospital, Parkville, Australia.

Using a blister model of inflammation in the rat hind footpad, we have studied
the temporal and quantitative contribution of mast cell mediators and
prostaglandins to substance P-induced plasma extravasation. In addition substance
P-related peptides (neurokinin A, SP5-11 and SP1-7) were tested for their ability
to induce a plasma extravasation response and the extent of histamine involvement
to the response was determined. The present results show that the plasma
extravasation response to substance P consists of an early substance P-mediated
response that is independent of other mediators and a late response that involves
interaction between substance P, mast cell mediators and prostaglandins. An early
histamine-independent response was also mediated by neurokinin A, a tachykinin
that shares a common C-terminal with substance P and by a C-terminally directed
analogue of substance P, namely SP5-11. On the other hand, a late
histamine-dependent response was mediated by the N-terminally directed analogue, 
SP1-7. The present data are suggestive of a possible sequence of events that
might occur during an inflammatory response to substance P and might involve
independent actions of its C- and N-terminal.

PMID: 2481561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Exp Clin Endocrinol. 1989 Sep;94(1-2):223-5.

Splenopentin-induced reconstitution of the immune response after total body
irradiation: optimization of treatment regime.

Eckert R(1), Schmidt R, Volk HD, Diezel W, Sönnichsen N, von Baehr R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Immunology, Medical School (Charité), Humboldt
University, Berlin, GDR.

In former investigations our group obtained an immuno-reconstituting effect in
mice treated by immunosuppression after a continuous treatment with splenopentin 
(SP5). The goal of the present study was to test whether a small number of
injections right after immunosuppression possibly produces the same result in the
sense of an initial effect. Although a short-term therapy induced an increase of 
antibody formation which was measurable after 4 weeks, the study clearly showed
that only a continuous treatment by SP5 led to an optimum, i.e. complete
reconstitution of antibody formation.

PMID: 2689192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Neuropeptides. 1989 Apr;13(3):191-6.

Substance P induced hydrolysis of inositol phospholipids in rat skin in an in
vivo model of inflammation.

Thomas KL(1), Andrews PV, Khalil Z, Helme RD.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Institute of Gerontology and Geriatric Medicine, Mount Royal
Hospital, Parkville, Australia.

The present study was undertaken to study the ability of substance P (SP) to
induce inositol phospholipid (IP) hydrolysis measured as inositol mono-phosphate 
(IP1) accumulation, in an in vivo blister model of neurogenic inflammation in the
rat hind footpad. SP was found to induce IP1 accumulation in a concentration
dependent manner. The use of SP analogues (SP5-11 and SP1-7) indicated that the
response is mainly mediated by the C-terminal sequence of the peptide. The
response was significantly reduced by the SP antagonist spantide, suggesting that
the response is mostly due to activation of the SP receptor on small diameter
vessels. Capsaicin pretreatment did not have an effect on the ability of SP to
induce the response. Experiments with mepyramine suggest that the response is
also partly mediated by SP induced histamine release from mast cells. This is the
first study to provide direct evidence for phosphoinositide mediated SP effects
in the skin.

PMID: 2469033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Lab Invest. 1989 Mar;60(3):347-52.

Use of deoxyribonucleic acid probes in the identification of cell origin and
detection of cellular contamination in human lymphoblastoid cell lines.

Naeim F(1), Jensen L, Susi E, Yam P, Gatti R, Salser W, Concannon P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California, Los Angeles.

Established lymphoblastoid cell lines have provided a valuable reference source
for studying neoplastic lymphoproliferative disorders in humans. However, two
major problems are associated with the establishment and growth of these cell
lines: (a) the established cell line may not represent the original neoplastic
clone, and (b) contamination of the established cell line with the other cell
lines may occur. Lymphoblastoid cell lines "W" and "SP5" were established from
splenectomy specimens of two patients with hairy cell leukemia. Both cell lines
displayed B cell characteristics by immunophenotypic and Ig gene rearrangement
studies. The banding patterns of the rearranged Ig genes (heavy and light chains)
in the W cell line were different and in the SP5 cell line were identical with
the corresponding untransformed splenic cell lines, indicating that cell line SP5
did and cell line W did not represent the original neoplastic clone. Continuous
cultures of some of the subclones derived from cell line W and SP5 led to the
growth of the cell lines W15T, W17T, and SP5T which all demonstrated T cell
features based on immunophenotypic and T cell receptor rearrangement studies.
However, the T cell receptor alpha and beta rearranged bands as well as bands
generated by hybridization with highly polymorphic DNA probes p YNH24 and
0-3315-32 in these three lines and a human T cell leukemia line (CEM), were
identical indicating that W15T, W17T and SP5T cell lines were contaminated with
CEM. Studies of gene establishment patterns and DNA polymorphisms by Southern
blotting are effective methods to establish clonal identity and to rule out
cellular contamination in lymphoblastoid cell lines.

PMID: 2784517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Allerg Immunol (Leipz). 1989;35(4):279-85.

Prevention of graft-vs-host reaction induced immunodeficiency by treatment with
splenopentin (DAc-SP5).

Eckert R(1), Volk HD, Diezel W, Maciewski J, Hiepe F, Forner K, von Baehr R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Immunology, Humboldt University, Berlin.

Early experiments had shown that splenopentin, the active part of the splenic
hormone splenin, stimulates the differentiation of virgin B- and T-lymphocytes
and significantly enhanced the reconstitution of immune reactions after immune
suppression. The present study investigates the influence of splenopentin on the 
course of the graft-vs-host reaction (GVHR). The experimental model used were
adult hybrid mice which received intravenously parental spleen cells. During the 
GVHR which has an chronical course in the strain combinations used a short
stimulatory phase is followed by a long-lasting immunosuppression detected by
antibody formation against sheep erythrocytes. Furthermore, the splenomegaly in
the first weeks after spleen cell injection changed to a drastic decrease of the 
spleen weight up to strongly beyond normal values. Continuous treatment with
splenopentin significantly prevented both symptoms of the GVHR: The suppression
of the antibody formation was diminished widely, and no loss of spleen weight
occurred. Furthermore, during the stimulatory phase anti-DNA-autoantibodies were 
produced in the untreated animals, while the splenopentin therapy prevented this 
reaction. During the further course of the experiment no increase of autoantibody
production was detected later on.

PMID: 2624251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Pharmacology. 1989;38(1):1-15.

Receptors for substance P and related neurokinins.

Regoli D(1), Drapeau G, Dion S, D'Orléans-Juste P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Medical School, University of Sherbrooke, Canada.

The most widely used smooth muscle preparations for neurokinin bioassays have
been critically analyzed in order to determine whether neurokinins act directly
or by the intermediary of other natural agents. Indeed, part of the contraction
of the GPI in response to neurokinins appears to be mediated by acetylcholine and
possibly prostaglandins. Active metabolites of the arachidonic acid cascade also 
intervene in the response of the HUB. Neurokinins produce relaxation of the DCA
by stimulating the release of a vascular smooth muscle relaxing factor from the
endothelium. In the other preparations (the RD, the RPA without endothelium and
the RPV) neurokinins may act directly on the smooth muscle fibers. Neurokinins
produce their biological effects by activating specific receptors. Three
different receptor types, one for each mammalian neurokinin, have been identified
by using four groups of natural peptide sequences and some selective agonists.
The receptor for SP is particularly sensitive to SP and physalaemin and shows
higher affinity for the whole natural peptides (SP, NKA) than for their
C-terminal fragments. The receptor for neurokinin A is highly sensitive to NKA
and eledoisin: it shows high affinity for heptapeptide fragments such as NKA4-10 
and SP5-11. The receptor for NKB is sensitive to NKB and kassinin more than to
the other natural peptides and their fragments. The natural peptides show however
little selectivity. Synthetic analogues active on a single receptor type
(selective agonists) have been used to find out whether the responses of the
isolated organs are due to the activation of one or more than one receptor. It
has been found that the GPI, the RD and the HUB contain all three or at least two
receptors, while the DCA has only the NK1, the RPA has only the NK2 and the RPV
only the NK3 type. Binding sites specific for each neurokinin have been
identified in brain and peripheral organs with accurate biochemical assays, using
labeled neurokinins. Competitive displacement assays have been performed with a
variety of neurokinin-related peptides, and their Ki have been determined. By
plotting Ki values against the ED50, estimated from biological assays, positive
significant correlations have been found for the monoreceptor (DCA, RPA, RPV) but
not for the multiple receptor systems (GPI, RD, HUB). This suggests that
pharmacological receptors may be identical with the recognition sites which bind 
the labeled neurokinins. The availability of monoreceptor systems and of
selective agonists opens the way for the identification of potential antagonists 
and accurate estimation of their affinities.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 2542998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Chromatogr. 1988 Nov 18;432:113-26.

Optimization of high-performance liquid chromatography-radioimmunoassay protocols
for the analyses of substance P and some of its metabolic fragments.

Igwe OJ(1), Felice LJ, Seybold VS, Larson AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biology, University of Minnesota, College of
Veterinary Medicine, St Paul 55108.

A reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatographic procedure combined with 
radioimmunoassay (HPLC-RIA) was developed and optimized for the concomitant
quantitation of substance P (SP) and some of its C- and N-terminal fragments in
the extracts of the spinal cord of mice. A selective and efficient solid-phase
extraction protocol was used for preparative purification of sample homogenates
prior to analyses. The sensitivity of the HPLC assay was 18.75 ng for SP and some
of its fragments of interest. Recoveries of peptides were calculated from spiked 
aqueous standards carried through the experimental protocol and ranged from 53 to
98%. The precision of the peptide recoveries from aqueous-based standards,
expressed as coefficient of variation, ranged from 2 to 28%. The sensitivities
for the RIA procedure using SP antiserum were 1.5, 3.4 and 4.6 fmol SP1-11,
SP2-11 and SP5-11, respectively. The percentage cross-reactivity of SP1-11
antiserum with the C-terminal fragments was complete whereas the
cross-reactivities of the N-terminal fragments were essentially zero. The molar
limits of detectability of SP and some of its C-terminal fragments determined by 
HPLC alone were several orders of magnitude greater than those determined from
the same spinal cord samples using RIA after HPLC fractionation.

PMID: 2464606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Pulm Pharmacol. 1988;1(3):113-8.

Airway responses to substance P and substance P fragments in the guinea pig.

Shore SA(1), Drazen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Biology Program, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA
02115.

Airway responses to rapid intravenous infusions of substance P (SP), selected
carboxy terminal fragments (SP3-11, SP5-11, SP7-11, and SP9-11), and an amino
terminal fragment (SP1-9) were measured in anesthetized, mechanically ventilated 
guinea pigs. The dose of each peptide required to decrease pulmonary conductance 
(GL) to 50% of baseline value was calculated in each animal. The order of ED50GL 
was: SP5-11 less than SP3-11 less than SP less than SP7-11. SP9-11 and SP1-9 were
inactive at doses up to 1000 nmol/kg i.v. The effects of the neutral
metalloendopeptidase (NEP) inhibitor, thiorphan, and the angiotensin converting
enzyme (ACE) inhibitor, captopril, on airway responses to SP5-11 were examined in
order to test the hypothesis that differences in degradation of SP and SP5-11
contribute to the difference in airway responsiveness to the two peptides.
Thiorphan (0.5 mg/animal, i.v.) caused a significant decrease in ED50GL for
SP5-11, as has been previously noted for SP. In contrast, captopril (1.7
mg/animal i.v.) had no effect on ED50GL for SP5-11, although it has a substantial
effect on SP responses. These results indicate that while the carboxy terminal of
SP is essential for peptide bronchoactivity, loss of amino terminal peptides (up 
to four residues) actually enhances bronchoconstrictor responses to the peptide. 
Part of this enhancement appears to result from differences in the degradation of
SP and SP5-11 by ACE. The data suggest that cleavage of SP by dipeptidyl
aminopeptidases could enhance its bioactivity.

PMID: 2485179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Immunol. 1987 Nov 15;139(10):3470-3.

The effect of substance P on the regional lymph node antibody response to
antigenic stimulation in capsaicin-pretreated rats.

Helme RD(1), Eglezos A, Dandie GW, Andrews PV, Boyd RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Monash University, Prince Henry's Hospital, Melbourne,
Australia.

The undecapeptide substance P (SP) contained in primary afferent nerves is
thought to mediate that part of the neurogenic inflammatory response consisting
of vasodilation and plasma extravasation. This response is diminished in rats
pretreated as neonates with the neurotoxin capsaicin. It is not known whether
primary afferent nerves influence cellular responses of the immune response to
antigenic stimulation. Using 6- to 12-wk-old Sprague-Dawley rats pretreated as
neonates with capsaicin, we examined the regional lymph node response to a s.c.
antigenic stimulus of sheep red blood cells. The number of cells secreting
antigen-specific antibody in these animals was reduced by more than 80% using
direct and indirect plaque assay methods. The reduced antibody response in
capsaicin-pretreated animals was reversed by a s.c. infusion of SP given over a
4-hr period at the injection site immediately after antigen stimulation. This
response had a threshold at approximately 1.0 X 10(-5) M SP. SP1-7 (1.0 X 10(-5) 
M) was without effect but an infusion of SP5-11 (1.0 X 10(-5) M) reversed the
effects of capsaicin treatment indicating a carboxyl-terminal effect of SP. The
results suggest that the reduced response of capsaicin-treated animals to an
antigenic stimulus is due to an effect of capsaicin on the SP-containing primary 
afferent nerves rather than a toxic effect of capsaicin on the immune system.

PMID: 2445815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1987 Nov;84(22):7915-9.

Low molecular weight human pulmonary surfactant protein (SP5): isolation,
characterization, and cDNA and amino acid sequences.

Warr RG(1), Hawgood S, Buckley DI, Crisp TM, Schilling J, Benson BJ, Ballard PL, 
Clements JA, White RT.

Author information: 
(1)California Biotechnology, Mountain View 94043.

Pulmonary surfactant is a lipid-protein complex that promotes alveolar stability 
by lowering the surface tension at the air-fluid interface in the peripheral air 
spaces. A group of hydrophobic surfactant-associated proteins has been shown to
be essential for rapid surface film formation by surfactant phospholipids. We
have purified a hydrophobic surfactant protein of approximately 5 kDa that we
term SP5 from bronchopulmonary lavage fluid from a patient with alveolar
proteinosis and shown that it promotes rapid surface film formation by simple
mixtures of phospholipids. We have derived the full amino acid sequence of human 
SP5 from the nucleotide sequence of cDNAs identified with oligonucleotide probes 
based on the NH2-terminal sequence of SP5. SP5 isolated from surfactant is a
fragment of a much larger precursor protein (21 kDa). The precursor contains an
extremely hydrophobic region of 34 amino acids that comprises most of the mature 
SP5. This hydrophobicity explains the unusual solubility characteristics of SP5
and the fact that it is lipid-associated when isolated from lung.

PMCID: PMC299446
PMID: 3479771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 1986 Oct;334(2):181-7.

Antagonist discrimination between subtypes of tachykinin receptors in the
guinea-pig ileum.

Kilbinger H, Stauss P, Erlhof I, Holzer P.

The effects of substance P and eledoisin on spontaneous and electrically-evoked
release of [3H]acetylcholine, and on smooth muscle were studied in the guinea-pig
myenteric plexus-longitudinal muscle preparation preloaded with [3H]choline.
Substance P and eledoisin caused transient increases in spontaneous release of
[3H]-acetylcholine and in longitudinal muscle tone. Both tachykinins were
equipotent in contracting the muscle, but eledoisin was more potent than
substance P in eliciting [3H]acetylcholine release. The release caused by
substance P was enhanced in the presence of naloxone and scopolamine which
suggests that the release is modulated through opioid and muscarinic receptors.
Substance P and eledoisin inhibited the release of [3H]acetylcholine evoked by
electrical stimulation at 0.1 Hz. The inhibition was not due to an activation of 
alpha-adrenoceptors, histamine or opioid receptors. The substance P antagonists
(D-Pro2, D-Trp7,9)SP (10 and 30 microM) and (Arg5, D-Trp7,9, Nle11)SP5-11 (1 and 
10 microM) competitively antagonized both the contractile effects of substance P 
and eledoisin, and the inhibition by the tachykinins of the electrically-evoked
release of [3H]acetylcholine. The increase in spontaneous [3H]acetylcholine
release elicited by substance P and eledoisin was not prevented by the substance 
P antagonists. The results suggest that the neuronal receptor whose activation
causes inhibition of acetylcholine release and the smooth muscle receptor
correspond to the SP-P type, whereas the neuronal receptor mediating an increase 
in spontaneous acetylcholine release is of the SP-E type. The two antagonists,
(D-Pro2, D-Trp7,9)SP and (Arg5, D-Trp7,9, Nle11)SP5-11, selectively block only
the SP-P receptor.

PMID: 2431326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Peptides. 1986 May-Jun;7(3):419-23.

Antinociceptive and Met-enkephalin releasing effects of tachykinins and substance
P fragments.

Naranjo JR, Arnedo A, De Felipe MC, Del Rio J.

Substance P (SP), physalaemin, SP4-11, SP5-11 and the SP5-11 analog DiMe-C7
induce an antinociceptive effect in rats after intraventricular administration.
Other tachykinins and the N-terminal fragments of SP are inactive. All
antinociceptive peptides increase the Met-enkephalin efflux from slices of rat
periaqueductal gray matter and their antinociceptive potency is correlated with
their capacity to release Met-enkephalin. The results, discussed in the light of 
current theories on different tachykinin receptors, suggest that the SP-P
receptor subtype may be involved in the control of noxious stimulation elicited
by SP at supraspinal levels.

PMID: 2430264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 1986 Feb;3(4):795-803.

The conformational analysis of substance P analogs using high-field NMR
techniques.

Kawaki H(1), Otter A, Beierbeck H, Kotovych G, Stewart JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.

High-field nuclear magnetic resonance measurements were carried out on substance 
P fragments SP4-11' [pGlu5]-SP5-11 and [pGlu6]SP6-11 both at 400 and at 500 MHz. 
A spectral simulation was carried out on two of these peptides and the coupling
constants were interpreted in terms of the conformations. The JNH-CHa coupling
constants are all approximately 8 Hz, with the exception of glycine, indicating
no preferred conformation for the backbone. For the amino acids other than p-Glu,
a comparison of the coupling constant data suggests the same relative rotamer
populations for the side chains. Proton longitudinal relaxation time data were
measured for all three peptides and support the above conclusions.

PMID: 2482046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Brain Res. 1986 Jan 15;363(1):145-7.

Selective activation of mesolimbic and mesocortical dopamine metabolism in rat
brain by infusion of a stable substance P analogue into the ventral tegmental
area.

Elliott PJ, Alpert JE, Bannon MJ, Iversen SD.

Microinfusion of the metabolically stable substance P (SP) agonist,
[pGlu5,MePhe8,Sar9]-SP5-11 (DiMe-C7), into the ventral tegmental area (VTA) of
rat brain increased levels of the dopamine (DA) metabolite dihydroxyphenylacetic 
acid in the prefrontal cortex (+ 120%) and nucleus accumbens (+30%) but not in
other regions of forebrain. In contrast, infusions of DiMe-C7 or SP into the
lateral ventricles or microinfusions of SP into VTA failed to elicit increases in
DOPAC levels in forebrain. DA levels were unaffected by SP or DiMe-C7 regardless 
of the route of administration. These data and previous studies suggest a role
for endogenous SP in the modulation of mesocortical and mesolimbic DA neurones.

PMID: 2418910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Allerg Immunol (Leipz). 1986;32(4):267-70.

Histamine receptor-bearing lymphocytes (HRL). VIII. Splenopentin-accelerated
reconstitution of the immunoresponsiveness after elimination of HRL.

Eckert R, Diezel W, Forner K, Pfüller U, Sönnichsen N, von Baehr R.

The maturation effect of DA-SP5 on a spleen cell population depleted of
immunocompetent, histami nereceptor-bearing lymphocytes was examined. Conjugates 
of histamine and the A-chain of the mistletoe lectin I killed in vitro these
cells and abolished, as shown in a previous paper, their humoral and cellular
capacity by around 90%. Sublethally irradiated mice were reconstituted with the
remaining cells and treated with DA-SP5 (3 intraperitoneally injections of 10
micrograms DA-SP5 per week). The strong accelerating action of DA-SP5 on the
restoration of the antibody response is interpreted as an effect of DA-SP5 on the
maturation of B- and T-cells under in vivo conditions.

PMID: 2951991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Biol Reprod. 1985 Sep;33(2):286-95.

Evidence for the existence of substance P in the prepubertal rat ovary. I.
Biochemical and physiologic studies.

Ojeda SR, Costa ME, Katz KH, Hersh LB.

The presence of substance P (SP) in the immature rat ovary was determined by
radioimmunoassay (RIA) of acidic extracts. The extracts produced an
inhibition-displacement curve of 125I-SP binding parallel to that generated by
authentic SP in the SP RIA. Initial chromatographic characterization of ovarian
SP in Sephadex G-25 revealed the presence of a molecular form that coeluted with 
authentic SP and a more abundant component that eluted earlier, suggesting the
presence of a heavier peptide, immunologically similar to SP. Nevertheless,
further characterization of these two seemingly different components by
reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) demonstrated that
both of them had a retention time similar to that of authentic SP. The ovarian
concentration of SP-like immunoreactivity (SP-LI) varied in relation to the onset
of puberty, with values increasing significantly between the late juvenile phase 
and the day of first proestrus. Substance P seems to be devoid of steroidogenic
capacity since SP itself and its stable analog [pGlu5,MePhe8,Sar9]-SP5-11 (SP-A) 
failed to stimulate steroid secretion from either granulosa cells in culture or
ovarian fragments in short-term incubation. Substance P also failed to stimulate 
prostaglandin E2 release from whole ovaries and to modify the steroidal response 
of cultured granulosa cells to follicle-stimulating hormone and to the beta
2-adrenergic agonist Zinterol. Production of SP-LI from granulosa cells in
culture could not be detected under either basal or gonadotropin-stimulated
conditions. These observations and the distribution of the peptide within the
ovary presented in the companion paper (Dees et al., this issue) strongly suggest
that SP is not directly involved in regulating steroidogenesis. Instead, SP may
be a component of the so-called sensory innervation of the ovary, and among other
undisclosed functions it may contribute to the regulation of ovarian blood flow.

PMID: 2412598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 1985 Jun;329(4):376-81.

Substance P antagonists and mucociliary activity in rabbit.

Lindberg S, Mercke U.

Substance P (SP) is known to accelerate mucociliary (m.c.) activity in the rabbit
maxillary sinus in vivo. The physiological significance of this finding was
investigated by testing three putative SP antagonists. [Arg5, D-Trp7,9,
Nle11]SP5-11 could not be used as an antagonist because it stimulated m.c.
activity. [D-Arg1, D-Trp7,9, Leu11]SP had no effect on the m.c. activity changes 
induced by SP. [D-Pro2, D-Trp7,9]SP was found to be an effective antagonist, 1
mg/kg of this drug reversibly inhibiting both the effects of 0.1 micrograms/kg SP
and the stimulating effect of 1.0 micrograms/kg bradykinin and 30.0 micrograms/kg
capsaicin; the stimulating effect of 0.5 micrograms/kg methacholine was not
inhibited. It is suggested that bradykinin and capsaicin stimulate m.c. activity 
at least partly by releasing SP. The results of this investigation also support
the view that the accelerating effect of SP on m.c. activity reflects
physiological SP-mediated protective mechanisms in the airways. It is concluded
that [D-Pro2,D-Trp7,9]SP is a useful pharmacological tool for studying the role
of SP in the control of m.c. activity in rabbits.

PMID: 2412138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1985 Mar 15;127(2):656-62.

Conformationally restricted cyclic analogues of substance P: insight into the
receptor binding process.

Darman PS, Landis GC, Smits JR, Hirning LD, Gulya K, Yamamura HI, Burks TF, Hruby
VJ.

Three new cyclic substance P analogues were prepared to examine the possible role
of a pseudocyclic turn structure for receptor recognition. In the guinea pig
isolated ileum [Cys5, Cys11]-SP5-11-NH2 and [Cys6, Cys11]-SP5-11-NH2 were
inactive at concentrations up to 100 microM, while [Cys5, Cys6, Nle11]-SP was a
weak agonist. The order of relative affinities on the rat brain radioreceptor
assay was as follows: [Cys5, Cys6, Nle11]-SP greater than [Cys5,
Cys11]-SP5-11-NH2 greater than [Cys6, Cys11]-SP5-11-NH2. We interpret these
results to indicate that a pseudocyclic structure of the 5-11 sequence may not be
an important factor involved in the receptor recognition of substance P.

PMID: 2579658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Eur J Pharmacol. 1985 Feb 5;108(3):217-23.

Pupillary supersensitivity to substance P following prolonged treatment with
tetrodotoxin or substance P antagonists.

Bynke G, Wahlestedt C, Beding B, Håkanson R.

Pilocarpine contracts the sphincter pupillae muscle via an effect on muscarinic
receptors and phenylephrine contracts the dilator pupillae muscle via an effect
on alpha-adrenergic receptors. These effects are thought to mimic the action of
the parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous systems, respectively. Intracellular 
injection of substance P (SP) produces an atropine-resistant constriction of the 
pupil. This response is thought to mimic the effect of local sensory reflexes on 
the sphincter pupillae muscle, involving SP-containing trigeminal nerve endings. 
Repeated intraocular injections of tetrodotoxin, a general blocker of nervous
conduction, over a period of 3 weeks produced supersensitivity to pilocarpine,
phenylephrine and SP in the rabbit iris. These findings support the view that,
like acetylcholine and noradrenaline, SP or an SP-like compound acts as a
neurotransmitter in the iris. Also, long-term topical application of an SP
antagonist, (D-Pro2,D-Trp7,9)-SP or (Arg5,D-Trp7,9)-SP5-11, to the rabbit eye
produced supersensitivity to SP but not to pilocarpine, thus supporting the view 
that the SP antagonists interact specifically with the SP receptors. The isolated
rabbit iris sphincter muscle responds to electrical stimulation with a
cholinergic twitch followed by a slow non-cholinergic contraction that can be
blocked by antagonists to SP. Analysis of the motor activity of the iris
sphincter muscle after long-term topical treatment of the eye with an SP
antagonist followed by an interval of 2 days after termination of treatment
revealed a greatly enhanced non-cholinergic contraction compared with the
cholinergic twitch, a finding that seems to be consistent with the idea that
supersensitivity to SP had developed.

PMID: 2580717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Gen Pharmacol. 1985;16(3):293-5.

Effects of analogues of substance P fragments on the MAO activity in rat brain.

Turska E, Lachowicz L, Koziolkiewicz W, Wasiak T.

The influence in vitro of analogues of Sp5-11 and SP6-11 substance P fragments on
the activity of monoamine oxidase (MAO) in homogenates and crude mitochondrial
fractions of rat brain was examined. The rat brain was divided into: I--cerebral 
cortex, II--hippocampus, III--midbrain, IV--thalamus with hypothalamus,
V--cerebellum and VI--medulla oblongata. The obtained results proved that the
analogues of SP fragments inhibit selectively the activity of the enzyme in the
homogenates of cerebral cortex, hippocampus, midbrain and cerebellum. In the
crude mitochondrial fractions the applied analogues of SP fragments caused a
slight increase of the enzyme activity. The most significant changes in the
activity of MAO were observed in hippocampus homogenate fraction.

PMID: 2410326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Life Sci. 1984 Dec 24;35(26):2681-91.

Substance P antagonists and the role of tachykinins in non-cholinergic
bronchoconstriction.

Karlsson JA, Finney MJ, Persson CG, Post C.

Electrical field stimulation of guinea-pig isolated hilus bronchi induced
tetrodotoxin-sensitive contractions of which only a minor part could be inhibited
by atropine. The remaining non-cholinergic bronchoconstriction was antagonized by
a heptapeptide and an undecapeptide substance P (SP) analogue (Arg5, D-Trp7,9)
SP5-11, IC50 = 24.0 microM and (D-Pro2, D-Trp 7,9) SP, IC50 = 10.0 microM. Of the
exogenously added tachykinins, both eledoisin (8 times) and physalaemin (3 times)
were more potent bronchoconstrictors than SP. Pretreatment with the SP-analogues 
shifted concentration-response curves to the tachykinins to the right, eledoisin 
being most readily antagonized. (Arg5, D-Trp 7,9) SP 5-11 also antagonized the
neural response more readily than that of SP. In addition, in the frog isolated
sciatic nerve preparation the two SP-analogues were found to possess potent
lidocaine-like neurodepressant actions which further complicated the
interpretation of the neural inhibitory effects of these compounds. It is
concluded that if a tachykinin contributes to non-cholinergic
bronchoconstriction, an eledoisin-like peptide is a more likely candidate than SP
itself. Since SP-antagonists may have local anaesthetic properties their value as
tools in neurophysiology seems limited. Inferentially, the non-cholinergic
bronchoconstrictive neurotransmitter remains to be identified.

PMID: 6083429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Neuropharmacology. 1984 Oct;23(10):1167-71.

Locomotor activation induced in rodent by substance P and analogues. Blockade of 
the effect of substance P by met-enkephalin antiserum.

Naranjo JR, Del Rio J.

Intraventricular administration of substance P (SP), of the heptapeptide SP5-11
and of DiMe-C7, a stable analogue of SP5-11 induced locomotor activation in rats 
and in mice. The activating effect of substance P was longer-lasting in mice than
in rats, whereas the effect of the two heptapeptides appears to be more marked in
rats than in mice. The locomotor stimulation induced by substance P was blocked
by naloxone and by the specific antiserum against met-enkephalin, suggesting that
this effect is possibly mediated by released of this opioid peptide. Since the
activating effect of substance P was also blocked by haloperidol, it is proposed 
that substance P produces behavioural excitation by activating dopaminergic
systems, implicated in the control of locomotion, through interposed
enkephalinergic neurones.

PMID: 6084200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Peptides. 1984 Jul-Aug;5(4):769-76.

Hydrolysis of substance p and neurotensin by converting enzyme and neutral
endopeptidase.

Skidgel RA, Engelbrecht S, Johnson AR, Erdös EG.

Angiotensin I converting enzyme (ACE) and neutral endopeptidase ("enkephalinase";
NEP), were purified to homogeneity from human kidney. NEP cleaved substance P
(SP) at Gln6-Phe7,-Phe8, and Gly9-Leu10 and neurotensin (NT) at Pro10-Tyr11 and
Tyr11-Ile12. NEP hydrolyzed 0.1 mM SP, NT and their C-terminal fragments at the
following rates (mumol/min/mg): SP1-11 = 7.8, SP4-11 = 11.7, SP5-11 = 15.4,
SP6-11 = 15.6, SP8-11 = 6.7, NT1-13 = 2.9, and NT8-13 = 4.0. Purified ACE rapidly
inactivated SP as measured in bioassay. HPLC analysis showed that ACE cleaved SP 
at Phe8-Gly9 and Gly9-Leu10 to release C-terminal tri- and dipeptide (ratio =
4:1). The hydrolysis was Cl- dependent and inhibited by captopril. ACE released
mainly C-terminal tripeptide from SP methyl ester, but only dipeptide from SP
free acid. Modification of arginine residues in ACE with cyclohexanedione or
butanedione similarly inhibited hydrolysis of SP, bradykinin and Bz-Gly-Phe-Arg
(80-93%) indicating an active site arginine is required for hydrolysis of SP. ACE
hydrolyzed NT at Tyr11-Ile12 to release Ile12-Leu13. SP, NT and their derivatives
(0.1 mM) were cleaved by ACE at the following rates (mumol/min/mg): SP1-11 = 1.2,
SP methyl ester = 0.7, SP free acid = 8.5, SP4-11 = 2.4, SP5-11 = 0.9, SP6-11 =
1.4, SP8-11 = 0, NT1-13 = 0.2, and NT8-13 = 1.3. Peptide substrates were used as 
inhibitors of ACE (substrate = FA-Phe-Gly-Gly) and NEP (substrate =
Leu5-enkephalin).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 6208535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Z Mikrosk Anat Forsch. 1984;98(1):107-18.

[The effect of N and C terminal sequences of substance P on non-neuronal cells in
vitro (nerve tissue culture)].

[Article in German]

Lindner G.

The effect of peptides (SP1-2, SP3-4 and SP5-11) of substance P (SP1-11) on the
morphology of the areas of growth of explants of the ganglion trigeminale from
chick embryos after incubation in Maximow chambers was observed. N- and
C-terminal sequences effected the growth of cultures differently. In
dipeptide-treated (= N-terminal sequences) cultures the areas of growth
increased. In heptapeptide-treated cultures (= C-terminal sequence SP5-11) the
areas of growth decreased. Only the dipeptide SP3-4 effects a mitogenic effect on
nonneuronal cells in short time tests. The C-terminal sequence SP5-11 stimulates 
neither the growth of nerve fibres nor the proliferation of cells. Finally the
importance of this in-vitro-tests in relation to the in-vivo-situation is
discussed.

PMID: 6202072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Neuropharmacology. 1983 Jul;22(7):859-63.

A comparison of the release of substance P and some synthetic analogues from
micropipettes by microiontophoresis or pressure.

Dray A, Hanley MR, Pinnock RD, Sandberg BE.

The release of substance P (SP) and two analogues by iontophoresis or pressure
from microelectrodes was compared. Substance P was released linearly by
iontophoresis from electrodes while no release of the analogues was detected.
[N-methylphenylalanine8, N-methylglycine9-] SP5-11 (DiMeC7) and
[methyl-2-aminoethyl]11 SP (SP-DAE) were released from electrodes by pressure
ejection with linear relationships in all cases between pressure and the amounts 
released. Under the tested experimental conditions, release of substance P by
iontophoresis was between 2 and 3 orders of magnitude less than that by pressure 
over a given time. The release of substance P and the uncharged analogue DiMeC7
by pressure was very similar while release of SP-DAE was one order of magnitude
less.

PMID: 6194470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Arzneimittelforschung. 1983;33(9):1249-54.

Substance P: structural requirements for the activation of brain catecholamine
synthesis and locomotor activity in rats.

García-Sevilla JA, Magnusson T, Carlsson A, Folkers K.

Intracerebroventricularly administered
Arg-Pro-Lys-Pro-Gln-Gln-Phe-Gly-Leu-Met-NH2 (substance P, SP) enhanced the
accumulation of DOPA after inhibition of the aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase 
in the rat brain. SP also stimulated locomotor activity in a dose-dependent
manner. A total of 31 structural analogues of SP were evaluated with respect to
the action on brain monoamine synthesis as well as on locomotor activity.
Catecholamine synthesis: SP1-10 was inactive which indicated that the [Met11]-NH2
terminal is essential for biological activity; [Leu10], [Phe7] and [Gln6] were
also essential for activity; the minimum length requirement for activity was a
hexapeptide amide structure. D-Amino acids in positions 8 or 9 increased
activity. [D-Pro2]p-SP and [pGlu5, Gly7]-SP5-11 were active in the dopamine-rich 
areas, but inactive in the noradrenaline (norepinephrine)-predominant parts of
the brain. The inactive [Ile7]-SP potentiated the effect of SP. Neither SP nor
its analogues, with the exception of [Lys5,D-Leu8,D-Phe9]-SP5-11, increased the
synthesis of 5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP). Locomotor activity: SP1-10 and
[D-Phe9]-SP were as active as SP; [Ile7]-SP and [Ile7, Ile8]-SP were inactive and
they did not antagonize the effect of SP. The results indicate that after
chemical manipulation of the SP molecule it is possible to obtain great variation
in activity and to dissociate to some extent the behavioural effects from those
on brain catecholamine synthesis.

PMID: 6196036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Pharmazie. 1982 May;37(5):368-9.

[Differences in activity between substance P and substance P-heptapeptide as
studied on the phenomenon of "gut dependence" in rats (author's transl)].

[Article in German]

Nieber K, Oehme P.

Naloxone causes a tonic contraction (= "gut dependence") of the ileum in
morphine-dependent rats. This "gut dependence" can be antagonized by morphine
(2.5 X 10(-7) g/ml). Substance P-undecapeptide (SP1-11) produces a tonic
contraction of the ileum in morphine-independent rats and also in
morphine-dependent rats. In the latter, this tonic contraction is comparable with
the naloxone-induced contraction. When morphine-dependent rats with
naloxone-induced "gut dependence" are given SP1-11, they show an additional
increase in tonus followed by a rapid tonus inhibition. Substance P-heptapeptide 
(SP5-11) also causes a naloxone-like contraction in both the morphine-dependent
and the morphine-independent rats. In contrast to SP1-11, SP5-11 produces neither
a tonus superposition nor a tonus inhibition in morphine-dependent rats with
naloxone-induced "gut dependence". The fact that SP5-11 does not, in contrast to 
SP1-11, exert these two effects (tonus superposition and subsequent tonus
inhibition) is indicative of differences between the mechanisms of the two
Substance P sequences.

PMID: 6180443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 1982 Mar;318(4):281-7.

The possible existence of multiple receptors for substance P.

Lee CM, Iversen LL, Hanley MR, Sandberg BE.

1. The possible existence of multiple receptors for substance P (SP) was
investigated by examining the relative pharmacological potencies of SP and
related peptides in contracting guinea pig ileum, in potentiating electrically
evoked contractions of rat vas deferens preparations and in competing for 3H-SP
receptor binding in rat brain membranes, and by comparing the extent of
cross-tachyphylaxis of various analogues with SP in the guinea pig ileum. 2.
Different rank orders of potencies were observed among SP, its C-terminal
fragments, analogues and related tachykinins in the different test systems, and
these could not be explained by differential access to the target organ
receptors. 3. In contrast to SP and physalaemin, both eledoisin and a
metabolically stable SP analogue, [pGlu5, MePhe8, Sar9]-SP5-11 exhibited
differential recovery from SP tachyphylaxis in the guinea pig ileum, and part of 
their spasmogenic action in this preparation was atropine-sensitive. 4. The
results suggest the possible existence of multiple SP receptors, and the
specificity of those in the brain may be different from those in the gut. The
structural and pharmacological basis for subdividing tachykinins into
SP-physalaemin and eledoisin-kassinin families is also discussed.

PMID: 6176885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Z Mikrosk Anat Forsch. 1982;96(4):643-55.

[The effect of substance P (SP) and SP partial sequences on nerve fiber growth in
tissue culture].

[Article in German]

Lindner G, Grosse G, Oehme P, Jentzsch KD, Neubert K.

Explants of the ganglion trigeminale (PNS) and of the telencephalon (CNS) from
chick embryos were cultivated in MAXIMOW chambers in semisynthetic media in the
presence of dipeptide fragments (Lys(Z)-Pro . HCl, Lys-Pro-2HBr, Arg-Pro-2HCl)
and the heptapeptide (SP5-11) of substance P as well as the complete substance P 
(SP1-11). 1. Histological examination of the dipeptide-treated CNS explants
indicates that the structure of outgrowth in vitro is changed. Fascicel were
observed. A stimulation of nerve fibre extension did not take place. 2.1. In
dipeptide-treated PNS cultures the index of areas covered by the explants
increased. 2.2. The index of nerve fibre growth increased significantly. The
stimulation was caused in multiplication of fibres. Only Lys(Z)-Pro . HCl
presents a prolongation of neurites. 2.3. SP5-11 effects in no case the growth of
nerve fibres. SP1-11 stimulated significantly the fibre regeneration. 3. The
possible role of SP1-11 with different effects under in vitro conditions is
discussed. Only the N-terminal dipeptides stimulate the growth of nerve fibres.
The C-terminal SP5-11 is without effect. Finally it is stated that the best
results in neuritic enlargement and neurogenesis can only be obtained by
cultivation with SP1-11.

PMID: 6184904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Acta Biol Med Ger. 1982;41(7-8):725-7.

Effects of substance P and shorter analogs on body temperature in the rat.

Richter R, Oehme P.

The thermoregulatory effects of intraperitoneally administered substance P
(SP1-11) (250 micrograms/kg), or equimolar quantities of SP1-4 and SP5-11 were
studied in conscious rats at an ambient temperature of 4 degrees C. SP1-11
produced hypothermia, whereas SP1-4 and SP5-11 had no influence. The hypothermic 
effect of SP1-11 was partially antagonized by naloxone. Thus, an opiate-dependent
step seems to be involved in the action of SP1-11.

PMID: 6183855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Jpn J Pharmacol. 1981 Jun;31(3):315-21.

Algesiogenic and analgesic activities of synthetic substance P.

Kotani Y, Oka M, Yonehara N, Kudo T, Inoki R.

The objective of our study was to determine whether the pure synthetic substance 
P(SP) is algesiogenic or analgesic when administered centrally or peripherally.
The relationships between SP-induced analgesia and the content of morphine-like
factor (MLF) in the brain were also studied. Intracarotid arterial administration
of SP (20-200 microgram) produced no pseudoaffective responses to pain in six out
of nine rats, but in the remaining three, there was an exhibition of these
responses. Chlorpheniramine pretreatment antagonized these responses. On
cantharidin blister base experiments in humans, SP (10(-3) g/ml) produced slight 
pain and an itchy sensation. SP given intracerebroventricularly produced an
analgesia in mice in a dose of 5 ng/mouse, as determined by the acetic
acid-induced writhing and hot plate methods. These SP-induced analgesia were
antagonized by naloxone pretreatment. SP did not alter the content of MLF in the 
mouse whole brain. However, SP5-11 not only produced an analgesia but also
increased the content of MLF. These results suggest that SP has a slight
algesiogenic activity which might be mediated by histamine and a slight analgesic
activity which might be mediated by MLF.

PMID: 6171665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Experientia. 1980 Sep 15;36(9):1104-5.

Synthesis and contractile activity of the C-terminal heptapeptide of substance P 
with N5-dimethyl glutamine in the 6-position. Active site studies.

Poulos CP, Pinas N, Theodoropoulos D.

The synthesis and testing of [N5-dimethyl-Gln6]-SP5-11 showed 37 +/- 12%
contractile activity relative to SP, and intrinsic efficacy 98 +/- 4%. This
finding indicates that the carboxamide groups of the dual Gln5-Cln6 moiety are
not equally related with the contractile response of the C-terminal heptapeptide 
of SP.

PMID: 6158458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Bacteriol. 1965 Dec;90(6):1655-63.

Characterization of Bacillus subtilis bacteriophages.

Brodetsky AM, Romig WR.

Brodetsky, Anna M. (University of California, Los Angeles), and W. R. Romig.
Characterization of Bacillus subtilis bacteriophages. J. Bacteriol. 90:1655-1663.
1965.-A group of six phages, SP5, SP6, SP7, SP8, SP9, and SP13, which use the
Marburg strain of Bacillus subtilis as host was characterized. These phages,
referred to as group 1, were examined for the following properties: host range,
plaque morphology, stability, adsorption kinetics, one-step growth
characteristics, calcium requirements, serum neutralization, thermal
inactivation, and inactivation by ultraviolet irradiation. Five unrelated B.
subtilis phages, SP3, SP10, PBS1, SP alpha, and SP beta, were included in the
studies. When first isolated, none of the group 1 phages was able to replicate
efficiently on B. subtilis SB19, a mutant of the "transforming" B. subtilis 168. 
Host range mutants capable of growth in SB19 were isolated for all of the group 1
phages except SP13, and are designated the "star" phages (SP5* through SP9*). For
characterization, SB19 was used as host for the star phages, and another B.
subtilis mutant, 168B, was host for SP13.

PMCID: PMC315874
PMID: 4955056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Am Med Assoc. 1953 Jan 31;151(5):387.

TECA low volt and pulse generator, Model SP5.

[No authors listed]

PMID: 13011012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


